Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen-specific markers for paraneoplastic neurological syndromes
obtained by proteomic analysis of patient immunoglobulins


In the antibody response, as occurs in antitumor immunity, germline
sequences are rearranged and mutated to generate a sequence with
specificity for an antigen. In earlier work, it was shown that the
antigen specificity of immune sera from rats can be distinguished by the
proteomic analysis of immunoglobulins. It is hypothesized that the
sequence of the antigen binding sites converges to a similar subset in
individuals exposed to a given antigen. We therefore tested the
applicability of our approach in patients with Paraneoplastic
Neurological Syndrome (PNS). In these patients, a tumor triggers a
well-characterized auto-immune response against onconeural antigens
expressed in tumor and the affected part of the nervous system. These
antibodies serve as markers for both the underlying tumor and specific
neurological syndromes. Sera of 60 patients with PNS associated with
paraneoplastic antibodies were analysed: 20 anti-HuD (18 lung cancer), 20
anti-Yo (6 breast, 9 gynecological and one other cancer), 10
anti-amphiphysin (4 lung, one breast and one other cancer), and anti-CV2
(6 lung cancer) antibodies. Antigen-specific immunoglobulins were
collected by affinity enrichment on beads coated with recombinant
antigen. The antigen-specific immunoglobulins were digested with trypsin
and analyzed by nano-LC and mass spectrometry. From the resulting
dataset, peptides were selected that uniquely identified one of the
patient groups, and the peptide sequence was deduced from fragmentation
spectra. 28 specific and unique peptides were found; 0 specific for
amphiphysin, 2 specific for CV2, 11 for HuD and 15 for Yo. Several marker
peptide sequences showed homology to known immunoglobulin sequences, and
no relations were found to other known proteins from the NCBInr protein
database. The data show that immunoglobulin-derived biomarkers can indeed
be found in samples from patients and can serve as early markers of
cancer and auto-immunity.

