Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antiproliferative activity of combined administration
of atorvastatin and zoledronic acid in LNCaP and PC3 prostate cancer cells


Atorvastatin (ATO) and other statins demonstrate anti-inflammatory,
anti-proliferative, and pro-apoptotic activities that suggest possible
utility in cancer chemoprevention. Bisphosphonates such as zoledronic
acid (ZOL) are used clinically to manage bone metastases from prostate
and other cancers, and also demonstrate anti-apoptotic and growth
inhibitory effects on cancer cells. Should these agents demonstrate
significant chemopreventive activity in preclinical cancer models, their
desirable clinical safety profiles would make them high priority
candidates for clinical evaluation as chemopreventive agents. The present
studies were performed to characterize the effects of ATO and ZOL on the
in vitro proliferation kinetics of parental LNCaP and PC3 human prostate
cancer cells, and in sub-clones of LNCaP and PC3 cells that differ
phenotypically from the parental cell lines. When administered as single
agents, ATO and ZOL both inhibited the proliferation of parental LNCaP
cells and LNCaP cell sub-clones in a dose-dependent (1 - 20 M) and
time-dependent manner. Administration of ATO and ZOL in combination at
concentrations at which each agent was minimally active as a single agent
resulted in synergistic antiproliferative activity in both LNCaP cells
and LNCaP sub-clones. For example, at 5 M, ATO and ZOL each inhibited
LNCaP cell proliferation by 5 to 10%; combined administration of ATO +
ZOL at 5 M inhibited LNCaP cell proliferation by nearly 50%. PC3 cells
and sub-clones were also sensitive to statin administration: exposure of
parental PC3 cells to ATO (5 M) for 6 days induced significant cell
death. ZOL inhibited proliferation in both PC3 cells and PC3 sub-clone
cells in a dose and time-dependent manner; enhanced antiproliferative
activity was seen in cells exposed to ATO + ZOL in combination. Because
the autophagosomal marker, LC3-II, is reported to be induced by ATO in
PC3 cells; LC3-II expression was evaluated in parental LNCaP cells and in
PC3 cells by immunoblotting. ATO consistently induced LC3-II expression
in PC3 cells, but had minimal effect on LC3-II expression in LNCaP cells.
ZOL did not induce LC3-II expression in either cell line. Exposure to ATO
+ ZOL in combination induced LC3-II expression in PC3 cells only. These
data demonstrate synergistic antiproliferative effects of ATO + ZOL in
both LNCaP prostate cancer cells and PC3 prostate cancer cells, as well
as in sub-clones derived from both prostate cancer cell lines. Enhanced
chemotherapeutic and/or chemopreventive efficacy may be achieved in
prostate cancer cells by administration of drug combinations that act
through different molecular mechanisms. (N01-CN-43303 from the NCI, DHHS).

