Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent antitumor activity of AbGn-ADC, a humanized monoclonal
antibody conjugated with dolastatin analogue, to gastric and pancreatic
cancers expressing AbGn carbohydrate epitope


AbGn is a glycotope-specific humanized monoclonal antibody recognizing
Lewisa- like carbohydrate expressed in gastric and pancreatic cancer
cells. While AbGn binding to normal tissues is restricted to only luminal
surface of the epithelium in gastro-intestinal track and secretory
glands, about 50% of gastric and pancreatic cancer samples tested express
AbGn epitope and can be recognized by AbGn antibody. FACS analysis and
confocal microscopic studies demonstrated extensive internalization of
AbGn after binding to the cell surface. The internalized AbGn
co-localized with lysosomal marker LAMP1, suggesting that AbGn-mediated
internalization followed the lysosomal pathway. A novel antibody-drug
conjugate (AbGn-ADC) was generated by linking AbGn to a dolastatin
analogue, a potent inhibitor of microtubulin polymerization, through a
dipeptide-based cleavable linker. This AbGn-ADC was evaluated for
antitumor activity in vitro and in mouse xenograft models. AbGn-ADC
eliminated cancer cell lines with nanomolar potency in vitro. No cell
death could be detected in SW480 cells, a gastric cell line with no AbGn
epitope expression, suggesting high selectivity of AbGn-ADC. When used to
treat mice with established human gastric (SNU-16) or pancreatic
(Panc.02.03B) cancer xenografts, AbGn-ADC significantly reduced the size
of the established tumors (pAbGn is a glycotope-specific humanized
monoclonal antibody recognizing Lewisa- like carbohydrate expressed in
gastric and pancreatic cancer cells. While AbGn binding to normal tissues
is restricted to only luminal surface of the epithelium in
gastro-intestinal track and secretory glands, about 50% of gastric and
pancreatic cancer samples tested express AbGn epitope and can be
recognized by AbGn antibody. FACS analysis and confocal microscopic
studies demonstrated extensive internalization of AbGn after binding to
the cell surface. The internalized AbGn co-localized with lysosomal
marker LAMP1, suggesting that AbGn-mediated internalization followed the
lysosomal pathway. A novel antibody-drug conjugate (AbGn-ADC) was
generated by linking AbGn to a dolastatin analogue, a potent inhibitor of
microtubulin polymerization, through a dipeptide-based cleavable linker.
This AbGn-ADC was evaluated for antitumor activity in vitro and in mouse
xenograft models. AbGn-ADC eliminated cancer cell lines with nanomolar
potency in vitro. No cell death could be detected in SW480 cells, a
gastric cell line with no AbGn epitope expression, suggesting high
selectivity of AbGn-ADC. When used to treat mice with established human
gastric (SNU-16) or pancreatic (Panc.02.03B) cancer xenografts, AbGn-ADC
significantly reduced the size of the established tumors (p<0.01). No
body weight loss or signs of toxicity was observed in AbGn-ADC treated
mice. These findings support the potential of further development of
AbGn-ADC for treating gastric and pancreatic cancers. Data from
pre-clinical AbGn-ADC tolerability study in relevant non-human primate
will be presented.

