Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of the uPA/uPAR system causes the overexpression of
miR124 and suppresses stemness in glioma stem cells


The invasiveness and destructiveness of malignant neoplasms in the
central nervous system are of great clinical importance. Higher-grade
tumors, such as glioblastomas, are associated with poor prognosis, and
patients average survival is only 8 to 12 months after chemotherapy
and/or radiotherapy. This poor prognosis reflects the resistance of tumor
cells to radiation and cytotoxic agents as well as the difficulty in
achieving total tumor resection. Highly infiltrative gliomas are known to
overexpress both uPA and uPAR. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are essential
post-transcriptional regulators known to determine cell identity and fate
and are also known to be involved not only in development and
differentiation but also in glioma progression. Acquisition of EMT has
also recently been linked to stem cell phenotypes which is mediated by
microRNAs. However, the molecular mechanism underlying EMT regulation
still remains elusive. In the present study, we used glioma initiating
cells (GICs), which show stem cell-like character, and determined whether
their stemness can be suppressed by targeting the uPA/uPAR system. We
raised glioma GICs from U87MG and 4910 glioma xenograft cells and
observed that GICs expressed 2- to 3-fold increased levels of uPA and
uPAR when compared to non-GIC. Further, the simultaneous downregulation
of both uPA and uPAR suppressed GIC from establishing intracranial tumors
in nude mice. Further, to understand whether this suppression of GIC
involved microRNAs, we profiled miR expression in U87 cells and observed
that miR124 and miR200a were significantly overexpressed. Using miRanda
analysis, we determined that miR124 targets the regulation of Lhx-2 and
Lhx-2 is over expressed (3- to 4-fold) in GIC when compared to non-GIC.
To determine whether this suppression of Lhx-2 by downregulation of uPA
and uPAR is mediated via miR124, we overexpressed miR124 in U87MG and
4910 glioma xenograft GICs and observed that miR124-overexpressed cells
failed to establish intracranial tumors in nude mice. Our results
demonstrate that the uPA/uPAR system may be involved in GIC maintenance
via suppression of miR124.

