Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-density protein lysate arrays: an essential tool in assessing
antibody specificity for clinical applications


Antibodies for clinical applications require rigorous scrutiny qualifying
them for diagnostics or therapeutic use. However, this is a lengthily and
complicated process that provides only limited conformation. Protein
microarrays are new tools that can determine the specificity and
reactivity of Abs and help identifying their target in less than a day.
We created a high-density protein array comprised from more than 10,000
over-expressed protein lysates made in human HEK293T cells. We tested
more than 15 available antibodies to two cancer targets; the excision
repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) and the receptor tyrosine
kinase ERBB2 (Her2/neo). Our results demonstrated the ability of the
lysate array in determining the specificity of antibodies with a single
fast and easy assay. ERCC1 is a predictor of resistance to platinum based
drugs and for poor prognosis in cancer. The commonly used anti ERCC1
antibody, mAb 8F1, is known to give non-specific cytoplasmic staining and
to cross-react with an unknown protein of similar size. We tested 10
commercially available Abs to ERCC1 and identified four mono-specific
ones (TrueMAb OriGene). Most of these specific Abs gave higher reactivity
than clone 8F1. With this test we also identified a cytoplasmic protein
of appropriate molecular weight that is cross-reacting with mAb 8F1. The
above results were corroborated by WB analysis and IHC assays supporting
the validity of this type of assays. We extended our tests to include
anti ERBB2 Abs as this important biomarker is indicative for the use and
response to the drug Herceptin. Our tests included mono and poly clonal
antibodies and clone 4B5, a rabbit mAb currently used for IHC diagnostic.
We found clone 4B5 to be reactive with two additional proteins besides
ERBB2, one of them is ERBB4. We also tested a rabbit polyclonal anti
ERBB2 serum and found it to be reactive with additional proteins
unrelated to those recognized by mAb 4B5. Three out of the four mouse
mAbs tested (TrueMAb OriGene) were determined to be specific. We submit
that the over-expression protein lysate arrays can establish the
reactivity and specificity of Abs and identify unknown targets. The speed
and convenience of these assays make them an important tool in developing
Abs for clinical use.

