Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammation-related biomarkers and risk of epithelial ovarian
cancer


Introduction: Chronic inflammation caused by ovulation-related wound
healing is theorized to cause ovarian carcinogenesis. We examined
associations between three plasma biomarkers of inflammation, CRP, IL-6,
and TNFR-2, and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer in a nested
case-control study of ovarian cancer cases and controls from the Nurses
Health Study (NHS) and NHSII as well as in the Women's Health Study (WHS)
cohort (CRP only). We further performed a meta-analysis with previously
published studies of these biomarkers and ovarian cancer. Methods:
Associations between quartiles of CRP, IL-6, and TNFR-2 and risk of
epithelial ovarian cancer were calculated using unconditional logistic
regression (NHS/NHSII) or Cox proportional hazards regression (WHS);
NHS/NHSII and WHS were combined using random effects meta-analysis. All
analyses were adjusted for age, menopausal status/post-menopausal hormone
use, duration of oral contraceptive use, tubal ligation, parity, and body
mass index. The NHS/NHSII analyses were additionally adjusted for blood
draw characteristics (fasting status, time of day and month of draw).
Random effects meta-analysis was used to combine these results with
previously published results. Results: In the NHS/NHSII (n=218 cases) and
WHS (n=159 cases), a 59% increased ovarian cancer risk was observed in
the 4th quartile of CRP compared to the 1st quartile (95% CI: 1.08-2.34).
Further, CRP >10mg/L compared to Introduction: Chronic inflammation
caused by ovulation-related wound healing is theorized to cause ovarian
carcinogenesis. We examined associations between three plasma biomarkers
of inflammation, CRP, IL-6, and TNFR-2, and risk of epithelial ovarian
cancer in a nested case-control study of ovarian cancer cases and
controls from the Nurses Health Study (NHS) and NHSII as well as in the
Women's Health Study (WHS) cohort (CRP only). We further performed a
meta-analysis with previously published studies of these biomarkers and
ovarian cancer. Methods: Associations between quartiles of CRP, IL-6, and
TNFR-2 and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer were calculated using
unconditional logistic regression (NHS/NHSII) or Cox proportional hazards
regression (WHS); NHS/NHSII and WHS were combined using random effects
meta-analysis. All analyses were adjusted for age, menopausal
status/post-menopausal hormone use, duration of oral contraceptive use,
tubal ligation, parity, and body mass index. The NHS/NHSII analyses were
additionally adjusted for blood draw characteristics (fasting status,
time of day and month of draw). Random effects meta-analysis was used to
combine these results with previously published results. Results: In the
NHS/NHSII (n=218 cases) and WHS (n=159 cases), a 59% increased ovarian
cancer risk was observed in the 4th quartile of CRP compared to the 1st
quartile (95% CI: 1.08-2.34). Further, CRP >10mg/L compared to <1 mg/L,
was associated with a 2.21-fold increased ovarian cancer risk (95% CI:
1.29-3.80). In meta-analyses with previously published studies, the 3rd
compared to the 1st tertile of CRP was associated with a 41% increased
risk (95% CI: 1.14-1.74) (Table). There were no statistically significant
associations between quartiles of IL-6 or TNFR2 and ovarian cancer risk
in the NHS/NHSII or in a meta-analysis with a previous publication.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that higher levels of circulating CRP,
but not IL-6 or TNFR2, are associated with increased risk of ovarian
cancer.


