Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analysis of different total RNA sequencing approaches


Initial transcriptomic studies largely relied on hybridization-based
microarray technologies and offered a limited ability to fully catalogue
and quantify the diverse RNA molecules that are expressed from genomes
over wide ranges of levels. Massively parallel cDNA sequencing, or Total
RNA-Seq, has allowed many advances in the characterization and
quantification of transcriptomes; an offer a new appreciation for the
complexity of the Transcriptome, encompassing a multitude of previously
unknown coding and non-coding RNA species, particularly small RNAs,
including micro RNAs. This work investigates the performance of different
strategies for Total RNA-Seq using multiple next generation sequencing
platforms. Standard RNA-sequencing approaches generally require
double-stranded cDNA Synthesis, which erases RNA strand information.
Synthesis of a randomly primed double-stranded cDNA followed by addition
of adaptors for next-generation sequencing leads to the loss of
information about which strand was present in the original mRNA template.
The polarity of the transcript is important for correct annotation of
novel genes, identification of antisense transcripts with potential
regulatory roles, and for correct determination of gene expression levels
in the presence of antisense transcripts. Here, we examine the
performance of strand-specific RNA libraries made by direct ligation of
adaptor on to the RNA. We analyze the effect of different RNA
fragmentation methods (divalent cations plus heat versus enzymatic
fragmentation) and we provide a comparative data analysis (library
complexity, continuity of gene coverage, strand specificity and 3and
5-end bias analysis). Identification and analysis of small RNA by deep
sequencing requires preparation of a di-tagged cDNA library, which leads
to adaptor-dimer formation that strongly contaminates the library. We
have developed a novel method to generate di-tagged small RNA libraries
free of adapter-dimer contamination without introducing any additional
enzymatic steps or gel purifications. This method has optimized the
3adaptor-ligation reaction to recover and to increase representation of
the 2-O-modified RNAs present in a biological sample. To reduce cost and
increase sample throughput we have developed a barcode strategy to tag
samples during library construction. The multiplexed libraries can then
be pooled together before size selection, reducing the number of steps in
the workflow. This technique reduces bias by ligation, increases
representation of modified small RNAs and simplifies workflow during
library construction for small RNA analysis and discovery.

