Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic re-programming of the AML cell line HL-60 during
differentiation: Roles of the EGR/NAB and NR4A transcription factors


HL-60 cells represent an established line of human acute myeloid leukemia
cells that can be induced to differentiate along several distinct myeloid
lineages. Phorbol esters activate a signaling network, which includes the
protein kinase C (PKC) pathway, causing the leukemia cells to
differentiate into macrophage-like cells. As the leukemia genetic program
is converted to the macrophage program, the cells exit the cell cycle,
undergo morphological changes, become adherent, display other macrophage
properties, and ultimately initiate apoptosis. This study provides a
detailed DNA microarray analysis with qRT-PCR validation of the genetic
network of the leukemia cell during first 24 hours post-induction of
differentiation. We present data describing the global changes in gene
expression at the RNA-level at 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 hours post-PMA
treatment and information about specific genes with regard to their RNA
and protein expression levels. Approximately 2,000 genes were identified
that exhibit significant changes in mRNA levels from the leukemia
expression program. A cluster analysis was performed to group these genes
by their pattern of expression resulting in a collection of distinct
expression profiles and associated functional profiles. These genes
encode transcription factors, intracellular signal transducers,
receptors, cytokines and a variety of other proteins. Of particular
interest in understanding the genetic re-programming of the leukemic
cells is the transcription factor expression profile. In addition to the
established roles of the NF-kappa-B and AP-1 transcription factors in
HL-60 cell differentiation, we present possible roles for the EGR/NAB and
NR4A transcription factor families in both differentiation and initiation
of apoptosis. A variety of biological analysis strategies using the
expression data to define regulatory groupings that characterize the
changing genetic network in these cells, including interaction networks
and pathway activations have been carried out. Taken together, we seek to
better understand the genetic program defining leukemia cells and the
mechanisms by which oncogenic mutations can be overridden to achieve cell
cycle arrest, differentiation and apoptosis.

