Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular responses to conductive interstitial thermal therapy of
murine 4T1 breast carcinoma in surviving tumors, bone marrow and serum.


Background: Ablation of solid tumor with a laser probe (CITT therapy)
causes coagulative necrosis in central zone of tumor. The exposure to
temperature gradient and immune responses to this treatment may affect
homeostasis of surviving cells in surrounding area as well as induce
systemic changes. The purpose of this study was 1/ to perform
quantitative analyses of 29 transcripts of selected genes in tumor
remaining after ablation and in bone marrow 2/ to evaluate changes in 16
cytokines in serum 3/ to compare levels of heat shock proteins in
surviving tumors and in control tumors. Methods: Real-time RT-PCR and
delta delta method was used to determine changes in transcripts in
remaining tumors after treatment relative to control tumors. Cytokines in
serum were tested using multiplex assay consisting of 16 murine
cytokines. Expression of Hsp27 and Hsp70 proteins were determined with
Western Blot. Results: 72 hours after thermal ablation of 4T1 tumors the
following changes were found in tumor, in bone marrow and in serum of
treated mice: 1/Out of 29 quantified transcripts, the level of four
transcripts (Csf3 Lifr, Serpin1 and Vcam1) decreased significantly in
remaining tumor. Majority of quantified transcripts had lower level in
ablated than in control tumors. In bone marrow (BM) an opposite trend was
observed. Levels of majority of quantified transcripts in BM increased
after ablation as compared to control mice. The transcripts of genes:
Cxcl12, Sele, Fgf2, Lifr, Mmp9, Timp3 were significantly higher in BM of
mice after tumor ablation. 2/ Out of 16 chemokines tested, 4 chemokines
(Il-5, Il-6, Ccl2 (MCP-1) and Ccl5 (RANTES) were detected in serum. There
was a consistent increase of Il-5 in serum from ablated animals. 3/
Levels of Hsp27 and Hsp70 proteins were higher in remaining tumor as
compared with control tumors. Conclusion The decrease of transcripts in
remaining tumor of genes involved in adhesion, extracellular matrix
degradation and tumor viability may inhibit re-growth of thermally
ablated tumors. The increase of transcripts in bone marrow of treated
mice indicates alteration of homeostasis of vascular niche and changes in
function of mesenchymal stem cells. The increase of Hsp27 may inhibit
apoptosis in remaining tumor. Up-regulation of Interleukin 5 suggests
that this cytokine may play role in stimulation of anti-tumor immunity,
as observed by other researchers. Further study is needed to determine
whether the transcript reported here may be used as markers predicting
long term effects of thermal ablation of solid tumors.

