Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the Notch/WISP-1 axis in determining the regulatory
effect of mesenchymal stem cells on melanoma cell motility


Purpose. Bone marrow (BM)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are known
to be recruited to the tumor tissues where they integrate into the
reactive tumor stroma and play a critical role in regulating tumor cell
behavior. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the influential
role of MSC for melanoma cell behavior remain poorly understood. We
sought to identify the molecular switch controlling the regulatory effect
of MSC on melanoma cell growth and migration. Methods. MSC from BM of
Notch1Flox/Flox mice were cultured in MesenCult media. Deletion of the
Notch1 gene was achieved by transduction of MSC with Cre/Lentivirus. The
role of Notch1-/ vs. Notch1+/+-MSC in modulating human melanoma cell
behavior in vitro was examined by testing the effect of conditioned
medium (CM) of MSC on melanoma cell growth and migration using MTT and
Transwell cell migration assays, respectively, and by counting the number
of DsRed-melanoma cells in melanoma-MSC co-culture assay using flow
cytometry. The downstream targets of the Notch1 signaling in MSC were
screened by genome-wide gene microarray analysis. Expression of selected
target gene was confirmed by immunoblotting assay. The biological
function of the selected target in mediating the regulatory effect of the
Notch1-/MSC on melanoma cell growth and migration was examined through
the reconstitution of target gene expression in Notch1-/MSC and evaluated
by testing the direct effect of supplemented recombinant protein encoding
the target gene on melanoma cells. The mechanism underlying the
regulatory effect of the Notch1 target on melanoma cell mobility was
analyzed by PCR-Array specifically focused on exploring cell migration.
Results. Notch1-/MSC, either by CM or in co-culture, had little effect on
melanoma cell proliferation, while the CM significantly promoted melanoma
cell migration. Global gene expression profiling of Notch1-/ vs.
Notch1+/+-MSC by microarray identified Wnt-induced secreted protein-1
(WISP-1) as a Notch1 downstream target gene. The Notch1
signaling-commanded regulatory effect of MSC on melanoma cell migration
is partially mediated by modulating WISP-1 expression, since the CM of
Notch1-/MSC promoted melanoma cell motility, while the enhanced motility
of melanoma cell was reversed by reconstituted overexpression of WISP-1
in Notch1-/MSC. Consistently, supplement of hWISP-1 inhibited melanoma
cell migration, presumably via modulating Cdc42/PAK cascade. Conclusions.
Our data reveal Notch1 signaling as a molecular switch controlling the
regulatory role of MSC in modulating melanoma cell motility, and
demonstrate that melanoma cell behavior can be determined by external
signals emanating from the MSC. WISP-1 is a molecular relay in the
transmission of Notch1 signaling, and may serve as a molecular target for
melanoma therapeutic intervention.

