Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitor androgen blockade therapy with functional androgen
receptor reporting system


Hormonal manipulation remains the first line treatment for advanced
prostate cancer. It includes surgical and medical means of androgen
deprivation and androgen receptor (AR) blockade therapies. However, the
majority of patients will develop castration resistant prostate cancer,
often with metastasis that accounts for the lethality of this disease.
Therefore, a reliable imaging modality capable of active surveillance of
tumor recurrence and/or new incidence of metastasis would greatly benefit
the timing and decision-making in adopting second line therapies. To this
end, we recently constructed a prostate specific yet androgen independent
promoter system, namely PSES-TSTA (Prostate Specific Enhancer Sequence
coupled with Two-Step Transcriptional Amplification). We used this system
to drive PET and optical imaging reporters and successfully visualized
subcutaneous tumor and intra-tibial metastasis in castrated mice. The
androgen independency of PSES-TSTA, which secured viability of this
imaging approach when only castrated level of androgen is available, is
attributed to the composition of the chimeric PSES sequence - an androgen
inducible element derived from the prostate specific antigen (PSA) gene
promoter and an androgen suppressible element from the prostate specific
membrane antigen gene enhancer (PSME). Another challenge faced by
patients after hormonal ablation therapy is the need for effective
second-line therapies. Interestingly, a growing body of evidence points
out that even at castration resistant stage, AR remains active and most
prostate cancer still rely on AR signaling axis for proliferation and
survival. Accordingly, much effort has been devoted to the development of
second generation anti-androgen agents. Therefore, it would be greatly
beneficial to establish a practical and reliable reporting system that
reflects the functional status of the androgen-AR axis so that the
efficacy of such new drugs can be monitored at the molecular level.
Inspired by previous results, we separated the two components of PSES and
generated two imaging reporters: PSA-driven Firefly Luciferase (PSA-FL)
and PSME-driven Renilla Luciferase (PSME-RL). Based on their respective
response to androgen signaling, we anticipated that the PSA-FL signal
will decrease while the PSME-RL signal will increase in the face of an
effective anti-androgen therapy. Indeed, we observed such pattern of
reporter gene expression in multiple prostate cancer cell lines.
Importantly, this system is able to differentiate the potency and
efficacy between the first generation and the more potent second
generation AR antagonists. Moreover, the simultaneous application of the
PSME- and PSA-driven reporter system is advantageous over the single PSA
promoter-based reporter in that it rules out the effect of tumor mass
reduction on the readout because both up- and down-regulation of gene
expression are being assessed and imaged.

