Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of AZD4547, a potent and selective FGF-receptor
inhibitor, alone and in combination with chemotherapy in standard
xenograft and human primary explant models of FGF-receptor 2 amplified
gastric cancer


Despite an overall decline, gastric cancer incidence remains high in
Asian countries including China, Japan and Korea. Five-year survival
rates continue to improve in early stage disease through an aggressive
combination of surgery and chemo/radiotherapy, primarily using
fluoropyrimidine and platinum agent combinations. Furthermore, the TOGA
gastric cancer trial(1) has provided clinical validation of a role for
Her2 in driving tumour progression in a subset of gastric cancer
patients. Despite these advances, late stage disease continues to have a
dismal prognosis and there remains an urgent need for novel therapeutic
options. We have previously established the incidence of FGFR2 gene
amplification in Chinese and Caucasian clinical gastric cancer tissues
(4-7%) and have validated FGFR2 oncogene addiction in amplified gastric
cancer cell lines, in vitro and in vivo, using both FGFR2 siRNA and a
selective small molecule FGFR inhibitor, AZD4547(2). AZD4547 is an orally
bioavailable, highly selective and potent small molecule inhibitor which
competes with ATP for binding to FGF receptors 1, 2 and 3, thereby
inhibiting autophosphorylation and downstream signalling. This agent is
currently in Phase I clinical studies. To further evaluate the potential
utility of AZD4547 in clinical gastric cancer, we established a bank of
19 gastric cancer primary explant models, derived directly from human
tumour tissue. Characterisation of these models using FGFR2 fluorescent
in-situ hybridisation analysis (FISH) identified an amplified model,
SGC083, with corresponding high level FGFR2 protein expression. In this
model, oral daily dosing of AZD4547 elicited rapid, potent and durable
tumour regression at well-tolerated doses (197% tumour growth inhibition
after 25 days dosing with 6.25mg/kg AZD4547, p=Despite an overall
decline, gastric cancer incidence remains high in Asian countries
including China, Japan and Korea. Five-year survival rates continue to
improve in early stage disease through an aggressive combination of
surgery and chemo/radiotherapy, primarily using fluoropyrimidine and
platinum agent combinations. Furthermore, the TOGA gastric cancer
trial(1) has provided clinical validation of a role for Her2 in driving
tumour progression in a subset of gastric cancer patients. Despite these
advances, late stage disease continues to have a dismal prognosis and
there remains an urgent need for novel therapeutic options. We have
previously established the incidence of FGFR2 gene amplification in
Chinese and Caucasian clinical gastric cancer tissues (4-7%) and have
validated FGFR2 oncogene addiction in amplified gastric cancer cell
lines, in vitro and in vivo, using both FGFR2 siRNA and a selective small
molecule FGFR inhibitor, AZD4547(2). AZD4547 is an orally bioavailable,
highly selective and potent small molecule inhibitor which competes with
ATP for binding to FGF receptors 1, 2 and 3, thereby inhibiting
autophosphorylation and downstream signalling. This agent is currently in
Phase I clinical studies. To further evaluate the potential utility of
AZD4547 in clinical gastric cancer, we established a bank of 19 gastric
cancer primary explant models, derived directly from human tumour tissue.
Characterisation of these models using FGFR2 fluorescent in-situ
hybridisation analysis (FISH) identified an amplified model, SGC083, with
corresponding high level FGFR2 protein expression. In this model, oral
daily dosing of AZD4547 elicited rapid, potent and durable tumour
regression at well-tolerated doses (197% tumour growth inhibition after
25 days dosing with 6.25mg/kg AZD4547, p=<0.0001). Anti-tumour efficacy
correlated well with pharmacodynamic modulation of phospho-FGFR
signaling. In contrast, in primary explant models lacking FGFR2 gene
amplification, equivalent doses of AZD4547 were significantly less
efficacious or inactive (26% and 7% tumour growth inhibition after 14
days dosing at 25mg/kg, p=0.03 and p=0.4 respectively). We also evaluated
the activity of AZD4547 in combination with chemotherapeutics considered
standard of care in the treatment of gastric cancer (5-FU, cisplatin,
taxotere and capecitabine) in FGFR2 amplified models. AZD4547 exhibited
efficacy benefit when used with chemotherapeutics at well tolerated doses
(minimal body weight loss). These data support the potential clinical
utility of AZD4547 as a selective agent for the therapeutic treatment of
gastric cancers harbouring genetic amplification of FGFR2. 1 Van Cutsem
et al. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:18s. 2 Xie et al. 2011 AACR Annual Meeting.
Abstract 1643.

