Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of cyclic GMP production by guanylate cyclase-C
agonists delays progression of colitis into colon cancer though
downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines


Colon cancer is one of the most prevalent malignancies in the world; with
an estimated 875,000 cases diagnosed worldwide; accounting for 8.5% of
all new cancers. Patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are
at increased risk of developing colorectal cancer. It is believed that
the persistent gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation may contribute to
colorectal carcinogenesis. The cGMP signaling mediates anti-inflammatory
effects of cellular molecules such as nitric oxide and hemeoxygenase-1.
Therefore, therapies that induce cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP levels by
inhibiting their degradation (phosphodiesterase inhibitors) exhibit good
efficacy in murine models of ulcerative colitis. Activation of guanylate
cyclase C (GC-C) by uroguanylin (UG), a peptide hormone produced in the
GI tract lumen, results in enhanced production of cyclic GMP. Earlier we
reported that UG expression is suppressed in human colon tumors and that
the oral treatment with UG inhibited polyps formation in ApcMin/+ mice
via a cGMP-mediated mechanism. Subsequently, we also reported that GC-C
agonists (plecanatide and SP-333), highly potent analogs of UG,
ameliorated GI inflammation in murine colitis models via downregulation
of certain pro-inflammatory cytokines. Thus, we reasoned that GC-C
agonists might also retard progression of colitis into colorectal tumors.
Apc Min/+ mice were randomized to receive either powdered diet
supplemented with or without plecanatide. DSS (4%) was administered in
the drinking water for two cycles. Cycle 1 consisted of 4 days of DSS
plus 17 days of water. Cycle 2 consisted of 3 days of DSS plus 18 days of
water. Mice were sacrificed at 15 wks of age. The number of tumors per
animal was counted for each segment of the colon. The mRNA levels of UG,
GC-C, Ki-67 and protein levels of -catenin within the colon were
measured. Expression of cytokines was examined in explant cultures of
colon. Both plecanatide and SP-333 were as effective as sulfasalazine or
5-ASA to inhibit DSS-induced inflammation in mice. Treatment with
plecanatide reduced multiplicity of tumors within the colon, increased
expression of protein kinase G-II (PKG-II) and decreased levels of Ki-67
and -catenin. Expression of UG was reduced following DSS treatment but it
was partially restored following treatment with plecanatide. In explant
cultures, plecanatide reduced production of the pro-inflammatory
cytokines such as IL-6, IL-17 and IL-23. These results suggest that
anti-inflammatory and anti-carcinogenesis activities of plecanatide were
mediated through downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This study
opens a novel avenue for development of GC-C agonists as a new class of
orally delivered, mucosally active, drug candidates for treatment of GI
inflammatory diseases and IBD-associated colon cancer. Supported by NIH
grant R21 CA133689 to KS.

