Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient delivery of prostate cancer gene therapy via
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells in vivo


It is critical to develop new therapeutic approaches for prostate cancer,
since there is no effective treatment for patients in the advanced stages
of this disease. And although many gene therapy approaches have been
evaluated to date, clinical responses unfortunately remain poor. We have
examined the potential of developing more effective cell-based gene
therapies for preventing prostate cancer progression, using
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ASC) as vehicles. The present
study reports promising preliminary observations using this novel gene
therapy modality. ASCs can be isolated using simpler methods as compared
to those involving bone marrow mesenchymal cells, and are much more
easily expanded at early passage numbers to therapeutic quantities. And
since current techniques allow isolation of ASCs from an individual's own
adipose tissue, this could help prevent immune reaction, suggesting that
ASCs could be far more efficient as a gene delivery vehicle than viral
vectors currently in clinical trials. In this study we have examined the
potential of new antiangiogenesis and proapoptotic therapies delivered by
ASCs and evaluated their ability to reduce prostate tumor growth rate in
vitro and in vivo. We expressed in ASCs several secreted antitumor gene
therapies (PEDF, Mda7, or IFNb), and all were found to be highly
effective in almost complete prevention of tumor progression in vivo
using prostate cancer xenograft models. Overall, ASC-delivered PEDF
prevented HUVEC tube formation in vitro and induced strong apoptosis of
cocultured cancer cells, suggesting a potential bystander effect that
might be useful for therapeutic applications. Similar antitumor findings
were observed when Mda7 or IFNb were delivered by ASCs, with induction of
strong cell cycle arrest, and viability reduction by an increase in the
apoptosis of cocultured tumor cells as assessed by Caspase 3/7 detection.
The transgene expression was overall non-toxic and did not appear to
interfere with the normal differentiation potential of ASCs (osteogenesis
or adipogenesis). Therefore, this novel cellular delivery method for gene
therapy appears to be effective and highly promising for translational
applications.

