Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting p53 to mitochondrial outer membrane using the Bcl-XL
signal causes p53 specific apoptosis


The tumor suppressor p53 can cause cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, and
apoptosis via its function as a nuclear transcription factor. However,
p53 also triggers apoptosis through a mitochondrial pathway.
Mitochondrial p53 binds to anti-apoptotic (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL) and
pro-apoptotic (Bak, Bax) proteins localized at the mitochondrial outer
membrane (MOM), causing MOM permeabilization that eventually results in
apoptosis. The purpose of this work was to develop an optimal version of
p53 engineered with a mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) to trigger
rapid apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway. To further investigate
mitochondrial activity of p53, we targeted p53 to specific mitochondrial
compartments. EGFP-p53 was fused to different mitochondrial targeting
signals (MTSs) directing it to the mitochondrial outer membrane (XL-MTS
from Bcl-XL; TOM-MTS from TOM20), inner membrane (CCO-MTS from cytochrome
c oxidase) or matrix (OTC-MTS from ornithine transcarbamylase). The
apoptotic mechanism for each construct was further studied using
pifithrin- (which inhibits p53-mediated transcriptional activity),
pifithrin- (which reduces binding of p53 to Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL), and by
over-expressing the anti-apoptotic Bcl-XL. Apoptosis assays (caspase-9,
TUNEL, Annexin-V, 7-AAD) were performed in T47D cells (human ductal
breast epithelial tumor cell line). While all MTS-EGFP-p53 constructs
showed apoptotic potential, only EGFP-p53-XL had the most significant
apoptotic potential compared to its own EGFP-XL control. EGFP tagged to
OTC, CCO and TOM tend to interfere with sensitive mitochondrial function
versus EGFP-XL, which demonstrated minimal toxicity. Previous work in the
literature found that targeting p53 to the mitochondrial matrix causes
apoptosis. However, our work indicates targeting even non-toxic proteins
(EGFP) to the matrix might cause some level of toxicity due to the MTS by
itself. Further, we inquired if the apoptotic response was due to the
Bcl-XL dependent pathway. CCO-EGFP-p53 initiated apoptosis mainly through
the transcriptional activity of p53 (rescued by pifithrin-). TOM-EGFP-p53
is thought to cause apoptosis by activating the pro-apoptotic Bak
(rescued by over-expressing Bcl-XL). OTC-EGFP-p53 resulted in apoptosis
through binding to Bcl-XL (rescued by pifithrin- and over-expressing
Bcl-XL) and showed additional apoptotic potential through transcriptional
activity of p53 (rescued by pifithrin-). In addition, EGFP-p53-XL was the
most specific to the p53/Bcl-XL mitochondrial pathway (rescued by
pifithrin- and over-expressing Bcl-XL). Taken together our data
highlights that targeting p53 to Bcl-XL via the XL MTS triggers a rapid
apoptotic response through an interaction of p53 with anti-apoptotic
Bcl-XL. Due to the ubiquitous role of p53, this gene therapy approach
could be used in many different types of cancers. Acknowledgements: NIH
CA151847

