Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase-2 mediated breast cancer progression by induction
of stem like cells and micro RNA


We established that elevated COX-2 expression by human and murine breast
cancer cells promotes tumor progression and metastasis via multiple
mechanisms primarily due to activation of the PGE-2 receptor EP4. COX-2
and HER-2, often co-expressed in human breast cancer, are both major
determinants of cancer progression. Many of the HER-2 actions were shown
to be COX-2 dependent, but the roles of COX-2 in the absence or presence
of HER-2 in breast cancer initiation and sustenance remain unclear. To
define these roles, we examined the consequences of introducing COX-2
gene into COX-2-ve, HER-2-ve, ER+ve, non-metastatic MCF-7 and COX-2-ve,
ER-ve, HER-2-over-expressing SK-BR-3 human breast cancer cell lines.
After stable integration of COX-2 cDNA, these two cell lines were named
MCF-7-COX-2 and SKBR3-COX-2. When compared with their empty
vector-transfected counterparts, they showed (1) epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (down regulation of E Cadherin and up regulation Vimentin by
qRT-PCR), (2) higher proliferative activity (BrdU uptake), (3) higher
migratory and invasive abilities across microporous membranes (8M pore
size) in Boyden chambers, (4) upregulation of EP4 and angiogenic and
lymphangiogenic factors VEGF-A, C and D (qRT PCR and western blot), (5)
markedly increased stem like cell populations in vitro (spheroid forming
ability of single cells in ultra-low attachment plates for successive
generations) and an increase in ALDH activity (flow cytometry). (6) Above
changes could be abrogated with specific COX-2 inhibitor NS-398 (Pfizer)
or an EP4 antagonist ONO-AE3-208 (ONO Pharmaceuticals, Japan) at non
toxic concentrations, indicating that all these functions are dependent
on COX-2 and EP4 activity. (7) Intravenous injection of MCF-7-COX2 cells
into immuno-deficient mice revealed a dramatic increase in their lung
colony forming capacity at 4-6 weeks, as compared to empty
vector-transfected cells. (8) Using differential gene and micro-RNA
(miRNA) arrays we identified two miRNAs upregulated and their target
fourteen tumor-suppressor like genes down-regulated by introducing COX-2
into MCF-7 cells. (9) We observed a positive co-relation between the
miRNA and COX-2 expression in multiple COX-2 disparate cell lines, in
which expression of miRNAs was inhibited by treatment with COX-2
inhibitors or EP4 antagonists. Current studies are testing the functions
of the miRNAs by knockdown and knock-in studies, and utilizing human
breast cancer tissues to explore the clinical relevance of these
findings. Our model system allowing identification and characterization
of COX-2 induced stem like cells in breast cancer should help defining
COX-2 and EP4 mediated pathways controlling their biology and utilization
of the novel miRNA markers for prognostic and therapeutic applications in
the clinic. (Supported by the CBCF, Ontario Chapter and the OICR funds
from the Government of Ontario to PKL).

