Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of the tumor suppressor APC in cells expressing lysozyme M
results in murine endometrial hyperplasia


The Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC1) tumor suppressor is a
multi-function protein that is involved in both the Wnt signaling cascade
and cytoskeletal remodeling. Mutations or loss of APC1 can result in
defects in cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation. APC
frequently collaborates with the canonical Diaphanous-related formin,
mDia1 (DIAPH1), which also functions to regulate cytoskeletal dynamics.
APC1 and DIAPH1 are genetically linked on Chromosome 5q in a region
frequently disrupted in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). Mice lacking
mDia1 (Drf1) and the Apc min mice develop myelodysplastic phenotypes. The
physical and functional linkage of APC and mDia1 as 5q tumor suppressors
and in cytoskeletal remodeling led us to explore the role of APC in tumor
suppression in myeloid-derived cell lineages. We created a mouse which
lacks APC in myeloid lineage cells by breeding Apc-flox mice with mice
expressing Cre recombinase under the control of lysozyme M (LyzsM) gene
promoter. Lysozyme M is expressed in myeloid lineage cells including
monocytes, macrophages and granulocytes. Surprisingly, the female mice
develop cystic endometrial hyperplasia and are unable to sustain
pregnancy. Lysozyme M expression appears to be limited to tissue resident
macrophages within the uterus and was not detected in uterine epithelial
cells. However, there is a small subset of uterine epithelial cells with
increased -catenin expression, suggesting that these cells lack APC. This
subset of cells has elevated expression of cyclin D1, a regulator of cell
cycle progression and a downstream effector of Wnt signaling, resulting
in increased proliferation. Interestingly, the uterine epithelial cells
with increased -catenin expression also have increased estrogen receptor
(ER) expression. Estrogen stimulates uterine growth and unopposed
estrogen signaling is a hallmark of Type I endometrial cancer. It is
unclear if the endometrial hyperplasia seen in these mice is due to
lysozyme M expression early on in uterine epithelial cell development or
perhaps in a progenitor cell population. A second alternative is that
loss of APC in tissue resident myeloid cells residing in the uterine
stroma affects epithelial morphology. Regardless, these data suggest that
APC plays a role in uterine tissue homeostasis, perhaps even regulating
ER expression.

