Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the use of Fe3O4@TiO2 nanoparticles and nanoconjugates
with a HPV 18 E2 peptide as a potential therapy for HPV containing cancer
cells


Over half a million women world wide are affected by cervical cancer each
year. HPV, human papillomavirus, is currently seen as the causative agent
of this form of cancer. There are multiple mechanisms by which HPV can
cause cervical cancer, the primary mechanisms being the integration of
HPV viral DNA into human DNA and the production of the viral oncoproteins
E6 and E7. The mechanism of action of these oncoproteins lies in the
deregulation of tumor suppressor proteins p53 and Rb. Current cervical
cancer therapies, such as radiation, surgical removal, and chemotherapy
target the cancerous cells but not the causative agent, HPV. The purpose
of this investigation is to find the optimal formulation for, and
evaluate the ability of, titanium dioxide (TiO2) shell - iron oxide
(Fe3O4) core nanoconjugates (Fe3O4@TiO2) to target HPV genome as a method
of therapy. Fe3O4@TiO2, which act the same as pure TiO2 nanoparticles,
produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in solution and have the ability to
cleave DNA upon the induction of photon energies above 3.2 eV (e.g. white
light), as was shown as a part of these studies. In this study, 6nm
Fe3O4@TiO2 nanoconjugates were covalently linked, via a dopamine linker,
to a truncated HPV 18 E2 peptide. The peptide linked to the nanoparticle
is a 22 amino acid sequence that contains a nuclear localization sequence
as well as a DNA binding motif. We hypothesized that (1) the
Fe3O4@TiO2-PNA nanoconjugates would localize to the nucleus of cells; (2)
presence of nanoconjugates in cells would lead to the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon induction with white light; (3)
presence of light activated nanoconjugates in cells would lead to double
strand breaks in DNA. The nanoconjugate was tested in HeLa cells which
contain multiple copies of HPV genome. To evaluate the effectiveness of
this nanoconjugate therapy, we have used DCFDA staining to determine
levels of ROS in cells upon the induction of light. As a method to
determine double strand DNA damage, we have used immunofluorescence
techniques to reveal changes in 53BP1 foci. Upon the introduction and
induction of Fe3O4@TiO2-HPV 18 E2 peptide nanoconjugates in HeLa cells we
have found increases in ROS levels and increases 53BP1 foci suggesting
the presence of double strand DNA damage.

