Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual cytoprotective and cytotoxic functions of autophagy in the
response of breast tumor cells to radiation and in radiosensitization by
vitamin D3


Introduction: While chemotherapy and radiation treatment may be initially
effective at suppressing breast cancer growth, disease recurrence and
tumor metastasis are major clinical problems. A number of strategies have
been developed in an attempt to enhance the response to radiation and
prevent tumor cell recovery by interfering with cytoprotective signaling.
Autophagy reflects a cellular response to stress that allows the
degradation of subcellular organelles to generate energy and metabolic
precursors; autophagy may be cytoprotective or cytotoxic, depending on
the cells and the nature of the stressful challenge. Our current studies
were designed to evaluate the involvement of autophagy in
radiosensitization by EB1089 as well as extending the work to the
hormonally active and natural form of 1,25D3. In addition, studies were
performed in breast tumor cells that are intrinsically resistant to
radiation and chemotherapy through over expression of Her-2/neu
(MCF7/Her-2/neu cells), as well as Hs578t cells and BT474 cells. Results:
In MCF-7 breast tumor cells, ionizing radiation promoted autophagy that
was cytoprotective; pharmacological or genetic interference with
autophagy induced by radiation resulted in growth suppression and/or cell
killing (primarily by apoptosis). The hormonally active form of vitamin
D, 1,25D3, also promoted autophagy in irradiated MCF-7 cells, sensitized
the cells to radiation and suppressed the proliferative recovery that
occurs after radiation alone. 1,25D3 enhanced radiosensitivity and
promoted autophagy in MCF7 cells that overexpress Her-2/neu as well as in
p53 mutant Hs578t breast tumor cells. In contrast, 1,25D3 failed to alter
radiosensitivity or promote autophagy in the BT474 breast tumor cell line
with low-level expression of the vitamin D receptor. Enhancement of MCF-7
cell sensitivity to radiation by 1,25D3 was not attenuated by a genetic
block to autophagy due largely to the promotion of apoptosis via the
collateral suppression of protective autophagy. However, MCF-7 cells were
protected from the combination of 1,25D3 with radiation using a
concentration of chloroquine that produced minimal sensitization to
radiation alone. The current studies are consistent with the premise that
while autophagy mediates a cytoprotective function in irradiated breast
tumor cells, promotion of autophagy can also confer radiosensitivity by
vitamin D (1,25D3). As both cytoprotective and cytotoxic autophagy can
apparently be expressed in the same experimental system in response to
radiation, this type of model could be utilized to distinguish
biochemical, molecular and/or functional differences in these dual
functions of autophagy. Supported, in part, by American Institute for
Cancer Research Grant # 06A058-REV and by a DOD predoctoral training
grant (W81XWH-09-1-0020).

