Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway profiling of head and neck cancer cell lines


Introduction: Cell lines retain key genetic aberrations of the
originating tumors, which frequently correlate with sensitivity to
specific inhibitors. We performed genetic and pathway based profiling of
40 head and neck cancer (HNC) cell lines using three publicly available
methods for pathway profiling based on expression and copy number data.
Methods: 40 HNC cell lines were analyzed for expression using expression
arrays (Agilent), and copy number using array comparative hybridization
(aCGH) and/or Nanostring methodologies. Integrative genomic analysis was
performed to determine pathway activity using pathway analysis techniques
previously described by Gatza et al. (BFRM), Pe'er et al (CONEXIC), Vaske
et al. (PARADIGM). Results: Frequent pathway activation was identified in
>10 well established signalling pathways for HNC including TP53,
PI3K-AKT, TP63/SOX2, Cyclin D1, MYC etc, as well as several - for HNC
previously unknown - signalling pathways. Cell lines could be associated
with expression-based biologic subtypes in HNC tissues suggesting that
specific cell lines should be used preferentially for modelling and
therapeutic evaluation for HNC subtypes (including HPV(+) cell lines with
characteristics of HPV(+) tumors). The three pathway analysis platforms
identified a large number of pathways with some overlap in particular
between BFRM and CONEXIC, whereas PARADIGM profiled a much wider set of
pathways. Both CONEXIC and PARADIGM employed copy number data, whereas
BFRM relied solely on expression data. Conclusion: Pathway alterations
characteristic of head and neck cancers were identified in virtually all
HNC cell lines. Pathway based classification of cell lines was achieved
and correlated with pathway activity in HNC tumor tissues. Three
pathway-profiling approaches provided a large set of pathway activity
with some significant overlap that may have translational relevance.
Validation studies are currently on-going.

