Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A CpG island methylator phenotype defines a clinically aggressive
subgroup of posterior fossa ependymoma


Ependymoma is the third most common pediatric brain tumor and remains
incurable in 45% of patients. It arises in the spinal cord,
supratentorial brain, and most commonly in children, the posterior fossa
(PF). We recently reported the identification of two molecularly and
clinically distinct subgroups of PF ependymoma, which we named Group A
and B. While patients with Group B tumors harbor a large number of gross
chromosomal gains and losses (approx. 17 arm events per tumor) and have
favorable prognoses (5 year PFS = 92%), patients with Group A tumors have
balanced genomic profiles (approx. 1 arm event per tumor) with poor
clinical outcomes (5 year PFS = 24%). We hypothesized that aberrant DNA
methylation could be a mechanism driving the tumorigenesis of Group A PF
ependymoma. To this end, we isolated methylated DNA in 92 ependymomas by
Methyl Binding Domain 2 protein assisted recovery, and hybridized
enriched DNA to promoter tiling arrays (Nimblegen). Using unsupervised
hierarchical clustering we determined that the DNA methylation profiles
of ependymoma were regionally specified, dividing tumors into subgroups
according to their anatomical origin. Using both gene expression and DNA
methylation platforms, we identified a subset of PF ependymoma, which
clustered with spinal tumors, supporting the vast molecular differences
between Group A and B PF ependymoma. We next compared the number of
methylated genes identified in Group A versus B, and observed that Group
A tumors exhibited a greater number of methylated genes at specific CpG
islands, a feature described as a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
in glioma, colon cancer, and breast cancer. We validated these findings
in a non-overlapping cohort of 48 PF ependymomas, analyzed using a
different array technology (Illumina Infinium 450K). Using various
unsupervised clustering methods (HCL, K-MEANS, NMF, and SOM), we verified
that Group A and B exhibited highly distinct DNA methylation profiles.
Further, we confirmed that Group A tumours were defined by a greater
overall number of methylated genes (A: 855, B: 233; Wilcoxon-Rank Sum
Test), and a greater number of methylated genes per tumour (A: 511, B:
425; Wilcoxon-Rank Sum Test). We performed Gene Set Enrichment analysis
and observed that many genes methylated in Group A exhibited a
significant overlap with genes marked by the polycomb repressor (PRC2)
complex in embryonic stem cells (pEpendymoma is the third most common
pediatric brain tumor and remains incurable in 45% of patients. It arises
in the spinal cord, supratentorial brain, and most commonly in children,
the posterior fossa (PF). We recently reported the identification of two
molecularly and clinically distinct subgroups of PF ependymoma, which we
named Group A and B. While patients with Group B tumors harbor a large
number of gross chromosomal gains and losses (approx. 17 arm events per
tumor) and have favorable prognoses (5 year PFS = 92%), patients with
Group A tumors have balanced genomic profiles (approx. 1 arm event per
tumor) with poor clinical outcomes (5 year PFS = 24%). We hypothesized
that aberrant DNA methylation could be a mechanism driving the
tumorigenesis of Group A PF ependymoma. To this end, we isolated
methylated DNA in 92 ependymomas by Methyl Binding Domain 2 protein
assisted recovery, and hybridized enriched DNA to promoter tiling arrays
(Nimblegen). Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering we determined
that the DNA methylation profiles of ependymoma were regionally
specified, dividing tumors into subgroups according to their anatomical
origin. Using both gene expression and DNA methylation platforms, we
identified a subset of PF ependymoma, which clustered with spinal tumors,
supporting the vast molecular differences between Group A and B PF
ependymoma. We next compared the number of methylated genes identified in
Group A versus B, and observed that Group A tumors exhibited a greater
number of methylated genes at specific CpG islands, a feature described
as a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in glioma, colon cancer, and
breast cancer. We validated these findings in a non-overlapping cohort of
48 PF ependymomas, analyzed using a different array technology (Illumina
Infinium 450K). Using various unsupervised clustering methods (HCL,
K-MEANS, NMF, and SOM), we verified that Group A and B exhibited highly
distinct DNA methylation profiles. Further, we confirmed that Group A
tumours were defined by a greater overall number of methylated genes (A:
855, B: 233; Wilcoxon-Rank Sum Test), and a greater number of methylated
genes per tumour (A: 511, B: 425; Wilcoxon-Rank Sum Test). We performed
Gene Set Enrichment analysis and observed that many genes methylated in
Group A exhibited a significant overlap with genes marked by the polycomb
repressor (PRC2) complex in embryonic stem cells (p<0.0001, FDREpendymoma
is the third most common pediatric brain tumor and remains incurable in
45% of patients. It arises in the spinal cord, supratentorial brain, and
most commonly in children, the posterior fossa (PF). We recently reported
the identification of two molecularly and clinically distinct subgroups
of PF ependymoma, which we named Group A and B. While patients with Group
B tumors harbor a large number of gross chromosomal gains and losses
(approx. 17 arm events per tumor) and have favorable prognoses (5 year
PFS = 92%), patients with Group A tumors have balanced genomic profiles
(approx. 1 arm event per tumor) with poor clinical outcomes (5 year PFS =
24%). We hypothesized that aberrant DNA methylation could be a mechanism
driving the tumorigenesis of Group A PF ependymoma. To this end, we
isolated methylated DNA in 92 ependymomas by Methyl Binding Domain 2
protein assisted recovery, and hybridized enriched DNA to promoter tiling
arrays (Nimblegen). Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering we
determined that the DNA methylation profiles of ependymoma were
regionally specified, dividing tumors into subgroups according to their
anatomical origin. Using both gene expression and DNA methylation
platforms, we identified a subset of PF ependymoma, which clustered with
spinal tumors, supporting the vast molecular differences between Group A
and B PF ependymoma. We next compared the number of methylated genes
identified in Group A versus B, and observed that Group A tumors
exhibited a greater number of methylated genes at specific CpG islands, a
feature described as a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in glioma,
colon cancer, and breast cancer. We validated these findings in a
non-overlapping cohort of 48 PF ependymomas, analyzed using a different
array technology (Illumina Infinium 450K). Using various unsupervised
clustering methods (HCL, K-MEANS, NMF, and SOM), we verified that Group A
and B exhibited highly distinct DNA methylation profiles. Further, we
confirmed that Group A tumours were defined by a greater overall number
of methylated genes (A: 855, B: 233; Wilcoxon-Rank Sum Test), and a
greater number of methylated genes per tumour (A: 511, B: 425;
Wilcoxon-Rank Sum Test). We performed Gene Set Enrichment analysis and
observed that many genes methylated in Group A exhibited a significant
overlap with genes marked by the polycomb repressor (PRC2) complex in
embryonic stem cells (p<0.0001, FDR<0.1%), a phenomenon seen in other
cancer CIMPs. We propose two diverse mechanisms leading to tumourigenesis
in Group A and B ependymoma. The greater number of chromosomal
alterations in Group B suggests a Chromosomal Instability (CIN)
phenotype, while the greater number of methylated CpG islands in Group A
suggests a CpG island Methylator (CIMP) phenotype. Understanding these
underlying mechanisms driving Group A and B pathogenesis may yield new
leads for subgroup-specific treatments of PF ependymoma.

