Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS mutation analysis using blood derived cell free tumor DNA for
treatment monitoring of metastatic colorectal cancer patients


Currently used non-invasive diagnostic methods for monitoring patients
undergoing anti-cancer treatment are limited. The applicability of
diagnostic imaging is limited and lack of sensitivity and specificity of
routinely used tumor markers hampers clinical application. Circulating
cell free DNA (ccfDNA) has been shown to contain minute fractions of
tumor-derived DNA. We tested in a proof of principal study the
applicability of circulating mutant DNA as a tool to (1) evaluate the
clinical sensitivity of cancer detection by analyzing KRAS2 mutations and
(2) monitor therapy response in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC)
patients. In our retrospective study we analyzed 50 serum samples of 18
patients with mCRC and confirmed KRAS2 mutation in the resected primary
tumor (G12D, G12V, or G13D). Samples were collected at therapy start
(t0), after four cycles of therapy (t1), which was on average after 8
weeks and if available, additional samples at later time points (t2, t3)
to assess the longitudinal outcome (median follow up 23 weeks, range
8-248weeks). Therapy response and course of disease were assessed using
RECIST criteria at all analyzed time points. The three most commonly
occurring KRAS2 (G12D, G12V, or G13D) mutations were examined by
Allele-specific PCR. The assay was established using defined tumor cell
line DNA and its sensitivity proofed to be up to 0.1%. In 15/18 patients
(83.3%), we could detect a KRAS2 mutation at start of therapy (t0) and
could confirm diagnosis of mCRC by analysis of ccfDNA. In contrast only
8/18 (44.4%) patients and 7/18 (38.9%) patients showed increased levels
of the tumor markers CEA and CA19-9, respectively. Therefore, the
analysis of the KRAS2 status identified 5 additional patients as positive
for colorectal cancer. To assess therapy response we quantified mutant
KRAS2 levels in ccfDNA of 15 patients with detectable KRAS2 mutations.
The changes of KRAS2 level were compared to the information from imaging,
evaluated by RECIST criteria. A concordance in the assessment of therapy
response after 4 cycles (t1) could be observed in 10/15 (66.7%) analyzed
cases. In 12/15 patients the longitudinal outcome (t2, t3) was assessed
and compared to t1. A concordance in the assessment of therapy response
could be observed in 9/12 (75%) patients. Validation of data from patient
sample analysis with Deep Sequencing is in progress.Our findings confirm
the potential of ccfDNA as a biomarker for improved serum based relapse
diagnosis and enables closed meshed monitoring of therapy response. A
multiplex mutational analysis will be needed to translate this principle
and include also other patient subpopulations (ie. KRAS2 negative).
Therefore, we adapted the assay using whole genome amplification to
amplify the limited amounts of ccfDNA that now allows the parallel
testing of multiple mutations (work in progress).

