Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Micro-RNA signature of glioblastoma multiforme invasion: An in
vivo study in patient-tumor derived orthotopic xenograft mouse models


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumor that
occurs both in adults and children. One of biologic features that make
GBM particularly difficult to treat is its diffuse invasion into normal
brain tissue. Efforts of developing new targeted therapies against GBM
invasion are hampered by poor understanding of the invasion process and
biological differences between the tumor core cells and those in the
invasive front, because the invasive GBM cells are rarely available for
comparative analysis. To understand the molecular mechanisms of GBM
invasion, we isolated invasive cells that have migrated into normal mouse
brain tissue from a panel of four (1 adult and 3 pediatric) patient-tumor
derived orthotopic xenograft mouse models and compared their microRNA
expression profiles with that of the matched tumor core cells using
Taqman MicroRNA array, a real-time PCR-based assay that profiles 768
microRNAs utilizing a normal human cerebral tissue as reference. To test
our hypothesis that the invasive GBM cells depend on a common set of
microRNAs to migrate into normal brain tissue, we focused our data
analysis on the microRNAs that are shared in at least 3 of the 4 GBM
models. From the total of 322 microRNAs that were found to be expressed
in at least 3 of the four models (159 were present in all four models),
we identified 7 microRNAs that were significantly upregulated in the
invasive cells in all four models, and an additional 49 in three of the
four models. This data set included miR-223 and miR-138, which have been
previously associated with tumor invasion. A total of 16 microRNAs were
also found to be decreased in the invasive GBM cells, including miR-107
and miR-18b that have been previously described in multiple human tumors.
Given the critical roles of cancer stem cells in tumor initiation and
progression, we also compared the neurosphere forming efficiency between
the invasive and tumor core subpopulations. In both of the models
analyzed to date, a significantly increased neurosphere forming
efficiency was observed in the invasive cells. To determine if and to
what extent that the microRNA signature of GBM invasion is preserved in
the neurospheres, we compared the microRNA profiles between neurospheres
and their corresponding freshly isolated xenograft cells of the invasive
front and tumor core. The correlation coefficients ranged from 0.58 to
0.84(0.725 0.136). Some of the dysregulated microRNAs originally found in
vivo were preserved in the cultured neurospheres. In conclusion, we have
established a novel in vivo model system that allows for isolation of
paired and biologically accurate invasive and tumor core GBM cells in
vivo in mouse brains. Using this system, we have identified a novel
subset of microRNAs that are significantly altered in the invasive cells.
This group of microRNAs warrants further evaluation as potential
therapeutic targets.

