Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomic strategies to identify oncogenes in breast
cancer


During the process of tumorigenesis and tumor progression cancer cells
acquire an array of genetic alterations. The theory of oncogene addiction
proposes that a small portion of these alterations generate driver
oncogenes that are critical for maintaining the transformed phenotype.
Strong support for this theory comes from the identification and
subsequent therapeutic targeting of individual driver oncogenes that has
resulted in significant clinical responses. However, in solid tumors that
contain multiple driver oncogenes, these responses are not durable and it
is therefore likely that multiple oncogenes will need to be identified
and targeted in these tumors in order to reverse the transformed
phenotype and effect durable clinical responses. Identifying multiple
driver oncogenes among the large number of mutated/amplified genes that
are present in most solid tumors is a nontrivial task that will require
novel approaches. In this study, we have developed an approach that
combines exome sequencing, array comparative genomic hybridization,
expression analysis and genome-wide, RNAi-based functional screening to
identify driver oncogenes that are functioning in individual cell lines
derived from human tumors. In a pilot study using this approach we have
shown that of the 583 amplified genes in the SUM225 breast cancer cell
line only 45 are hits in the RNAi-based functional screen. Similarly, of
the 806 genes that are mutated in this cell line only 26 are hits in the
RNAi-based functional screen. Interestingly, the SMPD3 gene that was both
amplified and a hit in the functional screen also contained a point
mutation and this point mutation was present in another HER2 positive
breast cancer cell line, SUM190. The identification of SMPD3 as a likely
driver oncogene in the SUM225 and SUM190 cell lines highlights the power
of an approach that combines sequence and copy number data with
functional screening to identify driver oncogenes. Future analysis will
incorporate expression data to further refine this approach.

