Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 3 induces
hyperacetylation and inhibition of nuclear heat shock protein (hsp) 90
leading to depletion of ATR and CHK1 with sensitization to DNA damage in
breast and cervical cancer cells


We have recently reported that in addition to checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1),
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated and Rad3- related (ATR) is chaperoned by
hsp90. Treatment of breast and cervical cancer cells with hsp90 inhibitor
induces proteasomal degradation and depletion of ATR and CHK1. This
results in impairment of the DNA damage response (DDR) and causes
sensitization to -irradiation and replication stress due to hydroxyurea
(Mol Cancer Ther 10:1194, 3011). In the present studies, we determined
that treatment with pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor panobinostat
(20 to 50 nM) or vorinostat (0.5 to 2 M) induced polyubiquitylation and
depletion of ATR and CHK1. Co-treatment with bortezomib, a proteasome
inhibitor, restored PS-mediated depletion of ATR and CHK1. Notably,
treatment with panobinostat induced hyperacetylation of both nuclear and
cytoplasmic hsp90. This inhibited the chaperone association of nuclear
hsp90 with ATR and CHK1, thereby promoting their degradation. PS
treatment induced -H2AX levels, which were inhibited by co-treatment with
N-acetylcysteine, suggesting that PS-induced ROS is involved in DNA
damage. Moreover, PS treatment further increased -irradiation induced DNA
damage and its repair, characterized by the increase in
-irradiation-induced comet tail moment and the lack of DNA
repair-mediated attenuation of the comet tail moment. To determine which
class I HDAC is involved in deacetylation of nuclear hsp90, we
individually knocked down (KD) HDAC 1, 2 and 3, by utilizing specific
shRNA, and determined the effect on nuclear hsp90 hyperacetylation and
the levels of ATR and CHK1. Our findings show that HDAC3 binds to hsp90
and KD of HDAC3, but not of HDAC1 or 2, caused hyperacetylation of
nuclear hsp90 and depletion of ATR and CHK1. This was also observed in
HDAC3 null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Ectopic overexpression of
HDAC3 inhibited nuclear hsp90 acetylation in transformed cells. These
findings demonstrate that HDAC3 is the nuclear hsp90 lysine deacetylase.
They also demonstrate that genetic KD of HDAC3, or its inhibition by
pan-HDAC inhibitors, induces hyperacetylation of hsp90, mediates loss of
hsp90 chaperone association and depletion of ATR and CHK1, abrogates
-irradiation-induced DDR, and results in sensitization of transformed
cells to DNA damage due to -irradiation or replication stress.

