Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of novel therapeutic targets for T-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphoma


T-cell malignancies account for 10-15% of all human non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(NHL). T-cell lymphomas are incurable, and the development of effective
treatment strategies has been hindered by the relatively infrequency of
these conditions. T-cell lymphomas occur spontaneously in dogs; they are
morphologically similar to human T-cell lymphomas, resemble their
biological behavior, and are relatively common (35% of all NHL),
providing opportunities to improve our understanding of the pathogenesis
of these tumors as well as to develop more effective therapies.
Tumor-initiating cells (TICs) influence tumor progression and response to
therapy in many cancers, so eliminating these cells may be necessary to
achieve durable remissions. However, the existence of TICs and their
potential significance have not been conclusively established in T-cell
NHL. The objective of this study was to evaluate the existence of
progenitor-like lymphoma cells (PLCs) in naturally occurring canine
T-cell NHL. We identified a reproducible population of tumor-related PLCs
in spontaneous T-cell malignancies. The cells expressed the hematopoietic
progenitor antigen CD34 and tumor-specific T-cell receptor gene
rearrangements. Somewhat unexpectedly, these cells also express B-cell
surface proteins (CD20 and CD22), but not the major T-cell surface
antigens (CD3 and CD5) that were expressed by the bulk of the tumor cells
(BTCs). We have adapted a xenotransplantation assay for primary canine
T-cell NHL using NOD/SCID/IL-2Rgammanull mice and genetically modifying
the tumor cells to express luciferase as a means monitor tumor growth and
distribution by in vivo imaging. This model allows us to expand and
serially transplant primary canine T-cell NHL for more detailed studies,
including limiting dilution assays and therapeutic targeting using
anti-B-cell reagents. In summary, we propose a novel concept in which a
small population of tumor cells with B-cell progenitor phenotypes may
paradoxically contribute to the pathogenesis of T-cell lymphoma,
potentially representing a novel therapeutic target. We already use dogs
with naturally occurring disease in the pathway for therapy development,
allowing us to expand these studies into clinical trials that can then be
rapidly translated to benefit human patients (for example, by using
approved agents such as anti-CD20 antibodies or CD22-targeted
immunotoxins).

