Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MGMT methylation based outcome prediction is associated with two
CpG regions separated by a prediction minimum centred at the initiation
start site


Promoter methylation of the repair gene MGMT is a predictive factor for
benefit from alkylating agent therapy in glioblastoma patients. High
through-put platforms for genome wide DNA methylation analysis have
allowed establishing the methylome of large series of patient samples
that has identified a glioma CpG methylator phenotype (G-CIMP). However,
classification of samples as being methylated or unmethylated for a given
gene is not obvious, since the relationship between CpG-methylation at a
given site and the extent of the overall CpG island methylation, and the
effect on gene silencing is strongly dependent on the location. For the
MGMT gene 176 CpGs are interrogated on the 450K chip of which 18 are
located in the CpG island associated with the promoter region.
Correlation of MGMT methylation at these 18 CpG sites in 63 glioblastoma
and 5 non tumoral brain tissues and methylation prediction established
previously by methylation specific PCR (MSP) indicated 2 regions with
highest association. The two areas were separated by a prediction minimum
centered at the initiation start site. The correlation of MGMT expression
with the methylation status of CpGs followed the same pattern with the
strongest negative correlation reaching 0.5 at the 2 peaks. Subsequently
we tested the predictive value of the 18 CpGs for outcome in these
patients treated within clinical trials with temozolomide containing
chemo-radiotherapy. Most intriguingly, correlation with gene expression,
survival analyses and association with MSP displayed almost superposable
images of CpGs, at the previously identified CpG regions! A model for
MGMT methylation classification based on stepwise logistic regression was
constructed with a kappa value close to 0.85. The model was validated in
a published external data set of homogeneously treated patient cohort
with anaplastic glioma for which methylation data and survival
information was available, and for which MGMT methylation was reported as
prognostic factor. The model was subsequently applied to the methylation
data available from the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) glioblastoma
data-set comprising 241 samples. Classification of the samples for their
MGMT methylation status based on the predictor revealed that MGMT is
frequently methylated in glioblastoma with G-CIMP (simulated p=0.001
chi-square, Monte-Carlo method), but is not a G-CIMP gene. Taken
together, the location of methylated CpGs within the promoter is crucial
for prediction of MGMT silencing and subsequent impact on outcome. Hence,
for efficient mining of large scale methylation data we need models to
identify regions of CpGs with a high impact on gene silencing or other
features relevant for the understanding of tumor biology and effect on
response to therapy.

