Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targets mediating resistance to EGFR/c-Met tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in NSCLC


c-Met and EGFR are therapeutic targets in NSCLC with a direct role in
tumor progression. Highly specific TKIs against c-Met, have limited
efficacy individually, and resistance to c-Met TKIs could be due to
activation/mutations in EGFR, or c-Met amplification/mutations which
could lead to increased expression and constitutive phosphorylation of
c-Met. In recent clinical trials, simultaneous treatment with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against c-Met/EGFR has improved patient
prognosis, however, their efficacy has been limited due to the
development of resistance to TKIs. To establish the mechanism of TKI
resistance in NSCLC, two cell lines (H2170 and H358) were made resistant
to c-Met and EGFR TKIs (15-30 fold increase in IC50 of SU11274 and 8-10
fold increase in IC50 of Erlotinib) by exposing the cells to
progressively increasing concentrations of both drugs simultaneously. In
H2170 cell lines, a 4-fold downregulation p-cMet 1003 (c-cbl binding
site) and a 5-fold increase in p-c-Met 1234/1235 (autophosphorylation
site) was observed. Additionally, several proteins in signaling pathways
(mTOR and Wnt) linked to EGFR and c-Met, were also found to be
differentially modulated in H2170 and H358 resistant lines: active
-catenin (1.5-2.5 fold increase), p-mTOR (2-4 fold increase), and
phospho-pS6kinase (2-20 fold increase). Interestingly, few differences
were observed in p-ERK or p-AKT, which are EGFR/c-Met downstream
signaling proteins, indicating that other pathways such as mTOR and Wnt
may cause TKI resistance. To confirm the role of mTOR and Wnt pathways in
resistance and to break their resistance, parental and resistant cell
lines were treated with the mTOR inhibitor everolimus and the Wnt
inhibitor XAV 939 in addition to c-Met and EGFR TKIs. An MTT viability
assay showed resistant cell lines to be 2-4 fold more susceptible in
comparison to parental cells with the addition of everolimus to TKI
combination treatment. In response to the Wnt inhibitor XAV 939, parental
cell lines showed no significant increase in sensitivity while resistant
lines showed a 2.5-3 fold decrease in viability when compared to c-Met
and EGFR TKI combination treatment. Our results suggest novel mechanisms
of resistance to c-Met TKI which are mediated by increased c-Met
stability, resulting in increases in Wnt expression/mTOR activation. The
decreased phosphorylation of c-Met 1003 may lead to decreased
binding/activity of Cbl and/or deficient ubiquitination of c-Met. This
may result in increased stabilization of c-Met as evidenced by the
increased phosphorylation of c-Met 1234/1235 and the subsequent
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Wnt pathways which has been shown. These
studies suggest a new treatment modality since inhibitors of Wnt pathway
or agents targeting -catenin have not entered clinical testing. These
results suggest that Wnt/ mTOR inhibitors combined with c-Met/EGFR TKIs
may be a novel combination therapy for lung cancer.

