Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET and fluorescence imaging of brain cancer with a dual modality
probe based on sarcophagine cage


The development of a PET/optical imaging system is attractive because of
the opportunity to obtain complementary data from two similar contrast
mechanisms using one probe. Different from PET/CT or SPECT/CT, a linker
is generally needed to efficiently incorporate PET tag, optical tag, and
the biomarker together. Previously we developed a
dicarboxyl-functionalized chelator (BaBaSar) derivatized from
sarcophagine cage (denoted as Sar). BaBaSar has been used for 64Cu
radiopharmaceutical development and the great in vivo stability of
64Cu-BaBaSar encouraged us to continue to derivatize the sarcophagine
core for versatile conjugation styles with biomarkers. In this study, we
synthesized a hetero-functionalized sarcophagine named BaAnSar: carboxyl
group at one end of the Sar cage and amino group on the other end. The
pendant hetero-arm could be further conjugated to multiple targeting
ligands via biologically stable amide bonds. In order to prove the
advantage of the this BaAnSar chelator, we chose dimeric c(RGDyK) peptide
(denoted as RGD2), a well-known ligand targeting integrin v3, onto the
carboxyl side and fluorescent dye Cy5.5 on the amino functional side of
the Sar cage. After labeling with 64Cu, a dual-modality probe,
64Cu-BaAnSar-RGD2-Cy5.5 was made and evaluated in U87MG tumor bearing
nude mice. Both NIR fluorescence imaging and microPET clearly delineated
the U87MG tumor from the surrounded normal tissue at 1, 4, and 20 h post
injection of 64Cu-BaAnSar-RGD2-Cy5.5. The microPET quantification of
U87MG tumor uptake was determined as 6.41 0.28, 6.51 1.45, and 5.92 1.57
%ID/g at 1, 4, and 20 h post injection, respectively. Good correlation
was also observed between the results measured by ex vivo PET and NIRF
organ imaging. In conclusion, we have successfully developed a
bifunctional chelator for dual PET and NIRF imaging probe construction.
The BaAnSar chelator developed herein has the potential to enhance
resolution for comprehensive visualization of the probe distribution and
provides a rapid and efficient imaging method for basic research and
potential clinical applications, especially as a visual guide during
surgery.

