Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative detection of discriminatory proteins in tissue and
serum of ovarian cancer patients by LC-MSE


Purpose: Using label-free UPLC-MSE quantification methods to identifying
proteins as well as determining their abundance in serum and
microdissected ovarian cancer tissue. Experimental procedures: Serum of
six patients with a serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary (stage IIIB or
higher) was collected before treatment. Matched control patients with a
serous cystadenoma of the ovary were chosen as a control group. In
addition, homogeneous regions of cells that exhibited uniform histology
were isolated from cancer tissue by laser capture microdissection (LCM),
normal ovarian epithelial cell samples and stroma samples were taken from
matched controls. We subsequently employed label-free ultra-high pressure
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MSE) to identify
proteins and determine their absolute concentrations in serum and tissue
lysates. Moderated t-tests were used to identify differentially expressed
proteins between patient- and control-group. p-values were adjusted for
multiple-testing using Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rates and
considered differentially expressed when Purpose: Using label-free
UPLC-MSE quantification methods to identifying proteins as well as
determining their abundance in serum and microdissected ovarian cancer
tissue. Experimental procedures: Serum of six patients with a serous
adenocarcinoma of the ovary (stage IIIB or higher) was collected before
treatment. Matched control patients with a serous cystadenoma of the
ovary were chosen as a control group. In addition, homogeneous regions of
cells that exhibited uniform histology were isolated from cancer tissue
by laser capture microdissection (LCM), normal ovarian epithelial cell
samples and stroma samples were taken from matched controls. We
subsequently employed label-free ultra-high pressure liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MSE) to identify proteins
and determine their absolute concentrations in serum and tissue lysates.
Moderated t-tests were used to identify differentially expressed proteins
between patient- and control-group. p-values were adjusted for
multiple-testing using Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rates and
considered differentially expressed when <0.05. Summary of the data: In
the serum specimens, 13 differentially expressed proteins were identified
by LC-MSE profiling. Proteins with different concentrations in patients
versus control sera include abundant serum proteins such as
apolipoprotein AI and transferrin, both exhibited a lower concentration
in serum of cancer patients. Differential expression was also observed
for apolipoproteins (APOA IV, APOA II and APOC III) and other proteins
that have not been associated with ovarian cancer previously such as C9
and Afamin. In the tissue-lysates we identified 535 Proteins of which 332
could be reliably quantified. Of these 56 were differentially expressed
proteins of which 12 had non-overlapping standard deviations. Literature
searches confirmed a link between ovarian cancer and 6 of these proteins,
suggesting a possible role in disease progression. Of special interest
was the identification of prohibitin (PHB) and cofilin-1 (CFL1).
Immunohistochemical detection of CFL1 in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissues of our patient group showed heterogeneous expression in 50% of
the serous ovarian carcinomas, whereas all the benign lesions were
negative. These results again demonstrate the validity of the protein
quantitation results obtained by MSE. Interestingly, no overlap was found
between the discriminatory proteins in serum specimens and corresponding
tissue lysates, illustrating the challenge to identify a single biomarker
in the circulation reflecting ovary cancer. Conclusions: Our study
revealed several protein changes in serum and tissue of patients
suffering from serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary. Further investigation
of these proteins is warranted to establish whether they could provide
new insights into disease etiology and act as potential new markers.

