Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dosimetric properties of a new thermobrachytherapy seed with
ferromagnetic core for treatment of solid tumors


Studies of the curative effects of hyperthermia and radiation therapy on
treatment of cancer show a strong evidence of a synergistic enhancement
when both radiation and hyperthermia modalities are applied
simultaneously. Varieties of tissue heating approaches developed up to
date still fail to overcome such essential limitations as an inadequate
temperature control, temperature non-uniformity, and prolonged time delay
between hyperthermia and radiation treatments. We propose a new
self-regulating Thermobrachytherapy seed, which serves as a source of
both radiation and heat for concurrent administration of brachytherapy
and hyperthermia. The proposed seed is based on the BEST Seed Model
2301-I125, where tungsten marker core and the air gap are replaced with a
ferromagnetic material. The ferromagnetic core produces heat when
subjected to alternating electro-magnetic (EM) field and effectively
shuts off after reaching the Curie temperature (TC) of the ferromagnetic
material thus realizing the temperature self-regulation. We present the
Monte Carlo study of dose rate constant and the other TG-43 radiation
characteristic factors for the proposed seed. For the thermal
characteristics, we studied a model consisting of 16 seeds placed in the
central region of a cylindrical water phantom using a finite-element
partial differential equation solver package COMSOL Multiphysics. The
modeling result shows that temperature of the thermoseed surface rises
rapidly and stays constant around TC of the ferromagnetic material. The
amount of heat produced by the ferromagnetic core is sufficient to raise
the temperature of the surrounding volume to the therapeutic range. The
volume of the therapeutic temperature range increases with increase of
frequency or magnetic field strength. These studies demonstrate that an
optimal isothermal distribution can be achieved on a target volume to
match with the radiation isodose distribution for the seed configuration
by tuning frequency and intensity of the alternating magnetic field. The
proposed combination seed model has a high potential for implementation
of concurrent brachytherapy and hyperthermia.

