Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mirk/dyrk1B kinase inhibition increases ROS and apoptosis in
ovarian cancer cells, but has little effect on normal diploid cells


Quiescent cancer cells in vivo, including stem cell populations, are
relatively insensitive to most chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation.
Tumor cells in culture can be placed in G0 by serum or nutrient
deprivation, and then can be targeted by a small molecule Mirk kinase
inhibitor. Mirk/dyrk1B levels are elevated up to 10-fold in quiescent
tumor cells where Mirk blocks cell cycling and increases viability by
decreasing reactive oxygen species (ROS). In prior studies Mirk was
detected in 75% of ovarian cancers, and was amplified in a subset. In
contrast, Mirk expression was quite low in most normal cell types and
Mirk knockout or depletion had no detectable effects on normal cells.
Response to a Mirk kinase inhibitor was compared between two strains of
normal diploid fibroblasts, early passage cultures of normal human
ovarian epithelial cells, and a series of ovarian cancer cell lines where
Mirk had been shown to be an active kinase. Serum-starved normal diploid
cells entered a G0 quiescent state and had minimal response to the Mirk
inhibitor, but serum-starved cancer cells were kept in cycle by the Mirk
inhibitor, which reduced E2F4 sequestration by p130/Rb2 by 2-3fold. Mirk
inhibitor treated cancer cultures had several-fold more sub-G0/G1
apoptotic cells and about 30-fold higher levels of the apoptotic proteins
cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase 3 compared with normal diploid cells.
The Mirk inhibitor increased total ROS levels and superoxide levels only
in the cancer cells, in a rapid time-course of 2-3 days. Cancer cell loss
after Mirk kinase inhibitor treatment was due at least in part to ROS,
since the ROS scavenger N-acetyl cysteine reduced the amount of cleaved
PARP and the extent of cancer cell loss. The Mirk inhibitor decreased the
EC50 of cisplatin up to 9-fold in ovarian cancer cells. Thus ovarian
cancer cells, which exhibit elevated Mirk expression/amplification and
active Mirk kinase, were shown to be more susceptible to the Mirk kinase
inhibitor than normal diploid cells.

