Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NM23-H1 suppresses melanoma cell motility by promoting strong
adhesions between fibronectin and 41 integrin


The metastasis suppressor NM23-H1 has a prominent role in melanoma and
other leading malignancies, where loss of NM23-H1 expression is
associated with onset of aggressive phenotypes and metastasis. NM23-H1
blocks multiple facets of the metastatic cascade, with autonomous cell
motility being perhaps the most scrutinized across multiple cancer types.
However, the molecular mechanisms through which NM23-H1 suppresses
cellular motility in melanoma are poorly understood. Herein, we report a
novel mechanism of motility suppression by NM23-H1 in melanoma via
upregulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) component fibronectin. In
agreement with previous reports, forced expression of NM23-H1 in
metastatic melanoma cell lines 1205LU and MDA-MB-435s/M14 led to a
significant decrease in random cell motility. The resultant sedentary
phenotype was associated with pronounced changes in cell morphology,
including a highly flattened appearance and marked increases in actin
stress fiber formation and the size of focal adhesions. In light of the
known roles of cell adhesion in conveying such phenotypic changes, we
measured the effect of NM23-H1 on expression and localization of
fibronectin, a major component of focal adhesion complexes. Forced
expression of NM23-H1 resulted in significantly increased expression of
endogenous fibronectin protein, which was concentrated at focal adhesion
sites. To assess the contribution of NM23-induced expression of
fibronectin to formation of immobilizing adhesions, blocking antibodies
directed against 41 and 51 integrins, the dominant fibronectin receptors
on melanoma cells, were applied. Antibodies directed against integrin 4,
but not 5, reversed the suppressing effect of forced NM23-H1 expression
on cellular motility. These findings indicate a novel role of NM-23-H1 in
regulating endogenous fibronectin-mediated cell movement, a critical
aspect of melanoma metastasis.

