Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RSK2 mediates anti-anoikis signals by regulating downstream
factors through both transcription -independent and -dependent manner in
human cancers


Metastasis is the most dangerous switch during tumor progression, which
involves complicated steps of events including anoikis resistance.
Anoikis is an anchorage-dependent cell death induced by loss of cell or
extracellular matrix attachment. Metastatic tumor cells may escape from
anoikis and invade other organs. However, the signaling mechanisms by
which invading tumor cells become resistant to the anoikis process
remains unclear. We recently reported that continued RSK2 expression
contributes to the maintenance of the invasive and metastatic potential
of human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Further studies
revealed that RSK2 signaling is commonly important to protect metastatic
human cancer cell lines including 212LN (HNSCC), A549 (lung cancer), and
SKBR3 (breast cancer) from anoikis. Stable knockdown of RSK2 did not
significantly affect apoptosis induced by control anti-cancer agent
cycloheximide, but sensitized various cancer cell lines to
detachment-induced anoikis. Phosphor-proteomics based study identified
two RSK2 phosphorylation targets, including a newly identified RSK2
substrate, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), and a known
target, CREB. Further study revealed that they are involved in RSK2
dependent anti-anoikis signaling. ASK1 is a mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase kinase, and its activity is regulated in various ways,
including phosphorylation. Our study showed that RSK2 directly
phosphorylates ASK1 at multiple sites, which negatively contribute to
ASK1 kinase and pro-apoptotic activity. Knockdown of ASK1 in cells
resulted in decreased anoikis, while overexpression of ASK1 sensitized
cells to anoikis which suggest that RSK2 phosphorylates and inhibits ASK1
to protect cancer cells from anoikis. CREB is a transcription factor
activated by RSK2 whose signaling is implicated in promoting tumor
progression and metastasis. We identify RSK2CREB transcription targets by
performing DNA microarray using metastatic HNSCC cells with stable
knockdown of RSK2 or CREB. We identified 115 and 45 genes that are
down-regulated or up-regulated in both knockdown cells. Among these
genes, we identified a group of anti-apoptotic genes down-regulated, and
pro-apoptotic genes up-regulated as novel RSK2 and CREB transcription
targets. Over-expression of the anti-apoptotic targets or transient
knockdown of the pro-apoptotic targets rescued the anoikis induced by
RSK2 knockdown and conferred resistance to cells from undergoing anoikis.
These data suggest a transcription-dependent mechanism in which RSK2 may
in part signal through CREB to provide anti-anoikis signals. These data
together suggest that RSK2 provides anti-anoikis signals via ASK1 and
CREB in both transcription-independent and -dependent manners,
respectively, which may promote cancer cell invasion and tumor metastasis.

