Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zoledronic acid encapsulated into liposomes and nanoparticles:
Enhanced antitumor activity in 3D-prostate carcinoma spheroids


Introduction: Zoledronic acid is currently used for the treatment of bone
metastases in hormone-resistant prostate cancer patients. The rapid
plasma half-life and the high affinity for Osteoclasts, the primary
targets of bisphosphonates, limit the use for extra-skeletal tissues.
Moreover, it remains still unclear, whether cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAF) influence the toxicity of ZOL. The use of nanomedicine is one
promising strategy to improve the availability of drugs within the tumor
tissue. To investigate the benefit of such approach, we used two
different nanovectors encapsulating ZOL on 3D-spheroids from prostate
carcinoma cells and CAF in combination with standard toxicity assays.
Material and Methods: Stealth liposomes (PGNP_ZOL) and a new generation
of nanovector, named self-assembly nanoparticles (NP_ZOL), were prepared
using standard protocols already described. The prostate carcinoma cell
lines PC-3, DU-145 and LNCaP were cultivated in 96-well MTP's and as
Spheroids on agarose coated 96-well MTP's. Heterologous spheroids were
prepared by mixing tumor cells with different ratios of normal (NAF) or
tumor-associated (CAF) fibroblasts. Cell cultures/spheroids were
incubated with ZOL, NP_ZOL/PGNP_ZOL for up to 120 h. Changes in growth
behavior and toxicity (apoptosis/necrosis) were quantified from
spheroid-cultures by modifications of standard assays (CDD+, LDH+). The
adaptability of these techniques for 3D- cultures was assessed using
thapsygargin/tunicamycin as apoptosis-inducing agents. Results:
Standard-viability assays revealed a significant enhancement of antitumor
activity of NP_ZOL/PGNP_ZOL as compared to the free drug in cell cultures
of DU-145 and LNCaP, whereas these effects were less pronounced in PC-3
cells. The antitumor efficacy of NP_ZOL/PGNP_ZOL was caused by a strong
inhibition of tumor cell proliferation as revealed by the BrDU-assay; on
the other hand, both CDD+ and LDH+ failed to detect both apoptosis and
necrosis after drug treatment for up to 120 h. The average IC50 values in
the tumor cells ranges from 10-20M/L, but the fibroblasts exhibit
complete growth inhibition at concentrations between 2-5m/L ZOL.
Conclusion: These results confirm the hypothesis that the use of
nanomedicine enables the extension in therapeutic applications of drugs
such as bisphosphonates. In this context, ZOL seems to exert benefits
even onto the primary tumor cells. Homo-/heterologeous 3D-spheroids offer
advanced models mimicking the microenvironment within a tumor tissue
grows thus bridging the gap between cell culture and live tissue.
Moreover, the rapid generation of single-tumor spheroids allows for a
high-throughput cell function and toxicity analysis.

