Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of nuclear transcription factor Y (NF-Y) as a novel
key transcriptional regulator of the tumor-suppressor gene DAPK1


The death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) belongs to a family of
multifunctional Ser/Thr-kinases that plays a crucial role in the
mediation of cell death, autophagy and tumor suppression. Loss or reduced
expression of DAPK1 occurs in the majority of patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and many other non-hematological tumors
commonly involving epigenetic silencing. To identify novel key DAPK1
transcriptional regulators, we conducted an siRNA screen in HEK293 cells
using a custom library targeting over 60 individual genes with known or
predicted DNA-binding function and general potential to modulate
transcription. Candidate gene selection for siRNA-mediated knock-down was
based on previous genome-wide siRNA screening experiments and in silico
prediction of binding sites at the DAPK1 promoter region. As endogenous
readout, DAPK1 mRNA expression was monitored by qRT-PCR.Using this
strategy, we identified nuclear transcription factor Y (NF-Y) as the top
positive regulator of DAPK1 that reduces its expression down to 55% of
the level determined in untargeted control siRNA-treated cells. NF-Y is a
well known transcriptional regulator of genes involved in cell cycle
control, apoptosis and stress response. NF-Y consists of 3 subunits,
NF-YA, -YB and -YC, forming a trimeric complex which is essential for
specific binding of CCAAT boxes located proximal to the transcriptional
start sites of genes. In addition to HEK293 cells, we were able to
diminish DAPK1 mRNA expression upon siRNA-mediated NF-Y knockdown in a
panel of 6 different cancer cell lines. Conversely, co-overexpression of
NF-YA,-YB and -YC in HEK293 cells leads to increased expression levels of
DAPK1. To investigate whether NF-Y contributes directly or indirectly to
DAPK1 transcriptional regulation, DAPK1 luciferase reporter constructs
harboring the predicted NF-Y binding site were generated. Point mutation
of the reverse CCAAT-box in the DAPK1 promoter constructs significantly
reduces the promoter activity down to 60% of the wild-type promoter.
Furthermore, NF-Y knockdown significantly reduces the activity of the
wild-type DAPK1 luciferase construct down to 55% in reporter assays.
Strikingly, the CCAAT-box mutated constructs do not show altered activity
after NF-Y depletion, suggesting a direct regulation of DAPK1 by NF-Y.
Taken together, these results strongly indicate a direct role for NF-Y in
the regulation of basal DAPK1 transcription levels, and also propose a
novel mechanism for aberrant transcriptional silencing of DAPK1 in cancer.

