Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative assessment of 3D nuclear architecture in colon
epithelial cells by micro-optical computed tomography


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a commonly diagnosed cancer and the third
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. About 50,000
people will die from this disease in 2011. CRCs develop through an
accumulation of genetic and epigenetic aberrations and have been broadly
classified into three molecular subtypes - chromosomal instability (CIN),
microsatellite instability (MSI), and CpG Island Methylator Phenotype
(CIMP). Research studies on CRC have predominantly focused on its
molecular biological and genetic basis, but very little is known about
the three-dimensional cell morphological variations between these
subclasses. We investigated alterations in the three-dimensional (3D)
nuclear architecture of the three molecular subtypes of CRC, comparing
them to a benign adenoma, using representative epithelial cell line
models: AAC1 (benign), AAC1-SB10 (CIN), HCT-116 (MSI) and RKO (CIMP). We
applied micro-optical computed tomography (Cell-CT) to image one hundred
individual hematoxylin-stained cells of each of the four types with
submicron, isotropic spatial resolution. We performed automated 3D image
analysis on the volumetric cell images, quantifying fifty descriptors
(features) to characterize the nuclear morphology and coarse chromatin
organization. We evaluated the statistical efficacy of our 3D features in
distinguishing among the cell types. Our results demonstrated previously
unreported morphological variations among the controls and three types of
CRC. Relative to the benign adenoma cells, in contrast to CIN and MSI,
the CIMP subtype exhibited markedly smaller cell and nuclear sizes,
smaller nucleus-to-cytoplasm (NC) ratio and a predominantly smooth
nuclear interior, lacking in clumpy chromatin. However, the CIMP cell
nuclei exhibited the highest optical density among the four cell classes.
MSI cells showed the clumpiest nuclear texture, followed by the benign
adenoma cell nuclei. These results offer new perspectives on nuclear
structure variations in benign colon adenoma and colorectal cancer cells,
warranting further investigation. They suggest that the hypermethylation
seen in the CIMP phenotype may result in demonstrable chromatin
compaction with a concomitant reduction in nuclear size. The chromatin
clumpiness observed in the MSI cells may reflect increased mutations at
nuclear scaffold binding sites, which tend to be characterized by single
and di-nucleotide repeats. We intend to pursue studies on human biopsy
cells with ultimate goal of testing the efficacy of Cell-CT for CRC
diagnosis, subtyping and staging.

