Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse association of depletion of interferon-induced protein
with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 with increased distant metastasis in
patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma


Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2), one
of most responsive interferon-stimulated genes, is inversely associated
with prognosis of patients with oral cancer. In the present study, we
further demonstrated that IFIT2 mRNA and protein expression was
positively associated with E-cadherin expression in tissue specimens of
oral squamous carcinoma cancer (OSCC). Loss of E-cadherin and IFIT2 was
observed at the invasive front, suggesting that loss of IFIT2 may induce
EMT and lead to metastasis in OSCCs. Accordingly, we found that OSCC
patients with lower IFIT2 (IFIT2 Interferon-induced protein with
tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2), one of most responsive
interferon-stimulated genes, is inversely associated with prognosis of
patients with oral cancer. In the present study, we further demonstrated
that IFIT2 mRNA and protein expression was positively associated with
E-cadherin expression in tissue specimens of oral squamous carcinoma
cancer (OSCC). Loss of E-cadherin and IFIT2 was observed at the invasive
front, suggesting that loss of IFIT2 may induce EMT and lead to
metastasis in OSCCs. Accordingly, we found that OSCC patients with lower
IFIT2 (IFIT2 < 50%) levels had higher distant metastatic rates and poorer
prognoses compared to OSCC patients expressing higher levels of IFIT2
(IFIT2 50%). In stable IFIT2-depleted OSCC cells, we observed
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and found enhanced cell motility
and invasiveness when compared to control cells. Furthermore, our results
indicated that atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) signaling was activated
in IFIT2-depleted cells. Inhibition of aPKC by a specific myristoylated
PKC pseudosubstrate or aPKC siRNA abolished IFIT2 depletion-induced EMT,
migration, and invasion, indicating that activation of aPKC signaling
plays an essential role in the cellular activities induced by IFIT2
depletion. Our study demonstrates that IFIT2 depletion activates the aPKC
pathway and hence induces EMT, cell migration, invasion and metastasis.
Taken together, IFIT2, a protein responsible for interferon stimulation,
may prevent OSCC from metastasizing and may serve as a prognostic marker.

