Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lyc-O-Mato causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human bladder
transitional carcinoma cells


Approximately two thirds of new bladder cancer cases in the United States
are superficial papillary transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), the majority
of which are low-grade neoplasms. Data suggest that bladder
carcinogenesis is a multi-step, multi-focal (field effect) process,
possibly involving the spread of pre-malignant clones-all of which are
prerequisites for effective preventive and/or interventional approaches.
Epidemiological data suggests an inverse relationship between serum
levels of carotenoids and risk of bladder cancer which has encouraged
further investigation. In this study, we evaluated the effect of
Lyc-O-Mato (a crude tomato extract containing 10% lycopene and other
tomato phytonutrients viz. tocopherols, phytoene, phytofluene,
beta-carotene, phospholipids and phytosterols) on human bladder cancer
cell growth, cell cycle modulation, induction of apoptosis, and
associated molecular alterations. Treatment of bladder cancer cell lines
(T-24, high-grade TCC and TCC-SUP, high-grade invasive tumor) with
Lyc-O-Mato at doses of 1-60M resulted in inhibition of cell growth along
with a G1 arrest in T24 cells and G2/M arrest in TCCSUP cells at 24 h
post-treatment. In other studies, Lyc-O-Mato treatment strongly induced
the expression of p21/waf1 and p27/kip1, and resulted in a decrease in
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and cyclins involved in G1 and G2/M
progression in T24 and TCC SUP cells. Lyc-O-Mato exposure to these cells
showed an increased interaction between cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDKIs)-cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and decrease in the
interaction of cyclins and CDKs with their respective stages of the cell
cycle. Furthermore, Lyc-O-Mato treatment significantly reduced the
phosphorylation of Retinoblastoma at Serine780, although no significant
changes were observed in the total levels of this protein. In additional
studies, Lyc-O-Mato showed a dose- and time-dependent apoptotic death in
both T24 and TCC SUP cells which was associated with significant
downregulation of survivin along with the enhancement of pro-apoptotic
protein, Bax. These observations provide a strong rationale for further
evaluating preventive and/or intervention strategies for Lyc-O-Mato in
pre-clinical models of bladder cancer.

