Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro modeling for breast cancer prevention - omega-3 ethyl
esters functioning as preventive agents in 21T series models


Over the past few decades, multiple trials have warranted the benefits of
using prevention as an effective strategy for lowering breast cancer
incidence. The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT) and Study of
Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) conducted by National Cancer Institute
demonstrated the effectiveness of tamoxifen and raloxifene as preventive
agents in reducing diagnoses of invasive breast cancer. Another
prevention study the VITAL cohort study demonstrated that omega-3
supplementation reduces breast cancer incidence in postmenopausal women.
In vivo studies have produced results that demonstrated a delay in onset
of breast cancer in transgenic mice model. However, current in vitro
effort did not have a system that closely resembles the linear
progression of breast cancer and therefore stalls the molecular
investigation of breast cancer prevention. Majority of in vitro
preventive studies have been conducted using cancer cell lines that do
not represent precancerous status of mammary tissues and do not mirror
the observation of delayed onset or reduced incidence in in vivo and
clinical trials. A recent report has suggested the use of a new series of
mammary cells that represent hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
and invasive carcinoma in nude mice. In this study we propose the use of
21T series breast cancer cells as a model for breast cancer prevention
study using omega-3 ethyl esters. Preliminary data using this model has
shown that omega-3 ethyl esters derived from Omacor reduce proliferation
only in 21NT (DCIS) and 21MT-1 (Invasive Carcinoma) and not in 21PT cells
(hyperplasic). Suppression of proliferation is most optimal in the
presence of estrogen. Survival of cells is inhibited in all cell lines
and Ki67 index is reduced in the presence of treatments. Targets of
omega-3 ethyl esters may include Akt, ER and NF-kB. Current studies are
conducted to investigate the effect of omega-3 ethyl esters on these
targets.

