Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lead optimization of a series of 5-aminopyrazol-imidazopyridine
compounds as potent anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitors active against
clinically relevant ALK mutations


Despite the success of Crizotinib in treating NSCLC patients with
EML4-ALK fusions, cancers eventually develop resistance via a variety of
mechanisms including mutations in the ATP binding site of the kinase
domain. A series of 5-aminopyrazol-imidazopyridine compounds were
identified to potently inhibit anaplastic lymphoma kinase and were found
to be active against a number of mutations in vitro but suffered from
strong Cyp inhibition and were found to be metabolically unstable by
incubation in human hepatocytes and microsomes. Installation of a
pyrimary alcohol group on the heteroaryl ethyl group of the scaffold
consistently improved Cyp3A4 liability, and led to improvement in
physical and DMPK properties as well as improvement of their metabolic
stability in human Heps. The lead compound from this series was orally
administrated to SCID mice in a Del xenograft model and achieved greater
than 90% phospho-ALK inhibition over 6 hours post dose at 10 mg/kg dose.
The lead compound was subsequently tested against Crizotinib-resistant
ALK mutations in enzyme assays, and was shown to inhibit the clinically
relevant ALK mutations, including L1196M. In enzyme assays, it was
inactive against G1269S mutation, consistent with modeling studies.
Subsequent profiling in an FDCP cell line over expressing ALK G1269S
mutation showed potent anti-proliferative activity, suggesting off-target
activity. Further characterization of this series identified AurB
inhibition to be a key cell cycle kinase responsible for the off-target
activity in the engineered cell line. The off target activity hinders it
from assessing the primary pharmacology responsible for its preclinical
efficacy in disease relevant models. In conclusion, we have identified a
novel orally bioavailable compound that is a potent dual active ALK and
AurB inhibitor that is active against clinically-relevant gatekeeper
mutant.

