Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complementary reactivation of tumor suppressor genes in breast
cancer cells by curcumin and curcumin O-glucuronide


Purpose: Curcumin appears to be a promising chemopreventive agent for
various human cancers including breast cancer (BC). However, the
molecular mechanism(s) by which it functions in vivo have not been fully
elucidated. Recently, we have shown curcumin to be an effective
hypomethylating agent in acute myeloid leukemia cells. Here, we
investigated the ability of curcumin and its major metabolite, curcumin
O-glucuronide (COG) to epigenetically modulate tumor suppressor gene
expression in BC cells. Method: MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 BC cells were
treated with curcumin and COG (0.1 to 20 M) for up to 96 hrs. MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cell engrafted tumor-bearing nude mice were treated with i.p.
doses of 100 mg/kg curcumin or oral doses of 300 mg/kg nanoemulsion
curcumin (NEC). The mRNA levels of RASSF1A, TIMP-3, DNMT1, microRNA29b,
and microRNA221/222 were assessed by RT-PCR and protein levels were
measured by Western Blot. DNA methylation levels were assessed using
LC-MS. The in vitro anti-proliferative activities of curcumin, COG and
NEC and the in vivo anti-tumor growth activities of curcumin and NEC were
evaluated. Results: Curcumin induced significant global DNA
hypomethylation in MCF-7 cells and reactivated RASSF1A expression in both
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. In vivo reactivation of RASSF1A by curcumin
was confirmed in MCF-7 engrafted tumor tissues in mice. Curcumin
reactivated TIMP-3 expression in MCF-7 engrafted tumor tissues, but
down-regulated TIMP-3 expression in MCF-7 cells in vitro. We have
evidence that this discrepancy was due to differential metabolism of
curcumin to COG in vitro (no COG formation) and in vivo (COG level >
curcumin), since COG itself reactivated TIMP-3 in MCF-7 cells. Notably,
COG down-regulated microRNA221/222, two oncogenic microRNAs that suppress
TIMP-3 expression, which may account for TIMP-3 reactivation in MCF-7
cells by COG. Importantly, COG chemically inhibited DNMT1 methylation
activity and up-regulated microRNA29b, a central regulator of DNMTs in
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, which may be responsible for its
hypomethylating activity. Curcumin elicited anti-tumor growth effects in
both MCF-7 (70%) and MDA-MB-231 (27%) cell engrafted tumor bearing nude
mice after four weeks of daily i.p. injection. Notably, NEC inhibited
MDA-MB-231 cell engrafted tumor growth up to 50%, nearly twice that of
curcumin. Conclusion: Curcumin reactivated RASSF1A and TIMP-3 tumor
suppressor genes in vivo presumably through its conversion to COG and
COG's modulation of DNA methylation and microRNAs. NEC is a more potent
formulation for MDA-MB-231 cell engrafted tumor growth in nude mice when
compared to curcumin. Further evaluation of NEC for BC prevention or
treatment either alone or in combination with clinically-used agents is
warranted. Supported by R21 CA135478 [ZL] and biomedical mass
spectrometry laboratory (KKC and ZL).

