Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of adiposity in racial and ethnic disparities in prostate
cancer occurrence and progression: A systematic literature review


Background and Objective: Black men develop and die from prostate cancer
(PCa) more than any other racial group. According to recent United States
(US) statistics, PCa incidence and mortality rates in Black men are 1.6
and 2.4 times that of their White (WH) counterparts, respectively.
Various biologic, behavioral, environmental, demographic, and
social-contextual factors have been shown to be components of the
persisting disparities in outcomes. However, it is not clear how aspects
of body composition, particularly adiposity, contribute to racial and
ethnic disparities in PCa occurrence and course. Current reviews on the
adiposity relationship have tended not to adequately address this.
Therefore, we conducted a systematic review of the literature examining
the role of adiposity in racial disparities in prostate cancer. Methods:
The US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health PubMed
database was searched for English articles published through October 1,
2011. Criteria for selection were: 1) an adiposity-related factor (BMI,
WHR etc.) was an exposure of interest and related to a PCa outcome
(diagnosis, progression, prostate cancer-specific mortality); 2) focused
on racial disparities in an adiposity association with PCa; 3) the
participant sample included men of predominant African Ancestry [AA]
(e.g. Black, African American, Ghanaian etc.); 4) and race-stratified,
particularly AA specific, effect estimates for PCa occurrence, mortality,
or progression were reported. Adjustment for race in a multivariate model
alone was not sufficient for inclusion in the review analysis. No
reviews, editorials, or comments were included in the review, although
they were cited for background content. Results: Many of the available
reviews on adiposity and PCa racial disparities focused on disparities in
screening, rather than incidence, progression, or mortality. The articles
which did address occurrence and outcomes often did not present
race-specific effect estimates and simply adjusted for race in
multivariate models. The available evidence suggests a unique role of
adiposity-related factors (i.e. body size, body fat distribution, and
fatty acid intake,) in the risk of PCa occurrence, progression,
differences in treatment efficacy, and PCa-specific death. Lack of
studies including sufficiently large numbers of AA prohibited reporting
of race-specific estimates in many studies, especially in studies
involving molecular biology and genetics. Conclusions: Incidence,
morbidity, and mortality are highest in Black men. Clarifying the role of
adiposity in PCa disparities is of great importance. Further clinical
research illuminating adiposity related targets for intervention and
mechanisms is crucial in this highly affected group.

