Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A survival-associated polymorphism within metastasis suppressor
RRP1B directs RRP1B-chromatin interactions and self-regulation of gene
expression


Previous studies demonstrate that activation of Ribosomal RNA Processing
1 Homolog B (Rrp1b) suppresses the metastatic capacity of the aggressive
Mvt-1 mouse mammary tumor cell line. Over-expression of Rrp1b induces a
gene expression signature that can be used to accurately predict survival
in human breast cancer. Also, human RRP1B contains a non-synonymous
coding SNP (rs9306160) associated with survival in multiple breast cancer
cohorts. However, the mechanism by which RRP1B modulates metastasis is
unclear. Co-IF, tandem affinity purification and co-IP reveal that RRP1B
co-localizes with double stranded DNA in the nucleus. Significantly,
these analyses show that RRP1B physically interacts with numerous DNA
binding proteins, many of which are prominent regulators of gene
expression. We hypothesize that RRP1B regulates gene expression in tumors
prone to metastasis through either direct or indirect interaction with
target regions. We performed ChIP-seq analysis of the human breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB231 and MCF7 to define RRP1B bound genomic loci.
ChIP-seq shows that RRP1B reproducibly interacts with 180 chromatin
regions including known metastasis genes, oncogenes and tumor
suppressors. Interestingly, RRP1B interacts with its own genomic locus at
exon 13, which contains the metastasis-associated SNP (rs9306160;
G1421A). To further characterize this interaction, MDA-MB231 cell lines
stably over-expressing either the RRP1B 1421G (WT) or the RRP1B 1421A
(Variant) allele were created. Growth curves and soft agar assays were
both significantly different between the WT and Variant allele cell
lines. Multiple clonal isolates were then transfected with a luciferase
reporter construct containing the 1.5 kb RRP1B exon 13 peak binding
region to examine the transcriptional activity. These studies indicated
that binding of RRP1B to its own exon 13 negatively regulates its
expression. Significantly, the magnitude of this decrease in RRP1B
transcription was greater in cell lines over-expressing the WT allele,
which is associated with the poorer overall survival in breast cancer.
Global analysis of gene expression in the cell lines over-expressing the
two allelic variants was performed using microarrays. A distinct gene
expression signature was found to delineate the cells over-expressing the
two allelic variants. A number of these genes overlap with RRP1B ChIP-seq
peaks, indicating that RRP1B may be differentially binding to the
regulatory regions of the genes identified on microarray analysis. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that RRP1B regulates its own expression
through binding to its own locus, and that this ability to self-regulate
is modulated by a germline polymorphism within the region of chromatin
bound by RRP1B. These observations give us further insight into the
mechanism of action of this germline-encoded metastasis suppressor.

