Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of cortical and subventricular GFAP+ astrocytes in
initiation of astrocytomas


Astrocytomas, including glioblastomas (GBM), are characterized by
cellular, molecular, and morphological heterogeneity, which raises the
question from which cells astrocytomas originate. Research with many
different types of cancer has established that tumor initiating cells
share molecular characteristics and gene expression signatures with stem
cells; however, the origin of glioma initiating cells and their
relationship to adult neural stem cells remains unclear. Using
conditional, inducible genetically-engineered mouse models (GEMM) with
inactivated RB (GFAP-driven transgenic expression of N-terminal SV40
large T mutant (T121), T) and/or PTEN (P) and/or constitutively activated
KRAS (R, KRAS(G12D)), we show that tumorigenesis was initiated in both
parenchymal GFAP+ astrocytes as well as GFAP+ NSC/progenitor cells in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) within two weeks of induction in adult mice.
The induced GFAP+ cells proliferated (measured by EDU incorporation) and
expressed multiple neural stem cell (NSC) markers such as Sox2, nestin
and CD133, which persisted in developing astrocytomas over several
months. Primary cortical astrocytes from TRP-/- mice cultured in vitro
under NSC conditions displayed self-renewal and multi-lineage
differentiation potential and expressed multiple NSC markers. When
stereotactically injected in the diencephalon of syngeneic recipient
mice, astrocytomas formed within 3 weeks, which histopathologically and
genetically resembled human glioblastoma and proved to be fatal with a
median survival of 25 days. To further evaluate the relationship between
adult neural stem/progenitor cells in the SVZ and astrocytoma initiating
cells, we crossed TRP GEMM with knock-in Sox2-GFP reporter mice to purify
TRP neural stem cells from the SVZ. These cells were then
stereotactically injected into the diencephalon of syngeneic recipient
mice. Allograft cells, identified by GFP expression, were found
proliferating around the injection site several weeks after injection,
suggestive of developing astrocytomas. Some cells also migrated along
white matter tracks and infiltrated the stem cell niche in the
subventricular zone. These results suggest that GFAP+ NSC within the SVZ,
and potentially GFAP+ astrocytes elsewhere in the neuraxis, may serve as
the cell-of-origin for diffuse astrocytomas in the adult murine brain.

