Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the transcriptional coactivator LEDGF/p75 to overcome
chemoresistance in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer death among
men in the US, with African American men presenting a disproportionately
high incidence and mortality. Reducing this mortality disparity requires
developing novel strategies for overcoming prostate tumor
chemoresistance. Currently, chemotherapy with Docetaxel (DTX), the
standard of care for advanced PCa, is limited because most patients
treated with the drug ultimately develop chemoresistance and succumb to
the disease. Circumventing this resistance is therefore essential for
increasing the effectiveness of DTX and other anti-PCa drugs. Our group
has established previously that lens ephitelium-derived growth factor p75
(LEDGF/p75), a stress survival oncoprotein, is overexpressed in human
prostate tumors, and that its overexpression in PCa cell models promotes
resistance to DTX via inhibition of lysosomal cell death. The present
study was designed to evaluate if overexpression of LEDGF/p75 in PCa
cells also promotes resistance to other chemotheurapeutic drugs, and if
its depletion sensitizes chemoresistant PCa cells to drug-induced cell
death. First, we treated PC-3 cells (with and without stable LEDGF/p75
overexpression) with increasing concentrations of DTX, paclitaxel,
doxorubicin, and TRAIL for up to 48 hrs. We then assessed cell viability
by MTT assays and morphological examination. LEDGF/p75 overexpressing
PC-3 cells showed higher viability than parental PC-3 cells in response
to DTX, paclitaxel, and doxorubicin. However, LEDGF/p75 did not protect
against TRAIL-induced cell death, indicating selectivity in the ability
of this stress oncoprotein to induce chemoresistance. We also observed by
immunoblotting and quantitative PCR that metastatic PCa cell lines
selected for DTX resistance, designated PC3-DR and DU-145DR, naturally
express high levels of endogenous LEDGF/p75 relative to their sensitive
parental cell lines. To assess the contribution of elevated LEDGF/p75
expression to DTX resistance in these two cell lines, we knocked down
this protein with a specific small inhibitory RNA (si-p75). Immunoblots
showed that si-p75 depleted cells of LEDGF/p75. Cell viability
significantly decreased in both PC3-DR and DU-145DR cell lines in
response to combined treatment with DTX and si-p75, relative to scrambled
siRNA control. Our preliminary results suggest that LEDGF/p75
overexpression promotes chemoresistance in cellular models of advanced
PCa, and that its inhibition increases sensitization to DTX. These
promising results have implications for the development of novel
theraupetic strategies for chemoresistant PCa. Further studies are in
progress to determine the spectrum of anti-PCa drugs antagonized by
LEDGF/p75, and if depletion of this protein sensitizes PCa cells to a
wide variety of antitumor drugs.

