Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Energy restriction caused by the glycolytic inhibitor,
2-Deoxy-D-Glucose inhibits chemical induced carcinogenesis in mice


Enhanced glucose metabolism is a fundamental metabolic change in most of
the tumors which drives the process of tumorigenesis. Dietary Energy
Restriction (DER) is a promising approach to target this enhanced
glycolysis for combating cancer but is difficult to sustain. Therefore,
metabolic modifiers like 2-Deoxy-D-Glucose (2-DG) has been used as Energy
Restriction Mimetic (ERM) without causing under-nutrition. In the present
studies we have investigated the effects of 2-DG on the two-stage model
of 7, 12-dimethylbenz (a) anthracene-tumor promoting agent (DMBA-TPA)
induced skin tumours (papillomagenesis) in mice. TPA containing phorbol
ester promotes tumorigenesis by generating reactive oxygen species,
increasing epidermal DNA synthesis and cellular proliferation along with
the mutation caused by DMBA. On the other hand, Energy Restriction (ER)
modulates oxidative stress and enhances activities of superoxide
dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase in the livers of rats.
Therefore, studies were designed to examine the effects of 2-DG
administered at the initiation or at the promotion phase of
papillomagenesis along with the modulation of the antioxidant defense
system upon chronic energy restriction created by 2-DG. 2-DG
administration (0.2% & 0.4% w/v) in daily drinking water was started pre-
or post-TPA application to the DMBA initiated skin of Swiss Albino mice
(male, n=4/group) till the termination of the study. Tumor incidence,
latency, tumour burden and yield were observed. Lipid peroxidation, GSH
level, SOD and catalase activities were analyzed in the liver. Chronic
administration of 2-DG did not significantly alter body weight, serum
lactate and blood glucose levels suggesting maintenance of general health
and physiological status. A significant reduction in tumor incidence with
increased tumor latency was observed, which was 2-DG dose dependent; 50 %
with pre-TPA and 25% post-TPA in 0.2% 2-DG group; and 0 % with post-TPA
in 0.4%2-DG group with average number of tumors per tumor bearing mouse
being 1, 1, and 0 respectively. Interestingly, tumor incidence in the
0.4% 2-DG group (pre-TPA) was 100%, with average number of tumors 2.5 per
animal. Under these conditions, 2-DG significantly enhanced the level of
reduced glutathione (GSH) with a concomitant reduction in the lipid
peroxidation, with no changes observed in SOD and catalase activities in
the liver. These observations suggest that the protective potential
against skin carcinogenesis is partly linked to the augmentation of
anti-oxidant defence system. Taken together, the present studies
demonstrate that dietary 2-DG can inhibit papillomagenesis. Although, the
exact mechanisms underlying cancer preventive potential of 2-DG is not
completely understood, it appears to be partly due to the upregulation of
the non-enzymatic antioxidant defence system.

