Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-acetylcysteine protects melanoma cells from glucose depletion
through unequal modulation of SOD1 and Copper chaperone for SOD1
depending on p53 mutational status


BACKGROUND.-Cancer cells from solid tumors undergo metabolic stress, when
nutrients become limiting, within poorly vascularized regions. Severe
deprivation of glucose and serum-derived growth factors can promote cell
death by metabolic stress, partly through excessive reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production.OBJECTIVES.- To investigate whether survival in
response to metabolic stress is influenced by N-acetylcysteine (NAC), an
anti-oxidant glutathione precursor, and whether it is linked to
modulation of superoxide dismutases (SOD1 and SOD2) that catalyze
intracellularly the conversion of O2 to H2O2. EXPERIMENTAL- matched human
melanoma cells with unequal p53 mutational status were exposed to
overnight depletion of glucose with either 0.5% or 10% serum
supplementation. Differential cell survival was assesed by crystal violet
staining. Mechanisms influencing response to glucose limitation were
studied by specific immune blotting. RESULTS.- A 24 hour glucose
depletion suppressed cell survival in 0.5% dialyzed serum but this was
counteracted by 2 mM NAC irrespective of cellular p53 status. A shorter
glucose depletion in 0.5% serum revealed normoxic induction of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF1) reciprocal with concomitant
down-regulation of SOD1 together with the Copper chaperone for SOD1 (CCS)
and intact PARP, with no comparable effect on mitochondrial SOD2. Under
these restrictive conditions, NAC addition partly restored SOD1 and PARP
but not CCS expression in mutant p53(R175H) cells. No comparable NAC
restoration of these proteins was evidenced in matched wt p53 melanoma
under glucose depletion in 0.5 % dialyzed serum. However, SOD1 but not
CCS was highest following glucose deprivation with 10% dialyzed serum in
wt p53 melanoma cells, compared to identically treated mutant p53 cells.
NAC addition increased CCS irrespective of p53 status with glucose
depletion in 10% serum, and preferentially induced SOD1 in mutant p53
cells under comparable conditions. CONCLUSIONS.-human melanoma cells are
protected from transient glucose depletion by anti-oxidants like NAC
through differential modulation of SOD1 and CCS depending on serum
availability and p53 mutational status.

