Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanism underlying acquired resistance to Aurora A
kinase inhibitor, Alisertib, in melanoma


Malignant melanomas are notorious for their resistance to
chemotherapeutic treatments. Thus the development of new therapeutic
strategies that will allow overcoming drug resistance is essential. We
have previously shown that Aurora A kinase (AurkA) inhibitor Alisertib
(MLN8237) inhibited melanoma cell grouth by blocking mitosis and inducing
senescence. In this study we used melanoma patients tissue specimens
implanted under the skin of athymic mice and mouse melanoma tumors grown
in immune-competent mice. Treatment with Alisertib inhibited melanoma
tumor growth in both model systems. However, most of tumors re-grew after
the treatment was paused and some of them acquired resistance to a second
round of chemotherapy. Interestingly mouse melanoma cells collected from
chemo-resistant tumors retained their resistance to Alisertib treatment
when re-implanted into new hosts. In order to gain understanding of the
molecular events facilitating Alisertib resistance we performed whole
transcriptome sequencing in mouse melanoma tumors. Each Alisertib-treated
tumor showed a large number of genomic alterations with the number of
single nucleotide variations in protein-coding transcripts ranging from
807 to 2036. In total 613 genes were affected across 6 analyzed samples
and among those, 253 genes carried nucleotide variations exclusively in
drug resistant tumors. In silico pathway analysis revealed a
statistically significant enrichment of this resistance-associated gene
set with genes involved in cell cycle regulation (pMalignant melanomas
are notorious for their resistance to chemotherapeutic treatments. Thus
the development of new therapeutic strategies that will allow overcoming
drug resistance is essential. We have previously shown that Aurora A
kinase (AurkA) inhibitor Alisertib (MLN8237) inhibited melanoma cell
grouth by blocking mitosis and inducing senescence. In this study we used
melanoma patients tissue specimens implanted under the skin of athymic
mice and mouse melanoma tumors grown in immune-competent mice. Treatment
with Alisertib inhibited melanoma tumor growth in both model systems.
However, most of tumors re-grew after the treatment was paused and some
of them acquired resistance to a second round of chemotherapy.
Interestingly mouse melanoma cells collected from chemo-resistant tumors
retained their resistance to Alisertib treatment when re-implanted into
new hosts. In order to gain understanding of the molecular events
facilitating Alisertib resistance we performed whole transcriptome
sequencing in mouse melanoma tumors. Each Alisertib-treated tumor showed
a large number of genomic alterations with the number of single
nucleotide variations in protein-coding transcripts ranging from 807 to
2036. In total 613 genes were affected across 6 analyzed samples and
among those, 253 genes carried nucleotide variations exclusively in drug
resistant tumors. In silico pathway analysis revealed a statistically
significant enrichment of this resistance-associated gene set with genes
involved in cell cycle regulation (p<0.0001). Among those were important
regulators of cell cycle checkpoints, DNA repair and DNA damage response
such as p53, Sesn3, TSC2, Camk2d, Lig1, Usp19, Slbp, Dgkz and Rpl24. This
data together with our previous findings that that Alisertib induces
polyploidy and subsequent activation of DNA damage response suggests that
endoreduplication (DNA re-replication after failed mitosis) may promote
the development of chemo-resistance in melanomas. We also found that
Alisertib-induced endoreduplication can be blocked through activation of
endogenous p53. Treatment with inhibitor of p53 degradation, Nutlin-3,
significantly reduced Alisertib-associated polyploidy by inhibiting Rb
phosphorylation and expression of genes involved in DNA replication
licensing. This coincided with a decrease in phosphorylation levels of
DNA-damage sensor histone H2AX and effector kinase Chk2. Notably,
co-treatment with Nutlin-3 neither rescued melanoma cells from cytostatic
effect of Alisertib treatment nor reversed Alisertib-induced senescence.
Our findings suggest that pharmacological activation of endogenous p53 in
combination with AurkA inhibitors could block endoreduplication-related
genomic instability and potentially delay the development of drug
resistance in melanoma tumors. This work was supported by grants from the
NIH (CA116021-07) and VCORCDP (CA90625-11).

