Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic plasticity in the normal breast


Metaplasia is observed in almost all epithelial cancers. The origins of
metaplasia are obscure although chronic inflammation is thought to be one
etiology. We present data that suggests that an origin of metaplasia is
the normal resident stem cell population. Methods: Starting from 10 gauge
tissue cores of normal breast donated to the Komen Tissue Bank, 28 normal
mammary epithelial (HME) and 33 normal stromal (HMS) cell lines were
established using an organoid isolation method after digestion with
enzymes for 24 hours. The HME cell lines were characterized by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Ploidy was assayed. Cellular morphology was
observed both on two-dimensional and in three-dimensional culture
systems. The HME cells were subjected to FACS analysis using multiple
antibodies. Results: 96.9% of early passage cells are diploid. The HME
cells express vimentin, CK 5/6, p63, CD 10, CK 18, and HER-1 when grown
on two dimensional plastic surfaces. Cells placed in the center of a
sandwich of Matrigel uniformly make spheres 37mm-325mm in diameter.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded sections of these spheres reveal keratinized squamous
differentiation. When the cells are grown on Laminin, Collagen Type IV,
or Fibronectin surfaces multiple cell types are observed including
osteoclasts, distinguished by the presence of Tartrate Resistant Acid
Phospatase; and chondrocytes, confirmed by staining with Alcian Blue.
Other cells with a spindle-shape and cytoplasmic vacuoles turn a dark
reddish-brown color when stained with Oil Red O, characteristics of
adipocytes. In other areas of the culture, the cells form a syncitium and
they express the protein MyoD, a marker of immature muscle. Finally,
there are numerous cells with long, dendritic processes. These cells
express Nestin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and beta-III
tubulin. Using FACS, the HME cells were found to be CD49f positive and
EpCAM negative. Multiple nucleoli were confirmed using anti-Nucleostemin
IHC. Conclusions: Phenotypic plasticity is common to all the HME cell
lines characterized to date. Differentiation into cells of mesodermal and
ectodermal origin, CD49+/EpCAM- by FACS, and the presence of multiple
nucleoli suggest that the isolated cells are a multipotent/stem cell
residing in the normal adult breast. These cells, through a series of yet
to be elucidated events, may be the cells of origin of both benign and
malignant metaplasia observed in breast lesions.

