Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining optimal conditions for collection and processing of
metastatic liver biopsies collected for a multicenter, prospective study
to identify biomarkers of clinical resistance to first-line therapy in
metastatic colorectal cancer


Introduction: The biomarker discovery process requires patient tissue
samples from which histology is verified and high-quality genomic
material is isolated. Several methods have been developed to either
preserve tissue morphology or extract sufficient quality and quantity of
RNA and DNA for downstream discovery efforts. As clinical trials
incorporate patient biopsies for biomarker discovery or validation, it is
becoming increasingly important to ensure quality material and identify
methods that allow for preservation of morphology and stabilization of
molecular content concurrently. We assessed, in liver needle-core
biopsies, different sampling, fixation, and genomic isolation methods to
maintain morphology and obtain high-quality genomic material for a
multi-center prospective study to identify biomarkers of clinical
resistance to first-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer. Four
sampling methods (snap freezing, RNAlater, frozen RNAlater, formalin),
two different fixation protocols for histological studies (10% formalin,
RNAlater followed by OCT embedding and freezing) and two RNA isolation
procedures (Triazol and AllprepDNA/RNA isolation) were evaluated.
Results: Keeping in mind site feasibility, we report that the ideal
condition to both preserve morphology and obtain high-quality genomic
material of patient liver biopsy samples is to collect biopsies in
RNAlater for shipping to a Central Pathology core, followed by washing
with cold PBS (on dry ice) to permit proper RNA preservation during OCT
embedding and cryostat sectioning for histological verification.
Simultaneous extraction of DNA and RNA from the same biopsy core yields
nucleic acids of optimal concentration and quality for downstream genomic
applications. Conclusion: The collection of biospecimens using
pre-determined protocol-specific standard operating procedures (SOPs) is
essential to control for pre-analytical variability inherent to
multicenter trials. Furthermore, histological control of percent tumor
cells in each biopsy is absolutely necessary to ensure optimal
representation of tumor (>70%) in the specimen. The above conditions were
used in the multicenter Q-CROC-01 study (NCT00984048), where three needle
core biopsies are collected from liver metastases of patients with
colorectal cancer. One biopsy is collected in formalin and is set aside
for downstream immunohistochemistry experiments. Two biopsies are
collected in RNAlater and verified for histology. If they pass quality
control, both DNA and RNA are isolated concurrently and sent to discovery
platforms (DNA: array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),
methylation profiles, RNA: gene expression profiles, RT-PCR, microRNA
profiles, alternative splicing profiles).

