Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG island shore methylation regulates caveolin-1 expression in
breast cancer


Caveolin-1 (Cav1), a multifunctional membrane protein, regulates
caveolae-dependent lipid trafficking, vesicular transport and signal
transduction. Cav1 expression is decreased in breast carcinomas compared
to normal tissue, and loss of Cav1 expression promotes mammary
tumorigenesis. However, recent reports indicate that Cav1 is
overexpressed in a subset of basal-like breast carcinomas and consider it
as a basal marker. To investigate the mechanism that results in
differential Cav1 expression in breast cancer, we performed genome-wide
profiling of DNA methylation using affinity purification and subsequent
next-generation sequencing of eluted DNA (MethylCap-seq) on 30 breast
cancer cell lines. In breast cancer cell lines displaying low Cav1
expression (Cav1-low; n=15, mostly luminal subtype), Cav1 promoter CpG
island (CGI) hypermethylation was observed in only four cell lines. In
the remaining Cav1-low lines, dense methylation at CGI shores
(methylation at regions outside of CGI) was seen, while Cav1 promoter CGI
methylation was strikingly low or absent. In Cav1-high cell lines (n=15
of basal-like subtype), hypomethylation of both promoter CGI and CGI
shores was observed. By integrating the methylome data with Cav1 mRNA
expression profiles, we found a significant negative correlation between
Cav1 CGI shore methylation and Cav1 gene expression. A similar DNA
methylation pattern was observed in a panel of antiestrogen-sensitive and
-resistant cell lines previously generated by our lab, with
hypermethylation at CGI shores for a Cav1-low, tamoxifen-resistant line,
and CGI shore hypomethylation in Cav1-high, fulvestrant-resistant lines
(basal-like). Treatment of Cav1-low cells with the DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-deoxycytidine resulted in demethylation of CGI shores and
Cav1 re-expression, further confirming the regulation of Cav1 expression
by CGI shore methylation. ChIP-seq results of Cav1-low cells indicated
that the Cav1 CGI hypomethylation was due to H3K4me2 occupancy.
SiRNA-mediated Cav1 knockdown resulted in a significant inhibition of
cell growth and invasion, indicating an important role of Cav1 in
supporting breast cancer cell progression. Furthermore, by using an
on-line survival analysis tool (Kaplan Meier Plotter), we determined a
significant negative correlation between Cav1 levels and overall survival
for patients with ER-negative breast tumors. The results of this study
demonstrate that DNA methylation at Cav1 CGI shores is associated with
tumor progression, displaying hypomethylation in normal breast epithelial
cells, hypermethylation in luminal breast cancer cells, and
hypomethylation in basal-like breast cancer cells. In addition, Cav1 CGI
shore methylation may represent a novel prognostic factor for
ER-negative, fulvestrant-resistant breast cancer.

