Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor conformation sensing small molecules as novel
anti-cancer agents


Estrogen mediated signaling affects cell proliferation, differentiation
and mammary gland function. The human Estrogen Receptor (hER) is present
in 70% of breast cancers. Consequently, estrogen mediated hER signaling
plays a critical role in breast cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and
treatment.Anti-estrogen, Tamoxifen, targets the LBD and transitions the
hER from agonist conformation into a structurally unique antagonist
conformation, which is distinctly recognizable by the position of helix
XII. Antiestrogen tamoxifen is a known treatment for hER positive breast
cancers. However, due to mutations and hormone-independent activation
of/in the hER, breast cancers develop resistance to tamoxifen, and resume
growth and malignant progression. Estrogen's action at hER is regulated
not only by estrogen, but also by other small molecules and coregulators.
A closer look at the compliment of coregulators during acquired tamoxifen
resistance shows a significant decrease in the corepressor breast cancer
susceptibility (BRCA1) protein expression. BRCA1 directly interacts, from
amino acids 67-200, with the hER, from 338-379 and 420-495, LBD/AF2
domain. The interface region of BRCA1 containing the binding motif (amino
acids 86-93), which specifically contain two essential chemical features,
a hydrophobic core and a charged carboxylic acid is necessary for high
affinity binding and hER repression. Here we present several small
molecules identified based on these pharmacophoric features as well as ER
molecular profiles of conformation sensing peptides. Discovery of
conformation sensing protein/peptides would open new avenues for drug
development and would lead to advanced clinical studies of
hER-conformation sensing small molecules as an entirely new class of
anticancer therapy especially in tamoxifen-resistant tumors.
Acknowledgements: This research was supported via funds from the New York
State, National Institutes of Health (5P20MD002725), through the NCMHD
-RIMI program (RVR) and NSF LSAMP Bridge to Doctorate grant (BR).

