Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAGED4B drives oral carcinogenesis and is a promising peptide
vaccine target for the treatment of oral squamous cell carcinoma


MAGED4B is a member of the Melanoma Antigen Gene (MAGE) family. We
demonstrated that MAGED4B is over-expressed in more than 50% of oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissues and that the expression of MAGED4B
is associated with lymph node metastasis and poor disease specific
survival. OSCC cell lines over-expressing MAGED4B exhibited an increase
in cell growth both in vitro and in vivo, and were significantly more
resistant to UV-induced apoptosis compared to control cells, suggesting a
role for MAGED4B in modulating cell death. Further, MAGED4B also promoted
cell migration. MAGE proteins are good targets for cancer immunotherapy
as they are highly immunogenic. We identified and synthesized MAGED4B
peptides that were HLA-A2- specific and tested the ability of these
peptides to generate an anti-tumour response using PBMCs from OSCC
patients and healthy individuals. Firstly, the PBMC samples obtained from
patients and healthy individuals were tested for HLA-A2 expression.
Positive samples were analyzed for peptide-specific stimulation of IFN-
and granzyme secretion ex-vivo via ELISPOT assay. Dendritic cells pulsed
with these peptides were used to stimulate PBMC cultures, and were
studied for IFN- and granzyme secretion. In parallel, the binding of the
peptides to the MHC-Class I molecule was determined by the binding assay.
Further, the ability of these bound peptides to interact with T cells was
measured by the dimer assay. We demonstrated that all the peptides have
good binding capacity with the MHC-Class I molecules. Moreover, the
binding of these peptides on MHC-Class I molecules could attract and
further interact with T cells. Notably, the PBMC stimulated once with
peptide-pulsed dendritic cells or twice with peptide and peptide-pulsed
dendritic cells showed peptide-specific cytotoxic activity against
MAGED4B-expressing OSCC cell lines. In summary, we first demonstrated
that MAGED4B drives oral carcinogenesis and second, showed that
MAGED4B-specific peptides are apable of inducing anti-tumour specific
immune responses. Taken together, this indicates that MAGED4B could be a
promising peptide vaccine target for the treatment of OSCC.

