Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship between the EMT status in primary lung
adenocarcinomas and the DFS, and the results of the molecular analyses of
lung adenocarcinoma with regard to the IGF1R and EMT status


Background: Predicting the risk of distant micrometastasis of NSCLC after
complete surgical resection is a significant problem to solve, and useful
molecular markers that can predict recurrence have not yet been
identified. The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an
important contributor to the invasion and metastasis of
epithelial-derived cancer. However, there is currently no data about the
EMT status in primary NSCLC and its clinical usefulness to predict the
recurrence and disease free survival (DFS). In addition, an association
between insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and EMT-related molecules was
reported, therefore, we also analyzed the association between the
expression of IGF1R and EMT-related molecules. Methods: Tumor specimens
were collected from 182 consecutive patients who underwent a complete
resection for lung adenocarcinoma from 2003 to 2007 in our department. We
analyzed the expression levels of EMT-related molecules (E-cadherin,
gamma catenin and vimentin) in the primary lung adenocarcinoma by
immunohistochemisty. We also analyzed the association between the
expression of IGF1R and EMT-related molecules in the primary lung
adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemisty. Results: The positive expression
of E-cadherin, gamma catenin and vimentin was identified in 94 (51.4%),
82 (40.4%) and 32 (17.5%) patients, respectively. Their expression was
not correlated with recurrence or disease-free survival (DFS) according
to the survival analysis. Positive expression of IGF1R was detected in 43
(23.6%) patients, and its expression was significantly associated with
the expression of E-cadherin and gamma-catenin, but not with
vimentin.Conclusions: The EMT status in the primary tumor of NSCLC does
not predict the recurrence and disease free survival. However, there was
a significant association between the expression of IGF1R and several
EMT-related proteins in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

