Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of TGF-beta superfamily ligand and mechanism of osteoblastic
tumorigenesis of prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related death in
men in the US. The skeleton is the most common site for prostate cancer
metastasis, which often results in osteoblastic lesions. Transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF), which is a multifunctional cytokine, is
important for the regulation of bone mass and matrix properties. Our
group has recently shown that TGF signaling helps in promoting
osteoblastic tumor growth by a novel human prostate cancer cell line,
PacMetUT1. However, the mechanism by which prostate cancer cells
metastasize to bone and how they induce formation of osteoblastic lesions
remains to be intensively investigated. Bone cells such as osteoblasts
express aromatase, which is the enzyme required for estrogen biosynthesis
in humans. Recent data further implicates an aberrant aromatase
expression and estrogen signaling in the development of prostate
malignancy. Hence we hypothesize that TGF and other growth factors
released from tumor cells can induce aromatase gene expression and
activity in bone cells leading to an enhanced estradiol synthesis which
would in turn lead to an increase in bone formation as estrogen is a
known osteogenic factor. We examined the effect of TGF superfamily
ligands on aromatase expression in pre-osteoblastic cells. Treatment with
TGF1 and BMP-4/7 resulted in an increase in aromatase expression in both
mouse pre-osteoblasts and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cells (MSC's). This increase in aromatase expression was abrogated after
transient knockdown of Smad's in MSC's. Treatment with letrozole
(aromatase inhibitor) as well as an anti-estrogen (ICI 182, 780) resulted
in a decrease in osteoblastic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells
as measured by alkaline phosphatase activity assay and expression of
osteogenic markers by quantitative real-time PCR analysis. Furthermore,
PacMetUT1 cells were found to be responsive to 17- estradiol treatment.
17- estradiol treatment of PacMetUT1 cells resulted in an enhanced
anchorage- dependent and independent cell growth in vitro. 17- estradiol
also induced a change in cell morphology of PacMetUT1 cells with a
reduction in E-cadherin expression and an increase in Vimentin expression
at both protein and mRNA level. This affect was abrogated after stable
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) knockdown in PacMetUT1 cells. Our results
demonstrate an aromatase-mediated induction of osteogenesis by TGF
superfamily ligands in the pre-osteoblastic cells and a stimulatory
effect of estrogen signaling on PacMetUT1 cell tumorigencity in vitro.
Future studies will delineate whether the induction of aromatase mediates
osteoblastic bone metastasis of prostate cancer cells in vivo and if
combination treatment of TGF and aromatase inhibitors can be used as a
novel therapeutic strategy to alleviate bone metastasis in prostate
cancer.

