Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redox nanoparticle enhances effect of anticancer chemotherapy and
suppresses cardio-toxicity


Utilizing the self-assembled core-shell-type polymeric micelle technique,
high-performance nanoparticles possessing stable nitroxide radicals in
the core and reactive groups on the periphery were prepared (Nitroxide
Radical-containing Nanoparticles; RNP). The average diameter of the
nanoparticles was ca. 40 nm, and the nanoparticles emitted intense
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signals. Owing to the confinement
of the nitroxide groups in the core of the nanoparticles, it reduces its
toxicity, prolongs its blood circulation time. Under the low pH
environment in vivo, it was confirmed that RNP disintegrated to expose
the nitroxide radicals outside of the particle. It is sharp contrast
against low-molecular-weight TEMPOL, which was reduced and excreted
rapidly from the blood stream. Recently, we have reported that RNP is
effectively worked to cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury. The RNP
disintegrates in penumbra area due to the acidosis of ischemic region,
followed by the scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated in
this area. This strategy could be applied to other ischemic injuries such
as renal and myocardial infarction. Quite recently, we have found that
scavenging of ROS in tumor region by RNP improves efficiency of
anticancer drug, doxorubicin (DOX). For example, RNP administration prior
to the DOX-injection remarkably improved its efficiency. When RNP was
administered via mice tail veil, it accumulated in tumor due to the
enhancement permeation and retention (EPR) effect. The accumulated RNP
scavenged excessive generated ROS in tumor, which suppressed activation
of transcription factors such as NF-B. Such suppression of inflammation
related transcription factors might increase effectiveness of anticancer
drug such as doxorubicin (DOX). The RNP pre-administration also reduced
its side effect. Actually, 25mg/kg intravenous administrations of RNP
before and after the DOX-injection (20mg/kg) reduced significantly the
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and the creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
activity. Thus, the nanoparticle anti-oxidant treatment is promising as a
new adjuvant for anti-cancer chemotherapy without severe side effect by
anticancer drug.

