Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lactobacilli secreting a tumor antigen and IL15 activates
neutrophils and dendritic cells and generates cytotoxic T lymphocytes
against cancer cells


Introduction and Objective Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) are lactic
acid bacteria, which were found to be better than BCG at inducing cell
death in human bladder cancer cell lines. This study compares both LGG
and BCG in vivo in an orthopic model and further evaluates the potential
of recombinant LGG to induce a directed anti-tumor response. Methods
MB49-PSA (murine bladder cancer cells secreting human PSA) cells were
implanted orthotopically in C57BL/6 mice and either LGG or BCG was
instilled weekly for 6 weeks. Tumor cure rates were noted and an
immnohistochemical examination was performed on the tumors. The human
prostate specific antigen (PSA) PSA was cloned into pLP500-slpAp vector
under the control of S-layer promoter of L. acidophilus. The murine IL-15
cDNA minus its termination codon was cloned upstream of the PSA protein
sequence. Lactobacilli were transformed with the plasmids to generate
LGG-IL15-PSA, LGG-PSA and LGG-S (pLP500-slpAp) respectively. PSA and IL15
secretion was 16-19 ng/2x109 CFU/ml. Bone marrow cells were isolated from
the tibia and femur of 8-10 weeks old female C57BL/6 mice. Neutrophils
were isolated by positive selection with anti-Ly6G microbead kit
(Miltenyi Biotech, Germany). To generate DCs, bone marrow derived cells
were cultured for 9 days in media with 40ng/ml of GM-CSF (BD Bioscience)
which was replaced every other day. Neutrophils and DC were exposed to
the recombinant LGG for 2h and used to stimulate T cells to generate CTL
against the murine bladder cancer cell lines expressing PSA (MB49-PSA).
Results LGG was as effective as BCG in the mice. Analysis of tumors after
repeated weekly LGG instillations showed increased infiltration of
neutrophils and macrophages into the tumor mass after therapy. In vitro,
recombinant LGG activated neutrophils (elevated MHC class I expression)
induced DC maturation (increased expression of CD86, CD80, CD40, MHC II
and CD83), T cell proliferation and PSA specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTL) activity. Activated DC were more efficient than activated
neutrophils in inducing T cell IL2 and IFN production. DC activated with
LGG for 2 h or with LGG treated neutrophils were re-isolated and plated
with nave T cells for 5 days to generate PSA specific T cells. Then PSA
secreting or control MB49 cells were added to the wells. IL15 enhanced DC
generation of CTL. Conclusions Intravesical instillation of LGG cured
mice of tumors. LGG secreting tumor antigens and cytokines could be used
to activate DC in vitro for DC therapy in patients or used as
intravesical therapy.

