Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic mechanisms of transformation for the NSD3 oncogene in
human breast cancer cells with the 8p11-p12 amplicon


An amplified region of chromosome 8, the 8p11-p12 amplicon, is observed
in 12-15% of breast cancers. This region contains 55 genes, of which 22
have been identified as candidate oncogenes based on the presence of
higher than normal copy number and associated elevated expression levels
in breast tumor cells compared to normal breast epithelial cells. Our lab
previously identified the short isoform of one amplicon gene, nuclear SET
domain-containing protein 3 (NSD3s), to be the most potent inducer of
transformation to a neoplastic phenotype of all genes on the 8p11-p12
amplicon when over expressed in MCF10A breast epithelial cells in vitro.
NSD3 is a member of the NSD family of methyltransferases, and has been
shown to methylate lysine 4, 27, and 36 on the H3 subunit of histones,
however the potently transforming short isoform lacks the catalytic SET
domain. Our lab has shown that over expression of NSD3s in the
immortalized human breast epithelial cell line MCF10A causes a
significant increase in proliferation in insulin-free culture conditions,
and the ability to form colonies in soft agar. In SUM44 cells, a breast
cancer cell line with the 8p11-p12 amplicon, shRNA knockdown of NSD3s
resulted in decreased proliferation. Immunoblotting with anti-H3K4me2
antibody shows MCF10A cells have higher global levels of H3K4me2 than SUM
44 cells, and over expression of NSD3s in MCF10A cells reduces global
H3K4me2 levels. Other NSD family members have been shown to act as
oncogenes in certain leukemias by blocking differentiation in developing
lymphocytes through H3K36me3-mediated inhibition of the polycomb
repressor complex, resulting in constitutive activation of the HOX gene
family. This epigenetic dysregulation of HOX through the NSD1 oncogene
results in acquisition of a stem-like phenotype in these cells that is
essential for the development of these leukemias. We predict a similar
mechanism in breast cancers that over express NSD3. Genome-wide
expression analysis has shown that IRX3, a gene expressed in cells of the
ectoderm lineage during differentiation, is upregulated in cells over
expressing NSD3s. Based on previous findings with other NSD family genes
we predict that genes involved in pluripotency or stemness will be
targets of NSD3s activity in breast cancers with the 8p11-p12 amplicon.
To investigate whether over expression of NSD3s induces a stem-like
phenotype in MCF10A cells, we have measured the expression level of
breast cancer stem cell surface markers CD44 and CD24 by flow cytometry,
and found that NSD3s over expression results in a sub-population of cells
that has higher CD44 expression than parental MCF10A, while maintaining
low CD24 expression. These data suggest that NSD3s may act as a driving
oncogene in breast cancer by altering histone methylation patterns in a
way that promotes the expression of genes that result in the acquisition
of stem-like phenotypes.

