Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of tumor-targeted near infrared dyes for fluorescence
guided surgery


Surgical resection of malignant disease is currently one of the most
common and effective cancer treatments. Unfortunately, quantitative tumor
resection is limited by a surgeon's ability to distinguish diseased
tissue from adjacent healthy tissue. Fluorescence guided surgery has
emerged as a tool to aid surgeons in the identification and removal of
malignant tissue. While non-targeted fluorescent dyes injected near the
primary tumor mass have been shown to passively accumulate in tumors and
lymph nodes, the resulting tumor to background ratios are often poor and
boundaries between malignant and normal tissue difficult to define. To
circumvent these problems, our lab has developed high affinity
tumor-specific ligands that can bind to either the prostate specific
membrane antigen (PSMA) or the folate receptor (FR); i.e. cell surface
molecules that are over-expressed on a number of cancers. In this study,
we link these tumor targeting ligands to near infrared (NIR) dyes and
explore their use in fluorescence guided surgery. In vitro, all FR and
PSMA targeted NIR dyes were found to have binding affinities in the low
nanomolar range. Binding was quantitatively blocked with 100-fold excess
of free ligand. Upon injection into mice with metastatic disease, the
targeted NIR dyes allowed clear distinction of tumor tissue from adjacent
healthy tissue. Surgical resection could be conducted until all
fluorescent tissue was removed. All resected fluorescent lesions were
later confirmed by histology to be malignant. Of the NIR dyes tested, the
800 nm dyes were found to have the greatest fluorescence intensity
through porcine tissue, indicating their superior ability to reveal
buried tumor nodules. Collectively, these tumor-specific NIR dyes
demonstrate significant potential for use in fluorescent guided surgery
by aiding in the complete resection of diseased tissue.

