Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathology, BRCA status, and ancestry among Hispanics with breast
cancer


Purpose: Classical epidemiologic approaches to breast cancer (BC)
causation may benefit from the identification of particularly high-risk
subsets such as BRCA carriers, given that Hispanics appear to have one of
the highest rates (25%) of BRCA mutations among women with BC. A pilot
study suggested a lower rate of progesterone receptor (PR) BC among
BRCA-positive Hispanics vs non-Hispanic whites (Lagos,
BreastCancerResTreat, 2011). Methods: We investigated the pathological
characteristics of BC in Hispanics, along with ancestral admixture,
stratified by BRCA status in a large cohort of Hispanics with a personal
or family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. All subjects were
enrolled in an IRB-approved registry and underwent genetic cancer risk
assessment (GCRA) and BRCA testing within a consortium of 14 high-risk
clinics across the US. Multigenerational pedigrees and data on
grandparental geographic origins, as well as epidemiologic factors, were
obtained at the initial GCRA visit. Clinical information was abstracted
from pathology reports. Genotyping of 59 ancestry informative markers
(AIMs) and STRUCTURE analysis was performed to determine differences in
ancestry. Results: Of the 746 Hispanic individuals enrolled, 610 were
diagnosed with invasive breast cancer. Among the BC cases, 152 (25%) had
deleterious BRCA mutations (98 in BRCA1, 54 in BRCA2), 30 (5%) had one or
more unclassified variants, and 428 (70%) had a negative result. The
overall mean age of diagnosis was 40.5 years (8.8); no difference was
observed by BRCA status. Overall, 39.9% of cases were estrogen receptor
(ER)-negative, 50.2% were PR-negative and 74.2% HER2-negative (7.4% were
negative for ER, PR and HER2). BRCA1 carriers were more likely to have
ER-negative and PR-negative tumors than either BRCA2 carriers or
non-carriers (P0.05). Mean percentage of European ancestry was highest
among BRCA2 carriers (54.5%) compared to non-carriers (51.6%) and BRCA1
carriers (46.3%; P0.05). Mean percentage of European ancestry was highest
among BRCA2 carriers (54.5%) compared to non-carriers (51.6%) and BRCA1
carriers (46.3%; P<0.05). Higher European and lower AmerIndian ancestry
was observed among cases with HER2-positive tumors versus negative tumors
(P0.05). Mean percentage of European ancestry was highest among BRCA2
carriers (54.5%) compared to non-carriers (51.6%) and BRCA1 carriers
(46.3%; P<0.05). Higher European and lower AmerIndian ancestry was
observed among cases with HER2-positive tumors versus negative tumors
(P<0.05). Conclusions: To date, this is the largest study of high-risk
Hispanic families in the US with complete BRCA testing, multigenerational
pedigrees, and detailed clinical and ancestral data. Interestingly, the
rate of PR negativity was much higher than what has been reported among
non-Hispanic whites in the literature. This supports our pilot study
observations. Since PR has been found to be an independent predictor of
endocrine therapy response, further study of lower levels of PR in the
Hispanic population is warranted. Data on non-Hispanic white women is
currently being collected for direct comparison. Additional research is
needed to investigate the potential unique BC immunophenotypes and
genetic profiles by ancestral background.

