Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs profiling in salivary rinse from patients with head and
neck squamous cells carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) constitute the fifth most
common malignancy worldwide. Over the last years, diagnosis and
management have improved through combined efforts in surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but long-term survival rates have improved
only marginally, and the overall 5-year survival rate for HNSCC patients
is around 50%. Late diagnosis and frequent locoregional relapse after
definitive therapy are the major causes of morbidly and mortality in
HNSCC cases. Hence, there is a need to acquire deeper understanding of
HNSCC biology and to identify effective molecular biomarkers useful for a
precocious recognition of the relapses. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
evolutionarily conserved, endogenous, small, noncoding RNA molecules of
about 19-24 nucleotides in length that function as posttranscriptional
gene regulators, might also function as tumor suppressors and oncogenes.
These small regulatory RNAs have been recently recognized to play
important roles in human cancers and increasing data support the value of
miRNA expression profiling to distinguish different types of human
malignancies and to categorize various cancer subtypes. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the miRNA expression profile in salivary rinse
samples from HNSCC patients and to investigate the significance of miRNA
as molecular marker for tumor recurrence detection. Comprehensive miRNA
profile was done in 4 salivary rinse samples from HNSCC patients and 3
samples from healthy donors using a Megaplex TaqMan Low Density miRNA
Arrays (TLDA - Life Technologies) to assess the expression status of 670
miRNAs. Expression values were calculated using the Ct method, where mean
Ct of the 3 normal samples was used as reference. All target miRNAs with
undetermined Ct values in all samples were removed, leaving 198 miRNAs in
the analysis. Using a cut-off of 2X to identify the differentially
expressed miRNAs, 101 candidates were selected. From that, 21 were
upregulated in the HNSCC samples while 80 were downregulated in these
samples. After a deep revision of the information available from the 101
differentially expressed miRNA, we selected 10 candidates to be validated
in an independent group of 100200 salivary rinses collected from HNSCC
patient at diagnoses. A preliminary result indicated that one of the
selected miRNA is overexpressed 95% (19/20) of tumor samples evaluated.
In the future, the validated candidates will be evaluated in salivary
rinses that are being collected each six months during the fallow-up of
300 patients included in the study. So we could evaluate their
uselfulness as markers for HNSCC relapses. Supported by Fapesp (Grant
2011/01919-2).

