Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel preclinical study in cynomolgus monkeys examining CCL2
production rate and kinetic profile after escalating dose administration
of anti-CCL2 human monoclonal antibody carlumab (CNTO 888)


Purpose: Carlumab (CNTO 888) is a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds CCL2 with high affinity in vitro. The objective of this study was
to estimate the production rate and kinetic profile of CCL2 following
escalating doses of carlumab with the goal of predicting the dose that
would maintain suppression of free CCL2 throughout the dosing interval.
Patients and methods: Eighteen male cynomolgus (cyno) monkeys were
allocated to 3 treatment groups: low dose [LD], fixed dose [FD] or high
dose [HD], (6 per group) and received various doses of carlumab weekly
(qw) or every other week (q2w) over a 6-week study period. LD received a
starting dose of 1 mg/kg qw for 3 weeks, followed by an increase to 5
mg/kg qw for 3 more weeks. FD received 15 mg/kg q2w. HD received a
starting dose of 12.5 mg/kg qw for 2 weeks, increased to 25 mg/kg qw for
2 weeks and then increased to 50 mg/kg qw for the final 2 weeks. Serial
serum samples were collected and analyzed using immunoassay methods to
determine the concentrations of free CCL2, carlumab-CCL2 complex and
carlumab. Results: Based on the slope of the carlumab-CCL2 complex
concentration-time profile immediately after dosing, the production rate
of CCL2 did not appear to significantly change as the dose of carlumab
was increased from 1 to 50 mg/kg. Increasing the dose from 1 to 25 mg/kg
resulted in a dose-proportional increase in the carlumab-CCL2 complex;
however, increasing the dose from 25 to 50 mg/kg did not result in
further increase of the carlumab-CCL2 complex, suggesting that a very
high proportion of the CCL2 in the serum was bound by carlumab at a dose
of 25 mg/kg. In LD, the concentration of free CCL2 was lower compared
with the higher dose regimens. Free CCL2 increased after the carlumab
dose increased from 12.5 to 25 mg/kg but decreased after a dose increase
from 25 to 50 mg/kg. This finding suggested that a dose >50 mg/kg would
be required to maintain suppression of free CCL2 throughout the dosing
interval due to the large amount of free CCL2 that continuously
disassociates from the complex. After a dose of 15 mg/kg every 2 weeks,
carlumab, free CCL2 and carlumab-CCL2 complex concentration-time profiles
demonstrated similar results to those observed in cancer patients.
Conclusions: In this novel comprehensive PK/PD study in cyno monkeys, the
production rates of CCL2 did not appear to correlate with increasing
doses of carlumab and suggested that a dose of >50 mg/kg every week would
be needed to continuously maintain suppression of free CCL2 below
baseline levels. This study design demonstrated that the cyno monkey is a
relevant species in which to examine the binding of carlumab on CCL2.
This study methodology could be applied to test other therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies targeting soluble ligands in cyno monkeys for which
the cyno homolog demonstrates cross reactivity.

