Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 70kDa fibronectin splice variant induced human mammary fibroblast
migration


A soluble factor hypothesized to play an important role in metastasis is
migration stimulating factor (MSF). MSF is a truncated splice variant of
fibronectin, with a structure nearly identical to the long-studied 70 kDa
N-terminal catheptic-D fragment. MSF is secreted by fetal fibroblasts,
some tumor cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAF), and tumor-associated vascular endothelial cells. MSF
is a potent bioactivator of normal adult fibroblast, and endothelial cell
migration, but previous studies have failed to regulate and characterize
the MSF gradient and the gradient effect on cell migration. In the
current study, we compared the motogenic activity of the 70 kDa
fibronectin N-terminal fragment (70kDA-FN) at different concentrations to
baseline media containing 2% fetal calf serum (FCS) using microfluidic
channels with well-characterized chemoattractant gradients. Microfluidic
channels with 5um x 1um x 500 um dimensions were developed from PDMS.
They comprise of two half-Y-shaped channels connected by a 1.35 um long
gradient controlling migration channel. In this design, cells were
introduced into the right half channel. To distinguish gradient dependent
migration from random migration, MSF was introduced into the
non-cell-containing half channel for chemotaxis, or placed directly into
the cell containing half channel for chemokinesis. GFP-labeled human
mammary fibroblast (HMF; originally termed RMF/EG) cells were provided by
Dr. Kuperwasser, and maintained in high glucose DMEM supplemented with
10% FCS. Prior to the experiments, HMFs were cultured overnight in DMEM
supplemented with 2% FCS. Microfluidic channels were imaged after 36
hours by an Olympus IX71 microscope, and migrating cells were quantified
using the custom image analysis program JeX. Prior to the migration
experiments, time-lapse fluorescent imaging of FITC-labeled 70kDa-FN was
used to characterize and verify the presence of the chemoattractant
gradient for 36 hours. The numbers of cells present in different
experimental conditions were compared using two-sided Mann-Whitney
Wilcoxon test. There was a statistically significant difference between
the chemotactic experimental conditions containing 70kDa-FN
concentrations of 14pMol/mL (pA soluble factor hypothesized to play an
important role in metastasis is migration stimulating factor (MSF). MSF
is a truncated splice variant of fibronectin, with a structure nearly
identical to the long-studied 70 kDa N-terminal catheptic-D fragment. MSF
is secreted by fetal fibroblasts, some tumor cells, tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM), cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF), and
tumor-associated vascular endothelial cells. MSF is a potent bioactivator
of normal adult fibroblast, and endothelial cell migration, but previous
studies have failed to regulate and characterize the MSF gradient and the
gradient effect on cell migration. In the current study, we compared the
motogenic activity of the 70 kDa fibronectin N-terminal fragment
(70kDA-FN) at different concentrations to baseline media containing 2%
fetal calf serum (FCS) using microfluidic channels with
well-characterized chemoattractant gradients. Microfluidic channels with
5um x 1um x 500 um dimensions were developed from PDMS. They comprise of
two half-Y-shaped channels connected by a 1.35 um long gradient
controlling migration channel. In this design, cells were introduced into
the right half channel. To distinguish gradient dependent migration from
random migration, MSF was introduced into the non-cell-containing half
channel for chemotaxis, or placed directly into the cell containing half
channel for chemokinesis. GFP-labeled human mammary fibroblast (HMF;
originally termed RMF/EG) cells were provided by Dr. Kuperwasser, and
maintained in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS. Prior to the
experiments, HMFs were cultured overnight in DMEM supplemented with 2%
FCS. Microfluidic channels were imaged after 36 hours by an Olympus IX71
microscope, and migrating cells were quantified using the custom image
analysis program JeX. Prior to the migration experiments, time-lapse
fluorescent imaging of FITC-labeled 70kDa-FN was used to characterize and
verify the presence of the chemoattractant gradient for 36 hours. The
numbers of cells present in different experimental conditions were
compared using two-sided Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon test. There was a
statistically significant difference between the chemotactic experimental
conditions containing 70kDa-FN concentrations of 14pMol/mL (p<0.01) and
1.4pMol/mL (pA soluble factor hypothesized to play an important role in
metastasis is migration stimulating factor (MSF). MSF is a truncated
splice variant of fibronectin, with a structure nearly identical to the
long-studied 70 kDa N-terminal catheptic-D fragment. MSF is secreted by
fetal fibroblasts, some tumor cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAM),
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF), and tumor-associated vascular
endothelial cells. MSF is a potent bioactivator of normal adult
fibroblast, and endothelial cell migration, but previous studies have
failed to regulate and characterize the MSF gradient and the gradient
effect on cell migration. In the current study, we compared the motogenic
activity of the 70 kDa fibronectin N-terminal fragment (70kDA-FN) at
different concentrations to baseline media containing 2% fetal calf serum
(FCS) using microfluidic channels with well-characterized chemoattractant
gradients. Microfluidic channels with 5um x 1um x 500 um dimensions were
developed from PDMS. They comprise of two half-Y-shaped channels
connected by a 1.35 um long gradient controlling migration channel. In
this design, cells were introduced into the right half channel. To
distinguish gradient dependent migration from random migration, MSF was
introduced into the non-cell-containing half channel for chemotaxis, or
placed directly into the cell containing half channel for chemokinesis.
GFP-labeled human mammary fibroblast (HMF; originally termed RMF/EG)
cells were provided by Dr. Kuperwasser, and maintained in high glucose
DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS. Prior to the experiments, HMFs were
cultured overnight in DMEM supplemented with 2% FCS. Microfluidic
channels were imaged after 36 hours by an Olympus IX71 microscope, and
migrating cells were quantified using the custom image analysis program
JeX. Prior to the migration experiments, time-lapse fluorescent imaging
of FITC-labeled 70kDa-FN was used to characterize and verify the presence
of the chemoattractant gradient for 36 hours. The numbers of cells
present in different experimental conditions were compared using
two-sided Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon test. There was a statistically
significant difference between the chemotactic experimental conditions
containing 70kDa-FN concentrations of 14pMol/mL (p<0.01) and 1.4pMol/mL
(p<0.05). Normalizing to migrating cells present in the control channel,
the 14pMol/mL and 1.4pMol/mL 70kDa-FN chemotaxis channels on average
contained 70% and 53% more cells, respectively. Furthermore, the
experimental setups testing chemokinesis on average contained more cells
compared to the control, supporting a possible role for 70kDa-FN in HMF
chemokinesis. MSF and 70kDa-FN are potent activators of fibroblast
migration. In the current experiment we utilized microfluidic channels to
test and confirm that 70kDa-FN induced fibroblast migration is both
chemokinetic and chemotactic, and dose dependent.

