Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiles classify renal cell carcinoma subtypes


Background: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for about 2-4% of all
human malignancies. Hereby, the entity of papillary RCC (pRCC) is the
second most common entity with about 10-15% of all RCC. According to
histomorphological characteristics pRCCs can be further subdivided in two
distinct subtypes. Type 2 pRCCs are correlated with a worse clinical
outcome than type 1 pRCCs. In order to characterize these RCC subtypes we
studied microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of primary pRCCs type 1 and
2 as well as clear cell RCC (ccRCC). Material and Methods: We performed
comparative miRNA expression profiling using Affymetrix miRNA
microarrays. Ten to fifteen samples were analyzed for each subtype
containing matched pairs of microdissected malignant and nonmalignant
tissue. Hierarchical clustering was used to identify characteristic miRNA
expression signatures. The expression of selected miRNAs was validated
using quantitative PCR. Results: Hierarchical clustering was not able to
identify miRNA expression signatures characteristic for all RCC subtypes,
highlighting the heterogeneity among RCC tumors. But when stratified
according to histological subtypes, tumor and nonmalignant tissue samples
could be separated from each other. Interestingly, pRCC tumors of type 1
and 2 displayed a characteristic miRNA expression profile making it
possible to separate these two tumor subtypes. A differential expression
of miRNAs miR-200c, mir-143, miR-145, miR-210 and miR-10b could be
confirmed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of pRCC samples (pBackground: Renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) accounts for about 2-4% of all human malignancies.
Hereby, the entity of papillary RCC (pRCC) is the second most common
entity with about 10-15% of all RCC. According to histomorphological
characteristics pRCCs can be further subdivided in two distinct subtypes.
Type 2 pRCCs are correlated with a worse clinical outcome than type 1
pRCCs. In order to characterize these RCC subtypes we studied microRNA
(miRNA) expression profiles of primary pRCCs type 1 and 2 as well as
clear cell RCC (ccRCC). Material and Methods: We performed comparative
miRNA expression profiling using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. Ten to
fifteen samples were analyzed for each subtype containing matched pairs
of microdissected malignant and nonmalignant tissue. Hierarchical
clustering was used to identify characteristic miRNA expression
signatures. The expression of selected miRNAs was validated using
quantitative PCR. Results: Hierarchical clustering was not able to
identify miRNA expression signatures characteristic for all RCC subtypes,
highlighting the heterogeneity among RCC tumors. But when stratified
according to histological subtypes, tumor and nonmalignant tissue samples
could be separated from each other. Interestingly, pRCC tumors of type 1
and 2 displayed a characteristic miRNA expression profile making it
possible to separate these two tumor subtypes. A differential expression
of miRNAs miR-200c, mir-143, miR-145, miR-210 and miR-10b could be
confirmed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of pRCC samples (p<0.05; paired t-test).
Applying a binary logistic regression model, a combination of only three
of these miRNA miRNAs was sufficient to correctly determine the subtype
of all pRCC tumor samples. Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate that
miRNA expression in RCC is heterogeneous but there are characteristic
miRNA expression profiles within RCC subtypes. In pRCC, specific miRNAs
may reflect a molecular correlate to the histological differences between
the two subtypes, which in turn are correlated to the clinical outcome.

