Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel chemopreventive combinatorial regimen significantly
suppresses NF-kB and PI3-kinase/Akt pathways in the Syrian golden hamster
pancreatic cancer model


Pancreatic cancer caused 40,000 deaths in 2010 and is currently ranked as
the fourth leading cause of deaths in the United States. Due to poor
prognosis of this disease, it is imperative that chemopreventive
strategies be developed to control the formation of the initial
neoplastic lesions. We have previously reported the effectiveness of a
low dose combination regimen of aspirin, curcumin and sulforaphane (ACS)
on MIA-PaCa-2 and Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines. The objective of
the current study was to use the ACS combination regimens in vivo to
demonstrate the molecular targets responsible for prevention of
pancreatic cancer in N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl) amine (BOP) carcinogen
treated Syrian golden hamsters. BOP treated Syrian golden hamsters
(n=6/group) were sacrificed after 24 weeks of treatment with a low
(20+45+1.6), medium (67+150+5) and high (200+450+16) doses (in mg/kg) of
ACS, respectively. Saline and BOP controls were included in the study.
The pancreatic tissues were processed for isolation of nuclear and
cytoplasmic proteins, and 20 mg of tissue was used for isolation of total
RNA. Results from the Western blot show that low dose of ACS combined
regimen down-regulated active NF-B by inhibiting phosphorylation of IB
and p65. Low dose ACS also inhibited phosphorylation of Akt, needed for
IKK activation. Consequently at the transcription level, low dose ACS
significant down-regulated NF-B regulated gene products TNF, IL1 and IL6
compared to BOP controls (p2 fold down-regulation in low dose regimen
compared to BOP controls. With the high and medium doses, a trend similar
to the low dose ACS was evident, whereby the effects were more
significant at higher doses (p2 fold down-regulation in low dose regimen
compared to BOP controls. With the high and medium doses, a trend similar
to the low dose ACS was evident, whereby the effects were more
significant at higher doses (p<0.001), thus demonstrating a
dose-dependent response. The significance of this work is in the
demonstration of the effectiveness in gene regulation of ACS even at the
low-dose level which shows its potential as a powerful combinatorial
regimen for pancreatic cancer prevention.

