Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor detection and surgical navigation with fluorescence
laparoscopy is enhanced with combinations of differently labeled
fluorophore-conjugated antibodies and fluorescent proteins


The aim of this study was to improve detection of primary and metastatic
lesions of human pancreatic cancer in mouse models with fluorescence
laparoscopy by enhancing the fluorescence signal of tumor with different
combinations of fluorophores without compromising background
illumination. Human pancreatic cancer models were established with
combinations of FG-RFP, MiaPaca2-GFP, BxPC-3-RFP, or BxPC-3 cancer cells
implanted in 6-week-old female athymic mice. Two weeks post-implantation,
diagnostic laparoscopy was performed with a Stryker L9000 LED light
source 24 hours after tail vein injection of CEA antibodies conjugated
with Alexa 488- and/or Alexa 555. Cancer lesions were detected and
localized under the fluorescence light mode. Intravital images were
obtained with the Maestro CRI Small Animal Imaging System, serving as a
positive control. Tumors were collected for histologic review.
Fluorescence laparoscopy with a 495-nm emission filter and an LED light
source enabled real-time visualization of differently
fluorescence-labeled tumors in the peritoneal cavity simultaneously. The
combination of BxPC-3 RFP labeled with anti-CEA-Alexa 488 afforded the
brightest signal of all established mouse models. We were able to
reproduce this enhanced fluorescence signaling by doubly labeling
non-color BxPC-3 tumor with anti-CEA-Alexa 488 and anti-CEA-Alexa 555.
The doubly labeled tumor provided a greater signal intensity profile
compared to tumors labeled with either anti-CEA-Alexa 488 or -Alexa 555
alone. This enhanced fluorescence signal permitted improved detection of
sub-millimeter lesions without compromising background illumination. The
ability to visualize tumor deposits expressing fluorescent proteins of
different wavelengths simultaneously with an LED light source enabled us
to establish the optimal combination of fluorophores that enhanced the
signal intensity of fluorescence. With this optimal fluorophore
combination, we improved the detection of sub-millimeter tumor lesions
without impairing the visualization of surrounding structures necessary
for surgical navigation.

