Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of fibrosis and stromal components in metastatic
pancreatic cancer (PC) autopsy specimens


Background: PC remains a deadly malignancy with a paucity of effective
therapeutic options. Recent data generated in a genetically engineered
mouse model of PC suggests that the notorious chemoresistance of this
disease is due to dense fibrosis and stromal proliferation that precludes
effective drug delivery to the cancer cells. However clinical experience
in patients with metastatic disease suggests that metastatic sites may
respond differently from the pancreatic primary (PP). Such variability
could be related to differences in the tumor-stroma relationship between
the PP and metastatic sites. We used paired specimens from the University
of Nebraska Medical Center's rapid autopsy program (RAP) to assess
histologic markers of fibrosis and stromal proliferation between the PP
and metastatic sites to better characterize these differences. Methods:
The RAP has been previously described (Stratford et al. PLoS Med 2010).
We identified 12 matched specimens that included PP tissue in addition to
metastatic lesions from liver, lung, abdominal cavity, or other sites.
Slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (to assess for % fibrosis)
and vimentin, CD10, and CD68 (stromal markers) and scored based on
pathologic review (HMW). Percent fibrosis was a composite measure based
on stromal components, including collagen, fibroblasts, and inflammatory
cells. Mixed linear model methods with repeated measures were used to
determine whether there was a difference in % fibrosis and CD68 between
patients tumors. Generalized estimating equations were used to determine
whether there was a difference in vimentin and CD10 between patients
tumors. Bonferroni adjusted p-value=0.0125 (=0.05 / 4 tests) was used as
significant alpha level for the tests. Statistical analysis was performed
using SAS version 9.2 and STATA/SE version 11.2 software. Results:
Percent fibrosis was statistically different between PP tissue and all
metastatic sites (p=0.002) with metastatic lesions demonstrating less
fibrosis than the respective paired PP. There were no statistically
significant differences in CD10, CD68 or vimentin staining between the PP
and metastatic sites; however liver metastases did trend towards
significantly more stromal cellular proliferation, based on CD10,
vimentin, and CD68 staining, when compared to other metastatic sites.
Conclusions: There was less stromal deposition and fibrosis in metastatic
sites versus the PP's that were examined. This difference could play a
role in the chemosensitivity of the primary tumor compared to metastatic
sites of disease. Furthermore, the liver appears to have more striking
stromal cellular proliferation compared to other metastatic sites, which
could also affect drug penetration and outcome. These differences in the
tumor-stroma relationship should be further validated and interventions
evaluated to improve drug delivery to the PP and metastatic sites in PC.

