Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the evolution of resistance to RAF inhibitors in
clinically relevant melanoma models


Small molecule RAF inhibitors such as Vemurafenib have provided
proof-of-concept that BRAFV600E is a key driver of proliferation and
survival in melanoma, as evidenced by tumor responses in this patient
population. Unfortunately, in many patients the tumor response is
short-lived, as resistance to the inhibitor rapidly develops.
Understanding the mechanisms that underlie drug resistance will be
critical to providing improved treatment options for these patients. Here
we model the emergence of resistance to selective RAF inhibitors,
utilizing a limited passage BRAFV600E primary human melanoma xenograft
model. This model, is expected to retain genetic diversity in a
physiologically relevant microenvironment. Mice bearing HMEX1906 tumors
were treated with one of two selective RAF inhibitors, Vemurafenib or the
novel RAF inhibitor NVP-LGX818, at clinically-relevant doses, providing
an opportunity to model pharmacokinetics, and replicate the selective
pressure observed in patients. Long-term continuous treatment of
BRAFV600E primary melanoma xenogafts with selective RAF inhibitors
resulted in the appearance of resistant tumors over the course of 4 to 6
weeks. Pharmacodynamic (PD) analysis of individual tumors indicated that
the MAPK pathway is suppressed in resistant tumors, although the degree
and duration of suppression is less than in tumors that remain sensitive
to RAF inhibitors. Furthermore, there is heterogeneity in the PD
response, with greater extent and duration of P-Erk inhibition in
sensitive tumors than in those resistant to RAF inhibitors. Biochemical
analyses indicate that multiple receptor tyrosine kinases are activated
and modulation of negative feedback loops may contribute to resistance.
In addition increased expression of BRAFV600E, was detected in a subset
of resistant tumors. Increasing the dose of RAF inhibitor administered to
mice bearing resistant tumors leads to a significant yet transient tumor
response, followed by tumor progression. Taken together with the PD data,
this supports tumor cell heterogeneity, and rapid adaptation of tumors to
the selective pressure being applied. Both in vivo drug withdrawal
studies as well as in vitro analyses indicate that the resistant cells
have become dependant on the presence of the RAF inhibitor for their
survival. Based on these observations it appears that resistant tumor
cells are less fit than sensitive tumor cells in the absence of drug. To
test this hypothesis, mice were dosed on an intermittent regimen(4 weeks
on / 2 weeks off) of RAF inhibitors. This regimen prevented the evolution
of resistance for the duration of the 4 month experiment. These data
could have implications in optimizing dose schedules to prevent the
emergence of clinical resistance to targeted therapy.

