Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A modular polymer platform for the delivery of cytokines is
effective in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC)


Educational objective: At the conclusion of this presentation, the
participants should be able to discuss the benefits of a modular polymer
platform, which will improve the outcome for patients with advanced
HNSCC. Objective: To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of an
immunomodulator secreting polymer platform in the treatment of HNSCC.
Study Design: in vivo animal study. Setting: Academic research
laboratory. Subjects and Methods: C3H/HeJ mice were injected with
SCCVII/SF cells. After tumors reached 1 cm in size, animals then
underwent surgery and were randomized to receive implantation of (1) no
polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain polymer with dendritic cells (DC)
secreting the chemokine CCL21; (4) plain polymer with DC alone; and 5)
plain polymer + daily CCL21 injection. Tumor size was measured until the
mice were euthanized. At necropsy, the tumors were excised and weighed.
Results: We were able to demonstrate that DC are viable and functionally
secrete CCL21 up to 14 days in the polymer. DC-CCL21 secreting polymer
effectively reduced tumor growth mice by over 16-fold (P Educational
objective: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants
should be able to discuss the benefits of a modular polymer platform,
which will improve the outcome for patients with advanced HNSCC.
Objective: To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of an immunomodulator
secreting polymer platform in the treatment of HNSCC. Study Design: in
vivo animal study. Setting: Academic research laboratory. Subjects and
Methods: C3H/HeJ mice were injected with SCCVII/SF cells. After tumors
reached 1 cm in size, animals then underwent surgery and were randomized
to receive implantation of (1) no polymer; (2) plain polymer; (3) plain
polymer with dendritic cells (DC) secreting the chemokine CCL21; (4)
plain polymer with DC alone; and 5) plain polymer + daily CCL21
injection. Tumor size was measured until the mice were euthanized. At
necropsy, the tumors were excised and weighed. Results: We were able to
demonstrate that DC are viable and functionally secrete CCL21 up to 14
days in the polymer. DC-CCL21 secreting polymer effectively reduced tumor
growth mice by over 16-fold (P < 0.01) as compared to control, plain
polymer, and plain polymer + intratumoral CCL21 injection groups. Flow
cytometry analysis revealed that there was a significant increase in CD4+
T cells, as well as a significant decrease in CD4+/CD25+ regulatory T
cells in the tumor site, underlying the significant tumor regression
observed. Conclusion: The major limitation for the clinical use of
cytokines is the lack of an effective protocol for the sustained delivery
of cytokines to the tumor milieu. We demonstrate the efficacy of a novel
polymer platform in delivering DC-CCL21 to SCCA in a murine model. Our
results indicate that this polymer may represent a new therapeutic
modality for patients with HNSCC. Once this polymer platform is optimized
we will plan for validation in the context of a prospective trial in
patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent HNSCC.

