Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide methylation profiling in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers and
frequently presents with an advanced disease. Although it has been shown
that a variety of epigenetic alterations can cause molecular
heterogeneity of liver tumors, these studies have focused on specific
genes, especially oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. There is limited
knowledge of the genome-wide methylation status in liver tumors and how
this may potentially contribute to carcinogenesis and prognosis. We
conducted genome-wide methylation profiling in a set of liver tumors. A
pilot study was first performed on DNA from paired fresh frozen tumor and
adjacent normal tissues from 5 patients. Genome-wide methylation profiles
were created using Infinium Human Methylation 450K BeadChips.
GenomeStudio was used to normalize data and to identify differentially
methylated (DM) genes in tumor vs. normal tissue with False Discovery
Rate (FDR) adjustment. Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned
using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Of the 485,577 CpG loci
studied, significant DM loci were observed between normal and tumor
tissues at 4% (17,612 CpGs) with an adjusted p-value Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers and frequently presents
with an advanced disease. Although it has been shown that a variety of
epigenetic alterations can cause molecular heterogeneity of liver tumors,
these studies have focused on specific genes, especially oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes. There is limited knowledge of the genome-wide
methylation status in liver tumors and how this may potentially
contribute to carcinogenesis and prognosis. We conducted genome-wide
methylation profiling in a set of liver tumors. A pilot study was first
performed on DNA from paired fresh frozen tumor and adjacent normal
tissues from 5 patients. Genome-wide methylation profiles were created
using Infinium Human Methylation 450K BeadChips. GenomeStudio was used to
normalize data and to identify differentially methylated (DM) genes in
tumor vs. normal tissue with False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjustment.
Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned using the Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA). Of the 485,577 CpG loci studied, significant DM
loci were observed between normal and tumor tissues at 4% (17,612 CpGs)
with an adjusted p-value < 0.001. Interestingly, 92% (15,712 CpGs) of the
observed DNA methylation changes corresponded to general hypomethylation
in tumor tissues, which was focused on promoter regions (741 out of 1,450
CpGs, 51%) and especially in promoter CpG islands (n=553, 74%).
Conversely, hypomethylated CpGs were mostly observed in gene body and
intergenic regions (12,343 out of 15,712 CpGs, 78%). Since the CpG
islands in promoter regions can directly regulate gene expression levels,
428 genes including 12 miRNAs co-located with the significant DM CpGs
(553 hypermethylated and 102 hypomethylated CpGs) in promoter region CpG
islands were characterized for their biological function and potential
role in liver cancer. IPA analysis showed Tissue and Cellular Development
(p=1.0e-41), Cellular Growth and Proliferation (p=1.0e-14), and Gene
Expression and Cell cycle (p=1.0e-12) as top networks. In particular, a
top canonical pathway indicated 24 genes associated with the G-protein
Coupled Receptor Signaling (p=3.12e-4) which is a key factor in
transactivation of the commonly altered EGFR pathway in HCC development.
Moreover, Nutritional Disease, with genes related to obesity (12 genes),
weight loss (6 genes) and weight gain (4 genes) was observed as a top
biological functional category (pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of
the most common cancers and frequently presents with an advanced disease.
Although it has been shown that a variety of epigenetic alterations can
cause molecular heterogeneity of liver tumors, these studies have focused
on specific genes, especially oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. There
is limited knowledge of the genome-wide methylation status in liver
tumors and how this may potentially contribute to carcinogenesis and
prognosis. We conducted genome-wide methylation profiling in a set of
liver tumors. A pilot study was first performed on DNA from paired fresh
frozen tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 5 patients. Genome-wide
methylation profiles were created using Infinium Human Methylation 450K
BeadChips. GenomeStudio was used to normalize data and to identify
differentially methylated (DM) genes in tumor vs. normal tissue with
False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjustment. Biological functions of the DM
genes were assigned using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Of the
485,577 CpG loci studied, significant DM loci were observed between
normal and tumor tissues at 4% (17,612 CpGs) with an adjusted p-value <
0.001. Interestingly, 92% (15,712 CpGs) of the observed DNA methylation
changes corresponded to general hypomethylation in tumor tissues, which
was focused on promoter regions (741 out of 1,450 CpGs, 51%) and
especially in promoter CpG islands (n=553, 74%). Conversely,
hypomethylated CpGs were mostly observed in gene body and intergenic
regions (12,343 out of 15,712 CpGs, 78%). Since the CpG islands in
promoter regions can directly regulate gene expression levels, 428 genes
including 12 miRNAs co-located with the significant DM CpGs (553
hypermethylated and 102 hypomethylated CpGs) in promoter region CpG
islands were characterized for their biological function and potential
role in liver cancer. IPA analysis showed Tissue and Cellular Development
(p=1.0e-41), Cellular Growth and Proliferation (p=1.0e-14), and Gene
Expression and Cell cycle (p=1.0e-12) as top networks. In particular, a
top canonical pathway indicated 24 genes associated with the G-protein
Coupled Receptor Signaling (p=3.12e-4) which is a key factor in
transactivation of the commonly altered EGFR pathway in HCC development.
Moreover, Nutritional Disease, with genes related to obesity (12 genes),
weight loss (6 genes) and weight gain (4 genes) was observed as a top
biological functional category (p<0.05). In addition, HCC related genes
including TP73, HOXA9, TRIL, RASL10A and IGF2BP1 were differentially
methylated between tumors and normals. In summary, we are performing
genome-wide profiling of differentially methylated genes in HCC using DNA
from tumor and normal tissue samples contributed to our biorepository. We
expect to confirm the pathways preliminarily identified as being involved
in liver carcinogenesis by obtaining methylation profiles from a larger
set of patients with liver tumors.

