Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large-scale DNA methylation profiling in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GIST) reveals epigenetic regulation of SPP1 as an independent
prognostic factor


Aims Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) have distinct gene
expression patterns according to anatomical localisation and genotype,
with potential impact on biological aggressiveness. DNA methylation of
CpG dinucleotides in the promoter region of genes is an important
mechanism for regulation of gene expression. We performed a large-scale
analysis of DNA methylation in GISTs to identify methylation patterns
associated with clinico-pathological parameters and prognosis. Methods
Seventy-five GISTs with either KIT or PDGFRA mutations were analysed for
DNA methylation of 1.505 CpG sites in the promoter regions of 807
cancer-related genes using a large-scale approach (Cancer Methylation
Panel I, Illumina). Epigenetic regulation of Secreted Phosphoprotein 1
(SPP1) expression was analysed at mRNA and protein levels in GIST882 and
GIST48b cells after treatment with a demethylating agent. Impacts on
tumorigenesis-related signalling pathways were analysed by Western Blot
after stimulation of GIST cell lines with SPP1. Prognostic impact of SPP1
at methylation and protein levels were investigated in 75 and 121 GIST
tumor samples, respectively, and compared to classical prognostic
parameters tumor size, mitotic counts and tumor localisation. Results
Principal component analysis revealed distinct DNA methylation patterns
according to anatomical localisation, genotype and mitotic counts.
Hypomethylation of a CpG dinucleotide 647 base pairs upstream of the
transcription start site of SPP1 was significantly correlated to SPP1
mRNA and protein level, and also to tumor progression (p=0.003). In vitro
analyses confirmed epigenetic regulation of SPP1 expression, and
demonstrated potential impact on proliferation and invasion. High protein
level of SPP1 was significantly correlated to shorter disease-free
survival in univariate (p=2x107) and multivariate (pAims Gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GISTs) have distinct gene expression patterns according
to anatomical localisation and genotype, with potential impact on
biological aggressiveness. DNA methylation of CpG dinucleotides in the
promoter region of genes is an important mechanism for regulation of gene
expression. We performed a large-scale analysis of DNA methylation in
GISTs to identify methylation patterns associated with
clinico-pathological parameters and prognosis. Methods Seventy-five GISTs
with either KIT or PDGFRA mutations were analysed for DNA methylation of
1.505 CpG sites in the promoter regions of 807 cancer-related genes using
a large-scale approach (Cancer Methylation Panel I, Illumina). Epigenetic
regulation of Secreted Phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) expression was analysed at
mRNA and protein levels in GIST882 and GIST48b cells after treatment with
a demethylating agent. Impacts on tumorigenesis-related signalling
pathways were analysed by Western Blot after stimulation of GIST cell
lines with SPP1. Prognostic impact of SPP1 at methylation and protein
levels were investigated in 75 and 121 GIST tumor samples, respectively,
and compared to classical prognostic parameters tumor size, mitotic
counts and tumor localisation. Results Principal component analysis
revealed distinct DNA methylation patterns according to anatomical
localisation, genotype and mitotic counts. Hypomethylation of a CpG
dinucleotide 647 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site of
SPP1 was significantly correlated to SPP1 mRNA and protein level, and
also to tumor progression (p=0.003). In vitro analyses confirmed
epigenetic regulation of SPP1 expression, and demonstrated potential
impact on proliferation and invasion. High protein level of SPP1 was
significantly correlated to shorter disease-free survival in univariate
(p=2x107) and multivariate (p<1x106) analyses. Conclusion The expression
of SPP1 is regulated epigenetically in GISTs, and high expression of SPP1
is a novel and independent prognostic parameter in GISTs.

