Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cationic polyurethanes-short branch PEI-mediated delivery of
Mir145 inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation and cancer
stem-like properties and in lung adenocarcinoma


The high invasiveness and frequent recurrence of lung adenocarcinoma
(LAC) are major reasons for treatment failures and poor prognoses.
Alterations in microRNAs (miRNAs) expression have been shown in lung
cancers. Recent reports have demonstrated that tumors contain a small
subpopulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that possesses self-renewing
capacity and is responsible for tumor malignancy including metastasis,
relapse, and chemoradioresistance. However, a miRNAs-based therapeutic
approach in LAC-associated CSCs (LAC-CSCs) is still blurred. Using
miRNA/mRNA-microarray and Quantitative RT-PCR, we found that the
expression of miR145 is negatively correlated with the levels of
Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1 in LAC patient specimens, and an
Oct4highSox2highFascin1highmiR145low phenotype predicted poor prognosis.
We enriched LAC-CSCs by side population sorting or identification of
CD133 markers and found that LAC-CSCs exhibited low miR145 and high
Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1 expression, CSC-like properties, and
chemoradioresistance. To clarify the role of miR145, we used a
polyurethane-short branch-polyethylenimine (PU-PEI) as the vehicle to
deliver miR145 into LAC-CSCs. PU-PEI-mediated miR145 delivery reduced
CSC-like properties, and improved chemoradioresistance in LAC-CSCs by
directly targeting Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1. Importantly, the repressive effect
of miR145 on tumor metastasis was mediated by inhibiting the
epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation (EMT) and metastastic
ability, partially by regulating Oct4/Sox2/Fascin1, Tcf4, and Wnt5a.
Finally, in vivo study showed that PU-PEI-mediated miR145 delivery to
xenograft tumors reduced tumor growth and metastasis, sensitized tumors
to chemoradiotherapies, and prolonged the survival times of tumor-bearing
mice. Our results demonstrated that miR145 acts as a switch regulating
lung CSC-like and EMT properties, and provide insights into the clinical
prospect of miR145-based therapies for malignant lung cancers.

