Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic profile of the base-excision repair inhibitor
methoxyamine-HCl (TRC102; MX) given as an one-hour intravenous infusion
with temozolomide (TMZ) in the first in human phase 1 clinical trial


Background: MX is the first base excision repair (BER) inhibitor
evaluated in humans. MX blocks the BER pathway by covalently binding to
apurinic/pymidinic (AP) sites in DNA. In several preclinical studies,
improved therapeutic efficacy has been demonstrated with various
chemotherapeutic agents including alkylating agents, such as TMZ. Initial
results and correlative studies of the first in humans administration of
MX have been presented (AACR Annual Meeting 2009, abstract#5433). Initial
PK analyses on patient samples receiving MX as a five-day continuous
infusion revealed a distinct PK profile, 10-fold greater than previously
estimated in dogs, where half-life of MX was estimated to be 4.5 hours.
As a result, the protocol has been amended with MX administration
adjusted from a five-day continuous infusion to a one-hour intravenous
infusion. PK results of the one-hour intravenous infusion regimen are now
presented. Methods: This ongoing phase I dose-escalation trial
investigates the safety, pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD)
profile of MX given as an one-hour intravenous infusion in combination
with TMZ. PD markers, including analysis of AP sites measured on DNA
extracted from patients mononuclear cells (PBMCs) as well as DNA strand
break determined by comet assay at multiple time points, are included.
Results: 23 patients have enrolled, in two cohorts. In cohort A (patients
with no-CNS disease), patients have enrolled in dose-levels 1 and 2 (TMZ
150 mg/m2/day, days 1-5 and MX 15 mg/m2 and 30 mg/m2 respectively). In
cohort B (patients with CNS involvement) enrollment started at a DL lower
(in DL1, TMZ 100 mg/m2/day, days 1-5 and MX 15 mg/m2; for DL2 TMZ
increased to 150 mg/m2/day, days 1-5 and MX remained 15 mg/m2).
Demographic, toxicity and efficacy data will be presented separately. The
average half-life of MX administered as an one-hour continuous infusion
was 55.04 hours (range: 12.2 - 100.3 hours, n = 20), statistically not
different from half-life of MX administered as a five-day continuous
infusion which was 45.1 hours (range: 32.1 - 68.8 hours, n = 6). PD
results, performed on 22 patients, showed that administration of the
combination of TMZ and MX resulted in 10-40% reduction in detectable AP
sites. Comet assay results, performed on 20 patients revealed that the
combination of TMZ and MX induced a 2 to 3-fold higher levels of DNA
strand breaks compared to TMZ alone. Conclusions: MX has a distinct PK
profile in humans, corresponding to a 10-fold increase in estimated
half-life when compared to the half-life observed in dogs, which has
allowed us to move to a convenient one-hour infusion regimen for further
development. PD demonstration of MX's biologic activity on patients
mononuclear cells has been demonstrated even at the lowest DL. Accrual to
the trial is ongoing.

