Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel tissue-targeted virogeneimaging system for squamous cell
carcinoma therapy expressing cell cycle regulator cdk2ap1


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) affects about 30,000 Americans each
year, and although the overall prognosis has improved in recent years for
localized carcinomas, metastases can decrease survival rates by half. For
tongue and palate lesions, surgery is usually the initial treatment, but
metastases aggressively develop at sites where conventional therapies are
ineffective. Therefore, our goal has been to develop more effective
therapeutic modalities for the disease utilizing expression of cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis-modulating genes. Our efforts have focused on
gaining understanding of the biology and therapeutic potential of
p12cdk2ap1 (p12), an S-phase growth suppressor and proapoptotic gene
commonly downregulated in OSCC. In vivo, we have showed that expressing
p12 using a nonviral vector can result in effective reduction in tumor
size and a dramatically altered tumor phenotype. Moreover, we have showed
that p12 can have cell growth inhibitory effects in a cell-autonomous as
well as non-cell autonomous manner, rendering expression of this cell
cycle regulator a very promising new gene therapy strategy. Therefore, we
hypothesized that this growth regulator molecule will comprise a highly
efficient antiumor gene therapy for OSCC. We have developed a novel viral
delivery vector system with high activity and high specificity expression
in oral tumor cells. This Adenovirus (Ad) utilizes a two-step
transcriptional amplification system driven by the SCCA2 promoter and a
bidirectional target cassette containing the sequences for the p12 and
ether firefly luciferase (Luc) or thymidine kinase (TK) imaging genes. We
constructed and are characterizing novel configurations of these dE1dE3
Ad-SCCA2-p12/Luc or p12/TK bidirectional vectors for gene therapy and
virogeneimaging (VGI) applications. We are currently testing the
specificity of these vectors and their effectiveness in tumor growth
inhibition at either floor of mouth, orthotopic, or distant sites
following intratumoral or systemic administration. We propose VGI can be
adapted to a nonviral system as well and may hold promise not only as a
novel SCC-specific gene therapy but perhaps as a molecular imaging
detection agent for tumor cells that have metastasized to distant and
thus difficult to treat sites.

