Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer knowledge and awareness among high school and
college students in mid-Western USA


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States
among women. Each year approximately 200,000 new cases are reported and
40,000 women succumb to the disease. Early detection and treatment
results in good prognosis and higher rates of patient survival; however,
despite advanced methods of screening, breast cancer is often detected at
an advanced stage when it has metastasized to other organs, particularly
in younger, premenopausal patients who typically have a poor
understanding of the disease. While educational activities meant to
promote breast cancer awareness among women are conducted every year in
the USA, especially during the month of October, previous studies show a
widespread ignorance of the disease, in both the USA and in women around
the world. At present there are no programs in place that specifically
promote breast cancer awareness among high school and college students.
Such programs would potentially engender the adoption and development of
health habits likely to lead to early detection and treatment, including
regular screenings and effective self-examination. The main goal of this
study was to investigate breast cancer awareness among college and high
school students. We used self-administered questionnaires to assess
breast cancer perceptions and misconceptions, awareness of risk factors
and understanding of breast self-examination. A total of 355 high school
students and 132 college students in a Mid-Western area of the USA
participated in the study. Our findings were in accordance with previous
studies carried out in other regions of the world, showing that a high
proportion of students at both high school and college level were largely
ignorant of the risk factors associated with breast cancer. Furthermore,
a number of misconceptions regarding the disease were common. Only 66% of
female college students and 40% of female high school students reported
having ever received information on breast self-examination.
Interestingly, only half the students who had received instruction
reported that they could perform breast self-examination with confidence.
Most of the participants however, expressed an eagerness to have more
information provided in schools. Consequently we strongly urge the
adoption of more breast cancer awareness programs targeting college and
high school students.

