Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of the androgen receptor function by c-Jun in prostate
cancer via a dual mechanism


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling plays a pivotal role in growth and
survival of prostate cancer cells. Upon ligand binding, AR translocates
into the nucleus and regulates expression of multiple genes through
binding their promoter regions. Thus, altered expression and activity of
AR contribute to disease progression. Consequently, significant effort
has been undertaken to identify and characterize numerous coactivators
and corepressors of AR. Here we report that the transcription factor
c-Jun, a basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor and is
an important member of the AP-1 family, acts as a transcriptional
repressor to inhibit the AR transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we
have found that c-Jun also represses the transcription of AR.
Overexpression of c-Jun in LNCaP prostate cancer cells inhibited
luciferase reporters driven by the androgen-induced prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) promoter, probasin promoter, mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) promoter and tandem repeats of androgen response elements in a
dose-dependent manner. Conversely, knockdown of c-Jun enhanced
androgen-stimulated AR activity in LNCaP cells. To further confirm the
results, we generated a doxycycline-inducible c-Jun overexpression LNCaP
stable cell line using lentivrial system. Consistent with the results of
promoter activity assay, induction of c-Jun by doxycycline inhibited both
steady state and androgen-induced PSA mRNA and protein levels.
Interestingly, the protein and mRNA of AR were also downregulated when
c-Jun was induced, suggesting that c-Jun suppresses AR expression at the
transcriptional level. Moreover, c-Jun induction resulted in a
significant reduction in cell number, suggesting that c-Jun suppresses
LNCaP cell proliferation by antagonizing AR signaling. In summary, our
results suggest that c-Jun negatively regulates the AR signaling by a
dual mechanism. Future identification of negative regulators of c-Jun
expression will provide a new opportunity to develop novel therapeutics.

