Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frameshift peptides as prophylactic cancer vaccines antigens


Background: The goal of the project is to develop a universal,
prophylactic cancer vaccine. We are integrating bioinformatics, genetics,
proteomics and immunological methods to identify tumor DNA-encoded
components for the development of an effective vaccine. In a previous
study, we used bioinformatic and genetics analyses to identify a list of
abberant transcripts associated with tumor cells that encode
frameshift-derived (FS) neo-peptides. These FS peptides are a result of
various gene mutations and abnormal splicings in tumor cells that would
cause expression of gene sequences in alternate reading frames. The
transcript encoding one of these vaccine component candidates, SMC1A
(Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes 1A) FS was detected in numerous
mouse and human tumor cell lines and primary human breast and pancreatic
tumors. One dose genetic immunization with a plasmid expressing SMC1A FS
significantly delayed tumor growth in C57BL/6 mice transplanted with the
B16F10 melanoma cell line. To exam protection of SMC1A FS in a more
realistic prophylactic model, we investigated the protection of SMC1A FS
in two mouse spontaneous breast tumor models. Results: We similarly
detected the transcript corresponding to the SMC1A FS peptide in tumors
from spontaneous mouse breast tumor models: FVB/N-NeuT and BALB-NeuT. The
SMC1A FS expression increases with the expression of Rat Her-2 in mouse
mammary gland. Wild type and mutated Rat Her 2 are the oncogenes that
induce spontaneously breast tumor development in FVB/N-NeuT and BALB-NeuT
respectively. Both anti-SMC1A FS IgG and SMC1A FS peptide induced IFN-
released splenocytes were detected in non-treated tumor bearing
FVB/N-NeuT mice. One dose genetic immunization of mice with an SMC1A FS
expression plasmid significantly reduced spontaneous breast tumor
development in FVB/N-NeuT mouse as compared to that in non-treated mice.
Genetic immunization followed by a protein boost (prime/boost regimen) in
BALB-NeuT mice also significantly reduced tumor development and the
reduction is associated with antibody reactivity to SMC1A FS. Discussion:
The protection of SMC1A FS prophylactic immunization in spontaneous mouse
tumor models indicates SMC1A S can be a potential prophylactic cancer
vaccine candidate to prevent a variety of tumors types. We are applying
the same basic approach to accumulate sufficient antigens to constitute a
broadly protective, prophylactic cancer vaccine. (This research is
supported by an Innovation Award from the DoD and The Keck Foundation to
SAJ.)

