Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of doxorubicin and the acid-sensitive
albumin-binding prodrug of doxorubicin INNO-206 induces complete
regressions in a xenograft pancreatic carcinoma model demonstrating
excellent tolerability


Combination therapy of macromolecular prodrugs with clinically
established low-molecular weight anticancer drugs is a field of research
that has been insufficiently explored to date. Recently, we investigated
the anticancer effect of a combination of doxorubicin with the clinically
assessed albumin-binding prodrug INNO-206, the
(6-maleimidocaproyl)hydrazone of doxorubicin, in an ovarian carcinoma
xenograft model (A2780). The combination achieved complete remissions as
did therapy with INNO-206 alone, but was far better tolerated. Due to
these encouraging results, we extended our combination trials to a more
chemoresistant tumor indication, i.e. pancreatic cancer. Thus, we
compared the following weekly schedules against the MiaPaca-2 xenograft
model (i.v. administration): 3 x 6 mg doxorubicin (MTD), 3 x 24 mg/kg
INNO-206 (doxorubicin equivalents, MTD), 3 x 3 mg/kg doxorubicin followed
6 h later by 3 x 12 mg/kg INNO-206, and 3 x 12 mg/kg INNO-206 followed 6
h later by 3 x 3 mg/kg doxorubicin. Whereas therapy with doxorubicin only
produced a moderate tumor inhibition, all other therapy arms induced
complete long-term remissions until the end of the experiment on day 44.
However, there were significant differences in the tolerability as
assessed by the body weight changes: whereas therapy at the MTD of
INNO-206 (3 x 24 mg/kg) produced a body weight loss of 16 %, therapy with
3 x 12 mg/kg INNO-206 followed 6 h later by 3 x 3 mg/kg doxorubicin
produced 7 % body weight loss, but 3 x 3 mg/kg doxorubicin followed 6 h
later by 3 x 12 mg/kg INNO-206 produced a body weight gain of + 2 % as a
clear indication of minimal systemic toxicity. This animal study is to
best of our knowledge the first investigation demonstrating that a
combination of an albumin-binding prodrug with its free parent drug not
only has clear therapeutic advantages over the free drug but that the
time-dependent schedule has a critical influence on the overall
tolerability and results in its best case in a 100 % cure rate without
causing any body weight loss. The current working hypothesis to explain
this surprising effect is that the combination of doxorubicin with an
albumin-binding prodrug of doxorubicin with acid-sensitive properties
enables a more homogenous distribution of the drugs in the tumor due to
different uptake mechanisms in a heterogeneous solid tumor (EPR effect
for INNO-206 and free diffusion into the tumor interstitium for
doxorubicin).

