Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APE/Ref-1, a drugable target for the therapy of human melanoma


Human malignant melanoma exhibits impaired redox status and abnormal
redox-regulated signal pathways. Induced as an adaptive response to
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), a
multi-functional protein called APE/Ref-1 serves as a redox chaperone and
modulator of many nuclear transcription factors and for maintaining
intracellular redox status. Our previous studies showed that knockdown of
APE/Ref-1 significantly sensitized melanoma cells to chemo-treatment and
reduced metastatic potential markedly. In this study, we further
characterized the role of APE/Ref-1 in the invasive properties of human
melanoma. Two function-deficient Ref-1 constructs were stably transfected
into melanoma cells; further studies with Scratch Migration and Matrigel
assays showed that both NLS-Ref-1 and RedoxD-Ref-1 markedly decreased
migration and invasive c-apacity. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 mRNA
levels were also significantly reduced in transfectants, which was
reversed by APE/Ref-1 cDNA overexpression. Nitric oxide (NO) stress
induced by DETA (NO donor) treatment was associated with enhanced
invasion potential of melanoma cells, which was significantly reversed by
APE/Ref-1 depletion. These results suggest that specific and potent
inhibitors targeting redox activity of APE/Ref-1 should be explored for
therapeutic potential. Utilizing 3-dimensional modeling and virtual
docking, we have screened compounds from 35 chemical vendors with total
number of more than 7 million. Through extensive chemical modifications
of our top ranked candidates, we have successfully synthesized novel
APE/Ref-1 inhibitors (#598-5, #598-21, and #598-24) showing significant
inhibition on the redox activity of APE/Ref-1. Notably, #598-21 exhibited
promising anti-melanoma activities with IC50 below 1 M. In addition, our
studies have also identified two leading compounds whose mechanism of
inactivation of APE/Ref-1 is due to the oxidation of APE/Ref-1 protein
itself. Taking these molecules as lead compounds, we are evaluating their
in vivo anti-tumor efficacies and synthesizing more potent inhibitors
with enhanced activities.

