Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic variant EGFRvIII defines a hierarchy in glioblastoma and
expression is restricted by epigenetic mechanisms despite the presence of
gene amplification


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadly primary brain
tumor. Amplification and rearrangements of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) gene are frequently found in GBM. The most common variant
is EGFRvIII, an exon 2-7 deletion mutant resulting from amplification and
rearrangement of the EGFR locus. We have hypothesized that EGFRvIII could
mark a cancer stem cell or tumor initiating cell population. If
amplification and rearrangement are early events in tumorigenesis, this
implies that they should be preserved throughout the tumor. However, in
primary GBM EGFRvIII expression was focal and sporadic. To understand the
relationship between EGFRvIII expression and the underlying genomic
alterations, we utilized manual dissection to separate EGFRvIII positive
and negative cells and a quantitative PCR assay that detects
independently both EGFR amplification and rearrangement. Unexpectedly, we
found EGFR amplification and rearrangement throughout the tumor,
including regions with no EGFRvIII expression. This supports our
hypothesis and further suggests that mechanisms exist to modulate
EGFRvIII expression even in the presence of high gene amplification. To
study this phenomenon, we characterized three GBM cell lines with
endogenous EGFRvIII expression and corresponding EGFR amplification and
rearrangement, confirmed by Western blot, RT-PCR and FISH. By flow
cytometry analysis EGFRvIII expression was heterogeneous, with 9-50%
EGFRvIII positive cells in each cell line. Both positive and negative
populations maintained the genetic alterations, recapitulating what we
observed in primary GBM. Importantly, EGFRvIII defined a hierarchy where
EGFRvIII-positive cells gave rise to additional positive and negative
cells. However, only cells that had recently lost EGFRvIII expression
could re-express EGFRvIII. Epigenetic mechanisms played a role in
modulating EGFRvIII expression to maintain a heterogeneous population.
Demethylation induced a 20-60% increase in the percentage of
EGFRvIII-positive cells, indicating that some cells could re-express
EGFRvIII. Surprisingly, inhibition of histone deacetylation resulted in a
50-80% reduction in EGFRvIII expression. Collectively, this data
demonstrates that EGFRvIII does follow a stem cell model for hierarchical
expression and sheds light on the existence of a transient population
that is able to re-express EGFRvIII, an important buffer for maintaining
EGFRvIII-positive cell numbers. Furthermore, we provide the first
evidence that EGFRvIII expression can be silenced by epigenetic
mechanisms, suggesting that drugs which modulate the epigenome might be
used successfully in glioblastoma tumors.

