Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel naphthalimide analogs elicit their anti-tumor activity
through a dual inhibition of topoisomerase II and Akt signaling pathway


Naphthalimide derivatives such as mitonafide, a topoisomerase II
inhibitor, have shown antitumor activity both in preclinical studies and
in phase I and phase II clinical trials. However, it suffers from severe
toxicity issues, especially central nervous system (CNS) toxicity. We
have recently reported promising naphthalimide analogs designed by
incorporating functional groups such as a isothiocyanate (ITC) group
which is present in chemicals found in cruciferous vegetables, in place
of N, N-dimethyl group in mitonafide. Some of these agents effectively
induced apoptosis in melanoma cells and inhibited cell proliferation, and
inhibited melanoma tumor growth by 60% without any apparent systemic
toxicity issues. The ITC group was incorporated in the structure in an
attempt to lower the toxicity associated with mitonafide and also because
this functionality has been shown to block PI3K/Akt pathway which is
activated in majority of cancer types; Akt3 is activated in 70% of
sporadic melanomas. The idea was to generate a compound capable of
inhibiting not only topoisomerase II similar to mitonafide but also PI3K
kinase. In order to evaluate the underlying mechanism of action, we first
evaluated topoisomerase-II inhibitory activity of agents relative to
mitonafide to check if the new agents retained this property. Relaxation
activity of DNA topoisomerase II was determined by measuring the
conversion of supercoiled pBR322 plasmid DNA to its relaxed form. Our
results indicate that the ITC analogs, NNITC-2 and NITC-6, exhibited
significant inhibition for DNA-topoisomerase II similar to mitonafide.
Interestingly, corresponding isoselenocyanate (ISC) analog NISC-6 was
less effective compared to NITC-6 as a topoisomerase II inhibitor;
NNISC-2 on the other hand was equally good as NNITC-2. Furthermore, to
test our hypothesis that the addition of ITC group into the structure
would make it capable of inhibiting PI3K/Akt pathway, we examined the
ability of naphthalimide derivatives to inhibit the total cellular
content of human Akt pathway proteins, by Western blot analysis using
polyclonal antibodies, in human melanoma cancer cells (UACC903). UACC903
cells treated with ITC derivatives at 0.5, 1 and 5 M, showed a rapid
decrease in Akt pathway proteins level in a dose-dependent manner. In
comparison, ISC analogs were less effective. Detailed results of these
investigations will be presented.

