Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphrinA1 induces microRNA-302b expression in malignant
mesothelioma cells and suppresses tumor growth via repression of Mcl-1
gene


Introduction: EphA2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and is over
expressed in malignant mesothelioma (MM). In earlier studies we
demonstrated that receptor EphA2 activation with ephrinA1 suppressed
growth of MM. In addition there is evidence that ephrin ligand induces
some MicroRNAs expression in cancer cells. MicroRNAs belonging to the
miR-302 family are emerging as key players in the control of
proliferation and cell fate determination during differentiation.
However, the mechanisms whereby EphrinA1 activation attenuates the MM
cell growth are not clear. Our study identified a novel mechanism of
Ephrin-A1 tumor suppressor signaling in MM cells. Ephrin-A1 activation up
regulates miR-302b expression in MM cells and attenuates tumor growth via
repression of Mcl-1. Methods: MM cell lines (CRL-2081 and CRL-5830) were
activated with recombinant-Ephrin-A1 for the indicated period of time.
The expression of miR-302b was analyzed by quantitative real time RT-PCR,
and the expression Mcl-1 was analyzed by RT-PCR, immuno-blotting and
Immunofluorescence staining. To confirm that Ephrin-A1 regulates the
expression of Mcl-1 mRNA through miR302-b up regulation, cultured cells
were transfected with and without miR302-b and miR-302b inhibitor prior
to activation. The cell proliferation and tumor growth was measured by
WST-1 and 3 D matrigel assay in vitro assays respectively. Luciferase
assay was performed to confirm the binding of miR-302b to the 3UTR of
Human Mcl-1. Results: Ephrin-A1 activation induced several fold increases
of miR-302b expression in MM cells when compared to resting cells. In
Ephrin-A1 activated MM cells, Mcl-1 expression was significantly down
regulated when compared to resting cells. Moreover, Ephrin-A1 activation
significantly inhibited MM cell proliferation and tumor growth. The
present data suggests that Ephrin-A1 targets MM cells by inducing the
expression of miR-302b and inhibits MM cell and tumor growth by targeting
Mcl-1 protein. Conclusion: Our data suggest that over expression of Mcl-1
enhances tumor proliferation in MM cells. During Ephrin-A1 activation
miR-302b expression is up regulated in MM cells. The up regulation of
miR-302b leads to repression of Mcl-1 gene and attenuation of tumor
growth. EphrinA1 could be a promising therapeutic agent for the treatment
of MM. Funding Source: NIR and RC1 Department of Health Florida; VA Merit
Review

