Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison and characterization of two orthotopic glioblastoma in
vivo mouse models with human U87 and LN-229 cells using in vivo
bioluminescence imaging and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)


Glioblastoma is the most common and most aggressive type of malignant
brain tumors. The prognosis is poor, with a median survival time of
several months only. Despite steady progress in treatment of
glioblastomas this tumor entity is still not curable. Thus, there is an
urgent need for the development of novel effective therapies, and for
appropriate in vivo models to characterize them. Most often novel
antiglioblastoma drugs are tested in subcutaneous xenograft mouse models
using various human or murine glioblastoma cell lines. To generate more
relevant, orthotopic brain cancer in vivo models, we stably transduced
the human glioblastoma cell lines U-87 and LN-229 with fire fly
luciferase suitable for in vivo bioluminescence imaging. To initiate
orthotopic growth, nude mice were anesthetized and placed in a
stereotactic fixation device. Through a burr hole cells were implanted
intracranially using a Hamilton syringe. Once to twice a week we used
bioluminescence imaging to continually monitor tumor growth in vivo.
However, as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most relevant tool to
monitor oncological therapy in glioblastomas clinically, we adapted this
translational aspect and analysed the mice in parallel using a dedicated
animal MRI System. MRI offers detailed information about growth
characteristics, size, blood supply and interaction with the surrounding
tissue of the tumor. To achieve this, we performed T2-weighted imaging,
and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) weekly to visualise the tumors as
well as necrosis and edemas. The use of both methods allowed independent
and complementary characterization of the tumors. When exponential growth
of the orthotopic tumors was observed, and the tumors reached critical
sizes necropsy was done. In vivo bioluminescence imaging revealed only a
very dominant signal in the region of the brain where the primary tumor
was located. To address potential metastases in more detail we analysed a
set of different resected organs and tissues for in vitro luciferase
activity followed by extensive histological examination. Currently, we
test different anti-glioblastoma agents in these orthotopic models to
evaluate an antitumoral effect as well as a potential reduction of the
edemas comparing the results in both models.

