Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time-series assessment of 5-fluorouracil efficacy on murine
colorectal liver metastasis model using intravital multiphoton microscopy


Clinically, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based chemotherapy has been proven to
be effective for colorectal cancer patients in either adjuvant or
metastatic setting. In the adjuvant setting, it remains unresolved issues
whether 5-FU inhibits the adhesion of circulating tumor cells to the
target organs such as liver or lung, or it eradicates clinically
undetectable micrometastases in these organs. We examine whether 5-FU
inhibits the adhesion of tumor cells to the liver on murine colorectal
liver metastasis model using intravital multiphoton microscopy. We also
examine whether 5-FU inhibits the liver metastasis formation from a
single tumor cell to metastatic colonies in the same mice using
time-series intravital multiphoton microscopy. Red fluorescent protein
(RFP) expressing SL4 murine colorectal cancer cell line (RFP-SL4) and
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-transgenic mouse (GFP mouse) were used.
3106 RFP-SL4 cells were injected into the spleen of GFP mice for
syngeneic liver metastasis model. Intravital multiphoton microscopy was
performed by exteriorizing the liver lobe of the living mice and fixing
it with a solder lug terminal and an adhesive agent. Time-series imaging
of the living liver of the same mice was performed using intravital
multiphoton microscopy at multiple time points. 5-FU was administered
before or after the inoculation of RFP-SL4 cells to examine its
inhibitory effect for tumor cell adhesion or liver metastasis formation,
respectively. The arrested tumor cells were clearly observed in hepatic
sinusoids 2 hours after inoculation. Time-series imaging of the same mice
showed that the number of tumor cells decreased in time dependent manner
(2h, 24h, and 72h after inoculation). Approximately 20 tumor cells were
imaged 2 hours after inoculation in the voxel volume of 210210100 m (x,
y, z). There is no significant difference in the number of imaged tumor
cells between the 5-FU pre-treatment and the control group by tumor
volumetric analysis (2h after inoculation). All mice (100%) had liver
metastases with diffuse growth pattern at 2 weeks after inoculation in
the control group. After observing the adhesion of tumor cells to hepatic
sinusoids by 1st intravital microscopy, the only half (50%) of mice had
liver metastases in the 5-FU treatment group macroscopically and
microscopically (2nd intravital microscopy at 2 weeks after inoculation).
5-FU based adjuvant chemotherapy may suppress colorectal liver metastasis
by inhibiting the process from a single tumor cell to metastatic
colonies. Time-series intravital multiphoton microscopy enables us to
visualize the treatment efficacy at the cellular level in the same
animals with the reduction of inter-individual variation.

