Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GAL-1 function as an alternative PI3K pathway activator depends on
PTEN and EGFR status in CHO cells


The PI3K signaling pathway, one of the most potent prosurvival pathways,
has been associated with adverse outcome in glioma. The frequency of
signaling alterations in the RTK/PI3K/RAS/PTEN axis in glioblastoma (GBM)
is 88% and leads to therapeutic resistance and poor prognosis. Previous
results in our lab have shown that Galectin-1 (GAL-1) gene expression is
prognostic in five glioma microarray datasets and in four out of five GBM
subpopulations. Our lab also has data suggesting an interaction between
GAL-1 and PI3K leading to increased PI3K activity. The purpose of this
study was to examine GAL-1's influence on survival in GBM patients in
regard to their PI3K status. Therefore an exploratory subgroup analysis
of the TCGA GBM dataset was conducted and findings were validated in
preliminary cell culture model. The TCGA dataset was normalized using
previously described methods. Survival analysis was performed using BRB
tools. Survival distributions within the dataset were examined among two
predefined subgroups: Patients with both EGFR mRNA expression below the
median and PTEN expression above the median formed the low PI3K group and
all other patients formed the comparison high PI3K group. The Kaplan
Meier curves generated using graphpad prism were stratified by GAL-1
(median split) expression. Stable constructs of CHO cells transfected
with an LGALS1 expression vector and/or with PTEN shRNA were created and
transiently transfected with an EGFR expression vector. Western blots and
clonogenic survival assay were performed. The group of patients with low
PI3K activity had better outcome than the patients with high PI3K. This
result suggests that patients with lack of PI3K activating EGFR over
expression or PTEN loss have improved survival outcome. When survival of
the low PI3K group is stratified for GAL-1 expression we found patients
with high levels of GAL-1 to have significantly worse outcomes when
compared to patients with low GAL-1 levels within this group. Analyzing
survival for the patients with high PI3K activity, we did not observe any
difference in prognosis when stratifying for GAL-1 expression. These
results led to the hypothesis that high GAL-1 results in reduced patient
survival through increased PI3K signaling. We hypothesize that the CHO
cells without EGFR, reexpressed PTEN and GAL-1 knockdown have the lowest
expression of pAKT. Furthermore we hypothesize that these cells are also
the most radiosensitive cells in a clonogenic survival assay. These
results indicate that GAL-1 could be an important prognostic marker and
that over expression of GAL-1 is functionally similar to loss of PTEN or
upregulation of EGFR. They also indicate that GAL-1 might be an
alternative mediator of PI3K signaling. These results will be validated
in a panel of glioma cell lines.

