Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An animal model to study the effects of primary tumor excision on
metastatic potential and organ-tropism of residual breast cancer cells


Because of constant improvements in early detection, the majority of
breast cancer patients are diagnosed when still in a localized or
regional stage and considered to be viable candidates for
breast-conserving surgery or lumpectomy. As only 37% of breasts are found
tumor-free following initial lumpectomy, between 22 and 59% of patients
currently need re-intervention because positive or close margins are
detected. In addition, re-excision or adjuvant therapies, such as local
irradiation, are normally started several weeks or even months after
primary surgery. During this period, the stroma at the site of tumor
removal, which is characterized by altered angiogenesis, immune cells
infiltration and activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts, may be
selecting for cancer stem phenotypes, increasing metastatic potential and
promoting the dissemination to specific secondary organs. This study aims
to: 1) establish whether surgery on primary breast tumors leads to the
emergence of cellular phenotypes with higher malignancy, associated with
an increase in local growth, invasiveness and metastatic potential; 2)
determine whether breast surgery alters the organ-tropism of residual
cancer cells. For our experiments, BALB/c mice were inoculated in the
mammary fat pad with 4T1 murine breast cancer cells and developed tumors
that were either allowed to progress or surgically excised. Approximately
50% of animals in the surgery group presented with local recurrence,
although all the excised tumors had positive margins. Local recurrences
showed higher Ki-67 staining compared to their respective primary tumors
and these data were in agreement with human samples of primary and
recurrent breast tumors. Interestingly, the overall survival of mice in
the control and surgery with recurrence groups were similar. Furthermore,
macroscopic lung metastases were detected in the control and local
recurrence groups, whereas mice without post-surgery recurrence failed to
develop lung metastatic lesions. Finally, differences in the
dissemination and growth of 4T1 cells to brain and bone between control,
surgery plus recurrence and surgery without recurrence groups were
investigated.

