Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protooncogenic TLR4 generates NANOG-dependent tumor-initiating
stem-like cells through LIN28-Let7 pathway in experimental and clinical
carcinogenesis


[Background] TLR4 signaling activated by alcohol/obesity-associated
endotoxemia, induces the stem cell marker Nanog to generate
tumor-initiating stem-like cells (TISCs) and liver tumors in the HCV
nonstructural protein Ns5a transgenic (Tg) mice but not in wild type or
Ns5a Tg mice deficient in TLR4 (Machida and Tsukamoto, PNAS, 2009).
However, it is unknown whether the TLR4-NANOG pathway serves as a
universal oncogenic signaling in the genesis of TISCs and HCC in other
etiological animal models and patients or how TLR4 is upregulated in
TLR4-NANOG-dependent TISCs. [Aim] We aimed to determine whether TLR4 is a
putative proto-oncogene for TIC in liver oncogenesis due to different
etiologies and how TLR4 is regulated at the transcriptional and
epigenetic levels. [Methods] CD133+/CD49f+ TISCs were isolated using FACS
from HCC developed in HCV Core Tg mice fed alcohol, diethylnitrosamine
(DEN)-treated mice, and alcoholic patients with or without HCV infection.
We generated Tg mice with liver-selective overexpression of
constitutively active (ca) TLR4 using LAP promoter-driven tTA and
Tet-caTLR4. TLR4 promoter-reporter analysis was performed on TISCs from
alcohol-fed Core Tg mice. [Results] CD133+/CD49f+ cells isolated from the
animal models and patients are tumorigenic both in vitro and in a
xenograft model, and TLR4 or NANOG silencing with shRNA attenuates their
tumor initiating property. Hepatocyte specific expression of caTLR4
results in spontaneous development of HCC in 35% of the mice. LIN28 and
TLR4 expression is 6-fold higher in TISCs compared to CD133-/CD49f+
cells, and the expression of LIN28 increases TLR4 expression with
reduction of Let7 microRNA in CD133- cells but not TISCs, suggesting
LIN28-mediated Let7 reduction drive TLR4 induction. TLR4 expression and
promoter activity are further reduced by a silencing of LIN28 or
expression of Let7. LIN28 and NANOG overexpression transform liver stem
cells through activation of TLR4-NANOG pathway. [Conclusions] These
results demonstrate that CD133+/CD49f+ cells are TLR4/NANOG-dependent
TISCs in both experimental and clinical HCC. TLR4 is induced by LIN28
signaling and is a universal proto-oncogene responsible for the genesis
of TLR4-NANOG dependent TISCs, and this pathway serves as a novel
therapeutic target for HCC.

