Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Active targeting, fluorescence imaging, and NIR photothermal
therapy of malignant tumors


We combine active targeting, fluorescent imaging, and subsequent
photothermal treatment of malignant cells as a viable approach for the
treatment of a variety of cancer types that over-express the epidermal
growth factor including head and neck, colorectal, ovarian, cervical,
breast, bladder, pancreatic, and prostate cancers. In our photothermal
therapy experiments, the use of a near infrared (NIR) laser enables us to
take advantage of both the plasmon resonance absorption peak of gold
nanorods (GNR), 785 nm with aspect ratio of 4, as well as the absorption
peak of the fluorescent dye, 774 nm. We used a 785 nm NIR laser with
fluence of 9.5 W/cm2 and a 4 minute exposure time. Anti- epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) antibody, which targets the epidermal growth
factor receptor over-expressed on malignant head and neck cancer cells,
was labeled with a fluorescent dye and conjugated to GNR. We have studied
the conjugation parameters for GNR and anti-EGFR antibodies and used
nearest neighbor approximations to analyze the nanorod-to-antibody ratio
from transmission electron microscope images. The optimal conjugation of
dye:antibody:GNR facilitates active targeting of the nanorods to the
tumor site. This active targeting is more efficient than previously
reported results that rely solely on the enhanced permeability and
retention effect. We demonstrate that PEGylating the GNR before
conjugation to antibodies improves the quality of the conjugation. We
also show that binding ability of the conjugated antibody to the
epidermal growth factor receptor has not been affected. In addition, cell
death by NIR photothermal therapy and gold nanorods is not compromised
following conjugation of gold nanorods to a fluorescently labeled
antibody. NIR photothermal treatment with the dye-antibody-nanorod
conjugate selectively heated the GNR, excited fluorescence, and was
sufficient to kill nearly 90% of tumor cells comparable to photothermal
therapy with the GNR alone.

