Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell-specific full-length human antibodies from Epstein-Barr
virus-immortalized sentinel node B lymphocytes from breast cancer patients


It has been demonstrated that patients do develop autoantibodies to a
solid tumor, but the level of the antibody response is too low to have
significant antitumor effect. This means that there are B cell clones
producing antitumor antibodies, but they are suppressed (or not activated
sufficiently) by the complex immunoregulatory systems in cancer patients.
When the B cell repertoire is transferred out of the human cancer
patient, in vitro methods allow the selection of anti-tumor antibodies
and can then allow unrestricted production of sufficient quantities for
clinical use. There are a variety of options available for the in vitro
generation of antibodies from human B cells that are basically based on
the recombinant production following gene cloning, and on B cell
immortalization, their propagation and antibody secretion in cell
culture. Most popular forms of recombinant expression of antibodies are
phage displayed scFv and Fab antibody libraries, which have disadvantage
of loss of original heavy and light chain pairings, inability to display
full antibody, and production in bacterial host cells. The antibodies
produced by B cell immortalization do not suffer from these drawbacks and
retain their original heavy and light chain pairings. We collected fresh
sentinel nodes and breast tumor specimens from cancer patients and
following B lymphocyte separation from sentinel nodes they were
immortalized using Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). The antibodies secreted from
the immortalized B cells were studied for binding to the tumor cells of
established cell lines and to the tumor cell surface protein preparations
from the same patient that the B cells were derived. Using cell-ELISA and
dot blot techniques, we identified several antibodies that were found to
bind intact tumor cells and to the cell surface protein preparations
derived from patient's tumors. It is expected that cancer-specific
antibodies identified by B cell immortalization method will be candidates
for therapeutic and diagnostic applications and further studies to
identify their target antigens and bioactivity will help in understanding
the humoral immune response to these breast cancer antigens and their
role in the cell proliferation and tumor growth. An innovative aspect of
this study is the exploitation of the cancer patients own immune
repertoire for generating therapeutic antibodies. This is in contrast to
most of the currently available therapeutic antibodies for clinical use,
which are derived from chimerization or humanization of rodent
antibodies. Currently no commercially available mAb has been developed
through the selective and regulatory processes of the human immune
system. The ability to reliably and rapidly generate tumor-binding
antibodies from patients own B cells will have broad applicability and
provide a platform for developing innovative therapeutic and diagnostic
reagents.

