Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and optimization of linked nucleic acid (LNA) probes to
detect the c-MYC G-quadruplex


The c-MYC oncogene is upregulated in almost 80% of cancers, and in some
cases is the causative oncogenic factor. It is regulated at the
transcriptional level with up to 90% initiating at the P1 and P2
promoters. The NHE III1 element regulates this region, which consists of
a unique guanine-rich string of DNA capable of adopting at least three
topologies: single stranded, double stranded (ds) and the non-B-DNA
G-quadruplex (G4) structure. G4s are formed when two or more tetrads
stack, each comprised of four guanines bonded by Hoogsteen hydrogen
bonds, stabilized with monovalent cations. Putative G4 forming regions
have at least four runs of three or more consecutive guanines separated
by varying nucleotides that comprise the loop structures. The c-MYC G4
structure has been elucidated to involve guanine runs 14 (G41-4) or 25
(G42-5) (of six total runs) in a parallel formation. Regulatory proteins
have been identified, and small molecule compounds are under
investigation to stabilize the G4 element and downregulate c-MYC
expression. In parallel to these efforts, we are developing linked
nucleic acid (LNA)-biotin bridge probes to be used as diagnostic tools to
identify these formations in biopsies in order to inform therapeutic
regimens. Molecular models of the two G4 isoforms were used to determine
the distance occupied by the secondary structure to be between 16.416.6
angstroms; various length nucleic acid sequences flanking a 17.730
angstrom linker were screened and optimized. Probes were shown to be
structure specific - either for the c-MYC G41-4 (probe 1a) or the G42-5
(probe 1b) - by EMSA analysis. The probes were amenable to internal
biotinylation for ongoing pull-down assays, but truncation of the
5-complementary sequence limited affinity. Interestingly, the LNA probes
thermally stabilized the c-MYC G4 in a unique pattern and are also being
examined for their potential therapeutic efficacy. Experiments are
underway to show that these hybrid probes will bind intracellularly and
show the frequency of G4 formation in quiescent versus activated cells,
and following treatment with c-MYC G4-interactive compounds. Through
these works, we highlight for the first time that a FISH-type probe can
be developed and used to selectively detect the formation of the c-MYC G4
in vitro. Up to 80% cancer patients overexpress c-MYC and are candidates
for G4-targeted therapies currently under development. The developed
probes will be of great utility as companion diagnostics in selecting
patients for G4-therapeutics and truly personalized medicine.

