Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of HPV/p16-associated microRNAs in primary
oropharyngeal carcinoma


Introduction: Deregulation of micro-RNAs (miR) is associated with
oncogenesis of various malignancies, suggesting that miR expression
profiling have the potential to unravel the complex biology of human
tumours. It is now established that human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated
oropharyngeal carcinoma (OPC) is a completely distinct entity, with a
significantly more favourable outcome, compared to HPV-negative OPCs. The
mechanisms underlying these differences currently remain incompletely
understood; we therefore postulated that miR profilings might offer
additional biological insights. Hence, the objectives of this study were
to determine whether: a) there were miRs which associate with HPV (or
p16) status; and b) there might be any association with clinical outcome,
independent of HPV (or p16) status. Experimental Procedures: Archival
formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) diagnostic biopsy specimens
were collected from 88 non-metastatic OPC samples (p16+ve:58; p16-ve:34),
from patients who were treated for cure, as per institutional guidelines.
Macrodissection was performed to ensure that each specimen contained >70%
tumor cells. Seven FFPE specimens derived from histologically normal
tonsils were used as controls. RNA was isolated using a commercially
available extraction kit designed specifically for FFPE samples (Ambion).
Expression levels of 365 miRs plus 3 endogenous controls were
simultaneously measured by quantitative RT-PCR using the Human TaqMan Low
Density Array (Applied Biosystem). Results: Four patient samples were
excluded due to poor RNA quality. Overall, 224 miRs were expressed in
>80% of both tumors and normal samples. Slightly more than half (128/224;
57%) of miRs were significantly differentially expressed between tumor
and normal tissues (pIntroduction: Deregulation of micro-RNAs (miR) is
associated with oncogenesis of various malignancies, suggesting that miR
expression profiling have the potential to unravel the complex biology of
human tumours. It is now established that human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated oropharyngeal carcinoma (OPC) is a completely distinct
entity, with a significantly more favourable outcome, compared to
HPV-negative OPCs. The mechanisms underlying these differences currently
remain incompletely understood; we therefore postulated that miR
profilings might offer additional biological insights. Hence, the
objectives of this study were to determine whether: a) there were miRs
which associate with HPV (or p16) status; and b) there might be any
association with clinical outcome, independent of HPV (or p16) status.
Experimental Procedures: Archival formalin fixed and paraffin embedded
(FFPE) diagnostic biopsy specimens were collected from 88 non-metastatic
OPC samples (p16+ve:58; p16-ve:34), from patients who were treated for
cure, as per institutional guidelines. Macrodissection was performed to
ensure that each specimen contained >70% tumor cells. Seven FFPE
specimens derived from histologically normal tonsils were used as
controls. RNA was isolated using a commercially available extraction kit
designed specifically for FFPE samples (Ambion). Expression levels of 365
miRs plus 3 endogenous controls were simultaneously measured by
quantitative RT-PCR using the Human TaqMan Low Density Array (Applied
Biosystem). Results: Four patient samples were excluded due to poor RNA
quality. Overall, 224 miRs were expressed in >80% of both tumors and
normal samples. Slightly more than half (128/224; 57%) of miRs were
significantly differentially expressed between tumor and normal tissues
(p<0.05); the majority of which (120/128; 94%) were up-regulated in tumor
samples. The top 5 most significantly up-regulated miRs were miR-21,
let-7g, miR-25, let-7f and miR-130b. It was noted that many of the
deregulated miRs were located at known fragile sites of the chromosome.
The top 5 most significantly p16-associated miRs included up-regulated
miR-20b, miR-9, miR-9*, as well as down-regulated miR-193b and miR-23a.
Further analyses identified three potential miR sets that associated with
overall survival (miR-107, miR-151, miR-492; p=0.0002), disease free
survival (miR-107, miR-151, miR-182, miR-20b, miR-361; p=0.0001), and
distant metastasis (miR-324-5p, miR-151, miR-152, miR-361, miR492;
p=0.0087), which retained significance even after adjusting for p16
status. Conclusions: We have identified a panel of p16/HPV-associated
miRs in OPC, which appear to associate with clinical outcome, independent
of p16 status. These data require further validation, but further
evaluations of these miRs might offer biological insights into the
mechanisms underlying the differences between HPV-positive vs.
HPV-negative OPC.

