Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy with anti-CTLA-4 plus leuprolide acetate in
the pre-surgical setting of patients with regional, high-risk prostate
cancer


Anti-CTLA-4 is a monoclonal antibody (Ipilimumab or Yervoy, Bristol-Myers
Squibb) that was recently FDA-approved for the treatment of patients with
metastatic melanoma. Since anti-CTLA-4 targets a T cell specific
molecule, as opposed to a tumor-specific molecule, it is being tested for
therapeutic efficacy in multiple malignancies, including prostate cancer.
In addition, since anti-CTLA-4 enhances anti-tumor T cell responses by
blocking an inhibitory signal on activated T cells, it has been
postulated that traditional therapies that lead to tumor cell death,
thereby releasing tumor antigens to prime and potentially activate T cell
responses, can be used in combination with CTLA-4 blockade to sustain
activated T cell responses and enhance anti-tumor immune responses.
Pre-clinical mouse models have shown this to be true. To determine the
impact of combination therapy on human immune responses, we designed a
pre-surgical clinical trial with a hormonal agent consisting of
leuprolide acetate, a standard agent that has therapeutic efficacy
against prostate cancer, plus anti-CTLA-4 (ipilimumab), in the setting of
patients with regional, high-risk prostate cancer. As of October 2011, we
have treated 4 out of a planned 20 patients on trial. Patients receive
one injection of leuprolide acetate (Lupron, Tap Pharmaceuticals) at a
dose of 22.5 mg on week 0 and ipilimumab at 10 mg/kg/dose on weeks 1 and
4. Patients then undergo surgery at week 8. Tumor tissues are collected
prior to any therapy and then at the time of surgery. Blood is collected
throughout the study prior to each therapeutic intervention and after
surgery. Immunologic analyses are ongoing on all collected patients
samples. These data will be compared to those obtained from previously
completed trials consisting of a trial whereby patients were treated with
ipilimumab monotherapy and a trial whereby patients were treated with
hormonal therapy prior to surgery. Our preliminary data indicate that
combination therapy impacts T cell responses including a measurable
increase in the frequency of T cells expressing the inducible
costimulator (ICOS) molecule. In addition, four patients have completed
the trial, including surgery, without any serious adverse events related
to the combination therapy.

