Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New understanding of cancer induction by ionizing radiation


Ionizing radiation is a unique carcinogen that provides an opportunity to
vary the location of biological damage within a cell nucleus. For
example, electron and x-ray beams deposit dose uniformly and randomly,
while energetic heavy ions deposit dose in densely packed straight lines
along the ion paths. Cancer yields for these 2 radiations vary as
follows: upward curvature with dose rate sparing for random and linearity
and no dose rate sparing for heavy ions. Dose rate sparing has long been
assumed to be based on biological repair, but it has never been explained
why dose responses should differ between these radiation or why repair
should be ineffective for heavy ions. To understand this better, consider
how the distribution of a typical molecular lesion, DNA double strand
breaks (DSBs), varies with the type of radiation. For heavy ions at a
specific energy, DSBs are expected to be lined up at random intervals
along each track, their number being proportional to average track length
in each nucleus, i.e. DSBs per nucleus are proportional to radiation dose
(D). Increased charge on the heavy ion causes increased lineal energy
transfer (L), i.e. DSBs are also proportional to L. Similarly for heavy
ions fusions between DSBs would also be proportional to D and L. The
comparable scenario for randomly deposited radiation differs in that the
DSBs are distributed randomly with the nuclei. Their number remains
proportional to radiation dose, but now fusions would exhibit
proportionality to dose-squared as a direct result of the randomness of
the DSBs. Moreover randomness eliminates simultaneity. Consequently DSBs
can be eliminated before second ones occur close enough to fuse, which
automatically gives rise to dose rate sparing. DSB fusion yields based on
the above considerations would have the form Yfusions = CfLD + BfD2 with
no dose rate sparing for the first term and positive dose rate sparing
for the second term. If fusions are the initial lesion of radiation
carcinogenesis, then Ycancer = CcaLD + BcaD2. Extensive cancer data in
rat skin based on radiations with very different L values (56Fe (L = 150
keV/), 40Ar (L = 125 keV/ ), 29Ne (L = 26 keV/ ), 1H (L = 0.34 keV/ ).)
and doses are presented that confirm the existence of independent linear
and dose-squared terms and that dose rate sparing only applies to the
dose-squared term. The data support the proposition that DSB fusions
could be the initial lesion of radiation carcinogenesis in the rat skin
model.

