Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of intestinal-specific Kaiso overexpression on the APC
MIN/+ mouse colon cancer model


The canonical Wnt signaling pathway is a crucial regulator of various
cellular processes during embryogenesis but when aberrantly activated, it
leads to tumorigenesis. The key downstream effector of the Wnt pathway is
the Armadillo protein, -catenin, which was first characterized as a
cytoplasmic cofactor for the transmembrane, cell-cell adhesion tumor
suppressor, E-cadherin. Recent evidence from our lab and others indicates
that another E-cadherin cofactor, p120ctn and its binding partner, the
POZ-ZF transcription factor Kaiso, co-regulate a subset of Wnt/-catenin
target genes and antagonize Wnt signaling. Specifically, using a Xenopus
model system, we and others found that Kaiso overexpression rescued the
-catenin-induced duplicate axis phenotype; this implicated Kaiso as a
negative regulator of Wnt signaling. However, it remains to be determined
whether an analogous antagonistic role for Kaiso is conserved in mammals.
Indeed, when Kaiso-null mice (which were viable and had no overt
developmental defects or tumors) were crossed with the APCMIN/+ mouse
model of colon cancer, the progeny had delayed tumor onset and reduced
polyp size. This suggested that Kaiso played a positive role in tumor
initiation and possibly cell proliferation in mammals. To resolve this
discrepancy, we generated intestine-specific Kaiso overexpressing
transgenic mice (KaisoTg/+) for subsequent mating with the APCMIN/+ mouse
model of colon cancer. Histological analysis of small and large
intestines from KaisoTg/+ and non-Tg mice revealed no gross morphological
differences. Immunohistochemical (IHC) and immunofluorescence (IF)
staining revealed strong nuclear Kaiso staining in intestinal tissues
from KaisoTg/+ mice whereas intestinal tissues from non-Tg mice displayed
weak cytoplasmic or no Kaiso staining. We detected no difference in
-Catenin expression levels in tissues from KaisoTg/+ mice and their
wildtype littermates. This suggests that Kaiso's regulation of WNT
signaling is downstream of its main effector -Catenin. KaisoTg-APCMIN/+
double mutant mice have been generated and surprisingly they display
decreased body size and weight, and have a decreased life span when
compared to the parentals (i.e. KaisoTg or APCMIN/+). Current studies are
aimed at assessing polyp formation and elucidating the expression levels
of p120ctn, -catenin, E-cadherin and cyclinD1 in the KaisoTg-APCMIN/+
intestines.

