Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of ALCAM function as a biologic basis for ethnic disparity in
breast cancer


Breast cancer affects African American women at a lower frequency than
Caucasian women, yet progression of the tumor and mortality from the
disease is higher among African Americans. The genetic and molecular
contributions to this ethnic disparity are poorly understood. Activated
leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is a junctional adhesive
molecule tethered at sites of cell-cell contact in epithelia,
mesenchymal, neuronal, and connective tissues. Loss of ALCAM function,
due to reduced transcript levels, and low membrane localization, is
associated with increased mortality, and poor response to adjuvant
therapy in breast cancer. In the current study, we tested the hypothesis
that this phenomenon contributes to the ethnic disparity in breast cancer
in the US. We studied cases of breast cancer in Atlanta among African
American (n=90) and Caucasian (n=104) women. Immunohistochemical staining
was used to study ALCAM expression in tumor and non-tumor adjacent breast
tissues. Clinicopathological variables including histologic tumor grade,
tumor size, lymph node involvement, estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR), and HER2-neu status were abstracted, and their
relationship to ALCAM expression was analyzed. Membranous ALCAM (mALCAM)
expression correlated significantly with tumor grade, with poorly
differentiated tumors showing low ALCAM staining. In addition, mALCAM
correlated positively with ER status (African American: p=0.0013;
Caucasian: p=0.0008) and PR status (African American: p=0.025; Caucasian:
p=0.0027) in both ethnic groups; however, there were no associations
between ALCAM expression and tumor size, lymph node involvement, or
HER2-neu status. Tumor expression of mALCAM in Caucasians was
significantly higher than in African Americans (pBreast cancer affects
African American women at a lower frequency than Caucasian women, yet
progression of the tumor and mortality from the disease is higher among
African Americans. The genetic and molecular contributions to this ethnic
disparity are poorly understood. Activated leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule (ALCAM) is a junctional adhesive molecule tethered at sites of
cell-cell contact in epithelia, mesenchymal, neuronal, and connective
tissues. Loss of ALCAM function, due to reduced transcript levels, and
low membrane localization, is associated with increased mortality, and
poor response to adjuvant therapy in breast cancer. In the current study,
we tested the hypothesis that this phenomenon contributes to the ethnic
disparity in breast cancer in the US. We studied cases of breast cancer
in Atlanta among African American (n=90) and Caucasian (n=104) women.
Immunohistochemical staining was used to study ALCAM expression in tumor
and non-tumor adjacent breast tissues. Clinicopathological variables
including histologic tumor grade, tumor size, lymph node involvement,
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2-neu status
were abstracted, and their relationship to ALCAM expression was analyzed.
Membranous ALCAM (mALCAM) expression correlated significantly with tumor
grade, with poorly differentiated tumors showing low ALCAM staining. In
addition, mALCAM correlated positively with ER status (African American:
p=0.0013; Caucasian: p=0.0008) and PR status (African American: p=0.025;
Caucasian: p=0.0027) in both ethnic groups; however, there were no
associations between ALCAM expression and tumor size, lymph node
involvement, or HER2-neu status. Tumor expression of mALCAM in Caucasians
was significantly higher than in African Americans (p<0.0001), while
there was no difference in expression of cytoplasmic ALCAM between the
two groups. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine ALCAM
expression in African American breast cancer, and to compare this
phenotype with Caucasians. Our results indicate that markedly lower ALCAM
expression may contribute to the poor prognosis of breast cancer among
African Americans. Future studies will examine the genetic basis of this
variation.

