Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of stabilized homoglutathione disulfide as a novel
nontoxic redox perturbing agent for increased anticancer efficacy


Human cancers harbor significantly higher levels of oxidative and
nitrosative stresses than corresponding normal tissues due to increased
metabolic load, accelerated rates of mitochondrial electron transfer, DNA
damage, production of cytokines and constitutive expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase. A selective exacerbation of these stresses in
tumors remains a viable anticancer strategy; however, this has not been
exploited. Increased levels of glutathione disulfide reflects the redox
imbalance resulting from various pathological stresses and leads to a
plethora of adaptive signaling and cellular defense strategies for
terminating apoptotic signals. Consistent with this theme, a glutathione
disulfide mimetic termed glutoxim (GSSG stabilized with minute amounts of
cisplatin; NOV-002 in USA) has gone through extensive clinical trials in
Russia, and has been shown to greatly sensitize tumors to anticancer
therapies and offer benefits in the treatment of many other diseases.
With the goal of obtaining a better, rational, and more powerful
redox-perturbing compound, we used a glutathione analog called
homoglutathione (HGSH) found in leguminous plants. HGSH differs from GSH
in having a terminal beta-alanine in place of glycine
(-glutamyl-cysteinyl--alanine as compared to
-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine). Synthetic HGSH was mixed with cisplatin at
1000:1 and 1000:10 molar ratios and disulfide formation was induced using
H2O2. We obtained total conversion of the thiol to HGSSG as verified by
TLC. Stabilized HGSSG was approx. 3.5-fold less efficient as a substrate
for glutathione reductase than glutoxim. Exposure of human cancer cell
lines to stabilized homoglutathione (100 M, 1-6 h) led to high levels of
bulk protein glutathionylation, a reversible posttranslational
modification that gauges the intracellular redox and transduces into
functional responses. The new agent increased p53 and its target the
p21cip1 protein in a time-dependent fashion in HCT116 cells. Overall
phosphorylation of cellular proteins and phosphorylation of the stress
kinase JNK1 were also markedly increased after short incubations with
stabilized HGSSG. Further, p53 glutathionylation as determined with a
specific antibody and the expression of the multifunctional DNA
repair/redox modulatory protein APE1were markedly enhanced by this agent.
The increased expression of APE1 appears to reflect the involvement of
the cytoprotective transcription factor NRF2 in redox modulation. Data on
the potentiation of anticancer drugs by stabilized HGSSG and its
chemoprotective effects in animal studies will be presented. In summary,
the ability of the new GSSG mimetic to alter extracellular and
intracellular redox signaling pathways may help to markedly improve/
modulate the various anticancer regimens (supported by RO3 CA125872 and
Association for Research of Childhood Cancer).

