Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) alters vesiculation of
cancer cells expressing oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR): Implications for the aggressive, procoagulant and proangiogenic
properties


Cancer cells release elevated amounts of membrane-derived organelles
containing complex molecular cargo, and known as extracellular vesicles
(EVs). This process (vesiculation) is implicated in intercellular
communication, as well as in cancer invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis
and activation of the coagulation system. We have previously demonstrated
a link between oncogenic transformation mediated by mutant K-ras,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) as well as other genetic lesions
and the intensity of cancer cell vesiculation. In the present study we
interrogate vesiculation during the superimposed processes of
de-differentiation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the
EGFR-driven epidermoid cancer cell line A431, EMT can be induced by
stimulation with EGFR ligands coupled with blockade of the E-cadherin. Of
note, A431 cells express high levels of the Tissue Factor (TF) receptor
which renders them procoagulant, and is required for the efficient tumor
initiation and proangiogenic signalling. A431 cells emit heterogeneous
population of EVs, including subsets containing TF, and EGFR. We observed
that induction of EMT in A431 cells is associated with a global increase
in vesiculation, as revealed by nanoparticle tracking analysis
(NTA/Nanosight). At the same time, EGFR and TF are relocated from the
plasma membrane to distinct subcellular microdomains, and this change is
associated with a rearrangement in the proteome of EVs emitted by cancer
cells, including a significant increase in TF content. Tumor
cell-derived, TF-containing EVs are readily taken up by endothelial cells
and trigger their procoagulant conversion and angiogenic responses. While
forming tumors in vivo A431 cells spontaneously undergo multilineage
differentiation and generate EMT-like subpopulations, which release into
the circulation a subset of EVs with a distinct molecular signature.
Thus, EMT-like processes not only modulate intrinsic cellular properties
(cell shape, differentiation), but also trigger a shift in cellular
vesiculation that may be detected in EV preparations isolated from
peripheral blood. Moreover, EVs that emanate from cancer cells upon their
entry into the EMT pathway may acquire the ability to modify the
extracellular and vascular milieu, and possibly facilitate tumor
initiation, invasion and metastasis.

