Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of two methodologies to quantify Thymidylate synthase
for predicting survival in patients with colorectal cancer treated on
CALGB 89803


Background: Thymidylate synthase (TS) levels determined by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) have been shown to be associated with
decreased survival in retrospective studies of patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC). The ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic TS determined by
automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) has been reported to significantly
predict a decreased time to recurrence in these same patients. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether TS measured by the AQUA
method predicts response in the CALGB 89803 patient sample, and to
determine if the AQUA measurement of TS is prognostic compared to the
standard IHC method. Methods: Tissue samples from 629 participants were
evaluated from an IRB-approved randomized trial of 5-FU/LV/CPT-11 in
patients with stage III CRC. TS levels were evaluated by IHC in 463
samples, by AQUA in 416 samples, and by both methods in 250 samples. TS
staining by IHC was categorized as 0; 1+; 2+; 3+. TS staining by AQUA
localizing to the nucleus, cytoplasm, and the ratio of the two
(nucleus/cytoplasm), were classified as continuous measurements
standardized by the highest observed value. The impact of each measure on
survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) was investigated using the
logrank test and the proportional hazards model. Statistical correlations
between the two measures were estimated using polyserial correlation.
Results: In TS levels measured by IHC, there were no significant
differences in OS. There was a significant difference in DFS (logrank
p=0.047), with increased DFS among patients with higher TS levels. The
nuclear and ratio AQUA TS measurements did not predict OS, but
cytoplasmic TS marginally predicted OS (Cox model p=0.07). There were
significant associations between nuclear and cytoplasmic TS and DFS (Cox
model p=0.019 and p=0.007, respectively) with higher TS levels associated
with increased DFS. DFS was marginally associated with the ratio (Cox
model p=0.069). Correlation between TS staining measured by IHC and AQUA
was low, while the correlation between the nuclear and cytoplasmic AQUA
measurements was high (0.90 Pearson estimate). In multivariable models,
the continuous measures of nuclear and cytoplasmic TS were each superior
to TS measured by IHC in predicting DFS (logrank p=0.03 and 0.1
respectively); the ratio was not. Conclusions: TS levels measured by IHC
and AQUA in the nucleus and cytoplasm predicted increased DFS with higher
levels contrary to previous reports presenting significantly decreased
survival for patients with higher TS tumor levels. The continuous
measures for TS in the nucleus and cytoplasm were highly correlated and
more strongly associated with outcome than TS measured by IHC. Given
these results, further studies of TS as a prognostic predictor, and the
use of the AQUA method as an alternate measurement of TS expression in
colorectal tumors are warranted.

