Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of KRAS mutations in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue using castPCR method


CTCs are tumor cells in circulation in the blood and are believed to be
shed from both the primary and metastatic tumors. CTC counts are
prognostic of survival in metastatic breast, colorectal, and prostate
cancers. It is postulated that these cells are genetically similar to
cells comprising the patient's tumor(s). The presence of these cells in
blood provides a minimally invasive source of nucleic acid for serial
monitoring of tumors for disease progression and emergence of drug
treatment resistance without the risks of traditional solid tumor biopsy.
Activating mutations in the KRAS gene are frequently found in human
cancers (up to 30% of cancer cases), and are present in a large portion
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), pancreatic, and colorectal
cancers. Reported mutations are mostly single point mutations in codons
12, 13 and 61, with the majority of mutations present in codon 12.
Importantly, KRAS mutation status can be predictive of response to
treatment, and may be used to determine the best therapeutic strategy.
Therefore, it is critical to develop a robust method for detecting
mutations from a limited number of enriched tumor cells (e.g. CTCs or
fine needle aspirate) in a high background of normal cells. Our studies
utilize competitive allele-specific PCR (castPCR) for detecting mutant
KRAS from human cancer cells spiked into and retrieved from blood, and
from fixed cells embedded in paraffin. This technology is reportedly
capable of detecting one mutant allele molecule in 10 million wild-type
molecules. KRAS is mutated in human NSCLC H441 cells (G12V) and in KP-4
pancreatic cells (G12D). After spiking H441 and KP-4 cells into human
blood, cells were captured/enriched and enumerated by the Veridex
CellTracks system. Both CXC and Profile kits (Veridex) were used.
Recovered cells were then lysed overnight with Arcturus PicoPure DNA
extraction lysis buffer, and the resulting DNA was analyzed for mutant
KRAS with the castPCR TaqMan Mutation Detection Assay (Applied
Biosystems) specific for the mutation found in H441 cells (G12V). Under
these conditions, we detected KRAS mutation in H441 cells with robust
sensitivity (20 spiked cells into 7.5ml of blood; KP-4 cells were
negative for the G12V mutation). To further examine if this method could
be used for detecting mutations in human tissue, FFPE tumor cells were
analyzed. The WaxFreeTM DNA kit (TrimGen) was used to extract DNA from
FFPE cells, and castPCR was performed. H441 mutant KRAS was detected from
as little as 200 pg DNA (100-fold dilution of DNA). Ongoing studies
involve correlating mutation status between CTCs and tumor FFPE tissue.
These data will aid in clinical biomarker development used in clinical
trials and improve methods to determine the most beneficial treatment
options for patients. Importantly, this approach may enable patients to
be serially monitored for tumor mutation status with blood draws.

