Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tankyrase inhibition represses Wnt signaling and lung cancer growth


Despite progress in smoking cessation and advances in treatment, lung
cancer remains the most common cause of cancer mortality for both men and
women in the United States. This highlights a pressing need for new
therapies. The Wnt signaling pathway is commonly deregulated in many
types of cancer, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Wnt
pathway activation is reported in human lung adenocarcinoma and other
lung cancer cell lines, as well as in disseminated lung cancers in
patients, including those with KRAS and/or EGFR mutations (both common
oncogenic events in NSCLC). Wnt pathway signaling is mechanistically
linked to the metastatic potential of several cancers, including lung
cancers. A pair of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) enzymes, tankyrase
(Tnks) 1 and Tnks2, have recently been highlighted as activating enzymes
in the Wnt pathway. They do so by PARsylating and destabilizing Axin, a
component of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)/axin/glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK-3) complex that regulates Wnt signaling by destabilizing
-catenin. This study sought to evaluate the therapeutic potential of
tankyrase inhibition in a transgenic cyclin E-driven mouse model of lung
adenocarcinoma and its derived cancer cell lines, with confirmation in a
panel of human lung cancer cell lines. The Wnt pathway was found to be
deregulated in de novo murine and human lung cancers through candidate
gene expression analysis by qPCR. For example, Wnt-inhibitory-factor 1
(Wif1) was found to be substantially repressed, in agreement with
published work. Microarray analysis revealed that both Tnks1 and Tnks2
were upregulated in the lung cancers of the transgenic cyclin E mice, in
comparison with both the adjacent normal and non-transgenic lung tissues.
Tnks inhibitors XAV939 and IWR-1 Endo were growth inhibitory in a panel
of murine and human NSCLC cell lines. Inhibition of Tnks by these
compounds was accompanied by stabilization of axin and the tankyrase
enzymes themselves, in agreement with previously reported data.
Tnks-targeting compounds were also able to inhibit the expression of a
stable Wnt-driven luciferase reporter in murine lung cancer cells.
Specific genetic repression of Tnks1 or Tnks2 by siRNAs (versus control
siRNAs) resulted in growth inhibition of murine lung cancer cell lines.
Because Wnt pathway activity is known to be basally reduced in cultured
cells in contrast to in vivo tumors, studies are underway to reintroduce
Tnks-knockdown murine cancer cells into syngeneic host mice via tail vein
injection, a model that recapitulates lung adenocarinoma in vivo.
Successful completion of these studies will determine whether restoration
of Wnt signaling control through inhibition of Tankyrase expression or
activity can repress lung cancer growth. Reduced tumorigenesis would
provide direct evidence for further development of Wnt and
tankyrase-targeted therapies in lung and other cancers.

