Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the roles of COIL and WIPI1 in breast cancer metastasis


Metastasis of cancerous cells to distant sites is the major cause of
death from breast cancer. In a previous study, we performed aCGH on
breast invasive duct carcinoma samples with and without lymph node
metastases and identified regions of genomic amplification that are
associated with lymph node metastasis. These were subsequently validated
by q-PCR. Within the 17q22-24 region, we have identified four genes
likely to contribute to metastasis based on published data: COIL, WIPI1,
TMEM100, and SLC16A6. We are using RNAi and ectopic over-expression to
characterize these genes with in vitro functional assays for
proliferation, migration, invasion, and survival. We used qRT-PCR
analysis on a panel of seven breast cancer cell lines of varying
invasiveness: MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, BT-549, CAMA-1, HS578T,
MCF-7, and SKBR-3. We identified that WIPI1 and COIL were expressed in
the majority. WIPI1 is up-regulated in a variety of tumor cells; studies
suggest WIPI1 can activate autophagy by suppressing TORC1. Autophagy can
inhibit cancer by maintaining genome stability via disposing of damaged
mitochondria and peroxisomes. In clinical data obtained from 298 breast
cancer patients, we observed high expression of WIPI1 to be associated
with higher survival and lower breast cancer relapse. Alternatively,
autophagy can also provide a survival mechanism for tumors with
restricted blood supply and resistance to chemotherapy. This is in
agreement with our observation of high WIPI1 protein expression in highly
invasive breast cancer cell lines. We are over-expressing WIPI1 in SKBR-3
and knocking it down in BT-549 in vitro. WIPI1 could help determine the
role of autophagy in tumor initiation processes such as proliferation and
invasion, and in maintenance of tumor cells following therapy. COIL is
found in a diffuse nucleoplasmic pool and in Cajal bodies (CBs). The role
of diffuse COIL is still unclear, but CBs, involved in the formation of
macromolecular complexes and found more in cells with high
transcriptional activity, require COIL for proper formation and
localization. We observed high expression of COIL protein in cell lines
with higher proliferation index, noticeably in ER positive cell lines
such as CAMA1 and absence in a non-tumorogenic cell line MCF10A. We are
investigating the association of COIL with proliferation, invasion and
migration abilities by over-expression and knockdown of the COIL protein
in MDA231 and MCF7 breast cancer cells. We found from clinical data
obtained from 245 breast cancer patients that high expression of COIL
resulted in lower survival and a higher risk of relapse. This suggests
that COIL may be a potential therapeutic target.

