Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adnab-9: A prospective stool biomarker for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma


Sporadic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a highly lethal cancer
and with no proven screening strategies. Adnab-9, a monoclonal antibody
to constituents of human colonic adenomas has been shown to be prognostic
in IPMN and diagnostic in gastric and colorectal cancer or adenomas
(CRN). In this study, we retrospectively and prospectively evaluated the
diagnostic potential of Adnab-9 in the stool of two distinct PDA
populations. Methods: As proof of principle, 249 Chinese patients
submitted stool for screening. Retrospectively, 15 patients had PDA and
80 patients without cancer served as controls. Adnab-9 stool reactivity
was determined by ELISA. Prospectively, 1132 American CRN screening
program patients submitted stool. Six patients developed PDA over five
years of follow-up. 11 Patients free of any significant CRN or other
cancer but deceased due to other causes, served as controls. An
additional four patients with a known family history of PDA also
prospectively submitted stool for Adnab-9. Results: The prospective study
results are summarized in the Table. Table: Prospective Study Data for
Adnab-9 stool antibody as a biomarker of PDA. The pilot study in Chinese
PDA patients found that 12 of 15 patients had stool Adnab-9 ELISA
positivity compared to 10 of 80 controls (OR 28, CI 6.7-116.8, PSporadic
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a highly lethal cancer and with
no proven screening strategies. Adnab-9, a monoclonal antibody to
constituents of human colonic adenomas has been shown to be prognostic in
IPMN and diagnostic in gastric and colorectal cancer or adenomas (CRN).
In this study, we retrospectively and prospectively evaluated the
diagnostic potential of Adnab-9 in the stool of two distinct PDA
populations. Methods: As proof of principle, 249 Chinese patients
submitted stool for screening. Retrospectively, 15 patients had PDA and
80 patients without cancer served as controls. Adnab-9 stool reactivity
was determined by ELISA. Prospectively, 1132 American CRN screening
program patients submitted stool. Six patients developed PDA over five
years of follow-up. 11 Patients free of any significant CRN or other
cancer but deceased due to other causes, served as controls. An
additional four patients with a known family history of PDA also
prospectively submitted stool for Adnab-9. Results: The prospective study
results are summarized in the Table. Table: Prospective Study Data for
Adnab-9 stool antibody as a biomarker of PDA. The pilot study in Chinese
PDA patients found that 12 of 15 patients had stool Adnab-9 ELISA
positivity compared to 10 of 80 controls (OR 28, CI 6.7-116.8, P<0.0001).
4 of 6 prospective American study PDA patients had either stool ELISA or
Western blot positivity for Adnab-9 compared to 1 of 11 controls (OR=20,
CI 1.4-287.6, PSporadic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a
highly lethal cancer and with no proven screening strategies. Adnab-9, a
monoclonal antibody to constituents of human colonic adenomas has been
shown to be prognostic in IPMN and diagnostic in gastric and colorectal
cancer or adenomas (CRN). In this study, we retrospectively and
prospectively evaluated the diagnostic potential of Adnab-9 in the stool
of two distinct PDA populations. Methods: As proof of principle, 249
Chinese patients submitted stool for screening. Retrospectively, 15
patients had PDA and 80 patients without cancer served as controls.
Adnab-9 stool reactivity was determined by ELISA. Prospectively, 1132
American CRN screening program patients submitted stool. Six patients
developed PDA over five years of follow-up. 11 Patients free of any
significant CRN or other cancer but deceased due to other causes, served
as controls. An additional four patients with a known family history of
PDA also prospectively submitted stool for Adnab-9. Results: The
prospective study results are summarized in the Table. Table: Prospective
Study Data for Adnab-9 stool antibody as a biomarker of PDA. The pilot
study in Chinese PDA patients found that 12 of 15 patients had stool
Adnab-9 ELISA positivity compared to 10 of 80 controls (OR 28, CI
6.7-116.8, P<0.0001). 4 of 6 prospective American study PDA patients had
either stool ELISA or Western blot positivity for Adnab-9 compared to 1
of 11 controls (OR=20, CI 1.4-287.6, P<0.03). 2 of 4 patients with family
history of PDA had stool positive by Adnab-9 ELISA or Western blot.
Conclusions: Our study suggests that Adnab-9 stool tests may be an
effective PDA diagnostic marker. Based on previous data in CRC and IPMN,
Adnab-9 appears to bind Paneth-like cells, which we and others have shown
to be cancer-associated and the likely source of the stool antigen.
Future prospective studies are needed to confirm the diagnostic efficacy
of Adnab-9 stool testing in PDA.


