Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ST6Gal-I sialylation of the Fas (CD95) receptor provides
protection against Fas mediated apoptosis


The golgi glycosyltransferase, ST6Gal-I, adds the negatively-charged
sugar, 2-6 sialic acid to membrane and secreted proteins. This enzyme has
been shown to be upregulated in numerous human cancers including colon
cancer. However, the function of ST6Gal-I in tumor progression remains
unclear due to a dearth of knowledge regarding enzyme substrates, and the
effect of sialylation on target function. Previously, we have shown
ST6Gal-I to be upregulated by oncogenic-ras which leads to increased
invasion in colon carcinoma cells. Recently a role for ST6Gal-I in the
protection of tumors against apoptosis is emerging, as we have shown
sialylation to block galectin-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting the
binding of galectin-3. Here we identify the Fas (CD95) receptor as a
target for ST6Gal-I sialylation, and show that Fas sialylation prohibits
apoptotic signaling in two independent cell models. Specifically, in an
shRNA knockdown of ST6Gal-I in cells with high endogenous ST6Gal-I (HD3),
and in a forced expression of ST6Gal-I in cells with no endogenous
sialyltransferases (SW48), we show the presence of ST6Gal-I impedes Fas
apoptotic signaling. Upon treatment with both the activating antibody,
CH11 and the endogenous ligand, FasL, cells expressing ST6Gal-I had
decreased levels of cleaved caspases 3 and 8, as shown by western blot
and immunofluorescent staining. However, there was no difference in
DR4/DR5-mediated apoptosis induced by TRAIL, suggesting a specific effect
of ST6Gal-I on Fas-mediated apoptosis. Additionally, we have shown
ST6Gal-I sialylation of Fas decreases the binding of FADD to Fas
cytoplasmic tails limiting DISC formation, and prohibits receptor
internalization after activation, effectively blocking Fas apoptotic
signaling. We have also shown Fas-mediated apoptosis driven by the
agonistic antibody, Jo2, to be inhibited in primary macrophages from
transgenic mice genetically engineered by our lab to over-express
ST6Gal-I. Furthermore, we have shown ST6Gal-I to be upregulated in 7/9
human colon tumor samples, and despite Fas downregulation, the expressed
Fas is hypersialylated in several human tumor tissues. In summary, these
data identify ST6Gal-I sialylation of the Fas receptor as a novel
mechanism in the self-protection of tumors against apoptosis, and further
identify ST6Gal-I as an important regulator of apoptotic signaling.

