Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Golgi protein GLG1 participates in tumor progression


Increasing evidence suggests that endocytosis and membrane trafficking
are deregulated in cancer cells. Because of their dependence on selected
signaling pathways, tumor cells may need to rely on accelerated receptor
recycling and increased secretion of a variety of molecules such as
matrix components, adhesion molecules and growth factors. Mass
spectrometry analysis of proteins associated with separase, recently
shown to be an important regulator of membrane trafficking, identified
the Golgi apparatus protein 1 (GLG1). GLG1 is primarily known as an
E-selectin ligand that mediates the initial step of tethering and rolling
of leukocytes on vascular endothelium. We therefore addressed the
possibility that GLG1 could play a similar role in circulating tumor
cells, facilitating arrest and extravasation into adjacent tissues.
Consistent with this possibility, tail vein injection of stably
GLG1-depleted tumor cells into NOD/SCID mice resulted in reduced numbers
of metastatic nodules. Moreover, metastatic tumor growth was almost
exclusively intravascular, indicating impaired extravasation of tumor
cells. Further investigation, however, showed that, in tumor cells, GLG1
is almost exclusively localized to the Golgi apparatus, challenging the
notion that it plays a direct role in mediating tumor cell adhesion to
endothelium as in leukocytes. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms by
which GLG1 could affect tumor cell migration through interactions at the
Golgi level, we conducted experiments using GLG1-depleted human tumor
cell lines. Transient silencing of GLG1 by siRNA was observed to modify
cell shape (elongated morphology), to markedly alter Golgi architecture,
to inhibit migration of a range of tumor cell lines, and to decrease 1
integrin protein level and impair its internalization/recycling. In
addition, subsequent experiments led to the identification of BIG1, an
Arf-GEF required to initiate membrane vesicle formation by promoting
guanine-nucleotide exchange on Arf1 and Arf3, as a new interactor of
GLG1. Taken together, our observations provide insight into a novel and
specific role of GLG1 in tumor progression by affecting, thanks to its
privileged position in the secretory pathway, trafficking of key
molecules implicated in cell migration.

