Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using hybrid population pharmacokinetic (PK)- scaled efficacy
exponential tumor model to determine possible efficacious dose for an
anticancer agent


Background: The proto-oncogene c-Met and its ligand HGF have both been
shown to be frequently dysregulated in and correlate with poor prognostic
outcomes in a number of human cancers (Christensen et al, Liu et al). The
c-Met pathway can be activated by abnormal c-Met expression levels,
activating mutations, gene amplifications autocrine/paracrine HGF
stimulation, making inhibiting c-Met tyrosine kinase activity a viable
therapeutic approach. INC280 is a highly selective small molecule c-Met
inhibitor developed jointly by Novartis and Incyte for the treatment of
solid tumors with activation of the c-Met pathway. Aim: The goal of the
present work is to predict a possible efficacious dose for INC280 for
treatment of solid tumors using a combination of a human population PK
model with an efficacy exponential tumor model scaled from mouse. The use
of population modeling that helps identify factors affecting drug
behavior or explain variability within a target population has been
endorsed by the regulatory agencies as a viable alternative to extensive
clinical studies. A nice summary of tumor growth models and their use in
Oncology can be found in Pharmacokinetics in Drug Development: Advances
and Applications. Methods: To construct the human population PK model,
data from 22 patients from a Phase I trial receiving multiple doses up to
150 mg of INC280 were used. An exponential tumor growth model was fitted
to multiple dose data in GTL-16 MET-amplified tumor bearing mice. As the
pharmacokinetics of INC280 in this mouse model was needed, a separate
PK/PD model in mouse was first established using data from a single dose
mouse study. The scaling from mouse to human was done by adjusting the
model to account for reported values of tumor doubling in HCC human
clinical trials as opposed to those observed in the mouse studies. Model
parameters intrinsic to INC280 efficacy (Emax, EC50) were assumed
constant across species. Results: A preliminary one compartment linear PK
model described the data adequately. The dose predictions were conducted
using the mean population PK parameters. Simulations were run for
different initial tumor volumes, different EC50 values (to account for
uncertainty for parameter estimate), and different tumor growth rates
with doubling times of 30 days and 114 days (Kubota et al.). Efficacious
dose was predicted to fall in the range of 100-400 mg total daily dose,
depending on aggressiveness of tumor growth. Conclusions: The use of
modeling and simulation to aid decision points in drug development is
becoming increasingly common. Here we present an integrative modeling
framework incorporating both preclinical and clinical data to provide
dose estimation. The assumptions in the model are clearly stated and the
model can be changed with the availability of new data.

