Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ET-743 interferes with EWS-FLI1 driven WRN expression in Ewing
sarcoma cells and sensitizes to topoisomerase I inhibitors


The hallmark of Ewing sarcoma is the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor
believed to be responsible for oncogenesis and tumor progression. ET-743
(Trabectedin, Yondelis) is a natural product recently identified as a
particularly active agent for Ewing sarcoma cells in vitro. We have
recently demonstrated that ET-743 interferes with the activity of the
oncogenic transcription factor EWS-FLI1. In this report, we examine the
link between EWS-FLI1 suppression and the DNA damage response. We
hypothesize that blocking the EWS-FLI1 associated DNA damage response may
confer additional sensitivity to specific cytotoxic agents. DNA repair
pathways and EWS-FLI1 targets were evaluated by microarray expression,
western blot analysis and siRNA interference. Microarray expression and
western blot analysis revealed that ET-743 suppresses WRN and XRCC4
expression, critical proteins in the Non-Homologous End Joining Pathway
(NHEJ) repair pathway. Further siRNA data showed that the EWS-FLI1
transcription factor drives the expression of WRN. These results suggest
that WRN suppression by ET-743 is occurring through an EWS-FLI1 dependent
mechanism. Since the NHEJ pathway is associated with resistance to
specific chemotherapeutic agents, several combination therapies were
investigated in vitro. ESFT cells show heightened sensitivity to the
combination of ET-743 and the topoisomerase I inhibitor, SN-38. This
result was unique to topoisomerase I inhibitors and further restricted to
ESFT cell lines. Consistent with these results, previous reports have
established that WRN deficient cells are hypersensitive to topoisomerase
I but not topoisomerase II inhibitors. Additionally, we found that
irinotecan augments the ET-743 mediated transcriptional inhibition of
EWS-FLI1. Taken together these mechanisms account for the heightened
sensitivity of the combination of ET-743 and irinotecan observed both in
vitro and in vivo in two different ESFT xenograft models. In summary, by
employing a mechanism based approach, we have identified a novel
combination therapy of ET-743 and irinotecan. By linking the EWS-FLI1
transcriptional program to the DNA damage response in ESFT cells, we
expose an inherent weakness to topoisomerase I inhibitors thus creating a
cell type specific sensitivity to the drug. This report provides a novel
method of oncogenic transcription factor targeting that involves direct
suppression of downstream targets and exploitation of the resulting
changes in gene expression.

