Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-IL10-R1 monoclonal antibody with concomitant bacillus
calmette-Gurin (BCG) prevents metastatic bladder cancer in an in vivo
mouse model


Introduction: Induction of Th1 immunity is required for effective
intravesical BCG immunotherapy of bladder cancer. IL-10 down-regulates
the Th1 response and is associated with BCG failure. We previously
demonstrated that blocking IL-10 receptor (IL-10R) by systemic
administration of anti-IL-10R1 mAb enhanced intravesical BCG (living
Pasteur strain) treatment of bladder cancer in an orthotopic mouse model.
Here we investigated the effect of anti-IL-10R1 mAb on clinically used
BCG (lyophilized TICE strain) for induction of anti-bladder cancer
immunity. Methods: Splenocytes were incubated with BCG alone or plus
control IgG or ant-IL-10R1 mAb for 24 hours, followed by ELISA analysis
of IFN- production. Bladder RNA was extracted after 6 treatments (twice
weekly) with intravesical (i.b.) BCG plus intraperitoneal (i.p.) control
IgG or anti-IL-10R1 mAb, followed by qPCR analysis of IFN- mRNA
expression. Three groups of 20 mice were inoculated with
luciferase-expressing MB49 bladder cancer cells and treated with i.b. PBS
plus i.p. PBS (Group 1), i.b. BCG plus i.p. control IgG (Group 2), or
i.b. BCG plus i.p. anti-IL-10R1 mAb (Group 3) 2x/wk for 6 total
treatments. Mice were monitored weekly using IVIS luminescence and
followed for 76 days. A bioluminesence cutoff of 5X104 p/s was used to
establish the presence of bladder cancer. At animal death bladders were
collected, weighed and processed for histological analysis. In suspected
cases of metastatic disease the affected organs were also collected for
histological analysis. Results: BCG plus anti-IL-10R1 mAb induced
increased IFN- production by splenocytes in a dose-dependent manner. BCG
plus anti-IL-10R1 mAb substantially increased IFN- mRNA. Eleven, 17 and 9
mice from Groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively, developed bladder cancer. One
mouse in Group 2 and 2 mice in Group 3 showed cancer regression. 36%, 53%
and 0% of Groups 1, 2 and 3 developed metastatic bladder cancer,
respectively (p=0.020). While bladder weights for the groups were
different, the differences did not reach statistical significance.
Conclusions: Anti-IL-10R1 mAb enhances BCG-induced Th1 immune responses
both in vitro and in vivo. Intravesical BCG plus anti-IL-10R1 mAb shows
statistical significance in preventing metastasis of bladder cancer in an
orthotopic bladder tumor mouse model. Anti-IL-10R1 mAb may prove useful
in clinical practice for the prevention of metastatic bladder cancer in
high-risk patients.

