Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Chk1 by the mTOR pathway is essential for cancer
cells to complete DNA replication in response to replication stress


Oncogenic signaling leads to DNA replication stress, DNA damage and
consequently DNA damage response (DDR), a barrier for tumorigenesis. For
survival and proliferation, cancer cells must overcome this
oncogene-induced DDR, but the molecular mechanism by which this is
achieved is largely unknown. Here we report that the mTOR pathway
prevents either spontaneous or drug induced DNA damage by sustaining
ATR-Chk1 checkpoint in pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) both in vivo and
in vitro. Pharmacological inhibition of mTOR signaling by the selective
TOR kinase inhibitor AZD8055 lead to spontaneous DNA damage and apoptosis
as demonstrated by the induction of H2AX phosphorylation and PARP1
cleavage both in cell culture and tumor xenografts of RMS. Treatment RMS
Rh30 cells with AZD8055 enhanced hydroxyurea induced H2AX phosphorylation
and attenuated ATR-Chk1 checkpoint activation, as shown by decreased
levels of phospho-Chk1(S345). We further found that mTOR signaling
controls CHK1 expression at the transcriptional level via enhancing the
activity of cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs). Consistent with its
essential role for cells to survive DNA replication stress,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Chk1, or inhibition of Chk1 function by a
Chk1 kinase inhibitor resulted in H2AX phosphorylation, while ectopic
increase of Chk1 attenuated the DNA damage induced by mTOR kinase
inhibition. Most importantly, the mTOR kinase inhibitor prevented the
slow S-phase progression following DNA replication stress, which was
accompanied with a decrease of Chk1 protein levels and
phospho-Chk1(S345). Our data suggest that the TORC1/TORC2 pathway
promotes RMS tumorigenesis by enhancing the cell survival functions of
the ATR-Chk1 checkpoint in response to DNA replication stress. Our
findings discovered an important unexpected functional linkage between
TOR signaling and the ATR-Chk1 checkpoint signaling cascade and may
impact targeting these two prominent cancer cell signaling pathways.
Supported by CA77776.

