Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ezrin plays a key role in the regulation of translation in
metastatic osteosarcoma


Our previous studies have demonstrated the association between Ezrin and
the metastatic biology of pediatric sarcomas including osteosarcoma (OS)
and rhabdomyosarcoma. Mechanistic studies exploring this association have
shown that Ezrin expression enhances the survival of metastatic cells
upon their arrival to the secondary metastatic site. In order to better
understand this role in metastasis, we undertook two non-candidate
analyses of Ezrin function including a microarray subtraction of high and
low Ezrin expressing cells and a proteomic approach to identify proteins
that bind the N-terminus of Ezrin in tumor lysates. Functional analyses
of these data led to a novel and unifying hypothesis that Ezrin
contributes to the efficiency of metastasis through regulation of protein
translation. In support of this hypothesis we found Ezrin to be part of a
ribonucleoprotein complex and to bind with poly A binding protein 1
(PABA1; PABPC1). Using luciferase reporter-based assays, we have shown
that OS cells expressing high levels of Ezrin are able to translate mRNAs
containing a stem loop 5 UTR structure, so called weakly translated
mRNAs, more efficiently than low Ezrin OS cells. This finding suggests
that Ezrin's contribution to the metastatic phenotype may be due in part
to enhanced translation of specific mRNAs during metastasis that are
normally expressed at low levels outside of the metastatic context.
Ongoing studies will now assess the ability of Ezrin to enhance the
expression of specific mRNAs in 3-dimensional contexts more relevant to
cancer cell growth in vivo. We have developed stable high and low Ezrin
osteosarcoma cell lines that express a GFP reporter with or without a
complex 5 UTR stem loop structure in the mRNA transcript and with and
without protein destabilizing elements. Initial studies have shown that
the addition of the 5 UTR structure and destabilizing elements
progressively limits GFP reporter expression. We plan to confirm that
this reduction in expression is due to reduced translation and to assess
whether 3-D culture conditions or the in vivo environment enhance
expression of these tunable reporters of translation in an
Ezrin-dependant manner. We expect these results to provide a novel
mechanistic basis to consider how Ezrin may contribute to metastasis.

