Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly sensitive assay for the discovery of inhibitors of the
histone methyltransferase DOT1L to treat MLL-rearranged leukemia


MLL-rearranged leukemia is an aggressive form of cancer characterized by
specific chromosomal rearrangements of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)
gene. In normal cells, MLL, a histone methyltransferase, methylates the
lysine 4 residue on histone 3 (H3K4) and thereby regulates the expression
of genes which control hematopoietic development. In leukemic cells,
chromosomal rearrangements fuse the N-terminus of MLL with one of more
than 50 partner proteins, giving rise to oncogenic fusion proteins that
lack H3K4 methyltransferase activity. These fusion proteins
inappropriately recruit DOT1L, which methylates H3K79, producing an
abnormal methylation pattern and activation of genes normally suppressed
during differentiation. Elevated expression of HOXA9 in particular leads
to a block in normal hematopoetic differentiation and the onset of
leukemia. A solid body of evidence has shown DOT1L to be crucial for the
development and maintenance of MLL-rearranged leukemias; consequently, it
is a promising target for therapeutic intervention. We have focused on
developing an assay suitable for high-throughput screening (HTS) to
detect compounds that inhibit DOT1L enzymatic activity. DOT1L catalyzes
the transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) to H3K79
and generates S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) as a byproduct. The enzyme
displays a very low rate of methylation of histone octamers or
nucleosomes and no activity towards individual histones or
histone-derived peptides. Thus DOT1L HTS requires a highly sensitive
assay that is able to accommodate protein-protein and protein-DNA
complexes as substrates. An assay using radiolabeled SAM has sufficient
sensitivity, but is relatively laborious and not well-suited for HTS. We
tested several previously reported non-radioactive assay formats, but
none enabled robust detection of DOT1L activity. Therefore, we developed
a coupled enzyme assay in which SAH is converted to homocysteine and
adenosine using SAH hydrolase. In a second enzyme-coupled step, adenosine
kinase generates AMP and ADP from the SAH-derived adenosine and added
ATP. Finally, ADP is detected using the luciferase-based Promega ADP-Glo
assay. The luminescent signal provides a highly sensitive measure of ADP
at a concentration as low as 10 nM. The readout is directly proportional
to SAH production; thus DOT1L inhibitors are identified by a reduction in
this signal. We report development of the assay, including careful
optimization of the activity of adenosine kinase to enhance sensitivity,
and assay validation demonstrating DOT1L inhibition by the non-selective
SAM-competitive inhibitor sinefungin, and pilot HTS of a 2,000-compound
library.

