Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nutlin-3 induces cell cycle arrest in p53 wild-type ovarian
carcinomas via upregulation of p21


Despite the fact that ovarian epithelial ovarian cancer is a molecularly
and histologically heterogeneous disease, standard treatment is the same
for all subtypes. Most high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (OCs) are
responsive to initial platinum/taxane chemotherapy, but low-grade serous
OCs and clear cell OCs are relatively chemoresistant with limited
treatment options upon recurrence, and most patients succumb to the
disease. It is therefore of interest to exploit the molecular differences
between high-grade serous OCs and other histological types in order to
develop novel therapeutics. Over 90% of high-grade serous OCs harbor p53
mutations, whereas low-grade serous OCs are p53 wild-type but more
frequently contain KRAS and BRAF mutations. Similarly, ovarian clear cell
carcinomas are p53 wild-type but more frequently contain PI3K mutations.
Nutlin-3 functions via inhibition of MDM2, thereby activating wild-type
p53 and inducing apoptosis. We therefore sought to validate nutlin-3 as a
potential novel therapeutic compound for p53 wild-type ovarian
carcinomas. Two low-grade serous OC cell lines (HOC-7, MPSC-1), two clear
cell OC cell lines (TOV21G, OVAS), and one high-grade serous OC p53-null
cell line (SKOV3) were treated with varying concentrations of nutlin-3
(0-70 m) for 72 hours, and cellular proliferation assays were performed.
The three serous OC cell lines were then treated with nutlin-3 (5 m), and
quantitative reaction real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and
Western blot (WB) were employed to quantify MDM2, p53, and p21 expression
at 24, 48, and 72 hours after treatment. The MPSC-1 cell line was then
sequenced for p53 mutations in exons 5, 6, 7, and 8. Nutlin-3 inhibited
cellular proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in the clear cell and
low-grade serous cell lines, but not the p53-null high-grade serous cell
line, as expected. Both PI3K-mutant clear cell ovarian cancer cell lines
exhibited decreased growth in response to nutlin-3, but to a lesser
extent than the low-grade serous cell lines. HOC-7, which bears a KRAS
mutation, was more sensitive to inhibition than BRAF-mutated MPSC-1.
Sequencing for p53 mutation in MPSC-1 surprisingly revealed a
heterozygous p53 40 bp deletion in exon 5, which accounted for the
reduced sensitivity of MPSC-1 to nutlin-3. On qRT-PCR and WB, levels of
p53 were slightly decreased after nutlin-3 treatment and were absent in
SKOV3. MDM2 and p21 were initially upregulated, but returned to
near-baseline levels after 72 hours. Nutlin-3 is a novel potential
therapeutic agent for low-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, and is
dependent on an intact p53 pathway. It appears to function via
upregulation of p21 with subsequent cell cycle arrest. Further studies
characterizing response to nutlin-3 according to tumor mutation status
are underway.

