Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzo(a)pyrene biotransformation enzyme expression, activities and
metabolite disposition in ApcMin mouse colon and liver is altered by
resveratrol exposure.


Statistics released by the American Cancer society indicates that colon
cancer is the third leading cause of cancer cases and related deaths in
America. In addition to dietary preferences and lifestyle habits,
exposure to toxicants such as benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is one of the major
contributing factors to the development of sporadic colon cancer. Our
laboratory has validated the ApcMin mouse model to study BaP-induced
colon carcinogenesis. Ongoing studies in our laboratory are focused
towards elucidating the anticarcinogenic effects of resveratrol (RVT)
against colon tumors. Our studies thus far have shown a decrease in the
incidence, size, and number of adenomas formed in the colon of mice
exposed to BaP and RVT, compared to BaP exposure alone. Since
biotransformation of toxicants is one of the key steps for initiating
carcinogenesis, the objective of this study was to investigate whether
RVT exposure simultaneously or prior to BaP treatment alters BaP
biotransformation and bioavailability in ApcMin mice. The BaP treatment
consisted of BaP-only administration (in peanut oil) at a dose of 100
g/kg body weight (bw) via oral gavage over a 60 day period (group I); BaP
(100 g/kg bw) co-administered with RVT (in 10% ethanol + 90% deionized
water) at a dose of 45 g/kg bw (group II); RVT administered for 1 week
prior to BaP dosing (group III). Blood, colon and liver samples were
collected at the end of exposure period. The expression of BaP
biotransformation enzymes (CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GST) in liver and colon
were assayed at the level of protein and enzyme activities. Plasma, liver
and colon tissue samples were analyzed by reverse phase-HPLC for BaP
metabolites. Resveratrol exposure both prior to- and concurrent with BaP
exposure caused a decrease in the expression and activity of CYP1A1/1B1
enzymes and an increase in GST enzymes both in liver and colon.
Additionally, our studies revealed a decrease in concentrations of
organic (Phase I) metabolites in plasma, liver and colon in mice that
received RVT + BaP compared to mice that received RVT alone. In contrast,
an opposite trend was noted with aqueous (Phase II) metabolites
registering an increase in mice that received RVT + BaP compared to mice
that received RVT alone. Between the two RVT-treatment strategies,
concurrent administration of RVT appeared to limit BaP bioactivation
compared to RVT treatment prior to BaP exposure. In summary, our results
suggest that RVT provides a preventive effect against BaP-induced colon
cancer initiation and progression in ApcMin mice (funded by NIH grants
5T32HL007735-12, 1F31ES019432-01A1 and 5RO1CA142845-O2).

