Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PROFILE study; Germline genetic profiling: Correlation with
targeted prostate cancer screening and treatment


Introduction: Men with a first degree relative with prostate cancer (PC)
have twice the general population risk. This risk is greater amongst
young cases and amongst men with more affected relatives. Genome Wide
Association studies have identified a number of common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that confer small but cumulatively substantial risks
of PC. These findings open the possibility for exploring the use of SNPs
in PC risk stratification for targeted screening. Objectives: PROFILE has
been developed as a pilot study; the primary aim is to determine the
acceptability and feasibility of targeted PC screening using prostatic
biopsy in men with a family history and its association with specific
genetic profiles. The secondary aims are to: (1) determine PC risk
related SNPs signatures in men with a family history; (2) study the
correlation between specific PC risk related SNP signatures and prostate
biopsy (PB) outcomes; (3) estimate the sensitivity and specificity of PSA
screening and the optimal PSA threshold for PB in men with a family
history of PC; (4) to assess the value of Diffusion Weighted Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (DW-MRI) as a PC screening tool in men with a family
history of PC. Method: Eligible men were aged 40-69 years with i) first
degree relative (FDR) with PC Introduction: Men with a first degree
relative with prostate cancer (PC) have twice the general population
risk. This risk is greater amongst young cases and amongst men with more
affected relatives. Genome Wide Association studies have identified a
number of common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that confer small
but cumulatively substantial risks of PC. These findings open the
possibility for exploring the use of SNPs in PC risk stratification for
targeted screening. Objectives: PROFILE has been developed as a pilot
study; the primary aim is to determine the acceptability and feasibility
of targeted PC screening using prostatic biopsy in men with a family
history and its association with specific genetic profiles. The secondary
aims are to: (1) determine PC risk related SNPs signatures in men with a
family history; (2) study the correlation between specific PC risk
related SNP signatures and prostate biopsy (PB) outcomes; (3) estimate
the sensitivity and specificity of PSA screening and the optimal PSA
threshold for PB in men with a family history of PC; (4) to assess the
value of Diffusion Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DW-MRI) as a PC
screening tool in men with a family history of PC. Method: Eligible men
were aged 40-69 years with i) first degree relative (FDR) with PC <70
years, or ii) two relatives FDR or second degree relatives (SDR) with PC,
at least one 1 year ago were offered a DW-MRI prior to biopsy. Blood DNA
from each participant was analysed for a panel of 39 SNPs associated with
increased risk of PC using iPLEX Sequenom technology. The results were
fed back to participants and an associated psycho-social study has
collected data on cancer worry, anxiety and depression and illness
perceptions. We aim to enrol 100 men Results: 70 men had been recruited
by 1st November 2011. 45 PB have been performed, finding 10 (22.2%) PC, 5
(11.1%) ASAP and 2 (4.4%) high grade PIN. The results of SNP profiling,
risk prediction modelling and clinical parameters will be presented
alongside the outcome of the baseline psychosocial measures Conclusions:
Our preliminary results indicate that PB as a means of PC screening is
feasible and acceptable in men with a family history of the disease. The
incidence of PC and ASAP in this group of men is higher than expected in
the general population. No adverse psychosocial variables were noted.
These results support the development of a larger national study.

