Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment of cancer cells with DNA damaging drugs and quercetin
suppresses cell growth independent of p21 and Bax induction


Quercetin, one of the most abundant polyphenols, has been evaluated for
its potential cancer preventive functions and for its anticancer activity
in vitro and in vivo. Its interactions with chemotherapeutics, however,
have not been established. Some reports indicate enhancement of drug
activity by quercetin but others suggest precautions in co-administering
antioxidants such as quercetin and chemotherapeutic drugs. Therefore,
further investigations were needed to determine the conditions under
which the co-treatment of cancer cells with drugs and quercetin could be
clinically beneficial. This study was done to examine how quercetin
modulates responses to the chemotherapeutic drugs, 5FU, camptothecin, and
VP16, in colon and prostate cancer cells, and to determine the
biochemical processes involved in the interactions. Survival of HCT116
colorectal cancer cells (p53 wild-type & null) was determined by assay of
clonogenicity of cells exposed to selected concentrations of 5-FU,
camptothecin, or VP16 in the presence or absence of quercetin. For cell
cycle and biochemical experiments, cells were exposed for 24 hours to 10
M 5FU, 1 M camptothecin, or 10 M VP-16 with or without 50 M quercetin.
The effects of the drugs on the cell cycle were measured by flow
cytometry. The induction of p53 and its transcriptional targets, p21 and
Bax, as well as the levels of cell cycle regulators, cyclin B1 and
survivin, were determined by immunoblotting. Additionally, cell migration
assays were used to evaluate the effect of combination treatments on the
motility of RKO colorectal and PPC1 prostate cancer cells. Quercetin
synergistically inhibited the clonogenicity of the wild-type HCT116
cells, but also inhibited effects on the cell cycle of all the drugs
tested. In contrast, for p53-null cells, the combination of low
concentrations of 5-FU with up to 6 M quercetin promoted clonogenic
survival. Exposure of wild-type cells to 50 M quercetin reduced
drug-induced up-regulation of p53, p21, and Bax. Combinations of
quercetin and the drugs also reduced the levels of cyclin B1 and
survivin. RKO and PPC1 cells exposed to the drugs had reduced migratory
capacity. Although quercetin alone reduced their migratory capacity,
combination treatments did not further reduce cell migration. In summary,
quercetin in combination with 5-FU reduced the survival of p53-proficient
HCT116 colorectal cancer cells independently of p21 and Bax, but
combination of this flavonoid with low concentrations of 5-FU provided a
survival advantage for p53-null cells. Further investigations are needed
to determine the mechanisms and circumstances under which the
combinations of bioactive dietary compounds and chemotherapeutic drugs
are beneficial. Supported by grants from NCI/NIH (2U54-CA118948-06, and
SC2CA138178).

