Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does KRAS testing in metastatic colorectal cancer impact overall
survival: A comparative effectiveness study in a population-based sample


The anti-epidermal growth factor (EGFR) monoclonal antibodies cetuximab
and panitumumab are approved for the treatment of metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC), but have been shown to be ineffective if the tumor has a
mutation in KRAS codon 12 or 13. Comparative effectiveness research is
intended to create evidence for decision making, and to find out what
works in health care. This is especially important in scenarios like KRAS
testing among patients with mCRC, since there is uncertainty around the
significance of rarer mutations, and no proven alternative treatment for
those who are found to harbor KRAS mutations in codons 12 or 13. We
sought to determine whether recommendations for KRAS testing implemented
in mid-2008 impacted survival in mCRC among 1203 mCRC patients from seven
integrated health plans that are part of the Cancer Research Network. We
included Stage IV cases diagnosed from 2006- 2009 and stage III cases
initially diagnosed from 2004- 2008 who progressed to distant metastatic
CRC (determined using chart review). We abstracted complete treatment
data, pathology reports, survival data and KRAS testing results from
electronic medical records. For cases that had not been previously tested
for KRAS mutation status, we tested archived pathology specimens from the
primary tumor. We used Kaplan-Meier plots and Cox proportional hazards
models to examine whether overall survival differed among stage III and
IV cases diagnosed before (n=751) and after (n=452) the implementation of
KRAS testing. We included 918 stage IV cases and 285 stage III cases with
progression. KRAS mutations (codon 12, 13, or 61) were found in 40% of
tumors. Mutations were more common among tumors arising in the proximal
compared to distal colon (46% mutated in ascending colon versus 33% in
sigmoid colon). Median survival among stage III cases with progression
was 589 days, compared to 437 days for stage IV cases (p=0.004). EGFR
inhibitors were given to 26% of patients in the pre-recommendation
period, and 13% of patients in the post-recommendation period. We found
no survival differences by mutation status. We also found no
statistically significant difference in survival time between the pre-
and post- KRAS testing recommendations. Our data suggest that KRAS
testing can be used to target anti-EGFR therapies without compromising
overall survival time among mCRC patients in a usual care setting.

