Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NY-ESO-1 and clinicopathological features in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer ranks fifth in cancer deaths among women and the American
Cancer Society estimates that in the US about 15,460 women will die from
this disease in 2011. NY-ESO-1 is an 18 kDa member of the cancer/testis 6
antigen family which is thought to play a role in germ cell
differentiation. In healthy adults, NY-ESO-1 is restricted to the testis.
NY-ESO-1 expression has been found in various malignant neoplasms,
including melanomas, neuroblastomas, soft tissue sarcomas, and carcinomas
from the breast and endometrium. To further delineate the role of
NY-ESO-1 in epithelial ovarian cancer, we constructed a tissue microarray
of archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded paired tumor and normal
control specimens from ovarian cancer patients. NY-ESO-1 expression was
correlated with clinicopathologic features and overall survival.
Specimens were collected from 242 patients who underwent cytoreductive
surgery for ovarian cancer between 1989 and 2009. Immunohistochemical
staining was performed with mouse monoclonal antibody clone E978 specific
for NY-ESO-1. Stained slides were digitized with the Aperio ScanScope XT
and images were analyzed using DEFINENS Tissue Studio software.
Histological scores (H-scores) based on intensity of NY-ESO-1 staining
and percent positive cells were calculated for all specimens. Positive
NY-ESO-1 expression was found in 21% of papillary serous carcinomas, 18%
of endometrioid carcinomas, and 20% of clear cell carcinomas. Ovarian
cancer tissue had significantly higher H-scores compared to normal tissue
controls from the same patients. H-scores increased with increasing FIGO
stage and grade of the tumors. Caucasians had higher H-scores compared to
African Americans and Asians. H-scores did not correlate with overall
survival. Similarly, no differences in overall survival based on NY-ESO-1
expression levels were detected when patients were stratified by their
histologic subtype. In conclusion, NY-ESO-1 is expressed in all
histologic subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer but not in normal
tissues, therefore making it an ideal candidate for the development of
targeted therapeutic approaches in ovarian cancer.

