Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a contra-indicatory biomarker to predict drug
resistance and treatment failure


The efficacy of a targeted therapy relies on the existence of a unique
target, a molecular alteration necessary for tumor growth (oncogenic
dependence). However, there is increasing evidence that some tumors may
contain alterations in multiple oncogenic pathways. Furthermore, cancer
cell subclones inside a tumor may harbor distinct oncogenic pathways
critical for their growth, exhibiting an intra-tumor genetic
heterogeneity. This genetic heterogeneity among cancer cells has
important implications in tumor evolution and could adversely affect
treatment outcomes. While conventional biomarkers are commonly used as an
indication for drug efficacy, we sought to evaluate an overall assessment
of genetic alterations in a tumor and investigate if it can predict a
tumor's resistance to an agent, for use as a contra-indicatory biomarker.
Our study has found that an individual patient tumor contains subclones
with unique profiles of loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH). The gene expression
profiles have shown a similar pattern. Using transcriptome sequencing, we
identified unique profiles of genetic mutations among cancer cells and
demonstrated several distinct oncogenic pathways that are differentially
activated among subclones. Xenograft studies have shown that individual
tumors and individual subclones within a tumor respond differentially to
targeted agents, ranging from being sensitive to resistant. Specifically,
xenografts created from cancer cell clones isolated from the culture of
primary tumors may be sensitive even when isolated from a resistant
tumor, and other xenografts may be resistant even when created from
clones isolated from a sensitive tumor, indicating the heterogeneity in
the original tumors. Longitudinal immunohistochemical analysis of
estrogen receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor and vascular
endothelial growth factor showed that the cancer cell populations of
individual subclones evolve differentially when treated with agents
targeting these factors. Our preliminary analysis based on the
quantitative measurement of LOH among subclones in individual tumors
indicates that a cutoff value can be used with good specificity to
predict drug resistance and this prediction works equally well for
several targeted agents, suggesting that intra-tumor heterogeneity may be
a common mechanism of treatment failure for many targeted agents. We are
currently working to validate the sensitivity and specificity of the
heterogeneity score in more patient tumors in vivo. We have reported a
contra-indicatory biomarker for targeted therapies to predict treatment
failure and remove patients from unnecessary treatment. This biomarker
can be used complementarily in targeted therapy to improve drug efficacy
in clinical trials as well as to reduce morbidity associated with
treatment.

