Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- synergistically stimulates malignant mesothelioma growth with
defects in the Hippo pathway by inducing CTGF expression


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) arises from the serosal cells of the pleural,
peritoneal and pericardial cavities with poor prognosis because of its
frequent diagnosis in advanced stages. The primary cause of this disease
has often been linked to asbestos exposure, and the number of patients
worldwide is expected to peak in the next two decades. There is no known
curative therapy for MM and further understanding in molecular mechanism
is needed to identify new candidates for targeted treatment. We found
that the TGF- pathway is associated with oncogenic mutations and loss of
the tumor suppressor NF2, and induces pro-oncogenic biological
activities. Loss of NF2 is one of the genetic lesions which have been
related to the growth of human MM. The NF2 gene is responsible for
neurofibromatosis type II syndrome and encodes Merlin which negatively
regulates YAP function. Nearly 75% MM cases have inactivating mutations
in the NF2 gene or in downstream signaling molecules of Hippo signaling
cascade. We examined a functional interaction between the Hippo and TGF-
pathways and found that endothelin-1 and connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF) are the only proteins affected by these two pathways in MM cells.
The CTGF promoter contains both a YAP/TEAD-binding site and a consensus
Smad-binding site adjacent to each other. The expression of CTGF induced
by TGF- in MM cell lines was greatly affected by the existence of YAP, by
its binding with Smad3, forming a complex on CTGF promoter lesion.
Knocking down CTGF expression in MM cells prolonged the survival of mice,
and a significant association was seen between CTGF expression and
extracellular matrix deposition in MM xenografts and in patient tissue
specimens. This study elucidates a novel molecular mechanism induced by
the TGF- pathway, which may be applicable to malignancies with defective
NF2 and of mesenchymal origin.

