Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative cellular effects of 4-phenyl-3-butenoic acid and
suberoylanilide acid in tumorigenic and non-tumorigenic cells


4-phenyl-3-butenoic acid (PBA) is a small molecule anti-inflammatory
agent which was previously shown to inhibit growth, increase gap junction
intercellular communication, increase phosphorylation of p38 mitogen
activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), and decrease phosphorylation of
c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) in tumorigenic cells at concentrations that
do not similarly affect non-tumorigenic cells. Suberoylanilide acid
(SAHA), which is also known as vorinostat, is a relatively new anticancer
agent structurally similar to PBA. The purpose of this study was to
compare the effects of these two agents on JNK and p38 activation in
vitro, as well as on cell growth. p38 MAPK and JNK are stress-activated
members of the MAPK family that play important roles in the control of
cell proliferation in a wide variety of cell types. Altered expression or
activation of these MAPKs has been observed in numerous tumorigenic cells
and human cancers. Our studies utilized human lung carcinoma cells
(H2009), transformed rat liver epithelial cells (WB-ras) as well as
non-tumorigenic cells from the same line (WB-neo). Cells were grown to
60-70% confluence and were subjected to treatment with PBA (0.1 mg/ml),
SAHA (500 nM) or vehicle for 48 hours. Whole cell lysates were extracted
and individual proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by western
blotting using phosphorylation site-specific antibodies to p38 and JNK
proteins. For cell counting, cells were trypsinized and suspended
followed by counting utilizing a Biorad TC-10TM cell counter. PBA and
SAHA were shown to have similar effects on JNK and p38 MAPK
phosphorylation in tumorigenic WB-ras and H2009 cell lines. These effects
included an increase in p38 MAPK phosphorylation and a decrease in JNK
phosphorylation. Both compounds were shown to significantly decrease cell
growth under these conditions. In untransformed WB-neo cells significant
differences in p38 MAPK phosphorylation were not seen with either
treatment. However it was shown that a decrease in phosphorylation of JNK
occurred following SAHA treatment, but not PBA treatment in the WB-neo
cells. Overall these studies demonstrate that PBA has similar effects on
JNK and p38 MAPK compared to SAHA in tumorigenic cells, while being less
potent in the non-tumorigenic WB-neo cells. This earmarks PBA for further
studies as a targeted anti-tumor therapy.

