Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidized ATM functions in intracellular redox regulation


Background: Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a serine/threonine
protein kinase that plays a central role in the signaling response to DNA
double strand breaks (DSBs) by phosphorylating multiple targets involved
in DNA repair and cell cycle control. In response to DSBs, ATM is
activated through interactions with the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) complex.
Recent work from our group identified a second mechanism of ATM
activation through direct oxidation that is independent of both MRN and
DNA DSBs. ATM signaling through the p53 tumor suppressor in response to
elevated ROS is known to prevent aneuploidy driven tumorigenesis and ATM
deficiency is linked to oxidative stress. While ATM is best known for its
role within the nuclear DNA damage response, recent studies implicate ATM
in cytoplasmic signaling pathways. ATM activation through direct
oxidation may function as a primary tumor suppressor mechanism and may
serve to regulate the intracellular redox balance, yet the biological
role of oxidized ATM remains to be elucidated. Methods: To investigate
the role of ATM kinase activity in redox regulation, the levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) were analyzed and compared in normal
fibroblasts and various cancer cell lines with different genetic
backgrounds following incubation with a specific inhibitor of the ATM
kinase and mock treatment. To analyze the role of ATM activation through
direct oxidation in redox regulation, ROS levels were measured and
compared in human cell lines overexpressing wild-type ATM and a mutant
form of ATM (C2991L) that is unresponsive to activation through direct
oxidation. Cellular fractionation experiments were used to analyze the
intracellular distribution of ATM following treatment with an oxidizing
agent. Findings: Inhibition of ATM kinase activity for 24 hours resulted
in increased ROS levels in normal human fibroblasts, WT and p53 -/-
HCT116 colon cancer cell lines and hela cells, which are deficient in
LKB1. Stable expression of the C2991L mutant form of ATM in 293 cells
resulted in elevated levels of ROS when compared to 293 cells
overexpressing wild-type ATM. Induced expression of the C2991L ATM mutant
in cells lacking native ATM resulted in elevated ROS levels 24 hours
post-induction when compared to the induced expression of wild-type ATM.
Using cellular fractionation studies, we show that ATM levels in the
cytoplasmic fraction increased at 30 minutes post-treatment with hydrogen
peroxide and remained elevated up to 2 hours post-treatment without an
accompanying increase in -H2AX, a widely utilized marker of DSBs.
Conclusions: These findings indicate that oxidized ATM functions in
regulating intracellular ROS levels and that this function is independent
of ATM signaling through the p53 and LKB1 signaling pathways. These
findings further show that ATM signaling in response to oxidative stress
may not be restricted to known nuclear signaling pathways activated by
DNA damage.

