Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of lung cancer associated oncoantigens as targets
for active immunotherapy


Non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death
in men and women. Therefore, the development of new therapeutic
strategies is essential for improving the prognosis and treatment of
patients. An interesting experimental model to study human lung
adenocarcinoma is represented by p53R172Hg/K-rasG12D mice. They develop
aggressive NSCLC that metastasize to multiple sites and display a
stepwise, directly age-related progression, mimicking several features
observed in lung cancer patients. Lung cancer progression in
p53R172Hg/K-rasG12D mice was characterized by non-invasive magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), histopathological and immunohistochemical
analysis. p53R172Hg/K-rasG12D mice develop lung adenocarcinomas already
evident in 10 week-old mice, with a variable degree of differentiation. A
significant gender difference in tumor progression was observed, with
females developing more tumors than males. Moreover, by using qRT-PCR,
some of the antigens deregulated in human lung cancer turned out to be
up-regulated also during cancer progression in our mouse model,
suggesting that p53R172Hg/K-rasG12D mice recapitulate the metastatic
nature of human NSCLC. Identification of oncoantigens expressed during
tumor development could provide an unprecedented opportunity to address
the immune system against these molecules. RNA was extracted from lungs
of 10, 20 and 30 week-old wild type (wt) and p53R172Hg/K-rasG12D mice.
Transcription profiling was done using Mouse Exon 1.0 ST arrays: we
detected 282 genes significantly differentially expressed during
different stages of cancer progression. Interestingly, some of the genes
that were already deregulated in the early phases of the tumor
development remained deregulated also in advanced stages, suggesting
their possible application as early biomarkers or as vaccination targets.
These genes were ranked to full-fill the minimal requirement for an
oncoantigen; within the plasma membrane proteins we identified potential
candidates: CXCR1, SLC16A6, SLC26A9 and ROS1. On the basis of the
literature data and mouse data we consider ROS1 an interesting putative
oncoantigen to be further investigated.

