Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDO drives tumor-promoting, pathogenic inflammation in lung


First identified as a mediator of acquired immune tolerance of the
foreign fetus from maternal immunity, the tryptophan-catabolizing enzyme
IDO (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase) has since been implicated in tumor
escape from the host immune system. Insight into the intricate role of
IDO in the classical DMBA/TPA skin carcinogenesis model suggested that
inflammatory tumor environments can induce IDO production resulting in de
novo tumor development. In the genetically deficient model of IDO, mice
show resistance to tumor formation. This provided a basis for our current
studies exploring the importance of IDO in the microenvironment of the
lung. To this end, we have investigated both primary tumor formation and
metastatic disease in the lungs of IDO-deficient mice using the
KRAS-induced lung adenocarcinoma and the metastatic 4T1 breast cancer
models. Elevation of the inflammatory cytokine IL6 was associated with
tumor outgrowth in the lungs in both models but was greatly attenuated
with the loss of IDO, consistent with the in vitro demonstration that IDO
activity markedly potentiates IL6 production. MDSCs (myeloid derived
suppressor cells) exhibited reduced T cell suppressive activity when
isolated from tumor-bearing, IDO-deficient animals that could be rescued
by ectopic production of IL6 in the tumor. IL6 production could likewise
reverse the pulmonary metastasis resistance exhibited by IDO-deficient
mice. Interestingly, while there is a clear role of the immune system in
lung tumor and metastatic outgrowth, IDO-deficient mice appear to have
reduced vascularization in the lung which may partly contribute to
reduced tumor formation. Together, these findings genetically validate
IDO as a therapeutic target in the settings of pulmonary cancer and
metastasis and establish the importance of IDO as a driver of IL6
production and MDSC function. Furthermore, the correlation of IDO to
angiogenesis may be a new insight into the role of this enzyme in cancer.

