Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New liver cancer genes identified by lentiviral vector-based
insertional mutagenesis in mice are associated to differential survival
in hepatocellular carcinoma patients


Next generation sequencing approaches are identifying a plethora of
mutations in a variety of human cancers. However, the potential clinical
implications of these new findings are still limited, since the
identification of cancer driving mutations is hampered by the
co-occurrence of several bystander and progression related events. Here
we developed a forward genetics approach based on a new lentiviral
vector-based insertional mutagen aimed at identifying liver cancer
initiating genes that are relevant in human hepatocarcinogenesis. We
generated a replication-defective lentiviral vector (LV) engineered with
long terminal repeats carrying hepatospecific enhancers capable to induce
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) upon a single administration in 3
clinically relevant mouse models of hepatocarcinogenesis. LV injection in
newborn mice was able to induce HCC in 30% of Cdkn2a deficient mice
(P=0.005 Vs untreated), in 27% of liver-specific Pten deficient mice
(P=0.04) and in 75% of wild type mice coupled to CCl4 administration
(P=0.002). From 30 LV-induced HCCs we could retrieve LV integrations that
allowed the identification of Braf, Fign, Sos1 and Dlk1-Dio3 region as
candidate cancer loci. The causative role of these genes in HCC was
experimentally validated in vivo by forced expression in the mouse liver.
Whole transcriptome gene expression analysis allowed unveiling the
molecular pathways on which the new cancer genes have an impact. We
showed that tumors with integration within Dlk1-Dio3 imprinted region
displayed the overexpression of the paternally expressed gene Rtl1
encoded within the region and a peculiar upregulation of oxidative
phosphorylation genes. Conversely, LV-mediated upregulation of Braf and
Fign caused the overexpression of all maternal genes from Dlk1-Dio3
region in HCCs which display the downregulation of oxidative
phosphorylation genes. Additionally, upregulation of Fign was associated
to the deregulation of Wnt pathway in HCCs. We found that all the newly
identified cancer genes were significantly upregulated and amplified or
deleted in the human HCCs, highlighting a relevant role of these genes in
human hepatocarcinogenesis. We also identified the specific molecular
signature resulting from the activation of each cancer gene found in
murine HCCs. Remarkably, gene expression analyses performed on 3
different human HCC collections showed that the signatures of all the 4
new cancer genes: 1) are present also in human HCCs; 2) can distinguish
different HCC stages; 3) can identify different prognostic groups of
patients. Moreover, SOS1 expression levels alone can discriminate HCC
patients with good or poor overall survival. This study identified new
clinically relevant liver cancer genes that may provide novel prognostic
markers and therapeutic targets for the diagnosis and treatment of human
HCCs.

