Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The medulloblastoma oncogene Otx2 enhances migration and permits
ectopic proliferation of neuronal progenitor cells of the cerebellum and
brainstem


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children.
Despite a thorough understanding of the genetic underpinnings of this
tumor, the pathogenesis of some variants of medulloblastoma, in
particular the non-Shh/non-Wnt subtypes, is poorly understood. One of the
most common genetic aberrations in non-Shh/non-Wnt medulloblastomas is
copy number gain of the homeobox transcription factor OTX2. Here we have
characterized mice engineered to ectopically express Otx2 in the
hindbrain to identify the functional consequences of this
subtype-specific genetic insult. Otx2 expression induced accumulation of
proliferative hyperplasias in the cerebellar white matter and dorsal
brainstem that were reminiscent of preneoplastic cells identified in
other animal models of medulloblastoma. These hyperplasias were comprised
of neuronal progenitor cells that had migrated away from their mitogenic
niches. As animals reached adulthood, ectopic cells exited the cell cycle
and differentiated, indicating that factors limiting proliferative
lifespan prevented full transformation by Otx2. Comparison of the effect
of Otx2 with activation of the Shh or Wnt pathways, which occur in
distinct subtypes of medulloblastoma, revealed overlap of responsive cell
types but distinct developmental processes involved. While activation of
the Shh or Wnt pathways give rise to sustained proliferation of neuronal
progenitor cells at their mitogenic niches, we found that Otx2 permitted
or enhanced migration of these cells away from these niches and induced
ectopic proliferation. These findings identify a role for Otx2
overexpression in altering spatiotemporal control of neuronal progenitor
cell proliferation and implicate a relationship between the cells of
origin of non-Shh/non-Wnt medulloblastomas and those of other
medulloblastoma subtypes.

