Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes in motion: Visualizing cancer metastasis via the
Synaptotagmin C2B domain


Exosomes play pivotal roles in intercellular communication and cancer
progression. Recent findings have shown exosomes to incite
proangiogenesis and prepare lymph nodes as remote niches for accumulation
and migration of melanoma cells. Exosomes present a highly curved
morphology with a size range of 30-100 nm that is distinct from other
lipid vesicles. Furthermore, exosomes have the potential as a general
metastasis biomarker since their increased secretion in the peripheral
blood has been correlated with cancer metastasis. Since aqueous
suspensions of exosomes cannot be seen by conventional optical methods,
we hypothesized that a molecular probe that binds to exosomes could be a
novel tool for detecting these vesicles. We aim to develop a
minimally-invasive diagnostic tool to detect and measure secreted
exosomes as biomarkers of cancer metastasis that may help clinicians and
patients decide on an appropriate therapeutic action. Taking a cue from
nature and using solid phase Click chemistry as a technique for peptide
modification, we created a fluorophore-tagged cyclic peptide based on the
membrane penetrating C2B domain of Synaptotagmin I. We investigated the
peptide-lipid interactions using synthetic liposomes as preliminary
models of exosomes through a combination of spectroscopic techniques. We
found that the peptide probe was selective for highly curved liposomes (d
100 nm). We tested blood plasma samples from rat models to find out if
our preliminary findings would translate to the detection of exosomes.
Our results showed that blood plasma treated with the peptide probe
showed fluorescence intensity that was remarkably higher than the
untreated peptide, which indicated binding to exosomes. Furthermore, we
used a real time nanoparticle tracking analysis system to visualize the
exosomes in a dynamic and physiologically-relevant medium. The
peptide-treated exosomes were detected as fast-moving, fluorescent
particles even in the complex matrix of blood plasma. This technique
provided us with a platform to study the size distribution and
concentration of exosomes in blood plasma. We have created a peptide
probe that selectively binds to exosomes from an animal model. The
investigation of the exosome binding property of this probe on clinically
relevant samples is ongoing.

