Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IFN- and TNF- favor the progression of prostate cancer in distinct
ways


Introduction Although screening methods for prostate cancer (PCa) have
substantially improved, the outcome for patients with advanced PCa
remains poor. The elucidation of the molecular mechanism that drives the
progression from a slow-growing, organ-confined tumor to a highly
invasive and castration-resistant cancer (CRPC) is therefore important.
Although a causal correlation between inflammation and PCa has not been
established, literature suggests that inflammation might play an
important role in its onset and progression. The aim of this study is to
investigate the effect of inflammation on progression of PCa. We have
evaluated the effect of IFN- and TNF- on proliferation, migration, and
invasion of PCa cells, and potentially identified the molecular
mechanisms underlying these effects. Materials and Methods The CA-HPV-10
and PC3 cell-lines were stimulated with 300U/ml of IFN- or TNF-. Relative
gene expressions were quantified by RT-PCR. Protein quantification was
performed by HPLC or ELISA. Functionality of cells was tested using:
acridine orange (viability), WST-1 (proliferation), Tscratch (migration)
and the Chemicon Cell Invasion Assay (invasion). Results IFN- induced
de-novo expression of both IDO1 and IDO2 genes in CA-HPV-10 and their
over expression in PC3. TNF- induced over-expression of MMP9, TNF- and
IL-6 in CA-HPV-10, and of 7 genes in PC3 (MMP9, IDO1 and IDO2, TNF-,
IL-6, IL-1 and ROS1). IFN- and TNF- do neither induce apoptosis nor
affect the proliferation of both cell-lines. TNF- significantly increases
migraton of metastatic cells (pIntroduction Although screening methods
for prostate cancer (PCa) have substantially improved, the outcome for
patients with advanced PCa remains poor. The elucidation of the molecular
mechanism that drives the progression from a slow-growing, organ-confined
tumor to a highly invasive and castration-resistant cancer (CRPC) is
therefore important. Although a causal correlation between inflammation
and PCa has not been established, literature suggests that inflammation
might play an important role in its onset and progression. The aim of
this study is to investigate the effect of inflammation on progression of
PCa. We have evaluated the effect of IFN- and TNF- on proliferation,
migration, and invasion of PCa cells, and potentially identified the
molecular mechanisms underlying these effects. Materials and Methods The
CA-HPV-10 and PC3 cell-lines were stimulated with 300U/ml of IFN- or
TNF-. Relative gene expressions were quantified by RT-PCR. Protein
quantification was performed by HPLC or ELISA. Functionality of cells was
tested using: acridine orange (viability), WST-1 (proliferation),
Tscratch (migration) and the Chemicon Cell Invasion Assay (invasion).
Results IFN- induced de-novo expression of both IDO1 and IDO2 genes in
CA-HPV-10 and their over expression in PC3. TNF- induced over-expression
of MMP9, TNF- and IL-6 in CA-HPV-10, and of 7 genes in PC3 (MMP9, IDO1
and IDO2, TNF-, IL-6, IL-1 and ROS1). IFN- and TNF- do neither induce
apoptosis nor affect the proliferation of both cell-lines. TNF-
significantly increases migraton of metastatic cells (p<0.001) and
markedly affects the invasiveness of both CA-HPV-10 and PC3 (increase of
32% and 51%, respectively), whereas IFN- has no or little effect.
Discussion IFN- induces IDO1 and IDO2, whose roles in modulating immune
tolerance have been extensively investigated. Conversely, IFN- does not
affect other mechanism of cancer progression, such as cell migration and
invasion. TNF-, on the other hand, induces stable over-expression of MMP9
in localized cancer, and of 6 other genes in metastatic cells. MMP9 plays
an important role in proliferation, migration and invasion and its
elevated levels have been reported in many tumors. These notions could
explain our findings showing that TNF- enhances PCa cell migration and
invasion. Furthermore TNF- enhances the ability of cancer cells to
actively maintain a pro-inflammatory microenvironment, due to the
over-production of TNF-, IL-6 and IL-1. High levels of these cytokines in
patients with advanced PCa have been hypothesized to play an important
role in the onset of a CRPC. In conclusion, IFN- and TNF- favor cancer
progression by enhancing its malignant features in distinct ways. IFN-
favors tumor immune-escape by inducing over-expression of IDO1 and IDO2,
while TNF- enhances PCa cell migration and invasion, sustains the active
maintenance of a pro-inflammatory microenvironment and favors the onset
of a CRPC.

