Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting multiple receptor tyrosine kinases in ovarian cancers


Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of cancer death among women in Western
Europe and the United States, which has the highest mortality rate of all
gynecologic malignancy. Although more than 70% patients have increased
5-year survival rates after surgery followed by chemotherapy and
second-line therapies, the low overall cure rates and the intolerable
side effects of systemic chemotherapy asks for the development of novel
and more effective pharmacological interventions. The increasing
evidences suggest that receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activation
participates in the oncogenic progression from nonneoplastic mesothelial
lining of the ovaries or the fallopian tube epithelium to epithelial
ovarian cancer. The RTKs, including EGFR, ERBB2, PDGFR, VEGFR and MET,
are activated in subsets of ovarian cancer, suggesting that these kinases
might represent novel therapeutic targets. However, clinical trials have
not or just partially shown benefit to ovarian cancers treated with EGFR,
ERBB2, or PDGFR inhibitors. Despite multiple RTK activation in ovarian
cancer pathogenesis, it is unclear whether transforming activity is
dependent on an individual kinase oncoprotein or the coordinated activity
of multiple kinases. We hypothesized that a coordinated network of
multi-RTK activation is important for the tumorigenesis of ovarian
cancers. Herein, we demonstrate co-activation of multiple RTKs (EGFR,
ERBB2, ERBB4, MET and/or AXL) in individual ovarian cancer cell lines and
primary tumors. We also show that coordinate inhibition of this
multi-kinase signaling has substantially greater effect on ovarian cancer
proliferation and survival, compared to inhibition of individual
activated kinases. The inhibition of this multi-RTK signaling by HSP90
suppression results in profound pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative
effects, and is associated with the inactivation of RTK downstream
PI3-K/AKT/mTOR and RAF/MAPK signaling. These studies suggest that
anti-multiple RTK strategy could be useful in the treatment of ovarian
cancer.

