Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Basonuclin1 (BNC1): A novel therapeutic target in ovarian cancer
identified through integrative TCGA-based functional genomic analysis


High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS-OvCa) is the most common and lethal
type of ovarian carcinoma. While TCGA provides comprehensive genomic
profiling of clinically annotated HGS-OvCa tumors, identification of
novel therapeutic targets using this dataset is still needed. We coupled
TCGA mRNA expression and clinical response data to systematically
identify genes which could alter progression of HGS-OvCa and investigated
associated alterations in DNA promoter methylation and microRNA
expression. For selected targets, we also used siRNA functional studies
to clarify gene-specific effects. We identified 102 genes as up-regulated
in tumors from patients whose cancer had progressed within 7 months of
diagnosis (chemo-resistant group: 53 cases) compared to tumors from
patients who had no disease progression for more than 3 years
(chemo-sensitive group: 57 cases). These genes had two-sample t-test
p-values High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS-OvCa) is the most common
and lethal type of ovarian carcinoma. While TCGA provides comprehensive
genomic profiling of clinically annotated HGS-OvCa tumors, identification
of novel therapeutic targets using this dataset is still needed. We
coupled TCGA mRNA expression and clinical response data to systematically
identify genes which could alter progression of HGS-OvCa and investigated
associated alterations in DNA promoter methylation and microRNA
expression. For selected targets, we also used siRNA functional studies
to clarify gene-specific effects. We identified 102 genes as up-regulated
in tumors from patients whose cancer had progressed within 7 months of
diagnosis (chemo-resistant group: 53 cases) compared to tumors from
patients who had no disease progression for more than 3 years
(chemo-sensitive group: 57 cases). These genes had two-sample t-test
p-values < 0.05 according to level 3 TCGA data from both Agilent and
Affymetrix platforms. Basonuclin1 (BNC1), a transcription factor which
regulates ribosomal biogenesis, cell proliferation, and epithelial
differentiation, was one of the key targets identified. Its expression
was found to be increased by more than two-fold (Agilent platform;
p=0.001) in chemo-resistant tumors. While no significant associated
changes in microRNA expression were evident in TCGA for the BNC1 gene, we
found that the expression of BNC1 negatively correlated with the degree
of methylation at the promoter region of transmembrane 4 superfamily
member 1, TM4SF1 (-0.42, Agilent platform), a known up-regulated
pro-angiogenic gene in ovarian cancer. Importantly, the siRNA functional
study had revealed a 35% reduction in cell viability in
cisplatin-resistant A2780-CP20 cells following BNC1 siRNA treatment, and
a further 15% reduction was noted when the cells were treated with
cisplatin at the IC30 concentration determined using the chemo-sensitive
parental cell line. Overall, our results demonstrate (a) the feasibility
of using TCGA data, coupled with functional siRNA studies, to identify
novel targets for the treatment of ovarian cancer and (b) the potential
of targeting BNC1 as a treatment strategy.

