Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of LC3 II shRNA and genistein completely inhibited
rapamycin-induced autophagy and promoted apoptosis in human malignant
neuroblastoma cell lines


Neuroblastoma is an extracranial solid tumor that mainly occurs in
children. It is derived from embryonic neural crest cells of the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system. The overall survival rate of
malignant neuroblastoma patients is very poor despite multi-modal therapy
including surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. Efficacy of
chemotherapy is often compromised due to presence of autophagy, which is
a survival mechanism in solid tumors. Autophagy is a catablolic process
for lysosomal degradation of cytoplasmic contents for recycling and it is
activated during stress such as nutrient starvation and growth factor
deprivation. The hallmark of autophagy is generation of double membrane
structure called autophagosome that contains the microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 form II (LC3 II). In this study, we used rapamycin
to mimic starvation-induced autophagy in human malignant neuroblastoma
SK-N-BE2 and IMR32 cells and then investigated capability of the
combination of LC3 II knockdown and genistein (GST) treatment for
inhibition of autophagy and promotion of apoptosis. First, we treated
both cell lines with 200 nM rapamycin for 6, 12, and 24 h and performed
acridine orange (AO) staining, flow cytometric analysis, RT-PCR, and
Western blotting to establish time-dependent increases in autophagic
features such as formation of acidic vesicular organelles (AVO) and LC3
II. Then, we carried out dose-response studies by transfecting the
rapamycin-exposed cell lines with various concentrations of LC3 II short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) plasmid and treating them with several doses of GST
alone and in combination. MTT assays showed the highest synergistic
efficacy in inhibiting cell viability using the combination of 50 nM LC3
II shRNA and 25 M GST in SK-N-BE2 cells while the combination of 100 nM
LC3 II shRNA and 25 M GST in IMR32 cells. Our AO staining and flow
cytometric quantitation of AVO confirmed that combination of LC3 II shRNA
and GST completely inhibited rapamycin-induced autophagy to promote
apoptotic death. In situ Wright staining and Annexin V-FITC/PI staining
showed that combination therapy most effectively induced apoptosis in
both cell lines when compared with control shRNA, LC3 II shRNA, or GST
alone. We unraveled the molecular mechanisms for inhibition of autopphagy
and induction of apoptosis by Western blotting of the proteins involved
in these processes. Down regulation of LC3 II and upregulation of mTOR in
both cell lines showed inhibition of autophagy. Combination therapy
promoted mitochondrial pathway leading to activation of caspase-3 and
degradation of PARP for inducing apoptosis. Collectively, our results
clearly show that combination of LC3 II knockdown and GST treatment
serves as promising therapeutic strategy for inhibition of autophagy and
induction of apoptosis in different human malignant neuroblastoma cells.

