Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early assessment of the XL184 treatment by Diffusion-Weighted MRI
in metastatic prostate cancer to the bone murine model


Ninety percent of patients with advanced prostate cancer develop
metastases to the bone1. At present, there is no definitive means for
assessing response to therapy, with RECIST identifying tumors in the bone
as unmeasureable. Cabozantinib (XL184) is an oral small molecular
pan-tyrosine kinase inhibitor of primarily MET and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). MET is known to play key roles in
cellular proliferation, migration and invasion, which contribute to the
survival and metastasis of cancer cells. XL184 is already in Phase 2
trials to evaluate the therapeutic benefit on castration-resistant
prostate cancer metastatic to the bone. Diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI)
is highly sensitive to microscopic changes in tumor tissue. Our goal was
to evaluate DW-MRI for detection and quantification of changes in tumor
tissue following one-week XL184 treatment. MR experiments were performed
on a 9.4T MRI. Human prostate cancer (PC3) cells were implanted by direct
intra-tibial injection into male SCID mice, which serves as a model for
prostate bone metastases2. Upon measuring tumor volume of 10mm3 on
anatomical scans, mice were distributed into 2 groups: XL184 at 30 mg/kg
(N=7) and vehicle (N=5). Treatments were delivered by oral gavage once a
day for 7 days. DW-MRI was performed at days 0 (pre-treatment), 1, 4, 7,
11, 14 and twice a week after. Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps
were calculated analytically from DW-MR images acquired at b-value 120
and 1200 s/mm2. End point of the study was when tumor volume reached 5x
the initial measure. Unpaired Student t-test was performed to compare MRI
metrics. XL184 treated mice had smaller tumor volume growth rate than
control mice. Significant differences in tumor volume were not observed
until 14 days post-treatment initiation (pNinety percent of patients with
advanced prostate cancer develop metastases to the bone1. At present,
there is no definitive means for assessing response to therapy, with
RECIST identifying tumors in the bone as unmeasureable. Cabozantinib
(XL184) is an oral small molecular pan-tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
primarily MET and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2).
MET is known to play key roles in cellular proliferation, migration and
invasion, which contribute to the survival and metastasis of cancer
cells. XL184 is already in Phase 2 trials to evaluate the therapeutic
benefit on castration-resistant prostate cancer metastatic to the bone.
Diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) is highly sensitive to microscopic
changes in tumor tissue. Our goal was to evaluate DW-MRI for detection
and quantification of changes in tumor tissue following one-week XL184
treatment. MR experiments were performed on a 9.4T MRI. Human prostate
cancer (PC3) cells were implanted by direct intra-tibial injection into
male SCID mice, which serves as a model for prostate bone metastases2.
Upon measuring tumor volume of 10mm3 on anatomical scans, mice were
distributed into 2 groups: XL184 at 30 mg/kg (N=7) and vehicle (N=5).
Treatments were delivered by oral gavage once a day for 7 days. DW-MRI
was performed at days 0 (pre-treatment), 1, 4, 7, 11, 14 and twice a week
after. Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps were calculated
analytically from DW-MR images acquired at b-value 120 and 1200 s/mm2.
End point of the study was when tumor volume reached 5x the initial
measure. Unpaired Student t-test was performed to compare MRI metrics.
XL184 treated mice had smaller tumor volume growth rate than control
mice. Significant differences in tumor volume were not observed until 14
days post-treatment initiation (p<0.05). In contrast, significantly
higher ADC values (pNinety percent of patients with advanced prostate
cancer develop metastases to the bone1. At present, there is no
definitive means for assessing response to therapy, with RECIST
identifying tumors in the bone as unmeasureable. Cabozantinib (XL184) is
an oral small molecular pan-tyrosine kinase inhibitor of primarily MET
and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). MET is known
to play key roles in cellular proliferation, migration and invasion,
which contribute to the survival and metastasis of cancer cells. XL184 is
already in Phase 2 trials to evaluate the therapeutic benefit on
castration-resistant prostate cancer metastatic to the bone.
Diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) is highly sensitive to microscopic
changes in tumor tissue. Our goal was to evaluate DW-MRI for detection
and quantification of changes in tumor tissue following one-week XL184
treatment. MR experiments were performed on a 9.4T MRI. Human prostate
cancer (PC3) cells were implanted by direct intra-tibial injection into
male SCID mice, which serves as a model for prostate bone metastases2.
Upon measuring tumor volume of 10mm3 on anatomical scans, mice were
distributed into 2 groups: XL184 at 30 mg/kg (N=7) and vehicle (N=5).
Treatments were delivered by oral gavage once a day for 7 days. DW-MRI
was performed at days 0 (pre-treatment), 1, 4, 7, 11, 14 and twice a week
after. Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps were calculated
analytically from DW-MR images acquired at b-value 120 and 1200 s/mm2.
End point of the study was when tumor volume reached 5x the initial
measure. Unpaired Student t-test was performed to compare MRI metrics.
XL184 treated mice had smaller tumor volume growth rate than control
mice. Significant differences in tumor volume were not observed until 14
days post-treatment initiation (p<0.05). In contrast, significantly
higher ADC values (p<0.0.5) for the treated group compared to control
were observed at day 7. These results demonstrate the use of DW-MRI as a
early biomarker of tumor response to XL184 in a metastatic prostate
cancer tumor model. DW-MRI may serve as a surrogate endpoint for
assessing patient response to treatment in clinical trials. References:
1. Carlin BI et al. Cancer. 2000;88(12):2989-2994. 2. Lee KC et al.
Cancer Res. 2007;67(8):3524-3528.

