Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of complex oncogene signatures in human cancer
specimens and cell lines


Activated oncogenes are the genetic drivers of human cancer progression.
Oncogenes become activated by structural DNA alterations including gene
amplification and over expression, point mutations, and gene
translocations/rearrangements. Data from existing targeted cancer
treatments clearly show that the best response is observed when the
activated oncogene is targeted. On the other hand, among the patients
with activated oncogene who respond to a targeted treatment, the level
and duration of response is highly variable. This could be explained by
the genomic context of an activated oncogene that is unique to any given
patient. Therefore, the ability to detect complex oncogene signatures in
human cancer specimens is vital for better predictions of the efficacy of
targeted agents, and to design therapeutic strategies with multiple
targeted agents. In our laboratory, we have been working to identify
candidate amplified and point mutated oncogenes in multiple human cancer
specimens and cell lines. To obtain individual oncogene signatures, we
have used high resolution aCGH coupled with a novel gene expression
algorithm that allows for the identification of genes that are over
expressed within amplicons in individual specimens. We have also used a
high-throughput, mass spectrometry based method for detection of point
mutations in oncogenes using the same specimens. These approaches have
allowed us to identify tens to hundreds of candidate oncogenes in each
specimen which were then refined by on-line computational tools such as
Gene Tracker. Using this approach, we have elucidated complex oncogene
signatures for over 50 cancer cell lines and specimens. Analysis of these
data sets points to highly variable oncogene combinations in individual
specimens. In other studies using a subset of breast cancers selected for
the presence of the 8p11 amplicon, we found that even in these highly
selected specimens, the oncogene signatures were unique to each patient.
These signatures make clear predictions about combinations of targeted
agents that could be considered. For example, we have observed activation
of oncogenes in the 8p11 amplicon to be associated with other oncogenes
such the EGFR, cdk4, MYST3, CRKL, and others. Additionally, the presence
of PIK3CA mutations occurs variably in these specimens as well. Most of
the breast cancer specimens and cell lines in our study have a
well-defined signature of oncogenes, and understanding these signatures
is important not only for the design of strategies using multiple
targeted agents, but also for the proper interpretation of clinical trial
results using single targeted agents. Thus, we have developed a
high-throughput, cost effective molecular diagnostic platform that can
accurately and rapidly identify the causal driving oncogenes in an
individual cancer biopsy specimens and therefore can be adapted to
analysis of large numbers of patient's specimens.

