Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Smad3 alters host-microbial interactions, predisposing the
colonic epithelium to inflammation


Introduction: The TGF pathway is mutated in up to 30% of human colon
cancers. Genetically Engineered Mouse Models (GEMs) with deficient TGF
signaling model several characteristics of IBD associated human colon
cancers. Introduction of Helicobacter sp. into the Smad3/ mouse model is
necessary for the development of inflammatory lesions which progress to
adenoma and carcinoma. The exact role of TGF1 signaling and
bacterial-associated inflammation has yet to be elucidated and offers a
potential target for the prevention of colon cancer. Methods: To
determine the function of TGF1 signaling on colonic bacterial composition
we used the Smad3/ GEM. We designed primers specific to the 16s rRNA
subunit of different Bacteroides species, and using the Roche LightCycler
preformed quantitative Real Time-PCR (qRT-PCR) on cecal DNA extracted
from Smad3/- and Smad3+/+ mice. To further examine the host-microbial
interaction we extracted RNA and protein from the cecum of Smad3/ and
Smad3+/+ mice and ran Real Time-PCR or Western Blot for different
Toll-like Receptor Pathway components. Results: qRT-PCR showed that
Smad3/- mice have a significantly lower quantity of Bacteroides sp; the
introduction of Helicobacter hepaticus results in a significant increase
in B. distasonis and a significant decrease in B. thetaiotaomicron in
Smad3/ mice. These data suggest that loss of SMAD3 and the addition of
Helicobacter hepaticus alters the colonic microflora. Previous studies
illustrated the importance of epithelial signaling in microbial induced
inflammation. To examine if Smad3 is altering the Toll-like receptor
pathway we examined RT-PCR of the cecum and found a significant increase
in Tlr4, Irak4, Cd14, Myd88, Nfkb, Cox2, and Nos2 mRNA in the Smad3/ mice
compared to Smad3+/+ mice. Western blots confirmed these data by showing
that cecal tissue from Smad3/ mice has increased IRAK4 and pNF-B.
Conclusion: Smad3/ mice show heightened Toll-like receptor pathway
activity which leads to a hyper-inflammatory response of the mucosa to
endogenous microbes. Further, loss of SMAD3 results in dysbiosis of the
gut microbiota. These findings suggest that SMAD3 plays a role in
microbial-host homeostasis.

