Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct liver cancer stem cells defined by EpCAM and CD90 in
human hepatocellular carcinoma


Recent evidences suggest that a certain type of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is hierarchically organized by a subset of cells with stem cell
features (cancer stem cells: CSCs). Although CSCs have been identified
using several CSC markers and are now considered a pivotal target for the
eradication of HCC, little information is known about the characteristics
of marker-positive cells. Here we explored the expression of CSC markers
CD90 and EpCAM in primary HCCs and cell lines to investigate the
molecular characteristics of each cell type. Gene expression profiling
and immunohistochemistry analyses were used to characterize 340
surgically resected HCC tissues and 11 advanced HCC tissues with distant
organ metastasis obtained from autopsy. Magnetic-activated cell sorting
was used to isolate EpCAM+ or CD90+ cells from surgically resected 12
fresh HCC specimens, which were tested for hepatic stem cell properties
including their tumor initiating capacity in NOD/SCID mice. In primary
HCC, EpCAM+ and CD90+ cells resided distinctively, and gene expression
analysis of sorted cells suggested that EpCAM+ cells had the features of
epithelial stem cells whereas CD90+ cells had those of vascular
endothelial cells. Clinicopathological analysis indicated that presence
of EpCAM+ cells was associated with poorly differentiated morphology and
high serum AFP with a tendency of portal vein invasion, while the
presence of CD90+ cells was associated with high incidence of distant
organ metastasis within two years after surgical resection and advanced
TNM stages. Serial xenotransplantation of EpCAM+/CD90+ cells in NOD/SCID
mice revealed the rapid growth of EpCAM+ cells in the subcutaneous lesion
and highly metastatic capacity of CD90+ cells into the lung.
Xenotransplantation experiments of cell lines further demonstrated that
EpCAM+ cells had the features of hepatic CSCs with marked tumorigenic
capacity whereas CD90+ cells had those of vascular endothelial cells with
highly metastatic features. Markedly, CD90+ cells showed the abundant
expression of c-Kit and VEGFR1 and chemosensitivity to imatinib methylate
(c-Kit inhibitor) and axitinib (VEGFR1/2 inhibitor). Taken together, our
data strongly suggest the discrete natures of EpCAM+ and CD90+ cells with
specific gene expression patterns and chemosensitivity to the molecularly
targeted therapy. The presence of distinct CSCs may determine the
clinical outcome of HCC.

