Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protection of colon carcinogenesis by estrogen receptor-beta may
involve regulation of angiogenesis and invasion specific signaling
molecules


Estrogen receptor-beta (ER) has been suggested to exert anti-tumorigenic
effects in the colon. However, its mechanism of action in colon cancer
remains unclear. Previously, we demonstrated that azoxymethane (AOM)
treated ER knockout (ERKO) mice showed a significantly higher incidence
of colonic precancerous lesions compared to AOM-treated WT mice. These
results were associated with a decrease in apoptosis and loss of crypt
organization in the colonic epithelium of ERKO mice. In the present
study, we investigated whether ER deficiency would also correlate with a
higher incidence of colonic tumors. For this, ERKO and WT mice were
injected subcutaneously with AOM (10mg/kg) once a week, for six weeks.
Forty weeks after the beginning of the study, mice were sacrificed and
colonic sections were collected for histopathology, RNA, and protein
expression analysis. Evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin sections from
each group showed that ERKO mice developed higher number of colonic
adenomas (1.40 0.40) than WT mice (0.33 0.21) (p Estrogen receptor-beta
(ER) has been suggested to exert anti-tumorigenic effects in the colon.
However, its mechanism of action in colon cancer remains unclear.
Previously, we demonstrated that azoxymethane (AOM) treated ER knockout
(ERKO) mice showed a significantly higher incidence of colonic
precancerous lesions compared to AOM-treated WT mice. These results were
associated with a decrease in apoptosis and loss of crypt organization in
the colonic epithelium of ERKO mice. In the present study, we
investigated whether ER deficiency would also correlate with a higher
incidence of colonic tumors. For this, ERKO and WT mice were injected
subcutaneously with AOM (10mg/kg) once a week, for six weeks. Forty weeks
after the beginning of the study, mice were sacrificed and colonic
sections were collected for histopathology, RNA, and protein expression
analysis. Evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin sections from each group
showed that ERKO mice developed higher number of colonic adenomas (1.40
0.40) than WT mice (0.33 0.21) (p < 0.05). Furthermore, Mouse Cancer
PathwayFinder Superarray revealed a greater than two-fold increase of
angiogenesis and invasion specific signaling molecules in ER-deficient
tumors compared to WT ones. These findings highlight the importance of ER
against colon carcinogenesis progression.

