Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular typing of breast cancer cases among a Hispanic
population and its association with body mass index


Background: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease which can be divided
into distinct molecular subtypes based on patterns of gene expressions
and tumor marker staining. The prevalence of breast cancer molecular
subtypes (BCMS), as well as specific risk factors by subtypes varies by
ethnicity, highlighting the relevance of research focused in specific
populations. Although the BCMS have been studied, there is scarce
evidence of the association between breast cancer risk factors and
molecular subtypes and the prevalence of each subtype among Hispanics
populations. In Puerto Rico, breast cancer is the most frequently
diagnosed malignancy and the leading cause of cancer death among females.
However, little is known about the breast cancer subtypes distribution
and its etiologic profile among Puerto Rican women. Objectives: We aimed
to determine the prevalence of BCMS and assess whether obesity differs
according to these subtypes among a female population of breast cancer
cases in Puerto Rico. Methods: A case-case analysis was conducted using
all cases of invasive breast carcinoma consulted to the UPR-School of
Medicine Immunoperoxidase Laboratory, from 2008-2010, for which hormonal
receptors and HER2 oncoprotein analysis were performed. To determine
molecular subtypes we characterized 172 tumor specimens based on
immunohistochemical (IHC) surrogates for ER, PR and HER-2+ status. The
molecular subtypes were defined as: luminal (ER+ and/or PR+), non-luminal
(ER-, PR-). Body Mass Index (BMI) was analyzed using the following
categories: normal weight (BMI Background: Breast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease which can be divided into distinct molecular
subtypes based on patterns of gene expressions and tumor marker staining.
The prevalence of breast cancer molecular subtypes (BCMS), as well as
specific risk factors by subtypes varies by ethnicity, highlighting the
relevance of research focused in specific populations. Although the BCMS
have been studied, there is scarce evidence of the association between
breast cancer risk factors and molecular subtypes and the prevalence of
each subtype among Hispanics populations. In Puerto Rico, breast cancer
is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy and the leading cause of
cancer death among females. However, little is known about the breast
cancer subtypes distribution and its etiologic profile among Puerto Rican
women. Objectives: We aimed to determine the prevalence of BCMS and
assess whether obesity differs according to these subtypes among a female
population of breast cancer cases in Puerto Rico. Methods: A case-case
analysis was conducted using all cases of invasive breast carcinoma
consulted to the UPR-School of Medicine Immunoperoxidase Laboratory, from
2008-2010, for which hormonal receptors and HER2 oncoprotein analysis
were performed. To determine molecular subtypes we characterized 172
tumor specimens based on immunohistochemical (IHC) surrogates for ER, PR
and HER-2+ status. The molecular subtypes were defined as: luminal (ER+
and/or PR+), non-luminal (ER-, PR-). Body Mass Index (BMI) was analyzed
using the following categories: normal weight (BMI <25.0 kg/m2),
overweight (BMI 25.0-29.9 kg/m2), and obese (BMI 30.0 kg/m2). Logistic
regression was used to estimate the associations between BMI and breast
cancer molecular subtypes. Results: The luminal subtype was the most
prevalent in our sample (75.0%) compared with the non-luminal (25.0%)
subtype. Association with Body Mass Index, evaluated using unadjusted
logistic regression model, differed by tumor subtypes. Using non-luminal
subtype as the reference group we observed that overweight women were
1.87 (95% CI: 0.73, 4.77) times more likely to be diagnosed with the
luminal disease compared to women with normal weight. However, obese
women were 4% (OR: 0.96, 95% CI: 0.40, 2.30) less likely to be diagnosed
with the luminal subtype compared to women with normal weight.
Conclusion: Even though this is a small pilot study, it is very
suggestive of an important association between body mass index and
luminal breast cancer subtype. Future studies that further assess the
association between BMI and BCMS will add to the biologic understanding
of this disease.

