Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rationale for combining the targeted investigational agents
TAK-733, a MEK1/2 inhibitor, with alisertib (MLN8237), an Aurora A kinase
inhibitor, for cancer therapy


MEK1/2 kinases have diverse functions in cell proliferation and survival,
including the regulation of cell cycle transitions between the G1, S, and
G2 phases and mediation of DNA damage response pathways. Therefore,
inhibition of MEK1/2 may facilitate the antiproliferative effects of
other therapies that disrupt cell cycle progression leading to DNA
damage, including antimitotic therapies. AAK is a serine/threonine
protein kinase essential for normal mitotic progression. Inhibition of
AAK leads to inappropriate progression through mitosis in the presence of
misaligned chromosomes resulting in aneuploidy and DNA damage, which
leads to apoptosis or senescence. Here, we evaluated the combination of
the allosteric MEK1/2 inhibitor TAK-733 with alisertib, the selective AAK
inhibitor. Proliferation assays in multiple tumor cell lines showed a
concentration-dependent decrease in the IC50 of TAK-733 and alisertib
with increasing concentrations of the second agent, suggesting increased
anti-proliferative activity of these agents when combined. This result
was corroborated by measuring changes in cell confluence over time, a
surrogate for proliferation rate, using an IncuCyte live-cell imaging
system. The decreased proliferation rate of the combination was due in
part to induction of apoptosis, as demonstrated by Annexin V and
sub-diploid DNA content analysis. Cell cycle progression differences of
the TAK-733/alisertib combination relative to the single agents were
assessed using time-lapse video microscopy by measuring the time to the
first mitotic event after drug addition, time spent in mitosis, and time
between mitotic events. Of these, the only observed difference in
cell-cycle progression time in the A2780 ovarian carcinoma cell line was
the time between mitotic events, which was 10 hours longer for the
combination relative to single agent alisertib. Moreover, the combination
of TAK-733 and alisertib significantly reduced the ability of the cells
to re-enter the cell cycle after one mitosis compared to either single
agent; 30% for the combination, compared to 90% for TAK-733 and 76% for
alisertib. Flow cytometry DNA content analysis showed that TAK-733
suppressed the formation of >4N/tetraploid cells induced by alisertib
alone in multiple cell lines. This observed decrease in the proportion of
>4N cells is greater than the decrease that could be extrapolated solely
from the cell cycle-slowing effect of the combination, suggesting that
TAK-733 reduces the proliferative potential of the alisertib-generated
aneuploid cells via cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Collectively, these
findings demonstrate an added benefit of TAK-733 over alisertib alone and
provide a pre-clinical rationale for further investigation of the
combination of TAK-733 and alisertib for cancer therapy.

