Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt pathway in human breast cancer: A comparison between estrogen
positive and estrogen negative tumors using reverse phase protein array


INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptor status is crucial for breast cancer
treatment planning. Some estrogen receptor (ER) negative tumors carry a
worse prognosis and lack more specific therapies. The AKT pathway is a
promising target in breast cancer and was reported hyper activated in ER-
tumors cells using in vitro models. We aimed to compare the level of Akt
pathway activation between ER+ and ER- tumors using frozen human breast
tumor samples. METHODS: 40 cases of breast cancer (20 ER+, 20 ER-) were
identified from the frozen tumor bank. Patients were between 40 and 70
years old, with Stage I or II, node negative disease. About 20.000 cells
from each tumor cells were purified by laser capture microdissection
(LCM) and the protein lysate applied to the Reverse Phase Protein Array
(RPPA). Antibodies tested by RPPA included Src, p-Src, Akt, p-Akt Thr308,
p-Akt Ser473, mTOR, p-mTOR, PDGFR, p-PDGFR Tyr751. We also compared these
results to patient matched non-microdissected samples and to
immunohistochemistry (IHQ) using digital quantification. RESULTS: 6 out
of 9 antibodies showed higher mean expression in ER- negative tumors but
only p-Src had statistically significant different levels (0.043). The
coordinated high levels (above median) of p-Src/p-Akt/p-mTOR was observed
in 1 (5%) of ER+ and in 8 (40%) of ER- tumors. All 8 cases from the ER-
group were triple negative (ER-/PR-/Her2-). Correlation coeficients of
LCM-RPPA samples and non-microdissected/RPPA samples varied from 0.02 to
0.47. Only p-Akt Ser473 showed a significant correlation (r=0.47,
p=0.003). Correlation coeficients between LCM-RPPA and IHQ for antibodies
Akt, p-Akt and mTOR were 0.03, 0.22 and 0.05, respectively. CONCLUSION:
Protein quantification using LCM-RPPA in human breast tumors is feasible
and can detect significant differences between ER+ and ER- tumors. Triple
negative tumors showed a high Akt pathway activation profile compared to
ER+ tumors. Triple negative tumors are more likely to benefit from
targeted therapies directed against the Akt pathway. LCMed and non-LCMed
matching samples analyzed by RPPA showed discrepant results. The same
happened to the comparison between LCM-RPPA and IHQ with digital
quantification.

