Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell-mediated regulation of Myc overexpressing
medulloblastoma cells on proliferation, migration and invasion


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common and malignant pediatric brain
tumor. Myc amplification was frequently shown in the tumor. Hereby cancer
stem cells are being issued lately was investigated whether it is
associated with Myc and its contributions. MB cell lines - UW228,
UW228-Myc, UW426 and UW426-Myc were used for following assays. Myc
overexpressing cells of two kinds of cells were shown significantly
higher proliferation rate than counterpart cells by cell proliferation
assay. In particular, the extent of difference in UW228-Myc was bigger
than in UW426-Myc. Using cell cycle analysis, DNA contents in both
UW228-Myc and UW426-Myc were mainly accumulated in G2/M phase compared
with their each control, suggesting that cells overexpressing Myc have
faster proliferation rate. In addition, two UW228-Myc and UW426-Myc cells
were demonstrated more increased self-renewal capacities by
colony-forming assay versus UW228 and UW426, respectively. For migration
and invasiveness, both Myc overexpressing cells increased in comparison
with each control by wound-healing assay and invasion assay using
Matrigel chamber. Interestingly UW228-Myc cells were shown nearly six
times higher invasiveness than in UW228 cells. In contrast, the disparity
of that in UW426 and UW426-Myc cells was just about two times. It is
verified that why Myc overexpressing cells have more dominant
proliferation, self-renewal, migration and invasion abilities than
corresponding controls by western blot assay. The results showed strongly
increased expression of migration, invasion-related markers (p-AKT,
p-ERK1/2 and Rac1) and cancer stem cell-related markers (Nestin, CD133,
Oct3/4 and SOX2), especially in UW228-Myc cells. In conclusion, Myc
expression induces not only cell proliferative and self-renew
propensities, but also migration and invasiveness by mediating cancer
stem cells.

