Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of lipogenesis in cancer stem-like cells at early stage of
breast cancer


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is considered an early stage of breast
cancer and it is the precursor of invasive breast carcinoma. However, the
transition from normal breast epithelial cells to DCIS is still not
clearly elucidated. In order to determine the role of lipogenesis in
normal to DCIS transition, we investigated the roles of SREBP1, a major
transcription regulator of lipogenesis and its downstream lipogenic genes
such as ACLY, ACC1 and FAS, by isolating cancer stem-like cells (CSCs)
from DCIS.com cell line which forms typical DCIS lesions in animals by
using the well-established cell surface markers, CD24/CD44+/ESA+. We
found that lipid synthesis was significantly upregulated in CSCs from
DCIS.com in contrast to the corresponding population from normal breast
epithelial cells (MCF10A). Furthermore, we found that this elevation of
lipogenesis is indeed caused by the overexpression of SREBP1 which
co-ordinately induces the overexpression of the downstream lipogenic
genes. The CSCs obtained from DCIS.com were also found to be more
tumorigenic than the parental cells as shown by the limiting dilution
analysis. To determine the role of elevated level of SREBP1 and
lipogenesis in the transition of normal breast epithelial cells to DCIS
phenotype, we overexpressed SREBP1 in MCF10A and examined the
transforming properties. Our in vitro data showed that MCF10A-SREBP1
cells indeed expressed a significantly higher level of SREBP1 and other
lipogenic genes and this elevated level of lipogenesis resulted in the
increased cell proliferation, increased mammospheres forming ability and
enhanced cellular growth in 3D culture. These data suggest that increased
lipogenesis in breast CSCs plays critical roles in DCIS formation. We
also examined the effects of Resveratrol on CSCs from DCIS.com.
Resveratrol significantly reduced the total lipid content by inhibiting
SREBP1 and in turn other lipogenic genes and induced a series of
pro-apoptotic genes such as DAPK2 and BNIP3 causing the death of CSCs
from DCIS. The mammosphere forming ability of CSCs from DCIS was also
blocked by Resveratrol. We also observed that Resveratrol indeed
significantly suppressed the formation of DCIS by inhibiting lipogenesis
and by upregulating DAPK2 and BNIP3 in our animal model of human DCIS.
Collectively, our results indicate that lipogenic genes ACLY, ACC-1, FAS
and SREBP1 are significantly up regulated in early stage of breast
tumorigenesis and they confer proliferative and growth advantages to
these cells. Lipogenesis targeting effect of Resveratrol on CSCs from
DCIS provides us with a strong rationale to use this agent for
chemo-prevention against DCIS.

