Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genetic analysis of clear cell renal cell carcionoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common form of adult kidney cancer
and accounts for 2-3% of all adult malignancies, in which clear cell
carcinoma accounts for more than 80% of the cases. As for the
pathogenesis of clear cell RCC, inactivation of the VHL gene has been
reported in 80% of clear cell RCC and more recently, frequent mutations
of epigenetic regulators, including PBRM1, SETD2, KDM5C and UTX, have
been demonstrated through high-throughput mutation studies, including
PBRM1 has been demonstrated in 40% of the cases. Nevertheless, probably,
our knowledge of the full spectrum of gene mutations in RCC is still
incomplete. In this study, to obtain a better understanding of molecular
pathogenesis of clear cell RCC, we performed an integrated genetic study
of clear cell RCC, where a total of 93 paired specimens were analyzed by
massively parallel sequencing of SureSelect (Agilent)-enriched whole
exomes, SNP array-based copy number analysis (Affymetrix), as well as
gene expression profiling (Agilent). In whole exome sequencing, 42
somatic mutations per sample were identified on average, which involved
not only previously reported genes, but also a number of novel gene
targets. Among these, mutations of genes involved in chromatin regulation
or histone modification were preferentially found in advanced cases. To
understand whole picture of gene mutations of epigenetic mechanism in
clear cell RCC, mutation analysis of 85 genes involved in chromatin
regulation or histone modification were performed in 180 cases using
multiplexed barcode sequencing. A total of 201 somatic mutations were
validated and 74% cases had at least one somatic mutation. PBRM1
mutations were found in 43% cases and SETD2 were mutated in 10% of cases.
When comparing clinical picture with mutation status, SETD2 mutation was
associated with the risk of metastasis, while PBRM1 mutations had no
impact on prognosis. Our results showed that in clear cell RCC, multiple
component of complexes involved in epigenetic regulation undergo gene
mutations, confirming that deregulated epigenetic apparatus play
important roles in pathogenesis of clear cell RCC. In this meeting, we
will present the result of our integrated genetic analysis of RCC and
discuss the genetic basis of RCC in terms of copy number alterations,
gene mutations, as well as gene expression profiles.

