Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive markers of efficacy for an angiopoietin-2 targeting
therapeutic in xenograft models


The clinical efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapies has been difficult to
predict, and in this era of personalized medicine biomarkers that can
predict effect are sorely needed. CVX-060 is an angiopoietin-2 (Ang2)
targeting therapeutic, consisting of two peptides that bind Ang2 with
high affinity and specificity, covalently fused to a scaffold antibody.
The resulting therapeutic has shown promising activity in a phase 1
clinical trial, with several phase 2 clinical programs in
progress/planning. In order to optimize the use of this compound in the
clinic a set of predictive biomarkers are desired. Here we describe the
construction of a predictive model based on the efficacy of CVX-060 in 13
conventional xenograft models, focusing on renal and ovarian cancer.
Pretreatment size tumors from each of the models were profiled for the
levels of 25 protein markers of angiogenesis, SNP haplotype in 5
angiogenesis genes, and somatic mutation status for 12 genes implicated
in tumor growth and/or vascularization. The markers chosen for evaluation
were accumulated from angiogenesis literature and a differential gene
expression analysis of CVX-060 treatment-induced changes. CVX-060
efficacy was determined as tumor growth inhibition (TGI%) at termination
of each study. A predictive statistical model was constructed based on
the correlation of these efficacy data with the marker profiles, and the
model was subsequently tested via prospective analysis in 7 additional
models The results of this work reveal a range of CVX-060 efficacy in
xenograft models of diverse tissue types (0-49% TGI, median = 38%).
Notably, we define a subset of 5-7 proteins, the levels of which are
predictive of TGI by Ang2 blockade. The majority of these proteins are
proximal to the target of CVX-060 and the direction of the associations
is such that better efficacy correlates with high levels of target and
low levels of compensatory/antagonizing molecules. The SNPs and somatic
mutations examined here did not correlate with TGI. Our study describes a
systematic approach to the problem of identifying predictive markers of
anti-angiogenic affect, and demonstrates the significant ground work
necessary to reveal treatment-sensitive predictive markers which can be
quantitatively defined. This effort has revealed a set of predictive
markers for CVX-060 efficacy that will be further evaluated in ongoing
clinical trials.

