Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitor, vorinostat, decreases transcription
of survivin and is an enhancer of gemcitabine therapy for resistant
pancreatic tumors


Introduction: Overall 5-year survival rates of patients with pancreatic
cancer remains below 15% due to delay in diagnosis and chemotherapeutic
resistance. Combinational therapy has become the mainstay of treatment in
patients who have metastatic pancreatic cancer. We hypothesize that 1)
vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydoxamic acid), a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, will improve efficacy of gemcitabine in gemcitabine-resistant
pancreatic tumor cells; and 2) vorinostat works through decreasing the
transcription inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). Methods: Six
different human pancreatic cell lines were treated with various levels of
vorinostat with or without gemcitabine. Viability of tumor cells was
determined via MTT assay and cytoplasmic levels of IAPs, including
survivin, were analyzed via western blot assay. Real-time RT-PCR was
performed on cell lysates to determine changes in survivin gene
expression. Results: Combinations of vorinostat with gemcitabine
significantly inhibited pancreatic cancer cells growth in vitro when
compared with either treatment alone (pIntroduction: Overall 5-year
survival rates of patients with pancreatic cancer remains below 15% due
to delay in diagnosis and chemotherapeutic resistance. Combinational
therapy has become the mainstay of treatment in patients who have
metastatic pancreatic cancer. We hypothesize that 1) vorinostat
(suberoylanilide hydoxamic acid), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, will
improve efficacy of gemcitabine in gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic tumor
cells; and 2) vorinostat works through decreasing the transcription
inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). Methods: Six different human
pancreatic cell lines were treated with various levels of vorinostat with
or without gemcitabine. Viability of tumor cells was determined via MTT
assay and cytoplasmic levels of IAPs, including survivin, were analyzed
via western blot assay. Real-time RT-PCR was performed on cell lysates to
determine changes in survivin gene expression. Results: Combinations of
vorinostat with gemcitabine significantly inhibited pancreatic cancer
cells growth in vitro when compared with either treatment alone (p<0.05).
Screening of IAPs expression in tumor cells after exposure to vorinostat
revealed variation of their expression in pancreatic tumor cells except
survivin, whose expression declined consistently in all cells after
vorinostat treatment. Overall cytoplasmic levels of survivin were seen to
decline across all cell lines treated. Real-time RT-PCR showed a decrease
in survivin gene expression in all cell lines tested as compared to
control. Conclusion: We conclude that 1) vorinostat increases the
efficacy of gemcitabine on pancreatic cells; and 2) decline of survivin
protein levels in after exposure to vorinostat is due to a decrease in
gene transcription and indicates that survivin plays an important role in
improving the chemotherapeutic effect of gemcitabine. We are currently
conducting in vivo experiments to verify our findings using orthotopic
pancreatic tumor animal models.

