Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mifepristone alters morphology, cytoskeletal architecture, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related proteins in human metastatic
cancer cells


The burden of secondary metastatic spread accounts for nearly 90% of
cancer-related deaths. The ability of cancer cells to metastasize is
often accompanied by biochemical changes leading to transition from an
epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype (EMT), changes in cell morphology,
loss of tight junctions, remodeling of the cytoskeleton, and acquisition
of migratory and invasive capacities. Previous work in our laboratory
demonstrated that the antiprogestin mifepristone (MF) inhibits growth of
known metastatic ovarian, prostate, breast, and brain cancer cells. In
response to MF the cells displayed changes in morphology, and had reduced
adhesive, migratory, and invasive capabilities. In this study, we
assessed if such anti-metastatic phenotype induced by MF is associated
with changes in the expression of EMT biomarkers (vimentin, slug,
E-cadherin, and high and low molecular weight keratins), abundance of
actin and tubulin, and/or modifications in the composition or
intracellular localization of focal adhesion proteins [vinculin,
phospho-focal adhesion kinase (p-FAK), and total FAK]. We studied all
these parameters in cancer cells of the ovary (SK-OV-3), breast
(MDA-MB-231), prostate (LNCaP), and brain (U87MG) upon exposure to
concentrations of MF that block growth, adhesion, migration and invasion.
MF induced a striking change in cellular morphology that was similar in
all cell lines, and that included shrinkage of the cell body, long, thin
cellular extensions, and a loss of cell-to-cell connections. Morphology
changes were dependent on time of drug exposure, not influenced by cell
density, and not associated with changes in the abundance of actin and
tubulin, but instead linked to a remarkable cytoplasmic redistribution of
actin and tubulin filaments. Upon removal of MF, cell morphology and
proliferation returned to normal in all cell lines expect for LNCaP in
which MF appears to induce irreversibly quiescence. The epithelial marker
E-cadherin was found expressed only in LNCaP cells, and was not modified
by MF. The mesenchymal intermediate filament protein vimentin was found
in SK-OV-3, MDA-MB-231, and U87MG cells, but not in LNCaP cells. MF had a
slight tendency to increase vimentin expression in SK-OV-3 and U87MG
cells, and altered the expression of cytokeratins in LNCaP, MDA-MB-231
and U87MG, but not in SK-OV-3 cells. The focal adhesion marker, vinculin,
was highly expressed in all cell lines and was not modified by MF,
whereas FAK and p-FAK were reduced by MF in LNCaP, MDA-MB-231, and U87MG
cells, but not in SK-OV-3 cells. In summary the anti-cancer effect of MF
manifested by inhibition of cell growth, adhesion, migration, and
invasion, is also associated with profound changes in cell morphology,
actin and tubulin distribution, and, to a lesser extent, dysregulation of
FAK, p-FAK and EMT-related proteins.

