Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of RNA quality control methods to improve BCR-ABL
measurement in whole blood samples


Measurement of BCR-ABL fusion transcripts in whole blood by quantitative,
reverse-transcriptase PCR is a clinically validated method to monitor
treatment response in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. For
example, achieving a three-log or greater reduction in BCR-ABL expression
from baseline is considered a Maximum Molecular Response (MMR). A 0.5-log
increase from MMR signifies treatment failure sufficient to motivate
change in treatment. The purpose of this study was to develop a BCR-ABL
test with improved analytical performance characteristics including
adequate quality control for RNA degradation or reverse transcription
interference and reliable comparison of results across testing sites. To
test whether RNA degradation could mask a 0.5-log increase in expression,
an RNA degradation model was established by incubating whole blood from
each of six individuals with K562 cells at room temperature for various
times post-venipuncture. When data from six subjects were combined, the
BCR-ABL/103 GUSB value trended down at 24h but was not significantly
decreased until 48h (51% decrease, p = 0.004). To quantify the amount of
whole blood RNA that can be loaded into an RT reaction without reducing
RT efficiency, six different amounts of total RNA extracted from whole
blood mixed with K562 cells were added into RT reactions. To measure RT
efficiency, an RT Standards Mixture (RTSM) containing known copy numbers
of External RNA Control Consortium (ERCC) 171 RNA and ERCC 113 cDNA was
added to each RT reaction. RT efficiency was measured as the yield of PCR
product from ERCC 171 RNA relative to ERCC 113 cDNA. Based on data from
three subjects, compared to RT efficiency at reference concentration of
30 ng/l RNA in RT, there was a 35% decrease (p = 0.043) at 167 ng/l RNA
and 82% reduction at 1000 ng/l RNA. The maximum yield of BCR-ABL
(molecules/L cDNA) was observed at 300 ng/l RNA/RT with a 3-fold increase
(p=0.003) compared to 30 ng/l RNA. Greater than 300 ng/l RNA/RT did not
further increase yield of BCR-ABL molecules/L cDNA, likely due to reduced
RT efficiency. We conclude that BCR-ABL/103 GUSB should be measured
within 24 hours following blood collection. Because decreasing RT
efficiency is associated with increasing RNA input into RT reactions,
including 300 ng/l RNA in RT reactions provides the maximum sensitivity
in measuring BCR-ABL expression.

