Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy overcomes acquired resistance to vorinostat


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have recently emerged as promising
anticancer agents. Two HDACi, vorinostat (Zolinza) and romidepsin
(Istodax), are currently FDA approved for use in cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma and several others have advanced into Phase II and III clinical
trials, both as single agents and in combination with cytotoxics, for a
variety of malignancies. Encouraging results have been obtained in
haematological malignancies. However, HDACi target many pathways and the
full mechanism responsible for their anti-neoplastic activity is still
far from clear. An understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
resistance to HDACi may help to elucidate their mechanism of action and
may be of relevance in an attempt to design more effective combination
strategies. The purpose of this study is to understand the molecular
alterations associated with resistance to vorinostat (Zolinza). A
vorinostat resistant clone (U937-VR) was derived from U937, a
monocytic-like histiocytic lymphoma cell line, using a dose escalation
protocol. Vorinostat-resistant cells (U937-VR) are able to grow in 2 M
vorinostat without induction of apoptosis. U937-VR cells are
cross-resistant to the cytotoxic effects of similar HDACi's such as
LBH589, but not to the structurally different benzamide MGCD0103, as
measured by propidium iodide (PI) staining and caspase 3/7 activation.
Also, resistance demonstrates a partial reversibility that could be
indicative of a non-mutational mechanism of resistance. The LD50 of
different chemotherapeutic drugs was evaluated by measuring apoptosis
with PI staining. U937 parental and U937-VR cells have equivalent LD50
for the DNA damaging agent cisplatin and for the microtubule stabilizing
agent taxol, indicating that the apoptotic machinery is intact in U937-VR
cells. Interestingly, the resistant cells exhibit increased sensitivity
toward chloroquine, an inhibitor of autophagy and to the proteasome
inhibitors MG132 and bortezomib. This increased sensitivity correlates
with an elevated accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins in U937-VR. These
cells also have increased autophagic flux which can be inhibited by knock
down of Beclin-1 or Lamp-2, which ultimately restores sensitivity to
vorinostat. Autophagy is also activated in parental U937 cells upon
treatment with vorinostat, however, in contrast to the resistant cells,
its inhibition decreases sensitivity to vorinostat. We therefore propose
that autophagy switches from a proapoptotic to a prosurvival signal
through chronic exposure to vorinostat. The key players involved in that
switch remain to be defined. These data are of importance in the design
of combination strategies using inhibitors of autophagy and HDACi for the
treatment of hematological malignancies.

