Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora B kinase inhibitor barasertib (AZD1152) and cytarabine in
combination exert more than additive cytotoxicities against
cytarabine-resistant acute myeloid leukemia cells in vitro


The majority of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) initially
achieve complete remission by cytarabine (ara-C)-based chemotherapy, but
many relapse with resistant disease. Aurora B kinase is involved in the
spindle assembly checkpoint component of the mitotic process. Barasertib
(formerly AZD1152), a selective inhibitor of aurora B kinase, provided an
overall hematological response rate of 25% in AML patients in a phase
I/II study, which warrants further investigation. To see the feasibility
of the incorporation of this new agent to the standard induction
chemotherapy, we evaluated the combination effect of barasertib with
ara-C against leukemic cells in vitro. Cultured human leukemia HL-60
cells and ara-C-resistant variant HL-60/ara-C cells were used. Growth
inhibition effects were evaluated by using the XTT assay. The cell cycle
distribution and the induction of apoptosis were determined by
flowcytometric analysis. Autophosphorylation of aurora B was assessed by
Western blotting. The XTT assay determined that the 50%-growth inhibitory
concentrations of ara-C were 100 - 300 nM for HL-60 cells and 4,000 -
5,000 nM for HL-60/ara-C cells, respectively. When HL-60 cells were
treated with barasertib-hQPA, the active compound of barasertib, the
cells exhibited an increase in the percentage of > 4N at 48 h with the
subsequent induction of sub-G1 population. Autophosphorylation of aurora
B was inhibited by barasertib-hQPA simultaneously. When the cells were
treated with ara-C, the accumulation at G2-M phase and the subsequent
increase in sub-G1 phase were observed. When the cells were treated with
barasertib-hQPA and ara-C in combination, the treatment induced the
greater-than-additive induction of sub-G1 population. However, the
augmentation was brought about only when the cells were treated with
barasertib prior to ara-C or both simultaneously. Barasertib-hQPA
similarly altered the cell cycle, inhibited autophosphorylation of auroa
B, and induced apoptosis in HL-60/ara-C cells. Low concentrations of
ara-C failed to modify cell cycle distribution without the induction of
apoptosis in HL-60/ara-C cells. Nevertheless, the sequential combination
between barasertib-hQPA and a moderate concentration of ara-C augmented
the sub-G1 population. In conclusion, the combination of barasertib with
ara-C provided greater cytotoxicity than barasertib alone in both
ara-C-sensitive and ara-C-resistant AML cell lines in vitro. The
sequential administration of barasertib with ara-C may be promising
against ara-C-refractory AML.

