Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of angiogenesis in the mouse heart by ionizing radiation


The heart is a critical dose-limiting organ during radiotherapy. In
patients treated for breast cancer or Hodgkin's disease, regions of the
heart can receive radiation doses in excess of 40 Gy. More recently,
epidemiological and clinical studies suggested that even moderate to low
radiation doses increase the risk of cardiovascular disease that can
present years after the initial exposure. Radiation can cause cardiac
microvascular damage but the mechanisms of pathogenesis of
radiation-induced heart disease have not been clearly defined. Cardiac
injury triggers repair processes in the myocardium requiring
neovascularisation. Here, we investigated latent effects of ionizing
radiation on angiogenic responses in the mouse heart. We also assessed
the effects of radiation on cardiac endothelial responses and
angiogenesis in vitro. The hearts of C57BL/6 and ApoE-/- mice were
locally irradiated with 0.2 to 16 Gy and animals were sacrificed at 20,
40 and 60 weeks post-irradiation. Formation of angiogenic sprouts was
assessed in ventricular heart explants embedded in fibrin gels. The
angiogenic capacity of irradiated hearts was also assessed through a
novel fibroblast-endothelial self-assembling assay we developed. Mouse
hearts were enzymatically digested into a single cell suspension and
cultured for 10 days. Within 5 to 7 days, endothelial cells began to form
capillary-like structures surrounded by fibroblasts and pericytes,
modeling the angiogenic process. Cardiac endothelial cells were also
irradiated in vitro and effects on migration and capillary-tube formation
on a fibroblast bed were established. Radiation caused a dose-dependent
inhibition of endothelial sprout formation in explants from both mouse
models. Significant changes were observed at 8 and 16 Gy after 20 weeks
and at 2 Gy after 40 or 60 weeks post irradiation. Irradiation also
significantly reduced the adherence and growth of extracted cardiac cells
and inhibited the quantity and quality of the capillary-like structures
formed in the self-assembling model. In vitro, irradiation (0.2 Gy)
inhibited the migration of cardiac endothelial cells in scratch wound
assays and capillary-like formation on a fibroblast bed. Our data show
that radiation causes persistent and progressive vascular damage and
suppresses angiogenic activity in the heart. Angiogenesis was inhibited
at doses likely to be delivered during thoracic radiation in cancer
patients. Impairment of the angiogenic response could lead to further
ischemia and degeneration in the myocardium and contribute to the
development of heart disease.

