Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting siRNA to tumors and their stroma as a dual anticancer
and anti-angiogenic therapy


New targets for RNA interference (RNAi)-based cancer therapy are
constantly emerging from the increasing knowledge on the molecular
pathways involved in carcinogenesis. Nevertheless, in vivo delivery of
small interfering RNA (siRNA) remains a crucial challenge for its
therapeutic success. SiRNAs on their own are not taken-up by most
mammalian cells in a way that preserves their activity. In order to
circumvent these limitations, we developed a cationic carrier system,
which can strongly improve its stability, intracellular trafficking and
silencing efficacy. We have recently developed a polyglycerol (PG)-Amine,
a water-soluble polyglycerol-based dendrimer that accumulates in the
tumor environment due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect, and therefore, represents an ideal delivery vehicle for antitumor
biological agents. PG-Amine entrapment of siRNA neutralized its negative
charge in a dose-dependent manner and significantly improved its cellular
uptake. The luciferase gene, ectopically overexpressed in U87 human
glioblastoma cell line was used as a model system and its silencing
efficacy was extensively evaluated both in vitro and in vivo. Following
encouraging results obtained from several cancer cell lines, the
silencing efficiency of the nanocarrier luciferase-siRNA polyplexes was
followed-up in vivo by non-invasive intravital bioluminescence imaging. A
significant gene silencing effect was accomplished in vivo in both human
glioblastoma and murine mammary adenocarcinoma mouse models following
intravenous administration of our polyplexes. We further characterized
the effect of silencing a few selected key proteins (e.g. Notch1) in
vitro and achieved significant effects on the proliferation and migration
of glioblastoma and neuroblastoma cell lines. In conclusion, we predict
that specific delivery of siRNA to tumor epithelial and endothelial cells
in vivo, and silencing of an important cell growth and angiogenesis
regulator will warrant this approach as a successful anticancer therapy.

