Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional ETS/E2F module in cancers expressing ETS fusion genes


Ewing's sarcoma (ESFT) is a highly aggressive pediatric cancer
characterized by the chimeric ETS transcription factor EWS-FLI1 as a
result of a chromosomal translocation. By whole genome gene expression
and ChIP-seq analyses we obtained evidence that EWS-FLI1 directly binds
to 50% of E2F target genes in ESFT. Furthermore, several E2F factors were
themselves found to be directly regulated by EWS-FLI1. Therefore, we
studied the functional interaction of EWS-FLI1 with E2F. Ten arbitrarily
chosen EWS-FLI1/E2F candidate targets including E2F3, RAD51, and ATAD2
were chosen for an in-depth promoter activity study by luciferase
reporter gene assays in combination with mutation analysis of
transcription factor binding motifs. By ChIP-PCR we confirmed direct
EWS-FLI1 promoter binding, and observed decreased reporter activity for
all ten studied promoters upon knockdown of EWS-FLI1 by RNAi.
Furthermore, the study of promoter occupancy by different E2F family
members revealed that silencing of EWS-FLI1 results in the exchange of
EWS-FLI1 induced, activating E2F3 by constitutively expressed repressive
E2F4 on the promoters of there jointly regulated target genes.
Importantly, testing E2F3 promoter occupancy on wildtype and ETS motif
mutated promoter constructs in ESFT cell lines revealed that binding of
E2F3 to its target promoters is dependent on an intact ETS binding site.
Mutation of the ETS motif resulted in reduced binding of E2F3. These data
are consistent with a model in which EWS-FLI1 actively recruits an
activating E2F factor thereby replacing a repressing E2F factor and in
which EWS-FLI1 binding is essential for E2F binding. Strikingly, the
functional E2F/ETS transcriptional module detected in ESFT for the
chimeric ETS factor EWS-FLI1 was found to be also relevant to TMPRSS2-ERG
expressing prostate cancer cells, but not active in HeLa cells. Supported
by grants from the Austrian Science Fund (P22328-B09), and the European
Comission (EU-FP7 STREP 259348). R. Schwentner is a recipient of a
DOC-fFORTE-fellowship of the Austrian Academy of Sciences.

