Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Slc5a8 inactivation is associated with mammary gland involution
delay, early onset of mammary tumorigenesis and accelerated lung
metastasis


Accumulation of milk during mammary gland involution induces apoptosis in
mammary epithelium, but the underlying molecular mechanism is not known.
Slc5a8, a plasma membrane transporter and a candidate tumor suppressor,
is silenced in many human cancers, including breast and colon cancers.
The tumor-suppressive function of Slc5a8 is believed to be due to its
ability to mediate the entry of butyrate and pyruvate into cells in a
Na+-coupled manner. Butyrate and pyruvate are inhibitors of histone
deacetylases (HDACs), and Slc5a8-mediated concentrative entry of these
compounds into cells causes HDAC inhibition. Normal cells possess low
HDAC activity, and inhibition of HDACs does not induce apoptosis. In
contrast, tumor cells possess high HDAC activity, and these cells are
propelled into apoptosis by HDAC inhibition. This probably explains why
tumor cells silence this transporter. Breast milk contains significant
amounts of butyrate. We postulated that Slc5a8 might play an important
role not only in normal mammary gland but also in breast cancer by
transporting butyrate into mammary epithelial cells and consequently
causing HDAC inhibition. Here we have shown that milk stasis-associated
mechanical stretching, which occurs in early onset of mammary gland
involution, dramatically induced Slc5a8 expression in luminal epithelium.
Deletion of Slc5a8 in mouse is associated with mammary gland hyperplasia,
stem cell and progenitor cell proliferation, and delayed mammary gland
involution. We hypothesize that the mammary gland hyperplasia and
involution delay in Slc5a8-null mice are due to lack of butyrate-induced
HDAC inhibition because the absence of the transporter prevents the entry
of butyrate into mammary epithelial cells. In wild type mice, mammary
gland involution was associated with decreased expression of HDAC1/3, and
exogenous administration of butyrate accelerated the involution process.
Further, deletion of Slc5a8 predisposed mice to early onset of mammary
tumorigenesis in two different mammary tumor models (MMTV-Neu and
MMTV-HRas), accelerated lung metastasis, and reduced disease-free
survival. Mammary gland-specific overexpression of Slc5a8 (Slc5a8-MMTV-Tg
mouse) induced early onset mammary gland involution, reduced mammary
tumor incidence, delayed mammary tumor formation, and reduced lung
metastasis. Induction of Slc5a8 with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
(5-azacytidine), coupled with exogenous administration of butyrate,
dramatically reduced mammary tumor incidence, delayed mammary
tumorigenesis, and increased disease-free survival. We conclude that
Slc5a8 functions as a tumor suppressor in mammary gland and that
induction of Slc5a8 with DNA methyltransferase inhibitors coupled with
butyrate administration might represent a novel approach to breast cancer
treatment.

