Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone morphogenetic proteins increase hepcidin in breast cancer
cells


Hepcidin is a systemic peptide hormone produced in the liver that
regulates iron absorption and recirculation. Induction of hepcidin by
inflammatory cytokines has been suggested to contribute to the anemia of
inflammation and cancer. Our previous work has shown that synthesis of
hepcidin is not confined to the liver, but is also observed in other
tissues. In particular, we found that hepcidin is produced in mammary
epithelial cells. Further, hepcidin levels increase in a subset of breast
cancers, and increased synthesis of hepcidin is associated with poor
prognoses in some breast cancer patients (Pinnix et al., 2010). In this
work we sought to understand mechanisms regulating hepcidin synthesis in
breast cancer, as well as the consequences of hepcidin upregulation. We
demonstrate that treatment with bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 2, 4,
6, or 7 results in hepcidin upregulation and concomitant Smad
phosphorylation in breast cancer cells. The BMP7-induced hepcidin
increase can be diminished by co-treatment of breast cancer cells with
the BMP inhibitors, Wise or Noggin. We next assessed the consequence of
hepcidin induction. Systemic hepcidin regulates iron by affecting the
levels of the iron export protein, ferroportin. Extracellular hepcidin
binds to ferroportin on the cell surface, initiating the internalization
and degradation of ferroportin. This, in turn, decreases the ferroportin
available to facilitate iron export, preventing iron efflux from the cell
and increasing cellular iron retention. To test the functionality of this
regulatory pathway in breast cancer, we used a hepcidin-specific antibody
to deplete cultured breast cancer cells of extracellular hepcidin. We
found that antibody-induced hepcidin depletion increased ferroportin
protein levels, suggesting that hepcidin-mediated ferroportin regulation
occurs in breast cancer cells. Consistent with this finding, we observed
that breast cancer cells have increased hepcidin and decreased
ferroportin relative to normal mammary epithelial cells. In all, these
results raise the possibility that BMP signaling may control hepcidin
expression in breast cells, decreasing ferroportin and increasing
intracellular iron. The potential for hepcidin to alter iron availability
to breast cancer cells on a paracrine level is a novel function for this
key systemic iron regulator. Reference Z. K. Pinnix, L. D. Miller, W.
Wang, R. D'Agostino Jr., T. Kute, M. C. Willingham, H. Hatcher, L.
Tesfay, G. Sui, X. Di, S. V. Torti, F. M. Torti, Ferroportin and Iron
Regulation in Breast Cancer Progression and Prognosis. Sci. Transl. Med.
2, 43ra56 (2010).

