Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Building the organization framework for biopsy-driven
translational research: The Quebec Clinical Research Organization in
Cancer (Q-CROC) experience


Introduction: The success of personalized medicine in oncology relies on
translational research efforts to identify biomarkers that will influence
clinical management. The discovery and validation of biomarkers is a
concerted effort requiring an organizational framework that is often
underestimated. The Quebec Clinical Research Organization in Cancer
(Q-CROC) consortium is a multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional group
of scientists and clinicians devoted to integrating and enhancing
translational and clinical research capacity in Quebec. We describe here
the organizational framework driving a multicenter, prospective study to
identify biomarkers of clinical resistance to first-line therapy in
metastatic colorectal cancer (NCT00984048, Q-CROC-01). Results: The
Q-CROC consortium has put in place an organizational infrastructure to
support the activities and operations of its translational projects. We
identified and addressed several critical issues during the course of the
Q-CROC-01 translational project that were also common to our subsequent
biomarker-driven trial in lymphoma (Q-CROC-02, NCT01238692) and breast
cancer (Q-CROC-03, NCT01276899). Examples of these issues include: (i)
feasibility and burden of tissue collection at participating sites, (ii)
limiting pre-analytical variability in blood and tissue specimens for
functional downstream applications, (iii) verification of tumor content
on biopsy specimens, (iv) tracking sample flow, (v) integration of
clinical data with discovery platforms, and (vi) engaging participation
throughout all steps of the project. In part to address the above issues,
we established five operational Cores: clinical, biobank, biospecimen
processing, bioanalytical and bioinformatic. A further challenge was the
integration between these Cores, who for the most part operated in silos.
We observed that a critical element to unify all components of the
consortium was a scientific project management team, consisting of
dedicated individuals regularly interacting with each Core to ensure that
objectives were aligned and deliverables were met. This academic
framework for translational research may be comparable to that of
multicenter clinical trials undertaken by industry, but some challenges,
including financial and time constraints, data sharing and IP agreements,
and engagement of its members, may be more palpable in the academic
setting. Conclusion: Infrastructure science is underestimated and
under-reported in translational cancer research and is crucial to the
success of any large-scale biomarker discovery effort. Our experience
with three multi-institutional biomarker-driven trials is that progress
hinges upon the availability of an infrastructure that is not only the
sum of its parts but that provides a concrete link between each component.

