Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NanoOxaza, pre-activated oxazaphosphorines prodrugs designed for
drug delivery strategy with wide anticancer activity


The oxazaphosphorines belong to the alkylating drug class with a wide
spectrum of antineoplasic activity. Ifosfamide (IFO) demonstrated
activity against various tumour types, from soft tissue sarcomas to
lymphomas both in adult and paediatric patients. Oxazaphosphorines are
metabolised by cytochromes, leading to ring opening and subsequent
production of active nitrogen mustards, which display DNA cross-links.
Associated toxicities of IFO are due to 1) acrolein, a urotoxic
metabolite concomitantly generated with the release of the alkylating
mustard and 2) chloroacetaldehyde, a metabolite derived from oxidation of
side chains of the molecule via the action of cytochrome P450 (CYP) known
to be responsible for neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity (Kerbusch et al.,
2001). To circumvent the oxidative related-toxicities, we have designed
pre-activated oxazaphosphorines. (Paci et al., 2001) through
electrochemical oxidation and engraftment of various moieties such as
O-alkyl groups (fatty acids, alcohols, polyols, or sugars) and S-alkyl
(thionyl) groups. Actually, IFO is activated by substitution at position
4 with labile moieties leading to the release of the cytotoxic entity
without enzyme activity. These moieties can bring tissue specificity or
physico-chemical characteristics leading to nanoassemblies for drug
delivery purposes. Some of these pre-activated prodrugs may be
constitutive of drug delivery systems, such as nanoparticles, aiming to
address alkylating moieties to their target. We present here the use of
squalene conjugation as squalene-based drug delivery systems have been
favourably used for drug delivery (Couvreur et al. 2006). The designed
compounds, SQ-IFO and SQ-thioIFO, have then two interesting properties.
First, they are pre-activated formulations of IFO with C4-oxidation
allowing to by-pass the CYP activation with the direct release of the
alkylating mustard. The second property is the described capacity of
squalenic derivatives for self-assembly in aqueous medium leading to
nanoparticles. The SQ-IFO and SQ-thioIFO nanoparticles have been fully
characterized with a mean diameter of 182 nm when prepared at 1mg/mL in
5% Dextrose. The cytotoxic activity of these nanoassemblies has been
studied in vitro on a panel of 9 human and murine cancer lines (A549,
MCF-7, B16F10, M109, MiaPaCa-2, KB 3.1, SK-N-MC, UW 479, IGR-OV1).
Squalenoyl IFO derivatives present high activity in vitro while IFO has
no activity on these cells even it is used in clinical practices to treat
these cancers. This proves the pre-activated property of these new
compounds and the lack of CYP activation needs. Their therapeutic
activity is currently studied in vivo on human Ewing sarcoma xenografts
in mice after i.v. administration. These new formulations of IFO could
constitute promising candidates for both oral and IV administration in a
wide panel of tumours.

