Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C epsilon and protein kinase C delta, which are
linked to skin carcinogenesis, associate with heat shock protein 90 beta


Protein kinase C (PKC), a family of eleven (, I, II, , , , , , , , )
phospholipid-dependent serine/threonine protein kinases, exhibits
functional diversity in its signals to a variety of cellular functions
including cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and
carcinogenesis. At least six PKC isoforms (, , , , and ) are expressed in
both mouse and human epidermis. To determine the in vivo functionality of
PKC and , in mouse skin carcinogenesis, we generated transgenic mice
overexpressing an epitope tagged PKC ( or )) under the control of human
keratin 14 promoter. The susceptibility of PKC ( or ) overexpressing mice
to skin carcinogenesis was determined by initiation with DMBA and
promotion with TPA. PKC and PKC transgenic mice exhibited different
responses to skin tumor promotion by TPA. PKC suppressed both formation
of skin papillomas and carcinomas. PKC transgenic mice developed only
squamous cell carcinomas, which could metastasize. PKC expression level
also dictated the susceptibility of mice to the development of SCC by
chronic exposure (2 kJ/m2 thrice weekly) to ultraviolet radiation (UVR).
As compared to wild-type littermates, PKC over-expressing transgenic mice
exhibited decrease in tumor latency by 12 weeks and a 3-fold increase in
tumor multiplicity. To find clues about the mechanism by which PKC
isoforms ( or ) may mediate skin carcinogenesis, we found that PKC ( or )
interacts with heat shock protein (Hsp) 90. Hsp90 is a ubiquitous
molecular chaperone, which plays a key role in the folding, activation
and assembly of a range of structurally and functionally different client
proteins (e.g., telomerase, nuclear hormone receptors, protein kinases)
in eukaryotic cells. Hsp90 exhibits a high degree of specificity towards
client proteins. In the present experiments, mice were exposed to either
single or chronic UVR treatments, emitted by Kodacel-filtered FS-40 sun
lamps (approximately 60% UVB and 40% UVA). In reciprocal
immunoprecipitation/blotting experiments, PKC and associated with Hsp90
in intact mouse epidermis in vivo. The association of PKC and with Hsp90
was further enhanced after UVR exposure of mice. We also determined the
interaction of Hsp90 with other PKC isoforms. Hsp90 did not interact with
PKC, PKC or PKC. Hsp90 is a core component of multiprotein complex
involving several collaborating chaperons (e.g., Hsp70/Hsp40, Hop/sti1,
Cdc37, p21). In reciprocal immunoprecipitation/blotting experiments, PKC
also interacted with Hsp70 but the interaction was not as dramatic as
with Hsp90. In summary, association of Hsp90 with its client PKC and may
be essential for both their maturation into a signaling-competent enzyme
and enzyme stability. Association of Hsp90 with PKC and may be critical
for their signals to skin carcinogenesis. (Support: NIH Grant CA 35368)

