Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-221 promotes tumorigenesis in human triple negative breast
cancer cells


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding, single-stranded RNAs of 22 nucleotides
that act as agents of the RNA interference pathway and negatively
regulate their targets by either cleaving mRNA molecules or by inhibiting
their translation. miRNAs are frequently located at fragile sites and
genomic regions susceptible to amplification, deletion, or translocation
during tumor development, and growing evidence indicates that miRNAs can
function as tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Additionally, miRNA
expression profiling analyses have revealed characteristic miRNA
signatures in human cancers. MicroRNA-221 (miR-221) is up-regulated in
many cancers including HCC, glioblastoma, pancreatic cancer, prostate
cancer, and tamoxifin-resistant breast cancer. Overexpression of miR-221
has previously been shown to promote cancer cell proliferation, most
likely by its ability to modulate the expression of the oncogenic
proteins c-kit and cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI) CDKN1B/p27.
In this study, we demonstrate that in comparison to normal mammary
tissues, miR-221 is overexpressed in triple negative breast cancer cell
lines (TNBC) and downregulated in non-TNBC breast cancer cell lines.
Stable knockdown of miR-221 expression reduced cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis in TNBC cell lines. Overexpression of miR-221 promoted
cell migration and cell invasion, while knockdown of miR-221 inhibited
both cell migration and cell invasion and increased E-cadherin expression
in TNBC lines but not in the non-TNBC lines. Furthermore, downregulation
of miR-221 in MDA-MB-231 xenografts decreased the tumor growth rate in
mice. Therefore, our results suggest that miR-221 is a potential oncomiR
that promotes cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in triple
negative breast cancer cells, and that knockdown of miR-221 is able to
induce in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activity in these TNBC cell lines.

