Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnosis of chronic lymphoid leukemia on unstained blood smears
using Raman microspectroscopy and supervised classification


Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia (CLL) is a blood cancerous disease
characterized by the proliferation of lymphocytes (lymphocytosis). This
is the most common leukemia, preferentially affecting people aged over 50
years old. It is incurable and in most cases shows no clinical signs.
Thus, it is often discovered by chance during a blood test. If necessary,
morphological and immunological studies are led by analyzing blood smears
colored with May-Grnwald Giemsa, by making a complete blood count and by
computing a Matutes scores. These studies are necessary because it is
impossible to distinguish a healthy cell from a cancerous one only using
a conventional microscope even if the cells are stained. In order to
establish the diagnosis of the disease reliably and automatically, a new
approach based on the Raman microspectroscopy is introduced in this
study. Based on the interaction between matter and light, this technology
acquires a real molecular and biochemical signature of the analyzed
sample in a label-free manner (no staining or marking of the sample).
Recently, Raman microspectroscopy has shown a promising potential to
highlight the pathophysiological states in both human and animal since
differences between different pathophysiological states occur at the
molecular level. From unstained blood smears, obtained by spreading a
drop of blood of CLL patients and healthy persons on standard glass
slides, Raman spectra are acquired on the nucleus of white blood cells.
Using a supervised classification algorithm such as the Support Vector
Machine (SVM), a spectral model is established to distinguish spectra
obtained from healthy or pathological cells. This model is computed using
a population of spectra called training set and consists of 513 spectra
from 6 CLL patients and 347 spectra from 4 healthy persons. Then, a
classification of the validation set composed of 2820 spectra from 33 CLL
patients and 1074 spectra from13 healthy individuals was achieved. A
sensitivity of 84.84% and a specificity of 84.61% were obtained on the
patient. Finally, a blind set composed of 721 spectra from 8 cases is
classified. The sensitivity and specificity are respectively equal to 80%
and 100%. The results obtained on the differentiation between healthy and
pathological cells show the real potential of Raman spectroscopy coupled
with supervised classification for the diagnosis of CLL. Future studies
will concentrate on the prognosis, and if possible the prediction of CLL.

