Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammation increases colonic tumor multiplicity and stage in
Pirc rats: A priming effect


Colon cancer is the second most common cancer in men and women in the
United States. The average lifetime risk for developing colon cancer is
about 7%. This lifetime risk is increased several fold in individuals
with an inflammatory bowel disease, and increases further with greater
extent, duration and severity of inflammation. The role of inflammation
in many cancers is becoming clearer, but the mechanism(s) by which
inflammation may initiate or support cancer growth remains to be
elucidated. Our laboratory has developed a rodent model of colon cancer,
the Polyposis in rat colon (Pirc) rat, which closely mimics the
predisposition for colonic neoplasia observed in humans. Colonic
inflammation in the Pirc rat induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)
increases the number of colon tumors up to ten-fold, and include invasive
adenocarcinomas as early as five months of age. To ascertain molecular
differences between colonic tumors and normal colonic epithelium in
DSS-treated Pirc rats, and colonic tumors and normal colonic epithelium
in untreated Pirc rats, tissues were harvested at 97 days of age, before
any detectable difference in tumor invasion. Agilent Whole Rat Genome
expression microarrays were run on several biological replicates of each
sample type. As expected, many genes (4630) were differentially expressed
between normal epithelium and colonic tumors (>2-fold change, 0.05 FDR).
Surprisingly, no significant difference in gene expression was observed
between tumors from untreated and DSS-treated Pirc rats. However, over
950 genes showed differential expression in normal epithelium between
untreated and DSS-treated Pirc rats. Further, many of the genes in
apparently normal epithelial tissue from DSS-treated Pirc rats showed an
expression profile intermediate between normal untreated Pirc epithelium
and tumors. Several of these candidates have been confirmed by qRT-PCR.
DSS-treated animals eventually develop a large number of tumors
throughout the colon. This expression profile could indicate that this
apparently normal tissue contains nascent tumors. Alternatively, this
could represent changes in the normal tissue surrounding the tumor that
supports the growth and invasion of colonic neoplasms. This distinction
requires further investigation using other biological endpoints. Wild
type rats treated with DSS develop a cobblestone pattern in the colon,
but rarely form even a single tumor. Microarray profiling of normal
epithelium from untreated and DSS-treated wild type rats may reveal
whether the signatures we have seen in the apparently normal colonic
epithelium from DSS-treated Pirc rats is simply an undetected tumor.
Using endoscopy we can longitudinally obtain biopsy samples to see
whether these expression profiles change over time from normal epithelium
to an invasive cancer. Comparing our data to that in humans with
ulcerative colitis will help focus future exploration of candidate genes.

