Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-1 reduces the efficacy of PI3K pathway inhibitors in
glioblastoma cells


Galectin-1 (Gal-1), is a small 14kD carbohydrate binding protein that is
known to be significantly upregulated in gliomas, and has also been
closely associated with patient survival. PI3K/AKT signaling is important
in cancer cells because upregulation of this pathway is associated with
increased cell survival and growth. Specifically in glioblastomas there
is a signaling alteration in the RTK/PI3K/RAS/PTEN axis in nearly 90% of
patients leading to therapeutic resistance and poor prognosis. While
Gal-1 has a defined role in activating MAPK signaling, the effect of
Gal-1 on PI3K signaling is unclear. The purpose of these experiments was
to study the role that Gal-1 has in cellular survival signaling,
primarily the PI3K pathway. Previous experiments from our laboratory have
demonstrated a significant role for Gal-1 in PI3K signaling and AKT
activation. An in vitro PI3K reaction showed that Gal-1 can increase PI3K
enzyme activity, even in the presence of a PI3K inhibitor. Gal-1 was also
shown to specifically interact with the PI3K enzyme in an in vitro Co-IP
assay. Based on these results, we investigated the role of Gal-1 in
protecting cells from PI3K pathway inhibition. LN229, U87, and LN18
glioma cell lines were used for these experiments. Cells were treated
with multiple different inhibitors for specific proteins in the PI3K
signaling pathway (EGFR - Gefitinib, AKT - MK-2206, PI3K - LY294002 and
PI-103, mTor - AZD 8055 and Everolimus). Initially, control cells were
compared with cells of different Gal-1 status for PI3K pathway activation
by western blot. We looked at multiple levels of activation including
pAKT, p-mTOR, and p-p70S6K. Following this analysis, proliferation was
examined by MTS assay and clonogenic survival was also tested. Our
results indicate that in the absence of Gal-1, all of the different
inhibitors listed above showed increased signaling inhibition in each of
the cell lines tested. In the control cells, higher concentrations of
these inhibitors were required to cause similar reduction in pathway
activation markers such as pAKT. Based on these results we examined
proliferation rates and clonogenic survival for several of the tested
inhibitors. In these experiments, we observed that Gal-1 increases
baseline survival signaling in cells and leads to an increased resistance
to many of the tested inhibitors. In conclusion Gal-1 has demonstrated an
ability to protect cancer cells from the effects of multiple PI3K pathway
inhibitors (i.e. PI3K, EGFR, and mTOR). Likely, this effect is due to the
increased baseline survival signaling seen in Gal-1 expressing cells.
While the mechanism for Gal-1's affect on inhibitor activity is still
under investigation, this research highlights that Gal-1 status might
serve as a predictive biomarker for the effectiveness of many different
PI3K pathway inhibitors that are currently showing limited efficacy in
clinical trials.

