Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the pharmacological importance of endoxifen for the
treatment of ER-positive breast cancer in premenopausal patients


Long term adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for five years is the antiestrogenic
standard of care for ER-positive breast cancer in premenopausal patients.
The metabolic activation of tamoxifen by CYP2D6 to endoxifen remains
controversial to plan the treatment of patients with breast cancer.
However, all retrospective studies focus entirely on postmenopausal
patients and no studies have been undertaken in the relevant
premenopausal treatment population. We have addressed the issue of the
pharmacological importance of endoxifen to control the
estrogen-stimulated growth of four ER-positive breast cancer cell lines
(MCF-7, T47-D, BT-474 and ZR-75). We have modeled the actual estrogen
environment in the laboratory (estradiol plus estrone) based on previous
data from premenopausal patients taking tamoxifen (Jordan et al, JNCI
2001; 83:1488-91). Our strategy was to evaluate the anti-proliferative
actions of actual concentrations of tamoxifen, N-desmethyltamoxifen and
4-hydroxytamoxifen combined, based on the actual measurements reported
for these metabolites in patients who were extensive metabolizers (EM),
intermediate metabolizers (IM) or poor metabolizers (PM) (Mrdter et al,
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011; 89:708-17). These data were then compared with
similar anti-proliferative experiments in the four cell lines, using
endoxifen obtained from four sources (Mayo Clinic, University of Indiana,
Institut fr Klinische Pharmakologie (IKP) and the Fox Chase Cancer
Center). Each cell line was evaluated with the clinically relevant
circulating levels of estrogen, with and without the inclusion of the
different endoxifens at the published concentrations from EM, IM and PM.
It is important to note that all synthetic endoxifen currently available
is an impure mixture of geometric isomers. Therefore, results obtained
are only an estimate of the efficacy of endoxifen in the patient. To
address this issue, we have specifically synthesized the appropriate
isomer of endoxifen as a fixed ring compound that can no longer
isomerize. We have previously used this strategy to discover the actual
pharmacology of the two geometric isomers of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (Murphy
et al, Mol Pharm 1990; 38:737-43). The results demonstrate the essential
requirement with the appropriate concentration of endoxifen necessary to
block estrogen-mediated cell replication. Acknowledgements: This work
(VCJ) was supported the subcontract under the SU2C (AACR) Grant number
SU2C-AACR-DT0409; the Susan G Komen For The Cure Foundation under Award
number SAC100009.

