Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of spatial and temporal heterogeneity of tumor
micro-environment in mouse models of non-small cell lung cancer
macroscopic xenografts and micro-metastases


18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (18F-FDG, imaging glucose metabolism),
18F-fluorothymidine (18F-FLT, cell proliferation) and 18F-misonidazole
(18F-FMISO, hypoxia) PET scans have emerged as important clinical tools
for management of cancer. The objective of this study was to spatially
and temporally visualize tumor microenvironment of tumor hypoxia,
proliferation and glucose metabolism using 18F-FDG, 18F-FLT and 18F-FMISO
digital autoradiography and microPET comparing with histological
findings. Methods: We used human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) A549
and HTB177 cells to generate subcutaneous and peritoneal metastases in
nude mice. Animals were coinjected with the mixture of one PET
radiotracer, pimonidazole (hypoxia marker) and bromodeoxyuridine
(proliferation marker) intravenously 1 hour before animal euthanasia. The
intratumoral distributions of radiotracers were visualized by digital
autoradiography (DAR) and related to microscopic visualization of
cellular proliferation, tumor hypoxia, stroma and necrosis. Serial
microPET scans (day 1to day5) were also performed in the same animals to
investigate change in glucose metabolism (using 18F-FDG), proliferation
(18F-FLT) and hypoxia (18F-FMISO). Results: NSCLC microenvironment was
complex and highly heterogeneous: xenografts had complex structures with
intermingled regions of well oxygenated (negative pimonidazole) and
highly proliferative (positive bromodeoxyuridine) cancer cells, hypoxic
(positive pimonidazole) and low proliferation (little bromodeoxyuridine)
cancer cells stroma and necrosis. Hypoxic cancer cells had high18F-FDG
and 18F-FMISO but low 18F-FLT accumulation, indicating increased glucose
metabolism is not a common feature of cancer cells but only hypoxic ones.
Well oxygenated cancer cells with high proliferation rate accumulated
high level of 18F-FLT, but low 18F-FDG and18F-FMISO. Stroma and necrotic
zones always associated with low activity in all radiotracers we tested.
MicroPET scans revealed apparent change in intratumor distribution of
18F-FLT, 18F-FDG as well as 18F-FMISO in as short as 48 hrs interval,
indicating temporal heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment in term of
proliferation, glucose metabolism and hypoxia. Conclusions: Both
macroscopic xenografts and micrometastases of NSCLC have spatial
heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment. Temporal change of tumor
microenvironment did occur in a very short of interval of natural growth
process in NSCLC. We have investigated to spatial and temporal behavior
of heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment which is important for better
understanding cancer biology and cancer management, if our findings in
mice models are clinically applicable. Acknowledgement: This study was
supported by Kentucky Lung Cancer Research Program Award to Dr. Xiao-Feng
Li.

