Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using the glycolytic inhibitor 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose, a novel
glycolytic inhibitor approach to target the chemoresistant, hypoxic cell
population in advanced LHBETATAG retinal tumors


Purpose: The aim of the current study is to assess the impact of
2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose on tumor burden and hypoxia in the LHBETATAG
retinal tumors. Methods: The study protocol was approved by the
University of Miami Institutional Animal Care and Use Review Board
Committee and the ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and
Vision Research. 17-week-old (n=54) LHBETATAG transgenic mice were
treated with 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose or saline control. These animals
received three different treatments. They were treated: (1) with one
injection and sacrificed at one day post-treatment, (2) with one
injection and sacrificed at one week post-treatment, or (3) twice a week
for three weeks and sacrificed at one day post-last injection. At the
time of enucleation, all eye samples were snap frozen and analyzed for
tumor burden and hypoxia using immunohistochemical techniques. Average
densities of the different groups were statistically analyzed using
ANOVA. Results were considered significant if p 0.05. Results: There was
no apparent toxicity associated with 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose treatment.
There was a significant reduction in tumor burden following treatment
with 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose at 1 day (86%) and 3 weeks (63%)
post-treatment (p0.05). There was no reduction of tumor burden observed
when mice were treated with 1 injection and eyes harvested at 1 week
post-treament (2%, p=0.0640). There was a significant reduction of
hypoxia areas following treatment with 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose at 1 day
(100%) and 3 weeks (75%) post-treatment (p0.05). There was an increase in
hypoxia of 12% following treatment at 1 week post-injection, but this
increase was not statistically significant. Conclusions: 2-FDG
significantly reduces tumor burden and tumor hypoxia following a single
injection, with continued efficacy following repeated injections for 3
weeks. 2-FDG treatment is efficacious in murine retinoblastoma tumors and
may enhance tumor control when combined with other therapies. 2-FDG
appears to target hypoxic cells, a population that has been resistant to
chemotherapy and radiation. Additionally, 2-FDG is commonly used in
medical imaging and does not pose significant toxicities.

