Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of BMP4 and BMP7 induced gene expression changes in
breast cancer cells reveals time-dependent transcription patterns and a
common synexpression group of genes


Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the transforming growth
factor beta superfamily of growth factors. They are well-known for their
key roles in the regulation of various developmental processes and bone
formation, but in recent years, evidence has also accumulated of their
crucial contribution in tumor biology. In particular, BMP4 and BMP7 have
been implicated in breast cancer pathogenesis. However, little is known
about BMP target genes in the context of tumor cells. Here, we used
whole-genome microarrays to explore the effects of BMP4 and BMP7
treatment on global gene expression levels in seven breast cancer cell
lines during a 6-point time series. Several complementary methods,
including hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed genes, gene
ontology enrichment analyses and model based clustering of temporal data,
were used for data analysis. Both BMP ligands had a strong influence on
gene expression levels, although the response to BMP4 treatment was more
pronounced as compared to BMP7. As might have been expected, the cellular
functions most strongly affected by the stimulation of BMP signaling were
regulation of transcription and development. The observed transcriptional
response, as well as its functional outcome, followed a temporal
sequence, where the regulation of gene expression and signal transduction
was followed by changes in transcripts involved in metabolism and cell
proliferation. Hierarchical clustering analysis revealed distinct
differences in the response of individual cell lines to BMPs, but also
underlined a common synexpression group of genes for both ligands.
Remarkably, the majority of the genes within these synexpression groups
were shared by the two ligands, and thus these genes are likely to
represent the core molecular responses common to BMP4 and BMP7 signaling
pathways. Taken together, our data demonstrate that BMP signaling has a
substantial effect on gene transcription in breast cancer cells and that
the cellular functions affected follow a logical temporal pattern. Our
results also reveal components of the cellular transcriptional response
that are common to BMP4 and BMP7. Finally, our study provides a list of
putative novel BMP target genes relevant in breast cancer.

