Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ongoing Phase II trial of an adenovirus/PSA vaccine for
prostate cancer


Introduction and Objectives: Our Phase I adenovirus/PSA vaccine trial has
proved that this vaccine is safe. We are conducting a Phase II clinical
trial with two separate protocols for patients with recurrent or hormone
refractory prostate cancer assessing toxicity, immune responses, and
changes in PSA levels. Methods: In Protocol #1 men with recurrent
prostate cancer following definitive initial treatment for their disease
were placed in one of two arms: Arm A; men receive the vaccine alone at
days 0, 30, and 60; Arm B; men receive the vaccine 14 days after the
initiation of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). In Protocol #2 men with
hormone refractory disease receive the vaccine alone using the same 3
injection schedule. Each injection consists of 108 pfu of the Ad/PSA
vaccine suspended in a collagen matrix. All patients return at regular
intervals for physical, chemical, radiologic, and immunologic
evaluations. Results: To date forty four patients have been enrolled and
have been followed a median of 12 months. The patients have a median age
of 71.3 years, and median enrollment PSA levels of 0.62 ng/ml in Protocol
#1 and 5.45 ng/ml in Protocol #2. In our preliminary results at this
early stage of the trial, 100% of the patients in Protocol #1 and 67% of
the patients in Protocol #2 demonstrated anti-PSA T cell responses above
preinjection levels. Sixty four percent of the patients demonstrated an
increase in PSA doubling time (PSADT). Conclusions: In an attempt to
follow up on the success of our Phase I clinical trial of the Ad/PSA
vaccine we have initiated a Phase II trial to investigate the therapeutic
efficacy of the vaccine in men with recurrent prostate cancer, either
following definitive therapy prior to other treatments or hormone
refractory. Early results from the first four four patients demonstrate
the induction of anti-PSA T cells responses in a high percentage of the
vaccinated patients and increase in PSADT in more than half of the
patients. No serious vaccine-related toxicities have been identified in
the patients.

