Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver-specific knockout mice and liver-derived cell lines provide
insights into potential roles for the GP73/GOLM1 HCC serum biomarker -
association with sustained cell proliferation


Golgi Protein-73kDa (GP73/GOLM1) is a resident cis Golgi Type II membrane
protein that is nearly undetectable in normal liver, but whose expression
is upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and whose circulating
levels increase in the plasma of patients with chronic liver disease and
HCC. As such, it is the subject of ongoing clinical trials investigating
its use as a serum biomarker for HCC. GP73/GOLM1 is cleaved by a
proprotein convertase and secreted by proliferating cells, an activity
possibly elevated in cancer, yet its biological role in the liver and in
the pathogenesis of HCC remains unclear. In order to investigate possible
biological roles for GP73/GOLM1, liver-specific knockout mice (C57BL/6)
were generated using the Cre-loxP system, characterized by a floxed GOLM1
gene and Cre recombinase driven by the albumin promoter. GP73/GOLM1
Cre+/genotypes were confirmed by PCR analysis. GP73/GOLM1Fl/Fl/Cre(+)
animals showed no obvious biological phenotype compared to their Cre(-)
littermates, and exhibited normal growth, behavior, and successful
mating, suggesting that hepatic GP73/GOLM1 is not vital for normal
physiological function, as might be hypothesized from its normally low
expression in the liver. Previous studies indicated that GP73/GOLM1
expression was not upregulated in post-hepatectomy liver regeneration,
suggesting that its activated expression in the liver is linked to
inflammatory or carcinogenic processes rather than transiently increased
mitosis. Examination of GP73/GOLM1 expression in 14 human HCC cell lines
revealed similar expression levels in epithelial and mesenchymal cell
lines, and in an SV40-transformed nontumorigenic human liver epithelial
cell line. Rodent in vitro models of hepatocellular transformation
revealed equal GP73/GOLM1 expression levels in nontumorigenic parent cell
lines and their transformed tumorigenic derivatives. Collectively, the
data from the in vivo and in vitro models thus far do not support a
direct association of GP73/GOLM1 expression with liver mitogenesis or
differentiation, but rather suggest that its expression may be linked to
a sustained commitment to cell proliferation - such as occurs in cell
lines, liver disease and cancerous transformation, promoted by an
inflammatory microenvironment. Possible mechanistic roles for GP73/GOLM1
in HCC development and progression are currently being tested in
carcinogenesis models with liver-specific knockout mice. A website on
GP73/GOLM1 has also been established as a resource for the research
community interested in the study of this protein.

