Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) expression for bladder cancer
diagnostics


Bladder cancer is one of the most common cancers in the United States. In
2011, the National Cancer Institute estimates approximately 70,000 cases
of bladder cancer will be diagnosed; of those, more than 15,000 are
expected to die. According to the American Cancer Society, the five-year
survival rate for patients diagnosed with bladder cancer is 98% (at stage
0), 88% (at stage I), 63% (at stage II), 46% (at stage III), and 15% (at
stage IV). These statistics highlight the fact that early detection of
bladder cancer is critical for improving prognosis and long-term
survival. Numerous markers have been tested for bladder cancer detection
and surveillance. These markers include complement factor H
(BTA-Stat/TRAK), nuclear matrix proteins (NMP22), mucin-like antigens,
hyaluronic acid, hyaluronidase, survivin, soluble Fas, telomerase and
detection of chromosomal aneuploidy and deletion using fluorescence in
situ hybridization (UroVysion). However, none of them are accepted as a
routine tool for bladder cancer diagnostics and surveillance. There
exists a continuing need for an assay that detects the presence of
bladder cancer in humans. It would be advantageous to develop an assay
with a protein that is associated with the development of bladder cancer.
We sought to identify cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) as a novel
bladder cancer biomarker. In this study, Western blot and ELISA were used
to access the level of CIP2A protein and other known bladder cancer
protein biomarkers (i.e., survivin) in bladder cancer cell lines, bladder
cancer patient tissues, and bladder cancer patient urines. Our studies
indicate CIP2A protein was abundantly expressed in bladder cancer cell
lines and it was not expressed in non-tumor epithelial cell lines. CIP2A
protein was specifically expressed in bladder tumor tissue at different
cancer stages, and not in adjacent non-tumor bladder tissue. Our data
showed that CIP2A protein detection in bladder cancer tissues had a
sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 100%. Our study also suggests there
was no detectable level of CIP2A protein in bladder cancer patient urine,
in contrast to that of other bladder cancer biomarkers such as survivin.
In conclusion, our studies suggest that CIP2A protein is specifically
expressed in human bladder cancer tissue and not in adjacent tissue. It
will be important to extend this finding and to develop non-invasive
assays for early detection or for surveillance of bladder cancer in
humans.

