Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A key role for ARF in drug resistance in invasive bladder cancer


Although most superficial bladder cancers can be removed transurethrally
with excellent prognosis, clinical outcome is much more problematic for
patients with muscle-invasive disease. Indeed, invasive bladder cancer is
a major clinical challenge since it is highly associated with
postoperative recurrence and metastasis. Current treatments for those
lethal forms of bladder cancer include systemic chemotherapy and
molecular targeted therapy; however, survival is poor since most patients
develop resistance to the drugs within a short timeframe. Clearly, there
is a need to identify novel therapeutic options for invasive bladder
cancer as well as a greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
drug resistance. We have been investigating mechanisms of drug resistance
using genetically-engineered mouse models of invasive bladder cancer
based on the combinatorial deletion of p53 and Pten in bladder
epithelium. p53 and PTEN are frequently inactivated in human bladder
cancers, particularly those with poor prognosis. Indeed, allograft tumors
established from these mice responded initially to the treatment with
cisplatin, docetaxel, or rapamycin but eventually developed resistance.
We have observed that these p53; PTEN deficient tumors express robust
levels of p19Arf, while targeted deletion of Arf retards the aquisition
of resistance following drug treatment. The significance of this
expression was further suggested by analysis of a published gene
expression profile of human bladder cancers which revealed that high Arf
expression is an independent predictor of poor survival of invasive
bladder cancer patients. Furthermore, following drug treatment in the
mouse model, the Arf-positive, compared to the Arf-negative, tumors were
significantly enriched in extracellular matrix/integrin signaling gene
signature consistent with activation of downstream PI3K-mTOR pathway,
suggesting that a model for drug resistance is via PI3K pathway
activation. We have observed similar results in human bladder cancer cell
lines either following knock-down of p14Arf in J82 cells that express
endogenous p14Arf or following forced expression of p14Arf in
ARF-negative UMUC3 human bladder cancer cells, and in both cases it was
coincident with deregulated activation of PI3K-mTOR pathway. Thus, we
propose that Arf confers drug resistance on bladder cancer by activating
PI3K-mTOR pathway, highlighting a potential therapeutic target for
advanced invasive bladder cancer patients.

