Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAP kinase activation and suppression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family members are associated with induction of apoptotic death in
melanoma cells following down-regulation of glutathione S-transferase P1


Introduction. The multifunctional protein, glutathione S-transferase P1,
GSTP1, is frequently overexpressed in malignant melanoma and has been
associated with increased tumor growth and resistance to therapy and poor
overall patient survival. A major cellular function of GSTP1 is as a
regulator of cell signaling mediated through its ability to interact with
and regulate key signaling proteins, notably, the MAP kinases. In a
previous study, we showed that RNA interference-mediated GSTP1
downregulation in GSTP1-overexpressing melanoma cells decreased cell
growth and increased the levels of both spontaneous and drug-induced
apoptosis. Here, we examined the molecular mechanisms underlying these
observations, particularly, those involving alterations in MAP kinase
signaling and pro-and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl2 family of
proteins. Methods. Exponentially growing cells of two human melanoma cell
lines A375 and DM6 were infected with a lentiviral vector carrying
GSTP1-targeted short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting. A heterogeneous
stable population was isolated by puromycin selection. Alternatively,
GSTP1 was knocked down by transfection of the cells with GSTP1-targeted
siRNA. The cells were confirmed as GSTP1-ve by PCR and western blotting.
At various time-points post GSTP1 suppression, the cells were analyzed
for the level of apoptosis by flow cytometry (FCM) and by measuring the
level of caspase 3/7 mediated cleavage of the peptide substrate,
Ac-DEVD-AFC. Extracts were prepared from control and GSTP1-knockdown
cells and analyzed for total and phosphorylated MAP kinases (P38, ERK,
and JNK) and for proteins of the Bcl-2 family. Results. There was a
near-complete suppression of GSTP1 transcripts and protein in both
melanoma cell lines following shRNA-lentiviral infection or at 72 hrs
post-siRNA transfection. Over 7 days, there was a steady increase in the
level of apoptosis in the cells with GSTP1 suppression, as evidenced by
an increase in the pre-G1 population by FCM or in caspase 3/7 activity.
This was associated with a significant increase in the level of
phosphorylation of the MAP kinases, Erk1/2 and JNK1/2. Following GSTP1
suppression, we also observed a significant decrease in the pro-survival
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins Mcl-1, Bcl-XL, and Bcl-2 with little to no
change in pro-apoptotic Bcl2 proteins Bad, Bim and Bid. Conclusion. These
results suggest that GSTP1 is obligate for growth and survival of of
GSTP1-expressing melanoma cells and that suppression of GSTP1 expression
in these cells induces an apoptotic response that involves activation of
the MAP Kinases, ERK and JNK, and suppression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
proteins. Supported by NIH grants RO1 CA 153050, RO1CA127872, RO1 CA
112519, P50CA108786 and P30-CA14236.

