Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trifluorothymidine incorporation into DNA strongly enforces the
potential of TAS-102 and leads to remarkably prolonged survival of cancer
patients


TAS-102 is a novel oral antitumor agent, consisting of trifluorothymidine
(FTD) as the active component and thymidine phosphorylase inhibitor (TPI)
which prevents degradation of FTD. In a double-blind randomized phase II
study conducted in Japan, TAS-102 significantly improved overall survival
of metastatic colorectal cancer patients, compared with placebo (TAS-102,
n = 112; Placebo, n = 57; median OS, 9.0 vs. 6.6 months; HR, 0.56; p =
0.001). We investigated mechanisms of action of TAS-102 to understand how
prognosis of cancer patients was improved. In vitro study, FTD was
previously reported to have two mechanisms, FTD incorporation into DNA
and thymidylate synthase (TS) inhibition. In this study, we show that FTD
incorporation into DNA is the main mechanism of TAS-102 and the key to
potentiate anti-tumor efficacy of FTD. We found that although TS
inhibition of FTD reduced rapidly after drug removal, the cytotoxicity of
FTD did not diminish. On the other hand, the cytotoxicity of FdUrd
diminished after drug removal. As compared to FdUrd, FTD was incorporated
into DNA to a greater extent by the time drug was removed. It is thought
that the FTD retained in DNA contributes to sustained growth inhibition.
Therefore, FTD incorporation into DNA is considered to be essential for
enforcing the potential of FTD. Additionally, we investigated the in vivo
potency of TAS-102 by using daily divided oral administration since this
regimen was the most optimal to maximize FTD incorporation into DNA.
Interestingly, TAS-102 showed marked tumor growth delay even after end of
the administration and remarkable prolonged survival of mice implanted
with KM20C derived from human colon cancer. Collectively, these data
suggest that TAS-102 improved survival of cancer patients primarily due
to FTD incorporation into DNA. FTD is previously reported to affect DNA
structure, and we speculate that TAS-102 exerts its anti-tumor effects
through interfering with DNA function once adequate amounts of FTD have
been accumulated in the DNA.

