Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer care-seeking patterns in Kumasi, Ghana


Background and Objective: Data from each of the 32 sentinel hospitals
within the 10 regions of Ghana indicate that cancer is among the top ten
causes of death in the country and it also appears to be on the rise.
Barriers that delay detection and treatment of cancer compound the
untoward consequences of this rising incidence. Over 80% of cancer
patients at Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital (KATH) in Kumasi present to
the hospital in Stage III or later, and data indicate that even those
relatively rare patients who are identified through detection and
screening in Ghana still present late to the hospital. Thus,
understanding and addressing the causes of delayed or dropped treatment
appears to be important steps that will guide policies for early
detection and treatment. We conducted this study to identify the
care-seeking and referral patterns of cancer patients before arriving at
and within KATH to reach specialized cancer treatment. Methods:
Semi-structured interviews with cancer patients were conducted between
June-July 2011 at the Oncology Directorate at KATH, which is one of
Ghana's two National Centers for Radiotherapy and Nuclear Medicine.
Patients were asked about their care-seeking patterns from the beginning
of their symptoms until their arrival at the Oncology Directorate, and
about the barriers they faced during their care-seeking process.
Abstraction of relevant clinical data from patient medical records was
done to complement and validate data from the interviews. Preliminary
Results: We attempted 224 interviews, with a final eligible sample size
of 216 completed interviews. Over 56% of those interviewed were new
patients first seen in the Oncology Directorate in 2011. Nearly 78% of
the patients were females, consistent with the gender distribution of the
Directorate. The most common cancers in our sample were: cervical and
uterine (32.71%), breast (27.10%), head and neck (16.36%) and prostate
(4.67%), approximately reflecting the different tumor types diagnosed in
the Directorate overall. Patients interviewed came from all ten regions
of Ghana, with 65.7% from the Ashanti region in which KATH is located.
Patients reported visiting an average of 2 facilities before arriving at
KATH, with an average time between initial symptoms and the first point
of care being 4 months and a range of less than one month to over 6.5
years. Conclusions: Preliminary results suggest that the care-seeking
patterns of cancer patients in Ghana might differ from what is commonly
believed, with approximately 7% of the respondents reporting that they
visited the facility of a traditional healer, herbalist or faith healer.
Moreover, system-related delays may play a larger role in delayed care
compared to patient-related delays. Further analysis from this study are
ongoing and will help identify factors that impact the delay between the
onset of cancer symptoms and presentation to treatment facilities and
also factors that are amenable to modification within the Ghanaian health
system.

