Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIFs regulate alternative splicing of HIF target genes


Alternative splicing is the process in which identical pre-mRNA molecules
are spliced in different ways, allowing individual gene to express
multiple mRNAs or isoforms that encode proteins with diverse and even
antagonistic functions. Alternative splicing occurs in over 70% of human
genes, is important in normal development and many diseases including
cancer. It is well known that most solid-tumors are hypoxic and the
hypoxic microenvironment is a driving force for tumor progression and
metastasis by hypoxia-inducible-factor (HIF)-mediated transcriptional
programs that increase genes involved in tumor growth, angiogenesis, and
metastasis. Here, we report a novel finding that transcriptional factor
HIF not only activates gene expression, also regulates RNA splicing of
its target genes, generating isoforms that favor tumor growth. Using an
Exon Microarray we found that approximately 1000 genes are predicted to
undergo hypoxia-mediated AS in Hep3B cells, 100 of those genes are
hypoxia inducible genes. Using RT-PCR, RT-qPCR and WB we validated that
the first 10 HIF target genes, CA9, ANGPTL4, WNK1, PLOD2, ADM, DUOX2,
ENO2, P4HA2, EGLN3, and PDK1 undergo hypoxia-mediate AS, as predicted by
exon array. Interestingly, AS of these genes is regulated by HIFs, not by
hypoxia since: 1) siRNA knockdown of ARNT, HIF1, or HIF2 inhibits hypoxic
induction of HIF target genes as well as inhibits hypoxia-mediated
splicing changes; and 2) Normoxic HIF activity by deleting VHL,
inhibiting PHD, or expressing normoxic-stable HIF protein led to hypoxic
splicing patterns of HIF target genes, demonstrating HIF activity is
sufficient to induce alternative splicing of HIF target genes. However,
AS of HIF target genes cannot be explained by increased transcription of
these genes since no splicing changes were observed when these genes were
activated by hybrid protein with HIF transactivation domains replaced by
VP16, E2F1, or SP1 transactivation domain. Further experiments indicated
that the N-terminal transactivation domains (N-TAD) of HIF1 or HIF2 are
responsible for splicing changes of these HIF-target genes. In summary,
we have uncovered a novel function of HIFs in the regulation of target
gene splicing. The discovery of HIF's role in mRNA splicing of its target
genes will change the dogma concerning the role of HIF in cancer
progression. We propose that HIFs promote cancer progression not only
through transcription activation but also through alteration of mRNA
splicing of HIF targets. RO1 CA134687 NIH/NCI (Hu)

