Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A potential antitumor herb medicine, Corilagin, inhibits ovarian
cancer cell growth by blockage of TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling pathways


Recently, we have identified that Corilagin is a major anti-tumor active
component extracted from a well-known hepatoprotective and antiviral
medicinal herb, Phyllanthus niruri L. Corilagin distinctly inhibited the
growth of ovarian cancer cell lines SKOv3ip, Hey and HO-8910PM, with
IC50s less than 20g/ml, while displayed the low toxicity against normal
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), with IC50s around 100g/ml. Corilagin
induced cell cycle arrest at G2 stage and enhanced apoptosis in Hey
cancer cells. To explore its anti-tumor activity in vivo, Corilagin was
delivered intra-peritoneally to the mice bearing SKOv3ip xenograft.
Although no statistical difference observed on mice weight between
untreated and Corilagin treated groups, xenograft tumor growth was
significantly restarted by 15g/mL of Corilagin treated group comparing to
untreated control group (pRecently, we have identified that Corilagin is
a major anti-tumor active component extracted from a well-known
hepatoprotective and antiviral medicinal herb, Phyllanthus niruri L.
Corilagin distinctly inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cell lines
SKOv3ip, Hey and HO-8910PM, with IC50s less than 20g/ml, while displayed
the low toxicity against normal ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), with
IC50s around 100g/ml. Corilagin induced cell cycle arrest at G2 stage and
enhanced apoptosis in Hey cancer cells. To explore its anti-tumor
activity in vivo, Corilagin was delivered intra-peritoneally to the mice
bearing SKOv3ip xenograft. Although no statistical difference observed on
mice weight between untreated and Corilagin treated groups, xenograft
tumor growth was significantly restarted by 15g/mL of Corilagin treated
group comparing to untreated control group (p<0.05). To understand the
anti-tumor mechanisms of Corilagin, we performed reverse phase protein
array (RPPA) analysis using untreated and Corilagen treated HO-8910PM
cells, and the results were confirmed by Western blots. We have found
that Corilagin blocked the activation of multiple signaling cascades,
such as, pAKT and pERK. Particularly, Corilagin inhibits TGF- secretion
in the culture supernatant of all tested ovarian cancer cell lines and
blocks the stabilization of Snail induced by TGF- in HO-8910PM cells. In
contrast, reduction of TGF- secretion was not observed in cytotoxic drug
Taxol-treated cancer cells, suggesting that Corilagin specifically
targets TGF- secretion. TGF- signaling plays a critical role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer metastasis. High
concentration of TGF- had been detected in ascites, blood and other body
fluids of ovarian cancer patients. In addition, our recent studies
identified that TGF- being the most important inflammation factor in
ovarian cancer, which stabilizes at the protein level of Snail, an
inducer of EMT, and further enhanced Snail expression when combined with
other inflammation factors. TGF- is regulated by Smads, but could also be
regulated by AKT/ERK signaling pathways. Our observations indicate that
Corilagin extracted from Phyllanthus niruri L. acts as an effective
natural targeted therapeutic agent against the growth of ovarian cancer
cells via TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling pathways.

