Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-211 promotes the progression of head and neck carcinomas by
targeting TGFRII


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is among the prevalent
neoplasms in the world. More than 50% patients die within 5 years after
initial therapy due to local recurrence, invasion or metastasis. Previous
studies have shown that transforming growth factor-beta type II receptor
(TGFRII) deprivation could promote HNSCC metastasis. Our
histolopathological analysis revealed that TGFRII was down-regulated in
metastatic tumors relative to primary HNSCC. This study aimed to address
the roles of microRNAs in regulating TGFRII for HNSCC progression. In
silico modules predicted that miR-211 and miR-370 might target TGFRII.
TGFRII was further confirmed to be a target of miR-211 in HNSCC cells by
means of reporter assay, quantitative RT-PCR analysis and Western blot
analysis. Interestingly, TGFRII and miR-211 were inversely expressed
during the metastasis process of HNSCC. In HNSCC cell lines, the
inhibition of TGFRII by miR-211 attenuated the Smad3 phosphorylation and
increased cell migration, while ectopic Smad3 expression decreased cell
migration drastically. In agreement with previous findings that the
disruption of TGF/Smad pathway could benefit HNSCC progression, this
study further specified that miR-211 played crucial regulatory roles in
the suppression of TGF/Smad pathway for HNSCC progression by targeting
TGFRII. To elucidate the in vivo oncogenic role of miR-211 in HNSCC
carcinogenesis, we established K14 promoter driven miR-211 transgenic
mice with stable expression of miR-211 in the basal epithelial layers of
skin and oral mucosa. By administrating of 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide in
drinking water to induce tongue tumors, the transgenic mice exhibited
higher potential for the induction and advances of tumors relative to
controls. This study concludes that miR-211 promotes HNSCC progression by
targeting TGFRII and intercepting TGF/Smad signaling pathway.

