Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the basic helix-loop-helix protein DEC1 induces
cellular senescence and is related to better survival in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Objective: Human differentiated embryo chondrocyte expressed gene 1
(Dec1), also known as Bhlhb2/Stra13/Sharp-2, is a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that involves in cell proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and cellular senescence. In this study, the
expression, function, diagnosis and prognostic impact of DEC1 in normal
esophageal epithelia, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and its
precursor lesions (intraepithelial neoplasia) were investigated. Methods:
ESCC combined with adjacent precursor tissues from 241 patients were
collected to construct tissue microarray (TMA) blocks. DEC1 expression
among normal epithelia, introepithelial neoplasia and ESCC was analyzed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and the correlations between Dec1 and
clinicopathological parameters were also analyzed statistically. In vitro
study, DEC1 was transient transfected into ESCC cell line EC9706, and
then cellular senescence was analyzed by senescence associated
-galactosidase (SA--Gal) activity. Fresh esophagectomy tissues from ESCC
patients were embedded and fixed, and tissue sections were detected by
immunohistochemistry of DEC1 and SA--Gal activity. Results: Compared with
normal epithelia, DEC1 expression was significantly increased in
intraepithelial neoplasia and DEC1 expression was significantly decreased
in ESCC in comparison with intraepithelial neoplasia. DEC1 overexpression
both induced cellular senescence in EC9706 cell line and correlated to
more senescent cells in fresh tissue sections. Kaplan - Meier method
analysis revealed that DEC1 expression levels were significantly
correlated with the survival of ESCC patients after surgery. The
expression levels of DEC1 were also correlated with the tumor embolus,
depth of invasion of ESCC, lymph metastasis status and pTNMs.
Conclusions: These results suggest that DEC1 overexpression is a
protective mechanism by inducing cellular senescence in ESCC progression,
and DEC1 is a potential prognostic marker of ESCC.

