Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation in CCRF-CEM cells confirms
hypermethylation at reported epigenetic markers of T-cell lymphoblastic
leukemia and identifies novel therapeutic targets with reduced
methylation upon treatment with dietary indoles


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (ALL) is the most common class of
malignancies among children and cases of T-cell origin are less
responsive to therapy than their B-cell counterparts. Cruciferous
vegetables have been demonstrated to be chemoprotective in a number of
cancer cell types due to their high content of indoles and
isothiocyanates. Previously, we demonstrated that indole-3-carbinol (I3C)
is an effective transplacental chemopreventive agent in a dibenzo[def,
p]chrysene (DBC)-induced model of murine T-ALL. We further confirmed that
treatment of human T-ALL cell lines with I3C and diindolylmethane (DIM),
the primary product of I3C condensation, reduces cell proliferation,
viability, and expression of cell-cycle proteins. Aberrant DNA
methylation is a recognized event in the development of cancer and
pharmacological demethylation of promoter-associated CpG islands is of
therapeutic interest to restore expression of epigenetically silenced
genes. We utilized genome-wide DNA methylation analysis to identify
potential epigenetic therapeutic targets of I3C and DIM in a model of
T-ALL. By differential methylation region (DMR) analysis with stringent
bonferroni multiple testing correction, 1,699 DMR probes were identified
which mapped to 298 unique transcripts. The differential degree of
hypomethylation by I3C, compared with DIM, is consistent with previous
findings that DIM is a more potent therapeutic in this model. I3C (60 M)
significantly reduced methylation in 53% of DMRs yet increased
methylation in the remaining 173 gene-mapped DMRs. DIM treatment with the
consumer available supplement formulation known as Bioresponse-DIM
(BR-DIM; 5 M), or with the pure crystalline form (C-DIM; 5 M or 15 M),
reduced methylation in over 500 probes and more than 200 genes.
Functional annotation of differentially hypomethylated genes revealed
that homeobox genes and transcription factors were most commonly
represented with negative regulators of apoptosis and Wnt/Frizzled
families also among the top gene clusters. Many identified genes have
been previously recognized as being frequently hypermethylated in
hematological malignancies and our results support demethylation of these
critical cancer survival pathways by dietary indoles derived from
cruciferous vegetables. These and novel genes from our analysis are
currently being validated and examined at the level of transcription.
Supported by P01CA90890, P42ES016465, CA135523 and The Linus Pauling
Institute.

