Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src plays a role in chemoresistance and migration in
chondrosarcoma cell lines


Chondrosarcomas (CS) are malignant cartilage-forming tumors of bone. High
grade chondrosarcomas show metastasis formation in 71% of cases, for
which currently no treatment strategies exist. Kinome profiling revealed
high GSK3, AKT, and Src pathway activity. These kinases play a role in
either cell survival, migration, or both. Our aim was to identify the
roles of these pathways in chemoresistance and migration and investigate
downstream effects while pinpointing the most important kinase in
chondrosarcoma. We used 5 conventional chondrosarcoma cell lines and 3
dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma cell lines for the experimental
procedures. Kinase inhibition was performed with enzastaurin (GSK3 and
AKT inhibition) and dasatinib (Src inhibition). WST and Live cell imaging
with AnnexinV staining (BD Pathway 855 Bioimager) were performed to
investigate cell viability and apoptosis formation. Proliferation and
migration assays were performed with the RTCA xCelligence System (Roche).
Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed containing 8 EC, 92 central CS
(grade I n=42, grade II n=35, grade III n=14), 11 OC and 45 peripheral CS
(grade I n=31, grade II n=11, grade III n=3). Overexpression of Src
family members can lead to excess Nrf2 translocation from the nucleus.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for the Src family members and GPX3,
the target of the transcription factor Nrf2. Western blot was performed
for Src family members, Nrf2, and GPX3. Inhibition of GSK3 and Akt with
enzastaurin in chondrosarcoma cell lines was ineffective, also when
combined with Src inhibition (dasatinib) or doxorubicin. Combination
treatment of dasatinib with doxorubicin, however, showed synergistic loss
in cell viability and apoptosis formation, with cleaved caspase3
activation, which was not observed after dasatinib single treatment.
Migration assays in cell lines (n=6) revealed that at low concentrations
of dasatinib (200nM), migration was successfully inhibited. TMA staining
revealed sporadic expression of Yes and Lck (5%), expression of Src (57%)
and abundant expression of Fyn (78%) throughout our panel of CS tissues.
Fyn is described to be associated with metastasis formation and is a good
candidate to play a role in chondrosarcoma progression. Overall pSrc
(active Src) approached 100% in all grades. Western blot analysis showed
nuclear localization of Nrf2 and restoration of GPX3 transcription after
dasatinib treatment of cell lines. We show that Src family kinases rather
than GSK3 and Akt kinases contribute to chemoresistance in
chondrosarcoma. Src kinase inhibition successfully prepared cells for
chemotherapy and acts synergistically with doxorubicin, and moreover was
able to completely inhibit chondrosarcoma cell migration and restore GPX3
transcription. These results strongly indicate Src family kinases, and in
particular Fyn, to be a potential target for the treatment of inoperable
and metastatic chondrosarcomas.

