Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reovirus (Reolysin) as a potential therapy for malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) are a rare form of soft
tissue sarcoma which may occur sporadically in the general population or
in association with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), and are highly
aggressive and often fatal. NF1 patients are at a greater risk for the
development of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors than the general
population. Current therapy relies upon surgical resection with adjuvant
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. Clinical trials using Reolysin
(Respiratory Enteric Orphan Virus) which is developed from the
naturally-occurring human reovirus have demonstrated the efficacy of this
reovirus as an oncolytic virotherapy. Reolysin selectively replicates in
cancer cells with activated Ras (Ras-GTP), resulting in virus-mediated
apoptotic cell death. Hence Reolysin demonstrates promising anticancer
activity and has minimal toxicity in patients. Since MPNST is associated
with neurofibromin (NF1) deficiency and active Ras we tested these tumors
as therapeutic targets for Reolysin treatment using two NF1 deficient
human MPNST-derived cell lines (CRL-2884, ST8814) with activated Ras and
one sporadic MPNST cell line (STS26T) which expresses NF1 but not active
Ras. These were compared with normal human Schwann cells (NHSC) which do
not show active Ras and mammary gland cells derived from an NF1 patient
(CRL-7329). Reolysin inhibited the proliferation and viability of the
three MPNST cell lines at a dose of 0.1 to 10 virus particles/cell,
including sporadic MPNST cells which do not have active Ras. In contrast,
the NHSC and CRL-7329 cells were more resistant to viral treatment, with
apoptosis induced at higher viral concentrations (10,000 and 100,000
virus particles/cell respectively). Furthermore, we examined the effects
of Reolysin on the Ras-signaling pathway in a bladder cancer cell line
(HTB-4) expressing NF1 and Ras and found that virus induced cytotoxicity
was similar to the control cell lines (100,000 virus particles/cell).
This study shows that MPNST-derived cell lines including sporadic MPNST
without active Ras were efficiently transduced, promoted virus
replication and were killed by the oncolytic reovirus. In contrast to the
highly sensitive MPNST cell lines, NHSC, CRL-7329 and HTB-4 cells were
resistant at similar viral concentrations. Our data suggests the use of
oncolytic Reolysin may represent a novel treatment approach for patients
with MPNST and provides the basis for preclinical testing of the
antitumor effects. Therapeutic efficacy of Reolysin in a mouse model for
MPNST is underway.

