Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RAX/PACT-PKR stress-signaling pathway promotes p53 sumoylation
and stability to induce G1 arrest


Cellular stresses including IL-3 withdrawal from factor-dependent
hematopoietic cells, inflammatory cytokine treatment or viral infection
promote RAX/PACT-dependent activation of the interferon-induced,
double-stranded RNA activated protein kinase PKR. Previously, we and
others demonstrated that activated PKR phosphorylates the alpha subunit
of eIF2 to inhibit protein synthesis and initiate apoptosis. In addition,
recent reports indicate that PKR may regulate the transcription factors
p53, STAT1 and NF-B. Now we find that RAX/PACT interacts with the SUMO E2
ligase Ubc9 to stimulate p53-Ubc9 association and reversible p53
sumoylation on lysine 386. In addition, stable or transient expression of
RAX/PACT in a variety of cell lines promotes p53 stability and activity
to increase p53 target gene expression. Significantly, while expression
of RAX/PACT, PKR or p53 alone has little effect on the cell cycle of
p53-null H1299 cells, co-expression of p53 with either RAX/PACT or PKR
promotes a 25 - 35% increase of cells in G1. In contrast, co-expression
of RAX/PACT with the sumoylation-deficient p53 (K386R) mutant or with p53
and the desumoylase SENP1 fails to induce such a G1 arrest. Furthermore,
RAX/PACT-induced, p53-dependent G1 growth arrest is inhibited by
expressing the dominant-negative PKR (K296R) mutant, and expression of
RAX/PACT in pkr+/+ but not pkr-/- MEF cells promotes p53 and p21
expression following gamma irradiation. Significantly, expression of
exogenous RAX/PACT promotes phosphorylation of wild-type but not p53
(K386R) on serine 392, and p53 stability is decreased in cells with
reduced RAX/PACT or PKR following doxorubicin treatment. Collectively,
results indicate that in response to stress the RAX/PACT-PKR signaling
pathway may promote p53 translational activation leading to G1 cell cycle
arrest by a mechanism dependent on p53 sumoylation and phosphorylation
that regulates protein turnover. Importantly, these novel findings may
indicate a wider role for the RAX/PACT-PKR signaling pathway to direct
sumoylation-dependent subcellular localization, protein stability or
protein-protein interactions of downstream targets in response to
cellular stress.

