Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum regulates reovirus-mediated cytopathy in K-Ras activated
colorectal cancer and intestinal epithelial cell lines


Background: The oncolytic potency of replication competent REOvirus has
been demonstrated in various cancers. The activity is most pronounced in
Kras mutant cancer cells, which account for 30-40 % of all cancers.
Herein we simultaneously utilized isogenic human derived colorectal
cancer cell lines that differ only by the presence of mutant Kras and
normal rat intestinal epithelial cells with inducible Kras to evaluate
whether the presence of oncogenic Kras alters the sensitivity of colon
cancer cells to reovirus. Methods: Reovirus was obtained from Oncolytics
Biotech Inc. Rat IEC's harboring IPTG inducible mutant Ras oncogene
(IEC-iKras) were treated with reovirus IPTG. The infectivity was
maintained at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 2. MTT assay was
performed at 72 hours to determine cell vability (CV). Similar
experiments were also performed with HCT116 (Kras mut) and its isogenic
derivative Hke3 [(Kras wild type (WT)]. Cells were cultured and treated
in both serum rich (SR) and serum free (SF) media to determine the effect
of growth factors on sensitivity to reovirus. Alterations in gene
expression were determined by real time PCR and protein expression by
western blot. Results: The activity of reovirus was observed in all cell
lines studied. Reduction in CV was greater in Kras mutant HCT116 compared
to WT Hke3 cells. Consistently, induction of Kras in IEC cells increased
the potency of reovirus. Furthermore, this effect was more prominent in
cells cultured in SF suggesting that growth factors in the serum may
attenuate the effect of mutant Kras on reovirus sensitivity. Expression
of the cell cycle regulator, p21 was preferentially increased upon
reovirus infection in Kras mutant compared to WT cells, and in cells
cultured in SF compared to SR conditions. Conclusion: Oncogenic Kras
mutations increase the sensitivity of colon cancer cells to Reovirus.
Clinical trials are underway testing reovirus in patients with Kras
mutant metastatic colorectal cancer.


