Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proliferative activity of human colon TIC in sphere cultures


In human colon cancer only a small subfraction of all tumor cells is able
to rebuild the tumor in immunodeficient mice. It has been hypothesized
that the proliferative activity of these tumor initiating cells (TIC) may
differ from the bulk of the tumor cells and that mitotic quiescence of
TIC may contribute to chemotherapy resistance or relapse after treatment.
By genetic marking, we have previously shown that a variable proportion
of all human TIC contributed to tumor xenograft formation only late after
serial transplantation suggesting that these delayed contributing TIC
indeed might have been quiescent in the primary recipient mice. We now
investigated the proliferative activity of transplantable TIC in sphere
cultures derived from primary human colon cancer samples. Samples from
human colon cancer tumors were dissociated and cultured under serum free
conditions that favor the outgrowth of tumor spheres that are enriched
with TIC. Dissociated sphere cells from two individual patients (TSC01,
TSC03) were stained using the fluorescent dye CFSE. Precise halving of
the fluorescence intensity during each cell division allows us to define
subfractions by FACS according to their proliferative activity. In both
patients, fractions of fast (F), slow (S) and non-dividing (N) cells were
distinguishable at day 8 after CFSE staining. Cell surface markers
previously associated with tumor-initiating potential (CD133, CD44 and
CD166) were equally expressed in all cell fractions. Sphere forming
capacity was quantified in vitro. The frequency of sphere forming cells
(SFC) was similar in the fast, slow and non-dividing fractions (TSC03: 1
SFC in 23 to 1 in 61 and TSC01: 1 SFC in 1,2 to 1 in 2,1), demonstrating
that the vast majority of all SFC were rapidly cycling in vitro. SFC
frequency as well as the kinetics of sphere formation remained stable
after serial replating. To assess the in vivo tumor initiating potential
and self-renewal ability, equal cell numbers of sorted N, S and F cells
were transplanted into immunodeficient mice. All sorted cell fractions of
both patients formed tumors, irrespective of their proliferative kinetics
in vitro. Moreover, the majority of cells within serially transplanted
tumors originating from CFSE+ fractions lost fluorescence intensity
indicating that they actively cycled after transplantation. Our results
demonstrate that functional assessment of CFSE stained primary human
colon cancer spheres allows discriminating TIC subfractions with
differing proliferative activity. The majority of all colon cancer TIC
from two patient samples rapidly divided in sphere cultures suggesting
that the tumor initiating potential is not tightly linked to mitotic
quiescence.

