Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of androgen receptor activity in refractory prostate
cancer cells by the novel Millennium-Takeda compound T-1759243


Purpose. Prostate cancer (PCa) continues to be a leading cause of cancer
death in males worldwide. In the prostate, androgens play a crucial role
in both normal and cancerous growth by acting through the androgen
receptor (AR), a member of the nuclear receptor super-family; hence, the
AR has become a target of therapeutic intervention. The standard
treatment for advanced PCa is androgen ablation therapy, initially
leading to tumor regression through inhibition of AR activity. However,
the success of androgen ablation therapy is often terminated by the
emergence of castration- recurrent PCa (CRPC), for which there is still
no cure. CRPC remains dependent on a functional AR-axis for proliferation
and drugs targeting this network are continually being developed. We have
examined the effects of Millennium-Takeda investigational compound
T-1759243 on both androgen-responsive and androgen-refractory PCa cells
in order to assess its therapeutic potential. Methods. We used PCa cell
lines LNCaP, LNCaP-C42 and 22RV1 and assessed effects on cell viability
and proliferation using MTS and BrdU assays. AR activity was measured
using PSA-luciferase reporter constructs and protein levels by western
blot. Microarray analysis with the Illumina HT-12 platform was used to
identify genes affected by treatment with T-1759243, followed by
real-time PCR confirmation. Pathway analysis was performed using
MetaCoreTM software. Results. Our studies have revealed that T-1759243
reduces viability in all cell lines examined, regardless of androgen
responsiveness. Treatment resulted in decreased proliferation in
androgen-responsive cells and increased apoptosis in refractory cells. AR
activity, as measured by PSA-luciferase assay, was greatly decreased in
all cell lines by 10uM T-1759243 and T-1759243 abrogated the ability of
synthetic androgen R1881 to increase AR activity by inhibiting nuclear
translocation of the AR in refractory cells. Pathway analysis revealed
changes in genes involved in cell-cycle, cell adhesion and cytoskeletal
remodeling in addition to genes in androgen target pathways. Conclusions.
T-1759243 is a novel AR antagonist that inhibits AR activity in both
androgen-dependent and androgen-refractory prostate cancer cells.
Additionally, it inhibits the ability of androgen to promote nuclear
translocation of the AR and thus stimulate AR activity in
castrate-resistant prostate cancer cells. Pathways affected by treatment
with T-1759243 are cell-specific and dependent on AR status and may
reveal novel gene targets in PCa treatment. This work was supported in
part by Grant #35 from Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc the Takeda
Oncology Company.

