Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irradiation of -ionizing radiation to in vivo glioma model induced
metastasis via occurrence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition


-Ionizing radiation (IR) therapy is known to be a one of major
therapeutic tools of cancer treatment but -IR also could be an inducer of
tumorigenesis and metastasis. Metastasis is major obstacle and required
to overcome for cancer treatment. Therefore, the aim of this
investigation was to study whether radiation could induce metastasis our
in vivo mouse system, and molecular mechanism behind -IR-induced
metastasis. C6L transfectant cell line expressing firefly luciferase
(fLuc) was treated with -IR and then immunoblotting, zymography and
invasion assay in vitro. We also used C6L transfectant cell line to
construct xenograft in nude mice and then IR was irradiated to xenograft
with -IR. The irradiated xenograft-containing mice were analyzed with
survival curve, measurement of tumor size, and bioluminescence imaging in
vivo and ex vivo. We also analyzed metastatic foci in organ of mice with
RT-PCR analysis, H & E staining and immunohistochemistry. -IR treatment
to C6L cell induced ocurrence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and increase of cell invasion. In irradiated xenograft-containing mice,
sizes of tumor were decreased dramatically and survival rate also
extended. Almost all non-irradiated xenograft-containing control mice
were dead within 4 weeks. But we also observed luminescence signals in
about 20.9% of -IR treated mice. Intestine or lung of luminescence
signal-detected mice contained several foci, which expressed fLuc gene
and presented histological features as a cancer tissue as well as
expressions of EMT markers. Taken together, these findings indicate that
-IR treatment could induce metastasis in vivo via EMT including increase
of MMP activity. We also propose that construction of metastasis animal
model by -IR treatment could use drug development to block cancer
metastasis and increase understandings of metastasis mechanism.

