Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a lung cancer growth factor, LASEP1 as a
serological and prognostic biomarker and a therapeutic target


To identify molecules that might serve as biomarkers or targets for the
development of novel molecular therapies, we have been screening genes
encoding transmembrane/secretory proteins that are up-regulated in lung
cancers, using cDNA microarrays. During this process, we identified a
secreted protein, LASEP1 (lung cancer-associated serum protein 1) as a
candidate. Immunohistochemical staining using tumor tissue microarrays
consisting of 374 non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) revealed that
LASEP1 protein was frequently over-expressed in lung cancers; positive
staining of LASEP1 was observed in 210 (56.1%) of 374 NSCLC, while that
was observed in 9 (69.2%) of 13 small cell lung cancers (SCLC). In
addition, a strong LASEP1 positivity was associated with poor prognosis
for patients with NSCLC (PTo identify molecules that might serve as
biomarkers or targets for the development of novel molecular therapies,
we have been screening genes encoding transmembrane/secretory proteins
that are up-regulated in lung cancers, using cDNA microarrays. During
this process, we identified a secreted protein, LASEP1 (lung
cancer-associated serum protein 1) as a candidate. Immunohistochemical
staining using tumor tissue microarrays consisting of 374 non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLC) revealed that LASEP1 protein was frequently
over-expressed in lung cancers; positive staining of LASEP1 was observed
in 210 (56.1%) of 374 NSCLC, while that was observed in 9 (69.2%) of 13
small cell lung cancers (SCLC). In addition, a strong LASEP1 positivity
was associated with poor prognosis for patients with NSCLC (P<0.001 by
log-rank test), and multivariate analysis confirmed its independent
prognostic value. Serum LASEP1 levels were higher in NSCLCs as well as
SCLCs patients than in healthy volunteers. The proportion of serum
LASEP1-positive cases was 127 (38.6%) of 329 lung cancers, while 4 (3.9%)
of 102 healthy volunteers were falsely diagnosed. Furthermore, treatment
of lung cancer cells with siRNAs against LASEP1 suppressed its expression
and resulted in growth suppression of the lung cancer cells; on the other
hand, induction of exogenous expression of LASEP1 conferred
growth-promoting activity and enhanced the cell mobility in vitro.
Interestingly, the growth activity of the LASEP1-positive cells was
neutralized by addition of originally developed anti-LASEP1 monoclonal
antibodies into their culture media. The systemic administration of the
anti-LASEP1 antibody to LASEP1-positive tumor-implanted mice
significantly suppressed tumor growth without any adverse events. We
found a receptor (LASEPR) which interacts with LASEP1 on lung cancer cell
surface and is essential for the growth of cancer cells. The data suggest
that the LASEP1-LASEPR interaction could promote the cancer cell growth
in an autocrine manner. LASEP1 is a potential serological and prognostic
biomarker and a therapeutic target for lung cancer.

