Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased detection of circulating prostate epithelial tumor cells
on microfluidic channels using enhanced staining and automated scanning


INTRODUCTION Anti-cytokeratin antibodies are typically used to detect
circulating tumor cells (CTC) of epithelial origin in the blood of cancer
patients. Cytokeratin (CK) is a cytoplasmic structural protein. We have
previously described the CEE Enhanced TM (CE) technology for in situ
fluorescence labeling of the capture antibodies used to isolate CTCs in
our microfluidic channel. The signal intensity of cells stained by CE
therefore reflects the number of antibody-targeted surface antigens on
each cell. In this study we show enhanced and increased detection of
prostate CTCs by co-staining CTCs with anti-CK, CE and anti-PSA in
combination with automated digital analysis. METHODS Matched tubes of
prostate cancer blood were processed and the CTCs captured on
micro-channels using a cocktail of antibodies. CTCs were fluorescently
stained with anti-CK and anti-CD45 labeled with AlexaFluor 488 and 594,
respectively. Micro-channels were rapidly scanned using a Cyntellect
Celigo cell scanner in combination with an automated Applied Spectral
Imaging microscope system. CTCs were identified as intact cells that were
DAPI+, CK+ and CD45-negative. After CTCs were confirmed by image
analysis, the same channels were further stained with CE-AlexaFluor 488
and anti-PSA labeled with AlexaFluor 647. The cell XY coordinates and
cell fluorescence intensity for scan 1 and scan 2 of the same
micro-channel were matched using proprietary software. Changes in
fluorescence intensity and co-localization of PSA staining were
determined. All reported CTCs were DAPI + and CD45 negative. RESULTS
Seventy-four of 100 prostate CTCs matched after CK stain and subsequent
staining with CE showed a CE increase in fluorescence intensity greater
than 10% above CK. The mean increase in fluorescence intensity for these
CTCs was 5.8-fold (95% CI 4.0-7.6), with a median increase of 2.6-fold
(95% CI 2.0-3.5). The mean and median increase in CTC fluorescence
intensity after CE was significant (pINTRODUCTION Anti-cytokeratin
antibodies are typically used to detect circulating tumor cells (CTC) of
epithelial origin in the blood of cancer patients. Cytokeratin (CK) is a
cytoplasmic structural protein. We have previously described the CEE
Enhanced TM (CE) technology for in situ fluorescence labeling of the
capture antibodies used to isolate CTCs in our microfluidic channel. The
signal intensity of cells stained by CE therefore reflects the number of
antibody-targeted surface antigens on each cell. In this study we show
enhanced and increased detection of prostate CTCs by co-staining CTCs
with anti-CK, CE and anti-PSA in combination with automated digital
analysis. METHODS Matched tubes of prostate cancer blood were processed
and the CTCs captured on micro-channels using a cocktail of antibodies.
CTCs were fluorescently stained with anti-CK and anti-CD45 labeled with
AlexaFluor 488 and 594, respectively. Micro-channels were rapidly scanned
using a Cyntellect Celigo cell scanner in combination with an automated
Applied Spectral Imaging microscope system. CTCs were identified as
intact cells that were DAPI+, CK+ and CD45-negative. After CTCs were
confirmed by image analysis, the same channels were further stained with
CE-AlexaFluor 488 and anti-PSA labeled with AlexaFluor 647. The cell XY
coordinates and cell fluorescence intensity for scan 1 and scan 2 of the
same micro-channel were matched using proprietary software. Changes in
fluorescence intensity and co-localization of PSA staining were
determined. All reported CTCs were DAPI + and CD45 negative. RESULTS
Seventy-four of 100 prostate CTCs matched after CK stain and subsequent
staining with CE showed a CE increase in fluorescence intensity greater
than 10% above CK. The mean increase in fluorescence intensity for these
CTCs was 5.8-fold (95% CI 4.0-7.6), with a median increase of 2.6-fold
(95% CI 2.0-3.5). The mean and median increase in CTC fluorescence
intensity after CE was significant (p<0.001). In addition to increased
fluorescence intensity of CK-stained CTCs after CE, a 40% increase in the
number of CTCs was observed as CK-negative cells that had become
positively stained with CE. Of the CK+ CTCs, 70% were PSA positive, while
CK-negative cells detected as CTCs with CE-only were 54% PSA positive.
Staining first with CE on matched blood samples gave similar numbers of
CTCs as staining with anti-CK. CONCLUSIONS These results demonstrate that
most CD45-, CK+ prostate CTCs co-stained with CE and PSA. In addition,
new CK-, PSA+ CTCs were detectable as CE positive and CD45 negative. CE
can increase the fluorescence signal of weakly CK stained cells, and
allows detection of CTCs previously below the CK detection threshold.
Studies are underway to characterize other CE-positive, CK-negative cells
with epithelial-to-mesenchymal cellular markers.

