Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of EGF-receptors signaling by small peptidomimetic
molecules in breast cancer cells


Protein-protein interactions play a crucial role in regulating many
biological processes as well as in disease pathology. Understanding the
structural basis and modulating protein-protein interactions has a
tremendous impact in developing new therapeutic strategies for many human
diseases. Human epidermal growth factor receptor family of proteins
(EGFR, HER2, 3 and 4) plays an important role in cell growth and
proliferation. Aberrant interactions of EGFR family of proteins lead to
tumor growth and metastasis. HER2, a member of EGFR family of proteins is
overexpressed in approximately 25% of breast cancers. Deregulation of
HER2 signaling pathways and overexpression of HER2 is known to occur in
many cancers. HER2 is known to form heterodimers and is a major
therapeutic target in breast cancer treatment. Formation of HER2 receptor
heterodimerization with other EGFR family of proteins such as EGFR, HER3
is essential for intracellular kinase activation and is the basis for
exploring direct inhibition of EGFR activation by blocking dimerization
for therapeutic purposes. We have designed several small peptidomimetics
to inhibit HER2-mediated signaling for cell growth. One of such
peptidomimetics, Compound 5 (Arg-[3-amino-naphthyl-propionic acid]-Phe)
designed, exhibited antiproliferative activity with IC50 values in the nM
range against HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines, SKBR-3 and
BT-474. Binding studies using Florescence Microscopy, ELISA, Circular
Dichroism (CD) and Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) confirmed that
compound 5 binds specifically to HER2-extracellular domain. SPR studies
revealed that compound 5 specifically binds to domain IV of HER2
extracellular region. Also, Compound 5 inhibited HER2-HER3 as well as
HER2-EGFR heterodimerization evaluated by SPR. Pathhunter and proximity
ligation assays confirmed the inhibition of HER2 heterodimerization with
EGFR and HER3 by compound 5. Western blots revealed that compound 5
blocks the transphosphorylation of HER2 protein. Based on these
observations small peptidomimetic inhibitor molecules can be potential
therapeutic agents in disabling HER2 mediated heterodimerization.

