Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring cancer datasets in the integrative genomics viewer (IGV)


Cancer genome characterization studies, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), are
producing a flood of diverse data including whole-genome sequencing
scans, expression profiles, high-resolution SNP and copy number data, and
epigenetic profiles. These diverse datasets are enabling researchers to
study the cancer genome in unprecedented detail. However, their sheer
size and diversity presents significant challenges to downstream
interpretation. While much progress has been made in automated analysis,
human review enabled by intuitive and responsive visualizations remains
an essential component of data analysis. The Integrative Genomics Viewer
(IGV) was developed to address this need by providing researchers with an
intuitive, user-friendly, interactive visualization tool for exploration
of diverse genomic datasets. IGV has extensive support for both
next-generation and micro-array based platforms, and for integration of
these data types with clinical and phenotypic data. It provides an
intuitive interface similar to online mapping tools such as Google Maps,
enabling smooth zooming and panning at all resolution scales, from whole
genome to base pairs. Data can be annotated, filtered, grouped, and
sorted in a variety of ways. This ability to dynamically and flexibly
integrate multiple different datasets, and view them at any scale, allows
investigators to elucidate complex biological relationships that are not
otherwise readily apparent. In this presentation we describe the IGV,
with emphasis on recent features focused on data integration and
interpretation, developed in close collaboration with cancer researchers.
Specifically (1) a multi-locus pathway view which supports simultaneous
viewing of data in multiple genomic regions defined by pathways or gene
sets, (2) integration with external tools such as Mutation Assessor and
PolyPhen, to provide views and data to asses the functional significance
of somatic events, and (3) a flexible, interactive charting capability to
enable detailed exploration of inter-dependencies between data types at a
specific locus or set of loci. These features will be illustrated in the
context of use cases drawn from the TCGA glioblastoma multiforme and
ovarian datasets.

