Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-educated macrophages promote tumor growth and peritoneal
metastasis in an orthotopic nude mouse model of human pancreatic cancer


There is a strong association between poor survival and increased
macrophage density in many cancers. In the current study, we determined
whether macrophages from tumor-bearing mice (tumor-educated macrophages)
had greater tumor-promoting capability than macrophages from
non-tumor-bearing mice. Ten transgenic nude mice ubiquitously-expressing
GFP were injected subcutaneously with the human pancreatic cancer cell
line, BXPC3 stably expressing RFP. GFP-expressing macrophages from
tumor-bearing transgenic GFP mice were harvested and defined as
tumor-educated macrophages. Macrophages were also harvested from
transgenic GFP mice (n=10) without subcutaneous tumors and identified as
nave macrophages. Three groups of mice were studied: 1) A control group
without addition of macrophages (n=10); 2) A nave group, with weekly
intraperitoneal (ip) injection of 106 nave macrophages per mouse (n=10);
and 3) A tumor-educated group, with weekly ip injection of 106
tumor-educated macrophages per mouse (n=10). The study ended with
termination of the tumor-educated group after 8 weeks due to a pre-morbid
state identified in all mice. At this time, all mice in each of the three
study arms were terminated, imaging was performed, and total tumor weight
was obtained. In the control group, the average primary tumor weighed 668
mg; only three mice (30%) developed peritoneal metastases with an average
weight of 241 mg. The nave-macrophage group had an average tumor weight
of 823 mg (p=0.51); 50% developed peritoneal metastases with an average
weight of 975 mg (p=0.029). The tumor-educated-macrophage group had an
average primary tumor weight of 2095 mg (p=0.001); 75% of mice developed
peritoneal metastases with an average weight of 2135 mg (p=0.008). When
comparing nave- to tumor-educated- groups, primary tumor weight was
significantly greater in the tumor-educated group (p=0.003), and the
average weight of metastasis was 2.2 times greater in the tumor educated
group, however this did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.17).
When comparing nave- to tumor-educated-groups, there was no statistically
significant difference with regard to body weight (p=0.87), or weight of
metastasis (p=0.68); however primary tumor weight was significantly
greater in the tumor-educated group (p=0.013). Tumor-educated-macrophages
specifically promote tumor growth progression in an orthotopic nude mouse
model of pancreatic cancer.

