Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Bcl2L13 as a novel GBM oncoprotein


Using in silico analysis of 272 GBM samples in the TGCA data set to find
important cell death mechanisms in gliomapathogenesis, we identified
differential expression of the novel Bcl2-Like13 protein (Bcl2L13).
Bcl2L13 shares significant structural homology with Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, but
contains a unique 250 amino acid sequence that may point to unique,
non-classical functions. Several studies have shown that Bcl2L13
expression correlates with increased chemotherapeutic resistance and
unfavorable treatment outcome in leukemia and ZIC1-driven liposarcomas.
These clinical data suggests that Bcl2L13 likely acts as an onco-protein
in multiple cancers and may act in a similar manner in GBM. Using qRT-PCR
and immunohistochemical analyses, we found that Bcl2L13 was highly
overexpressed in >90% of GBM samples, but absent in adjacent normal
brain. Using RNAi-loss- and cDNA complementation studies in glioma cell
lines and glioma stem cells (GSCs), we determined that Bcl2L13 potently
inhibits therapy-induced apoptosis by inhibiting mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabalization (MOMP) and post-mitochondrial caspase-3 and -7
cleavage, likely acting in a similar manner as canonical Bcl-2 family
proteins. Bcl2L13 overexpression also greatly increased cellular
proliferation, and immunofluorescence and cell fractionalization
experiments revealed that Bcl2L13 is localized at the mitochondria. To
study the impact of Bcl2L13 on the progression of gliomagenesis in vivo,
we orthotopically injected glioma cell lines with enforced expression of
Bcl2L13-targeting shRNAs into immunocompromised SCID mice. Strikingly,
neutralization of Bcl2L13 signaling increased overall glioma-free
survival, which was associated with enhanced intratumoral apoptosis and
decreased proliferative indices. To molecularly elucidate the mechanism
by which Bcl2L13 exerts its anti-apoptotic effects, we performed a Yeast
Two Hybrid screen and identified a select number of tumor suppressors and
onco-proteins including ceramide synthase 2 (CerS2), (a regulator of
MOMP) and O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), (an important
prognostic indicator of telozolomide effectiveness) as Bcl2L13
interaction partners. Co-immunoprecipitations confirmed the interactions
between Bcl2L13 and these proteins. Taken together, these results reveal
that Bcl2L13 represents a novel anti-apoptotic, Bcl-2-like GBM
oncoprotein that inhibits apoptosis progression and promotes tumor growth
by impacting mitochondrial membrane physiology.

