Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved coiled-coil design enhances interaction with Bcr-Abl and
induces apoptosis


The fusion protein Bcr-Abl responsible for the oncogenic activity in
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) depends heavily on oligomerization for
function. Formation of Bcr-Abl oligomers occurs through a coiled-coil
domain existing at the N-terminal portion of the Bcr segment. Previously,
we have shown that disruption of this oligomerization utilizing a
modified coiled-coil domain (CCmut2) both decreases the proliferation of
CML cells and results in the induction of apoptosis. An important
contributing factor to these results stems from the increased
destabilization of CCmut2 homo-dimers. This phenomenon occurs due to the
rationally mutated residues in the modified coiled-coil which allow for
favorable interactions with the wild-type Bcr-Abl, but destabilizing
interactions with other CCmut2 molecules, thus discouraging the formation
of CCmut2 homo-dimers. In turn, this increases the availability and
affinity for the modified coiled-coil to interact with and inhibit
endogenous Bcr-Abl in CML cells. An additional mutation (K39E) was
included that could potentially further destabilize the mutant
homo-dimer. Added to the other mutations found in CCmut2 (C38A, S41R,
L45N, E48R, Q60E), the new construct was termed CCmut3. To show that
CCmut3 results in enhanced binding to a wild-type coiled-coil domain
(representative of endogenous Bcr-Abl), 2 separate assays were performed.
Colocalization studies were used to show the degree to which CCmut3
localizes intracellularly with Bcr-Abl. Additionally, a mammalian
two-hybrid assay was conducted to show the relative selective
dimerization between CCmut3 and the Bcr-Abl coiled-coil. Next, caspase
3/7 assays were performed and showed the ability of CCmut3 to induce
apoptosis. The CCmut 3 also showed nuclear segmentation (a measurement of
late-stage apoptosis) and decrease in oncogenic proliferation (via the
colony forming assay). Taken together, these results provide strong
evidence for using CCmut3 as a therapeutic for CML. Lastly, attempts to
truncate the CCmut3 to find the smallest possible sequence needed (e.g.,
helix 2) to bind and kill cells effectively is currently underway.

