Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical testing of mRNA engineered chimeric antigen receptor T
cells: Comparison of a multi-infusion protocol to a single injection of
stably expressed CARs in ALL xenograft models


T cells engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs),
consisting of an anti-tumor targeting domain fused to Signal 1 and 2
activation domains, are a promising approach to cell therapy. We compared
T cells engineered to stably express CARs using integrating viral vectors
with T cells transiently expressing CARS via direct transduction with
non-integrating mRNA. In early clinical testing, this CAR design using
lentiviral transduction has been tested in 3 patients with advanced CLL.
In these refractory patients with very high disease burdens, dramatic
clinical responses have been observed, with two patients achieving CRs
and one a PR, all sustained at >12 months. Transient expression has
several advantages: short-term expression may allow initial clinical
testing while limiting toxicity, and expediting manufacturing and scaling
to GMP of CAR modifications, allowing rapid iterative improvements of CAR
design. To evaluate the in vivo efficacy of mRNA CAR+T cells, we used
xenograft models of human ALL (Nalm-6 and a primary patient leukemia,
both CD19+) and high-level human T cell engraftment. NSG mice were
injected with ALL at a dose producing 100% BM engraftment by 5d with 100%
mortality by 25d (Nalm-6) or 36d (Primary). T cells were expanded ex vivo
using CD3/CD28 beads and underwent lentiviral gene transfer or mRNA
electroporation. mRNA transfection produced high but transient CAR
surface expression, peaking at 4 hours and then declining over 8d. Using
a novel method of simultaneous bioluminescent tracking of CARs and
leukemia, we observed rapid migration of CAR T cells to all sites of
disease and 100-fold reduction in ALL burden after only 24h. Using low
dose cyclophosphamide (CTX; 60 mg/kg IP) 24h before the next infusion, we
were able to deplete non-CAR expressing T cells and observe continued
effects on leukemia from subsequent mRNA CAR infusions resulting in
significantly prolonged survival in mice treated with mRNA CARs.
Short-term efficacy of a single dose of mRNA vs. lentiviral CAR+ T cells
was similar. Neither CTX nor untargeted repeat CAR T cells infusions
alone had an effect on leukemia burden or survival. While lentiviral CAR+
T cells persisted and were active longer, median overall survival was not
different between repeat mRNA CARs (52d Nalm-6, 76d primary) and a single
dose of lentiviral transduced CARs (54d Nalm-6, 87d primary). Only stably
expressed CARs resulted in any long term cures in this model. Relapse
patterns suggest that the efficacy of mRNA and lentivirus CAR T cells are
similar, as peripheral disease can be repeatedly cleared with subsequent
mRNA CAR infusions but immune privileged xenograft artifact sites such as
the tooth root are more resistant. These pre-clinical results demonstrate
an important advance in T cell engineering, and are leading directly to
clinical trials testing mRNA CAR CTLs.

