Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal miRNAs contribute to prostatic zinc homeostasis


A high level of zinc accumulation is required for normal prostatic
function and secretion of prostatic fluid, and loss of zinc is a
consistent marker of malignancy. We have recently shown that the
reduction in expression of a major zinc transport protein, hZIP1, is due,
in part, to aberrantly expressed microRNAs (miRs). MiR-183, 96 and 182,
of the miR-183 family, target hZIP1 and other zinc transporters through
binding the 3 untranslated region (UTR) leading to decreased
intracellular zinc in prostatic cells. Overexpression of miRs-183, 96 and
182 in prostate cancer is accompanied by decreased zinc concentration.
African American men, as compared to Caucasian men, are at a higher risk
of diagnosis and death from prostate cancer. African American men
typically present with prostate tumors with higher Gleason grades at an
earlier age than Caucasian men. This suggests that the prostatic tumors
African American men suffer from are more aggressive and faster growing
than the prostate tumors of Caucasian men and that there may be a strong
biological component to this disparity. It has been previously shown that
the prostatic lesions of African American men have a consistently lower
zinc concentration than the lesions of their Caucasian peers and have
comparatively reduced prostatic expression of hZIP1. We hypothesize that
increased expression and exosomal secretion of miRs-183, 96 and 182 may
be responsible for the greater degree of zinc depletion in the cancerous
prostatic lesions of African American men, as compared to Caucasian men.
Exosomes are small vesicles secreted from most cell types that have been
repeatedly shown to be capable of carrying miRs to neighboring cells or
the circulation. Our preliminary data shows that miRs-183, 96 and 182 are
secreted in exosomes from primary prostate epithelial cells in culture,
indicating a possible regulation of zinc via cell-to-cell transfer of
exosomal miRs. Additionally, we found that the miR-183 family is more
highly expressed in the prostatic tissues of African American men, which
may contribute to the prostatic zinc disparity. Ongoing work will measure
exosomal levels and activity of miR-183, 96 and 182 in primary prostatic
epithelial cells from African American and Caucasian men and we have data
to suggest that exosomes from African American men contain higher levels
of miRs-183, 96 and 182. We will further determine the ability of
exosomally derived miR-183, 96 and 182 to regulate zinc homeostasis in
primary prostate epithelial cells. The identification of these miRNAs
have important implications for patient care, in that African American
men may benefit more from zinc supplementation than their Caucasian
peers. As miRNA-targeted therapies emerge, these miRNAs may be targeted
for prostate cancer treatment.

