Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dimerized single chain TRAIL-receptor agonists do not depend on
Fc-gamma-receptor cross-linking for anti-tumor efficacy in vivo


APG350 is a TRAIL-receptor (TRAIL-R) agonist comprising two single-chain
TRAIL-R binding domains (scTRAIL-RBD) that are dimerized via the Fc-part
of a human IgG1-mutein thereby creating six receptor binding sites per
molecule. This improved ability to form clusters on target cells composed
of six TRAIL-Rs each, distinguishes APG350 from current clinical
development candidates. In vitro, comparison of APG350 with recombinant
APO2L/TRAIL and a TRAIL-R2 specific agonistic antibody revealed superior
apoptosis induction for APG350 on primary and established human tumor
cell-lines. Treatment of mice bearing Colo205 xenograft tumors with
APG350, APO2L/TRAIL or an agonistic TRAIL-R2 specific antibody showed
superior anti-tumor efficacy for APG350. Pronounced anti tumor efficacy
was also shown on colon cancer stem cell (CSC) derived xenografts and
successful APG350 re-treatment of relapsed CSC derived tumors
demonstrated that tumors did not develop drug resistance. For most
agonistic TRAIL-R antibodies effective apoptosis induction is achieved
only upon additional cross-linking. SEC-based fractionation of a TRAIL-R2
specific agonistic antibody indicates a small amount of multimerized
antibody that showed efficient apoptosis induction in vitro. However, the
respective monomeric antibody showed poor apoptosis induction in vitro
that could be enhanced upon cross-linking. In contrast apoptosis
induction by APG350 was only marginally enhanced by cross-linking.
Although monomeric agonistic TRAIL-R antibodies are poor apoptosis
inducers in vitro, they show efficient apoptosis induction on xenograft
tumors in vivo. A likely explanation for this difference is given by a
recent publication showing that anti-tumor efficacy of an agonistic
TRAIL-R2 specific antibody (Drozitumab) depends on cross-linking by
Fc-receptors (FcR) in vivo. These data suggest that FcR cross-linking
might be a common requirement for the anti-tumor efficacy of agonistic
TRAIL-R antibodies. To exclude that in vivo efficacy of APG350 depends on
cross-linking by FcRs we designed APG350-muteins with strongly reduced
(APG808) or lacking FcR binding (APG780). Side by side comparison of
APG808, APG780 and APG350 in mice bearing Colo205-derived xenograft
tumors showed identical anti-tumor efficacy for all respective proteins.
Given that APG780 cannot bind to FcRs these results suggest that the
anti-tumor efficacy of APG808, APG780 and APG350 is solely based on the
unique construction principle of the dimerized scTRAIL-RBD. APG350
induces superior clustering of TRAIL-Rs that in contrast to agonistic
TRAIL-R antibodies does not require cross-linking via FcRs for its potent
anti-tumor efficacy. APG350 based dimerized scTRAIL-RBD formats may
therefore have the capacity to bridge the current gap seen between
preclinical and clinical efficacy for agonistic TRAIL-R specific
antibodies.

