Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the unfolded protein response as a therapeutic approach
in hematological malignancies


The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a complex signaling pathway
activated in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. In recent years,
the UPR has been implicated in cancer and chemosensitivity, particularly
solid tumors. We have investigated the potential value of targeting the
UPR as a novel therapeutic approach in hematological malignancies using a
panel of cell lines representing AML, lymphoma and multiple myeloma. UPR
activation was determined from expression of the key ER chaperones GRP78
and GRP94 and UPR mediators using Western blot analysis. The effect of
cytotoxic agents and agents that induce (thapsigargin, tunicamycin),
target (versipelostatin) or silence (siRNA) UPR proteins were studied,
alone and in combination, using cytotoxicity, apoptosis and colony
formation assays. The UPR was constitutively active in these
hematological cancer cell lines, with differential activation of key UPR
proteins across the tumor types studied. There were also differences in
UPR activation between the hematological cell line panel, peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and the colorectal cancer cell line HT-29.
Further UPR activation was seen at the translational level following
minimally toxic (EC5), and cytotoxic (EC25 and EC50), concentrations of
ER stress inducers, proteasome and HSP90 inhibitors. A number of
strategies were used to study the effect of UPR modulation on
chemosensitivity. Minimally toxic concentrations of the ER stress inducer
thapsigargin protected cells from cytotoxic agents, with a reduction in
antiproliferative drug effect. The activity of the novel small molecule
versipelostatin, reported to downregulate the ER molecular chaperones
GRP78 and GRP94, was also investigated. The downregulation of these
chaperone proteins previously reported in solid tumor cell lines (Park et
al. 2004) was confirmed in HT-29 cells, but downregulation was not
observed in the hematological cell lines studied, although
versipelostatin was an effective cytotoxic agent at low micromolar
concentration. Combination experiments with the chemical chaperone
4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA) resulted in a small increase in apoptosis when
PBA was combined with ER stress inducing agents. However, PBA also showed
HDAC inhibitory activity at the concentrations used, suggesting the
interaction seen may be due to HDAC inhibition in addition to, or instead
of, its chemical chaperone activity. Finally, siRNA mediated silencing of
GRP78 and GRP94 in the THP1 (AML) and U266 (multiple myeloma) cells
resulted in a decrease in the targeted protein, but showed only minimal
effects on the activity of chemotherapy. In conclusion, the UPR is
activated in these hematological cancer cell lines and plays a complex
role in chemosensitivity. In contrast to previous reports in solid tumor
cells, modulating the UPR in these hematological malignancies had only a
modest effect on sensitivity to cytotoxic agents.

