Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JL1 is a cell surface molecule of acute leukemia blasts: Potential
for targeted immunotherapy


Background: Acute leukemia in adults is associated with poor prognosis,
with many patients suffering from treatment-resistant relapse. Novel
targeted therapies are needed. JL1 was identified as an extracellular
glycoform of the cell surface protein sialophorin (CD43). We tested
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific for JL1 that are not immunoreactive
to the common form of CD43. We characterized JL1 expression in primary
acute leukemia blasts and explored the therapeutic potential of these
antibodies against acute leukemia. Methods: Fresh peripheral blood or
bone marrow aspirate samples from acute leukemia patients, healthy
donors, or leukemia cell lines were used for expression studies by flow
cytometry (FC) with a monoclonal antibody against JL1.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was also performed on normal human tissues. A
saporin-conjugated anti-JL1 mAb was used to evaluate the
proliferation-inhibition and apoptosis-induction against leukemia cell
lines in vitro and primary acute leukemia cells ex vivo. A mouse
engraftment model with primary acute leukemia cells was established to
investigate the in vivo effect of the JL1 mAb. Results: By IHC, JL1
expression was found in normal human thymocytes FC showed that JL1 was
not detectable on normal peripheral blood cells (n=3). FC assay of acute
leukemia blasts showed that 85.7% (18 of 20 acute myeloid leukemia and 6
of 8 acute lymphoblastic leukemia) of cases expressed JL1. A
saporin-conjugated anti-JL1 mAb was capable of mediating dose-dependent
proliferation-inhibition and apoptosis-induction in CEM-7 leukemia cells.
The effect of proliferation-inhibition of anti-JL1-saporin on different
cell lines appears to be related to JL-1 expression level. Preliminary
data also shows this toxin-conjugated mAb displayed effects of 1)
proliferation-inhibition on primary JL1+ acute leukemia blasts while
control antibody-saporin had no detectable activity; 2) inhibition of
colony formation of primary leukemia cells in a soft agar assay. A
SCID/CEM-7 xenograft mouse model indicates that JL1 mAb treatment
prolongs survival. We are currently testing the in vivo efficacy of
JL1-saporin conjugate in primary acute leukemia blast-engrafted NSG mouse
model. Conclusion: JL1 is a cell surface antigen expressed in majority of
acute leukemia blasts while it is not detectable in normal human blood
cells. JL1 mAbs are capable of inhibiting proliferation and mediating
apoptosis in cell lines and primary acute leukemia cells when mAb is
conjugated to saporin. Mouse xenograft data demonstrates the anti-tumor
potential of JL1 mAb in vivo. Taken together, these data suggest that JL1
is a promising target in the treatment of acute leukemia.

