Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new serotype chimera Cancer Terminator Virus (Ad.5/3-CTV)
expands the efficiency and specificity of prostate cancer gene transfer
and therapy


Conditionally replication-competent adenoviruses (CRCAs) represent
potentially useful reagents for treating prostate cancer (PC). We
previously constructed a unique CRCA, Cancer Terminator Virus (CTV), in
which the E1A gene, necessary for adenoviral replication, is controlled
by the cancer-selective Progression Elevated Gene-3 (PEG-3) promoter and
which simultaneously expresses melanoma differentiation associated
gene-7/interleukin-24 (mda-7/IL-24) from the E3 region of the adenovirus.
mda-7/IL-24, a novel member of the IL-10-related cytokine gene family,
displays almost ubiquitous antitumor properties in vitro and in vivo,
leading to its rapid entry into the clinic, where its safety and clinical
efficacy, when administered by adenovirus (Ad.mda-7; INGN 241), was
observed in a phase I clinical trial in humans with advanced carcinomas
and melanomas. mda-7/IL-24 preferentially induces apoptosis in cancer
cells while exerting no discernible toxic effects toward normal cells and
it also elicits potent antitumor bystander activity in distant cancer
cells as a consequence of autocrine and paracrine secretion of
MDA-7/IL-24. The CTV was generated on a serotype 5 background (Ad.5-CTV)
with infectivity depending on Coxsackie-Adenovirus Receptors (CARs). CARs
are frequently reduced in many tumor types, including PCs thereby
limiting effective therapy. Using serotype chimerism, a novel CTV
(Ad.5/3-CTV) was created by replacing the Ad.5 fiber knob with the Ad.3
fiber knob facilitating infection in a CAR-independent manner. We
evaluated Ad.5/3-CTV in comparison with Ad.5-CTV in low CAR human PC
cells, demonstrating higher efficiency in inhibiting cell viability in
vitro. Moreover, Ad.5/3-CTV potently suppressed in vivo tumor growth in a
nude mouse xenograft model and in a spontaneously induced PC in Hi-myc
transgenic mice. Ad.5/3.CTV exerted a marked anti-tumor bystander effect
in vivo confirming therapeutic utility. In these contexts, and
considering the significant responses in a Phase I clinical trial of a
non-replicating Ad.5-mda-7, the use of Ad.5/3-CTV to administer
therapeutic and cytotoxic mda-7/IL24 to selectively induce cytolysis and
apoptosis in prostate tumor cells represents a viable treatment options.
(Supported by R01 CA097318 and P01 CA104177)

