Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA mediated reprograming of fibroblasts into cancer
associated fibroblasts in ovarian cancer


Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a major constituent of the tumor
stroma and promote the invasion and growth of cancer cells. However, the
mechanism by which cancer cells transform normal fibroblasts into CAFs is
unclear. While it is clearly established that microRNAs are deregulated
in cancer and are involved in cellular reprograming, it is not known if
they play a role in the transformation of normal fibroblasts into CAFs.
Therefore, we investigated the novel possibility of microRNA mediated
reprogramming of normal fibroblasts into CAFs. Primary CAFs extracted
from the metastasis of patients with ovarian cancer and normal omental
fibroblasts (NOFs) extracted from non-cancer patients were profiled for
microRNA expression. The functional role of microRNAs in CAFs was
established by assessing their ability to promote ovarian cancer
co-invasion, colony formation and tumor growth in mice. The microRNA
targets were identified using gene array analysis, validated by 3UTR
luciferase reporter assay, and functionally verified both in vitro and in
mouse xenografts. Comparing CAFs and NOFs we found that, in ovarian
cancer CAFs miR-31 and miR-214 were downregulated while miR-155 was
upregulated as compared to normal or tumor-adjacent fibroblasts.
Mimicking this deregulation by transfecting microRNAs and microRNA
inhibitors induced a phenotypic and functional conversion of normal
fibroblasts into CAFs, and the reverse experiment resulted in the
reprograming of CAFs into normal fibroblasts. The microRNA induced CAFs
and patient-derived CAFs shared multiple upregulated genes highly
enriched in chemokines important for CAF function. The most highly
upregulated chemokine, CCL5/RANTES, was found to be a direct target of
miR-214. CCL5 was functionally important for both CAFs and normal
fibroblasts reprogrammed into CAFs, in vitro and in mouse xenografts.
These results indicate that tumor cells can reprogram fibroblasts to
become CAFs through the regulation of their microRNAs, suggesting that
targeting microRNA in stromal cells, as well as in tumor cells, could be
beneficial for cancer treatment.

