Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
method for controlling the radiochemical purity (RCP) of
99mTc-tetrofosmin used in oncology


Background: The 99mTc-tetrofosmin is a radiopharmaceutical used in
oncology for scintigraphic quantification of the myocardial perfusion.
The preparation of this drug is based on a complexation reaction of
technetium 99 metastable (99mTc) with tetrofosmin. The reference method
for quality control is thin layer chromatography, using TLC SA bands.
This method is simple but only separates two types of impurities: free
technetium and hydrolyzed technetium associated to hydrophilic impurities
like gluconate-99mTc and takes from 30 to 35 minutes. This gluconate
impurity gives a poor image quality and difficult interpretation issues.
HPLC is a sensitive and specific method, it thus, has an interest in
controlling RCP and identifying all impurities. Methods: The reference
method is a method by planar chromatography TLC SA tape, size 1 cm x 20
cm. Two marks were scored: 3 cm from the edge to indicate the deposit (10
L of the preparation) and 15 cm by the end of migration. Mobile phase was
acetone: dichloromethane (65:35, v/v). The radioactive bands were
quantified by counting the radioactivity using a radiochromatograph
miniGITA (Raytest) equipped with a scintillation probe. The
chromatographic system consisted in a Symmetry Shield column RP18 5m 100
(Waters) with a gamma detector Gammaram (Lablogic). Empower software
(Waters) was used for peak integration. The mobile phase, at a rate flow
of 1.0 mL / min, consisted of a mixture of acetonitrile (Waters) and
titrisol buffer (Waters) (40:60, v/v). The sample volumes injected were
no more than 10 to 30 L in order not to exceed 50,000 counts per second
due to the risk of radioactive detector saturation. Results: The RCP was
measured simultaneously by HPLC and reference method in 30 preparations.
For HPLC, mean RCP = 97.21%, = 2.178% [91.6%-99.63%]. For TLC SA, mean
RCP = 97.99%, = 1.135% [94.31%-99.86%]. The results obtained by both
methods were compared using the Wilcoxon t test. The RCP obtained either
by TLC SA or HPLC methods are not significantly different (p-value =
0,497, higher than in significance = 0.05) Conclusions: A new HPLC method
was developed for the control of the RCP 99mTc-Tetrofosmin. This method
is reliable, rapid, sensitive and easy to use when the equipment is
available. It allows us to improve the detection of cardiotoxic side
effects due to chemotherapy more quickly than TLC SA method and to
prevent toxicity by dose adjustment of anticancer drugs. Although the
HPLC method does not differ from TLC (reference method), HPLC provides
additional information about the quality of the preparation (percentage
of gluconate-99mTc).

