Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel NSAID conjugated molecules for lung cancer
therapy


Background: Many promising chemopreventive Non-Steroidal
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) such as Flurbiprofen have acquired
anti-cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) effects with anti-cancer activities.
Recently several phosphorylated-NSAID compounds were shown to improve the
therapeutic potency over the parental NSAID molecules (JPET 111.183533,
2011) by 10 to 30 folds. Previously, we also reported several novel and
potent molecules by the incorporation of NSAIDs such as aspirin,
indomethancin, ketorolac, ketoprofen, and sulindac into the aclyting
N-terminal of our lead mimetic molecules B317 (F5C-OC2Y-Atmp) (AACR 45:
476, 2004). Here we report a new series of highly potent molecules by
replacing the N-terminal F5C with a flurbiprofen (Fbp). The resultant
molecules effectively inhibit many cancer cell lines in vitro and in
vivo, with efficacy much better than the unmodified parental NSAID
molecules or those phosphorylated NSAID analogs. Methods: Standard MTT
assays were used to access growth inhibitory effects of the parental and
NSAID conjugated molecules. Effects of drugs on cell cycle and apoptosis
were analyzed by flow cytometry. In vivo efficacy was evaluated in
subcutaneous lung xenografts in athymic nude mice. Results: 32 lung
cancer cell lines including 24 NSCLC and 8 SCLC cell lines were treated
with various concentrations of some selected conjugated drugs for 4 days.
The best compound had an average IC 50 value of 0.5 uM, with a range of
0.1 to 2 uM, while parental Flurbiprofen had IC50 value of 500 uM, with a
range of 200 uM to 800uM. Cell cycle analysis showed that exposure of
lung cancer cells to these new conjugates resulted in a significant shift
of cells from S and G2 phases into G1 arrest, resulting in high
percentage of apoptotic cell deaths in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Finally, our in vivo efficacy studies demonstrated that new NSAID
conjugates at 5 mg/kg by daily ip injections significantly suppressed
growth of subcutaneous xenografts of human lung adenocarcinoma in athymic
nude mice without causing weight loss. Conclusion: Our new NSAID
conjugate is a novel class of therapeutic agent with anti-growth effects
against lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, with a 1000 fold increase
in potency than the parental Flurbiprofen.

