Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of optical imaging approaches in 2D and 3D in
disseminated mouse tumor models


Introduction: Optical imaging allows staging and tracking of multiple
tumors in disseminated tumor models and to this end, bioluminescence
(BLI) imaging has been the most common approach. While BLI is cost
effective and quantitative, it requires luciferase-engineered tumor
lines, which have the disadvantages of time and uncertainty associated
with transfection, as well as potential phenotype change in the
engineered line, compared with the parent. Exogenous fluorescence probes
preferentially activated by tumors provide a similar efficient optical
imaging means to tumor burden tracking in these models, directly in any
tumor lines of interest. This methods also allows 3D imaging through new
tomographic optical imaging technologies. In this work, BLI and activated
fluorescent probe imaging were used in a luciferase-expressing Raji-luc
human Burkitt's lymphoma model and an M-NFS-60 mouse leukemia model. 2D
fluorescence reflectance imaging was also compared to 3D tomographic
imaging to determine additional utility of the 3D imaging approach.
Methods: Raji-luc lymphoma cells were transfected to express luciferase
using a lentiviral vector transfection method. Raji-luc cells (1x107
cells in 100l PBS) were injected IV in CB-17 mice on Day 0. In CD-1 mice,
M-NFS-60 leukemia cells (1x107 cells in 100l PBS) were injected IP.
Bioluminescence scans were used to determine the distribution of light
throughout the body immediately following implantation. In vivo and ex
vivo bioluminescence imaging was used to localize tumor signals and
determine incidence and tumor growth. Both cathepsin- (ProSense) and MMP-
(MMPSense) activated fluorescent probes were injected IV 24h prior to
fluorescence reflectance and fluorescence molecular tomographic imaging.
Results and Discussion: Bioluminescence imaging of intravenously injected
of Raji-luc cells from one to four weeks after inoculation showed a high
incidence of tumor growth at sites including hind limbs, spine, and brain
in addition to lung and to a lesser extent, the axillary lymph nodes and
sternum. Fluorescence imaging with tumor activated probes provided a
measure of disseminated tumor burden, but had the disadvantage of normal
tissue background, compared with BLI where there was inherently no normal
tissue background. Fluorescence molecular tomographic imaging provided a
quantitative advantage over 2D fluorescence reflectance. Activated
fluorescent probe imaging provides a viable means for imaging in
disseminated tumor models without the need for engineered cell lines.

