Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a clinically relevant in vivo model of ovarian
cancer tumorgrafts in immunodeficient mice


Despite advances in chemotherapeutic options over the last four decades,
ovarian cancer remains the most lethal gynecologic malignancy with a cure
rate that is essentially unchanged. A major barrier is lack of
treatment-nave, clinically- relevant in vivo models of epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC). To target this problem, we have developed low-passage in
vivo models of EOC derived from patient primary debulking procedures at
Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN). Tumors were obtained from consented patients
with suspected ovarian cancer, minced and injected into severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice intraperitoneally for model establishment.
To the date, we have heterotransplanted 129 EOC or ovarian malignant
mixed mullerian (MMMT) tumors. The most common histologic subtype is
serous (70.5%), followed by endometrioid (12.4%), clear cell (6.9%), and
others (9.9%). The tumors were injected intraperitoneally into severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice and the average time to moribund
(TTM) was 174 +/ 83 days. In general, tumors grew faster with serial
passages, TTM for epithelial tumors was 87 +/ 15 days and 19.5 +/ 3 days
for MMMT. De novo ascites developed in 17 models and 24 models developed
bowel metastasis, two clinically-relevant complications in late-stage
ovarian cancer patients. Tumorgrafts were histologically similar to their
source patient tumors and were positive for expression epithelial markers
(pan-cytokeratin). The engraftment rate was 72.4% (n=87) after 6 months
of lead-time, which is the average time to tumorgraft harvest. Passage of
well-established tumorgrafts in SCID mice was successful in 88.6 % (n=
70) of all mice but only 56% (n=16) of athymic nude mice, consistent with
prior studies demonstrating improved engraftment rates in more
immunodeficient mice. Molecular characterization of tumorgrafts by array
comparative genomic hybridization revealed similar gains and losses
between the patient, early-passage, and later-passage tumorgraft tissues,
indicating the tumorgrafts were genetically similar to their primary
tumor. Analysis of tumorgrafts using the Affymetrix Human Plus 2.0 arrays
revealed a predominance of previously described molecular subtypes C3,
C4, and C5. Current investigations with both standard chemotherapy and
novel targeted therapies are ongoing. Taken together, these models are as
diverse as the patient population from which they are derived, produce
clinically-relevant complications of EOC, maintain genetic fidelity in
SCID mice, and are useful preclinical models for testing and development
of novel therapeutics for ovarian cancer. High rates of engraftment are
feasible. These tumorgrafts may help define predictors of response and
eventually, lead to better treatments for patients. This work is funded
by the Mayo Ovarian SPORE (CA136393) and the Minnesota Ovarian Cancer
Alliance.

