Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA biomarkers prognostic for disease-free and overall
survival in stage I and II lung adenocarcinoma


Background: Approximately 50% of all non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) cases in the United States are adenocarcinoma histology. While
definitive lung cancer resection offers a chance for cure in stage I and
II NSCLC, up to 57% of patients will have disease relapse or metastatic
disease within 5 years. A majority of the relapsed cases will take place
within 2 years of definitive surgical resection. Thus, pathologic staging
alone does not stratify patients for prognosis sufficiently. Identifying
patients with aggressive versus indolent tumors would have critical
implications for directing treatment and designing future clinical
trials. We propose using microRNA (miRNA) for discovery and validation of
prognostic biomarkers for stage I and II lung adenocarcinoma. Methods:
For the Discovery Cohort, we identified treatment-nave AJCC 7th edition
stage I and II lung adenocarcinoma patient samples from 26 disease-free
survivors (DFS) and overall survival (OS) at least 47 months and 14
patients with DFS and overall survival less than 23 months. Total RNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples.
Differential miRNA array expression profiling between these two groups
was assessed in the Discovery cohort on an 8x15 Agilent microarray
printed with 886 miRNAs. Target miRNAs were selected based on minimum of
2-fold change in expression and Welch t-test p-value cut-off of 47 months
and N=12 with DFS and OS47 months and N=12 with DFS and OS<23 months), to
confirm differential expression of target miRNAs. Fold-change values were
generated using the Ct method. A PCR-based miRNA classifier was
developed. Results: Microarray analysis of the Discovery Cohort revealed
7 miRNAs that were significantly under-expressed in lung adenocarcinoma
tumor from patients with DFS and OS 47 months and N=12 with DFS and OS<23
months), to confirm differential expression of target miRNAs. Fold-change
values were generated using the Ct method. A PCR-based miRNA classifier
was developed. Results: Microarray analysis of the Discovery Cohort
revealed 7 miRNAs that were significantly under-expressed in lung
adenocarcinoma tumor from patients with DFS and OS <23 months. They
included let-7a/b/c, miR-130a, -451, -29c, and -99a. PCR results in the
Validation Cohort (total N=89) remained statistically significant for
differential expression for all target miRNAs (p47 months and N=4 DFS/OS
47 months and N=4 DFS/OS <23 months) is ongoing. Conclusion: We have
validated miRNAs prognostic for DFS and OS in stage I and II lung
adenocarcinoma in at least one cohort of 89 patients so far. A two miRNA
classifier is currently being evaluated and we anticipate results for
accuracy prediction on the Independent cohort at the time of the meeting.

