Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Globally, minorities are at increased risk for lung cancer


Purpose of Study: To determine whether identifiable minority populations
in countries of the six regions of the world experience higher incidence
rates of lung cancer than do the members of the majority population of
those countries. Experimental procedures: The WHO website has codified
the world's continents into six regions including Africa, Americas, South
East Asia, Europe, The Eastern Mediterranean and the Western Pacific.
This definition of world regions was used for this study. Data were
available from five of the six regions. Countries were ordered in each
region according to population density. In each region, at a minimum, the
10 most densely populated countries were included. A minority population
group was defined as a numerically smaller proportion of a population
differing from the majority by a specific identifiable characteristic.
Minority and majority populations were defined according to the CIA world
fact book and the minority rights group international. Each country was
evaluated separately for incidence rates of lung cancer within both
minority and majority populations. Codified study data were included for
a country only if the data met the following specific criteria: (1) the
data had to be presented in its original form using a case-control or
cohort methodology; (2) lung cancer incidences had to be reported as an
outcome. Data were only included for analysis if it were published as a
case-control or cohort study with appropriate references in a
peer-reviewed journal. No data from non -peer reviewed articles were
considered. Results: Table 1: Lung cancer incidence rates in minority and
majority populations from countries included in the top ten of the most
densely populated of five world regions. Conclusions: Globally, minority
populations experience much higher incidence rates for lung cancer within
a country than do the majority population. We hypothesize that this is
due to marginalization of these minority groups which may lead to
increased smoking in the minority group members as a coping mechanism.


