Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic reprogramming affects malignant properties of human
liver cancer cells


Background: A plastic phenotype is a significant hallmark of aggressive
tumors and embryonic stem cells (ESC). Cancer plasticity is dynamically
regulated both by cell microenvironment and epigenetic machinery
therefore playing important roles in transcriptional reprogramming and
cell fate stable changes. Objective: We have explored the relationship
between epigenetic alterations and local microenvironment in regulation
of cancer stem cells (CSCs) using Zebularine (Zeb), a
DNA-methyltransferase1 inhibitor, in combination with the modulation of
cellular density in culture. Methods: Seven human hepatoma cell lines,
including two primary HCC cell lines, were plated at high (HD) and low
density (LD) and grown in the presence or absence of Zeb for 3 days.
After, cells were propagated in serum-free condition for evaluation of
sphere-forming capacity. Primary tumor-spheres were passaged every 10
days to produce generation 1 (G1) trough G5. Spheres at different
generations were examined for differences in gene expression and
tumorigenic capacity in vivo. The sphere-derived mRNA and microRNA gene
expression signatures generated for different passages were integrated
with human HCC database and tested for their prognostic value by
Kaplan-Meier. Results: Cells grown under LD failed to form spheres when
placed in non-adherent growth conditions. Cells cultured at HD displayed
a sphere forming potential at G1 but were unable to maintain extended
sphere forming capacity regardless of Zeb pre-treatment. In contrast,
Zeb-treated LD (LDZ) cells showed unique features in terms of self
renewal potential both in vitro and vivo. LDZ-derived spheres were more
proliferative as indicated by Ki67 staining whereas HDZ-spheres showed
activation of apoptotic pathway and dowregulation of NF-kB protein
levels. LDZ also maintained a higher expression of CSC related markers
(CD133, CD44, EpCAM) as well as key factors involved in ESC self-renewal
and pluripotency (Bmi1 and Suz12, subunit of distinct polycomb complexes,
PRC1 and PRC2). Also, LDZ-derived spheres consistently expressed higher
levels of DNMT1 and DNMT3a. In addition, LDZ spheres exhibited
epithelial-mesenchymal transition attributes as judged by the
upregulation of -catenin, ZEB1, VIM and SNAL1 markers as compared to HD
spheres. Finally, only G1 LDZ-spheres derived cells showed higher in vivo
tumorigenicity and could give rise to brain metastasis. Consistently,
global transcriptome analysis confirmed that LDZ sphere signature was
enriched in oncogenic molecules associated with metastasis, invasion and
resistance to apoptosis, including SMAD2, CD133, CD44 and NF-kB and was
able to predict the clinical outcome of liver cancer patients.
Conclusions: Epigenetic reprogramming of liver cancer cell lines induced
by a combined modulation of DNA methylation and cellular microenviroment
generates long lasting memory effects changing the CSC malignant capacity.

