Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel ovarian cancer imaging agent based on integrin ligation


Ovarian cancer diagnosis and subsequent evaluation of disease progression
is difficult due to the location of tumor mass and access to the organs
affected. Ultrasound and surgical exposure are required to confirm
disease and response to treatment. In an effort to develop a non-invasive
radiologic method for both diagnostic assessment and to follow disease
progression we have produced a integrin ligand, vicrostatin (VCN) that
can be radiolabeled and imaged upon binding to active integrins
over-expressed on the tumor. VCN displays a high affinity for integrins
which are active and pivotal in tumor growth and progression. In the
present studies we utilized an animal model employing the luciferase
expressing cell line OVCAR-3luc. This procedure allows us to observe both
the tumor itself in a living animal, and also co-register the PET image
with the optical image enabling us to detect tumors in the
intraperitoneal (IP) space. For these experiments we injected OVCAR-3luc
cells IP and allowed the tumors to age for 28 days. At this point, with
no obvious sign of disease, we imaged the tumors using the optical
imaging system to detect the presence of luciferase. Since luciferase is
only found in the tumor, this enables us to specifically image the tumor.
Following these images 64Cu-DOTA-VCN is injected into the tail vein of
the study animals and allowed to circulate for 90 minutes. At this time
the animal is placed onto the mounting tray of the PET imaging
instrument. There is a specific accumulation of 64Cu-DOTA-VCN in an area
in the lower abdomen that correlates with a location of luciferase
activity seen in the optical image. Both of these positions were
confirmed by dissection and exposure of the tumor in the sacrificed
animal. Experiments in which a larger number of cells are injected IP
produced unusable optical images, as the tumors grew very large and
coated much of the surface in the IP space yielding bright and
indistinguishable images in the mouse abdomen. One problem of note is the
high level of uptake by the kidneys at the 90 minute time point. The
kidneys shield the ability to view an ovarian tumor via a dorsal or
ventral total slice view. When viewed transversely, there is clear
separation between the kidneys and the tumor mass which binds the
64Cu-DOTA-VCN. A three dimensional reconstruction yields a three
dimensional model that can be rotated and rendered to observe the
position of the tumor in relationship to the kidneys in space. These
studies show that VCN can be utilized to image early stage OC and could
possibly be used to monitor residual disease after surgical or
therapeutic intervention.

