Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic steroid hormone levels and risk of testicular germ
cell tumors


Background: Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT), the most commonly
occurring cancer among young men in the U.S., are thought to be
endocrine-related tumors. The relationship between steroid hormone levels
and development of TGCT, however, has been difficult to study given the
rarity of the tumor in the general population and the paucity of
pre-diagnostic serum from young men. The U.S. Servicemen's Testicular
Tumor Environmental and Endocrine Determinants (STEED) study, however,
was able to overcome these obstacles by enrolling military servicemen who
had previously donated serum specimens to the Department of Defense Serum
Repository. Methods: STEED participants were enrolled between 2002 and
2005. The associations between TGCT risk and log-transformed serum
concentrations of testosterone, free testosterone, estradiol, free
estradiol, 3-androstanediol glucuronide (3-diol-G), an indicator of
peripheral androgen action, and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) were
examined in 517 case and 790 control participants. Odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using logistic regression
models, adjusting for date of serum donation, age, race/ethnicity, family
history of testicular cancer, history of cryptorchidism, height, and body
mass index. Results: The analysis found that while testosterone was not
significantly associated with TGCT risk, there was an inverse association
between 3-diol-G and risk (OR=0.80, 95%CI=0.63-0.99). In addition, there
was a significant inverse association with TGCT and the ratio of 3-diol-G
to testosterone (OR=0.76, 95%CI=0.61-0.93). There was also a significant
direct association between estradiol and TGCT risk (OR=1.41,
95%CI=1.06-1.87). The relationships between the free forms of
testosterone and estradiol and risk were the same as the relationships
between the total forms of each hormone and risk. There was no
association between TGCT and SHBG. Conclusion: These results suggest that
the hormone metabolism of men who subsequently develop TGCT may vary from
that of other men. In men who develop TGCT, more testosterone may be
converted to estradiol and less to dihydrotestosterone, the most potent
form of androgen, than in men who do not develop TGCT. Further
examination of metabolites, both upstream and downstream in the steroid
hormone pathway, may help elucidate the mechanism by which these
exposures are related to development of TGCT.

