Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of small molecule SYK inhibitors for
treatment of primary B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Background: B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most
common childhood cancer. Intensified and central nervous system
(CNS)-directed chemotherapy has significantly improved outcomes for
pediatric patients but are associated with late-effect morbidities.
Moreover, 20% pediatric and a higher frequency of adult patients suffer
relapses that are often fatal. Thus there is a need to develop therapies
that target signaling abnormalities in B-ALL, which may reduce
complications of CNS leukemia and decrease long-term morbidities.
Rationale: Using a p53-/- SCID mouse model of B-ALL we observed pre-B
cell receptor (pre-BCR)-independent activation of the spleen tyrosine
kinase (SYK) and found that it was crucial for the proliferation and
survival of these leukemias. We then asked whether abnormal SYK
activation occurs in human B-ALL and whether these cells are sensitive to
small molecule SYK inhibitors. Methods: Viably frozen diagnostic B-ALL
samples from children (n=54) and adults (n=42) tested for sensitivity to
SYK inhibitors R406 (Astra-Zeneca) and BAY61-3606 in a short-term in
vitro proliferation assay. Phospho-flow cytometry was also performed to
quantify phosphorylation of SYK and other signaling proteins in B-ALL
samples. The R406 pro-drug (Fostamatinib: Fosta) was used in a
xenotransplant assay to determine therapeutic potential of SYK inhibition
in vivo. Results: Phospho-flow cytometry profiling of primary B-ALL
samples revealed prominent phosphorylation of SYK (Y348) and downstream
signaling proteins that was decreased by SYK inhibitors. Furthermore, SYK
inhibitors significantly attenuated proliferation of pre-BCR-negative and
pre-BCR-positive B-ALL samples indicating that SYK was required for their
survival and proliferation. In contrast, FLT3 or SRC inhibitors did not
inhibit proliferation of pediatric and adult B-ALL samples. Importantly,
siRNA-mediated SYK knockdown also reduced proliferation of B-ALL cell
lines. Therefore, we tested the therapeutic potential of SYK inhibition
using xenotransplantion. NOD.SCID.gamma C-/- (NSG) mice were injected
intrafemorally with primary B-ALL samples (n=9) and fed chow containing
either vehicle (AIN-76A diet) or Fosta (AIN-76A diet with 2g Fosta/kg).
Leukemia burden was assessed 4-8 weeks post-transplantation. Mice given
the Fosta diet had significantly reduced numbers of leukemic blasts in
their injected femurs, other bones, spleens and CNS as compared to
vehicle-treated mice. In addition, Fosta treatment reduced spleen, liver
and kidney weight in ALL-transplanted mice. Conclusion: SYK signaling is
vital to B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia survival; small molecule SYK
inhibitors have therapeutic potential in poor-prognosis and relapsed
B-ALL.

