Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-kit inhibitors and radiation: A promising combination in NSCLC


Background: NSCLC comprises 80% of lung cancer cases, and of these, about
40% are unresectable. Ionizing radiation (IR) and chemotherapy are used
for patients with unresectable tumors, but radiotherapy remains largely
palliative due to radioresistance. The failure of NSCLC therapy is
associated with the tremendous heterogeneity in terms of cell of origin,
pathology, etiology, and molecular/genetic pathogenesis. The existence of
CSCs, undifferentiated cells with the capacity to self-renew and restore
the tumor cell population, reflects the cellular heterogeneity within
NSCLC. Evidence suggests that resistance to IR treatment is associated
with CSCs within human tumors. Thus, targeting CSCs represents a new
strategy for cancer treatment. We reported on our ability to isolate,
culture and assay human lung CSCs from cultured cell lines. We found the
stem cell factor (SCF) and its receptor c-kit functions, in a crucial
pathway, for the self-renewal and proliferation of human lung CSCs.
Hypothesis: CSCs survived after IR treatment of NSCLC cells. SCF/c-kit
signaling is a central component of the self renewal and the survival of
CSCs in lung tumors. The combination of IR treatment and c-kit pathway
inhibition will eliminate bulk NSCLC cells and CSCs. Methods:
CD133-positive and c-kit positive lung CSCs were isolated from H460 and
A549 cultured NSCLC cell lines and from tumor samples from patients with
NSCLC. The expression of cell surface markers, stemness of the cells and
their resistance to IR were evaluated. Lung CSCs were treated with c-kit
inhibitors and neutralizing SCF antibody and the growth of tumor spheres
were assessed. Bulk NSCLC cells were irradiated and then were grown in
the media with c-kit inhibitors and neutralizing SCF antibody for 3-12
days. The growing clones will then be counted and analyzed for expression
of CSC markers. Cells from clones were re-plated and grown in stem
cell-selective media and the CSC nature of the cells were analyzed.
Results: We found that human lung CSC radioresistance is mediated by
preferential activation of the DNA damage checkpoint response and an
increase in DNA repair capacity. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, with anti
c-kit activity (eg.imatinib, dovitinib, sunitinib, and axitinib), were
compared for their ability to abrogate lung CSC proliferation and
potentiate the effect of IR on NSCLC. We found that lung CSCs
proliferation was abrogated by all of the four c-kit inhibitors; however,
axitinib showed the most profound anti- CSC effect. Conclusions:
Targeting c-kit signaling, in c-kit and CD133-positive NSCLC cells with
neutralizing SCF antibody or RTK inhibitors, suppressed CSC self renew
and enhanced radiation response. The combination of IR treatment with
SCF/c-kit pathway inhibition eliminated bulk NSCLC cells and radiation
resistant CSCs. Work is supported by the grants: P50 CA090440 and The
Pittsburgh Foundation (M2010-0021).

