Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of pre-invasive pancreatic cancer serum biomarkers
using genetically engineered mouse models and mass spectrometry techniques


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading
cause of cancer death in the United States. Surgery is the only curative
treatment approach if the tumor is diagnosed early at an organ confined
stage. Therefore, serum biomarkers specific for early stage pancreatic
neoplasia would be of tremendous value in the treatment of this disease.
Genetically engineered mouse models (GEM) of pancreatic neoplasia have
been generated that closely recapitulate the molecular and biological
properties of human PDAC. Here we take advantage of these GEMs and a
high-throughput proteomics approaches to dig deep into the serum proteome
of these mice to identify representative biomarkers of early stage
pancreatic neoplasia. Methods: Serum was collected from 9 Pdx1-Cre
(control) and 9 Pdx1-Cre;LSL-RasG12D (pre-invasive PDAC model) mice at 4
months of age. Serum was then pooled into 3 sets of 3 samples for each
arm. The top 7 most abundant proteins were depleted from each pooled
sample prior to labeling with a tandem mass tag (TMT) sixplex isobaric
labeling system and long-column MudPIT analysis. Data were searched in
SEQUEST, and quantified in ProteoIQ. Candidate proteins were accepted
only with 97-99% confidence, and at least 2 unique TMT tagged peptides.
Only biomarkers with >2 fold change and passing 2 non-parametric
statistical tests were further evaluated. The same samples were also
analyzed with a 1D MALDI-TOF MSMS approach to survey the low-mass serum
proteome. In addition, a multi-dimensional MALDI-TOF approach was carried
out on whole protein serum samples using spectral counting to quantify
proteins instead of TMT labeling. Results/Discussion: Long-column MudPIT
analysis resulted in identification of 3001 proteins with high
confidence. Seventy of these proteins passed fold change and statistical
filters, with 25 of these having known biological connections to
pancreatic disease or function. A number of these proteins are currently
being validated by immune assays. Multi-dimensional MALDI-TOF analysis
resulted in identification of 8 differentially abundant proteins. Two of
these proteins have been validated by Western blot. Taken together, these
mass spectrometry techniques allow for a relatively in-depth survey of
the serum proteome with accurate quantitation of potentially novel early
stage pancreatic neoplasia biomarkers. Ultimately, the biomarkers
identified in this study will be validated in human studies with the
expectation that high risk patients will benefit from the application of
these biomarkers for early diagnosis and improved treatment of disease.

