Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-myc downstream regulated gene 1: A novel mediator of
hypoxia-driven chemoresistance in glioblastoma


Like other solid tumors, glioblastomas (GB) feature vast hypoxic areas
that are thought to promote tumor growth, angiogenesis and even drug
resistance and hence facilitate an aggressive growth and recurrence after
treatment. Elucidation of hypoxia-signalling and identification of the
major regulators of hypoxia-dependent chemoprotection seems logical for
the optimization of current treatment regimens. Using comparative 2D gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis, we here identify N-myc
downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) as upregulated by chronic sublethal
hypoxia in GB cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of human
astrocytoma specimens shows a marked increase in expression from WHO II
to IV and a preferential perinecrotic localization of NDRG1 in GB. In
vitro, besides the hypoxia-driven induction of NDRG1, which is mediated
by Hif1 and Hif2, NDRG1 is also induced by irradiation. NDRG1 limits
glioma cell invasiveness in vitro and reduces proliferation in vitro and
in vivo. Furthermore NDRG1 acts antiangiogenic with reduced endothelial
cell migration and sprouting, and interferes with the expression of
multiple angiogenesis-related signalling molecules. Most interestingly
NDRG1 protects from temozolomide (TMZ)-induced G2/M-arrest and subsequent
reduction of tumor cell proliferation. Analyzing pairs of GB tissue
samples of relapsed glioblastoma patients reveals a dramatic increase of
NDRG1-positive cells suggesting a treatment-related selection for NDRG1
expressing populations and a potential role for NDRG1 in the recurrence
of GB. In line with these findings, quantifying the NDRG1 status in
tissue specimens of the UKT05 GB trial, which looked at a
dose-intensified TMZ therapy plus standard radiotherapy, reveals a
negative correlation between NDRG1 status and overall survival. In the
present work we identify hypoxia-driven NDRG1 as a modulator of tumor
growth, invasion, angiogenesis and as a novel mediator of chemoresistance
towards TMZ in GB. Our findings shed light on the role of hypoxia in
adaption to chemotherapeutic treatment and introduce NDRG1 as a promising
candidate for targeted therapy.

