Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age dependent carcinogenic susceptibility of rat liver is related
to potential of gap junctional intercellular communication


Cancer incidence rises with age, thus, it seems that advancing age is one
of the most important risk factors for malignancy. Several factors have
been implicated, like DNA alterations. However, there is little
experimental evidence to establish the link between aging and
carcinogenesis. Gap junctions have important roles in the maintenance of
tissue homeostasis and the control of cell growth and differentiation.
Connexins are subunits of gap junction channels, which allow
intercellular exchange of small molecules, such as ions, second
messengers, and cellular metabolites between contacting cells. In the
liver, connexin 32 (Cx32) is a major gap junction protein. We previously
demonstrated that transgenic rats carrying a dominant negative mutant of
Cx32 (Cx32Tg) have much decreased capacity for gap junctional
intercellular communication (GJIC), and increased susceptibility to
diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced hepatocarcinogenesis as compared to
littermate wild-type (wt) rats. In order to evaluate the age-dependent
susceptibility to DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis, male Cx32Tg and wt
rats at 10, 30 or 85 week-old (wk-old) were given a single
intraperitoneal administration of DEN (40 mg/rat) and sacrificed 12 weeks
later. The number and area of glutathione S-transferase placental form
(GST-P)-positive preneoplastic foci were significantly increased in the
liver of 10 and 30 wk-old Cx32Tg rats compared with age-matched wt.
However, in the 85 wk-old rats, both Cx32Tg and wt rats had similarly
large number and area of GST-P-positive foci, and the difference was not
significant. In accordance with these results, the lack of a difference
at 85 weeks may be supposed to the initial lower levels of Cx32 and GJIC
function in older wt rats. To confirm this hypothesis, we examined
alteration of GJIC function with age in the livers of wt type rats at 10,
40, 70 and 100 wk-old. Interestingly, function of hepatic GJIC was
gradually reduced, and protein and mRNA expression of Cx32 were also
decreased with aging in wt rats. In summary, the present study shows that
GJIC function is decreased with aging in rats, and it may cause promotion
of hepatocarcinogenesis in older rats. In addition, Cx32Tg may be a good
model to study roles of gap junctions in aged liver.

