Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocellular carcinoma-specific isoforms of methylated
DNA-binding protein 2 and their therapeutic and diagnostic potential


Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in the world. It is
particularly prevalent in developing countries in Asia and Africa. In the
US alone, it is estimated that 26,190 adults will be diagnosed with
primary liver cancer this year, and 19,590 people will die of the
disease. Hepatocellular carcinoma has no efficient cure, has a 5-year
survival rate of 14% and is highly metastatic. In the last couple of
decades, it has been established that many types of cancer involve major
changes in the DNA methylation machinery and in turn, widespread yet
highly specific changes in cytosine methylation. DNA methylation is a
chemical modification on the DNA associated with gene inactivation, and
in contrast to genetic mutation, is dynamic and reversible, making it a
preferable target for therapeutics. Methylated-DNA Binding Proteins (MBD)
have been shown to play a critical role in the progression and metastasis
of cancers in general and specifically in hepatocellular carcinoma. We
have identified two isoforms of the MBD2 protein (hcMBD2) that have not
been previously reported in any somatic cells: these isoforms are totally
silenced in normal liver cells and active in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Specific inhibition of these isoforms of MBD2 in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HePG2 cell line) has a dramatic effect on cell growth and cellular
transformation, but no effect in normal cells, where the isoforms are not
expressed. Knockdown experiments show dramatic reduction in cell
invasiveness, reduced cell growth rate and increased cell death in HepG2
cells, while primary liver hepatocytes remain largely unaffected. A
survey of several types of cancers and their surrounding tissue of origin
shows the expression of hcMBD2 in several other types of cancer, such as
breast cancer. These results position hcMBD as a promising candidate for
cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.

