Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical profile of AMG900 in combination with HDACIs in
prostate cancer


Background: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes maintain the structural
conformation of chromatin. Inhibition of HDACs induces G1 arrest and
differentiation. Previous microarray analysis demonstrated downregulation
of the aurora kinase-pathway in prostate cancer cell lines treated with
HDAC-inhibitors (HDACIs) vorinostat and valproic acid (VPA). Hence we
sought to combine these HDACIs with AMG900, a pan-Aurora kinase
inhibitor, to assess potential additive or synergistic effects,
hypothesizing that low-dose combinations will have a proapoptotic effect
comparable to a higher dose of AMG900 as a single agent. Methods: We used
MTS assays, clonogenic assays, beta-galactosidase staining and western
blot analyses to investigate differences in proliferation and molecular
markers with combinations of AMG900 and HDACIs compared to AMG900 alone.
Results: In vitro treatment of a panel of prostate cancer cell lines with
low-dose combinations of AMG900 with HDACIs revealed enhanced
antiproliferative responses compared to single agent use. Short term MTS
assays only demonstrated moderate synergism in DU-145 and LNCaP cells
co-treated with VPA and synergism in PC3 cells co-treated with
vorinostat, based on the Chou-Talalay-method (CalcuSyn). However, all
cell lines demonstrated significant decreased long term survival when
combining low-dose AMG900 (1nM) with HDACIs. In DU-145 and PC3 cells
lines, the low-dose AMG900 (1nM) combinations demonstrated equivalent
clonogenic survival to high dose AMG900 treatment (5nM), either alone or
in combination with HDACIs. We noted morphologic changes in treated cell
lines and explored senescence with beta-galactosidase staining. DU-145
and PC3 cells, when treated with a combination of AMG900 and HDACIs,
demonstrated a significant increase in beta-galactosidase positive cells,
suggesting cell senescence (10-20% in single agent vs 50% in low-dose
combinations). We also explored the mechanisms associated with decreased
clonogenic survival at low doses and found a significant increase in
cleaved PARP in DU-145 cells with both combinations, and with Vorinostat
in LNCaP cells, but not PC3 cells which have a baseline level of ongoing
apoptosis. In addition, western blot analysis showed significant
differences in ACH3, pH3 and Cyclin B1 in combination treatment compared
to single agent use. Conclusions: A combination of low-dose AMG900 with
HDACIs in prostate cancer cell lines demonstrates synergy and efficacy
equivalent to high doses of AMG900 alone, confirming our hypothesis.

