Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low MEOX2 expression is a feature of stem-like Rat BTUC glioma
cell line and contributes to its profound resistance to oncolytic herpes
virus infection


Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV1) is an oncolytic virus that is often
engineered with viral gene manipulations to selectively destroy cancer
cells through its lytic replication cycle. The engineered HSV1 features
effective tumor cell killing and low toxicity in clinical applications,
making it an ideal therapeutic option for gliomas and other cancers.
However, there are many examples where HSV1 demonstrates poor killing
efficacy in highly malignant rat glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) models as
well as in clinical samples of high grade human GBM. Further vitro
evidence revealed the problem may not be simply physical obstacles in the
tumor mass, but rather the resistance of glioma cells themselves to HSV1
infection. A good example is the stem-like BTUC (BTUCsph) rat glioma cell
line, which we find to be completely resistant to HSV1 entry. Unlike
other glioma cell lines, the BTUCsph cells are derived from an aggressive
rat GBM model that strongly mimics the histological features of a
malignant and highly infiltrative form of human GBM known as gliosarcoma.
BTUCsph shares many features with brain tumor initiating cells including:
1) the expression of neural stem cell markers such as CD133 and nestin;
2) their ability to grow as self-renewing spheres; and 3) their
remarkable tumor initiating abilities, where as few as 100 cells are
sufficient to generate a tumor in vivo. Further molecular
characterization of the BTUCsph cell line revealed that it expresses very
low levels of the MEOX2, a tumor suppressor that not only inhibits cell
proliferation, but also suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) - a hallmark of malignant progression in GBMs. Interestingly, we
find that many HSV1-permissive glioma cell lines (U87, SF188, 9L) express
significantly higher MEOX2 compared to the HSV1-resistant BTUCsph cell
line. Hypothesis and Rationale: Based on our characterization of BTUCsph,
we suggest that low MEOX2 is a feature of the HSV1-resistant BTUCsph cell
line that sets it apart from HSV1-permissive glioma cell lines. We
further suggest that low MEOX2 expression profile may contribute to their
resistance to HSV1 entry. Experiments and Key Findings: Using a defective
HSV1 virus UL53-RTK-UL54 (ICP27 deleted virus expressing GFP reporter) to
infect a panel of glioma cell lines (BTUCsph, 9L, U87, SF188) and BTUCsph
derived tumors in vivo, we find that cells permissive to HSV1 infection
strongly correlates with MEOX2 positivity. In our functional studies, we
further revealed that MEOX2 knockdown in the HSV1-permissive 9L glioma
cell line resulted in marked decline in HSV1 entry, while MEOX2
overexpression in the HSV1-resistant BTUCsph glioma cell line resulted in
significant increase in HSV1 entry. Conclusion: Low MEOX2 expression is a
feature of the highly malignant BTUCsph glioma cells that contributes to
their resistance to HSV1 entry.

