Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of cisplatin induced changes in serous ovarian cancer
and normal fallopian tube cells


Platinum drugs are the most active agents for treatment of ovarian
cancer. While most patients initially respond to this treatment, the
majority eventually become resistant and ultimately succumb to the
disease. Despite much investigation, in vitro elucidated mechanisms of
platinum resistance have not correlated with those involved in clinical
chemoresistance. Traditionally, in vitro models have consisted of
established ovarian cancer cell lines that have been propagated in
culture for decades. Chemoresistance is then modeled by growing cells in
the presence of increasing concentrations of platinum or other cytotoxic
drugs. As an alternative approach, we developed primary cell lines from
normal human fallopian tube epithelial cells (n=5) and serous ovarian
cancers (n=15). The latter group included tumors isolated from chemo-nave
(n=9) and chemo-exposed (n=6) patients. Each primary cell line was
treated with vehicle and cisplatin (50uM) for 24hrs and expression
profiling was performed using Affymetrix arrays. Differentially expressed
genes were identified using BRB ArrayTools (PPlatinum drugs are the most
active agents for treatment of ovarian cancer. While most patients
initially respond to this treatment, the majority eventually become
resistant and ultimately succumb to the disease. Despite much
investigation, in vitro elucidated mechanisms of platinum resistance have
not correlated with those involved in clinical chemoresistance.
Traditionally, in vitro models have consisted of established ovarian
cancer cell lines that have been propagated in culture for decades.
Chemoresistance is then modeled by growing cells in the presence of
increasing concentrations of platinum or other cytotoxic drugs. As an
alternative approach, we developed primary cell lines from normal human
fallopian tube epithelial cells (n=5) and serous ovarian cancers (n=15).
The latter group included tumors isolated from chemo-nave (n=9) and
chemo-exposed (n=6) patients. Each primary cell line was treated with
vehicle and cisplatin (50uM) for 24hrs and expression profiling was
performed using Affymetrix arrays. Differentially expressed genes were
identified using BRB ArrayTools (P<0.001 considered significant). The
expression profiles of chemo-nave and chemo-exposed samples were similar
regardless of vehicle or cisplatin treatment. However, comparison of
cisplatin and vehicle treated cells revealed robust differences between
cell types with 3312 differentially expressed genes in the chemo-naiive,
6160 genes in the chemo-exposed, and 5277 genes in normal FT cells lines
(all at PPlatinum drugs are the most active agents for treatment of
ovarian cancer. While most patients initially respond to this treatment,
the majority eventually become resistant and ultimately succumb to the
disease. Despite much investigation, in vitro elucidated mechanisms of
platinum resistance have not correlated with those involved in clinical
chemoresistance. Traditionally, in vitro models have consisted of
established ovarian cancer cell lines that have been propagated in
culture for decades. Chemoresistance is then modeled by growing cells in
the presence of increasing concentrations of platinum or other cytotoxic
drugs. As an alternative approach, we developed primary cell lines from
normal human fallopian tube epithelial cells (n=5) and serous ovarian
cancers (n=15). The latter group included tumors isolated from chemo-nave
(n=9) and chemo-exposed (n=6) patients. Each primary cell line was
treated with vehicle and cisplatin (50uM) for 24hrs and expression
profiling was performed using Affymetrix arrays. Differentially expressed
genes were identified using BRB ArrayTools (P<0.001 considered
significant). The expression profiles of chemo-nave and chemo-exposed
samples were similar regardless of vehicle or cisplatin treatment.
However, comparison of cisplatin and vehicle treated cells revealed
robust differences between cell types with 3312 differentially expressed
genes in the chemo-naiive, 6160 genes in the chemo-exposed, and 5277
genes in normal FT cells lines (all at P<0.001 cutoff). More than 1200
genes (1274) were differentially regulated in all three types of cells
however; large number of genes were also uniquely altered in each cell
type: normal FTs (2269), chemo-exposed (2772), and chemo-nave (1016).
After cisplatin treatment, 1975 genes showed altered expression in both
chemo-nave and chemo-exposed cells. Seven genes were selected for further
investigation based on their expression pattern and known biological
function. Microarray data was validated using real time RT-PCR in an
independent set of cisplatin treated ovarian cancer cell lines.
Expression of select targeted genes was also evaluated in the ES2 and
SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells treated with increasing doses of cisplatin.
All of the selected genes showed a change in expression pattern after
cisplatin treatment consistent with array data. To further investigate
the role of these target genes, we are testing dose response to platinum
following modulating their expression using siRNA mediated knockdown and
overexpression. Our investigation will provide a better understanding of
genes involved in response to cisplatin in normal and ovarian cancer
cells. By exploiting common and unique features of this response we hope
to develop novel strategies for overcoming drug resistance and hence
increased efficacy of the adjuvant chemotherapy for treatment of ovarian
cancer.

