Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of stem cell and EMT markers on circulating tumor cells


Tumor metastasis contributes significantly to cancer mortality especially
in breast, colon, lung and prostate cancers and is believed to be
associated with distant seeding of circulating tumor cells (CTC) present
in the peripheral blood that arise from the primary tumor. Various
studies on breast, colon and prostate cancer suggest that CTC numbers are
good prognostic indicators. Although there are different technologies
available to detect CTCs from peripheral blood, the CellSearchTM
(Veridex, NJ, USA) technology is the only system approved by the US FDA
for clinical utilization in metastatic breast, colorectal and prostate
cancer. This system is based on a semiautomated immunomagnetic enrichment
in combination with image cytometry and uses ferrofluid-conjugated
antibodies for epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), a cell surface
antigen expressed on most normal epithelial cells and carcinomas to
capture CTCs and cytokeratin (CK) 8, 18 & 19 to image. Additionally, by
definition, CTCs are negative for CD45 (leukocyte common antigen). One
major limitation of the CellSearchTM system is the sole dependence on
anti-EpCAM antibody-based enrichment. Recent studies have demonstrated
that epithelial cancer cells transition into mesenchymal-like tumor cells
to gain migratory capacity, and therefore, CTC enumeration using the
EpCAM-based system may be misleading due to the lower expression of this
antigen. Based on this observation, we hypothesize that CTCs might
express stem cell and EMT-associated markers, both hallmarks of the
metastatic properties of these cells. To test this concept, we determined
the expression of the stem/progenitor (Doublecortin like Kinase-I
[DCLK-1]; CD133) and EMT (-Catenin, Fibronectin and Vimentin) markers on
a panel of lung cancer cells (A549: epithelial lung carcinoma, H358:
bronchioalveolar carcinoma, H69: small cell lung cancer), colon cancer
cells (SW480: colorectal adenocarcinoma, SW620: colorectal adenocarcinoma
derived from metastatic lymph node) and tumor cells isolated from the
ascites fluid of ovarian cancer patients. Tumor cells isolated from
ascites fluids were also labeled with a DCLK-1 specific antibody and
sorted using Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Both DCLK-1
positive and negative cells from the cell sorting were stained by
immunofluorescence and images were taken using inverted microscopy. Our
data demonstrate that a small population of cells in the tumor cell lines
and the tumor cells isolated from the ascites fluid of ovarian cancer
patients have cancer stem cell properties. Furthermore, these cells also
express stem/progenitor and EMT markers. These findings suggest that
using these markers may be more sensitive and informative on patient
prognosis than the use of EpCAM and cytokeratins for the detection and
enumeration of circulating tumor cells.

