Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytomegalovirus enhances glioblastoma via PDGF-B/STAT3 pathway
activation


Recently several groups have demonstrated cytomegalovirus (CMV) protein
and DNA in a large majority of glioblastomas (GBMs), though the exact
role of CMV in tumors remains controversial. Although CMV is capable of
activating several oncogenic pathways, it has never been shown to be a
transforming virus. Because of this, we hypothesize that CMV infection
can modify the rate of gliomagenesis in the context of genetic mutations
known to predispose to tumor formation. To test this, we used the Smith
strain mouse CMV (MCMV) to infect Mut3 (GFAP-cre; Nf1loxP/+; Trp53-/+)
mice that develop normally but eventually develop spontaneous gliomas at
an adult age After intraperitoneal viral inoculation, mice exhibited
multisystemic infection throughout the body, including the brain. Mut3
mice infected perinatally (103 plaque forming units) developed gliomas
significantly sooner than mock-infected Mut3 mice. MCMV-infected mice
developed GBMs (WHO grade IV) at a higher rate than less severe tumors,
whereas, mock-infected mice developed less severe gliomas (WHO grade
III). Since MCMV preferentially infected the neural stem cell (NSC)
niche, an area shown to generate gliomas, we interrogated changes in
signaling in this population via microarray of cultured NSCs in MCMV-
versus Mock-infected mice. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified a PDGF-B
network as the highest scoring differentially regulated network between
MCMV-and Mock-infected neurospheres. In vitro infection of mouse
tumorspheres and human GBM tumorspheres with CMV validated the observed
upregulation of PDGF-B, a molecule shown to cause gliomas de novo.
Additionally, in vitro infection of human glioma stem cells with HCMV
(Towne strain) or exogenous PDGF-B activated STAT3, a key regulator of
gliomas. In mice infected with MCMV, PDGF-B is upregulated in CA2/3
neurons and STAT3 is activated in the subventricular zone and dentate
gyrus suggesting a paracrine effect of MCMV-induced PDGF-B. Also,
infected human brain tumor stem cells demonstrated an increase in
proliferation via flow cytometry. Taken together, our data suggest that
CMV in gliomas may accelerate GBM progression by activating PDGF-B/STAT3
signaling in the NSC population.

