Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the selective contribution of chromosomal instability to
tumor evolution and prognosis


The specific role of Chromosomal Instability (CIN) in tumorigenesis has
been a matter of conjecture. In part, this is due to the challenge of
directly observing dynamic whole-chromosome mis-segregation events as
well as the lack of firm understanding of the mechanisms that lead to CIN
in cancer. These shortcomings have long prevented the ability to
distinguish the role of CIN, which consists of increased rates of
chromosome mis-segregation, from that of aneuploidy, which is a state of
non-diploid chromosome number. To overcome these limitations, we use
human-derived cancer cell lines to understand the biological basis of
chromosome mis-segregation. We then extend these findings to tumor
samples from patients diagnosed with Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma to
examine the selective contribution of CIN to tumor prognosis and
evolution. We show that, in human cancer cell lines, chromosome
mis-segregation occurs primarily as a result from defective microtubule
dynamics, which prevent the correction of erroneous attachments of
microtubules to chromosomes during mitosis. These attachment errors lead
to the formation of lagging chromosomes and chromatin bridges during
anaphase. Strikingly, restoring normal microtubule dynamics significantly
decreases chromosome mis-segregation frequencies and suppresses CIN. We
then use lagging chromosomes and chromatin bridges as morphological
features to examine the selective contribution of CIN to tumor prognosis.
Hematoxylin and Eosin-stained samples from a cohort of 54 patients
diagnosed with Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) are used to examine
the relationship between frequencies of chromosome mis-segregation and
patient prognosis, overall survival, and response to treatment. We show
that a two-fold increase in the frequency of chromosome mis-segregation
leads to a 24% decrease in overall survival and 48% decrease in
relapse-free survival after treatment. The hazard ratio (HR) of death in
patients with increased chromosome mis-segregation is 2.31 and these
patients are more likely to present with higher tumor stage, exhibit
tumor bone marrow involvement, and receive a higher International
Prognostic Index (IPI) score. In summary, this work demonstrates that CIN
primarily arises due to defects in the attachments of microtubule to
chromosomes. Furthermore, increased rates of chromosome mis-segregation
in DLBCL substantiate inferior outcome and poor prognosis. This is likely
due to increased heterogeneity of tumor cells leading to a larger
predilection for adaptation in response to external pressures such as
metastasis and drug treatments. We propose that targeting CIN would yield
improved prognosis and enhanced response to chemotherapeutic drugs.

