Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyamine Transport System (PTS) activity and hijacking in cancer
cells: New option in Head and Neck tumors treatment with the
polyamine-containing drug candidate F14512


The Polyamine Transport System, although not clearly identified at the
molecular level in eukaryotic organisms, was found over activated in many
types of cancer cells, such as leukemia, prostate, melanoma and NSCLC.
Polyamines are implicated in many biological functions, and the need for
polyamines in tumor cells, conveyed by the PTS, is crucial. New
therapeutic strategies consist to use this transport system to deliver a
cytotoxic agent specifically into cancer cells. Head and neck cancer
remains the 6th common cancer with a very poor survival rate indicating
the crucial need for new targeted strategies. For this study, we used 4
Head and Neck (H & N) cancer cell lines representative of various
localizations: CAL 33 and CAL 27 from base of the tongue, Fadu from the
pharynx and SQ20B from the larynx. Here, using a polyamine-coupled
fluorescent probe, we show that the PTS is active in all head and neck
cancer cell lines regardless the tumor localization. In these models,
flow cytometry demonstrated that the PTS incorporates quickly, massively
and specifically the probe into cancer cells. Confocal microscopy
observations revealed that the spermine probe accumulates into the cell
nuclei, the site of action of F14512 which is a potent topoisomerase II
inhibitor. Considering this property, we evaluated the potential of the
F14512 (Pierre Fabre laboratories, France) in these H & N cancer cell
lines. F14512 contains a PTS-recognized spermine side chain attached to
an epipodophyllotoxin moiety targeting topoisomerase II. We found that
F14512 presents a much higher cytotoxicity than etoposide in the 4 cell
lines. Competition assays showed that this effect is dependent of the PTS
activity and confirmed the targeted action of F14512 against cells with
active PTS. The high efficiency of F14512 in the head and neck cancer
cell lines is reported here for the first time and may be of interest for
the future development of this novel drug candidate, currently in phase 1
clinical trial in leukemia. Studies are in progress, using fresh tumor
biopsies from patients with head and neck cancer, to analyze the PTS
status of the tumors using the specific spermine-containing fluorescent
probe and to evaluate the activity of F14512.

