Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and functional characterization of p130Cas as a
substrate of protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 14


Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are thought to be potentially
important regulators in tumorigenesis as antagonists of protein tyrosine
kinases (PTKs). Among them, Protein tyrosine non-receptor type 14
(PTPN14) has been shown to be mutated in both colorectal and breast
cancers. However, little is known about the cellular signaling pathways
it regulates. In order to determine whether PTPN14 has causative roles in
tumorigenesis, we set out to identify substrates of PTPN14 and shed light
on the mechanism why it is mutated in different tumor types. In this
study, we report the identification of p130Cas, a scaffolding molecule,
as a substrate of PTPN14 through a proteomic approach. We show that
PTPN14 specifically dephosphorylates p130Cas at tyrosine 128 by shRNA
knockdown and overexpression. We also demonstrate p130Cas is a direct
substrate of PTPN14 by substrate trapping and in vitro phosphatase
assays. We then mutate tyrosine 128 residue to phenylalanine in DLD1 and
RKO, two different colorectal cell lines, to study the biological
functions of this phosphosite. The mutant cells show reduced
tumorigenicity based on colony formation and soft agar assays. However,
the phenotypes diverge between the mutant cells from the two cell lines
when we test the effect of the mutation on tumor growth in xenograft
model. RKO Y128F mutant cells display significantly reduced tumor volumes
while DLD1 Y128F mutant cells do not. In addition, RKO Y128F mutant cells
are less invasive than parental cells in Matrigel but DLD1 Y128F mutant
cells are surprisingly more invasive. We find that AKT is not fully
activated in both mutant cells, which is likely the cause of the common
phenotypes. However, phospho-ERK is up-regulated in DLD1 mutant cells
possibly due to a compensatory mechanism but not in RKO mutant cells
since ERK is already constitutively active in RKO cells, which explains
the discrepancies in phenotypes mentioned above. Last, Src is shown to be
the kinase of p130Cas Y128. When the phosphorylation of p130Cas Y128 is
surveyed in six commonly used colorectal cancer cell lines, the
phosphorylation levels are found to be correlated with the sensitivities
to Src inhibitor. Thus, p130Cas Y128 phosphorylation can be utilized as a
prognostic marker for Src inhibitors that are already in clinical trials.

