Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ids act as downstream effectors in the transforming growth factor-
pathway in prostate cancer cells


Transforming growth factor- (TGF) regulates proliferation,
differentiation and differentiated function in a wide variety in cells.
In prostate cancer cells, TGF inhibits proliferation in the earlier
stages; however the cancer cells become refractory to growth inhibitory
effects in advanced stages where TGF promotes cancer progression and
metastasis. Intracellular mechanisms involved in these varied effects of
TGF on prostate cancer cells are poorly understood. Inhibitor of
Differentiation (Id) family of closely related proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3,
Id4) inhibit binding of bHLH transcription factors to DNA and inhibit
their effects on cell proliferation and differentiation. In the present
study, we have investigated the involvement of Id1 and Id3 proteins in
the effects of TGF on prostate cancer cells. Id1 and Id3 isoforms of
protein are expressed in DU145 cells, which have previously been shown to
be responsive to growth inhibitory effects of TGF. TGF caused a
significant increase of protein levels of Id1 and Id3 as determined by
Western blot analyses. This early induction was followed by a late
downregulation of Id1, while Id3 induction remained stable. However in
PC3 cells, this early induction of Id1 and Id3 proteins remained stable.
Proliferation marker p21 was also induced in DU145 cells, while p21
protein was undetected in PC3 cells upon TGF1 treatment. Since previous
studies have revealed that the loss of Id1 or Id3 is indicative of loss
of proliferation in prostate cancer, Id1 effects were further studied
between DU145 and PC3 cell lines. Id1 knockdown in DU145 cells resulted
in enhanced inhibitory effects of TGF on cell proliferation. However, Id1
knockdown in PC3 did not influence TGF effects on proliferation. These
results indicate that Id1 downregulation by TGF may be required for its
effects on proliferation in DU145 cancer cells. We next investigated TGF
effects on migration in PC3 cells, which TGF stimulation has been shown
to increase its migration properties. Both Id1 and Id3 knockdown in PC3
cells decreased migratory response to TGF. This indicated that both Id1
and Id3 are necessary for TGF migratory properties of PC3 cells. Taken
together, these results show that Id1 and Id3 act as necessary proteins
in the TGF pathway on both proliferation and migration. Grant support:
NIH 1P20MD002285-02 and RCMI G12RR03602

