Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of CXCR3 splicing in prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among men,
with the metastasis of these tumors being the main reason for the high
rates of mortality and morbidity. This tumor progression requires
epithelial cell dedifferentiation, migration, invasion and growth in an
ectopic site. CXCR3 is a G-protein coupled receptor whose splicing was
found to be differentially regulated in prostate cancer. We have found
over-expression of the CXCR3A splice isoform in prostate cancers and cell
lines whereas normal prostate epithelium expresses by and large only the
CXCR3B isoform, representing a possible switch in the expression between
the CXCR3 splice variants. As these variants link differentially to pro-
and anti-invasion signaling pathways, this may explain the relentless
progression of the prostate carcinoma cells. The switch is present at
both the RNA and the protein level which suggests that the altering
factor is at the trancriptional control level. We hypothesized that a
mutation in the gene or an epigenetic modification of the genome could
possibly be regulating the splicing event and hence the switch in the
expression. CXCR3 when scanned for mutations was found to be intact
except for a polymorphism in the intronic region which coincided with the
normal prostate cells. On the epigenetic regulation side, the CpG
dinucleotides in the regulatory regions, the one intron and 5 upstream
region, susceptible to methylation changes were analysed for methylation
differences. The upstream sequence does not show a differential
methylation pattern whereas the intronic region shows differential
methylation between the cancer and normal prostate cells at 3 different
nucleotides. A possible explanation is that the methylation in the
introns alters the speed of the transcription machinery allowing more
time for a particular splice variant to be transcribed more than the
other. A bichromatic reporter minigene has been designed for each of the
differentially methylated CpG nucleotides, to study its effects on the
splicing regulation of the CXCR3 gene. Further studies include expressing
the minigene and documenting the splicing differences.

