Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fully automated SNP detection from whole blood and mutation
detection from plasma-free DNA


Purpose Gene polymorphism and genetic mutation are related to the
therapeutic effect of many drugs, and a simple genetic test method is
preferred. To meet this demand, we have developed a platform for genetic
testing called i-densy, which can complete fully automated gene
polymorphism analysis from whole blood in approximately 90 minutes, and
compared it with the existing test method. Also, recent reports indicate
that DNA derived from cancer cells are liberated in blood (it is called
circulating cell-free DNA). Using the i-densy, we here tested EGFR gene
T790M mutation in circulating cell-free DNA from a sample derived from
advanced lung cancer patient with EGFR-TKI aquired resistance, and then
compared with the existing test method. Methods The i-densy newly
developed can perform fully automated gene polymorphism testing from 70L
of whole blood and allows typing of 3 polymorphisms or mutations in a
single reaction. Four samples can be tested at once with this instrument,
and testing is also possible using oral mucosa or purified nucleic acid
instead of whole blood. In addition to the i-densy, circulating cell-free
DNA was also tested using Mutation Biased PCR (MBP) method that can
preferentially amplify mutation sequence. Results As a result of using
the i-densy with whole blood for gene testing on 1236C>T, 3435C>T and
2677 G>(T/A) polymorphism of ABCB1 gene related to toxicity and
pharmacokinetics of EGFR-TKI erlotinib, results of 1236C>T and 3435C>T
matched with that of Taqman assay method and 2677 G>(T/A) matched with
Direct sequencing method for all 20 samples. We also extracted free DNA
from peripheral blood plasma of a patient, and tested EGFR T790M mutation
using Mutation Biased PCR (MBP) method, PNA-LNA PCR clamp method and
Cycleave method. Among 19 patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI,
number of patients tested positive for T790M were 10 (53%) using MBP
method, 3 (16%) using PNA-LNA PCR method and 5 (26%) using Cycleave
method. Also, when using MBP method, there was not a single case with
T790M mutation detected among cases with continued therapeutic effect or
which EGFR-TKI is not used. Conclusion The i-densy newly developed has
been identified to be simple and fast that allows accurate gene
polymorphism from whole blood, and also confirmed to be useful in
clinical practice. As a result of EGFR gene T790M mutation testing from
circulating cell-free DNA using the i-densy and MBP method, appearance
ratios of acquired resistance mutation were very close to each other
(approximately 50%), indicating the high detection performance compared
to other methods.

