Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel assays for Sirtuin and PARP families utilizing unmodified
substrates


Class III HDACs, also known as sirtuins, couple deacetylation of the
peptide/protein substrate to cleavage of NAD+ to form nicotinamide and
O-acetyl-ADP-ribose. The mammalian sirtuins comprise 7 members, termed
Sirt1-7, which share the NAD+-binding catalytic domain, but differ in N-
and C-termini, subcellular localization, substrate preference, and
ultimately in biological function. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs)
also cleave NAD+ to generate nicotinamide, but instead covalently attach
the ADP-ribose moiety either to a peptide substrate or to other
preexisting mono- or poly(ADP-ribose) units. The assays most commonly
used for measuring sirtuin and PARP activities in high throughput employ
chemically modified substrates. The most widely used method for
quantifying sirtuin activity utilizes a fluorophore-modified acetylated
peptide substrate that, upon deacetylation, is cleaved by a protease to
liberate the fluorophore to generate a fluorescent signal. Although this
method has been used to discover activators of Sirt1, such as resveratrol
and related compounds, interpretation of the physiological relevance of
this activation is complicated by the observation that these compounds
fail to stimulate Sirt1 activity on most native acetylated peptide
substrates. A potential explanation for these contradictory results is
that stimulation of Sirt1 activity by resveratrol-like compounds is
dependent upon the sequence of the acetylated substrate, but a
high-throughput assay with unlabeled acetylated peptide substrate is
needed to define such substrate selectivity.Here we describe assays for
Sirtuin and PARP family members that employ unmodified substrates. The
assays employ purified recombinant PNC1 nicotinamidase to measure
nicotinamide generated upon cleavage of NAD+ during sirtuin-mediated
deacetylation or PARP-mediated ADP-ribosylation. The nicotinamidase
converts nicotinamide to nicotinic acid and ammonia, and the ammonia is
detected with a fluorogenic reagent, o-phthalaldehyde, to produce a
fluorescent signal. We show that the Sirtuin assay method 1) detects
activity of multiple Sirt family members, 2) distinguishes sirtuin
activity on different acetylated substrates, and 3) does not detect
activation of Sirt1 by resveratrol on an acetylated H3K9 peptide
substrate, in contrast to the stimulation observed with
fluorophore-modified peptide substrates. Thus, this approach enables
flexibility in choice of sirtuin isoform and peptide substrate, and
enables extensive characterization of substrate dependence of sirtuin
modulators. In addition, we demonstrate that the utility of the PARP
assay method for sensitive detection of DNA damage-dependent PARP1 and
PARP2 auto-PARylation activities.

