Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of BRMS1 promoter methylation in operable
breast cancer


Backround: Breast Cancer Metastasis Suppressor gene-1 (BRMS1) suppresses
breast cancer metastasis in multiple experimental models by reducing
solitary cell survival and inhibiting growth initiation. Loss of BRMS1
expression has been shown to predict reduced disease-free survival in
subsets of breast cancer patients. The BRMS1 promoter region contains a
promoter-associated CpG island (CGI) that encompasses the transcriptional
start site.The aim of our study was to investigate the methylation status
of BRMS1 in breast tumors (FFPES) of operable breast cancer patients and
evaluate its prognostic significance. Patients and methods: Using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP), we examined BRMS1 promoter methylation in
116 fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (FFPEs): 5 pairs of breast tumors and
their surrounding non-cancerous tissues, 4 non-cancerous tissues, 10
benign breast tumors (fibroadenomas), 10 normal breast tissues and 82
breast tumors. All breast tumors were isolated from patients with
operable breast cancer. Results: Methylation of BRMS1 promoter was
observed in 0/19 (0%) noncancerous breast tissues, in 0/10 (0%) benign
breast tumors (fibroadenomas) and in 31/82 (37.8 %) breast cancer tumors.
During the follow-up period 22/82 (26.8%) patients relapsed and 20
(24.4%) patients died. BRMS1 methylation was detected in 13/22 (59.1%)
patients that relapsed and in 12/20 (60.0%) of patients who died.
Disease-free interval (DFI) and overall survival (OS) were significantly
associated with BRMS1 promoter methylation (P=0.007). Conclusion: We show
for the first time that BRMS1 promoter methylation status in FFPEs from
operable breast cancer patients provides important prognostic information
and merits to be further evaluated and validated in a larger cohort of
patients. This finding is consistent with other studies that showed
significant down-regulation of BRMS1 in some breast tumors, especially in
metastatic disease, because of epigenetic silencing.

