Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ferritin heavy chain in therapeutic sensitivity of human
glioblastoma cells


Elevated iron requirements and heightened iron metabolism is key to the
survival and proliferation of cancer cells. As one of the major iron
regulatory proteins, ferritin is elevated in cancer cells and we have
previously shown that decreasing ferritin expression in human
glioblastoma cells will increase the sensitivity to BCNU and radiation
both in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we investigate the underlying
mechanism of this finding. Through a nanotechnology-based transfection
platform, the human glioma cell line U251 was transfected with H-ferritin
siRNA and an effective knockdown efficiency of protein was achieved
within 48 hours. H-ferritin down-regulation in glioma cells was
associated with a transient decrease in transferrin receptor, suggesting
a release of intracellular iron with loss of ferritin. This iron release
in turn generated intracellular oxidative stress, which was demonstrated
by protein oxidation. The stability of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs),
which is an indicator of radioresistance, was decreased in glioma cells
with H-ferritin down-regulation. This observation is consistent with the
increased sensitivity to treatment. Exposure to radiation resulted in
increased protein oxidation which could be exacerbated by H-ferritin
down-regulation. Thus there is a synergistic effect of radiation and
H-ferritin down-regulation; possibly also including the destabilization
of HIFs. Additionally, we have previously demonstrated a DNA protection
role for H-ferritin. Down-regulation of H-ferritin is associated with
increased DNA vulnerability when cells were exposed to ionizing
radiation. Moreover, the activation of DNA repair mechanisms was impaired
when H-ferritin was absent. Finally, we expanded the vulnerability
studies to include the first-line chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide and
found that H-ferritin down-regulation increased the sensitivity of glioma
cells to this DNA alkylating agent. This study suggests that the iron
management protein, H-ferritin, has a cytoprotective role in human glioma
cells, which renders them more resistant to conventional therapies.
Therefore down-regulation of H-ferritin via nanoliposomes delivering
siRNA is a potential adjuvant therapy in glioma treatment.

