Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of H2aX and other biomarkers to quantify distribution of drug
activity in solid tumors


Background: The disorganized vasculature within solid tumors leads to
decreased drug delivery and poor penetration of drugs from blood vessels
to the tumor cells. Our laboratory has used quantitative
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to show limited intratumoral distribution of
the auto-fluorescent drugs doxorubicin and mitoxantrone. Most anti-cancer
drugs are not fluorescent and do not have antibodies that recognize them;
there is a need for biomarkers that can be used to quantify their
distribution and efficacy in different regions of solid tumors. The aim
of the present study was to characterize the spatial distribution within
solid tumors of biomarkers of drug effect that can be used to test drug
efficacy. Methods: Cleaved caspase 3 (a marker of apoptosis), H2aX (a
marker of DNA damage) and Ki67 (a marker of cell proliferation) were
quantified in tumor sections in relation to blood vessels (recognized by
CD31) using monoclonal antibodies and IHC. To validate the use of these
biomarkers we compared their time-dependent distribution with (i) the
distribution of auto-fluorescent doxorubicin and (ii) the distribution of
a fluorescent monoclonal antibody that detects melphalan-induced DNA
adducts. The biomarkers were then used to study the distribution of
docetaxel in relation to tumor blood vessels. Results: The distributions
of doxorubicin in MCF7 & MDA-MB-231 xenografts and of melphalan-induced
DNA adducts in MCF-7 & EMT-6 tumors decreased exponentially with
increasing distance from tumor blood vessels; they were similar to the
distribution of H2aX at 10 minutes after injection of these drugs. The
distributions of cleaved caspase 3 and of change in Ki-67 at 24 hours
following treatment also mirrored the distribution of the drugs. The
distribution of these biomarkers following injection of docetaxel also
showed a sharp decrease in drug activity with increasing distance from
tumor blood vessels in solid tumors (MCF-7, PC-3 & A431). Conclusions:
Activation of H2aX occurs within 10 minutes after injection of several
drugs and is the preferred biomarker for studying distribution of drug
activity in tumors. There is heterogeneity of activity of many anticancer
drugs in solid tumors, with rapid decrease in activity with increasing
distance from tumor blood vessels. Poor distribution of drugs to cells
within tumors is an important cause of drug resistance. Supported by a
research grant from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research

