Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific pomegranate juice components are potential inhibitors of
prostate cancer metastasis


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the second-leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in U.S men. Early stages can be controlled with
hormone ablation therapy that suppresses the rate of prostate cancer
growth. However, over time, the cancer overcomes its hormone dependence,
becomes highly aggressive and metastasizes to the lymph nodes and bone
marrow. Recently, Pomegranate juice (PJ) has been identified as a natural
product that inhibits prostate cancer progression. In an UCLA phase II
clinical trial, patients with rising PSA were given 8 oz of PJ by mouth
daily. PSA doubling time significantly increased with treatment from a
mean of 15 months to 54 months post-treatment. We have shown previously
that PJ inhibits the migratory and metastatic properties of prostate
cancer cells by stimulating cell adhesion and inhibiting cell migration
and chemotaxis. However, the soluble phase of PJ contains many components
and as a whole it is difficult to determine how to best maximize its use
in treating prostate cancer. A way to overcome this challenge is to
identify chemical components of PJ responsible for the anti-metastatic
effect of whole juice. Methods: By using two hormone-independent prostate
cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145 and one hormone-sensitive cell line
LNCaP, we took an integrative approach using Affymetrix gene arrays and
miRNA PCR arrays to identify specific PJ components that have similar
effects as the juice on cell adhesion, migration and chemotaxis. Results:
We show that the specific PJ components luteolin, ellagic acid and
punicic acid individually inhibit growth of hormone-dependent and
-independent prostate cancer cells, and also inhibit their migration and
their chemotaxis towards SDF1, a factor that is important in prostate
cancer metastasis to the bone. However, the greatest effects were
observed when the three components were used together. In addition, our
Affymetrix gene array results show that these components also increase
the expression of cell adhesion genes and decrease expression of genes
involved in cell cycle control and cell migration. Moreover, miRNA PCR
array results show that these components increase several well-known
tumor-suppressive miRNAs and decrease several oncogenic miRNAs. We also
show that these components inhibit the CXCR4/SDF1 chemotaxis axis.
Moreover, when taken together, the integrated results of the gene and
miRNA arrays show a powerful correlation in regulation of function by the
specific genes important in processes critical for metastasis.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that these components may be a more
effective inhibitor of prostate cancer metastasis than the whole juice.
Chemical modification of these compounds could further enhance their
bioavailability and efficacy of treatment. Moreover, because the
mechanisms of metastasis are similar for most cancers, these PJ
components may also be effective in treatment of metastasis of other
cancers.

