Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-1 (GPC1) promotes S-phase entry and DNA replication in
human glioma cells


Glypican-1 (GPC1), the most ubiquitously expressed member of the glypican
family of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), is highly expressed in
the developing brain and gliomas. In gliomas, GPC1 is overexpressed in
both tumor blood vessel endothelial cells (ECs) and the neoplastic cells.
Prior work by us in ECs indicates that GPC1 is overall mitogenic and
essential for cell cycle progression and proliferation, implying a role
in glioma angiogenesis. The present study focused on the role of GPC1 in
glioma cells to explore potential roles in tumorigenesis and growth. The
expression of GPC1 in U87 cells, a human glioma cell line with a
relatively low basal level of GPC1, was titrated by adenoviral
transduction. BrdU pulse-labeling showed a robust induction of S-phase
entry and DNA replication by expression of GPC1 in a dose-dependent
manner. GPC1 overexpression ultimately led to DNA re-replication and
aneuploidy as well as enlarged nuclei and cell rounding. Consistent with
these cell cycle effects, ectopic expression of GPC1 significantly
induced downregulation of pRb, p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 and upregulation of
cyclin E, CDK2 and E2F transactivation activity. These cellular and
molecular activities of GPC1 were independent of serum concentrations in
the growth medium, suggesting that they do not require exogenous growth
factors. This activity required intact GPC1 as neither unglycanated GPC1
core protein nor isolated GPC1 HS chains induced the cell cycle and
molecular alterations seen after intact GPC1 was added. The more general
relevance of our observation to other cell types and the HS-dependency of
the GPC1 activity were confirmed by GPC1 transduction of wild-type and HS
synthesis-defective CHO cells. Overexpression of GPC1 induced dramatic
S-phase entry in wild-type but not in HS-deficient mutant CHO cells. In
summary, this work reveals a potent S-phase promoting activity of GPC1 in
glioma cells, which may lead to accelerated cell growth and/or increased
genomic instability and, therefore, implies a role for GPC1 in glioma
tumorigenesis and growth.

