Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of oncogenic Pim kinases, including Pim-2, alters cell
growth and signaling in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most common cancer of the
pancreas, comprising over 85% of all cases. PDAC has a relative 1-year
survival rate of 20% and a 5-year survival rate of 4%. A better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms leading to the development of
pancreatic cancer remains a major goal for defining appropriate treatment
strategies and earlier detection. Past studies have shown that members of
the oncogenic Pim kinase family (Pim-1, Pim-2, and Pim-3) are aberrantly
expressed in a variety of solid tumors, including pancreatic cancer.
Currently, only Pim-1 and Pim-3 have been shown to be anti-apoptotic and
aberrantly expressed in PDAC. Although members of the Pim kinase family
have been shown to have a high degree of homology at the amino acid
level, past studies have demonstrated functional differences among the
members of the Pim family. To better understand the significance of these
observations, we have investigated the role of Pims, including Pim-2, in
growth transformation of pancreatic cancer. We hypothesize that
inhibition of Pim-2 will be effective in antagonizing the aberrant growth
of PDAC. Initially, we confirmed by western blot analysis that Pim-2 is
aberrantly expressed in PDAC tissues and cell lines. Also, we found that
inhibition of Pim-2 expression by shRNA resulted in decreased cell
viability of PDAC cells. Additionally, inhibition of PIm-2 expression
resulted in decreased anchorage-independent growth. These effects were
further demonstrated by inhibiting Pim activity using novel small
molecule Pim inhibitors developed by Jasco Pharmaceuticals that inhibit
Pim-2 activity in the picomolar range. To begin to determine a mechanism
for this growth inhibition, we studied the activity of various downstream
substrates of Pim kinases in PDAC cells such as 4EBP-1. Overall our
research continues to validate the role of Pim-2 in growth
transformation, as well as further support Pim-2 as a viable target for
drug therapy in pancreatic cancer.

