Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting p300 for inhibiting triple negative breast cancer


Breast cancer (BC) can be classified into four main subtypes:
normal-like, HER2 overexpressing, luminal A and B, and basal-like BC.
Normal-like BC cells exhibit gene expression pattern resembling basal
epithelial cells. Erb-B-2/HER2-positive BC cells display high levels of
Her2 expression. Luminal tumors show heightened expression of luminal
cytokeratins and genes specific to the luminal epithelial cells, and are
generally ER positive. Basal-like BC is characterized by the lack of
expression of ER, progesterone receptor (PgR), and HER2. Triple-negative
BC (TNBC) is defined by the lack of expression of ER, PgR and HER2 with
distinct molecular, histological and clinical characteristics. Among the
four BC subtypes, TNBC shares many of the molecular features of
basal-like BC. Patients with TNBC have worse prognosis than those with
other types of BC due to residual diseases that are resistant to
chemotherapy and display heightened tendency to disseminate to distant
organs. Available targeted therapies are ineffective for TNBC.
Interestingly, cells derived from TNBC contain an elevated proportion of
tumor cells with stem cell traits. These cells, known as cancer stem
cells (CSCs), can self renew, differentiate into other types of cells in
the tumor bulks, and efficiently promote tumor regrowth. CSCs are highly
resistant to chemotherapy due to the expression of antiapoptotic genes.
Several highly active signaling pathways, including cytokine-JAK-STAT3,
Wnt--catenin, and Hippo-TAZ cascades, support the survival and sustained
self-renewal of CSCs. One remarkable feature of these diverse signaling
pathways is the reliance on the functions of the coactivators and
acetyltransferases p300 and its paralog CBP for the expression of the
effector genes that underlie the CSC phenotypes. We therefore hypothesize
that inhibition of p300/CBP is an effective strategy for treating TNBC.
Using an unbiased ultra high-throughput screening, we have identified
small chemical compounds that were highly toxic to TNBC cell line
MDA-MB-231 and potently inhibited the enzymatic activity of p300.
Validation experiments revealed that a specific compound, L002, with the
IC50 of 1.98 M against p300 in vitro suppressed histone acetylation at
several known sites of p300 acetylation in cell-based assay. L002 was
highly toxic to MDA-MB-231 cells but much less so to MCF7 derived from a
luminal BC. Experiments are underway to examine the effects of L002 on
the survival of breast CSCs. (This work was supported by Bankhead-Coley
Cancer Research Program of the Florida Department of Health.)

