Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interference of the polyphenolic compound curcumin with expression
regulation of target genes of the PLAG1 oncogenic transcription factor


Transcriptional upregulation of a variety of signaling genes is a key
feature of PLAG1-induced tumorigenesis. The PLAG1 gene is mainly
expressed during embryogenesis and mobilization of its oncogenic
potential in human tumors results from genetic aberrations. The oncogenic
capacity of the PLAG1 gene was initially demonstrated by various standard
experimental approaches in vitro. The oncogenic potential of the PLAG1
gene was further demonstrated by the generation of a versatile tumor
mouse model system with Cre-mediated expression activation of the PLAG1
gene. In previous studies, it was demonstrated that the PLAG1-encoded
protein is a genuine transcription factor, which recognizes a specific
bipartite DNA sequence motif and activates a variety of target genes
among which genes of the Igf and Wnt signaling pathways. In an attempt to
interfere with the oncogenic PLAG1 transcription factor, the possible
effect of a variety of natural products including various polyphenols was
studied. Initially, PLAG1 transduced Balb/c-3T3 expressing high levels of
PLAG1 were screened for the possible effect of a variety of polyphenols
on the PLAG1-induced upregulation of various established PLAG1 target
genes such as for instance Igf2. The polyphenolic compound curcumin was
selected for further studies since, in the initial experiments, it was
shown to exhibit downregulation of Igf2 expression as well as that of
other well-established PLAG1 target genes such as H19, Dlk1, and Gtl2.
Evaluation of the expression of various genes which lack the
PLAG1-specific bipartite DNA binding motif in their promoter regions
revealed no effect of curcumin; e.g. Plag1, Wnt6 and Ctnnb1. The
observation that preferentially the expression of PLAG1 target genes was
affected by curcumin raised the possibility that curcumin might interfere
with the binding of the PLAG1 transcription factor to its specific DNA
binding sites in the promoter regions of the tested PLAG1 target genes.
To test this hypothesis, the effect of curcumin on the expression of two
reporter gene constructs was studied. These reporter constructs consisted
of the luciferase gene under expression control of a HSK-tk promoter with
either three wild-type PLAG1-specific DNA binding motifs or, as a
control, three mutated forms of it upstream of HSV-tk. The results of
these experiments suggested that curcumin indeed might interfere directly
with the binding of the PLAG1 transcription factor protein to its cognate
DNA binding motif. To further substantiate these results in an
independent way, EMSA experiments are being performed. Altogether, the
results of these studies seem to favor the notion that curcumin could
directly affect the PLAG1-induced tumorigenic process in vivo by
interfering with the binding of the PLAG1 transcription factor to its
cognate binding sites in promoter regions of target genes.

