Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a novel in vivo electroporation-based DNA vaccine
utilizing a small molecule regulated immune switch


Dendritic cell (DC) vaccines are a rapidly progressing area of
translational research intended for developing new cancer treatment
modalities. Although ex vivo DC-based vaccines have been extensively
studied and clinically tested for the treatment of cancer, they are
inherently limited by short DC lifespan after activation, labor-intensive
production (requiring ex vivo manipulation of autologous cells), high
cost and consequent limited accessibility to the patient. Therefore, we
have attempted to develop portable, regulatable adjuvants that could be
targeted to DCs and activated in situ. Development by our lab of an
inducible variant of the costimulatory molecule, CD40 (iCD40), and a
composite, inducible MyD88/CD40 (iMC) adjuvant, that also incorporates
the universal Toll like receptor adapter, MyD88, have been shown to
increase the potency and lifespan of DC vaccines. These inducible
receptors act as in vivo DC switches that lead to the priming and robust
expansion of antigen (Ag)-specific T-cells capable of eliminating
pre-established tumors in mice. Despite the success of these DC switch
systems, practicality and scalability of patient-tailored ex vivo DC
vaccines remains a major hindrance to their widespread applicability.
Therefore, the future of DC vaccines lies in the development of
off-the-shelf methodologies, such as viral or non-viral vectors that can
deliver adjuvants along with tumor antigens. DNA vaccines are attractive
for this purpose owing to their elegant simplicity, ease of production,
and lack of anti-vector immune responses. In order to successfully
vaccinate patients with DNA, one must be able to deliver plasmid encoding
therapeutic genes to target cells efficiently. In vivo electroporation is
a relatively new technology just starting to be tested in clinical
trials, and provides a safe, simple, and effective means by which to
administer DNA vaccines. Data from our preliminary studies of the
electroporative delivery of plasmids encoding the model antigen
-galactosidase (LacZ) in mice suggests that LacZ-specific T-cell
responses are induced, and that upon tumor challenge, mice receiving
prophylaxis via electroporation had slower tumor growth kinetics when
compared to controls. Together, this preliminary data supports the notion
that DNA vaccination with tumor Ag by electroporation may be a simple and
effective off-the-shelf cancer vaccine strategy. Additionally, this
vaccination strategy may be enhanced by the addition of the iMC adjuvant.
Therefore, further investigation of intradermal electroporation is
warranted by these findings, to better characterize the induced immune
responses and better optimize vaccination

