Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique and redundant roles of human RecQ homologs in cellular
response to oxidative DNA damage


RecQ helicases contribute diverse activities towards genome maintenance
in response to a variety of DNA lesions. Human RecQ homologs include
RECQ1, BLM, WRN, RECQL4, and RECQ5. Although these RecQ proteins are
similar in their catalytic core and share certain biochemical properties
in vitro, mutations in BLM, WRN and RecQ4 lead to clinically distinct
diseases of cancer predisposition. This suggests that each human RecQ
protein functions in distinct molecular events, but their specialized
functions are only vaguely understood. RECQ1 is the most abundant but
poorly characterized RecQ homolog in humans. Biochemically, RECQ1
displayed distinct substrate specificities from WRN and BLM, indicating
that these helicases likely perform non-overlapping functions. Cellular
studies imply that RECQ1 is involved in cellular proliferation and
maintenance of genomic stability. We have obtained key preliminary
evidence suggesting a unique role of RECQ1 in repair of oxidative DNA
damage. RECQ1 is quickly recruited to the chromatin when cells are
exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Remarkably, the chromatin
localization of RECQ1 is more robust and rapid than that of WRN helicase
which has been shown to function in oxidative DNA damage repair.
Deficiency in WRN or BLM helicase result in reduced homologous
recombination and over-activation of PARP under basal condition; however,
RECQ1-deficiency did not lead to PARP activation in undamaged cells and
resulted in a comparatively modest, but significant, reduction in
relative homologous recombination repair. In stark contrast to what is
seen in WRN-deficiency, RECQ1-depleted cells over-activate PARP in a
specific response to H2O2 treatment. Nonetheless, similar to WRN, RECQ1
associates with PARP-1 in human cells. Our results suggest a novel and
non-overlapping role of RecQ1 in exogenously induced-oxidative DNA damage
repair via modulation of PARP-1. Given that several RecQ proteins exhibit
interaction with PARP-1, this study should provide a paradigm to
delineate specialized and redundant functions of human RecQ homologs in
DNA repair mechanisms.

