Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the redox-adaptive response in tumors to potentiate
cancer therapy


Resistance to chemotherapy is a major impediment to successful cancer
treatment. To enhance therapeutic intervention, we are developing novel
compounds that target the redox-adaptive response in tumors, a process
that increases intracellular glutathione levels. Elevated levels of
intracellular glutathione render tumors resistant to chemotherapy and
radiation therapy by protecting against reactive oxygen species,
inactivating electrophilic metabolites of chemotherapy drugs, and
blocking Bcl-2-mediated apoptosis. Glutathione synthesis requires free
intracellular cysteine. Cells under oxidative stress synthesize high
levels of glutathione and the supply of cysteine becomes rate limiting
for glutathione synthesis. We have developed a novel strategy to deplete
the free cysteine available to tumor cells, thereby blocking the drug
resistance in tumor cells that have undergone redox-adaption. To
accomplish this in humans, two enzymes must be inhibited, gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase (aka gamma-glutamyl transferase, GGT1) and gamma-glutamyl
leukotrienase (aka, GGT-rel, GGT5). In humans, both GGT1 and GGT5 cleave
the gamma-glutamyl bond of extracellular glutathione initiating the
breakdown of glutathione into its constituent amino acids, glutamate,
cysteine and glycine. Inhibiting GGT1 and GGT5 depletes the body of
cysteine by blocking the catabolism of glutathione in the kidney
resulting in the excretion of glutathione in the urine. Inhibiting these
enzymes also blocks the tumor's ability to use extracellular glutathione
as a source of cysteine.Our approach not only reduces the ability of the
tumor to synthesize glutathione, it also reduces the cysteine (and the
total amount of reduced thiol) in the tumor. Previously we used
high-throughput screening and identified OU749
(N-[5-(4-methoxybenzyl)-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl]benzenesulfonamide), a
novel inhibitor of GGT1. We have subsequently developed a new assay
system, which provides an unambiguous method to evaluate the inhibition
of the physiologic reactions catalyzed by both GGT1 and GGT5. Kinetic
data obtained from the assay can be used to directly evaluate the potency
and mechanism of action of each inhibitor. Synthesis of an extensive
array of OU749 analogues and evaluation of the inhibitory activity of
these analogues in our new assay system has resulted in the
identification of two new lead compounds, HL-6 and HL-7. These new leads
are uncompetitive inhibitors of both human GGT1 and GGT5. These compounds
are orders of magnitude less toxic than the currently available GGT1
inhibitors. Continued optimization of these lead compounds will provide
new drugs for potentiating cancer therapy.

