Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of cell-free serum DNA in
esophageal adenocarcinoma and Barrett's esophagus


Aberrant DNA methylation (DNAm) is a feature of most types of cancers.
Genome-wide DNAm profiling has been performed successfully on DNA
extracted from many types of tumor tissues. However, the invasive
procedure and the likely existence of tissue heterogeneity limit the
utility of tumor tissue for epidemiological studies. While recent data
indicate that cell-free circulating DNA methylation (cfDNAm) profiles
reflect DNAm profiles in matched tumor tissues, no studies have examined
the association of cfDNAm with cancer or precursors on a genome-wide
scale. The objective of this pilot study was to evaluate the putative
significance of genome-wide cfDNAm profiles in esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EA) and Barrett's esophagus (BE, EA precursor). We performed genome-wide
DNAm profiling in EA tissue DNA (n=8) and matched serum DNA (n=8), in
serum DNAs of BE (n=12) and healthy controls (n=12), using the Infinium
Humanmethylation27 Beadchip that covers 27,578 CpG loci in 14,495 genes.
We found that cfDNAm profiles were highly correlated to DNAm profiles in
matched tumor tissue DNAs (r=0.92) in patients with EA. We selected the
most differentially methylated loci (a -value difference of >0.2 and a
P-value of 6 x 10 7 between groups) to perform hierarchical clustering
analysis. We found that 911 loci can perfectly discriminate between EA
and control samples; 554 loci can separate EA from BE samples; and 46
loci can distinguish BE from control samples. These results suggest that
genome-wide cfDNAm profiles are highly consistent with DNAm profiles
detected in corresponding tumor tissues. Differential cfDNAm profiling
may be a useful approach for the non-invasive screening of EA and EA
premalignant lesions. Supported by grants: Flight Attendant Medical
Research Institute (FAMRI) grant# 062459; NIH grants CA92824, CA74386,
CA90578, and CA119650); the Kevin Jackson Memorial Fund and Alan Brown
Chair of Molecular Genomics.

