Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-7 and its novel target regulate sensitivity to microtubule
stabilizing agents


Microtubule stabilizing drugs, such as Taxol that is used in the
treatment of numerous malignancies, cause distinct responses in cancer
cells, including apoptosis, mitotic catastrophe, necrosis and accelerated
senescence. However, drug resistance, a complex and mutlifactorial
phenotype, is a major obstacle to therapy and the foremost cause of
disease progression and cancer-related mortality. MiRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs that regulate protein expression by targeting their
3UTRs, and are emerging as key regulators of cancer pathogenesis that can
influence sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. We have
identified miR-7 as a regulator of sensitivity to the
microtubule-stabilizing agents, discodermolide and Taxol. Over-expression
of miR-7 in the lung cancer cell lines A549 and H2122, strongly inhibited
cell proliferation and sensitized the cells to drug-induced apoptosis.
Over-expression of miR-7 also increased the number of acidic lysosomes,
as measured by -galactosidase activity, which likely reflects lysosomal
stress. It also increased basal and drug-induced caspase activation,
which most likely mediate the sensitizing effects of discodermolide and
Taxol. In addition, we validated that the transcription factor, Kruppel
like factor 4 (KLF4) is a target of miR-7, and that its expression also
regulates sensitivity to discodermolide and Taxol. KLF4 is suppressed in
discodermolide- and Taxol-treated A549 cells that have a strong senescent
phenotype, and is over-expressed in A549 cells that are resistant to
either drugs. ShRNA-mediated knockdown of KLF4 in A549 and H2122 also
sensitized cells to discodermolide and Taxol though to a lesser degree
than miR-7 overexpression, and also inhibited cell proliferation and
increased lysosomal -galactosidase activity and caspase activity. Thus,
we hypothesize that suppression of KLF4 partially mediates the potent
anti-tumor effects of miR-7 in A549 and H2122 lung cancer cells. In
summary, we have identified miR-7 and its novel target, KLF4, as
important regulators of sensitivity to discodermolide and Taxol, and
suggest that miR-7 is a promising candidate for therapeutic development.

