Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Properties associated with cancer progression in primary clonal
epithelial and mesenchymal-like murine mammary tumor cells


The majority of cancer patients die from tumor relapse. Consequently,
characteristics of tumor cells that may contribute to aggressive cancer
progression are under intense investigation. Tumors are composed of
heterogeneous populations of cells that express a continuum of epithelial
and mesenchymal markers. There is mounting evidence that mesenchymal
tumor cells acquire invasive features and are refractory to conventional
treatment, but in order to decipher the contribution of both epithelial
and mesenchymal-like tumor cells to disease relapse we must understand
the cellular and molecular properties of each cell type. Using a
combination of different culture conditions and cell sorting strategies,
we cloned epithelial and mesenchymal-like tumor cells that were derived
from FVB Tg MMTV/Neu spontaneous mammary tumors. The availability of
these clonal primary cell lines provides an unique opportunity to compare
tumor cell properties that may contribute to aggressive disease such as
proliferation, resistance to apoptosis, tumorigenicity, invasiveness,
expression of growth factor and cytokine receptors, inflammatory cytokine
secretion, immunogenicity, and expression or down-regulation of
immune-modulatory molecules. Some of our preliminary data has revealed
that (1) Epithelial cells are more proliferative in vitro, and cell
proliferation was reduced upon exposure to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
TKI-258. TKI-258 did not significantly decrease the proliferation of
mesenchymal-like tumor cells, (2) A population of epithelial-enriched
cells was more tumorigenic as compared to mesenchymal-like-enriched cells
when administered to an immune competent syngeneic host, (3) Epithelial
cells express greater Neu transgene, IL-6 and TNF- transcripts than
mesenchymal-like cells, and (4) When low passage clonal epithelial and
mesenchymal-like cells were used as a whole cell tumor vaccine in FVB
wild-type mice there was an increase in CD8 T cell activation as compared
to that elicited by administration of a non-clonal high passage tumor
cell line. We are continuing to explore molecular and functional
differences between the clonal epithelial, clonal mesenchymal and the
non-clonal tumor cell line cells. Characterization of epithelial and
mesenchymal-like tumor cells represents an initial step in deciphering
how tumor cells contribute to aggressive cancer progression and will
offer insight into how epithelial and mesenchymal-like tumor cells
respond to therapeutic interventions. The ultimate goal will be to tailor
anticancer therapy toward eradicating the unique type of tumor cells that
populate patient tumors.

