Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to second-line tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment in
imatinib-resistant Philadelphia-positive leukemia patients can be
anticipated by ultra-deep sequencing of the BCR-ABL kinase domain using
Roche 454 technology


Definite spectra of point mutations in the Bcr-Abl kinase domain (KD) are
known to confer resistance to the 1st-generation tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) imatinib (IM) and to the 2nd-generation TKIs dasatinib
(DAS) and nilotinib (NIL) in Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) leukemias.
Currently, European LeukemiaNet guidelines recommend mutation analysis to
be performed by denaturing-high performance liquid chromatography
(D-HPLC) and/or direct sequencing. Using Roche 454 next-generation
sequencing (NGS) technology on a GS Junior instrument, we investigated
whether an ultra-deep amplicon sequencing strategy for mutation screening
of the Bcr-Abl KD could highlight emerging clones harbouring critical
mutations, ultimately anticipating the development of drug-resistance. A
lower detection limit of 0.05% - 5 mutated Bcr-Abl transcripts in a total
of 10,000 Bcr-Abl transcripts - could routinely be achieved. Serially
collected samples from IM-resistant CML and Ph+ ALL pts who received DAS
and/or NIL as 2nd- or 3rd-line therapy and developed DAS- or
NIL-resistant mutations were retrospectively analyzed from the time of
switchover to the time of relapse. NGS was able to confirm all mutations
known to be present in >20% of cells, allowed to follow quantitatively
the dynamics of mutated clones over time and showed that i) 9/12
IM-resistant pts who failed to achieve a satisfactory response to
2nd-line therapy (primary resistance) were already harbouring mutations
known to be insensitive to DAS (T315I, F317L/V) or NIL (E255K/V, Y253H,
F359V/C) at 1-10% level before the TKI start - despite they had been
scored as wild-type by D-HPLC; ii) in 9/13 IM-resistant pts who relapsed
after an initial response (acquired resistance), the emerging resistant
clone(s) carrying DAS- or NIL-insensitive mutation(s) could be identified
up to six month in advance than when D-HPLC and conventional sequencing
were used. In addition, when used for mutation monitoring of newly
diagnosed Ph+ ALL pts enrolled in clinical trials with DAS or NIL, NGS
again highlighted emerging resistant clones in 7/8 pts who later
relapsed. We conclude that the higher sensitivity of NGS allows to detect
emerging mutant clones earlier than the currently used methods; this is
particularly relevant: i) in IM-resistant CML and Ph+ ALL pts before
switching to and during treatment with a 2nd-line TKI, where NGS may
anticipate the presence of DAS- or NIL-insensitive mutations, ensuring
the most effective and timely therapeutic decisions; ii) more in general,
for mutation monitoring of Ph+ ALL pts, that are known to be highly
genetically unstable, hence markedly prone to develop resistance and
mutations while on TKI therapy. Based on our data, further evaluation of
the routine applicability of NGS is warranted. Supported by AIL, AIRC,
PRIN, ELN.

