Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NLRP3 is involved in tumor development by regulating immune
function


The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein cytoplasmic complex that
mediates the processing of pro-inflammatory interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-18
and possibly IL-33, via the activation of Caspase-1. While NLRP3 has been
widely described in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases, its role
in tumor-host interactions, where inflammation is known to be a major
player, has yet to be fully elucidated. We observed that DMBA carcinogen
treatment that induced large and numerous papillomas in the skin of wt
mice induced barely visible lesions in NLRP3 deficient counterparts.
Similarly IV injection of B16F10 melanoma cells resulted in multiple lung
metastases in wt mice but virtually no metastatic growth in
NLRP3-deficient animals. The NLRP3 inflammasome thus appears to be a key
helper for tumor cell growth and survival at both primary and secondary
sites. Bone marrow transplantation revealed that leukocyte-derived NLRP3
plays a key role in supporting tumor cell survival prompting us to
compare the immune cell distribution and function in NLRP3 deficient mice
to those in wt littermates, in both the presence and absence of tumor
growth. Flow cytometry analysis of immune cell populations in these mice
allowed us to link NRLP3 to the recruitment, adaptation and ability of
the immune system to target tumor cells. We observed that compared to wt
animals, NLRP3 KO mice had fewer CD3+CD4+ T cells, NK cells and
F4/80+CD11c+ myeloid cells but more CD11b+Gr1+ cells, B lymphocytes and
F4/80+CD206+ macrophages of the M2 phenotype in the spleen. The increased
numbers of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and M2 macrophages in
mice that displayed decreased tumor growth was counterintuitive but was
associated with functional impairment that could explain decreased
permissiveness of the microenvironment for tumor growth. Our observations
provide a framework to investigate the mechanistic implication of NLRP3
in the relationship between tumor cells and their microenvironment.

