Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic profiling identifies differentially methylated loci in
metastatic vs. non-metastatic primary squamous and basal cell skin cancers


Nonmelanoma skin cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
United States. Over 2 million new cases of these cancers are diagnosed
each year, and incidence rates are increasing worldwide. Basal cell
carcinomas (BCCs) and squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) of the skin are
generally considered less aggressive than melanomas, which is reflected
in their lower relative mortality rates. Despite this, a clinically
relevant subgroup of both of these cancers will metastasize and develop
an aggressive disease phenotype. In order to characterize the molecular
pathways that may be involved in the development of metastatic disease in
these common cancers, we measured DNA methylation profiles at 1505 CpG
sites associated with 807 related to cancer using the Illumina Goldengate
Methylation Cancer Panel BeadArray in BCCs and SCCs isolated from
patients treated at the University of Michigan. DNA methylation was
measured in metastatic (n=9) and non-metastatic (n=19) primary SCCs and
in metastatic (n=3) and non-metastatic (n=9) primary BCCs. Due to the
known divergent mechanisms of carcinogenesis of basal and squamous cell
carcinomas, separate analyses were conducted for these tumor types.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was used to identify overall
differences in DNA methylation patterns between metastatic and
non-metastatic disease. Gene specific analyses using linear modeling
coupled with an empirical Bayes method of variance estimation were
conducted to identify if methylation at individual CpG sites is
associated with metastatic potential. SCCs were not found to cluster
based on metastasis, however, metastatic BCCs were found to cluster
together, suggesting that metastatic BCCs may share common mechanisms of
pathogenesis. In gene specific analyses, FRZB was found to be
statistically significantly hypermethylated in metastatic compared to
non-metastatic primary SCCs (median methylation: 54.2% vs. 4.7%;
p=3.8x10-5). Two sites in MYCL2 were found to be significantly
hypomethylated in metastatic vs. non-metastatic BCCs (3.7% and 4.0% vs.
77.9% and 53.5%; p=1.87x10-6 and 3.69x10-5 respectively). The results
from this pilot study give insight into the molecular mechanism of
metastasis for nonmelanoma skin cancers and identify the divergent
characteristics of BCCs and SCCs. The differentially methylation regions
identified in this study may be useful epigenetic biomarkers of
metastatic potential for nonmelanoma skin cancers to be examined in an
extended patient population in future studies.

