Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers of breast cancer risk in a randomized trial of a
low-fat or low-carbohydrate weight loss intervention and physical
activity among overweight and obese premenopausal women


There is convincing evidence that being overweight or obese increases the
risk of breast cancer. Furthermore, adult weight gain has been associated
with an increased risk of breast cancer in several studies. Conversely,
physical activity reduces breast cancer risk. However, the link between
specific dietary patterns and breast cancer risk is unclear.
Additionally, the biological mechanisms linking diet, physical activity,
and breast cancer are uncertain. Therefore we conducted a study to
determine the impact of a low-fat versus a low-carbohydrate diet and
exercise on weight loss and biomarkers of breast cancer risk. We
conducted a 52 week randomized intervention trial of low-fat (20% of
total calories from fat, 20% from protein, and 60% from carbohydrate) vs.
low-carbohydrate (40% of total calories from carbohydrates, 30% from fat,
and 30% from protein) diet along with physical activity (10,000
steps/day) among premenopausal women with a body mass index (BMI) of 25
or higher. Forty-two women were randomized to the low-fat arm and
thirty-seven were randomized to the low-carbohydrate arm. Anthropometric
measurements and blood draws were conducted at baseline, week 12, week
34, and week 52. Levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and IGF
binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) were measured in association with weight.
Overall, there were no significant differences among the women in the two
groups with respect to race, education, marital status, smoking status,
insurance, work status, occupation, or income. Women in both groups lost
a significant amount of weight during the study (pThere is convincing
evidence that being overweight or obese increases the risk of breast
cancer. Furthermore, adult weight gain has been associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer in several studies. Conversely, physical
activity reduces breast cancer risk. However, the link between specific
dietary patterns and breast cancer risk is unclear. Additionally, the
biological mechanisms linking diet, physical activity, and breast cancer
are uncertain. Therefore we conducted a study to determine the impact of
a low-fat versus a low-carbohydrate diet and exercise on weight loss and
biomarkers of breast cancer risk. We conducted a 52 week randomized
intervention trial of low-fat (20% of total calories from fat, 20% from
protein, and 60% from carbohydrate) vs. low-carbohydrate (40% of total
calories from carbohydrates, 30% from fat, and 30% from protein) diet
along with physical activity (10,000 steps/day) among premenopausal women
with a body mass index (BMI) of 25 or higher. Forty-two women were
randomized to the low-fat arm and thirty-seven were randomized to the
low-carbohydrate arm. Anthropometric measurements and blood draws were
conducted at baseline, week 12, week 34, and week 52. Levels of
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3)
were measured in association with weight. Overall, there were no
significant differences among the women in the two groups with respect to
race, education, marital status, smoking status, insurance, work status,
occupation, or income. Women in both groups lost a significant amount of
weight during the study (p<0.0001) although there was no difference
between the two groups in weight loss (p=0.07), or in waist-to-hip ratio
either over time or between groups. Although IGFBP-3 did not change with
weight, the average trend of IGF-1 across groups was associated with
weight loss even though there was no difference across interventions.
Adherence to the diets was low with only 29% of the women adherent to the
low-carbohydrate intervention and 22% adherent to the low-fat
intervention. In conclusion, both a low-fat and low-carbohydrate diet
plus exercise resulted in significant weight loss although there was no
difference between the two groups. Examination of biomarkers of breast
cancer risk demonstrated that neither intervention was significantly
better at altering levels. IGFBP-3 did not significantly change with
weight loss, however, IGF-1 was significantly positively associated with
weight loss. Although calorie restriction and physical activity are
effective in reducing obesity, the most effective type of diet that best
reduces obesity and can impact breast cancer prevention was not
identified. These results suggest that a larger randomized trial is
needed to examine diet, physical activity, and biomarkers of breast
cancer risk.

