Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule translation inhibitors with safety and
efficacy in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) animal models


Although the overall survival rate for early stage breast cancer is high,
triple negative breast cancers are particularly aggressive and are more
likely to recur than other breast cancer subtypes, resulting in a
significantly increased risk of death. Eukaryotic mRNAs possess a capped
5-end that is required for initiation of protein synthesis known as
cap-dependent translation, which in normal cells is tightly controlled.
Deregulation of translation initiation can lead to uncontrolled growth, a
hallmark of cancer cells. Eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) is a
critical component of the machinery that carries out cap-dependent
translation in the cell and a strong determinant for the rate of
translational initiation. Greater than 60% of triple negative breast
tumors have high levels of eIF4E, and elevated levels of eIF4E have been
shown to correlate with higher rates of recurrence and increased risk of
death. We have recently developed two new classes of translation
initiation inhibitors using in vitro and cellular assays of protein
translation and cancer cell proliferation. These inhibitors are novel
drug-like molecules with molecular weights Although the overall survival
rate for early stage breast cancer is high, triple negative breast
cancers are particularly aggressive and are more likely to recur than
other breast cancer subtypes, resulting in a significantly increased risk
of death. Eukaryotic mRNAs possess a capped 5-end that is required for
initiation of protein synthesis known as cap-dependent translation, which
in normal cells is tightly controlled. Deregulation of translation
initiation can lead to uncontrolled growth, a hallmark of cancer cells.
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) is a critical component of the
machinery that carries out cap-dependent translation in the cell and a
strong determinant for the rate of translational initiation. Greater than
60% of triple negative breast tumors have high levels of eIF4E, and
elevated levels of eIF4E have been shown to correlate with higher rates
of recurrence and increased risk of death. We have recently developed two
new classes of translation initiation inhibitors using in vitro and
cellular assays of protein translation and cancer cell proliferation.
These inhibitors are novel drug-like molecules with molecular weights <
500, micromolar IC50s in TNBC cells lines, desirable PK properties, and
no significant toxicity. A xenograft study (MDA-MB-231 s.c. in nude mice)
was performed on lead compounds NM043 and NM891 and compared to vehicle
control and paclitaxel. Daily i.p. injections were initiated when mean
tumor volumes reached 100 mm3 (Day 0). Mean tumor volumes at Day 31 were
as follows; vehicle: 898 260 mm3, paclitaxel: 493 123 mm3, NM043: 394 143
mm3, and NM891: 276 119 mm3. Analysis of AUC indicated that there were
significant differences between the vehicle control group and groups
treated with NM043 (p=0.003) and NM891 (p=0.001), but not paclitaxel. The
groups treated with NM043 and NM891 were subdivided into 2 groups on Day
32. For the next 10 days, one group continued to receive treatment while
the other did not. Statistically significant differences were noted
between the vehicle control group and all treatment groups (including the
drug withdrawal groups) on Day 42. Although tumor growth resumed quickly
after NM043 treatment was withdrawn, tumor growth did not resume within
10 days of the withdrawal of NM891. On day 45, mice treated with NM891
were sacrificed and detectable levels of NM891 were found in both plasma
and tumor samples from the mice that discontinued treatment on Day 31,
indicating that less frequent dosing of NM891 will likely be an option.
NM043 and NM891 are promising clinical candidates and represent potential
first in class small molecule therapeutics aimed at reducing recurrence
and increasing survival rates for TNBC. Future efforts will be focused on
GLP toxicology and studies to determine dosing range, route, and schedule
in support of an IND to advance these drugs into Phase I/II clinical
trials.

