Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARC-P HS+: A versatile radiosynthesizer for the production of PET
tracers


Objective: Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has seen dramatic growth in
research over the last 20 years, and is now a standard in the diagnosis,
staging, and treatment monitoring of cancer. PET uses molecular probes in
trace amounts to examine specific biochemical, biological, and
pharmaceutical processes noninvasively with high sensitivity, and has the
advantage that the same probe can be used across cell cultures, mouse
models, and patients. Although the majority of clinical PET studies are
performed with 2-[F-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose ([F-18]FDG), FDG-PET does
not identify the specific biochemical pathways through which disease is
occurring nor can it provide a companion diagnostic for the discovery,
development, and use of molecular therapeutics. New technologies are
needed to accelerate the development, production, and distribution of
novel PET probes to increase the sophistication of cancer care through
personalized medicine. Methods: The ARC-P HS+ radiosynthesizer was
developed to address limitations in other synthesizers that restrict the
diversity of probes they can produce. The ARC-P HS+ contains three
reaction vessels that are moved among dedicated stations for reagent
addition, sealed reaction, evaporation, and transfer, eliminating
exposure of tubing and valves to high pressures, the root cause of
limitations in other systems. It was designed to handle a wide range of
synthesis conditions, including multiple reaction vessels, reagents that
are corrosive or sensitive to the environment and reaction steps
performed at high temperatures (e.g., up to 165C) and pressures (e.g.
>100 psig [690 kPag]). To ensure ease of setup and diversity of probes,
reagents are installed via a disposable cassette, which contains all
wetted paths. Each cassette comprises reagent storage vials, gaskets for
sealing the reaction vial, purification cartridges, and disposable
valves. Results: Compared to our first generation synthesizer, the
cassette-based approach of ARC-P HS+ reduced the number of reagents
prepared and installed by the operator and eliminated the need for
cleaning. Setup time and manual interventions were reduced. We confirmed
that ARC-P HS+ could complete the demanding synthesis of [F-18]FAC, a
novel probe for oncology, as well as [F-18]FMAU. Performance of both
syntheses was comparable to previous reports. Conclusions: ARC-P HS+ is
capable of producing the [F-18]FAC family of probes as well as probes
with similar stringent synthesis requirements. Commercialization of this
system with disposable cassette-based kits could facilitate production of
these tracers, as well as providing a path to make other probes currently
used in the clinic ([F-18]FDG, [F-18]FLT, [F-18]F-DOPA, etc.) more
readily available. With minimal modifications in only software and
reagents, this unit can be used to produce essentially all classes of
F-18 labeled probes involving a wide range of reaction conditions.

