Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin inhibits -catenin signaling in pancreatic cancer cells
by disrupting nuclear -catenin/TCF-1 complex: critical role of STAT-3


-catenin/TCF signaling plays an important role in normal development.
However, its aberrant activation is associated with several cancers
including pancreatic cancer. In our previous study, we have shown that
capsaicin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells was associated
with mitochondrial depolarization and oxidative stress. In the present
study, we evaluated the effect of capsaicin on -catenin/TCF signaling. In
a concentration and time-dependent study, we observed that capsaicin
treatment inhibits the activation of disheveled (Dsh) and phosphorylation
of STAT-3 at Tyr705 in L3.6PL, Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer
cells. Capsaicin treatment activated GSK-3 by inhibiting its
phosphorylation and further activated APC and Axin multicomplex leading
to the ubiquitination and degradation of -catenin. Pre-treatment of cells
with MG-132 blocked capsaicin-mediated proteasomal degradation of
-catenin. The expression of TCF-1 and -catenin-responsive proteins c-myc
and cyclin D1, were also decreased in response to capsaicin treatment.
Significant cleavage of caspase-9, caspase-3 and PARP was observed in all
the cell lines. To establish the involvement of -catenin in
capsaicin-induced apoptosis, cells were treated with LiCl or SB415286,
inhibitors of GSK-3. Our results reveal that capsaicin treatment
suppressed LiCl-mediated activation of -catenin signaling. Our results
further showed that capsaicin blocked the nuclear translocation of
-catenin and TCF-1. The immunoprecipitation results also indicated that
capsaicin treatment reduced the interaction of -catenin with TCF-1 in the
nucleus. Interestingly, STAT-3 over expression or STAT-3 activation by
IL-6, significantly increased the levels of -catenin and attenuated the
effects of capsaicin in inhibiting -catenin signaling. These observations
indicate the direct regulation of -catenin by STAT-3 in our model. Taken
together, our results suggest that capsaicin-induced apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer cells was associated with the inhibition of -catenin
signaling due to the dissociation of -catenin/TCF-1 complex leading to
apoptosis, and this process was orchestrated by STAT-3. [Supported in
part by R01 grants CA106953 and CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the
National Cancer Institute].

