Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant loss of nuclear expression of Actinin-4 in metastatic
breast carcinoma and lymph nodes: A novel biomarker for metastatic breast
carcinoma


Background: Actinin-4 is an actin cross-linked protein. The expression
and subcellular distribution of actinin-4 (ACTN4) has been associated
with multiple roles in tumorigenicity and cancer metastasis. In the
present study, we developed a novel antibody against human actinin-4 and
investigated the clinical utility of actinin-4 as a biomarker in
metastatic breast cancer. Methods and findings: We generated a novel
monoclonal antibody (AB-Actinin-4) using hybridoma technology and native
ACTN4 protein as an immunogen. The antibody specifically recognized both
native and denatured human Actinin-4 protein and displayed high affinity
as assessed by ELISA, immunohistochemistry assay, western blot and flow
cytometry. Using this antibody and ELISA as well as immunohistochemical
techniques, we examined plasma levels and tissue expression of actinin-4
in healthy controls and breast cancer patients samples. 50 plasma samples
from healthy controls and breast cancer patients were analyzed for the
presence of soluble actinin-4. ELISA results showed significantly
decreased actinin-4 levels in plasma samples from patients with breast
carcinomas compared to healthy control plasma. A total of 156 cases,
including 70 normal, 36 non-metastatic breast carcinoma, 50 breast
carcinoma tissues with regional metastasis, and 50 matched metastatic
lymph nodes were examined. The immunoreactivity of actinin-4 was located
mainly in nucleus and cytoplasm of cells. To assess the difference
between groups, the staining intensity and intracellular distribution
were compared and the intensity in nucleus and cytoplasm was separately
scored as 0, 1+, 2+ and 3+. Grades 0 and 1+ were defined as negative and
2+ and 3+ as positive. Significant differences between the groups were
found in nuclear staining. 92% of normal and 89% of non-metastatic breast
carcinoma samples displayed positive nuclear staining. In contrast, only
29% of metastatic lymph nodes and 51% of metastatic breast cancer tissues
showed strong nuclear staining. Conclusion: Actinin-4 demonstrated
significantly decreased expression in plasma from breast cancer patients.
Metastasis leads to significant loss of the nuclear expression of
Actinin-4 in breast cancer tissues, in comparison to normal and
non-metastatic breast carcinoma tissues. Our data suggests that Actinin-4
might have significant impact in breast cancer metastasis. Actinin-4 may
serve as a reliable biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of
metastatic breast cancer as well as could be a therapeutic target.

