Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Side population analysis and gene expression profiling identify
Notch pathway genes in neuroblastoma


High-risk neuroblastoma (NB) has a very poor prognosis. Upon relapse, NB
is chemotherapy-resistant and almost universally fatal. Cancer stem-like
cells have been identified in both primary tumors and in cell lines and
may have inherent resistance to traditional chemotherapeutic agents. We
previously investigated NB cancer stem-like cells using side population
(SP) analysis of three pairs of NB cell lines derived from single
patients at the time of diagnosis and at relapse after therapy. We
reported that the proportion of SP cells in the relapsed cell lines was
significantly increased compared with its paired pretreatment cell line.
Based on these findings, we hypothesized that specific signaling pathways
would be differentially expressed in the pre- versus post-relapse SP
cells. Therefore, we performed gene expression profiling using Affymetrix
whole-genome arrays on the SP fraction of the cell lines SMS-KCN
(pre-treatment) and SMS-KCNR (relapse). Microarray analysis revealed 126
genes at least 2-fold up-regulated in the post-relapse SP cells compared
to the pre-relapse SP fraction. Specifically, we identified several
members of the Notch signaling pathway including Notch 2. To confirm the
finding of increased notch expression, we measured mRNA expression in 84
genes involved in Notch signaling in SMS-KCN SP and SMS-KCNR SP cells
using an RT*2 Profiler PCR Array. Multiple notch genes were confirmed to
be upregulated from 1.5-fold (NOTCH1) to 15-fold (HES1) in the
post-relapse compared to the pre-treatment cell line SP cells.
Subsequently, mRNA expression levels of nine Notch pathway genes,
NOTCH1-4, HES1, HEY1, HEYL, and JAG1 and 2, were measured in six paired
cell lines (SMS-KCN and KCNR, SMS-KAN and KANR, and CHLA-122 and 136) by
qRT-PCR and were increased in each of the unsorted post-relapse cell
lines. To assess the functional role of Notch signaling, we treated four
of the cell lines with a -secretase inhibitor (DAPT, 5M) every 72 hours
for 7 days which resulted in a >50% decrease in viability in all cell
lines. Evaluation of the publicly available NCI NB gene expression
profiling database (http://home.ccr.cancer.gov/oncology/oncogenomics/)
showed that increased expression of NOTCH1, 2, and 3 correlated with a
worse clinical outcome compared to those with low Notch expression
levels. These results suggest that side population analysis coupled with
gene expression profiling is a useful method for identifying novel
pathways in NB and that upregulation of the Notch pathway may be
important in the biology of NB cancer stem-like cells. Inhibition of the
Notch pathway using -secretase inhibitors may provide new therapeutic
options in NB.

