Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse associations between soluble cytokine receptors and
colorectal cancer risk


Laboratory studies have suggested that soluble receptors of
proinflammatory cytokines could be anti-inflammatory by acting as decoy
receptors, blocking binding of the cytokines to their membrane receptors,
and hence inhibiting cytokine signaling. Thus, relatively high levels of
soluble cytokine receptors and receptor antagonists may be protective
factors against colorectal cancer, which is an inflammation-associated
disease. This case-cohort study nested within the Women's Health
Initiative Observational Study of postmenopausal women 50-79 years of age
at baseline (1993-1998) examined whether baseline plasma levels of IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) and the soluble receptors of IL-6 (sIL-6R
and sgp130), TNF (sTNF-R1 and sTNF-R2), and IL-1 (sIL-1R2) were inversely
associated with colorectal cancer risk. Analytes were measured in 433
incident colorectal cancer cases and 823 subcohort members using
multiplex assays (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Circulating levels of IL-6,
TNF-, insulin, and estradiol measured previously were also available for
data analyses. IL-1Ra and the 5 soluble receptors did not correlate with
each other or with their ligands (all correlations r Laboratory studies
have suggested that soluble receptors of proinflammatory cytokines could
be anti-inflammatory by acting as decoy receptors, blocking binding of
the cytokines to their membrane receptors, and hence inhibiting cytokine
signaling. Thus, relatively high levels of soluble cytokine receptors and
receptor antagonists may be protective factors against colorectal cancer,
which is an inflammation-associated disease. This case-cohort study
nested within the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study of
postmenopausal women 50-79 years of age at baseline (1993-1998) examined
whether baseline plasma levels of IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) and
the soluble receptors of IL-6 (sIL-6R and sgp130), TNF (sTNF-R1 and
sTNF-R2), and IL-1 (sIL-1R2) were inversely associated with colorectal
cancer risk. Analytes were measured in 433 incident colorectal cancer
cases and 823 subcohort members using multiplex assays (Millipore,
Billerica, MA). Circulating levels of IL-6, TNF-, insulin, and estradiol
measured previously were also available for data analyses. IL-1Ra and the
5 soluble receptors did not correlate with each other or with their
ligands (all correlations r < 0.3), with the exception of sTNFR2, which
was moderately correlated with sTNFR1 (r=0.51) and TNF- (r=0.43). The
table below shows the hazard ratios for colorectal cancer risk, when each
analyte was entered separately into a Cox regression model adjusting for
other colorectal cancer risk factors. Colorectal cancer risk decreased
significantly with increasing levels of sIL-6R and sIL-1R2. The ratios of
IL-6 or TNF- to their soluble receptors were not associated with
colorectal cancer risk. There were also no significant interactions
between pairs of soluble receptors or between soluble receptors and their
ligands. Increased circulating levels of sIL-6R and sIL-1R2 may confer
protection against colorectal cancer. If our results are confirmed, these
soluble receptors can be considered for chemoprevention.


