Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Notch signaling enhances the antitumor efficacy of
chemotherapy in triple negative breast cancer through reduction of cancer
stem cells


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by lack of estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or Her2/neu. It is known to be
particularly aggressive and refractory to current chemotherapies.
Tumor-initiating cells (TICs) have been postulated as responsible for
treatment failure for this type of cancer. Recent evidence suggests that
Notch signaling may play a role in regulation of TIC self-renewal and
differentiation hence present a promising target for development of novel
therapies for TNBC. We previously discovered a mouse monoclonal Ab
(mu-hN1) that produces robust efficacy in both T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and TNBC by specifically blocking human Notch1 signaling in
tumor cells. We subsequently produced a humanized Notch1 mAb (hu-hN1)
that retained similar characteristics and activities compared to the
mouse prototype mu-hN1. To gain insights into the mechanisms of Notch1
blockade on TNBC tumor grow inhibition (TGI), we evaluated the effect of
hu-hN1 on apoptosis, proliferation and TIC self-renewal in Notch-driven
Sum149 and a patient derived xenograft (PDX) TNBC models. We showed that
hu-hN1 inhibited Notch signaling by reduction of NICD (Notch
intracellular domain) and target genes Hes-1 and cMyc in Sum149 tumors.
Inhibition of Notch signaling led to significant TGI either as a single
agent or in combination with Docetaxel. TGI of hu-hN1 appeared to be in
part due to induction of apoptosis in the tumor cells. More
interestingly, treatment with this Ab caused reduction in mammosphere
formation and CD44+/CD133+/ESA+ cell population. It also resulted in
decrease in tumor incidence and delay in tumor recurrence, suggesting an
anti-TIC activity of the agent. Further investigation in a PDX TNBC model
confirmed the robust tumor efficacy and anti-TIC effect of hu-hN1. Taken
together, our findings suggest that anti-Notch1 mAbs may provide novel
therapies to improve the efficacy of conventional treatments by directly
targeting the TIC niche. They may also delay tumor recurrence and hence
have a major impact on cancer patient survival.

