Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for lactate dehydrogenase in the c-Met/HGF signaling axis


Tumor cells often display a glycolytic phenotype, even in the presence of
oxygen; a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect. The ability of
cancerous cells to perform aerobic glycolysis is unique when compared to
non-cancerous cells, and therefore, presents a possible therapeutic
target for elimination of cancer cells that rely on aerobic glycolysis.
Activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase, c-Met, by hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) is a major contributing event in the progression of prostate
cancer (PCa). Signaling through this receptor leads to increased cell
motility, proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Studies have shown that
targeting this signaling axis can greatly reduce the number of bone
metastases that arise from primary PCa tumors. Oxamate, a lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) inhibitor, and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) are known
glycolytic inhibitors. Our studies have found that oxamate reduced c-Met
activation and HGF-induced cell motility, while 2-DG had no effect. In
order to confirm that oxamate was targeting LDH-A or LDH-B, we created
LDH-A, LDH-B, and LDH-A/B knockdown (KD) DU145 cells. Although all of the
clones used in the experiments had greater than 70% KD, we were unable to
recapitulate the effects seen with oxamate. We believe that this could be
due to incomplete KD. In support of this, use of a specific LDH-A
(Fly-21) inhibitor significantly reduced c-Met activation and HGF-induced
cell motility. Together, these data support a role for LDH-A in
facilitating HGF-induced c-Met activation. Because oxamate is a direct
LDH inhibitor, we hypothesized that oxamate would have a greater
reduction in lactate (LA) export from cells than 2-DG; however, both,
oxamate and 2-DG reduced LA production by approximately 75% in DU145
prostate cancer cells. Therefore, the ability of oxamate to reduce c-Met
activation is not apparently due to a decrease in LA export. However, it
is possible that LA import via monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1)
activity may be important for c-Met activation and downstream signaling
events. In support of this, KD of MCT1 resulted in reduced c-Met
activation and blocked HGF-induced cell motility. These data indicate a
potential connection between LDH activity/lactate import and the c-Met
signaling axis, suggesting that inhibition of these processes may be a
new mechanism for preventing c-Met driven metastatic events.

