Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RECRUIT-TandAb AFM13: Overcoming limitations of monoclonal
antibodies in Hodgkin lymphoma


Introduction: AFM13 is a RECRUIT-TandAb (CD30xCD16A) for treating Hodgkin
Lymphoma by recruiting NK-cells and macrophages to the specific CD30
surface antigen on Reed-Sternberg cells. This redirected immune response
leads to potent tumor cell killing. RECRUIT TandAbs are tetravalent and
bispecific, and address key deficiencies of monoclonal antibodies such as
(i) V/F polymorphism and (ii) non-selective binding to immune effector
cells vs. granulocytes via CD16B receptor. Furthermore, RECRUIT-TandAbs
have significant advantages over other antibody fragment technologies
such as (i) bivalent binding to the targets and, (ii) longer half-life.
Methods: AFM13 binds with high affinity to both CD30 and CD16A and is
able to rapidly induce the lysis of CD30+ cells at picomolar
concentrations in the presence of PBMCs. Intensive in vitro
characterization demonstrated that AFM13 is specific for the CD16A
receptor, which becomes activated only in the presence of tumor cells:
there is no systemic activation of NK-cells in the absence of target
cells. A robust GMP production process in mammalian cells and a
lyophilized formulation with excellent stability have been established.
Toxicology testing in Cynomolgus monkeys did not reveal any toxicity.
Currently, AFM13 is being investigated in a single arm phase I dose
escalation trial for patients with relapsed and/or refractory Hodgkin
Lymphoma (HL). Patients receive a single cycle of 4 weekly doses, which
are escalated in cohorts of 3 patients at the dose levels of 0.01, 0.04,
0.15, 0.5, 1.5, 4.5 and 7.0 mg/kg. Study objectives are the assessment of
safety and tolerability, PK, immunogenicity, antitumor activity, as well
as the determination of the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or the optimal
biological dose (OBD). The safety of the MTD or OBD will be confirmed in
further patients receiving 2 cycles of AFM13. Results and Conclusion: So
far, AM13 was shown to be safe and well tolerated by highly pre-treated
Hodgkin Lymphoma patients in weekly doses of up to 1.5mg/kg. Adverse
events were generally mild, with the most frequent drug-related event
being fever. A first objective response was achieved on the dose level
1.5mg/kg. Five cases of stable disease / minor response were observed on
lower dose levels. Further patients are being treated in the ongoing dose
escalation study. Preclinical and interim clinical data will be
presented, showing that AFM13 may become a safe and effective targeted
therapy for CD30 positive malignancies.

