Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of a BRCAness profile with outcome and molecular
aberrations involving homologous recombination in the TCGA ovarian cancer
dataset


A subset of sporadic epithelial ovarian cancer (EOCs) may harbor a
BRCAness phenotype characterized by improved outcome and enhanced
responsiveness to platinum analogues and PARP inhibitors, similar to
their BRCA1/2 mutated counterparts. This BRCAness phenotype may be due,
in part, to defective homologous recombination (HR) related to various
mechanisms, including BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation, somatic mutation
of BRCA1/2 genes, or loss of function mutations in other HR pathway
genes. We recently defined a gene expression profile of BRCAness that
correlates with chemotherapy response and outcome in EOC. Here, we used
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) EOC dataset to evaluate the association of
the BRCAness profile with outcome, chemotherapy response and specific
molecular aberrations that may underlie defective HR. We accessed data
from 265 advanced stage high grade serous EOCs for which there was
available gene expression, DNA copy number, promoter methylation and
whole-exome DNA sequencing information. Patients were characterized as
having a BRCAness phenotype (BL profile) or not (NBL profile) based on
our BRCAness signature. BL patients were associated with improved median
overall survival (OS) compared to NBL patients (59 vs 41 months
respectively, log-rank p=0.008). Multivariable analysis demonstrated that
the BRCAness profile maintained an independent association with OS
(HR=1.72, p=0.024). BL patients had a longer median platinum free
interval compared to NBL patients (17 vs 11 months, p=0.024) and improved
median disease free survival (18 vs 14 months, p=0.055). BRCAness profile
was associated with molecular events affecting BRCA1/2 function such as
BRCA1/2 mutations, BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation and EMSY amplification
(47% in BL patients vs 27% in NBL patients, two-sided Fisher's exact
p=0.007). Furthermore, BL patients had higher frequency of homozygous
PTEN deletion compared to NBL patients but this did not reach statistical
significance (12% vs 6% respectively, two-sided Fisher's exact p=0.14).
Conversely, BRCAness profile was not associated with molecular events
affecting the function of other Fanconi Anemia (FA) genes
(FANCA/B/C/D2/E/F/G/I/J/L/M, PALB2) or DNA damage response genes involved
in HR (ATM, ATR, CHEK1, CHEK2) although the overall incidence of these
molecular events was very low (5% and 3% respectively). In conclusion,
the BRCAness profile may identify patients with improved outcome,
responsiveness to chemotherapy, and those who harbor certain molecular
aberrations involving HR. Efforts to improve the predictive ability of
the BRCAness profile using gene expression data from the TCGA dataset are
underway.

