Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitrogen oxides-derived immunotherapy: Revealing cryptic
melanoma-specific immune targets


Nitrogen oxides (NOx) can exert their relevant biological functions
through two reversible molecular modifications: a) direct interaction
with metals (nitrosation), and b) by interacting with thiols
(s-nitrosylation); or irreversible modifications of aromatic amino acid
residues such as tyrosine or phenylalanine (nitration). Any of these
modifications have been demonstrated to affect the biological fate of the
modified molecule or alter their functions. We have previously shown that
these NOx-derived changes will trigger a myriad of modifications at the
genetic, epigenetic and post-translational level in tumor cells resulting
in a robust and effective therapeutic immune response against cancer
cells. However, the molecular mechanisms and immune-related tumor targets
remain elusive. Thus, we hypothesize that NOx-derived protein
modifications (i.e., Tyrosine nitration) will differentially prime the
immune system with otherwise subdominant antigens (cryptic) making them
immune visible and triggering an effective anti-tumor immune response. We
have tested this hypothesis using the well-characterized B16-C57BL/6
syngeneic and poorly immunogenic melanoma mouse model. NOx-modified and
non-modified B16-F0 melanoma cell lysates were used to immunize nave
C57BL/6. Post-immunized sera was screened against SDS-PAGE resolved
untreated B16-F0 lysates and human protein library micro array for
differential recognition of immune cross-reactive of novel mouse and
human melanoma targets by the mouse IgG fraction. Our results
demonstrated the highly significant (p Nitrogen oxides (NOx) can exert
their relevant biological functions through two reversible molecular
modifications: a) direct interaction with metals (nitrosation), and b) by
interacting with thiols (s-nitrosylation); or irreversible modifications
of aromatic amino acid residues such as tyrosine or phenylalanine
(nitration). Any of these modifications have been demonstrated to affect
the biological fate of the modified molecule or alter their functions. We
have previously shown that these NOx-derived changes will trigger a
myriad of modifications at the genetic, epigenetic and post-translational
level in tumor cells resulting in a robust and effective therapeutic
immune response against cancer cells. However, the molecular mechanisms
and immune-related tumor targets remain elusive. Thus, we hypothesize
that NOx-derived protein modifications (i.e., Tyrosine nitration) will
differentially prime the immune system with otherwise subdominant
antigens (cryptic) making them immune visible and triggering an effective
anti-tumor immune response. We have tested this hypothesis using the
well-characterized B16-C57BL/6 syngeneic and poorly immunogenic melanoma
mouse model. NOx-modified and non-modified B16-F0 melanoma cell lysates
were used to immunize nave C57BL/6. Post-immunized sera was screened
against SDS-PAGE resolved untreated B16-F0 lysates and human protein
library micro array for differential recognition of immune cross-reactive
of novel mouse and human melanoma targets by the mouse IgG fraction. Our
results demonstrated the highly significant (p <0.0001) IgG-associated
immune recognition of five cross-reactive novel melanoma targets (in
relative affinity decreasing order): 1) Golgi reassembly stacking protein
1 (GORASP1), 2) ArfGAP w/GTPase domain-ankyrin repeat and PH domain 1
(AGAP1), 3) Microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), 4) Mitochondrial
ribosomal protein L46 (MRPL46), and 5) Protocadherin beta 6 (PCDHB6).
Currently, we are evaluating the significance and functional activity of
the identified targets and their isolated/purified specific immune
effector (IgG) counterparts. In addition, we are characterizing the
potential molecular and immunological mechanisms that might lead to the
use of these novel melanoma-specific immune targets as
diagnostic/prognostic and/or immunotherapeutic tools.

