Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and isolation of host factors in response to
therapy: an approach to identify new targets for cancer therapy


Chemotherapy remains one of the most common treatment modalities for
cancer, and while initial tumor regression is usually observed, tumor
re-growth and metastatic spread sometimes occur. Several preclinical
studies have shown that, under certain circumstances, chemotherapy may
induce angiogenesis and metastases. Several mechanisms were suggested for
explaining tumor recurrence following therapy, and they are mostly
related to the acquired resistance of tumor cells to a specific therapy.
A recent body of evidence suggests that host derived molecular and
cellular mechanisms may also account for the pro-tumorigenic and
pro-metastatic effects of tumor cells following chemotherapy, yet there
is still ample necessity for further investigation and isolation of such
host factors. In order to solely study the host-driven pro-tumorigenic
effects of chemotherapy on tumor cells, we used non-tumor bearing mice
which were treated with paclitaxel chemotherapy. Subsequently, when the
cytotoxic drug was cleared from the circulation, plasma was collected and
used in various screening technologies in order to isolate and identify
possible factors which may alter the tumor microenvironment for the
tumor's advantage. We found that factors promoting bone marrow derived
cell mobilization and angiogenesis, e.g., stromal-derived factor 1-
(SDF-1) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) are
substantially upregulated in the plasma of paclitaxel treated mice. In
addition, increased activity of metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and MMP9 were
also observed in plasma and bone marrow derived cells collected from mice
primed with paclitaxel chemotherapy. The inductions of such host factors
contributed to tumor re-growth due, in part, to their role in
angiogenesis mediated by bone marrow derived cells, and to their impact
on tumor cell migration and invasion activity which can lead to
metastases. The pharmacologic or genetic blockade of each of these
factors in conjunction with paclitaxel chemotherapy increased the
treatment outcome. Additional factors are currently being evaluated and
validated with respect to their impact on tumor re-growth following
therapy, and will be presented in the upcoming meeting. Collectively, the
evaluation of upregulated host factors in response to chemotherapy may
raise potential new targets for cancer therapy, and may therefore
contribute to the development of new treatment approaches for prolonging
the efficacy of conventional cancer therapies.

