Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extended treatment with azacitidine maintains low DNMT1 levels and
DNA methylation in MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro and in vivo


Background: Azacitidine (AZA) is approved for treatment of patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes or WHO-defined acute myeloid leukemia with
multi-lineage dysplasia (Background: Azacitidine (AZA) is approved for
treatment of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes or WHO-defined acute
myeloid leukemia with multi-lineage dysplasia (<30% blasts). The drug is
administered subcutaneously or intravenously once a day during the first
7 days of a 28-day cycle. Clinical trials investigating the use of AZA in
solid tumors have been reported, although response rates were poor,
possibly due to suboptimal dose and schedule. An oral formulation of AZA
is currently being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial in solid tumors,
using continuous dosing of single agent oral AZA or intermittent dosing
(14 days on, 7 days off) in combination with chemotherapeutics. It is
postulated that extended AZA dosing schedules may be optimal for
maintaining DNA hypomethylation and inducing cell death, and thus may
cause responses in patients with solid tumors. Purpose: To better
understand the effects of short-term vs. extended treatment with AZA on
pharmacodynamic markers. Methods: The effects of AZA dose and schedule
(short-term vs. extended) on pharmacodynamic markers such as DNMT1
depletion, DNA methylation, and apoptosis were evaluated in MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. For in vitro experiments,
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated daily with 0.1 or 0.3M AZA for up to 12
days, and harvested at various times during treatment, as well as up to
12 days following treatment. For in vivo studies, MDA-MB-231
tumor-bearing mice were dosed (ip) with 1 or 3mg/kg AZA daily for 3, 7,
14, 21, or 28 days and tumors were harvested during and at several time
points after the dosing period. DNA and cell lysates were prepared (from
cell pellets or xenograft tumors) for DNA methylation analysis (LINE-1 or
EpiTech Methyl qPCR assay) and DNMT1/cleaved-PARP western blotting,
respectively. Results: In both in vitro and in vivo studies, AZA caused a
rapid (by 8 hours post in vivo dose), dose-dependent depletion of DNMT1
protein; when AZA treatment was halted, DNMT1 protein levels returned to
basal levels within 3-4 days. Consistent with these results, AZA in vitro
and in vivo caused a dose-dependent decrease in DNA methylation (LINE-1
and gene-specific) and further reduction in DNA methylation with
additional days of AZA dosing. In vitro, DNA methylation returned to
basal levels upon AZA removal (within 8 days); the kinetics of DNA
re-methylation was slower in more hypomethylated DNA. Lastly, apoptosis
(PARP cleavage) was not observed in tumors from mice until 14 or 21 days
of dosing with 3mg/kg or 1mg/kg AZA, respectively. Studies are underway
in other xenograft models to support these findings. Conclusions:
Extended AZA treatment maintains low DNMT1 levels and DNA methylation,
and induces cell death. These results provide a strong rationale for the
use of extended AZA dosing schedules in the clinic.

