Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of lung cancers by integrated genomic and
proteomic analysis


Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) represents 80% of lung cancers, the
deadliest cancer worldwide. The genomic profiling of DNA and mRNA, and
characterization of proteomes have begun to address the objective to
stratify and treat tumors according to their molecular features. However,
these data sets have largely been used independently and typically have
not been integrated. Hence most cancers including NSCLC continue to be
classified largely based on histology. Our aim for this study was to
integrate a set of comprehensive functional genomics data sets in order
to stratify a set of NSCLC primary tumors and establish that primary
tumor xenografts mirror closely the primary tumors, and hence may serve
as validated pre-clinical models. Our preliminary analyses indicated that
engraftment is prognostic of poor clinical outcome (John et al., 2011,
Clin Cancer Res, 17:134-41), and that the major NSCLC subtypes
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are readily resolved according
to their distinctive proteomes (Wei et al., 2011, J Proteome Res
10:161-74). Herein we characterized a collection of 12 each primary tumor
(T), primary tumor xenograft (X), and patient-matched normal lung (N) by
using mass spectrometry for proteome analysis, Illumina 1M Omni-Quad for
somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs), and Illumina Omni-1 Quad HT-12
v4 for mRNA expression. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of protein
abundances and SCNAs independently revealed that primary tumor and
xenografts are highly correlated with each other. This correlation was
significantly enhanced in the proteome data when a small number of highly
abundant blood-associated proteins were systematically identified and
subtracted. We identified tumor-specific dysregulated proteins and SCNAs
in T and X using N as a reference. Two thirds of T and X matched pairs
could be identified based on Pearson Correlation Coefficients of the
dysregulated proteins. This clearly demonstrates that the xenografts
accurately recapitulated tumor proteomes. Proteins upregulated in tumors
were expressed to a significant extent from regions of SCNA gain, and we
found a high degree of concordance between mRNA expression levels and
SCNAs. Some primary tumors had very highly correlated proteomic profiles,
suggesting they may be effectively stratified according to their proteome
signatures. In conclusion, our integrated analysis has validated the
primary xenograft model, provided an initial systems level perspective on
the central dogma in cancer, and reinforces the proteome as a distinctive
molecular feature for lung tumor stratification.

