Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) plays roles in
proliferation, survival and migration of Ewing tumor cells by activation
of a CD74-CD44 receptor complex


The deregulated expression of cytokines and the aberrant activation of
their downstream signaling pathways would give tumor cells the abnormal
proliferation and survival. Therefore identification and understanding of
deregulated cytokines in certain tumor would provide an opportunity of
better targeted therapies of the cancer. MIF, a proinflammatory cytokine
has been known to play a role in proliferation, survival and apoptosis in
several tumors. In our studies it was found that MIF expression in Ewing
tumors is pretty high and it is secreted out of the cells. Ewing tumor
cell lines deficient of MIF showed morphological change, deregulation of
differentiation, decrease of proliferation and increase of apoptosis.
Through the investigation of several signaling pathways it was found that
JAK2/STATs pathways are involved in the MIF dependent survival and
proliferation of Ewing tumors and in addition, MIF is involved in the
autophagy of Ewing tumors through the activation of AMPK. It has been
reported that CD74 is the main receptor of MIF and in our study it was
found that CD74 is expressed in Ewing tumors even though the expression
is much less than MIF. The decreased expression of CD74 in Ewing tumor
cell lines caused the morphological change and inhibition of
proliferation, which are the similar phenotypes of MIF deficient Ewing
tumor cell lines. It is known that CD74 is associated with CD44 which is
involved in the signaling pathways of cellular survival and
proliferation. In our study it was found that decreased expression of
CD44 in Ewing tumor cell lines caused the inhibition of cell survival and
proliferation. In conclusion, our data implies that MIF and its
downstream signaling pathways such as JAK/STATs, AMPK, CD74 and CD44
might be involved in growth, survival, proliferation and metastasis of
Ewing tumors. Therefore MIF and its downstream signaling pathways could
be promising targets of Ewing tumors therapy.

