Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Environmentally responsive nanoparticles for the intracellular
delivery of RNAi therapeutics into tumor-associated macrophages


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) represent a potentially promising
therapeutic target in cancer because they have been shown to facilitate
tumor growth, invasiveness, and metastasis. However, methods to
specifically target therapies to TAMs are lacking. To address this
problem, we designed and synthesized mannosylated micellar nanoparticles
(ManNPs), composed of tri-block co-polymers. The three polymer blocks
include (1) an azido-displaying block for functionalization with
biomolecules via azide-alkyne click chemistry, (2) a cationic block for
the condensation of polyanions such as siRNA, and (3) a pH-responsive
terpolymer block that facilitates endosomal disruption. This terpolymer
is hydrophobic at pH 7.4, allowing these polymers to self-assemble into
25 nm micellar nanoparticles under physiologic conditions. However, they
become protonated at lower pH ranges representative of endosomal
compartments (5.8 - 6.2), leading to disassembly of the nanoparticles,
and increased ability to disrupt endosomal membranes and enable
cytoplasmic delivery. This pH-dependent behavior has been validated using
a red blood cell hemolysis assay. This environmentally-responsive
behavior facilitates improved cytoplasmic delivery of siRNA, access to
the intracellular silencing machinery, and consequently, knockdown of
target gene expression. Further, we demonstrate that mannosylation of
these nanoparticles via click chemistry significantly enhances their
ability to deliver siRNA into murine bone marrow-derived primary
macrophages (BMDMs), relative to control, untargeted nanoparticles.
Targeted nanoparticle uptake is mediated specifically through the
macrophage mannose receptor (CD206), as validated through competition
experiments with free mannose, or by pre-incubating BMDMs with
lipopolysaccharide to downregulate CD206 expression. This is particularly
important for cancer applications because CD206 is upregulated in
tumor-suppressed and non-activated macrophages, enabling more specific
targeting of TAMs versus healthy macrophages in other tissues. The ManNPs
described here present new opportunities to target TAMs in various
cancers, providing an enabling technology for the modification of the
immunosuppressive tumor environment by targeting TAM activity. Studies
are pending to demonstrate this behavior in an in vivo murine model of
metastatic breast cancer.

