Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory sequences of the ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter A1
gene are hypermethylated in prostate cancer resulting in loss of gene
expression


Introduction/Objective: Cholesterol homeostasis is altered in prostate
cancer resulting in increased levels of cholesteryl esters and free
cholesterol, but the mechanism behind these perturbations is not complete
understood. We examine the role of DNA methylation in the regulation of
ABCA1 expression. Methods: Genome wide methylation analysis using
MBD-isolated Genome Sequencing (MiGS) was performed on the normal
prostate epithelial cell line PrEC, the prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP
and DU 145, 3 benign prostate specimens obtained from radical
cystoprostatectomy, and 6 prostate cancer specimens obtained from radical
prostatectomy. Bisulfite genomic sequencing was performed on the ABCA1
CpG island in PrEC and LNCaP to verify the methylation patterns
discovered by MiGS. Real time RT-PCR was performed to assess ABCA1 mRNA
levels in PrEC and LNCaP. LNCaP was treated with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
(5-aza), the LXR agonist T0901317, or a combination of the two drugs; and
ABCA1 CpG island methylation was assessed by methylation-specific PCR
(MSP) and gene expression was assessed by real time RT-PCR. Results: MiGS
analysis revealed that ABCA1 CpG island methylation was present in LNCaP
and 6 prostate cancer specimens but not PrEC, DU 145, or 3 benign
prostate specimens. Bisulfite genomic sequencing primers were used to
amplify fragments from the CpG island spanning 404 to +1,301 of the ABCA1
gene. LNCaP showed dense methylation in the entire region while PrEC
showed only minimal methylation from 236 to 404. Real time RT-PCR
revealed that there was 10-fold more ABCA1 mRNA in PrEC when compared
with LNCaP. Treatment of LNCaP with 10M T0901317 for 24 hours increased
ABCA1 mRNA to 14 fold above untreated LNCaP without detectable changes in
DNA methylation. Treatment with 5M 5-aza for 1 week increased ABCA1 mRNA
to 50 fold above control and resulted in loss of DNA methylation in the
ABCA1 CpG island as detected by MSP. The combination of 5M 5-aza and 10M
T0901317 increased ABCA1 mRNA expression in LNCaP to 320 fold above
control. Conclusions: ABCA1 is hypermethylated in a subset of prostate
cancers, but not normal prostate, resulting in loss of gene expression.
Therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing intracellular cholesterol
content solely by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase may be hindered by this
acquired deficiency in cholesterol export.

