Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma displays abnormalities in
homology directed repair


The incidence of adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal (GE) junction has
risen dramatically over the last three decades. Outcomes continue to be
poor with 5 year survivals estimated at 15%. These poor outcomes are
related to the advanced presentation in the majority of patients in
addition to the resistance esophageal adenocarcinoma displays to
cisplatin based chemotherapy or radiation especially when each is
administered alone. Only one-third of patients will have significant
benefit and achieve complete responses when treated with the combination
of cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiation followed by surgical
resection. Therefore, the need persists for overcoming resistance to
cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiation. Previous studies have
highlighted the role of DNA repair pathways in resistance to cisplatin or
radiation in a number of solid organ malignancies. The nucleotide repair
pathway (NER) repairs the majority of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions while
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) formed in response to radiation are
repaired by homologous recombination (HR) and the non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ) pathways. We hypothesized that cisplatin and radiation
resistance in esophageal adenocarcinoma is mediated through abnormalities
in these DNA repair pathways. Using paired GE junction adenocarcinoma
tumor samples with their matched normal tissue, we analyzed the
expression of DNA repair genes in NER, HR and NHEJ pathways using
quantitative RT-PCR. We identified overexpression of genes involved in HR
in esophageal tumor samples in comparison to their normal counterparts.
Eme1, an endonuclease present in complex with Mus81, showed consistent
overexpression in GE junction adenocarcinoma samples. Mus81-Eme1 has been
shown to play an important role in rescuing stalled replication forks and
has been implicated in the repair of interstrand crosslinks, such as
those formed in response to cisplatin therapy. Eme1 overexpression in
esophageal adenocarcinoma could play a role in resistance to cisplatin
through its impact on the repair of cisplatin induced DNA lesions. In
addition, Eme1 overexpression could lead to genomic instability
contributing to pathogenesis, metastases and therapeutic resistance.
Further understanding the implications of Eme1 overexpression in these
processes in GE junction adenocarcinoma will be of significant value.

