Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gamma-tocotrienol and simvastatin target TIC and EMT populations
in drug-resistant breast cancer


Background and significance: Breast cancer (BC) is the second leading
cause of cancer deaths in women. Despite great advances in treatment of
early and advanced BC, relapse with drug resistance and metastasis is the
biggest impediment to successful remission. Accumulating evidence
supports the emerging concept that cancer stem cells (CSCs, also called
tumor initiating cells, TICs), a rare tumor cell population that exhibits
self-renewal and differentiation properties, are responsible for tumor
relapse and metastasis. Hence, identifying molecular mediators
responsible for maintenance of TICs and metastasis in drug resistant
breast cancer is important to develop better and successful therapeutic
strategies. Model system and methods: Acquired tamoxifen resistant
(MCF-7/TamR) and doxorubicin resistant (MCF-7/ADR) cell lines as well as
their isogenic parental counterparts MCF-7/S and MCF-7/WT, respectively
were used in this study. ALDH activity assay was used for
characterization and enrichment of TIC population. Immuno-staining/FACS
of CD44+/CD24- was used to determine the metastasis potential in-vitro.
Western blot analyses were used to detect signal transduction mediators
known to be important for maintenance of TIC and EMT populations.
Results: Both drug resistant cell lines expressed a higher percentage of
TIC population as detected by ALDH activity and elevated EMT population
as detected by CD44+/CD24- and increased EMT marker Vimentin and
decreased MET marker E-cadherin in comparison with the isogenic sensitive
cell lines. Both drug resistant cell lines uniformly expressed higher
levels of pStat-3, c-Myc and CyclinD1 in comparison with their respective
parental cell lines. Knockdown of Stat-3 using siRNA and Stat-3 inhibitor
reduced TIC populations, reduced EMT populations, and decreased c-Myc and
CyclinD1, but did not affect Vimentin and E-cadherin protein expression.
T3 and SVA alone and in combination reduced TIC populations as measured
by reduced ALDH population and inhibition of mammospheres. Both agents
alone and in combination reduced the EMT populations and reduced the
levels of p-Stat3, c-Myc and CyclinD1expressed in drug-resistant breast
cancer cell lines. Conclusion: These in vitro data demonstrate that drug
resistant breast cancer cell lines contain high levels of TIC and EMT
sub-populations that are in part controlled by the Stat-3 pathway.
Furthermore, T3 and SVA alone and in combination show the ability to
target TIC population and metastasis associated mediators. Supported by
the Clayton Foundation for Research.

