Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of cancer stem cell markers in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive
malignancy with a high incidence of distant metastasis. Recent studies
have shown that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are important in cancer cell
growth, invasion, metastasis, and recurrence. Several studies have
revealed some CSC-specific markers for PDAC, such as CD133, CD24, CD44,
CXCR4, ESA, and nestin. Some evidence also suggests that PDAC progresses
through a multistep process comprised of noninvasive precursor lesions
known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PanINs). The reports of
CSCs in PanINs are limited. We performed a comprehensive analysis of the
expression of CSC markers in PDACs, PanINs, and normal pancreatic
tissues. Materials & Methods: CD24, CD44, ESA, CD133, CXCR4, and nestin
were used as CSC markers. Human PDACs (n=67), PanIN-1 (n=35), PanIN-2
(n=52), PanIN-3 (n=18), and normal pancreatic tissues (n=54), which were
obtained from patients who underwent surgical operations in the surgical
department of Nippon Medical School, were used for immunohistochemical
analysis. Human PDAC cell lines, PANC-1, KLM-1, and MIA PaCa-2, were used
for flow cytometric assays and quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Results:
Regarding the clinicopathological features, the positivity of CD44 and
CD133 showed significant correlations for UICC classifications and
histological features In the survival analysis, CD133-positive PDACs led
to a significantly poorer prognosis. In the immunohistochemical analysis,
CD24, CD44, ESA, CXCR4, and nestin showed a gradual increase of
positivity along with the grades of PanINs. Flow cytometric assays and
RT-PCR analysis confirmed the expression profile in PDAC. Conclusion: CSC
markers were expressed to various extents in PDAC, and the expression of
CD133 and CD44 was correlated with the prognosis and stage. Furthermore,
CSC markers showed a gradual increase along with the grades of PanINs;
therefore, CSC may be involved in the carcinogenesis of PDAC.


