Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch regulates the egression of angio-supportive bone
marrow-derived cells after chemotherapy


Introduction Our understanding of angiogenesis has evolved from a simple
endothelial-centric model into a multi-faceted process in which bone
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) are found to support the vasculature. BMDCs
can act in an immediate seek and repair manner in response to various
types of therapy, presumably to support tissue regeneration. This can
induce an angiogenesis rebound after therapy and thereby impair therapy
efficacy. Method By transplanting the bone marrow from the transgenic
tamoxifen-inducible VE-cadherin Cre ERT2/EYFP (CIVE) mice into wild type,
lethally irradiated, C57 Bl/6 mice, followed by tamoxifen treatment of
the recipient mice, we created a mouse with YFP+ bone marrow-derived
VE-Cadherin expressing cells (0.3% of the bone marrow). Allowing us to
specifically track this lineage of BMDCs. In a second set of experiments,
we used the CIVE-EYFP-notch-KO mice as bone marrow-donors. After
tamoxifen induction, LLC cells were implanted subcutaneously and after
eight days mice were either treated with vehicle control, cisplatin or
paclitaxel. Tumor growth was measured and tumors were analyzed by FACS
analysis and immunohistochemistry. Results Eight days after treatment
with chemotherapy a significant increase in endothelial cells was seen in
the tumor compared to the untreated tumors (pIntroduction Our
understanding of angiogenesis has evolved from a simple
endothelial-centric model into a multi-faceted process in which bone
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) are found to support the vasculature. BMDCs
can act in an immediate seek and repair manner in response to various
types of therapy, presumably to support tissue regeneration. This can
induce an angiogenesis rebound after therapy and thereby impair therapy
efficacy. Method By transplanting the bone marrow from the transgenic
tamoxifen-inducible VE-cadherin Cre ERT2/EYFP (CIVE) mice into wild type,
lethally irradiated, C57 Bl/6 mice, followed by tamoxifen treatment of
the recipient mice, we created a mouse with YFP+ bone marrow-derived
VE-Cadherin expressing cells (0.3% of the bone marrow). Allowing us to
specifically track this lineage of BMDCs. In a second set of experiments,
we used the CIVE-EYFP-notch-KO mice as bone marrow-donors. After
tamoxifen induction, LLC cells were implanted subcutaneously and after
eight days mice were either treated with vehicle control, cisplatin or
paclitaxel. Tumor growth was measured and tumors were analyzed by FACS
analysis and immunohistochemistry. Results Eight days after treatment
with chemotherapy a significant increase in endothelial cells was seen in
the tumor compared to the untreated tumors (p<0.01). This correlated with
a rapid re-growth of the treated tumors six days after treatment
initiation. This treatment-enhanced angiogenesis was accompanied by a
clear increase in YFP+ cells as soon as 1 day after chemotherapy for 0.1
to 0.3% (pIntroduction Our understanding of angiogenesis has evolved from
a simple endothelial-centric model into a multi-faceted process in which
bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) are found to support the vasculature.
BMDCs can act in an immediate seek and repair manner in response to
various types of therapy, presumably to support tissue regeneration. This
can induce an angiogenesis rebound after therapy and thereby impair
therapy efficacy. Method By transplanting the bone marrow from the
transgenic tamoxifen-inducible VE-cadherin Cre ERT2/EYFP (CIVE) mice into
wild type, lethally irradiated, C57 Bl/6 mice, followed by tamoxifen
treatment of the recipient mice, we created a mouse with YFP+ bone
marrow-derived VE-Cadherin expressing cells (0.3% of the bone marrow).
Allowing us to specifically track this lineage of BMDCs. In a second set
of experiments, we used the CIVE-EYFP-notch-KO mice as bone
marrow-donors. After tamoxifen induction, LLC cells were implanted
subcutaneously and after eight days mice were either treated with vehicle
control, cisplatin or paclitaxel. Tumor growth was measured and tumors
were analyzed by FACS analysis and immunohistochemistry. Results Eight
days after treatment with chemotherapy a significant increase in
endothelial cells was seen in the tumor compared to the untreated tumors
(p<0.01). This correlated with a rapid re-growth of the treated tumors
six days after treatment initiation. This treatment-enhanced angiogenesis
was accompanied by a clear increase in YFP+ cells as soon as 1 day after
chemotherapy for 0.1 to 0.3% (p<0.05). The influx of YFP+ cells was
specific for the tumor tissue, as no YFP+ cells were detected in control
organs like lung, liver and spleen. Two populations of YFP+ cells were
identified in the tumor, a macrophage-like population (Gr1/CD11b+) and an
endothelial-like population (PECAM+). The YFP+ cells in the tumor were
found in close association with the tumor vessels as per confocal
microscopy. FACS analysis showed that in the untreated tumors housed
0.45% of all PECAM+ cells were YFP+, however, this value increased to
1-3% after chemotherapy. Transcriptional analysis of the YFP+ cells
revealed high levels of Notch in this population. Using the notch KO mice
as bone marrow donors resulted in a defective homing of the YFP+ cells to
the tumor which completely prevented the therapy-enhanced angiogenesis
and significantly enhanced anti-tumor effect of the chemotherapy.
Conclusion In summary, our study identifies an important role for the
BMD-VE-cadherin expressing cells in supporting angiogenesis, especially
in response to chemotherapy. It reveals the critical role of notch
signaling in the ability of these cells to egress the bone marrow and
home to the tumor. Preventing the contribution of these angio-supportive
cells significantly enhanced therapy efficacy and provides a new strategy
to enhance anti-cancer therapy.

