Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MRI-guided intra-arterial delivery of SPIO-labeled natural killer
cells to hepatocellular carcinoma


Adoptive immunotherapy with natural killer (NK) lymphocytes is a
promising approach for treatment of HCC; however, intravenous (IV)
infusion may lead to insufficient NK dose delivery to tumors. Also,
quantification of intra-tumoral NK delivery may be crucial to optimize
therapy or to predict response. We hypothesize that: a) transcatheter
intra-arterial (IA) infusion allows for targeted delivery of NK cells to
HCC and b) iron oxide labeling methods allow for visualization of IA NK
delivery with MRI. 4.0106 NK-92 cells (ATCC; Manassas, VA) were labeled
overnight with 10 pg/cell of Texas Red iron oxide nanoparticles (GENOVIS
AB, Sweden) using 4.5 mg/ml protamine sulfate as a transfection agent.
Cell viability was measured using a cell counter, and labeling efficacy
was measured by fluorescence microscopy with DAPI and by Prussian blue
iron staining. With IACUC approval, 6 Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted
with 4.0106 McA-RH7777 HCC cells divided between the left lateral and
median lobes to simulate a metastatic tumor. After 8 days of tumor
growth, a 24G catheter (Terumo Medical Co., Somerset, NJ) was placed in
the proper hepatic artery via laparotomy, and digital subtraction
angiography (DSA) confirmed placement. 7.0T MRI scanner (Bruker,
Billerica, MA) was used for T2*W scans pre- and post- NK infusion. T2*
measurements in tumor and normal liver were compared pre- and
post-infusion using paired t-test. Livers were harvested for Prussian
blue histology to confirm NK delivery; percentage of cells in a
high-powered (20) field identified as NK (%HPF) were compared between
tumor and normal tissues. NK cell viability was >90% before and after
labeling. Labeling efficacy was >95%. DSA confirmed successful catheter
placement in each animal. Transcatheter NK infusions led to significant
reductions in tumor T2* (meanSD: pre 11.60.7 msec, post 9.81.1 msec,
p=0.04) but no significant reductions in normal liver T2* (meanSD: pre
7.50.1 msec, post 7.60.3 msec, p=0.36) during intra-procedural MRI scans.
Histologic %HPF measurements were significantly higher in tumor (1.51%)
than surrounding normal liver tissues (0.06%) (pAdoptive immunotherapy
with natural killer (NK) lymphocytes is a promising approach for
treatment of HCC; however, intravenous (IV) infusion may lead to
insufficient NK dose delivery to tumors. Also, quantification of
intra-tumoral NK delivery may be crucial to optimize therapy or to
predict response. We hypothesize that: a) transcatheter intra-arterial
(IA) infusion allows for targeted delivery of NK cells to HCC and b) iron
oxide labeling methods allow for visualization of IA NK delivery with
MRI. 4.0106 NK-92 cells (ATCC; Manassas, VA) were labeled overnight with
10 pg/cell of Texas Red iron oxide nanoparticles (GENOVIS AB, Sweden)
using 4.5 mg/ml protamine sulfate as a transfection agent. Cell viability
was measured using a cell counter, and labeling efficacy was measured by
fluorescence microscopy with DAPI and by Prussian blue iron staining.
With IACUC approval, 6 Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted with 4.0106
McA-RH7777 HCC cells divided between the left lateral and median lobes to
simulate a metastatic tumor. After 8 days of tumor growth, a 24G catheter
(Terumo Medical Co., Somerset, NJ) was placed in the proper hepatic
artery via laparotomy, and digital subtraction angiography (DSA)
confirmed placement. 7.0T MRI scanner (Bruker, Billerica, MA) was used
for T2*W scans pre- and post- NK infusion. T2* measurements in tumor and
normal liver were compared pre- and post-infusion using paired t-test.
Livers were harvested for Prussian blue histology to confirm NK delivery;
percentage of cells in a high-powered (20) field identified as NK (%HPF)
were compared between tumor and normal tissues. NK cell viability was
>90% before and after labeling. Labeling efficacy was >95%. DSA confirmed
successful catheter placement in each animal. Transcatheter NK infusions
led to significant reductions in tumor T2* (meanSD: pre 11.60.7 msec,
post 9.81.1 msec, p=0.04) but no significant reductions in normal liver
T2* (meanSD: pre 7.50.1 msec, post 7.60.3 msec, p=0.36) during
intra-procedural MRI scans. Histologic %HPF measurements were
significantly higher in tumor (1.51%) than surrounding normal liver
tissues (0.06%) (p<0.01). Transcatheter infusion permitted selective
delivery of NK cells to HCC. The intra-hepatic distribution of iron oxide
labeled NK cells was quantitatively visualized with MRI. We will perform
studies in the future to assess relationships between therapeutic
outcomes and the delivered NK dose, comparing IV and IA administration
routes. Clinicians could one day use these methods to adjust
patient-specific therapeutic regimens during adoptive immunotherapies for
the treatment of HCC. In vivo quantification of the delivery of
therapeutic agents is a powerful concept that offers the potential to
address many unmet needs in both pre-clinical and translational research
settings.

