Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive cell health analysis on a novel multi-parametric
cell analyzer


The study of anti-cancer compounds and cancerous cell lines requires
access to cell health information that includes parameters such as
cellular vitality, cell cycle and apoptosis and provides a complete
picture of cell health. Traditionally, expensive and complicated
instrumentation has been required for comprehensive cell health analysis.
Here we present data from a novel, low-cost, easy to use, compact, high
performance instrument, the Muse Cell Analyzer which provides
multi-dimensional cell health information. The instrument utilizes a
combination of highly simplified mix and read assay protocols with a
touch-screen interface which greatly simplifies data acquisition and
analysis. The objective of this study was to evaluate performance of Muse
Count and Viability Assays when compared to traditional predicate methods
including hemacytometers and automated image based systems. The mix and
read format of the Muse Count & Viability assay provides quantitative
detection of multiple suspension cell lines (e.g. Jurkats, Hl60s, K562s)
and adherent cell lines (e.g. CHOs, PC3s, MCF-7s) across a wide range of
concentrations and viabilities. Comparison of count and viability data
from multiple platforms indicate that count and viability information on
a vast variety of cancer cell lines can be robustly and accurately
obtained on the Muse Cell Analyzer and the system depicts good linearity
over a wide concentration range. Superior precision was obtained on the
Muse Cell Analyzer for a variety of sample types with %CV ranging from
1-8% compared to %CV of 5-20% for predicate methods on the same samples.
Cytotoxicity effects of anti-cancer compounds such as staurosporine,
gambogic acid etc.on multiple cell types could be reliabily obtained on
the instrument platform. The mix and read format of the Annexin V & Dead
Cell assay and simplified Cell Cycle protocol on the instrument further
allows for the easy and reliable study of impacts of anti-cancer
compounds. The combination of three critical assays for cell count and
viability, apoptosis and cell cycle status on a simple low cost
instrument makes the Muse Cell Analyzer a versatile and accurate solution
for comprehensive cell health analysis.

