Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of pemetrexed on innate and adaptive immune cells in
subjects with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas


Fifteen patients with previously surgically resected, or newly diagnosed,
non-resectable metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were consented
to an IRB approved study of immune cell functions in subjects treated
with pemetrexed followed by gemcitabine. All subjects had a health
performance status of 0-1 and no subject had received previous
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Dosages were pemetrexed at 500 mg/m2
followed two weeks later with a second dose of pemetrexed and gemcitabine
at 1250 mg/m2. Blood draws were at 5 time-points to investigate baseline
levels of innate and adaptive immune cell functions and the effects of
pemetrexed on those responses as measured 7 and 14 days after initial
therapy as well as the effects of a combination therapy of pemetrexed
with gemcitabine. Our study revealed a strong positive correlation
between pre-therapy absolute numbers of NK cells and overall survival
(p=0.039). Cytolytic units of NK activity positively correlated with
numbers of NK cells (p=0.008). Therapy with pemetrexed decreased killing
activity with cytolytic units decreasing with each blood draw and
reaching significance with combination therapy with gemcitabine (p=
0.02). Expression of Th1-type cytokines were induced and intracellular
accumulation measured by flow cytometry. Pemetrexed induced a substantial
increase in NK (CD56+) cells producing IFN. The increased IFN production
detected 7 days after initial pemetrexed therapy however had a
significant negative correlation with survival (p=0.038) suggesting that
NK cell production of IFN had a deleterious effect on patient survival. A
similar significant negative correlation was obtained when either the
combination of anti-CD3, anti-CD28, or Concanavalin A was used to induce
cytokine production. Addition of gemcitabine to the therapeutic regimen
decreased numbers of cell producing IFN to pre-therapy baseline levels.
Memory (CD45RO+) T-cells enumerated at baseline also revealed a
significant negative correlation with survival (p=0.011) but were
decreased by pemetrexed therapy alone or in combination with gemcitabine.
FoxP3+, CD8+ T-cells were detected and demonstrated a strong positive
correlation with both progression-free interval (p=0.005) and with
survival (p=0.026) suggesting that FoxP3+, CD8+ T-cells are beneficial to
pancreatic cancer patients. While pemetrexed therapy resulted in a
negative correlation with survival by increasing activation of a subset
of NK cells to produce IFN, addition of gemcitabine abated those
responses, decreased IFN production thereby resulting in a significant
positive correlation between NK cells producing IL-2 and survival
(p=0.041). Innate immunity thus is an important defense against
pancreatic cancer. In order to eliminate a negative effect of NK cell
induction of IFN however, pemetrexed should follow rather than precede
gemcitabine in initial therapy for pancreatic cancer

