Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of bioscaffolds to study escape from tumor dormancy


Tumor dormancy and escape from dormancy remains an elusive mystery in
cancer progression; clinically, escape from dormancy is thought to result
in recurrent, aggressive disease. Over 70% of prostate cancer patients
have disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in their bone marrow at the time of
primary treatment, yet less than 30% of those patients developed
recurrent disease 5-15+ years post-initial treatment. Currently there are
no good methods for studying tumor dormancy and escape from dormancy.
Imaging studies using mouse models of dormancy and examination of DTCs
from patients for gene signatures that may give clues to such dormancy
are still in the early stages of development. Other tools for studying
dormancy in vitro and in vivo need to be developed, especially for
prostate cancer, in which no mouse models of dormancy currently exist.
Here we present a study in which we implanted porous polyHEMA scaffolds
pre-seeded with human prostate cells (benign, malignant or dormant) into
athymic nude mice and compared growth to that in Matrigel. The malignant
line had similar growth curves in the pHEMA bioscaffold and Matrigel.
Likewise the failure to grow in vivo for a benign prostate epithelial
line was similar in Matrigel and the bioscaffold. However, while a human
prostate cancer cell line engineered to overexpress the
senescence-associated gene insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7
(IGFBP7), and thus mimic dormancy, failed to grow in vivo with Matrigel,
it grew when placed in a pHEMA bioscaffold. Because of this difference in
growth, we further explored the BP7 expressing prostate cancer cell line.
We measured the mRNA and protein levels of BP7 in the implants to
determine if loss of BP7 would, in part, explain the growth of the BP7
cell line in the scaffolds. mRNA levels of BP7 were actually
significantly higher in the pHEMA (growth group) compared to the Matrigel
(non-growth group), pTumor dormancy and escape from dormancy remains an
elusive mystery in cancer progression; clinically, escape from dormancy
is thought to result in recurrent, aggressive disease. Over 70% of
prostate cancer patients have disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in their
bone marrow at the time of primary treatment, yet less than 30% of those
patients developed recurrent disease 5-15+ years post-initial treatment.
Currently there are no good methods for studying tumor dormancy and
escape from dormancy. Imaging studies using mouse models of dormancy and
examination of DTCs from patients for gene signatures that may give clues
to such dormancy are still in the early stages of development. Other
tools for studying dormancy in vitro and in vivo need to be developed,
especially for prostate cancer, in which no mouse models of dormancy
currently exist. Here we present a study in which we implanted porous
polyHEMA scaffolds pre-seeded with human prostate cells (benign,
malignant or dormant) into athymic nude mice and compared growth to that
in Matrigel. The malignant line had similar growth curves in the pHEMA
bioscaffold and Matrigel. Likewise the failure to grow in vivo for a
benign prostate epithelial line was similar in Matrigel and the
bioscaffold. However, while a human prostate cancer cell line engineered
to overexpress the senescence-associated gene insulin-like growth factor
binding protein 7 (IGFBP7), and thus mimic dormancy, failed to grow in
vivo with Matrigel, it grew when placed in a pHEMA bioscaffold. Because
of this difference in growth, we further explored the BP7 expressing
prostate cancer cell line. We measured the mRNA and protein levels of BP7
in the implants to determine if loss of BP7 would, in part, explain the
growth of the BP7 cell line in the scaffolds. mRNA levels of BP7 were
actually significantly higher in the pHEMA (growth group) compared to the
Matrigel (non-growth group), p<0.0001. Protein levels of BP7 were not
significantly different between the groups, however, there was a trend
for higher BP7 expression in the pHEMA group. Angiogenesis is important
in metastatic spread and growth, however, there were no significant
differences in vessel density between the Matrigel and bioscaffold
implants. Other factors that influence metastasis include activation of
immune cells; in particular, macrophages are hypothesized to play an
important role in metastasis. We stained the implants for macrophages and
saw increased numbers of macrophages in the pHEMA implants compared with
the Matrigel implants. We will present data from transcript profiles and
cytokine antibody arrays that examine differences that occur between the
dormant and growing BP7 prostate cancer implants. We hypothesize that
infiltration of macrophages into bioscaffolds seeded with dormant cells
creates a microenvironment that favors cancer cell escape from dormancy.
Thus the use of pHEMA scaffolds provides an in vivo model for studying
escape from dormancy in prostate cancer.

