Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol reduces drug resistance by down-regulation of survivin
expression in multidrug resistant squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck


Background: Resistance to chemotherapy is a major obstacle in cancer
therapy. The purpose of this study is to evaluate honokiol in combination
with paclitaxel in controlling proliferation of multi-drug resistant
(MDR) cancer cells. Honokiol is a small molecule purified from Magnolia
officinalis. Honokiol has been shown to suppress tumor growth through
apoptosis and inhibition of angiogenesis. In this study, we investigated
the effects and mechanisms of those effects of honokiol on MDR squamous
cell cancers of the head and neck (SCCHN) Methods: Serial MDR SCCHN lines
including KB-8-5, KB-C1, and KB-V1 derived from the drug sensitive
parental KB-3-1 cells were used in this study. Cytotoxic effects of
honokiol alone and in combination with paclitaxel on apoptosis in
drug-sensitive and -resistant cells were evaluated in vitro and in a
subcutaneous KB-8-5 xenograft model, Results: The cell growth inhibition
analysis revealed a wide range of IC50 values of paclitaxel from 1.660.09
to 6560.9 439.52 ng/ml in the KB serial cell lines, indicating that those
cell lines have different levels of resistance to the paclitaxel
treatment. In contrast, honokiol effectively inhibited proliferation and
induced apoptosis in all four cell lines with IC50 values from 3.350.13
to 2.770.22 g/ml. Mechanistic studies revealed that honokiol induced
similar mitochondria-dependent apoptosis in drug resistant cell lines
regardless of the differential resistance levels to paclitaxel treatment.
Moreover these effects were associated with inhibition of STAT3
phosphorylation and down-regulation of STAT3 target gene expression,
including survivin and Mcl-1. Combined treatment with honokiol and
paclitaxel synergistically increased cytotoxicity as compared to the
single drug treatment. This combination also significantly inhibited
growth of xenografted tumors in nude mice. Conclusion: These results
suggest that honokiol may be a promising drug in overcoming paclitaxel
resistence of SCCHN. Targeting MDR SCCHN using honokiol in combination
with paclitaxel, may benefit patients with SCCHN. (Supported by grants
P50CA128613, GCC Distinguished Cancer Scholar to Dong M. Shin and
Jonathan J Beitler)

