Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Mre11 nuclease is critical for sensitivity of cells to Chk1
inhibition


The Chk1 kinase is required for the arrest of cell cycle progression when
DNA is damaged, thereby providing time for cells to repair their DNA and
recover. Chk1 also stabilizes stalled replication forks. As a
consequence, many Chk1 inhibitors have been developed and tested for
their potential to enhance DNA damage-induced tumor cell killing.
However, inhibition of Chk1 alone, without any additional exogenous
agent, can be cytotoxic. Using the novel Chk1 inhibitor MK-8776
(previously known as SCH900776), we screened a panel of cell lines and
found that some are killed rapidly at low concentrations while other cell
lines continue to grow in the presence of much higher concentrations.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of this sensitivity is critical
for defining which patients might respond best to therapy with Chk1
inhibitors. We have investigated the mechanism of sensitivity in U2OS
osteosarcoma cells. Upon incubation with MK-8776, single-stranded DNA
regions (ssDNA) and double-strand breaks (DSB) begin to appear within 6
h. These DSB have been attributed to the structure-specific DNA
endonuclease, Mus81. The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex is known to be
responsible for the resection of DSB to ssDNA. However, we show that
inhibition of the Mre11 nuclease activity leads to a decrease not only in
the amount of ssDNA following Chk1 inhibition, but also in the formation
of DSB, suggesting that DSB arise as a consequence of ssDNA formation.
These findings were corroborated by the discovery that Mre11-deficient
ATLD1 cells are highly resistant to MK-8776 and form neither ssDNA nor
DSB following treatment, but once complimented with exogenous Mre11, the
cells accumulate both ssDNA and DSB when incubated with MK-8776.
Inhibition of Chk1 also leads to aberrant activation of Cdc25A and Cdk2,
and our findings suggest that Mre11 provides the link between Cdk2
activation and Mus81. We propose that the variable sensitivity of cell
lines to Chk1 inhibition reflects defects in this pathway. These data
highlight a novel role for Mre11 in the production of DSB and may help
define which tumors are more sensitive to MK-8776 alone or in combination
with DNA damaging agents.

