Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a predictive in vitro assay for evaluating therapies
against metastatic breast cancer


The major challenge in breast cancer research pertains to tumor
heterogeneity being a constant characteristic in the disease process.
Although it is recognized that rare cancer cells drive the disease, there
is a lack of suitable function-based assays to identify and focus on such
cells for therapy development. Based on the hypothesis that only rare but
highly adaptable cancer cells succeed in metastasizing, we have recently
isolated rare (The major challenge in breast cancer research pertains to
tumor heterogeneity being a constant characteristic in the disease
process. Although it is recognized that rare cancer cells drive the
disease, there is a lack of suitable function-based assays to identify
and focus on such cells for therapy development. Based on the hypothesis
that only rare but highly adaptable cancer cells succeed in
metastasizing, we have recently isolated rare (< 0.01% of population)
highly metastatic cells present in an aggressive inflammatory breast
cancer cell line SUM149. Using a variety of long-term adaptability assays
we have found that such cells have adaptability to survive lack of
glutamine, glucose, oxygen, and serum. Unlike the majority of cells, such
cells have a high ability to dissociate their metabolic state from
regulatory state, thus making them more resistant to chemotherapy drugs.
These properties of cancer cells make them suitable for survival as
resistant cells in the body, which often use quiescence as a way of
surviving unfavorable conditions. As an initial step to optimize our in
vitro system for evaluating potential personalized therapies, we compared
the efficacy of several experimental targeted therapy drugs on metastatic
Gln-independent variants and on parental SUM149 cell line. Since cell
proliferation and apoptosis assays after a short exposure to experimental
therapies are not good at predicting clinical response, we chose to
determine therapeutic efficacy by analyzing residual/resistant cells
after a relatively long exposure to therapy. Celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor
(2-10 micromolar range), failed to inhibit resistant cells in both
Gln-ind and parental SUM149 cell lines. At a 50 micromolar concentration,
celecoxib eradicated all cells with a proliferative potential in the
parental cell line but not in the Gln-ind subpopulation. Metformin, an
anti-diabetes drug that activates AMPK and also inhibits cancer stem
cells, was less effective in inhibiting Gln-ind cells than the parental
cell line. BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, sensitized Gln-ind and
parental cells to the chemotherapy drugs doxorubicin and paclitaxel.
However, Gln-ind cells yielded significantly more clonogenic (10-fold)
cells after they were treated sequentially with BAZ235 and
doxorubicin/paclitaxel. Salinomycin, a potassium ionophore and an
inhibitor of cancer stem cells, was also less effective against Gln-ind
cells. HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid, and butyrate, which are being
evaluated as sensitizers to other therapies in various cancers,
sensitized both Gln-ind and parental cell line to doxorubicin and
paclitaxel. We conclude that the pair of cell lines used in this study
will be useful in discovering strategies (e.g., novel therapies and ways
to administer them) for eradicating metastatic breast cancer cells.

