Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the transcriptome landscape of HER2+ breast cancer


Motivation: Overexpression of HER2 (the product of the ERBB2 gene) occurs
in about 15% of all breast tumors. We have undertaken to use next
generation transcriptome sequencing technology to identify genomic
features that are unique to HER2+ tumors. Interactome mapping was then
used to integrate the genes associated with these features into a
transcriptome landscape model, with a view towards identifying nodes of
interaction that might be targeted in HER2+ tumors. Methods: We performed
50nt paired-end RNA-sequencing for 24 breast tumors: 8 each HER2+, ER+,
triple negatives (TN). In addition to breast adenocarcinomas, we also
sequenced 8 early passage non-transformed HMEC cell lines as normal
controls. Reads from RNA sequencing were aligned to the genome and exon
junctions using TopHat software. Gene counts were summarized and
annotations were performed using our in-house programs. Tukey's test was
used to obtain genes or transcripts that are specific to HER2 tumor group
compared to other tumors/normal. A combination of bioinformatics
softwares and algorithms were used to identify SNVs. Results: Only 13527
genes with median gene count greater than 16 reads in at least one of the
4 groups were considered for differential gene expression and splicing
analysis. Some 696 genes were differentially expressed in HER2+ tumors
compared to ER+, TN tumors and HMECs. We identified 272 alternately
spliced transcripts for which the HER2+ tumors exhibited a mean
transcript expression ratio significantly different from the means of
other tumor groups. We also identified 4735 expressed single nucleotide
variants that are uniquely associated with HER2+ tumors compared to other
tumors/normal groups. Among these 3579/4735 sequence polymorphisms were
not present in the 1000 genome germline sequence database or in the
dbSNP132 database of naturally occurring germline polymorphisms.
Integration of all the genes obtained from genomic feature analyses
(differential expression, alternative splicing, single nucleotide
variance) has been carried out to indentify biological processes that are
specific to the HER2+ tumor subtype. Key nodes and pathways that are
specific to HER2+ tumors will be evaluated for association with clinical
outcome in a large series of patients who have received HER2-targeted
therapy.

