Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network signatures of survival in glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary malignant brain
tumor in adults and also the most aggressive, with a median survival time
of approximately 1 year. Differences in age and pathology have long been
recognized as key factors in determining prognosis, and, more recently,
comprehensive mRNA profiling has been undertaken to establish the
molecular basis underlying prognosis. Though early mRNA expression-based
gene sets represented unbiased queries into molecular differences in
gliomas, they only uncovered differences in survival ex post facto1, 2.
Newer gene sets capitalize upon advances in technology, yet they suffer
for their unwieldy size and ambiguous biological meaning3. Though the
myriad gene sets proposed share little overlap with each other, recent
work has demonstrated that the use of interaction networks can
consolidate these differences. To determine the molecular basis of
prognostic differences in GBM directly, we employed an existing
computational framework, CRANE, to exhaustively search protein
interaction networks and identify molecular signatures distinguishing
short-term (635 days) survivors of GBM in The Cancer Genome Atlas gene
expression microarray dataset. Using CRANE, we identified a 50 gene
subnetwork signature of survival in GBM, which we validated in an
independent dataset of 91 patients (80% classification accuracy). We
further hypothesized that the use of interaction networks consolidates
variation in mRNA expression into more stable features at higher
phenotypic levels. To test this hypothesis, we examined protein
expression levels of the 50 network targets in an independent cohort of
16 patients (10 patients: survival18 months) using label-free proteomics.
Of the 17 network targets identified in common with our 50 subnetwork
signature genes, 8 were significantly differentially expressed between
short-term and long-term survivors, and expression levels of 3 of the
proteins (STAT3, Calnexin, and HSPA9) predicted phenotype (LTS vs. STS)
with 75% or more accuracy (12 or 13 correct out of 16). Our conclusion is
that data integration using interaction networks can drive discovery of a
stable subnetwork signature exhibiting clear differences in protein
expression. This manageable subset of proteomic targets will prove
invaluable in the design of cost-effective clinical assays (e.g. IHC)
suitable for retrospective analysis from FFPE tumor tissue in existing
biobanks, as well as for prospective studies predicting patient survival
- a much desired endpoint for clinicians and patients alike.

