Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of STAT2 enhances the establishment of B16 melanoma tumors


STAT2 is a key component of type I interferon (IFN-I) induced activation
of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. Several studies including ours have
shown that STAT2 is a critical signaling mediator in the apoptotic and
cell growth inhibitory effects of IFN-I. These findings suggest that
STAT2 has tumor suppressive function. To investigate this further, the
B16-F1 mouse melanoma cell line was used in a tumor transplantation model
to interrogate the role of STAT2 in tumorigenesis. We found that STAT2
null mice injected subcutaneously with B16-F1 melanoma tumor cells showed
accelerated tumor growth rate and grew larger tumors compared to those
formed in wild type mice. We next compared the antitumor effects of IFN-I
in wild type and STAT2 null mice administered intraperitoneally 3 days
after tumor injection and given three times weekly until day 21 of the
study. IFN-[[Unsupported Character - Symbol Font ?]] therapy of STAT2
null mice was ineffective as tumors continued to grow at the same rate as
in saline treated STAT2 null mice. In contrast, wild type mice that
received IFN-[[Unsupported Character - Symbol Font ?]] developed smaller
tumors compared to saline treated control mice. Evaluation of B16 tumors
established in wild type mice by Western blot analysis showed a marked
reduction in the levels of STAT2 and STAT1 proteins. Similarly, B16
tumors established in STAT2 null mice also showed low levels of STAT1
protein. To determine whether tumor derived soluble factors were involved
in decreasing STAT2 protein; supernatants collected from B16-F1 tumors
incubated overnight with serum free medium were used to treat B16-F1
tumor cells grown in vitro. A decrease in STAT2 protein was evident when
tumor supernatants derived from tumors established in wild type and STAT2
null mice were used. Taken together our findings reveal that host STAT2
restricts the establishment of melanoma tumors and soluble factors
secreted by melanoma tumors reduce STAT2 protein levels thereby
diminishing the antitumor effects of IFN.

