Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetics in renal cell carcinoma


In 2011, an estimated 60,920 men and women will be diagnosed of which
13,120 will die of cancer of the kidney and renal pelvis. The current
standard line of therapy includes surgery [partial or radical
nephrectomy] or the use of molecular targeted agents such as
antiangiogenic agents or immunotherapy. The common mutations found in
renal cell carcinomas [RCC] are Von-Hippau Lindau [VHL] gene in clear
cell RCC, c-met gene in papillary RCC type I, Fumarate hydratase [FH]
gene in papillary type II or the Brit Hogg Dube [BHD] gene in chromophobe
RCC. However there have been several studies indicating that some of the
above genes like VHL can be silenced through promoter methylation as
well. Hence, there has been an increasing focus on epigenetic
modifications that can occur in RCCs, because of the possibility of
reversing these epigenetic marks. There have been considerable reports on
the use of agents such as histone deacetylase [HDAC] inhibitors or DNA
methyl transferase inhibitors in different RCC cell lines or clinical
trials. In this study, we looked at the HDAC expression and activity in
matched tumor and non-tumor renal cell carcinoma tissue obtained from
tissue procurement services at RPCI. Class I HDACs [HDAC 1, 2 and 3] and
two members of class II HDACs [HDAC 4 and 5] are overexpressed in tumors
compared to their non-tumor counterparts. In contrast, a class II member
HDAC 6 level is lower in the tumor tissues relative to their non-tumor
counterparts which corresponded to higher levels to acetylated -tubulin
in those tumors. However, these HDAC expression levels did not tend to
have a correlation with grade or stage. We also established xenografts,
that are implanted orthotopically and efforts are underway to obtain
relatively faster growing tumors subcutaneously. Ongoing studies include
defining the relation between expression and activity of HDACs in these
tissues and the interaction and impact of other proteins with Class I and
II HDACs [such as ER-, Class III HDACs, VHL] in the context of common
active pathways in tumors such as hypoxia [results of which will be
available at the time of the meeting]. Further work also includes to look
into other histone as well as DNA modifications, as well as enzymes that
cause these modifications, in the matched tissues and to explore the
potential use of histone or DNA modifying agents as part of RCC treatment.

