Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 response of cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) to cisplatin
is closely correlated with the p53 response of tumor cells in lung cancer
tissue cultures


One of the major molecular players in cellular stress responses is the
p53 tumor suppressor protein. The vast majority of the research of p53
activities upon DNA damage has focused on its cell autonomous functions,
i.e. its ability to induce cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, apoptosis,
autophagy, or senescence in a homogenous cell population. However, data
on the impact of tumor cells on p53 activation in their neighboring
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and also vice versa are still
limited. We investigated p53 status and responses to the p53-activating
drug cisplatin both in tumor cells and in their adjacent CAFs in intact
tumor tissues derived from 28 individual lung cancer patients. For this,
200m thick patient derived tissue slices were cultivated ex vivo in
presence or absence of cisplatin for 72 hours. By comparing cultivated
control slices with the corresponding tumor tissue material immediately
fixed after surgery (pathological routine material) we could show that
morphology and p53 staining pattern were highly preserved during
cultivation. TP53 mutations were detected in 16 of the 28 cases (57.1%).
Independent of their p53 mutation status, the tumor samples could be
divided into 3 categories according to their p53 immunostaining
characteristics in the tumor cell compartment: (I) tumor cells with
constitutively low p53 protein which was accumulated upon cisplatin (12
cases, 7 with mutated p53); (II) tumor cells with constitutively high p53
and no further accumulation upon cisplatin (8 cases, 7 with mutated p53);
(III) tumor cells with constitutively no detectable p53 and no
accumulation upon cisplatin (8 cases, 2 with mutated p53). Importantly,
regardless of the p53 mutation status of the tumor cell compartment we
detected a CAF specific p53 accumulation and induction of the p53 target
p21 selectively in category I tumors (i.e. tumor tissue samples
characterized by p53 accumulation in the tumor cell compartment). In
sharp contrast, tumor tissues with no detectable p53 accumulation in
tumor cells (categories II and III) showed no p53 accumulation or p21
induction in their adjacent fibroblast compartment. Furthermore, a CAF
specific induction of TUNEL positive cells in cisplatin treated samples
(7 of 28 cases) was selectively observed in tumor tissues characterized
by a parallel induction of tumor cell death. These data for the first
time show a close correlation of p53 response in tumor cells and adjacent
fibroblasts in intact lung tumor tissues from patient derived material
indicating that tumor cells control molecular and functional responses of
their neighborhood fibroblasts upon DNA damage.

