Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mTOR kinase inhibitor, CC214, preferentially blocks the growth
of EGFRvIII-activated glioblastomas


mTOR pathway hyper activation is a common feature in many cancers,
including in nearly 90% of Glioblastomas. mTOR exists in two multiprotein
complexes, which differ in regulation, function, and response to the
allosteric mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. The failure of glioblastomas to
clinically respond to rapamycin appears to be mediated both by inability
of rapamycin to inhibit mTORC2 signaling, and by failure to fully
suppress p4E-BP1, a critical effector of mTORC1. The new generation of
mTOR kinase inhibitors (mTORki) has emerged as a new class of targeted
cancer therapies capable of blocking mTOR more potently than rapalogs
(such as Rapamycin). Here we demonstrate that CC214-1 and CC214-2, mTOR
kinase inhibitors, have potent effects on the growth of glioblastoma in
vitro and in vivo. Across a panel of GBM cell lines, CC214-1 was
significantly more effective at suppressing 4E-BP1 phosphorylation and
protein translation, and mTORC2 signaling than rapamycin, resulting in
significantly more growth inhibition at equal levels of suppression of S6
phosphorylation. EGFRvIII, the constitutively active EGFR mutant
frequently detected in GBMs strongly activates mTORC1 and mTORC2
signaling, potently sensitizing tumors to CC214-1. In contrast, PTEN
expression suppressed mTOR signaling and reduced the response to CC214-1.
In vivo CC214-2 significantly inhibited mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling,
significantly suppressing tumor growth by 50%. CC214-1 also potently
activated autophagy. Addition of chloroquine suppressed autophagy
resulting in significant CC214-1-dependent apoptotic cell death. These
results demonstrate the potential activity of mTOR kinase inhibitors in
GBM, and identify EGFRvIII expression and PTEN loss as molecular
determinants of response. These data also suggest that mTOR kinase
inhibitors, alone or in combination with autophagy inhibiting agents, are
likely to have significant anti-tumor efficacy in GBM patients.

