Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea polyphenols modulate expression of specific microRNAs
for induction of molecular mechanisms of apoptosis in malignant
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and SK-N-DZ cells


Neuroblastomas are extracranial solid tumors that mostly occur in
children. Specific microRNAs (miRs) act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors
in different malignancies. Modulation of expression of specific oncogenic
miRs (onco-miRs) and tumor suppressor miRs (TS-miRs) may control growth
of malignant neuroblastomas. The green tea polyphenolic compounds
(-)-epigallocatechin (EGC) and (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
possess anticancer effects. We studied changes in expression of onco-miRs
(miR-92, miR-93, and miR-106b) and TS-miRs (miR-7-1, miR-34a, and
miR-99a) in human malignant neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and SK-N-DZ cells after
treatment with EGC or EGCG. We also examined the effects of
overexpression of miR-93 or miR-7-1 and treatment with EGC or EGCG on
apoptosis. First, cells were treated with EGC or EGCG and subjected to
MTT assay to determine residual viability, Annexin V-FITC/PI staining and
flow cytometry to detect apoptotic populations, and Wright staining to
determine morphological features of apoptosis. Then, differential
expression of specific miRs was examined by RT-PCR. Further, Western
blotting was performed to detect molecules involved in receptor and
mitochondria mediated apoptotic pathways. Both EGC and EGCG
dose-dependently reduced cell viability in both cell lines. EGC was less
efficacious than EGCG in inducing apoptosis, as determined by Annexin
V-FITC/PI staining and further confirmed by Wright staining. Significant
decreases in expression of three onco-miRs (miR-92, miR-93, and miR-106b)
and increases in expression of three TS-miRs (miR-7-1, miR-34a, and
miR-99a) occurred after treatment with 50 M EGC or 50 M EGCG. Western
blotting showed that EGCG was much more potent than EGC for upregulating
pro-apoptotic Bax and down regulating anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 resulting in
an increase in Bax:Bcl-2 ratio, which could trigger mitochondrial release
of pro-apoptotic factors such as Smac and AIF into the cytosol. Both EGC
and EGCG decreased expression of survivin, the endogenous caspase
inhibitor, and activated calpain and caspase-3 to generate
calpain-specific 145 kD spectrin break down product (SBDP) and
caspase-3-specific 120 kD SBDP. Increased proteolytic activity of
caspase-3 also generated ICAD fragment leading to activation of CAD for
completion of apoptosis. To confirm the onco-miR role of miR-93 and
TS-miR role of miR-7-1, we transfected the cells with the mimic of miR-93
or miR-7-1 and then treated with EGC or EGCG and determined apoptotic
features by flow cytometry and Western blotting. In conclusion, our
results showed that green tea polyphenols modulated expression of
specific miRs for induction of apoptosis and established that
overexpression of miR-7-1 and treatment with EGCG could be used as an
effective combination therapy for controlling growth of human malignant
neuroblastoma cells.

