Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic resistance of Akt kinases to dephosphorylation through
an ATP-dependent molecular switch


The serine/threonine Akt protein kinases (Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3) affect
multiple cellular functions associated with hallmark properties of
cancer, such as cell growth and survival, differentiation, metabolism and
migration. Hyperphosphorylation of a threonine residue (Thr308 in Akt1)
in the activation loop of Akt kinases is a prerequisite for the
deregulated Akt activity frequently that is observed in neoplasia.
Conversely, phosphatases including type 2A serine/threonine phosphatase
(PP2A), reverse Akt phosphorlyation and activity. Here, we describe a new
layer of control of Akt phosphorylation that points to ATP binding pocket
occupancy as a means to decelerate Akt dephosphorylation. We show that
targeting Akt kinases to the cell membrane markedly reduces the ability
of phosphatases to dephosphorylate Thr308. This effect depends on the
occupancy of the ATP binding pocket by either ATP or ATP competitive Akt
kinase inhibitors (A443654 or G690693). To reconstitute this effect, we
use purified phosphatases and Akt proteins to show that ATP markedly
inhibits the dephosphorylation of phospho-Thr308 in vitro. Mutational
analysis reveals that Arg273 in Akt1 and the corresponding Arg274 in Akt2
are essential for shielding Thr308 against dephosphorylation. While the
binding of ATP and several ATP mimic inhibitors, ATP-S, A-443654 and
G690693 inhibits Akt dephosphorylation, the binding of other closely
related molecules, ADP, ADPS and isoquinoline sulphonamide (IQS, Ki
0.23uM) does not block dephosphorylation, suggesting unique determinants
in the -phosphate of ATP that regulate Akt dephosphorylation. These
results suggest that occupancy of the ATP-binding pocket of Akt kinases
stabilizes a conformational state of the Akt kinase domain that restricts
phosphatase access to phospho-Thr308, thereby sustaining Akt
phosphorylation. Finally, we determine that phosphorylated Akt kinases in
untransformed cells are subject to rapid dephosphorylation. However, in
several cancer-derived cell lines, phosphorylated Akt kinases are highly
resistant to dephosphorylation and the resistance depends on
ATP-occupation. In addition, dephosphorylation resistance provides a
mechanistic explanation for the paradoxical phosphorylation of Akt
previously described for ATP competitive inhibitors, A443654 and G690693.
Also, dephosphorylation resistance may be the converging point of the
oncogenic signals that induce Akt hyperactivation. Exploration of
structures and amino acids involved in this process may hold the key to
developing the next generation of pharmacological agents that could
promote normal Akt physiology while inhibiting cancer cells for more
positive results in cancer therapy.

