Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ABC transporters in cancer through small molecule
inhibitors


Multidrug resistance is one of the major causes of treatment failure in
cancer therapy. While multidrug transporter proteins are known for their
contributions to chemoresistance and efflux of anti-cancer drugs from
cancer cells, a significant body of evidence points to their fundamental
roles in tumour biology (Fletcher et al, Nature Rev Cancer, 10:147-156,
2010). We have investigated the ABCC subfamily of multidrug transporter
genes in the highly malignant and aggressive childhood solid tumour,
neuroblastoma and found that high levels of ABCC1 and ABCC4 are powerful
independent prognostic indicators of clinical outcome. However, the
agents used to treat the patients described in these studies are not
known substrates of ABCC4 and we have shown that siRNA-mediated knockdown
of ABCC4 results in reduced proliferation and enhanced morphological
differentiation of neuroblastoma cells, in the absence of any cytotoxic
drug treatment (Henderson et al, JNCI, 103;1-16, 2011). The aim of this
study is to develop a potential new approach for the treatment of
neuroblastoma through the inhibition of ABCC4 using small molecule
inhibitors. A cell-based screen of a library of diverse chemical small
molecules was used to isolate potent small molecule inhibitors of ABCC4
that were able to sensitize HEK293 cells over-expressing MRP4 to a
cytotoxic MRP4 substrate, 6-mercaptopurine (6MP). Filtering of compounds
based upon their ability to cause 6MP accumulation, together with focused
library screening, have resulted in the identification of several
chemical structures able to specifically block MRP4. In addition to
reversing drug resistance to 6MP, these compounds cause morphological
differentiation and inhibition of cell growth, as seen with MRP4 siRNA,
in the BE2C neuroblastoma cell line. Importantly, these compounds
significantly potentiate morphological differentiation caused by the
established differentiation agent, all-trans retinoic acid. We further
show that these inhibitors have potency in other MRP4 expressing cancer
cell lines beyond neuroblastoma. These pharmacological inhibitors offer
clinical potential for the treatment of neuroblastoma and other MRP4
overexpressing cancers.

