Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMG box-containing protein 1 (HBP1) is a direct target of
transcription factor FOXO1 in invasive oral cancer


Constitutively activated PI3K/Akt signaling with deregulated activity of
FOXO factors is often associated with tumorigenesis. Reduced HBP1
expression and/or loss-of-function HBP1 mutants have been observed in
several types of cancer. FOXO1 and HBP1 seem to share common biological
roles such as cell growth inhibition. We have previously demonstrated
that, in oral cancer, reduced HBP1 expression expedited cell
proliferation, growth, and migration, while the role of FOXO1 remains
unclear. Hence, the objective of the current study is to investigate the
reciprocal roles of FOXO1 and HBP1 in oral cancer. In a subset of oral
tumor specimen, we found that both FOXO1 and HBP1 expression levels were
significantly lower than those of the control tissues. In addition, FOXO1
expression was positively correlated with that of HBP1, and the status of
low FOXO1 and HBP1 was associated with invasiveness of oral tumor,
indicating a coordinated down-regulation of FOXO1 and HBP1 in invasive
oral cancer. To further examine if HBP1 is a transcriptional target of
FOXO1, we searched for putative binding sites within a 2-kb HBP1 promoter
region, and identified two FOXO1 consensus sites, located 177 to 184 bp
and 388 to 395 bp, from the transcription start site. As shown by
reporter analysis and in vivo chromatin IP assay, these cis-acting
elements and trans-acting FOXO1 factors, with functional DNA-binding
domains, were necessary for complete activation. Furthermore, suppression
of FOXO1 led to a reduction of HBP1 expression. In a reciprocal manner,
FOXO1-mediated inhibition of colony formation, cell growth, and invasion
was disrupted upon HBP1 knockdown in invasive oral cancer cells. Taken
together, our data provide the significant findings that HBP1 is a novel
downstream target of FOXO1 and that the FOXO1-HBP1 pathway might be a
prospective means of intervention in invasive oral cancer.

