Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CARD 10 mediated NF-kB activation in colorectal carcinoma
cells


Colorectal carcinoma is the fourth most common cancer in men and the
third in women worldwide, accounting for 8% of all cancer deaths. NF-B
gene plays a role in tumorgenesis through the transcriptional activation
of genes associated with cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis,
tumor promotion, inflammation and suppression of apoptosis. NF-B protein
activation, defined as nuclear expression of NF-B by immunohistochemistry
was an independent prognostic marker for poor survival. CARD10 gene is
known positive regulator of the NF-B activation pathway and can activate
the NF-B activity. CARD10 is an enzyme that is encoded by the CARD10 gene
and it associates with IKK complex resulting in NF-B activation.
Considering the potential therapeutic utility of targeting NF-B and its
key modulators, we previously studied CARD10 genetic alterations and
immunohistochemical expression of CARD10 in a large cohort cases1. CARD10
protein expression associated significantly with NF-B activation, and
CARD10 amplification was significantly associated with CARD10 protein
expression and presence of distance metastasis. To extend and confirm our
clinical finding, we performed in vitro studies using a panel of CRC cell
lines to investigate the biological role of CARD10 alterations in CRC
carcinogenesis. Our data showed that TNF- treatment caused efficient
translocation of p56 in CARD 10 muatation harboring cell line -DLD-1
cells to nucleus as compared to HCT-15 cells. Furthermore, the luciferase
activity was significantly higher in CARD 10 amplified HCT-116 cells as
compared to DLD1 and HCT-15 cells which carry normal CRAD10 gene copy
number after 48 hours of transfection with an NF-B reporter. In addition,
it was also observed that the formation of colonies was significantly
higher in HCT-116 as compared to DLD-1 and HCT-15. Finally CARD 10 siRNA
transfection knocked down the expression of CARD10 and abrogated the
expression of NF-B, and resulted in apoptosis through activation of
caspase-3. These data suggest that CARD10 mutation and amplification
mediated NFB activation play an important role in cellular transformation
of CRC cells. Thus, the study raises the possibility that inhibition of
CARD10 might have significant therapeutic value in CRC. Reference: 1:
Jehad Abubaker, Prashant Bavi, Zeenath Jehan, Maqbool Ahmed, Wael
Al-Haqawi, Mehar Sultana, Sarita Prabhakaran, Nasser Al-Sanea, Alaa
Abduljabbar, Luai H Ashari, Samar Alhomoud, Fouad Al-Dayel, Shahab Uddin,
Khawla S. Al-Kuraya. Clinicopathological significance of CARD10
alterations in Middle Eastern colorectal cancer. 102nd AACR Annual
Meeting, April2-6, 2011, Orlando, Florida.

