Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulated transcriptional mechanisms that control crypt cell
maturation: A mechanism that contributes to stem cell overpopulation
during colon cancer development


Our goal is to determine how transcriptional regulatory mechanisms that
control crypt cell maturation in normal colonic epithelium, when
dysregulated, lead to maturation arrest, tumor stem cell (SC)
overpopulation and colorectal cancer (CRC) development. Accordingly, we
studied changes in maturation during colon cancer development caused by
APC mutations. Quantitative mapping of crypt cell subpopulations was done
on colon tissues from FAP patients using markers for stem cells (SC),
proliferating cells, cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis. In normal human
colon, mapping defined the sequential transitions in colonic crypts that
enterocyte subpopulations undergo during their maturation from
stem-to-proliferating-to-differentiated-to-apoptotic cells, illustrating
the point that maturation is a process involving both proliferation and
differentiation. In normal-appearing (heterozygous-mutant) and
adenomatous (homozygous-mutant) FAP crypts, SC and proliferating cell
subpopulations increasingly expanded towards the crypt top, while
differentiated/apoptotic subpopulations in the upper crypt contracted,
indicating that crypt cell maturation becomes progressively delayed.
These data indicate that there are coordinated mechanisms that regulate
maturation of crypt cells in normal crypts which become dysregulated in
premalignant crypts. To investigate possible transcriptional regulation
of a network of genes underlying maturation, we used bioinformatic tools
to identify (i) genes that are co-expressed in the proliferating cell
population and (ii) transcriptional regulatory elements (TREs)
statistically enriched in the promoter regions among those genes.
Computational analysis revealed (i) a specific cassette of sixty-six
genes that are co-expressed with the markers used for mapping the
proliferating cell population in the lower colonic crypt and (ii) eleven
TREs that are significantly enriched in the promoter regions among genes
in this gene set. Quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry was then used
to validate that the transcription factors (TFs), which correspond to the
common TREs, are differentially expressed along the normal crypt axis and
in normal colonic epithelium versus malignant colon tissues. Our results
indicate that dysregulation of a transcriptional regulatory network
contributes to delayed crypt cell maturation, SC overpopulation, and
initiation and promotion of CRC. Accordingly, restoring maturation by
targeting transcriptional pathways that control expression of multiple
genes involved in crypt cell maturation may be a therapeutically
effective approach to CRC treatment.

