Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell of origin for cervical cancer


Background Squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix and its precursor
[cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN)] are thought to develop either
within, or in close proximity to, the squamo-columnar (SC) junction of
the ecto and endocervix. Despite this assumption, one issue unresolved in
cervical cancer research is the identity of the normal cervical cell type
in the SC junction in which tumorigenesis begins. Methods Using GeneChip
Human Exon Arrays (Affymetrix), we compared the gene expression profiles
of the ecto and endocervical epithelia with the SC junctional cells.
Fetal and adult cervical specimens were studied in situ to identify,
characterize and determine the dynamics of junctional cell development.
CINs and cancers were stained with junction-specific antibodies to
ascertain their relationship to the SC junctional cell population.
Cervices in which the transformation zone had been excised were analyzed
for evidence of the SC junctional immunophenotype. Results Human adult
cervices displayed a unique monolayer of cuboidal cells at the SC
junction that displayed a unique 77 gene expression signature. Analysis
of fetal and postnatal mouse and human cervices using biomarkers from
this unique gene signature revealed broad expression in the lining cells
of the lower genital tract that, over time, become concentrated in the
region of the SC junction. Junction-specific biomarkers consistently
immunostained high-grade CINs and squamous and glandular cancers
associated with both carcinogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV) and strong
expression of p16ink4. Non-carcinogenic HPV-associated CINs and low-grade
CINs predominated in the ectocervical location and were usually SC
junctional-marker negative. Cervices previously subjected to surgical
excision of the SC junction did not remanufacture junctional cells at the
new SC junction. Conclusions This study shows, for the first time, that a
discrete, residual embryonic cell population in the cervix is uniquely
susceptible to carcinogenic HPV infection and is lost following surgical
excision of the SC junction. The negative association between the
junctional immunophenotype and noncarcinogenic HPV-related CIN may
signify different affinities for the SC junction between carcinogenic and
non-carcinogenic HPVs. Because junction-specific biomarkers highlight
CINs and all cancers with carcinogenic HPVs, they may facilitate
interpretation of cervical cancer precursors as well as propose a novel
cell type for studies of experimental papillomaviral carcinogenesis. The
possibility that unique populations of junctional cells are also involved
in the pathogenesis of other HPV-related cancers (anogenital and
oropharyngeal) merits investigation.

