Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suicidal tendencies: The promotion of cell death by a prolactin
antagonist through autophagy in ovarian cancer


As a multifunctional pituitary hormone and cytokine, prolactin (PRL) is
not only essential for normal reproduction and maintenance of pregnancy,
but is involved in over 300 biological activities. There is increasing
evidence that PRL plays a role in a variety of cancers including ovarian
cancer. Elevated levels of PRL have been reported in patients with
ovarian cancer. Furthermore, increased expression of PRL receptors (PRLr)
have been shown in ovarian cancers, signifying the importance of
PRL-mediated signaling in ovarian carcinogenesis. Abnormal activities of
PRLr-mediated signaling pathways such as MAPK and JAK2/STAT5 lead to
tumorigenicity and recurrence. Therefore, inhibition of PRL signaling is
implicated as a target in cancer therapy; however, no viable strategies
have been identified for blocking PRL during tumor progression. Herein,
we report a novel strategy to counteract the activity of PRLr-mediated
cellular survival in malignant ovarian cancer cells with autophagic cell
death. Prolanta (G129R), an analog of human PRL with a single amino-acid
substitution at position 129 Glycine with bulky Arginine, induces
adaptive autophagy through antagonism of the PRLr expressed on human
ovarian cancer cells (HeyA8 and SKOV3). The mouse ovarian cancer cell
IG10, which does not express PRLr, had no induction of autophagy upon
Prolanta treatment. We also identified that Prolanta competitively binds
to PRLr and partially inhibits the oncogenic signaling pathways mediated
by PRLr, including JNK/STAT3, PI-3K/Rac/PAK pathways that can lead to
cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. In addition, we
observed cell death after Prolanta treatment in 3-D-spheroid models. We
explored molecular mechanisms behind this autophagic cell death induced
by Prolanta. Through biomarker identification using the reverse phase
protein array (RPPA), we revealed a signaling complex regulated by
Pea-15, an autophagy activator through JNK-pathway, which was activated
by Prolanta. Microarray analysis reported an array of autophagic genes
activated by Prolanta. Furthermore, in an orthotopic mouse model,
Prolanta treatment with or without a taxane caused significant inhibition
of SKOV3 and HeyA8 growth. In summary, Prolanta functions as a molecular
antagonist to tumor-associated PRL by inducing adaptive autophagic cell
death in human ovarian cancer. These preclinical findings reveal the
novelty of Prolanta as an adjuvant therapy for ovarian cancer.

