Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dairy foods and nutrients in relation to risk of epithelial
ovarian cancer


The identification of modifiable risk factors for ovarian cancer is
important to reduce incidence and mortality. Previous studies have
suggested that the lactose component of dairy foods may promote ovarian
carcinogenesis via the accumulation of galactose (lactose metabolite)
with potentially toxic effects on oocytes and disruption of ovarian/
pituitary feedback. Alternatively, high calcium levels in dairy products
might decrease ovarian cancer risk by decreasing cell proliferation and
increasing apoptosis by down-regulation of parathyroid hormone which has
opposing effects. Our objective was to evaluate whether dairy foods and
nutrients were associated with ovarian cancer risk in 1909 epithelial
ovarian cancers and 1989 population based controls identified between
1992-2008 in the New England based case-control (NECC) study. At the time
of enrollment, participants were interviewed in-person about known and
suspected ovarian cancer risk factors and diet was assessed using a
validated self-administered, semi-quantitative food frequency
questionnaire. We used unconditional logistic regression to estimate
associations between dairy exposures and ovarian cancer risk and
polytomous logistic regression to test whether associations varied across
histological subtypes of ovarian cancer or in cases that were classified
as rapidly fatal vs. less aggressive cases. Multivariate models were
adjusted for study center/phase, age, number of pregnancies, oral
contraceptive use, tubal ligation, family history of ovarian cancer and
total calories. We observed a significantly decreased risk of ovarian
cancer with higher intakes of dietary and total (diet + supplements)
calcium (dietary calcium: Quartile 4 (Q4) vs. Q1 OR= 0.74 (95% confidence
interval (CI) = 0.62 - 0.89); total calcium: Q4 vs. Q1 OR = 0.61 (95% CI
= 0.50 - 0.74)), Ptrend The identification of modifiable risk factors for
ovarian cancer is important to reduce incidence and mortality. Previous
studies have suggested that the lactose component of dairy foods may
promote ovarian carcinogenesis via the accumulation of galactose (lactose
metabolite) with potentially toxic effects on oocytes and disruption of
ovarian/ pituitary feedback. Alternatively, high calcium levels in dairy
products might decrease ovarian cancer risk by decreasing cell
proliferation and increasing apoptosis by down-regulation of parathyroid
hormone which has opposing effects. Our objective was to evaluate whether
dairy foods and nutrients were associated with ovarian cancer risk in
1909 epithelial ovarian cancers and 1989 population based controls
identified between 1992-2008 in the New England based case-control (NECC)
study. At the time of enrollment, participants were interviewed in-person
about known and suspected ovarian cancer risk factors and diet was
assessed using a validated self-administered, semi-quantitative food
frequency questionnaire. We used unconditional logistic regression to
estimate associations between dairy exposures and ovarian cancer risk and
polytomous logistic regression to test whether associations varied across
histological subtypes of ovarian cancer or in cases that were classified
as rapidly fatal vs. less aggressive cases. Multivariate models were
adjusted for study center/phase, age, number of pregnancies, oral
contraceptive use, tubal ligation, family history of ovarian cancer and
total calories. We observed a significantly decreased risk of ovarian
cancer with higher intakes of dietary and total (diet + supplements)
calcium (dietary calcium: Quartile 4 (Q4) vs. Q1 OR= 0.74 (95% confidence
interval (CI) = 0.62 - 0.89); total calcium: Q4 vs. Q1 OR = 0.61 (95% CI
= 0.50 - 0.74)), Ptrend < 0.001 in both comparisons. Higher intakes of
dietary and total vitamin D also were associated with a modest but
statistically significant decreased risk of ovarian cancer (dietary vit
D: Q4 vs. Q1 OR=0.82 (95% CI = 0.68 - 0.99); total vit D: Q4 vs. Q1 OR =
0.76 (95% CI = 0.63 - 0.92), Ptrend= 0.03 and 0.01 for dietary and total
vitamin D, respectively. In models that were mutually adjusted for total
calcium, total vitamin D and lactose, the association with calcium
retained significance while the association with vitamin D was no longer
significant. We did not observe an association between lactose and
ovarian cancer risk and we observed similar associations for calcium,
vitamin D and lactose among case groups defined as rapidly fatal or less
aggressive. Together these results confirm previous reports that calcium
appears to be protective for ovarian cancer. Prior studies of vitamin D
and ovarian cancer risk have been inconsistent, however we observed a
modest protective association that warrants further consideration.

