Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of uPA in chemo-sensitization and p53 regulation in
pancreatic cancer cells


Despite new knowledge of the molecular profile of pancreatic cancer and
its precursor lesions, survival rates have changed very little over the
last 40 years. The ability to predict which patients would benefit most
from surgical intervention and/or chemotherapy would be a great clinical
asset. Researchers have demonstrated that uPA is frequently present in a
higher concentration in the serum of pancreaticobiliary cancer patients.
It is known that uPA is involved in ECM degradation and has been
correlated with malignant transformation of cancer cells. Emerging data
have suggested that the capability of a tumor to grow and propagate is
dependent on a small subset of cells within a tumor called cancer stem
cells (CSCs) or cancer initiating cells. Under in vitro cell culture
conditions, these cells possess sphere-forming ability, which is known to
be one of the properties of CSCs. Interestingly, the significance of this
sphere formation ability still remains unclear. Recent studies have
demonstrated that these sphere-forming cells acquired chemoresistance to
cisplatin. In the present study, as observed by FACS analysis, we show
that a sub-population of MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells
possess cancer stem cell properties. RNAi-mediated suppression of uPA in
these cells retarded their tumor forming ability in a nude mouse model.
We also observed that uPA-suppressed MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells, after
supplementation with uPA protein regained their cancer stem cell
phenotype and showed increased expression of Lhx-2. To determine whether
these sub-population cells possess any chemoresistance, we treated these
cells with varying concentrations of gemcitabine (0-1000 nM) and observed
that these cells were resistant to gemcitabine even at the 1000 nM
concentration. Further suppression of uPA using siRNA in these cells
sensitized these cells to gemcitabine. In addition, to determine whether
uPA has any transcriptional role, we examined whether uPA interacted with
any known transcription factors we used a TF-protein array. We observed
that uPA interacted with Hoxa-5 very strongly. To further determine
whether the interaction of uPA with Hoxa-5 invokes any regulatory
response, we used a p53 promoter known to possess Hoxa-5 binding regions
to drive a Luciferace gene, both with and without the presence of uPA. We
observed that uPA retarded p53 promoter activity. Finally, nude mice
implanted with MIA PaCa-2 cancer stem cells were susceptible to
gemcitabine treatment after uPA downregulation. Taken together, these
results indicate that targeting uPA can sensitize chemoresistant
pancreatic cells to gemcitabine.

