Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF activates NF-B through RIP1 ubiquitination-dependent and
independent pathways


TNF-induced NF-B activation has long been believed to depend on TRAF2/5-
and cIAP1/2-mediated RIP1 ubiquitination. Recently, HOIP/HOIL-1-mediated
linear ubiquitination of NEMO/IKK has emerged as a new player in
TNF-induced NF-B activation. However, the mechanisms by which these
proteins mediate NF-B activation have become more complex than ever
before due to an accumulation of conflicting results. Several independent
studies even challenged the notion that these proteins ever play
essential roles in NF-B activation. Here, we report the identification of
immediate and delayed phases of IKK activation in TNF-treated cells.
TNF-induced immediate IKK activation requires ubiquitination of RIP1
catalyzed by cooperative actions of TRAF2, cIAP1/2, UbcH5 and Ubc13, and
that in the absence of any one of these components; those remaining are
only capable of mediating delayed IKK activation by recruiting the
HOIP/HOIL-1 complex. In RIP1-deficient cells, TRAF2 undergoes increased
auto-ubiquitination through K63-linkage, yet it is not capable of
mediating immediate IKK activation. Notably, depletion of either HOIP in
RIP1-deficient cells or both TRAF2 and cIAP1/2 in wild-type cells
completely impairs IKK activation. In addition, deletion of the TRAF2
RING domain also severely reduces the immediate phase of IKK activation.
These data suggest that two RING finger E3 ligases (TRAF2 and cIAP1) and
two E2 enzymes (UbcH5 and Ubc13) cooperate to catalyze immediate RIP1
ubiquitination and IKK activation, and that, in the absence of RIP1,
TRAF2 and cIAP1/2 recruit HOIP/HOIL-1 and mediate the delayed phase of
IKK activation. TRAF5 has no substantial role in TNF-induced NF-B
activation. Importantly, in embryonic hepatocytes, RIP1 is completely
degraded, yet these cells are not sensitized to TNF-triggered cell death
because of delayed IKK activation. Thus, this study provides evidences
for the existence of RIP1 ubiquitination-dependent and -independent
pathways that mediate NF-B activation, and thereby clarifies molecular
details of this important signaling mechanism.

