Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nicastrin in the maintenance of breast cancer stem cells
and invasion


Background: Cancer stem-cells may be involved in development and
metastasis of tumours, including breast cancer. Initial identification of
breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) was based on a combination of CD44+,
CD24- and Lin- markers. Later, several markers such as aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) were defined. The notch signaling pathway has
been implicated in BCSC survival. Gamma-secretase (GS) is an enzymatic
multi-protein complex composed of presenilin 1 (PS1), nicastrin (NCT),
anterior pharynx-defective phenotype 1 (APH-1), and the PS enhancer 2
(PEN-2) proteins, which activates Notch. We have previously shown that
high levels of NCT observed in 47.5% of BC patients, confers worse
overall survival in the ER negative patients. Here, we have explored
targeting NCT, the vital component of GS assembly and function, to
determine its role in the maintenance of the BCSC pool. Methods: Stable
NCT knock-down HCC1806 breast cancer cells (HCC1806 ShNCT) and control
cells (HCC1806 ShLUC) were produced by lentiviral infections and
puromicin selection. Stable NCT overexpressing MCF10A cells (MCF10ANCT)
and control cells (MCF10ACTRL) were produced by retroviral infections and
puromicin selection. The sulphorhodamine B and three-dimentional (3D)
assay in Matrigel were used to measure the proliferation rate of these
cells. Invasion assay was perfomed using Matrigel-coated Boyden chamber.
Stem cell content was evaluated by the percentage of CD44+/CD24- and
ALDEFLUORhigh cells and mammospheres formation assay. In vivo
expreriments were performed by subcutaneous injection of HCC1806 ShLUC
and ShNCT into nude mice. Results: Stable knockdown of NCT in HCC1806
breast cancer cells achieved the following effects: disruption of GS
formation and GS/Notch activity, reduction of the pool of BCSC as defined
by CD44+/CD24- and ALDH1+ phenotype and inhibition of BCSC cell invasion.
Moreover, NCT silencing reduced breast cancer xenograft formation in
vivo. Intriguingly, MCF10ANCT presented significant morphological
alterations when cultured in a 3D context. Compared to control cells, the
epithelial-mesenchymal (EMT) and invasion cell markers, vimentin, Twist
and Snail are significantly up-regulated in MCF10ANCT cells. In addition,
the over-expression of NCT promoted the generation of a BCSC phenotype
characterized by the CD44+/CD24- phenotype and increased ALDH1 activity
(up to 3 fold). Finally, using DAPT and Wortmannin as pharmacological
inhibitors of Notch and AKT signalling pathways respectively, we found a
reversion of the malignant phenotype of MCF10ANCT cells in terms of
invasion and stem cell content. Conclusions: These results suggest that
therapies directed against NCT may not only reduce tumor size but also
the number and the invasive capacity of BCSC. Moreover, we have
demonstrated that, even in normal breast epithelial cell line MCF10A,
high expression of NCT can induce a Notch/pAKT-dependent EMT transition
program.

