Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hexosamine biosyntheic pathway and O-linked glycosylation for
targeted therapy in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma


Mammalian cells fuel their growth and proliferation through the
catabolism of two main substrates: glucose and glutamine. Both nutrients
are required for the synthesis of glucosamine, the precursor substrate of
the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway. The hexosamine signaling pathway
terminating in O-linked N-acetyl glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) cycling has been
implicated in cellular signaling cascades and regulation of transcription
factors involved in cancer biology. Biological functions of the
hexosamine biosynthetic signaling pathways need elucidation, to determine
whether altered O-GlcNAc metabolism plays a significant role in
hematologic tumors such as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and
utilize this bifunctional pathway as a targeted therapeutic strategy in
DLBCL. We have identified a key enzyme of the hexosamine biosynthetic
pathways to be highly-expressed in DLBCL cell lines and patient tumor
cells. In contrast to normal circulating and tonsillar B cells, DLBCL
cells expressed high levels of the terminating enzyme O-GlcNAc
transferase (OGT). OGT mRNA expression is highly expressed in DLBCL in
comparaison to other cancers. We discovered that several key growth and
survival transcription factors, such as NF-kB and NFAT, known to be
highly-activated in DLBCL, are linked to the hexoasmine biosynthetic
pathway. We demonstrated that both NF-kB (p65) and NFATc1 directly
associated with OGT, and down-regulation of OGT by siRNA inhibits these
transcription factors activation, suggesting that both NF-kB-p65 and
NFATc1 require O-GlcNAc glycosylation by OGT for their activation. These
results suggest that the hexosamine pathway is highly active and utilized
in DLBCL, and that exploiting this bi-functional pathway(s) as a
therapeutic approach is feasible. We have previously developed an imaging
agent, 99mTc-ethylenedicysteine-glucosamine (99mTc-EC-G) because EC-G
mimics phosphorylated N-acetylglucosamine. ECG treatment in DLBCL cells
enhances p65 and NFATc1 nuclear translocation. For therapeutic
strategies, we developed metallic unlabeled Platinum (Pt)
derivatives-EC-G as potential therapeutic agents. Pre-clinical in vitro
studies have shown that our two lead compounds, Pt-9 and Pt-DACH-EC-G
effectively inhibit lymphoma cell growth and induce apoptosis. These lead
compounds can also induce DNA damage in DLBCL cells, through the
up-regulation of phosphorylated histone 2AX (pH2AX), leading to the
disruption of p65 and NFATc1 binding to DNA. This data importantly
demonstrates that the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway is linked to key
growth and survival pathways involved in the pathophysiology of DLBCL.
Targeting these pathways with novel platinum EC-G compounds as a
theranostic approach should lead to new, more effective treatments and
diagnosis for DLBCL, particularly for relapsed/refractory DLBCL.

