Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic inflammatory levels of nitric oxide/reactive nitrogen
species down-regulate BRCA1 protein expression and decrease homologous
recombination


The link between inflammation and cancer was proposed more than 150 years
ago when Virchow suggested that malignancies tend to arise at sites of
chronic inflammation. Recent studies have established that elevated
levels of nitric oxide/reactive nitrogen species (NO/RNS) generated in
the inflammatory microenvironment are associated with several conditions
critical for initiation and promotion of cancer. The BRCA1 protein
contributes to cell viability in multiple ways, including DNA repair,
cell cycle checkpoint control, transcription, and regulation of
chromosome segregation. The BRCA1 gene mutations have been identified and
associated with an increased risk of cancer. Sporadic breast carcinomas,
on the other hand, rarely show mutations of this gene. Instead, BRCA1
protein expression is frequently reduced in sporadic cases. BRCA1
expression is negatively regulated at the transcriptional level by the
repressive complex of retinoblastoma-like protein 2 (RBL2) and E2F4.
Formation of the repression RBL2/E2F4 complex is accelerated by RBL2
dephosphorylation. Recently, protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), an enzyme
responsible for RBL2 dephosphorylation, was shown to be nitrated and
activated by NO/RNS (Ohama T., et al., JBC 285, 2010). In the present
investigation MCF-10A (human mammary epithelial cells) and A549 (human
lung carcinoma cells) were incubated with 0.05-0.1 mM of the NO-donor
SNAP, concentrations that mimic the chronic inflammation level of
intracellular NO/RNS. These levels of NO/RNS induce substantial
dephosphorylation of RBL2 in a PP2A dependent way. RBL2 dephosphorylation
promoted a repressive RBL2/E2F4 complex formation, with accumulation of
this complex into nuclei. RBL2/E2F4 inhibitory complex binds to the
single E2F site in the proximal promoter of the BRCA1 gene, replaces the
activator E2F1, and block BRCA1 proliferation. To measure the impact of
RNS-dependent BRCA1 downregulation on the level of DNA Homologous
Recombination Repair (HRR) we used DR-GFP system, which has been
described by many investigators (R. S. Bindra et al., Cancer Res 65,
2005; S. E. Golding et al., JBC 279, 2004; A. J. Pierce, R. D. Johnson,
L. H. Thompson, M. Jasin, Genes Dev 13, 1999). The preliminary results
showed that inflammatory levels of NO/RNS significantly decreased the HRR
frequency for the both types of cells. Interesting, the same
concentration of SNAP also promotes MCF-10A and A549 cells proliferation.
These data revealed that NO/RNS-dependent decrease in BRCA1 expression
can lead to genetic instability by shifting the balance between the
high-fidelity HRR and the error-prone non-homologous end-joining pathways
of the DNA repair. This mechanism can play a significant role in the
maintenance of genetic instability and stimulation of carcinogenesis
under chronic inflammatory conditions.

