Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotoxic consequences of exposure to mixtures of food-derived
chemical carcinogens


It has been shown that mutagenic chemicals can form naturally in foods
during cooking. Examples include Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), a polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon generated by incomplete combustion of organic
substances such as lipids, leading to contamination of numerous
foodstuffs (Lijinski and Shubik, Science 1964, 145, 53),
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), a heterocyclic
amine that is formed during the cooking of meat (Murray, et al. J
Chromatog 1993, 616, 211), and glycidamide (GA) is the ultimate genotoxic
metabolite of acrylamide (AC), which forms when foods, such as potatoes
and cereals, are cooked at temperatures exceeding 100C, in a reaction
between the amino acid asparagine and reducing sugars that are naturally
present in these foods (Tornqvist, Adv Exp Biol Med 2005, 561, 1). These
chemicals have individually been shown to be genotoxic but the biological
consequences of exposure to mixtures of these chemicals have not been
systematically examined. The aim of the current study was to examine the
biological response of MCL-5 cells (a metabolically competent human
lymphoblastoid cell line) to mixtures of these genotoxic chemicals at
concentrations that are relevant to human exposure (mM to sub-nM). Cells
were exposed to the chemicals individually or in mixtures for 24h and
mutagenicity was assessed through resistance to trifluorothymidine at the
thymidine kinase (TK) locus and 6-thioguanine at the hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) locus. The mixture exposures gave
modified dose-response curves from the individual chemicals, with
increased mutation frequency (MF) at some low concentration combinations
that were not mutagenic individually, and decreased MF at some
combinations of higher concentrations that did produce a mutation
response individually. Responses also differed between the TK and HPRT
loci, with a higher MF observed for high concentration combinations at
HPRT compared to TK. Ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity was
measured and was found to correspond to the MF at the TK locus suggesting
the involvement of CYP1A family in the mutation response. These data
suggest that mixtures of genotoxic chemicals produce different mutation
responses to the individual chemicals. The increase in MF at some low
concentration combinations where the individual chemicals are not
genotoxic is of significance when considering the carcinogenic potential
of food.

