Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery, synthesis and SAR studies of a novel nonpeptidic
reversible proteosome inhibitor with low nano-molar chymotrypsin like
activity


The development of proteosome inhibitors for CT-L activity has been the
subject of considerable interest in the treatment of cancer due to its
critical role in maintaining homeostasis and hence its key position in
many cellular processes. Proteosome inhibitors are classified as
reversible or irreversible inhibitors according to their chemical
structure and their mechanism of inhibition. Irreversible inhibitors
possess a chemically reactive group, such as aldehydes, boronic acids,
epoxy ketones that react with catalytic Thr1-O covalently, where as
reversible inhibitors inhibit proteosome non-covalently via H-bond
interactions (electrostatic and/or van der Waals). Bortezomib, a peptide
boronic acid analog, is the first clinically approved proteosome
inhibitor and is found to be an irreversible or slow reversible inhibitor
that forms covalent bond with the N-terminal nucleophilic Thr1 in the 5
subunit of the proteasome. Reversible proteosome inhibitors (peptidic
molecules) reported to date inhibit the proteosome non-covalently.
Similar to Bortezomib, MLN9708 is a modified dipeptidyl boronic acid,
which hydroylses immediately in plasma to MLN2238, is a potent,
reversible and specific inhibitor of the chymotrypsin-like subunit of the
proteasome. Small molecules as reversible proteosome inhibitors are less
extensively investigated. In this study, we present the discovery of
PI-184, non-peptidic small molecule with a pyridine and oxadiazole
pharmacore as a reversible, potent and a novel proteasome inhibitor.
Structure Activity relationship (SAR) guided synthesis of analogs around
PI-184 led to the discovery of highly potent compounds with in-vivo
chymotrypsin-like inhibitory activity. Here we present the detailed SAR,
in-vitro and in-vivo proteasome activity of PI-184 class of compounds as
potential anti-cancer agents.

