Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gains in FGF19 are predictive of response to the fibroblast growth
factor receptor (FGFR) small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor BGJ 398
in vitro


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of cancer
death world-wide. Sorafenib, a multi-targeted small molecule inhibitor of
the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor and other kinases
is the only approved systemic agent in advanced HCC. Despite multiple
studies defining the molecular heterogeneity of HCC, clinical trials of
new agents do not pre-select for predictive markers. The fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) receptor consists of 4 receptor tyrosine kinases and
over 20 ligands. Differential expression and activation of these
receptors and ligands have been implicated in oncogenesis and the
pathogenesis of HCC (Sawey 2011). BGJ398 is a selective small molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the FGFR family of receptors 1-4. Given the
molecular diversity of HCC, we hypothesized that there would be a subset
of HCC that would be more dependent on FGFR inhibition and used cell line
models to identify predictive markers of response to BGK 398. Methods: 20
human HCC cell lines were used. In vitro dose response curves were
generated using direct cell count assays over 6 days. IC 50 values were
calculated from the dose response curves. Genomic data on the cell lines
was derived using the Agilent 105K CGH platform. These data were analyzed
in the context of the sensitivity data to BGJ 398. Western blot analysis
was performed for effects of BGJ398 on phospho-FRS2 (tyr-196), a
downstream signaling molecule for FGFR activation. Flow cytometry was
performed for effects of BGJ 398 on the cell cycle and apoptosis.
Results: There was differential sensitivity to BGJ 398 across the HCC
cell lines. 3 cell lines were identified as having IC 50 values less than
1 M versus the remaining cell lines which were all >1 uM. When analyzed
in the context of the CGH data, all 3 cell lines had gains in FGF 19 of
log2 ratio of 0.9 to 2.6. BGJ inhibited FRS2 activation in all cell lines
tested. Flow cytometry revealed the BGJ induced cell cycle arrest in
sensitive lines without significant apoptosis. Conclusions: Gains in
FGF19 are predictive for growth inhibitory effects of BGJ398 in human HCC
cell lines in vitro and provide rationale for patient selection in
clinical trials.

