Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host-derived CCL2 plays a critical role in prostate cancer growth
and skeletal metastasis


We have previously reported that the presence of CC chemokine ligand 2
(CCL2) produced by prostate cancer (PCa) epithelial cells,
stroma/osteoblasts, and bone marrow endothelial cells, is pro-tumorigenic
for prostate cancer cells. CCL2 increases prostate cancer cell
proliferation, migration, and survival and induces osteoclast formation.
Moreover, the key role of CCL2 in the tumor growth and metastasis has
been linked to its regulatory role in mediating monocyte/macrophage
infiltration into the tumor microenvironment. Using a model of human PCa
cells implanted in mice, Loberg R. et al. reported that anti-murine CCL2
neutralizing antibodies resulted in greater reduction of overall tumor
burden compared to the use of anti-human antibody (anti-tumor
cell-derived). This suggests that host-derived CCL2 may play a key role
in prostate tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, in this study, we
have employed CCL2 knockouts which were interbred to SCID mice to
generate colonies of homozygous SCID/CCL2/ mice. PCa cells (PC3Luc) were
injected into the left ventricle (Intracardiac-injection) of SCID/CCL2/-
and wild-type controls (n=20/group). The effects of deletion of CCL2 in
the host on prostate cancer cell homing, growth in bone and bone
destruction were evaluated for 4 weeks. In a parallel experiment, PC3Luc
cells were subcutaneously implanted and tumor size was monitored weekly
for 4 weeks. This parallel study addressed bone-specific vs. generalized
influences of host-derived CCL2 on prostate cancer growth. We found that
skeletal metastases occurred in 4/20 SCID/CCL2/ mice vs 14/20 WT mice. In
addition, X-ray photographs showed significantly fewer bone resorptive
lesions in SCID/CCL2/ mice vs. WT mice. Histology examinations confirmed
x-ray findings. In the parallel experiment, PC3Luc tumor grew slower in
SCID/CCL2/- mice vs. WT mice. These results indicate that host-derived
CCL2 production defines a permissive microenvironment for prostate cancer
growth and skeletal metastasis. These findings may significantly impact
the therapeutic field through targeting the host instead of the tumor
cells in prostate cancer. Supported by U.S. Department of Defense
PC061231 (J. Zhang), National Natural Sciences Foundation Key Project
(81130046, J. Zhang) and National Natural Science Foundation Project
(81171993, Y. Lu).

