Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The autophagy-senescence connection in chemotherapy of breast
tumor cells; senescence accelerated by autophagy but not dependent on
autophagy


Introduction: Previous studies from our laboratory have established the
capacity of Adriamycin to promote accelerated senescence in MCF-7 cells,
while a number of studies have indicated that Adriamycin promotes
autophagy. Although senescence and autophagy are considered to be two
distinct cellular events in response to genotoxic stress, recent reports
have suggested that the two are functionally intertwined. Thus, the
current work was designed to determine whether autophagy and senescence
were related in response to treatment with Adriamycin (ADR) and
Campthothecin (CPT) in MCF-7 cells in vitro. Experimental Procedure:
Autophagy induction was measured by acridine orange
staining/quantification by flow cytometry and RFP-LC3; autophagic flux
was based on p62 western immunoblotting. Autophagy was inhibited
pharmacologically using 5M Chloroquine or 5mM 3-MA and genetically using
shRNA against ATG5 and ATG7. Senescence was measured by -galactosidase
staining and C12FDG fluorescence by flow cytometry. To block senescence,
shRNA against p21 and 53 were used. The senescence associated markers
p21, pRb, and p53 were measured by western immunoblotting. To evaluate
common signaling events, 20M KU55933 or 2mM caffeine were used to
downregulate ATM and 20M N-acetyl cysteine or 20M Glutathione were used
for scavenging ROS. Results: Both ADR and CPT collaterally induced
autophagy and senescence in a time-dependent manner. Downregulation of
ATM by pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation collaterally
blocked both ADR-induced autophagy and senescence. Suppression of ROS
generation collaterally interfered with ADR-induced senescence and
autophagy. Moreover, shRNA against either p53 or p21 resulted in a marked
reduction in ADR-induced autophagy. In contrast, autophagy blockade with
chloroquine, 3-MA, or shRNA against ATG5 and ATG7 only delayed
senescence. Finally, tissue and protein analysis from a 4T1 breast tumor
model showed that both autophagy and senescence co-exist in vivo in
response to ADR. Conclusions: Treatment of MCF-7 cells with either ADR or
CPT induced both autophagy and senescence. Interference with ROS
generation, ATM activation and induction of p53 or p21 suppressed both
autophagy and senescence. However, these observations may indicate only
that both responses are mediated by common DNA-damage induced signaling
pathways. When autophagy was blocked either pharmacologically or
genetically, senescence was temporally delayed, but the overall extent of
senescence induced by ADR or CPT was not attenuated. Consequently,
although autophagy appears to accelerate and facilitate the senescence
process, it is clear that senescence can occur independently of
autophagy. Overall, this study provides new insights into the role of
autophagy in the senescence process and the signaling events that appear
to contribute to both responses.

