Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligonucleotide aptamer: A promising imaging probe for
CD30-positive lymphoma tumors


Aptamers are a class of small molecule ligands composed of short
single-stranded oligonucleotides and able to bind a variety of targets
with high affinity and specificity. Although aptamer technology has
emerged over the past several decades its potential clinical value has
not yet been fully explored. Aptamer probes can be easily generated
through chemical synthesis and simply modified with tracking reporters.
In addition, aptamers have little or no immunogenicity and thus, are
suitable for in vivo use for disease diagnosis and targeting therapy.
Lymphomas are cancers originating from the lymphatic system and can be
specifically diagnosed by histology examination of tumor tissues.
However, none of modern imaging technologies, including CT, MRI, and PET,
is specific for in vivo imaging of lymphoma tumors. Notably, a new
antibody-mediated CD30-targeting therapy (Brentuximab) has been recently
approved by FDA for relapsed CD30-positive lymphomas although no specific
imaging method for monitoring of therapeutic response is available up to
date. Our previous studies have demonstrated that the synthetic aptamers
can be used as probes to specifically diagnose lymphoma cells by
multi-color flow cytometry and selectively detect lymphoma in
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues by immunohistochemical staining. In this
proof-of-concept study, we investigated the aptamers for specific in vivo
imaging of CD30-positive lymphoma tumors. For this purpose, the
CD30-specfic aptamer probes were chemically synthesized as described
previously and conjugated with near-infrared fluorophore IRD800CW
reporter. The tumor-bearing mouse model was established to carry both
CD30-positive lymphoma and CD30-negative control tumors in each mouse.
The CD30 aptamer probes were systemically administrated through the tail
vein of the tumor-bearing mice. A whole-body scan by the XENOGEN IVIS 200
Imaging System was carried out. Imaging studies revealed that that the
aptamer probes selectively and specifically highlighted the CD30-positive
lymphoma tumor, but not the control tumor in the same mouse. The specific
imaging signals from aptamers reached the highest peak instantly post
administration, gradually diminished to 50% density at 30 min, and
disappeared from mouse body within 2 hrs. In addition, systemic
distribution study indicated that the aptamer probes were removed from
the body mainly through the kidneys and gastro-intestinal system
(gallbladder, cecum, and colon). In summary, these findings demonstrate
that synthetic aptamers can be used for specific in vivo imaging of
lymphoma tumor, providing solid foundation to develop an imaging approach
for real-time monitoring of therapeutic response of Brentuximab and early
detection of CD30-positive lymphoma relapse.

