Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Finding the genetic determinants of response to radiotherapy


Radiotherapy is very effective at local control of tumours but leads to
adverse reactions in a minority of patients. This project aimed to
predict which breast cancer patients will show radiation toxicity,
allowing them to be offered alternative treatment (e.g. mastectomy).
Previously, studies have focussed on single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) for association with adverse reactions, but there is growing
evidence that genomic copy number variation (CNV) are frequent and
significantly contribute to genetic variation and human diseases. The aim
of this candidate gene association study was to determine copy number
variants (CNVs) that influence radiation toxicity in cancer patients, and
combine these with clinical indicators to contribute to a predictive
algorithm. CNV data for 88 candidate genes were ranked based on CNV
position, size and frequency. Paralogue ratio test (PRT) assays were
designed for the top-ranked 13 genes. Typing of the CNVs in the analysed
samples was performed using PRT method because it is cheap, simple and
fast and requiring a small amount of genomic DNA. Copy number typing was
carried out on 69 control samples (comprising 30 random DNA and 39 CEPH
[Centre de Etude du Polymorphisme Humain] specimens of three
multigenerational reference families); and 401 samples from a breast
cancer cohort (i.e. test samples) with good clinical characterisation and
scored for late effects of radiotherapy. Two PRT assays in the DNA ligase
1 (LIG1) gene were used for typing. PRT amplification products were
electrophoresed on agarose gel (PRT2 assay) and ABI 3031xl genetic
analyser (PRT3 assay) respectively. Quantification of DNA bands was
performed using Syngene and Genescan software respectively and
statistical analysis in SPSS. The result of this study showed that 5.2 %
of the CEPH samples and 0.3% of the breast cancer cohorts showed
consistent evidence of raised copy numbers which suggest duplication of
LIG1 gene in those samples. The result also showed moderate correlation
between the two assays used (r=0.56). The findings from this study have
re-inforced the need for future research to focus on further
characterisation of this studied CNV either by using more PRT over a
wider region around LIG1 or an array or sequence based approach. Future
work would also attempt to establish whether cells from the breast cancer
patients show changed expression of LIG1. Lastly, CNV typing would be
repeated in further cohorts, though with a frequency of 0.3%, many more
cohorts in the range of thousands might be required. With multiple
patients with the variant, then it might be possible to detect
significant differences in radiation toxicity phenotypes.

