Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating the role of Arid3B in normal and malignant
differentiation of esophageal and cervical stratified squamous epithelia


ARID3B is DNA binding protein overexpressed in neuroblastoma and ovarian
cancer. We have determined that ARID3B expression is also upregulated
during squamous epithelial differentiation (cervix, skin, and esophagus).
Therefore, we wanted to assess the role of ARID3B in development of
squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus and cervix. In addition to
examining the expression of ARID3B, we also wanted to determine the
mechanism for ARID3B regulation in cancer and normal squamous cell
epithelia. Recent evidence suggests that p63, specifically the Np63
isoform, transcriptionally regulates Arid3B. p63 is a member of the p53
transcription factor family and is essential for the proliferative
potential of stem cells in stratified squamous epithelia. p63 is also
involved in various cancers including skin cancer and esophageal cancer.
In esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, p63 is ubiquitously expressed and
low levels are associated with a poor prognosis. We hypothesize that p63
regulates Arid3B in normal and malignant differentiation of stratified
squamous epithelium. To evaluate ARID3B expression in cancer we performed
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays using two independent Arid3B
antibodies. Loss of nuclear Arid3B appears to be common in squamous cell
carcinoma of cervix and esophagus. We also examined expression of ARID3B
in a normal and a squamous cell carcinoma esophageal cell line. We are
also examining the coordinate expression of p63 and Arid3B in serial
sections of normal and malignant tissue sections of esophagus, cervix,
and skin. We are also investigating the regulation of ARID3B in 3D cell
culture models of esophagus differentiation. Our data suggests that
misregulation of ARID3B may contribute to the development of cancer in
stratified epithelia specifically of the cervix and esophagus.

