Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of epigenetically silenced miRNAs reveals
miR-340 as a methylation repressed potential tumour suppressor miRNA in
neuroblastoma


The dysregulation of miRNA contributes to the pathogeneisis of many
cancers, including the childhood cancer neuroblastoma (NB). The goal of
this study was to identify epigenetically silenced miRNAs that have
functional relevance as NB tumor suppressors. MeDIP-ChIP was performed on
15 primary NB tumors and 3 NB cell lines using a custom designed tiling
array, allowing the identification of significant peaks of methylation
within 10 Kb upstream of pre-miRNAs. Expression profiling data (TaqMan
qPCR) was then used to identify up-stream methylation peaks that were
inversely correlated with miRNA expression, i.e. high methylation, low
expression. In total, 58 miRNA loci had a significant (p The
dysregulation of miRNA contributes to the pathogeneisis of many cancers,
including the childhood cancer neuroblastoma (NB). The goal of this study
was to identify epigenetically silenced miRNAs that have functional
relevance as NB tumor suppressors. MeDIP-ChIP was performed on 15 primary
NB tumors and 3 NB cell lines using a custom designed tiling array,
allowing the identification of significant peaks of methylation within 10
Kb upstream of pre-miRNAs. Expression profiling data (TaqMan qPCR) was
then used to identify up-stream methylation peaks that were inversely
correlated with miRNA expression, i.e. high methylation, low expression.
In total, 58 miRNA loci had a significant (p < 0.05) inverse correlation
between an upstream site of methylation versus expression in the tumor
cohort. Twenty-five of these loci exhibited significant re-expression
following treatment of NB cell lines with the de-methylating agent
5-aza-cytidine. Remarkably, 56% (n = 14) of the re-activated loci were
significantly correlated with poor event free or overall patient survival
when under-expressed in tumors. In addition, several loci formed parts of
polycistronic clusters, where a common methylation peak appears to
co-ordinately regulate the cluster. Genome-wide DNA de-methylation of
many protein coding gene promoters occurs during all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) induced differentiation of NB cell lines (Das et al Can Res
2010;70 7874). Here, this initial finding is extended to include DNA
methylation alterations that affect the expression of miRNA loci. MiR-340
was consistently de-methylated and re-expressed following ATRA treatment
of both SK-N-BE and SHSY-5Y cells, and also was significantly
re-activated in response to 5-aza-cytidine. Moreover, there was a
significant inverse correlation between miR-340 methylation and
expression levels in NB tumors. Ectopic over-expression of miR-340 mimics
in three NB cell lines showed significant reduction in cell viability and
colony forming efficiency, further indicating a tumor suppressor
function. The transcription factor SOX2 is a predicted target of miR-340,
and using luciferase reporter constructs we have experimentally validated
direct targeting of the SOX2 mRNA by this miRNA. Over-expression of SOX2
in NB is associated with poor patient survival in NB, and this gene is
significantly down-regulated during ATRA induced differentiation. Our
results demonstrate that SOX2 down-regulation is mediated
post-transcriptionally following de-methylation and re-expression of
miR-340, which directly targets SOX2 mRNA. In conclusion, we have
determined that DNA methylation decreases the expression of a large set
of clinically relevant miRNAs in NB tumors and that the in vitro
differentiating effects of ATRA can be attributable, in part, to
de-methylation and reactivation of tumor suppressive miRNAs.

