Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measurement of kinase activity in cancer cell lines and tumor
tissue using a tyrosine kinase peptide substrate array


Introduction Tyrosine kinases play an important role in tumor biology.
Their activity can be measured using a kinase peptide substrate array
consisting of 144 Tyr residue-containing peptides (PamChip, PamGene, Den
Bosch, The Netherlands). We evaluated this platform for the measurement
of kinase activity in tumor tissue and cancer cell lines under various
experimental conditions. Methods Lysates of colorectal and renal cancer
cell lines, HCT116 and 786-0 respectively, were made using both Mammalian
and Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (M-PER and T-PER, Thermo
Scientific) and Radio-Immunoprecipitation Assay (RIPA, home made) buffer.
Lysates from patient-derived tumor tissues were prepared by adding T-PER
to several 10 m cryoslides containing >50% tumor. After lysate incubation
with reaction buffer containing a fluorescent labeled antibody against
phospo-tyrosine and ATP, kinase activity profiles were determined on
kinetics of recorded peptide substrate phosphorylation intensities. The
effect of protein and ATP concentration, different lysis buffers and
number of freeze-thaw cycles on basal kinase activity was studied.
Sunitinib, sorafenib and dasatinib, clinically available tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), were used to differentially inhibit kinase activity in
the lysates. Results Application of 2.5-15 g protein in 40 l sample mix
per array revealed linearly increasing phosphorylation signal intensities
and initial velocities (Vini) of the kinetic curve (R2 = 0.98).
Increasing ATP concentrations induced phosphorylation signal intensities,
but above 400 M the curve deviated from linearity. Basal kinase activity
profiles of cell lines and tumor tissues were reproducible with CV's
below 15%, with good signal-to-background ratios and low aspecific
binding. Different lysis buffers resulted in a maximum variation of
phosphorylation signal intensity of 475.7% in both cell lines without
affecting the actual profile. Quadruple freeze-thawing of lysates did not
affect signal intensities by more than 10%. Inhibition profiles of
treated vs. control lysates were reproducible within and between
experiments, showing a higher and differential number of inhibited
peptides at increasing TKI concentrations. In contrast to the
ATP-independent inhibition of dasatinib, ATP-dependent inhibition for
sunitinib and sorafenib was demonstrated by combining a fixed drug
concentration with increasing concentrations of ATP up to 800 M.
Conclusion Kinase activity in lysates from cancer cell lines and
patient-derived tumor tissue can be reproducibly profiled with a tyrosine
kinase peptide substrate array. In addition, TKIs show differential
ATP-dependent inhibition profiles on this array. Taken together, we
expect that array-based tumor kinase activity profiling may lead to
specific TKI-phosphorylation fingerprints for personalized treatment.

