Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3M-011, a toll-like-receptor-7/8 agonist, as immunological
adjuvans in combined therapy of gastrointestinal tumors


Background: Although there are reports about spontaneous regressions in
advanced cancer stages, in most cases the immune response to solid tumors
is unable to stop the progression. This immune response is mediated
mainly by effectors of the cellular immune system, specifically NK cells
and monocytes/macrophages, which are activated by the binding of antigens
to toll-like-receptors. 3M-011, an agonist to TLR-7/8 of this sub-family
of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) may be able to boost the
antitumoral immune response, especially in combination with other
immunostimulatory treatments such as monoclonal antibodies or ionizing
radiation. Materials/Methods: In vivo experiments comprised hetero- and
orthotopic mouse models of colorectal cancer evaluating 3M-011, m225
(mouse IgG to EGFR) and photon irradiation alone or in combination.
End-points were tumor growth, metastasis and tumor cell dissemination.
Mice with complete regressions were re-challenged with tumor cells to
evaluate the immunization effect of the therapeutic combination. The
cytotoxic activity of various immune cell populations (NK cells, CD-8+
T-cells, macrophages) against gastrointestinal cancer cell lines was
quantified in 51Cr release assays. Interactions between these
subpopulations were investigated by co-culture experiments.
NfkB-Activation was quantified by luciferase-based NfkB reporter assays.
Results: A distinct growth retardation for subcutaneous tumors and
reduction in metastastic activity of orthotopic tumors was demonstrated
in vivo. The combination of the TLR-7/8 agonist and m225 or photon
irradiation was shown to be over-additive. Mice with complete regressions
after radio-immuntherapy showed distinct anti-tumor immunity when
re-challenged with tumor cells as compared to control animals. In vitro
assays revealed NK cells in combination with monocytes/macrophages as
main effectors of the TLR-mediated early immune response followed by
T-cell mediated adaptive immune response. Both effects are controlled by
plasmacytoid dentritic cells. On a cellular level, NfkB was shown to be
the pivotal pathway of the TLR-mediated immunostimulatory effects as well
as the combined therapy effects. Conclusion: The addition of a TLR-7/8
agonist to radiotherapy and antibody therapy can achieve supra-additive
therapeutic effects by boosting the immune response to the tumor.
Therefore, the addition of a TLR-7/8 agonist to the treatment of advanced
gastrointestinal cancers is a promising approach and merits further
evaluation.

