Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), and
colorectal adenoma risk


Introduction: Methionine and its metabolic derivatives regulate activity
of most methyltransferases and activity of several enzymes involved in
one-carbon metabolism. S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the direct metabolite
of methionine, is the methyl donor for nearly all methylation reactions
in the body. SAM is irreversibly converted to S-adenosylhomocysteine
(SAH), the metabolic precursor of homocysteine. SAH is a potent inhibitor
of all methyltransferases. Very few studies have evaluated biological
measures of methionine and its metabolites with colorectal cancer.
Recently, a large cross-sectional study found plasma methionine was
associated with a reduced risk of distal colorectal adenoma. To our best
knowledge, no study has evaluated SAM or SAH with colorectal cancer or
adenoma. Methods: In this study, we evaluated plasma levels of these
markers with risk for colorectal adenoma using a colonoscopy-based
matched case-control design. Participants were part of a large
case-control study of colorectal adenoma. A subset of cases were
individually matched to polyp-free controls in a 1:1 ratio on age, sex,
race, study site and date of sample collection. Included in the analysis
were 220 pairs of adenoma cases and polyp-free controls. SAM and SAH were
measured in a single assay by high-performance liquid chromatography.
Sex-specific quantile cutpoints were derived using the distributions
among controls. Conditional logistic regression models were used to
derive odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) for the
associations with colorectal adenoma risk after adjusting for age, and
other potential confounders. All of the reported P values were
two-tailed, and statistical significance was set at 0.05. Result: A
statistically significant interaction between sex, SAH or SAM, and
adenoma risk was observed. Among women, high SAH was associated with a
borderline statistically significant increased risk of adenoma (p for
trend=0.08). Among men, both high SAH (OR=0.36, 95% CI: 0.16-0.78, p for
trend=0.009) and high SAM (OR=0.41, 95% CI: 0.19-0.88, p for trend=0.02)
were associated with decreased risks of adenoma. The joint association of
SAM and SAH was also evaluated among men. In comparison to men with low
SAH and low SAM, men with high SAM and high SAH had a reduced risk of
colorectal adenoma. Conclusion: The findings reported in this study are
new, suggesting SAH and SAM may be involved in the development of
colorectal adenoma. Further studies are warranted.

