Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Equol enhances tamoxifen's antitumor effect by induction of
caspase-mediated apoptosis in MCF-7 breast cancer cells


Soy phytoestrogens, such as daidzein and its metabolite equol, have been
proposed to be responsible for the low breast cancer rate in Asian women.
However, since these compounds possess both estrogenic and
anti-estrogenic properties, it remains unknown whether they provide
protection against tumor development and progression. Since the majority
of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer patients are treated
with the selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen, the basic
objective of this project is to determine whether equol enhances or
inhibits tamoxifen's anti-tumor effect and to identify the molecular
mechanisms involved. For this purpose, we examined the individual and
combined effects of equol and tamoxifen on the ER+ breast cancer cell
line MCF-7 (ER+/R+). We found that equol at concentrations higher than 10
M significantly reduced the viability of MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, the
combination of equol (100 M) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT; 10 M) reduced
MCF-7 cell viability and induced apoptosis more effectively than each
compound alone. Subsequent treatment of MCF-7 cells with the pan-caspase
inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK and the calpain/cathepsin inhibitor ALLN demonstrated
that equol and 4-OHT induce apoptosis via both caspase-depended and
-independed mechanisms. In order to further investigate the apoptotic
pathways employed by equol, 4-OHT and their combination, we evaluated the
expression of key proteins involved in apoptosis such as PARP, -fodrin,
AIF, bcl-2, bax, p21 and p53 using Western blot analysis. The combination
of 4-OHT and equol induced PARP and -fodrin cleavage which was inhibited
by Z-VAD-FMK indicating that their combination induces caspase-depended
apoptosis. This was accompanied by reduced bcl-2:bax ratio confirming a
pro-apoptotic effect. The combination of equol and 4-OHT induced
caspase-7 cleavage indicating a significant role for caspase-7 in equol-
and tamoxifen-induced apoptosis. Finally, upon determination of the
effect of equol and tamoxifen on estrogen receptor expression in MCF-7
cells, it was found that equol reduces the ER:ER ratio, while 4-OHT
increases it. When cells were treated with both compounds we observed
that the effect of equol prevailed, providing an additional explanation
for the beneficial combined effects of equol and tamoxifen. In
conclusion, the effects of equol in potentiating tamoxifen's anti-tumor
effect may be explained by the induction of the caspase-mediated
apoptotic pathway and the reduction of the ER:ER ratio. These results can
find applications in clinical or pre-clinical cancer chemoprevention
studies against breast cancer.

