Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mucin MUC16 protects ovarian cancer cells from innate immune
responses


Epithelial ovarian cancer cells overexpress the mucin MUC16. The
estimated molecular weight of this membrane spanning mucin is 5 million
Da. CA125, a diagnostic marker used to monitor regression and recurrence
of ovarian cancer in patients undergoing treatment for this disease, is a
repeating peptide epitope present in MUC16. Recent studies have indicated
that MUC16 facilitates metastasis of ovarian cancer cells and likely also
plays a pro-oncogenic role. We have demonstrated that MUC16 protects the
ovarian cancer cells from natural killer (NK) cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
The large molecular weight allows the mucin to act as a barrier around
the cancer cells and prevent the formation of activating immune synapses
between NK cells and ovarian cancer cells. In addition, MUC16 also
inhibits NK cell responses by interacting with the inhibitory receptor
Siglec-9. Here, we extend these initial studies to demonstrate that
knockdown of MUC16 impairs ovarian cancer cells from forming tumors in
SCID mice. Cytotoxicity experiments using splenocytes from SCID mice
proved that the residual biologically active macrophages and NK cells
from SCID mice are able to more effectively lyse the MUC16 knockdown
ovarian cancer cells as compared to control cells expressing this mucin.
The higher susceptibility of the MUC16 knockdown cells to immune cell
mediated lysis was also observed when assays were conducted with murine
effectors that were previously stimulated with anti-CD40 antibody. In
addition, our data also demonstrates that humanized anti-EpCAM antibody
is unable to overcome the immunesuppression mediated by MUC16.
Stimulation of the immune cells with the cytokine huKS-IL2, an
immunotherapeutic agent used in ovarian cancer clinical trials, also does
not circumvent the immunosuppressive effects of MUC16. The data we have
obtained indicates that ovarian cancer cells specifically express MUC16
to protect themselves from immune attack. Modulation of MUC16 expression
may therefore serve as a useful strategy to control the progression of
ovarian cancer via immunologic therapy.

