Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of primo vascular system (PVS) on cancer metastasis
and therapeutic intervention: A new dimension of cancer stem cell


The ability of cancer cells especially immature and multi-potent cancer
stem cells to escape from conventional therapeutic intervention has been
long investigated. The exact mechanisms and safe harboring of this
population of cells have yet to be identified. The primo vascular system
(PVS) which is composed of new types of micro-conduits named
primo-vessels (PV) and primo-nodes (PN) has recently emerged as a third
component of circulatory system. In this study, we have shown the
existence of PVS and their networks in murine xenograft of human
histiocytic lymphoma cells (U937) using trypan blue. These PVs are
thread-like, elastic, multi-lumen structure and appears to radiate from
PN, perpendicular of the conventional venuoles-arteriols and reside in
close proximity to the tumor. PNs are about 500-600 M membranous sac-like
structures, containing numerous tiny cells evident by DAPI staining.
Isolation of RNA from PVS signifies the presence of intact
transcriptional machinery in the cells. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E)
staining of PVS shows the presence of loose and abortive structure lined
by fibroblast but filled with lightly dense fibers, cells, lacuna and
nerve-like structures. To further characterize the origin and type of
cells within the PVS, immunostaining with antibodies for CD68, CD45 and
lysozyme has revealed the cells are same immunophenotype as of U937.
RT-PCR arrays demonstrates a hundred to thousand fold up regulation of
human cancer stem cell specific transcription factors most notably KLF4,
an upstream regulator of NANOG which maintain the pluripotent and
undifferentiated state of stem cells. These results suggest that PVS
close to the tumor could be the safe haven for a selective population of
cancer stem cell. Further understanding of the biological properties and
responsiveness to therapy of these cells will shed light on new
dimensions of anti-cancer interventions.

