Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and integrin 51
regulate plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) activity in
medulloblastoma cells


The urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system is a dynamic
extracellular protease system that regulates both proteolytic and
non-proteolytic events associated with cancer progression. In earlier
studies, we have demonstrated that radiation-induced cell adhesion was
associated with uPAR expression and downregulation of uPAR effectively
inhibited radiation-induced cell adhesion of medulloblastoma cells.
Herein, we further investigated the impact of uPAR downregulation on
plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1), a key regulator component of the
uPA system, and its role in cell adhesion. With radiation treatment, the
levels of uPAR and PAI-1 increased in D283 and UW228 cells. Surprisingly,
knockdown of uPAR elevated the levels of PAI-1. The increase in PAI-1
levels in uPAR-knocked down cells was regulated by activation of
cJUN/CREB signaling molecules. Moreover, studies show that the reduced
interaction between uPAR and integrin 51 plays a critical role in PAI-1
release into the extracellular matrix, thereby enhancing the cell
detachment process. Incubation of medulloblastoma cells with
Tiplaxtinin-PAI-039, a potent PAI-1 activity inhibitor, increased the
association of uPAR with integrin 51 and cell adhesion. Interestingly,
prolonged inhibition of PAI-1 activity adversely affected cell viability;
we were able to revert this effect by exogenously supplementing cells
with recombinant PAI-1. Moreover r-PAI-1 showed no significant effect on
cell adhesion whereas it increased the association of uPAR with integrin
51. Expression of full-length (FL) uPAR elevated uPA and PAI-1 levels
both at the transcriptional and the translational levels. These increased
PAI-1 levels play a pivotal role in regulating uPA activity by binding
and translocating integrin 51 towards the uPA/uPAR complex. Taken
together, the results of the present study lead us to conclude that
levels of uPAR and integrin 51, and their association on the cell surface
dictate the function of PAI-1 to maintain extracellular homeostasis.

