Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Syndecan 1 and 4 in breast cancer brain metastasis


As many as 20% of breast cancer patients have brain metastases, with
women surviving only 2-16 months after diagnosis of this metastasis.
Thus, resolving the mechanisms of metastasis to the brain is clinically
important. In invasive breast carcinomas, Syndecan (Sdc) 1 is observed in
stromal fibroblasts and endothelial cells where it is involved in tumor
growth and angiogenesis. Staining for Sdc1 in both the tumor and stromal
cells has been reported to be a negative predictor of disease free and
overall survival in estrogen receptor (ER) negative breast tumors, and
expression of Sdc1 and 4 is associated with increased proliferation index
in breast tumors. A direct connection between these receptors and breast
cancer metastasis has not been shown. The reduced expression of Sdc1 or 4
in MDA-231 breast cancer cells and reduced expression of Sdc4 in CN34Brm
breast cancer cells significantly decreased metastases to only the brain
but had no effect on bone, lung, or ovarian metastases when the cells
were injected into the left ventricle of the mouse heart (nude mice).
Additionally, metastases to the brain was reduced when these cells were
injected in the orthotopic site of NSG mice, however, primary tumor
growth and metastases to the lung, liver, ovaries, and lymph nodes were
not affected in this model. These results suggest Sdc1 and 4 facilitate
breast cancer organotropism to the brain. There was no difference in
proliferation rate of these cells in vitro. Furthermore, intracranial
injection of MDA-231 breast cancer cells with decreased expression of
Sdc1 had no effect on growth within the brain. However, migration of
MDA-231 through an in vitro blood brain barrier (BBB) is decreased by the
knockdown of Sdc1 or 4 in these cells. These results suggest that Sdc1
and 4 may play a role in the arrival of breast cancer cells to the brain
but not growth within the brain. The attachment of breast cancer cells to
brain slices has been shown to be correlated with their ability to bind
to the brain blood vessels after crossing the BBB and to grow in the
peri-vascular space. We found that silencing of Sdc1 decreased attachment
of MDA-231 cells to brain slices. Wild-type mouse Sdc1 could rescue this
decrease but a mutant mouse Sdc1 lacking the whole cytoplasmic tail could
not rescue the attachment. Taken together these data support the
hypothesis that Sdc signaling is important in breast cancer metastasis to
the brain and/or peri-vascular growth in the brain. These results suggest
that movement across the BBB, attachment to the brain matrix and movement
into the brain parenchyma is altered by Sdc expression. Additionally, the
signaling of Sdc is important in this attachment. We are currently
examining the signaling molecules that may be involved. These results may
explain the correlative observations of Sdc expression with poor clinical
outcome. These studies may lead to development of new biomarkers and/or
treatment for breast cancer metastasis to the brain.

