Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription induced by the POU6F2-encoded RPF-1 and genome-wide
screening of promoter occupancy unveil a potential regulatory role in
kidney embryogenesis


Wilms Tumor (WT, or nephroblastoma), a tumor of embryonic origin, is the
most frequent genitourinary tumor in childhood. Current view of this
malignancy point out to a common origin with the fetal developing kidney.
Undifferentiated mesenchymal cell types and differentiated immature
structures are in fact present in WTs, whose gene expression tend to
overlap with the early nephrogenesis transcriptome. Remarkably, several
factors guiding the development of kidney are overexpressed in WT
specimens. WT is also characterized by alterations at several genomic
loci and 20% patients exhibit LOH at chr7p. We were able to identify the
smallest overlapping region at 7p14 encoding the POU6F2 gene, of the POU
family of transcription factors regulating developmental and biological
processes. Moreover, expression of POU6F2 mouse homolog was shown during
nephrogenesis. These finding may be indicative of a role for this gene in
kidney development, and since perturbation of this process contribute to
WT, we addressed whether the Retina-derived POU domain Factor-1 (RPF-1,
product of POU6F2) is a bonafide transcription factor participating in
the transcriptional program that drive nephrogenesis. By addressing RPF-1
protein-DNA interaction we could confirm functional interaction with
consensus octamers for POU proteins. Following its induction in human
embryo kidney (HEK293) stable transfectants, the pattern of
transcriptional targets regulated was evaluated and about 750 genes
showed significant modulation (p80% genes, suggesting for RPF-1 a low
specificity in its binding to DNA. Top biological processes emerging from
functional annotation analysis of direct transcriptional targets included
kidney, metanephron, tube and ureteric bud development, primary germ
layer formation, cell fate commitment, and neurogenesis as well. Axonal
guidance, ephrin signalling, and transcription were top canonical
functions clustered by gene ontology. Accordingly, regulators of
nephrogenesis, such as EYA1, PDGFD, SLIT2 and ROBO2, myogenic
differentiator MEF2C, neurite regulator MAP2, and GATA2 stem cell
differentiator, are all regulated through promoter featuring closely
spaced octamers. Overall, our results suggest a direct implication of
RPF-1 into the transcriptional program guiding kidney development, and
perturbation of its function during embryogenesis may contribute to the
development of nephroblastoma.

