Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirate
(EUS-FNA) derived pancreatic cancer cell lines from advanced stage cancers


Background: The investigation of primary cancer cells are becoming more
critical in studying various solid cancers which are comprised of
heterogeneous groups of cells including the tumor initiating or cancer
stem cells. As only 10 to 15% of all pancreatic cancers are applicable
for surgical intervention due to the advanced stage discovery, endoscopic
ultrasound (EUS) provides as a unique tool to acquire tissue specimen for
developing primary cell cultures. With our success from previous pilot
study in culturing primary cells of PDAC from EUS-aspirates, we have
investigated the feasibility of developing such cell lines from
sequential group of PDAC patients, in particular unresectable cases of
PDAC where the surgical specimen would not be commonly available.
Methods: Under IRB approved protocol at UC Davis Medical Center,
consecutive patients with suspected pancreatic mass lesions were
included. After cytopathological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, additional
EUS fine-needle aspirate (FNA) specimens were obtained from each PDAC
patient. Needle aspirates were processed as follows: the FNA specimen was
immediately transferred into a microfuge tube containing fresh media with
antibiotics/antimycotics and kept at refrigeration temperature for a few
hours prior to further processing. Subsequently, the tube was centrifuged
(1000 x g for 3 min) and treated with collagenase IV for 1 hr at 37oC
then it was passed through 40 um mesh. Flow-through was then plated onto
a treated tissue culture plate in a defined serum-free media and
incubated at 37oC with 5% CO2. The media was exchanged at least every
other day. Once the primary cells were grown, tumor formation was
confirmed in mouse xenograft (NOD mice). Cell viability (XTT) assay was
performed with gemcitabine treatment (1uM) against the cells comparing to
commercially available PDAC cell lines (MiaPACA2, Panc-1, BxPC3).
Results: We enrolled 40 patients with suspected pancreatic mass for the
study. Thirty-six patients were subsequently diagnosed with PDAC. Of the
36 patients, preoperative unresectable stages (stage III and IV) included
11 patients. Microbial contamination precluded successful cell culture
development in 7 cases including 3 in the unresectable stages.
Development of cell culture was possible from 7 patients, where 5 cases
were from the stages III and IV PDAC cases. Thus, we have successfully
developed PDAC primary cell lines in 5 out of 8 advanced unresectable
PDAC cases. The primary cells showed significantly more resistance to
gemcitabine compared to commercial cell lines. Conclusion: As previously
demonstrated, EUS-FNA derived primary cell culture development is
possible. Further improvement in sampling and culturing technique would
enhance the yield and expansion of the PDAC cell lineages for further
investigation.

