Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of c-myc by the triterpenoid celastrol


c-Myc is a bHLH-ZIP transcription factor that is deregulated in a variety
of human cancers. More specifically, c-Myc heterodimerizes with another
bHLH-ZIP partner protein, Max, to bind to specific sequences (E-Boxes:
CAC/TGTG) located near the transcriptional start sites of its numerous
target genes. Because c-Myc's highly variable downstream effects are
difficult to attack individually, directly inhibiting the association
between c-Myc and Max association by interfering with their
bHLH-ZIP-mediated heterodimerization has emerged as an attractive
therapeutic strategy. Thus far, high throughput screens of chemical
libraries have identified a number of small molecules that specifically
inhibit the c-Myc-Max association. However, these synthetic compounds and
their analogs are generally of low potency and therefore have limited
clinical utility. Here we report identification of celastrol, a naturally
occurring triterpenoid, as a potent c-Myc inhibitor. We sought to further
assess celastrol's ability to inhibit c-Myc-Max interaction and cell
growth, and determine its structure activity relationship. Surface
plasmon resonance and electrophoretic mobility shift studies revealed
that celastrol specifically binds to c-Myc and prevents both its
interaction with Max, and subsequent DNA binding with a Kd in the low
micromolar range. Co-immunoprecipitation studies confirmed that the
dose-dependent disruption of c-Myc-Max heterodimers by celastrol could
also be achieved in c-Myc-overexpressing human HL60 promyelocytic
leukemia cells. Moreover, in vitro data demonstrated that celastrol
significantly inhibited both HL60 and Burkitt's lymphoma cell growth with
IC50s in the nanomolar range. However, modifications to the C-28
carboxylic acid group of celastrol eliminated c-Myc binding, suggesting
that celastrol binds to c-Myc via this functional group. This structure
activity relationship may provide a basis for the development of more
pharmacologically suitable analogs. Together these results suggest that
celastrol is among the most potent Myc-Max disruptors yet identified, and
suggest a mechanism of action. Celastrol thus represents a promising new
agent with which to target c-Myc and provides a new structural chemical
platform for further pharmaceutical development.

