Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wogonin enhances tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand's antitumor activity in vivo through H2O2-mediated downregulation
of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein and cellular inhibitor of
apoptosis protein 1 and 2


Numerous malignant cells are resistant to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced cytotoxicity, limiting value of
TRAIL as an antitumor therapeutics. Combination of TRAIL with other
agents is a promising strategy to overcome TRAIL resistance. Wogonin (5,
7-dihydroxy-8-methoxyflavone), a flavonoid originated from the root of
the medicinal herb Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi, has been shown to
enhance TRAIL-induced apoptosis in malignant cells in in vitro studies.
However, whether wogonin enhances TRAIL's antitumor activity in vivo has
never been studied. In this study, we first found that wogonin sensitized
a variety of cancer cells including A549, HeLa and SKOV3 to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis, as indicated by increased annexin V staining and enhanced
activation of caspase-8 and -3 in TRAIL and wogonin cotreated cells,
whereas having marginal effect on non-transformed bronchial epithelial
cells and cervical epithelial cells. Then the effect of combination of
TRAIL and wogonin was tested in a xenografted tumor model with A549 cells
in nude mice. The results show that wogonin greatly enhanced
TRAIL-induced suppression of tumor growth, which was accompanied with
increased apoptosis in tumor tissues determined by a terminal
deoxynucleotidyl-transferase -mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL)
assay. The protein levels of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein
(XIAP) and cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1 and 2 (cIAP-1 and
cIAP-2) were markedly reduced in both cultured cells and xenografted
tumor tissues with co-treatment of wogonin and TRAIL. The down-regulation
of these antiapoptotic proteins was likely mediated through proteasomal
degradation and involved intracellular H2O2, as wogonin robustly induced
H2O2 accumulation in A549 cells and the reactive oxygen species
scavengers butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC)
and the proteasome inhibitor MG132 restored the expression of these
antiapoptotic proteins and suppressed cytotoxicity in cells co-treated
with wogonin and TRAIL. These results provide important in vivo evidence
supporting the application of wogonin as TRAIL sensitizer for cancer
therapy.

