Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of LPCAT1 and concomitant lipid alterations in
gastric cancer


Background: Gastric cancer is the second most common neoplasm in the
world and the second major cause of cancer death in Japan. Discovery of
Helicobacter pylori, one of the major causes of gastric ulcer as well as
gastric cancer, has dramatically developed our understanding of
pathogenesis in upper gut. Recently, involvement of lipid in the
carcinogenic and developmental process has been reported in other
malignancies such as colon cancer, but its roles in gastric cancer remain
to be analyzed. In this study we utilized imaging mass spectrometry to
analyze the alterations of lipid in the gastric cancer specimens.
Methods: Twelve sections of human gastric cancer and adjacent normal
tissues surgically resected were utilized for the lipid analysis. Mass
spectra were acquired using the MALDI-TOF/TOF type mass spectrometer
(ultraflex II; Bruker Daltonics), equipped with a 355 nm Nd:YAG laser. A
total of 200 laser shots per point were irradiated (1 s/point). Ion
images were reconstructed from the spectra with flexImaging 2.1 (Bruker
Daltonics). The two-dimensional image obtained was compared to the
hematoxylin and eosin staining of a nearby section. The mass spectra were
obtained both from cancerous lesion and non-neoplastic mucosa and the
structure of lipid molecules was determined using lipid databases such as
Lipid Search. Protein expression of lysophosphatidylcholine
acyltransferase 1 (LPCAT1) was immunohistochemically analyzed in 196
gastric cancer specimens and corresponding non-cancerous mucosa. Results:
The averaged spectra from the whole section, the non-neoplastic area and
the cancerous area could be distinguished. All of spectra had a number of
signals in the mass range, most of which corresponded to the
phospholipids region. Majority of such signals within the phospholipids
region were characterized as phosphatidylcholine (PC) and
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). We focused on two signals: m/z 798.5 and
496.3 which were higher and lower, respectively, in cancer lesion
compared with non-neoplastic area. From the results of the database
search, we identified the ion at m/z 798.5 and 496.3 as
potassium-adducted PC (16:0/18:1) and proton-adducted LPC (16:0),
respectively. LPC is known to be converted to PC in the presence of
acyl-CoA by LPCAT1 in Lands cycle. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed
that LPCAT1 was highly expressed in cancer lesion compared with
non-neoplastic mucosa and that expression levels of LPCAT1 in cancer
lesions were higher in differentiated adenocarcinoma than poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma. Conclusions: Lipid alterations in gastric
mucosa appear to be involved in the carcinogenic or developmental process
of gastric cancer. In particular, overexpressed LPCAT1 may play important
roles by converting LPC to PC.

