Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail 1 regulates invasion through uPA-uPAR and MMP-9 signaling in
prostate cancer cells


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process by which cancer
cells acquire mesenchymal properties, such as induction of N-cadherin,
while epithelial-associated genes like E-cadherin are lost. This enables
the cells to be more invasive, migratory and metastatic. Factors that can
induce EMT include growth factors like transforming growth factor -
(TGF-) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), and transcription factors like
Snail1. Snail1-induced EMT promotes migration and invasion and we
hypothesized that this may be mediated by urokinase (uPA) and its
receptor (uPAR) activities. uPA, a serine protease, may be activated by
integrin engagement to bind to its receptor, uPAR, and initiate a
signaling cascade that regulates a variety of biological pathways
including invasion. Since Snail1 can induce matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP 2 and 9) which are also involved in cell invasion, we also examined
MMP activity. Androgen-dependent LNCaP, and 22Rv1 and
androgen-independent ARCaP human prostate cancer (PC) cells were stably
transfected with empty vector control (Neo) or constitutively active
Snail1 which led to increased cell migration and invasion. The levels of
Snail1, uPA, and uPAR were measured by Western Blot analysis. uPA
activity in conditioned media was measured using the Elisa uPA activity
assay kit. Additionally, cells were treated with MAPK inhibitor, UO126,
at set time points. Gelatin zymography analysis was utilized to detect
MMP-9 activity in the conditioned media. Currently, ARCaP-Snail cells are
being transiently transfected with uPAR siRNA to assay for the effects of
uPAR knockdown on uPA and MMP activity. The data suggests that
overexpression of Snail1 increased uPA and uPAR protein levels, while uPA
activity was elevated in conditioned media from LNCaP, 22Rv1 and ARCaP
cells. Also, MAPK inhibited MAPK expression in the cell and decreased uPA
activity. In addition gelatin zymography showed higher MMP 9 activity in
ARCaP-Snail overexpressing cells that was inhibited by MAPK inhibitor.
Therefore, Snail-mediated cell migration and invasion in human prostate
cancer cells may occur via the regulation of uPA and uPAR activities in
addition to MMPs.

