Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-tumor activity of the Smoothened inhibitor IPI-926 in
models of residual disease is time dependent


Although response rates can be high for some solid tumors and hematologic
malignancies following treatment, cure rates are low and there is a need
to extend the duration of response and overall survival after remission.
This relapse is attributed to the presence of residual malignant cells
that remain undetected after primary treatment and in many instances the
presence of these residual tumor cells eventually leads to disease
recurrence and shortened survival. The role of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway
in cancer has been well established, with both ligand-independent
signaling due to genetic mutations, as well as ligand-dependent
signaling, in which Hh signaling occurs either directly to the tumor
cells or to the tumor microenvironment being observed. Moreover, it has
been shown that Hh ligand produced by tumor cells acts on stromal cells
and inhibition of this interaction results in alterations to the
tumor-associated stroma and significant inhibition of tumor growth.
IPI-926 is a potent and selective Hh pathway antagonist that inhibits the
key signaling membrane protein Smoothened (Smo). IPI-926 delays tumor
regrowth post-cytoreduction with either standard of care chemotherapy or
targeted therapy in pre-clinical xenograft models of small cell lung
(SCLC), non-small cell lung (NSCLC) and prostate cancer. Data reported
here show that the activity of IPI-926 in this post-therapy setting
exhibits a strict time-dependence, or efficacy window. In both the Lx-22
SCLC and H1650 NSCLC models, delaying the time between cytoreductive
therapy and initiation of IPI-926 treatment resulted in significant loss
of anti-tumor activity. To investigate the molecular consequences
underlying this loss of activity, RT-PCR analysis of tumors from
different time points post therapy was performed. These results showed
upregulation of human Hh ligand in the tumors in response to
cytoreductive therapy with subsequent increased Hh signaling in the
murine-derived stromal cells. IPI-926 abrogated this signaling. In
addition, histological and immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that
IPI-926 induced significant changes in the tumor microenvironment post
therapy. Taken together, these data suggest that the administration of
IPI-926 post cytoreductive therapy could potentially be beneficial in the
residual disease setting in multiple cancer types and warrants further
investigation. Moreover, the timing of IPI-926 administration post
therapy is critical for this benefit. IPI-926 is currently being
evaluated in three Phase 2 clinical trials designed to explore multiple
approaches to target ligand-dependent activation of the Hh pathway: 1) a
randomized Phase 2 trial in combination with gemcitabine in patients with
metastatic pancreatic cancer; 2) a randomized Phase 2 in patients with
metastatic or locally advanced chondrosarcoma; and 3) a single-arm Phase
2 trial in patients with myelofibrosis.

