Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with Pequi (Caryocar brasiliense Camb) fruit pulp oil
decrease the DNA damage caused by chemical carcinogenesis in experimental
model of lung cancer.


Background: It is well known that a daily consumption of foods that are
rich in antioxidants prevents the oxidative damage caused by reactive
species (ROS), including DNA damage, and can reduce the risk of cancer,
atherosclerosis and other degenerative diseases. The pulp of Caryocar
brasiliense Camb, most known as pequi, is a Brazilian fruit that has high
levels of antoxidants properties, such as vitamin C, carotenoids,
phenolic compounds like flavonoids, saponins and tannins, and essential
oils. The aim of this study was to evaluate the action of the pequi oil
in the DNA damage in experimental model of lung cancer induced by the
urethane. Material and Methods: Male BALB/c mice (n=14) received by
gavage 0,5L/mg/day of pequi oil (CBC oil) during 75 days. After 15 days
of the beginning of the gavage, 10 of these animals received two doses of
1,5g/kg intraperitoneal of urethane (Urethane + CBC oil). Urethane
animals (n=4) were only submitted to two doses of 1,5g/kg intraperitoneal
of urethane (urethane group). After these 75 days, lung tissues were
submitted to histological and biochemical analysis by comet assay method
to evaluated the DNA damage. The DNA damage was quantificate by image
analysis. Results: The lung parenchyma from the urethane groups without
oil and with oil showed neoplasic formations induced by the chemical
carcinogenesis in contrast with oil control group. The image analysis of
the comet assay showed a statistical significant diminish of the DNA
damage cells in the urethane oil group when compared with urethane
control group (p=0.001). The decreased DNA damage was very similar that
we obtained in the oil control group. Conclusion: We conclude that the
different antioxidant components found in the pequi oil diminish the DNA
damage in the mouse lung after chemical carcinogenesis, suggesting that
this type of strategies may have a greater impact in lung cancer
treatment. Financial Support: FAPESP, CNPq

