Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The multifunconal role of B7-H3 in metastasis and drug resistance


With the advent of new targeted therapeutic alternatives some encouraging
therapeutic improvements have been achieved. However, the outcome for
patients with advanced metastatic disease is still dismal, and increased
understanding of molecules and pathways regulating tumor growth,
metastasis and resistance is needed. The overexpression of the
immunoregulatory B7-H3 protein has been associated with advanced disease
and poor prognosis in several types of cancer. In our own studies on
clinical samples from colon cancer patients we reported for the first
time a significant correlation between nuclear B7-H3 expression and poor
survival. Further we have demonstrated a novel non-immunological role of
B7-H3 in chemoresistance and metastasis, and have found that B7-H3
expression is associated with resistance to several chemotherapeutic
compounds, including paclitaxel, docetaxel, dacarbazine, cisplatin and
doxorubicin in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistic studies revealed that B7-H3
knock-down cells were sensitized to drug-induced apoptosis concurrent
with abrogation of Jak2/Stat3 phosphorylation We are further studying the
function of B7-H3 and its involvement in treatment response, focusing on
the effect of small molecular inhibitors in B7-H3 high versus low
expressing tumor cell lines applying drug screens in 384 well plates with
a wide selection of such inhibitors. Preliminary results show that the
mTOR inhibitor everolimus, and the AKT inhibitors API-2 and PI3K-AKT
inhibitor Wortmannin have a greater effect in the B7-H3 knockdown cells
compared to the vector control cells. The associations between the
corresponding pathways and B7-H3 are being studied. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that the B7-H3 protein regulates tumor cell migration and
invasion, and experimental metastasis formation in nude mice, possibly
ascribed to B7-H3 regulation of metastasis-associated molecules. We
investigate the mechanistic links between the effects of B7-H3 on
metastasis and resistance, e.g. by comparing drug effects on the
development of metastasis in nude mice injected with B7-H3 knock-down and
vector control cells and assessing the expression of relevant markers at
various time points during treatment. The only phosphorylation site in
the short intracellular tail of B7-H3 is a serine, and as part of
elucidating the mechanisms by which B7-H3 regulates Stat3/Jak2, we are
studying the effects of this serine on cell signaling by creating cell
variants with mutated serine. In summary, we have demosntrated novel
multifunctional, non-immunological effects of B7-H3 on clinically
important cancer features and in ongoing studies we are continuing to
elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Our data suggest that B7-H3 is an
attractive prognostic marker and a target for therapeutic intervention.

