Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and optimization of a chimeric antigen receptor against
human CD22: A new immunotherapeutic agent for adoptive immunotherapy


CD22 is expressed on a number of hematologic malignancies. A recombinant
immunotoxin composed of an anti-CD22 Fv fused to a 38 kDa fragment of
Pseudomonas exotoxin A (Moxetumomab pasudodtox, HA22) is currently being
evaluated in the treatment of B cell malignancies. We used the Fv
sequence to construct a series of chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) to
determine the optimal affinity, domain structure, and signaling required
for optimal anti-leukemic activity. The original anti-CD22 binding
domain, BL22, or a newer generation high-affinity domain, HA22, were
fused to transmembrane and signaling sequences derived from the TCR
zeta-chain, CD28, and CD137. In some constructs we extended the binding
domain away from the membrane using constant domains from IgG (CH2CH3).
Retroviral gene vectors were used to transduce activated primary T cells
with CAR constructs. We found: HA22 Fv, 2 as opposed to 3 signaling
motifs, and non-CH2CH3 containing CARs were superior in short-term in
vitro tumor cell cytolysis assays, indicating that Fv affinity,
signaling, and 3-D structure of the CAR all impact the anti-leukemic
effectiveness of CARs. Finally, direct comparison to CD19-specific CAR
showed an equivalent or superior killing activity in 2 out of 3 ALL lines
tested. Using Scatchard analysis to define the number of CD22 molecules
on the surface, the ALL line with the lowest number of CD22 molecules was
also the least able to be killed by CAR-transduced T cells. The superior
lytic activity of CD19-CAR for this single cell line was due to
preservation of high levels of CD19 at the cell surface. We are currently
testing the in vivo activity of anti-CD22 CAR in an immunodeficient mouse
model bearing human cell lines and primary patient-derived ALL. Our
results indicate that CD22-CAR should be developed for the immunotherapy
of CD22+ malignancies.

