Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of selection bias by lung cancer screening


Background: Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. The five-year survival rate of lung cancer is still extremely
poor: only 16%. This is mainly due to the fact that most patients present
with an advanced stage of the disease. Recent studies showed that
screening of high risk persons is very effective in reducing the
mortality from lung cancer. However, the inclusion criteria for these
studies are rather strict. For instance the study by The National Lung
Screening Trial Research Team Persons only included people with more than
30 pack-years (PY) and aged between 55 and 74 years at time. Aim: To
evaluate the effects of selection bias in lung cancer screenings studies
as the The National Lung Screening Trial. Methods: The inclusion criteria
of The National Lung Screening Trial were extrapolated to our population
based cohort: The Rotterdam Study. The Rotterdam Study is an ongoing
prospective cohort study in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, in which all
inhabitants of the Rotterdam suburb Ommoord aged 55 years were invited to
participate in the study. A total of 7,983 participants (78%) were
included between 1990-1993 in the first cohort. Up to 2009, 208 deaths
due to incident lung cancer were found in this cohort. Results: In our
cohort, only 62 cases (29.8%) complied with the criteria of the screening
trial (persons with unknown smoking history were included in the >30 PY
group). 12.5% of the lung cancer cases between 55-74 years of age were
never smokers or had a history of Background: Lung cancer is the most
common cause of cancer mortality worldwide. The five-year survival rate
of lung cancer is still extremely poor: only 16%. This is mainly due to
the fact that most patients present with an advanced stage of the
disease. Recent studies showed that screening of high risk persons is
very effective in reducing the mortality from lung cancer. However, the
inclusion criteria for these studies are rather strict. For instance the
study by The National Lung Screening Trial Research Team Persons only
included people with more than 30 pack-years (PY) and aged between 55 and
74 years at time. Aim: To evaluate the effects of selection bias in lung
cancer screenings studies as the The National Lung Screening Trial.
Methods: The inclusion criteria of The National Lung Screening Trial were
extrapolated to our population based cohort: The Rotterdam Study. The
Rotterdam Study is an ongoing prospective cohort study in Rotterdam, the
Netherlands, in which all inhabitants of the Rotterdam suburb Ommoord
aged 55 years were invited to participate in the study. A total of 7,983
participants (78%) were included between 1990-1993 in the first cohort.
Up to 2009, 208 deaths due to incident lung cancer were found in this
cohort. Results: In our cohort, only 62 cases (29.8%) complied with the
criteria of the screening trial (persons with unknown smoking history
were included in the >30 PY group). 12.5% of the lung cancer cases
between 55-74 years of age were never smokers or had a history of <30 PY
at baseline and the remaining 57.7% were above 74 years. Consequently,
70.2% of cases would not have been included. A relative reduction in
mortality of 20%, as found in the screening trial, would lead to a
reduction in mortality in the Rotterdam Study population of lung cancer
of 6.0% (i.e. 0.2*62 = 12.4 persons out of the 208 would have been saved
from mortality by lung cancer). Conclusion: Screening of lung cancer with
the present inclusion criteria reduces lung cancer death rate compared to
standard of care, but because only a minority of lung cancer patients
comply with these criteria, we should be cautious in generalizing
findings to the total population of such patients. In addition, mortality
reduction may be different in countries with other demographics and
health care systems.

