Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the pro-survival protein c-MET with ARQ 197 inhibits
growth of multiple myeloma cells


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a B-cell disorder characterized by the
accumulation of mature plasma cells in the bone marrow. Earlier studies
have established that patients with MM have high plasma concentrations of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) which is correlated with poor prognosis
and advanced disease stages. HGF is the ligand for the c-MET receptor
tyrosine kinase. Our group has previously shown that inactivation of the
c-MET receptor by siRNA and ribozyme approaches inhibited proliferation
and induced apoptosis in MM cell lines. Hence, we hypothesized that the
HGF/c-MET axis plays a critical role in myeloma cell survival and
targeting this pathway would be an effective strategy to treat MM. To
further test our hypothesis, we used MM1.S, U266 and OPM-2 myeloma cell
lines and ARQ 197 (tivantinib), a small molecule non-ATP-competitive and
selective c-MET inhibitor (Ki=355 nM). This drug is orally bioavailable,
achieving steady-state levels of median 6-7 M in plasma of patients with
solid tumors. Cell growth was inhibited by at least 50% and annexin
V/propidium iodide positive cells increased by at least 60% within 48
hours of treatment with 1 M (U266 and OPM-2) and 3 M (MM.1S) ARQ 197.
Consistent with this biological response, downstream effectors of c-MET
signaling including phospho-GAB1 and phospho-ERK1/2 were decreased. MM
patients develop resistance to the current drugs such as lenalidomide and
bortezomib. We tested ARQ 197 in paired MM cell lines - RPMI 8226, ANBL-6
and KAS-6/1 - that are sensitive and resistant to lenalidomide or
bortezomib. In general, all the tested cell lines expressed readily
detectable levels of proHGF as well as detectable albeit low levels of
c-MET. Interestingly, the resistant cell lines expressed significantly
higher c-MET protein levels compared to drug-nave controls, but were
equally sensitive to ARQ 197 indicating that this c-MET kinase inhibitor
overcomes inherent drug resistance. The bone marrow microenvironment is
also a source for acquired drug resistance, yet ARQ 197 was effective in
inhibiting growth of MM cell lines grown on human stromal cells (NKtert)
which mimic the bone marrow microenvironment. Consistent with these data,
exogenous addition of the cytokines interleukin-6 (0.5 and 1.0 ng/ml) or
HGF (50 ng/ml) did not abrogate ARQ 197-mediated cell death or growth
inhibition. Importantly, plasma cells from healthy donors (n = 15) showed
no difference in c-MET mRNA expression compared to plasma cells from MM
patients (n = 147) but showed relatively lower levels of HGF expression
compared to MM patients. These results suggest that the HGF/c-MET pathway
is upregulated in MM plasma cells. In conclusion, inhibition of the c-MET
receptor tyrosine kinase activity with ARQ 197 is a novel-target based
strategy to impact on the pathobiology of MM. Based on these data, we are
initiating a clinical trial of ARQ 197 in patients with
relapsed/refractory MM.

