Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of ribonuclease QBI-139 in combination with standard of
care therapies


RNA has been recognized as a drug target for cancer therapy, as evidenced
by the ongoing clinical trials of RNAi and antisense therapies. An
alternative approach that circumvents the delivery and stability issues
of those drugs is to harness the activity of naturally occurring RNA
degradation enzymes. Human ribonuclease (RNase) variants have been
generated with diminished binding to their natural inhibitor inside
cells, which allows the new proteins to kill cancer cells. One of these
RNase variants, referred to as QBI-139, demonstrated efficacy against
multiple tumor types in xenograft models of human cancer and was selected
for an ongoing first in human Phase I clinical trial. Non-small cell lung
and ovarian cancer are two of the indications where QBI-139 has shown
significant efficacy as a single agent in xenograft models. In planning
for the next stage of clinical trials, the impact of combinations of
QBI-139 plus standard of care agents in these diseases was determined
both in vitro and in vivo. QBI-139 showed additive and synergistic
activity in combination with cisplatin and docetaxel, which are standard
of care for non-small cell lung and ovarian cancer, respectively. Fixed
ratios of QBI-139 and the combination drug based on their EC50 values
were tested. The Combination Index (CI) was determined using median
effect analysis. Synergy was demonstrated with QBI-139 in combination
with cisplatin against non-small cell lung cancer (A549 and H1975). An
additive effect of QBI-139 and cisplatin was seen in ovarian (Ovcar-3)
cancer. In ovarian cancer (SK-OV-3), a combination of docetaxel and
QBI-139 was synergistic with QBI-139. The benefit of the combinations
were repeated in xenograft models of both cancers and were signifcat
relative to each agent alone. Non-small cell lung and ovarian cancer
represent critical unmet needs and new, differentiated treatment
approaches such as QBI-139 combination therapy are critical.

