Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivery of doxorubicin to multi-drug resistant murine xenografts
via drug-loaded micelles formed from mixtures of amphiphilic triblock
copolymers


BACKGROUND: The toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs is often the limiting
factor in patient dosing and can be the source of severe discomfort and
suffering for patients undergoing chemotherapy. For example, the
anthracycline antibiotic doxorubicin (DOX) is a potent chemotherapeutic
but prolonged use can also lead to permanent heart damage. Tumors can
also develop resistance to DOX by increased expression of drug efflux
pumps. Nanoparticle formulations of DOX have been reported to improve
tumor-specific delivery via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect. METHODS: In this work, we have encapsulated DOX in polymeric
micelles formed from mixtures of amphiphilic triblock copolymers. The
copolymers are composed of a hydrophobic polymer segment flanked by two
hydrophilic blocks. Two different copolymers were used to form the mixed
micelles: a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and poly(hydroxybutyrate)
(PEO-PHB-PEO), and a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and poly(propylene
oxide) (Pluronic F127). We hypothesize that forming mixed micelles will
improve drug loading and enable preparation at room temperature (where
Pluronic F127 micelles are highly unstable), while facilitating drug
delivery by utilizing the stability of Pluronic F127 micelles at
physiological temperatures. RESULTS: We have demonstrated that the
micelles formed from the mixtures of PEO-PHB-PEO and Pluronic F127
triblock copolymers provide a combination of high drug loading content
and drug delivery capabilities. DOX loading for mixed micelles was
greater than that for Pluronic F127-only micelles (pBACKGROUND: The
toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs is often the limiting factor in
patient dosing and can be the source of severe discomfort and suffering
for patients undergoing chemotherapy. For example, the anthracycline
antibiotic doxorubicin (DOX) is a potent chemotherapeutic but prolonged
use can also lead to permanent heart damage. Tumors can also develop
resistance to DOX by increased expression of drug efflux pumps.
Nanoparticle formulations of DOX have been reported to improve
tumor-specific delivery via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect. METHODS: In this work, we have encapsulated DOX in polymeric
micelles formed from mixtures of amphiphilic triblock copolymers. The
copolymers are composed of a hydrophobic polymer segment flanked by two
hydrophilic blocks. Two different copolymers were used to form the mixed
micelles: a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and poly(hydroxybutyrate)
(PEO-PHB-PEO), and a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and poly(propylene
oxide) (Pluronic F127). We hypothesize that forming mixed micelles will
improve drug loading and enable preparation at room temperature (where
Pluronic F127 micelles are highly unstable), while facilitating drug
delivery by utilizing the stability of Pluronic F127 micelles at
physiological temperatures. RESULTS: We have demonstrated that the
micelles formed from the mixtures of PEO-PHB-PEO and Pluronic F127
triblock copolymers provide a combination of high drug loading content
and drug delivery capabilities. DOX loading for mixed micelles was
greater than that for Pluronic F127-only micelles (p<0.05 for all mixture
ratios). DOX encapsulated in mixed micelles demonstrated increased uptake
in a drug resistant MDA-435-MDR cell line over free doxorubicin
(pBACKGROUND: The toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs is often the
limiting factor in patient dosing and can be the source of severe
discomfort and suffering for patients undergoing chemotherapy. For
example, the anthracycline antibiotic doxorubicin (DOX) is a potent
chemotherapeutic but prolonged use can also lead to permanent heart
damage. Tumors can also develop resistance to DOX by increased expression
of drug efflux pumps. Nanoparticle formulations of DOX have been reported
to improve tumor-specific delivery via the enhanced permeability and
retention (EPR) effect. METHODS: In this work, we have encapsulated DOX
in polymeric micelles formed from mixtures of amphiphilic triblock
copolymers. The copolymers are composed of a hydrophobic polymer segment
flanked by two hydrophilic blocks. Two different copolymers were used to
form the mixed micelles: a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and
poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PEO-PHB-PEO), and a copolymer of poly(ethylene
oxide) and poly(propylene oxide) (Pluronic F127). We hypothesize that
forming mixed micelles will improve drug loading and enable preparation
at room temperature (where Pluronic F127 micelles are highly unstable),
while facilitating drug delivery by utilizing the stability of Pluronic
F127 micelles at physiological temperatures. RESULTS: We have
demonstrated that the micelles formed from the mixtures of PEO-PHB-PEO
and Pluronic F127 triblock copolymers provide a combination of high drug
loading content and drug delivery capabilities. DOX loading for mixed
micelles was greater than that for Pluronic F127-only micelles (p<0.05
for all mixture ratios). DOX encapsulated in mixed micelles demonstrated
increased uptake in a drug resistant MDA-435-MDR cell line over free
doxorubicin (p<.05 for all mixture ratios), while cytotoxicity of the
micelle treatment was approximately equivalent to that of the free drug.
Tumor treatment efficacy was assessed in mice with subcutaneous dual
xenografts of MDA-435 and MDA-435-MDR (drug resistant) cell lines. Tumor
suppression of drug resistant tumors was similar for encapsulated and
free drug, but mice treated with micellar DOX showed no significant
weight loss after treatment, while mice treated with unencapsulated DOX
experienced severe weight loss after one week when compared to initial
time point (18.2% +/ 2.1% weight loss, p = .0009). CONCLUSION: The
cytotoxicity, drug uptake, and tumor suppression properties demonstrated
by PEO-PHB-PEO/Pluronic F127 mixed micelles supports their viability as
chemotherapeutic drug delivery systems for drug resistant tumors.

