Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-cording microRNA hsa-miR-199a expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma correlates with patient survival


[Aim] MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression at a post-transcriptional level. Previous study from our group
identified forty nine miRNAs that are expressed differentially by
comparing 26 pair samples of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor tissue
and non-tumor liver tissue using next-generation sequencer system. In
this study, the expression of hsa-miR-199a and hsa-miR-199b, one of the
extracted targets from our study, were investigated by real-time PCR
using validation set HCC samples, and were examined the correlation
between the miRNA expression and clinical data. [Patients and Methods]
Forty-eight patients diagnosed as HCC had undergone surgical removal from
1991 to 1997 at the Department of Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology,
Tokyo Women's Medical University, Japan. The formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded samples were prepared using the standard protocol. The paraffin
blocks were cut into 10m sections, and the tumor samples were collected
using Laser-captured microdissection and total RNA including miRNA
fraction were isolated. After synthesized cDNA using miRNA specific
primer, real-time PCR was performed using miRNA specific primer/probe.
[Results] The expression level of hsa-miR-199a and hsa-miR-199b were
down-regulated in tumor compared to non-tumor (P[Aim] MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at a
post-transcriptional level. Previous study from our group identified
forty nine miRNAs that are expressed differentially by comparing 26 pair
samples of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor tissue and non-tumor
liver tissue using next-generation sequencer system. In this study, the
expression of hsa-miR-199a and hsa-miR-199b, one of the extracted targets
from our study, were investigated by real-time PCR using validation set
HCC samples, and were examined the correlation between the miRNA
expression and clinical data. [Patients and Methods] Forty-eight patients
diagnosed as HCC had undergone surgical removal from 1991 to 1997 at the
Department of Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Japan. The formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples
were prepared using the standard protocol. The paraffin blocks were cut
into 10m sections, and the tumor samples were collected using
Laser-captured microdissection and total RNA including miRNA fraction
were isolated. After synthesized cDNA using miRNA specific primer,
real-time PCR was performed using miRNA specific primer/probe. [Results]
The expression level of hsa-miR-199a and hsa-miR-199b were down-regulated
in tumor compared to non-tumor (P<0.0001, P=0.0002, respectively). The
patients were divided into two groups, higher/lower expression of each
miRNA, the group of the higher hsa-miR-199a expression was significantly
longer overall survival time compared to the lower expression group
(P=0.0303). However, hsa-miR-199b was not significant difference
(P=0.3801). [Conclusion] The hsa-miR-199a may be potential prognostic
factor for HCC patients.

