Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells isolation and characterization from breast tumor
of a germline carrier of TP53 p.R337H (Brazilian founder) mutation


Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), an inherited cancer predisposition syndrome,
is associated with germ line mutations in TP53. It is characterized by
high risk of multiple, early cancers. In Brazil, a variant form of LFS is
exceedingly frequent due to a widespread founder TP53 mutation, p.R337H,
detected in about 0.3% of the general population in Southern Brazil. This
mutation occurs in p53 oligomerization domain and its effect on p53
oligomerization is supposed to be dependent upon pH conditions. We have
isolated and characterized Cancer Stem Cells from tumors of p.R337H
mutation carriers. After informed consent and surgical resection
fragments were dissociated and brought in culture. Adherent cells and
spheroids were derived from different tumor types. Spheroids derived from
a breast cancer (BC) were further analyzed to demonstrate positive
immunolabeling for CD44, CD24, Oct4 and Sox2 antibodies. Time-lapse
videomicroscopy showed rapid growth, frequent asymmetric division and
absence of senescent phenotypes for least 17 passages. At confluence,
some cells spontaneously differentiated into adipogenic and muscle-like
cells. Floating and adherent spheroids contained self-renewing cells
capable of long-term proliferation without losing their primary
characteristics. These properties are similar to those of stem cells with
inactivated p53 protein. However, treatment of adherent cells with the
DNA damaging agent doxorubicin elicited p53 accumulation, p21 induction,
cell cycle arrest at low doses of Dox and cell death/apoptosis at higher
doses. These results are consistent with the notion that p.R337H may
retain a quasi-normal p53 function in response to stress while expressing
properties similar to mutant p53 in long-term CSC culture. These p.R337H
CSC may provide a very useful model for studying the defects underlying
inherited cancer in p.R337H carriers.

