Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-Myc-mediated transcriptional repression of HPP1 in colon cancer
by recruitment of HDACs


Background: Epigenetic gene silencing plays a critical role in
tumorigenesis. HPP1, a putative tumor suppressor gene is downregulated in
a number of tumor types including colon cancer. As a mechanism of
suppression, promoter hypermethylation of HPP1 is known to be important,
however the contributions and mechanisms of histone deacetylation have
not been described. Additionally, the c-myc oncogene also contributes to
the suppression of HPP1 via promoter binding to a cognate E-box site. We
sought to elucidate the role of histone deacetylation and the potential
interplay with c-myc in the transcriptional regulation of HPP1. Methods:
The HPP1 non-expressing cell lines, HCT-116 and DLD-1, were treated with
the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-aza-2-deoxycitidine (5-Aza-DC) and/or
histone deacetylation (HDAC) inhibitors, including sodium butyrate (SB),
Vorinostat (SAHA), trichostatin A (TSA) and valproic acid (VPA).
Knockdowns of c-Myc and HDAC-1, 2, 3 and 4 were performed using siRNA.
Protein and mRNA expression of HPP1 were determined by Western Blot and
RT-PCR respectively. Furthermore, Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
and ChIP-re-ChIP experiments were used to demonstrate the binding of
c-Myc and HDACs to the HPP1 promoter. Co-IP assays were used to test the
physical interaction between c-Myc and HDAC3. After knockdown of HDAC3
using siRNA in HCT116, ChIP was also used to test the activity of
acetylated histone 4 (AcH4). Results: 5-Aza-DC as well as HDAC
inhibitors, including SB, TSA, SAHA and VPA, resulted in the
re-expression of HPP1 in HCT-116 and DLD-1 cells. Individual HDAC
inhibitors administered in combination with 5-Aza-DC resulted in a
synergistic effect on HPP1 re-expression. Concordantly, knockdown of
HDAC2 and HDAC3 in HCT116 cells, and HDAC1 and HDAC3 in DLD-1 cells by
siRNA significantly enhanced HPP1 expression. Co-IP, ChIP and double ChIP
experiments confirmed binding of c-myc to the HPP1 promoter as a complex
with dominant recruitment of HDAC3. By ChIP assay, the levels of AcH4
increased significantly in HCT116 after knockdown of HDAC3. Conclusions:
We have demonstrated that HDAC-1, -2 and -3 contribute to the epigenetic
regulation of HPP1. Moreover, c-myc binds to the HPP1 promoter and
mediates epigenetic suppression via the dominant recruitment of HDAC3
with subsequent enhancement of histone deacetylation. Our findings may
lead to a greater biologic understanding for the application of the
targeted use of HDAC inhibitors for anti-cancer therapy.

