Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing of a rare case of familial childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer in children,
accounting for approximately 25% of all pediatric cancer cases. However,
familial childhood ALL is extremely rare. Few families with multiple
non-twinned siblings diagnosed with childhood ALL have been reported, and
to date no highly penetrant leukemia susceptibility gene(s) has been
identified to explain this uncommon occurrence. We postulated that pure
(nonsyndromic) familial childhood ALL could result from the accumulation
of disadvantaging rare DNA variants in predisposing genes or biological
pathways. To address this hypothesis, we used next-generation sequencing
technologies to capture and re-sequence the whole-exomes of a family
comprising the mother, father and two male non-twinned affected siblings
(sibling A and sibling B). Both brothers were diagnosed with the
identical ALL subtype, pre-B hyperdiploid childhood ALL, three years
apart. The similar clinical and molecular characteristics of the siblings
suggest shared etiologic factors. Using the Agilent SureSelect All Human
Exon 38 Mb Kit and the SOLiD 3 Plus system, we captured and sequenced a
total of 17.5 Gb of sequence for the entire family, with a mean coverage
of 47X. For each individual, approximately 96% or 36.4 Mb of the targeted
bases were covered 1X and 70% of the targeted bases or 26.4 Mb passed our
thresholds for variant calling. We identified 52,038 positions at which
the called allele(s) differed from the reference genome in at least one
of the four family members. In total, we identified 19,096 germline
variants in sibling A and 28,061 in sibling B, of which 2,355 (12.3%) and
2,125 (7.6%), respectively, were previously undiscovered in dbSNP. We
investigated non-synonymous homozygous variant and compound heterozygous
positions shared between the siblings, as well as genes/pathways with
increased burden of rare non-synonymous variants. Based on several
criteria (PolyPhen annotation, known allele frequency, etc.), we
identified variants that are strong functional candidates to explain this
case of pure familial childhood ALL. In parallel, high-density genotyping
was also performed (Illumina Omni 2.5M) for quality control and
structural variant detection, allowing the identification of putatively
shared copy number variants that may also be involved in leukemogenesis.
Though independent validation and functional assessment is required, this
is the first study to identify genetic factors involved in pure familial
childhood ALL.

