Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FK506 binding protein (FKBP) 51 controls TNF-related apoptosis
inducing ligand (TRAIL) response in melanoma


FKBP51 is a cochaperone that regulates several biological processes in
the cell, through protein-protein interaction. Very recently, we have
found that FKBP51 is hyperexpressed in malignant melanoma and plays a
crucial role in its chemo- and radio-resistance. Downmodulation of
FKBP51, by gene silencing, produces an increase of melanoma apoptosis
induced by several cytotoxic stimuli. To investigate the mechanism of the
increased apoptosis sensitivity of FKBP51-silenced melanoma, we performed
a study of protein expression profiles in melanoma cells that were
depleted or not of FKBP51, using ionizing radiation (IR) as apoptotic
stimulus. Among the multiple signaling pathways that were found modulated
in FKBP51-silenced cells, a marked upregulation of TRAIL receptors was
found. In particular, the death receptors were significantly increased in
FKBP51-depleted cells, while the decoy receptors, that do not transduce
death signal, were decreased in the same cells. Among TRAIL receptors,
TRAIL R2 (DR5) transduces most efficiently the death signal. Aim of the
present study was to validate the increase of DR5 at mRNA and protein
level in FKBP51-silenced melanoma cells and investigate the effect of
FKBP51 silencing on TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Summary of key findings
FKBP51-silencing increased DR5 transcript by 6,1 folds (range 2,8/14,7
folds), in melanoma cells, measured by Real-time PCR. Flow cytometry
confirmed the increased expression of DR5 (by more than 100%) in FKBP51
silenced cells, compared with non silenced melanoma cells. The study of
apoptosis was in accordance with the expression of death receptors.
Indeed, FKBP51 silencing increased TRAIL-induced apoptosis, as suggested
by both propidium iodide incorporation and annexin V staining of melanoma
cells. Low levels of apoptosis were measured in melanoma cells stimulated
with 100ng/ml TRAIL (18 + 6%). By contrast, 39 + 14% of apoptosis was
measured in FKBP51-depleted melanoma cells, following TRAIL stimulation
(P= 0.01). FKBP51 regulated the acetylation pattern of melanoma as
suggested by the reduced amount af acetylated protein in FKBP51
silenced-melanoma cells (D), most interestingly, reduced levels of
acetylated Yin Yang 1 transcription factor (YY1) involved in control of
DR5 tanscription, were found in FKBP51-silenced melanoma, as suggested by
western blot assay. Conclusions FKBP51 gene silencing produces a marked
increase in TRAIL sensitivity of melanoma, due to upregulation of TRAIL
death receptors. FKBP51 decreases the acetylation pattern of melanoma,
and in particular of the DR5 transcriptional repressor YY1, suggesting
that epigenetic modification of DNA could be responsible for reduced
TRAIL-receptor transcription and resistance to apoptosis of melanoma.

