Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-AZA/TSA reverses tamoxifen induced changes in chromatin
remodeling enzymes in MCF-7/TAM-R cells


One major problem in breast cancer therapy is acquired resistance,
necessitating the search for new approaches for overcoming this
complication. The objective of this study is to overcome tamoxifen
resistance in breast cancer cells using either a demethylating agent
(such as 5-AZA) or a histone deacetylase inhibitor (such as trichostatin,
TSA) or their combination. This is based on the observations that the
promoters of ER- and ER- are rich in CpG islands, known to be associated
with gene silencing. Methylated CpG clusters are expected to be
especially susceptible to epigenetic modifications. Therefore, treatments
with 5-AZA or TSA are expected, through chromatin remodelling, to
activate the transcription of ER- and ER- m-RNA and produce functional
proteins, reversing in this manner tamoxifen resistance. Using the MTT
assay we determined the growth rates of MCF-7, MCF-7/TAM-R and MDA-MB-231
in the presence of 5-AZA, TSA and their combinations in the presence or
absence of 4-OH tamoxifen. We identified the conditions (i.e order of
inhibitor addition and concentration) that reverse tamoxifen resistance
and those providing the maximum cell death of the MCF-7 and MCF-7/TAM-R.
We found that pretreatment with 5-AZA (2M) or TSA (0.1M) enabled
tamoxifen (10M) to produce a considerable cell death (over 50%).
Interestingly, MCF-7/TAM-R cells that normally do not express ER-, after
24 hours of treatment with TSA and 5-AZA produced a marked increased in
the expression of ER- as determined by both Western Blot and fluorescence
microscopy. Following 48 hours of treatment the levels of ER- were
further increased. Moreover, following 48 hours treatment with 5-AZA/TSA
and tamoxifen the levels of p21 and p53 were substantially increased
compared with the vehicle control. To determine if these changes are due
to enzymes that modulate chromatin structure we evaluated the expression
of HDAC1, 2, 3, 4, DNMT3a, and the levels of acetylated H3. We found that
4-OH-tamoxifen induced over a 10-fold increase in the HDAC3 expression
levels compared to the untreated controls and this effect was reversed
when 4-OH tamoxifen was provided in combination of 5-AZA and TSA. 4-OH
tamoxifen also upregulated HDAC1 and DNMT3a protein levels which were
accompanied by a dramatic increase in H3 acetylation. These results show
clearly that: (a) the reversal of tamoxifen resistance can be achieved
with relatively low concentrations of 5-AZA/TSA, (b) the upregulation of
ER-, p53 and p21 are essential components of the molecular pathway
leading to this reversal, and c) these changes are accompanied by
alterations in the expression levels of enzymes that control chromatin
structure. These findings may find applications in clinical therapeutic
protocols in the treatment of tamoxifen resistant breast cancer.

