Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Navigating Latinas with breast screen abnormalities to diagnosis:
The Six Cities Study


BACKGROUND: We sought to compare time from initial abnormal breast screen
to definitive diagnosis between navigated and non-navigated patients in
racially/ethnically diverse Latina women in six U.S. cities. METHODS:
Eligible Latinas had an abnormality of BIRADS 3, 4, or 5 detected on a
mammogram, clinical breast exam, magnetic resonance imaging, or
ultrasound between July 2008 and December 2010 in six U.S. cities (San
Antonio, Miami, Houston, San Diego, New York, and San Francisco). Data
were pooled for this analysis. Navigated patients received assistance by
locally trained navigators using a patient-centered model suggested by
Harold Freeman and endorsed by the Institute of Medicine. Non-navigated
patient data was obtained via retrospective medical chart review. We used
Log-Rank Chi-squared tests to evaluate bivariate associations with
dependent variables and Kaplan-Meier and Cox Proportional Hazards
analyses to compare time-to-diagnosis and timely diagnosis estimates
between Navigated and Control group Latinas. RESULTS: Among 480 women
with initial BIRADS 3, 4, or 5 results, follow-up data was available for
425 (88.5%). Radiologic classification of initial abnormality (BIRADS),
rather than any other sociodemographic or clinical characteristic was the
only significant predictor of overall and timely diagnosis. Data for
women with an initial BIRADS 3 result were adjusted to control
clinician-imposed diagnostic delays. Of all women, > 95% achieved
definitive diagnosis within 180 days. Median time to definitive diagnosis
was significantly reduced among navigated compared to non-navigated
Latinas (20 days versus 27 days, hazard ratio [HR] 1.32, p = .007). This
translates to a 132% increase in rates of diagnosis among navigated
women. This effect was primarily observed in women with an initial BIRADS
3 result, especially when adjusted for clinically directed waiting
periods between initial and follow-up screening examinations. Among
navigated patients, only between-BIRADS variation rather than
sociodemographic characteristics, number of barriers to care, insurance
status or type or site-specific variables were associated with timely or
time-to-diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: Patient-centered navigation to assist
Latina women with breast screening abnormalities reduces median
time-to-diagnosis by approximately 25% when types of screening
abnormality and barriers to care are addressed at patient level.
Community-based interventions may be the most effective means to reduce
cancer health disparities when addressing the needs of underserved
populations.

