Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells from perfusable tumor nodules grown on
decellularized rat lung scaffold has mesenchymal characteristics


Circulating tumor cells are thought to be responsible for metastasis.
These cells leave the primary site of cancer and enter the circulation
after undergoing epithelial to mesenchymal transition. The tumor cells
lose the epithelial features, such as expression of E-cadherin, and
acquire mesenchymal characteristics, such as expression of Twist1, Zeb
and N-cadherin. In this study, we developed a novel ex vivo model that
utilizes a decellularized rat lung scaffold to grow tumor nodules and
study circulating tumor cells. We hypothesized that circulating tumor
cells in our ex vivo model will have mesenchymal characteristics. We
created the decellularized rat lung scaffold using SDS and Triton-X. We
then placed 344SQ or 393P mice lung cancer cell lines in the
decellularized rat lung scaffold and perfused them in a customized
bioreactor. We measured tumor growth on the scaffold and the number of
circulating tumor cells for 14 days. We then analyzed the functional
characteristics of the circulating tumor cells using the Boyden chamber
and determined gene expression of E-cadherin, N-cadherin, Zeb1 and Twist.
Both the 344SQ and 393P lung cancer cell lines formed tumor nodules that
gradually increased in size with an increase in the number of circulating
tumor cells over the 14-day period in our model. The circulating tumor
cells had greater ability to migrate than the monolayer cell cultures in
the Boyden chamber assay, with 100% of the circulating tumor cells
migrating in contrast to 69% and 71% of the monolayer cell cultures of
344SQ and 393P, respectively. The circulating 393P tumor cells had a
significant increase in Twist (58-fold), Zeb (20-fold) and N-cadherin
(14-fold) and decrease in E-cadherin compared to the 393P cells from the
monolayer cell culture. This difference was even more dramatic for the
circulating 344SQ tumor cells with an increase in Twist (>6000-fold), Zeb
(14-fold) and N-cadherin (88-fold) compared to the 344SQ cells from the
monolayer. There was small 4-fold increase in E-cadherin expression in
the circulating 344SQ tumor cells compare to the 344SQ cells from the
monolayer. The circulating tumor cells in our model have both phenotypic
and genotypic characteristics of mesenchymal cells. The cancer cells that
are more mesenchymal at the baseline have a greater difference in these
characteristics. The circulating tumor cells in our model may be the
sub-population of cells responsible for metastasis.

