Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mirk/Dyrk1B mediates cell survival and G0/G1 phase of cell cycle
via interacting with MAPK/ERK pathway in human cancer cells


Minibrain-related kinase (Mirk) known as the dual specificity
tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase (Dyrk) 1B is a serine/threonine
kinase. Our recent studies have also demonstrated that knockdown of Mirk
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in reduction of viable cells
and cell apoptosis in both ovarian cancer and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines. Furthermore, it has been reported that Mirk/Dyrk1B
can be negatively regulated by mitogenic-activated protein (MAP) /
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase signaling. In this
study, we demonstrated the widely overexpressed Mirk protein in variant
cell lines of both human ovarian cancer and NSCLC was correlated with the
levels of activated ERK examined by western blot analysis. Interestingly,
knockdown of Mirk by siRNA in those ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR3,
OVCAR10, OVCAR1063, MDAH2774), and NSCLC cells (H292, H441, H1299, PC9)
led to increased cell number and cells from G0/G1 into S phase of cell
cycle accompanied by up-regulated activation of ERK and its upstream
signals, increased cyclin D1, reduced p27, and no evidence of cleaved
PARP which are not consistent with our previous findings in the other
cell lines. We hypothesized that the increased activation of ERK after
Mirk siRNA treatment may block the anti-proliferative effects of Mirk
siRNA in some lines or may counterbalance cell loss through apoptosis in
human cancer. To examine this further in both OVCAR3 and H292 cells, the
increase in cell proliferation induced by Mirk siRNA could be blocked by
the MEK inhibitor U0126 in a dose-dependent manner. MEK inhibition
abrogated the activation of ERK and subsequent changes in cell cycle
proteins (cyclin D1, p27) induced by Mirk knockdown. Combined Mirk siRNA
and U0126 induced cell apoptosis in both OVCAR3 and H292 cells. In
summary, Mirk may mediate cell survival and G0/G1 phase of cell cycle via
interacting with MAPK/ERK pathway in human cancer cells.

