Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of expression of SWI/SNF subunits in high risk Wilms tumor is
accompanied by global gene expression changes


Introduction: The TARGET initiative seeks to identify therapeutic targets
through genomic sequencing supported by copy number and gene expression
analysis. The High Risk Wilms Tumor TARGET project, currently in
progress, includes the analysis of favorable histology (FH) tumors that
relapsed and tumors with anaplasia (unfavorable histology). We report the
identification of a group of Wilms tumors (WT) identified by a unique
gene expression pattern. Methods and Results: 102 high risk WT (43
anaplastic, 59 relapsed FH) were analyzed using Affymetrix U133+2 chips.
Unsupervised hierarchical analysis consistently selected 9 tumors (5
anaplastic, 4 FH) that shared a striking gene expression pattern. These
patients presented at 15-96 months (median 51); 7 had a triphasic
histology and 2 were blastemal predominate; 4 died of their disease. When
the top differentially expressed genes (PIntroduction: The TARGET
initiative seeks to identify therapeutic targets through genomic
sequencing supported by copy number and gene expression analysis. The
High Risk Wilms Tumor TARGET project, currently in progress, includes the
analysis of favorable histology (FH) tumors that relapsed and tumors with
anaplasia (unfavorable histology). We report the identification of a
group of Wilms tumors (WT) identified by a unique gene expression
pattern. Methods and Results: 102 high risk WT (43 anaplastic, 59
relapsed FH) were analyzed using Affymetrix U133+2 chips. Unsupervised
hierarchical analysis consistently selected 9 tumors (5 anaplastic, 4 FH)
that shared a striking gene expression pattern. These patients presented
at 15-96 months (median 51); 7 had a triphasic histology and 2 were
blastemal predominate; 4 died of their disease. When the top
differentially expressed genes (P<0.0001) were analyzed with PANTHER,
significant repression (p=5x107) of genes responsible for the regulation
of chromatin architecture was apparent. Among the most significantly
down-regulated were ARID1A (fold change (FC) 0.2, p=5.2x108) and SMARCA4
(BRG1, FC 0.16 p=9x106), among others. Transcriptomic analysis using
hierarchical clustering based on chromosomal position displayed a unique
pattern of alternating increased and decreased expression of small
genetic regions for all chromosomes in this group. These findings may
represent long-range genomic regulation that has been attributed to
histone modifications and are in keeping with the role of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex. Analysis using the Affymetrix 6.0 SNP chip
demonstrated LOH for 1p31 (ARID1A) and 19p13 (BRG1) in 2 and 1 of the 9
tumors, respectively. Global methylation analysis is underway.
Conclusion: Mutations in several SWI/SNF subunits (including ARID1A,
BRG1, SMARCB1, PBRM1) have been implicated in the development of a wide
range of neoplasias. In normal cells, SWI/SNF subunit protein levels are
tightly controlled in a coordinated fashion in order to maintain constant
cellular levels. Little is known about the transcriptional regulation of
these subunits. This report suggests that a subset of Wilms tumors show
striking repression of many SWI/SNF subunits, resulting in a unique
globally abnormal gene expression pattern that has not been previously
described in tumors with ARID1A or SMARCB1 loss. Whole genomic or exomic
sequencing of our tumor set is in progress.

