Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of CD47 in the tumor microenvironment enhances anti-tumor
adaptive immune responses when combined with ionizing radiation


Over half of the new cancer patients diagnosed this year in the United
States will require ionizing radiation (IR) therapy as part of their
course of treatment. Achieving a curative response, however, is limited
by detrimental side effects and off-target toxicities of IR to normal
cells. We previously demonstrated that CD47 null mice or blockade of CD47
confers radioprotection to normal tissues including radiosensitive
hematopoietic progenitors. On the other hand, blockade of CD47 enhanced
the radiation-induced tumor growth delay in two syngenic mouse models.
One possible explanation for this observation is that, by protecting
tumor-associated immune cells, CD47 suppression increases tumor immune
surveillance. To examine the role of T cell immunity, we used the F15-12
RM mouse fibrosarcoma model in athymic mice. Blockade of CD47 in
combination with IR did not alter tumor growth in these T-cell deficient
mice versus IR alone. However, adoptive transfer of CD8+ T-cells in
combination with CD47 blockade and IR significantly enhanced the
reduction in tumor growth when compared to tumors of mice irradiated in
combination with the T cell transfer alone (186 50 vs. 370 123 mm3
respectively, N=8). In vitro experiments showed that blockade of CD47
enhances antigen dependent CD8+ mediated cytotoxicity of tumor cells.
Furthermore, in a syngeneic tumor model of B16 melanoma we observed over
a 50% reduction in volume of irradiated tumors in a CD47-/- host versus a
WT host. Immunohistochemical staining indicated an increase of
intratumoral CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells. Further analysis indicated that lack
or blockade of CD47 in combination with IR resulted in a significant
increase in granzyme B expression, further indicating that the increased
target cell death may be mediated by this pathway. CD47 suppression may
also reduce tumor growth by altering the immunosuppressive factor VEGF.
In both tumor models, either blockade of or lack of CD47 in combination
with IR was associated with a reduction in VEGF. VEGF is a potent
pro-angiogenic factor and a potent immunosuppressive factor that inhibits
activation of cytotoxic T-cells. Our findings indicate that agents
targeting CD47 enhance anti-tumor T cell immunity when combined with
radiation. Combining CD47 suppression with IR and adoptive T cell
transfer may increase the percentage of curative responses.

