Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of osteoblastic and osteolytic factors in
prostate cancer bone metastases


Prostate Cancer (PCa) metastasizes to the bone in approximately 90% of
patients who die of PCa. Growth of tumor cells in the bone can lead to
replacement of bone marrow, spinal cord compression, severe bone pain,
cachexia and death. The bone response to a metastasis can manifest as a
spectrum of osteoblastic to osteoblastic/osteolytic (mixed) or osteolytic
responses in the same patient at different biopsy sites. A number of
proteins have been proposed to promote the osteoblastic and osteolytic
responses in PCa bone metastasis. Our objective was to determine whether
known bone forming and degrading factors are associated with the
osteoblastic or osteolytic response in pre-clinical models and clinical
specimens of PCa bone metastasis. Additionally, we wanted to identify
novel proteins that may be associated with the osteoblastic and
osteolytic response in PCa bone metastases. Using specimens obtained at
rapid autopsy at the University of Washington, we compared the gene
expression profile of osteoblastic and osteolytic metastases (n=14) from
13 patients and validated our findings by qRT-PCR. We also interrogated
the same factors at the protein level in 18 osteoblastic and 18
osteolytic PCa bone metastases from 27 patients by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Additionally, we are currently interrogating the levels of these
factors in 6 novel LuCaP xenograft models of PCa that promote an
osteoblastic response and 4 that promote an osteolytic response in the
tibia of immune compromised mice by IHC. Using gene expression arrays,
validated by qRTPCR, we identified a putative osteoblastic factor EMID1
(p=0.01) and two putative osteolytic factors, MMP12 (p=0.03) and sFRP1
(p=0.02). By IHC, MMP12 expression approached significance (p=0.07),
whereas sFRP1 was significantly higher in the osteolytic samples
(p=0.02). Interestingly, we did not observed significant differences in
transcript levels between osteoblastic and osteolytic metastases for a
number of proposed osteoblastic and osteolytic factors including BMP2 and
7, tachykinin 1, endothelin 1, osteoprotegerin, and sclerostin.
Furthermore, none of the proposed osteoblastic and osteolytic factors we
interrogated by IHC showed a significant difference in protein expression
between osteoblastic and osteolytic PCa bone metastases. This is the
first detailed analysis of PCa osteoblastic and osteolytic factors in
human specimens and animal models of PCa in the bone. Our data suggest
that many of the factors important in bone remodeling may not be central
to the bone response in PCa bone metastases. Additionally we have
identified three factors that may have a role in bone remodeling in PCa
bone metastases.

