Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Valproic acid enhances radiation therapy by protecting normal
hippocampal neurons and sensitizing malignant glioblastoma cells


Neurocognitive deficits are devastating sequelae that follow cranial
irradiation in patients with medulloblastoma and leukemia. Valproic acid
(VPA) has been used effectively as a neuroprotector in various
neurological insults. In the present study we demonstrate that VPA could
be used to protect hippocampal neurons from the damaging effects of
radiation. The effect of VPA pretreatment on cell death was examined
using clonogenic survival assays. Mouse hippocampal neurons, HT-22 were
treated with 0.6 mM VPA for 7 days prior to irradiation. A significant
increase in survival was seen in HT-22 cells treated with VPA compared to
cells treated with radiation alone. In contrast, VPA treatment decreased
the survival of irradiated cancer cells, D54 and GL-261 compared to
radiation alone. To elucidate the mechanism of this selective increased
survival in normal hippocampal cells we monitored for program cell death
by Annexin V-FITC or DAPI staining. Irradiated HT-22 cells which were
pretreated with VPA demonstrated 2 fold decrease in apoptosis than
irradiated cells. Similar results were obtained using irradiated mice.
Seven-days old C57BL6J pups were either irradiated with the single dose
of 7 Gy or treated with VPA (200mg/Kg) followed by 7Gy irradiation. VPA
pretreatment protected hippocampal neurons from radiation-induced
apoptosis as demonstrated by counting the pyknotic nuclei in the
subgranular zone of the hippocampal region. Western immunoblotting of
HT-22 cells revealed that VPA not only inhibited HDAC, but also inhibited
glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), an enzyme required for apoptosis. A
heterotopic glioma model of GL-261 was used to evaluate the tumor growth
delay following treatment with VPA (200 mM) and radiation (five fractions
of 2Gy). VPA alone delayed the tumor growth; however VPA in combination
with radiation significantly delayed tumor growth. In conclusion, VPA
protected hippocampal neurons from radiation-induced damage in vitro and
in vivo. This protection is specific to hippocampal neuronal cells and
not to cancer cells. The molecular mechanism could involve enzymatic
inhibition of both HDAC and GSK-3. VPA could be used as a novel therapy
for the prevention of neurocognitive deficits resulting from cranial
irradiation.

