Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor vascularization by endothelial differentiation of
endometrial cancer stem cells


Evidence for existence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) has been reported in
several malignant tumors. CSCs have properties of self-renewal,
tumorigenesis and multilineage differentiation. Many studies about CSCs
have focused on self-renewal, tumorigenesis. However, it is unclear about
multilineage differentiation. Our previous study showed CD133 was a CSC
marker and a critical prognostic marker in endometrial cancer. In that
study, we demonstrated that CD133+ cells were capable of generating both
CD133+ and CD133- cells, whereas CD133 cells did not generate CD133+
cells, indicating that CD133+ CSCs have a differential ability. The
present study investigated endothelial differentiation of endometrial
cancer cells. We have established endometrial cancer cells from normal
human endometrial epithelial cells by introduction of HPV16 E6/E7, hTERT
and K-ras genes (EM-E6/E7/hTERT/K-ras cells). Histological findings of
tumors formed from EM-E6/E7/hTERT/K-ras cells showed that tumors were
composed of solid and vascular regions. Vascular regions were stained
human-specific anti-CD31 antibody, suggesting that EM-E6/E7/hTERT/K-Ras
cells are capable of differentiating to endothelial cells. Subcutaneous
xenografts from clinical samples in endometrial cancer also demonstrated
that human endometrial tumors contained human vessels labeled by
human-specific anti-CD31 antibody. Endothelial tube formation assay (in
vitro angiogenesis) revealed that isolated CD133+ endometrial cancer
cells could show tube formation while CD133- cells could not, indicating
that CD133+ endometrial cancer cells had an ability of endothelial
differentiation. Furthermore, western blot analysis showed high
expression of VEGFR1 in CD133+ cells. We demonstrated a new function of
CSCs in endometrial cancer cells. These findings shed light on the
establishment of new target therapy to endometrial cancer.

