Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-specificity phosphatase-2 (DUSP2) negatively control
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression in cancer cells


Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an inducible form of cyclooxygenase, plays a
crucial role in the development of cancer via its enzymatic product,
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Clinical studies reveal that COX-2 is
overexpressed in numerous types of cancers, and is associated with
increase of angiogenesis, metastasis, and drug resistance. Although
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, COX-2 inhibitors, have been used
for cancer therapy; they have serious side effects in many aspects.
Therefore, to explore the underlying mechanism of COX-2 overexpression
during cancer progression is critical for developing more efficient and
safer way to block COX-2 function. Previously, we have found that the
expression of dual-specificity phosphatase-2 (DUSP2), a MAPK-specific
phosphatase, is markedly reduced in many kinds of cancers. Here, we
identified that COX-2 was a potential downstream target gene of DUSP2. In
vitro studies demonstrate that knockdown of DUSP2 significantly increases
COX-2 expression and PGE2 production while overexpression of DUSP2
reduces those in cancer cells. Xenografted mouse study further reveals
that levels of DUSP2 are reduced during cancer development, which is
inversely correlated with COX-2 expression. Re-expression of DUSP2 during
tumor progression inhibits COX-2 expression and suppresses tumor growth
while knockdown of DUSP2 increases COX-2 expression and enhances tumor
growth. These results implied that COX-2 overexpression was due to loss
of DUSP2 expression in cancer. Furthermore, we found that hypoxia
represses DUSP2 expression resulting in COX-2 overexpression. Taken
together, we have demonstrated for the first time that aberrant
expression of COX-2 during tumor development is regulated by
hypoxia-mediated DUSP2 downregulation. Our data also suggest that DUSP2
is a good molecular target for cancer therapy.

