Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF mutation is associated with large, proximal sessile serrated
polyps, but not with adenomas


Background: Different colorectal cancer (CRC) pathways result in tumors
with distinct phenotypic and molecular signatures. The adenoma-carcinoma
pathway involves conventional adenoma precursors, resulting in tumors
that tend to exhibit chromosomal instability but lack microsatellite
instability. Less is established about the origin of microsatellite
unstable CRC. This sub-set of tumors includes some tumors with aberrant
methylation, which often exhibit activating mutations in the BRAF
oncogene, and are commonly found in the proximal colon. Objective: We
aimed to compare the prevalence of BRAF-mutation between distinct
colorectal polyp types. Methods: We conducted a case-case comparison of
BRAF-mutation status in polyp tissue DNA from participants aged 24-79 in
a colonoscopy-based study, who were diagnosed with colorectal adenomas or
hyperplastic polyps (HPs). During colonoscopy, polyps were biopsied,
fixed in paraffin, and H&E slides prepared. All participants underwent a
standard pathology review to confirm the diagnosis and determine the
percent of lesional tissue in the block. Polyps classified as tubular
adenomas or tubulovillous adenomas were considered conventional adenomas;
those classified as HPs, sessile serrated polyps, or traditional serrated
adenomas were considered serrated polyps. Medical records were abstracted
to ascertain polyp location and size; tissue blocks from polyps at least
3 mm in diameter and containing at least 80% lesional tissue were
selected for BRAF analyses. BRAF-mutation status was determined using 2
assays specific for the V600E mutation. A validated TaqMan assay was run
on all samples, and a fluorescent allele-specific PCR assay was run on a
subset for quality control. Of the 1044 polyp DNA samples tested, 880
(84%) were successfully assayed. Results: Of 529 conventional adenomas,
including 129 tubulovillous adenomas, only 2 (0.4%) had V600E
BRAF-mutations. Among serrated polyps, 176 of 351 (50%) were
BRAF-mutation positive. Of these, sessile serrated polyps had the highest
prevalence of a BRAF-mutation: 74 of 120 (62%), followed by traditional
serrated adenomas: 5 of 11 (45%), and HPs: 97 of 220 (44%). Polyp
location and size were also associated with a BRAF-mutation. For serrated
polyps, 45 of 98 (46%) rectal, 39 of 95 (41%) distal colon, and 92 of 156
(59%) proximal colon polyps were BRAF-mutated. Serrated polyps 10 mm had
a higher prevalence of BRAF-mutation than those Background: Different
colorectal cancer (CRC) pathways result in tumors with distinct
phenotypic and molecular signatures. The adenoma-carcinoma pathway
involves conventional adenoma precursors, resulting in tumors that tend
to exhibit chromosomal instability but lack microsatellite instability.
Less is established about the origin of microsatellite unstable CRC. This
sub-set of tumors includes some tumors with aberrant methylation, which
often exhibit activating mutations in the BRAF oncogene, and are commonly
found in the proximal colon. Objective: We aimed to compare the
prevalence of BRAF-mutation between distinct colorectal polyp types.
Methods: We conducted a case-case comparison of BRAF-mutation status in
polyp tissue DNA from participants aged 24-79 in a colonoscopy-based
study, who were diagnosed with colorectal adenomas or hyperplastic polyps
(HPs). During colonoscopy, polyps were biopsied, fixed in paraffin, and
H&E slides prepared. All participants underwent a standard pathology
review to confirm the diagnosis and determine the percent of lesional
tissue in the block. Polyps classified as tubular adenomas or
tubulovillous adenomas were considered conventional adenomas; those
classified as HPs, sessile serrated polyps, or traditional serrated
adenomas were considered serrated polyps. Medical records were abstracted
to ascertain polyp location and size; tissue blocks from polyps at least
3 mm in diameter and containing at least 80% lesional tissue were
selected for BRAF analyses. BRAF-mutation status was determined using 2
assays specific for the V600E mutation. A validated TaqMan assay was run
on all samples, and a fluorescent allele-specific PCR assay was run on a
subset for quality control. Of the 1044 polyp DNA samples tested, 880
(84%) were successfully assayed. Results: Of 529 conventional adenomas,
including 129 tubulovillous adenomas, only 2 (0.4%) had V600E
BRAF-mutations. Among serrated polyps, 176 of 351 (50%) were
BRAF-mutation positive. Of these, sessile serrated polyps had the highest
prevalence of a BRAF-mutation: 74 of 120 (62%), followed by traditional
serrated adenomas: 5 of 11 (45%), and HPs: 97 of 220 (44%). Polyp
location and size were also associated with a BRAF-mutation. For serrated
polyps, 45 of 98 (46%) rectal, 39 of 95 (41%) distal colon, and 92 of 156
(59%) proximal colon polyps were BRAF-mutated. Serrated polyps 10 mm had
a higher prevalence of BRAF-mutation than those < 10 mm (69% vs. 48% with
BRAF-mutation, respectively). Discussion: Our results suggest that
BRAF-mutation is commonly found in serrated polyps, but rarely occurs in
conventional adenomas. Among serrated polyps, the prevalence of
BRAF-mutation was highest in polyps that were proximally located, 10 mm,
and with sessile serrated histology. These findings support the thesis
that serrated polyps may be important precursors for the subset of CRC
exhibiting BRAF-mutation.

