Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive miRNA profiling of taxane-resistant human breast and
ovarian cancer cell lines using the SmartChip real-time PCR system


MiRNAs are post-transcriptional regulators of cell proliferation, tissue
differentiation, embryonic development and apoptosis. We profiled the
expression of miRNAs in a panel of taxane-resistant human breast and
ovarian cancer cell lines using the recently developed WaferGen SmartChip
System. Four breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, BT-549, MDA-MB-231 and
T-47D) and four ovarian cancer cell lines (1A9/A2780, ES-2, MES-OV and
OVCAR-3) were selected for resistance to either docetaxel or paclitaxel
alone or co-selected with taxane in the presence of the P-glycoprotein
inhibitor, PSC-833 (valspodar, 2 M). All of the variants established by
exposure to taxanes alone are MDR1/ABCB1(+), whereas the resistance
observed in the co-selected variants is not transporter-mediated. We have
previously reported elevated class III -tubulin (TUBB3) content, reduced
BRCA1 and elevated CDKN1A (p21) in the majority of the non-MDR1 taxane
variants relative to parental controls. For miRNA profiling, total RNA
was analyzed using the SmartChip Human MicroRNA Panel version 2.0
containing 1,150 unique real-time PCR reactions in quadruplicate for a
total of 4,600 reactions per sample. Following ligation to a miRNA
cloning linker (Integrated DNA Technology, Coraville, IA), the equivalent
of 500 ng of starting RNA per sample was added to a one-step cDNA and
real-time PCR cocktail (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The total
volume per reaction was 100 nL containing an equivalent of 96 pg of RNA.
Forty cycles of real-time PCR were performed on the SmartChip Cycler and
a quality screen was performed to remove any outlier data. MiRNA
profiling is complete and an analysis of these data revealed a clear
separation between the two sets of non-MDR1 variants based on tumor type
(breast vs. ovarian), and selection conditions (non-MDR1 vs. parental).
We observed reduced miR-200 family expression in the majority of these
taxane-resistant variants, consistent with published findings that
miR-200c directly targets and suppresses TUBB3. Furthermore, Significance
Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) software identified reduced miR-635,
miR-296-3P, and let-7B in both MDR1(+) and MDR1(-) variants of breast
origin, and elevated let-7 family (let-7B, let-7F and let-7I) and reduced
miR-1225-5P and miR-4286 in the ovarian cell lines relative to parental
controls. The functional significance of these observations will be
studied by introducing miRNA inhibitors or mimics specific to key
alterations with the goal of sensitizing cells to taxanes.

