Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Introducing a novel acoustic imaging tool for breast cancer
detection


Objective: This paper introduces an alternative non-invasive and
non-ionizing breast imaging tool called vibro-acoustography (VA). This
method is based on low-frequency harmonic vibrations induced in the
object by the radiation force of ultrasound. Contrast in
Vibro-acoustography images represent several properties of the object,
including the dynamic characteristics at the audio frequency and
scattering and absorption properties at the ultrasound frequency. X-ray
mammography and ultrasound are the main imaging modality used today for
detection of breast lesions. X-ray mammography, however, is ionizing and
its sensitivity is greatly reduced in dense breasts. Ultrasound images
suffer from speckles or other or artifact that prevents the physician
from delineating the mass lesion from the background tissue. Hence, VA
may be used as a stand-alone imaging device or as a tool to provide
supplementary information to other existing imaging modalities. Materials
& Methods: Matching vibro-acoustography and mammography images of human
breast are acquired using a combined mammography/vibro-acoustography
machine. Images of various types of breast masses are investigated and
their characteristics features are compared. Image features, such as
lesion borders, interior texture, and speculation pattern, are studied.
Results: Resulting images show soft tissue structures, breast lesions and
microcalcifications within breast with high contrast, high resolution,
and no speckles. The results have been verified using x-ray mammograms of
the breast. Vibro-acoustography images demonstrate that calcified masses
normally show sharp borders, benign non-calcified masses have smooth
texture, and, in some cases, malignant masses are characterized with
spiculation. Conclusion: The encouraging results which are based on the
data collected from an ongoing study indicate that the above mentioned
image features may be used for differentiation of breast masses and
suggest that further development of vibro-acoustography technology may
lead to a new clinical tool for various imaging applications. Work
supported in part by Grant CA121579-01A1from NIH and Grant BCTR#0504550
from Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation.

