Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel HLA-restricted T-cell epitopes specific
for the breast cancer-associated tumor antigen NY-BR-1


Out of all malignancies, breast cancer resembles the most common
malignant caner type (26%) of women in the western world and the second
most frequent cancer related cause of death (15%) in women. Efficient
treatment options are available for early stage breast cancers yielding
five year survival rates of up to 85%, however for metastasized breast
cancer types, five year survival rates are resided at much lower levels
(20%) and therapy options are very limited. It is therefore of great
importance to establish innovative therapy strategies which will affect
the late stage breast cancer tumors. Immunotherapy approaches,
particularly adoptive T cell transfer, constitute an attractive strategy
to develop new therapy options for metastasized mammary carcinomas. The
differentiation antigen NY-BR-1 was found to be expressed on mRNA level
in breast tissue, testis, prostate, and most notably in 80% of tested
breast cancers. Among normal tissues, expression of the NY-BR-1 protein
was present solely in ductal epithelium of the breast. Compared to
healthy breast tissue NY-BR-1 protein levels are highly elevated in
invasive breast tumors and their corresponding metastasis. Thus, NY-BR-1
can be considered as a breast cancer associated tumor antigen that might
represent a suitable target antigen for T cell based immunotherapy
approaches. The main focus of this project is to identify novel
HLA-restricted T cell epitopes that could be used in clinical trials.
Therefore, various HLA-transgenic (tg) mouse strains (DR4tg, DR3tg and
HHDtg mice), were immunized with the NY-BR-1- encoding expression plasmid
pcDNA3.1-NY-BR-1 followed by ex vivo analyses of the NY-BR-1-specific T
cell responses with a synthetic peptide library covering the entire
NY-BR-1 protein. Applying this strategy, four potential HLA-DRB1*0301
restricted epitopes and three HLA-DRB*0401 restricted candidate epitopes
could be determined. The relevance of these new epitopes for the human
system will be analyzed by screening of PBMCs from tumor patients and
healthy donors for the presence of cognate T cells. Such T cells will be
expanded and used as donors for high affinity NY-BR-1-specific TCRs in
order to establish autologous TCR-transduced T cells ready for adoptive
transfer of breast cancer patients. Currently, blood-samples of NY-BR-1+
patients are being collected for subsequent in vitro analyses of
HLA-restricted, NY-BR-1-specific T cell responses.

