Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of hyaluronan and hyaluronidases in cutaneous
melanoma


Aberrant hyaluronan expression implicates aggressive disease progression
and metastatic potential in many cancers. In tumors originating from
simple epithelium, hyaluronan amount is increased both in the epithelial
and stromal component and it correlates with patient's poor overall
prognosis. The role of hyaluronan degrading enzymes (hyaluronidases,
HYAL1-2) in cancer progression is controversial. Hyaluronidases are
proposed to be both tumor suppressors and tumor promoters. In this
retrospective study, we characterized the expression levels of HYAL1 and
HYAL2 and correlated their expression to hyaluronan in the different
stages of primary skin melanoma as well as in metastatic melanoma.
Superfically (pT1) and deeply (pT4) invasive melanoma (Breslow 4mm
(n=18)), in situ melanoma (n=17), lymph node metastasis (n=19),
dysplastic nevi (n=28) and benign nevi samples (n=29) were analyzed for
hyaluronan staining and HYAL1 and HYAL2 immunoreactivity (ABCAM
antibodies) in paraffin tissue sections. Stainings were evaluated for
their intensity and coverage. The tissue area for hyaluronan and
HYAL1/HYAL2 positive staining was estimated with a five-level scoring
from 0-4 and the staining intensity of melanocytic cells was evaluated
with a four-level scoring (0-3; no color, weak, moderate and strong) by
two independent observers. Compared to benign nevi and in situ melanoma,
the cell-associated hyaluronan staining coverage and intensity were
clearly reduced in the invasive part of melanoma with advanced Breslow
depth. Strong hyaluronan staining intensity was detected in 36% of in
situ melanoma cases and in 21% of superficial melanoma (Breslow 4mm),
only 6% of cases showed strong hyaluronan staining intensity. In
addition, in lymph node metastases the melanoma cells showed low
hyaluronan staining intensity or were totally hyaluronan negative.
However, the tumor stroma was highly hyaluronan positive in all groups.
HYAL1 immunoreactivity was found in melanocytic cells both in benign nevi
and melanoma samples while the tumor stromal cells were negative. The
coverage of HYAL2 immunoreactivity was parallel to HYAL1, although its
staining intensity was lower than that of HYAL1. Our results suggest that
hyaluronan content is clearly decreased in invasive primary and
metastatic melanoma compared to benign nevi. The results from hyaluronan
stainings will be compared with clinical follow-up data to study the
prognostic value of hyaluronan in melanoma.

