Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL12 (SDF-1) chemokine expression as a baseline factor
associated with resistance to induction chemotherapy in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Background. SDF-1, and its cognate receptor CXCR4, are recognized as
major factors in tumor progression and metastasis. Recent data also
suggest that chemokines may play a role in resistance to chemotherapy. In
this study, we investigated the expression of SDF-1 and CXCR4 in initial
tumor biopsies prior to treatment in patients treated by induction
chemotherapy for organ preservation and correlated this expression with
response to chemotherapy. Material and Methods. Patients with locally
advanced pharyngo-laryngeal carcinomas, candidates for neoadjuvant
platinum-based chemotherapy as part of an organ preservation program,
were considered for this study. Objective response in organ preservation
accounted for more than 50% reduction in tumor size on CT-scan or MRI.
Tissue biopsies were scored for SDF-1, CXCR4, Vimentin and E-cadherin
staining by immunohistochemistry. Staining was measured according to a
specific scoring scale. Biopsies were all read by three different
observers for scoring adjudication and quantification was performed using
the Histolab Software (Microvision). Results. Among the 42 patients who
entered in this study, 23 had primary site in the hypopharynx and 19 in
the larynx. Twenty-two patients experienced objective response and 20
patients were non-responders to induction chemotherapy. SDF-1 staining
score was higher in cancer cells than that in normal epithelial cells
located in the close vicinity of the tumor. SDF-1 staining was
predominantly located in the cytoplasm of cancer cells. The level of
SDF-1 expression was significantly higher in tumors from non-responders
compared to responders (score: 155 vs 110, p=0.01). CXCR4 expression was
similar between responders and non-responders, and predominantly located
in the cytoplasm and the nucleus of cancer cells. Vimentin and E-cadherin
were evaluated as potential differentiation markers. Few tumor cells
expressed Vimentin in our biopsies. Interestingly lower E-cadherin
expression was observed in non-responders compared to responders (score:
110 vs 170, p=0.01) suggesting that loss in epithelial differentiation
may facilitate resistance to chemotherapy in this population. Conclusion.
High expression levels of SDF-1 cytokine and the loss of E-cadherin as a
marker of epithelial differentiation in cancer cells were shown to
correlate with the lack of response to induction chemotherapy in
hypopharyngeal and laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas.

