Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptation of soft agar colony formation assays to identify agents
which block proliferation of putative colon cancer stem cells


Cancer stem cells have been the focus of renewed interest in recent
years. In theory these cells have the potential to limit the success of
therapy, serving as therapy-resistant reservoirs of disease. In a
previous study (Proc AACR 2011 #5202), each of seven human colon cancer
cell lines was found to contain a subset of single cells, each of which
possesses putative cancer stem cell properties: the capacity (a) to
initiate and sustain highly prolific clonal growth in vitro as well as
(b) to form tumor xenografts which are readily transplantable in vivo.
Despite the extensive in vitro propagation of each human colon cancer
cell line established from patient tumors many years ago, they have
retained the functional capacity to initiate and sustain cancer cell
growth from single cells both in vitro and in vivo. Because soft agar
cultures require the clonal growth of single cells and permit the
detection of stem-cell derived colonies on the basis of cumulative colony
masses, we explored the utility of low cell inoculation density cultures
and the stratification of colony data into multiple size categories as a
means to identify agents which modulate cancer stem cell function. In the
current study, HCT-116 and HT-29 parent cell lines were employed to
evaluate the activity of selected differentiating agents, a stem-cell
inducing agent, cytotoxic agents, and a battery of clinical and
experimental therapeutic agents postulated to modulate cancer stem cell
function in a three-step strategy: (1) testing each agent in 96-well
plate colony formation assays; (2) a comparison of the indices of drug
activity in colony formation assays with indices of drug activity
measured in the NCI60 screen and identification of agents which are more
active in blocking colony formation than inhibiting monolayer culture
growth; (3) an evaluation of the highly active agents in a conventional
35-mm dish colony formation assay in order to quantify putative
anti-cancer stem cell activity. Of 41 agents tested, 11 agents were
observed to exhibit prominent effects upon colony formation at
concentrations which were - 1 log less than that required for the
inhibition of growth in monolayer cultures. In contrast to cytotoxic
agents which indiscriminately impact the growth of all colony categories,
these 11 agents were differentially active against stem-cell derived
colonies. Moreover, it is noteworthy that several clinical agents were
highly active following long exposure to fractions of concentrations
achievable in human patients. These results suggest that the soft agar
colony formation assay of established human cancer cell lines in which
cell inoculation and analysis parameters are optimized for the
measurement of long-term growth in low cell inoculation density cultures
provides a sensitive method for detecting agents which impact putative
cancer stem cell function. (Supported in part by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E)

