Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of polymorphisms in DNA repair genes and HPV 16
integration status in cervical dysplasia


BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the second leading cause of death in women
worldwide, and yet, little is understood about why some HPV-infected
women develop cancerous lesions while others are able to clear the
infection with no sequelae. Previous evidence has indicated that HPV
integration status may be associated with cervical cancer development and
progression. However, host genetic variation within genes that may play
important roles in the viral integration process has been understudied.
The purpose of this study was to examine the association between both HPV
16 viral integration status and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) DNA repair pathway genes on cervical
dysplasia, comparing women with no dysplasia to those with low-grade or
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions. METHODS: A total of 765
women were selected from two large trials designed to evaluate optical
technologies for cervical cancer, being conducted at MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Lyndon B Johnson General Hospital, and the British Columbia
Cancer Agency. Genotyping was conducted using the Illumina Golden Gate
platform; individuals with call rates BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the
second leading cause of death in women worldwide, and yet, little is
understood about why some HPV-infected women develop cancerous lesions
while others are able to clear the infection with no sequelae. Previous
evidence has indicated that HPV integration status may be associated with
cervical cancer development and progression. However, host genetic
variation within genes that may play important roles in the viral
integration process has been understudied. The purpose of this study was
to examine the association between both HPV 16 viral integration status
and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) DNA repair pathway genes on cervical dysplasia, comparing women
with no dysplasia to those with low-grade or high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions. METHODS: A total of 765 women were selected from
two large trials designed to evaluate optical technologies for cervical
cancer, being conducted at MD Anderson Cancer Center, Lyndon B Johnson
General Hospital, and the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Genotyping was
conducted using the Illumina Golden Gate platform; individuals with call
rates <85% were excluded from the analyses. HPV integration status was
determined using an assay described in the literature. Chi-square and
Fisher's exact tests were conducted to determine which SNPs were
significantly associated with normal cytology, low-grade, or high-grade
lesions. Among participants with cervical dysplasia, chi-square tests and
polytomous logistic regression models were used to evaluate the effect of
each polymorphism on viral integration status. We used an additive
genetic model for all tests. P-values were adjusted using the false
discovery rate method and FDR-adjusted q values are reported. RESULTS:
Women with high-grade lesions were significantly younger than women with
low-grade or no lesions. Tag-SNPs in 13 DNA repair genes, including
RAD50, WRN, and XRCC5, were significantly associated with cervical
dysplasia. HPV16 integration status was differential across cervical
cytology, but overall, most participants had a mix of both episomal and
integrated HPV 16. Four tag-SNPs in the XRCC4 gene were found to be
significantly associated with HPV 16 integration status. CONCLUSION: Our
findings indicate that host genetic variation in NHEJ DNA repair pathway
genes, specifically XRCC4, are significantly associated with HPV
integration, and that these genes may play an important role in
determining cervical cancer development and progression. This is the
first time that host genetic variation has been linked to the viral
integration event.

