Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role of integrin-associated CD151 in human ovarian cancer


Despite being implicated in multiple types of human epithelia-origin
cancer, laminin-binding (LB) integrins (e.g., 31 and 64) have rarely been
investigated for their roles in human ovarian tumors. More recently, we
and others have shown that CD151, a member of the tetraspanin family, not
only forms tight surface complexes with these adhesion receptors, but
also mediates the malignancy of human carcinomas largely in a LB
integrin-dependent manner. Here we report our studies on the role of
CD151 in human ovarian cancer. Initially, we stained human ovarian tumor
tissue microarrays with CD151-specific antibody. Our data showed that the
majority of ovarian tumors exhibited a reduced expression of CD151
protein, compared to the fallopian tube, implying a putative suppressing
role of this tetraspanin in ovarian cancer. With this hint we next
evaluated the impact of CD151 ablation on the behaviors and proliferation
of cultured human ovarian cancer cells. While CD151 removal had a minimal
impact on cell motility or invasion, it markedly enhanced cell
proliferation. Also, CD151-deficeint cells appeared to have reduced
cell-cell contacts, suggestive of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-like changes. However, there was no dramatic difference in the
surface expression of E-cadherin protein, according to our FACS analyses.
To substantiate these observations, we also injected ovarian cancer cells
with or without CD151 knockdown into immuno-deficient nude mice
subcutaneously or orthotopically (intra-peritoneal). Results from these
ex vivo analyses showed that disruption of CD151 accelerated ovarian
tumor growth and production of ascites fluid in mice, further supporting
a role of CD151 in ovarian tumor progression. While tumors in the control
group had homogenous epithelial-like appearance, those derived from
CD151-ablated cells exhibited mucin-related vacuoles and diverse
morphologies. Our subsequent DNA array and protein analyses indicated
that there was indeed a marked increase in the expression of a mucin
family member in CD151-deficient tumor cells. Collectively, these results
provide strong evidence that CD151 suppresses human ovarian cancer
progression by regulating tumor cell proliferation and extracellular
microenvironment.

