Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Doxorubicin-mitomycin co-loaded polymer lipid nanoparticle
enhanced efficacy against breast tumor and decreased toxicity as compared
to Doxil


Background: Multidrug resistance acquired by cancer cells and the
dose-limiting toxicity of anti-cancer drugs are contributing factors to
the failure of cancer chemotherapy. Doxorubicin (Dox) -Mitomycin C (MMC)
co-loaded stealth polymer lipid hybrid nanoparticles (DMsPLN) was
developed to overcome these problems and demonstrated anti-cancer synergy
in vitro. The purpose of the study is to evaluate in vivo efficacy and
safety of DMsPLN in a breast cancer model. Method: The efficacy and
systemic toxicity of DMsPLN were evaluated against clinically used Doxil
in mice bearing murine or human mammary carcinomas. DMsPLN were
administered intravenously at 50 mg/m2 doxorubicin single dose or once
every 4 days for 4 cycles. Tumor size was measured as function of time to
determine therapeutic efficacy of the treatment and systemic toxicity was
monitored by repeated measurement of body weight. Results: Significant
difference in the efficacy of DMsPLN relative to Doxil was observed in
both sensitive and resistant tumor models. A clear enhancement of tumor
growth delay (TLD) was evident with both single and 4 times doses of DMs
PLN. In single dose and 4x dose DMsPLN groups, the TGD were significantly
improved to 100% and 300% in the sensitive tumor model. In the resistant
tumor model, the TGD ranged from 30%-130% for the single dose and the 4x
dose DMsPLN, respectively. 10% of the mice showed complete tumor
disappearance in DMs PLN and 25% complete tumor disappearance was
observed in DMs PLN 4x group in the sensitive tumor model. 11% of the
mice showed complete tumor disappearance in both DMs PLN and in DMs PLN
4x group in the resistant tumor model. In addition to enhanced efficacy,
none of the toxicity associated with Doxil treatment were observed in
single or 4x DMsPLN treatment. Conclusions: DMsPLN demonstrated enhanced
efficacy and reduced toxicity over Doxil in aggressive mouse models of
sensitive and resistant breast cancers. Therefore, DMsPLN may provide
clinically relevant, more aggressive anti-cancer interventions.

