Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF- dynamically modulates genome-wide cross-regulation of cRel,
Np63 and TAp73 promoter binding and gene expression in head and neck
cancer: TP53 and NFB ChIP-Seq in HNSCC


We previously showed that cRel, Np63, and TAp73, members of NF-kappaB and
TP53 transcription factor (TF) families, together regulate broad
biological processes critical for inflammation and cancer survival.
However, the underlying molecular mechanisms explaining the global
cross-regulation of transcriptome and interactive signal network have not
been revealed. Here, we demonstrate that inflammatory cytokine TNF-
induces a dynamic, genome-wide increase in cRel and Np63 chromatin
occupancy after replacing TAp73 binding activity, using Illumina Next
Generation ChIP-sequencing and fitting the data into a dynamic Poisson
distribution model integrated in MACS. Globally, significant binding
peaks (pWe previously showed that cRel, Np63, and TAp73, members of
NF-kappaB and TP53 transcription factor (TF) families, together regulate
broad biological processes critical for inflammation and cancer survival.
However, the underlying molecular mechanisms explaining the global
cross-regulation of transcriptome and interactive signal network have not
been revealed. Here, we demonstrate that inflammatory cytokine TNF-
induces a dynamic, genome-wide increase in cRel and Np63 chromatin
occupancy after replacing TAp73 binding activity, using Illumina Next
Generation ChIP-sequencing and fitting the data into a dynamic Poisson
distribution model integrated in MACS. Globally, significant binding
peaks (p<10-5) were highly enriched in promoter regions (10%). These
binding peaks further showed significant enrichment around transcription
starting sites (2000bp), and co-localized peaks for any of the two TFs
were prevalent within a distance of 200 bp. De novo motif search using
Gibbs Sampler indicated that cRel and Np63 bound to p53 motifs while
TAp73 binding switched from p53 to AP1 motifs when treated with TNF-.
Motifs from these TFs also co-localized within 200 bp. Binding activities
of individual transcription factors were validated by ChIP-PCR and
oliogo-ELISA based binding assays. In addition, TNF- modulated 1050
differentially expressed genes detected by microarray, of which one-third
exhibited binding activity for at least one TF, and 73 genes were
identified with co-binding activities for the three TFs simultaneously.
Ingenuity Systems Pathway Analysis (IPA) and Gene Ontology revealed that
these genes are enriched in cancer-related transcription factors and
signaling pathways. Our data suggest a novel mechanism of genome-wide
replacement of TAp73 by cRel and Np63, supporting cross-regulation and
interactive network between NF-kappaB and TP53 families.

