Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of miRNA in chemotherapy resistant
neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is a paediatric cancer of the sympathetic nervous system,
accounting for 15 % of childhood cancer related deaths. Treatment of
neuroblastoma (NB) patients involves intensive rounds of multimodal
chemotherapy, with initial responses often being positive, but with a
high likelihood of relapse and development of therapy resistance. The aim
of this project is to identify miRNAs associated with resistance to
chemotherapeutics in NB, and elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved.
In order to understand miRNA involvement in NB drug resistance, two MYCN
amplified (KellyCis83, CHP-212Cis100) and one MYCN single copy cell line
(SK-N-ASCis24) resistant to cisplatin (CDDP) were developed using drug
pulse selection. An increase in resistance to CDDP was confirmed by
examination of IC50s before and after selection. Expression of 770 miRNAs
was analyzed using Taqman arrays and drug resistant profiles were
compared to those of parental lines. 41, 51 and 72 miRNAs were
differentially expressed in KellyCis83, SKNASCis24 and CHP-212Cis100
respectively. A total of 8 miRNA exhibited the same pattern of
differential expression in both KellyCis83 and SKNASCis24, 6 miRNA in
KellyCis83 and CHP-212Cis100, and 8 miRNA in SKNASCis24 and
CHP-212Cis100. 2 miRNA were commonly differentially expressed across all
three cell lines. Assessment of cellular proliferation revealed resistant
variants KellyCis83 and CHP-212Cis100 grown in the presence of low-dose
CDDP consistently outgrew cells grown in normal media. This increase in
growth is not observed in the parental cell lines. MiRNA expression
profiles of cells challenged with 0.2 M CDDP were obtained and 31 miRNAs
differentially expressed in KellyCis83 and CHP-212Cis100 identified. Many
miRNAs identified have been previously associated with drug resistance,
confirming the efficacy of this approach. For example, in the panel of 8
miRNA common to KellyCis83 and SK-N-ASCis24, all miRNA are predicted to
target at least one of two key copper transporters involved in CDDP
transport; hCtr1 and ATP7A. Each cell line was also analyzed using aCGH
to identify DNA copy number alterations. A region of focal gain
containing NAIP (NLR family, apoptosis inhibitory protein) was identified
in SKNASCis24, and a 15-fold increase of NAIP mRNA was confirmed using
qPCR. NAIP inhibits caspases-3, 7 and 9 resulting in increased cell
survival. This discovery was of interest because 13 of the 33 miRNAs
down-regulated in SK-N-ASCis24 are predicted to target NAIP. SiRNA
depletion of NAIP mRNA led to increased sensitivity to etoposide, but not
CDDP in SK-N-ASCis24. However, both drugs have different mechanisms of
action and it is possible that NAIP has a greater influence over the
function of etoposide in our model. In conclusion, we have identified
miRNA associated with drug resistance in NB, and are now working to
elucidate the mechanism of miRNA involvement in the process of multidrug
resistance.

