Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -catenin silencing induces both apoptotic and autophagic cell
death through LKB1/AMPK signal in head and neck cancer cells


-Catenin, a multifunctional protein involved in key molecule of Wnt
signaling transduction, has been well known to regulate cell
proliferation, differentiation, cell-cell adhesion, survival, and
apoptosis as well as plays an important role in human tumorigenesis. Our
previous report showed that Wnt/-catenin pathway controls
radiosensitivity of head and neck caner (HNC) cell via
cyclooxygenase-2-mediated Ku expression. However, the specific molecular
mechanisms of -catenin in tumor cell survival and death are still not
fully understood, so in the present study we attempted to elucidate the
mechanism of cell death in HNC cell by studying how -catenin silencing
regulates cell death through KB1/AMPK signaling. We performed -catenin
knockdown in HNC cell by using small interfering RNA. Its effect on the
cell viability was confirmed by observation of cell morphologic change,
electron microscopy, MTT and FACS analysis. Also, we confirmed the
expression of several proteins corresponding signal pathway by western
blot analysis. -catenin silencing significantly induced G1 cell-cycle
arrest and also increased the expression of Bax and the active form of
caspase-3, and decreased the expression of Bcl-2, demonstrating the
sequential activation of apoptotic cascades following treatment with
-catenin siRNA in HNC cell. Interestingly, -catenin silencing induced
autophagy as well as apoptosis. We confirmed that the numbers of
autophagic vacuoles and the expression of LC3-II increased in cells
treated with -catenin siRNA. This is probably because LKB1-dependent AMPK
is activated by -catenin silencing in HNC cell. Activated AMPK, in
-catenin silenced AMC-HN-3 cells, causes a G1 cell cycle arrest by
phosphorylated p53 as well as inhibited protein synthesis by suppressing
mTOR activity. Also, Treatment with LKB1 siRNA or compound C in AMC-HN-3
cells preserved cell viability against -catenin silencing-induced
cytotoxicity. Taken together, our data show that -catenin silencing
induces cell death through LKB1/AMPK signal, and as a result, apoptosis
and autophagy are induced together in HNC cell, suggesting that a novel
interaction between -catenin and LKB1/AMPK signaling pathway occurs. Our
study provides new insights into understanding the cellular and molecular
mechanisms involving -catenin silencing-induced cell death.

