Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of CS-7017, a selective PPAR agonist, on the
TGF/Smad-mediated enhanced cell motility of EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor-resistant non-small cell lung cancer cells


Background: CS-7017, a novel selective peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPAR) agonist of thiazolidinedione class, has been
reported to induce morphological change and cellular differentiation as
well as its antiproliferative effects. A phase II clinical trial of
CS-7017 in combination with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib is currently ongoing in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Though EGFR-TKIs
are effective for NSCLCs with EGFR-activating mutations, the majority of
responders eventually develop acquired resistance. We have previously
reported that EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC cells acquire enhanced cell
motility via activation of TGF pathway. In this study, we aim to
investigate the effects of CS-7017 in EGFR-TKI-resistant NSCLC cells with
a focus on cell motility. Materials and Methods: Erlotinib-resistant
PC-9ER and gefitinib-resistant PC-9/ZD cells, established from PC-9 NSCLC
cells with EGFR-activating mutation, were used for this study and
constitutive PI3K/Akt activation and the EGFR T790M mutation have been
previously shown to account for the acquired resistance, respectively.
Growth-inhibitory effect of CS-7017 was evaluated by MTT assay. Wound
closure assay and transwell assay were performed to evaluate the cell
motility. The levels of TGF1 and 2 secretion were quantified by ELISA.
Cellular mRNA levels of TGFB1 and TGFB2 were measured by qRT-PCR. Smad-
or PPAR-mediated transcriptional activity was analyzed by luciferase
assay. Effects of CS-7017 on the molecules relevant to EGFR, TGF and PPAR
pathways were observed by immunoblot analysis. Results: Both PC-9ER and
PC-9/ZD resistant cells showed the enhanced cell motility resulting from
TGF2-induced activation of TGF pathway. CS-7017 showed significant
inhibitory effect on the cell motility of the resistant cells but showed
no growth-inhibitory effect. Moreover, combination treatment of CS-7017
and erlotinib resulted in better inhibition of the cell motility of
PC-9ER cells. CS-7017 treatment was found to suppress the TGF2 secretion
significantly resulting from downregulation of TGFB2 at transcriptional
level and attenuated Smad2 phosphorylation was observed in the resistant
cells. Smad-mediated transcriptional activity was also suppressed by
CS-7017 treatment. CS-7017 treatment induced PPAR-mediated
transcriptional activity in PC-9 and PC-9/ZD cells but not in PC-9ER
cells, suggesting that the inhibitory effect of CS-7017 on the cell
motility of PC-9ER cells may not be due to direct activation of PPAR
signaling by CS-7017. Conclusions: These results imply that CS-7017 may
serve as a potential therapeutic agent to prevent metastasis in NSCLC
patients who develop acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs regardless of the
types of resistance mechanisms.

