Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative biotherapy for brain tumors: Myxoma virus accelerates
NK clearance of malignant gliomas


Innovative biotherapeutic approaches for experimental malignant gliomas
(MGs) and brain tumor stem cells (BTSCs) include using oncolytic viruses
such as Myxoma Virus (Myxv) or immune cells such as Natural Killer (NK)
cells. In this study, we combined the individual strengths of using NK
cells and Myxv to treat MGs with a view of overcoming the potential
limitations posed when each is used as monotherapy. All MGs (U87, U251)
and BTSCs (25EF and 48EF) investigated expressed varying levels of NK
ligands including inhibitory MHC-I, activating ULBP1-3, MICA/B, and
co-activating nectin-2, poliovirus receptor. Infection of MGs and BTSCs
with Myxv resulted in the downregulation of MHC-I expression both on the
cell surface and intracellularly. No effect was observed on the
expression of NK activating ligands except for the downregulation of
nectin-2. The downregulation of MHC-I and nectin-2 by Myxv was
specifically mediated by M153 gene of Myxv as loss of M153 restored MHC-I
and nectin-2 expression. Subsequently, NK cell degranulation and killing
of MGs was enhanced in Myxv-infected cells. Loss of M153 inhibited NK
degranulation and lysis of MGs. In vivo, using luciferase-expressing U87
cells in a mouse intracranial model, Myxv accelerated tumor size
reduction/clearance by NK cell lysis. Combined intratumoral treatment
with Myxv and NK of established U87 tumor accelerated tumor clearance
when compared with single treatment with Myxv or NK. Tumor in 66% of mice
(4 out of 6 mice) were cleared or significantly reduced within 14 days
following combination treatment with Myxv and NK. No significant effect
was observed in Myxv or NK singly-treated mice within the same time
frame. Clearance of tumors was only first observed in 50% (2 out of 4) of
Myxv-treated mice after 25 days Myxv treatment. In NK treated mice, the
tumor size rather increased. The enhanced tumor clearance in the combined
Myxv and NK treated mice was possibly due to the down-regulation of MHC-I
by Myxv since combined treatment with NK cells and mutant Myxv (gene M153
which is responsible for MHC-I down-regulation was deleted) did not
result in clearance of tumors.

