Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular changes induced by the curcumin biphenyl analogue D6 in
melanoma cells


Malignant melanoma (MM) is one of the most aggressive cancers that affect
humans. It is the most common and fatal skin cancer, with an incidence
that is critically increasing in Western populations (15 times in the
last 40 years) and for which, in the advanced stages, there is no
effective therapy. The search for new compounds able to control it is
therefore essential. The hydroxylated biphenyl compound
(3E,3E)-4,4-(5,5,6,6-tetramethoxy-[1,1-biphenyl]-3,3-diyl)bis(but-3-en-2-on
e), namely D6, a structural analogue of curcumin, showed a strong
antitumor activity on MM cells both in vitro and in vivo, as we have
recently described [1]. The mechanisms of action of this compound are not
clear yet, but it inhibits cancer cells growth by inducing apoptosis
without affecting normal fibroblasts growth. Firstly we investigated the
ability of D6 to enter cells by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
(LC-MS) analysis. The LC-MS data showed a quick cellular uptake of D6
with a maximum peak after about 2 hours. To investigate on the effects of
D6 treatment on the cell cycle progression in MM cells, we performed flow
cytometry analysis, which evidenced a cell cycle arrest in the G2/M
phase. Gene expression profiles analysis using Illumina high-density
microarrays, was carried out on D6 treated MM cells and normal
fibroblasts allowing the identification of 599 transcripts whose
expression was modulated by D6 treatment in MM cells but not in normal
fibroblast. The analysis of results, performed by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis software, showed the centrality of CDKN1A gene, encoding p21, a
major negative cell cycle regulator, which was strongly over expressed,
while cyclin B and cdc25 phosphatase, showed both to be down modulated.
Other genes which expression interestingly appeared to be decreased by D6
activity were the oncogenes c-kit and PI3K, suggesting a down regulation
of both c-kit mediated and PI3K/AKT signal transduction pathways driving
to cell proliferation. Modulation of expression of these specific genes
has been confirmed at a protein level by western blotting analysis.
Moreover our results pointed out an upregulation of several heat shock
family genes, which is probably due to a curcumin related anti
inflammatory effect of D6. The preliminary results of these analysis show
that D6 induces molecular changes in MM cells at both gene expression and
protein levels, involving major cell proliferation regulatory pathways.
[1] Marina Pisano et al. (2010).Enhanced anti-tumor activity of a new
curcumin-related compound against melanoma and neuroblastoma cells.
Molecular Cancer, 9:137.

