Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZMIZ1 is elevated in epithelial ovarian cancer due to an
upregulated alternative promoter and is associated with p53 mutations


Objectives: The ZMIZ1 gene has recently been found to be a possible,
candidate oncogene through a transposon mutagenesis screen. It is widely
known that one of the most common genetic alterations in epithelial
ovarian cancer involves mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.
Previous studies have shown that ZMIZ1 appears to transcriptionally
regulate the p53 gene. We hypothesize that ZMIZ1 expression is caused by
the presence of an alternative promoter and that the interaction between
ZMIZ1 and p53 may impart worse survival. Methods: A retrospective chart
review was performed to identify 138 patients with epithelial ovarian
cancer. Data collected included clinico-pathologic factors, patient
follow-up, and mortality. ZMIZ1 staining and p53 sequencing were
performed on all patients. For the determination of ZMIZ1 alternative
promoter relative gene expression, RT-PCR was performed on 33 tumors
after cDNA had been isolated. Statistical analyses included chi-square
analysis and the binomial test. The log rank test was used to evaluate
survival analysis. Results: Immunostaining for the ZMIZ1 protein was
performed with the following results: 55 (40%) tumors stained positive
and 83 (60%) were negative. Of those patients that were found to be ZMIZ1
positive, over half were noted to have a p53 gene mutation. The median
survival of the ZMIZ1 positive/p53 mutated cohort was approximately 36
months while the median survival for the ZMIZ1 negative/p53 wild type
cohort was 84 months (p = 0.012). ZMIZ1 alternative promoter relative
gene expression was noted to be elevated in patients with ZMIZ1 positive
immunostaining compared to patients with negative staining. Conclusions:
ZMIZ1 staining appears to be present in 40% of patients with epithelial
ovarian cancer. In tumors that are ZMIZ1 positive, half contain p53 gene
mutations; this combination imparts worse survival. ZMIZ1 upregulation
may be due to the presence of a newly identified alternative promoter.
Additional studies are ongoing to better define the role of this
alternative promoter.

