Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia reveals
genetic and transcriptional predictors of compound sensitivity


The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) represents a collaborative
effort to assemble a comprehensive resource of human cancer models for
basic and translational research. It contains a detailed genetic
profiling of approximately 1,000 human cancer cell lines spanning many
tumor types. Thus far, high-density SNP array data, gene expression
microarray data and mutation data from hybrid capture sequencing of 1,650
cancer genes has been obtained. Additionally, we have assessed the
sensitivity of these same cell lines using a series of pharmacological
compounds that represent both conventional cytotoxic and targeted agents.
On major goal of the CCLE effort involves systematic integration of the
genomic and pharmacologic datasets in order to identify putative targets
of prevalent genetic alterations as well as predictors and modifiers of
pharmacologic sensitivity and resistance. The availability of
high-quality data generated by uniform criteria across hundreds of cell
lines markedly enhances the statistical power to discover genetic
alterations involved in carcinogenesis and molecular predictors of
pharmacologic vulnerability. We developed a framework based on an elastic
net machine-learning regression algorithm, and combined with a
bootstrapping procedure, to derive predictive models of the sensitivity
to each compound, using all genetic features of the cell lines in the
collection. Through this computational prediction approach, we have both
rediscovered molecular features predicting response to most drugs in our
set but also uncovered novel potential biomarkers of sensitivity and
resistance to targeted agents and chemotherapy drugs. For instance, we
have found that response to topoisomerase 1 inhibitors seems to be linked
to the expression of a single gene. We have also observed that tissue
lineage is a key predictor for sensitivity to certain compounds,
providing rationale for clinical trials of these drugs in particular
cancer types and we identified potential stratifiers for existing EGFR
targeted therapies. Finally, we have found an additional target for a
certain chemotype of MEK inhibitors, and shown that this interaction was
responsible for growth suppression, which might be a new indication for
this kind of drug. Our cell line-based platform provides a valuable tool
for the development of personalized cancer medicine, revealing critical
tumor dependencies and helping to stratify patients for clinical trials.

