Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-transcriptional regulators of microRNA biogenesis regulate
pathogenesis of cancer


MicroRNAs (miRs) have emerged as key regulators of both normal and
pathologic phenotypes, including cancer. Fine grained regulation of their
biogenesis, however, is still poorly understood and only a few of their
key regulators have been characterized. In order to understand the extent
and specificity of miR-biogenesis control, as well as the role of
miR-biogenesis regulators in tumorigenesis and cancer progression, we set
out to identify these regulators and profile their targets. We developed
a genome-wide computational screening method that leverages miR and gene
expression profiles in hundreds of samples to identify potential
biogenesis regulators in glioma and ovarian cancer. In total, miRage
predicted thirty miR-biogenesis regulators that are common to glioma and
ovarian cancer tumors, and hundreds of glioma-specific and
ovarian-cancer-specific regulators. Predicted regulators include known
biogenesis regulators DGCR8, HNRNPA1, DDX5, LIN28 and SMAD family
proteins. We validated selected regulators that are predicted to regulate
miRs in both cancers and are differentially expressed across glioma
prognosis. Differential expression of (1) mature miRs, (2) their host
genes, (3) co-transcribed miRs, (4) miR precursors, and (5) pri-miRs were
measured upon ectopic expression or RNAi-mediated silencing of the
predicted regulators in a glioma cell line. DDX10 was predicted to
up-regulate miR-218 biogenesis, and we showed that its ectopic expression
up-regulates miR-218 at the pri-miRNA stage; up-regulation of DDX10 may
account for miR-218 over-expression in poor-prognosis tumors.
High-throughput screening by nanostring nCounter and fluidigm systems
suggest that DDX10 regulation is broader effect than regulation by the
known biogenesis regulator, DDX17. In total, we report on nearly a dozen
validated miR-biogenesis regulators that were predicted by our
computational screens. Our results suggest that miR biogenesis is a
complex, context specific, and finely-regulated process, and that miR
biogenesis regulators may influence tumor initiation and progression by
altering the expression of specific tumor-suppressor and oncomirs or by
modifying large miR programs.

