Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: uPAR-mediated endothelial targeting facilitates endothelial to
tumor cell transfer of oncolytic measles virus: In vitro and in vivo
studies.


The tumor endothelium constitutes a barrier to the efficient delivery of
viral and non-viral therapeutic agents into tumor cells after systemic
administration. Because endothelial cells are easily accessible after
intravenous administration of a therapeutic agent, oncolytic viruses that
target tumor endothelium may have the advantage of circumventing this
problem since they may bind to endothelial cells, replicate in them, and
facilitate viral entry into tumor tissue. The urokinase plasminogen
receptor (uPAR) is over-expressed in tumor endothelium and plays a
critical role in tumor neovascularization. The goal of this study is to
demonstrate the ability of an oncolytic measles virus redirected against
uPAR (MV-uPA) to infect endothelial cells in vitro and to target tumor
vasculature in vivo. We engineered and rescued recombinant oncolytic
measles viruses fully retargeted against human (MV-huPA) or murine
(MV-muPA) urokinase receptor. A dual targeting measles virus (MV-un-muPA,
targeting human cancer cells via CD46 and murine tissues via murine uPAR)
was generated by displaying murine ATF of uPA into the C-terminus of the
unmodified MV-H glycoprotein of MV-Edm genome, and then rescued. The
specific dual species targeting virus offers the unique opportunity to
investigate the ability of a virus to target tumor angiogenesis (via
murine uPAR) and deliver the infection to tumor cells (via CD46) in vivo.
Stimulation of human (HUVEC, HMVEC-L and HMVEC-D) and murine (MS1)
endothelial cells by serum and growth factors was associated with
upregulation of uPAR expression, as compared to non-stimulated ECs, while
levels of CD46 -the natural receptor for non-retargeted oncolytic MV-were
not changed. Upregulation of uPAR was associated with higher infection
efficiency of ECs by the species specific MV-uPA compared to non-targeted
MV-GFP. Human endothelial (EC)-to-human tumor cell (TC) viral transfer in
vitro was demonstrated by co-culture experiments between MV-huPA infected
ECs expressing GFP and uninfected, RFP expressing breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436, MCF-7) and identification of yellow fluorescent
syncytia. MV-un-muPA efficiently infected mouse ECs (MS1) and human
cancer cells. Importantly, MS-1 cells infected with MV-un-muPA
successfully transferred the virus to human TCs. Intravenous
administration of MV-un-muPA to mice bearing human breast tumors
(MDA-MB-231) was associated with targeting of murine tumor vasculature
(via murine uPAR), higher viral protein (MV-N) in tumor tissues, and a
trend to better survival, compared with single targeted (CD46) control
virus, In conclusion, our results demonstrated that tumor endothelial
uPAR targeting by MV-uPA facilitates endothelial-to tumor cell viral
transfer in vitro, and viral entry into tumor tissues in vivo by
targeting angiogenic endothelium.

