Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential regulation of autophagy vs. apoptosis as a
potentially unique mechanism of cancer cell specific radiosensitization
with fluoxetine


Introduction: Prior data demonstrate that selective serotonergic reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) are cytotoxic to cancer cells and that fluoxetine can
sensitize cells to radiotherapy (XRT) potentially through induction of
autophagy; however, there is limited information on the effects of
serotonergic receptor modulation and mechanisms of other SSRIs on
cytotoxicity with radiotherapy. Methods: Human lung cancer lines (A549
and H460) and oropharyngeal cancer cells (FaDu) were treated with dose
escalated SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine), serotonergic
receptor (5-HTR) agonists (CP809101, S14506), or 5-HTR antagonists
(agomelatine, spiroxatrine) alone or in combination with dose escalated
XRT to evaluate the effects of on cell survival using clonogenic survival
assays. 5-HTR expression, apoptosis, and autophagy were evaluated as
potential mechanisms of the effects of SSRIs on XRT. Results: Fluoxetine,
paroxetine, or sertraline alone had a cytotoxic effect on cancer cells in
a concentration dependent manner. Fluoxetine had a sensitizing effect in
combination with XRT in a cell specific manor; however, sertraline and
paroxetine had an additive cytotoxic effect on XRT. 5-HTR agonists and
antagonists did not demonstrate any significant sensitizing effects, but
agonists were cytotoxic at 10-50 uM with no apparent cytotoxicity from
antagonists. Western blot analysis demonstrated that fluoxetine,
paroxetine, or sertraline decreased apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3 and
cleaved PARP) and increased autophagy (LC3B-II) in H460 cells associated
with the sensitizing effect of fluoxetine on XRT. In contrast, the
additive cytotoxicity of sertraline or paroxetine was not associated with
a differential regulation of apoptosis vs. autophagy in A549 cells.
Conclusions: SSRIs appear to have a cytotoxic effect alone or in
combination with XRT potentially through a non 5-HTR based mechanism. The
cell specific differential regulation of apoptosis vs. autophagy
associated with fluoxetine warrants further examination of a potentially
unique mechanism of radiosensitization.

