Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measurement of tumor vascular integrity changes in an orthotopic
glioma model in rats induced by antiangiogenic treatment using DCE-MRI


Background Glioblastoma is the most aggressive subtype of brain tumors.
Antiangiogenic compounds are being tested in clinical trials, for this
pathology, mostly in combination with other molecules. The availability
of an imaging biomarker of efficacy could help optimize the dosing and
scheduling of these combinations. The aim of this study was to validate
DCE-MRI, using two contrast agents of different molecular weight, as an
imaging biomarker of the efficacy of sorafenib (Nexavar, BAY 43-9006) in
an orthotopic glioma model in Nude rats. Methods U-87 MG human glioma
cells were inoculated by stereotactic injection in the right caudate
nucleus of 24 Nude rats. All rats were first imaged 10 days after cell
injection to measure their baseline tumor volume (TV) using T2-weighted
MRI (Bruker Pharmascan, 4.7T). Based on their TV, 20 rats were selected
and imaged at D-1 (14 days after cell injection). The rats were then
randomized into 2 groups of 8 rats according to their tumor vascular
status following a full DCE-MRI protocol using either Gd-DTPA (Magnevist)
or P846 (two parameters: Ktrans from pharmaco-kinetic modeling of the
contrast agent uptake curve, and iAUC60, the initial area under the
gadolinium concentration time curve after 60 seconds). P846 is a
medium-molecular weight, gadolinium-based contrast agent provided by Dr
P. Robert (Guerbet). In both subgroups of 8 rats, each animal received a
daily per os administration of either sorafenib (100 mg/kg/adm) or its
vehicle. All 16 rats were then imaged at D1, D3 and D7. At each time
point, voxelwise maps of DCE-MRI parameters were derived from imaging
data and their distribution analyzed within regions of interest within
the tumor and the contralateral lesion-free tissue. Results Sorafenib was
well tolerated and it increased the median survival of tumor-bearing rats
by 20%. At D7, despite no difference in tumor growth kinetics, DCE-MRI
parameters (Ktrans and iUAC60) showed significant differences between
sorafenib-treated and control groups using either Magnevist or P846.
Visual assessment showed that the heterogeneity of contrast agent uptake
was reduced by antiangiogenic treatment with sorafenib. The
quantification of this phenomenon by statistical analysis of the
parameter distributions within the ROIs is pending. Conclusions In
conclusion, we have shown that DCE-MRI, with either Magnevist or P846
contrast agents, is a suitable non-invasive imaging technique to show
changes of tumor vasculature integrity induced by antiangiogenic
treatment such as sorafenib in orthotopically-implanted glioma in Nude
rats.

