Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Science Exchange: An integrated platform for experiment outsourcing


Introduction: Scientific research is becoming increasingly specialized,
necessitating greater use of collaborations and outsourcing to draw on
experimental expertise. To facilitate this, many research institutions
have established core facilities to help reduce the inefficiencies
associated with the historical system of bartering to gain access to
specialized equipment and expertise. However, the current core facility
system is fragmented: researchers have varying degrees of access to
services, quality is hard to evaluate and pricing is not transparent.
Researchers who need to collaborate outside of their institution lack an
easy way to find providers, evaluate them, coordinate logistics and pay
for work. Similarly, core facilities lack a robust mechanism for
promoting their expertise and services to relevant researchers outside
their institution. Methods: Science Exchange, an online marketplace
accessible at www.ScienceExchange.com, was launched in August 2011 to
address these issues. Science Exchange works by signing up core
facilities as providers of different experiment types. Researchers can
search for an experiment type they wish to outsource and choose a
facility to perform the work, or post an open project and receive bids
from qualified facilities. Science Exchange acts as a centralized hub for
provider information and reviews, and assists with project management,
including billing and payment. The goal of Science Exchange is to create
an integrated and accessible marketplace for experimental services.
Results: As of October 2011 more than 3,000 scientists from over 500
research institutions have registered with Science Exchange. The top 10
most searched for experiment types are, in descending order: DNA
sequencing, Bioinformatics, Microarray, DNA analysis, electron
microscopy, protein extraction/ purification, confocal microscopy,
realtime qPCR, microRNA microarray, and NMR. On average, experiments
outsourced through the platform have saved users 54% of the value of
their experiment ($4,664 per experiment). Conclusions: Science Exchange
has begun to address the barriers to effective experiment outsourcing. As
with any marketplace, awareness and participation by key players is
essential to increase utility. Experience also provides data necessary to
make outsourcing as frictionless as possible for the particulars of each
experiment type. Our team has an enduring commitment to making the
platform as useful for researchers and providers as possible.

