Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogenic activity of anthrax lethal toxin using the mouse
retina as a model system


Our laboratory has previously shown that inhibition of MKK pathways by
anthrax lethal toxin (LeTx) inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis,
reduces VEGF secretion, and results in rapid cessation of blood flow to
tumors in melanoma and sarcoma xenograft model systems. To gain insight
into the anti-angiogenic nature of LeTx, we utilized both developmental
and pathological models of vascularization in the murine retina. By
immunoblotting and immunofluorescence microscopy we observed that MAPK
activation occurs in a spatially and temporally regulated manner during
retinal vascular development. Intravitreal administration of LeTx caused
an early delay in retinal vascular development followed by the formation
of abnormal vascular tufts that co-stained with phosphorylated MAPK in
the outer retinal region. Using a model of oxygen-induced retinopathy,
western analysis revealed that MAPK activation preceded the onset of
hypoxia and development of neovascularization in this model system.
Intravitreal injection of LeTx during hypoxia resulted in a persistent
lack of development and progression of all pathologic aspects of
neovascularization, while having minimal effect on macrophage
recruitment. VEGF levels remained at an elevated level even with the
persistent lack of neovascular growth and continued hypoxic environment,
implying a VEGF-independent mechanism for the effects of MKK inhibition.
Additionally, immature retinal vasculature during normal development was
persistently destroyed following MAPK inhibition, while mature vessels
from adult animals were unaffected. Our studies not only reveal that MKK
signaling plays a key role in retinal angiogenesis but also that
perturbation of MKK signaling by LeTx can profoundly alter vascular
morphogenesis. The persistent destruction of immature vessels during
normal vascular development in the retina and in the model of
oxygen-induced retinopathy suggests an extreme sensitivity of immature
vessels to MKK signaling inhibition. Since MKK inhibition prevents
oxygen-induced retinopathy by a mechanism independent of the
VEGF-targeting strategies, this approach may be used in conjunction with
existing strategies utilizing VEGF inhibitors to prevent pathologic
angiogenesis.

