Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Key miRNAs and co-targets in patients of OPSC and OCC


Objectives: To identify the key microRNAs (miRNAs) and their top
co-targets in patients of elderly ovarian papillary serous carcinoma
(OPSC) patients with advanced stage and ovarian clear cell carcinoma
(OCC), for the insight of possible regulation gene and pathway of
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) prognosis. Methods: The study was opened
to patients with primary, previously untreated EOC referred to member
institutions. Pathologic diagnosis was confirmed by central review.
High-throughput analysis of the miRNA profile in a panel of OCC and OPSC
cells was assessed using a microarray platform. The miRNA-targets and
possible pathway were predicted by TargetScans, MicroCosm Targets version
5, miRBase and Ingenuity. Finally, the downstream predicated co-target,
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was validated by quantitative
Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemical
(IHC) assay. Results: Of the 667 miRNAs analyzed from human, we
identified 83 as enriched in the OPSC, and 15 in OCC (PObjectives: To
identify the key microRNAs (miRNAs) and their top co-targets in patients
of elderly ovarian papillary serous carcinoma (OPSC) patients with
advanced stage and ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCC), for the insight of
possible regulation gene and pathway of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
prognosis. Methods: The study was opened to patients with primary,
previously untreated EOC referred to member institutions. Pathologic
diagnosis was confirmed by central review. High-throughput analysis of
the miRNA profile in a panel of OCC and OPSC cells was assessed using a
microarray platform. The miRNA-targets and possible pathway were
predicted by TargetScans, MicroCosm Targets version 5, miRBase and
Ingenuity. Finally, the downstream predicated co-target, activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was validated by quantitative Real-Time
Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemical (IHC) assay.
Results: Of the 667 miRNAs analyzed from human, we identified 83 as
enriched in the OPSC, and 15 in OCC (P<0.01 for all). Seventeen of 667
miRNAs were significantly expressed with at least 3 fold differences in
the OPSC versus OCC. The expression of tree miRNAs (miR-30a*, miR-30e*,
miR-505*) were most significantly lower in OCC comparing to elderly OPSC
patients with advanced stage. ATF3, the top co-target gene of three key
miRNAs mentioned above was highly expressed in OCC lesions, and a
stronger distribution was shown in protein level of ATF3 by
immunohistochemistry in OCC than OPSC lesions. Conclusions: We identified
the key miRNAs that differentially expressed in patients of elderly OPSC
with advanced stage and OCC tumors, predicted and validated the most
popular co-target shared by the key miRNAs, indicating the possible
regulation gene and pathway for EOC prognosis.

