Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of PKC/par3/par6 polarity complex is critical for
hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration, and
invasion in lung cancer cells


Rationale: We have previously reported that hypoxia induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lung cancer cells. EMT has
been known to contribute to tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Recent
evidence suggests that loss of cell polarity complex, which consists of
atypical protein kinase C (PKC), Par (partitioning defective) 3, and
Par6, is strongly correlated with malignancy. However, it is unknown
whether hypoxia-induced cancer cell migration, invasion, and metastasis
are caused by the loss of PKC/Par3/Par6 polarity complex and subsequent
EMT. Methods: We incubated A549 in hypoxic conditions (1.5% O2) for a
period of time and assessed the protein abundance of -SMA, vimentin,
E-cadherin, PKC, Par3, and Par6 as well as PKC ubiquitination. Next we
knocked down PKC/Par3/Par6 by siRNAs and determined the abundance of
-SMA, vimentin, and E-cadherin. We also measured cell migration and
invasion after knockdown of PKC/Par3/Par6 in vitro. In addition, we
established A549 cells with knockdown of Par3 and determined cell
proliferation rate and lung colonization in a mouse tail-vein injection
model, in which lung cancer cells were injected intravenously into the
tail vein of mice and lung metastatic foci were quantified in five weeks.
Furthermore, we obtained human lung adenocarcinoma tissue samples and
self-matched adjacent normal tissues as well as unmatched normal tissues
and detected the expression levels of PKC/Par3/Par6 polarity complex.
Results: We found that A549 cells exposed to hypoxia expressed decreased
PKC/Par3/Par6 polarity complex and E-cadherin and increased expression of
-SMA and vimentin, suggesting that loss of PKC/Par3/Par6 polarity complex
is associated with the induction of EMT. We also showed that hypoxia
increased ubiquitination of PKC. Our results also showed that loss of
either of PKC, Par3, or Par6 resulted in EMT, elevated migration and
invasion, and increased the numbers of metastatic foci in the lungs.
Moreover, we show that human lung adenocarcinoma tissues express less
Par6 protein than the adjacent normal tissues. Conclusions: These results
suggest that in lung cancer cells hypoxia downregulates PKC/Par3/par6,
leading to EMT and increased cancer cell migration, invasion, and
colonization. Support: UIC Faculty Scholarship Support Program and the
University of Illinois Cancer Center Pilot Subsidy Program.

