Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MALDI imaging mass spectrometry of three-dimensional cell culture
systems


3D cell cultures have increased complexity compared to simple monolayer
and suspension cultures, recapitulating the cellular architecture in the
body. For example, many colon cancer cell lines form rounded
heterogeneous spheroid structures that mimic the pathophysiological
properties of tumors when grown under appropriate cell culture
conditions. Classical imaging methodologies, like immunohistochemistry,
are commonly used to examine the distribution of specific species within
the spheroids. However, there is a need for an unbiased discovery-based
methodology that would allow examination of protein/peptide distributions
in 3D culture systems, without a need for prior knowledge of the
analytes. We have developed MALDI imaging mass spectrometry protocols to
examine protein distributions in 3D cultures models. Using the HCT 116
colon carcinoma cell line, we have grown spheroids measuring 1 mm in
diameter for MALDI IMS imaging. We detect changes in the spatial
distribution of proteins across the spheroids by IMS. While most proteins
are distributed across the structures, some are localized to either the
proliferative outer rim of the spheroids or to the central necrotic core.
We are now expanding our studies to map the changes in protein
distribution that accompany knockdown of E-cadherin (CDH1). We are
inserting inducible shRNAs targeting CDH1 into HCT 116 cells. Once our
cells stably express the shRNAs, we will grow spheroids and then trigger
knockdown of CDH1 expression. We will map changes in protein expression
over a time course using the MALDI imaging mass spectrometry protocols we
have developed. As CDH1 is a critical component of cell-cell junctions,
we anticipate that its reduction will trigger phenotypic changes in the
spheroid structures. In addition, we expect to see a shift in
transcriptional activity that correlates with activation of the
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition. Our unbiased protein mapping
technology enables us to examine previously observed protein changes that
result from CDH1 reduction.

