Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzyl isothiocyanate-mediated inhibition of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human breast cancer cells is
associated with downregulation of urokinase-type plasminogen activator
and its receptor


Novel approaches for chemoprevention of breast cancer are clinically
attractive not only because many risk factors associated with this
disease are not easily modifiable (e.g., genetic predisposition) but also
due to the fact that the currently available chemopreventive options
targeted against breast cancer (e.g., estrogen receptor antagonists) are
sub-optimal and plagued with adverse side effects. Needless to emphasize
that breast cancer continues to be a leading cause of cancer-related
death in American women despite significant advances towards targeted
therapies. Benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC), a constituent of edible
cruciferous vegetables (e.g., garden cress), seems promising for
chemoprevention of breast cancer based on our own preclinical work. For
example, we have shown previously that BITC administration not only
inhibits growth of human breast cancer xenografts (MDA-MB-231) in athymic
mice but also imparts significant protection against mammary cancer
development in a transgenic mouse model (MMTV-neu). More recent studies
from our laboratory have revealed that BITC is a potent inhibitor of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human breast cancer cells, but
the mechanism underlying this effect is not known. In the present study,
we addressed this question using MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and SUM159 human
breast cancer cells as a model. Overexpression of superoxide dismutase,
which confers significant protection against proapoptotic and
proautophagic cell death responses to BITC, did not have any meaningful
impact on BITC-mediated inhibition of EMT. Likewise, ectopic expression
of constitutively active STAT3, a transcription factor implicated in EMT
regulation, had no effect on EMT inhibition by BITC. Instead, the
BITC-mediated inhibition of EMT was associated with suppression of
protein and mRNA levels of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and
its receptor (uPAR). Secretion of uPA in culture media of breast cancer
cells was also decreased significantly upon BITC treatment. BITC-mediated
inhibition of MDA-MB-231 xenograft growth in vivo was accompanied by
downregulation of uPA and uPAR protein expression in the tumor and
suppression of uPA secretion in plasma. Ectopic expression of uPAR in
MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7 cells conferred partial but significant protection
against BITC-mediated inhibition of EMT, cell migration, and/or cell
invasion. Collectively, these results indicate that BITC-mediated
inhibition of EMT is caused, at least in part, by suppression of the
uPA/uPAR system. This investigation was supported by the USPHS grant RO1
CA129347-05, awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

