Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of lysyl oxidase on proangiogenic phenotypes of tumor
endothelial cells


Introduction and Objectives: The molecules which are highly expressed in
tumor endothelial cell (TEC) are important to target TEC more
specifically. We found LOX gene was upregulated in TEC compared to normal
endothelial cell (NEC) by DNA microarray analysis in three different
types of human tumor xenografts in nude mouse including renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). LOX is an enzyme which is reported to play a critical
role in the metastatic potential of tumor, possibly promoting tumor cell
trafficking into the premetastatic niche in various types of
malignancies. However, the effect of LOX on TEC has not been reported. To
investigate whether LOX might be a TEC-specific target in cancer therapy,
we analyzed its expression in clinical sample and examined the function
of LOX on TEC. Methods: We successfully purified human TEC (hTEC) and NEC
(hNEC) from surgically resected RCC and normal parenchyma from six
patients, respectively. Using cultured hTEC and hNEC, competitive reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed. LOX
expression level was investigated using immunohistochemistry (IHC). To
explore the role of LOX in TEC, mouse TEC (mTEC) and NEC (mNEC) were
isolated from human tumor xenografts in nude mouse and the normal
counterparts, respectively. To investigate the function of LOX, LOX was
knock-downed using siRNA and TEC phenotypic changes were analyzed by
migration assay and vascular tube formation assay. In addition, we
investigated the effect of -aminopropionitrile (BAPN), an irreversible
inhibitor of LOX, on tumor angiogenesis and metastatic colonization in
vivo. Results: LOX expression levels were higher in isolated TEC than NEC
both in human (Tissues: clear cell carcinoma 6; Stage T1, 3; T3, 3; Grade
1, 1; Grade 2, 2; Grade 3, 3) and mouse by RT-PCR. In IHC, LOX was
detected in blood vessels in human RCC, not in normal tissue. Cell
migration and tube formation of mTEC were suppressed by LOX knock-down
using siRNA with decrease in phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase
(Tyr397). Furthermore, BAPN specifically inhibited tumor angiogenesis and
micrometastasis in vivo, via inhibition of LOX activity of TEC.
Conclusions: Our findings suggest that LOX upregulated in TEC contributes
in their proangiogenic phenotype and plays key roles in tumor metastasis.
LOX might be a TEC-specific target and be useful for cancer therapeutic
purposes.

