Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK1775, a selective Wee1 inhibitor shows antitumor activity
against sarcoma cells


Sarcomas are rare and heterogeneous mesenchymal tumors affecting both
pediatric and adult populations with more than 70 recognized histologies.
Doxorubicin and ifosfamide have been the main course of therapy for
treatment of sarcomas; however, the response rate to these therapies is
about 10-20% in metastatic setting. Toxicity with the drug combination is
high, response rates remain low, and improvement in overall survival,
especially in the metastatic disease, remains negligible. Accordingly,
new agents are needed for the treatment of this heterogeneous group of
diseases. Wee1 is a critical component of the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint
control and mediates cell cycle arrest by regulating the phosphorylation
of CDC2. Inhibition of Wee1 by a selective small molecule inhibitor
MK1775 has been reported to to enhance the cytotoxic effect of DNA
damaging agents. However, its role in the treatment of mesenchymal tumors
has not been explored. In this study we investigated the therapeutic
efficacy of MK1775 in various sarcoma cell lines and patient-derived
tumor explants ex vivo both alone and in combination with other
chemotherapeutic drugs frequently used in the treatment of sarcomas. Our
data demonstrate that MK1775 treatment as a single agent at clinically
relevant concentrations leads to unscheduled entry into mitosis and
initiation of apoptotic cell death in all sarcomas tested. Additionally,
MK1775 significantly enhances the cytotoxic effect of the DNA damaging
agents, gemcitabine and doxorubicin. In MK1775 treated cells CDC2
activity was enhanced and G2/M ceheckpoint was impaired as assessed by
increased expression of phosphorylated histone H3, a marker of mitotic
entry. The cytotoxic effect of Wee1 inhibition on sarcoma cells appears
to be independent of p53 status as all sarcoma cell lines with different
p53 mutation were highly sensitive to treatment. Additionally, in
patient-derived bone and soft tissue sarcoma samples we showed that
MK1775 in combination with gemcitabine causes significant apoptotic cell
death suggesting that this treatment may represent a novel approach in
the treatment of sarcomas. In patient-derived xenograft mouse models of
sarcoma we are currently analyzing the therapeutic efficacy of MK1775 in
vivo by utilizing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion MRI
methods. Our results together with the high safety profile of MK1775
strongly suggest that this drug can be used as a potential therapeutic
agent in the treatment of both adult as well as pediatric sarcoma
patients.

