Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A quantitative sequencing based method for the monitoring of
clonal expansion


Background: Genetic modification of hematopoietic stem cells with
retroviral vectors has been associated with clonal expansion and even the
induction of T-cell leukemia. Therefore, monitoring the behavior of the
transduced cells may reveal critical information related to the viral
vector, its application in hematopoietic stem cells and leukemogenesis.
We have developed a viral barcode that provides a quantitative measure of
clonality upon sequence analysis of genomic DNA recovered from transduced
cells. In the polyclonal population, sequencing should reveal great
variability, yet a decrease in population complexity would a reduce
barcode variability. Clonal expansion would be revealed when a single
barcode is predominant in the population. Methods: A barcode containing
10 variable sites was produced and inserted in a lentiviral vector,
generating a library with up to 1024 possible clones. Virus supernatant
encoding the library was produced and used to transduce NIH3T3 cells.
gDNA was isolated and the barcode region sequenced (Sanger method)
resulting in a chromatogram that reveals the relative contribution of
each base at the variable site and, thus, monitors alterations in the
cell population. Alternatively, the barcode library was inserted in
lentiviral vectors encoding IL2RG (therapeutic gene for the correction of
x-linked severe combined immunodeficiency) or LMO2 (an oncogene
implicated in the onset of leukemia in X-SCID gene therapy trials) and
these viruses were used to transduce mouse hematopoietic progenitor cells
before transplant in myeloablated recipient mice. Peripheral blood was
collected periodically for analysis. Results: To evaluate the
quantitative profile of the technique, a single plasmid clone was
isolated and mixed at known proportions with the plasmid library or with
a second distinct clone. The barcode region was sequenced and the
chromatogram amplitudes used to quantify the amount of the clone present
in the mix of plasmids. We have found a correlation of 96% between the
obtained and the predicted results. In a tissue culture assay we
simulated clonal expansion by mixing cells transduced with a single viral
clone with cells transduced with the viral library and monitored the
barcode over time, showing that the barcode can reveal the complexity of
a cell population. At this time, the transplanted mice are being
monitored for the onset of leukemia as revealed by both hematologic exams
and evaluation of the barcode. Conclusions: We have shown that common
sequencing procedures can be used reliably to quantify the presence of a
barcode even in a mixed population of cells. Such a method could be
applied to gene therapy approaches in the hematopoietic system as well as
used to reveal the behavior of cell populations during leukemogenesis.
This work was supported by FAPESP.

