Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beclin-1 regulation of autophagy in endocrine resistant breast
cancer


Resistance to endocrine therapy occurs in nearly 50% of all patients
diagnosed with estrogen receptor positive breast cancer, thus elucidating
mechanism(s) of endocrine resistance is of major importance. To provide a
model, we selected MCF7 variants that are estrogen independent and either
sensitive (LCC1) or resistant (LCC9) to antiestrogens: Faslodex (FAS; ICI
182, 780) and Tamoxifen (TAM). Antiestrogens induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress which, depending on cell type, stimulus, and duration, may
subsequently activate the unfolded protein response (UPR), autophagy,
and/or apoptosis. Gene microarray analysis of LCC9 cells show high
expression levels of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), implicating the
unfolded protein response (UPR) as a pro-survival mechanism of
resistance. In addition to an elevated UPR, autophagy is substantially
elevated in response to antiestrogens. To better understand the role of
autophagy in antiestrogen responsiveness, we investigated the consequence
of knocking down BECLIN-1 in LCC1 and LCC9 cells treated with FAS and
TAM. Preliminary results indicate a time-dependent change in autophagy
following knock-down of beclin-1 in response to short-term (48h) and
long-term (6 day) treatment. At 48h, sensitive LCC1 cells respond to
antiestrogens with high levels of autophagy measured by increased LC3BII
to LC3BI ratio and decreased expression of p62. Relative cell density
(measured by crystal violet assay) decreases by 20% at 48h and by 80% at
6 days in LCC1 cells however, LCC9 cells are minimally affected by
antiestrogen treatment. The level of autophagy remains high at 6 days in
sensitive cells however levels remain constant in resistant cells.
Autophagy is significantly lowered by reduced BECN1 in both sensitive and
resistant cells however there is an increase in cell density in sensitive
cells transfected with BECN1- shRNA at 6 days, indicating an autophagy
associated programmed cell death mechanism in response to antiestrogen
treatment. Protein expression of an active form of caspase 12/4 (an
initiator caspase activated during endoplasmic reticulum stress) is
elevated in sensitive cells at 6 days in response to antiestrogen
treatment, also indicating the onset of apoptosis at this time. Elevated
expression of Bcl-2 family members in resistant cells may play a more
substantial role than BECN1 alone, as the combination of Bcl-2 family
protein inhibitors and BECN1-shRNA sensitizes resistant cells to a
greater extent. Thus, Bcl-2 family members in resistant cells may play a
critical role in managing the balance between cell survival (moderate
autophagy) and programmed cell death (excessive autophagy and apoptosis)
in response to antiestrogen treatment.

