Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of the effect of MAPRE2 on human lung adenocarcinoma cell
migration and invasion


Lung cancer is the most malignant disease which makes lots of people dead
worldwide. More and more evidences showed that cancers might arise from
chromosome alteration, including amplification or deletion. Our previous
study integrating microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and
affymetrix gene expression profiles identified a potential candidate
gene, MAPRE2, in a lung cancer cell line model with different invasion
capability. MAPRE2 (Microtubule-associated protein RP/EB family member 2)
is usually located on microtubule and interactes with tumor suppress gene
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli). MAPRE2 might be involved in microtubule
polymerization, cell migration and tumorigenesis of colorectal cancers,
but its function is unclear. The purpose of this study is to investigate
the effects of MAPRE2 on cancer cell function. The results of real-time
PCR and western blotting showed that DNA copy number, RNA and protein
level of MAPRE2 were higher in low invasive lung cancer cells than in
highly invasive cells. Immunofluorescence assay indicated that the
distribution of MAPRE2 protein was predominant in cytoplasm. Furthermore,
overexpression of MAPRE2 could inhibit cancer cell proliferation,
anchorage- dependent and -independent growth, cell motility, invasion
ability in vitro and tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. On the
contrary, silencing MAPRE2 enhanced lung cancer cell proliferation and
invasion ability. Consider the whole map of MAPRE2-regulated signalling,
transcriptomic analysis was performed and the results showed that MAPRE2
could affect 1039 genes (ANOVA, FDRLung cancer is the most malignant
disease which makes lots of people dead worldwide. More and more
evidences showed that cancers might arise from chromosome alteration,
including amplification or deletion. Our previous study integrating
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and affymetrix gene
expression profiles identified a potential candidate gene, MAPRE2, in a
lung cancer cell line model with different invasion capability. MAPRE2
(Microtubule-associated protein RP/EB family member 2) is usually located
on microtubule and interactes with tumor suppress gene APC (adenomatous
polyposis coli). MAPRE2 might be involved in microtubule polymerization,
cell migration and tumorigenesis of colorectal cancers, but its function
is unclear. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of
MAPRE2 on cancer cell function. The results of real-time PCR and western
blotting showed that DNA copy number, RNA and protein level of MAPRE2
were higher in low invasive lung cancer cells than in highly invasive
cells. Immunofluorescence assay indicated that the distribution of MAPRE2
protein was predominant in cytoplasm. Furthermore, overexpression of
MAPRE2 could inhibit cancer cell proliferation, anchorage- dependent and
-independent growth, cell motility, invasion ability in vitro and tumor
growth and metastasis in vivo. On the contrary, silencing MAPRE2 enhanced
lung cancer cell proliferation and invasion ability. Consider the whole
map of MAPRE2-regulated signalling, transcriptomic analysis was performed
and the results showed that MAPRE2 could affect 1039 genes (ANOVA, FDR<
0.05) which are dominantly involved in cell cycle and adhesion-related
biological signalling, such as MAPK, focal adhesion and tight junction
pathways. Our results suggested that MAPRE2 might play a significant role
in MAPRE2-mediated pathways to suppress tumorigenesis and metastasis.

