Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of everolimus and bicalutamide in
castration-resistant prostate cancer: Results from a phase I/II clinical
trial


Background: We previously showed that the mTOR pathway is activated in
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) while inhibition of this
pathway upregulated androgen receptor (AR) signaling. Based on these
data, a phase I/II clinical trial was designed to determine the efficacy
and tolerability of the combination of the AR inhibitor bicalutamide and
the mTOR inhibitor everolimus in CRPC patients compared with bicalutamide
alone. Methods: Eligible patients had histologically confirmed disease
and disease progression (PSA or radiographically) while on androgen
deprivation therapy (failed the therapy); and could have less than 2
months of bicalutamide at the initiation of androgen deprivation to
prevent flare. The primary endpoint is PSA response. Complete response
(CR) was defined as complete disappearance of all measurable and
non-measurable disease. Results: In all, 19 patients were enrolled in the
study, but data from only 18 have been included because one patient
passed away before he could be started on the drugs. No unexpected
toxicity was observed in the 18 patients enrolled in this study. 5
patients were on placebo+bicalutamide and 13 were on
everolimus+bicalutamide. Of the 13 patients on everolimus+bicalutamide,
nine (69.23%) had partial response (PR, a decline in PSA by at least
30%), one (7.69%) unconfirmed PR (patients have PSA response less than
two cycles), and three (23.08%) had stable disease (SD, no symptomatic
deterioration, PSA increase 50%) and 4 did not, were further analyzed for
levels of ErbB3. Significantly, ErbB3 levels were increased in the serum
from patients who did not show any decline or partial decline in PSA, but
not in the ones who responded well to the drug combination. Conclusions:
The combination of everolimus+bicalutamide doubled the time to relapse in
patients who had failed androgen deprivation therapy, compared to
bicalutamide alone. Relapse in these patients may be related to the
increase in ErbB3, hence an ErbB3 inhibitor in combination with
everolimus may further benefit this group of patients. We intend to
investigate in the future whether expression of ErbB3 in the serum can be
used to predict whether a patient will respond to the treatment or not.

