Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of autophagy by erlotinib protects NSCLC cells with
wild-type EGFR from erlotinib cytotoxicity


Erlotinib is an orally available EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor which has
significant clinical activity in previously treated patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), as well as in maintenance therapy
after frontline chemotherapy. Although it has shown efficacy in NSCLC
with both wild-type and mutant EGFR, it is much more effective in tumors
with activating EGFR mutations than in those tumors which have wild-type
EGFR. This study identifies autophagy induction as a potential mechanism
for the relative resistance of wild-type EGFR NSCLC cells to erlotinib.
Autophagy is a tightly regulated lysosomal self-digestion process that
may promote cell survival and/or be involved in type II cell death. The
potential role of autophagy in erlotinib-induced cytotoxicity has not
been well defined. We used four wild-type EGFR NSCLC cell lines, which
are either erlotinib-sensitive (H322 and H358) or erlotinib-resistant
(H460 and A549), to determine if treatment with erlotinib induces
autophagy. We then assessed the effect of disrupting autophagy by
chemical and genetic approaches on erlotinib-induced cytotoxicity.
Erlotinib at a clinically relevant concentration (2 M) induced autophagy,
as shown by increased MDC staining, increased conversion of LC3-I (the
cytosolic form) to LC3-II (the lapidated form associated with
autophagosome), and the formation of autophagic vacuoles, in all tested
cell lines. Autophagy induction by erlotinib was greater in resistant
cells than in sensitive cells, suggesting that autophagy is a
cytoprotective mechanism. This was confirmed with the use of autophagy
inhibitors chloroquine (CQ), 3-methyladenine, and bafilomycin A1, which
synergistically increased erlotinib cytotoxicity. Similar enhancement was
seen with knockdown of Atg-5 and Beclin-1 gene expression. Cotreatment
with CQ did not alter erlotinib-induced EGFR signaling inhibition or
G1-phase arrest, but markedly activated mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis.
Furthermore, disrupting autophagy by CQ or other inhibitors enhanced
erlotinib-induced upregulation of BIM expression, and knockdown of BIM
expression by siRNA attenuated the cytotoxicity induced by the
combination. In addition, inhibition of autophagy by CQ enhanced
erlotinib-induced ROS generation and activation of p38 but not JNK
signaling. Inhibition of ROS generation by N-acetyl-cysteine, or
inhibition of p38 by SB202190 attenuated the cytotoxic effect of the
combination, suggesting that ROS generation and p38 activation are
potential mediators of the synergism observed. The ability to adapt to
anti-EGFR therapy by triggering autophagy may be a major determinant of
resistance to erlotinib in NSCLC tumors with wild-type EGFR. Inhibition
of autophagy by CQ or other inhibitors represents a novel strategy to
potentiate erlotinib efficacy in NSCLC tumors with wild-type EGFR.
Supported by NIH/NCI grants 113360, 132783, and 154755.

