Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Key determinants of immunotherapy success in frequently-used
murine tumor models


Cancer immunotherapy uses a patient's own immune system to recognize and
eliminate malignant cells. The potential advantages of this approach over
conventional treatments include the systemic trafficking of immune cells
to treat primary and metastatic disease, inherent antigen-specificity of
adaptive immunity to minimize collateral damage, and the induction of
immunological memory to prevent recurrent disease. While many acknowledge
the promise of immunotherapy, its translation to the clinic has been slow
and only occasionally successful. In the more than 3 decades of
experience of our laboratory in developing and testing immunotherapy
reagents for cancer, we observed that a given set of reagents can produce
complete regressions in some but not all tumor models. We hypothesized
that a major contributor to this variability was underlying differences
in the immune escape strategies utilized by different tumors. Our
hypothesis was supported with data from a series of immunotherapy
experiments on a panel of experimental murine solid tumor models.
Comprehensive immune profiles were generated for each by measuring tumor
infiltrating leukocytes (TIL), immune activation, and immune suppression
present in the tumor microenvironment using qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry
staining, and flow cytometry techniques. Key differences emerged amongst
models in the extent of immune activation that correlated directly with
TIL and immunosuppression. From these data, it appears that some tumors
are more visible to the immune system and have active countermeasures to
survive, while others use immune evasion strategies to persist in the
host. To classify tumor models along this spectrum, ten immune-related
genes and cell markers showing significant change across the models were
selected to generate an immunogenicity score for each model: CD40, 41BBL,
OX40L, CD80, CD86, CD11c, CD45, BM-2 (PMN marker), Granzyme B, and CD8.
Importantly, we observed that MHC class I mouse equivalent H2-D
correlated with this immunogenicity level for each tumor. Secondly, Treg
and MDSC were measured in the tumor microenvironment and draining
lymphoid tissues using immunohistochemical and flow cytometry techniques
to determine the dominant suppressor cell population(s) present.
Immunotherapy regimens were then developed to match each tumor model
using immunogenicity to indicate the level of immune stimulation needed
and suppressor cell component to indicate targets for reversing tumor
tolerance. These regimens were used to treat established solid tumors in
mice and demonstrated that two features of a tumor's immune profile,
namely immunogenicity level and dominant suppressor cell component, are
the key determinants of immunotherapy success in vivo. Viewed in this
way, the tumor/host relationship becomes the overriding feature for
determining optimal treatment for patients based upon immune profiling
data obtained at the time of biopsy.

