Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary human tumor-derived Oncoprint platform predicts molecular
mechanism of sensitivity and resistance to anti-EGFR in colorectal
cancer: A step towards personalized cancer medicine


Colorectal cancer (CRC) continues to have a dismal prognosis (overall
five year survival is 11%). Majority of patients with CRC are either
over-treated or under-treated as there is no technology in use for
predicting treatment outcome. Currently, monoclonal antibodies that
target EGFR have been approved for the treatment of metastatic CRC.
However, only 10% to 20% of patients with metastatic CRC clinically
benefit from anti-EGFR therapy. This indicates that molecular alterations
other than EGFR are associated with their response. The aim of the
present study is to use Oncoprint- our integrated platform technology
that combines functional assays with molecular profiling to predict the
clinical outcome to anti-cancer agents including anti-EGFR therapies.
Forty tumors were obtained from patients with primary CRC and local
metastasis with due informed consent. Tumors were sectioned and cultured
in customized 96 well plates coated with CRC specific extracellular
matrix (ECM) in the presence of their respective autologous ligands and
were treated with anti-EGFR agent. Pharmacodynamic analysis of anti-EGFR
agents was determined by phospho-EGFR and phospho-ERK
immunohistochemistry. Tumor cell viability was assessed by WST, cellular
proliferation was measured by Ki-67 and cell death was assessed by TUNEL
and activated caspase-3. Tumor cell content and tumor/stroma ratio was
evaluated using histopathological analysis. Mutations of KRAS/BRAF
pathway and global microarray data were used to understand the molecular
basis of response and non-response to anti-EGFR in these patient tumors.
Functional read-out from Oncoprint platform showed that 30% of these
tumors are responsive to anti-EGFR treatment. Molecular profiling of
these tumors showed that they were wild type for K-RAS and B-RAF.
Microarray data also suggest that RAS gene signature is a predictor of
response. Mutation of either KRAS (codon 12/13/61/146) or BRAF (V600E)
confers non-response to anti-EGFR treatment. However, wild type KRAS/BRAF
was observed in 40% of non-responders. RAS gene signature was
conspicuously absent in these patients. Clinical follow-up of these
patients is under progress. Collectively these findings indicate that
there are factors other than K-RAS mutation that may be indicative of the
true response or non-response of anti-EGFR treatments under clinical
setting. Oncoprint platform may be able to predict the true clinical
response of anti cancer therapies including anti-EGFR treatments.
Further, molecular profiling of individual tumor along with the efficacy
analyses by Oncoprint would be beneficial for the identification of
driver mutations and the selection of appropriate treatment options for
these patients.

