Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer cells are selectively targeted by
zinc-sequestration chemotherapy


Introduction: Zinc accumulates at levels 10-fold higher in the prostate
than other soft tissues and this metal is implicated in prostate cancer
(PCa) pathogenesis. Prostatic lesions have 6-fold lower concentrations of
zinc than normal adjacent prostate tissue. Zinc levels are even lower in
normal and malignant prostate tissue from African American (AA) men, who
are 1.5 times more likely to develop prostate cancer than their Caucasian
(Cauc) counterparts, thus highlighting the associative that that zinc
could have in prostate cancer carcinogenesis. PAC-1 is a chemotherapeutic
agent that induces cell death via zinc sequestration by activation of
pro-caspase 3, which is a major player in cell death. We hypothesized
that the low zinc levels in prostate cancer cells will cause the cells to
be uniquely sensitive to cell death by PAC-1. Secondarily we hypothesized
that AA patients, who have lower zinc in the prostate, may have enhanced
response to PAC-1. Methods: PAC-1 cytotoxicity was investigated in LNCaP,
PC-3, 957e/hTERT (immortalized normal primary cell line) and
patient-derived normal and cancer primary epithelial cells (PrE) by
treatment with 100, 50, 25,10,1, 0 micromolar concentrations of PAC-1 and
PAC-1 analogs. Cell death was analyzed via the MTS colorimetric assay.
Results and conclusion: Normal and cancer prostate cells are sensitive to
PAC-1 and even more sensitive to PAC-1 analogs. PAC-1 was growth
inhibitory and induced cell death at higher concentrations. Ongoing
studies will examine zinc-dependency of PAC-1-induced death. PAC-1 and
its analogs-induced cell death and caspase-3 activation will be measured
in zinc-depleted, zinc sufficient and zinc-excess media. Studies will
also determine PAC-1 cytotoxicity in normal and cancer prostatic
epithelial cells. PAC-1 cytotoxicity levels in patient-matched prostate
cancer cells (PrCa) from AA and Cauc men will also be studied to
interrogate the disparate role of zinc in regards to sensitivity to
PAC-1. These results may be translated to the clinic since a derivative
of PAC-1 (S-PAC-1) has been shown to have positive effects in a Phase I
clinical trial in pet dogs with lymphoma.

