Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMCmage1: A novel bi-specific biologic re-directing T cells to
kill MAGE-A3/A6 presenting cancers


In a minority of cancer patients immunotherapy has shown the capacity to
eradicate tumours leading to clinical remission and the promise of a
cure. In the majority of patients however, a cure remains elusive due to
active immune evasion by cancers; HLA-down-regulation and
immunosuppression are two of the known mechanisms adopted by cancers to
promote their survival and proliferation. To overcome these challenges we
have developed bi-specific soluble biologics termed ImmTACs (Immune
mobilising mTCR against cancer) to re-direct the immune system to
recognise and kill cancers. Antigenic peptide fragments presented by HLA
molecules on the surface of cancer cells constitute the largest class of
cancer associated targets. T cells scan the HLA-peptide (pHLA) antigens
being presented to them; sufficient recognition by the harboured T Cell
Receptor (TCR) will result in T cell activation and killing of the
antigen presenting cell. In cancer patients this process is inefficient
partly due to the low affinity TCRs expressed by tumour specific T cells
and the low abundance of pHLA on cancers. ImmTACs comprise a soluble TCR
with an enhanced affinity for cancer associated pHLA (targeting end)
fused to an anti-CD3 scfv, enabling potent T cell re-direction (effector
end). Our pipeline constitutes a number of ImmTACs targeting various
antigen pHLA complexes relevant to numerous cancer indications. IMCmage1
is a novel ImmTAC targeting MAGE-A3168-176 in the context of HLA-A1.
MAGE-A3 is a well validated cancer testis antigen expressed in a variety
of cancers including myeloma, NSCLC, prostate cancer, melanoma, bladder
cancer, oesophageal cancer and others. IMCmage1 re-directs T cells from
cancer patients or healthy donors to kill a range of MAGE positive
cell-lines in vitro; this activity is observed against cells presenting
as few as 40 epitopes per cell and is coupled with the release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines including IFN, TNF, IL-2, MIP1 and others. We
also demonstrate that IMCmage1 specifically targets and kills the myeloma
associated population within CD138+ cells extracted from the marrow of a
stage III myeloma patient. IMCmage1 specificity was confirmed by exposure
to a panel of HLA-A1 MAGE negative primary cells derived from various
organs such as the heart, skin, lung and others; no significant activity
was detected. A phase I clinical trial in multiple myeloma to assess
tolerability and establish a maximum tolerated dose is planned to
commence in Q2 2012.

