Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compensatory activation of alternative DNA repair pathways
following exposure to the PARP Inhibitor ABT-888 in vitro and in patients
with solid malignancies


PARP inhibitors are being developed with the hope of inhibiting base
excision repair in tumor cells following DNA insult. They do so by
inhibiting poly ADP-ribose polymerase-1(PARP-1) which plays an important
role in the repair of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) breaks. Although some
PARP inhibitors have been shown to suppress its target at safely
achievable concentrations in humans, mono-therapy with these agents is
generally not able to induce responses. The compensatory effect of
alternative repair pathways, including., homologous recombination (HR)
repair, nucleotide excision repair (NER), among others, could potentially
be responsible for this lack of effect. Examples of HR repair proteins
include those involved in the Fanconi Anemia/BRCA pathway and for NER,
the ERCC proteins. We performed Western immunoblot analysis to evaluate
the expression level of PAR, Fanconi Anemia D2, ERCC1 and beta-actin
proteins in the human cancer cell lines H1299 (lung) and
MDA-MB-231(breast) following exposure to the PARP inhibitor ABT-888
(veliparib). The expression level of these protein was also evaluated in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) obtained from consenting
patients with advanced solid malignancies participating in a dose
escalation trial with ABT-888, as monotherapy or in combination with
mitomycin C. PAR protein level was reduced at 6 hours post ABT-888
exposure (5M) and maintained at low levels through 48 hours in the H1299
and MDA-MB-231cancer cells. However FANCD2 and ERCC1 protein expression
was elevated simultaneously in these cancer cells post ABT-888.
Similarly, FANCD2 and ERCC1 protein levels increased in the PBMCs of 22
patients analyzed following ABT-888 as a single agent (n=12) or in
combination with mitomycin C (n=10). These results confirm that ABT888
can inhibit its target PAR expression both in cancer cells and patients
PBMCs. However, our results also show that ABT-888 up-regulates
homologous recombination (HR) and nucleotide excision repair (NER)
pathways, which have the potential of resulting in not only resistance to
the antitumor effect of ABT-888, but also in decreasing the effect of DNA
targeting cytotoxic chemotherapy when combined with isolated PARP
inhibition. It is plausible that cancers with defective FA or NER
pathways, which are incapable of mounting a compensatory response, would
represent a better target for ABT-888 alone or in combination with DNA
targeted cytotoxic chemotherapy. Experiments aimed to evaluate this
notion are underway. The potential role of other compensatory repair
mechanisms also merit further investigation.

