Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human T cells limit breast tumor growth partly by down regulating
cell survival-related molecules and up regulating apoptosis-related
molecules in tumor cells


Background: Innate immune system has been known to play an important role
in inhibiting the malignant transformation, tumor progression and
invasion. However, the mechanistic basis remains ambiguous. Despite
polyclonality of human T cells, V2V2 T cell subset, major subset of
peripheral T cells, uniformly recognize non-peptide antigens and provide
the first line of defense towards many microbial infections. This T cell
subset was also shown to recognize and limit the growth of the various
tumors such as myeloma, lymphoma, pancreatic tumors and ovarian tumors.
The differential recognition of the tumor cells by the V2V2 T cells
depends on the expression levels of certain surface molecules on the
tumor cells. Methods: To determine innate immune response of T cells
towards breast tumor cells, human peripheral T cells were isolated and
expanded in vitro using aminobisphosphonate, risedronate and co-cultured
with breast tumor cells to assess tumor cell viability and proliferation
using MTT assays and to determine the alteration in molecular levels in
tumor cells using western blots. Cell morphology was recorded under
microscope and flowcytometric analysis was performed to evaluate tumor
surface molecules. Xenograft of the human breast tumor cells and human T
cells were performed in immunocompromised NOD/SCID mice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to evaluate status of the tumor tissue
morphology, angiogenesis and apoptosis. Western blot was also performed
to evaluate key signaling molecules. Results: Breast cancer cell death
was associated with the surface expression levels of MICA/B and ICAM-1.
Molecular signaling analysis demonstrated that cell survivability or
immune escape from T cells was associated with the higher expression
levels of cell survival-related molecules such as Akt, Erk1/2 and Bcl2
and concomitant down regulation of apoptosis-related molecules, PARP and
cleaved Caspase 3, and down regulation of tumor suppressor genes, PTEN
and P53. However, opposite molecular signaling was observed in
susceptible cell lines after co-culture with T cells. In vivo,
anti-neoplastic effects of T cells were also documented, where tumor
growth was inhibited due to the disruption of microvasculature, induction
of tumor suppressor genes p53, downregulation of survival signals, and a
strong induction of apoptotic molecules. Conclusions: Our current study
reveals that T cells limit the in vitro growth of breast cancer cell
lines as SKBR7 (HER2+), T47D (ER+) and MDA-MB-231 (ER-) by inhibiting
their survival and inducing apoptosis, except BR-CA-MZ01 (PR+) cells. In
vivo xenograft also confirms the anti-neoplastic effect of T cells
towards breast tumor cells. These findings reveal that complex molecular
signaling mechanisms are involved in T cell-mediated anti-neoplastic
effects other than cytotoxicity.

