Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High ALDH activity is associated with high tumorigenicity in
prostate cancer


OBJECTIVE: Tumor initiation and progression might be driven by rare
populations of cells endowed with stem-properties, and therefore defined
as cancer stem cells (CSC). High Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity
has been suggested to selectively identify CSC in several tumor types
including breast cancer, and, possibly, prostate cancer (PCA). In this
study, we investigated presence and potential CSC characteristics of
cells with high ALDH activity (ALDH bright) in PCA cell lines, fresh
surgical specimens, and primary cultures. MATERIALS AND METHODS: PC3,
Du145, VCaP, and LNCaP PCA cell lines were evaluated. Surgical specimens,
including Benign Prostate Hyperplasia (BPH) and PCA, were used directly
for gene expression studies. Surgical samples were also enzymatically
digested for functional analysis and the establishment of primary
cultures. ALDH activity was tested using ALDEFLUOR technology. Cells were
sorted from individual cell lines by flow cytometry and evaluated for CSC
properties, including spheroid formation ability, clonogenicity,
stemness-related gene expression, ALDH specific isoforms expression, and
tumorigenicity upon injection in NOD/SCID mice. RESULTS: PCA cell lines
and primary cultures displayed heterogeneous ALDH activity and expression
of specific ALDH isoforms. Despite a higher expression of Oct4A and Klf4
stemness associated genes, ALDH bright cells isolated from Du145 and PC3
did not show improved spheroid formation or clonogenic capacity, as
compared to their dim counterparts. Interestingly, however, ALDH bright
cells were associated with a significantly higher tumorigenic capacity in
vivo as compared to ALDH low cells. Nevertheless, ALDH bright cells lost
their higher tumorigenic capacity following serial in vivo passages. Most
importantly, a well defined ALDH bright population could also be detected
in cells isolated from PCA specimens (n>20). ALDH activity was consistent
with a strong expression of several ALDH specific isoforms in PCA
tissues. Notably, a significant increase of defined ALDH isoforms such as
ALDH1A3 (p=0.001) was detectable in tissues obtained from patients with
PCA as compared to BPH or normal specimens. CONCLUSIONS: ALDH bright
subsets can be detected in cells isolated from fresh PCA tissue samples,
PCA cell lines and primary cultures. These populations appear to be
associated with increased in vivo tumorigenicity rather than enhanced in
vitro stem properties in the cell lines investigated. Importantly,
expression of ALDH specific isoforms appears to be increased in clinical
PCA as compared to BPH and normal samples, thereby suggesting a putative
role of ALDH in PCA tumorigenesis.

