Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factors in head and neck cancer: Genetic
alterations and therapeutic targeting with ponatinib


Background: FGF signaling plays an important role in cancer. Little is
known about its involvement in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). FGFR1 focal amplification and high expression (Freier, Schwaenen
et al.), expression of FG-BP (Li et al.) and FGF2 autocrine signalling
loops (Marshall et al.) have been described in connection with HNSSC. We
therefore examined copy number alterations for several FGFR and
FGF-related Genes in 159 patient tissues and cell lines as well as
expression levels in 116 patient tissues and 40 cell lines. Based upon
our findings we tried a combined FGFR-inhibiton with ponatinib in 5 head
and neck cancer-cell lines alone and in combination with gefitinib.
Methods: Copy Number Data analysis for 144 patient tissues and cell lines
(Nanostring) as well as for 20 cell lines (aCGH) of which 5 were covered
by both techniques and showed comparable results. Expression data
analysis for 116 tissues and 40 cell lines (Agilent). Viability for 5
cell lines treated with gefitinib and ponatinib alone and in combination.
Immunoblotting was performed to deterimed PI3K-AKT and MAPK signaling.
Results: Frequent copy number increase could be detected for FGF19 in
tissues and cell lines. FGFR1 copy number increase could be seen in only
1 tissue sample, but appeared to be deleted in several samples. High
relative expression could be detected for FGFBP1 in tissues and cell
lines. Viability testing showed high efficacy in 5/5 cell lines tested
for ponatinib but was not solely mediated by AKT or MAPK signaling.
Combined treatment with ponatinib and gefitinib was more effective than
treatment with either agent alone and synergy was present. Conclusions:
FGF signaling is important in Head and Neck Cancer. FGF19 amplification
is frequent. We were unable to replicate FGFR1 amplification with only
one tissue showing FGFR1 copy number increase. High expression levels
could be shown for FGFBP1, providing an alternative hypothesis for
explaining the efficacy of FGF2 inhibition as previously shown (Marshall
et. al.). Ponatinib is effective as a single agent on HNSSC cell line
models and shows synergistic effect in combination with gefitinib. It is
promising to evaluate FGF pathway inhibition (e.g. with ponatinib) in its
ability to overcome EGFR-inhibitor resistance.

