Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of p53 in cdk inhibitor VMY-1-103-induced apoptosis in
prostate cancer


The mammalian cell cycle is a tightly regulated process that controls
cell division and replication. The tumor suppressor p53 plays a crucial
role in both the G1/S and mitotic checkpoints, as well as in apoptosis in
response to DNA damage. P53 activates p21, which is an inhibitor of
cdk/cyclin E complexes, to cause cell cycle arrest. P53 can also function
as a mediator of apoptosis by activating either the instrinsic or
extrinsic pathway of apoptosis by activating transcriptional targets such
as Bax, Bid, and TRAIL R4/5. In prostate cancer (PCa), p53 mutations are
frequently associated with advanced staged disease. We recently have
developed a novel analog of the CDK inhibitor purvalanol B, termed
VMY-1-103 (VMY) which functions as a potent inhibitor of proliferation.
To assess the efficacy of this compound in vitro, we tested the ability
of VMY to cause cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in LNCaP, DU145, and PC3
prostate cancer cell lines. VMY caused an increase in cells in G2/M in
all cell lines tested. Additionally, VMY treatment resulted in a large
amount of apoptosis in LNCaP cells, which are p53 wild-type. In contrast,
DU145 cells, which are p53 mutant, and PC3 cells, which are p53 null,
were significantly less susceptible to VMY-mediated apoptosis, strongly
suggesting that functional p53 was required for VMY to induce apoptosis
in PCa cells. In order to test this hypothesis, a series of experiments
were carried out in these PCa cell lines. Knockdown of p53 by siRNA in
LNCaP cells resulted in a decreased sensitivity to VMY, as these cells no
longer underwent cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Further modulation of
p53 was performed by overexpressing a wild-type construct in PC3 cells,
which greatly sensitized the cells to cell death following VMY treatment.
Conversely, introduction of several mutant p53 constructs into LNCaP
cells did not decrease sensitivity to the drug whatsoever. Importantly,
in DU145 cells, which have two mutations of p53 on opposite alleles,
apoptosis was significantly increased when cells were pre-treated with
PRIMA-1 to restore WT p53 function. Therefore, our data establishes p53
plays a crucial regulator of sensitivity to VMY and its ability to induce
apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. In addition we show that modification
of mutant p53 by PRIMA in a p53 deficient cell lines, and the ensuing
restoration of drug sensitivity, enhances the potential of VMY as a novel
therapeutic for prostate cancer.

