Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct activation of pro-apoptotic BAX as a novel strategy for
cancer therapy


BCL-2 family proteins are essential regulators of cellular life and death
and, when deregulated, contribute to the development, maintenance, and
chemoresistance of human cancer. Anti-apoptotic members contribute to
cancer pathogenesis by sequestering the -helical BH3 death domains of
their pro-apoptotic counterparts such as BAX. The anti-apoptotic groove
that binds and neutralizes BH3 helices has been successfully targeted by
small molecules and stapled peptides in an effort to inhibit the
inhibitors of apoptosis. Using a Stabilized Alpha-Helix of BCL-2 domain
(SAHB) modeled after the BIM BH3 helix, we previously identified a
geographically distinct BH3-binding groove that mediates the direct
activation of BAX, suggesting a new strategy for inducing apoptosis by
flipping BAX's on switch. Engagement of the novel site by BIM SAHB
directly activates BAX (Gavathiotis et al. Nature, 2008), unleashing a
succession of key conformational changes that culminates in the formation
of toxic mitochondrial pores (Gavathiotis et al. Mol Cell, 2010). Here,
we demonstrate that BIM SAHB effectively overcomes the apoptotic
blockades of a series of diverse hematologic cancer cells by broadly
targeting inhibitory anti-apoptotic complexes and directly activating
BAX. Importantly, BIM SAHB induces dose-responsive caspase 3/7 activation
and the morphologic features of apoptosis. To identify a BAX-selective
agent, we further performed a computational screen to identify BAX
activator molecules (BAMs) capable of directly engaging the BAX trigger
site. We demonstrate by competitive fluorescence polarization binding
assays and NMR analyses that BAM7 engages the BAX trigger site and, as a
result, promotes the functional oligomerization of BAX. Strikingly, the
molecule does not interact with the canonical BH3 binding pocket of
anti-apoptotic proteins and induces cell death in a BAX-selective
fashion. These first stapled peptide and small molecule gain-of-function
modulators of a BCL-2 family protein highlight a new pharmacologic
paradigm for induction of cancer cell apoptosis through direct activation
of BAX.

