Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of regulatory T lymphocytes reverses the imbalance
between Pro- and anti-tumor immunities via enhancing antigen-specific T
cell immune responses


Immunogenicity is the ability of antigens to elicit an immune response.
The host immunity for anti-tumor can be induced because of the existence
of tumor-specific and/or tumor-associated antigens. However, the most
effective immune manipulation for ovarian carcinoma is eagerly awaited.
To explore the systemically and locally kinetic changes of immunologic
profiles during tumor progression and to elucidate the inhibition of
tumor growth and the reverse of immunologic profiles by depletion of Treg
cells in ovarian carcinomas, ovarian cancer patients and the ascitogenic
animal model were employed. Immunologic profiles with flow cytometric
analyses, immunohistochemistric staining, RT-PCR, ELISA, and ELISPOT
assays were performed. In vivo depletion of Treg cells with the mAb
PC61was also performed in the animal model. Including the
anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4 and TNF- significantly decreased, TGF-,
IL-6, IL-10 significantly elevated in human ascites when the disease
progressed to advanced diseases. The ratios of CD8+ T cell/Treg cell in
the tumor asociated lymphocytes of the human ascites were lower in
advanced diseases than those in early diseases. These alterations of
immune components during tumor progression were proved in our animal
model. Mice, when treated with kinetic low dose of mAb PC61, showed
longer survival than the other groups. Tumor-bearing mice treated with
kinetic low dose mAb PC61could inhibit the suppressive immunologic
profiles, enhance the effective immunologic profiles, and generate potent
antigen-specific anti-tumor immunities and effects. We concluded that the
imbalance between effective and suppressive immunities could be
identified in tumor-bearing situation, especially in advanced diseases.
The depletion of Treg cells could correct the immunologic profiles and
generate potent antigen-specific immunity. The strategy of targeting Treg
cells can be a new strategy for the immunotherapy of ovarian carcinoma.

