Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crizotinib (PF-02341066) reverses multidrug resistance in cancer
cells by inhibiting the function of P-glycoprotein


Background and purpose: Besides targeting the well-known oncogenic c-Met,
crizotinib is the first oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) inhibiting
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) in clinical trials for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this study, we investigated the
potential multidrug resistance (MDR) reversal by crizotinib in vitro and
in vivo. Experimental approach: MTT methods were used in vitro and the
xenografts in nude mice were used in vivo to investigate crizotinib
reversal of MDR. To understand the mechanisms for MDR reversal, the
alterations of intracellular doxorubicin(Dox) or rhodamine 123
accumulation, Dox effluxion, ABCB1 expression level, ATPase activity of
ABCB1, and crizotinib-induced c-Met, Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation were
examined. Key results: Crizotinib significantly enhanced the cytotoxicity
of ABCB1 substrate chemotherapeutic agents in MDR cells, with no effect
found on sensitive cells in vitro and in vivo. In addition, crizotinib
significantly increased the intracellular accumulation of rhodamine 123
and doxorubicin and inhibited the drug efflux in ABCB1-overexpressing MDR
cells. Further studies showed that crizotinib enhanced the ATPase
activity of ABCB1 in concentration-dependent manner. However, the
expressions of ABCB1 were not affected and the reversal activity of
crizotinib was not related to the phosphorylation of c-Met, Akt or
Erk1/2. Importantly, crizotinib significantly enhanced the effect of
paclitaxel against the KBv200 cell xenografts in nude mice. Conclusions
and implications: Crizotinib was found to reverse ABCB1-mediated MDR by
inhibiting ABCB1 transport function without involvement of ABCB1
expression or blockade of the Akt or Erk1/2 pathways. These findings is
useful for combination chemotherapy of crizotinib with conventional
chemotherapeutic drugs.

