Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical variations in the expression of cancer stem
cell and macrophage markers in primary and recurrent oral squamous cell
carcinomas


Head and Neck Squamous Cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth most common
malignancy worldwide. Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the
most common subtype and the sixth most common cancer in the US, with
8,000-10,000 deaths/year. Despite the best available treatment options of
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, the five year survival rate is
approximately 50%, indicating recurrence is a common phenomenon.
Preliminary studies with HNSCC cell lines have indicated higher
expression of cancer stem cell markers such as CD44 in the aggressive
tumor cell lines. It has been shown that cancer stem cells play an
important role in the development and maintenance of tumor cells and in
distant metastases. Thus, the current study was undertaken to determine
whether cancer stem cell markers can be detected in primary and recurrent
OSCC samples. In addition, since immune response cells such as
macrophages may also play an important role in disease progression, we
analyzed the distribution of macrophages in primary and recurrent tumors.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tumor samples of patients
with OSCC. Five samples from patients with primary tumors and five
samples from patients with recurrent tumors were analyzed for CD 44,
ALDH, and Bmi-1, cancer stem cell markers of HNSCC. In addition, all
samples were stained with a monoclonal antibody, CD68, a marker for the
detection of tumor-associated macrophages. In the primary tumor group, CD
44 and Bmi-1 stained diffusely throughout the specimens (>90% staining),
especially at the periphery of the lesions. ALDH stained strongly (>90%)
and diffusely in two of the primary samples, and scattered staining (3-5%
of tumor cells) was seen in the other three primary samples. CD 68
stained mainly around tumor clusters but not between individual tumor
cells. The recurrent tumors also showed a strong staining of CD 44 within
the tumor, especially at the periphery. In contrast, staining of ALDH and
Bmi-1 was relatively weak. Additionally, in contrast to the primary
tumors, CD 68 staining was more diffuse, and especially strong between
tumor cells, suggesting a migration of tumor-associated macrophages into
the tumor. These features reflect the transitory and
tumor-microenvironment dependent expression of biomarkers that mediate
the aggressive tumor cell properties. In this context, the data suggest
that infiltrating macrophages may be playing an important role in
mediating both tumor recurrence, and the transition towards aggressive
tumor cell phenotypes. Further studies will be required to determine the
role of macrophage mediated modulation of aggressive properties (secreted
cytokines versus cell-cell interactions) of oral squamous cell tumors.

