Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble ALK4 extracellular domain antagonizes the cancer/stem cell
phenotype caused by Nodal and Cripto signaling in mammary epithelia


We recently determined that a fraction of cells in a highly enriched
fetal mammary stem cell pool expresses the oncofetal protein Cripto and
its receptor/co-factor GRP78 on their surfaces. Cripto is a GPI-anchored
protein important for embryonic stem cell self-renewal and developmental
plasticity. It is also selectively overexpressed in multiple human tumors
including 80% of human breast tumors. Cripto overexpression increases
cellular proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and promotes
mammary tumor growth in mice. Cripto functions as an obligatory
co-receptor for Smad2/3 activation by the TGF- superfamily member Nodal
but attenuates activin-A and TGF-1 signaling and the cytostatic effects
of these ligands on human mammary epithelial cells. Cripto can be
secreted from cells and soluble forms activate Src, ras/raf/MAPK and
PI3K/Akt pathways. We recently identified the HSP70 family member GRP78
as a cell surface receptor/co-factor that is required for Cripto
signaling via TGF- and Src/MAPK/PI3K pathways. Here, we developed a
soluble and highly specific Cripto antagonist based on the extracellular
domain of the Activin/Nodal Type I serine/threonine kinase receptor ALK4
(sALK4-ECD). We tested the ability of this antagonist to block Cripto
signaling via TGF- and Src/MAPK/PI3K pathways in oncogenic and stem cell
phenotypes in mammary epithelial cells and breast cancer cell lines. The
sALK4-ECD protein dose-dependently and specifically inhibited 125I-Cripto
binding to 293T cells transfected with full length ALK4. In addition,
sALK4-L75A-Fc blocked 125I-Cripto binding to native human mammary
epithelial MCF10A cells. sALK4-ECD inhibited Cripto-dependent Nodal
signaling in 293T cells and inhibited Nodal-induced Smad2 phosphorylation
in native NCCIT cells. sALK4-ECD also blocked Cripto-induced PI3K
activation, cell proliferation and migration in MCF10A cells. Cripto and
Nodal signaling had profound effects on MCF10A growth in suspension and
mammosphere reseeding capacity that were also inhibited by sALK4-ECD. We
evaluated Nodal/Cripto signaling in cancer cell lines and primary fetal
mammary stem cells and tested the efficacy of sALK-ECD mediated
suppression of Nodal and Cripto effects in vitro and in vivo. These
studies were designed to test if Cripto represents a functional cell
surface marker of normal stem cells and/or the cells that initiate or
perpetuate breast cancers. Our results point to distinct roles for Cripto
and Nodal/Cripto signaling in promoting the oncogenic phenotype via
activation of Smad2/3 and PI3K pathways, and support a role for Cripto
antagonism such as that afforded by sALK4-ECD as a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of human disease.

