Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) of
primary ex vivo AML blasts highlights mTOR and MEK as potential key
molecular driver signals of therapeutic significance


Identification of signaling pathways that are required for the growth and
differentiation block of cells from adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is
urgently required to facilitate development of novel therapies. Here, we
describe an approach to functionally determine molecular drivers of AML
by quantitative drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) of AML
blast cells in primary culture ex vivo. The selection of drugs covered
the entire cancer pharmacopeia and much of the pipeline of drugs under
development in the industry: 120 FDA approved small molecular cancer
drugs and 120 emerging drugs, investigational compounds and signal
transduction inhibitors. All compounds were tested over a 10,000-fold
concentration range to generate quantitative and reliable dose-response
data. In addition, whole exome and transcriptome sequencing and
phophoproteomic profiling were also performed to derive a comprehensive
understanding of the molecular AML-related aberrations on an individual
basis. Comparison of 17 AML patient samples and 3 healthy bone marrow
control samples based on ex vivo drug responses identified several
classes of approved and investigational drugs that showed selective
anti-AML activities: mTOR inhibitors (e.g. temsirolomus, everolimus,
sirolimus), MEK inhibitors (e.g. AS703026, GSK1120212, RDEA119,
selumetinib), tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g. dasatinib, ponatinib,
sunitinib), Bcl-2 inhibitors (navitoclax) and HSP90 inhibitors (e.g.
BIIB021, NVP-AUY922, tanespimycin). In particular, the rapamycin class of
mTOR inhibitors and allosteric MEK inhibitors stood out as effective and
selective inhibitors in 8/17 (47%) and 9/17 (52%) of the patients,
respectively. Simultaneous data from other targeted inhibitors made it
possible to dissect the critical steps in signaling and therapeutic
efficacy. For example, PI3K and Akt inhibitors were not effective in
these patients, suggesting that the mTOR dependency is mediated through a
PI3K-Akt-independent pathway. Similarly, the dependency of MEK signaling
appears to be through a Ras-Raf-independent pathway since Raf inhibitors
were not effective. In conclusion, the DSRT platform allows us to derive
quantitative data on the ex vivo drug response profiles of AML cells from
individual patients. This information could be used as a diagnostic tool
to optimize personalized therapies in the future. Our data demonstrate
that mTOR and MEK signaling and the associated inhibitors are the most
promising leads for improved AML therapeutics. This analysis also
demonstrates gaps in our current understanding of the redundancy of key
cancer cell signaling pathways and proves the significant value of data
from experimental drug response testing ex vivo.

