Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Organ-specific Gst-pi expression in new metastatic
androgen-independent prostate cancer animal model


Introduction: Prostate cancer is major leading cause of death in western
world. And elucidating the mechanisms of metastasis in prostate cancer,
particularly to the bone, is a major issue for treatment of this
malignancy. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been identified as
important chemical mediators in cell growth and differentiation, and
glutathione oxidation-reduction (redox) system is the main mechanism
against ROS in human body. We established a new metastatic model of
prostate cancer, using new cell line, and we investigated the role of
glutathione redox system in the androgen-independent prostate cancer.
Methods: A new cell line, PCai1, was established from the
androgen-independent cancer derived from transgenic rat model for
adenocarcinoma of the prostate (TRAP), and investigated its metastatic
potential in nude mice. By cDNA microarray analysis in our model,
glutathione S-transferase Pi (Gst-pi), which was the major component
protein of glutathione redox system, had higher expression in androgen
independent prostate cancer. Therefore, effects of Gst-pi knocked down in
vitro with iRNA strategy were analyzed in PCai1 cells, and the
quantification of ROS was performed by DCFH assay. In addition, to
evaluate roles of Gst-pi in castration-resistant cell proliferation,
Gst-pi siRNA transfected PCai1 cells were transplanted subcutaneously in
castrated or normal nude mice. Results: Gst-pi-siRNA in vitro
significantly suppressed cell proliferation rate of PCai1. In addition,
high levels of intracellular ROS were recognized in the Gst-pi knockout.
Strong expression of Gst-pi was realized castration-resistant prostate
cancer specimen, while no tumor was stained in hormone nave prostate
cancer. PCai1 frequently formed metastatic lesions in the lung and lymph
nodes after orthotopic implantation in the prostate. Intravenous
injections of PCai1, metastasis to lung and bone were obvious. Tumors
metastasized in the bone marrow after intravenous injection expressed
high levels of Gst-pi, while metastatic lesions in the lung and lymph
nodes failed to express Gst-pi as seen in cases of the orthotopic
implantation. Knock down of Gst-pi expression of PCai1 significantly
inhibited tumor growth of PCai1 compared to negative controls in
castrated mice. On the other hand, Gst-pi expression did not affect tumor
growth in non-castrated mice Conclusion: Establishment of a new
metastatic prostate cancer model allows for the systematic analysis of
genetic and molecular characteristics of human tumors. And these results
suggest that glutathione redox system can regulate cancer cell growth in
androgen free environment. Gst-pi expression of the prostate cancers are
dependent on metastatic site, and that Gst-pi has an important role in
adapting prostate cancer for growth and metastasis involving an
alteration of ROS signals.

