Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment imposes major alterations and profoundly
shapes functional status of macrophages: peritoneal and tumor-associated
macrophages from tumor hosts are two very different subpopulations


Macrophages are key players in the inflammatory response and exhibit
significant roles in the different stages of tumor progression. We have
previously reported deficient functions of peritoneal macrophages of
D1-DMBA3 mammary tumors bearers (T-PEMs). We showed that T-PEMs are
impaired in inflammatory activity due to diminished expression of
transcription factors NFB and C/EBP. We have also demonstrated that
T-PEMs display neither M1 nor M2 phenotypes, exhibit deficiencies in the
production of several inflammatory cytokines, are less differentiated and
show increased apoptosis. Importantly, we showed for the first time that
their apoptosis in periphery contributes to increased myelopoiesis. We
examined the blood monocytes from these tumor mice and demonstrated that
these cells are neither inflammatory nor suppressive and are less
differentiated, similar to the T-PEMs they later become. In the present
study we investigate tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) from the same
tumor model and compare them with T-PEMs and with peritoneal macrophages
from normal mice (N-PEMs). Our results show that TAMs downregulate
IL-12p70, but upregulate IL-12p40, IL-23, IL-6 and IL-10 and chemokines
and their receptors are very differently expressed in these two
macrophages subpopulations. NFB and C/EBP family members are decreased in
TAMs as compared with T-PEMs, however NFBp50 homodimers, STAT1/pSTAT1 and
STAT3/pSTAT3 are all overexpressed. Moreover TAMs block T-cell
proliferation and are more prone to apoptosis than T-PEMs due to a higher
expression of activated caspase-3 and downregulation of Bcl-X. Our
results show that T-PEMs and TAMs have equally impaired phagocytic
capacity compared with fully-phagocytic N-PEMs. Moreover, TAMs
constitutively express iNOS, produce nitric oxide but no arginase and are
Gr-1high and CD11blow, thus are not classic myeloid-derived suppressor
cells. Collectively, our results show that the exposure to different
locations and tumor factor gradients determine macrophage phenotypes and
functions. The tumor microenvironment, as the setting in most intimate
contact with tumor cells is the one that most alters macrophage activity.
Targeting tumor factors and other cells in the tumor microenvironment may
allow reversion of macrophage dysfunction.

