Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the p53 response in pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia


B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most common malignancy
in children. Despite a cure rate of approximately 85%, the prevalence of
this disease causes B-ALL to be the leading cause of cancer-related death
in children. Additionally, the toxic drugs necessary for cures can cause
severe side effects in developing children. Thus, there is a tremendous
need for innovative therapies to combat B-ALL. The p53 tumor suppressor
is a key regulator of apoptosis and is almost always wild-type in
pediatric B-ALL, in stark contrast to virtually all other cancers.
Alterations in the p53 pathway are associated with drug resistance,
underscoring its central role in determining response to chemotherapy. We
identified a set of p53-regulated transcriptional targets that comprise
an apoptotic gene signature significantly associated with response to
therapy and independently prognostic for outcome in pediatric ALL. We
hypothesize that cells can be primed for an enhanced apoptotic response
to chemotherapy by modulating expression levels of the p53-regulated
apoptotic signature genes with small molecules before administering
chemotherapy. We conducted a high-throughput screen to identify novel
compounds that prime ALL cells for apoptosis to convert a
chemotherapy-resistant cell into one that is sensitive. This screen was
performed using 83,745 compounds in both the wild-type p53 cell line TK6
and the mutant-p53 line, WTK1. Cells were treated with either compound
alone or compound plus daunorubicin, a drug used to treat ALL. Compounds
were normalized and scored by using both the B-score and the robust
Z-score. Hits were defined as compounds that do not significantly alter
viability of the cells alone, but significantly increase
daunorubicin-induced cell death. As our primary screen takes a functional
approach with an endpoint of viability rather than expression of our gene
signature, it's possible that compounds we have identified function
through alternative mechanisms. As our secondary screen, we interrogate
these hits for induction of the signature. Because patient outcome was
associated with the gene signature, we hypothesize that the most
successful compounds will act by altering the signature from the bad risk
expression to the good risk expression, thereby having the potential to
convert a chemoresistant cell into one that is sensitive.

