Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonerythroid alpha spectrin prevents telomere fragility after DNA
interstrand crosslink damage


Telomere dysfunction and increased telomere fragility are important
contributing factors to chromosome instability. We have previously
demonstrated that the structural protein, nonerythroid -spectrin(IISp),
is critical for maintenance of chromosome stability after DNA interstrand
crosslink (ICL) damage. However, whether IISp plays an important role in
maintaining telomere stability after DNA damage is an extremely important
question and the goal of the present study. IISp in normal human
lymphoblastoid cells was depleted by siRNA and cells treated with an ICL
agent, mitomycin C (MMC). Cells were analyzed using immunofluorescence
and in situ hybridization (IF-FISH) and probed with antispectrin and a
telomeric Cy3-conjugated-PNA probe or antibodies against two telomeric
proteins, TRF1 or TRF2. Metaphase spreads of these cells were also
examined and stained with the PNA probe and scored for telomeric
abnormalities. In cells damaged with MMC but not in undamaged cells, a
portion of IISp (50%) was found to co-localize with the PNA probe in the
telomeres along with TRF1 and TRF2, indicating that IISp localizes to
telomeres after ICL damage. To assess whether there was increased
telomere fragility after ICL damage, chromosome ends were examined for
loss of telomeric signal. After treatment with MMC, 28% of the chromatid
ends showed a loss of telomeric signal compared to 2% in nondamaged
cells. However, after depletion of IISp, 74% of the chromatid ends in MMC
damaged cells displayed loss of telomeric signal compared to 18% in the
nondamaged cells. This indicates that there was increased telomere
fragility in MMC treated cells after knockdown of IISp. In addition to an
increase in fragile telomeres in these cells, the chromosomes in the IISp
siRNA treated cells damaged with MMC showed a significant increase in
sister chromatid end fusions compared to the undamaged cells, which is
indicative of aberrant telomere structure.These results on telomere
fragility after loss of IISp are similar to those obtained using cells
from the cancer prone genetic disease, Fanconi anemia complementation
group A (FA-A), in which we have shown that there is a deficiency in IISp
levels which correlates with a defect in ability to repair DNA ICLs.
Examination of FA-A lymphoblastoid cells showed that there is an increase
in fragile telomeres after MMC treatment: 76% of the chromatid ends
showed loss of telomeric signal after MMC damage compared to 24% in
undamaged cells. When levels of IISp were restored to normal in the FA-A
cells by knocking down -calpain, a protease that cleaves IISp, the
percentage of chromatid ends showing loss of telomeric signal (26%) after
MMC was similar to that in normal cells. These studies collectively show
that IISp plays an important and central role in maintenance of telomere
stability after DNA ICL damage and suggests that it is an important
factor in telomere function and chromosome stability.

