Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical combinations of vemurafenib, a selective BRAF
inhibitor, with other targeted therapies in BRAFV600E colorectal cancer
models


Mutations in BRAF at codon 600 promote catalytic activity and are
associated with 8% of all human (solid) tumors, including about 10% of
colorectal cancers (CRCs). Vemurafenib (RG7204, PLX4032) is a
first-in-class, BRAF-specific small molecule inhibitor that
dose-dependently inhibits tumor growth in BRAFV600E CRC xenografts.
Despite these encouraging preclinical findings, unlike the remarkable
responses observed in melanoma, single agent vemurafenib in a Phase I
extension trial of 21 patients with previously treated metastatic CRC
resulted in a modest 5% response rate. We therefore explored a range of
combinations of vemurafenib with different novel targeted therapies
including a MEK inhibitor, an AKT inhibitor, a PI3K inhibitor, an
mTOR/PI3K dual inhibitor and an EGFR inhibitor in BRAFV600E CRC cell
lines. The consequences of these combinations on proliferation were
analyzed by MTT assay and the combined effect was determined by
combination index (CI) calculated using CalcuSyn software. Western
analysis and Annexin V staining were utilized to evaluate combination
effects on downstream signaling events and apoptosis induction. Optimized
doses of both vemurafenib and a MEK inhibitor were tested as single
agents and in combination in CRC xenograft models in nude mice.
Synergistic anti-proliferative effects were observed with combinations of
vemurafenib and other targeted therapies in the BRAFV600E positive CRC
cell lines tested. More effective signaling inhibition and apoptosis
induction were observed with the combinations than either agent alone.
Combining vemurafenib with a MEKi delivered greater anti-tumor activity
and increased life span of animals in the LS411N CRC xenograft model. In
a BRAF-mutant CRC xenograft model with inherent resistance to vemurafenib
(RKO), tumor growth inhibition by vemurafenib was enhanced by combining
with an AKT inhibitor. These in vitro and in vivo data suggest that the
administration of vemurafenib in combination with novel targeted
therapies may be effective in delivering enhanced and sustained clinical
antitumor efficacy in colorectal cancers harboring the BRAFV600E mutation.

