Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as a selective delivery vehicle for
a PSA-activated protoxin for advanced prostate cancer


Circulating bone marrow-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) can
differentiate into cells of the mesoderm lineage and have an innate
tropism for tumor tissue in response to the inflammatory microenvironment
present in malignant lesions. MSCs have been detected in the perivascular
space of many tumors, including prostate. MSCs are inherently
non-immunogenic, which prevents allogeneic MSCs from being rejected by
host defense mechanisms. This immune-privileged status, together with
their oncotropic properties, makes possible the infusion of allogeneic
MSCs into patients for therapeutic purposes. PRX302 is a PSA-activated
aerolysin-based protoxin that forms membrane pores and leads to necrosis
by a proliferation-independent mechanism at low picomolar concentrations.
Active PSA is bound to inhibitors, such as A2M, in the plasma, and
therefore, is only present in an active form at sites of local and
metastatic prostate cancer. Consequently, PRX302 will only be converted
to a toxic form in the tumor microenvironment and thereby, limit
off-target toxicity. Based upon this rationale we hypothesize that MSCs
can be used as a cell-based targeting vehicle to selectively deliver
therapeutic agents, such as PRX302, to primary and metastatic sites of
prostate cancer, and thus spare host toxicity. We have demonstrated that
fluorescently-labeled MSCs home to sites of prostate cancer in nude mice
bearing castration-resistant CWR-22RH xenografts and a significant
fraction are localized to the perivascular space. This co-localization
with the tumor vasculature suggests that a MSC-delivered cytotoxin would
have profound anti-tumor efficacy through effects on both cancer and
endothelial cells. Furthermore, we have confirmed that MSCs and stromal
cells derived from human prostate cancers (PrCSCs) in men older than 50
(>10 tested), but not those isolated from normal prostates in men under
30 (>7 tested), can differentiate into adipocytes, osteoblasts, and
chondrocytes under the appropriate conditions. Furthermore, these PrCSCs
are positive for CD90, CD73, CD105, and FAP, but do not express CD34,
CD45, CD11b, CD19, or HLA-DR, which is consistent with the hMSC phenotype
and suggests that MSCs migrate to cancerous prostates in the human as
well. Importantly, PRX302 binds with low nanomolar affinity to GPI-anchor
proteins, which are highly expressed on the surface of all mammalian
cells. Using PIG-A-targeted zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) to knockout
GPI-anchor synthesis, we have demonstrated that GPI-anchor-deficient MSCs
retain their tumor homing properties. Therefore, MSCs can be genetically
modified to endogenously express PRX302 from the PIG-A locus as a safe
harbor and prevent self-sterilization due to protoxin secretion. The
therapeutic efficacy and host toxicity of these PRX302-expressing MSCs
will be evaluated against a series of human prostate cancer xenograft
models.

