Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quadruple immunofluorescence protocol for identification of the
metastatic potential of prostate CTCs


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading cause of cancer in men
and second to lung cancer in cancer-associated mortality in United
States. The prognosis for 5-year survival is >90% if detected at an early
stage while it decreases to 31% for patients diagnosed with metastases.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are being studied to develop new
anti-metastatic therapies. Our immunofluorescence protocol will help in
identification of the metastatic potential of prostate CTCs. Methods: We
have developed and optimized quadruple immunofluorescence protocol for
the characterization of PCa CTCs. Cells were seeded on cell-tak coated
coverslips, fixed with 2% HCHO and washed with PBS containing glycine.
Triton-X (0.1%) for 10 min was used to permeabilize the cells followed by
three times wash with PBS containing 0.5% BSA (PBB). Cells were incubated
with 2% BSA for 1 hr at room temperature following which cells were
washed three times with PBB. Anti-rat HECA-452 and anti-rabbit CXCR4
primary unconjugated antibodies were added for 1 hr and washed with PBB
three times. Cells were incubated with highly cross-adsorbed secondary
antibodies for goat anti-rabbit 405 and goat anti-rat 594 for 1 hr at
room temperature. Cells were washed with PBB and incubated with two
primary conjugated antibodies for PSMA (AF 488) and EpCAM (AF 647) for 1
hr. Cells were washed, mounted and analyzed using Zeiss LSM 700 confocal
microscope. Results: We have been successfully able to visualize four
markers in a single cell. Different cell lines were used as negative and
positive control for different markers. U937(PSMA-, HECA452+, EpCAM-,
CXCR4+), MDAPCa2b(PSMA+, HECA452+, EpCAM+, CXCR4+), PC3(PSMA-, HECA452-,
EpCAM+, CXCR4+), KG1(PSMA-, HECA452, EpCAM-, CXCR4-). Isotype and
secondary antibody controls were used for unconjugated antibodies to
determine the specificity of primary and secondary antibodies,
respectively. We chose surface markers involved in the adherence of PCa
CTCs to the blood vessel and homing to the bone. Previous studies have
shown that hematopoietic progenitor cells utilize the coordinated
expression of CXCR4 and E-selectin to migrate to the bone marrow. CXCR4
is a chemokine receptor, which binds to SDF-1 present on the human bone
marrow while HECA-452 is an epitope present on the selectins and is
associated with E-selectin ligand activity. EpCAM and PSMA were used to
identify prostate epithelial CTCs.Images were taken under the transmitted
light to observe the cell. Conclusion: The multi-marker
immunofluorescence (MMI) is challenging because of limited species of
specific antibodies and simultaneous usage of limited lasers for the
excitation. However, MMI is important in assessing different cell markers
in CTCs where the sample size is very limited. Our protocol can be used
for the detection and characterization of prostate CTCs.

