Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock protein (HSP) Grp94-targeted combinatorial
immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is among the deadliest of cancers as it is rarely
curable and the 5-year survival rate of patients with any stage of the
disease is approximately 6%. This dismal clinical picture is reflective
of the poor response of this disease to chemo- and radio- therapy, as
well as to surgery as conventionally used. The unmet clinical needs for
patients with pancreatic cancer highlight the urgency to develop
effective novel therapies for this disease. To address this need, we have
developed a combinatorial immunotherapy which eliminates differentiated
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells and pancreatic cancer initiating cells
(CICs). According to the cancer stem cell theory, CICs are responsible
for disease recurrence and metastases. Therefore, they have to be
eradicated in order to cure a malignant disease. The tumor antigen we
have selected as a target is the HSP glucose-regulated protein of 94 kDa
(Grp94), a member of the HSP90 family, since it plays an important role
in the biology of malignant cells. Furthermore, we have recently
developed a human monoclonal antibody (mAb), named mAb W9, which has a
unique specificity. It recognizes an extracellular epitope of Grp94,
which is expressed on many types of malignant cells, including
differentiated pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells and pancreatic CICs. mAb
W9 inhibited in vitro growth of the human pancreatic cancer cell lines
PANC2.03 and PANC3.27 by 40%. The antiproliferative activity was
increased to 90% when mAb W9 was combined with cyclopamine and 5-FU, both
of which inhibit the hedgehog signaling pathway that is aberrantly
activated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma, particularly in pancreatic CIC.
The antitumor activity of mAb W9 reflected a decreased level of RAS,
C-Raf, phosphorylated (p)-MEK, p-ERK, and p-AKT. mAb W9 had also an
effect on pancreatic CICs, identified as cells with high aldehyde
dehydrogenase expression. These cells are referred to as ALDHbright
cells. Treatment of the human pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2 in
vitro with mAb W9, cyclopamine and 5-FU inhibited the growth of
ALDHbright cells by 90%. In contrast, the inhibition was only 50% when
cells were treated with mAb W9 or cyclopamine individually, 20% when they
were treated with 5-FU and 70% when they were treated with mAb W9 in
combination with cyclopamine or 5-FU. Apoptosis was induced in 70% of
pancreatic cancer cells PANC1 by mAb W9 in combination with cyclopamine
and 5-FU, but in less than 35% by the agents individually and by the
combinations of any two of the agents. Our in vitro findings strongly
suggest that targeting cell surface Grp94 with mAb W9 in combination with
cyclopamine and 5-FU may represent an effective strategy to eliminate
differentiated pancreatic cancer cells and pancreatic CICs.

