Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolactin hormone signaling promotes cancer stem cell niche and
migration in colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer is a leading cause of cancer related deaths
in US. Various intrinsic and extrinsic factors contribute to the
development of colorectal tumors. Prolactin (PRL), a peptide endocrine
hormone associated with regulating diverse physiological activities from
lactation to stimulating oligodendrocyte cell proliferation is now
receiving increasing attention in relation to tumorigenesis. Acting
through prolactin receptor (PRLR), prolactin modulates various downstream
events via the Jak-STAT and MAPK pathway. Clinical evidences suggest an
increased serum prolactin levels in patients with breast, prostate and
colorectal cancers. The present study is aimed to understanding the role
of PRL in colorectal tumorogenesis. Method: Colorectal cancer cell lines
HCT116, HT29 and SW620 were used in the study. Cell growth and
proliferation was measured by hexoseaminidase assay. Real Time PCR and
Western blot analysis were performed to study the cancer promoting genes,
stem cell markers and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs). Spheroid
(colosphere) formation was used to assess stem cells in a population.
Scratch plate assay was used to assay migration. Prolactin treatment was
done in serum free media supplemented with prolactin alone or in
combination with reduced levels of EGF, FGF, Heparin and B12 supplements
for spheroid formation assay. Results: Quantative RT-PCR and western blot
analyses demonstrated that colon cancer cell lines express PRLR.
Alternative splicing has been shown to produce different human PRLR
isoforms, wherein the short forms can act as dominant negative receptors.
However, our studies demonstrated that the colon cancer cell lines
expressed predominantly the long form. We next determined the effect of
recombinant human prolactin on HCT116 and HT29 cells. PRL treatment did
not cause a significant change in proliferation but increased expression
of cancer promoting genes including cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2),
interleukin-8 (IL-8), vascular endothelial growth factor- A (VEGF-A) and
RNA binding protein protooncogene RBM3. PRL treatment also increased the
size and number of colospheres suggesting that PRL affects stem cells.
Furthermore, PRL treatment enhanced the expression of CD133 and also of
the colon cancer stem cell marker, DCLK1 (doublecortin calmodulin like
kinase 1). In addition, PRL treatment resulted in increased migration of
SW620 cells when compared to untreated control. This increase in
migration was further confirmed by increased expression of MMP-2 and
MMP-7 and increased FAK activation. Conclusions: Taken together, these
data demonstrate that PRL increases the viability of colon cancer stem
cells, expression of cancer promoting genes and migratory capacity.
Future Directions: Further investigations would be directed towards
understanding the mechanism of PRL signaling in colorectal cancers.

