Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering a novel role of claudin-7 as a basolateral protein
maintaining cell-matrix interactions in human lung cancer cells and in
mouse intestines


The ability to invade host tissues and metastasize is the major cause of
cancer-related death. During tumor invasion, metastasizing cells disrupt
normal cell-matrix adhesion and acquire an invasive phenotype. Claudins
are adhesion proteins localized at tight junctions (TJs). Claudin-7 is a
unique TJ membrane protein in that it has a stronger basolateral membrane
distribution than that of apical TJs in epithelial cells. To study the
basolateral function of claudin-7, claudin-7 gene silencing experiments
were carried out in a lung cancer cell line using the lentivirus shRNA
approach. We found that claudin-7 knockdown (KD) cells showed disrupted
cell-matrix interactions. Consequently, when claudin-7 KD cells were
plated on the uncoated glass surface, they were unable to attach to the
glass and died the day after plating. In contrast, control cells adhered
well and grew normally. Using immunofluorescent microscopy and
biochemistry methods, we found that claudin-7 co-localized and
co-immunoprecipitated with integrin 1 at the basolateral compartment.
Knockdown of claudin-7 by lentivirus claudin-7 shRNA downregulated
integrin 1 at both mRNA and protein levels. This cell-matrix defect can
be rescued by transfecting claudin-7 or integrin 1 back to the claudin-7
KD cells. Suppression of claudin-7 also upregulated matrix
metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) at both mRNA and protein levels and
downregulated several collagens, such as type V 1, type XV 1, and type
XVI 1, at the mRNA level. We also generated claudin-7-deficient (Cldn7/)
mice using targeted-gene deletion method. Cldn7/ mice displayed severe
intestinal defects including attenuated villi, mucosal ulcerations and
epithelial cell sloughing. Using immunofluorescent microscopy and
biochemistry methods, we found that claudin-7 co-localized and
co-immunoprecipitated with integrin 2 in Cldn7+/+ mouse intestines where
claudin-7 was highly expressed. Deletion of claudin-7 reduced integrin 2
expression and altered its localization. Electron microscopy revealed
significant intercellular gaps below TJs and the cell-matrix loosening in
Cldn7/ intestines. Thus, our current study highlights a novel non-TJ
function of claudin-7 in maintaining epithelial cell-matrix interactions
by interacting with integrins.

