Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modulation restores expression of functional
progesterone receptor in endometrial cancer cells


Endometrial cancer, the most common gynecologic malignancy, is a
hormonally regulated tumor. Given progesterone is a tumor suppressor in
the endometrium, response to progestin-based therapy correlates
positively with progesterone receptor (PR) expression. Many endometrial
tumors have lost of PR, which limits the clinical application of
progestin-based therapy. PRB promoter methylation was reported in 74% of
endometrial cancer patients, which correlate with loss of PR expression.
These clinical data suggest that restoring PR expression by epigenetic
modulation might sensitize tumors to progestin-based therapy. Therefore,
we hypothesized that restoring PR expression in endometrial cancer cells
will inhibit proliferation and induce cell death. Epigenetic modulators,
such as DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi) and histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) were evaluated as effective agents to restore PR
expression in a panel of endometrial cancer cells. Treatment with the
DNMTi 5-aza-2deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) or the HDACi LBH589 alone or in
combination upregulated PGR mRNA levels. At the protein level, LBH589
treatment upregulated PR by 24 hours and sustained expression for at
least 72 hours, even in the presence of progestrone. The upregulated PR
expression by LBH589 treatment was dose dependent; an obvious increase in
PR was detected with 10 nM LBH589 when compared with control, and the
expression reached the highest level at 50 nM to 100 nM. To investigate
if the restored PR is functional, we examined PR nuclear localization and
expression of target genes. First, after treatment with LBH589 in the
absence or presence of progesterone, PR nuclear localization was
confirmed by immunostaining and nuclear fractionation followed by Western
blotting. Next, a progesterone response element (PRE)-luciferase reporter
assay was used to directly examine PR transcriptional activity. LBH589
treatment increased PRE-luciferase activity by 8- to 10-fold in Ishikawa
and ECC1 cells. Furthermore, expression of endogeneous PR target genes
containing PRE (FoxO1 and cyclin D) or Sp1 element (p21 and p27) was
studied in response to LBH589 treatment. Restored PR upregulated FoxO1,
p21, p27 and downregulated cyclin D1, demonstrating that PR is functional
as a transcription factor. Our findings reveal that epigenetic modulators
can restore endogenous PR expression in endometrial cancer cell lines.
This preclinical study provides strong support that strategy to
re-establish PR expression will result in resensitization of endometrial
tumors to progestin therapy.

