Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New insights of miR-221 and miR-222 cluster functions in Burkitt
lymphoma.


Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a mature aggressive B-cell neoplasm, with a
characteristic clinical presentation, morphology and immunophenotype.
Several studies have indicated the importance of miRNAs in B cell
maturation and in the development of B cell lymphomas. MicroRNAs (miRNA)
are a class of naturally occurring, small, non-coding RNA that can
control gene expression by targeting mRNA molecules for translational
repression or cleavage. They are usually expressed in a tissue-specific
manner and play important roles in apoptosis, differentiation and cell
proliferation; therefore their deregulation may be involved in
carcinogenesis or tumor progression by altering normal gene expression
patterns. Over the past years microRNAs signatures have been described to
characterize and classify different types of BL or to investigate the
expression of miRNAs possibly regulated by c-Myc in BL cases positive or
negative for Myc traslocation. Howhever, it remained unclear the
functional role of miRNAs that have been found differentially expressed
and no further studies have been conducted. We performed miRNA expression
profile to gain further insights into the molecular pathology of BL. We
conducted array analysis on a set of 5 sporadic BL patients, 3 endemic BL
patients, 9 reactive tissues and 11 cases of mononucleosis. A common
trend of miRNAs altered expression was also observed by NanoString
analysis in 10 BL cell lines compared to 5 normal CD-19+ B cells. Among
several miRNAs previously described be deregulated in BL we identified a
severe down-regulation of miR-221, miR-222 in all classes of comparisons
we analyzed. The down-regulation of miR-221 and miR-222 associated to BL
has been also confirmed by q-RT-PCR method in a different cohort of BL
patients (20) compared to the healthy controls (6). When miR-221 and
miR-222 expressions have been restored in BL cancer cell lines, lacking
of their expression, by gene expression profile we identified the
differentially expression of several genes involved in ncRNAs processing,
ncRNA metabolic process and also in the regulation of cell
differentiation and cell cycle. Furthermore, functional experiments
identified many of these genes as new direct targets of miR-221 and
miR-222. In conclusion, our study reveals new insights into the
functional significance in loss of miR-221 and miR-222 expression in BL
pathogenesis.

