Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellmap: Tumor cell subpopulation analysis in immunohistochemistry
stained tumor tissue


All potential factors within individual patients which contribute to a
lack of response to a given therapy are not known, but cancer biologists
have long hypothesized that distinct and disparate populations within the
tumor can be selected for by therapy to outgrow and emerge as a resistant
tumor. As more targeted therapies are being developed, the understanding
of these subpopulations of cells within a tumor has become very important
to clinical strategy. Thus, there is a need to effectively distinguish
and evaluate different populations of cells in a tumor within formalin
fixed tissue. These contextual evaluations are important for
understanding the biology of a target, evaluating pharmacodynamic or
surrogate efficacy markers, or evaluating biomarkers for a companion
diagnostic approach. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) remains the most direct
approach to evaluating biomarkers within tissue context, but requires a
pathologist to subjectively separate the complex components of tumor
tissue and the compartments of the tumor cells themselves to deliver a
numerical score that is based on the staining intensity of a cell and the
percentage of cells which stain. This output is considered qualitative,
due to pathologist subjectivity in scoring sample regions, the inability
to effectively discriminate minor differences in staining intensities for
a biomarker, and the inability to deliver a dataset with sufficient
sample size to overcome bias deficiencies. Furthermore, a significant
amount of information content is lost in this score, eliminating the
potential to identify and analyze discrete cell populations within a
tumor that may be leading to refractory to therapy. In contrast, modern
image analysis (IA) approaches can deliver a far more quantitative IHC
score by objectively distinguishing tumor components and cellular
compartments, detecting minor differences in staining intensity, and by
performing this function across the whole tumor section. However, current
IA approaches are designed only to report an average or thresholded
intensity across the analyzed region, without reporting the cell-by-cell
statistics required to identify discrete cell populations within a tumor.
To answer this, we have designed Cellmap, which can analyze an IHC
stained tumor tissue section which has been digitally imaged, and make
multiparametric measurements about cell morphology and biomarker staining
in every cell individually. This information can be reported tumor-wide,
or within a specific component of the tumor, and/or within a compartment
of the cell simultaneously. Cellmap can be used to make quantitative
measurements which identify specific cells with specific signaling
processes, and determine their location within a tumor section. This
information can be used to identify and quantify discrete cell
populations relevant to a disease hypothesis which are associated with a
specific tumor microenvironment.

