Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Laminin receptor cross-talk stimulates receptor internalization
and migration of human prostate cancer cells


Integrin cell adhesion receptors are internalized and recycled to the
plasma membrane during cellular migration. The laminin binding A3B1 and
A6B1 integrin receptors are differentially expressed on prostate tumor
cells in Gleason grades 3-5 as detected in biopsy and prostatectomy
specimens. The A6 integrin exists as a full length form or as a
pro-metastatic variant, A6pB1, a receptor form missing the extracellular
laminin binding domain via the action of the serine protease, uPA. The
objective of this study is to determine whether internalization of the A6
integrin occurs in human bone metastatic lesions and whether cross-talk
between the laminin receptors A6B1, A6pB1 and A3B1 modifies their
respective internalization rates. In a tissue microarray of 185
metastatic prostate cancers from 45 patients, approximately 70% of bone
metastases expressed A6B1 on tumor plasma membrane and/or within the
cytoplasm. The A6 and A6p integrins in DU145 cells are constitutively
internalized with a biological half life of approximately 30 minutes as
compared to 60 minutes for A3 or 20 minutes for the unrelated transferrin
receptor. Increasing production of A6pB1 by supplying exogenous uPA
stimulated A3 internalization. Conversely, blockage of A6pB1 production
using an A6 specific antibody (J8H) decreased A3 internalization.
Targeted depletion of the A3 integrin increased DU145 cell migration that
was dependent upon A6 integrin as detected by antibody blocking
experiments using J8H (A6 specific) and AIIB2 (B1 specific). Analysis of
transcriptomic data from prostate cancer xenografts, revealed three
different candidate receptor recycling genes that significantly
correlated with the loss of membrane and increase in cytoplasmic
expression. Taken together, these data indicate that cross-talk between
A6B1 and A3B1 modifies their internalization rates and prostate tumor
cell migration. This suggests that successful therapeutic targeting of
metastasizing prostate cancer cells may depend upon coordinated targeting
of both receptors and the recycling machinery. Current work is to
determine the involvement of candidate recycling genes in the biological
control of laminin binding integrins in human prostate cancer. (Supported
in part by NIH grants P30CA023074, 1RO1 CA159406 and the TACMASS core
service of the University of Arizona Cancer Center).

