Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of expression of specific oncogenic and tumor
suppressor microRNAs enhanced therapeutic efficacy of 4-HPR and EGCG in
human malignant neuroblastoma cells


Malignant neuroblastomas are extra cranial solid tumors that mostly occur
in children. Studies show modulation of expression of specific microRNAs
(miRs) in the pathogenesis of malignant neuroblastomas. So, suppression
of specific oncogenic miRNAs (onco-miRs) or overexpression of specific
tumor suppressor miRs (TS-miRs) may provide opportunity for controlling
growth of malignant neuroblastomas. We explored whether
N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide (4-HPR, a synthetic retinoid) and
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG, a flavonoid from green tea) could
be effective in modulating expression of specific onco-miRs and TS-miRs
for increasing differentiation and apoptosis in human malignant
neuroblastoma SK-N-BE2 and IMR-32 cells. We treated the cells with
different doses of 4-HPR, EGCG, and combination of both, subjected to MTT
assay, and found that combination of 0.5 M 4-HPR and 50 M EGCG acted most
synergistically to reduce cell viability in both cell lines. Combination
therapy increased morphological and biochemical features of neuronal
differentiation and apoptotic death. Increases in apoptosis in both cell
lines were associated with activation of extrinsic and intrinsic caspase
cascades. Increased cytosolic level of AIF also indicated activation of
caspase-independent pathway of apoptosis. Activation of calpain and
caspase-3 produced 145 kD spectrin break down product (SBDP) and 120 kD
SBDP, respectively. Increased activity of caspase-3 also caused ICAD
fragmentation leading to completion of apoptotic process. Our RT-PCR
experiments indicated that significant changes in expression of three
onco-miRs (miR-92, miR-93, and miR-106b) and three TS-miRs (miR-7-1,
miR-34a, and miR-99a) could be associated with increases in
differentiation and apoptosis in both cell lines after treatment with
combination of 4-HPR and EGCG. Then, we investigated the effects of
overexpression of an onco-miR (miR-93) and a TS-miR (miR-7-1) on the
therapeutic efficacy of the drugs. We transfected the cells with miR-93
and miR-7-1 mimics and subjected to treatment with 4-HPR and EGCG alone
and in combination for evaluation of the effects on induction of
apoptotic death by flow cytometry and Western blotting. Overexpression of
the onco-miR (miR-93) reduced the efficacy of the combination therapy
while overexpression of the TS-miR (miR-7-1) increased the efficacy of
the combination therapy for induction of apoptosis in both cell lines.
Collectively, results showed that combination of 4-HPR and EGCG acted
synergistically to increase differentiation and apoptosis, modulated the
expression of specific onco-miRs and TS-miRs for induction of apoptosis,
and overexpression of the TS-miR (miR-7-1) in combination with 4-HPR and
EGCG could be used as the most potent therapeutic regimen for controlling
growth of human malignant neuroblastoma cells.

