Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative assessment of cell viability and motility kinetics by
novel real-time technology and classic endpoint assays


Background Elucidation of biological mechanisms underlying deregulated
proliferation and motility of cancer cells and identification of
potential therapeutic targets require accurate cell-based monitoring. The
xCELLigence Real Time Cell Analysis (RTCA) technology (Roche Applied
Science) constitutes a non-invasive and label-free approach to assess
cell viability and motility in real time, hereby countering key features
of classic label-based endpoint detection methods. Here we show results
of in vitro detection of cell viability and migration on 2 cancer cell
lines using xCELLigence RTCA DP and correlate these with data obtained
from parallel experiments carried out using established assessment
methods for each process. Methods and results Kinetic viability and
migration measurements were carried out on the MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer)
and A549 (lung cancer) cell lines using the xCELLigence RTCA DP
instrument. Cell viability was assessed during 10 days of incubation
using modified 16-well plates (E-plate) containing microelectrodes at the
well bottoms for impedance-based detection of attachment, spreading and
proliferation, expressed as a Cell Index (CI) value. Cell migration was
measured during 38 hours using 16-well plates (CIM16-plate) consisting of
an upper and a lower chamber separated by a microporous membrane equipped
with a similar detection system at the bottom side. The Sulforhodamine B
(SRB) assay and a 24-well Transwell system served as reference tools to
assess viability and migratory kinetics. Viability was estimated by
optical density (OD) reading (540 nm) of solubilized cells that were
fixed and stained with SRB at a rate of 1 plate per day. Good
correlations were observed between SRB and RTCA CI for 5x103 and 104
MDA-MB-231 cells/mL (Spearman's = 0.79 and 0.84 resp) and similar
doubling times (p = 0.459). The experimental Transwell design allowed
dynamic quantitation of cancer cell migration by fixing and staining of
the insert membranes in methanol and crystal violet in duplicates at 10
time points during a 24 hour-incubation. Pixel area quantitation showed
strong correlation with xCELLigence CI (Spearman's = 0.90 for both cell
lines). However, OD measurements (590 nm) correlated even stronger with
CI (Spearman's = 0.96 and 1.00 for MDA-MB-231 and A549). Moreover,
analysis of random migration indicated a significant difference between
RTCA CI and area / OD (p Background Elucidation of biological mechanisms
underlying deregulated proliferation and motility of cancer cells and
identification of potential therapeutic targets require accurate
cell-based monitoring. The xCELLigence Real Time Cell Analysis (RTCA)
technology (Roche Applied Science) constitutes a non-invasive and
label-free approach to assess cell viability and motility in real time,
hereby countering key features of classic label-based endpoint detection
methods. Here we show results of in vitro detection of cell viability and
migration on 2 cancer cell lines using xCELLigence RTCA DP and correlate
these with data obtained from parallel experiments carried out using
established assessment methods for each process. Methods and results
Kinetic viability and migration measurements were carried out on the
MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer) and A549 (lung cancer) cell lines using the
xCELLigence RTCA DP instrument. Cell viability was assessed during 10
days of incubation using modified 16-well plates (E-plate) containing
microelectrodes at the well bottoms for impedance-based detection of
attachment, spreading and proliferation, expressed as a Cell Index (CI)
value. Cell migration was measured during 38 hours using 16-well plates
(CIM16-plate) consisting of an upper and a lower chamber separated by a
microporous membrane equipped with a similar detection system at the
bottom side. The Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay and a 24-well Transwell
system served as reference tools to assess viability and migratory
kinetics. Viability was estimated by optical density (OD) reading (540
nm) of solubilized cells that were fixed and stained with SRB at a rate
of 1 plate per day. Good correlations were observed between SRB and RTCA
CI for 5x103 and 104 MDA-MB-231 cells/mL (Spearman's = 0.79 and 0.84
resp) and similar doubling times (p = 0.459). The experimental Transwell
design allowed dynamic quantitation of cancer cell migration by fixing
and staining of the insert membranes in methanol and crystal violet in
duplicates at 10 time points during a 24 hour-incubation. Pixel area
quantitation showed strong correlation with xCELLigence CI (Spearman's =
0.90 for both cell lines). However, OD measurements (590 nm) correlated
even stronger with CI (Spearman's = 0.96 and 1.00 for MDA-MB-231 and
A549). Moreover, analysis of random migration indicated a significant
difference between RTCA CI and area / OD (p < 0.001) implying reduced
detection limits of the xCELLigence system. Conclusions The similarity
between observations as performed with conventional approaches and
xCELLigence makes both methods interchangeable. Added with results
indicating reduced detection limits, xCELLigence provides an accurate
detection platform for high-throughput kinetic screenings and for
determination of time-dependent cell proliferation and motility dynamics.

