Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) and therapy (PDT) with dendrimer
porphyrin micelle


[Background and purpose] We previously reported that the efficacy of
photodynamic therapy (PDT) with dendrimer phthalocyanine-loaded micelles
(DPc/m). However, monitoring of this photosensitizer by the clue of
fluorescence is quite difficult because of the low intrinsic fluorescence
originating from phthalocyanine, thus other fluorescence dye such as
Alexa is required for the monitoring. For resolving this problem, we
developed a novel micelle-based photosensitizer loading dendrimer
porphyrin (DP). The DP-loaded micelles (DP/m) intensely emit fluorescence
from porphyrin without an additional fluorescence labeling. The aim of
this study was to verify practical effectiveness of DP/m by comparing
that of DP on PDD and PDT. [Materials and Methods] For in vitro
cytotoxicity tests, rat bladder carcinoma cells (AY-27) were incubated
with DP/m for 4 h and were exposed to laser light (635 nm, 100 J/cm2).
One day after PDT, cell viability was measured by WST-8 assay.
Distribution of DP/m in cellular organelles was investigated using
fluorescence markers of cellular organelles by a confocal laser scanning
microscope. In addition, we examined in vivo fluorescence imaging using
an orthotopic bladder tumor model established by inoculating AY27 cells
in female Fischer F344 rats via transurethral catheterization. Four hours
after intravenous administration of DP/m, the bladders were extracted and
fluorescence image was obtained of bladder. [Results] DP and DP/m without
light irradiation were basically non-toxic (low dark toxicity), showing
cell viability being > 85% at the concentration up to 17 M. However,
photoirradiated DP and DP/m induced the high level of cytotoxicity:
survival rate was less than 5%. PDT using DP/m showed an approximately 15
times of cytotoxicity when compared with PDT using DP. The results
suggested that DP/m highly accumulate in cancer cells and can provide a
significant photodynamic effect leading to cell damage. Confocal laser
scanning microscopic studies showed that DP/m exhibited preferential
accumulation in lysosomes through endocytosis and retention in the cells.
When DP/m were injected (i.v.) into the bladder tumor animal models,
fluorescence from the DP/m were clearly visualized in accordance with
tumor distribution. We detected fluorescence even when a size of tumor
was less than 1 mm, thus enabling optical imaging with excellent contrast
between tumor and surrounding normal tissue. A study of PDT in vivo is
now carried out. [Conclusion] We developed dendrimer porphyrin-loaded
micelles (DP/m), which were effective for both PDD and PDT. An excellent
detection of tumor was achieved owing to the intense fluorescence of DP/m
and highly accumulation in tumors. The preferable DP/m uptake in tumors
resulted in effective phototoxicity.

