Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OCT-3/4 expression is associated with high levels of the
pro-apoptotic BH3 only protein NOXA in testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs)


Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells are the pluripotent precursors of
differentiated structures of testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT)
characterized by expression of the embryonal transcription factor
OCT-3/4. Loss of OCT-3/4 during differentiation abrogates the
extraordinary high sensitivity to cisplatin in these cells. We previously
observed a constitutively high expression level of NOXA and a major role
of this pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein for cisplatin hypersensitivity in
the EC cell lines NTERA-2D1 and 2102EP. We now investigated if these high
NOXA protein levels may be directly linked to the OCT-3/4 status in TGCT
cells. Therefore, we analyzed NOXA protein expression in an extended TGCT
cell line panel of 5 OCT-3/4 negative and 5 OCT-3/4 positive cell lines.
Importantly, NOXA protein was highly correlated with OCT-3/4 levels and
also with cisplatin sensitivity. These data indicate that constitutively
high NOXA levels might be responsible for the low threshold for
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in OCT-3/4 positive pluripotent cells. A
direct link between OCT-3/4 and NOXA could also be demonstrated by RNAi
mediated silencing experiments performed in NTERA-2D1 and 2102EP cells.
Silencing of OCT-3/4 resulted in a significant downregulation of NOXA
transcript and an almost complete loss of NOXA protein accompanied by a
loss of cisplatin sensitivity. This was observed in both differentiation
competent NTERA-2D1 cells as well as in differentiation incompetent
2102EP cells pointing to a direct OCT-3/4 dependent NOXA regulation
rather than a bystander effect of differentiation upon loss of OCT-3/4.
We further validated our in vitro data by comparing OCT-3/4 and NOXA
expression levels in patient samples derived from ECs with other
non-seminomatous GCTs, seminomas, and tumor entities from lung, breast,
and ovary. In agreement with our in vitro observations, OCT-3/4 and NOXA
were found to be highly expressed selectively in seminomas and ECs. This
could also be confirmed on protein level in primary tissue samples
derived from 5 ECs and 8 seminomas by western blot analysis. In
conclusion, our data for the first time demonstrate a close correlation
between OCT-3/4 and NOXA protein levels and strengthen the previously
hypothesized role of constitutively high NOXA levels for the exquisite
sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin.

