Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of residual tumor cells after various
chemotherapies shows distinct gene expression patterns in patient-derived
breast cancer xenografts


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive
disease associated with a high risk of distant recurrence, rapid
progression to death and poor overall survival. Systemic treatments of
TNBC patients are limited to cytotoxic chemotherapy due to the lack of
identified molecular targets. Therefore, the characterization of tumor
cells that are responsible for recurrences after such treatments is of
high therapeutic relevance. Using patient-derived TNBC xenografts that
reproduce tumor relapse, we have analyzed the gene expression profile of
residual cancer cells (RCC) after various chemotherapeutic treatments.
Experimental design: Sixteen human breast cancer xenografts (HBCx) were
treated with adriamycin-cyclophosphamide (AC), docetaxel, cisplatin, or
capecitabine. Xenografts showing complete tumor remission followed by
local relapse in at least 75% of mice were considered as tumor recurrence
models. Gene expression profiles were obtained from tumor samples before
treatment (untreated group) and after treatment (tumor remission and
tumor recurrence groups) using Affymetrix U133 Gene Arrays. Results: Two
xenograft models showed complete tumor remission after chemotherapy, i.e.
the HBCx-10 xenograft (AC) and the HBCx-33 xenograft (cisplatin and
capecitabine). An exploratory analysis on expression datasets of these
xenografts tumors showed two distinct groups: one consisted of untreated
and relapsed tumors and the other of RCC. The differential analysis
showed no difference in gene expression between the untreated and
relapsed tumors in the 2 models analyzed, whatever the cytotoxic agent
administered. In contrast, when gene expression was analyzed in RCC
compared to untreated or relapsed tumors, we found 2405 genes
differentially expressed in the HBCx-10 xenograft (fold change greater
than 2 or less than 2), and 2886 and 945 genes in the HBCx-33 one treated
with capecitabine and cisplatin, respectively. By comparing the 3 lists
of differentially expressed genes, we found 227 common genes, 137 being
up-regulated and 90 down-regulated. Gene Ontology analysis of these genes
revealed enrichment in several biological processes related to immune
response, response to wounding, inflammatory response, cell
proliferation, cell adhesion, and apoptosis. Validation studies with
additional RNA and protein studies are currently ongoing on selected
deregulated genes. Conclusions This study supports the existence of a
distinct molecular profile of residual tumor cells after chemotherapy in
TNBC, with a subset of deregulated genes common to the different tumors
analyzed and the different administered treatments. Further elucidation
of the signaling pathways associated to these deregulated genes may
provide key insights into the molecular mechanism driving breast cancer
recurrence.

