Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TH17 cells in early pancreatic tumorigenesis


Activating Kras mutations have been detected in 30% of pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasias (PanIN), increasing to 100% in advanced
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Chronic pancreatitis is a risk
factor for PDAC and cigarette smoking, the most important single risk
factor for PDAC, has been recently associated with chronic pancreatic
inflammation. The central hypothesis guiding our work is that
inflammatory cells recruited to the pancreas in response to chronic
injury can interact with epithelial cells harboring activated KrasG12D,
affecting the progression of PanIN lesions. Further understanding of this
interaction would be fundamental to generate effective chemopreventive
strategies in high risk populations. To test this hypothesis, we have
used the Mist1:CreERT2; LSL-KrasG12D mice in which the LSL KrasG12D
allele is activated specifically in the acinar compartment of adult mice,
leading to the rapid formation of PanIN with a classic ductal phenotype.
We have established a model of chronic inflammation- induced pancreatic
tumorigenesis that results in significant acceleration in the initiation
and progression of PanIN lesions at 4 weeks after the activation of Kras.
We have found that TH17 cells, a subtype of CD4+ T-helper cells known to
play an active role in other models of inflammation- induced
tumorigenesis, are rapidly recruited to the pancreas after Kras
activation and are further increased in the presence of concomitant
chronic pancreatic inflammation induced by cerulein injections. The
differentiation of CD4+T cells into TH17 requires IL-6 and TGF-B, and
both factors are increased in the pancreatic tumor microenvironment.
Finally, Stat3, a key transcription factor that determines the
differentiation of Th17 lineage, is activated in cells infiltrating early
PanIN lesions. We are currently evaluating both genetic ablation of TH17
cells and neutralizing antibodies against IL-17 as novel therapeutics
strategies in murine PanIN.

