Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER-2 FISH analysis and H & E staining of circulating tumor cells
pre-isolated using high porosity precision microfilters


Background: We have previously presented a novel precision microfilter,
CellSieveTM, which achieves rapid (98%) isolation of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) from peripheral blood identified by fluorescent
immunostaining. We continue with the concept of using CTCs as a minimally
invasive liquid biopsy from a patient's peripheral blood for cancer
detection and subtyping. We show CTCs can be analyzed on a microfilter
using both molecular determinants and histopathology, namely fluorescent
in-situ hybridization (FISH) for the HER-2 mutation and Hematoxylin &
Eosin Staining (H&E) for the histological morphology. Cancer subtyping
using the molecular characterization of CTCs is a method to provide
prognostic determination of breast cancer patients. Further,
histopathological diagnosis is still the gold standard for detecting
cellular abnormalities in determining further testing. We show CTCs can
be rapidly and efficiently collected from blood specimens on CellSieveTM
microfilters and analyzed morphologically, immunologically, and
molecularly for cancer subtyping and clinical determination. Materials
and Methods: CellSieve microfilters are produced with 8 m diameter pores
on a clear polymer with approximately 140,000 pores contained within a 9
mm diameter area. Breast cancer cell lines were used to evaluate the
assay performance. Enumerated cells were spiked into 7.5 mL whole human
blood and mixed with 7.5 mL of a fixation solution. Filtration was
performed in a filter holder with the sample drawn by negative pressure
at a flow rate of 10 mL/min. The cells captured on the filter were fixed
and permeabilized within the filter holder. Cells were then stained and
identified by fluorescent microscopy by the presence of DAPI, cytokeratin
(FITC), and EpCAM (PE), while showing no CD45 marker (Cy5). Filters were
then washed and probed directly with a HER-2 DNA probe according to a
modified FISH procedure. After microscopic analysis and mutation
determination, the filters were flushed with a modified hematoxylin
solution followed by an Eosin Y solution. Filters were then remounted and
analyzed by light microscopy. Results: We demonstrated that CTC
isolation, immunostaining, molecular analysis, and finally morphological
determination can be performed rapidly and efficiently on a single
sample. Using the antibody combination described above, we counted the
CTCs. We then determined HER-2 mutation status of the CTCs using FISH,
and finally verified the morphology of the cell type. Conclusions:
Microfiltration of CTCs on a CellSieveTM microfilter can be used in a
variety of characterization techniques, including immunofluorescence,
FISH and histopathological staining. This technique, rapid and efficient
capture of CTCs from patient blood, followed by analysis of tumor cells,
can be used to determine therapy.

