Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Gli1 results in altered c-jun activation, inhibition
of cisplatin-induced up-regulation of ERCC1, XPD, and XRCC1, and
inhibition of platinum-DNA adduct repair


The transcription of ERCC1 and other nucleotide excision repair genes is
strongly influenced by c-jun. C-jun is transcriptionally regulated by Gli
proteins of the Hedgehog pathway. We therefore studied the possible
relationships between Gli1, c-jun, and the upregulation of ERCC1, XPD,
and XRCC1 in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells. We studied
the paired human ovarian cancer cell lines A2780 and A2780-CP70. We used
a shRNA construct that specifically degrades Gli1 message; which has been
previously published by one of the co-authors (Shevde-Samant et al.,
2009). Genes we assessed for mRNA and/or protein levels included: c-jun,
ERCC1, XPD, XRCC1, Gli1, Gli2, SHH, IHH, GAPDH, and -tubulin.
Platinum-DNA adduct repair was assessed by atomic absorbance spectrometry
with Zeeman background correction. Use of the anti-Gli1 shRNA in
cisplatin-resistant cells, resulted in a block of the cells ability to
up- regulate genes in response to cisplatin treatment, including: c-jun,
ERCC1, XPD, and XRCC1. This block in upregulation of c-jun was concurrent
with a change in the phosphorylation pattern of the c-jun protein,
shifting that pattern from a Ser63/73 dominant pattern, to a Thr91/93
dominant pattern. A2780-CP70 cells were treated at their cisplatin IC50,
and DNA repair was assessed after pretreatment with anti-Gli1 shRNA or
scrambled shRNA control. Control cells repaired 78% of platinum-DNA
adducts at 12 hours; compared to 33% repair in cells pretreated with
anti-Gli1 shRNA; a 2.4 fold difference. Pretreatment of A2780-CP70 cells
with anti-Gli1 shRNA resulted in supra-additive cell killing with
cisplatin; shifting the cisplatin IC50 from 30 M to 5 M. Pretreatment of
these cells with cyclopamine, did not shift the cisplatin IC50. We
conclude that the transcriptional protein Gli1 is important in the
upregulation of these three DNA repair genes in human ovarian cancer
cells. And that Gli1 thereby strongly influences platinum-DNA adduct
repair, and cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. This Gli1 role has c-jun
as an intermediate in the pathway.

