Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gaussia luciferase complementation demonstrates that secreted
CXCL12 (SDF-1) forms dimer under physiologic conditions


Chemokine CXCL12 signaling through receptors CXCR4 and/or CXCR7 promotes
tumor growth and metastasis in more than 20 different human malignancies,
establishing CXCL12 as a promising therapeutic target in cancer. Under
physiologic conditions, many chemokines form homodimers, which may
activate signaling pathways distinct from those regulated by monomers of
the same chemokine. Prior studies with recombinant, mutant forms of
CXCL12 engineered to form either monomers or dimers show that monomeric
and dimeric CXCL12 preferentially activate different downstream signaling
molecules. However, the extent to which CXCL12 forms homodimers under
physiologic conditions and resultant effects on CXCR4 and CXCR7 signaling
remain to be determined. To analyze dimerization of CXCL12 secreted by
mammalian cells, we used bioluminescence imaging of CXCL12 fused to
either full length or complementation fragments of Gaussia luciferase
(GL). Using column chromatography and GL protein fragment
complementation, we demonstrated that CXCL12 is secreted from mammalian
cells as both monomers and homodimers, and the homodimer remains stable
in the extracellular environment. In 3D spheroid cultures, we also
established that CXCL12 secreted from two independent cell populations
can form homodimers in the extracellular space. Relative to dimeric
CXCL12, monomeric CXCL12 preferentially signaled via CXCR4 to Gi proteins
to activate AKT and suppress intracellular cAMP. By comparison, dimeric
CXCL12 was more potent at recruiting -arrestin 2 to CXCR4 and regulating
chemotaxis CXCR4+ breast cancer cells. In cell-based assays and an
orthotopic tumor xenograft model of human breast cancer, we also found
that CXCR7 preferentially sequestered monomeric CXCL12 and had minimal
accumulation of the dimer. From these studies, we conclude that CXCL12
secreted from mammalian cells forms homodimers under physiologic
conditions, and monomeric versus homodimeric CXCL12 regulate distinct
signaling pathways. These results inform ongoing efforts to target CXCL12
and its receptors for cancer therapy.

