Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of curcumin plus docetaxel on neuroendocrine features,
or not, in castration-resistant prostate cancer: A prospective study


Background &Aims: Curcumin, a polyphenol derived from Curcuma Longa is
known for his anti-cancer activity and may exert synergic effects with
cytotoxic agents. In parallel, neuroendocrine differentiation in
castration-resistant prostate cancer provides an aggressive phenotype to
disease. In this prospective phase II study, we assessed the impact of a
new combination, docetaxel plus curcumin, in patients with or without
neuroendocrine features. Methods: In this phase II study, thirty patients
received docetaxel 75 mg/m*2 (perfusion given every 3 weeks) in
combination with curcumin orally at 6 g/day (day-4 to day+2 of
docetaxel). Neuroendocrine features were determined by serum chromogranin
A and neuron-specific enolase, before each cycle. Variations were divided
in 3 groups: an increase > 25%, a decrease of 50% or greater and
stability. Treatment response were measured by PSA >50% decrease (PSA
response) and objective response rate on evaluable metastatic lesions.
Results: Initially, 53% of patients had an elevated chromogranin A and
33% an elevated neuron-specific enolase. During treatment, 7% performed a
> 50% chromogranin A decrease and 30% a neuron-specific enolase decrease.
PSA response was observed in 59% of patients and 40% out of patients with
evaluable targets had a partial response. PSA and objective response rate
were identical whatever neuroendocrine feature. A positive correlation
was found between chromogranin A and PSA, age, weight and palliative
radiotherapy. Conversely, neuron-specific enolase was negatively
correlated with PSA and patients'age. Conclusions: Curcumin and docetaxel
had a global action on tumors with or without neuroendocrine features.
Chromogranin A was the best neuroendocrine marker in correlation with
clinical parameters. This association delivered then remarkable results
on neuroendocrine differentiation of castration-resistant prostate
cancer, in comparison with pivotal study data with docetaxel alone (TAX
327).

