Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macromolecular transport, collagen fiber morphology, and
metastasis are influenced by the tumor growth location


Metastasis and malignant ascites are major causes of poor prognosis in
prostate cancer patients. Cancer cells metastasize more readily from
orthotopic sites than from heterotopic sites (1). Here we have focused on
characterizing the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in facilitating
metastatic dissemination from metastasis-permissive environments and on
understanding the role of hypoxia in these environments using noninvasive
MRI and optical imaging of orthotopic and subcutaneous PC3 tumor
xenografts. MRI of a macromolecular contrast agent was used to
characterize interstitial fluid transport, second harmonic generation
(SHG) microscopy to determine collagen I fiber distribution, and enhanced
green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression to detect hypoxia. These
studies will provide insights into the dynamics of interstitial
transport, and the influence of collagen I fibers within these
metastasis-permissive environments. PC3-HRE-EGFP cells were engineered to
express EGFP under hypoxia (1). For the orthotopic implantation, we used
a microsurgical method that avoids disseminating cancer cells during
inoculation in the prostate. By implanting PC3 tumor tissues rather than
injecting cells, the stromal tissue and the three dimensional
cytoarchitecture, believed to play a critical role in tumor progression
and metastasis, were maintained. Interstitial fluid transport parameters
were measured on a Bruker Biospec 4.7T spectrometer as previously
described (2). SHG microscopy of freshly excised xenograft slices was
performed on a Zeiss 710 LSM NLO microscope system. Collagen fiber
morphology was characterized in terms of the inter-fiber distance and
fiber volume (3). A significantly higher number of interstitial fluid
pooling voxels, and lower efflux and influx rates were observed in
orthotopic tumors compared to the subcutaneous ones. SHG imaging
demonstrated significantly higher fiber density and volume in orthotopic
tumors. Metastases to lymph nodes, lungs and several other organs were
routinely observed following orthotopic implantation, but rarely occurred
after subcutaneous implantation. Overall, orthotopic prostate tumors were
characterized by a higher density of collagen fibers, a higher number of
interstitial fluid pooling voxels, and lower efflux and influx rates
compared to subcutaneous tumors. Characterization of hypoxia in
orthotopic and subcutaneous environments and its relationship to
interstitial transport and collagen fiber distribution is ongoing. These
data demonstrate the profound impact of the location of tumor growth on
the ECM and macromolecular transport, and provide additional insights
into environments that are permissive for metastasis and the accumulation
of malignant ascites. (1) Raman et al, Cancer Res, 66:9929-9936, 2006.
(2) Pathak et al, Cancer Res, 65:1425-32, 2005. (3) Kakkad et al,
Neoplasia 12:608-17, 2010.

