Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by a dietary agent for
the prevention/ treatment of breast cancer


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women, affecting over
1 million women worldwide (208,000 cases in U.S.) and resulting in
400,000 deaths, yearly. The morbidity associated with breast cancer has
been only partially impacted by current treatment modalities including
surgery, radiotherapy, and adjuvant chemotherapy and/or hormone
therapies. There is an immediate need for effective prevention and/or
treatment of breast. Changes in reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a
pivotal role in these processes. For example, a moderate increase in ROS
promotes cell proliferation, but excessive amounts of ROS can induce
apoptosis in cancer cells. Therefore, it is possible to manipulate the
oxidative stress (redox) system to selectively kill cancer cells. Neem
(Azadirachta indica) is a well-known medicinal plant having a wide
spectrum of biological activities. In our studies, Ethanolic fraction of
Neem Leaf (EFNL) significantly decreased cell viability and induced
apoptosis in both estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cells without causing toxicity to normal primary
breast epithelial cells. Oral administration of EFNL (5.0 mg/kg body
weight) significantly inhibited the growth of MNU-induced mammary tumors
without causing any toxicity. EFNL treatment not only inhibited the
growth of established mammary tumors, but also significantly inhibited
the growth of any new mammary tumors. These interesting results led us to
investigate the mechanism underlying EFNL actions on breast cancer. Our
results suggested that EFNL induced Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) which
lead to inhibition of phosphorylation of the pro-survival signal
proteins, Akt and its downstream signaling of mTOR and NF kappa B
activation. Over expression of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide
dismutases (SOD1 & SOD2) or pharmacological agent [N-acetylcysteine]
abrogated EFNL-induced ROS generation, inhibition of cell survival and
Akt inactivation in breast cancer cells. These results clearly
demonstrate that EFNL induced ROS regulates pro-survival function in
breast cancer cells and provides a novel molecular target for breast
cancer treatment. The results may provide a preclinical
proof-of-principle for a novel targeted therapy for breast cancer cells
using EFNL as a nontoxic dietary agent.

