Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of kava extracts and kavalactones on histone lysine
methylation in urinary bladder cancer


According to the GLOBOCAN08, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide in
2008 report, age-standardized incidences of tobacco-smoking related lung
and bladder cancers in three kava drinking pacific countries (Fiji,
Vanutu and Samoa) were markedly lower than those in their neighbor
countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, despite of the higher
percentages of smokers in their populations (up to 58.3% of man in Samoa
smoke). It has recently been thought that modification of reversible
epigenetic events such as histone acetylation and methylation during
carcinogenesis may be one of the most promising ways in prevention of
tobacco-smoking related cancers. We therefore examined the effect of kava
extracts and their main chemical components kavalactones on histone
lysine methylation in malignant and non-malignant bladder cell lines. Our
data have shown that the kava crude extract, kawain and methysticin but
not dehydrokawain, yangonin, 11-methoxyyangonin in the extract induce
expression of H3K4 me1 and me2, as well as H3K9 me2 in bladder cancer
cell lines (5637, T24 and RT4). In addition, both kawain and methysticin
significantly inhibits the in vitro activity of demethylase
lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1). Compared to non-malignant bladder
epithelial cells TEU2, bladder cancer cells express very little or no
H3K4 me1 and me2, as well as H3K9 me2. Among all the tested kavalactones,
kawain demonstrated selectivity in inhibition of the growth of bladder
cancer cells versus non-malignant bladder epithelial cells (TEU2).
Consistent with the above results, a specific LSD1 inhibitor II and a
nonspecific monoamine oxidases inhibitor trans-2-Phenylcyclopropylamine
(2-PCPA, also known to inhibit LSD1) significantly induce the expression
of H3K4 me1 and me2, as well H3K9me2 in tested bladder cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, dietary feeding of 6 g kawain/kg mouse food significantly
slows down hydroxybutyl(butyl)nitrosamine (OH-BBN)-induced mouse urinary
bladder carcinogenesis and increases the survival rates of mice treated
with OH-BBN in both prevention (kawain was given before the OH-BBN
treatment) and promotion (kawain was given after the OH-BBN treatment)
protocols. Immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded bladder sections
revealed that OH-BBN-induced mouse bladder tumors show significantly
decreased H3K4me1 expression (p=0.0005) compared to normal mouse
bladders, whereas bladder tissues from kawain treated mice show a
significant increase in the expression of H3K4me1 compared to those from
vehicle control treated mice in the OH-BBN model (p=0.002). Taken
together, our results suggested that modification of histone lysine
methylation may represent a new approach for bladder cancer prevention
and treatment, and that kavalacones may be promising cancer preventive
agents existing in the kava plant.

