Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ginger compound, 6-shogaol, inhibits prostate cancer cell
growth through reduced activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (Stat3)


Prostate cancer is the most common non-skin neoplasm and second leading
cause of death in men in the USA with an estimated 240,890 new cases and
33,720 deaths from this disease in 2011. The risk for developing prostate
cancer increases with age and overall 1 in 6 men will be diagnosed with
this disease. Despite much recent progress, prostate cancer continues to
represent a major cause of cancer-related mortality and morbidity in men.
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) has been widely used as a spice, and as a
medicinal herb in traditional herbal medicine. It is a natural dietary
ingredient with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticarcinogenic
properties. Ginger contains several pungent constituents such as
gingerols, shogaols, paradols, and gingerdiols. The shogaols are
predominant constituents in the dried ginger. Several studies reported
that 6-shogaol has anticancer and anti-inflammatory activity. However the
mechanism(s) involved in anticancer effect of 6-shogaol has not been
clearly elucidated. In the current study, we found that 6-shogaol
inhibited the proliferation of human prostate cancer cells including
LNCap, DU145 and PC-3 in a concentration dependent manner. In order to
find the mechanism associated with the antiproliferative effect of
6-Shogaol, we performed Western blotting and found that this compound
inhibited the constitutive (DU145) and IL-6 (LNCap and DU145) induced
phosphorylation of Stat3(Tyr705). 6-shogaol also inhibited constitutive
and IL-6 induced phosphorylation of Stat3(Ser727) in both cell lines. It
also decreased the level of several Stat3 regulated molecules such as
cyclin D1 and survivin. Next we measured the apoptosis inducing activity
of 6-shogaol and found that this compound induced apoptosis in LNCap and
DU145 cells also in a concentration dependent manner. In order to confirm
the mechanism involved in apoptosis induction, we measured the level of
various apoptosis markers and found that 6-shogaol induced cleavage of
PARP and caspase7 in both LNCap and DU145 cell lines. Quantitative real
time PCR data showed that 6-shogaol decreased the mRNA level of Bcl2,
CCL5, IL-6, IL-7 and increased the expression of Bax, p21, IRF1 and
SOCS1. Collectively, the current data lead us to suggest that 6-shogaol
may possess properties for further consideration as a therapeutic and/or
chemopreventive agent for human prostate cancer.

