Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parthenolide-mediated redox modification of Keap1 leads to
differential effects on radiosensitivities of prostate cancer and normal
cells


Elevated oxidative stress is more frequently observed in cancer cells
than in normal cells. Thus, further exposure to exogenous reactive oxygen
species (ROS) is expected to push cancer to cell death, whereas normal
cells may maintain redox homeostasis through ROS mediated adaptive
responses. We previously demonstrated that parthenolide selectively
enhances radiosensitivity of prostate cancer cells through activation of
a NADPH oxidase-dependent redox signaling pathway. Our present study
identifies the status of the redox sensitive Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein-1 (Keap1) as a central regulator responsible for the
parthenolide-mediated differential redox modification. This results in
both a radiosensitization effect in prostate cancer cells and a
radioresistance effect in normal prostate epithelial cells.
Mechanistically, parthenolide increases the reduced state of Keap1 in
prostate cancer cells in a thioredoxin-dependent manner but causes
oxidation of Keap1 in normal prostate epithelial cells. Selective
knock-down of thioredoxin leads to Keap1 oxidation and subsequent
activation of the NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2). These results suggest
that redox modification of Keap1 is a major mechanism for the
parthenolide effect on radiation therapy in cancer and normal cells.
Consistent with the differential effect of parthenolide in cancer and
normal cells, the levels of superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and
peroxynitrite were selectively increased in parthenolide treated prostate
cancer cells but not in normal prostate epithelial cells, indicating the
selective increase of ROS in cancer cells. Parthenolide reduces the
levels of Nrf2 targets, antioxidant proteins including manganese
superoxide dismutase and heme oxygenase in prostate cancer cells, but
increases the levels of these proteins in normal cells. This suggests
that an antioxidant response is critical for the protection of normal
cells against ROS generated from parthenolide.

