Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TC21/R-Ras2 is a critical mediator of the Nf1 oncogenic switch


The TC21/R-Ras2 protein is an oncogenic member of the Ras family. Ras
proteins act as binary switches which are active when bound to GTP and
inactive when bound to GDP. GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) accelerate
the hydrolysis from Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP. This Ras-related GTPase TC21 has
transforming capabilities similar to H, N and K-Ras. Activated alleles of
TC21 transform epithelial and fibroblast cell lines and induce tumors in
vivo. To explore the role of TC21 in cancer we used a model of Ras
activation driven by loss of the NF1 tumor suppressor protein, a GAP for
all Ras proteins including TC21. Thus loss of NF1 predicts increased
levels of activated TC21/R-Ras2. NF1 loss in Schwann cells of the
peripheral nervous system causes benign tumors known as neurofibromas.
Neurofibromas can transform to sarcomas known as malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). We found that TC21 loss delayed benign
neurofibroma formation in Nf1fl/fl;DhhCre mice. Nf1 loss increased mRNA
encoding the cytokine transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) and rendered
Schwann cell progenitors insensitive to TGF-; these phenotypes could be
rescued by the Ras-related protein TC21/R-Ras2 and were mediated through
TGF- receptors. Conversely, growth of Nf1;Trp53 brain tumors and NF1/
MPNST sarcomas were accelerated by TC21 loss. MPNST from Nf1;Trp53 mice
and NF1/ MPNST xenografts had increased levels of mRNA encoding TGF-
ligands, and blocking TGF- decreased sarcoma size induced by shTC21. In
benign and malignant tumors an AKT-dependent pathway regulated TGF-
expression. Indicating relevance to human tumorigenesis, global gene
expression analyses demonstrated increases in expression of TGF- ligands
and decreases in TGF- receptors in human neurofibromas and MPNSTs. Thus,
we identify critical roles for TC21 in regulation of TGF- expression. The
results are important because TGF- acts as a tumor suppressor in numerous
types of benign tumors and is also known for its oncogenic role in
cellular transformation and tumor progression. While it has been known
that Ras proteins are involved in TGF- mediated tumor suppression and
oncogenesis, integration between the pathways is incompletely understood,
especially in vivo. The study demonstrates that TC21 can be a major
regulator of the duality of TGF- effects on tumorigenesis in vivo. This
work was supported by a grant to NR (NIH P50NS057531-03).

