Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT1 links tumor suppressive NOTCH signaling to p53


Besides its important role in organismal development, NOTCH receptor
signaling exerts tissue specific proliferative or antiproliferative
functions. While the oncogenic role of NOTCH has been extensively
investigated due to its constitutive activation in T-cell leukemias and
several epithelial cancers, little is known about NOTCH mediated tumor
suppression. We have previously reported that in Ewing's sarcoma, a
pediatric bone tumor driven by the chimeric ETS oncogene EWS-FLI1,
auto-stimulatory NOTCH signaling is suppressed and that reactivation
results in p53 and consequently growth inhibitory p21 induction via
activation of the NOTCH effector HEY1. We now demonstrate that
HEY1-mediated p53 stimulation is accompanied by C-terminal p53
acetylation as a consequence of downregulation of nuclear deacetylase
sirtuin 1 (SIRT1). We found that both EWS-FLI1 and HEY1 bind to the SIRT1
promoter with opposite transcriptional consequences. Thus, knockdown of
EWS-FLI1 and ectopic HEY1 expression resulted in similar SIRT1 modulation
and p53 acetylation which could be reversed by ectopically expressed
SIRT1. Consistent with these results, treatment of Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines with the sirtuin inhibitor Tenovin 6 resulted in massive cell
death. Immunohistochemical analysis of more than 310 Ewing's sarcoma
samples identified moderate (25%-50% positive nuclei) to strong (>50%
positive nuclei) SIRT1 expression in 35% of cases. Additional 20% showed
sporadic positivity (between 10-25% positive nuclei). The involvement of
SIRT1 in tumor suppressive NOTCH signaling is not restricted to Ewing's
sarcoma, but also relevant at least to B-cell malignancies and some
normal tissues, since we found that in several B-cell leukemia and
lymphoma cell lines and in keratinocytes HEY1 was able to lead to
activating p53 acetylation in a SIRT1 suppression-dependent manner.
Supported by grants from the Austrian Science Fund (P22328-B09) and the
European Comission (EU-FP7 STREP 259348).

