Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tim-3 expression and function in natural killer cells from
metastatic melanoma patients


BACKGROUND: Tim-3 (T-cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain 3) is a
type-I glycoprotein receptor with pivotal roles in immune regulation and
tolerance induction. Tim-3 has opposing roles in innate and adaptive
immunity. It synergizes with TLR signaling in DCs inducing the production
of inflammatory cytokines, while it acts as a negative regulator of
Th1/Tc1 cell function by triggering T cell apoptosis upon interaction
with its ligand, galectin-9. Tim-3 is also responsible for the functional
exhaustion of T cells observed in some chronic infectious diseases and
tumors, such as metastatic melanoma (MM). Natural Killer (NK) cells,
innate immune cells which eliminate tumors and infected cells through
cytotoxicity and IFN production, constitutively express Tim-3. Moreover,
it has been described that some tumor cells (including melanoma cells)
express and secrete galectin-9. However, little is known about the role
of Tim-3 on NK cells, particularly in the presence of galectin-9, in
healthy or melanoma patients. METHODS: Purified NK cells from PBMCs of 20
melanoma donors (MD) and 40 healthy donors (HD) were characterized
according to the expression of Tim-3 by flow cytometry. Lamp-1 expression
on NK cell surface was used to measure NK cell cytotoxicity against the
following target cells: i) K562 cells which don't express Galectin-9 and
ii) Gmel galectin-9+ and Gmel galectin-9- sorted melanoma cells. IFN
production was assessed by intracellular staining after 4 hours culture
in presence of IL-12. RESULTS: MD NK cells express higher levels of Tim-3
compared to HD NK cells (pBACKGROUND: Tim-3 (T-cell immunoglobulin domain
and mucin domain 3) is a type-I glycoprotein receptor with pivotal roles
in immune regulation and tolerance induction. Tim-3 has opposing roles in
innate and adaptive immunity. It synergizes with TLR signaling in DCs
inducing the production of inflammatory cytokines, while it acts as a
negative regulator of Th1/Tc1 cell function by triggering T cell
apoptosis upon interaction with its ligand, galectin-9. Tim-3 is also
responsible for the functional exhaustion of T cells observed in some
chronic infectious diseases and tumors, such as metastatic melanoma (MM).
Natural Killer (NK) cells, innate immune cells which eliminate tumors and
infected cells through cytotoxicity and IFN production, constitutively
express Tim-3. Moreover, it has been described that some tumor cells
(including melanoma cells) express and secrete galectin-9. However,
little is known about the role of Tim-3 on NK cells, particularly in the
presence of galectin-9, in healthy or melanoma patients. METHODS:
Purified NK cells from PBMCs of 20 melanoma donors (MD) and 40 healthy
donors (HD) were characterized according to the expression of Tim-3 by
flow cytometry. Lamp-1 expression on NK cell surface was used to measure
NK cell cytotoxicity against the following target cells: i) K562 cells
which don't express Galectin-9 and ii) Gmel galectin-9+ and Gmel
galectin-9- sorted melanoma cells. IFN production was assessed by
intracellular staining after 4 hours culture in presence of IL-12.
RESULTS: MD NK cells express higher levels of Tim-3 compared to HD NK
cells (p<0.05). Moreover, MD NK cells have a defect in cytotoxicity,
proliferation and IFN production, but it still remains unclear if Tim-3
is involved in this exhausted phenotype. So far, we found that Tim-3
expression by itself (without engagement of specific ligands) does not
negatively affect NK cell cytotoxicity. However, the expression of
Galectin-9 by the target cells induces a decrease in NK cell cytotoxicity
(Gmel Gal-9+ vs Gmel Gal-9-). CONCLUSION: These data suggest that when
engaged with Galectin-9, Tim-3 expression down-modulates NK cell
cytotoxicity. Therefore, galectin-9 expression may be a possible
mechanism for tumors to evade immune surveillance. Given that an
increasing body of data supports an important role for Tim-3/Galectin-9
interaction in immune regulation in infectious diseases and cancer,
deciphering the function of Tim-3 in different cell types will be
critical for potentially targeting it therapeutically.

