Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of genomic loss of heterozygosity predict homologous
recombination repair defects in ovarian cancer


Introduction: BRCA1 and BRCA2 are key members of the homologous
recombination (HR) pathway. Mutations in these genes and other HR pathway
defects have potential therapeutic relevance when used to support agents
that introduce or exploit double-strand DNA breaks. This study examines
the association between HR deficiency and genomic patterns of loss of
heterozygosity (LOH). Methods: Ovarian tumors from two independent
datasets were characterized for germline and somatic defects in BRCA1 and
BRCA2. Whole genome LOH profiles were generated using Affymetrix SNP
arrays. Publically available data was downloaded from the TCGA website
for a third independent ovarian cancer dataset. RAD51C promoter
methylation was assayed in two of the datasets. Comprehensive profiling
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 defects, and genome wide LOH was also performed on
approximately 70 breast, ovarian, colon and pancreatic cell lines.
Results: Examination of the pattern of LOH within ovarian tumors with
BRCA1, BRCA2, or RAD51C defects compared to tumors without defects in
these genes has resulted in the development of a homologous recombination
deficiency (HRD) score that has highly significant association with HRD
(p=9*10-11). An intermediate class of LOH sizes (>15 Mb but less than a
whole chromosome) is highly positive correlated with defective HR,
suggesting this class of LOH exists due to double strand DNA break
formation and requires repair by HR. The HRD score was validated in two
independent ovarian cancer datasets (p=2*10-7 and 9*10-29), and
successfully identified breast and pancreatic cell lines with BRCA
defects, suggesting it will be effective across multiple tumor types.
Conclusions: BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers have improved outcomes
following treatment with DNA damaging agents such as platinum salts, and
preclinical studies have demonstrated PARP inhibitor efficacy in BRCA1 or
BRCA2 deficient cells. HR deficiency in ovarian cancer is not solely due
to germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, and HR deficiency is not unique to
ovarian tumors. Each type of cancer is likely to have a unique spectrum
of genetic variants resulting in HRD. The HRD score appears capable of
detecting HRD regardless of etiology or mechanism. This score could have
clinical utility in breast and ovarian cancer, and could be used to
target the use of PARP inhibitors and platinum salts in other cancers.

