Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the CCL2/CCR2 chemokine pathway in breast tumors through
intratumoral delivery of calcium cross linked TAT peptide: siRNA complexes


Breast tumors exhibit inflammatory responses through recruitment of
stromal cells in the primary tumor microenvironment, including
fibroblasts and macrophages. Accumulation of these stromal cells
correlates with development of invasive breast cancer and poor patient
prognosis. These stromal cells express high levels of the inflammatory
chemokine CCL2, corresponding to overexpression of its receptor CCR2 in
the tumor epithelium. Our laboratory and others have shown that CCL2/CCR2
signaling mediates stromal: tumor interactions to regulate breast cancer
cell survival, invasion and metastasis. While the CCL2/CCR2 signaling
represents a novel and potentially effective therapeutic target in
invasive breast cancer, it is necessary to develop new tools to
specifically inhibit CCL2/CCR2 signaling in vivo. siRNA knockdown could
specifically target CCL2 or CCR2, but is unstable and toxic when
delivered in vivo. The HIV-1 derived TAT peptide penetrates cell plasma
membranes at high efficiency and contains nuclear translocation signals
to enhance siRNA delivery to the nucleus. Recent studies from our
research team have shown that CaCl2 condenses TAT/nucleic acids to
nanoparticles facilitating cellular uptake. The goals of these studies
are to design TAT nanoparticle formulas to target CCL2 and CCR2 protein
expression in breast tumors. Using an in vitro luciferase reporter
system, we identified specific N/P ratios and CaCl2 concentrations that
would transfect stromal cells and PyVmT mammary tumor cells. TAT/CaCl2
nanocomplexes carrying GFP plasmid or Cy3 labeled siRNAs were then
injected into PyVmT mammary tumors. We observed visible GFP expression
and Cy3 labeled siRNA uptake in over 50% of the PyVmT mammary tumor at
low and high N/P ratios. Normal mammary tissues did not show significant
uptake of TAT nanoparticles. Flow cytometry analysis showed that high N/P
ratios resulted in efficient TAT/CaCl2/siRNA uptake in breast cancer
associated fibroblasts and macrophages. TAT/CaCl2/siRNA nanocomplexes
formed at low N/P ratios resulted in efficient siRNA uptake in tumor
epithelial cells. Preliminary studies of PyVmT mammary tumors showed a
reduction in CCL2 and CCR2 expression upon delivery of TAT/CaCl2
nanoparticles carrying CCL2 or CCR2 siRNAs. These data indicate this
nanoparticle strategy represents a novel, feasible approach to target the
CCL2/CCR2 signaling in breast cancer, with important implications on
therapeutic targeting.

