Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of the leptin receptor in pancreatic cancer cells
mediates tumor growth


Background: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death
with a five year survival rate around 5%, which has not changed in 30
years. Obesity and increased abdominal adipose tissue independently
correlate with an increased relative risk for the development of
pancreatic cancer. These conditions have been associated with altered
levels of adipokines, or adipose secreted cytokines. Circulating serum
levels of the adipokine leptin are increasesddramatically in obese
patients as well as in high fat diet induced obese mice. Leptin has been
shown to induce oncogenic signaling in breast and prostate cancer. We
have previously shown an increase in orthotopic pancreatic tumor size in
high fat diet induced obese mice compared with regular diet control mice.
We hypothesize that leptin signaling mediates pancreatic tumorigenesis.
Methods: Leptin receptor status was determined in human as well as murine
pancreatic cell lines. Leptin stimulated cell proliferation was
determined using a modified BrdU assay. Leptin receptor levels were
knocked down in human and murine pancreatic tumor cells using a shRNAmir
approach. Leptin receptor shRNA Panc02 knockdown cells were injected
orthotopically into the pancreas of C57/Bl6J mice on regular or high fat
diet to determine the contribution of leptin to pancreatic tumor growth.
Results: We have detected the long form of the leptin receptor in five
human and four murine pancreatic cancer cell lines. In vitro
administration of leptin stimulated proliferation of Panc1 and CFPAC1
cell lines, which was abrogated with co-incubation of a leptin
antagonist. To better understand the mechanism of leptin-mediated
signaling, we studied downstream targets and identified a significant
increase in phosphorylation of STAT3 in Panc1, BXPC3 and CFPAC1 cell
lines after leptin treatment. Orhtotopic injection of leptin receptor
shRNA Panc02 cells into normal and obese mice showed a markedly
diminished tumor growth in obese mice when compared to the nonsilencing
control Panc02 cell growth in obese mice. Conclusion: These results
implicate leptin as a mediator of pancreatic tumorigenesis and suggest
that leptin activation is mediated in part through STAT3 signaling.
Knockdown of the leptin receptor results in inhibition of high fat diet
associated tumor growth in vivo.

