Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effect of oncolytic adenovirus on transforming growth
factor- -induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human cancer cells


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a tumor
progression-related process by which epithelial cells lose their
epithelial characteristics and acquire mesenchymal properties. EMT
promotes the malignant phenotypes including invasion, metastasis and drug
resistance, resulting in tumor recurrence and poor prognosis. Therefore,
to prevent tumor progression, EMT targeted therapy is required. Oncolytic
virotherapy is a promising strategy for anticancer therapy. Although a
variety of oncolytic adenoviruses have been developed to induce
tumor-selective cell death, the effect of oncolytic adenovirus on the
EMT-induced tumor progression remains unclear. In this study, we
investigated the biological effect of oncolytic adenovirus on EMT in
human cancer cells. Methods: We previously generated a
telomerase-specific replication-selective oncolytic adenovirus (OBP-301;
Telomelysin), in which the human telomerase reverse transcriptase
promoter drives the expression of E1A and E1B for virus replication.
Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) was used to induce EMT in human lung
(A549) and pancreatic (Panc-1) cancer cells. To investigate whether
OBP-301 infection affects TGF--induced EMT in these cells, western blot
and real-time PCR analysis for EMT-related markers were performed. We
also examined cell mobility using transwell migration and invasion
assays. In vitro antitumor effect of OBP-301 and chemotherapeutic agents
in TGF--treated cancer cells were assessed by trypan blue exclusion
assay. Results: Administration of TGF- induced mesenchymal
characteristics, including spindle-like cell morphology, down-regulation
of E-cadherin, up-regulation of vimentin and high motility, in A549 and
Panc-1 cells. When TGF--treated cancer cells were infected with OBP-301,
suppression of E-cadherin expression was attenuated. Conversely, the
expression levels of mesenchymal markers, vimentin and N-cadherin, and
EMT-inducing transcription factors, Snail, Slug and ZEB1, were reduced.
OBP-301 infection also inhibited TGF--induced enhancement of migration
and invasion in cancer cells. Moreover, OBP-301 efficiently killed
TGF--treated cancer cells, whereas TGF--treated cancer cells were
resistant to cisplatin and docetaxel. Conclusion: Our results suggest
that telomerase-specific oncolytic adenovirus OBP-301 inhibits
TGF--induced EMT in human cancer cells. OBP-301 has therapeutic potential
against cancer cells that have undergone EMT. Therefore, OBP-301 might be
a promising anticancer agent to suppress EMT-mediated cancer progression
and metastasis.

