Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of survivin during immortalization is linked to
repression of p16INK4a and confers resistance to oxidative stress


Survivin is an essential component of the chromosomal passenger complex
and a member of the Inhibitor of Apoptosis (IAP) family. It is expressed
at high levels in a large variety of malignancies, where it is implicated
in cytoprotection and drug resistance. Nevertheless, the pathways that
mediate the cytoprotective functions of survivin and the mechanisms
underlying its upregulation in cancer have not been fully elucidated.
Results from our past investigations revealed that survivin was
upregulated during telomerase-mediated immortalization of human
myofibroblasts (MRC-5) (1). Since the immortalization process is an
essential step in human carcinogenesis, upregulation of survivin during
immortalization may explain why survivin is abundant in virtually all
cancers. The present study aimed to characterize the mechanism
responsible for the upregulation of survivin during immortalization, and
the functional consequences of its over expression in immortal cells.
Results from whole genome expression analyses and qRT-PCR demonstrated
that the upregulation of survivin during immortalization was paralleled
by increased expression of the transcription factor E2F1. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay confirmed that E2F1 directly interacted
with the survivin gene (BIRC5) promoter in immortal cells. Moreover, it
was shown that E2F1 binding to BIRC5 was corresponded with repression of
tumor suppressor p16INK4a, an event that commonly occurs during
immortalization and human tumorigenesis. Survivin and p16INK4a were also
functionally linked by assays that showed either upregulation of survivin
or repression of p16INK4a rendered telomerase-transduced MRC-5 cells
resistant to oxidative stress. Conversely, siRNA-mediated down regulation
of survivin activated caspases and enhanced the sensitivity of immortal
MRC-5 cells to oxidative stress. Together these data show that repression
of p16INK4a contributes to the upregulation of survivin, and thereby
provides a survival advantage to cells that are subject to oxidative
stress during immortalization. 1. Yuan et al., Oncogene (2009) 28,
2678-2689.

