Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor induces anterograde lysosome trafficking
via activation of p38


Previous studies from our laboratory have demonstrated that acidic
extracellular pH and activation of c-Met by the Hepatocyte Growth Factor
(HGF) in the tumor microenvironment, have the ability to induce
anterograde (outward) lysosome trafficking in prostate tumor cells,
resulting in an increase in protease secretion and tumor cell invasion.
Lysosome redistribution requires microtubules, sodium proton exchangers
(NHEs) and PI-3K activity. These processes can be blocked by preventing
anterograde lysosome trafficking using NHE inhibitors or anti-diabetic
drugs belonging to the thiazolidinedione class. Epidermal Growth Factor
(EGF) is another growth factor that is commonly expressed in the tumor
microenvironment, including prostate tumors, and is involved in
activating a variety of processes leading to tumor progression. Upon
binding of the EGF to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), a variety
of cellular survival and stress pathways are activated, ultimately
resulting in cytoskeletal changes and altered gene expression that
contribute to the increased motility and invasion of tumor cells.
Interestingly, we have found that EGFR activation also induces
anterograde lysosome trafficking and scattering in DU145 prostate cancer
cells by a mechanism that is dissimilar to that of HGF-induced lysosome
movement. For instance, we have determined that EGF anterograde lysosome
trafficking and scattering is dependent on the activity of the mitogen
activated protein kinase p38, but is not dependent on the activity of
PI3K. Conversely, HGF mediated lysosome trafficking and scattering is
dependent on the activity of PI3K. Additionally, EGF induced peripheral
lysosome movement appears to be independent of the activity of NHE 1 and
3, but treatment with the broad acting NHE inhibitor, EIPA
[5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride], prevented EGF induced anterograde
lysosome trafficking and promoted a clustering of lysosomes around the
nucleus, suggesting that multiple NHEs are involved in EGF mediated
lysosome trafficking. This was accompanied by a reduction in cell
invasion through reconstituted basement membrane in a transwell invasion
assay. Also, EGF-induced lysosome repositioning was reversed by
troglitazone, an anti-diabetic agent. Together, these data further
implicate lysosome positioning as critical to the process of HGF and EGF
mediated tumor invasion and provide insight into the mechanism by which
EGF induces peripheral lysosome trafficking. This information further
supports the notion that inhibition of lysosome repositioning is a
potentially viable therapeutic target to block HGF- and EGF-induced tumor
cell invasion.

