Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing antigen-specific Th1 epitope based vaccines by
excluding immunosuppressive peptide sequences


We have determined that IGFBP-2 is immunogenic in ovarian cancer. Our aim
is to develop a multi-epitope vaccine that will elicit Th1 immunity to
IGFBP-2. Antigen specific Th1 can modulate the tumor microenvironment to
enhance cross priming, supporting the proliferation of cytotoxic T cells
which are capable of eradicating ovarian cancer cells. Although some
clinical benefit has been demonstrated with this strategy, recent ex vivo
analyses of human PBMC have described the presence of antigen-specific
CD4+ T regulatory cell (Tregs) in cancer patients that were not detected
in healthy individuals. Thus, we questioned if we could optimize our
vaccine to include only Th1-stimulating epitopes. Using a combined
scoring system from five algorithms for predicting class II binding to
determine Th epitopes, we identified 14 IGFBP-2 peptides. Th1
immunogenicity (IFN-gamma) and potential immunosuppression (IL-10) was
evaluated by ELISPOT for 40 different donors. Twenty-two percent of the
donors only responded with IL-10 secretion to any peptide, 22% only
responded with IFN-gamma and 53% of the patients had a mixed IFN-gamma
and IL-10 response. To determine which peptides would induce a
predominantly Th1 response in the greatest number of people, we used a
ratio of IFN-gamma to IL-10 and analyzed both the magnitude and frequency
of ELISPOT responses for each of peptides using the following algorithm:
(corrected mean SPW) x (percent of responding donors). The peptides were
then ranked from highest IL-10 response to highest IFN-gamma response.
Interestingly, 6 of the 14 peptides demonstrated a preference to secrete
IFN-gamma over IL-10 and are only located in the N-terminus (amino acids
1-163) of IGFBP-2; the remaining potentially immunosuppressive peptides
are located in the C-terminus (amino acids 164-328). Vaccination with
p1-163 in MMTV-neu mice demonstrated a robust Th1 response (p=0.03) and
concomitant inhibition of tumor growth by 70% compared to adjuvant only
control animals, p164-328-vaccinated or full length protein-vaccinated
mice (pWe have determined that IGFBP-2 is immunogenic in ovarian cancer.
Our aim is to develop a multi-epitope vaccine that will elicit Th1
immunity to IGFBP-2. Antigen specific Th1 can modulate the tumor
microenvironment to enhance cross priming, supporting the proliferation
of cytotoxic T cells which are capable of eradicating ovarian cancer
cells. Although some clinical benefit has been demonstrated with this
strategy, recent ex vivo analyses of human PBMC have described the
presence of antigen-specific CD4+ T regulatory cell (Tregs) in cancer
patients that were not detected in healthy individuals. Thus, we
questioned if we could optimize our vaccine to include only
Th1-stimulating epitopes. Using a combined scoring system from five
algorithms for predicting class II binding to determine Th epitopes, we
identified 14 IGFBP-2 peptides. Th1 immunogenicity (IFN-gamma) and
potential immunosuppression (IL-10) was evaluated by ELISPOT for 40
different donors. Twenty-two percent of the donors only responded with
IL-10 secretion to any peptide, 22% only responded with IFN-gamma and 53%
of the patients had a mixed IFN-gamma and IL-10 response. To determine
which peptides would induce a predominantly Th1 response in the greatest
number of people, we used a ratio of IFN-gamma to IL-10 and analyzed both
the magnitude and frequency of ELISPOT responses for each of peptides
using the following algorithm: (corrected mean SPW) x (percent of
responding donors). The peptides were then ranked from highest IL-10
response to highest IFN-gamma response. Interestingly, 6 of the 14
peptides demonstrated a preference to secrete IFN-gamma over IL-10 and
are only located in the N-terminus (amino acids 1-163) of IGFBP-2; the
remaining potentially immunosuppressive peptides are located in the
C-terminus (amino acids 164-328). Vaccination with p1-163 in MMTV-neu
mice demonstrated a robust Th1 response (p=0.03) and concomitant
inhibition of tumor growth by 70% compared to adjuvant only control
animals, p164-328-vaccinated or full length protein-vaccinated mice
(p<0.001 for all). Vaccination with p164-328 or full length protein did
not inhibit tumor growth. These data suggest that more effective vaccines
can be designed when both Th1 epitopes and immunosuppressive epitopes are
screened simultaneously and epitopes that are most likely to induce
robust Th1 responses in the majority of individuals can be identified and
included as vaccine components.

