Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nestin regulates stem cell functions of pancreatic cancer cells


Introduction: Nestin, a class VI intermediate filament, is expressed in
pancreatic exocrine progenitor cells. Previously, we reported that 30% of
PDAC cases expressed nestin in cancer cells, and its expression was
correlated with invasion (Kawamoto, et al. Hum Pathol 2009). Knockdown of
nestin using shRNA in human PDAC cell lines inhibited cell migration and
invasion in vitro and liver metastasis in vivo. Restoring the expression
level of nestin returned the inhibition of cell migration and invasion to
the previous level (Matsuda, et al. Cancer Biol Ther 2011). In this study
we analyzed the expression and roles of nestin in pancreatic cancer stem
cells. Methods: Expressions of stem cell markers and nestin were analyzed
using immunocytochemistry and real-time PCR. To assess cancer stem cells,
a sphere formation assay was performed as follows: cells were grown in an
ultra-low attachment surface plate supplemented with epithelial growth
factor and fibroblast growth factor 2. Nestin-regulating molecules were
clarified by DNA microarray analysis. Results: The expression level of
nestin was high in sphere-forming PDAC cells, and its expression levels
correlated with sphere-forming ability. In DNA microarray analysis using
nestin shRNA-transfected clones and nestin-expression vector
transfected-clones, at a 2-fold cut-off, only transcriptional factor 4
(TCF4) showed a compatible change coincident with nestin expression. It
has been reported that TCF4 is involved in the Wnt pathway, and
negatively regulates the transcription of NANOG. In real-time PCR,
expression levels of TCF4 and NANOG correlated with nestin expression
level. Conclusion: Nestin expression levels correlated with
sphere-forming ability and expression levels of TCF4 and NANOG. These
results indicate that nestin regulate stemness via TCF4 and NANOG.The
expression of nestin is associated with highly metastatic cancer
stem-like cells, and nestin regulates migration, invasion, and metastasis
by altering the pancreatic cancer stem cell function.

