Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of BRM


BRM is part of the SWI/SNF complex and is key anticancer protein which is
silenced in variety of tumor types. SWI/SNF is a prerequisite for the
function of many different anticancer proteins such as Rb and p53 and it
has essential roles in growth control, differentiation, development, cell
adhesion, and DNA repair. Consequently, inactivation or impairment of
this complex can stimulate tumor development and tumor progression
through the abrogation of a number of anticancer mechanisms. Unlike many
tumor suppressor proteins, BRM is not mutated, but rather epigenetically
suppressed, which is validated by the fact that HDAC inhibitors were the
first compounds found to restore BRM expression. Unfortunately, these
compounds are too broadly active and in addition to restoring BRM
expression, they inactivate it by acetylation. To try to better
understand how BRM is epigenetically regulated, we knocked-out each of
the known 11 HDACs, using shRNAs in BRM-deficient and BRM-positive cell
lines to determine which ones regulate or inactivate BRM. We found that
that shRNA knockdown of only HDAC3 or HDAC9 restores both BRM expression
and function, while suppression of HDAC2 induces BRM acetylation.
Similarly, we tested the impact of over-expression of 25 different
Histone Acetyltransferases (HATs) on BRM expression and acetylation. We
found ectopic expression of KAT6A, KAT6B, and KAT7 in BRM-deficient cell
lines induces BRM whereas ectopic expression of KAT2B and KAT8 causes BRM
acetylation in BRM-positive cell lines. We also uncovered that HDAC9 is
greatly over-expressed only in BRM-deficient cell lines and its
expression is driven by MEF2D and GATA3. Expression and knockdown
experiments directed at MEF2D and GATA3 showed that these transcription
factors regulate BRM and HDAC9. Similarly, we found that GATA3 expression
is only expressed in BRM-deficient cell lines. This work outlines the
complex array of proteins which are tied to the expression and regulation
of BRM. It is important to note this epigenetic mechanism is not likely
specific to BRM, but rather likely regulates a cadre of anticancer and
cellular proteins as well. Hence, determining how BRM is aberrantly
regulated is the first step in determining how to target BRM and this
mechanism for therapy.

