Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression from benign breast disease to cancer in women with a
family history of breast cancer


Background: In the general population, benign breast disease (BBD) is an
established risk factor for breast cancer, with increased risks ranging
from 20 to 50% for atypical proliferative subtypes. There is limited data
on the incidence of atypical hyperplasia (AH) and its association with
breast cancer risk specifically among women with a strong family history
(FH). Methods: In an ongoing, prospective cohort of women with a FH of
breast cancer and/or a BRCA1/2 mutation who attend the Breast and Ovarian
Surveillance Service (BOSS) at Johns Hopkins (N=1,132), we identified 259
pathology confirmed incident BBD cases diagnosed between 1959 to 2010.
Slides were obtained for re-review and evaluation of specific histologic
features. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the risk
of breast cancer relative to BBD subtype. Results: Of the incident BBD
diagnoses, 61.4% were non-proliferative, 26.3% were proliferative without
atypia, and 12.4% were AH. AH cases were diagnosed at an older age
(p-value=0.04) and were less likely to have a strong FH (p-value=0.01) as
compared to non-atypical subtypes. Sixty-one BBD cases progressed to
cancer and the median time to diagnosis was significantly shorter for
cases of AH (4.2 years) than for non-proliferative disease (8.8 years)
(pBackground: In the general population, benign breast disease (BBD) is
an established risk factor for breast cancer, with increased risks
ranging from 20 to 50% for atypical proliferative subtypes. There is
limited data on the incidence of atypical hyperplasia (AH) and its
association with breast cancer risk specifically among women with a
strong family history (FH). Methods: In an ongoing, prospective cohort of
women with a FH of breast cancer and/or a BRCA1/2 mutation who attend the
Breast and Ovarian Surveillance Service (BOSS) at Johns Hopkins
(N=1,132), we identified 259 pathology confirmed incident BBD cases
diagnosed between 1959 to 2010. Slides were obtained for re-review and
evaluation of specific histologic features. Cox proportional hazards
models were used to estimate the risk of breast cancer relative to BBD
subtype. Results: Of the incident BBD diagnoses, 61.4% were
non-proliferative, 26.3% were proliferative without atypia, and 12.4%
were AH. AH cases were diagnosed at an older age (p-value=0.04) and were
less likely to have a strong FH (p-value=0.01) as compared to
non-atypical subtypes. Sixty-one BBD cases progressed to cancer and the
median time to diagnosis was significantly shorter for cases of AH (4.2
years) than for non-proliferative disease (8.8 years) (p<0.01). Women
with AH were 2.36 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.15, 4.87) times more
likely to develop in-situ or invasive breast cancer compared to
non-proliferative cases, adjusting for age and year of incident BBD. In
models additionally adjusting for BRCA1/2 mutation status and degree of
FH, women with AH had a 4.5-fold (95% CI: 2.16, 9.53) increased risk of
breast cancer. BBD subtype and degree of FH were found to be independent
risk factors for breast cancer. Prophylactic mastectomy and tamoxifen use
post BBD diagnosis did not differ by BBD subtype or the total number of
BBD diagnoses. Conclusion: Given the high incidence of AH in this cohort
and the increased risk of breast cancer associated with this subtype, AH
may be a viable target for preventative strategies in women with a FH of
breast cancer. Further, AH does not seem to track with a stronger FH,
suggesting two different breast cancer pathways.

