Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Experimental therapy of pancreatic cancer with KCN1, a novel
anticancer agent targeting HIF-1 pathway


Hypoxia is a major driving force in a majority of human cancers and
correlates with a poor outcome of cancer treatment. Hypoxia Inducible
Factor-1 (HIF1) has been identified as the key orchestrator of hypoxic
response due to its transactivation of genes that are involved in many
aspects of malignant tumor growth from cell survival and metabolism to
angiogenesis and invasion. Thus, pharmacological targeting of HIF-1
represents a promising strategy to inhibit tumor growth and progression.
The purpose of the present study was to determine anti-cancer activity
and pharmacological properties of KCN1, a novel small molecule HIF-1
pathway inhibitor. We investigated the in vitro activity of KCN1 on the
survival of several human pancreatic cancer cell lines, including HPAC,
Panc-1 and BxPC3 cells. KCN1 exerted potent effects against the various
cell lines, leading to a significant decrease in cell viability, and
inhibited cell proliferation and cell cycle progression, leading to an
arrest in the G1 phase. We also found that the expression of numerous
proliferation-associated and cell cycle regulatory proteins were affected
by KCN1. It reduced the expression of E2F1, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, Cdc25c
and CDK 2, 4, and 6 and, conversely, increased p21 expression. Moreover,
KCN1 inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer xenograft tumors in nude
mice. There were no significant host toxicity and no gross organ
abnormalities upon necropsy. We also developed an HPLC method for KCN1
quantitation and accomplished experiments to derive preclinical
information for its further development. The HPLC method provided a
linear detection of KCN1 in biological matrices in the range from 0.1 to
100 M, and had a limit of quantitation of 0.085 M in mouse plasma. KCN1
was relatively stable in plasma, being largely intact after an 8-hr
incubation in mouse plasma at 37C. The compound was extensively plasma
bound, and was metabolized by S9 microsomal enzymes. Pharmacokinetic
studies indicated that KCN1 could be detected in tumors and all of the
normal tissues examined. In conclusion, our preclinical data indicate
that KCN1 is a potential therapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer. The
initial pharmacological data provide a basis for its future development
as a preclinical and clinical lead HIF1 inhibitor. (This work was
supported by NIH/NCI grant R01 CA116804.)

