Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The three-throng role of miR-21 in cancer


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-25 nucleotide) RNA molecules,
representing one of the largest class of regulatory RNAs. miR-21 is
overexpressed in virtually all types of tumor tissues compared to normal
noncancerous tissues. Despite the appreciation of miRNA dysregulation,
mouse models of cancer have focused on genetic changes in the epithelial
tumor cells. Results from several miR-21 transgenic and knockout mouse
models show that miR-21-deficiency reduces tumorigenesis and broad miR-21
overexpression leads to pre-B cell lymphoma, yet the underline mechanisms
of miR-21 promoting tumorigenesis remain elusive. We used knockout mice
to dissect the role of miR-21 in cancer and found three distinct
functions for this oncogene. (1) miR-21 is anti-apoptotic; its genetic
ablation results in increased apoptotic cell death in a chemical induced
skin carcinogenesis model. (2) miR-21 is pro-necrosis; using two
pathological necrosis mouse models (acute pancreatitis and cardiac
ischemia) and one cell line model, we found loss of miR-21 inhibits
necrosis when apoptosis is attenuated naturally or artificially; this
suggests that tumor cells with high miR-21 levels would choose necrosis
over apoptosis to provoke inflammation, which can provide a fertile
environment for tumor growth. (3) We also found a direct role of miR-21
in tumor stroma. During the past decade, epithelial cell-derived solid
tumors have increasingly been recognized as organs consisting of
parenchyma (tumor cells) and stroma (the surrounding connective,
supporting, and inflammatory cells). One such stromal cell is the
macrophage and there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) promote tumor cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and progression. Plasticity and
diversity are hallmarks of macrophages. Two distinct states of polarized
activation for macrophages are well-characterized: the classically
activated (M1) and the alternatively activated (M2). Differential
cytokine production is a key feature of polarized macrophages. The M1
phenotype is typically IL-12high/IL-10low, whereas M2 macrophage is
IL-12low/IL-10high. TAMs observed in most human cancers are M2-like.
miR-21 upregulates IL-10 through repressing the expression of programmed
cell death 4 (PDCD4) that is a negative regulator of IL-10 and
down-regulates IL-12 through repressing its -subunit (IL12A), indicating
that its overexpression drives macrophages toward the tumor-promoting M2
phenotype (IL-12low/IL-10high). Our in vitro data suggest that miR-21
deficiency primes macrophages towards the M1 phenotype. Using a syngeneic
tumor model, we show that miR-21-null mice bear smaller tumors compared
to the wild-type control. Taken together, these data suggest that
miR-21's oncogenic role comes from both tumor cells (pro-necrosis and
anti-apoptosis) and the stroma, including TAMs.

