Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating cancer associated cells co-express epithelial and
hematopoietic markers in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients (pts)


Background: Circulatingtumor cells (CTCs) are most commonly isolatedby
using positive selection enrichment targeting the epithelial cell
adhesion activating molecule (EpCAM). Using positive selection, a CTC is
defined as EpCAM and cytokeratins (CK) positive (+) and CD45 negative
(-). However, other rare cancer associated cells (RCACs) including EpCAM
- and/or CD45 + cells have been reported (van de Stolpe, 2011). In order
to investigate these RCACs, a prospective study in MBC using
multi-parameter flow cytometry and immunocytochemistry (ICC) was
undertaken. Methods:Forty blood samples from MBC pts were collected prior
to initiation of a new line of chemotherapy, after one cycle, or at time
of progression. Twenty one (52%) samples were from pts with estrogen
receptor (ER) -, progesterone receptor (PR) -, and HER2neu
non-overexpressing, or triple negative breast cancer (TNBC); nineteen
(47%) were from pts with ER/PR +, HER2neu nonoverexpressing disease.
Blood was processed using immunomagnetic negative depletion (Yang, 2009).
Multiparameter, flow cytometry analysis was conducted prior to, and after
depletion of CD45 + cells. Multistep, sequential labeling and fixation
for surface markers was performed, followed by permeablizition for CK.
ICC staining for EpCAM, CD45, CK 8/ 18/19 and DAPI was performed.
Results: Either very low or no CK + events were present in blood samples
from healthy volunteers (n=5). Various post-enrichment events were
identified. These populations were also present by ICC with confocal
microscopy. Conclusions: In addition to CTCs, RCACS that are CD45 +
and/or EpCAM - are detectable in MBC pts and more frequently present in
TNBC pts. These populations, only detectable by negative depletion, may
be clinically significant as ongoing studies evaluate the predictive
capabilities of blood based biomarkers.

