Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of Rac1 and Cdc42 in ovarian cancer using the
R-enantiomer of ketorolac


Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of cancer death for women in the
United States and is frequently diagnosed at late stage with multiple
secondary metastases. Ras-homologous (Rho) family GTPases contribute to
metastatic dissemination through regulation of actin reorganization, cell
motility, cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix adhesion. Rho GTPases
are altered in a number of human cancers and our work provides the first
evidence for dysregulation of Rac1 and Cdc42 in ovarian cancer. These
findings suggest that Rac1 and Cdc42 inhibitors represent potential
therapeutics for ovarian cancer. Using high throughput screening we
identified the R-enantiomers of ketorolac and naproxen as novel
inhibitors of Rac1 and Cdc42. Although it has been noted that
R-enantiomers of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are poor inhibitors
of cyclooxygenase (COX) activity, little is known about the pharmacologic
activities or targets of the R-enantiomers. The objective of this study
was to investigate the effects of R-ketorolac on ovarian cancer. The
effects of racemic, R- and S-ketorolac were investigated using SKOV3ip
ovarian cancer cells. The compounds NSC23766 and MLS0000693334 were used
as positive controls for Rac1 and Cdc42 respectively. An in vitro G-LISA
assay indicated R-ketorolac, and not S-ketorolac, inhibits Rac1 and Cdc42
activity. In cells, R-Ketorolac, not S-ketorolac, inhibits cell:cell
adhesion and cell migration. An intra-peritoneal xenograft model of tumor
implantation was used to determine the effects of drugs in vivo. Racemic
ketorolac decreased the number of implanted tumors by 70%. To elucidate
the mechanism of GTPase inhibition by R-ketorolac, a targeted microarray
analysis was performed. Preliminary results show an alteration to the
gene expression profile of human cytoskeletal regulators in response to
ketorolac treatment. These effects may be due to inhibition of Rac1 and
Cdc42 directly or through upstream or downstream inhibition. This
analysis also provides biomarkers that can be used to analyze tumor
tissues from primary patients and animal studies. Together, these
findings indicate that R-ketorolac is a novel inhibitor of Rac1 and/or
Cdc42, and inhibit cellular processes necessary for ovarian cancer
metastasis. The mechanism behind ketorolac inhibition will require
further investigation. In the future, this drug may offer benefit to
ovarian cancer patients through inhibition of these GTPase targets

