Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine interleukin/STAT3 signaling in breast implant-associated
T cell anaplastic large cell lymphoma cell lines suggests a mechanism for
tumor progression and effective therapy


Recently, over 80 cases of anaplastic large-cell kinase (ALK)-negative,
T-cell, anaplastic, non-Hodgkin lymphomas (T-ALCL) have been identified
worldwide in patients with textured saline and silicone breast implants.
These breast implant-associated T-ALCL cases are striking for their
homogeneous clinical presentation and pathology that is distinct from
established classes of ALCL. In order to understand the nature of this
newly emerged clinical entity, we have established three new cell lines,
designated T cell Breast Lymphoma (TLBR) -1, -2, and -3, from patient
primary tumor biopsy specimens. Characterization of these pre-clinical
models confirmed fidelity to the original tumor biopsy specimens and
highlighted unique features that may aid the development of effective
treatments for these cancers. Gene expression analysis demonstrated
significant up-regulation of survivin and down-regulation of
pro-apoptotic genes (BID, BAK, BBC3) by all TLBR cell lines relative to
healthy donor T cells. This preliminary finding prompted examination of
upstream regulators of cell survival in T cells, namely the interleukin
signaling associated with the JAK/STAT pathway. TLBR cell lines were
found to secrete high levels of IL-6 and IL-10, and were strongly
positive for the cognate receptors. The TLBR cell lines also showed
elevated levels of STAT3 and pSTAT3 by immunoblotting techniques, along
with a simultaneous reduction in expression of the pSTAT3 phosphatase,
SHP-1. These results implicate an unregulated autocrine STAT3 pathway
present in the TLBR cell lines that strongly contributes to their
tumorigenesis. Assays of various inhibitors of this pathway support this
hypothesis since targeting of STAT3 with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
Sunitinib, led to dramatic in vitro cell death in all TLBR cell lines.
More specific inhibition of STAT3 with S3I-201 had comparable results
with Sunitinib. Furthermore, IL-6 neutralization by a monoclonal antibody
or SHP-1 restoration by 5-azacytidine treatment also demonstrated
moderate efficacy in inhibiting TLBR cell line growth in vitro. These
discoveries strongly suggest the use of these reagents in the clinical
treatment of Breast Implant Associated T-ALCL. The TLBR cell lines
closely resemble the primary breast implant-associated lymphomas from
which they were derived, and as such provide valuable preclinical models
to study the unique biology and provide clinicians with improved
knowledge for treatment and diagnosis.

