Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation cell engineering: the Jump-In cell engineering
platform


The stable introduction of genetic material into cell lines has become
one of the most widely used methods since its introduction more than 3
decades ago. Cell engineering has become an indispensable tool for a wide
range of areas in Life Science, such as cell biology, physiology, In-vivo
modeling, drug discovery and bioproduction. However, most cell
engineering strategies currently employed for the generation of stable
cell lines require substantial commitment in respect to time, FTE hours
and resources. In addition, most cell lines are generated by relying on
random integration of genetic material into the genome, which typically
results in a wide range of expression levels within a cell population.
For these reasons the frequent generation of engineered cell lines is in
general cumbersome and unpredictable. Life Technologies recently
developed and validated the Jump-In cell engineering platform, a novel
gene targeting technology based on R4 integrase mediated site specific
homologous recombination. This technology allows the targeted integration
of genetic material into a specific pre-engineered site, which by design
reduces the effort required for generation of stable cell lines compared
to standard methods. Isogenic expression from a defined genomic locus
provides the ideal solution for comparative analysis of gene families,
isotypes or orthologs. This technology was applied to two widely used
cellular backgrounds, HEK293 and CHO-K1. We used these cellular
backgrounds as case studies to demonstrate how this technology can be
applied to rapidly generate engineered cell lines for a variety of cell
based assay applications, including reporter assays for pathway analysis,
GPCR activity assays and analysis of protein post-translational
modifications. In summary, Jump-In technology enables researchers to
accelerate the development of cellular assays by greatly reducing the
amount of time and resources required for the upfront cell engineering
process. For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human
therapeutic or diagnostic use.

