Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal microRNAs: mediators for cell-cell communications


Background: Exosomes are 30-100nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin,
mediating diverse biological functions including tumor-cell invasion,
cell-cell communication and antigen presentation through transfer of
proteins, mRNAs and microRNAs to neighboring or distant cells. MicroRNAs
are small regulatory non-coding RNA molecules that regulate
protein-coding genes. Recent evidence suggests that microRNAs can be
released through ceramide-dependent secretory machinery regulated by
neutral sphingomyelinase 2 (nSMase2) enzyme expressed by smpd3 gene that
triggers exosome secretion. In this study, we investigated the
exosome-mediated microRNA transfer among various types of cells, the
regulation of exosome-mediated microRNA secretion and functional role of
these exosomal microRNAs inside the recipient cell after uptake. Methods:
Exosomes were isolated from culture media of cells by serial
centrifugation, filtration and ultracentrifugation method. Isolated
exosomes were stained with PKH26 dye and then observed for cellular
uptake in different cells by confocal microscopy after counterstaining
with Hoechst stain. In addition, this uptake was also shown by exosome
isolated from stable 293T cell line overexpressing the pCDH-CD63-GFP
fusion protein. To determine the effect of nSMase2 on exosome secretion,
stable cell lines were established with smpd3 gene. Levels of microRNAs
secreted in media were determined by real time PCR. To validate the
function of exosomal microRNA in the recipient cells, we determined the
protein level of microRNA target genes by western blot. Results: We first
showed that exosomes can be transferred among different cell lines
through direct uptake. We found that miR-10b is highly expressed in
metastatic breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells as compared to non-metastatic
breast cells; it is actively secreted into medium. For example, nSMase2
promoted the exosome-mediated miR-10b secretion whereas ceramide
inhibitor suppressed this secretion. Importantly, western blot revealed
that upon uptake, miR-10b can still reduce the protein level of its
target genes such as Bim, indicating its functional significance.
Conclusion: We found that the exosomes secreted from cancer cells
containing microRNA can be taken up by other cells and have functional
role in the recipient cells suggesting the importance of exosome-mediated
microRNA transfer in tumor microenvironment. Our results collectively
suggest that a set of specific microRNAs may play an important role in
modulating tumor microenvironment through exosomes. Thus, a better
understanding of this process may aid in the development of novel
therapeutic agents.

