Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of the chromatin remodeling protein CHD3 and platinum
resistance in ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from
gynecological malignancies. Currently platinum-based chemotherapy,
coupled with a taxane based drug is the primary treatment for ovarian
cancer. Approximately 25% of patients either present with or rapidly
develop resistance to platinum based chemotherapy and all recurrent
tumors ultimately become resistant. Epigenetic modifications have been
associated with tumor formation and progression and may contribute to
therapy response. We hypothesize that Epigenetic changes such as DNA CpG
methylation is in part responsible for the onset of chemoresistance of
EOC. To identify epigenetically regulated genes associated with ovarian
cancer chemotherapy resistance, a genome wide approach was used. For the
most significant genes an in vitro culture system was developed to study
platinum resistance. Candidate genes were screened by addition of shRNAs
to model the transcriptional suppression caused by DNA methylation and
genes that scored positive for increasing resistance were identified, one
of them being the CHD3 gene. Here we show that loss of expression of
CHD3, a member of the Mi-2/NuRD complex, causes increased resistance to
platinum chemotherapy drugs. Additionally, ovarian cell lines
transcriptionally silenced for CHD3 are more invasive, and have increased
migratory ability. Recent evidence suggests molecular and phenotypic
associations between chemo resistance and the acquisition of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer cells. The transition of
epithelial cell to a mesenchymal cell requires an alteration in
morphology, cellular architecture, adhesion, and migration capacity.
Cancer cells undergoing EMT can acquire invasive properties and enter the
surrounding stroma, resulting in the creation of a favorable
microenvironment for cancer progression and metastasis. Our results
indicate that when CHD3 is silenced, cells undergo an EMT-like transition
thereby allowing them to bypass apoptosis and resist platinum based
therapy. Taken together, we provide the first evidence of a role for CHD3
as an important epigenetic regulator of chemoresistance in ovarian cancer
and hypothesize EMT as one of the underlying mechanisms. Furthermore,
CHD3 expression might represent a therapy response predictor and could be
a future therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.

