Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early immune modulatory events during ovarian cancer outgrowth in
the omental fat band


Ovarian cancer is the fourth most deadly cancer in women. Typically
originating in the layer of epithelial cells surrounding the ovary,
cancer cells exfoliate, disseminating throughout the peritoneal cavity.
The omental fat band (OFB) has been described as a secondary lymphoid
organ, composed of heavily vascularized fatty tissue interspersed with
immune cell aggregates. The OFB is also the site of preferential tumor
cell adhesion and invasion within the peritoneal cavity, and is removed
at the time of surgical debulking in ovarian cancer patients as a
preventative measure. Animal studies have shown that ovarian cancer cells
home to the omentum as early as 20 minutes post-injection, however the
early signaling events that contribute to immune evasion and neoplastic
outgrowth have not been fully elucidated. Our lab has developed a
spontaneously transformed murine ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE) cell
model that, following long-term passaging mimics the progressive stages
of ovarian cancer from non-tumorigenic MOSE-E (early) cells to MOSE-L
(late) cells which readily disseminate and establish tumors throughout
the peritoneum after injection. We have developed two cell variants of
the MOSE-L cell line, which differ in their in vivo aggressiveness. The
heterogeneous EGFP-expressing MOSE-L IVP2 cell line results in a slowly
developing disease state with administration of 1 x 106 cells. In
contrast, the MOSE-L firefly luciferase-expressing (FFL) TICv is a highly
aggressive tumor-initiating cell variant that results in rapidly
disseminating disease with as few as 100 implantable cells. Here we have
utilized these cell lines to evaluate early and late changes within the
OFB immune microenvironment in order to shed light on both beneficial
anti-tumorigenic immune signals, as opposed to signals involved in immune
evasion, tumor cell seeding/outgrowth and establishment of aggressive
disease states. Specifically, MOSE-E, EGFPMOSE-L IVP2 and MOSE-L FFL TICv
cells were injected intraperitoneally (IP) into C57BL/6 mice and at 24 h
or 4 wks post-injection subsets of mice were euthanized and blood,
peritoneal washings, OFB, spleens, perigonadal fat depots were collected
for further analysis. Here we describe changes to the OFB and peritoneal
serous exudate as a function of tumor cell dissemination using flow
cytometry for immunophenotyping and quantitative real-time PCR for gene
expression profiling. Preliminary results confirm that ovarian tumor
initiating cells preferentially invade the omentum early during cancer
metastasis, and are capable of escaping innate immune surveillance
mechanisms. In contrast, MOSE-E cells readily home to the OFB early, but
are cleared within 7 days. The completion of this study should provide
new insights into the initial immunomodulatory events associated with
early ovarian cancer seeding and outgrowth within the OFB, a tissue
crucial in early ovarian cancer metastasis.

