Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determinants of taxane activity using CTCs from CRPC
patients


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling drives castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) disease progression. The taxanes (TXN) represent the only
class of chemotherapy agents that improve survival in CRPC. Our recent
work revealed that TXNs work by blocking AR nuclear accumulation and
signaling downstream of microtubule (MT) stabilization. Moreover, we
showed that AR cytoplasmic sequestration in CRPC patients circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) significantly correlated with clinical response to TXN
therapy. Our data, suggest that TXN-induced blockade of AR nuclear
accumulation partly underlies the clinical activity of TXNs in CRPC.
Recently several AR splice variants, lacking the ligand binding domain,
have been identified in CRPC. These variants are constitutively active in
the nucleus and likely to be insensitive to current therapies targeting
either ligand biosynthesis or ligand-receptor interactions. Currently,
the role of AR splice variants on TXN chemotherapy response in CRPC is
unknown. Our preliminary data in preclinical PC models suggest that
certain AR variants depend on MTs for nuclear accumulation and are TXN
sensitive while others are MT-independent and TXN-insensitive. In this
study we are prospectively evaluating whether the presence of AR splice
variants and the integrity of the MT-AR axis in CTCs can predict clinical
response to TXN chemotherapy in CRPC. CTCs are captured by the
geometrically enhanced differential immunocapture (GEDI) microfluidic
device that uses PSMA-based immunocapture and size-selective cell
transport for maximum specificity of CRPC-derived CTCs. We captured
viable CTCs from CRPC patients (median 54 CTC/ml) and performed molecular
and functional analyses. Comparison of CTCs captured by CellSearch or
GEDI, using same day blood draw from 30 CRPC patients, revealed a 2-400
fold increase in CTC numbers with the GEDI. GEDI-capture of live CTCs
allowed us to evaluate ex-vivo TXN sensitivity and determine
drug-target-engagement (DTE) by MT bundling. CTCs isolated from docetaxel
(DTX)-resistant CRPC patients did not show any evidence of DTX activity
in this assay suggesting that it can be used to monitor patient's
response in real time. In addition, we have miniaturized RNA sequencing
(RNA-Seq) to enable molecular analyses of GEDI-captured CTCs. RNA-Seq of
50 GEDI-captured LNCap 86.2 cells spiked into 1 ml healthy donor blood,
detected both the T868A AR point mutation and ARv567 splice variant. In
an ongoing prospective clinical study, we are capturing CTCs from CRPC
patients treated with TXNs and are evaluating the integrity of the MT-AR
signaling axis, in relation to clinical response to therapy. Our CTC
analyses include RNA-Seq for the detection of AR splice variants,
alterations in tubulin isotypes and MT related proteins, and multiplex
confocal microscopy of DTE and AR localization. These analyses are
performed longitudinally and may identify biomarkers predictive of
clinical TXN efficacy.

