Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatostatin, a novel SREBP inhibitor, suppresses cell growth and
induces apoptosis in prostate cancer


Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs), SREBP-1 and SREBP-2,
are transcription factors mainly controlling lipogenesis and
cholesterogenesis via the regulation of genes related to fatty acid and
cholesterol biosynthesis. We previously showed that SREBP-1 was highly
elevated in clinical prostate cancer specimens compared with non-tumor
prostate tissues. Also, SREBP-1 promoted cell viability and progression
through alterations of the metabolic and signaling networks involving
lipogenesis, androgen receptor (AR) and oxidative stress in prostate
cancer cells. In the present study, we evaluated the therapeutic benefit
of targeting the aberrant SREBP signaling in prostate cancer by using a
novel SREBP inhibitor, fatostatin. Fatostatin significantly inhibited
cell proliferation and suppressed anchorage-independent colony formation
in soft agar in LNCaP and C4-2B prostate cancer cells. Fatostatin also
reduced the abilities of in vitro migration and invasion in both cells.
The results of flow cytometric analyses with annexin V/propidium iodide
staining showed that fatostatin caused G2/M arrest and induced cell
death. Additionally, apoptosis was observed by inducing caspase-3 and
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavages and increasing caspase activities
in fatostatin-treated prostate cancer cells. In the animal study,
fatostatin significantly inhibited C4-2B xenograft tumor growth and
markedly decreased serum PSA level compared to control group in
immune-compromised mice. The results of fatostatin action in prostate
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo are due to specific interruption of the
proteolytic process of mature SREBP-1, -2 and their regulated gene
expressions including HMG-CoA reductase, fatty acid synthase and further
inhibition of lipid biosynthesis and AR signaling network. In summary,
our study demonstrates for the first time that fatostatin will be
developed as a novel anti-prostate cancer drug and provides new insights
into cancer therapy by targeting SREBP.

