Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase and integrin-linked
kinase: A characterization of potential partners in ovarian cancer
metastasis


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the fifth leading cause of overall
cancer death among American women. In 2010, 15,520 deaths were directly
attributed to EOC; and 21,650 additional cases were diagnosed. When EOC
is diagnosed prior to metastatic dissemination, the overall 5 year
survival rate is 93%; however, over 75% of women with EOC are diagnosed
with metastasis already present, dropping the survival rate to less than
20%. The process of EOC metastasis is unique in that epithelial cells
detach from the primary tumor and shed into the peritoneal cavity as
single cells and multicellular aggregates (MCA), which adhere
intraperitoneally and invade the interstitial collagen-rich
submesothelial matrix, where they proliferate to anchor secondary
lesions. Proteolytic activity promotes the migration and collagen
invasion crucial to metastatic success. Also key to cell migratory
activity are focal adhesions (FA), integrin- and protease-rich cell
adhesion sites that physically link the actin cytoskeleton to the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and transduce signals into the intracellular
compartment. Sites of adhesive contacts with collagen fibers have been
associated with beta-1 integrin clustering and various matrix
metalloproteinases. Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP),
an ECM degrading protease localized to the cell surface, has been shown
to promote a collagen-invasive phenotype in ovarian carcinomas.
Additionally, collagen-activated integrin-linked kinase (ILK), a beta-1
integrin cytoplasmic domain interactor, has been shown to regulate
several biological processes that promote invasion and suppress anoikis.
As initial steps to assess the contributions and potential
inter-relationships of tumor cell invasion at FAs, presented here is a
characterization of MT1-MMP and ILK expression in select ovarian cancer
cell lines and in human EOC tumor tissue microarrays.

