Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol potentiates glycolytic inhibitor-induced neuroblastoma
cell death independent of sirt activity


Introduction: Low survival rates and severe side effects of current
neuroblastoma treatments underline the need for more effective less toxic
therapies. Compared to normal cells, cancer cells demonstrate high
glucose consumption even under aerobic conditions, therefore; targeting
the glycolytic pathway in cancer cells as a potential therapy is
currently an area of intense investigation. The polyphenolic compound
resveratrol which can be found in grapes, peanuts, red wine and purple
grape juice, has demonstrated antitumor activities both in vitro and in
vivo. Here we investigate the potential of inhibiting glycolysis in
combination with resveratrol treatment. Methods: To inhibit glycolysis we
used the glucose analog, 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG). N-MYC amplified
neuroblastoma cells (NB1691) were exposed to low dose 2-DG (0.5 and 2mM)
and resveratrol 10uM. Cell viability was determined at 72hr using MTS
assay. Western blotting was used to determine cell signaling pathways and
apoptotic protein levels. The role of the NAD+ dependent HDAC sirtuin 1
(sirt1) was determined using 50uM of the inhibitor sirtinol. Results:
While 2-DG did reduce cell viability (2mM:82+4.4% of control), the
combination of 2-DG and resveratrol significantly reduced cell viability
(20+2.2%) compared to resveratrol alone (69+2.8%). Western blot analysis
indicated a robust activation of AKT with 2-DG with treatment, however
this activation was blocked with 10uM resveratrol. Furthermore, western
blot analysis revealed that this was caspase dependent cell death.
PI3K/Akt inhibitors wortmannin and LY-294002 (10uM each) also reduced
cell viability in combination with 2-DG to approximately 40% compared to
non-treated, confirming the protective role of AKT signaling in response
to 2-DG treatment. To determine if resveratrol, a well-known activator of
sirt1, inhibited AKT via sirt1, cells were pretreated with sirtinol.
Inhibiting sirt1 did not prevent resveratrol's inhibition of AKT.
Conclusions: The oncoprotein AKT mediates signaling processes involved in
evading apoptosis and promoting cell proliferation and recently has been
linked to glycolysis. Resveratrol significantly increased 2-DG-induced
cell death by inhibiting the 2-DG induced increase in AKT activity
independent of sirt1. Here we show that combining resveratrol with 2-DG,
two relatively non-toxic agents can significantly reduce neuroblastoma
cell viability.

