Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequential metastases of colorectal cancer: Treatment,
immunophenotypes and spatial distributions of infiltrating immune cells


The role of the immune system in the course of colorectal cancer has been
elucidated in the last decade. While quantification of the immune cell
infiltrates within the the resected specimen at diagnosis has a clear
power to estimate the prognosis of the patient, the role within the
metastatic situation and especially within the metastatic lesion itself
remains largely unclear. Recent analyses of infiltrates in colorectal
cancer liver metastases revealed a role for the infiltrate density not
only for prognosis but also in the prediction of treatment response. This
not only broadens the view on these infiltrates and indicates a
systematic role of the local immunological microenvironment, but also
raises the question how these infiltrates change during repeated courses
of treatment (i.e. resection, chemotherapy etc.). To adress this
question, multiple sequential lung or sequential liver metastases of
colorectal cancer patients were analyzed using whole slide image
quantification, using antibodies against CD3, CD8, FOXP3, CD68 and CD163.
The clinical data and interventions were analyzed in association with the
individual patient and the profiles of the metastatic lesions. The
resulting cell densities reveal a heterogeneous profile: after
successfull treatment of a metastatic lesion, the recurrent lesion can
still have the same immunophenotype with similar cell distributions. In a
situation of a favorable immune cell profile, this profile can return and
apparently convey a similar favorable course of the disease. But also the
opposite was found: the recurrent metastatic lesion could have a
different profile with alterations in specific immune cell subsets.
Treatment failure and a progression were observed after this change in
immune cell composition. Further analyses are required to elucidate the
different patterns and their associations to the treatment, the tumor
cell phenotype and other factors. It is clear from this data however,
that there is an immune cell plasticity during the course of the disease
that needs to be analyzed and maybe has potential for improving
therapeutic decisions.

