Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between Runx2 regulatory network and PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway in breast cancer cells


The Runt-related transcription factor Runx2 is essential for skeletal
development but is also aberrantly expressed in several cancers (e.g.,
breast, prostate and osteosarcoma) where it promotes cell migration,
invasive and growth properties of cancer cells. The phosphatidylinositol
3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway is linked to Runx2-dependent
skeletogenesis, however, the mechanisms of Runx2 role in PI3K-Akt
signaling in breast cancers, and its implication in cancer progression
remains under investigated. To mechanistically determine the function of
Runx2 in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced PI3K/Akt signaling and
concomitantly ensuing downstream signaling events, we modulated Runx2
expression levels in immortalized normal MCF-10A and invasive MDA-MB-231
cells via lentiviral vector-mediated gene delivery. The Runx2
over-expression in EGF-stimulated MCF-10A cells increased the cellular
response towards PI3K inhibitor LY294002 as indicated by a decline in Akt
(Serine 473) phosphorylation (pAkt) levels. This effect could be restored
by Runx2 suppression indicating the specificity of Runx2 function in Akt
regulation. In MDA-MB-231 cells, Runx2 over-expression and, surprisingly,
suppression profoundly inhibited pAkt suggesting that a threshold level
of Runx2 is required for phosphorylation of Akt. The Runx2-mediated
decline in pAkt was completely reversed by the Runx2-DNA binding mutant
over-expression indicating that Runx2 DNA binding domain is essential for
Akt inhibition. To further dissect the mechanism of Runx2-mediated
regulation of pAkt levels in MDA-MB-231 cells, we examined the protein
levels of phosphatases and kinases associated with PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway. These analyses revealed that PH domain and leucine rich repeat
protein phosphatase 1 (PHLPP1) levels were directly responsive to Runx2.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed Runx2 recruitment on the
proximal promoter of PHLPP1 suggesting that Runx2 mediates its effect on
Akt activity, in part by regulating PHLPP1 expression. Furthermore, Runx2
overexpression increased nuclear translocation of a forkhead box
transcription factor FoxO1, a downstream molecule of PI3K/Akt signaling
indicating an indirect Runx2 affect on FoxO1 transcriptional activity in
MDA-MB-231 cells as examined by western blot analysis and
immunofluorescence studies. Together, our results identified clinically
relevant and novel mechanisms of Runx2 regulatory network in PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway that could have important consequences in targeting
breast cancer-associated cell survival and invasive properties.

