Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting breast cancer bone metastases looking at the cross-talk
between tumor cells and bone environment


Metastatic dissemination is a major cause of cancer associated death; in
breast cancer, bone, lung and brain are the major sites of tumor relapse.
Bone marrow (BM) is a reservoir for metastatic breast cancer cells that
can enter into a quiescent state and remain latent even for decades after
dissemination. By still unknown mechanisms, dormant tumor cells can
reacquire proliferative ability, thereby causing osteolytic or
osteoblastic lesions. During these processes BM environment and tumor
cells strongly influence each other. We aimed to analyze molecular
mechanisms involved in the liaison between tumor cells and BM
microenvironment. More specifically, we investigated how breast cancer
cells can affect BM stoma when they home to the endosteal niche and how
bone microenvironment can influence the behavior of tumor cells. We took
advantage of the MDA-MB231 SCP1833 subclone, which after intracardiac
injection has a high propensity for bone metastases. Tumor cell
dissemination was followed by bioluminescence imaging and when BM
metastases were detected different cell populations from the bone
environment were isolated by cell sorting. We excluded cells of the
hematopoietic compartment from the analysis, concentrating on the CD45-
population. We used the best available antibodies that define osteoblast
(CD45-, TR119-, Sca1-, CD51+), endothelial cells (CD45-, TR119-, Sca1+,
CD31+) and mesenchymal progenitors (CD45-, TR119-, CD31-, Sca1+) for
sorting in order to compare BM populations from tumor-bearing mice with
un-injected control mice by a genome wide-transcriptome study. Microarray
analysis revealed that BM is strongly affected by breast cancer cell
dissemination. Indeed, several components of key molecular pathways
involved in tumor development (including TGFBR, PDGFRB, EGFR, HGFR and
IGFR signaling pathways) are modulated in the BM of mice with tumor
cells. We are following up this analysis by testing the effects of the
PI3K-mTOR inhibitor BEZ-235 in breast cancer bone metastases. PIK3CA,
that is a downstream effector of several of the above-mentioned pathways,
is up-regulated in the bone stroma of tumor-bearing mice. Besides the
effect of BEZ-235 on tumor cells, we want to elucidate how the BM
responds to PI3K pathway inhibition, and how this influences survival and
proliferation of tumor cells. To investigate the effect of BM environment
on disseminated tumor cells, we compared the expression profile of
MDA-MB231 SCP1833 from the mammary fad pad, i.e, the primary tumor, with
tumor cells isolated from BM. We have uncovered some transcripts for
surface proteins whose expression is down-regulated in cancer cells that
have homed to the BM, compared to tumor cells growing in the mammary fad
pad. These and other results that will be presented show the important
role that the environment plays on the tumor cell transcriptome and
ultimately on the response to therapy.

