Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of an androgen transporter, organic anion transporting
polypeptide 1B3, impacts progression and treatment of prostate cancer


Organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) are membrane transporters
that facilitate the movement of large substrates into cells. One family
member, organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B3 (OATP1B3) is
aberrantly overexpressed in prostate cancer and has been shown to influx
both endogenous small molecules and chemotherapy reagents. Our hypothesis
is that the OATP1B3 affects tumor growth by influxing testosterone.
However, little is known about the cause of OATP1B3 expression in cancer
and the impact of OATP1B3 transport on tumor growth. Therefore, we
completed a study investigating putative hypoxia elements in the OATP1B3
promoter region, characterizing the impact of OATP1B3 androgen transport
on prostate cancer growth, and examining the effect of OATP1B3 on the
efficacy of standard prostate cancer treatments. The results showed that
OATP1B3 co-localized with HIF 1-alpha in prostate cancer tissues from
patients, correlated significantly to HIF1A in xenograft tumors under
castration (P=0.005), and confirmed HIF-1alpha elements in the SLCO1B3
promoter region. In addition, radioactive transport assays with Xenopus
oocytes showed that OATP1B3 transports testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone 50- to 250-fold over passive diffusion at low
physiological concentrations. A prostate cancer cell line expressing
OATP1B3 grew faster than untransfected in response to androgens at all
concentrations. Finally, OATP1B3 increased cell sensitivity to docetaxel
treatment. In summary, these data show that hypoxia and castration
increases OATP1B3 expression in cancer, OATP1B3-mediated androgen
transport significantly impacts prostate cancer growth and OATP1B3
impacts the efficacy of docetaxel. These data provides evidence that
OATP1B3 impacts prostate cancer growth and treatment. Future studies
could screen for specific inhibitors of OATP1B3-mediated androgen
transport.

