Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: [18F]FDG accumulation in tumor microenvironment
-Microautoradiographic study combined with immunohistochemistry in mice-


[Purpose] Tumor microenvironment is characterized by the conditions
including hypoxia, low nutrition, stromal cell infiltration, and acidosis
due to incomplete blood vessel network. Tumor microenvironment has been
recognized as a major factor influencing not only the response to
anti-cancer therapies but also malignant progression and metastasis.
Non-invasive imaging of such a microenvironment by positron emission
tomography (PET) will provide more therapeutic merits. Accumulation of
FDG, 2-deoxy-2-[F-18]fluoro-D-glucose, a most-often used PET probe, in
tumor has been reported to correlate with the metastasis and malignancy.
However, the FDG uptake profile in the microenvironment has remained
unknown. In this study, we simultaneously visualized the intratumoral FDG
distribution and the microenvironment by using microautoradiography in
microscopic spatial resolution combined with immunohistochemistry.
[Methods] Human epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was transplanted into
the back of female SCID mice, and FDG was injected into the mice 2 weeks
after the transplantation. The tumors were removed from mice 45 minutes
after the FDG administration and the frozen sections were obtained.
Overall image of the intratumoral FDG distribution was obtained by
conventional autoradiography. FDG distribution and microenvironment in
microscopic levels were visualized by microautoradiography followed by
immunohistochemical detection of hypoxic condition and cell-specific
markers. [Result & Conclusion] Conventional autoradiography and
microautoradiography showed the similar pattern in FDG distribution in
the tumor. Furthermore, microautoradiographic study with
immunohistochemistry revealed that grains at high-density were observed
in pimonidazol (hypoxia marker)-accumulated areas showing infiltration of
many S100A4-immunopositive fibroblasts. These results suggested that FDG
accumulation was prominent in stromal cells involved in hypoxic condition
in tumor microenvironment.

