Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization and pharmacokinetic characterization of potent CXCR4
antagonist CovX-Bodies


Here we describe a series of CXCR4 antagonist CovX-Bodies, produced by
covalently attaching CXCR4 antagonist peptides to a humanized IgG1
molecule with the goal of producing molecules with the potency and
specificity of peptides and the pharmacokinetic parameters of an
antibody. Extensive SAR was performed on peptides derived from T140, a
highly charged 14 amino acid cyclic peptide containing 4 Arginine
residues. Both the free peptides and the associated CovX-bodies were
potent antagonists of CXCR4 in vitro, and SAR studies were consistent
with a model of both allosteric and orthosteric inhibition. However, in
vivo pharmacokinetic (PK) studies revealed an unexpected and
CXCR4-independent disappearance of the CovX-Bodies from circulation, such
that approximately 10% of the injected CovX-Body remained in circulation
1 hour after i.v. injection into mice. Based on the known nonspecific
cell-penetrating properties of Arginine-rich peptides, we hypothesized
that Arginine replacement and charge neutralization would improve the
pharmacokinetics of the CovX-Bodies. We identified substitutions that
could replace up to 3 of the 4 Arg residues while retaining potent CXCR4
binding and antagonism, but Arg2 was obligate. However, these CovX-Bodies
were only modestly improved in PK, indicating that that the anomalous in
vivo behavior was not solely a function of charge or the net number of
Arg residues. Only the replacement of Arg2 significantly improved the
pharmacokinetics of the CovX-Bodies, but also resulted in a loss of CXCR4
antagonism. Extensive SAR failed to identify a suitable replacement
residue for Arg2, nor did alternative structural forms such as 5 member,
bicyclic, or reversed ring molecules have significantly improved
pharmacokinetics. Based on these data, we conclude that the specific
property of the peptide that allows potent inhibition of CXCR4, of which
Arg2 is an integral component, also mediates binding to moieties other
than CXCR4, leading to the depletion of these molecules from circulation.

