Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of dietary fish oil on rat colonic prostaglandin (PG) E2
metabolism


PGE2, an eicosanoid generated from arachidonic acid (AA) by the
cyclooxygenase function of prostaglandin H synthases (PGHS)-1 and 2, has
been linked to the risk of many cancers including colorectal
carcinogenesis. Targeting colonic PGE2 homeostasis by utilizing
nutritional products such as fish oil may reduce endogenous PGE2 that, in
turn, may decrease subsequent inflammatory events that lead to
carcinogenesis. Rats were fed high fat fish oil diets contained different
ratios of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and n-6 fatty acid. The colon was
horizontally divided into three equal length transections, first
(proximal end), second (transverse) and third (distal end). Enzymes
involved in PGE2 metabolism (15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase
(15-PGDH) and PGE synthase (mPGES)) were measured using quantitative PCR
and semi-quantitative Western Blotting. GC-MS analysis was performed to
detect fatty acid levels in serum and colon. LC-MS/MS analysis was used
to examine eicosanoid levels. Our results showed that the colonic
epithelial mucosa contained less PGE2 per mg of protein than did the
whole colon. Colonic PGE2 and several eicosanoids including
13-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid(13HODE), 5-Hydroxyeico-satetraenoic acid
(5 HETE), 15-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15 HETE) and
12-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12 HETE) were distributed differentially
in different part of the colon. Dietary fish oil intake increased tissue
levels of EPA in the colon. PGHS-2 gene was affected the most by dietary
fish oil among all the genes tested in normal colon. Fish oil
dose-dependently decreased PGHS-2 mRNA expression in all three colon
sections. mRNA expression of 15-PGDH was higher in the third colonic
section than the first two sections; however it was not altered by
dietary fish oil. In conclusion, different parts of the colon have
different eicosanoid profiles. The decreases in PGE2 in normal colon
observed with fish oil feeding do not appear to be related to expression
of PGHS-1, mPGES and 15-PGDH but are most closely correlated with PGHS-2
despite that PGHS-2 levels are already low in the normal colon. These
data support the concept of anatomic variability in colonic
carcinogenesis.

