Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HDAC inhibitor ITF2357 blocks c-Myc expression via microRNA
modulation and cap-dependent translation inhibition in human Burkitt's
lymphoma


Deregulated c-Myc expression plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
and progression of aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHLs) and
multiple myeloma. Chromosomal translocations juxtaposing c-Myc to
immunoglobulin gene regulatory elements are virtually invariant, early
transforming events in Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), thus constituting the
prime example of c-Myc-driven oncogenesis. The key role of c-Myc-mediated
epigenetic changes for its oncogenic gene expression reprogramming makes
histone deacetylases (HDAC) inhibitors novel suitable drug candidates for
the treatment of c-Myc-driven lymphomas. Furthermore, an increasing body
of evidence is unraveling the ability of these inhibitors to
down-regulate c-Myc expression itself in tumor cells. Therefore, we
studied the potential antitumor activity of ITF2357, a new-generation
pan-HDACs inhibitor, in human BL pre-clinical models. ITF2357 boosted
histone and non-histone protein acetylation in Namalwa and Raji cells,
and induced G1 cell-cycle arrest followed by apoptosis especially in the
Namalwa model. Treated cells displayed a significant decrease of c-Myc
protein but not mRNA levels. This effect was only partially explained by
the significant up-regulation of let-7a and miR-26a - two microRNA that
negatively control c-Myc expression - since it was not as persistent as
c-Myc down-regulation. Given tumor cell addiction to cap-dependent
translation for the constitutive expression of short-lived oncoproteins,
including c-Myc, we investigated whether this mechanism was also affected
by ITF2357. Akt and PIM kinases are the best-defined activators of
cap-dependent protein translation initiation via 4E-BP1 phosphorylation
and derepression of the translation factor eIF4E. We found that 4E-BP1
and eIF4E phosphorylation as well as phosphorylated-Akt and PIM kinases
were significantly down-regulated in the treated cells. Since mTOR and
PIM kinase inhibitors display only limited clinical efficacy against
B-NHLs, ITF2357 treatment may thus exert a therapeutic advantage, given
its ability to concurrently block the redundant oncogenic survival
signals that control cap-dependent translation initiation, and
potentially overcome the selection of chemoresistance mechanisms. In
Raji-xenografted immunodeficient mice, ITF2357-mediated biomolecular
effects were translated into 45% tumor shrinkage and complete disease
eradication in 70% of the animals when the drug was used as maintenance
management after its combination with low-dose cyclophosphamide. Taken as
a whole, these findings provide the proof-of-concept for the clinical
evaluation of ITF2357 in rational combinations with conventional and
unconventional anticancer agents for the treatment of
c-Myc-overexpressing and/or cap-translation-dependent NHLs.

