Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic activation of batracylin and N-acetylbatracylin to
reactive metabolites that bind protein and DNA: Possible role in toxicity


Batracylin (NSC 320846, BAT) is a heterocyclic arylamine and
topoisomerase II inhibitor shown to be active in murine tumor models, but
with demonstrated species differences in toxicity associated with
metabolism to N-acetylbatracylin (NBAT) by N-acetyltransferase (NAT). BAT
is a preferential substrate of human NAT2. Accordingly, production of
NBAT should be subject to population variability as a function of NAT2
polymorphisms. A phase I clinical trial of BAT in patients with advanced
cancer and slow acetylator NAT2 phenotypes to reduce the risk of
NBAT-related toxicity found a dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) of
cystitis/hemorrhagic cystitis. In subsequent in vitro and in vivo
preclinical studies to elucidate metabolic pathways that might contribute
to BAT toxicity, we found oxidative metabolites and thiol conjugates of
BAT and NBAT (MM Ames et al, Cancer Res 2011;71(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
1303). Since these data are consistent with metabolic activation of BAT
to potentially toxic metabolites, we assessed formation of reactive
intermediates as measured by covalent binding (CB) to protein and DNA or
by formation of glutathione conjugates. Radiolabeled BAT and NBAT were
incubated with 3-MC-induced rat (r), human (h) and dog (d) liver
microsomes (LM), as well as with recombinant human cytochromes P450
(CYPs) with or without added DNA. NADPH-dependent BAT protein and DNA CB
were detected in all microsomal preparations (see table below).
NADPH-dependent NBAT protein CB was detected in all microsomal
preparations except hCYP1B1. NADPH-dependent NBAT DNA CB was detected in
all microsomal preparations except 3MC-rLM. We also detected a
glutathione conjugate of mono-hydroxy BAT by lc/ms/ms analysis when BAT
was incubated with hLM in the presence of glutathione and NADPH. Thus,
CYP-catalyzed oxidation of BAT yields reactive metabolites that that bind
protein and DNA and may contribute to drug-related DLT. Supported in part
by NCI Contract N01-CM-52206.


