Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic
leukemia


Hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is an aggressive form of
leukemia characterized by multiple whole chromosomal losses and very
dismal outcome. Our previous genome wide study of hypodiploid childhood
ALL cases treated by the Children's Oncology Group and St Jude, employed
interrogation of DNA copy number alterations using Affymetrix SNP 6.0
microarrays, candidate gene resequencing and gene expression profiling
using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. These analyses showed that
this disease can be divided into multiple subtypes characterized by
variation in the degree of aneuploidy, distinct submicroscopic deletions,
sequence mutations and gene expression profile. Near haploid ALL (24-31
chromosomes) frequently harbors alterations of genes regulating Ras
signaling (67.6%; NF1, NRAS, KRAS, PTPN11, FLT3, and PAG1), IKZF3
(encoding the lymphoid transcription factor AIOLOS; 13.2%), and a histone
gene cluster at 6p22 (17.6%), while low hypodiploid ALL (32-39
chromosomes) is enriched for IKZF2 (HELIOS; 52.9%), TP53 (70.6%) and RB1
(41.2%) alterations. A striking finding was exclusivity of Ras signaling
and IKZF2/3 alterations, and biochemical indications of Ras pathway
activation in both near haploid and low hypodiploid ALL. To further
interrogate the genomic changes of hypodiploid ALL, we performed next
generation sequencing using either Illumina GAIIx or HiSeq3000 sequencers
on both tumor and matched remission DNA. Whole genome sequencing to at
least 30 fold haploid coverage was performed on 10 near haploid and 8 low
hypodiploid cases, and whole exome sequencing (Agilent SureSelect Human
All Exon 50Mb) on 5 near haploid and 1 low hypodiploid cases. The burden
of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and insertion/deletion (indel)
mutations was in general low in this ALL subtype, with 0-5 indels and
9-95 SNVs in coding regions and untranslated leader regions in the whole
genome sequenced cases, where the majority of cases had fewer than 30
SNVs. Further, the number of structural variations, including the ones
too small to be identified by SNP microarray analysis, and structural
rearrangements, were also low, with less than 25 structural variations
identified in the whole genome sequenced cases. For the whole exomes,
between 10 and 42 non-silent SNVs and 1-2 indels were identified per
case. No recurrent alterations not previously identified in the
hypodiploid cohort were found in these 24 cases, indicating that the
initial genome wide study of this cohort identified the major recurrent
alterations in hypodiploid ALL. However, the recurrence screening
including the remaining 78 near haploid and low hypodiploid cases in our
cohort on the alterations identified by the whole genome and exome
sequencing study is ongoing. Altogether, these findings provide critical
new insights into the genetic basis of hypodiploid ALL, and indicate that
therapeutic targeting of the Ras pathway should be pursued in this
disease.

