Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eavesdropping of crosstalk between adipose stem cells (ASC) and
ovarian cancer cells


Background Adipose tissue contains a population of multipotent adipose
stromal cells (ASC) which migrate into tumors and form supportive tumor
stroma elements. ASCs release various growth factors, cytokines and
metabolites that influence on physiochemical nature of the local
environment. Ovarian cancer cells have a predilection for metastasis in
omentum, the primary repository for visceral adipose. The effects of
omental derived adipose stem cells (O-ASC) and subcutaneous tissue
derived adipose stem cells (SC-ASC) on ovarian cancer biology including
ovarian cancer proliferation, gene expression and response to
chemotherapy were investigated. Methods and Results Luciferase labelled
ovarian carcinoma cells (OVCA 429) were co-cultured with O-ASC, SC-ASC
and control fibroblast line Wi38. Significantly higher levels of
luciferase activity was detected when ovarian carcinoma cells were
co-cultured with O-ASC than with SC-ASC and Wi38 (3470.4 RLU vs 1253.2
RLU, p=Background Adipose tissue contains a population of multipotent
adipose stromal cells (ASC) which migrate into tumors and form supportive
tumor stroma elements. ASCs release various growth factors, cytokines and
metabolites that influence on physiochemical nature of the local
environment. Ovarian cancer cells have a predilection for metastasis in
omentum, the primary repository for visceral adipose. The effects of
omental derived adipose stem cells (O-ASC) and subcutaneous tissue
derived adipose stem cells (SC-ASC) on ovarian cancer biology including
ovarian cancer proliferation, gene expression and response to
chemotherapy were investigated. Methods and Results Luciferase labelled
ovarian carcinoma cells (OVCA 429) were co-cultured with O-ASC, SC-ASC
and control fibroblast line Wi38. Significantly higher levels of
luciferase activity was detected when ovarian carcinoma cells were
co-cultured with O-ASC than with SC-ASC and Wi38 (3470.4 RLU vs 1253.2
RLU, p=<0.005). Moreover, co-culture of 429 cells with ASCs in presence
of different concentrations of Taxol revealed that O-ASC influence tumor
cell chemosensitivity. Additionally, O-ASC promoted formation of
significantly more ovarian carcinoma tumorispheres which were more closer
associated to each other than those created in sphere medium only. To
identify differentially expressed genes in O-ASC and SC-ASC, we performed
microarray experiments (NimbleGen platform) which were analyzed using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. The highest expressed genes
were connected with growth, proliferation and development of cells and
most of the proteins coded by these genes were localized in the
extracellular space, plasma membrane or exosomes (CALR, UNC5B in O-ASC or
COL1A2, FN1 in SC-ASC). We also performed ELISA assays focused on release
of growth factors which revealed that O-ASC and SC-ASC secrete more VEGF
(1678 pg/ml) and FGF (29 pg/ml) compared to control cells Wi38 (114 pg/ml
and 2.7 pg/ml respectively). Chemokine SDF-1 was also secreted in high
level by O-ASC S1 (1537 pg/ml) but SC-ASC released only 187 pg/ml
relative to Wi38 (706 pg/ml) which indicates that these two types of
adipose stem cells can create different surrounding environment. Summary
O-ASC cells have unique tumor promoting effects and create specific
environmental niche by releasing growth factors, cytokines and other
factors which can stimulate ovarian cancer cells to grow faster and clump
together. ASC may also influence protection of ovarian cancer from
toxicity of chemotherapeutics. The knowledge about microenvironmental
crosstalk between normal stem cells and tumor cells can contribute in the
development of new treatment to prevent metastasis of ovarian cancer and
make them vulnerable to chemotherapy.

