Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Norton-Simon modeling for the optimization of dose and schedule of
palifosfamide in breast cancer


Palifosfamide (P), the stabilized active metabolite of ifosfamide, is a
bifunctional DNA alkylating agent with broad anticancer activity,
including against cells with ALDH over-expression resistant to
cyclophosphamide. In contrast to other agents of its class, P's favorable
safety profile, rapid onset of action, and comparable activity by IV and
PO routes permits optimization of dose-schedule. To this end we used
Norton-Simon Modeling to analyze the growth curves of the MX-1 breast
cancer xenograft model, unperturbed and perturbed by various
dose-schedules of P. This method fits an equation N(t)/t=F(N)G(t) to
experimental data on tumor size N as a function of time t to define the
magnitude and shape of the curve of growth perturbation G as a function
of time t before, during, and after the administration of anticancer
therapy. In general (as in this case), growth perturbation peaks at a
number of days after administration and declines thereafter. This is
largely due to the induction of spontaneously reversible resistance
(tachyphylaxis) as evidenced by the cancers reversion to drug sensitivity
after a period of drug absence. Hence, repeated cycles of intermittent
therapy allows for further growth perturbation, providing for sustained
anticancer effect. The solution of the Norton-Massague equation
N(t)/t=aN^b-cN^d fit unperturbed growth exactly (r^2=0.99973). 180 mg/kg
as a single dose caused tumor volume regression with a peak growth
perturbation at 7 days after administration. The effect of lower dose
levels in (growth perturbation as a % of that of 180 mg/kg as a single
dose; peak at days after start of administration) were 120 mg/kg (75%;
7), 80 mg/kg (34%; 5), and 53 mg/kg (16%; 3). When P was given in divided
doses over 5 days, 180 mg/kg cumulative dose resulted in (94%; 10), 120
mg/kg (55%; 6), and 80 mg/kg (16%; 3). Hence, the administration of P
over 5 days preserved almost full efficacy but delayed the time of
emergence of drug resistance by 43% (from 7 days to 10 days). Moreover,
analysis of the effects of P alone, docetaxel alone, and the simultaneous
combination indicates that the shapes and magnitudes of the single-agent
curves add to perfectly predict that of the combination, with minimal
loss of single-agent activity. Hence, the daily x 5 schedule (9 days off)
at highest tolerated dose level is proposed for clinical study, both as a
single agent and in combination with other anticancer medications.

