Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation is frequent in diffuse large B cell
lymphoma and is independent of molecular subtype: Implications for
biomarker


Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and is associated with variable clinical
presentation as well as variable response to standard chemotherapy
regimens. Most significant advances in the treatment of DLBCL over the
last 15 years, has been the addition of rituximab to standard
chemotherapy. However, still 40% of patients relapse and succumbing to
the disease. To improve clinical outcomes for DLBCL patients, it is
urgent to identify novel molecular targets and stratify patients
according to the expression of specific biomarkers that predict outcomes
for the individual patient. Recently, it has been reported that the
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is over
expressed in DLBCL human cell lines. However, no study has reported the
STAT3 expression in DLBCL patient samples or its molecular subtypes
(germinal centre B cell type (GCB) and Non-GCB cell type). The
phosphorylation of STAT3 (pSTAT3) at its Tyr-705 residue (pSTAT3Tyr705)
leads to its activation, followed by dimerization and translocation to
the nucleus. Constitutively active STATs (particularly STAT3 and STAT5)
contribute to the malignant phenotype in both human cancer cell lines and
primary tumors. We hypothesize that constitutive STAT3 activity might be
associated with drug resistance and adverse outcome in DLBCL patients. We
determined whether STAT3 is constitutively active in patients with DLBCL,
and whether activated STAT3 levels correlate with disease severity.
Expression of total (tSTAT3) or tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3)
was determined by in 40 DLBCL tumors. pSTAT3 was found in 52% (21/40) of
cases with variable expression {18% low, (+); 25% moderate, (++); and 10%
very high (+++)}. However 80% (32/40) of patients expressed tSTAT3.
pSTAT3 was expressed in both germinal centre B cells (GCB) (46%) and
Non-GCB (69%) DLBCL cases which were molecular subtyped by the Hans
method. Furthermore in-vitro inhibition of STAT3 dephosphorylated STAT3
and caused an inhibitory effect on phospho-STAT3 positive DLBCL cells;
there was minimal effect on phospho-STAT3 negative cells. Event free
survival was lower in pSTAT3 positive compared to pSTAT3 negative DLBCL
patients. In summary, our data provide the first evidence that
over-expression of pSTAT3 is common in DLBCL, this expression does not
clearly relate only to non-GCB tumors and therefore STAT3 inhibitors
should be tested in all DLBCL. Pre-treatment assessment of pSTAT3 tumor
status will be important to understand whether this IHC marker can
preselect patients for response or lack of response to new JAK/STAT
targeted agents such as TG101348 (Sanofi Aventis) and BMS-911543
(Bristol-Myers Squibb). Our findings suggest a potential novel
therapeutic approach of targeting the inhibition of STAT3 activity in a
majority of DLBCL patients.

