Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of 91 integrin-iNOS pathway in matrix
metalloproteinase-9 and/or urokinase plasminogen activator
receptor-mediated glioma cell migration


Src tyrosine kinase activates inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and,
in turn, nitric oxide (NO) production as a means to transduce cell
migration. Src tyrosine kinase plays a key proximal role to control 91
signaling. Our recent studies have clearly demonstrated the role of 91
integrin in matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and/or urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR)-mediated glioma cell migration. In
the present study, we aimed to investigate the involvement of 91
integrin-iNOS pathway in MMP-9- and/or uPAR-mediated glioma cell
migration. Immunohistochemical analysis of the glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) tissue array revealed the prominent presence of iNOS in several
clinical GBM samples. In addition, immunofluorescence analysis of U251
glioma cell lines and 5310 glioma xenograft cells showed a prominent
expression of iNOS. Transcriptional inactivation of MMP-9 and/or uPAR by
respective shRNA reduced iNOS expression in both U521 and 5310 glioma
cells. RT-PCR analysis revealed elevated iNOS mRNA expression in these
glioma cells after transfection with MMP-9- or uPAR-overexpressing
plasmids. Wound healing and spheroid migration assays showed a
significant inhibition of the migration potential of MMP-9- or
uPAR-overexpressed U251 glioma cells after treatment with L-NAME, an
inhibitor of iNOS. Similarly, Matrigel invasion assay revealed a
significant inhibition of the invasion potential of the control or
MMP-9/uPAR-overexpressed U251 and 5310 glioma cells after L-NAME
treatment. Further, we noticed a prominent reduction of iNOS expression
in the tumor regions of nude mice brains, which were injected with 5310
glioma cells, after MMP-9 and/or uPAR knockdown. Integrin 91 regulates
iNOS activity via Src tyrosine kinase; Src coordinates subsequent
signaling pathways through activation of FAK and tyrosine phosphorylation
of the adaptor protein p130Cas. Western blot analysis of MMP-9 and/or
uPAR shRNA treated U251 and 5310 glioma cells revealed significant
reductions in the protein expression of cSrc, phosphoSrc, FAK and p130Cas
after simultaneous downregulation of both MMP-9 and uPAR. Taken together,
our results from the present and earlier studies clearly demonstrate that
91 integrin-mediated cell migration utilizes the iNOS pathway, and
inhibition of the migratory potential of these glioma cells by
simultaneous knockdown of MMP-9 and uPAR could be attributed to the
reduced 91 integrin and iNOS levels. Therefore, our results highlight the
possible involvement of 91 integrin-iNOS pathway in MMP-9- and/or
uPAR-mediated glioma cell migration.

