Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redirecting the endogenous immune response against prostate cancer
using an antibody-recruiting small molecule


Background: Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related
deaths in American males in 2011. Immunotherapy has emerged as a method
of treatment against androgen-independent prostate cancer, but its
applicability is limited by its cost, difficulty of administration, and
potential inherent immunogenicity. We have developed a class of
antibody-recruiting small molecule targeting prostate cancer (ARM-P)
capable of enhancing antibody-mediated immune recognition of prostate
cancer cells. ARM-P targets the prostate specific membrane antigen
(PSMA), a membrane bound protein overexpressed on many forms of prostate
cancer, and simultaneously binds to anti-dinitrophenyl (DNP) antibodies
present in the bloodstream. ARM-P-based treatment of prostate cancer
confers the advantages of immunotherapy but also benefit from ease of
synthesis and administration with no inherent immunogenicity. Methods:
PSMA-positive LNCaP prostate xenografts were immunized using DNP-ficoll
and treated with ARM-P (every other day), docetaxel (weekly), or the
combination for 28 days, and tumor mass and survival were used as
measures of efficacy. Negative controls included vehicle, LNCaP xenograft
in the absence of immunization, and PSMA-negative DU145 xenografts. LNCaP
cells and PSMA negative DU145 cells were used for in vitro assays on
ARM-P. Specifically, antibody recruiting was measured using a
fluorescently labeled anti-DNP antibody, and ARM-P mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) by immune effector cells
was measured in a standard calcein release assay. Results: Prostate
xenograft studies show that compared to vehicle, ARM-P inhibits growth of
LNCaP tumors and prolongs survival in the presence of anti-DNP antibody
(median survival of 55 days) with an efficacy comparable to that of
docetaxel. Combination therapy of ARM-P and docetaxel showed an enhanced
effect and improved median survival to 71 days. ARM-P showed no effect in
the absence of DNP immunization and DU145 xenografts. To elucidate the
mechanism of action of ARM-P, we showed that ARM-P recruits anti-DNP
antibodies to LNCaP cells in a dose dependent fashion, and can be
outcompeted by titrating in respective ligands for PSMA and anti-DNP
antibody. We observed up to 40% cell killing mediated by ARM-P on LNCaP
cells in ADCC assays with anti-DNP IgG and human immune effector cells.
Cell death was not observed under identical conditions for DU145 cells
and in the absence of effector cells. Conclusions: ARM-P is able to
selectively enhance immune recognition and destruction of PSMA-expressing
prostate cancer cells, and demonstrates in vivo efficacy at a level
comparable to that of docetaxel. Taken together, ARM-P presents an
example where a small molecule is capable of modulating an immune
response in a manner similar to that of a biologic, while addressing many
shortcomings of biologics.

