Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -cryptoxanthin supplementation inhibits the carcinogen-initiated
and nicotine-promoted lung carcinogenesis in AJ mice by suppression of
AKT activation


A pooled analysis from well-implemented cohort studies reported that
increased dietary -cryptoxanthin (BCX) intake, rather than -carotene used
in earlier human trials, is associated with reduced risk of lung cancer.
Nonetheless, BCX efficacy on lung carcinogenesis has not been reported.
In these studies, we examined the protective effects of BCX at different
doses against lung carcinogenesis at the initiation and the promotion
stages of the cancer development in male AJ mice. In the tobacco
carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)- 1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
[NNK]-initiated lung carcinogenesis model, we found a 52-63% reduction of
lung tumor multiplicity in mice pre-treated with BCX at 0.2 and 2 mg kg
BW-1 d-1, as compared to the NNK group (PA pooled analysis from
well-implemented cohort studies reported that increased dietary
-cryptoxanthin (BCX) intake, rather than -carotene used in earlier human
trials, is associated with reduced risk of lung cancer. Nonetheless, BCX
efficacy on lung carcinogenesis has not been reported. In these studies,
we examined the protective effects of BCX at different doses against lung
carcinogenesis at the initiation and the promotion stages of the cancer
development in male AJ mice. In the tobacco carcinogen
4-(methylnitrosamino)- 1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone [NNK]-initiated lung
carcinogenesis model, we found a 52-63% reduction of lung tumor
multiplicity in mice pre-treated with BCX at 0.2 and 2 mg kg BW-1 d-1, as
compared to the NNK group (P<0.01). In contrast, BCX did not
significantly alter the spontaneous lung tumor multiplcitiy in mice
without the NNK treatment. Furthermore, in the NNK-initiated and
nicotine-promoted lung cancer model, we found that nicotine treatment by
intraperitoneal injections not only significantly induced emphysema, a
risk for lung cancer, but also greatly increased lung tumor multiplicity
of the NNK-treated mice. Remarkably, BCX at 2 and 4 mg kg BW-1 d-1
prevented the nicotine-induced pulmonary emphysema and decreased tumor
multiplicity by 86-91% (PA pooled analysis from well-implemented cohort
studies reported that increased dietary -cryptoxanthin (BCX) intake,
rather than -carotene used in earlier human trials, is associated with
reduced risk of lung cancer. Nonetheless, BCX efficacy on lung
carcinogenesis has not been reported. In these studies, we examined the
protective effects of BCX at different doses against lung carcinogenesis
at the initiation and the promotion stages of the cancer development in
male AJ mice. In the tobacco carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-
1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone [NNK]-initiated lung carcinogenesis model, we
found a 52-63% reduction of lung tumor multiplicity in mice pre-treated
with BCX at 0.2 and 2 mg kg BW-1 d-1, as compared to the NNK group
(P<0.01). In contrast, BCX did not significantly alter the spontaneous
lung tumor multiplcitiy in mice without the NNK treatment. Furthermore,
in the NNK-initiated and nicotine-promoted lung cancer model, we found
that nicotine treatment by intraperitoneal injections not only
significantly induced emphysema, a risk for lung cancer, but also greatly
increased lung tumor multiplicity of the NNK-treated mice. Remarkably,
BCX at 2 and 4 mg kg BW-1 d-1 prevented the nicotine-induced pulmonary
emphysema and decreased tumor multiplicity by 86-91% (P<0.01). BCX
protective effect on carcinogenesis was associated with significant
suppression of lung AKT activation measured by immunoblotting. BCX also
reduced the emphysema-related IL-6 and early growth response-1 induction
of mRNA levels measured by real-time PCR. Contrary to -carotene reported
in prior animal studies, BCX also induced the retinoic acid receptor-
mRNA. As measured by HPLC analysis, the concentrations of liver BCX were
higher in the BCX supplemented mice, without alteration of the retinol
concentrations. Our data suggest that BCX is a unique chemopreventive
agent for lung cancer prevention, which is likely to be independent of
its provitamin A activity.

