Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP overactivation predicts the susceptibility of human cancer
cells to apoptosis induction by PARP inhibitors


Chemical inhibitors of poly(ADP)ribose (PAR) polymerases (PARP) have
generated raising expectations in cancer treatment, either as
monotherapeutic agents for the therapy of tumors that are deficient in
DNA repair by homologous recombination, or combined with DNA-damaging
compounds. Results from early clinical trials suggest that PARP
inhibitors are well tolerated, and would be particularly useful for
BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutated tumors. However, as these tumors constitute a
minor fraction of all cancers, the main challenge is to extend the
efficacy of PARP inhibitors to BRCA-proficient tumors, calling for the
need of reliable biomarkers that predict the efficiency of PARP
inhibitor-based therapy. Here, we report the effects of two chemically
distinct PARP inhibitors, the phenanthridinone PJ34 and the
4-methoxy-carbazole derivate CEP8983, on non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells exhibiting increased PARP activity. We found that PAR
polymers are a predictive marker of the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to
PARP inhibitors. We were able to confirm these findings in mesothelioma,
cervical cancer and ovarian cancer cell lines that are characterized by
constitutively increased expression of PARP (as monitored by
immunoblotting with a PARP1-specific antibody) as well as enhanced PARP
enzymatic activity (as detected by immunoblotting with an antibody that
recognizes poly(ADP)ribosylated proteins). Upon treatment with PARP
inhibitors, cells with hyperactivated PARP exhibited signs of DNA damage
(as assessed by immunofluorescence microscopy with an antibody that
recognizes the phosphorylated form of histone 2AX) and underwent cell
death via the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis (as monitored by
immunofluorescence microscopy with antibodies for the detection of
cytochrome c and active caspase-3). The chemosensitizing or cell
death-inducing effects of PJ34 and CEP8983 were mimicked by PARP1- and
PARP2-specific siRNAs, suggesting that they are indeed mediated by PARP
inhibition. Moreover, PARP inhibitors efficiently reduced the growth of
NSCLC xenografts exhibiting increased PARP activity (as evaluated by
immunohistochemistry for poly(ADP)ribosylated proteins on paraffin
embedded xenografts). Altogether, our results indicate that PARP
overactivation reflects the susceptibility of NSCLC cells to apoptosis
induction by PARP inhibitors.

