Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of second malignancies in patients with Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia: A population based Canadian study


A previous population based study on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
in Manitoba, Canada, demonstrated that in elderly patients the relative
survival is reduced, with the difference being greater in males (Seftel
et al. 2009). In this study we evaluated the risk of 2nd cancers in an
unselected Canadian CLL population to determine whether 2nd cancers might
explain the poor relative survival seen in older men with CLL. All CLL
diagnoses in Manitoba (Jan 98-Dec 03) were obtained from the Manitoba
provincial cancer registry and a centralized flow cytometry database. All
cases were reviewed to confirm the diagnosis of CLL. For each patient,
the time at risk was considered from the index cancer diagnosis (CLL
diagnosis where CLL is the first primary cancer) to the second primary
cancer, date of death or censoring date (Dec 09). The Standardized
Incidence Ratio (SIR) was calculated to compare the observed number of
second cancers in CLL patients with an expected number derived from age,
gender and calendar year specific standardized rates of second
malignancies for patients with follicular lymphoma (FL). Of 612 patients,
148 (24%) had a history of a previous cancer and were eliminated from the
study. Of the remaining 464 (median age 69 y, F:M ratio 1:1.4) 104
(22.88%) patients eventually developed a second malignancy (median follow
up 6.4 y, median time to develop 2nd cancer 3.3 y). CLL patients had a
1.8-fold higher relative risk of a 2nd cancer (95% CI 1.29-2.41) compared
to FL patients. SIR was 1.9 when non-melanoma skin cancers were excluded.
Patients with FL had a similar incidence of second malignancies, as did
patients with other invasive cancers. The most common second cancer among
CLL patients was non-melanoma skin cancer, followed by cancers of the
digestive organs, prostate, breast and lung. Malignancy was the leading
cause of death in CLL patients. In patients with a 2nd cancer, cancers of
the digestive organs, lung and brain were the most common causes of
death. However, in patients without a 2nd cancer, CLL was the primary
cause of death. After cancer, cardiovascular complications and infections
were the most common causes of death in CLL patients. This study is
unique in that (a) it is a population-based study of CLL patients with a
confirmed diagnosis (b) the risk of 2nd cancers was compared with another
cancer cohort. FL is an indolent B cell neoplasm that is treated and
followed in similar ways to CLL. We demonstrated that CLL patients have a
significantly increased risk of developing a 2nd cancer compared to FL
patients, and this increase was similar in both genders and in all age
groups. Thus, the poor relative survival of older men with CLL cannot be
explained by an increased incidence of 2nd cancers. The increased
incidence of malignancy in CLL may be related to the immune suppression
in this disease or to an inherited predisposition to cancer. Further
investigations are underway to better explain our observations.

