Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in vitro: clinical
implications for breast cancer biology


Background: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial step
in not only embryonic development but also cancer progression. From the
perspective of cancer biology, EMT has been assumed to relate to the
aggressiveness of cancer, which is defined by metastatic potential, and
the properties of cancer stem cells. There are very few models that
recapitulate EMT in vivo or in vitro. Takahashi et al. previously
reported that ARPE-19 retinal pigmental epithelial cells transformed to
mesenchymal cells after extrinsic stimulation with TNF- and TGF- in
vitro. In this model, ARPE-19 cells developed cellular foci with
fibronectin deposits and lost E-cadherin expression. Thus, this in vitro
model was a very good representation of EMT. In the current study, using
this model, we clarified the biological processes and clinical
implications of EMT in breast cancer. Our objectives were to 1)
understand the molecular dynamics of EMT using time-course whole-genome
transcriptional profiles of this EMT model and 2) define the clinical
implications on the basis of these transcriptional profiles. Methods:
mRNAs were extracted from ARPE-19 cells treated with TNF- and TGF- and
subjected to Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays (GSE12548). We compared the
gene expressions at four time points: 0, 6, 24, and 60 hr after
treatment. For analyzing microarray data, the BRB-array tool was used.
All statistical tests were two-sided. Results: Samples were paired by
time point as follows: 0 vs 6, Phase I; 6 vs 24, Phase II; and 24 vs 60,
Phase III. In each comparison, the numbers of significantly
differentially expressed probes (false discovery rateBackground:
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial step in not only
embryonic development but also cancer progression. From the perspective
of cancer biology, EMT has been assumed to relate to the aggressiveness
of cancer, which is defined by metastatic potential, and the properties
of cancer stem cells. There are very few models that recapitulate EMT in
vivo or in vitro. Takahashi et al. previously reported that ARPE-19
retinal pigmental epithelial cells transformed to mesenchymal cells after
extrinsic stimulation with TNF- and TGF- in vitro. In this model, ARPE-19
cells developed cellular foci with fibronectin deposits and lost
E-cadherin expression. Thus, this in vitro model was a very good
representation of EMT. In the current study, using this model, we
clarified the biological processes and clinical implications of EMT in
breast cancer. Our objectives were to 1) understand the molecular
dynamics of EMT using time-course whole-genome transcriptional profiles
of this EMT model and 2) define the clinical implications on the basis of
these transcriptional profiles. Methods: mRNAs were extracted from
ARPE-19 cells treated with TNF- and TGF- and subjected to Affymetrix U133
plus 2.0 arrays (GSE12548). We compared the gene expressions at four time
points: 0, 6, 24, and 60 hr after treatment. For analyzing microarray
data, the BRB-array tool was used. All statistical tests were two-sided.
Results: Samples were paired by time point as follows: 0 vs 6, Phase I; 6
vs 24, Phase II; and 24 vs 60, Phase III. In each comparison, the numbers
of significantly differentially expressed probes (false discovery
rate<0.05) were 1652 (Phase I), 805 (Phase II), and 110 (Phase III),
suggesting that gene expression changes were most remarkable early in
EMT. Among the three phases (I, II, or III), no probes overlapped each
other, indicating that different genes were associated with different
dynamic phases of EMT. Next, over- and underexpressed biological pathways
associated with EMT dynamics in each phase were analyzed using Ingenuity
pathway analysis. The overexpressed pathway in phase I was correlated
with the hepatic fibrosis activation bioprocess. This pathway was also
identified in mouse breast cancer stem cells of our model (data on
submission). Also, in this pathway, IL-8 and TGF- receptor 2 were
upregulated, and both of them are overexpressed in triple-negative breast
cancer, one of the most aggressive subtypes of breast cancer.
Interestingly, tight junction signaling was upregulated at Phase III, and
fibronectin and twist1 were still overexpressed at this very late phase
of EMT. These findings imply that tight junction proteins could be
expressed very late in the EMT process. Conclusion: Different biological
processes are associated with different dynamic phases of EMT; this
finding implies that analyzing EMT dynamics can be a promising approach
to identifying molecular targets for breast cancer.

