Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of exosomal microRNA in serum of patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Exosomes are 40 -100 nm membrane vesicles secreted by various
cells such as T cells, platelets, and epithelial cells by exocytosis.
Exosomes are found in blood, urine, amniotic fluid, and malignant
ascites, and contain distinct subsets of microRNAs (miRs) depending upon
the tumor from which they are secreted. Exosomes play a major role in
cell-to-cell communication, targeting cells to transfer exosomal
molecules including proteins, mRNAs, and microRNAs by an endocytosis-like
pathway. Recent reports imply that miRNAs can be stably detected in
circulating plasma and serum since miRNAs are packaged by exosomes to be
protected from RNA degradation. We have previously reported that
overexpression of miR-21 was observed in patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma. miR-26a is also known to be overexpressed in
esophageal cancer. Objective: Aim of this study is to clarify the
expression levels of miR-21 and miR-26a in exosomes from the serum of
esophageal cancer patients. Patients and method: We extracted exosomes
from serum of 20 esophageal cancer patients (ESCC group) and of 20 benign
disease cases without inflammation (control group) by September, 2010
from October, 2009. We separated exosomes from serum, and then extracted
total RNA including microRNA from exosome. Furthermore, using
quantitative quantitative RT-PCR, we analyzed expression of miR-21,
miR-26a where overexpression was confirmed in esophageal cancer in a past
report. Results: The expression levels of miR-21 in exosomes were
significantly higher in ESCC than those in control (P Background:
Exosomes are 40 -100 nm membrane vesicles secreted by various cells such
as T cells, platelets, and epithelial cells by exocytosis. Exosomes are
found in blood, urine, amniotic fluid, and malignant ascites, and contain
distinct subsets of microRNAs (miRs) depending upon the tumor from which
they are secreted. Exosomes play a major role in cell-to-cell
communication, targeting cells to transfer exosomal molecules including
proteins, mRNAs, and microRNAs by an endocytosis-like pathway. Recent
reports imply that miRNAs can be stably detected in circulating plasma
and serum since miRNAs are packaged by exosomes to be protected from RNA
degradation. We have previously reported that overexpression of miR-21
was observed in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. miR-26a
is also known to be overexpressed in esophageal cancer. Objective: Aim of
this study is to clarify the expression levels of miR-21 and miR-26a in
exosomes from the serum of esophageal cancer patients. Patients and
method: We extracted exosomes from serum of 20 esophageal cancer patients
(ESCC group) and of 20 benign disease cases without inflammation (control
group) by September, 2010 from October, 2009. We separated exosomes from
serum, and then extracted total RNA including microRNA from exosome.
Furthermore, using quantitative quantitative RT-PCR, we analyzed
expression of miR-21, miR-26a where overexpression was confirmed in
esophageal cancer in a past report. Results: The expression levels of
miR-21 in exosomes were significantly higher in ESCC than those in
control (P <0.001), while miR-26a expression levels in ESCC were tended
to be higher than those in controls. Furthermore, we analyzed the
supernatant which extracted exosomes from serum. There was almost no
expression of both miRs in the supernatant after extraction of exosomes.
When we compared exosomal and serum levels of miR-21, no correlation was
observed between them. Conclusion: We have confirmed the elevated levels
of exosomal miR-21 in the serum of patients with ESCC compared with the
control. Although further analysis is needed to clarify the biological
meaning of the elevated exosomal miR in the serum, the exosomal miR may
become new biomarkers for ESCC.

