Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential requirements for the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met
in scirrhous gastric carcinoma cell lines


The prognosis of patients with scirrhous gastric carcinoma (SGC) has been
very poor. SGC cells do not form obvious tumor mass, but cause diffuse
infiltration and eventually rigid thickening of the gastric wall.
Furthermore, SGC cells frequently infiltrate through gastric serosa and
cause peritoneal dissemination. However, the mechanisms underlying the
progression of SGC have not yet been fully elucidated. In the present
study, we performed immunoblotting and proteomic analyses of
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in differentiated non-SGC cell lines
(MKN7, MKN1, and MKN74) and poorly differentiated or SGC cell lines
(MKN45, NUGC-4, KATO III, HSC59, 58As9, HSC44-PE, and 44As3) to identify
signaling pathways and molecules that are characteristics of SGC. We
found that the tyrosine kinase receptor c-Met is overexpressed and highly
phosphorylated in SGC cell lines. c-Met is a cell surface receptor for
HGF and implicated in the growth, survival, invasion, and metastasis of
various human cancers. Amplification of c-Met gene in SGC was also
previously reported. We analyzed the downstream signaling pathways of
c-Met in SGC cells by using two c-Met inhibitors PHA-665752 and
JNJ-38877605. Treatment of 58As9 cells with the c-Met inhibitors markedly
inhibited phosphorylation of Erk, Akt, and Stat3, but promoted
phosphorylation of Src. In contrast, 44As3 cells treated with the c-Met
inhibitors showed no significant changes in phosphorylation of these
molecules, in spite of successful inhibition of c-Met phosphorylation.
Reflecting these observations, c-Met inhibitors blocked cell
proliferation and caused morphological alterations in 58As9 cells but not
in 44As3 cells. Similar results were obtained when MKN45 and NUGC-4 cells
were analyzed in the same manner: MKN45 cells but not NUGC-4 cells were
sensitive to c-Met inhibition. These results suggest that SGC can be
classified into two subtypes according to their dependencies on the c-Met
signaling pathway. Further studies are now conducted to identify
therapeutic targets in c-Met-independent SGC cell lines.

