Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-leukemic efficacy of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
phenylbutyrate (PB): Reversal of epigenetic inactivation of WNT
signalling pathway by PB


The histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDAC), phenylbutyrate (PB), is a novel
antitumor agent. PB has shown anti-cancer efficacy in clinical trials and
in in vitro and in vivo models. The anti-neoplastic effects have been
linked to protein farnesylation inhibition and pro-apoptotic action in
radiation-induced acute myeloid leukemia (AML) mice and malignant cells.
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is involved in epigenetic control of gene
expression. The objective of the current study was to evaluate additional
mechanisms i.e., epigenetic activity, of PB. A radiation late effects
model was used to study PB epigenetic mechanisms. Mice were sub-lethally
irradiated (3.5 Gy, 60Co) to induce leukemia. To test the anti-leukemia
efficacy of PB and epigenetic mechanisms, mice were irradiated and then
injected with PB (25 ug/kg) or saline daily 3 x weekly (2 weeks) for a
total of 6 doses. Secreted Frizzled-related protein genes (SFRPs), which
function in the Wnt signaling pathway, have been found to be
down-regulated by promoter hypomethylation in human acute myeloid
leukemia. Therefore, the methylation status of SFRP genes was analyzed in
20 samples obtained from radiation-induced AML mice. Aberrant CpG island
methylation was observed in all four SFRP genes tested by
methylation-specific PCR in AML mice. The frequencies of aberrant
methylation among the irradiated mice samples were 55% for SFRP1, 30% for
SFRP2, 15% for SFRP4, and 32% for SFRP5. In contrast, mice irradiated and
treated with PB demonstrated aberration frequencies of 12% for SFRP1, 6%
for SFRP2, 0% for SFRP4, and 4% for SFRP5 at 120 days post-radiation. At
day 120 post-radiation, 50% of irradiated mice had developed leukemia
while only 20% of mice treated with PB showed leukemia. The results
demonstrate 1) that PB is an effective countermeasure against
radiation-induced leukemia, 2) that epigenetic alterations are associated
with radiation-induced leukemia and 3) that PB's efficacy may be
associated with prevention of epigenetic disturbances involved in
leukemogenesis. These studies do not reflect the opinion of the U.S.
Government or the U.S. Department of Defense and are the scientific
opinions of the author. This work was supported by DTRA Grant G1B2BJ,
G2B2EM, AFRRI/USUHS RAB5AH, EU05-0089, and EU07-102.

