Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear receptors as novel targets in ER negative breast cancer


Background: Estrogen negative (ER-) breast cancer is the major clinical
problem in breast cancer treatment due to the limited useful targets in
ER- breast cancer. Nuclear receptors are good targets in ER- breast
cancer because of the availibility of agonists and antagonists. Material
and methods: We used microarray analysis of 227 ER-negative tumors to
identify nuclear receptor (NR) targets, and performed hierarchical
clustering using 41 NR's. Contributing receptors were scored using
prediction analysis of microarrays (PAM) across clustered groups. The
candidates gene expression levels were confirmed by qRT-PCR using TaqMan
probes. pGIPZ lentiviral vectors carrying shRNA were used to knockdown
the selected receptors. Cells were treated with Docetaxel, Doxorubicin
and Cisplatin for three days and MTT growth assay was used to evaluate
the knockdown effect on cells proliferation and chemosensitivity.
Statistical analysis was performed using Red-R software. Results: The 41
NRs clustered the tumors into 5 distinct groups. Groups III and V were
chosen according to the higher representative percentage of patients
(61%). For each group we selected 4 genes that were the highest ranked
discriminators of the group and three cell lines which match each groups
signature. Thus, testicular receptor 2 (TR2), testicular receptor 4
(TR4), GCNF and RevErbb receptors were selected from group III and
androgen receptor, thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB), COUP-TF1 and
ESRRg receptors were selected from group V. The expression levels of the
selected receptors were confirmed by q-RT-PCR. The knockdown of TR2 in
HCC38 cell line (group III) rendered cells more sensitive to Docetaxel or
Doxorubicin. However, the knockdown of TR4 rendered cells more resistant
to all the 3 chemotherapy drugs. TR2 knockdown dramatically downregulated
TR4 gene expression, whereas TR4 knockdown upregulated TR2 expression
suggesting that TR2 maybe the dominant factor in chemotherapeutic
response. Knockdown of THRB in HCC 2185 cells (group V), rendered cells
more resistant to chemotherapy drugs while THRB agonist could be able to
reverse the resistance. Interestingly, COUP-TFI was upregulated in THRB
knock down cells. Statistic analysis using clinical data from Sabatier
R., BCRT 2011 showed that patients with low THRB or higher COUP-TFI have
worse outcome. Conclusion: Clinical targeting of NRs in selected
ER-negative breast cancers may be an interesting alternative therapy
since more and more agonists and antagonists are being available. The
clinical data showed that THRB and COUP-TF1 could be used as predictive
factors for the outcome. The use of agonists (for THRB for example) or
antagonists (for TR2 for example) combined with chemotherapy could be
conceivable in the future.

