Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive radiofrequency increases the anticancer effect of
gemcitabine in treating pancreatic cancer via autophagy


Pancreatic cancer has a high mortality rate. Currently the main treatment
for unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma is chemotherapy based on
gemcitabine (GCB) use. Trials of GCB, combined with radiation therapy and
other cytotoxic agents, did not produce a substantial improvement in
patient response over GCB alone. This indicates that new therapeutic
approaches should be developed for the treatment of this disease. In our
laboratory we developed a new method based on the use of non-invasive
radiofrequency (RF) field. Electromagnetic energy produced by 220 MHz was
shown to have low tissue specific absorption rate and therefore,
excellent whole body tissue penetration with documented safety in humans
exposed to the RF field for several hours. The RF frequency of our device
is lower, 13.56 MHz and generates mild hyperthermia. In the current study
we used human Panc-1 tumor cells, known for their poor response to GCB,
and studied the effect of RF on tumor cells with and without GCB.
Combination of GCB with RF (GCB+RF) significantly inhibited proliferation
of Panc-1 cells in vitro when compared with either treatment alone
(PPancreatic cancer has a high mortality rate. Currently the main
treatment for unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma is chemotherapy
based on gemcitabine (GCB) use. Trials of GCB, combined with radiation
therapy and other cytotoxic agents, did not produce a substantial
improvement in patient response over GCB alone. This indicates that new
therapeutic approaches should be developed for the treatment of this
disease. In our laboratory we developed a new method based on the use of
non-invasive radiofrequency (RF) field. Electromagnetic energy produced
by 220 MHz was shown to have low tissue specific absorption rate and
therefore, excellent whole body tissue penetration with documented safety
in humans exposed to the RF field for several hours. The RF frequency of
our device is lower, 13.56 MHz and generates mild hyperthermia. In the
current study we used human Panc-1 tumor cells, known for their poor
response to GCB, and studied the effect of RF on tumor cells with and
without GCB. Combination of GCB with RF (GCB+RF) significantly inhibited
proliferation of Panc-1 cells in vitro when compared with either
treatment alone (P<0.005). Using orthotopic Panc-1 tumor mouse model, we
were able to achieve significant (PPancreatic cancer has a high mortality
rate. Currently the main treatment for unresectable pancreatic
adenocarcinoma is chemotherapy based on gemcitabine (GCB) use. Trials of
GCB, combined with radiation therapy and other cytotoxic agents, did not
produce a substantial improvement in patient response over GCB alone.
This indicates that new therapeutic approaches should be developed for
the treatment of this disease. In our laboratory we developed a new
method based on the use of non-invasive radiofrequency (RF) field.
Electromagnetic energy produced by 220 MHz was shown to have low tissue
specific absorption rate and therefore, excellent whole body tissue
penetration with documented safety in humans exposed to the RF field for
several hours. The RF frequency of our device is lower, 13.56 MHz and
generates mild hyperthermia. In the current study we used human Panc-1
tumor cells, known for their poor response to GCB, and studied the effect
of RF on tumor cells with and without GCB. Combination of GCB with RF
(GCB+RF) significantly inhibited proliferation of Panc-1 cells in vitro
when compared with either treatment alone (P<0.005). Using orthotopic
Panc-1 tumor mouse model, we were able to achieve significant (P<0.01)
tumor growth arrest in mice that received GCB+RF treatment. Mice
receiving RF or GCB alone showed no significant response. In these
experiments mice received treatment with GCB at 70 mg/kg i.p. 24 hr prior
to the 10-minute RF exposure once weekly for up to 8 weeks without
evidence of toxicity. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumors for
proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis showed that proliferation
index was the lowest only in the group receiving GCB+RF treatment when
compared with untreated group or groups receiving any single treatment.
Significant elevation of apoptosis and reduction of angiogenesis were
observed in all treated groups when compared with untreated control,
however, no significant difference was determined between treated groups,
indicating that observed antiproliferative effect of combination
treatment in vivo could be induced by another type of tumor cell death,
for example, by autophagy or necroptosis. In fact, electron microscopy of
Panc-1 cells treated with GCB+RF showed substantial elevation of
autophagosomes in tumor cells when compared with either of the single
treatments. Staining for autophagy with anti-LC3B antibody revealed the
induction of autophagy in tumor cells 24 hr after RF exposure which was
reversed within 24 hr after exposure. GCB treatment prevented tumor cells
recovery from autophagocytosis after RF exposure and correlated with
substantial elevation of tumor cells death. The obtained results
demonstrate the ability of non-invasive RF treatment to stimulate
autophagy in pancreatic tumor cells, which may play an important role
improving anticancer effect of GCB.

