Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma molecular imaging in vivo using multi-spectral
optoacoustic tomography


Brain research has been revolutionized by imaging technologies. X-ray CT
and MRI provide high spatial resolution, revealing anatomical anomalies
indicative of disease. PET and optical imaging have target specificity,
allowing the visualization of molecular events. Intravital microscopy has
specificity and resolution, providing key information on pathological
micro-events, but lacks penetration depth. Multi-spectral optoacoustic
tomography (MSOT) combines high resolution, molecular specificity and
depth to achieve non-invasive in vivo anatomical, functional and
molecular imaging in deep tissue. MSOT illuminates tissue with light
pulses at multiple wavelengths and detects the acoustic waves generated
by the thermoelastic expansion following light absorption. Using spectral
analysis of the data collected, MSOT can then differentiate the spectral
signatures of endogenous biomarkers such as oxy-/deoxy-hemoglobin and of
photo-absorbing agents and quantify their concentration. In this work we
explore the potential of MSOT in cross-sectional imaging of the mouse
brain and contrast these results with MRI and ex vivo brain imaging to
validate the MSOT in vivo findings. 8 week old nude CD-1 mice were used
for stereotactic implantation of U87 glioblastoma cells and for imaging
of hemoglobin contrast and ICG biodistribution. In vivo MSOT of the
intact mouse head yielded unprecedented performance in cross-sectional
imaging of the mouse brain by visualizing the overall brain outline and
anatomy, and imaging temporal arteries and blood vessels beneath the
skull. Additionally, NIR probes were injected into the 3rd ventricle,
with an excellent correlation between MSOT and fluorescence imaging of
cryoslices, demonstrating the capacity of MSOT to localize NIR probes in
the brain through intact skin and skull with high accuracy. In addition,
spectral decomposition of hemoglobin confirmed the MSOT ability to
visualize well perfused and ischemic brain conditions following a CO2
challenge. Additionally, MSOT accurately visualized ICG bio-distribution
injected into the tail vein, and followed in real time the ICG kinetics
and clearance. Finally, spectral decomposition of deoxygenated hemoglobin
allowed the observation of hypoxia related to the growth of U87 tumor
cells injected into the striatum. Multispectral processing allowed the
visualization of the true organ distribution of IntegriSense and
AngioSense in the brain, with planar fluorescence imaging used for a
reference comparison. The application of MSOT in in vivo brain imaging is
demonstrated. MSOT can be used to follow changes in blood oxygenation, as
well as the distribution of near-infrared probes. With the advent of new
molecular probes, MSOT could also track molecular features of
neurological disease and cancer in mouse models.

