Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of TGF3 and its effects on migratory and invasive
behavior in prostate cancer cells: Involvement of PI3K/Akt pathway


Transforming Growth Factor- (TGF) is a secreted protein that is involved
in the regulation of many cellular processes and has been implicated as a
factor in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Studies have indicated
that different TGF isoforms may exert differential effects on cancer
cells during different stages of the disease, however very little is
known about the expression patterns of the 3 isoforms in prostate cancer.
Non-traditional signaling pathways including PI3-kinase have been
associated with TGF-mediated effects on cancer cell invasion and
metastasis. Whether or not TGF isoforms play a differential role in
migration and invasion of prostate cancer, and act through PI3-Kinase,
has not been investigated. In the present study, we have carried out
expression analysis of TGF isoforms and signaling components in cell line
models representing different stages of prostate cancers and studied the
differential effects of specific isoforms on migratory, invasive behavior
and induction of the PI3-Kinase and MAPK/ERK pathways. TGF1 and TGF-3
were expressed in all cell lines, with TGF3 increasing in metastatic cell
lines. TGF1 and TGF3 induced motility and invasive behavior in PC3 cells,
with TGF3 being more potent in inducing invasive behavior. TGF-3 caused a
significant increase in the phosphorylation of AKT (pAKT), a downstream
target of PI3-Kinase, in PC3 cells. LY294002, a PI3-kinase inhibitor,
blocked this induced migration and phosphorylation of AKT. Inhibitors of
TGFRI (SB431524) and Smad-3 (SIS3) blocked TGF- induced motility and TGF
isoform induced pAKT. There was no differential isoform effect on the
phosphorylation of ERK (pERK). PD98059, a MAPK/ERK inhibitor, did inhibit
any TGF induced migration and pERK, but did not affect isoform induced
pAKT. Furthermore, TGF isoforms may be differentially phosphorylating
Smad-2 and Smad-3 in PC3 cells. Based on these results, we conclude that
TGF3 is expressed in metastatic prostate cancer cell lines and is
involved in induction of invasive behavior in these cells. Furthermore,
these effects of TGF3 are mediated via the PI3-Kinase pathway and are
TGFRI and Smad-3 dependent. Grant support: MBRS-RISE 2R25GM060414, NIH
1P20MD002285-02 and RCMI G12RR03602

