Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reolysin: A novel reovirus-based agent that induces endoplasmic
reticular stress in RAS-activated pancreatic cancer


Mutations in the RAS oncogene are associated with transformation and
proliferation and are prevalent in many tumor types. Since RAS is
frequently hyperactivated in pancreatic cancer and plays an essential
role in tumor progression, it is an ideal therapeutic target. Reoviruses
are naturally occurring viruses that are non-pathogenic and have been
reported to specifically replicate in cancer cells with an activated RAS
pathway, but not in normal tissue. To take advantage of this observation
therapeutically, the reovirus-based anticancer agent Reolysin was
recently developed. Reolysin has already progressed into clinical trials,
but its mechanisms of action have not been fully elucidated. We
hypothesized that Reolysin exposure would result in the production of
viral products, stimulate endoplasmic reticular (ER) stress, and induce
apoptosis. Reolysin treatment triggered the selective replication of
reoviruses as visualized by immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy
in KRAS-transformed immortalized human pancreatic duct epithelial cells
and in a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines. Reovirus accumulation was
associated with an increase in the expression of ER stress-related genes
as assessed by microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses, cleavage of
caspase-4, and induction of apoptosis. In support of our hypothesis that
Reolysin induces ER stress-mediated apoptosis, co-treatment with
tunicamycin or brefeldin A further augmented Reolysin-induced cell death.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib causes ER stress-mediated apoptosis. Here we show that
co-treatment with bortezomib and Reolysin stimulates the simultaneous
accumulation of ubiquitinated and viral proteins resulting in enhanced
levels of ER stress-related gene expression, caspase-4 cleavage, and
apoptosis. The role of caspase-4 as a regulator of therapeutic
sensitivity to these agents was investigated by targeting caspase-4
expression with siRNA. Knockdown of caspase-4 blunted apoptosis
stimulated by Reolysin, bortezomib, and the combination. Importantly,
bortezomib also dramatically augmented the anticancer activity of
Reolysin in xenograft models of pancreatic cancer in vivo. Analysis of
tumor specimens from mice treated with Reolysin and bortezomib displayed
reovirus accumulation, enhanced expression of GRP78/Bip, a marker of ER
stress and increased levels of apoptosis. Collectively, our results
demonstrate that the abnormal protein accumulation induced by Reolysin
and bortezomib promotes heightened ER stress and apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells.

