Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron deficiency suppresses EMT through down-regulation of
N-cadherin in esophageal cancer.


[Introduction] Epithelial-Mesenchymal-Transition(EMT) plays a great role
in cancer metastasis and invasion. Mechanism of EMT still remains
unclear, However E-cadherin and N-cadherin are known to have contribution
to EMT. In particular, down-regulation of N-cadherin has been reported to
reduce cancer metastasis and invasiveness. Iron metabolism and its
relationship with cancer cell were studied for a long time. Iron overload
is known to induce some kinds of cancer, and iron deficiency is also
known to suppress the tumor growth in vivo study. But the correlation of
iron metabolism and tumor progression isn't unclear. Recently, it was
reported that iron metabolism was essential for EMT and iron deficiency
down-regulated EMT differentiation. In this study, we hypothesized that
iron deficiency down-regulated the expression of N-cadherin, and
suppressed the ability of metastasis and invasiveness. Here we
demonstrate our results. [Materials and Methods] In vitro study, TE-4 and
TE-10 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and OE19 esophageal
adenocarcinoma cell line were used in this study. Cell viability was
determined by XTT assay. Iron chelator deferasirox was used to simulate
iron deficient condition. To determine that iron deficiency suppresses
EMT and invasiveness of cancer cells, we investigated western blotting
analysis, three-dimensional spheroid model analysis and migration assay.
Moreover, to determine the expression N-cadherin in mRNA level, PCR assay
was performed. In vivo study, iron depletion condition was made by iron
deficient diet. Normal and iron deficient diet were fed for 3 weeks
before implantation of TE-4 cells in athymic male nude mice(n=8/group).
After implantation, each diet was fed continuously for a month. [Results]
In vivo study, iron deficient diet suppressed the tumor growth(tumor
volume: normal diet vs iron deficient diet = 30.71.1 mm3 vs 10.92.2 mm3).
In vitro study, deferasirox reduces proliferation of all cell lines in a
concentration manner. According to western blotting analysis, deferasirox
induces reduction of N-cadherin protein in TE-4 and TE-10 cell lines.
N-cadherin down-regulation declines invasiveness of TE-4 and TE-10 cell
lines in the three-dimensional spheroid model analysis and migration
assay. Real time PCR assay shows that down-regulation of N-cadherin is
dependent on reduction of N-cadherin mRNA. [Conclusion] Iron controlled
treatment can be a novel therapy for invasiveness of cancer under EMT.

