Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF2/Sp1/mTOR interaction mediates a deacetylation-dependent FVII
gene activation under serum deprived condition in ovarian cancer cells


Hypoxia-inducible factors HIF1 and HIF2 are major transcription factors
required for adaptive responses to hypoxia. HIFs form a complex with
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in order to bind to
the regulatory region of target genes. The acetylation of histones by
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) is one of the epigenetic marks
associated with active chromatin. Indeed, HIFs recruit p300 HAT to
hypoxia response elements (HRE) within gene regulatory regions. Blood
coagulation factor VII (fVII) is a key enzyme in the extrinsic
coagulation cascade predominantly produced by hepatocytes. fVII interacts
with its cellular receptor, tissue factor (TF) and, when bound to TF, is
converted to its active form (fVIIa), thereby triggering a downstream
coagulation cascade. In addition to being a major cause of thrombosis in
cancer patients, formation of the TF-fVIIa complex is known to initiate
key pathogenic mechanisms in cancer, including cell motility, invasion,
cell survival and angiogenesis. In addition, TF-fVIIa complex can be a
cause of a common complication of cancer, venous thromboembolism
particularly in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC). Here, we report an
unusual transcriptional activation mediated by HIFs in ovarian clear cell
carcinoma (CCC). While characterizing coagulation factor VII (FVII) gene
induction under hypoxia, which can initiate key pathogenic mechanisms in
cancer, we observed that the interaction of HIF2 with Sp1, but not with
ARNT, could induce transcription of FVII in a HRE-independent manner.
Immunoprecipitation, followed by western blotting analysis revealed that
PAS domains can associate with Sp1. Unexpectedly, this gene activation is
associated with histone deacetylation. We found that a class II HDAC,
HDAC4, is recruited with HIF2 to the FVII promoter as a coactivator,
while p300 HAT negatively regulates this process.We next examined whether
serum starvation affects FVII activation since we consider that hypoxic
cancer tissues should be devoid of serum factors other than O2 and
nutrients. We found that FVII activation under hypoxia can be coupled
with mTOR signaling when cells are simultaneously exposed to hypoxic and
serum-free conditions, which synergistically enhances transcription via a
deacetylation-dependent pathway. On the other hand, we found that
unfolded protein response is not responsible for the synergistic
activation although cells exposed to both hypoxia and serum-free
conditions undergo endoplasmic reticulum stress. Further we did not
observe such synergism when cells were treated with glucose-free
condition, in which expression of HIFs is largely decreased compared to
serum starved condition. These results suggest the presence of a
stress-responsive transcription mediated by HIF2/Sp1/HDAC4/mTOR network.

