Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-microtubule agents for breast cancer


Background and Objectives: Stathmin is a founding member of a family of
microtubule-destabilizing proteins and is one of the key regulators of
the microtubule cytoskeleton. Interestingly, stathmin is expressed at
high levels in breast cancer and its overexpression is linked with
disease progression. Recent studies identified numerous short peptides
from the N-terminal region of stathmin family that were shown to impede
tubulin polymerization. Here, we tested the hypothesis whether
intracellular delivery of stathmin-like peptide(s) would inhibit the
malignant proliferation of breast cancer cells by disrupting microtubule
assembly in in vitro models of human breast cancer. Methods and Results:
The peptide(s) that we designed consisted of a short stathmin-like domain
that was fused to a TAT transduction domain, which served as a carrier to
facilitate entry into breast cancer cells. We also included a
hemagglutinin (HA) epitope tag to track the peptide intracellularly.
Since stathmin could be phosphorylated & inactivated intracellularly by
p34cdc2 kinase, we also designed another peptide in which Ser-16 was
mutated to an alanine to prevent its inactivation by phosphorylation.
Previous studies had shown that this substitution results in a more
potent form of stathmin that cannot be inactivated by phosphorylation. As
a control, we had generated a similar peptide in which the stathmin-like
domain was scrambled. We tested the effects of these peptides in
different breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, T47D, & SKBR-3).
Immunostaining of breast cancer cells exposed to different peptides
showed a vast majority of cells (>95%) positive for anti-HA staining
suggesting that the designed peptides can be efficiently taken up by the
cells. Proliferation assays in different breast cancer cell lines showed
growth inhibitory effects in cells exposed to both, wild type or mutant
peptides compared to cells exposed to a control peptide. However, the
mutant peptide mediated a more profound anti-proliferative effect as
expected. Immunofluorescence analysis of the microtubule organization of
breast cancer cells exposed to different peptides using an anti-tubulin
antibody showed a marked reduction in the density of microtubules. We
also quantified the levels of polymerized and unpolymerized tubulin in
breast cancer cells exposed to the different peptides using a sensitive
biochemical assay. Immunoblot analysis showed a 1.8 fold decrease in the
ratio of polymerized to soluble tubulin in cells exposed to wild-type
peptide relative to control cells. The ratio of polymerized to soluble
tubulin was further decreased by 3.7 fold in cells exposed to the mutant
peptide. This suggests that the observed anti-proliferative effect is
likely a result of inhibition of microtubule assembly. Thus, peptide(s)
could be used to modulate stathmin function and inhibit malignant
proliferation of breast cancer cells by interfering with the microtubule
equilibrium.

