Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CD44 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
with a new humanized antibody RO5429083


Introduction: HNSCC is a debilitating and deadly disease for which
current treatments are extremely toxic and ineffective. Increasing data
suggest that persistent cancer stem cells (CSC), resistant to standard
chemo and radiation therapy, give rise to disease recurrence. Thus, poor
outcomes may reflect ineffective CSC killing. CD44 is a promising
therapeutic target that has two defined roles in tumorigenesis: it is a
putative cancer initiating cell or CSC marker and it promotes migration
and proliferation through interaction with EGFR, Rho and Ras signaling.
Therefore therapies that target CD44 may destroy the CSC population,
which is resistant to therapy while precisely eradicating the
proliferating population of cancer cells. Methods: RO5429083 is a novel
functional monoclonal antibody, developed by Roche, that targets a
glycosylated, conformation dependent epitope of CD44. To evaluate CD44 as
a therapeutic target in vivo, we established CAL 27 (HNSCC cell line)
xenografts in nude mice and treated them with RO5429083 (Roche) in
comparison to cisplatin (DPP), a conventional drug used in HNSCC
treatment. After treatment, the mice were sacrificed, and the tumors were
embedded in paraffin for IHC analysis. We also analyzed the effect of
RO5429083 in vitro on peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBMCs). Results:
RO5429083 treatment displayed a remarkable tumor growth inhibition in CAL
27 xenografts compared to DPP or control (PIntroduction: HNSCC is a
debilitating and deadly disease for which current treatments are
extremely toxic and ineffective. Increasing data suggest that persistent
cancer stem cells (CSC), resistant to standard chemo and radiation
therapy, give rise to disease recurrence. Thus, poor outcomes may reflect
ineffective CSC killing. CD44 is a promising therapeutic target that has
two defined roles in tumorigenesis: it is a putative cancer initiating
cell or CSC marker and it promotes migration and proliferation through
interaction with EGFR, Rho and Ras signaling. Therefore therapies that
target CD44 may destroy the CSC population, which is resistant to therapy
while precisely eradicating the proliferating population of cancer cells.
Methods: RO5429083 is a novel functional monoclonal antibody, developed
by Roche, that targets a glycosylated, conformation dependent epitope of
CD44. To evaluate CD44 as a therapeutic target in vivo, we established
CAL 27 (HNSCC cell line) xenografts in nude mice and treated them with
RO5429083 (Roche) in comparison to cisplatin (DPP), a conventional drug
used in HNSCC treatment. After treatment, the mice were sacrificed, and
the tumors were embedded in paraffin for IHC analysis. We also analyzed
the effect of RO5429083 in vitro on peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBMCs).
Results: RO5429083 treatment displayed a remarkable tumor growth
inhibition in CAL 27 xenografts compared to DPP or control (P<0.005).
Moreover, treatment with this new humanized antibody inhibited
constitutive EGFR phosphorylation on CAL 27 xenografts. In addition,
treatment of PBMCs from healthy donors with RO5429083 produced an
expansion of cytolytic natural killer (NK) cells. Conclusion: Based on
our studies the anti-CD44 antibody RO5429083 effectively inhibits tumor
growth in the CAL 27 model of HNSCC. In addition to decreasing EGFR
signaling, RO5429083 appears to have a protective effect on PBMCs and
expands the NK cell population. In conclusion, we anticipate that
anti-CD44 therapy will effectively target the stem cell population while
boosting the number of NK cells, and thus may synergize with drugs that
work via antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) such as
Cetuximab.

