Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel pathway involving Tcf-driven Bcl2 under regulation of
Bmi-1 stem cell factor: Role in chemoresistance


Introduction: Bmi-1 a polycomb group (PcG) protein and stem cell factor
is reported to play important roles in cell cycle, cell immortalization
and senescence. Bmi-1 is reported to be elevated in several tumor types;
however its mechanism of action is not clearly understood. Emerging
evidences show that the chemoresistance of tumor cells are in part due to
the activation of PcG proteins. Objective: In the current study, we
investigated the relevance of Bmi-1 in the proliferation of prostatic
tumor cells before and after chemotherapy and investigated the underlying
mechanism. Methods: Bmi-1 protein was determined in normal, prostate
cancer (CaP) cell lines and human prostatic tissues by employing
immunoblot and immunohistochemistry analysis. To understand the mechanism
a two prong approach (overexpression and silencing) was adopted by stably
transfecting normal and CaP cells with either Bmi-1-overexpressing or
Bmi-silencing plasmid. Transfected cells were tested for proliferation
and sensitivity to various chemotherapeutic agents (casodex, docetaxel
and Cisplatin) by employing MTT, 3[H]thymidine uptake and soft-agar
assays. Immunoblot, microarray, luciferase-based reporter, TESS and ChIP
analysis were used to identify potential targets of Bmi-1. The
significance of Bmi-1 in proliferation and its translational significance
as a molecular target (for gene therapy and chemotherapy) was evaluated
by measuring the tumorigenic growth and sensitivity of CaP cells
(harboring varied Bmi-1 expression) to Docetaxel therapy in xenograft
mouse models. Results: Bmi-1 protein levels are highly elevated in CaP,
colon cancer cell lines and in prostatic tissues of CaP patients.
Bmi-1-overexpression was observed to abolish the senescence of normal
epithelial cells and increase proliferation of CaP cells even under the
presence of chemotherapeutic agents. A reverse effect was observed in
Bmi-1-supressed cells. Bmi-1 was observed to regulate the expression of
Cyclin D1 and Bcl-2, pro-survival genes and targets of Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) signaling. We provide compelling evidence that regulation of Bcl-2
by Bmi-1 is independent of SHH and is mainly through the activation and
binding of TCF-4 transcriptional factor (Wnt signaling component) to
promoter regions of Bcl-2. We identified the binding sites of TCF-4 on
promoter region of Bcl-2 gene in tumor cells and in human tissues.
Docetaxel therapy did not inhibit growth of Bmi-1 overexpressing tumors,
however significantly inhibited the growth of Bmi-1-silenced tumors.
Finally, we identified small molecule inhibitors of Bmi-1 by using Blue
Gene/L Super Computer. Conclusions: For the first time, we identified a
novel Tcf/Bcl-2 pathway driven by Bmi-1 that confers chemoresistance to
tumor cells. We suggest that Bmi-1 could be developed as a novel
therapeutic target to treat chemoresistant tumors.

