Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paradoxical MAPK activation and beneficial effects of vemurafenib
on T-cell phenotype resulting in improved functionality in vivo


Adoptive T cell transfer (ACT) based immunotherapy for melanoma can
induce remarkable and highly durable tumor responses, which may last many
years. Vemurafenib (Vmf) is a potent inhibitor of BRAF mutated at V600E
with response rates of up to 80% in patients with metastatic melanoma.
However, drug resistance develops in most of patients leading to response
durations of only several months. We previously showed that the combined
approach of BRAF inhibition with adoptive cell immunotherapy leads to an
improved outcome in vivo. Here we show that Vmf also directly and
independently affects T lymphocytes, resulting in favorable anti-tumoral
phenotypic changes. We had created a transplantable murine melanoma
cell-line driven by V600E BRAF oncogene (SM1) derived from a
spontaneously arising melanoma in transgenic mice harboring the V600E
BRAF mutation under the control of tyrosinase promoter. SM1 cells stably
expressing the ovalbumin (OVA) model antigen were implanted in C57BL6
mice. Daily i.p. Vmf combined with ACT of OVA-specific TCR transgenic
cells generated by retroviral transduction demonstrated superior tumor
control of the combined treatment in comparison to each treatment alone.
We also confirmed better outcomes with this combination in the pmel-1
model, which is based on the ACT of TCR transgenic cells against the
endogenously expressed and relevant melanoma antigen, gp100. We then
cultured primary T cells in the presence of Vmf with a broad range of
concentration (0.1 to up to 100 uM). There was no evidence of
cytotoxicity, but interestingly, T cells differentiated into a phenotype
resembling T central memory (CM) cells (CD44+, CD62L+) in a dose
dependent manner as assessed by flow-cytometry. CM T cells were shown to
induce superior anti-tumoral responses in comparison to ACT of Effector T
cells in murine models. As expected for CM T cells, further analysis of
24 h collection supernatants from in vitro cognate peptide stimulated T
cells showed dose-dependent lower interferon-gamma secretion with Vmf as
analyzed by ELISA. Pmel-1 T cells were then analyzed by Immunoblotting
for phosphorylation status (activation) of protein kinases at 1, 5, 15,
30 min and at 24h after Vmf treatment (concentrations from 1 to 15 uM).
Vmf induced increased levels of pERK and pMEK. Co-immunoprecipitation
studies and kinase assays further demonstrated a role of C-Raf in this
paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway in T cells induced by Vmf.
Furthermore, in vivo studies in C57BL6 mice treated with Vmf daily or
vehicle control for 3 weeks demonstrated skewing of CD3+ cells towards a
phenotype resembling central memory T cells (CD44+, CD62L+, LY-6C+).
Taken all our data together, we provide further support for the rationale
of combining BRAF targeted therapy and adoptive T cell immunotherapy and
the testing of such combinations in patients with V600E BRAF mutant
metastatic melanoma.

