Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring adjuvant treatment effects of MMP 2/9 inhibition in
experimental breast cancer bone metastases using VCT and ultra high-field
MRI in a longitudinal study


In the microenvironment of bone metastases, matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) 2/9 are expressed by osteoblasts, osteoclasts and tumor cells, and
in particular MMP 9 has been associated with osteoclast-mediated
migration, invasion and angiogenesis. Using non-invasive imaging
techniques including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and volumetric
computed tomography (VCT) monitoring various aspects of treatment
response including osteolysis, invasion and angiogenesis can be assessed
longitudinally. The purpose of the study was to image effects of adjuvant
MMP 2/9 inhibition in experimental breast cancer bone metastases using
VCT and ultra high-field MRI. Human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were
inoculated into the femoral artery of nude rats, resulting in localized
osteolytic bone metastases of the hind leg. Animals were either treated
with a MMP 2/9 inhibitor (n=14) beginning immediately after tumor cell
inoculation (p.i.) for 30 days (200 mg/kg orally) or sham-treated (n=17).
Animals were imaged at days 10, 20 and 30 p.i. using VCT (Volume CT,
Siemens) and MRI (7 Tesla, Siemens). Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
(DCE-MRI) was performed to determine amplitude A (associated with blood
volume) and exchange rate constant Kep (associated with perfusion and
vessel permeability) in skeletal metastases. Volumetry of osteolysis and
of the corresponding soft tissue tumor was obtained by VCT and MRI,
respectively. All values were expressed as treatment over control ratios
in percent (T/C%). Beginning from day 20 p.i., osteolyses and
corresponding soft tissue tumors of bone metastases could be assessed by
VCT and MRI at high isotropic resolution (200 m for VCT, 110 m for MRI).
Strong uptake of contrast media within the soft tissue tumor enabled
detailed assessment of volume and invasive behavior of the soft tissue
tumor using ultra high-field MRI. Bone metastasis formation could not be
prevented by MMP inhibition as the tumor take rate was not significantly
different between the two groups within the observation time. However,
the mean volumes of osteolysis and soft tissue tumor were significantly
smaller upon MMP inhibition as compared to controls at days 20 (MRI, 28
T/C%; VCT, 46 T/C%) and 30 (MRI, 24 T/C%; VCT, 38 T/C%) p.i. As
determined by DCE-MRI in skeletal metastases, a significant reduction of
the amplitude A was assessed after MMP inhibition (day 30 p.i., 63 T/C%),
whereas no significant differences for the exchange rate constant Kep
were found between the groups. In conclusion, inhibition of MMPs 2/9 in
experimental breast cancer bone metastases resulted in anti-resorptive,
anti-invasive and anti-angiogenic effects as imaged longitudinally and at
high resolution by VCT and ultra high-field MRI after adjuvant treatment.

