Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of prostate cancer growth and invasion by a triphenyl
ethylene compound ormeloxifene


Background: Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of death and the
most commonly diagnosed cancer in males in the US. Very limited
therapeutic modalities are available for treatment of androgen refractory
advanced stage prostate carcinomas. Therefore, understanding the
molecular basis of the disease and development of newer strategies for
prevention and treatment of prostate cancer is urgently needed. An
important signaling pathway that is known to operate in most types of
cancer, including prostate cancer, is the aberrant -catenin signaling.
Inappropriate -catenin/Wnt signaling leads to the accumulation of
-catenin in the nucleus where it functions as a co-transcription factor
to transcribe proto-oncogenes. In addition, -catenin has also been shown
to cross-talk and modulate the transcription activity of other factors
including estrogen and androgen receptors. Therefore, strategies to
regulate this specific signaling pathway using synthetic or natural
agents can be developed as a novel therapeutic modality for the treatment
of prostate cancer. Ormeloxifene is a synthetic, non-steroidal triphenyl
ethylene compound that has been widely used as an oral contraceptive and
has demonstrated promising results in the inhibition of breast cancer.
Herein, we have investigated the effect of ormeloxifene on prostate
cancer cell growth and its effect on -catenin transcription activity.
Methods: The effect of ormeloxifene on cell proliferation, anchorage
dependent colony formation, anchorage independent growth, cell motility,
and invasion of prostate cancer cells were determined using standard
techniques. -catenin/T cell factor (TCF) transcription activity was
measured by luciferase reporter assays using reporter constructs Topflash
or Fopflash and pRL-TK (Renilla luciferase). Luciferase activities were
assayed using Dual Glo reagent. The expression and subcellular
localization of proteins was determined by immunoblotting and confocal
microscopy. Results: Ormeloxifene demonstrated inhibition of cell
proliferation in all the four (LNCaP, C4-2, PC3 and DU145) prostate cell
lines in a dose dependent manner. In addition, ormeloxifene also
effectively suppressed clonogenic, cell motility and invasive
characteristics of C4-2 androgen-refractory prostate cancer cells.
Repression of these cellular phenotypes was correlated with attenuation
of -catenin/TCF4 trasncriptional activity. The inhibition of the
-catenin/TCF4 signaling was also reflected in the decreased expression of
c-Myc, a downstream target of the -catenin/TCF4 signaling pathway upon
ormeloxifene treatment. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that
ormeloxifene effectively inhibits tumorigenic characteristics of prostate
cancer cells via intervention/attenuation of -catenin/TCF4 signaling
pathway. It may therefore be a novel therapeutic modality for the
treatment and management of prostate cancer.

