Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vorinostat exposure results in differential sensitivity and
nuclear structure normalization in an in vitro model of esophageal
adenocarcinoma progression


Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) has a poor prognosis with a five-year
survival rate of less than 20%. Barrett's esophagus (BE), often
consequent to chronic acid reflux, contributes to a 15-fold increased
risk for EA. BE is a multi-stage condition that may progress through
metaplasia and increasingly severe dysplasia to EA. The progression from
normal squamous epithelium through BE to EA is characterized by genetic
and nuclear structure aberrations. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
are becoming increasingly popular as anticancer therapeutics. Vorinostat
(Zolinza) is a pan-HDAC inhibitor currently approved to treat cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma. It is under investigation in at least 81 actively
recruiting clinical trials for various other cancer types including
gastrointestinal cancers. We investigated the effects of vorinostat
treatment on cell lines representative of normal squamous (EPC2),
metaplasia (CPA) and adenocarcinoma (Flo1) of the esophageal epithelium.
We assessed variations in viability and three-dimensional (3D) nuclear
morphology upon drug treatment, comparing the results against vehicle
(DMSO) control and untreated cells of all three types. A 12-point,
three-fold, serial dilution drug-dose-response (DDR) experiment performed
at 24, 48 and 72 hour time points indicated a differential response among
the cell types. Flo1 cancer cells were most sensitive to the drug, with
an IC50 value at 48 hours of 0.7928 micromolar, versus 7.536 micromolar
for CPA and 21.49 micromolar for EPC2. After 24 hours of vorinostat
exposure, assessment of apoptotic activity with the Caspase 3/7 Glo assay
revealed increased apoptosis in Flo1 but not the other cells. To
understand the morphological correlates of vorinostat treatment, we used
micro-optical computed tomography to acquire 3D images of 200 individual,
hematoxylin-stained, untreated and treated (48 hours at the Flo1 IC50
dose) cells of each cell type with sub-micron, isotropic spatial
resolution. We applied computer vision techniques to quantify 3D nuclear
morphology and coarse chromatin organization. Treatment with vorinostat
normalized the nuclear structure of cancer and metaplastic cells,
reverting them to a more nearly-normal phenotype: Flo1 cells showed
reduced cell and nuclear volumes and decreased chromatin clumpiness after
vorinostat treatment. The same morphological trends were present but less
pronounced in CPA cells. EPC2 cells showed minimal changes in response to
treatment. These results support further exploration of vorinostat for
the treatment of patients with BE and EA. Our data indicate that
vorinostat sensitivity increases, with a corresponding increase in
apoptosis, as cells progress from normal to esophageal adenocarcinoma.
This increased sensitivity to the drug is accompanied by a normalization
of nuclear architecture in surviving abnormal cells.

