Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cellular model for investigation of circulating tumor cells and
identification of therapeutic target and regimen


Tumor cells disseminating into circulatory system is crucial for cancer
metastasis during cancer progression and surgical operation in removing
tumor mass. Due to technical hurdles, it is not yet available to culture
and propagate circulating tumor cells derived from cancer patients. Not
yet any model system has been established to investigate the cellular and
molecular changes associate with the entry of primary tumor cells into
bloodstream. In this study, genetically modified C6 glioma cells (C6-LG)
that elicit high procoagulant activity and express luciferase/GFP
reporter gene were used for xenograft injection into nude mice to
establish a metastatic model. Two C6-derived sublines, C6-lung and
C6-blood, were isolated and established from the cells that colonized at
lung tissue and from blood circulation, respectively. Cellular analyses
revealed that C6-lung and C6-blood had differential cell cycle
distribution, cell growth rate, migration and metastatic potential.
Microarray analyses also revealed differential gene expression signatures
between these two sublines. Nevertheless, podoplanin was up-regulated in
both cell lines when compared to the parental C6-LG. Consistent with
these observations, C6-lung and C6-blood activated platelet and induced
platelet aggregation that is closely associated with their in vivo
metastatic potential as revealed by gene knockdown analysis. Using these
C6-sublines as the cellular screening platform, we have identified a
novel compound designated as CGU-07 that elicited inhibitory activity in
cancer cell-induced platelet aggregation. In conclusion, circulating and
primary tumor cells have both common and distinguished cellular and
molecular profiles. Targeting on the common molecular signature such as
podoplanin raises the hope to further application of its therapeutic use
in the prevention and treatment of tumor metastasis.

