Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of SOX5 perturbs human glioma cell proliferation and
is associated with proneural glioblastoma


Background: The proneural subtype of glioblastoma (GBM) is characterized
by PDGFR alterations. In a retroviral insertional mutagenesis screen
(Johansson et al., PNAS, 2004) the transcription factor Sox5 was
identified as a candidate brain tumor locus and the mode of insertions
indicated an overexpression of the short version of Sox5 (s-Sox5). This
led to an investigation of the role of s-Sox5 in glioma development, and
we subsequently found that opposite to our hypothesis, s-Sox5 could
inhibit glioma development in mice, reduce cell proliferation and clone
formation ability of human glioma cell lines, and induce acute cellular
senescence in primary mouse glial cells through regulation of AKT and
p27Kip1 (Tchougounova et al., Oncogene, 2009). Aims: To investigate if
s-SOX5 alterations are associated with a certain subtype of human GBM,
and to identify the mechanism behind the anti-tumoral properties of
s-SOX5 in newly established human glioma cell cultures (HGCCs). Methods:
The TCGA dataset for GBM was analyzed via the cBio Cancer Genomics Portal
(http://cbioportal.org) for alterations in SOX5 + other SOX genes and
glioma genes. Endogenous SOX5 + expression of other SOX proteins were
analyzed with immunostainings in six newly established HGCCs maintained
under stem cell conditions. These HGCCs were also transfected with
pcDNA-V5-s-Sox5, and analyzed by flow cytometry for EdU incorporation,
cleaved Caspase-3 and V5. Results: We found that the majority of SOX5
alterations were confined to the proneural subtype (10/56 cases) with 90%
of the alterations being upregulations. In fact, all upregulations of
SOX5 were found in the proneural group. Only a few alterations (3/56; all
downregulations) were found in the mesenchymal subtype, and none in the
classical or neural subgroups. The upregulated SOX5 expression in the
proneural subtype could be connected to a slight increase in patient
survival. Co-occurring alterations in s-SOX5, PDGFR, SOX6 and SOX10 were
found in the proneural subtype. These findings are only suggestive and
need to be validated in larger set of tumor samples. Immunostainings
showed that all HGCCs expressed SOX2, SOX6, SOX9 and SOX10. For SOX5, two
were completely negative while the remaining four showed varying
expression. The transfection efficiency was very low (10%), but when
specifically analyzing the V5-s-SOX5 positive cells, we found in all
HGCCs a reduced number of EdU positive cells compared to the uninfected
cell population of the same sample (statistically significant in three
HGCCs). Conclusion: Our preliminary data suggest that upregulation of
s-SOX5 could be a defining alteration in the proneural subgroup of GBM,
and that s-SOX5 suppresses proliferation of human glioma cell cultures.
Further studies are underway to solidify our findings and clarify the
mechanism behind s-SOX5/Sox5 inhibition of glioma cells.

