Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasticity between the cancer stem-like and non cancer stem-like
states is regulated by the PI3K/Akt/-catenin/CBP pathway


Introduction: Cancer stem-like cells (CSC) - a subpopulation of
self-renewing, tumorigenic, drug resistant tumor cells - are thought to
promote cancer formation, therapy resistance and disease progression.
Recently, we and others reported that the CSC phenotype may not represent
a static pre-existing seed population; rather, CSC subpopulations can
arise through direct conversion of non-CSC to the CSC phenotype. Here we
show that PI3K/Akt/-catenin/CBP signaling plays a key role in mediating
this important phenotypic plasticity. Methods: As previously reported,
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) and Hoechst dye exclusion were
applied to cancer cell lines in order to isolate side populations (SP) of
cells enriched for CSC properties (high tumorigenicity and drug
resistance) versus non-side-populations (NSP) of cells lacking these
properties. GFP+ NSP were re-combined with GFP SP to enable tracking of
the two phenotypes in culture over time. The cells were treated with
pharmacological and siRNA inhibitors targeting members of the
PI3K/Akt/-catenin/CBP pathway, and their effects on SP size and NSP-to-SP
conversion were measured. Results: NSP-to-SP conversion was significantly
reduced by exposure to LY294002, a PI3K/Akt inhibitor, and the same
effect was recapitulated by direct siRNA knockdown of Akt. Further
downstream, BIO (6-bromoindirubin-3-oxime) was used to inhibit GSK-3, a
protein that normally potentiates -catenin degradation. Exposure to BIO
increased both the overall levels and the nuclear localization of
-catenin and significantly increased SP size. Conversely, siRNA knockdown
of -catenin signficantly decreased SP size. Still further downstream, two
-catenin transcription co-factors, CBP and P300, exerted opposite effects
on the CSC phenotype: Blocking -catenin-CBP interaction with the specific
inhibitor ICG001 significantly decreased SP size and sphere formation,
whereas blocking -catenin-P300 interaction with the specific inhibitor
IQ-1 significantly increased SP size. Moreover, ICG001 inhibition of
-catenin-CBP interaction abrogated the SP expansion caused by upstream
BIO inhibition of GSK-3. ICG001 did not affect the nuclear localization
of -catenin, suggesting that CBP indeed cooperates with -catenin further
downstream to transcriptionally impact NSP-to-SP conversion. Conclusion:
Cellular plasticity between the non-CSC and CSC phenotypes has
considerable therapeutic ramifications because it implies that the
drug-resistant, aggressive CSC subpopulation may be replenished from the
larger non-CSC population. Our present studies identify
PI3K/Akt/-catenin/CBP signaling as playing a key role in mediating this
phenotypic plasticity. Therefore, therapeutic targeting of this pathway
may be uniquely effective at overcoming the therapy resistance and
disease progression attributed to the CSC phenotype.

