Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming resistance to cisplatin in NSCLC cell lines:
TRAIL-modulating strategy by a DR5 agonist, LBY135


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80% of the lung cancer
cases and is further divided into three different histological subtypes:
Adenocarcinoma (ADE), Large Cell Carcinoma (LCC) and Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (SCC). Treatment includes complete surgical resection, but most
of the patients are already in advanced or metastatic disease stage at
diagnosis. Therefore, the therapy of choice in these cases is
platinum-based chemotherapy, which presents high general toxicity and
stumble into an intrinsic feature of lung cancer, the high rate of
chemo-resistance. The mechanisms underlying platinum resistance and
sensitivity are not fully understood, and there are no validated
biomarkers to select sensitive patients up to now.In spite of the recent
developments in the field of target-drugs (e.g. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors), several sub-groups of lung cancer patients still have unmet
needs for therapy and drugs with specific mechanisms emerge as a rational
alternative. Aberrations found in the apoptotic pathway are a common
feature in lung cancer. TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is
a member of the TNF family of cytokines, which can induce apoptotic cell
death in a variety of tumor cells by engaging specific death receptors,
DR4 and DR5, while having low toxicity towards normal cells, which
express decoy receptors for this cytokine. In this study, we sought to
explore TRAIL pathway activation as a strategy to subvert the resistance
to cisplatin presented by NSCLC cell lines. We have used a panel of NSCLC
cell lines harboring different mutations and displaying distinct
histology profiles (A549 - ADE: KRAS mut, TPp53 WT and BRAF WT; LC319 -
ADE: KRAS mut, TPp53 mut and BRAF mut; H460 - LCC: KRAS mut, TPp53 WT and
BRAF WT; Calu-1: SCC: KRAS mut, TPp53 null and BRAF WT. As expected,
these cell lines display differential sensitivity to cisplatin. NSCLC
cell lines were treated with suboptimal concentrations of cisplatin
(IC30) for 48h and expression of TRAIL receptor family was accessed by
real-time PCR. Our results demonstrate that IC30 of Cisplatin induces an
increase in the expression of DR4 and DR5 in NSCLC cell lines,
accompanied by an increase in protein expression. Also, Decoy receptors 1
and 2 (DcR1/DcR2) were differentially upregulated by cisplatin. LBY135
(Novartis) is a monoclonal Ab agonist to DR5 and it was able to decrease
metabolic activity measured by MTT assay in NSCLC cell lines. We
postulated that cisplatin could chemo-sensitize lung cancer cells to
DR5-induced cell death. Accordingly, the combination of a Cisplatin IC30
with LBY135 had synergistic effect upon cell death in NSCLC cell lines,
in spite of the fact that DcR1/2 were upregulated. Our results suggest an
alternative way to subvert chemo-resistance in lung cancer, and that
anti-DR5 therapies might be more effective than TRAIL-based ones, since
it bypasses the DcR1/2 inhibitory effect.

