Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained multilocular adipose tissue phenotype in adult Brca1
mutant mouse mammary gland is correlated with an increase in BMP7


A major challenge to breast cancer research is the identification of
alterations in the architecture and composition of the breast that are
associated with breast cancer progression. Mammary epithelial cells are
surrounded by an environment of supporting cell types, including the
extracellular matrix, fibroblasts, and adipose tissue. Recent studies
have demonstrated that this surrounding environment is an important
regulator of tumor cell fate. The aim of the present investigation was to
characterize the mammary adipose phenotype in the mammary gland of the
Brca1 mutant mice in the expectation that this would shed light on the
role of the mammary tissue environment in the early stages of breast
tumorigenesis. We have observed sustained deposition of multilocular
lipids in the mammary fat pad of Brca1 mutant mouse from puberty into
adulthood that was reminiscent of brown adipose tissue (BAT) as compared
to wildtype mice. Using a marker for BAT, the uncoupling protein 1
(UCP1), we demonstrated that these multilocular mammary adipose regions
in Brca1 mutant mice stain positive for UCP1. Transcriptionally, UCP1
mRNA in the Brca1 mutant mice was elevated greater than 50-fold over
levels seen in the age-matched mammary glands from wildtype mice. To gain
insight into the origin of the multilocular adipocyte phenotype in the
Brca1 mutant mouse mammary gland, we measured the expression of PRDM16, a
regulator of brown fat differentiation. PRDM16 mRNA expression was
increased 2-fold in Brca1 mutant mouse mammary gland compared to wildtype
mice. Additionally, we show that protein levels of the bone morphogenetic
protein 7 (BMP7), a protein known to induce brown adipogenesis in
subcutaneous white adipose tissue, is significantly increased in mammary
glands from Brca1 mutant mice compared to wildtype mice. These findings
suggest that BMP7 could play a role in the sustained brown adipose tissue
phenotype observed in adult Brca1 mutant mice. Interestingly, BMP7 has
also been implicated in breast cancer pathogenesis and has been shown to
induce breast cancer cell migration and invasion. We also demonstrate
that the multilocular brown adipose phenotype in the mammary fat pad of
Brca1 mutant mice has increased vascularity, a characteristic that is
favorable for tumor development. Given that adipose tissue is the major
contributor to the volume of the breast, it is critical to determine
whether the sustained deposition of multilocular brown adipocytes in the
mammary gland can impact breast cancer development. This Brca1 mutant
mouse model should provide a physiologically relevant context to further
examine the role of the plasticity of adipose tissue in breast cancer
development.

