Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of doxorubicin cytotoxicity in breast cancer by
NIM811, A non-immunosuppressive cyclosporine A analog


Cyclophilin A (CypA) is a member of the immunophilin family of peptidyl
prolyl isomerases (PPI) that catalyze the cis-trans interconversion of
proline imide bonds of peptides. In this role, cyclophilins have been
found to function as signaling switches, regulating the activity of
receptors, kinases and transcription factors. The PPI activity of CypA is
inhibited by the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine A (CsA), and in turn
the CypA-CsA complex inhibits calcineurin-mediated NFAT activation. Our
laboratory has demonstrated that CypA is necessary for the prolactin
(PRL)-induced activation of Jak2/Stat5 signaling and gene expression
(Cancer Res 68:7769, 2008). In addition, we have also shown that CsA
inhibits the in vitro and in vivo growth and progression of both ER+ and
ER- breast cancer cell lines. Here, we show that the
non-immunosuppressive CsA analog NIM811 blocked PRL-stimulated activation
of the Jak2/Stat5, PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways in T47D cells. NIM811 also
inhibited ER+, ER-, and Her2+ breast cancer cell proliferation, survival,
motility and anchorage independent growth in a dose-dependent manner.
NIM811 inhibited PRL induced gene expression, such as CISH and Cyclin D1.
NIM811 also blocked the PRL-induced association between Stat5 and cMyb,
and at higher doses, triggered PARP cleavage and activate Caspase 3.
Furthermore, NIM811 increased the effects of doxorubicin in inhibiting
monolayer cell growth and soft agar colony growth in vitro. In vivo,
NIM811 alone significantly induced the primary tumor central necrosis and
inhibited lymph node metastasis; combining NIM811 with a low dose of
doxorubicin significantly inhibited MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenograft
tumor growth and distant organ metastasis. In summary, these results
indicate that non-immunosuppressive cyclophilin inhibitor NIM811 has
significant potential as both a single agent or in combination with
cytotoxic agents for breast cancer therapy.

