Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of AMPK in the radiosensitization of breast tumor cells
by Vitamin D


Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that the active form
of vitamin D, 1,25-di hydroxy vitamin D3 (1,25 D3) can confer enhanced
sensitivity to irradiation (IR). Studies using ZR-75-1 breast tumor cells
indicated that radiosensitization was likely to be occurring through the
promotion of autophagy. Interestingly, our experimental system
demonstrated that autophagy can actually have dual roles. Inhibition of
autophagy both enhanced sensitivity to radiation and attenuated radiation
sensitization by 1,25D3. The current work was designed to distinguish the
molecular mechanisms for cytoprotective autophagy and cytotoxic
autophagy. In vitro studies assessed the effects of 100nM 1,25 D3 alone,
radiation (4 Gy IR) and the combination treatment of 100nM 1,25 D3
concurrently with radiation. Cell viability was assessed over a period of
6 days by trypan blue exclusion. Sensitization to radiation was confirmed
by clonogenic survival. Autophagy induction was measured by RFP-LC3
redistribution, formation of puncta by acridine orange staining, while
autophagic flux was based on degradation of p62 by western blotting and
the colocalization of RFP-LC3 and lysotracker green. Autophagy was
inhibited pharmacologically using 200nM Bafilomycin A1 or 5uM Chloroquine
and genetically using ATG5 and ATG 7 knockdown. AMPK activation was
monitored by flow cytometry for phopho-AMPK. The impact of AMPK
inhibition on cell viability was monitored over a period of 3 days by
trypan blue exclusion using the pharmacological inhibitor, Compound C
(5uM). The effects of AMPK inhibition on autophagy induction were
monitored by the redistribution of RFP-LC3.1,25D3 sensitized ZR-75-1
cells to radiation based on reduced clonogenic survival and markedly
greater suppression of cell viability by trypan blue exclusion. Acridine
orange staining, RFP-LC3 redistribution and p62 degradation were
indicative of autophagy with either radiation alone or 1,25 D3 + IR.
Autophagy blockade with Chloroquine, Bafilomycin A1 or knockdown of Atg5
and ATG 7 increased sensitivity to radiation alone while attenuating the
impact of 1,25 D3 + radiation. AMPK phosphorylation was observed with
1,25D3+IR but not with IR alone. Inhibition of AMPK by Compound C
diminished autophagy induction by 1,25D3+IR and attenuated the
radiosensitization.This experimental model appears to provide a useful
tool to distinguish the factors involved in cytoprotective and cytotoxic
autophagy. AMPK appears to play a significant role in the radiation
sensitization of breast tumor cells by 1,25D3 as well as in the cytotoxic
function of autophagy, but not in cytoprotective autophagy. However, the
involvement of AMPK will have to be confirmed through genetic silencing
of AMPK as well as its downstream effectors such as mTOR and ULK. In
addition, analysis of differential gene expression and protein profiles
should shed light on the factors that differentially regulate these
pathways.

