Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylases as promising drug targets for treatment of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most aggressive
cancers and the prognosis for advanced esophageal cancer patients is poor
in spite of combination therapy including surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. There is urgent need for the development of new therapeutic
agents to improve the prognosis of ESCC patients. To find a lead compound
effective for the treatment of ESCC, we first screened a set of 285
compounds (SCADS inhibitor kit available at
http://scads.jfcr.or.jp/index.html) for their growth inhibitory effect in
21 cell lines of ESCC. Of the 285 compounds tested, 19 compounds showed
greater than 80% growth inhibition at 200 nM in at least one cell line.
Our attention was drawn to trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi), because this compound showed antitumor activity in a
broad set of ESCC in this initial screening. Also, this class of compound
appears to be a promising agent for the treatment of some type of cancer
cells. Therefore, we further explored the underlying mechanism for the
antitumor effect of HDACi in ESCC. To validate that HDACs are indeed the
molecular targets, HDAC1 or HDAC2 expression was knocked down by siRNA,
and the effect on cell growth was examined. Knockdown of HDAC1 or HDAC2
expression alone did not show significant cell growth inhibition, but
simultaneous knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression induced significant
cell growth inhibition. We then evaluated the growth inhibitory effect of
two HDAC inhibitors, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and
TrichostatinA (TSA), in our panel of 21 ESCC cell lines. The
proliferation of ESCC cells was inhibited by SAHA and TSA in a
dose-dependent manner. The IC50 of SAHA and TSA for these cell lines
ranged from 0.25 to 6.34 microM and 16.1 to 489nM, respectively. The
susceptibilities to SAHA and TSA were correlated. Cell cycle analysis by
imaging cytometry showed prominent cell-cycle arrest in G2/M phase in
cell lines treated with SAHA. Finally, we sought to determine the gene
expression pattern associated with the sensitivities to the HDAC
inhibitors. Gene expression profiling revealed that a set of genes
related to cell cycle or mitosis was highly expressed in cell lines
resistant to the HDAC inhibitors. Hierarchial cluster analysis showed
that the cell lines were divided into two groups according to the
expression pattern of genes related to cell cycle or mitosis, and
significant differences were observed in the susceptibility to HDAC
inhibitors between the two groups. One group showed high expression of
genes involved in G2/M phase and low susceptibility to HDAC inhibitors,
and the other group showed the opposite pattern. These results suggest
that HDACs may be promising molecular targets for treatment of ESCC and
that the susceptibility to HDAC inhibitors may be predicted by the
expression pattern of genes involved in cell cycle, especially in the
G2/M phase.

