Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of death receptor 6 (DR6) increases in association with
ovarian tumor development and progression


Background: Because of the lack of an early detection test, ovarian
cancer (OVCA) remains a lethal malignancy of women. OVCA differs from
other malignancies in its specific dissemination pattern that the tumor
typically spreads in a diffuse intra-pelvic and abdominal manner. Thus
tumor microenvironment plays an important role in tumor dissemination and
suppression of anti-tumor immunity is a hallmark of tumor progression.
Although the precise mechanism of immune evasion by the tumor is not
known, expression of death receptor 6 (DR6) has been suggested to be
associated with tumor progression in several malignancies. DR6 is a
member of the TNF receptor superfamily and a regulator of immune
function. Expression of DR6 by ovarian tumors is unknown. Access to
patients at early stage OVCA is very difficult. Laying hens develop OVCA
spontaneously with histopathology similar to humans. Objectives: The goal
of the present study was to determine whether DR6 is expressed by ovarian
tumors at early stage and to examine whether DR6 expression is associated
with OVCA tumor progression in the laying hen model of human OVCA.
Materials and Methods: 3 years old normal, low or stopped egg-laying hens
were scanned by ultrasound, sera were collected, hens were euthanized and
ovarian tissues were processed for paraffin and frozen sections,
immunoblotting and mRNA extraction. Stages of OVCA were confirmed at
gross morphology and routine histology. Samples were divided into 3
groups: normal (control), early and late stages of OVCA. Sera were tested
for DR6 levels by ELISA and confirmed by 2D-Western blot (WB). Expression
of DR6 by normal and tumor ovaries was examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), WB and RT-PCR. Results: DR6 was expressed by the epithelium of the
ovarian tumor and angiogenic microvessels in the tumor stroma. The
population of DR6+ microvessels and serum levels of DR6 was significantly
higher in hens with ovarian tumors than the normal hens. Immunoblotting
and gene expression analysis confirmed IHC observations. There was a
significant increase in DR6 expression in hens with early stage OVCA
(including microscopic tumor) suggesting that serum DR6 may be a
potential indicator of ovarian tumors at very early stage. The
frequencies of DR6+ cells were significantly higher in hens with late
stage OVCA than early stage suggesting that DR6 may be involved in
ovarian tumor development and progression in laying hens. Conclusion: For
the first time, this study showed that epithelial cells in ovarian tumors
express DR6 and results suggest that changes in serum levels as well as
tissue expression of DR6 are associated with tumor initiation and
progression. Thus serum DR6 may be useful as a surrogate maker of OVCA,
target for anti-tumor immunotherapy as well as molecular imaging. This
study will provide a foundation for a clinical study. Support: DOD
(OC#093303), NCI-POCRC (P50 CA83636) and the Elmer Sylvia and Sramek
Foundation.

