Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relevance of myosmine in cigarette filter butt


Risk assessment of tobacco involves the evaluation of toxicological
ingredients and their pathway of uptake in human body. Some relevant and
significant aspects regarding the conversion of tobacco constituents to
cancer suspect and toxicological important substances during tobacco
pyrolysis are known. Albeit some mechanisms as shown in the case of
tobacco specific N-nitrosamine (TSNA) formation could have been
recovered, the majority of these procedures remain obscure and rare
knowledge is available concerning the conversion of tobacco constituents
to activated reactive intermediates due to tobacco pyrolysis. The
concentrations of nicotine and TSNA are balanced using their metabolic
profile or biomarkers in urine, blood and saliva to correlate their
realistic uptake. Recently the conversion of nicotine to myosmine during
peroxidation reaction was demonstrated which could be similar to
processes during tobacco pyrolysis. In the case of both tobacco alkaloids
nicotine and myosmine problems may arise from classification of their
origin. The amount of myosmine which is formed from nicotine would add to
the natural given concentration in tobacco, on the other hand nicotine
concentration would be diminished by this conversion. This effect would
cause uncertainty of validation and biomarkers of these substances and
their derived TSNA in urine, blood and saliva. As reported in the
literature the filter analyses of cigarette promises a practicable
methodology which would lead to preliminary insights not only in
constituents of mainstream smoke (MS), in relation to environmental smoke
(ETS), but also about possible candidates up taken in human organism. At
the moment the effect under the concern of toxicology is not clear, but
the conversion of nicotine to myosmine may be demonstrated by the
analysis of cigarette filter butts from smoked cigarettes. For this
reason cigarette butts were collected and the filters separated. The
filters were shredded and subjected to the specific extraction procedure.
The resulting extract was further cleaned up, enriched by
solid-phase-extraction (SPE) procedure and analysed by high performance
liquid chromatography - diode array detection (HPLC-DAD), whereupon
myosmine was detected. These preliminary results clearly demonstrate that
the investigation of effects from tobacco smoke in biological model
systems and human being demands an accurate quantification of its most
toxic relevant ingredients including the profile from conversion of
nicotine to myosmine via pyrolysis. Considering the discussion of
carcinogenic and toxicological risk assessment of tobacco use, the
problems correlating nicotine, myosmine and TSNA from cigarette smoke
requires further declaration. Acknowledgement: This work was supported by
DFG grant Zwi59/2-2, and TY 81/1-2

