Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel biomarker panel identifies the response to CDDP treatment
in NSCLC patients


Purpose: Many cancers initially respond to Cisplatin-based chemotherapy;
however, resistance frequently develops. We have recently reported that
reduction of IGFBP-3 expression by promoter methylation is involved in
the CDDP acquired resistance process in 3 matched CDDP
sensitive/resistant human cancer cell lines and in a human cohort of 36
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, probably because CDDP
also induces DNA methylation de novo. The purpose of the present study is
to investigate the role of IGFBP-3 in the PI3K signaling pathway
alterations to design a translational based-profile to predict resistance
in NSCLC. The biological significance of IGFBP-3 is of great importance
in controlling cell growth, transformation and survival; as IGF-I binds
to IGFBP-3 with stronger affinity than to its own receptor (IGFIR),
blocking their interaction and abolishing the mitogenic and antiapoptotic
actions. IGF-I is also able to activate EGF receptor. Those tyrosine
kinases receptors (IGFIR and EGFR), signal through the PI3K/Akt pathway,
that plays a crucial role in cell growth, proliferation, and survival and
is commonly upregulated during tumorigenesis, including NSCLC; although
the precise mechanism is not well defined. Patients and methods: In the
present study we have examined the relationship between first, IGFBP-3
gene expression regulated by promoter methylation measured by RT-PCR,
bisulfite sequencing and methylation specific PCR and second the
activation of the EGFR, IGFIR and PI3K/AKT pathways through the analysis
of the PTEN, AKT, pAKT, pEGFR, EGFR, pIGFIR and IGFIR protein levels by
Western-Blot, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical analysis in 10
human cancer cell lines and in 25 NSCLC patients with known IGFBP-3
methylation status and response to CDDP. Additionally, in order to
provide a helpful tool that enables clinicians to identify or to exclude
patients with a potential response to cisplatin, we have used the
Fisher's exact test within a 2x2 contingence table to calculate the
association between our diagnostic test and the true outcome of analyzed
samples in terms of cisplatin IC50. Results: Our results suggest that
loss of IGFBP-3 expression by promoter methylation in tumor cells treated
with CDDP may activate the PI3K/AKT pathway through the specific
derepression of IGFIR signaling, inducing resistance to CDDP. This study
also provides a predictive test for clinical practice with an accuracy
and precision of 0.84 and 0.9, respectively, (P=0.0062). Conclusion: We
present a biomarker-test that could provide clinicians with a robust tool
with which to decide on the use of cisplatin, improving patient clinical
outcomes. Supported by FIS project number: PS09/00472 and a Miguel Servet
financial grant to Ibanez de Caceres, I (CP08/000689; PI-717).

