Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ruffles and filopodia in adhesion gradient sensing


Filopodia play a sensory role in directing motility during embryonic
development and axon pathfinding. They also show a low prevalence in
cancer cells. Here, we determine whether cells from a rat tracheal
epithelial line in vitro use filopodia to sense adhesive gradients. Cells
exhibit haptotaxis (movement toward a more adhesive surface) when placed
on a metal-glass gradient. Tantalum (Ta) and platinum (Pt) gradients were
created on glass slides and high (H), middle (M), and low (L) positions
defined along the gradient. Cell counts in randomly selected fields
confirmed that the cells recognized the gradient. To determine whether
the prevalence of protrusions differed at the H, M, and L locations, we
measured the values of latent factors 4 (filopodia), 5, and 7. Factor 4
values were high at H and significantly lower at M and L (pFilopodia play
a sensory role in directing motility during embryonic development and
axon pathfinding. They also show a low prevalence in cancer cells. Here,
we determine whether cells from a rat tracheal epithelial line in vitro
use filopodia to sense adhesive gradients. Cells exhibit haptotaxis
(movement toward a more adhesive surface) when placed on a metal-glass
gradient. Tantalum (Ta) and platinum (Pt) gradients were created on glass
slides and high (H), middle (M), and low (L) positions defined along the
gradient. Cell counts in randomly selected fields confirmed that the
cells recognized the gradient. To determine whether the prevalence of
protrusions differed at the H, M, and L locations, we measured the values
of latent factors 4 (filopodia), 5, and 7. Factor 4 values were high at H
and significantly lower at M and L (p<0.05). Cells ability to form large
protrusions, represented by factors 5 (lamellar distribution) and 7
(nascent neurites), was uniform across the Ta gradient. To detect the
cells ability to interpret directional cues, we distinguished the cell's
top (T) side, i.e. the side oriented toward H location, from the bottom
(B) side. Factor 4 values at H-T exceed those at M-B and L-T (Table 1).
Trend analysis confirmed a decrease in factor 4 over the gradient with
significance of pFilopodia play a sensory role in directing motility
during embryonic development and axon pathfinding. They also show a low
prevalence in cancer cells. Here, we determine whether cells from a rat
tracheal epithelial line in vitro use filopodia to sense adhesive
gradients. Cells exhibit haptotaxis (movement toward a more adhesive
surface) when placed on a metal-glass gradient. Tantalum (Ta) and
platinum (Pt) gradients were created on glass slides and high (H), middle
(M), and low (L) positions defined along the gradient. Cell counts in
randomly selected fields confirmed that the cells recognized the
gradient. To determine whether the prevalence of protrusions differed at
the H, M, and L locations, we measured the values of latent factors 4
(filopodia), 5, and 7. Factor 4 values were high at H and significantly
lower at M and L (p<0.05). Cells ability to form large protrusions,
represented by factors 5 (lamellar distribution) and 7 (nascent
neurites), was uniform across the Ta gradient. To detect the cells
ability to interpret directional cues, we distinguished the cell's top
(T) side, i.e. the side oriented toward H location, from the bottom (B)
side. Factor 4 values at H-T exceed those at M-B and L-T (Table 1). Trend
analysis confirmed a decrease in factor 4 over the gradient with
significance of p<0.001 (Ta) and pFilopodia play a sensory role in
directing motility during embryonic development and axon pathfinding.
They also show a low prevalence in cancer cells. Here, we determine
whether cells from a rat tracheal epithelial line in vitro use filopodia
to sense adhesive gradients. Cells exhibit haptotaxis (movement toward a
more adhesive surface) when placed on a metal-glass gradient. Tantalum
(Ta) and platinum (Pt) gradients were created on glass slides and high
(H), middle (M), and low (L) positions defined along the gradient. Cell
counts in randomly selected fields confirmed that the cells recognized
the gradient. To determine whether the prevalence of protrusions differed
at the H, M, and L locations, we measured the values of latent factors 4
(filopodia), 5, and 7. Factor 4 values were high at H and significantly
lower at M and L (p<0.05). Cells ability to form large protrusions,
represented by factors 5 (lamellar distribution) and 7 (nascent
neurites), was uniform across the Ta gradient. To detect the cells
ability to interpret directional cues, we distinguished the cell's top
(T) side, i.e. the side oriented toward H location, from the bottom (B)
side. Factor 4 values at H-T exceed those at M-B and L-T (Table 1). Trend
analysis confirmed a decrease in factor 4 over the gradient with
significance of p<0.001 (Ta) and p<0.023 (Pt). On Pt only, factor 5
increased (p=0.000) as the metal content of the substrate declined.
Ruffling activity is generally inverse to filopodia but positively
related to factor 5 (Heckman et al., doi:10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.08.023).
On haptotactic substrates, the former relationship was observed by
correlation analysis but was restricted to the L location on the
gradient. This suggests that poor adhesion may help to convert mechanisms
of filopodia formation to ruffle formation. The above results suggest
that sensing depends on net filopodia stabilization at the more adhesive
H location. We conclude that filopodia respond to the gradient and that
regulation of the sensing and signaling mechanisms can now be evaluated.


