Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XIAP downregulation accompanies inhibition of melanoma xenograft
growth by mebendazole


Background: Melanoma's intrinsic resistance to therapy has been
attributed to modulation of cellular survival pathways including
apoptosis. We originally reported that mebendazole (MBZ), which acts as a
microtubule-disrupting agent, is a potent inducer of apoptosis in
melanoma cells in vitro via a Bcl-2 dependent mechanism (Molecular Cancer
Research, 2008). Here, we show that MBZ is also able to effectively
modulate another key anti-apoptotic factor, XIAP, to promote melanoma
apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo. Methodology: Safety and efficacy of
mebendazole was assessed using a human melanoma xenograft model
established from M-14 cells. The effect of MBZ on XIAP expression and
induction of apoptotic pathways was evaluated by immunoblotting and
co-immunoprecipitation techniques along with densitometric
quantification. The growth inhibitory effects of MBZ were determined in a
panel of melanoma cell lines with the sulphorhodamine (SRB) assay. siRNA
techniques were used to reduce expression of XIAP. Results: Oral MBZ is
as effective as the current standard of care temozolomide (TMZ) in
reducing melanoma growth in vivo, with no notable toxicities observed.
Inhibition of melanoma growth in vivo is accompanied by MBZ specific
reduced expression of XIAP and cleavage of caspase 9. In response to MBZ
treatment, sensitive cell lines display reduced levels of XIAP expression
whereas resistant cell lines do not. Moreover, down-regulation of XIAP
expression by siRNA in the MBZ-resistant melanoma cell line UACC1097 was
accompanied by a reduction in the IC50 for MBZ from >10 M to 3.7 M.
Exposure of melanoma cells to MBZ promotes the interaction of SMAC/DIABLO
with XIAP, thereby alleviating inhibition of apoptosis by XIAP.
Conclusions: In addition to demonstrating efficacy and safety in vivo,
our preclinical studies of the promising anti-melanoma agent mebendazole
provide insight into characterization of an apoptotic promoting mechanism
of action.

