Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralizing Endosialin antibody, MORAb-004, enhances efficacy of
TAXOTERE in a metastatic melanoma model


Endosialin/Tumor Endothelial Marker-1 (TEM1) is a cell surface
glycoprotein that is expressed on cells involved in the development of
tumor vasculature, primarily pericytes and stromal fibroblasts. Studies
have found it to play a key role in tumor growth and neo-vessel formation
in numerous cancer types. We are currently evaluating the safety and
therapeutic potential of MORAb-004, a humanized monoclonal IgG targeting
endosialin/TEM-1, in clinical trials. Because MORAb-004 only recognizes
human antigen and has no cross-reactivity with rodent endosialin/TEM-1,
we generated a human endosialin/TEM-1 knock-in mouse in order to assess
its activity in vivo. Previously, in this transgenic model, we found that
MORAb-004 significantly inhibited subcutaneous B16-F10 melanoma
progression by 70% when administered intravenously for 5 consecutive
days. Moreover, using the Lewis Lung Carcinoma model of metastatic
disease our results showed that MORAb-004 had a significant inhibitory
effect on the number of lung metastases. For these studies, supporting
clinical trials for using MORAb-004 in combination with standard of care
chemotherapeutics, we developed a B16-F10 melanoma lung colonization
model. In this model, the human endosialin/TEM-1 knock-in mice were
implanted intravenously with B16F10 cells adapted for in vivo lung
colonization. These mice were treated with Docetaxel, MORAb-004, or the
combination of the two agents, respectively. A group of the tumor-bearing
mice receiving PBS served as control. At the end of the study, the lungs
of each mouse were harvested. A ratio of the area of tumor nodules versus
total lung surface area is calculated as tumor burden. MORAb-004, at 50
mg/kg three times weekly for a total of 7 i.v. injections reduced tumor
burden by 45%. Treatment of Docetaxel, at 3mg/kg twice weekly for a total
of 5 i.p. injections, reduced less than 20% of tumor burden in the lungs.
When MORAb004 was added to Docetaxel treatment, a significant enhancement
of efficacy was observed. The reduction of tumor nodules in the lungs was
increased to approximately 70%. A similar trend is seen in combination
therapy where MORAb-004 was added to gemcitabine regimen. Our results
demonstrate the ability of MORAb-004 to inhibit tumor growth in a murine
model. Moreover, when added to the chemotherapeutic regimen, it
significantly enhances the therapeutic effect of traditional chemotherapy.

