Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of Akt isoforms in chemoresistance of carcinoma
endometrial cells


Akt (also known as PKB) is a crucial survival kinase that is normally
activated by growth factors, but in tumors, it is constitutively
activated at a high frequency through oncogenic events affecting its
upstream regulation. Since studies have demonstrated that the three Akt
isoforms exhibit distinct physiological functions, we propose that Akt
isoforms may contribute differently in chemoresistance of endometrial
carcinoma cells. In order to determine the specific role of each Akt
isoform, we have stably produced transfectants in which the expression of
Akt is downregulated by specific shRNAs for Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3 using the
KLE endometrial carcinoma cell line. This endometrial cell line is known
to constitutively express the three Akt isoforms and to highly resist to
chemotherapeutic treatment. In this study, we have demonstrated that the
downregulation of Akt1 and Akt2 by RNA interference strongly sensitizes
KLE cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin and taxol and affects cell
proliferation. Moreover, cisplatin treatment of these cells induced the
activation of pro-apoptotic factors such as the cleavage of caspase -3,
-6, -9 and PARP and it also inhibited the expression of anti-apoptotic
factors such as XIAP and Bcl-2. Alternatively, we used constitutively
active Akt expression vectors for each isoform to produce stable
transfectants using the chemosensitive Hec 1A endometrial cancer cell
line, in which no Akt activity is detected. Constitutive Akt1 and Akt2
expression leads to an increase in cell proliferation, as well as
resistance to apoptosis after chemotherapeutic treatment in these stable
transfectants. Moreover, Akt isoforms contribute differently in other
cancer cell processes, such as migration. We showed that Akt2 blocks cell
motility, while the activation of Akt1 or Akt3 does not show any effect
on our endometrial cancer cell model. Our findings highlight the
contribution of Akt1 and Akt2 isoforms in the molecular mechanisms that
govern chemoresistance of endometrial carcinoma. Furthermore, Akt
isoform-specific transfectants will provide a solid model to determine
the involvement of each Akt isoform in tumor progression and metastasis.

