Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide induces apoptosis through the activation of ASK1
and is enhanced by a thioredoxin reductase inhibitor


Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is an effective treatment for acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). While it is undergoing clinical trials for numerous
malignancies including multiple myeloma, myelodysplastic syndrome,
lymphoma and solid tumors, it has demonstrated only limited efficacy as a
single agent. However, it may hold promise as part of a combination
therapy. Thus investigation to elucidate the mechanisms of action
underlying these clinical responses may lead to generation of rational
combination therapies to increase its therapeutic spectrum. Previous work
has described a pathway required for ATO-induced apoptosis in APL cells
involving the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and the
subsequent induction of a specific mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) cascade that includes both stress-activated protein kinase
(SAPK)/ERK kinase 1 (SEK1) and c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) activation.
However, the link between ROS production and activation of SEK1 remains
to be elucidated. Apoptosis signaling kinase 1 (ASK1) is a MAP3K upstream
of SEK1 and has been implicated in the induction of stress-induced
signaling. Here, we show that ATO activates ASK1 in a dose- and
time-dependent manner in an APL cell line. ASK1 activation is preceded by
ATO-induced ROS accumulation, which is significantly reduced with
N-acetyl-L-cysteine antioxidant co-treatment. Murine embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) from ASK1 deficient mice are less susceptible to
ATO-induced apoptosis and growth inhibition. Moreover, they exhibit
markedly lower ATO-induced JNK activity compared to wild type cells. One
model of ASK1 regulation suggests that ASK1 is kept in an inactive form
by reduced thioredoxin-1 (Trx1). During oxidative stress, Trx1 is
oxidized and releases ASK1 for activation. Immunoprecipitation of ASK1
followed by immuoblotting for Trx1 in APL cells shows a strong basal
association that is lost with ATO treatment. Furthermore, the activity of
thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1), an enzyme that converts oxidized Trx1
into reduced Trx1, is significantly decreased following ATO treatment.
This suggests that ATO activates ASK1 signaling by ROS-mediated oxidation
of Trx1 and by inhibiting the restoration of reduced Trx1 by decreasing
TrxR1 activity. In addition, we show that inhibition of TrxR1 with the
TrxR1 inhibitor Au(III)Cl sensitizes APL cells to ATO-induced apoptosis.
This suggests that regulation of ASK1 is dependent on Trx1 redox states.
Overall, our results suggest that targeting Trx1 may enhance ASK1
signaling and ATO-induced apoptosis in a novel combination therapy.

