Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A large-scale synthetic lethal RNAi screening identifies unique
sensitizing targets for anti-inflammatory CDDO-Me in metastatic melanoma


Metastatic melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer strongly
associated with the inflammatory process by secreting high levels of
proinflammatory cytokines and producing reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species. Chronic inflammation is considered as a major factor to promote
the tumor microenvironment in advantage of resistance to radiation,
chemotherapy, and biotherapy for metastatic melanoma. CDDO-Me, a novel
synthetic triterpenoid, has been shown to exert potent anti-inflammatory
and antitumor activity by decreasing oxidative stress and the production
of pro-inflammatory molecules, such as Nrf2 and iNOS, in several tumor
models. CDDO-Me is presently under evaluation in clinical studies for
chronic kidney disease and pancreatic cancer. Here, we used CDDO-Me as a
primary agent to inhibit metastatic melanoma growth. In order to improve
CDDO-Me response in melanoma cells, we utilized a large-scale synthetic
lethal RNAi screen with 24,000 siRNAs targeting 6,000 human druggable
genes to identify targets that when silenced would sensitize melanoma
cells to CDDO-Me. Results from the screens identified twenty of siRNA
pools that significantly potentiated the growth inhibitory effects of
CDDO-Me in A375 cells. We selected five unique genes, GNPAT, SUMO1,
SPUNT2, FLI1, and SSX1, which have not been addressed as drug targets in
melanoma before, for target validation and functional analysis in four
metastatic melanoma and control cell lines. Specific siRNA against each
of these five genes could substantially sensitize four tested melanoma
cells to CDDO-me by increasing the growth inhibition and induction of
apoptosis, while treatment with nontarget siRNA resulted in no change
compared to the treatment with CDDO-Me only. Further studies of
downstream signaling revealed that these five genes involved in
regulating melanoma cell proliferation and cell death. We identified for
the first time that the levels of phosphorylated Erk1/2, Akt, GSK-2, and
PRAS40, were dramatically decreased by individual siRNA against GNPAT,
SUMO1, SPUNT2, FLI1, and SSX1. Our findings indicate that GNPAT, SUMO1,
SPUNT2, FLI1, and SSX1 may play critical roles in synergy with
inflammation pathways in modulating melanoma cell survival, which could
serve as sensitizing targets to enhance CDDO-Me efficacy in melanoma.
Supported by MDACC SPORE in Melanoma P50CA093459.

