Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arthritis augments breast cancer metastasis: Role of mast cells
and SCF/c-Kit signaling


Background Breast Cancer remains the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. In 2011, an estimated 458,000
women are expected to die from the disease due to metastasis. Metastasis
is regulated not only by intrinsic genetic changes in malignant cells,
but also by the microenvironment, especially those associated with
chronic inflammation. We have reported that mice that suffer from
autoimmune arthritis have significantly increased incidence of bone and
lung metastasis and decreased survival associated with breast cancer. In
this study, we evaluated the mechanism contributing to the increased
metastasis. Our preliminary studies show that the metastatic niches (bone
and lung) in the arthritic mice express significantly higher levels of
mast cells than their non-arthritic counterparts. It is known the
SCF/c-kit signaling within the metastatic niche triggers the activation
of mast cells which are known to aid the metastatic process via
up-regulation of various pro-inflammatory factors. Thus, we hypothesize
that increase in mast cells triggered by SCF/cKit signaling may be the
underlying cause for increased metastasis and that targeting the SCF-cKit
interaction may prevent metastasis. Methods We used two mouse models; one
that develops spontaneous autoimmune arthritis (SKG mice) injected with
metastatic breast cancer cells (4T1), and second, that develops
spontaneous breast cancer (MMTV-PyV MT mice) injected with type II
collagen to induce autoimmune arthritis. Mice were left untreated or
treated with anti cKit receptor antibody celecoxib (a known drug used to
treat autoimmune arthritis). Mast cell levels and metastasis were
monitored along with the pro-inflammatory factors associated with mast
cell activation. Results i) Differentiation of mast cells from bone
marrow derived stem cells was significantly higher in the arthritic
versus the non-arthritic tumor-bearing mice; ii) Mast cell population
within the bone and lung lesions were significantly higher in the
arthritic versus non-arthritic tumor-bearing mice; iii) The SCF/cKit
signaling was significantly up regulated within the metastatic lesions of
the arthritic versus the non-arthritic tumor-bearing mice; and iv)
Treatment with the anti-cKit receptor antibody + celecoxib significantly
reduced the differentiation of mast cells and consequently reduced breast
cancer-associated metastasis. Conclusion: Mast cell levels and SCF/cKit
signaling are significantly higher in breast cancer mice that suffer from
autoimmune arthritis versus their non-arthritic counterparts. Mice
treated with anti-cKit receptor + celecoxib shows decreased metastasis
and mast cells. Thus, mast cells play a critical role in not only
remodeling the tumor microenvironment but also the metastatic niche to
facilitate efficient metastasis.

