Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression of hsp27 in renal cell carcinoma and the
correlation with tumor progression


Background Overexpression of Hsp27 protein has been correlated with tumor
progression in a variety of cancers including Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC).
Various phosphorylation patterns of Hsp27 correlate with the
aggressiveness of tumor phenotype. Increased Hsp27 phosphorylation was
reported to correlate with increased tumor progression in RCC. Since the
phosphorylation status of Hsp27 is dependent on phosphorylation by
kinases and dephosphorylation by phosphatases, a better understanding of
these factors in the tumor microenvironment needed to be analyzed at the
gene expression level. Gene expression studies of tumor tissues using
microarray routinely fail to identify hsp27 because large amount of
transcripts that microarrays analyze may mask the changes observed with
hsp27 and its associated genes. Hence, we used quantitative RT-PCR to
investigate the relative gene expressions of hsp27 in RCC tumor and
normal adjacent tissues (NAT). We examined the gene expression levels of
MAP kinases such as Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase 1 (mapk1) and
MAPK-activated protein Kinase 5 (mk5) along with a major phosphatase,
Protein Phosphatase 2 A (pp2a). Methods RCC tumor and normal control
samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen within one hour post surgical
excision. Frozen samples were pulverized in Covaris TissueTubes using the
Covaris CryoPrep system. The pulverized tissue was homogenized for RNA
extraction using the Covaris Adaptive Focused Acoustics (AFA) S220
system. Total RNA was extracted using a Qiagen RNeasy Plus kit. The gene
expressions for Hsp27, MAPK1, MK5, and PP2A were analyzed by RT-PCR using
validated TaqMan assays on an Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR
System. A house keeping gene, beta actin, was measured in parallel to
normalize the differences between samples. Results In RCC, in comparison
to NAT, the relative gene expressions of hsp27 increased to 224.44%
suggesting an upregulation of hsp27 in cancer tissue. Adding to this
microenvironment, the phosphorylating enzymes were also upregulated in
the RCC tissue. Expression levels of kinases, mapk1 and mk5 were
increased to 22.11% and 37.18% respectively. Interestingly, the level of
phosphatase (pp2a) was decreased 67.25 %. These data suggests that the
combination of the upregulation of kinases along with down regulation of
phosphatase may be a major factor creating the environment of enhanced
phosphorylation in overexpressed hsp27. Conclusion Our data shows that
the gene expression level increase of hsp27 in RCC is consistent with the
predicted increase in protein level expression of Hsp27. However, the
dramatic combined effect of the increase in the gene expression of the
kinases, along with decrease in the gene expression of the phosphatase
may result in a striking increase in phosphorylation. The enhanced
phosphorylation will activate Hsp27 in the tumor microenvironment
resulting increased tumor progression.

