Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MAGE family of cancer-testis antigens are potent oncogenes


Introduction: Cancer-testis antigens (CTAs), including the MAGE protein
family, are genes whose expression is typically restricted to the
germline, but are aberrantly expressed and presented as antigens in human
tumors. Therefore, CTAs constitute excellent targets for cancer
immunotherapy. Surprising recent evidence suggests that the aberrant
expression of MAGE CTAs in tumors is not simply an inert consequence of
widespread genomic deregulation, but rather an important functional event
promoting tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the expression of MAGE CTAs
correlates with poor prognosis in a variety of cancer types. However, the
role of MAGE CTAs as oncogenes driving tumorigenesis has been unexplored
and their biochemical activity of MAGEs has been enigmatic. Aims and
Methods: In this study, we investigated the function of the large MAGE
protein family. First we determined the oncogenic potential of more than
20 MAGE CTAs in 3T3 transformation assays, soft agar
anchorage-independent growth assays, and matrigel transwell invasion
assays. We then selected several of these oncogenic MAGE CTAs for further
in-depth study to identify their biochemical and cellular functions.
Using a variety of in vitro and cellular assays, we identified common
binding partners of more than ten MAGE proteins, solved the crystal
structure of one MAGE protein, and investigated the biochemical activity
of several MAGE CTAs. Results and Conclusions: We found that the majority
of MAGE CTAs (more than 15) have oncogenic activity in cell
transformation, anchorage-independent growth, and/or invasion.
Additionally, we showed that a common feature of MAGE proteins is their
ability to bind to and enhance the activity of E3 RING ubiquitin ligases,
such TRIM28/KAP1, through a conserved tandem winged-helix domain.
Importantly, we discovered that several MAGE-TRIM28 ubiquitin ligase
complexes directly ubiquitylate and degrade the critical p53 tumor
suppressor in vitro and in cancer cells. Thus, our findings clearly
establish that MAGE CTAs function as oncogenes through their ability to
regulate the activity of E3 RING ubiquitin ligases, resulting in the
deregulation of vulnerable signaling pathways (such as the p53 tumor
suppressor). These results underscore the importance of MAGE proteins as
therapeutic targets for cancer and highlight a novel germline signaling
program co-opted by cancer cells to facilitate tumorigenesis.

