Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and
genetic polymorphisms on benzo(a)pyrene-DNA adducts in a Polish cohort of
mothers and newborns


Background Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a class of
chemicals common in the environment. Major sources of PAHs include fossil
fuel combustion and cigarette smoking. Certain PAHs are carcinogenic,
though the degree to which genetic variation influences susceptibility to
PAH exposure remains unclear. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is a well-studied PAH
that is classified as a probable human carcinogen. Here, we evaluated
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) frequency in genes related to PAH
metabolism and detoxification, and explored the interactions between PAH
exposure and SNPs on BaP-DNA adducts, an established cancer risk marker,
in umbilical cord white blood cells (WBCs). Methods Maternal and
umbilical cord blood were collected at delivery from participants in a
longitudinal cohort study of Polish mothers and newborns in Krakow,
Poland. WBC DNA was isolated from cord blood, and genetic polymorphisms
and BaP-DNA cord adducts were then measured in 503 mothers and 445
newborns. Maternal PAH exposure was measured during pregnancy with a
personal air exposure monitor. For this study 7 maternal and newborn
genes related to PAH metabolism, detoxification and repair were selected
for SNP analyses: CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, GSTM3, GSTT2, NQO1 and XRCC1.
SNP x PAH interactions on logarithmic (ln)-transformed BaP-DNA adduct
levels were explored. Results We observed a number of significant
interactions between high PAH exposure and SNPs in both mothers and
newborns on BaP-DNA adducts in cord blood. For example, the interaction
between a CYP1A2 SNP (rs2069514) and high PAH exposure on cord BaP-DNA
adducts in newborns was significant (=1.34, pBackground Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a class of chemicals common in the
environment. Major sources of PAHs include fossil fuel combustion and
cigarette smoking. Certain PAHs are carcinogenic, though the degree to
which genetic variation influences susceptibility to PAH exposure remains
unclear. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is a well-studied PAH that is classified as
a probable human carcinogen. Here, we evaluated single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) frequency in genes related to PAH metabolism and
detoxification, and explored the interactions between PAH exposure and
SNPs on BaP-DNA adducts, an established cancer risk marker, in umbilical
cord white blood cells (WBCs). Methods Maternal and umbilical cord blood
were collected at delivery from participants in a longitudinal cohort
study of Polish mothers and newborns in Krakow, Poland. WBC DNA was
isolated from cord blood, and genetic polymorphisms and BaP-DNA cord
adducts were then measured in 503 mothers and 445 newborns. Maternal PAH
exposure was measured during pregnancy with a personal air exposure
monitor. For this study 7 maternal and newborn genes related to PAH
metabolism, detoxification and repair were selected for SNP analyses:
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, GSTM3, GSTT2, NQO1 and XRCC1. SNP x PAH
interactions on logarithmic (ln)-transformed BaP-DNA adduct levels were
explored. Results We observed a number of significant interactions
between high PAH exposure and SNPs in both mothers and newborns on
BaP-DNA adducts in cord blood. For example, the interaction between a
CYP1A2 SNP (rs2069514) and high PAH exposure on cord BaP-DNA adducts in
newborns was significant (=1.34, p<0.01). We will present significant
interaction results from analyses performed on both maternal and newborn
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, GSTM3, GSTT2, NQO1 and XRCC1 SNPs. Discussion It is
biologically plausible that an individual's abilities to metabolically
activate and detoxify BaP and repair DNA damage play a role in
susceptibility to DNA adduct formation following prenatal PAH exposure.
Ultimately, this susceptibility could correlate with future risk of
cancer development. Our findings of several SNP x PAH exposure
interactions on cord BaP-DNA adducts support the hypothesis that genetic
variability can contribute to susceptibility and potential cancer risk
from prenatal PAH exposures.

