Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine c-met/HGF HCC patient derived xenograft (PDX) models for
evaluating c-met inhibitors


c-Met is a receptor tyrosine kinase that interacts with its ligand, HGF,
secreted from surrounding stroma (paracrine signaling). This interaction
is involved in cell growth, invasion, metastases and angiogenesis of a
number of solid tumors. c-met gene amplification and increased gene
expression have been frequently associated with these tumors. c-met is
thus considered as an important cancer target for therapy of the cancers
that their growth depends on activated c-met/HGF signaling1, including
many HCC. As for any investigational c-met inhibitors, a highly relevant
c-met/HGF experimental cancer model is critical to evaluate its efficacy
and associated changes in biomarkers for predicting the likely
responders. While patient derived xenograft (PDX) models, without any in
vitro manipulation, mirror patients histopathological and genetic
profiles2,3, the successfully engrafted PDX models usually lost its human
stroma in mice and thus its c-met dependency. This is due to the lack of
paracrine c-met/HGF mechanism in mice (no cross reactivity between mouse
and human), and the tumors with such c-met/HGF paracrine dependency are
selected against. The engrafted models might have changed its properties
from the original human tumors by relying on other signaling pathways for
survival, and thus not suitable for evaluating c-met inhibitors.
Apparently, neither of these scenarios can be adequately used to evaluate
c-met inhibitors. One alternative to this is engraftment of primary human
tumor into HGF-transgenic immunocompromised mice, which would support the
growth of c-met dependent PDX via paracrine mechanism. We recently
screened a number of PDX HCC models using a c-met inhibitor and
identified two responders, indicating their reliance on c-met/HGF
signaling for growth, among many non-responders. The non-responders
likely grow by relying on signaling pathway other than c-met/HGF. The two
responders, on the other hand, likely grow through c-met/HGF autocrine
mechanism. To further investigate this, we performed genomic profiling
and IHC analysis of c-met and HGF on these two responders and other
non-responders. Our results demonstrated that these two responders have
amplification of HGF gene and express high levels of both c-met and HGF
in both mRNA and protein (IHC). This is in contrast to no gene
amplification and low level expression of both genes for non-responders.
All these are consistent with that these two responders grow in mice via
c-met/HGF autocrine mechanism. In conclusion, these two HCC models could
be very useful models for evaluating c-met inhibitors. 1. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 7, 504-516 (2008). 2. Nature 464, 999-1005 (2010). 3. Clin Cancer
Res 13, 3989-3998 (2007).

