Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential beneficial effects of the BRCA1 mutation carrier state
on bone strength


We previously suggested, based on observations in a mouse model in which
we conditionally inactivated Brca1 in ovarian granulosa cells, that
mutant mice are exposed to higher estradiol levels and also have
prolonged estradiol exposure unopposed by progesterone due to an increase
in the proestrus phase of their estrus cycle relative to metestrus. We
sought to examine the biological significance of increased hormonal
stimulation in homozygous Brca1 conditional knockout mice and to test the
hypothesis that the effect is also present in mice with a heterozygous
mutation such as present in human BRCA1 mutation carriers. We use
endometrial cellular proliferation as an indicator for short-term effects
of a Brca1mutation. Long-term effects were examined by measurements of
long bone parameters using micro-computed tomography. The relative
effects of heterozygous versus homozygous Brca1 mutations were evaluated
by measuring the expression of enzymes involved in estradiol biosynthesis
in granulosa cells. Mutant mice synchronized in the proestrus phase of
their estrus cycle showed an increase in endometrial stromal cell
proliferation in (P = .01). Mutant mice also showed an increase in
trabecular bone density (P = .01) and femoral length (P = .02). Protein
expression of aromatase and Hsd3B was higher in granulosa cells of mice
carrying a heterozygous mutation in their ovarian granulosa cells
compared to wild type littermates (P = .005 and .006 respectively). Our
results provide a potential explanation for epidemiological observations
to the effect that height is associated with increased risk for breast
and ovarian cancer. The results also suggest that BRCA1 mutations, while
associated with increased cancer risk, may also have some inherent
advantages such as increased bone strength that may have contributed to
the maintenance of mutated BRCA1 alleles in the human gene pool.
Heterozygous Brca1 mutations such as present in human BRCA1 mutation
carriers are not silent.

