Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil extracellular traps sequester circulating tumor cells
in vitro and in a murine model of metastasis


Introduction: Emerging evidence suggests that neutrophil mediated factors
may be implicated in cancer progression, however the mechanisms for this
are unclear. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NET's) constitute a
mechanism by which pathogens are trapped and killed in extracellular
neutrophil derived DNA webs containing antimicrobial proteins. The role
of NETs in cancer progression is unknown. We hypothesized that
circulating tumor cells could become trapped within NET's, potentially
favoring the development of metastatic disease. Materials and Methods:
Static adhesion assays were performed using H59 lung cancer cells added
to neutrophil monolayers. NETs were induced with phorbol myristate
acetate (PMA). NET formation was inhibited with DNAse. Adhesion under
dynamic conditions was quantified under flow at 1 dyne/cm2. Lung cancer
cells (A549 or H59) were perfused over neutrophil monolayers stimulated
with PMA, PMA + DNAse, or media alone, and tumor cell adhesion was
quantified. NET formation after stimulation was verified by staining
extracellular DNA with Sytox green and assessed for the presence of tumor
cell-NET association. To study in vivo interactions between NETs and
cancer cells, control and bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated
mice (4 hours prior) were prepared for spinning disc confocal intravital
microscopy and H59 cells were injected intra-arterially. Neutrophils were
identified by injection of anti-GR1 Alexa 647 conjugated mAb and NETs
were stained by injection of anti-histone H2A.X Alexa 555 conjugated
mAb.Results: Static H59 cells adhesion to neutrophils stimulated with PMA
increased 8-fold over media alone, an effect that was completely
attenuated by DNAse. Under flow conditions, PMA increased A549 and H59
cell adherence to neutrophil monolayers 10-fold over media alone, DNAse
reduced cancer cell adhesion in PMA stimulated neutrophils by a factor of
3. Staining with Sytox green demonstrated a high degree of
co-localization of NETs with clusters of malignant cells in neutrophils
stimulated with PMA alone, but not in the presence of DNAse or media
alone. Mice stimulated with LPS demonstrated heavy histone H2A.X staining
suggestive of NET formation and co-localization with H59 cells. LPS
induced NET formation correlated with a previously published 50% increase
in H59 cell adhesion to hepatic sinusois. Conclusions: Neutrophil
extracellular trap formation is associated with increased adherence and
capture of cancer cells in both static and dynamic conditions. This is
the first time this in vitro finding has been described and correlates
with the first demonstration of in vivo NET/cancer cell interactions.
These results suggest a novel mechanism by which neutrophils may promote
cancer progression.

