Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sloan-Kettering Institute (Ski) protein plays distant roles in
activation of Smad proteins in response to nodal and TGF- in prostate
cancer cells


Transforming growth factor- (TGF-) acts as a tumor suppressor in the
early stages of epithelial cancers by inhibiting proliferation and
inducing apoptosis. However, in the later stages of the disease, TGF-
acts as a tumor promoter and is associated with aggressive forms of
cancer due to its effects on angiogenesis, immune suppression, and
metastasis. Previously, we have demonstrated that Nodal, another member
of the TGF- superfamily and its receptors are expressed in prostate
cancer cell lines. Nodal and TGF- exerted differential effects on
prostate cancer cells; both inhibited proliferation in WPE, RWPE1, and
DU145 cells while neither had effect on the proliferation of LNCaP and
PC3 cells. On the other hand, Nodal and TGF- induced migration in PC3
cells, but had no effect on cell migration in DU145 cells. Nodal
primarily employs Smad2 for intracellular signaling while TGF- is
essential for both Smad2/3 phosphorylations. In the present study, we
have determined the expression and role of Ski in Nodal and TGF-
signaling in prostate cancer cells. Ski is a co-repressor of the
Smad-mediated TGF- signaling. Ski was originally classified as an
oncogene based on its ability to transform chicken and quail fibroblasts.
RT-PCR analysis showed comparable mRNA levels of Ski in several
established prostate cell lines; however, high levels of Ski protein were
only detected in prostate cancer cell lines and Ski protein levels were
very low or absent in normal cells. Ski protein levels were also high in
prostate cancer tissue samples compared to normal prostate tissues.
Treatment with Nodal and TGF- had no effects on Ski mRNA levels; however,
Nodal had no effect on Ski protein levels while TGF- induced degradation
of Ski protein levels mediated by the proteasome pathway. Reduced Ski
levels correlated with increased basal and TGF--induced Smad2/3
phosphorylation. Knockdown of endogenous of Ski reduced proliferation in
DU145 prostate cancer cells and enhanced migration of PC3 cells. We
conclude that high level of Ski expression in prostate cancer cells may
be responsible for repression of TGF- and Smad2/3 signaling, but Ski
protein levels do not influence Nodal effects.

