Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increase in proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells via
PKC activation-induced down-regulation of BKca channel


Purpose: K+ channels are involved in tumorigenesis through the regulation
of cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion. However, the
involvement of the large conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (BKCa) channels in
the cancerous phenomenon is controversial. This study was performed to
investigate whether and how BKCa channels are related to the cellular
processes for tumorigenesis. Methods: Cell proliferation and migration
assays were performed in non-invasive (MCF-7) and invasive (MDA-MB-231)
breast cancer cells in the absence or presence of BKCa channel modulators
or PKC modulators. Patch-clamp technique and reverse-transcriptase
(RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were performed to study the
expression of the BKCa channel in breast cancer cells. The relationship
between BKCa channels and cell proliferation/migration was analyzed using
gene overexpression and knock-down techniques. Results: Patch-clamp
technique and RT-PCR data showed that BKCa channels were expressed in
both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Inhibitors of BKCa channels increased
cell proliferation and migration, whereas BKCa channel activators
suppressed them. Overexpression of BKCa in breast cancer cells reduced
proliferation and migration, whereas silencing of BKCa enhanced the
proliferation and migration. BKCa inhibitors (paxilline, ChTx, and IbTx)
induced PKC activation, and the PKC activation down-regulated the BKCa
channel expression and activity. In addition, the treatment of PMA (a PKC
activator) decreased BKCa channel expression, whereas combination of PKC
inhibitors maintained the BKCa channel expression levels without
reduction. Conclusion: These results show that a decrease in BKCa
expression levels, which could be modulated by PKC activation, increases
cell proliferation and migration in breast cancer cells and suggest that
modulation of BKCa expression may regulate tumorigenesis of breast cancer
cells. Key words: Breast cancer; Cell migration; K+ channels;
Proliferation

