Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia affects the metabolic activation and detoxification of the
environmental mutagen benzo(a)pyrene


Hypoxia is characteristic for a number of pathologies and promotes
genetic instability, as exposure to low oxygen levels results in an
elevated mutation frequency. We have previously shown that activation of
the hypoxia responsive transcription factor HIF-1, in the presence of
sufficient oxygen, enhanced mutation frequencies induced by the
environmental mutagen benzo[a]pyrene (BaP). Since proper carcinogen
metabolism depends on oxygen we examined how varying oxygen levels
influenced BaP metabolism by studying its activation and deactivation.
The human lung carcinoma cell line A549 was treated with BaP under
different oxygen concentrations (20%, 5%, and 0.2%) for 18 hours and
alterations in BaP-metabolism were determined. First, we analyzed the BaP
induced expression of key metabolic enzymes; expression levels of CYP1A1
and CYP1B1 was higher under hypoxia, while expression of the detoxifying
enzymes UGT1A6 and UGT2B7 were significantly reduced by hypoxia. Then,
several BaP metabolites in supernatants were determined by
HPLC-fluorescence detection. In general, low oxygen levels lead to slower
metabolism of BaP leaving more of the parent molecule intact. At the same
time, BaP-7,8-dihydrodiol, the pre-cursor metabolite of the reactive
metabolite BaP-7,8-dihydroxy-9,10-epoxide (BPDE), was formed in higher
concentrations under hypoxia. Finally, under hypoxia DNA adducts
accumulated over a period of 168 hours, whereas DNA adducts were
efficiently removed under 20% oxygen, eventually leading to 1.6 times
higher adduct levels under hypoxic conditions. These data indicate that
the metabolism has shifted towards increased activation of BaP instead of
detoxification under hypoxic conditions. These data support the idea that
modulation of carcinogen metabolism may be an important additional
mechanism for the observed HIF1 mediated genetic instability.

