Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer cells induce fibronectin production in the
peritoneal microenvironment through a TGFRI-dependent mechanism which
promotes the early steps of metastasis


The high mortality rate that results from ovarian cancer (OvCa) is caused
by the wide dissemination of cancer cells within the abdominal cavity.
OvCa cells metastasize to the peritoneum, which is covered by a single
layer of mesothelial cells, and invade into the underlying stroma,
composed of extracellular matrices (ECM) including fibronectin (FN) and
stromal cells such as fibroblasts. We hypothesize that cancer cells
stimulate stromal cells to produce and secrete FN, initiating the
metastatic niche. A 3D model of the human peritoneal surface (in vitro),
pieces of human omentum (ex vivo), and a mouse xenograft model (in vivo)
of OvCa were used to investigate the early effects of cancer cells on the
host microenvironment. FN expression was investigated in human normal and
tumor tissues using tissue microarrays, reverse-phase protein arrays, and
preserved tissues. The different model systems and tissues were examined
utilizing a number of techniques including; immunohistochemistry,
immunofluorescence, ECM extraction, real-time quantitative PCR, and
immunoblotting. Our results reveal that FN is overexpressed in the stroma
of more than 90% of OvCa metastatic tissues examined. Moreover, total FN
expression levels are significantly greater in omental metastases as
compared to patient-matched primary tumor tissues. Additionally, the EDA+
fragment of FN is upregulated in OvCa metastases when compared to normal
omental tissue. Cancer cell adhesion and proliferation are increased on
omental metastases-derived ECM as compared to normal omental-derived ECM,
which are significantly inhibited when the interaction between FN and its
receptor, integrin 51 is blocked. Using the in vitro 3D model, we found
that mesothelial cells and fibroblasts are the source of FN, and multiple
peritoneal cancer cells induce FN production. Knocking-down FN in
mesothelial cells (in vitro), sections of human omentum (ex vivo), and
mouse peritoneum (in vivo) perturbs OvCa cell adhesion, invasion, and
proliferation. Likewise, treatment with ATN-161, which antagonizes the
interaction between FN and its receptor, integrin 51, also reduces OvCa
cell adhesion, invasion, and proliferation in the 3D omental model (in
vitro), and OvCa metastasis in the xenograft model (in vivo). OvCa cells
increase phosphorylation and nuclear localization of Smad2/3 in
mesothelial cells upon co-culture, and inhibition of Smad 3 as well as
TGFRI in mesothelial cells resulted in decreased FN production. Moreover,
Rac 1 activity is increased upon co-culture of OvCa and mesothelial
cells, and subsequent inhibition of Rac 1 in mesothelial cells lead to a
decrease in FN production. Taken together, we show that abdominally
metastasizing cancer cells induce FN production in the microenvironment
and inhibition of this response may prevent the first steps of peritoneal
metastasis.

