Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-kit expression promotes prostate cancer cell migration and
invasion through Brca2 downregulation


In many human cancers, expression or activity of the receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) c-kit is often associated with increased malignancy. In
prostate cancer (PCa), we reported an association between expression of
c-kit and clinical progression, with the highest expression seen in
castrate-resistant metastatic bone specimens. We also found de novo c-kit
expression in experimental intraosseous tumors formed by otherwise c-kit
negative PCa cells. However, the biological consequences of c-kit
expression and activation in PCa cells remain unknown. Here, we show that
c-kit overexpression in PC3 and C4-2B PCa cells significantly enhances
their migratory and invasive ability in vitro. Consistent with this
result, we found that expression and activation of c-kit in PCa cells
decreased the expression of E-cadherin and increased the expression of
vimentin, suggesting an epithelial mesenchymal transition-like
phenomenon. Furthermore, activation by c-kit ligand in PC3 and C4-2B
cells transfected with c-kit lead to phosphorylation of Akt. This
contributes to the enhanced invasiveness of c-kit-expressing PCa cells,
as demonstrated by an inhibitory effect by PI3K/Akt inhibitors LY294002
and Wortmannin. In an attempt to identify genes differentially expressed
in c-kit-expressing and -non-expressing PCa cells, we used a microarray
containing 84 genes, representing growth factor receptors, transcription
factors, cell cycle, and DNA repair genes. The analysis of the array
demonstrated a consistent down-regulation of Brca2 in both
c-kit-expressing PC3 and C4-2B cells, further validated by qRT-PCR and
immunoblotting. Re-introduction of Brca2 into c-kit-expressing PCa cells
suppressed c-kit-enhanced invasiveness to levels similar to those shown
by c-kit-non-expressing cells, and led to reduced phosphorylation of Akt.
Our results provide evidence that c-kit expression in PCa cells, an event
which is induced upon interaction with the bone microenvironment,
promotes tumor migration and invasion through an Akt-dependent mechanism
regulated by Brca2 down-regulation. The identification of this novel
signaling axis and its importance in PCa migration and invasion reveal
potential therapeutic targets for regulating the expansion of PCa
metastatic lesions in bone.

