Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of DNMT1 in the DNA damage response


DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are proteins reponsible for establishing
and maintaining genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation, an epigenetic
signature regulating gene expression and genome integrity. DNMT1 is
regarded as the maintenance enzyme while DNMT3A/3B are involved in the de
novo synthesis of DNA methylation pattern. Besides its known role in
copying methylation during replication, DNMT1 has been reported to be
involved in the DNA damage response by recruitment to damaged sites on
DNA. However, the mechanism of how DNMT1 takes part in DNA damage repair
(DDR) remains to be elucidated. Our previous study showed that DNMT1 is
an early responder to DNA double-strand breaks and interacts with
components of the DDR machinery (Ha, KS et al, 2011, Hum. Mol. Genet., 20
(1): 126-140). In order to further characterize the role of DNMT1 in DDR,
we analyzed DNMT1 in cis and trans. In our previous study, we observed
that DNMT1 is recruited to DNA damage sites rapidly and transiently.
Since DNMT1 is present throughout the cell cycle, this rapid and
transient localization suggests that, upon DNA damage, in order to
localize on DNA damage sites, a fraction of the DNMT1 protein pool might
be modified and/or its complement of binding partners transiently
altered. To this end, we purified DNMT1 from mammalian cells before and
after ionizing radiation and analyzed its post-translational
modifications (PTMs) by mass spectrometry. DNMT1 shows multiple unique
patterns of PTMs including acetylation and methylation before and after
ionizing radiation. In order to characterize trans-acting partners of
DNMT1 after DNA damage, we purified DNMT1 complexes after protein
cross-linking and used mass spectrometry to determine the identity of
interacting factors. Consistent with changes in the localization and PTM
patterns on DNMT1 in the presence and absence of DNA damage, several
known and novel DNMT1-protein interactions are also altered in cells with
damaged DNA. Finally, in order to understand the role of DNMT1 in the DDR
mechanism in a physiological context, we used siRNA to acutely reduce
levels of DNMT1 in the presence and absence of DNA damage. Knock-down of
DNMT1 reduced the activation of DDR signaling molecules such as ATM,
CHK1, and -H2AX in a colon cancer cell line. Collectively, our results
demonstrate that DNMT1 is a critical molecule involved in coordinating
DNA damage signaling with DNA repair mechanisms.

