Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent antisense pharmacology of highly optimized antisense
oligonucleotides in multiple transgenic, spontaneous and patient derived
xenograft models of cancer reveals antitumor activity for the non-coding
RNA MALAT-1.


Antisense technology holds great promise as a novel drug discovery
platform that can rapidly translate discoveries from cancer genomics into
highly selective therapeutics. Antisense oligonucleotices (ASOs) are
particularly attractive, as they can be applied to difficult to drug
target classes currently not tractable by other therapeutic modalities.
Recent clinical demonstration of activity for ASOs in cancer patients
supports the potential of this drug class, however, challenges in
demonstrating robust antisense pharmacology in preclinical cancer models
has slowed the progress of this technology as cancer therapeutics. Here
we have employed a high resolution in-situ hybridization-based
methodology (QuantigeneTM) among other detection methods, to demonstrate
visually and quantitatively the activity of systemically administered,
high potency next generation antisense oligonucleotides, in multiple
preclinical cancer models. Cancer models evaluated include, transgenic
models, chemically induced tumor, genetically predisposed mouse strains,
cell line derived xenograft and patient derived xenograft models. As a
test antisense target RNA sequence we chose the non-coding RNA MALAT1
(also called NEAT2) because it is ubiquitously expressed at high levels
in most cell types and thus RNA levels could be readily visualize at the
cellular level by Quantigene method. In addition, as MALAT-1 is
overexpressed in many human tumors it also had the potential to be a
therapeutically relevant target. We screened >1000 ASO sequences in vitro
and identified highly potent mouse and mouse/human cross reactive MALAT-1
ASOs that reduced target RNA in cells in culture with IC50 values in the
low nanomalor range (10-50 nM), without any lipid mediated delivery
vehicles (ASO free uptake). Systemic delivery (s.c. administration of
ASOs formulated in saline) of MALAT1 ASOs in vivo were well tolerated in
all animals tested, and reduced target RNA by 70>90% in the tumor cells
of APC/min- mice, prostate tumor cells of the TRAMP model, DEN-induced
HCC tumors as well as in the tumor cells of several human tumor xenograft
models and in a patient derived NSCLC primary tumor explants model.
Interestingly, MALAT-1 inhibition by ASOs was also associated with
significant antitumor effects including inhibition of tumor formation and
decreased BrdU positive cells in the polyps of APC/min- mice, decrease
tumor growth in TRAMP prostate tumors and DEN HCC tumors and significant
tumor growth delays in several xenograft and human tumor explant models.
These data demonstrate unequivocal, potent, ASO mediated antisense
activity of highly optimized next generation ASOs targeting MALAT-1 by
systemic administration and highlight a previously uncharacterized role
of the ncRNA MALAT1 as regulator of tumor growth in vivo.

