Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic extracellular domain mutations of ERBB2 in cancer


The ERBB2 receptor tyrosine kinase gene is frequently amplified and
mutated in human cancer. However, mutations characterized to date have
been located in the kinase domain of the receptor. Using
publically-available sequencing datasets, we have found that
extracellular domain mutations of ERBB2 located beneath the dimerization
arm recur in lung, breast, and ovarian cancers. We expressed cDNAs
harboring these mutations in NIH-3T3 cells and found that the mutants
support anchorage-independent proliferation. We furthermore found that
substitution of any one of a number of amino acids in this region of the
protein is oncogenic. We sought to biochemically characterize the
extracellular domain mutations of ERBB2 and found that they cause
oncogenic transformation by one of two mechanisms: elevation of
C-terminal tail phosphorylation, or reduction-sensitive covalent
dimerization unaccompanied by increases in C-terminal phosphorylation.
Analysis of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins in the cell by stable
isotope labeling followed by mass spectrometry (SILAC) revealed that both
classes of mutant receptor phosphorylated the same set of proteins to
effect transformation. The most prominent targets were proteins involved
in cytoskeletal and membrane dynamics, controlling cell motility. STAT3
was also phosphorylated to a limited extent in ERBB2-transformed cells.
Interestingly, STAT3 phosphorylation was mediated solely by a
JAK-dependent autocrine loop in cells transformed by the ERBB2 mutants
activated by reduction-sensitive dimerization; whereas both ERBB2 and JAK
family kinases contributed to STAT3 phosphorylation in cells transformed
by ERBB2 mutants exhibiting increased C-terminal phosphorylation. In
order to characterize inhibitor sensitivity, we transformed Ba/F3 cells
to IL-3 independence with the ERBB2 extracellular domain mutants. All
extracellular domain mutants tested were sensitive to irreversible
inhibitors of ERBB2, suggesting that treatment with such inhibitors may
benefit patients harboring mutations of the extracellular domain of ERBB2.

