Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New strategy for the identification of breast cancer antigens that
induce therapeutic immune responses in tumor-bearing mice


This study describes a unique strategy designed to identify breast cancer
antigens (TAA) that induce therapeutic immune responses in tumor-bearing
mice. In a mouse model, the strategy led to the identification of growth
factor receptor-bound protein 10 (Grb10) as a newly identified TAA. Grb10
is a signal transduction molecule associated with multiple transmembrane
tyrosine kinase receptors. It was discovered by comparing microarrays of
cellular breast cancer vaccines highly enriched for cells that induced
breast cancer immunity with non-enriched vaccines. The vaccines were
prepared by transferring a cDNA expression library derived from SB5b
cells, a breast cancer cell line derived from a neoplasm that arose
spontaneously in the mammary gland of a C3H/He mouse into LM cells, a
mouse fibroblast cell line. As the transferred cDNA integrates
spontaneously into the genome of the recipient cells, replicates as the
cells divide, and is expressed, the vaccine could be prepared from a
little as 10 micrograms of tumor tissue. Relatively few cells in the
transfected cell population, however, incorporated cDNA fragments that
included genes specifying TAA. (The vast majority specified normal
cellular constituents.) A unique strategy was developed, therefore, to
enrich the vaccine for immunotherapeutic cells. Comparative microarrays
of enriched and non-enriched vaccines resulted in the identification of
twenty overrepresented genes. One, the gene for Grb10, was approximately
100-fold overrepresented. To determine if Grb10 in the enriched vaccine
was partly responsible for its therapeutic benefits, the gene was
incorporated into an expression plasmid that was then transfected into
the fibroblast cell line, which was then used as a vaccine. Mice with
established breast cancer treated solely by immunization with the
fibroblasts modified to express Grb10 developed robust immunity to the
breast cancer cells, which, in some instances, was sufficient to result
in tumor rejection.

