Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PKC-iota inhibitor ICA-1 overcomes chemoresistance and induces
cell death in glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme is a very aggressive brain cancer that is
refractory to most chemotherapeutics. The standard of care for
glioblastoma patients is the administration of temozolomide following
surgery. However, temozolomide provides an approximately 20% enhanced
survival rate. Therefore, it is imperative to develop other novel
chemotherapeutics to better enhance the survival rate and induce tumor
regression in patients. A potential candidate for a pre-clinical
glioblastoma study is the novel chemotherapeutic, ICA-1. ICA-1 is a
PKC-iota inhibitor which specifically inhibits PKC-iota and not its
homologue, PKC-zeta. Results demonstrated that ICA-1 inhibited cell
proliferation rates in a range of T98G glioblastoma concentrations in
vitro. Also, results showed that low density T98G cultures which have a
high proliferation status and high S-phase promotion concomitantly
demonstrated resistance to ICA-1 treatment. However, high density T98G
cultures which have a lower proliferation status and low S-phase
promotion are concurrently chemosensitive toward ICA-1. At 48h post ICA-1
treatment, the majority of cells in the high density cultures were in
G0/G1 with a rise of cells in this phase of the cell cycle shown by day 5
post-treatment. Conversely, between 48h and day 5, 30-44% of cells from
the low density cultures were in S phase irrespective of ICA-1 therapy.
Furthermore, by day 5 post-treatment, ICA-1 induced significant cell
death in T98G cells only at higher ranges (i.e., 20-40 microM of ICA-1).
Interestingly, 40 microM ICA-1 caused a significant cell death rate of
45% when 7,500 cells were seeded into a 24-well plate on Day 0 followed
by ICA-1 exposure on the next day. Forty microM ICA-1 induced 15% cell
death when 3,750 cells were seeded. There was a stepwise increase in the
amount of ICA-1 required to induce cell death as the cell concentration
increased (i.e., high density T98G cultures required elevated levels of
ICA-1). Therefore, the data suggested that the G0/G1 phase glioblastoma
cells (i.e., the higher cell concentrations) were more sensitive to 40
microM ICA-1 therapy. Whereas, the S phase glioblastoma cells were less
sensitive to the ICA-1 therapy. Future animal models may show that the
more aggressive the tumor becomes, the greater the potential for the
effectiveness of ICA-1 (i.e., greater chemosensitivity).

