Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of angiopoietin family members in the progression of
ovarian cancer


Despite advances in surgical debulking, radiation, and chemotherapy over
the past few decades, ovarian carcinoma remains the most deadly
gynecological malignancy. This is largely due to the lack of early stage
detection manifesting in approximately 80% of patients presenting with
metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. Current chemotherapeutic
drugs are effective only for a short period as patients with advance
disease eventually develop resistance despite significant initial
responses. Thus, there is a pressing need for the identification of novel
therapeutic targets in ovarian cancer. Mounting evidence suggests that
the Angiopoietin/Tie-2 functional axis has wide-ranging effects on tumor
angiogenesis and progression of a variety of cancer types, however, the
expression profiles and biological effects of the Angiopoietin family
members on ovarian cancer remain largely unknown. Our data show for the
first time that Ang-1, Ang-2 and Ang-4 are expressed in ovarian cancer
cell lines and patient samples from both primary and secondary tumor
lesions. More specifically, patient tumors revealed a unique localization
pattern of Angiopoietin family members whereby Ang-1 and Ang-2 are
robustly expressed in tumor cells and stroma, whereas Ang-4 expression is
predominately in the tumor stroma. In addition, we show that
overexpression of Ang-4 and Ang-2 and, to a lesser extent, Ang-1,
promotes subcutaneous growth of ovarian cancer cells and results in
accelerated ascites formation and poor survival in an orthotopic ovarian
cancer mouse model. Immunohistochemical analysis of orthotopic tumors
suggests the pro-growth effects of Ang-1 and Ang-4 are mediated through
increased tumor cell proliferation as determined by positive Ki67
staining. Our results also demonstrated that ovarian cancer cells express
Tie-2 receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), the angiopoietin receptor. The
expression of Tie-2, as well as angiopoietin family members, by ovarian
cancer cells suggests the potential of an Angiopoietin/Tie-2 autocrine
loop. Lastly, further analysis suggests the potential role of
angiopoietins in increasing the amount of cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) in the tumor microenvironment. Taken together, our data suggest
that the Angiopoietin/Tie-2 functional axis is a significant player in
ovarian cancer progression and is a potential target for ovarian cancer
therapy.

