Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of protein tyrosine kinase c-Src and protein
tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 is a novel therapeutic strategy that induces
potent inhibition of pancreatic cancer cell viability in vitro and tumor
progression in vivo


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is a deadly human malignancy, with over 95% of
patients succumbing within five years. The majority of pancreatic cancer
deaths are caused by metastatic dissemination of the primary tumor. The
only curative treatment is surgical resection, which is limited by tumor
stage, and the standard chemotherapeutic option, gemcitabine, offers only
modest survival and quality of life benefits. There is a need for a
greater understanding of pancreatic cancer biology and development of
novel therapies to inhibit tumor progression and metastasis. The
non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase, c-Src (Src) has emerged as a
potential target for the treatment of pancreatic cancer, having been
demonstrated to promote a number of tumorigenic processes. Src is
overexpressed and/or aberrantly activated in greater than 70% of human
pancreatic cancers. In addition, SHP-2, a non-receptor protein tyrosine
phosphatase, regulates Src family kinase activity. Evidence has
established clinical relevance for SHP-2 in human diseases. A recent
study demonstrated that inhibition of SHP-2 abrogates in vitro and in
vivo angiogenesis and inhibits activity of the MAPK/Erk1/2 and PI3K/Akt
survival pathways. SHP-2 and Src function as key signaling intermediates
downstream of growth factor receptors, cytokine receptors, and integrins,
and are crucial for activation of downstream cascades of tumor
progression and metastasis. The purpose of this study was to determine
the importance of SHP-2 and Src, for pancreatic cancer signaling, cell
biology, tumorigenicity, and metastasis. We have demonstrated elevated
SHP-2 expression and phosphorylation in pancreatic cancer cells, relative
to normal pancreatic cells. Phosphorylation of SHP-2 in pancreatic cancer
cells occurs in a Src kinase-dependent fashion. Functional inhibition of
SHP-2 and Src, individually or in combination, resulted in reduced
ERK-1/2 phosphorylation, increased cleavage of caspase 3 and PARP,
increased expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, and decreased
levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL. These results were mirrored
by decreased viability and increased caspase activity in the presence of
Src and SHP-2 inhibition. Finally, treatment of mice with small molecule
inhibitors of Src or SHP-2, produced markedly smaller pancreatic tumors
relative to controls in an orthotopic nude mouse model and dual treatment
exacerbated this effect. The potential use for the Src and SHP-2
signaling axes as therapeutic targets remains largely untapped. These
data suggest the importance of SHP-2 in pancreatic cancer cell biology
and its potential value as a therapeutic target. Our studies suggest that
the anti-tumor/anti-metastatic effects of Src inhibition may be improved
through simultaneous inhibition of SHP-2.

