Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Turmeric oil inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma through abolishing
EpCAM expression


Background: In previous study, we found that turmeric oil, a volatile oil
from turmeric, can prevent hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in an
orthotopic HCC mouse model. Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), a
marker of cancer stem cells (CSC), is correlated with HCC initiation,
progression, and prognosis. Our resent data showed that turmeric oil can
decrease EpCAM expression in esophageal cancer and HCC cell lines. Since
the role of EpCAM in HCC carcinogenesis is becoming clarified, it is
likely that turmeric oil prevents HCC through EpCAM signaling. Aim: To
investigate the mechanism of turmeric oil for HCC prevention. Method:
EpCAM expression in the specimens from HCC patients (n=25) was evaluated
by immunohistochemical staining. Red fluorescent protein (RFP)-labeled
H4IIE cells were inoculated into liver lobe of ACI rats. The rat HCC
tumor tissues from RFP-H4IIE cell inoculation were evaluated for the
subpopulation cells, which co-expressed RFP and EpCAM. The HCC rats by
H4IIE cell inoculation were treated with turmeric oil (100mg/kg, i.p,
every 2 days) for 2 weeks. The H4IIE cells treated with turmeric oil as
well as with EpCAM siRNA, and then inoculated at 106 into the right flank
of nude BALB/c mice for 1 week. Three HCC cell lines from human (HepG-2),
mouse (hepal-6), and rat (H4IIE) cells, were treated with turmeric oil to
evaluate the cell viability EpCAM expression, and -catenin in vitro.
Results: In human samples, a strong EpCAM expression was found HCC
tissues, while EpCAM was barely detected in the healthy controls. In HCC
animal models, RFP+ EpCAM+ cells were detected in the formed tumor tissue
and in circulation. The incidence of HCC by H4IIE cells inoculation was
significantly decreased in rats treated with turmeric oil. Abolishing of
EpCAM by turmeric oil caused the H4IIE cells unable to form tumor in nude
mice. In cell culture study, turmeric oil significantly decreased EpCAM
expression in all three HCC cell lines. Turmeric oil caused
relocalization of -catenin, a component in Wnt/-catenin pathway, in
nuclear and cytosol (Figure 1). Conclusion: 1) EpCAM-positive HCC cells
contribute to HCC initiation in animal models; 2) The inhibition of HCC
by turmeric oil is through decreasing EpCAM expression; 3). The
regulation of EpCAM expression by turmeric oil is associated with
Wnt/-catenin pathway.

