Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER phosphorylation on Ser167 in the development of endometrial
cancer


Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most common malignancy of the female
genital tract. Type I (endometrioid) EC is associated with elevated
estrogen signaling. One of the earliest genetic events in human type I EC
is loss of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN. Loss of PTEN allows
unrestrained activation of the AKT kinase, which, in turn, regulates such
key processes as proliferation, survival, cell size, and mRNA
translation. We have previously shown, using a Pten+/ mouse model, that
the neoplastic lesions develop even in the absence of estrogen,
suggesting that there might exist a functional and physiological link
between loss of Pten and hormone-independent increased estrogen receptor
activity. Previous studies have suggested that AKT can phosphorylate and
activate estrogen receptor alpha (ER) at Ser167, promoting the activation
of this nuclear receptor both in vivo and in vitro, even in the absence
of ligand. In order to define in vivo the role of ER phosphorylation on
Ser167 in normal endometrial physiology and during neoplastic
transformation, we have designed a knock-in approach to introduce the
S167A mutation in the mouse germline (ERA/A). These mice are viable and
fertile. We bred ERA/A mice to Pten+/ mice to test whether ER
phosphorylation on Ser167 is required for the development of endometrial
hyperplasia and carcinoma. We found that, at the age of 6 months, the
uterus weight of ERA/A/Pten+/ mice was significantly reduced compared to
that of Pten+/ mice. To elucidate whether inhibition of ER
phosphorylation on Ser167 affects cell cycle progression, we analyzed
BrdU incorporation in primary cultures of control and ERA/A endometrial
epithelial cells, and found that impairment of ER phosphorylation on
Ser167 leads to a significant reduction of the number of actively
proliferating cells. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms
responsible for this cell cycle impairment, we analyzed by real-time PCR
the expression levels of cell cycle-related genes in the uterus of
control and ERA/A mice. Surprisingly, our results indicate that many
genes related with the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, like Ccna2 or Ccnb1,
and spindle formation, like Plk1 or Tpx2, are deregulated in ERA/A uteri,
compared to wild-type controls. In conclusion, our results indicate that
ER phosphorylation on Ser167 is an obligatory pathway for the development
of endometrial lesions consequent to loss of Pten in endometrial cancer,
at least in part by affecting the expression of cell cycle genes.

