Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of hypoxia mediated cell cycle dysregulation:
miR-134 targets CDKN2A


Background: Among the various factors in the tumor microenvironment
influencing tumor growth and progression, hypoxia plays a key role in
promoting tumor growth and resistance to therapeutics. However, a
mechanistic understanding of the complicated biological interplay between
the stromal framework (hypoxia context) and malignant regions of the same
tumor remains an unmet need. In this study, we examined the molecular
networks of interplay between hypoxia and miRNA deregulation. Study
methods and results: In this study, we profiled the expression of miRNAs
in ovarian cancer cells upon exposure to hypoxia (1% O2) using microRNA
microarray (Agilent v14). We found that significant numbers of miRNAs are
dysregulated. In A2780 and Skov3 ovarian cancer cells, using a
statistical cutoff (p1.5), normoxia v/s short term (48hrs) and long term
(6 days) hypoxia exposure, we found that 23 MicroRNAs were down regulated
whereas 11 were upregulated. Among these, miR-134 validated to be
overexpressed under hypoxia by 3 - 4 fold in A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian
cancer cells consistently across the short and long term time points.
Upon bioinformatics analyses for target sites of commonly up regulated
miRNAs, we found that miR-134 was predicted to target CDKN2A (Miranda,
microT, PITA, RNA22, TargetScan). CDKN2A is a protein involved in cell
cycle control, precisely regulating cell cycle G1 control through
complexing with CDK4. Considering the fact that CDKN2A expression is lost
in several cancer types and its correlation with the aggressive tumor
growth, we checked expression of CDKN2A under hypoxic conditions. CDKN2A
was down-regulated under hypoxia by 55% and was inversely correlated with
miR-134 expression in cell lines tested. Upon transfection of A2780
ovarian cancer cells with miR-134 microRNA mimics, we observed consistent
down regulation of CDKN2A by >40%, compared to scrambled control
transfected cells. This further proves the role of miR-134 in
deregulating CDKN2A expression in ovarian cancer. Discussion: This study
provides new insights into miRNA-134's role in regulating cell cycle in
the context of hypoxia mediated signaling. These findings may have
implications for new approaches targeted at curbing the deleterious
effects of hypoxia on tumor growth.

