Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker evaluation In phase I clinical trials of selective PI3K
and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors


Background: The PI3K/Akt pathway is frequently activated in cancer by
multiple mechanisms including PI3K activating mutations, PTEN loss, RTK
activation, and other means. GDC-0941 and GDC-0980 are selective PI3K and
dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors, respectively, which are currently in phase II
clinical development. Assays for candidate predictive and pharmacodynamic
biomarkers were conducted on patient samples collected from phase I
studies of GDC-0941 and GDC-0980. The purpose was to confirm pathway
inhibition at tolerable doses, as well as look for association between
anti-tumor activity and candidate predictive biomarkers. Methods:
Archival tumor tissue samples were analyzed using a 6 gene mutation assay
(PIK3CA, EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, NRAS, AKT1), an immunohistochemistry assay for
PTEN, and a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay for PIK3CA.
Select samples were analyzed for an expanded mutation panel and
genome-wide copy number alterations using the Oncoscan platform
(Affymetrix). For pharmacodynamic biomarker assays, analyses were
initially limited to pre and post treatment phospho-AKT levels in
platelet rich plasma. Once substantial downmodulation of pAKT in
surrogate tissue was observed, pre- and post treatment biopsies were
collected from a subset of patients and analyzed for phospho-S6 levels by
immunohistochemistry. Results: Predictive biomarker assays were conducted
on over 150 samples from the phase I study. Overall we found a prevalence
of 7% PIK3CA mutations and 15% loss of PTEN in these samples. PIK3CA
amplification was observed in several samples from ovarian cancer
patients. Overall there were five confirmed partial responses in the
studies, and two of these occurred in patients with activating mutations
in PIK3CA. Robust PD knockdown of pAKT in surrogate tissue was observed
in the early stage of dose-escalation. Moreover, substantial knockdown of
pS6 was seen in tumor tissues in patients treated at or below the
recommended phase II dose. Conclusions: Pharmacodynamic assays confirmed
effective pathway knockdown at safe and tolerated clinical doses of
GDC-0941 and GDC-0980. Anti-tumor activity was observed in patients with
PIK3CA mutations, as well as some patients whose tumors did not harbor
pathway alterations. These data support patient stratification in phase
II clinical studies to determine whether a predictive biomarker will be
useful in identifying responsive patients.

