Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of the shape of the ligand estrogen receptor complex
controls estrogen induced apoptosis in breast cancer


Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are the standard of care for long term
adjuvant treatment of estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer in
postmenopausal patients. However, acquired drug resistance eventually
develops and evolves to expose a vulnerability in breast cancer: estrogen
induced apoptosis. The discovery of the new biology of estrogen induced
apoptosis has translated to treatment of patients in clinical trials
[Jordan V, Ford L. Cancer Prev Res 2011;4:633-7]. We recently reported
the sequence of events involved in triggering of estrogen induced
apoptosis [Ariazi et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011]. Our goal here is
to define the mechanics of ligand ER action to trigger apoptosis.
4-Hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT) reverses estradiol (E2) induced apoptosis in
long term estrogen deprived MCF-7 cells. As an investigative tool, we
synthesized a range of estrogenic triphenylethylenes (TPEs), which are
structurally similar to 4OHT. We discovered that although the TPEs are
all classified as estrogens for breast cancer growth they, like 4OHT,
inhibit E2 induced apoptosis. We previously identified that the surface
amino acid D351 within the ligand binding domain is critical for the
estrogenic actions of 4OHT. Unlike raloxifene, whose antiestrogen side
chain shields and neutralizes D351, the side chain in 4OHT is too short.
In order to elucidate the biological activity of the TPE:ER, we devised
an assay using induction of the mRNA for the transforming growth factor
(TGF-) gene in situ[Jordan et al. Cancer Res. 2001;61:6619-6623]. In
MDA-MB231 cells stably transfected with wild type ER (MC2 cells), TPEs
and tamoxifen metabolites, 4OHT and endoxifen induce TGF- mRNA expression
in a similar fashion to 17 estradiol (E2). Cells stably expressing D351G
ER (JM6 cells) i.e. without the charged D351, ER retain responsiveness to
planar estrogens; however the nonplanar estrogens and 4OHT, lose their
ability to induce TGF- mRNA and become completely antiestrogenic. This
response therefore is characteristic of an antiestrogenic conformation of
the ER complex where charged D351 would interact with activating function
1(AF-1) to enhance estrogen action for growth. The TPEs prefer to dock
with the ER in a conformation related to 4OHT: the antiestrogenic
conformation. The fact that the TPEs also stimulate growth of breast
cancer demonstrates the extreme sensitivity of this estrogenic endpoint.
Thus the observation that planar and nonplanar compounds have different
abilities to change the shape of the ER complex may have important
implication for the modulation of the E2 induced apoptosis. We conclude
that AF-1 is required for E2 induced growth but AF1 and AF2 together are
required to deliver coactivators and cause E2 induced apoptosis.
Acknowledgements This work (VCJ) was supported by the Susan G Komen for
the Cure Foundation under Award number SAC100009.

