Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-beta induced stromal versican promotes cancer invasion in
advanced stage serous ovarian cancer


Tumor microenvironment is crucial for tumor progression. Cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) support tumor growth and invasion by
actively secrete different proteins into the extracellular matrix. Using
transcriptome profiling analysis on microdissected normal and malignant
ovarian tumor tissues, we obtained a CAF specific gene signature. One of
the identified genes, versican, showed a 15fold increase in expression in
the fibroblastic stromal component of the tumor tissue. This study seeks
to evaluate the clinical significance of stromal versican
over-expression, to delineate the role of versican in ovarian cancer
progression and to understand the regulatory mechanism of versican.
Clinical significance of stromal versican expression was evaluated by
Kaplan Meier analysis (N=102). Results suggested that high versican
expression in cancer stroma is significantly associated with poor overall
and progression free survival in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC)
patients (pTumor microenvironment is crucial for tumor progression.
Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) support tumor growth and invasion by
actively secrete different proteins into the extracellular matrix. Using
transcriptome profiling analysis on microdissected normal and malignant
ovarian tumor tissues, we obtained a CAF specific gene signature. One of
the identified genes, versican, showed a 15fold increase in expression in
the fibroblastic stromal component of the tumor tissue. This study seeks
to evaluate the clinical significance of stromal versican
over-expression, to delineate the role of versican in ovarian cancer
progression and to understand the regulatory mechanism of versican.
Clinical significance of stromal versican expression was evaluated by
Kaplan Meier analysis (N=102). Results suggested that high versican
expression in cancer stroma is significantly associated with poor overall
and progression free survival in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC)
patients (p<0.01). Co-culturing ovarian cancer cells with normal ovarian
fibroblasts showed significantly increased in versican expression in
fibroblasts. Based on this observation, we hypothesize that signaling
molecules secreted by cancer cells induce versican expression in
fibroblasts. To test this hypothesis, we treated ovarian fibroblasts with
different cytokines. The results showed a significant increase in
versican expression in TGF-beta treated cells (pTumor microenvironment is
crucial for tumor progression. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
support tumor growth and invasion by actively secrete different proteins
into the extracellular matrix. Using transcriptome profiling analysis on
microdissected normal and malignant ovarian tumor tissues, we obtained a
CAF specific gene signature. One of the identified genes, versican,
showed a 15fold increase in expression in the fibroblastic stromal
component of the tumor tissue. This study seeks to evaluate the clinical
significance of stromal versican over-expression, to delineate the role
of versican in ovarian cancer progression and to understand the
regulatory mechanism of versican. Clinical significance of stromal
versican expression was evaluated by Kaplan Meier analysis (N=102).
Results suggested that high versican expression in cancer stroma is
significantly associated with poor overall and progression free survival
in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) patients (p<0.01).
Co-culturing ovarian cancer cells with normal ovarian fibroblasts showed
significantly increased in versican expression in fibroblasts. Based on
this observation, we hypothesize that signaling molecules secreted by
cancer cells induce versican expression in fibroblasts. To test this
hypothesis, we treated ovarian fibroblasts with different cytokines. The
results showed a significant increase in versican expression in TGF-beta
treated cells (p<0.01). Further studies using pathway inhibitors
suggested that the induction is mediated through the TGF-beta receptor
type II and the subsequent Smad signaling. To delineate the function
roles of versican in cancer progression, cell motility and cell invasion
assays were conducted. Cancer cells demonstrated increased invasiveness
and motility in the presence of extracellular versican. The results were
further confirmed using a 3D cancer invasion model in which ovarian
cancer cells were co-cultured with fibroblasts and supplied with
high-levels of versican in the type I collagen matrix. Transcriptome
profiling analysis and luciferase reporter assay were performed to
evaluate the underlying molecular mechanism. The results showed that
versican up-regulated CD44 and MMP9, and activated the NFB signaling
pathway. Co-localization of versican with CD44 and MMP9 proteins
demonstrated that elevation of versican in stromal fibroblasts, and both
CD44 and MMP9 in cancer cells particularly at the epithelial-stromal
interface of the invasion front. In conclusion, stromal versican is a
prognostic marker for HGSC and is associated with poor patient survival.
Ovarian cancer cells induce versican production in CAFs through TGF-beta.
Subsequently, stromal versican up-regulates CD44 and MMP9 expression in
cancer cells, which may facilitate the degradation of ECM at the invasion
front. Our result demonstrated an important role of CAFs in supporting
cancer progression.

