Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel lentiviral barcoding strategy for lineage tracing of cancer
stem cells


The cancer stem cell theory posits the existence of a subset of
tumorigenic cells with self-renewal potential and the ability to wholly
reconstitute original tumors by lineage restriction. The corollary
follows that these tumor-initiating cells (TICs) may be defined in part
by their progeny, non-TICs that can contribute to tumor bulk, but lose
their self-renewal potential. Although the expression of surface markers
have been employed to identify highly enriched populations of TICs, no
lineage-tracing experiments have been performed to date to trace the fate
of TICs. To characterize TIC growth kinetics in mammary tumor cells
transplanted into syngeneic recipient mice containing intact immune
system, we developed a lentiviral barcoding system as a means of genetic
lineage tracing of cell subpopulations sorted by surface marker
expression. Combining antibody-based flow sort analysis with
lentiviral-borne 60mer genetic barcodes, we have examined both clonality
and propagation kinetics of barcodes in the tumor outgrowth. These
studies are based on the hypothesis that TICs represent a limited
subpopulation in breast cancers that give rise to tumor heterogeneity. By
uniquely barcoding cells sorted by candidate surface marker expression
(e.g. CD29 and CD24), then re-pooling barcoded cell fractions for
transplantation into recipient mice, the abundance of each barcode in the
reconstituted tumor reflects the frequency of TIC progeny from individual
sorted cell fractions. In theory, only barcodes integrated into TICs
should propagate throughout the heterogeneous tumor cell population.
Thus, lineage tracing of each barcode is possible when the
transplant-derived tumors are again FACS-analyzed using the same
antibodies of the original sort. Alternatively, if there is extensive
plasticity in tumors, non-TIC may acquire self-renewal properties and
give rise to a new population of TICs with altered genetic and epigenetic
properties. Here we present preliminary results in the previously
characterized mouse p53 null stochastic model of basal-like breast
cancer. Using qPCR, we demonstrate that barcodes integrate stably and are
present throughout the reconstituted tumor cell population. We further
determined that CD29hi/CD24hi subfraction consistently out-compete other
subpopulations while giving rise to self and progeny populations not of
the CD29hi/CD24hi immuno-profile. Our results indicate that CD29hi/CD24hi
subfraction retains the two cardinal features of self-renewal and ability
to give rise to progeny through lineage restriction ascribed to TICs. Our
novel lentiviral barcoding strategy not only directly tests the CSC
hypothesis but also provides future framework for defining specific
biomarkers and evaluating therapeutics directed towards cancer stem
cells. This lineage tracing methodology should be applicable not only to
genetically engineered mouse models but also to primary human breast
cancer xenografts.

