Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging and diagnostic potentials of a novel cancer targeting
peptide on bladder cancer in vitro and in vivo


Background: We have previously identified a cyclic peptide PLZ4 through
screening of one bead one compound(OBOC), that specifically binds to
bladder urothelial carcinoma cells. The main objective of this study is:
1) to optimize the binding and diagnostic potential of PLZ4 on cancer
cells in urine, 2) to determine the imaging potential in xenograft mouse
model. Methods: PLZ4 peptide was conjugated to the fluorescent dye Alexa
488 to determine the binding affinity toward several human and canine
clinical biopsy smears and paraffin-fixed bladder tumor sections. It was
also tested for in vitro diagnostic efficiency with human and dog bladder
cancer cell lines treated with urine for 2 and 4 hours. To determine the
in vivo targeting and imaging efficacy, PLZ4 was labeled with 64Cu
through the chelator DOTA or near-infrared dye DiD loaded in
nanocarriers. Mice carrying subcutaneous human or dog bladder cancer
xenografts generated from cell lines or clinical specimens were used for
in vivo imaging. Results: Our results indicated that PLZ4-Alexa 488 bound
to primary bladder cancer obtained from dog and human patients and had
higher affinity in paraffin-fixed bladder tumor sections compared to
H232A lung cancer xenograft tissue sections. PLZ4 also retained its
affinity toward both human and dog bladder cancer cells in the presence
of urine for 2 and 4 hours. Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging
displayed the accumulation of PLZ4-DOTA-64Cu conjugate at human xenograft
bladder cancer sites, while liver and kidney were also found to have high
uptake. DiD-loaded nanomicelles decorated with PLZ4 showed a better
homing property than non-targeting nanomicelles in both human and canine
xenograft bladder cancers. Conclusion: PLZ4 has high imaging, diagnostic
and therapeutic potential both in vitro and in vivo. It can possibly be
developed for targeted delivery of radionuclides or chemotherapeutic
nanoformulations in the management of bladder cancer.

