Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the tumorigenicity of disseminated tumor cells


Background: Tumor cells that disseminate to the bone marrow (disseminated
tumor cells, DTCs) have been identified in 30% of stage I - III breast
cancer (BC) patients and independently predict outcome. Because DTCs are
a rare, heterogeneous population of cells, little is known regarding
their characteristics; such as their clinical significance with regard to
disease progression, and targets that can be utilized for their
eradication. DTC Identification is typically achieved using antibodies to
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), and cytokeratin (CK). However,
EpCAM and CK can be down-regulated during epithelialmesenchymal
transition (EMT). To date, no published report has assessed the
tumorigenicity of DTCs isolated from patient samples using an in vivo
animal model. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
tumorigenicity of DTCs in vivo. Methods: Thirteen clinical stage I-III BC
patients provided informed consent to participate in an IRB-approved
study involving collection of bone marrow at the time of primary surgery.
Following Ficoll centrifugation, bone marrow aspirates were cultured
using breast cancer stem cell enriching conditions for 21 days. At 21
days, viability of floating cells with high nuclear: cytoplasmic ratios
were confirmed with Tryphan blue staining and cytokeratin expression was
identified using pan-cytokeratin immunostaining. 200 cells were
co-injected with Matrigel into the mammary fat pads (3 mice/patient) of
female nude mice. Mice were monitored daily for tumor formation. Results:
Viable floating cells with large nuclear: cytoplasmic ratios were
observed in 10/13 cases. Both CK+ and CK- DTCs were identified in 8 out
of 10 cases, and CK- DTCs only were identified in 2 out of 10 cases. One
of the 10 samples was tumorigenic in vivo; all 3 mice injected with this
patient's cells developed breast tumors within 55 days. This sample was
obtained from a 40-year old T2N2 patient with a grade 2 estrogen receptor
positive, progesterone receptor negative, Her2/neu negative tumor.
Interestingly, CK expression was not detected in this patient's cultured
cells. Conclusions: DTCs can be isolated and propagated using breast
cancer stem cell enriching conditions, enabling the characterization and
assessment of DTCs that are in the process of (or have undergone) EMT. In
addition, the tumorigenetic potential of DTCs can be assessed on a
patient-by-patient basis by employing an in vivo mouse model. Further
studies are needed to develop targeted therapies for the eradication of
micrometastatic disease in stage I-III BC patients.

