Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel upfront sample enrichment nanotechnology identifies
prostate, breast, colon, ovarian, lung, pancreatic, and melanoma cancer
specific biomarker candidates


BACKGROUND: Routine laboratory blood tests for biomarkers could
dramatically simplify and improve cancer diagnosis, prognosis and
tailored therapy. The tumor and its microenvironment, produce cascades of
information that enrich the blood proteome with potential cancer
biomarkers that could be highly informative about the establishment,
progression and metastatic dissemination of cancer. Nevertheless, the
identification of low abundance and labile cancer specific biomarkers in
blood remains extremely challenging. Low abundance markers are masked by
high abundance proteins such as albumin, and by non-specific markers
whose changes accompany many diseases. In this study, we analyzed a large
cohort of human serum samples from a wide-range of cancer conditions and
benign states, and utilized a rapid and powerful nanoparticle-based
biomarker capture technology. METHODS- We utilized isopropylacrylamide
(NIPAm) core shell hydrogel particles, functionalized with two chemical
baits, Cibacron blue F3GA and vinylsulfonic acid, for biomarker capture
from 450 serum/plasma samples. Twenty age and stage-matched cancer and 20
to 40 benign/inflammatory controls were processed for each of the 7
cancer types, and proteins eluted from the particles were analyzed by
high resolution LC-MS/MS analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher).
All specimens were analyzed in a randomized, batch fashion, followed by
an accurate comparison of the results in order to 1) identify a panel of
biomarkers for each cancer type and distinguish protein which are
involved in commons cancer mechanism and proteins which could uniquely
indicate a particular cancer type and 2) avoid the technological bias
that could be associated with the comparison of separated studies.
RESULTS: For each cancer type we obtained a panel of hundreds of
candidates biomarkers, a large number of them not previous identified by
MS and/or never measured in plasma. Within the proteins identified are
kinases, cytokines, growth factors, structural and nuclear proteins. Each
panel of candidate biomarkers includes a) proteins unique for a cancer
type, such as the tyrosine kinase Tec, specific for prostate cancer; b)
proteins common to many cancer types such as, PRKAG2, CD9, Lipocalin 2,
Annexin I, and SDFR-1 and c) numerous proteins whose role in cancer is
novel or not well-described. CONCLUSIONS: Cancer-specific low abundance
marker candidates have been identified using NanoTrap nanoparticles, a
novel rapid upfront sample processing biomarker capture technique. We are
developing a protocol for the validation of the biomarkers based on
MRM-MS. Further investigation will be required to understand the
biological meaning and clinical value of the proteins identified.

