Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting myeloid derived suppressor cells as novel strategy to
enhance immunotherapy in murine prostate cancer models


Purpose: Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are a major component
of the immunosuppressive environment responsible for immune tolerance in
cancer. These cells facilitate carcinogenesis and tumor progression by
impairing T and NK cells activation and contributing to regulation of
angiogenesis. In current study, we evaluated whether accumulation of
MDSCs occur in two murine prostate cancer models: a castrate resistant,
syngenic transplantable tumor (CR Myc-Cap) and the Hi-myc transgenic
tumor models. Tasquinimod is an anti-angiogenic agent tested in prostate
cancer and has been found to bind to an inflammatory protein S100A9 and
therefore have the potential to affect accumulation and function of
MDSCs. We investigated whether tasquinimod affects the induction and
function of MDSCs and facilitate vaccine therapy in these castrate
resistant prostate cancer models. Experimental design: Splenocytes and
blood cells were isolated from nave and CR Myc-Cap tumor bearing mice.
Blood samples were taken from Hi-myc transgenic mice and age-matched
littermates at different ages. All these splenocytes and blood samples
were subjected to staining with MDSCs markers, Gr1 and CD11b, and to flow
cytometry analysis. CR Myc-Cap tumor bearing mice were treated with
either vehicle, tasquinimod (1mg/kg), modified survivin vaccine peptide
SurVaxM, or combination. Tumor growth, MDSCs accumulation and function
upon treatments were monitored. Results: The peripheral MDSCs (in blood
and spleen) significantly increased in tumor bearing mice. The MDSCs
number increase correlated with disease progression in the transgenic
model. Low doses of tasquinimod (1-5mg/kg) did not change the
CD11b+Gr1high MDSCs number, but CD11b+Gr1high, CD11b+Gr1int, CD11b+Gr1
cells were differently accumulated in vehicle or tasquinimod treated
mice. Tasquinimod in vivo treatment reduced peripheral CD11b+Gr1int,
CD11b+Gr1 cells number. Low doses of tasquinimod have minimal effect on
CD11b+Gr1high MDSCs function and did not enhance the SurVaxM vaccine
therapy in CR Myc-Cap model.Conclusions: In summary, our study
demonstrates MDSCs accumulation in two prostate cancer models and
suggests that MDSCs may contribute to immune tolerance in prostate
cancer. The study also suggests low dose tasquinimod affect maturation of
MDSCs into other immunosuppressive cell types (CD11b+Gr1int, CD11b+Gr1).
Higher doses of tasquinimod (10mg/kg) are being tested for their
potential to affect MDSCs accumulation and function in prostate cancer
models.

