Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2/neu oncogene induced tumors in mammary epithelial cell COX-2
deficient mice have disease delaying modifications of tumor
microenvironment


Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) enzyme, which catalyzes the synthesis of several
pro- and anti-tumorigenic prostanoids, is associated with more than 40%
of breast cancers. COX-2 inhibitors decrease the risk of tumorigenesis
and breast cancer recurrence, however, systemic COX-2 inhibition is
associated with a serious cardiovascular hazard that is unrelated to the
anti-tumorigenic benefits. Targeting the COX-2 pathway in cancer
chemoprevention or therapy, therefore, requires refined mechanistic
understanding of how COX-2 and its main pro-tumorigenic product PGE2, act
in the complex tumor microenvironment to support tumor growth. To that
end, we engineered mice on a pure FVB/N background that lack COX-2 only
in mammary epithelial cells (MECs). Mice transgenic for COX-2 exons 5 and
6, flanked by loxP sites (COX-2flox/flox (wild type; WT)), were crossed
with mice expressing cre recombinase under control of the mouse mammary
tumor virus (mmtv) promoter (Cremmtv) to achieve MEC-targeted deletion of
COX-2 (COX-2MECKO). Unlike global COX-2 deficiency, mice lacking COX-2 in
MECs were viable, fertile and disease-free making them highly suitable
for cancer studies. WT and COX-2MECKO mice were crossed with mice that
express activated HER2/neu oncogene also under control of the mmtv
promoter (HER2/neummtv), to drive mammary tumor development. This is a
valid molecular model for human breast cancer as amplification of
HER2/neu proto-oncogene occurs in 10-30% of breast cancers. Tumor onset
was significantly delayed in HER2/neummtvCOX-2MECKO mice compared to
their HER2/neummtv WT littermates (median disease free survival 23 and 29
weeks, respectively (p=0.006, n=12-17)). Tumor multiplicity was also
decreased (p=0.043) in HER2/neummtv COX-2MEC KO mice (3.857 1.388; n=7)
vs. HER2/neummtv WT (6.929 0.9804; n=14). Tumors from HER2/neummtv WT
showed higher expression of mRNA for the vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) receptors VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 by real time PCR (Q-PCR).
Elevated CD31 mRNA and protein levels were evident in HER2/neummtv WT
tumors by Q-PCR and immunohistochemistry, indicating limited
vascularization in the HER2/neummtvCOX-2MECKO mice. In addition, cell
sorting by flow cytometry revealed increased infiltration of HER2/neummtv
COX-2MECKO tumors by CD3+ CD4+ lymphocytes as well as CD3+ CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells. These data suggest a paracrine role for mediators, most likely
PGE2, derived from COX-2 in mammary epithelium in promoting and tumor
supportive microenvironment including angiogenesis and immune escape.
Targeted approaches to restrain COX-2/PGE2-dependent promotion of
microenvironmental permissiveness may be useful in chemoprevention or
treatment of breast and other cancers.

