Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial effect of thermally targeted p21 polypeptide and
bortezomib in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most common non-skin malignancy in men and is
responsible for more deaths than any other type of cancer, except lung
cancer. Most cases of prostate cancer are androgen dependent. However,
during androgen ablation therapy androgen-independent prostate cancer
(AIPC) cells are selected via multiple mechanisms. Since, AIPC cells are
immune to androgen deprivation their appearance represents a major
obstacle in the treatment of prostate cancer. Several mechanisms used by
prostate cancer cells require proteasome function among which is androgen
receptor recycling as well as degradation of NK-KB inhibitor IKB.
Bortezomib, a FDA-approved proteosome inhibitor for the treatment of
multiple myeloma was shown to induce growth arrest and apoptosis in many
tumor types including AIPC, where it was shown to have a modest effect as
a single treatment regime. Previously in our laboratory, Bac-ELP-p21 was
found to inhibit the proliferation of SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells and
induce S-phase arrest as well as apoptosis. Driven by the need for new
therapeutic means for AIPC, we investigated the inhibitory effects of the
p21 mimetic peptide on the growth of the androgen independent prostate
cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145 as well as its potential to be used as a
combination therapy with Bortezomib. For our prostate cancer research, we
have further optimized the delivery system in order to get higher yields
of purified protein as well as better temperature response. The
redesigned p21-ELP1-Bac polypeptide retained its ability to enter both
PC3 and DU145 cells and localize into the nucleus, which was confirmed
using confocal microscopy and flow cytometry, respectively. Using MTS
assay, we have shown that the IC50 value of both Bortezomib and the p21
mimetic peptide decreased by 1.5 and 4.5 times, respectively, when those
two drugs were used in combination in both PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer
cell lines. Furthermore, the combination treatment lead to an increase in
phosphatidylserine exposure in both cell lines observed using flow
cytometry after staining with Alexa 488 Annexin and propidium iodide.
Using a BrdU incorporation assay combined with PI staining, we found that
treatment with p21-ELP-Bac after treatment with Bortezomib caused an
increase in the G1 phase of arrested cells in both cell lines. The
thermally responsive macromolecular carrier combines the advantages of
thermal targeting to the tumor site with targeting of a specific
molecular pathway. Our results show that small molecule proteosomal
inhibition combined with p21-ELP-Bac represents a promising AIPC
treatment that can be further utilized with other therapeutic peptides.

