Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRBP1 overexpression is frequently found In lung cancer patients
and alleviates intracellular stress induced apoptosis through positive
regulation of GRP78 in lung cancer


How tumors evade apoptotic signals and survive during cancer progression
has not yet been resolved. To unravel the molecular mechanisms involved
in lung carcinogenesis will greatly improve therapy. Endoplasmic
reticulum is a cellular organelle in which secretory and proteins are
synthesized and modified. These processes are always enhanced in cancer
cells. Ribosome binding protein1(RRBP1) was originally reported as a
ribosome-binding protein on the rough endoplasmic reticulum. In this
report, we showed that RRBP1 was highly expressed in the early stage of
lung cancer compared to their adjunct normal tissue samples by utilizing
lung cancer tissue array(n=87). Depletion of RRBP1 by short-hairpin RNAs
significantly reduced cell growth and induced apoptosis in A549 and CL1-5
cells, but not in normal lung cells(BEAS2B). Furthermore, RRBP1-depleted
NSCLC cells could activate CD95/caspase signaling pathways. Treatment
with caspase8 inhibitor (ZVAD-FMK) or with shRNA against caspase8 was
sufficient to suppress apoptosis in RRBP1-depleted cells. This effect is
associated with significantly reduction in the expression of GRP78.
GRP78, an antiapoptotic protein widely upregulated in cancer, plays a
critical role in chemotherapy resistance in some cancers. According to
our data, ectopic expression of RRBP1 alleviated tunicamycin induced
apoptosis by upregulation GRP78 protein level in lung cancer cells. A
strong correlation was observed between the expression of RRBP1 and GRP78
in tumor biopsies from NSCLC patients, supporting the concept that GRP78
expression levels are controlled by RRBP1. Taken together, this study not
only showed that GRP78 is regulated by RRBP1 but also report that RRBP1
and GRP78 expression is involved in NSCLC growth and progression. suggest
that RRBP1 is required for lung cancer growth and development, which may
be a useful target in lung cancer treatment and expected to provide the
basis for a rational approach for the development of new molecular
targeted therapies

