Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic ascorbate inhibits pancreatic cancer cell EMT and
sensitizes cancer cells to gemcitabine


Pharmacologic concentrations of ascorbate have been shown to act as a
pro-oxidant anti-cancer agent. Our previous work has showed that
pharmacologic ascorbate worked synergistically with gemcitabine in 8
pancreatic cancer cells lines, and in gemcitabine responsive and
non-responsive mouse tumor models. This study aimed to investigate the
mechanisms for this synergistic effect. In PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells
treated with 2.5 mM ascorbate, real time RT-PCR showed increased mRNA
expression levels of E-cadherin, and decreased levels of Vimentin,
indicating a reversal/inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). The inhibition of EMT was attribute to up-regulation of microRNAs
mir429 and mir 200 family, which binds to to 3 URTs of Zeb-1 and Zeb-2
mRNAs, thus inhibited Zeb-1/2 mRNA translation and accelerated their
deadenylation and subsequent exonucleolytic digestion. Consistant with
the mir429 and 200 increase, real-time RT-PCR showed decreased in Zeb-1.
Since Zeb-1 is a repressor of E-cadherin, the inhibition in Zeb-1
resulted in the increased level of E-cadherin. Moreover, mRNAs for
multiple MMPs were also found inhibited by ascorbate treatment, while
collagen type IV and type II were largely increased. Relatively, mir21
was found decreased by ascorbate treatment. Mir21 is an oncomir that
promotes cancer invasion. It inhibits TIMP-3 and up-regulate MMPs, and
thus its inhibition is associated with repression of MMPs. At cellular
level, immulofluorescence clearly showed an increase in E-cadherin and
decrease in Vimentin expression, which confirmed the RT-PCR results in
indicating EMT inhibition. As EMT is highly related to drug resistance,
we co-treated PANC-1 cell with ascorbate and gemcitabine. PANC-1 cells
exhibited a highly EMTed phenotype and were resistant to gemcitabine
single-drug treatment. The combination treatment of ascorbate and
gemcitabine dramatically increased cell death compared to gemcitabine
alone. Using Chou-Talalay's constant ratio design, gemcitabine IC50 was
decreased 3.5-fold, and gemcitabine IC90 was decreased 11.5-fold. In
PANC-1 orthotopic mouse tumor model (n=3 for each group), live animal
imaging showed predominant tumor growth and metastasis in saline-treated
controls, but tumor regression in ascorbate (4 g/kg/day, i.p.) treated
mice. At day 54, 2 of the 3 ascorbate-treated mice were tumor-free.
Experiments are underway with larger groups of mice and with
ascorbate/gemcitabine combination treatment to examine tumor growth and
metastasis. Collectively, these data demonstrated that ascorbate at
pharmacological doses inhibited pancreatic cancer growth. Inhibition in
EMT by ascorbate resulted in a strong synergistic effect between
ascorbate and gemcitabine. These results suggest a rational combination
of high dose parenteral ascorbate and gemcitabine in treating pancreatic
cancer, one of the most lethal cancers worldwide.

