Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase II study of ipilumimab plus androgen deprivation therapy
in castration-sensitive prostate carcinoma


Anti-CTLA-4 therapy (Ipilimumab, Yervoy) was recently FDA-approved for
the treatment of metastatic melanoma based on improved median overall
survival observed in Phase III clinical trials. Since anti-CTLA-4 targets
a T cell specific molecule, as opposed to a tumor specific molecule, it
is being investigated as treatment for multiple malignancies, including
prostate cancer. Given that anti-CTLA-4 mediates anti-tumor responses by
enhancing T cell responses, it has been postulated that standard agents
that enable tumor cell death may allow for priming of a T cell immune
response that can be augmented by combination with CTLA-4 blockade.
Therefore, we hypothesized that adding ipilimumab to standard androgen
ablation (AA) therapy in men with metastatic prostate cancer (mPC) would
improve immune and clinical responses. We designed a clinical trial
whereby men with castrate-sensitive mPC, ECOG performance status 2 and
normal organ and marrow function are registered 1 month of initiation of
an LHRH agonist or antagonist (LHRHa). Men with autoimmune diseases,
known brain metastases, small cell carcinoma morphology, known HIV,
Hepatitis B or C infection, untreated symptomatic spinal cord
compressions or chronic immunosuppressive therapies are excluded.
Starting on day 29, patients receive 4 monthly doses of 10mg/kg
ipilimumab. The primary endpoint of the trial is to estimate the rate of
PSA 0.2ng/mL at 7 months, shown to be a powerful predictor of survival
(Hussain et al. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:3984). Secondary endpoints
include: immune responses, time to testosterone recovery (>50ng/mL), time
to disease progression off AA, overall survival and safety of the
combination.Accrual is ongoing. Data from 8 patients accrued to date show
a significant increase in the frequency of T cells expressing the
inducible costimulator (ICOS), as we have previously shown with
ipilimumab monotherapy (Liakou et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2008;105:14987; Carthon et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:2861), and
significant increases in memory T cell markers. ICOS+ T cells play an
important role in anti-tumor responses mediated by anti-CTLA-4 therapy
(Fu et al. Cancer Res. 2011;71:5445). Significant changes in dendritic,
natural killer and macrophage cell populations have not been observed. To
date, one patient developed an asymptomatic grade 3 transaminitis after 2
doses of ipilimumab that resolved with high dose steroids. Assessment of
immune responses induced by the combination of ipilimumab and AA, and
evaluation of clinical endpoints are ongoing. Updated data will be
presented.

