Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-stabilizing functions of NM23 in metastatic melanoma


The metastasis suppressor protein NM23-H1 exhibits two enzymatic
activities in vitro with potential roles in the maintenance of genomic
integrity: a nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK) activity that maintains
balance in nucleotide pools and a 3-5 exonuclease (3-5 EXO) activity that
could provide proofreading during DNA repair and replication. Studies
were conducted in cell culture and in vivo to determine the extent to
which NM23-H1 expression contributes to maintenance of genomic integrity,
as well as suppression of melanoma initiation and progression. Expression
of NM23-H1, and possibly NM23-H2, was shown to be necessary for timely
repair of UVR-induced (6-4) photoproducts (6-4PP) in melanoma cell lines,
as well as in transgenic mouse-derived melanocytes and embryo
fibroblasts, as determined by immunoslot-blot assay. NM23 protein
expression also suppressed the incidence of both spontaneous and
UVR-induced mutations as determined using the 6-thioguanine resistance
colony-forming assay. Point mutations that either selectively or tandemly
disrupted the NDPK and 3-5 EXO activities of NM23-H1 exhibited
compromised DNA repair and mutation-suppressing activities, consistent
with contributions of both enzymatic functions. UVR induced rapid (The
metastasis suppressor protein NM23-H1 exhibits two enzymatic activities
in vitro with potential roles in the maintenance of genomic integrity: a
nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK) activity that maintains balance in
nucleotide pools and a 3-5 exonuclease (3-5 EXO) activity that could
provide proofreading during DNA repair and replication. Studies were
conducted in cell culture and in vivo to determine the extent to which
NM23-H1 expression contributes to maintenance of genomic integrity, as
well as suppression of melanoma initiation and progression. Expression of
NM23-H1, and possibly NM23-H2, was shown to be necessary for timely
repair of UVR-induced (6-4) photoproducts (6-4PP) in melanoma cell lines,
as well as in transgenic mouse-derived melanocytes and embryo
fibroblasts, as determined by immunoslot-blot assay. NM23 protein
expression also suppressed the incidence of both spontaneous and
UVR-induced mutations as determined using the 6-thioguanine resistance
colony-forming assay. Point mutations that either selectively or tandemly
disrupted the NDPK and 3-5 EXO activities of NM23-H1 exhibited
compromised DNA repair and mutation-suppressing activities, consistent
with contributions of both enzymatic functions. UVR induced rapid (< 5
min) translocation of NM23-H1 to the nucleus, where it colocalized
closely in concert with 6-4PPs, strongly suggesting direct participation
in the repair of those lesions. Consistent with this proposed function,
transgenic mice engineered to be hemizygous-null in expression of both
NM23-M1 and NM23-M2 (the mouse homologs of NM23-H1 and NM23-H2,
respectively) were rendered susceptible to UVR-induced melanoma and
epithelioid follicular cyst formation. Moreover, this NM23-deficient
genotype conferred an aggressively metastatic phenotype to the
HGF-expressing transgenic mouse model of UVR-inducible melanoma.
Metastasis of highly-pigmented cells to draining lymph nodes and the
lungs was seen in most cases, with lesions also occasionally seen in
liver, brain and bone. Taken together, these results demonstrate a
critical role for NM23 proteins in DNA repair and suppressing mutations
under basal and genotoxic conditions. Importantly, they highlight for the
first time a tumor suppressor function in the context of UVR-induced
melanoma in vivo, and suggest a novel metastasis suppressor activity
through suppression of metastasis-driving mutations.

