Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fer protein-tyrosine kinase promotes lung tumor progression and
metastases


FER is a ubiquitously expressed non-receptor protein-tyrosine kinase
implicated in regulating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, cell
growth and migration. Although no activating mutations have been
described for FER, recent studies implicate FER as a positive regulator
of cancer progression in the prostate and liver. FER is composed of
Fer/CIP4 homology-Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (F-BAR), extended F-BAR (FX), SH2,
and kinase domains. FER oligomerization and membrane targeting is
conferred by F-BAR/FX domains, while the SH2 domain allows FER
recruitment to tyrosine phosphorylated ligands, including activated
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR). Since gene amplification
or gain-of-function mutations in EGFR are frequently observed in
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), we tested whether FER participates
in EGFR-driven NSCLC migration, progression, and metastases. Here we show
that FER is expressed in normal lung epithelial cells and at variable
levels in NSCLC cell lines. In a panel of NSCLC homogenates we observed 5
out of 12 cases of increased FER expression over normal adjacent tissue.
Furthermore, in a tissue microarray containing a range of lung cancer
histological types we observed high FER expression in the NSCLC
adenocarcinoma subtype and in SCLC. In human lung epithelial carcinoma
H1299 cells that overexpress wild-type EGFR, we detected rapid
EGF-induced activation of FER, and subsequent phosphorylation of several
putative FER substrates including STAT3, Cortactin, and Vav2. To probe
the function of FER, we used a lentiviral shRNA system to achieve stable
knock-down (KD) of FER in H1299 cells. Compared to control cells, FER KD
cells displayed a significant reduction in EGF-induced migration in
scrape wound assays. FER KD cells were also defective in frequency and
velocity of invasion under an agarose drop containing EGF. Of the
putative FER substrates tested, we observed a significant decrease in
Vav2 phosphorylation in Fer KD cells. Since Vav2 promotes Rac activation,
we compared localization of active, GTP-bound Rac1 in control and FER KD
cells treated with EGF. Interestingly, FER promotes localization of
GTP-Rac1 to the leading edge of these cells. To test the role of FER in
NSCLC progression and metastasis, H1299 vector control and FER KD cells
were grown as subcutaneous tumors in immune compromised mice
(Rag2-/-c-/-) for four weeks. Although we observed no significant
differences in tumor mass for FER KD cells compared to control, the
potential role of FER in metastasis is currently under investigation.
Together, this study may implicate FER as a viable new therapeutic target
for treatment of EGFR-driven metastasis of lung cancers.

