Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity on colorectal and pancreatic tumors of a new
strategy based on ROS generation by non-thermal plasma


Background. Local treatments of tumors are mainly based on surgical
resection and/or treatment such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) or ionizing
radiation (IR). Action mechanisms of IR and PDT are based on the
generation of ROS in the vicinity of the cells. In this context, cold or
Non Thermal Plasma (NTP), a new technology which can generate in situ
ROS, is currently under investigations. NTP is a cold (Background. Local
treatments of tumors are mainly based on surgical resection and/or
treatment such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) or ionizing radiation (IR).
Action mechanisms of IR and PDT are based on the generation of ROS in the
vicinity of the cells. In this context, cold or Non Thermal Plasma (NTP),
a new technology which can generate in situ ROS, is currently under
investigations. NTP is a cold (<40C) ionized gas (air or noble gas) thank
to an electric discharge. It contains free charges (electrons, ions),
free radicals and excited molecules. NTP can be generated at the end of a
catheter (plasma jet) allowing a local treatment that is compatible with
usual endoscopes for dysplasia or non resecable tumors. Previous studies
have shown an in vitro antitumor activity of NTP on various cells lines
and in vivo on subcutaneous xenografts. The aim of this work was to
assess the antitumor potential of fibred NTP when applied directly on in
situ orthotopic human pancreatic or colorectal carcinoma xenografts.
Methods. For in vitro experiments, HCT116-Luc and Mia Paca-Luc cells were
seeded in 24-well plate and then treated with a plasma jet device called
plasma gun. The effects on cells were assessed by bioluminescence imaging
(BLI). For in vivo experiments, HCT116-Luc cells were xenografted in the
caecum wall of nude mice and tumors were treated by a single NTP exposure
7 days post-induction. Concerning pancreatic tumors, MIA PaCa2-Luc cells
were injected in the pancreas head and NTP treatments were started 4 days
after implantation. Two others exposures were performed on D14 and D24.
For both models, tumor growth was monitored by BLI once a week. Results
and Discussion. NTP treatment showed a significant antitumor effect on
HCT116 and Mia Paca cells in vitro and in vivo. In vitro plasma induced a
decrease of BLI resulting from a massive cell death. Localized treatments
of tumor using plasma gun induced significant tumor stabilization. On
colorectal tumors, a BLI difference of 90% between treated and CTRL
tumors were observed at D22. This effect was confirmed by tumor weight
measurement. Moreover, a significant metastasis decrease was observed.
Similar results were observed on pancreatic tumors with also a
stabilization of tumor growth and a BLI decrease following each treatment
leading finally at D36 to a significant difference of tumor volume (84%).
Comparison of NTP with the references drug of these pathologies is
ongoing. The results obtained on two different tumor types show the
potential antitumor activity of NTP on implanted small tumors. These
effects were linked to a high rate generation of ROS in the vicinity of
tumors, inducing lethal DNA damages, a multiphase cell cycle arrest and
finally apoptosis. Such results demonstrate the interest of NTP for
treatment of dysplasia and non-resecable tumors that could be associated
to real time per operative near infrared fluorescence imaging via
fibro/coelioscopy.

