Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vivo and in-vitro breast cancer profiling to delineate adaptive
endocrine resistance: A pilot study


A substantial fraction of estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancers
fail to respond to endocrine treatment, i.e. tamoxifen and aromatase
inhibitors. While tamoxifen failure has been partially attributed to
primary resistance, for example CYP2D6 deficiency (Schroth et al JAMA
2009), adaptive resistance during ER blockade/estrogen deprivation plays
a prominent role. Little is known about shared molecular patterns driving
both resistance types. Long-term estrogen deprived (LTED) breast cancer
can be induced to undergo apoptosis by pulse estrogen (Song et al JNCI
2001; Jordan JCO 2008). We hypothesize that it should be possible to
identify predictive markers for adaptive endocrine resistance and
sensitivity to apoptosis to recognize endocrine refractory tumors. To
study a putative interface of primary and acquired resistance we
performed gene expression profiling with low-density arrays (Fluidigm
BioMark system) in tumors of 12 breast cancer patients treated with
tamoxifen. They were selected to model CYP2D6 independent primary
resistance: half of the patients had functional CYP2D6 but were tamoxifen
resistant due to relapse (median time-to-event 3.8 years). The other half
of patients were CYP2D6 deficient but tamoxifen sensitive due to the
absence of relapse (median follow-up 13.5 years). Expression profiles
have been compared to LTED MCF-7 cells (3 and 6 months estrogen deprived)
and MCF-7 cells grown in the presence of estrogen thereby modeling
adaptive resistance. Gene targets were selected based on literature i)
involved in endocrine resistance (N=62), ii) playing a role in transport
and estrogen supply (N=30), and iii) being p53 targets for apoptosis and
cell-cycle check points (N=46). We observed both shared and specific
expression phenotypes for adaptive and primary resistance. The
proliferation genes Cyclin B1 and STK15 were downregulated in LTED MCF-7
cells in line with lowered proliferation rates and, unexpectedly, Cyclin
B1 expression was also decreased in tamoxifen insensitive tumors
suggesting an involvement of G2/M cell cycle transition. The chemokine
receptor CXCR4 was upregulated in both LTED cells and resistant tumors,
confirming its prominent role in breast cancer progression. The
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 hydroxylase CYP27B1 was upregulated in LTED, but not
in resistant tumors suggesting a different role between the two models.
Other potential markers involve differentiation, inflammatory response,
cell cycle/apoptosis, and estrogen disposition pathways. Our preliminary
data demonstrate the feasibility to discern between short-term adaptive
versus primary resistance patterns. Expression profiling of LTED cells
following estrogen-induced apoptosis is currently underway.

