Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinate autophagy and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibition enhances
cell death in melanoma


The PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is a critical survival pathway in numerous
malignancies, including melanoma. Inhibitors of this pathway in cancer
cells, in particular mTOR, are commonly cytostatic rather that cytotoxic,
which may potentially limit efficacy of these agents. mTOR inhibition
also induces the survival pathway of autophagy, a catabolic process
whereby cells collect and recycle cellular components to sustain energy
homeostasis. Thus we tested the hypothesis that autophagy induction by
mTOR inhibitors directly limited their efficacy for the treatment of
melanoma. Here we found that melanoma exhibits high basal levels of
autophagy, as evidenced by a) detection of autophagosomes using LC3
fluorescence and autophagic flux in multiple melanoma cell lines and b)
increased LC3 fluorescence in human primary and metastatic melanomas
compared to benign nevi. Knockdown of Atg7, a key element of autophagy
machinery, resulted in cell death, indicating that survival of melanoma
cells is autophagy dependent. We also showed that the autophagy inhibitor
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) shows synergy when combined with the mTOR
inhibitor CCI-779 (temsirolimus), inducing cell death via increased
apoptosis in melanoma cell lines and in 3-D spheroid cell cultures. Since
autophagy eliminates mitochondria that are a source of toxic reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and mediators of apoptosis, we tested the
possibility that this contributed to melanoma survival. To test this
potential mechanism, we examined the role of the transcription factor
Nrf2, a master regulator of antioxidant defense. Treatment with CCI-779
inactivated Nrf2 by blocking its nuclear translocation and creating the
requirement for autophagy to eliminate ROS-producing mitochondria.
Combination treatment with CCI-779 and HCQ then prevented mitochondrial
elimination by autophagy, resulting in increased ROS production compared
to either agent alone and increased cell death. Conversely, knockdown of
the Nrf2 binding protein and inhibitor Keap1 increased Nrf2 activity,
resulting in increased cell culture survival and resistance to treatment
with CCI-779 and HCQ. These data suggest that coordinate inhibition of
the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and autophagy pathways promotes ROS-mediated apoptosis
and is a new therapeutic paradigm for the treatment of melanoma.

