Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation cancer gene sequencing for clinically actionable
mutations


Cancer gene mutations are important diagnostic, prognostic, and
predictive biologic markers. Mutation detection in cancer tissues has
been a real challenge for researchers as a cancer is often associated
with multiple mutations and new mutations may occur as the disease
progresses and during treatments. Essentially, all cancer tissues are a
mosaic mixture of normal and abnormal cell clones. Therefore, a new
technology that can target many mutations simultaneously with high
sensitivity is exceedingly desirable. Targeted next generation sequencing
permits deep sequencing of hundreds of mutations concurrently. We have
used a novel next generation sequencing technology that merges multiplex
PCR with ion semiconductor sequencing (AmpliSeq, Life Technology) to
sequence a panel of clinically actionable cancer gene mutations on 12
tumor samples including 6 archived FFPE samples, 2 bone marrow samples,
and 4 cell lines with known mutations, and a normal blood sample as a
control. Each sample was run three times to assay for inter-run
variability. The panel contains 739 mutations including clinically
actionable mutations such as EGFR mutations in exons 18-21, BRAF V600E,
KRAS mutations at codons 12, 13, and 61, and many more. Using this
technology we successfully identified all known mutations previously
detected using Pyposequencing or Sanger sequencing technologies. The most
common somatic mutations were also confirmed by Competitive
Allele-Specific TaqMan PCR (castPCR, Life Technology). To determine the
sensitivity of the test, we studied mutation positive FFPE samples with
serial dilutions. Our results showed that the test can detect mutations
at frequencies as low as 5% with 99% confidence. Analysis of mutation
calls in different runs showed little inter-run variation. Other benefits
of this novel technology are its fast turn around time, which can be as
short as two days, and its low cost. Our experience demonstrates that
this technology holds great potential clinical utility including
diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

