Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of nitric oxide in chromium-induced lung
carcinogenesis


Certain hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] compounds are well established human
respiratory toxins and carcinogens of occupational and environmental
relevance. Our recent studies have shown that intranasal (IN) exposure of
Balb/c mice to particulate zinc Cr(VI) compounds leads to pronounced
innate inflammation in the lung, which we postulate plays a significant
role in pulmonary tumorigenesis. Nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to be
induced via inflammatory response mediators, and has been implicated in
the progression of different cancers, including lung. Moreover,
NO-induced tumor invasiveness has been correlated with enhanced matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) expression in lung tumor cell lines. Of
particular relevance to the present study is the finding that in vitro
exposure of human lung cells to Cr(VI) in culture led to increased NO
production. The aim of the present study was to explore the role of NO in
chromium-induced lung tumorigenesis. BALB/c mice received weekly IN
delivery of either saline or 10 ug particulate basic zinc chromate, which
is an intermediately water soluble chromate typically encountered in
mining/chromate production facilities and which is also present as an
environmental atmospheric contaminant in urban areas surrounding
ferrochrome production facilities. After 9 weeks, immune cells,
cytokines, NO, MMPs and pathologic features of lung injury and
inflammation were measured in airway lavage fluid and lung tissue, at
both 24h after the final Cr(VI) dose, as well as 1 week later. As
previously shown, repetitive Cr(VI) exposure induced a neutrophilic
inflammatory airway response 24h after treatment. Neutrophils were
subsequently replaced by increasing numbers of macrophages 1 week after
treatment. Peribronchiolar inflammation was observed in chromate-exposed
mice, and was accompanied by a 100-fold increase in pro-MMP9 release into
the airways. Notably, airway NO was significantly increased 1.9 fold in
Cr(VI)-exposed mice as compared to their saline-treated counterparts at
both time points following final exposure. Moreover, immunoreactivity of
induced nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) was markedly increased in airways
exposed to Cr(VI), with staining localized to infiltrating immune cells.
In conclusion, repetitive exposure to particulate chromate induces an
inflammatory environment in the lung, accompanied by enhanced NO
production, which we postulate may promote Cr(VI) carcinogenesis.
Supported by NIH grants CA107972 and ES017334 to SC and ES017307 to SRP.

