Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA regulation of cell viability and drug response in cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths, with the
majority of deaths due to failed therapy from tumor drug resistance.
Third-generation chemotherapeutic agents represent the standard
first-line treatment for advanced small cell (SCLC) and non-small cell
(NSCLC) lung cancer patients. Response rates are poor (20-40%) with a
median survival of 8-10 months. In an unbiased and comprehensive
approach, we have combined a high-throughput screening platform with a
library of chemically synthesized microRNA mimics and inhibitors. We have
used this platform to identify mimics and inhibitors that reduce cell
viability in general, and those that specifically sensitize cells to
taxanes. We have identified several miRNAs for which over-expression or
inhibition has a dramatic and selective effect on cell viability or drug
response. We have demonstrated that miR-337-3p mimic sensitizes NSCLC
cells to taxanes. By combining in vitro and in silico approaches, we
identified STAT3 and RAP1A as direct targets that mediate the effect of
miR-337-3p by enhancing taxane-induced arrest in the G2 phase of the cell
cycle. We have identified an inhibitor of miR-139-5p as a potent and
selective regulator of SCLC cell viability. Inhibiting miR-139-5p
decreases SCLC cell viability by over 80%, but has a minimal cytotoxic
effect on that of NSCLCs or immortalized human bronchial epithelial
cells. We are currently investigating the targets of miR-139-5p that
mediate its effect on SCLC cell viability. We also identified miR-10a
inhibitor as increasing cell viability, with the converse observed for
miR-10a mimic, suggesting that miR-10a acts as a tumor suppressor gene by
directly decreasing expression of gene(s) that promote cell survival and
growth. Manipulation of miR-10a levels also resulted in significant
changes in both mRNA and protein levels of its predicted target, the
catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), which has been
shown to play a major role in proliferation and survival in a number of
human cancers and is a significant therapeutic target. We have identified
miR-337-3p as a regulator of taxane sensitivity, and miR-10a and
miR-139-5p as modulators of cell viability. Increasing levels of
miR-337-3p and inhibiting miR-10a and miR-139-5p may therefore provide
novel therapeutic tools for the treatment of NSCLC and SCLC.

