Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-34 prevents in vivo lung tumor initiation and progression in
the therapeutically resistant Kras;p53 mouse model


Lung cancer represents the leading cause of cancers deaths in men and
women worldwide, and current therapies fail to treat this disease in the
overwhelming majority of cases. The RAS and p53 pathways are two of the
most frequently genetically modified pathways in lung cancers.
Alterations in both result in loss of responsiveness to current therapies
leading to decreased overall patient survival. Because the microRNA,
mir-34 is a downstream transcriptional target of p53, which is reduced in
its expression in p53 null tumors, we hypothesized that targeting
Kras;p53 tumors with miR-34 would represent a novel yet powerful
therapeutic to suppress lung tumorigenesis. To this end we have made use
of the therapeutically resistant KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53LSL-R172H/+ mouse
model of lung cancer. In this work we characterized the tumor progression
in these mice following transgene activation specifically in the lung
through intratracheal administration of adenoviral particles expressing
cre recombinase. We note that adenocarcinomas are evident as early as 10
weeks following cre-recombination with severe lung inflammation
presenting at 22 weeks. Epithelial cells from these tumors were harvested
and cultured in vitro where they remain propagating, currently at passage
45. All three lines generated support growth in soft agar assays and are
invasive based on transwell migration assays. Because of the
pro-apoptotic effects of miR-34, we transduced the cells with
miR-34-expressing lentivirus. Transduced cells responded with reduced
proliferation and decreased migration. Based on these promising results
we began two series of in vivo experiments. We first assessed the
contribution of miR-34 to prevent tumor formation in
KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53LSL-R172H/+ mice. Animals that were treated with miR-34
at the same time as cre-induced recombination of transgenes show little
to no evidence of tumorigenesis at 19 weeks, while control animals had
multiple nodules that represented 8% of the total lung area. The second
series of in vivo experiments evaluated the ability of miR-34 to act as a
treatment in pre-formed tumors. While miR-34 was unable to reduce the
preformed tumors in these animals it was able to prevent further tumor
growth. These data support the use of miR-34 as a tumor preventive
mechanism and suggest that miR-34 may be useful in sensitizing tumors to
other conventional therapeutics.

