Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic K-Ras transforms three-dimensional colon epithelia
through upregulation of ERK-MAPK signaling


Colorectal cancers have the third highest incidence and are the second
most common cause of cancer-related death when considering tumors that
affect both men and women in the United States. Interestingly, a third of
these tumors harbor activating mutations in K-Ras and are associated with
worse outcomes. Caco-2 cells, derived from a colorectal carcinoma, are
noninvasive and do not harbor mutations in K-Ras, B-Raf or PI3KCA. This
cell line has historically been used as a model to study normal,
differentiated colonic epithelium in two-dimensional cell culture. Recent
studies have used Caco-2 cells in a three-dimensional cell culture system
to better model epithelial morphogenesis. In this study, we studied the
effects of introducing oncogenic K-Ras into three-dimensionally cultured
Caco-2 cells. Control Caco-2 cells seeded in extracellular matrix
generate hollow, polarized structures after ten days. In contrast, Caco-2
cells expressing oncogenic K-Ras formed much larger and filled structures
that lack a central lumen. Furthermore, western blot analysis of protein
lysates made from day 1 and day 10 control structures revealed a strong
decrease in cyclin B, suggesting a reduction in the proportion of cells
undergoing mitosis. K-Ras structures, however, maintained cyclin B
levels, providing evidence of prolonged proliferation. In addition,
immunofluorescence of the apical marker aPKC and the tight junction
protein ZO-1 revealed that K-Ras structures have disrupted polarity.
Caco-2 cells expressing oncogenic B-Raf phenocopied our results with
oncogenic K-Ras. Conversely, MEK inhibition with U0126 reverted K-Ras
structures back to normal morphology, indicating that K-Ras acts through
the ERK-MAPK signaling pathway. The expression of active versions of
PI3KCA and RalGDS, other Ras effectors, in Caco-2 cells produced
structures identical to control. Further work aims to elucidate a more
specific mechanism of Ras downstream of the ERK-MAPK signaling pathway in
our three-dimensionally cultured Caco-2 system.

