Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor action of adenosine A3 receptor in prostate cancer
involves suppression of micro RNA-21


Introduction: Adenosine-based drugs have shown promising results against
various solid tumors including prostate cancer. These drugs exert their
effects via adenosine receptors (ARs), and in prostate cancer, the A3AR
subtype appears to play a major role in its anti-tumor action. MicroRNAs
(miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate the coding RNAs at
post-transcriptional level. One of these, miR-21, has been shown to
promote prostate cancer growth and invasiveness. In the present study, we
hypothesized that A3AR agonists suppressed prostate tumor growth by
reducing miR-21 expression. Methods: In vivo studies were performed in
xenograft model of prostate cancer in severe combined immunodeficient
(SCID) mice. Mice were injected subcutaneously with PC3-MM human prostate
cancer cells, treated with vehicle, the agonist N-(3-iodobenzyl)
adenosine-5-N-methyluronamide (IB-MECA), the antagonist
9-Chloro-2-(2-furanyl)-5-((phenylacetyl)amino)-[1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-c]quinaz
oline (MRS1220) or MRS1220 + IB-MECA, on alternate day for 2-3 weeks, and
tumor growth was measured. Primary tumors were then excised and used to
determine miR-21 (by TaqMan assay) and maspin, PDCD4 and TPM1 (by Western
blotting and RT-PCR). In vitro studies were done in PC3-MM cells grown in
cell culture plates. The levels of miR-21 were also detected in RNA
samples obtained from human prostate cancer tissues (OriGene
Technologies), while the levels of maspin and PDCD4 were determined in
the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) prostate tumor sections by
immunohistochemistry. Results: IB-MECA suppressed tumor growth in SCID
mice. This effect was blunted in presence of the antagonist, MRS1220.
Reductions in tumor volume were associated with reduced expression of
miR-21 in the primary tumors. Furthermore, we observed up-regulation of
the tumor suppressor proteins maspin, PDCD4 and TPM1, which are known to
be negatively regulated by miR-21. Similar findings were obtained in in
vitro cell culture studies. In human prostate cancer RNA samples from
patients with different stages of prostate cancer there was high
expression of miR-21. This finding co-related with down-regulation of its
target proteins, maspin and PDCD4, in human prostate tumor sections.
Conclusions: Based on the data, we conclude that activation of the A3AR
reduces the prostate cancer growth by suppressing miR-21 expression and
up-regulating tumor suppressor proteins such as maspin, PDCD4 and TPM1.
These data support the use of A3AR agonists as a viable therapeutic
option against the advanced forms of prostate cancer.

