Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-23b Expression is Regulated by VHL and effects on Glioma
Cell survival and invasion


Background Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary brain tumor
in adults. While increasing evidence indicates that the deregulation of
miRNAs is involved in a wide range of human cancers, the roles and
potential mechanisms of miRNA in glioma development and progression are
still largely unknown. Methods The expression of miR-23b in 48 clinical
samples and five glioma cell lines with different grades was examined by
FISH and qRT-PCR. Flow cytometry, Annexin V method, Colony formation
assay, and Transwell cell invasion test were used to detect the
proliferation and invasive activity of the tumor cells before and after
transfection with AS-miR-23b of glioma cells. Luciferase assay and
western blot analysis were used to examine that VHL is a direct target of
miR-23b. In vivo anti-glioma effect of AS-miR-23b was investigated using
subcutaneous xenograft models. Results We identified that expression of
miR-23b is elevated in both glioma tissue samples and glioma cells by
real-time PCR and FISH analyses. Knock-down of miR-23b expression
triggered growth inhibition, induced apoptosis and suppressed invasion of
glioma cells in vitro. Luciferase assay and western blot analysis
revealed that VHL is a direct target of miR-23b. As such, restored
expression of VHL inhibited glioma cell survival and induced apoptosis.
Mechanistic investigation revealed that miR-23b deletion decreased
HIF-1/VEGF expression and suppressed -catenin/Tcf-4 transcription
activity in a VHL-dependent manner. Furthermore, expression of VHL was
inversely correlated with miR-23b in glioblastoma samples and was
predictive of patient survival in a retrospective analysis. Conclusion In
summary, we demonstrate that down-regulation of miR-23b inhibits survival
and invasion of glioma by repressing expression of VHL. Genetic
restoration of VHL bypassed the effects of miR-23b overexpression,
suppressing the ranscriptional activities of both the HIF/VEGF and
-catenin/Tcf-4 pathways. Based upon these observations, we propose that
anti-angiogenic therapy for glioma could benefit from adjuvent miRNA
therapy targeting the HIF1 and -catenin/Tcf-4 pathways.

