Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcium-depending formation of bone metastases in patients with
renal cell carcinoma


Introduction: Although a number of molecules have been implicated in the
process of formation of cancer metastases, the organ-selective nature of
cancer cells is still poorly understood. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) often
metastasize into bones, a calcium enriched tissue. We analyzed the
influence of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) in RCC and an enhanced
extracellular calcium concentration in processes of metastatic spread.
Material and Methods: In 33 matched RCC specimens, 11 non-metastasized,
11 metastasized into the lung and 11 metastasized into bones five years
after nephrectomy, CaSR was quantified by RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses. To investigate the influence of enhanced extracellular calcium
on the formation of metastases, primary RCC cells were isolated from
patients developing bone, lung and no metastasis five years after
nephrectomy (each 3 cell lines). Cell proliferation after calcium
treatment (2.5, 5 and 10 M) was quantified by BrdU incorporation. Cell
migration was determined in a Boyden chemotaxis assay with calcium as
chemotactical agent (10 M). Expression and activity of intracellular
signal transduction mediators were analyzed by a human phospho kinase
array and Western blot analyses. Results: Compared to non-metastasizing
RCC, CaSR mRNA expression was 10.8-fold increased and CaSR protein level
was 1.5-fold increased in tumor specimens of patients developing bone
metastases. In primary RCC cells with a high bone metastastic potential
CaSR expression was 3.7-fold higher compared to non-metastasizing RCC
cells. Calcium treatment of bone-metastasizing RCC cells, but not of
non-metastasizing cells, induced a concentration dependent enhancement of
proliferation. In a Boyden chamber experiment with calcium as chemo
attractant, RCC cells from patients with bone metastases showed a
9.4-fold higher migratory potential compared to cells from patients
without metastases. In lung metastatic RCC cells migration was only
1.7-fold enhanced. The enhanced proliferation and migration of cells with
high potential to build bone metastases seem to be caused by an
activation of Akt and a highly increased integrin alpha 5 expression.
Additionally, the tumor suppressor PTEN was markedly reduced in tumors
metastasizing into bones and after calcium treatment, promoting tumor
progression. Conclusion: Our results indicate that formation of bone
metastases of RCC is caused by an enhanced expression of the CaSR.
Extracellular calcium has a promoting effect on cell migration and
proliferation of bone metastasizing RCC cells via Akt signalling and
integrin alpha 5.

