Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of ephrin-A1 on the resistance of photodynamic therapy
in esophageal cancer cells


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been demonstrated as an effective
minimally invasive treatment modality for early esophageal cancer.
However, the molecular action in esophageal cancer during PDT is hardly
known. To know better about the mechanisms of the resistance to PDT in
esophageal cancer cells, we selected the PDT-resistant sub-cell lines and
investigated the global gene modulations in the resistant cells by
whole-genome microarray. Photofrin is a most frequently used
photosentizer in PDT. We have selected two Photofrin-PDT resistant
sub-cell lines, PDTR4-4 and PDTR4-6, derived from CE48T/VGH (CE48T)
esophageal cancer cell line. At least 700 genes reached to over 1.5 fold
changes in both subcell lines compared to parental cell line. Among the
candidate genes, TNF and EFNA1 genes were notably up-regulated in both
resistant cell lines and down-regulated in Photofrin-PDT treated cells
compared to untreated cells by microarray analysis. It revealed that TNF
and EFNA1 encoded proteins may play some roles to promote the resistance
to Photofrin-PDT. EFNA1 encodes ephrin-A1, a ligand belongs to a receptor
tyrosine kinase. It has been found associated with tumor formation and
up-regulated in various cancer types. TNF encodes tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)cytokine. Because TNF-alpha can induce ephrin-A1
expression in endothelial cells, we suggest TNF-alpha may activate the
expression of ephrin-A1 and induce the resistance to Photofrin-PDT in
esophageal cancer cells. Currently, we investigated whether TNF-alpha can
activate the expression of ephrin-A1 in esophageal cancer cells. We
clearly observed recombinant TNF- alpha can activate the gene expression
of EFNA1 in transcription level. To further demonstrate Photofrin-PDT
inhibit the gene expression of TNF and EFNA1 in esophageal cancer cells,
we detected the mRNA expression of both TNF and EFNA1 in CE48T cells upon
Photofrin-PDT treatment by quantitative PCR. We clearly observed
Photofrin-PDT can inhibit the expression of the transcripts encoded by
both TNF and EFNA1. The protein expression of ephrin-A1 was also
suppressed by Photofrin- PDT. Meanwhile, we determined the background
expression levels of both TNF and EFNA1 in PDTR4-6 and another more
resistant sub-cell line PDTR5-8. Compared to parental cells, both PDTR4-6
and PDTR5-8 displayed significant over-expression of TNF and EFNA1 in
transcription levels. Finally, we investigated whether exogenous
ephrin-A1 can enhance the resistance to Photofrin-PDT in esophageal
cancer cells. We preliminarily observed the CE48T cells which incubated
in the medium containing 10 and 25 ng/ml of recombinant ephrin-A1 were
more resistant to Photofrin-PDT induced cell death by around 20 % versus
untreated cells. Based on our findings, we suggest TNF-alpha -induced
ephrin-A1 expression may contribute to Photofrin-PDT resistance in
esophageal cancer cells.

