Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase II study of BIBF1120 in recurrent glioblastoma multiforme


Background: BIBF 1120, a potent, orally available triple angiokinase
inhibitor targeting VEGFR 1-3, PDGFR- /-, and FGFR 1-3, has shown
promising clinical activity with a good safety profile in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer or ovarian cancer. The specific and
simultaneous abrogation of these three pathways results in effective
growth inhibition of both endothelial and perivascular cells. This may be
more effective than inhibition of endothelial cell growth via the VEGF
pathway alone. In addition, signalling via FGF-receptors has been
identified as a possible escape mechanism for tumour angiogenesis when
the VEGF pathway is disrupted. Recurrent glioblastomas (GBM) have an
extremely poor prognosis and consequently new and innovative therapies
are still needed. Accordingly, the purpose of this study was to assess
the efficacy and safety of BIBF 1120 in two parallel groups of patients
with recurrent GBM after radiotherapy and temozolomide (STD) or the same
regimen and subsequent bevacizumab based therapy (BEV). Methods: Patients
were included in one of two parallel groups depending of prior exposure
to bevacizumab (STD or BEV). Inclusion critieria included recurrent GBM,
PS 0-1, normal organ function, available archival tissue blocks, and
measurable disease according to RANO guidelines. A total of 32 patients
were to be enrolled in each group in a two-stage design including a
stopping rule if less than 4/16 patient responded. BIBF-1120 was
administered orally 200 mg bid, with weekly plasma sampling for the first
4 weeks and MRI assessement every 8 weeks. Primary endpoint was objective
response rate. Secondary endpoints were safety, PFS and plasma and tissue
biomarkers. Results: The study was prematurely stopped for after
inclusion of 13 patients in the STD arm and 12 patients in the BEV arm.
No objective responses were seen in either arm. One patient in the BEV
arm has had stable disease for 8 months while the remainder of the
patients in both arms progressed within the first 4 cycles. BIBF-1120 was
very well tolerated with no observed grade III or IV adverse events. Most
frequent adverse events were grade I-II hypertension, diarrhoea and
fatigue, with a frequency of Background: BIBF 1120, a potent, orally
available triple angiokinase inhibitor targeting VEGFR 1-3, PDGFR- /-,
and FGFR 1-3, has shown promising clinical activity with a good safety
profile in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer or ovarian
cancer. The specific and simultaneous abrogation of these three pathways
results in effective growth inhibition of both endothelial and
perivascular cells. This may be more effective than inhibition of
endothelial cell growth via the VEGF pathway alone. In addition,
signalling via FGF-receptors has been identified as a possible escape
mechanism for tumour angiogenesis when the VEGF pathway is disrupted.
Recurrent glioblastomas (GBM) have an extremely poor prognosis and
consequently new and innovative therapies are still needed. Accordingly,
the purpose of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of BIBF
1120 in two parallel groups of patients with recurrent GBM after
radiotherapy and temozolomide (STD) or the same regimen and subsequent
bevacizumab based therapy (BEV). Methods: Patients were included in one
of two parallel groups depending of prior exposure to bevacizumab (STD or
BEV). Inclusion critieria included recurrent GBM, PS 0-1, normal organ
function, available archival tissue blocks, and measurable disease
according to RANO guidelines. A total of 32 patients were to be enrolled
in each group in a two-stage design including a stopping rule if less
than 4/16 patient responded. BIBF-1120 was administered orally 200 mg
bid, with weekly plasma sampling for the first 4 weeks and MRI
assessement every 8 weeks. Primary endpoint was objective response rate.
Secondary endpoints were safety, PFS and plasma and tissue biomarkers.
Results: The study was prematurely stopped for after inclusion of 13
patients in the STD arm and 12 patients in the BEV arm. No objective
responses were seen in either arm. One patient in the BEV arm has had
stable disease for 8 months while the remainder of the patients in both
arms progressed within the first 4 cycles. BIBF-1120 was very well
tolerated with no observed grade III or IV adverse events. Most frequent
adverse events were grade I-II hypertension, diarrhoea and fatigue, with
a frequency of < 10%. Conclusion: BIBF-1120 was well tolerated, but did
not show anti-tumor activity in recurrent GBM at the dose of 200 mg bid
in this patient population.

