Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of lenvatinib (E7080) on site specific phosphorylation in
cancer cells with activated FGFR2 signaling


Objective: Somatic mutations in FGFR2 contribute to development of
malignant tumors. It has been reported that 10-12% of endometrial
carcinomas have mutations in the FGFR2 gene and FGFR2 is thought to be a
target for novel anti-cancer agents. Lenvatinib is an inhibitor of
multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, such as VEGFR, FGFR, PDGFR, RET and
Kit. Lenvatinib inhibited angiogenesis driven by both VEGF and FGF in
preclinical models. The purpose of this study is to determine the effect
of lenvatinib on site specific phosphorylation of FGFR2 expressed in
tumor cells, which are addicted to FGF signaling by either amplification
or active mutations of FGFR2. Methods: The gastric cancer cell line,
SNU-16, and endometrial cancer cell lines, AN3CA and MFE-296, were
examined for phosphorylation status of FGFR2. Phosphorylation of FGFR2
was detected by western blotting after immunoprecipitation (IP-WB) with
anti-FGFR2 antibody and the site specific phosphorylation status was
assessed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Inhibitory
activity of lenvatinib and sorafenib against the phosphorylation of FGFR2
was examined followed by FGF-2 stimulation. Results: Phosphorylation of
FGFR2 was promoted in SNU-16 because of gene amplification. Inhibitory
activity of lenvatinib and sorafenib (0.001-10 uM) was examined against
the phosphorylation of FGFR2. IP-WB analysis showed that lenvatinib
inhibited the phosphorylation of FGFR2 at 1 uM and 10 uM, while sorafenib
inhibited only at 10 uM. Next, we performed LC-MS analysis to determine
whether lenvatinib and sorafenib selectively affect site specific
phosphorylation of FGFR2. LC-MS analysis showed three different statuses
of phosphorylation in FGFR2, single phosphorylation of either Y656 or
Y657 and dual phosphorylation of Y656 and Y657, and both agents inhibited
phosphorylation at 10 uM despite the phosphorylation status. IP-WB
analysis also showed a constitutive activation of FGFR2 in AN3CA and
MFE-296 (mutation in FGFR2 kinase domain) compared to other endometrial
cancer cells without mutation. Lenvatinib, but not by sorafenib,
decreased the phosphorylation of FGFR2 in AN3CA and MFE-296 at 1 uM,
consistent with the observation in SNU-16. LC-MS analysis in AN3CA
demonstrated the phosphorylation on Y657 was clearly inhibited by both
agents, although the level of phosphorylation on Y656 was increased by
sorafenib, but not by lenvatinib. Conclusions: IP-WB analysis showed that
lenvatinib inhibited the phosphorylation of FGFR2 at lower concentration
in comparison with sorafenib. LC-MS analysis indicated that inhibitory
activity of both agents was different among phosphorylation sites of
FGFR2 and also types of FGFR2-activated cancer cells. These results
suggested that lenvatinib may exert an unique anti-tumor activity through
the inhibition of FGFR2 signaling, in addition to the anti-angiogenic
activity via inhibition of VEGFR2 kinase.

