Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Foretinib, a multi-kinase inhibitor of cMET and PDGFR, in the
treatment of disseminated medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
childhood accounting for around 10% of all pediatric cancer deaths.
Dissemination occurs in 30% of the patients at the time of diagnosis and
essentially defines children with incurable disease given that metastatic
disease is refractory to current treatments. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for new therapies to treat metastatic MB. The hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF)/cMET signaling pathway has been recently implicated
in the pathogenesis of MB. Overexpression of cMET and HGF is associated
with group C tumors which have high incidence of metastasis and poor
outcome. Moreover, overexpression of the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) was also identified in metastatic MB. Using foretinib, a
multi-kinase inhibitor of cMET and PDGFR, we aimed to target two
important pathways involved in MB dissemination. Using three MB cell
lines (Daoy, ONS - 76 and D425) that express different amounts of the
receptors (cMET and PDGF), we performed dose-response experiments with
foretinib, measuring downstream targets of cMET and PDGFR activation. We
showed that foretinib inhibits proliferation, migration, invasion and
anchorage independent growth of MB cell lines in a dose-dependent manner.
By immunofluorecence, we observed that foretinib induces polyploidy and
using flow cytometry analysis we found that it also induces apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest in G2-M phase. To test the efficacy of foretinib in
vivo we have created a disseminated mouse model of MB injecting MB cells
in the fourth ventricle of nude mice, mimicking the process of
dissemination in children. The cells were previously transfected with a
luciferase expressing vector allowing weekly monitoring of tumor growth
and dissemination by bioluminescence imaging. Foretinib was able to
reduce tumor growth and metastasis in xenografts, increasing survival
when compared to controls. Altogether these results suggest that small
molecule inhibitors of cMET and PDGFR may represent a new therapeutic
strategy in the treatment of disseminated MB. Given that foretinib is
already being tested in clinical trials for other forms of cancer, the
findings from our experiments may lead to the design of identical trials
in children with metastatic medulloblastoma.

