Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinetic quantification of caspase-3/7 mediated apoptosis using
live-cell imaging


Apoptosis, the biological process by which cells undergo programmed cell
death, is required for normal tissue maintenance and development.
However, aberrations in apoptotic signaling networks are implicated in
numerous human diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer.
Stimulation of either the extrinsic or intrinsic apoptotic pathways
triggers a signaling cascade that typically results in the activation of
executioner caspase-3. Numerous in vitro assays have been designed to
measure the activation of caspase-3. The majority of these assays utilize
reagent substrates that incorporate the DEVD motif which is recognized by
both activated caspases 3 and 7. Such assays result in single,
user-defined time point measurements of caspase-3/7 activity and
typically require multiple wash steps or cell lifting prior to data
collection; potentially resulting in the loss of cells or critical data
in experiments where cells undergo apoptosis at different rates according
to treatment conditions. In this study, we optimized an assay system
incorporating a bi-functional reagent containing the DEVD motif linked to
a DNA dye for use on the IncuCyte FLR imaging system. When added to cell
culture growth medium, this relatively inert, non-fluorescent molecule
crosses the cell membrane where it is available to be a substrate for
activated caspase-3/7. The reaction product is a green fluorescent DNA
dye that labels the nuclei of cells undergoing apoptosis. Our data show
that this strategy can quantitatively measure the kinetic activation of
caspase-3/7 through extrinsic stimulation of human tumor derived
MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma cells, HeLa cervical adenocarcinoma
cells, A549 lung epithelial carcinoma cells, and HT 1080 fibrosarcoma
cells following treatment with TNF and cycloheximide. Moreover, we
exemplify the use of this strategy in 96-well plate screening protocols
using both HT 1080 and MDA-MB-231 cells to measure the induction of
caspase-3/7 activity in the presence of staurosporine, a well-known
general protein kinase inhibitor and inducer of caspase-3/7 mediated
apoptosis with Z values 0.6. We provide evidence that this stable,
kinetic, mix-and-read assay can provide both quantitative and qualitative
assessments of caspase-3/7 activity using fluorescent images and
high-definition phase contrast images, respectively.

