Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A causes autophagy in normal as well as cancerous human
breast cells


Withaferin A (WA), a promising anticancer constituent of traditional
Indian (Ayurvedic) medicinal plant Withania somnifera, inhibits growth of
MDA-MB-231 (estrogen-independent) and MCF-7 (estrogen-responsive) human
breast cancer cells in culture and MDA-MB-231 xenografts in vivo in
association with apoptosis induction. We have shown recently that
WA-induced apoptosis in human breast cancer cells is initiated by
reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting from inhibition of mitochondrial
respiration. Because ROS are frequently implicated in induction of
autophagy, which is an evolutionary conserved process for
bulk-degradation of macromolecules including organelles, we raised the
question of whether WA treatment causes autophagy. In the present study,
we have addressed this question using MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast
cancer cells, a spontaneously immortalized and non-tumorigenic normal
human mammary epithelial cell line (MCF-10A), and MDA-MB-231 xenografts
from control and WA-treated mice. WA treatment resulted in autophagy
induction in cancerous (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) as well as normal mammary
epithelial cells (MCF-10A) as judged by transmission electron microscopy,
cleavage of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3),
formation of acidic vesicular organelles, and punctate pattern of LC3
localization. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed markedly higher
expression of LC3 in MDA-MB-231 xenografts from female athymic mice
administered i.p. with 4 mg/kg WA compared with control. Autophagy is a
protective mechanism against apoptosis by several agents. Interestingly,
inhibition of WA-induced autophagy either by a pharmacological agent
(3-methyladenine) or siRNA knockdown of critical autophagy regulating
proteins ATG5 or Beclin1 did not have any meaningful impact on growth
inhibition or apoptotic cell death resulting from WA exposure in
MDA-MB-231 or MCF-7 cells. Collectively, these results indicate that WA
induces autophagy in breast cancer cells regardless of estrogen receptor
expression and this response is not unique to cancerous breast cells. In
addition, unlike many other agents, autophagy induction by WA has no
influence on its ability to inhibit cell growth or cause apoptosis at
least in breast cancer cells. This investigation was supported by US PHS
grant CA142604 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

