Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PGE2 induces LEF-1 expression in breast cancer cells, but is not
required for the nuclear localization of beta-catenin


We have previously demonstrated that poorly differentiated MDA-MB-231
cells displayed delayed tumor onset, reduced frequency of occurrence and
loss of their capacity for extrapulmonary colonization when transfected
stably with a potent and specific cyclooxygenase (COX) 2 shRNA sequence.
We attributed the reduction in tumor growth and extrapulmonary
colonization to reduced invasive capabilities, reduced angiogenesis,
altered metabolism and differences in the stabilization of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1. We also observed loss of expression of
oncogenes, receptors and degradative enzymes associated with tumor growth
and metastasis including matrix metalloproteinase-1, CXC Receptor-4,
roundabout-1, hyaluronan synthase-2, and monocarboxylate transporter 2.
In addition to these previously reported transcriptome changes, we
observed that the most highly downregulated transcription factor was
Lymphoid-Enhancer Factor-1 (LEF-1) a result validated by qPCR showing an
8-fold loss of LEF-1 in COX-2-silenced cells. Here, we present evidence
demonstrating that LEF-1 accumulation in the nucleus of COX-2-silenced
cells is reduced compared to COX-2 containing parental cells. Induction
of COX-2 by phorbol esters resulted in nuclear accumulation of LEF-1 in
COX-2 containing, but not in COX-2-silenced, cells. Addition of
physiological concentrations of PGE2 to COX-2-silenced cells partially
restored LEF-1 expression in the nucleus of these cells. LEF-1 is a
member of the T-cell specific factor (TCF) family of transcription
factors that direct transcription of downstream target genes upon nuclear
translocation of -catenin from the cytoplasm. -catenin translocation to
the nucleus occurs in response to canonical signaling of the ligand Wnt
to its receptor Frizzled. An earlier study showed that the COX-2 product
prostaglandin E2 promoted the translocation of -catenin to the nucleus of
colon cancer cells via G-protein coupled receptor signaling. As expected,
immunofluorescence of COX-2 containing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
showed nuclear expression of -catenin. However, the nuclear localization
of -catenin persisted even in the absence of PGE2, as observed in
COX-2-silenced cells, suggesting that PGE2 expression is not necessary
for the nuclear localization of -catenin in MDA-MB-231 cells. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that while PGE2 is not necessary for
the nuclear localization of -catenin in MDA-MB-231 cells, it can promote
the nuclear accumulation of the TCF family member LEF-1, thereby further
promoting the non-canonical activation of the Wnt pathway in breast
cancer.

