Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid and efficient methods for preparing rRNA-depleted and
directional RNA-Seq libraries from low-input and FFPE RNA samples


Massively parallel sequencing of cDNA libraries (RNA-Seq) is rapidly
becoming the preferred method for transcript profiling, and analysis of
novel transcripts, novel isoforms, alternative splice sites, rare
transcripts and cSNPs, compared to microarrays. Preparing NGS RNA-Seq
libraries typically require first isolating rRNA-depleted RNA or
enriching for poly(A)+ mRNA. However, total RNA isolated from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) patient tissue samples is
normally fragmented, making it not suitable for rRNA-depletion using some
commercially available kits or poly(A)+ enrichment, which results in a 3
sequence bias. Here, we present an efficient single-pass rRNA-depletion
method (Ribo-Zero technology) for use with as little as 100 ng total RNA
input from either intact or fragmented (e.g., FFPE) RNA samples.
Additionally, an improved, more user-friendly version of the ScriptSeq
RNA-Seq method (ScriptSeq v2) is used to rapidly prepare directional (99%
strandedness) RNA-Seq libraries in about 2.5 hours, in a single-tube
workflow, from either the intact or fragmented Ribo-Zero treated RNA
samples. The ScriptSeq method does not require end-polishing,
adaptor-ligation, cDNA fragmentation, or gel-size selection. The combined
Ribo-Zero and ScriptSeq workflow is completed in about 5 hours,
generating cluster-ready NGS libraries that contain Massively parallel
sequencing of cDNA libraries (RNA-Seq) is rapidly becoming the preferred
method for transcript profiling, and analysis of novel transcripts, novel
isoforms, alternative splice sites, rare transcripts and cSNPs, compared
to microarrays. Preparing NGS RNA-Seq libraries typically require first
isolating rRNA-depleted RNA or enriching for poly(A)+ mRNA. However,
total RNA isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) patient
tissue samples is normally fragmented, making it not suitable for
rRNA-depletion using some commercially available kits or poly(A)+
enrichment, which results in a 3 sequence bias. Here, we present an
efficient single-pass rRNA-depletion method (Ribo-Zero technology) for
use with as little as 100 ng total RNA input from either intact or
fragmented (e.g., FFPE) RNA samples. Additionally, an improved, more
user-friendly version of the ScriptSeq RNA-Seq method (ScriptSeq v2) is
used to rapidly prepare directional (99% strandedness) RNA-Seq libraries
in about 2.5 hours, in a single-tube workflow, from either the intact or
fragmented Ribo-Zero treated RNA samples. The ScriptSeq method does not
require end-polishing, adaptor-ligation, cDNA fragmentation, or gel-size
selection. The combined Ribo-Zero and ScriptSeq workflow is completed in
about 5 hours, generating cluster-ready NGS libraries that contain <2 %
of reads that map to rRNA sequences (nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded)
and 98% of reads that map to the genome, while maintaining the
representation of coding and non-coding transcripts, independent of
polyadenylation. This reduction in rRNA sequence reads improves sequence
depth and coverage of mRNA, and increases the percentage of uniquely
mapped reads required for transcriptome analysis.

