Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of jaspamide in the actin cytoskeleton of melanoma cells:
The relation between migration and invasion


Metastasis is the leading cause of melanoma mortality. The metastatic
cascade represents a multi-step process which includes several cellular
and molecular processes including cell migration and invasion. Tumor
cells can migrate either collectively, in a mesenchymal or in an amoeboid
type of movement. The role of microfilaments is essential in mesenchymal
migration, where it acts in the formation of membrane protrusions, and
amoeboid migration, where they play a key role in cell contraction. In
this context, the present work aimed to analyze the effects of the marine
sponge-derived drug jaspamide, which has well-known properties on
cytoskeleton (anti-polymerizing of the actin microfilaments). After the
determination of the IC50 concentrations for the HT144 (derived from
human melanoma) and NGM (from human benign nevus) cell lines, the effects
of the treatment with jaspamide were studied through wound assays,
transwell assays, Boyden's chamber assays, fluorescent cytochemistry,
immunofluorescence and Western blotting. The treatments demonstrated the
drug acts disorganizing the microfilament cytoskeleton in a
dose-dependent way, leading the accumulation of F-actin in the
perinuclear region. The wound assays indicated that drug treatment
impaired the migration ability of both cell lines. However assays in
Boyden's chambers showed increasing in cell migration in consequence of
jaspamide treatment, result that could be explained by switch of the
migration strategy from mesenchymal to ameboid. This fact was
corroborated by the decreased expression of the IRSp53 protein after
jaspamide treatment meanwhile MT1-MMP expression is not affected by the
treatment. By treating thecell lines with the compounds Y-27632 or
NSC23766 in addition to jaspamide, it is possible to conclude that NGM
cells use mainly the RAc signaling pathway to control cellular migration
process. In contrast, the melanoma cell line HT144 however could use
either Rac or Rho pathway to migrate. Key words: Melanoma. Jaspamide.
Migration. Invasion. Metastasis.

