Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysophosphatidic Acid Acyltransferase-Beta contributes to
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


Abstract: Lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase-beta (LPAAT-) catalyzes
the production of phosphatidic acid (PA) from lysophosphatidic acid
(LPA). PA is a lipid cofactor that contributes to the activation of
c-Raf, BRAF, mTOR and PKC-. LPAAT- expression is a prognostic factor in
gynecologic malignancies and is being investigated as a therapeutic
target in a variety of tumor types. We previously reported that LPAAT- is
expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and in human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma tissues. We employed siRNA knockdown of LPAAT- expression
in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro. We find that reduction in the
expression of LPAAT- protein is associated with decreased proliferation
and impairment in anchorage dependent growth of pancreatic cancer cells.
Methods: MiaPaCa and Panc-1 cells were transfected with two different
siRNAs targeted to LPAAT- at 10 nM and 25 nM for 48 hrs and 72 hrs. A
non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. The cells were then plated on
tissue culture dishes or in soft agar and allowed to proliferate.
Proliferation on plastic dishes was measured using Alamar Blue. Colony
formation in soft agar was determined by directly counting macroscopic
colonies. Results: Transfection of MiaPaCa and Panc-1 cells with siRNA at
25 nM for 72 hours achieved almost 100% inhibition of LPAAT- protein
expression by Western blotting. Under these conditions there was a 50%
reduction in proliferation and colony formation. Studies to determine the
effects of depleting LPAAT- on the levels of p-PKC-, p-MEK, p-4E-BP1 and
p-S6Kinase are ongoing and will be presented. Conclusions: Suppression of
expression of LPAAT- protein in pancreatic cancer cell lines reduces
proliferation and anchorage independent growth. This contributes to the
validation of LPAAT- as a therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

