Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin protects head and neck cancer stem cells against DNA
damage induced apoptosis


The cancer stem cell hypothesis posits that within a tumor exists a
distinct subpopulation of cells responsible for tumor initiation,
progression, and maintenance. These cancer stem cells (CSCs) tend to be
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and, like normal stem cells,
possess the ability to self-renew and differentiate, thereby effecting
tumor recurrence. Metformin, the most widely prescribed drug for the
treatment of diabetes, has received attention in recent years as a
potential anticancer agent capable of targeting cancer stem cells through
such means as inhibiting cell proliferation and abrogating
chemo-resistance. In the current study, we sought to determine the
effects of Metformin on a putative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) cancer stem cell culture. In contrast to the findings of previous
studies, our data suggests that Metformin promotes properties of a cancer
stem cell phenotype in HNSCC in vitro. Treatment with Metformin resulted
in a dose-dependent induction of the stem cell genes CD44, BMI-1, Oct-4,
and Nanog, as measured by qPCR. These results were supported by
immunofluorescence data. Metformin treatment promoted self-renewal
capacity of HNSCC stem cells, as demonstrated by the increase in size and
number of tumorspheres formed in non-adherent and non-differentiating
conditions. At various doses, treatment with Metformin alone had no
effect on cell proliferation, as measured by MTS assay. Furthermore, when
administered in combination with cisplatin, Metformin significantly
protected against cisplatin-induced cell death, as demonstrated by MTS
and TUNEL assays. Immunoblot experiments demonstrating a decrease in Akt
phosphorylation upon treatment with Metformin suggests Metformin-mediated
cytoprotection is independent of the Akt pathway. Other possible
mechanisms are currently under investigation, including Metformin's
ability to regulate autophagy. Although further in vivo studies are
necessary, taken together, our findings suggest that Metformin may not be
an effective therapeutic option for patients with HNSCC.

