Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human prostate mesenchymal stem cells in prostate cancer:
Mechanisms of TGF-1 promoted myofibroblast/CAF differentiation


Reactive stroma in prostate cancer is typified by the co-evolution of
myofibroblasts and carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), yet the
origin and biology of myofibroblast stem/progenitor cells are not known.
TGF-1 is overexpressed in prostate cancer cells and affects myofibroblast
differentiation, a key step in formation of a tumor-promoting reactive
stroma. However, specific mechanisms of how TGF-1 regulates recruitment,
activation and differentiation of myofibroblast stem/progenitor cells are
poorly understood. Human prostate mesenchymal stem cell (hpMSC) lines
were initiated from organ cultures of normal human prostate gland and
characterized by a novel 3D co-culture model. Differentially engineered
LNCaP cells to overexpress active TGF-1 were cultured as organoids on
CM-inserts and hpMSCs were co-cultured with engineered LNCaP cells either
in direct contact or on laminin-coated coverslips in the bottom chamber.
3D organoids grown in serum-free media for 72 hours were analyzed by IHC,
ELISA and qRT-PCR. In addition, RNAi gene knockdown experiments were
performed in hpMSC to identify key transcription factors involved in
myofibroblast/CAF differentiation. hpMSCs were CD44+/CD90+ and showed
characteristics and gene expression similar to human mesenchymal stem
cells. In the 3D model, LNCaP cells and hpMSCs self-organized into a
free-floating organoid. The organoids exhibited a periphery of LNCaP
cells and a core of reactive stroma-appearing cells. Significantly, LNCaP
cells induced myofibroblast differentiation of hpMSC and this was
promoted by LNCaP expression of active TGF-1. Gene expression analysis
identified the RUNX1 and ID1 transcription factors as upregulated in
hpMSC by TGF-1. Knockdown of RUNX1 and ID1 are being used to assess the
role and mechanisms of how these transcription factors regulate
myofibroblast differentiation. Together, these data suggest that the
genesis and co-evolution of reactive stroma in prostate cancer results
from activation and differentiation of CD44+/CD90+ endogenous hpMSC via
upregulation of specific transcription factors by TGF-1. Defining key
mechanisms that recruit, activate and differentiate the origin of
myofibroblasts/CAFs could provide clues to develop new strategies to
target the microenvironment niche.

