Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic analysis on pharmacological responses to oxaliplatin
plus 5-FU in colorectal cancer cells


Purpose: Oxaliplatin (L-OHP) in combination with 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU)/leucovorin (FOLFOX regimen) is an important treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer. However, metabolic functions to determine
pharmacological response to L-OHP in combination with 5-FU are still
unclear. The purpose of this study is to elucidate metabolomic responses
to L-OHP in combination with 5-FU and key pathways relating to
chemosensitivity. Experimental Procedures: Human colorectal carcinoma,
HCT116 (high-sensitive) and DLD-1 (low-sensitive) cells, were exposed to
L-OHP, 5-FU or L-OHP plus 5-FU. After treatment with the anti-cancer
agents, the intracellular metabolites were extracted by liquid-liquid
extraction and simultaneously and quantitatively analyzed by capillary
electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE-TOFMS). The mRNA
expression level of spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase (SSAT) was
measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR (Taqman PCR). Results:
N1-acetylspermine and N8-acetylspermidine in polyamine metabolism were
accumulated to a greater extent after L-OHP exposure in drug-sensitive
cancer cells. The mRNA expression level of SSAT-1, a key enzyme in
polyamine catabolism, increased after L-OHP exposure in drug-sensitive
cancer cells but not drug-resistant cancer cells. In addition to the
up-regulation of polyamine metabolism in drug-sensitive cancer cells, the
intracellular levels of endogenous nucleotides remarkably increased after
L-OHP exposure in drug-sensitive cancer cells. These results imply the
changes in nucleotide metabolism due to the disruption of DNA synthesis
by L-OHP. The intracellular level of -alanine also accumulated after
L-OHP exposure in drug-sensitive cancer cells. -alanine is known as a
pyrimidine catabolite of uracil. These results show that nucleotide
metabolism and polyamine metabolism may be important metabolic pathways
relating to L-OHP chemosensitivity. Furthermore, in drug-sensitive cancer
cells, polyamine metabolism, glutathione metabolism, and nucleotide
metabolism were up-regulated after exposure to L-OHP plus 5-FU. On the
other hand, metabolites belonging to each metabolic pathway on the whole
increased moderately after exposure to L-OHP plus 5-FU in drug-resistant
cancer cells. Conclusions: Polyamine metabolism, glutathione metabolism,
and nucleotide metabolism are important metabolic pathways relating to
responsiveness to L-OHP plus 5-FU. The present CE-TOFMS metabolome
analysis created a new finding on metabolomic response to L-OHP plus 5-FU
in colorectal cancer cells with different chemosensitivities.

