Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Rho GTPase RhoE is a p53-regulated candidate tumor suppressor


Rho family proteins are prominent members of the well-known Ras
superfamily and are deeply involved in almost all the malignant behaviors
of cancer. As Small GTPases, Rho proteins can cycle between active
GTP-bound state and GDP-bound state by regulating of GEFs, GAP and GDI.
RhoE is a unique member of Rho family proteins that can bind but do not
hydrolyze GTP, thus remain constitutively active upon expression without
the need of regulation by the GTP/GDP conformational changes of other Rho
GTPases. Previous studies have shown that RhoE may play a role opposite
that of RhoA in regulating cell proliferation. Here, for the first time,
we systematically investigate the expression patterns of RhoE by systemic
immunocytochemistry analysis of 74, 32, 62, and 34 gastric, colorectal,
lung, and breast carcinomas, respectively, and found that RhoE protein
level was significantly decreased in most cancer cases compared with that
of adjacent normal tissues. RhoE expression also appeared to inversely
correlate with the clinical grade of gastric, colorectal, lung cancer
tissues. Increasing RhoE expression in MKN45, SW480, HepG2 and SPCA1
cancer cell lines that have relatively low level of endogenous RhoE could
markedly inhibit proliferation, migration and invasion activities and
induced apoptosis of the cancer cells. Interestingly, p53 transcription
activity was reduced in these RhoE under-expressed cancer cells that
contain p53 mutations, and increasing p53 activity significantly
increased RhoE expression in the cells. Significantly, p53 transcription
activity, measured by the p53-responsive p21Cip1, MDM2, and GADD45
expressions, paralleled RhoE expression in gastric cancer tissues. Thus,
RhoE may participate in human cancer progression as a candidate tumor
suppressor under the regulation by p53. This work also enriches our
knowledge in the role of small G protein network in cancer.

