Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of 15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 on osteolytic bone
metastasis by breast cancer cells


The majority of patients dying from cancer of the breast or prostate have
metastases to bone. Bone is a dynamic tissue and metastatic breast cancer
cells indirectly induce osteoclast-mediated bone resorption by secreting
osteolytic factors, resulting in the increase of bone destruction.
15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2), an endogenous ligand for
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-, is the electrophilic
cyclopentenone prostaglandin as one of the terminal products of the
cyclooxygenase-2-catalyzed reactions. Through the post-translational
modification of redox and inflammatory signaling molecules, this
prostaglandin exerts various biological actions, such as potent
anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, anti-fibrotic, and apoptotic
activities. In particular, 15d-PGJ2 has been known to exhibit anti-tumor
effects in a variety of cancers. This study explores the in vitro and in
vivo effect of 15d-PGJ2 on osteolytic bone metastasis by breast cancer
cells. 15d-PGJ2 inhibited the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231
metastatic human breast cancer cells, in a dose-dependent manner.
Treatment with 15d-PGJ2 inhibited osteoclast formation and reduced pit
formation by osteoclast activity in receptor activator of the NF-B ligand
(RANKL)-treated mouse bone marrow macrophages (BMMs). In differentiated
osteoclasts, the activities of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and
cathepsin K markedly decreased by 15d-PGJ2 treatment. Furthermore, we
inoculated MDA-MB-231 cells into the left cardiac ventricle of nude mice
and then subcutaneously injected 15d-PGJ2 for 6 weeks. The
histomorphometrical analysis, including bone volume and microstructure,
revealed that 15d-PGJ2 inhibited bone destruction by metastatic breast
cancer cells. These results demonstrate that 15d-PGJ2 may inhibit
migration/invasion of breast cancer cells, prevent RANKL-mediated
osteoclast differentiation/ activity, and suppress breast cancer
cells-mediated osteolytic lesion in mice. Thus, 15d-PGJ2 can be a
therapeutic agent for cancer metastasis to bone.

