Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of hypoxia on the tumor-stromal interaction in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma


INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic cancer is characterized by extraordinary
fibrosis and pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) are the major player in
synthesizing extracellular matrix (ECM) upon activation. The
interaction/communication between PSCs and pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells is essential for inducing stroma/ECM
production, pancreatic cancer progression and general therapy resistance.
Compared to traditional 2D cell culture, cells in a three-dimensional
context demonstrate different behavior and functions as reflected by
building up a microenvironment that more closely mimics the one observed
in the native tissue. This feature is especially critical for testing
drug efficiency as cellular response to drugs is profoundly affected by
environmental cues. AIMS & METHODS: Our aim was to build up a more
reliable and predictive drug screening system. To this end we set up and
compared 2D and 3D cell cultures containing either human PSC and PDAC
cells alone or in combination. RESULTS: Among PDAC cells, panc-1 cells
are the most commonly used which are also able to form spheres in vitro.
We generated mono-spheres from panc-1 cells and compared them to
conventional 2D culture. The efficiency of different drugs on viability
of cells in panc-1 sphere resulted to be much lower than on viability in
2D cultures. Cells in 3D compared to the 2D culture show higher gene
expression for ECM proteins as collagen and fibronectin, for growth
factors as PDGF and VEGF, as well as for protein like Cox2, Glut1. We
co-cultured panc-1 and PSCs, allowing them to interact and form
hetero-spheres in which PSCs localized in the cortical area and were
identified e.g. by expression of asma, a marker for PSCs activation.
These avascular mini-tumors were further characterized at different
levels. CONCLUSION: 3D cultures are more resistant to chemotherapy
compared to their 2D counterpart offering a more predictive platform for
drug screening before proceeding to more expensive in vivo models and
clinical trials. The avascular mini-tumors can be considered as an
alternative in vitro cell model for studying pancreatic cancer
development and fibrosis from a more complete perspective.

