Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular targets of quinolinone derivatives with anticancer
activity


Currently, we are testing chemical libraries of quinolinone derivatives,
compounds with high selective cytotoxic activity. These compounds,
derived from quinolone antibiotics, are well known for their
antibacterial, antiprotozoal, cytotoxic and immunosuppressive effects.
2-phenyl-3-hydroxy-4(1H)-quinolinones were tested by MTT assay for
cytotoxic activity and some of them proved IC50 values in sub-micromolar
concentrations. Cell cycle and DNA/RNA synthesis were further analysed by
flow cytometry. The accumulation of cells was observed predominantly in
G1 phase together with significant DNA and RNA synthesis inhibition. The
most active derivative was tested in in vivo cancer mice model with using
hollow fibres. Hollow fibres were filled by leukemic CEM cell line and
were implanted subcutaneously and intraperitoneally to mice. Afterwards,
mice were treated by tested compound. Hollow fibres were after 14 days
taken from mice and surviving cells were tested by cytotoxic MTT assay.
activity of tested quinolinone was comparable to doxorubicin. For protein
targets identification, we have synthesized biotinylated molecules of
original derivatives. Biotinylated derivatives were immobilized on the
surface of streptavidin coated magnetic beads and whole complex (magnetic
bead-streptavidin-biotin-quinolinone) was incubated with total cellular
lysate of the CEM cell line. Thereafter non-bonded proteins were
washed-out and specifically bonded proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE
gel. Following silver-staining of the gel we identified sample lines with
specifically bonded proteins to biotinylated compound and negative
control. Specific proteins were cut off from the gel and trypsinized to
get peptides for protein identification by MS analysis (LC-MS/MS and
LC-MALDI). Identified targets are proteins associated with translational
regulation, glucose metabolism and cytoskeleton. Potential targets were
validated by western blot and by other assays (reporter cell models,
kinase and enzymatic assays, evaluation in vitro transcription and
translation). The work was supported by grants: LC07017,
CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0009 coming from European Social Fund. Infrastructural
part of this project (Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine)
was supported from the Operational Programme Research and Development for
Innovations (project CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030).

