Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad spectrum BH3 mimetic BI-97D6 induces apoptosis of acute
myeloid leukemia cells even when co-cultured with supporting stromal cells


The BCL2 family of proteins contains members that possess potent
anti-apoptotic function (e.g. BCL2, MCL-1) as well as pro-death members
(e.g. BAX, BIM). Aberrant expression of anti-apoptotic members such as
BCL2 or suppression of pro-apoptotic members such as BAX or BIM can lead
to tumor formation and promote resistance to therapy in many types of
cancer including Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML). A recent model of
tumorigenesis/chemoresistance suggests cancer cells become dependent on
pro-survival molecules including BCL2 and MCL-1. This model suggests that
the addicted malignant cells can be eliminated by targeting the survival
molecule that supports the tumor cell. Recent efforts to target a broad
group of BCL2 family members has evolved using small molecule inhibitors
to target the BH3 domain since the association between the two groups of
BCL2 family members involves this domain. While compounds including
ABT-737 have shown promise for treatment of some cancers, the compound
binds poorly to MCL-1 and related BCL2 family members such as BCL2A1 and
thus cells that rely on these anti-apoptotic BCL2 family members display
resistance to the compound. Furthermore, we and others have recently
found that ABT-737 can promote MCL-1 expression likely via a mechanism
involving ERK. A superior approach would be to develop a single BH-3
mimetic agent that is effective at inhibiting MCL-1 as well as other BCL2
family members. In the current study, we examine if the Apogossypol
analog BI-97D6 (Wei et al, J Med Chem. 2010), which has efficacy against
MCL-1 as well as BCL2 and BCL-XL, has potential an effective
anti-leukemia agent. BI-97D6 is novel as an Apogossypol compound since it
acts as a true BH3 mimetic. Other gossypol and apopgossypol compounds
have been shown to promote death by ER stress mediated mechanisms. In AML
cells, we found that BI-97D6 does not induce CHOP expression or JNK
activation, which are features of ER stress induction. Bax/Bak knock out
MEFs were resistant BI-97D6, indicating that the drug acts specifically
as a BH3 mimetic. BI-97D6 interferes with the association of MCL-1 with
BIM and induces the death conformation of BAX in OCI-AML3 cells. The drug
is effective at killing a variety of AML derived cell lines with IC50
values at 72 hours in the nanomolar range (i.e. below 50 nM for OCI-AML3,
HL60, and MOLM13). Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BM MSC)
have been shown to protect leukemia cells from conventional chemotherapy
agents such as AraC. There was no difference in BI-97D6 mediated killing
of OCI-AML3 cells whether the cells were treated in co-culture with BM
MSC or alone. These results suggest that BI-97D6 could have efficacy
against AML, regardless of MCL-1 levels, which is not diminished by the
protective effects of the BM microenvironment. Further mechanistic
details are under investigation.

