Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction of In Vivo Tumor Growth and Angiogenesis by a Humanized
IgG4 Monoclonal Antibody to SEMA4D


Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D; CD100) has been implicated in several key
mechanisms of tumor progression, including metastasis, tumor invasion,
and neovascularization. SEMA4D binding to its receptor plexin-B1 (PLXNB1)
on endothelial cells activates RhoA and AKT signaling pathways, which
promotes formation of new blood vessels and tumor growth in vivo. SEMA4D
is over-expressed in a wide array of tumor types, and is also produced by
inflammatory cells recruited to the tumor microenvironment, such as
tumor-associated macrophages. In addition to its effects on endothelial
cells, the interaction of PLXNB1 with MET and ERBB2 can lead to
SEMA4D-mediated transactivation of these membrane receptor kinases with a
direct effect on tumor cell migration and invasive growth. Collectively,
these results suggest that expression of SEMA4D, either by tumor cells or
by tumor associated inflammatory cells, functions as a crucial factor in
tumor metastatic potential, and that expression of SEMA4D and/ or its
high affinity receptor in tumors induces neovascularization and increases
overall tumor aggressiveness. Antibody neutralization of SEMA4D
represents a new therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment. We selected a
humanized IgG4 antibody, VX15/2503, that binds with roughly 3 nM affinity
to rat, mouse, primate, and human SEMA4D. We utilized cellular collapse,
flow cytometric and other in vitro functional assays to demonstrate that
this antibody blocks SEMA4D interaction with PLXNB1. Using both this
antibody and its mouse IgG1 equivalent, MAb 67-2, we have demonstrated
that antibody-mediated SEMA4D neutralization blocks tumor growth in CT26
tumor grafts with a tumor growth delay (TGD) of 42% and BCA34 (TGD 18%)
tumor grafts, as well as RIP-Tag2, with a tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
of 56%, and Tyr:NRAS (TGD 52%) spontaneous tumor models. In summary, we
demonstrate that antibody mediated neutralization of SEMA4D in vivo
inhibits tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis in a variety of tumor
models. The humanized antibody, VX15/2503, has successfully completed
IND-enabling toxicology testing and a Phase I trial is currently being
conducted in adult patients with advanced solid tumors.

