Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt signaling regulates neuropilin-2 (NRP2) expression and
contributes to cancer cell invasiveness in castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC)


Progression to CRPC represents a major challenge for treatment of
advanced PCa. However, underlying mechanisms of this process remain
largely unknown. We found that androgen deprivation in mice bearing PCa
patient-derived tumors and in PCa LNCaP cells resulted in increased
expression of wnt transcriptional factors: TCF4 and LEF1, as well as
c-myc and NRP2. Using GenBank and MatInspector software, we identified
five potential binding sites for TCF4 in the 5 flanking promoter region
spanning from 3891 to +108 base pairs of the NRP2 gene. Treatment of
LNCaP cells with Wnt3a and Wnt 5a conditioned medium increased NRP2 mRNA
expression; and inhibition of Wnt signaling by overexpression of secreted
Wnt antagonists (WIF1 and Frzb/sFRP3) in two CRPC cell lines: C4-2B and
PC3 down-regulated the expression of NRP2 in both in vitro cell cultures
and in in vivo xenograft tumors. Chromatin immunoprecipitation/real-time
PCR a! nalysis revealed that both WIF1 and Frzb/sFRP3 expression
decreased the in vivo binding of TCF4 and beta-catenin to the NRP2
promoter at five predicted sites. Knock-down of NRP2 by short-hairpin RNA
in CRPC cell lines markedly reduced cellular invasiveness and migration
capacity. Furthermore, we analyzed gene microarray data sets from the UCI
SPECS project. The total of 204 samples from 82 patients include 66
tumors, 65 tumor-adjacent stromas, 28 far stromas and 45 normal prostate
samples. The mRNA expression levels of the genes of interest were
normalized to the average expression levels of these genes from the
normal prostate samples. We showed that the percentage of samples with
WIF1 down-regulation progressively increased from far stroma to adjacent
stroma and tumors. Strikingly, the levels of NRP2 mRNA are up-regulated
in all tested adjacent stroma and most of tumor samples. Furthermore, the
expression levels of NRP2 in far and adjacent stroma and tumors are
inversely related to WIF1 mRNA levels (correlation coefficients are
0.6918, 0. 2349 and 0.5931; PsProgression to CRPC represents a major
challenge for treatment of advanced PCa. However, underlying mechanisms
of this process remain largely unknown. We found that androgen
deprivation in mice bearing PCa patient-derived tumors and in PCa LNCaP
cells resulted in increased expression of wnt transcriptional factors:
TCF4 and LEF1, as well as c-myc and NRP2. Using GenBank and MatInspector
software, we identified five potential binding sites for TCF4 in the 5
flanking promoter region spanning from 3891 to +108 base pairs of the
NRP2 gene. Treatment of LNCaP cells with Wnt3a and Wnt 5a conditioned
medium increased NRP2 mRNA expression; and inhibition of Wnt signaling by
overexpression of secreted Wnt antagonists (WIF1 and Frzb/sFRP3) in two
CRPC cell lines: C4-2B and PC3 down-regulated the expression of NRP2 in
both in vitro cell cultures and in in vivo xenograft tumors. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation/real-time PCR a! nalysis revealed that both WIF1 and
Frzb/sFRP3 expression decreased the in vivo binding of TCF4 and
beta-catenin to the NRP2 promoter at five predicted sites. Knock-down of
NRP2 by short-hairpin RNA in CRPC cell lines markedly reduced cellular
invasiveness and migration capacity. Furthermore, we analyzed gene
microarray data sets from the UCI SPECS project. The total of 204 samples
from 82 patients include 66 tumors, 65 tumor-adjacent stromas, 28 far
stromas and 45 normal prostate samples. The mRNA expression levels of the
genes of interest were normalized to the average expression levels of
these genes from the normal prostate samples. We showed that the
percentage of samples with WIF1 down-regulation progressively increased
from far stroma to adjacent stroma and tumors. Strikingly, the levels of
NRP2 mRNA are up-regulated in all tested adjacent stroma and most of
tumor samples. Furthermore, the expression levels of NRP2 in far and
adjacent stroma and tumors are inversely related to WIF1 mRNA levels
(correlation coefficients are 0.6918, 0. 2349 and 0.5931; Ps<0.01). For a
large series of clinical samples, NRP2 expression appears to be
associated with WIF1 down-regulation. These results suggest that NRP2 may
be a novel Wnt target gene and contribute to progression of CRPC.

