Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of combined treatment with ursolic acid (UA) and
resveratrol (Res) on skin tumor promotion by TPA


In recent years, emerging evidence suggests that cancer chemopreventive
agents when combined might be more effective than when given alone. Both
UA and Res have been shown to reduce inflammation and tumor development
in various tissues. In mouse skin, both compounds have been shown to
block skin tumor promotion by TPA and reduce TPA-induced inflammation. In
this study, we have further evaluated the effect of UA and Res on skin
tumor promotion with emphasis on examining combinations of these agents.
For these experiments, UA, Res and combinations of UA + Res were applied
topically (various doses) prior to TPA treatment on mouse skin. The
combination of UA + Res showed additive and possibly synergistic
inhibition of TPA-induced epidermal hyperproliferation as assessed by
both epidermal hyperplasia and BrdU labeling index. The effect of UA, Res
and the combination of UA + Res on epidermal signaling pathways was also
evaluated. The combination of UA + Res significantly inhibited activation
of epidermal Akt, NF-B, p38 MAPK, and JNK in response to TPA treatment
compared to the treatment with the individual compounds. The combination
of UA + Res also dramatically reduced the induction of epidermal Cox-2 by
TPA. Notably, combined treatment with UA and Res induced a dramatic
increased phosphorylation of AMPK- suggesting that AMPK activation may
also play a critical role in the ability of the combination to alter skin
tumor promotion. Combination treatment during skin tumor promotion showed
greater inhibition of tumor multiplicity than with either agent alone. In
further experiments, the effect of UA, Res and UA + Res on proliferation
of bulge-region keratinocyte stem cells (KSCs) was evaluated. Both UA and
Res treatment inhibited TPA-induced proliferation and migration of
bulge-region KSCs. Furthermore, the combination of UA + Res appeared to
be more effective at blocking proliferation of these cells from the hair
follicle when compared with the single compound-treated groups. Taken
together, these data suggest that the combination of UA + Res has either
additive or synergistic inhibitory effects on keratinocyte proliferation
(including KSCs) and various signaling pathways. These effects may
explain the greater inhibition of skin tumor promotion by the combination
of UA and Res.

