Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting patient mutomes by integrating DNA and RNA sequencing


Personalized cancer medicine, the matching of therapies to a given
patient's somatic alterations, depends on highly accurate and complete
identification of patients somatic alterations, or their mutome. Advances
in sequencing technologies (exome sequencing, RNAseq, and whole genome
sequencing) have provided a means to examine large portions of the
genetic content of patients cancers. Computational tools have arisen that
make somatic mutation predictions utilizing particular sequencing assays;
however, each sequencing assay has limitations and existing mutation
detection tools exhibit less than ideal agreement when analyzing the same
data. The task of identifying all somatic mutations in one patient's
cancer remains a challenge to personalized cancer medicine. Typically,
somatic mutation detection is performed utilizing DNA sequencing. Because
RNA sequencing is often a component of genome characterization projects
along with DNA sequencing, we sought to evaluate the possible added value
of RNA sequencing in somatic mutation detection. We have developed an
original computational method, UNCeqR, that makes patient-specific
somatic mutation predictions utilizing RNA sequencing combined with DNA
sequencing. DNA mutations and RNA mutations are statistically modeled
separately and results are combined in a meta-analytic fashion, resulting
in up to three predictions for a locus: DNA-only, RNA-only, and DNA+RNA.
In addition to de novo genomewide mutation predictions, UNCeqR can query
specific a priori mutations. UNCeqR was applied to The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) lung squamous cell carcinoma sequencing data, consisting of
Ilumina RNAseq and Illumina exome sequencing. Of annotated exons, 20% had
very low to zero coverage in RNA and 5% had very low to zero coverage in
DNA, indicating that both sequencing assays add new genomic territory for
mutation detection. Limiting to regions with both DNA and RNA coverage,
56% of mutations detected from DNA were also predicted by RNA, providing
an independent validation of these mutations. To evaluate if mutation
detection using DNA+RNA is superior to detection using DNA-only, cancer
specimen DNA and RNA reads were randomly split into subsamples. UNCeqR
was executed on each of the subsamples and mutation agreement was
compared among pairs of subsamples within regions of DNA and RNA
coverage. Compared with the DNA-only method, DNA+RNA mutation detection
exhibited a 42% relative increase in percent agreement across subsamples
and a 230% relative increase in the number of mutations detected.
Therefore, RNA sequencing adds positive value to somatic mutation
detection via UNCeqR.

