Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of miR-1275 through histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation during human glioma stem-like cell differentiation


Functional and morphological heterogeneity characterizes aggressive
glioblastoma and contributes to invasion, metastasis and drug resistance.
The molecular mechanisms underlying this heterogeneity are poorly
understood. Recent studies have revealed that tumors contain a minor
population of tumor-initiating cells, called cancer stem cells (CSCs).
The CSCs are considered able to aberrantly differentiate into diverse
cell types. Such stem-like cancer cells have been well characterized in
glioblastoma multiforme, and are referred to as glioma stem-like cells
(GSCs). Using GSCs as a model, we investigated the roles of micro-RNA
(miR) in GSCs differentiation. miR-microarray showed that 19 and 48 miRs
were commonly upregulated and downregulated in two GSC lines during the
differentiation, respectively. Among those miRs, quantitative-PCR
analysis showed that miR-1275 was consistently downregulated during the
GSC differentiation, while the expression of its target, oligodendrocyte
specific protein (OSP/CLDN11), a marker of oligodendrocyte, was
upregulated. Compellingly, inhibition of miR-1275 using specific
antisense oligonucleotide increased the expression of OSP in GSC.
Epigenetic analysis revealed that level of histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation(H3K27me3) was enriched in the promoter of pri-miR-1275
during the GSC differentiation. Treatment of 3-Dezaneplanocin-A, an
inhibitor of H3K27me3, impaired the GSC differentiation in parallel with
sustained miR-1275 expression. In general, astrocytic component is the
most prevalent in glioblastomas, while a subset of cases also contain an
oligodendroglial component in the tumors. Our results illuminated the
epigenetic regulatory pathways of miR-1275 closely associated with
oligodendroglial differentiation, which may contribute to the tissue
heterogeneity formation of glioblastomas.

