Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cervical cancer screening practices among Hispanic migrant and
seasonal farmworkers of Michigan


Cervical cancer incidence among all racial/ethnic groups in the United
States is highest among Hispanics. Previous studies have found that
migrant and seasonal farmworkers have limited access to health care and
may therefore be less likely to follow screening recommendations for
early cervical cancer detection. The objective of this study was to
describe Pap test utilization and identify barriers, attitudes and
knowledge regarding cervical cancer screening among Hispanic migrant and
seasonal farmworkers served by Northwest Michigan Health Services, Inc
(NMHSI) in Shelby and Traverse City, Michigan. This cross-sectional study
surveyed the patient population of NMHSI. A questionnaire addressing
knowledge, attitude and practice of cervical cancer screening was
administered to 309 participants in NMHSI clinics or in participants
residences. The Hispanic study population included 184 seasonal and 125
migrant farmworkers. Of all Hispanics surveyed (mean age 38.7), 94.2% had
ever received a Pap test. Comparatively, 87.7% had received a Pap test
recently (in the last two years for 21-29 year olds, in the last three
years for those over 30) and 14.5% had an abnormal Pap test result in the
last ten years. There was no significant difference between migrant and
seasonal farmworkers in terms of ever having had a Pap test or having had
a recent Pap test (p-value 0.88 for both comparisons). Consistent with
these findings, participants reported that they understood the benefits
of and experienced few barriers to getting Pap tests. These findings
suggest that migrant farmworkers may not experience more difficulty in
receiving Pap tests than seasonal farmworkers in Michigan. Farmworkers in
general recognize the importance of receiving Pap tests even though both
groups of women have low levels of acculturation. Furthermore, findings
suggest that recent efforts to increase cervical cancer screening have
been effective. While cervical cancer screening rates are high, knowledge
is low and this continuing research will aid in identifying specific gaps
in cervical cancer screening knowledge and attitudes to address in future
interventions.

