Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Population Pharmacokinetic (PPK) modeling of ProLindac (AP5346), a
nanopolymer prodrug of diaminocyclohexane (DACH)-platinum (Pt) in
recurrent advanced ovarian cancer (AOC) patients


Background: ProLindac (PL) is a 25 kDa hydroxypropylmethacrylamide
copolymer linked to a DACH-Pt. The DACH-Pt complex is thought to be
biologically inert while attached to the polymer, with slow in vivo Pt
release accelerated in low pH environments (extracellular space of
hypoxic tumor and intracellular lysosomal compartment). Methods: 9/35
patients (pts) with recurrent OAC treated with single-agent PL via 2-h IV
infusion at doses of 900 mg/m*2 q2w (3 pts), 1400 mg/m*2 q3w (3 pts) and
1680 mg/m*2 q3w (3 pts) were assessable for full PK analysis. 8 time
point samples were collected on cycle 1, and 2 samples at cycles 2, 3 and
4. The ultrafiltration procedure used Ultra-4 filters (Amicon) with 50
kDa for unbound PL (U-PL) and 3 kDa for unbound Pt (U-Pt) cut-off. Urine
was collected every 6 h from day 1 to 5 of dosing 1. Pt levels were
measured by a validated Flameless Atomic Absorption Spectrometry Method
(concentration range: 12.5 - 500 ng/mL). PPK was modeled using a
nonlinear mixed effect model program (Monolix version 3.1s) by computing
the maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters without any
approximation of the model. Results: A 3-compartment open model
adequately described the total PL time-concentration curve with linear
elimination while a 2-compartment model satisfactorily described U-PL and
U-Pt time-concentration curves with linear elimination. Mean PPK
parameters with SD are summarized below: The mean recovery of PL dose in
urine was at least 60% within 5 days. Conclusion: The central Vd for
total PL Pt is rather small, close to the circulating blood volume
suggesting that the major part of parent drug is restrained in the
circulatory space with weak tissue diffusion probably due to a high
protein binding rate. However, for U-PL and U-Pt, the Vd is much higher
suggesting: 1) a significant tissue diffusion of active species
(free-Pt), 2) PL is bound to plasma proteins with low-energy bonds.


