Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Licochalcone E inhibits solid tumor growth and lung metastasis of
4T1 murine mammary carcinoma cells in the BALB/c mouse orthotopic model


Licochalcone E a phenolic constituent of licorice that is reported to
exert excellent anti-cancer effects. In the present study, to investigate
the effect of licochalcone E oral administration on the solid tumor
growth and metastasis of breast cancer cells, 4T1 cells were injected
into the inguinal mammary fat pads of syngeneic female BALB/c mice. One
week after the injection the mice were subjected to oral gavage for 25
days with licochalcone E (0, 7, or 14 mg/kg body weight/day).
Licochalcone E treatment induced a significant reduction in solid tumor
growth, which was accompanied by 1) reduced Ki67 (prototypic cell cycle
related nuclear antigen), cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)2, CDK4, cyclin A,
and cyclin D1 and 2) increased numbers of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells
with increased Bax and cleaved caspase-3 expression but reduced Bcl-2
expression in tumor tissues. Licochalcone E also reduced the expression
of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), VEGF-R2, CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1),
VEGF-C and LYVE-1 (lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-) in tumor
tissues. In addition to tumor growth, oral licochalcone E administration
markedly reduced the number of pulmonary tumor nodules. In lung tissues,
licochalcone E induced a significant reduction in the levels of cytokines
and angiogenesis-related proteins including DPPIV (CD26), endoglin
(CD105), MMP-9, C5a, interleukin (IL)-1ra, IL-16, MIG (CXCL9). In vitro
culture studies showed that licochalcone E dose-dependently inhibited the
migration of MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells at concentrations of
0-20 mol/L without significant changes in cell viability. Licochalcone E
significantly reduced secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-9,
urokinase-type plasminogen activator and VEGF in concentration-dependent
manners in MDA-MB-231 cells. These results demonstrated that licochalcone
E inhibits solid tumor growth and metastasis of breast cancer cells and
these effects were mediated via the reduction of a wide variety of
cytokines and chemokines, which subsequently inhibits tumor angiogenesis,
lymphangiogenesis, proliferation, and metastasis.

