Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomic classification of breast cancer using pooled
lentivirus shRNA screens


Targeted therapies for most breast cancers are lacking because our
knowledge of essential genes driving tumor proliferation is still
primitive for each subtype. Although ongoing intensive efforts to
genetically characterize large numbers of breast tumors are providing a
plethora of new data on genomic abnormalities (e.g., amplifications,
deletions, somatic mutations), it can be difficult to access which of
these actively drive pathogenesis. Even if an oncogene or tumor
suppressor is identified, these often are not amenable to targeted
therapy (eg. KRAS, c-MYC, p53, etc). However, unanticipated gene/pathway
dependencies can arise as a consequence of these genetic abnormalities in
cancer cells (synthetic lethality). The recent development of
lentiviral-based shRNA libraries enables genome-wide screening of
cultured cancer cells in a pooled format, facilitating the identification
of genes necessary for cancer cell proliferation and survival in cell
culture as well as potential synthetic lethal interactions. The overall
objective of this project was to identify subtype-specific targets for
human breast cancer using a genome-wide shRNA screen, as well as to
compare functional genomic and genomic classification schemes. We
screened a panel of 53 breast cancer lines using an 80,000 lentiviral
shRNA library targeting 16,000 genes in a pooled format. We identified
several classes of gene dropouts, including general essential genes,
which are required for survival or growth in more than 70% of all cell
lines, irrespective of subtype. Most of these were enriched in
housekeeping functions, although several genes involved in cellular
signal transduction also were identified, including mTORC1, RAPTOR,
TGFBR2, DDR1 and DDR2. In addition, we observed several subtype-specific
genes, whose essentiality is restricted to a defined subtype.
Furthermore, unsupervised and supervised clustering of our functional
screening results identified potential drivers unique to each subtype.
These include amplified/overexpressed genes such as ERBB2, ERBB3, FOXA1,
SPDEF, TFAP2C, and CCDN1 known to be specific to the luminal and HER2
subtypes, respectively. Finally, integration of gene expression, copy
number variation, and functional screening results identified potential
synthetic lethal interactions with common genetic changes. Our study
represents an extensive functional genetic survey of three major breast
cancer subtypes, reveals complexities between genomic and functional
genomic results, and uncovers several unexpected gene dependencies and
potential novel therapeutic target for each subtype.

