Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FC-IBC-02: A new in vitro-in vivo model of inflammatory breast
cancer (IBC)


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive type of advanced
breast can[[Unsupported Character - Codename ­]]cer and it is associated
with a poor prognosis in spite of appropriate multidisciplinary
treatments. The disease is characterized by peculiar molecular and
clinical features and usually affects younger patients, mostly under the
age of 50 years at diagnosis. IBC has shown the capacity to spread early,
primarily through lymphatic channels and secondarily through blood
vessels causing the inflammatory signs and development of early
metastasis. The high incidence of metastatic disease at presentation, the
persistence of residual disease after induction chemotherapy associated
with significant risk of disease recurrence immediately surgery strongly
support our hypothesis that these patients develop micro metastatic
disease early in the disease course (Cristofanilli et al., Cancer
2007;110:1436-44). Moreover, the lower survival rate of IBC patients may
be due to the early activation of metastatic process associated with a
peculiar phenotype of cancer stem cells (CSCs) (Cristofanilli et al.,
Oncologist 2003;8:141-8). Although IBC research has been ongoing for over
15 years, very few molecular alterations have been associated
specifically with IBC and few preclinical models are currently available
to evaluate the peculiar biology of IBC. The majority of IBC studies have
been performed using the cell lines SUM149 and SUM 190 which were
developed from the primary tumor and, KPL-4 isolated from the pleural
effusion of IBC patients. Although both the SUM149 and KPL-4 injected
into immuno- compromised mice form primary tumors, there are currently
only two in vivo xenograft models of IBC, the Mary-X and the WIBC-9
models that recapitulate the tumor emboli that are the signature of IBC
in humans. We have developed another IBC model, FC-IBC-02, derivate from
the pleural effusion of a 49 years old IBC triple negative patient. Tumor
cells from the pleural effusion were ER(-) Pgr(-) and Her2(-) and
strongly positive for tetraspanin CD151 and E-cadherin. Cells from the
pleural effusion of this patient were growth under non-adherent
conditions in serum-free mammary epithelial growth medium (MEGM). These
tumor spheroids have Aldhehyde Dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH-1) activity and
characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSC) and they rapidly developed
tumors when they were injected in the mammary fat pad of SCID mice. These
tumors were poorly differentiated carcinomas ER-negative PgR-negative
Her2-negative and the mice developed micro metastasis in the lungs. In
contrast, cells isolated under adherent conditions were unable to produce
tumor in SCID mice. In summary, our studies demonstrated that IBC is a
disease enriched for cells with a stem cell phenotype and these cells are
highly tumorigenic. IBC may represent an ideal model to evaluate stem
cell targeting therapeutic modalities.

