Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hnRNP A2/B1 regulates S1PR3 expression in lung cancer


Several clinical trials have shown that elevated expression of
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 (hnRNP A2/B1) in exfoliated
bronchial epithelial cells correlates with eventual development of lung
cancer. Cells with high levels of hnRNP A2/B1 expression have also been
reported to manifest multiple molecular features of genetic injury. The
hnRNPs are a complex group of RNA-binding proteins which play a key role
in mRNA processing: stability, splicing, export and subcellular
localization and participate also in telomere biogenesis. To elucidate
the mechanism that links hnRNP A2/B1 overexpression with lung cancer
progression we have knocked down hnRNPA2/B1 mRNA in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell line A549 with a stable siRNA vector-based system.
Silencing hnRNP A2/B1 increased proliferation and decreased migration in
A549 and H1703 cell lines. These changes in migration and proliferation
in A549 and H1703 hnRNPA2/B1-silenced cell lines correlated with an
increase of E-Cadherin expression in both cell lines at mRNA and protein
level. This increase in E-Cadherin expression was accompanied with a
down-regulation of E-Cadherin inhibitors Twist1 and Snai1. We have
proposed that hnRNP A2/B1 modulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in lung cancer cell lines that present a mesenchymal or
intermediate phenotype such as H1703 and A549. It has been proposed that
EMT may induce metastasis of cells with a mesenchymal phenotype. After
metastatic seeding, EMT would be reversed trough mesenchymal-epithelial
transition (MET) allowing tumor growth. However, mechanisms that regulate
reversion of EMT are still poorly characterized. Interestingly,
sphingosine 1-phospate (S1P) is an important angiogenic factor and
regulator of vascular permeability. Microarray expression analysis
revealed that silencing hnRNP A2/B1 decreases expression of the
sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 3 (S1PR3), a pro-migration RhoGTPAse
activating S1P receptor, in A549 cells. Therefore, Moreover, S1P also
stimulates motility of cancer cells through S1P receptors. It has been
described that S1PR3 regulates migration and invasion in breast, prostate
and gastric cancer. In A549 cells, S1PR3 is the most abundant receptor
for S1P. Here we report that down regulation of hnRNP A2/B1, in lung
cancer cells, decreases S1PR3 expression at the mRNA and protein level.
We propose that further study of the mechanistic link between hnRNP
A2/B1, S1P function and S1P receptors may allow a better understanding of
the molecular mechanisms involved in invasion, metastasis. It may also
provide new insights regarding the interaction between endothelial and
epithelial cells and the regulation of EMT during tumor progression.

