Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of ERCC1 isoforms in NSCLC


Background: ERCC1 is a DNA repair protein whose expression is a
prognostic and predictive biomarker of chemotherapy effect in NSCLC. Five
alternative transcripts of the ERCC1 gene have been described or
hypothesized to exist (isoforms 201 to 205). Nevertheless, little is
known about the function and relative expression of these isoforms. We
explored 3 main questions: a- Which ERCC1 isoforms are detected by
clinically validated antibodies? b- Which isoforms are expressed in lung
cancer cell lines and patient samples? c- Which isoforms are functional
for removal of cisplatin DNA-adducts and potentially relevant as
predictors of cisplatin resistance? Methods: To determine the specificity
of anti-ERCC1 antibodies, a screening of isoform specific peptide
sequences was achieved using a peptide array (Epitope Mapping
CelluSpots). The expression of ERCC1 isoforms was evaluated in 20 lung
cancer cell lines and in 123 NSCLC patients by qRT-PCR. We established a
functional DNA repair assay by monitoring the accumulation of cisplatin
adducts over time with a specific antibody RC-18 (courtesy of Juergen
Thomale, Germany). To investigate isoforms functionality, we created
stable ERCC1 attenuated A549 cells with Zinc Finger Nucleases technology
(Sigma). Using lentiviral constructs we rescued ERCC1 isoforms
expression. Results: The 2 monoclonal antibodies, clone 8F1 and 3H11
recognize a conserved region shared by all isoforms of ERCC1 protein, and
so, are unable to distinguish the different isoforms. The 5 isoforms were
all detected at mRNA level, both in cancer cell lines and in patient
tissues. Interestingly, a significant increase in isoform 201 expression
was observed in all tumor tissues compared to normal counterparts. We
obtained 7 A549 clones harboring a 85-95% decrease in ERCC1 expression.
In these cells we observed a 7-fold increase in IC50 of cisplatin
accompanied by a significant decrease in the rate of nucleotide excision
repair (NER). We are currently exploring isoform function by analyzing
DNA repair efficiency in the different stable cell lines. Conclusions:
Alternative roles for ERCC1 beyond NER are currently emerging. Our 7 A549
clones, with stable and strong ERCC1 attenuation, provide a very
promising tool to analyse all functions of ERCC1. Since most antibodies
used to test ERCC1 positivity in patients do not distinguish the
different isoforms, it is urgent to characterize their function further,
particularly the role of isoform 201 overexpression in NSCLC tumors.

