Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microglia promote glioma cell migration through a Pyk2 signaling
pathway


Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most malignant form of
glioma. Despite the non-metastatic nature of gliomas, prognosis is poor
because tumor cell invasion into surrounding brain leads to recurrence
even after radical surgery. Microglia infiltrate most glioma tumors and,
therefore, make up an important component of the glioma microenvironment.
Microglia may release factors which stimulate signaling pathways and
promote glioma cell dispersal and cell invasion. The purpose of the
present study was to test the hypothesis that glioma and microglial cells
are involved in a reciprocal interaction in the tumor microenvironment
where they modulate functions and abilities of each other in order to
promote tumor progression and invasion. We hypothesize that microglial
cells release soluble factors which promote migration of glioma cells
through a Pyk2 signaling pathway. In the present study, we used three
different human glioma cell lines with varying levels of invasiveness:
A172, U-87MG and HS683, as well as, an immortalized human microglial cell
line. We used three experimental groups of glioma cells: group 1 were
control glioma cells, group 2 were glioma cells treated with microglia
conditioned medium (MCM), and group 3 were glioma cells treated with
conditioned medium from microglia that were pretreated with glioma
conditioned medium (AMCM). Group 3 simulates the cross-talk between
microglia and glioma cells which occurs in the brain. Using a matrigel
invasion assay and a wound healing assay, we demonstrated that factors
released from microglia significantly increased migration/invasion of
glioma cells. The effect was stronger when glioma cells were exposed to
microglia activated by glioma conditioned medium (AMCM) to simulate
cross-talk between glioma and microglial cells as compared to the effect
of resting microglia (MCM). To examine potential intracellular pathways
that are involved in the process of activation of glioma migration and
invasion by microglia, we used a antibody microarray targeting cell
signaling proteins. We found upregulation of phosphorylated Tyr579/580
Pyk2 protein in glioma cells treated with MCM and with AMCM. These data
were confirmed by Western Blot of rat C6 glioma cells and of A172, U87,
HS683 human glioma cell lines demonstrating a common effect of soluble
factors released from microglial cells on upregulation of the Pyk2
intracellular pathway in different glioma cell lines. Pyk2 has previously
been shown to increase glioma cell migration and invasion. Taken
together, these data indicate that microglial cells activate glioma cell
migration/dispersal. Furthermore, these interactions activate the
pro-migratory-Pyk2 signaling pathway in glioma cells.

