Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra- and intercellular Wnt pathway induction synergistically
accelerates FGFR1-mediated prostate tumorigenesis


Cancer growth and metastasis requires proliferation, cell migration, and
stromal remodeling, functions also found during organogenesis and wound
repair. The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and canonical Wnt/-catenin
signaling pathways are two pathways central to these functions. FGFs and
their receptors (FGFRs) are expressed in most tissues and play pivotal
roles in development, wound healing and neovascularization, and are also
upregulated in many solid cancers, including prostate, mammary, renal,
kidney, bladder, and testicular tumors. We previously demonstrated in the
JOCK1 (juxtaposition of CID and kinase) prostate cancer (PCa) mouse model
that chemically induced dimerization (CID) of FGFR1 signaling in the
prostate is sufficient for tumor initiation and early tumor maintenance
and prolonged (42 weeks) FGFR1 activation results in PCa with distant
metastasis. The Wnt pathway is also vital for proper embryogenesis and
homeostasis of adult tissues by regulating stem cell self-renewal,
pluripotency, and differentiation in several tissues, including colon,
hair shaft, and chondrocyte stem/progenitor cells. The uncontrolled
activation of this important stem pathway is also associated with various
cancers, including colon, breast and prostate. Recently, we have
discovered that induced crosslinking of the Wnt co-receptor LRP5 is
sufficient to induce canonical Wnt signaling and nuclear localization of
-catenin. We subsequently developed two novel mouse models where Wnt can
be specifically activated in the prostate epithelium, Pro-Cat
(prostate-targeted inducible -catenin), or in virtually every tissue
sub-layer, Ubi-Cat (ubiquitously expressed inducible -catenin).
Consistent with previous literature, induced Pro-Cat mice never
progressed beyond prostatic hyperplasia, however, after a year of pathway
induction, 2 out of 6 Ubi-Cat mice developed adenocarcinoma, indicating a
yet unexplored role for stromal Wnt signaling in tumorigenesis. In order
to delineate possible crosstalk and synergism between FGF and Wnt
pathways, we bred JOCK1 mice unto Pro-Cat and Ubi-Cat transgenic lines.
Both Pro-Cat/JOCK1 and Ubi-Cat/JOCK1 mice developed widespread
hyperplasia, high-grade PIN and adenocarcinoma with an extensive reactive
stroma by 24 weeks of CID injections. Fascinatingly, Pro-Cat/JOCK1 mice
do not continue to progress beyond the timeline established by JOCK1
induction alone whereas Ubi-Cat/JOCK1 mice continue to progress to
advanced transitional sarcomatoid lesions. These results suggest that
intracellular crosstalk between Wnt and FGFR1 in the epithelia is
sufficient to accelerate tumor initiation, however accelerated
progression requires intercellular crosstalk between the stroma and the
epithelia. Additional experiments necessary to definitively implicate the
stroma in accelerated tumorigenesis are underway and will be discussed.

