Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MBD-capture coupled with next generation sequencing elucidates
genome-wide crosstalk between epigenetic marks and its role in cancer


Aberrations in DNA methylation are a hallmark of cancer, and these
epigenetic changes lead to tumor suppressor gene silencing by
hypermethylation, global genomic hypomethylation, and genomic
instabilities. Post-translational histone modifications are important
epigenetic marks that have been implicated in regulating DNA methylation
patterning. Several known histone marks, including methylation of histone
H3 at lysines 4 and 27 and monoubiquitylation of histone H2A (H3K4me,
H3K27me, and H2Aub, respectively), are believed to differentially
regulate DNA methyltransferase activity on DNA. The histone mark H3K4me
is associated with gene activation, and H3K27me and H2Aub are associated
with loci of transcriptional repression and DNA methylation, especially
at hypermethylated genes in cancer. Recent studies have examined the
genome-wide distribution of these histone modifications or have studied
how their distribution relates to DNA methylation within specific loci,
but these studies have not ascribed specific roles to these histone
modifications in DNA methylation patterning, nor do we understand why
only subsets of genes throughout the genome become hypermethylated in
cancer. This poster demonstrates how the histone marks H3K4me, H3K27me,
and H2Aub affect genome-wide DNA methylation patterning and
transcriptional regulation, and we highlight several epigenetic targets
of H3K27me and H2Aub epigenetic repression that participate in the
pathogenesis of cancer. We have used siRNA transfection in NCCIT human
embryonic carcinoma cells to target critical subunits of the complexes
that establish each of these histone modifications. Through these siRNA
treatments, we assessed the roles of each mark in establishing DNA
methylation patterns throughout the genome and how these patterns relate
to genome-wide gene expression. The effects of histone mark deficiency
were analyzed by an assay that isolates methylated-CpG-containing DNA
(MBD-capture) coupled to massively parallel DNA sequencing to identify
sequences with altered methylation patterns. These sequencing results
were correlated with patterns of gene expression determined by expression
microarray analysis to identify gene targets whose epigenetic
misregulation results in alterations in gene expression. In total, this
poster demonstrates how histone modifications contribute to the control
of the human DNA methylome and postulates how these marks exert
downstream effects toward the pathogenesis of cancer.

