Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of microRNAs identified in human acute
myeloid leukemia stem cells


Human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is organized as a functional cellular
hierarchy and is sustained by a rare population of leukemia stem cells
(LSC). AML is a heterogeneous disease with a relapse rate of up to 80%
depending on age of the patient and AML subtype. Recent work suggests
that leukemia stem cell properties influence therapy response, overall
survival, and relapse of the disease. In order develop more effective
novel therapies that target this rare cell population; it is imperative
that we better understand LSCs at the molecular level. Although it is
generally accepted that oncogenic mutations underlie cancer initiation
and progression, most studies have focused on protein coding genes.
However, there is increasing recognition that non-coding RNAs can also
play a role in leukemogenesis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small
non-coding RNAs that function as important regulators of the translation
of protein-coding genes. In order to identify LSC specific miRNAs, we
fractionated 16 primary human AML samples into four sub-populations, each
of which were xenotransplanted into immune-deficient mice to evaluate in
vivo leukemia initiating capacity. Global miRNA expression profiling was
performed on each population and a LSC specific miRNA signature generated
by supervised analysis guided by the ability to initiate leukemia in
vivo. Similarly, a human cord blood derived hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
enriched miRNA signature was also established. From these lists, we
selected ten promising candidate miRNAs to assess for biological
function. We have initiated a functional screen to determine the role of
the candidate miRNAs using both in vivo and in vitro assays. Preliminary
results show that enforced expression of two miRNA candidates strongly
reduced engraftment capability of HSCs over untransduced HSCs in
immune-deficient recipients. Moreover, enforced expression of three
additional miRNA candidates show a competitive growth advantage of
transduced HSCs over untransduced HSCs and compared to controls. Also,
enforced expression of one of these three miRNAs in the surrogate LSCs of
a unique leukemia cell line induces a strong proliferative advantage over
untransduced LSCs in an in vitro culture setting. In conclusion, thus far
we have identified five miRNAs that affect hematopoietic stem cell
properties. Further in vivo and in vitro analysis will determine whether
these miRNAs are suitable targets for therapy.

