Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin D1 overexpression supports stable EBV infection in
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells


Poorly or undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is regularly
associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. EBV infection of
premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelial cells has been postulated to play
an important role in the pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. We
have previously reported that genetic alterations could be detected in
premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues. It is not clear if these
genetic alterations may associate with the establishment of EBV
infection. In this study, we have examined the role of cyclin D1 in
supporting EBV infection in nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. While cyclin
D1 is commonly expressed in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues we found
that overexpression of cycline D1 is readily detected in dysplastic
nasopharyngeal epithelial closely associated with EBV infection.
Furthermore, using a panel of immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial
cells, we demonstrated that overexpression of cyclin D1 or CKD4 supports
EBV infection and result in the establishment of stable EBV infected
nasopharyngeal cell lines. We also observed that EBV infection induced
growth inhibition and senescence in nasopharyngeal epithelial cells,
which may be the underlying reason for low detection rate of EBV
infection in healthy nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues. However, cyclin
D1 overexpression suppressed senescence and differentiation in the
immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cells, suggesting cyclin D1 may
play an important role in supporting EBV infection in these cells. We
postulated that the altered expression of cyclin D1 or CDK4 in
premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelial cells may over-ride the growth
suppression effects of EBV infection and support EBV latent infection in
premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. Acknowledgement: This study
is sponsored by grant support received from the Hong Kong Research Grant
Council (Grant number: GRF780911 and AoE /M-06/08)

