Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 is a critical mediator of the pro-survival effect of
Bcl-2-Rac1 interaction in human cancer cells


We recently showed that Bcl-2 overexpression induced a pro-oxidant
intracellular milieu resulting in an inhibition of apoptotic execution
and that reversing the pro-oxidant milieu by inhibiting intracellular
superoxide production sensitized Bcl-2-overexpressing cells to apoptotic
stimuli. We provide evidence that the small GTPase Rac1 is functionally
involved since gene silencing and functional inhibition of Rac1 blocked
Bcl-2-mediated increase in intracellular superoxide production in tumor
cells. A co-localization and physical interaction between the two
proteins were observed, which could be blocked by the BH3 mimetics as
well as by synthetic Bcl-2 BH3 domain peptides both in vitro and in vivo.
The Bcl-2 BH3 peptides as well as silencing and functional inhibition of
Rac1 reversed intracellular superoxide levels and overcame Bcl-2-mediated
drug resistance in human leukemia and cervical cancer cells,
demonstrating that this interaction is functionally relevant. Notably,
the interaction was observed in primary cells from patients diagnosed
with B-cell lymphoma with Bcl-2 overexpression but not in noncancerous
tissue. Furthermore, computer simulation driven virtual predictive
experiments based on the protein pathway dynamic network created by
Cellworks Group Inc. were carried out to study the functional implication
of this interaction. An HCT116 human colorectal cancer cell line with
KRAS over-activation, PI3K overexpression, CDKN2A deletion, -catenin
overexpression and Bcl-2 overexpression was created as a base line.
Phenotypic indices of angiogenesis, proliferation, viability, metastasis
as well as tumor volume were all found to be amplified in a variant cell
line when Rac1 was overexpressed based on the above computer modeled
HCT116. Strikingly, the expression levels of both STAT3 and -catenin were
significantly upregulated in the variant cell line; however upon Rac1 or
Bcl-2 knockdown in both the base and the variant cell lines, apoptotic
markers such as Bax, caspase 3 and cleaved PARP1 were amplified while
STAT3 and -catenin were significantly down-regulated. Intrigued by these
predictions, we set out to verify the correlation between STAT3 signaling
and Bcl-2-Rac1 interaction. Interestingly, there is indeed a strong
correlation between the activation status of STAT3 (pY705) and Bcl-2
expression as well as Rac1 activation status. Furthermore, STAT3 was
found to be localized to mitochondria and our preliminary results suggest
an association with Bcl-2.

