Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) contributes to
tumor growth and metastasis though interaction with the host immune
response


The Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor (MIF) is overexpressed in many
cancers and the degree of expression correlates with tumor
aggressiveness. MIF contains a conserved tautomerase activity for which a
physiological substrate or function has yet to be identified. We
determined that sulforaphane (SFN), a chemopreventive agent prevalent in
broccoli, covalently modifies MIF and inhibits its enzymatic tautomerase
activity with an IC50 within the concentration range observed in the
plasma of human subjects following a broccoli sprout meal. We are
examining the role of MIF in tumor growth and metastasis in the 4T1 model
of breast carcinoma. This model recapitulates many aspects of human
breast tumor progression, including spontaneous metastasis from the
mammary fat pad to similar target organs in similar proportions. We found
that a 4T1 tumor cell line depleted of MIF forms smaller tumors than the
4T1 cells that express, and is reduced in its ability to metastasize to
the lung. Reconstitution of the MIF deficient 4T1 cells with wild-type
MIF rescues the defect in tumor growth and metastasis, while a
tautomerase-deficient MIF does not. This suggests a function for the
tautomerase activity in tumor progression and metastasis. Importantly,
the MIF dependent growth differences are only manifested in vivo, as the
MIF KD cell line is not compromised in growth or colony formation in
vitro, suggesting that MIF may be contributing to the interaction between
the tumor and the host immune response. This was confirmed by our
demonstration that MIF deficient and MIF containing tumors exhibited
similar growth properties in immunodeficient animals. This may represent
an alternative mechanism for chemoprevention in which SFN can target the
tumor microenvironment rather than the tumor cells. We are currently
working to characterize a leukocyte population whose recruitment is
altered in MIF depleted tumors.

