Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of GFI proteins by Notch intracellular domains


Growth factor independence (GFI)-1 and its homolog, GFI1B, are
transcriptional regulators that play critical roles during hematopoiesis.
GFI family proteins are characterized by near-invariant SNAG and zinc
finger domains that direct transcriptional repression and DNA-binding,
respectively. A linker region with limited homology and unknown function
separates the conserved SNAG and zinc-finger regions. GFI proteins
display distinct expression patterns within the myelo-erythroid
compartment and make similarly distinct contributions to cell fate
specification. GFI1 expression is necessary for hematopoietic stem cell
maintenance and is required for granulocytic differentiation beyond the
promyelocyte stage. Enforced expression of GFI1 promotes IL-2-independent
growth of hematopoietic progenitors and inhibits apoptosis. Mutations in
GFI1 lead to a severe congenital neutropenia syndrome that carries an
increased risk of myeloid leukemia development. GFI1B expression
predominates in erythroid and megakaryocytic precursors and is required
for terminal differentiation along both lineages. Moreover, elevated
GFI1B expression occurs preferentially in erythroid and megakaryoblastic
leukemias, and contributes to the malignant phenotype by supporting
growth and preventing apoptosis. Given their complementary roles as
growth and survival factors, yet distinct contributions to lineage
allocation in hematopoiesis, it is essential to define how GFI family
proteins are integrated into the signaling machinery governing cell fate
specification. We show that both GFI1 and GFI1B interact with
intracellular domains of Notch receptors. Enforced expression of the
Notch1 intracellular domain (N1-ICD) impairs GFI-mediated transcriptional
repression. Using deletion mutagenesis, we have mapped the regions
required for the N1-ICDGFI1 interaction. Both the ankyrin repeat and
transactivation domains of N1-ICD contribute binding surfaces for GFI1.
In reciprocal mapping experiments, we show that N1-ICD binding to GFI1
requires a 128-amino acid motif in the divergent linker region near the
zinc finger repeat elements. This region contains a high probability
consensus sumoylation element that is absolutely conserved in mammalian
species but not present in GFI1B. These data suggest that Notch
activation may directly impact transcriptional targets regulated by GFI
family proteins and expand the potential sphere of influence for Notch in
hematopoietic development.

