Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effects of vitamin D in liver cancer


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of cancer
related mortality worldwide. In view of its limited therapeutic options,
strategies for HCC prevention are urgently needed. Vitamin D (VD) and
calcitriol have anti-proliferative and other anti neoplastic activities.
Low levels of VD are associated with increased risk for cancer, and
calcitriol can be active agent in cancer treatment. Therefore, VD might
be a strong candidate for HCC prevention. We show that vitamin D can
prevent the development of HCC in cell lines, reduce proliferation in
animal models and modify cell cycle protein levels in human livers.
Methods: 1) Hep3B HCC cells were treated with either calcitriol, or two
synthetic VD analogs - EB1089 and QW-1624F. Growth was measured using an
MTS assay. 2) Livers were harvested from 12 months-old wild-type (WT)
mice fed standard Purina chow, and age-matched 2spectrin (2SP)+/ mice
after 6 weeks of feeding with a semi-purified AIN-93 diet containing 1000
IU VD/kg or 10,000 IU VD/kg. Hepatocyte proliferation (Ki67 staining) and
fat content (Oil red staining) were assessed as well as cell cycle
proteins (by Western blot). 3) Human liver tissue from healthy and
cirrhotic livers as well as from HCC patients were stained for TGF
Receptor II (TBRII) and for 2SP with and without treatment with VD.
Results: 1) HCC cell lines - Doses of 10-1000nM of calcitriol or vitamin
D analogs suppress the growth of HCC cells. 2) Serum levels of VD in WT
and 2SP+/ mice on regular diet were 25.6+/ 2.9 ng/mL and 21.7+/ 8 ng/mL,
respectively (p=NS). High dose vitamin D in the diet increased
significantly serum levels of vitamin D in 2SP+/ mice to 49.6+/ 12.7
(p=0.0036). Proliferation and steatosis were higher in hepatocytes from
2SP+/ mice fed low dose VD as compared to the wild-type mice fed standard
diet. However, high dose VD reduced hepatocyte proliferation and
steatosis in 2SP+/ mice. Levels of cyclin D1 were increased in the 2SP+/
mice fed with regular diet as compared to the wild type mice. However,
high-dose VD restored the levels of cyclin D1 almost to that of the WT
(p=0.069). 3) Normal human hepatocytes have active TGF- signaling as
demonstrated by high levels of 2SP and TBRII staining, while cirrhotic
liver cells and HCC cells have reduced 2SP and TBRII staining. VD
treatment partially restores TGF- signaling with similar 2SP and TBRII
staining to that in normal hepatocytes. A potential mechanism through
KLF-4 modulation may contribute to it. A disappearance of an MRI detected
nodule was observed in one of the patients treated with Vitamin D with
restoration of TGF- markers. Conclusions: 1) Calcitriol and its analogs
suppress proliferation of HCC cell lines. 2+3) High doses of VD in the
diet suppress hepatocyte proliferation and hepatic steatosis in
susceptible mice. Possible mechanism can be the effect of VD on cell
cycle proteins through the TGF- pathway as seen in humans. These findings
emphasize the use of vitamin D as a novel preventive treatment for HCC.

