Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The atypical kinase SgK223 is a novel mediator of cell invasion in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer still remains one of the most aggressive and lethal of
human cancers, with a lack of effective treatments contributing to its
poor prognosis and high mortality. Perturbations in tyrosine kinase
signaling are characteristic of many human cancers. In order to detect
aberrant protein tyrosine phosphorylation events in pancreatic cancer,
and to subclassify pancreatic cancer cell lines based on their tyrosine
phosphorylation patterns, tryptic digests from a wide panel of pancreatic
cancer cell lines were subjected to anti-phosphotyrosine
immunoprecipitation, then analysed by liquid chromatography coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Proteins were ranked according to
differences in median phosphorylation levels across the cell line panel,
and those that exhibited significantly variable phosphorylation levels
were selected as candidates for further evaluation as biomarkers and
therapeutic targets. One candidate identified by this approach was
SgK223, a 175 kDa atypical kinase with substitutions in the DFG motif of
its kinase domain. Since this is one of the conserved motifs critical for
full catalytic activity, SgK223 may be catalytically inactive. Western
blotting revealed that SgK223 protein expression varied across the panel,
with a subset of pancreatic cancer lines exhibiting overexpression
relative to normal human pancreatic duct epithelial (HPDE) cells. To
further interrogate the role of SgK223 in pancreatic cancer, SgK223 was
overexpressed in HPDE cells. This resulted in an elongated cell
morphology and increased cellular migration and invasion in transwell
assays, with no effect on cellular proliferation or Erk and Akt activity.
MS/MS analysis determined that SgK223 was phosphorylated on tyrosine
residues 159 and 413. Since the former is a candidate Stat3 binding site,
we characterised Stat3 signalling in this model. SgK223 overexpression
led to enhanced Stat3 tyrosine phosphorylation and transcriptional
activity. These data identify a role for SgK223 as a mediator of cell
invasion in pancreatic cancer, and support the use of MS-based
phosphoproteomic profiling as an effective discovery tool for
cancer-associated signaling proteins.

