Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dihydroartemisinin (DHA): A potent enhancer of PARP inhibitors and
DNA-damaging agents activity in human tumor models


Synthetic lethality (SL) is a cellular condition in which two or more
non-allelic and non-essential mutations, which are not lethal on their
own, become deadly when present within the same cell. PARP inhibitors
(PARPi) represent a paradigmatic example of therapeutic application of
the SL approaches. In cancer cells with BRCA1 or BRCA2 loss of function,
inhibition of PARP1 activity leads to an accumulation of single strand
breaks converted to double strand breaks but cannot be repaired by
homologous recombination. However, preclinical and preliminary clinical
evidences suggest a potentially broader scope for PARPi. Currently,
several PARPi are under different phases of clinical investigation as
monotherapy or in combination with DNA damaging agents. Although PARPi in
monotherapy are quite safe, their combination with cytotoxic agents leads
to exacerbation of the typical cytotoxic-related side effects, thus
reducing the potentiality to improve the therapeutic index (T.I.) of
these combinations. The study aim was to assess if the combination of
PARPi and DNA-damaging agents with the widely used antimalarial agent DHA
could improve both their antitumor activity and T.I. We have preliminary
observed, in different cancer cells, that DHA was an inducer of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (increased expression of typical ER
stress-related genes), activation of checkpoint kinases and
transcriptional up-regulation of different p53-target genes and of
mitochondrial membrane depolarization. A consequence is PARP activation
that, in absence of other factors, leads the cells to recover from damage
and to their rescue. On the contrary, we observed that the simultaneous
use of DHA with a PARPi or cytotoxic agents causes a massive cell death.
More specifically a strong synergism was observed on tumor cells, when
DHA was combined with different drugs: doxorubicin and platinum compounds
on NCI-H460, temozolomide (TMZ) on MDA-MB436 and CAPAN-1. In addition, a
synergistic interaction was identified between DHA and the PARPi (ABT-888
or AZD-2281) on various tumor cells (e.g., A431, HCT116, SW620,
MDA-MB436, NCI-H460, A2780/DDP, CAPAN-1). In vivo, the combination of DHA
(delivered at 200 mg/kg p.o. according to the schedule qdx5/w) with
ABT-888 or AZD-2281, resulted in a significantly higher tumor growth
inhibition than with monotherapy in NCI-H460 NSCLC, HCT116 colon ca. and
MDA-MB436 triple-negative breast cancer BRCA1 negative xenografted in
nude mice. DHA was also able to synergize in vivo with the alkylating
agent TMZ against MDA-MB436 tumor model. No toxic effects of
administrations of DHA in combination with chemotherapeutics in terms of
body weight recordings were found throughout the experiments.Taken
together, these results clearly pinpoint the clinical potential offered
by DHA in the SL approaches in developing less toxic and more efficacious
therapies to treat cancer patients.

