Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of therapeutic NefM1 peptide with single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) suppresses growth of 3-D cultures of breast and
colon cancers


Background and Objectives: In vitro studies with NefM1 peptide
demonstrated apoptotic effects on a number of cancer cell lines
containing CXCR4 receptors. This suggests that NefM1 apoptotic peptides
can be used as a therapeutic agent for breast and colon cancers. In this
study we hypothesized these cancers cultured as 3-D tumor spheres will
undergo greater regression and destruction after treatment with NefM1
peptide- linked-carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) particles than with NefM1
peptide alone. Material and Methods: Human breast cancer (MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468) and colon cancer (HT-29, WiDr, SW 480) cells were cultured
with 1% Sea Prep hydrogel in supplemented RPMI1640 medium. After 3 weeks
the 3-D cultures developed as tumor spheres. Like in vivo conditions
these 3-D cultures had cell-cell interactions and the sphere is held
together by an extracellular matrix. The cultures were treated with NefM1
peptide and NefM1 carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) to compare their relative
effects on the growth of the tumor spheres. The viability status of the
tumor spheres was established using ethidium bromide and acridine stain
and fluorescent microscopy. The Nef peptide was linked to SWNTs using
thionine and binding was verified by gel electrophoresis. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) showed internalization of NefM1-SWNTs
nanoparticles. Results: In 3-D cultures, the SeaPrep hydrogel facilitated
the growth of tumor spheres. All breast (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468) and
colon (HT-29, WiDr, SW-480) tumor spheres showed reduction and
disintegration with nefM1 administration. This was enhanced with the
NefM1- SWNTs conjugate which destroyed all cells in the culture. This
indicated effective delivery of NefM1 into the cells via SWNTs. This is
novel in that not only were these growing tumor spheres killed by the
peptide binding to the CXCR-4 receptors, but the nanoparticles allowed
for increased internalization of the peptide into the cells. The
NefM1-SWNT's will undergo further study regarding its ability to enhance
suppression of these tumors in SCID mice models. Conclusion: An apoptotic
peptide (NefM1) can be linked to a nanoparticle which enhances its
cytotoxicity to breast and colorectal cancers in vitro. Using 3-D
cultured tumor spheres to evaluate the suppression of cancer growth is
convenient and cost effective for drug delivery and drug discovery.

