Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel model of breast cancer metastasis: Killing two birds with
one stone


American women carry a lifetime risk of 1:8 of developing breast cancer,
with metastatic disease remaining incurable. Between 70-80% of breast
cancer patients diagnosed with metastases will exhibit lesions in their
skeleton and in 25% of patients bone is the first site of metastasis.
Breast cancer bone metastases are most frequently osteolytic. Thus,
patients exhibiting bone lesions might suffer from nerve compression,
bone fractures, hypercalcemia, pain, or paralysis. Existing treatment
strategies for patients with bone metastases are palliative and designed
to limit cancer-associated bone loss. It has been difficult to study
breast cancer dissemination to bone due to lack of good animal models and
little biopsy tissue availability. For human xenografts to establish bone
lesions, human breast cancer cells are injected into the left ventricle
of the heart, a procedure technically challenging and not 100% efficient.
Resulting bone lesions are slow to develop and may be easy to miss on
x-ray examination. Here, we show that a well-described parental
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line recapitulates progression of human
disease when injected intravenously through the lateral tail vein into
athymic nude mice. For reasons yet unclear, 30-50% of animals develop
rapid and extremely lytic bone lesions in lumbar, sacral and caudal
vertebrae and hind limbs. Similar to breast cancer patients, these
animals exhibit pathologic fractures and paralysis, necessitating
euthanasia within 4 weeks after cell inoculation. Interestingly, animals
not affected by bone metastases go on to develop overt lung metastases
within 10-12 weeks after cell inoculation. Bioluminescence imaging
studies indicated presence of luciferase-tagged MDA-MB-231 cells in lungs
of all mice at 2 and 24 hours post-cell inoculation. Within three weeks
post-injection, large lesions were detected in the lumbar to caudal
vertebrae regions and hind limbs of mice injected with luciferase-tagged
(6/15 mice) or parental MDA-MB-231 cells (7/13 mice). Bone osteolysis was
confirmed by x-ray, and paralysis occurred as early as 3 weeks after cell
injection. Cytogenetic finger printing preformed by the institutional
core facility confirmed that cell lines used exhibit properties of
MDA-MB-231 cells consistent with ATCC profile. Furthermore, molecular
comparison of these cell lines with MDA-MB-231 cells obtained from other
sources, including ATCC, revealed no differences. Unexpectedly, when
examined in an orthotopic breast cancer model, MDA-MB-231 cells used in
these studies produced rapidly growing tumors that spontaneously
metastasized to lymph nodes and lungs, while MDA-MB-231 cells purchased
from ATCC were completely non-tumorigenic. Studies are underway to
determine a molecular mechanism responsible for this aggressive
metastatic phenotype. This model may serve as a valuable tool for
screening new therapeutics aimed to stop growth of metastases at multiple
sites.

