Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation and fitness testing of a quantitative immunoassay for
HIF1 in biopsy specimens


HIF1 is an important marker of hypoxia in human tumors that is altered in
a number of cancers, but a reproducible method to determine changes in
HIF1 protein expression in human tumor biopsy specimens has not been
available. While HIF1 is being used as a pharmacodynamic marker in
clinical trials in the NCI (CTEP# 8610, 8856, 8880), an important
limitation in measuring the change in HIF1 induced by cancer therapeutic
agents is the lability of the protein, in the presence of oxygen, upon
collection of the sample. We have devised a method of specimen
collection, handling, and extraction that preserves and stabilizes HIF1
levels in tumor biopsies. Degassed collection buffer yielded a
significant increase of recovered HIF1 levels compared to the standard
method of flash-freezing. The addition of 2-hydroxyglutarate, an
inhibitor of prolyl hydroxylase domain enzyme that is involved in the
degradation pathway of HIF1 under normoxic conditions, to the collection
buffer showed a trend for improved yield of the HIF1 recovery. Sonication
and homogenization with ceramic beads were superior to homogenization
with metallic beads or tissue grinding. Employing this specimen-handling
method allowed validation of a two-site immunoassay for HIF1 quantitation
in solid-tissue extracts generated from tumor biopsies. Intra-assay
variability was less than 10%, and inter-assay variability was less than
20%. Accuracy, assessed by spike recovery, was 99 +/ 7%. HIF1 readings
declined linearly with decreasing sample load over a range of 1 to 10 g
protein per well. Fitness for purpose was demonstrated by quantifying a
reduction in HIF1 protein levels following topotecan or
indenoisoquinoline NSC 743400 treatment in an A375 xenograft model,
followed by assessment of other xenograft models. HIF1 was also
demonstrated to be upregulated under low oxygen tension culture
conditions in DU145 human prostate cancer cells. Funded by NCI Contract
No. HHSN261200800001E.

