Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring biomarkers of metastatic breast cancer based on
nanoporous silica chip for early diagnosis and therapeutic evaluation


Breast cancer is the most frequently occurring malignancy and the second
leading cause of cancer death in the United Stated and other Western
countries. In these patients, not the primary tumor, but the metastasis
of breast cancer caused to death. There is still a challenging to detect
the metastasis in early stage and no effective target therapy at late
stage metastatic breast cancer, expect the conventional chemotherapy
intervention. Therefore, the identification of biomarkers for the
detection of cancer metastasis in the early stage and discovery of new
therapy targets may hold the key to the management of metastasis breast
cancer. Although high molecular weight proteins in blood have been
extensively studied, little is known about the low molecular weight (LMW)
proteins and peptides due to difficulties in isolation and purification
of this low abundant population. These substances may circulate at very
low levels and can be difficult to detect in the presence of large
abundance of proteins such as albumin. In our study, we have recently
developed nanoporous chip-based technologies to separate small
proteins/peptides from the large proteins in serum. We used nanoporous
silica chips, with a highly periodic nanostructure and uniform pore size
distribution, to isolate LMW proteins and peptides from serum of mouse
model with MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer lung metastasis. The
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) were used in profiling the LMW proteins and
peptides in three distinct stages (control, early stage and late stage).
All data were then carried out by principle component analysis and
vertical scatter plot to identify signatures unique to different stages
of cancer development. Finally, we found eight peptides significant
changes during the tumor development. It is interesting that these eight
candidate biomarkers can be divided into three groups. Changes on serum
level of group 1 fragments can be detected from both early and late stage
mice. These candidates can sever as biomarkers for detection of early
stage tumor metastasis. Only one peptide was included in Group 2, which
was showed the similar level in control and early stage mice, but
significantly elevated in late stage mice. This fragment is indicative of
late stage tumors. Level of group 3 fragments increased during tumor
development, and reached peak in late stage mice. Group 3 markers could
be used to guide physicians to better treat cancer patients based on
their tumor progression. More detailed studies in mass sequence are
needed to validate the usefulness of these biomarkers. In conclusion, the
nanotechnology based silica chips provide a rapid, sensitive,
reproducible and inexpensive platform that will lead to significant,
personalized diagnosis and new therapies for the treatment of breast
cancer.

