Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Panobinostat potentiates the cytotoxic effects of ara-C and
daunorubicin on acute myeloid leukemia cells through suppressing the DNA
damage response


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a challenging disease to treat.
Resistance to anthracycline [e.g., daunorubicin (DNR)] and ara-C-based
chemotherapy is a major cause of treatment failure in this disease.
Therefore, new therapies are urgently needed to improve treatment outcome
of AML. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACIs) are a promising
new class of anti-cancer drugs, which induce differentiation, cell cycle
arrest, and apoptosis in human leukemic cells, but not in normal cells.
We previously demonstrated strikingly synergistic antileukemic
interactions between valproic acid and ara-C in pediatric AML,
accompanied by cooperative induction of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)
and apoptosis. However, the precise molecular mechanisms remain to be
identified. Recent studies with solid tumor cell lines established that
HDACIs down-regulate expression of genes encoding critical DNA DSB repair
proteins, which play critical roles in the DNA damage response (DDR), an
important mechanism limiting chemotherapeutic efficacy. These results led
to our hypothesis that HDACIs suppress the DDR in AML cells to enhance
the cytotoxic effects of the DNA damaging chemotherapeutic drugs, DNR and
ara-C. In four AML cell lines and ten diagnostic AML blast samples,
treatment with the novel pan-HDACI, panobinostat, resulted in suppressed
expression of BRCA1, CHK1, and RAD51 in a dose-dependent fashion,
accompanied by dose-dependent induction of apoptosis or proliferation
arrest. Treatments of the AML cell lines with ara-C or DNR resulted in
induction of RAD51, BRCA1, and CHK1, which was abolished by
co-administration of panobinostat. Importantly, panobinostat
substantially enhanced ara-C- or DNR-induced DNA DSBs, as reflected in
the induction of H2AX, an established biomarker for DNA DSBs. This was
accompanied by a dramatic synergistic induction of apoptosis. Whereas
panobinostat alone resulted in G1 arrest, ara-C and DNR alone caused
S-G2/M and G2/M arrest, respectively. The latter effects were abrogated
when these agents were simultaneously administered with panobinostat.
Interestingly, shRNA knockdown of BRCA1, CHK1, or RAD51 caused delayed
repair of DNA DSBs induced by ara-C or DNR. Further, shRNA knockdown of
BRCA1 or CHK1 resulted in significantly increased basal and ara-C- or
DNR-induced apoptosis, along with substantially increased DNA DSBs and
abrogated S and G2 checkpoints. In contrast, shRNA knockdown of RAD51
significantly enhanced DNR-induced DSBs and apoptosis, but had no impact
on S and G2 checkpoints. These results support our hypothesis that
suppression of the DDR by HDACIs represents a novel mechanism underlying
the antileukemic activities of this class of drugs, and the synergy
between HDACIs and DNA damaging agents in AML. Studies are underway
evaluating in vivo efficacies of these drug combinations using xenograft
NSG Mice.

