Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sonic hedgehog in non-small cell lung cancer lymph node
metastasis; ROS and PI3kinase/Akt signaling pathway


Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway plays an important role in the
metastasis of various organs. Recently, we found that increased shh
producing cells correlate with enhanced migration, invasiveness and
increased lymphangiogenesis in Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but
the mechanism is unknown. In this study, we investigated the function of
shh pathway in human NSCLC. We performed immunohistochemistry on lung
tumor biopsies and the result showed the expressions of shh, Gli1, VEGF-D
and LYVE1 were enhanced in lymph node metastasis specimens compared to
lymph node negative lung cancer specimens. We also investigated the role
of shh signaling in the invasiveness and the motility of NSCLC. We found
that Shh N-terminal peptide (N-shh) enhanced cell motility and
invasiveness in NSCLC, and this process was inhibited by AAD-cyclopamine
(SMO inhibitor). We observed that the mRNA expressions of shh, Gli1,
VEGF-D and LYVE1 were enhanced by N-shh treatment, whereas no increase of
these factors was observed when KAAD-Cyclopamine (a Shh signaling
inhibitor) was treated together. In addition, we confirmed that
Shh-induced lymphangiogenesis and motility/invasiveness of NSCLC are also
reduced by LY294002, PI-3 Kinase/Akt inhibitor meaning that shh pathway
and PI-3 Kinase/Akt are strongly related. Thus, we investigated the
functional relationship between Shh and Akt signaling in the metastatic
progression in NSCLC. Phosphorylation of Akt was enhanced by N-Shh, but
regulated by KAAD-cyclopamine or LY294002. We further analyzed the
effects of shh signaling in vitro by stimulating a HMVEC with N-shh and
we observed N-shh enhanced the tube formation on matrigel, but the
enhancement was inhibited upon cyclopamine or LY294002 treatment. The ROS
production was increased in shh-overexpressing cells. These results
indicate that shh signaling pathway can contribute to ROS generation
enhancing the metastatic and lymphangiogenetic potential of tumor cells.
Our findings suggest that Shh-Akt signaling processes through ROS and the
activation of these pathway increases the metastatic potential of
non-small cell lung cancer.

