Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Temsirolimus inhibits colon cancer growth in vitro and in vivo


Objective: Temsirolimus (CCI-779), an ester of the macrocyclic
immunosuppressive agent sirolimus, is a cytostatic cell cycle inhibitor
with antitumor properties. Temsirolimus inhibits the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), a serine-threonine kinase involved in the initiation of
mRNA translation, and has been shown to inhibit the growth of a variety
of tumor cells. However, there have been only a few reports concerning
the effect of temsirolimus on colon cancer cells. In the present study,
we aimed to investigate the mechanisms of antitumor activity of
temsirolimus in colon cancer cells in in vitro and in vivo studies.
Methods: Two human colon cancer cell lines, CaR1 and LOVO, were treated
with temsirolimus at a range of concentrations. Cell proliferation, cell
cycle and apoptosis indices were evaluated to assess antitumor effects in
vitro. The effect of temsirolimus on the proliferative activity was
investigated by the MTS assay. The cell cycle was evaluated by
flow-cytometry after staining of cell with PI. Apoptosis was analyzed by
flow-cytometry after double-staining of cells with AnnexinV/PI.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway related proteins were measured by Western blot
analysis. The in vivo effects of temsirolimus on tumor cell growth were
examined using subcutaneous xenograft mouse model. Temsirolimus treatment
(0, 0.1, 1, 10 mg/kg, 3 days/week, i.p.) was started when tumor reached
approximately 100-200 mm3, and repeated three weeks. Tumor volume was
calculated using the following equation: Volume (mm3) = Length x Width2 x
1/2. Results: Temsirolimus decreased the ability of colon cancer cells to
proliferate in vitro in time and dose dependent manners. Furthermore,
temsirolimus induced G1 cell cycle arrest, but did not induce apoptosis.
Western blot analysis revealed that temsirolimus downregulated
phospho-S6K, which phosphorylates the S6 protein of the 40S ribosomal
subunit and leads to initiation of protein synthesis. In murine xenograft
model, temsirolimus reduced tumor volume in a dose-dependent manner.
After three weeks treatment, the average tumor volume in the vehicle
group was about four times larger than that in the group receiving
temsirolimus at a dose of 10mg/kg. Conclusions: Temsirolimus suppressed
the proliferation of colon cancer cells in vitro through induction of G1
cell cycle arrest and downregulation of phospho-S6K. The tumor
suppressive effect of the mTOR inhibitor was reproduced in an in vivo
model. Our present findings indicate that mTOR signaling is a potential
target of colon cancer, and the mTOR inhibitor temsirolimus may be a
promising agent for colon cancer treatment.

