Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) in multiple myeloma


Introduction: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been linked to
angiogenesis in many cancers including multiple myeloma (MM). Most
published reports on EPCs are based upon myeloid lineage cells, which can
support angiogenesis, but cannot form blood vessels on their own. A
recently described subpopulation of EPCs called endothelial colony
forming cells (ECFCs) have a high clonogenic potential, an ability to
differentiate into more mature endothelial cells, as well as in vitro and
in vivo vasculogenesis. The role of ECFCs in the pathobiology of MM is
unknown. Objective: Determine the in vitro interaction of ECFCs and MM
cells by using a matrigel assay, an MTS proliferation assay, and cell
cycle analysis. Methods: ECFCs derived from cord blood, or peripheral
blood, of normal volunteers and MM patients were combined with human MM
cells. MM cells and ECFCs were cultured alone or in co-culture and
studied for in vitro tubulogenesis and were evaluated using a
2-dimensional matrigel assay, with images captured at 6 and 24 hours post
culture, and analyzed using Image J. Vascular tubules regressed after 24
hours of culture. Therefore, to evaluate the interaction of ECFCs and MM
cells over a longer duration, GFP-expressed ECFCs and cherry red
expressing MM cells were cultured either alone or in co-culture for 3-5
days. T-tests were used to evaluate the differences between the 2 groups.
Results: In matrigel cultures, MM cells preferentially associated with
ECFCs as over 90% of MM cells migrated towards the newly formed vascular
tubes. No statistical differences in the number of closed units, vascular
area and branch length was observed between ECFCs cultured alone or with
MM cells. There was also no detectable difference in the proliferation of
ECFCs or MM cells. In longer term cultures (3-5 days), the growth of MM
cells was significantly reduced in the MM-ECFC co-culture compared to MM
cells cultured alone (1.7 Vs. 2.8 fold of baseline, p=0.008). ECFC growth
was largely unaffected by MM cells. Summary: Cell cycle analysis showed
an increased G1 phase and decreased S phase when MM cells were
co-cultured with ECFCs compared to MM cells cultured alone. Conclusion:
We demonstrated a tropism of MM cells for ECFCs. In contrast to the
proliferation reported when HUVECs are co-cultured with MM cells, ECFCs
keep MM cells in a quiescent state by causing G1 arrest. We hypothesize
that ECFCs may induce a vascular niche for MM cells. The quiescent state
could theoretically result in resistance to chemotherapeutics, which tend
to target dividing cells. MM cells could subsequently acquire other
molecular events allowing them to dislodge from the vascular niche and
contribute to relapse. Additional work to understand the mechanisms
underlying the interactions of ECFCs and MM cells, and whether this
interaction could be targeted for therapy, are warranted.

