Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of stromal reaction by PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitor
in an orthotopic mice model of gastric carcinoma


Recent studies in molecular and cellular biology have shown that tumor
growth and metastasis are not determined by cancer cells alone but also
by a variety of stromal cells. Many human tumors secrete platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) ligands, and PDGF receptors (PDGF-Rs) are expressed
by various stromal cell populations, including carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs). We reported recently that, in a mice model of colon
cancer, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) traveled to
tumor stroma, where they differentiated into CAF-like cells. In the
present study, we examined PDGF-B and PDGF-R expression in relation to
clinicopathologic features of human gastric carcinomas. We also examined
the effects of PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib, nilotinib) on
tumor stroma in an orthotopic nude mouse model of human gastric
carcinoma. Five gastric carcinoma cell lines and 38 surgical specimens of
gastric carcinoma were used. Under culture conditions, gastric cancer
cell lines expressed PDGF-B at various levels but not PDGFR-. When cells
from these lines were implanted orthotopically into the gastric wall of
nude mice, cells with high PDGF-B expression resulted in tumors with
abundant stroma. In contrast, cells with low PDGF-B expression resulted
in medullary tumors with little stromal reaction. In surgical specimens,
we found PDGF-B expression to be associated with stromal reaction. PDGF-B
and PDGF-R mRNA expression was significantly higher in patients with
lymph node metastasis than in those without and also significantly higher
in diffuse-type carcinoma than in intestinal-type carcinoma. In surgical
specimens and orthotopic tumors, tumor cells expressed PDGF-B, but PDGF-R
was expressed predominantly by stromal cells, including CAFs, pericytes,
and lymphatic endothelial cells. Treatment with PDGF-R tyrosine kinase
inhibitors did not inhibit tumor growth but did significantly decrease
the stromal reaction, lymphatic invasion, lymphatic vessel area, and
pericyte coverage of tumor microvessels. In addition, tumor tropism of
MSCs was also inhibited by treatment with PDGF-R inhibitors in vivo and
in vitro. The PDGF/PDGF-R signaling pathway appears to regulate
cancer-stromal cell interaction, and target molecule-based inhibition of
the stromal reaction may hold promise as an effective anti-tumor therapy.

