Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential role of CD44 in liver regeneration


Background and Aim: Liver regeneration occurs after liver damage by
ischaemia, hepatitis, or in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients
receiving hepatic resection or liver transplantation. Understanding the
molecular bases of this process will provide novel therapeutic approaches
for patients with various liver diseases. Previous studies suggested the
linkage between CD44, a multifunctional cell surface receptor, and liver
regeneration. The detailed role of this receptor in liver regeneration,
however, remained unclear. The present study aimed at elucidating the
role of CD44 in liver regeneration. Materials and Methods: A mouse model
of liver regeneration induced by partial hepatectomy (PH) was employed.
Serum and liver tissues were collected at different time points after PH.
ELISA was performed to measure hyaluronic acid (ligand for CD44) level in
serum. Flow cytometry was done to characterize liver cell populations
after PH. Liver regeneration was quantified by measurement of liver mass
and by immunohistochemical staining for PCNA (a proliferation marker).
Quantitative PCR was performed to compare gene expression pattern of 46
genes between CD45 CD44+ cells and their CD44 counterparts. Results:
Firstly, serum hyaluronic acid level was elevated at the early stage of
liver regeneration. Secondly, by flow cytometry, an increase in CD45
CD44+ cell population was found. Thirdly, immunohistochemical analysis
revealed active hepatocyte proliferation during this period.
Interestingly, the hepatectomy-induced cell proliferation was suppressed
after treating mice with anti-CD44 antibody, suggesting a functional role
of CD44 in liver regeneration. Lastly, dysregulation of genes involving
in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and metabolism of hyaluronic acid
was disclosed in CD45 CD44+ cells. Conclusion: The present study
indicated that CD44-mediated pathways are required for liver
regeneration, which may have therapeutic implications in treating liver
diseases, including HCC.

