Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new paradigm for ABCB6: Role in growth and proliferation


ABCB6 is a mitochondrial ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter whose
expression is upregulated in a broad spectrum of primary human cancers,
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We recently demonstrated that
in hepatoma cells ABCB6 expression promotes growth and proliferation. In
contrast, loss of ABCB6 expression in these hepatomas precipitates a
delay in progression through G2/M phase of the cell cycle. As histone H3
is specifically phopshorylated during mitosis, we took advantage of the
H3 phosphorylated antibody to separate G2 phase of the cell cycle from
the M-phase. Using this approach, we demonstrate that loss of ABCB6
expression leads to a delay in M phase and not the G2 phase of the cell
cycle. However, it is not clear how a mitochondrial transporter,
originally characterized as a transporter of porphyrins, regulates cell
growth. We have proposed two broad hypotheses to evaluate the mechanism
by which ABCB6 regulates growth and proliferation; 1) ABCB6 functionally
interacts with one or more of the cell cycle regulatory components, thus
precipitating M phase delay; 2) ABCB6s location and function as a
mitochondrial membrane transporter alters mitochondrial dynamics leading
to some level of control over cellular proliferation. To test our
proposed first hypothesis we have begun a systematic evaluation of the
expression and function of cell cycle regulatory components in response
to ABCB6 expression. Results from these studies demonstrate that ABCB6
expression alters the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p16, p21 and p27. In addition, yeast two-hybrid screening and protein
interaction studies reveal that ABCB6 interacts with p21 and a novel
tumor susceptibility protein-101 (TSG-101). TSG 101 co-localizes with
microtubule organizing centers and mitotic spindles during mitosis and
its deficiency is associated with abnormalities in microtubules, genetic
instability and carcinogenesis. In this report, we provide evidence of
the physical and functional interactions between ABCB6 and cell cycle
regulatory components and explore the significance of these interactions
to growth and proliferation.

