Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of ZNF516 and INTS1 is related with promoter
methylation in cervical uterine cancer cell lines


Introduction: One of the most common neoplasia in developing countries is
cervical uterine carcinoma (CC). HPV infection is recognized as the major
risk factor for carcinogenesis of cervix. However, not all infected women
will develop a cervical cancer. Several studies have proposed DNA
methylation as early biomarker in CC. A higher promoter methylation is
associated with lower gene expression. Aim: To evaluate the association
between DNA methylation and gene expression of ZNF516 and INTS1 in
cervical cancer cell lines. Materials and Methods: DNA isolated from 12
normal and 7 cervical cancer tissue samples was enriched by Methylated
DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG
Islands plus Promoter arrays (MeDIP-chip). Bioinformatics strategies were
used for background correction, array normalization and data analysis of
differentially methylated genomic regions by Methylation Specific PCR in
a cohort of 221 normal, premalignant, and cervical cancer samples.
Relative expression analysis was performed in a normal cervical
epithelium cell line (ECT1 E6/E7) and three cervical cancer cell lines
(C-4I, SiHa and C-33A) using real time PCR. MSP was also used to examine
promoter methylation in normal cervical and cervical cancer cells lines.
Results: ZNF516 and INTS1 were differential methylated in the promoter
region of normal and cervical cancer samples in the MeDIP-chip discovery
project. The methylation frequency was 100% in cervical cancer cell
lines. Relative expression of ZNF516 was significantly lower in C-4I and
SiHa (p Introduction: One of the most common neoplasia in developing
countries is cervical uterine carcinoma (CC). HPV infection is recognized
as the major risk factor for carcinogenesis of cervix. However, not all
infected women will develop a cervical cancer. Several studies have
proposed DNA methylation as early biomarker in CC. A higher promoter
methylation is associated with lower gene expression. Aim: To evaluate
the association between DNA methylation and gene expression of ZNF516 and
INTS1 in cervical cancer cell lines. Materials and Methods: DNA isolated
from 12 normal and 7 cervical cancer tissue samples was enriched by
Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and hybridized to Nimblegen
385K CpG Islands plus Promoter arrays (MeDIP-chip). Bioinformatics
strategies were used for background correction, array normalization and
data analysis of differentially methylated genomic regions by Methylation
Specific PCR in a cohort of 221 normal, premalignant, and cervical cancer
samples. Relative expression analysis was performed in a normal cervical
epithelium cell line (ECT1 E6/E7) and three cervical cancer cell lines
(C-4I, SiHa and C-33A) using real time PCR. MSP was also used to examine
promoter methylation in normal cervical and cervical cancer cells lines.
Results: ZNF516 and INTS1 were differential methylated in the promoter
region of normal and cervical cancer samples in the MeDIP-chip discovery
project. The methylation frequency was 100% in cervical cancer cell
lines. Relative expression of ZNF516 was significantly lower in C-4I and
SiHa (p <0.05) in relation with the normal cell line. C-33A showed
elevated promoter methylation and a low expression of ZNF516, however,
this result was not significant. INTS1 expression was significantly lower
in C-33A and SiHa (p Introduction: One of the most common neoplasia in
developing countries is cervical uterine carcinoma (CC). HPV infection is
recognized as the major risk factor for carcinogenesis of cervix.
However, not all infected women will develop a cervical cancer. Several
studies have proposed DNA methylation as early biomarker in CC. A higher
promoter methylation is associated with lower gene expression. Aim: To
evaluate the association between DNA methylation and gene expression of
ZNF516 and INTS1 in cervical cancer cell lines. Materials and Methods:
DNA isolated from 12 normal and 7 cervical cancer tissue samples was
enriched by Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and hybridized to
Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands plus Promoter arrays (MeDIP-chip).
Bioinformatics strategies were used for background correction, array
normalization and data analysis of differentially methylated genomic
regions by Methylation Specific PCR in a cohort of 221 normal,
premalignant, and cervical cancer samples. Relative expression analysis
was performed in a normal cervical epithelium cell line (ECT1 E6/E7) and
three cervical cancer cell lines (C-4I, SiHa and C-33A) using real time
PCR. MSP was also used to examine promoter methylation in normal cervical
and cervical cancer cells lines. Results: ZNF516 and INTS1 were
differential methylated in the promoter region of normal and cervical
cancer samples in the MeDIP-chip discovery project. The methylation
frequency was 100% in cervical cancer cell lines. Relative expression of
ZNF516 was significantly lower in C-4I and SiHa (p <0.05) in relation
with the normal cell line. C-33A showed elevated promoter methylation and
a low expression of ZNF516, however, this result was not significant.
INTS1 expression was significantly lower in C-33A and SiHa (p <0.05) in
relation with the normal cell line. C-4I showed a high promoter
methylation and a low expression of INTS1, however, this result was not
significant. Conclusions: We have identified ZNF516 and INTS1 as
potentials biomarkers for cervical cancer. These genes may be a useful
tool for diagnosis and clinical management of cervical cancer. These
results need to be confirmed in clinical samples, from an independent
laboratory before the gene panel is examined in a Phase II Biomarker
Development Trial. Work sponsored by CORFO Project 09CN14-5960 and
Postdoctoral Fondecyt Research Project 3120141.

