Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of genes in regions of
recurrent genomic gain as putative therapeutic targets in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in the United States. PDAC presents with the
worst prognosis of all solid tumors and the 5-year survival rate for
patients with advanced PDAC is only 2%. Current chemotherapies fail to
attenuate the aggressiveness of this disease and as such, novel
therapeutic strategies are needed. The purpose of our study is to
identify putative therapeutic targets in PDAC and characterize the role
of a target gene in tumor progression. Towards this aim, we sought to
identify genes which are recurrently gained or amplified in pancreatic
tumors. If increased copy of specific genes confers neoplastic
properties, selective targeting of such genes may have therapeutic
implications. We obtained publically available copy number alteration
data on 60 PDAC genomes characterized in four independent PDAC studies.
Using bioinformatics and computational approaches, we identified 20
genomic loci that are gained in at least one sample in three of the four
PDAC datasets. Our integrated analysis of the genes mapping to these 20
loci results in a catalogue of 710 protein-coding genes and 46 miRNA
genes, which are candidate targets for further analysis. In order to
delineate appropriate biological models for functional validation of
these genes in PDAC, we obtained SNP array-based copy number data using
the Illumina OmniExpress platform and gene expression analysis from
Illumina HT-12 BeadChip arrays from 30 human PDAC cell lines. We
identified genes from our candidate gene list in which copy number
alteration and gene expression are correlated as computed by a Spearman
rank correlation coefficient, . This gene set was enriched for genes with
high correlation between copy number and expression in comparison to
simulated gene sets (p = 0.007). Our data suggest that Epithelial
cell-transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) on 3q26.3 is a strong
candidate for functional validation. This gene encodes a Rho-specific
guanine exchange factor involved in various cellular processes including
regulation of G1-to-S phase transition in cell-cycle progression. To
validate our in silico findings, we have designed experiments to
investigate the role of ECT2 amplification in PDAC, using the 30 human
PDAC cell lines we have genetically analyzed. This will be accomplished
through differential inhibition of the ECT2 protein, using RNAi and small
molcules, in cell lines in which ECT2 is amplified, compared to
appropriate control lines. In conclusion, we have identified a set of
candidate target genes in PDAC and are currently validating the role of
one of these targets, ECT2, in PDAC tumor progression.

