Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a distinctive pattern of lipid composition in
Irvalec resistant tumor cells


Irvalec is a marine derived synthetic depsipeptide showing cytotoxic
activity against a wide diversity of tumor cells both in vitro and in
vivo. The compound is currently undergoing Phase II clinical studies in
patients with solid tumors. The existing data on the mechanism of action
of Irvalec indicate that the compound inserts and self-organize in the
plasma membrane of tumor cells, rapidly inducing loss of membrane
integrity and cell permeabilization, giving rise to a fast and dramatic
necrotic death. By continuous exposure of human colon carcinoma HCT-116
cells to stepwise increasing concentratrions of Irvalec, a resistant
subclone of the cell line was established, named HCT-116-Irv. In
dose-response cytotoxicity assays, HCT-116-Irv cells showed a GI50 value
>50 M, representing a specific resistance index to the compound greater
than 10.8 as compared to their wt counterpart. The resistant cells did
not show any of the morphological and physiological responses to Irvalec
observed in parental cells and no overexpression of Pgp efflux pump or
significant cross-resistance to other antitumoral drugs was detected. Due
to the presumably direct effect of Irvalec on the cell membrane, we
searched for possible changes in the lipid composition of the resistant
cells, acquired during the process of resistance development. After
fractionation of the lipid extracts using thin layer cromatography (TLC),
two differential fractions, that were completely absent in the resistant
cells as compared to wt cells, were identified and purified.
Interestingly, one of these fractions, named F4, was found to be able to
interact with a biotinilated derivative of Irvalec, using a standard
overlay assay. These results suggested that the lipid composition could
be directly related to the sensitivity of tumor cells to Irvalec. Efforts
are now focused on the chemical characterization of the selected lipid
fraction and its putative biological role mediating the cytotoxic
response to Irvalec.

