Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor genes? The status of genes PAX 5&6 in primary and
secondary gliomas and glioblastoma multiforme tumors


Background: Gliomas are the most common brain tumors, and glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) tumors have the poorest prognosis, and due to their
molecular heterogeneity, these tumors remain incurable and highly
resistant to treatments, in most cases. The PAX (paired box) family of
genes is comprised of are nine members that are subdivided based on the
products of their protein domain structures. PAX5 and PAX6 are
developmental genes that are vital during embryonic stages of
development, and their transcription factors have supportive, if not, key
functions in tumorigenesis. Interestingly, gene PAX6 has been reported to
be over and under expressed in high grade gliomas, GBMs, and glioma cell
lines. However, these results could be an effect of upstream or
downstream manipulation of other transcription factor(s), the origin of
the tissue (PAX6 expression is restricted to the forebrain, optic cup,
hindbrain, and spinal cord, lens placode, and nasal epithelium), and the
epigenetic regulation of some other gene. In addition, there are no
reported mutations in either gene PAX5 or PAX6 in the cells from GBMs.
Therefore, confusion exists as to role these genes have in tumorigenesis,
and whether either gene has the properties or characteristics of a tumor
suppressor gene. Study Objective: The overall study objective was to
determine if either PAX5 or PAX6 are tumor suppressor genes, and can be
silenced or over-expressed to inhibit the progression of cultured human
adult primary glioma tissue samples, by employing small interfering RNA
(siRNA) methodology. Methods: Primary cell cultures were incubated in
reduced serum conditions for at least 1 month prior to transfections and
cells were passed every 7 to 10 days or when flask was 90% confluent. To
investigate and measure true inhibition of cell proliferation or
progression of the cells, several techniques were used, such as,
real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays, and immunohistochemistry. Results: The high grade
(IV) primary glioma tissue samples and their respective cell cultures
showed relatively high expression levels for the gene PAX6 and lower
levels of expression for gene PAX5 when compared to GAPDH gene and
standard controls. Our initial transfections for knocking down of PAX6
using siRNA (TriFECTA, IDT) showed 90% of control samples were
transfected, and our primary cells were knockdown by 82%, 70%, and 65%
for each of PAX6 isoforms (N000280.21.1-S, 2-S, and 3-S) respectively. We
are currently analyzing the rest of the PAX6 data and all of the PAX5
data.

