Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of estrogen response through long-range
chromatin interactions


Classical 17-estradiol (E2) signaling requires the activity of the
estrogen receptor at genomic regulatory regions. Differences in DNA
sequence, ligand, receptor type and co-factor availability can affect
this activity. However, the role of chromatin structure in the
transmission of the estrogen signal is relatively unexplored. The 3D
interaction between regulatory elements and promoters at long-range
chromatin interaction sites presents a novel and dynamic mechanism of
transcriptional regulation. Recent work to study such interactomes has
identified relationships among histone modifications and loop boundaries
[1], as well as among specific proteins, including estrogen receptor
alpha (ER), that appear to mediate the formation of chromatin loops
[2-4]. We wish to identify the protein, DNA sequence, and epigenetic
characteristics required for chromatin looping at ER-bound sites. The
publication of an ER-bound interactome in the MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line [2] has permitted us to identify the 67-kb loop region upstream of
the krppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) gene as an ideal candidate region for
examination of the role of chromatin looping in breast cancer ER-mediated
transcriptional regulation. To study chromatin looping in situ, we have
developed a model system which integrates a luciferase gene with the
entire native regulatory locus of KLF9 on a single BAC. With this
construct we can use reporter assays to screen for the elements required
for long-distance chromatin interaction mediated, E2 stimulated
transcriptional regulation. We detect early estrogen-induced activation
of KLF9 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and have validated 3/5 previously
reported ER binding sites [2, 5, 6] in this region by quantitative ChIP.
Enrichment of ER at these sites is E2 dependent. Additionally, we observe
unique transcriptional responses from proximal and distal ER-bound sites
in reporter assays. We hypothesize that the KLF9 loop is responsible for
a rapid repression of transcriptional that occurs between 2-4 hours post
E2 treatment. Chromatin looping is a regulatory mechanism common among
most nuclear hormones and occurs at many estrogen-responsive genes; this
process may present a novel mechanism for drug targeting in the treatment
of many anti-endocrine resistant cancers and disorders. Future work will
test our hypothesis of loop-based repression, identify the elements
required for looping at the KLF9 locus and detect patterns in epigenetic
modifications that may regulate or be regulated by the loop structure.
Unique protein targets involved in looping will be examined for
regulatory roles at a genome-wide level. 1. Handoko, L., et al., Nat
Genet, 2011: p. 630-8. 2. Fullwood, M.J., et al., Nature, 2009: p. 58-64.
3. Tan, S.K., et al., EMBO J, 2011: p. 2569-81. 4. Kagey, M.H., et al.,
Nature, 2010: p. 430-435. 5. Carroll, J.S., et al., Nat Genet, 2006: p.
1289-1297. 6. Hua, S., et al., Mol Syst Biol, 2008.

