Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR1 is expressed in human breast cancer and associated with
enhanced tumor-cell growth


The receptor-tyrosine-kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) was identified
by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based search for tyrosine kinases
similar to the tropomyocin receptor kinase (Trk) neurotropic receptors.
ROR1 and a related protein, ROR2, were identified as orphan receptors
with an extracellular Frizzled-like, cysteine-rich domain, an
extracellular, membrane-proximal kringle domain, and an intracellular
tyrosine-kinase-like domain. Both ROR proteins are primarily expressed
during embryogenesis. In prior studies, we and others found that ROR1 was
expressed by leukemia cells and some cancer cell lines, and was involved
in cell survival. However, it was not known whether breast tumor cells
expressed ROR1 or whether its expression had functional and clinical
significance. In the present study we used a high-affinity mAb specific
for ROR1 (named 4A5) to examine human breast cancers and investigate its
functional role for tumor growth. We examined fresh-frozen tumor biopsy
specimens or tissue microarrays of neoplastic and normal adult tissues
for ROR1. The neoplastic cells of high proportions of human breast
cancers (70%) expressed ROR1, which was not detected on non-neoplastic
adult breast tissues. We interrogated available DNA microarray datasets
on primary human breast cancers and cancer cell lines, and fount that
breast cancer cell lines or primary breast cancers that expressed
high-levels of ROR1 were more likely to lack expression of estrogen or
progesterone receptors or HER2/Neu. Conceivably, tumors that are poorly
differentiated are more likely to express ROR1. Patients who had primary
breast cancers that expressed higher levels of ROR1 had a significantly
shorter median survival than did patients with primary breast cancers
that had low-to-negligible expression of ROR1. We silenced ROR1
expression in breast cancer cell lines to evaluate its function on
tumors. When silenced for ROR1 for MDA-MB-231 cells that expressed ROR1,
MDA-MB-231 cells were more sensitive to spontaneous apoptosis and had an
impaired cell growth in vitro and in vivo. On the other hand, MCF-7 cells
that were transduced to express ROR1 had more aggressive growth
characteristics than did control MCF-7 cells. We investigated the
mechanism by ROR1 induced cell survival and found that ROR1 could
interact with casein kinase 1 epsilon (CK1) to activate phosphoinositide
3-kinase-mediated AKT phosphorylation and cAMP-response-element-binding
protein (CREB), which in turn induce expression of genes (CCNB1, BCL2,
and CCND1) that can enhance resistance to apoptosis and/or promote tumor
growth. Moreover, Wnt5a, a ligand of ROR1, could induce ROR1-dependent
signaling and enhance cell growth. This study demonstrates that ROR1 is
expressed in human breast cancers and has biological and clinical
significance, indicating that it may be a potential target for breast
cancer therapy.

