Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of RTOG 9813: Optimization of a pilot study to
identify novel molecular biomarkers for anaplastic astrocytomas


Anaplastic gliomas (WHO grade III) are a histologically defined and
occurring subtype of glioma with a median survival of less than 3 years.
In general, the histological classification and grading of tumors,
combined with clinical prognostic features, guides treatment decisions.
However, the optimum treatment for anaplastic gliomas remains
controversial. Treatment identification is made even more difficult as
histological classification of gliomas is troublesome and subject to a
large (20-30%) degree of interobserver-variation. Because anaplastic
gliomas are histologically and molecularly diverse, there is a clinical
need to objectively identify prognostically relevant subtypes and
subtypes that will respond to treatment. Therefore, we have sought to use
clinical trial tissue, specifically from the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group (RTOG), to identify much needed prognostic and predictive markers
for anaplastic gliomas. In particular, we have focused on RTOG 9813, a
closed trial that assessed for the benefit of TMZ compared to nitrosourea
in combination with radiation. We are currently performing
high-throughput screening technologies, such as SNP/CN genotyping, miRNA
profiling and methylation profiling. Unfortunately, clinical samples are
formalin-fixed and embedded in paraffin (FFPE), resulting in partially
degraded RNA and DNA. Due to the lack of literature currently about
digestion of FFPE cores, which are preferred to scrolls from CNS tumors
due to necrosis and other non-tumor heterogeneity, we have successfully
optimized nucleic acid isolation protocols for FFPE cores to determine
which procedure maximizes recovery while retaining the quality required
for our downstream assays. Specifically, we determined that for DNA
isolation using a combination of the Ambion RecoverAll kit with the
Epicentre MasterPure protocol increases our yield 2-4X more from a 1mm
core than using the Ambion RecoverAll or Epicentre MasterPure kits alone
as well as other non-kit methods. Additionally, the 260/280 and 260/230
ratios were high and most consistent using the combined protocol. For RNA
isolation, a traditional Trizol method gave us the best yield, but a
combination of the Ambion's RecoverAll digestion buffer and the Qiagen
RNeasy FFPE Kit gave us the highest yield while maintaining the 260/280
and 260/230 ratios needed for our downstream assay for miRNA
(Nanostring). We will present the optimized method for both the DNA and
RNA isolations from 1mm FFPE cores as well as preliminary correlative
data from anaplastic astrocytoma tissue using these isolation techniques
in combination with the Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 and Nanostring miRNA
expression analysis. Our ultimate goal is to develop a diagnostic tool
that will help clinical decision making by further characterizing
subpopulations of anaplastic gliomas that may be used for therapeutic
purposes.

