Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hotair, a long non-coding RNA, exhibits pro-oncogenic activity in
pancreatic cancer


HOTAIR is a long intervening non-coding RNA (lincRNA) that represses
specific gene transcription by interaction with the Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) that trimethylates histone H3 lysine 27, leading to
reprograming of chromatin states. HOTAIR is a poor prognostic indicator
for survival of breast, colon and liver cancer patients and is highly
associated with cancer invasion and metastasis. In this study, we show
that HOTAIR is more highly expressed in pancreatic tumors than normal
tissue and is strongly correlated not only with cell invasiveness but
also cell proliferation and death. Overexpression of HOTAIR increased
cell invasion in pancreatic cancer cells expressing low levels of HOTAIR
and this was previously observed in other cancer cell lines. However,
unlike previous reports, HOTAIR knockdown in Panc1 and L3.6pL pancreatic
cancer cells that overexpress this lincRNA decreased cell proliferation,
altered cell cycle progression, and induced apoptosis, demonstrating an
expanded function for HOTAIR in pancreatic cancer cells compared to other
cancer cell lines. Results of gene profiling studies after HOTAIR
knockdown showed that there was minimal overlap between HOTAIR-regulated
genes in pancreatic vs. breast cancer cells and HOTAIR uniquely
suppressed several interferon-related genes and genes related to cell
cycle progression in pancreatic cancer cells. Consistently, Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) shows that HOTAIR regulates gene sets relevant
to cell proliferation using HOTAIR Knockdown gene profiling data and
pancreatic patient gene expression data. Analysis of selected genes
suppressed by HOTAIR in Panc1 and L3.6 pL cells showed by knockdown of
EZH2 and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that HOTAIR-mediated gene
repression was both PRC-2-dependent and -independent. HOTAIR knockdown in
L3.6pL cells also inhibited tumor growth in mouse xenograft model,
further demonstrating the pro-oncogenic function of HOTAIR in pancreatic
cancer. These results indicated that HOTAIR is a potential molecular
target for inhibiting pancreatic cancer cell invasion, metastasis and
proliferation for inducing cell death.

