Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin blocks medroxyprogesterone acetate-dependent progression
of BT-474 human breast tumor xenografts by inducing apoptosis


Recent clinical and epidemiological evidence suggests that hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) containing both estrogen and progestin
increases the risk of metastatic breast cancer in post-menopausal women
compared with estrogen monotherapy or placebo treated women. The
biological mechanisms behind this phenomenon remain obscure. We showed
that medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), a commonly used progestin in HRT,
increases the production of the potent angiogenic growth factor VEGF in
breast cancer cells. The anti-progestin RU-486 blocks this effect,
suggesting the involvement of progesterone receptors in the process (Int
J Cancer, 2001, 92:469). This led to our hypothesis that progestins
increase the angiogenic potential of latent tumorigenic cells in the
breast, leading to development of palpable tumors. Using a xenograft
model that was developed in our laboratory (Cancer Res., 2007, 67:9929),
we previously showed that progestins promote the growth and development
of BT-474 human xenograft tumors, as well as increasing BT-474 cell
metastasis. In this study, we sought to determine whether apigenin, a low
molecular weight flavonoid with known anti-carcinogenic properties,
inhibits MPA-induced growth of BT-474 xenografts in nude mice. BT-474
human breast cancer cells were inoculated in immune-deficient mice that
had been pre-inoculated with estradiol pellets. As was previously
reported with this model, estradiol supported a short burst of tumor cell
growth, which was followed by tumor regression. Implantation of MPA
pellets rescued and stimulated further tumor growth. Administration of
apigenin (50 mg/kg i.p.) inhibited the MPA-induced progression and
development of BT-474 xenograft tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that the anti-tumor effects of apigenin occur through induction
of tumor cell apoptosis, as measured using TUNEL assay, and also in part
by suppression of cell proliferation (Ki67). Apigenin therefore appears
to have therapeutic potential against progestin-dependent breast cancer
and might be considered as a neutraceutical for treating
progestin-dependent tumors in women already exposed to progestins. This
study was supported by a COR award from the College of Vet Medicine, and
research funds from RADIL, University of Missouri.

