Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC)


Background and aims: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a cancer which
occurs in high frequency in Southern China. The identification of
diagnostic and prognostic markers will be highly beneficial for early
stage NPC detection. Previous microcell-mediated chromosome transfer
(MMCT) studies showed that the transfer of an intact human chromosome 11
suppresses the in vivo tumor growth of a NPC cell line (HONE1) in nude
mouse tumorigenicity assays. We aim to identify candidate genes which are
associated with tumor suppression in NPC. Methods: Differential
expression analysis of 19K genes was performed in oligonucleotide
microarray hybridization for the chromosome 11 microcell hybrids (MCHs)/
tumor segregants (TSs) pairs to hunt for some other unknown NPC genes.
The gene expression of the candidate gene was examined in the NPC cell
lines and tumor tissues. Functional analysis of restoration of the
candidate gene expression was studied. Results: Using oligonucleotide
microarray analysis, Serum Amyloid A 1 (SAA1), mapping close to 11p15.1,
was identified as showing consistent down-regulated expression in the
TSs, as compared to their parental tumor-suppressing MCHs. Gene
expression and protein analyses show that SAA1 was not expressed in the
NPC HONE1 recipient cells, tumor segregants, and other NPC cell lines;
SAA1 was exclusively expressed in the non-tumorigenic MCHs. The mechanism
of SAA1 gene inactivation in these NPC cell lines was attributed to
hypermethylation. The clinical relevance of SAA1 in NPC was examined by
RT-PCR; 54.8% (23/42) of NPC specimens showed either down-regulation or
loss of SAA1 gene expression. After transfection of SAA1 gene into HONE1
cells, a dramatic reduction of colony formation ability was observed.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that SAA1 is a candidate tumor
suppressor gene in NPC. Acknowledgments Grant support: Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic
of China grant HKU772309 (H.L. Lung)

