Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase activation by the metastasis promoting protein
S100A4


S100A4 is a protein linked to increased invasion and metastatic potential
of cancer cells and the significance of S100A4 as a prognostic marker has
been reported for different tumor types. It has no enzymatic activity and
exerts its functions through interaction with other proteins, both
intracellularly and in the extracellular space. Many functions and
biological effects of S100A4 have been elucidated, but the detailed
knowledge on receptor(s) affected and signaling pathways induced are not
completely revealed. Induction of metastasis resembles changes occurring
during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and it has been
suggested that several of the metastases promoting properties of S100A4
is caused by involvement in this process. In a previous study we
identified a set of 136 genes affected by extracellular S100A4. Induced
expression of some of these genes was validated and found to be dependent
on NF-B signaling. In the osteosarcoma cell line used, S100A4 activated
NF-B through IKK and IB phosphorylation, and the induced signal
transduction was found independent of the previously suggested
S100-receptor RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products). In the
present study, tyrosine kinase arrays (PamGene) were utilized to screen
for substrates phosphorylated by S100A4-activated kinases. Comparing
levels of substrate phosphorylation, S100A4 stimulation significantly
affected 32 substrates, including EGFR and PDGFR. EGFR and PDGFR
phosphorylation has been validated using western immunoblotting and
immunoprecipitation. The EGFR inhibitors AG 1478 and gefitinib reduced
the level of basal and S100A4-induced EGFR phosphorylation.
Interestingly, reduced levels of S100A4-induced IB phosphorylation and
NF-B activation were also observed. The mechanisms of EGFR activation are
under further investigation. Of particular interest, EGFR could be
activated by ligands cleaved from the cell membrane in a process
involving ADAM activity, referred to as ectodomain shedding. Thus, we are
in the process of testing the effect of ADAM inhibitors in our cell
system and characterize the expression of specific ADAMs. Insight into
the signaling mechanisms induced by S100A4 is important to understand how
this protein is involved in the biological processes constituting the
metastatic cascade and will provide valuable information for
identification of novel therapeutic targets.

