Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stroma-mediated DNA damage resistance of human breast cancer


Chemotherapy and radiation are often employed to decrease breast cancer
deaths. However, patients with metastatic disease invariably manifest
resistance to chemotherapy and/or radiation, ultimately causing breast
cancer deaths due to ineffective treatment. We have defined a gene
expression signature, the interferon-related DNA damage resistance
signature (IRDS), that is highly associated with radiation and
chemotherapy resistance of breast cancer in both cell lines and patients.
Interestingly, IRDS-mediated resistance in experimental models appears to
be much greater in vivo than in vitro, suggesting a potential
contribution of the tumor microenvironment. To address the question of
whether the tumor microenvironment plays a role in IRDS-mediated
radioresistance, we investigated the influence of heterotypic
interactions between breast cancer and stromal cells on IRDS expression.
We found that breast cancer cell lines primarily of the basal subtype
increase IRDS expression after tumor-stroma interaction, resulting in
enhanced resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. This increase in IRDS
and DNA damage resistance depends on STAT1, a member and transcriptional
regulator of the IRDS. Tumor-stroma interaction also leads to induction
of a population of breast cancer cells with properties of breast cancer
stem-like cells (BCSC). Evaluation of a tumor-stroma extracellular
interactome revealed that a stroma-directed NOTCH signaling pathway can
cooperate with STAT1 signaling to regulate common target genes. STAT1 and
NOTCH signaling direct the expansion and/or survival of BCSC, an
inherently DNA damage resistant population. Using available primary
breast cancer data sets, a similar activation of NOTCH signaling is
observed, as well as transcriptomic activation of the NOTCH pathway in
breast cancer. Importantly, a marker for NOTCH signaling cooperates with
the IRDS to identify breast cancer patients likely to fail adjuvant
chemotherapy. The ability of gamma secretase inhibitors to inhibit both
stroma-mediated expansion of BCSC and DNA damage resistance highlights
the therapeutic potential of this class of targeted agents for breast
cancers that express the IRDS. In conclusion, our data suggests that
stroma can regulate DNA damage resistant BCSC populations in a subset of
basal breast cancers through STAT1 and NOTCH signaling.

