Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computer-assisted Gleason grading of prostate cancer: Two novel
approaches using nuclear shape and texture feature to classify pathologic
Gleason grade patterns 3 and 4


Introduction: We used two novel computer-assisted imaging applications
that incorporate nuclear shape and texture analysis to differentiate
Gleason grade patterns 3 and 4 of H&Ein a tissue microarray (TMA). The
two approaches utilized a variational adaptive segmentation scheme
(AdACM) (Rutgers) and the cardinal multiridgelet transform (CMRT) based
texture analysis (University of Pittsburgh). Methods: The TMA include 0.6
mm cores from blocks that included Gleason patterns of CaP radical
prostatectomy cases from 40 patients. The TMA comprised 13 Gleason
patterns 6 (3+3), 8 pattern 7 (3+4), 7 pattern 8 (4+4) and 5 pattern 9
(4+5) Gleason grade (GG) patterns. The AdACM uses 200 200 pixel images
extracted for nuclear & architectural textural features. All features
were based on mathematical energy terms with a shape prior in a
multi-level set formulation. The CMRT is an image transform that is
translation- and rotation-invariant, and provides a means of displaying
texture contents for selection of discriminative features. With a 3-scale
decomposition, it gives 8 ridgelet packets and 16 statistical texture
features in a 256 x 256 pixel image patch that are averaged over 9
non-overlapping patches in a given image for separation of GG patterns 3
and 4. Results: The CMRT study utilized 3 of 16 texture features
extracted from images and trained a Gaussian kernel support vector
machine (SVM), a leave-one-out cross-validation showed an accuracy of 94%
and AUC of 0.97. For AdACM, nuclear features and architectural features
were extracted. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) was employed for
feature selection and best features from all three classes could
discriminate Gleason grade 3 vs. 4 with an accuracy of 86% via a SVM
classifier. Conclusions: Unique quantitative imaging of tissue nuclear
shape and texture features can accurately differentiate Gleason patterns
3 and 4. Our research will next evaluate CaP outcomes.


