Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune modulation and Treg suppression with metronomic
cyclophosphamide enhances the anti-tumor effect of a therapeutic peptide
vaccine in a murine model


In order to be optimally effective therapeutic cancer vaccines must be
combined with immune modulatory approaches, particularly in advanced
cancer where several different pathways of cancer induced immune
suppression may be active. We have developed a potent cancer vaccine
enhancement formulation named DepoVaxTM (DPX) that is particularly well
suited for the delivery of peptide antigens. DPX is a novel vaccine
platform comprised of liposomes in oil that is formulated with a TLR
adjuvant, universal T-helper peptide and specific tumor peptide antigens.
We have shown that DPX generates better immune responses than Montanide
based emulsion formulations. A major obstacle to any cancer vaccine,
however, is tumor induced immune suppression. Regulatory T cell (Treg)
mediated immune suppression is an important mechanism of tumor immune
evasion in many types of cancer including ovarian cancer. We sought to
determine if combining a DPX-based peptide vaccine approach with immune
modulation in the form of Treg suppression could enhance the anti-tumor
effect of the vaccine. Metronomic cyclophosphamide (mCPA) treatment has
been reported to selectively sustain reduced regulatory T cell numbers
and activity. Using a murine tumor model (C3) we tested the benefit of
combining mCPA and DPX vaccination for controlling well established
subcutaneous solid tumors in vivo. We found that neither mCPA or DPX
treatments alone were sufficient to eradicate advanced C3 tumors.
However, combining mCPA with DPX vaccination provided effective tumor
control. We further characterized the immune response by isolating and
phenotyping tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and testing their
immunogenicity by IFN- ELISPOT assay. Our results indicate that the DPX
vaccine can increase the levels of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells and mCPA
treatment reduces the CD4+FoxP3+ T regulatory cells. We conclude that
immune responses generated by the DPX vaccine were more effective at
controlling advanced tumors together with reduced Treg-mediated immune
suppression. We have designed and initiated a phase I/II clinical trial
to test a DPX vaccine targeting Survivin (DPX-Survivac), in combination
with mCPA in ovarian cancer patients.

