Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin-c and osteopontin-b splicing isoforms activate
prostate cancer progression features


Osteopontin (OPN) is one of the proteins overexpressed in prostate cancer
(PCa) and is involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis. Alternative
splicing of the OPN gene generates three protein splicing isoforms
(OPN-SI), designated as OPNa, OPNb and OPNc, which have demonstrated
specific roles in different tumor models. However, the roles of each of
these isoforms have not been previously characterized in PCa. Our
previous study reported that OPN-SI were overexpressed in PCa tissues,
strongly associated with PCa occurrence and with tumor cell
differentiation. Besides, OPNc was the most upregulated variant. We have
also demonstrated that OPNc splicing isoform can contribute for PCa
diagnosis and prognosis. Based on these results, the present study aimed
to evaluate the putative roles of OPN-SI in PCa biology using in vitro
and in vivo functional assays. PC-3 was stably transfected with
expression vectors containing OPNa, OPNb and OPNc, as well as empty
vector control. PC-3 cells overexpressing each construct were analyzed
for in vivo tumor growth and in relation to different aspects mimicking
tumor progression, such as cell proliferation, migration, invasion and
soft agar colony formation. OPNc and OPNb overexpressing cells
significantly activated enhanced xenograft tumor growth and PC-3
proliferation, migration, invasion, and soft agar colony formation, as
well as the expression of several cancer related genes. Additionally, we
have also shown that some of the OPNc and OPNb-dependent pro-tumorigenic
roles are mediated by PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Inhibition of this
pathway by using LY294002 specifically inhibited tumor progression
features evoked by OPNc and OPNb overexpression. According to our data,
OPNc and OPNb roles on favoring different aspects of PCa progression
suggest that these isoforms contribute to the physiopathology of prostate
cancer progression and tumorigenesis. Altogether, the data open
possibilities of new therapeutic approaches for prostate cancer that
selectively downregulate OPNc and OPNb, altering its properties favoring
prostate tumor progression.

