Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-cell lymphoma in e-miR-1792 transgenic mice


The miR-1792 is a polycistronic miRNA cluster, consisting of six miRNAs:
miR-17, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-19b, miR-20a and miR-92a encoded from last
exon of a non-coding RNA. It is frequently overexpressed in variety of
solid and lymphoid malignancies and has been appropriately called
Oncomir-1. Loss-of-function studies revealed a role of miR-1792 in heart
and lung development, and gain-of-function studies have shown its role in
myc induced B-cell lymphomas. In addition to its role in tumorigenesis,
the cluster is involved in regulation of lymphocyte development. Some of
the key targets of this miRNA include the tumor suppressor, Pten and the
proapoptotic, Bim gene. In order to study the mechanisms by which
miR-1792 overexpression induce tumorigenesis, we generated a B-cell
specific transgenic mouse model. The miR-1792 overexpression was driven
by the e enhancer and immunoglobulin heavy chain promoter with a 3 Green
Fluorescent Protein (GFP) tag in order to track the miRNA expression.
Expression analysis using Northern Blot and qRT-PCR yielded four founders
with significant overexpression of all six miRNAs in their spleens.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed significant overexpression of all six
miRNAs ranging from 2.5 to 25-fold in spleen cells. Flow cytometry
analysis of spleens from 9-month old healthy transgenic mice showed
significantly increased CD43+TCR- population as compared to wild type
mice. In older mice (18-months) the symptoms are more pronounced with
mice developing ascites, enlarged spleen and lymph nodes. The flow
analysis of spleens from these mice showed CD19+CD5+ B-cell population
similar to human chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Histological
analysis showed multiple organs (lungs, kidney, brain) infiltrated by
these lymphoma cells. Southern Blot analysis showed these cells to be
oligoclonal B cells, while no T cell clonality was observed. Total mRNA
profiling from these malignant cells showed that 782 genes are up- and
1019 genes are down-regulated in transgenic B-cells versus wild type
CD19+ B-cells. Ingenuity pathway analysis showed majority of the
downregulated genes are represented by Hematological System Development
and Function, and Inflammatory Response pathways, while the upregulated
genes are represented by cell cycle pathway. Some of the upregulated
genes in miR-1792 over-expressing malignant B-cells as compared to normal
CD19+ B-cells included ZAP-70, CCL5, NONO, previously reported in B-CLL
gene signature. Among other overexpressed genes, cJun, cFos and ATF3,
were upregulated 5-fold, 67-fold and 18-fold, respectively. We
hypothesize that AP-1 dependent transcription may be one of the key
survival factors in the miR-1792 driven lymphomas. Currently, we are
exploring the negative regulators of the oncogenic cJun signaling pathway
which may be miR-1792 targets. Overall, we found that miR-1792
overexpression in mice has the ability to induce B-cell lymphoma which
can develop into CLL at an older age.

