Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic and vascular disrupting activity of EHT 6706, a novel
tubulin polymerization inhibitor


Among cytotoxics commonly used for cancer treatment,
microtubule-targeting agents harbor a broad clinical anti-tumor efficacy.
Microtubule-targeting agents act by their direct cytotoxic actions on
tumor cells but also by their anti-angiogenic and vascular-disrupting
actions. In contrast to classical antiangiogenic agents, vascular
disrupting agents can, at the same time, block cell survival, prevent the
formation of new vessels and damage the existing tumor vasculature. Here
we describe EHT 6706, the current lead compound of a novel chemical class
of tubulin targeting agents. EHT 6706 inhibits in a dose-dependent manner
microtubule formation in an in vitro tubulin polymerization assay. EHT
6706 binds at or near the colchicine binding site of the
tubulin-colchicine complex, hence displacing the [3]H-colchicine tracer.
This binding competition is comparable to that of combretastain A-4, an
established colchicine site binder with a higher affinity for tubulin
than colchicine. At low concentrations, EHT 6706 decreases the amount of
microtubular materials and induces alteration in tumor cell morphology.
Perturbing microtubule dynamics with EHT 6706 halts the rapid cancer
cells division by blocking cells in the metaphase/anaphase transition of
the cell cycle and leads to apoptosis. EHT 6706 exhibits broad
cytotoxicity in vitro with potency at sub-nanomolar/low nanomolar
concentrations (0.3-10nM) in multiple cancer types (more than 60 cell
lines, including the NCI60 panel) such as breast, melanoma, colorectal,
renal, ovarian, non-small cell lung, leukaemia, as well as pancreatic
cancer cells. EHT 6706 exerts this growth inhibition of human tumor cells
independently of the type of main multidrug resistance mechanisms (ABC
transporter MDR-1 (Pgp-1), MRP-1). Furthermore, EHT 6706 retains
cytotoxic activity against all of the resistant cell lines tested
(combretastatin, vinblastin, imatinib), thus indicating the potential of
this agent for the treatment of resistant tumors. EHT 6706 carries a
potential for enhancing antitumor effects of radiation. In H460 and
MiaPaca2 cell lines, indeed, EHT 6706 treatment inhibits clonogenic
survival synergistically with ionizing radiation and exerts additive
inhibition of proliferation when given in combination with conventional
chemotherapeutic agents. Finally, in vitro experiments demonstrate that
EHT 6706 has anti-angiogenic and vascular disrupting effects. Endothelial
cell tube formation inhibition, pre-established vessels disruption, and
vascular permeability increase were observed in a concentration- and
time-dependent manner. These studies demonstrate that EHT 6706 has potent
in vitro efficacy as a novel tubulin-targeted anti-proliferative and
anti-vascular agent. EHT 6706 is a candidate for in vivo pharmacokinetic
and efficacy studies.

