Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel regulatory genes controlling epithelial to
mesenchymal transition in cultured breast cancer cells


Breast cancer prognosis is tightly correlated with the degree of spread
beyond the primary tumor. A prerequisite for breast cancer cell
dissemination is activation of a process called epithelial - mesenchymal
transition (EMT). During EMT, epithelial cells lose epithelial
characteristics, such as E-cadherin expression and gain mesenchymal
properties, such as vimentin expression. The reversal process to EMT is
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), which occurs during colonization
of the disseminated cancer cells to distant sites. Thus, EMT should be
considered as a transient and reversible process in cancer progression.
Despite the clinical importance, EMT and MET have been largely studied
from a focused signalling standpoint, which may provide a biased view of
the biological processes involved. In this study, RNAi technology
followed up by lysate microarray analysis (LMA) using E-cadherin and
vimentin as endpoint markers was performed to identify novel EMT and MET
regulatory genes in cultured breast cancer cells. The screening
conditions were optimized for the estrogen receptor (ER) positive
E-cadherin expressing luminal MCF-7 breast cancer cells and for ER
negative vimentin expressing mesenchymal bone metastatic MDA-MB 231
cells. The results from the replicate screens with >1012 siRNAs targeting
599 genes (1-3 siRNAs / gene) amplified and /or over-expressed in breast
cancer cells were found to correlate (r > 0.9), and the validated siRNAs
targeting E-cadherin and vimentin were among the top repressing hits for
the corresponding endpoints, indicating reliability of the protocol.
Interestingly, several novel putative E-cadherin (E-cadherin reducing
siRNAs, genes inducing loss of metastatic potential) and vimentin
(vimentin reducing siRNAs, metastasis-promoting candidate genes)
regulators were identified and validated using secondary assays,
indicating that our knowledge on EMT and MET is still far from
comprehensive. Functional characterization of the identified candidate
regulators in cultured breast cancer cells is on-going. Since modulation
of the differentiation state of breast cancer cells is a promising
therapeutic strategy, better understanding of EMT and MET may provide
novel therapeutic opportunities to block breast cancer cell dissemination.

