Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mcl-1 dependency is a predictive biomarker for apoptotic induction
by short-term dinaciclib (SCH 727965) treatment


Dinaciclib (SCH 727965) is a potent and selective inhibitor of the
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) 1, 2, 5 and 9 undergoing clinical testing
against a range of solid and hematologic malignancies. From preclinical
studies, more than 140 cell lines have been profiled for dinaciclib
response in long-term (>72 hrs) viability or clonogenicity assays with
>97% of the lines showing IC50 25 nM. This uniformly low nM potency is
likely due to repression of both cell cycle progression and transcription
through inhibition of CDK1/2 and CDK9, respectively. CDK9 phosphorylation
of the RNA pol II (RNAPII) at Ser2 and 5 is required for transcriptional
initiation and elongation. We and others have observed rapid
CDK9-dependent effects on cells after short-term dinaciclib exposure,
including loss of RNAPII Ser2 phosphorylation followed by rapid
elimination of the short half-life, pro-survival protein Mcl-1. Since a
cancer cell's ability to avoid apoptosis is dependent on the balance of
several Bcl-2 antiapoptotic family members, including Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and
Mcl-1, we hypothesized that Mcl-1 dependent cell lines would be more
sensitive to dinaciclib treatment. Moreover, we anticipated that this
differential sensitivity could be discriminated from longer-term
inhibitory cell cycle effects by conducting short-term dinaciclib
exposure assays. Here we report the activity of dinaciclib to induce
apoptosis on a panel of 25 human solid tumor cell lines with varying
levels of Mcl-1 dependency. Mcl-1 dependency in solid tumor cell lines
has been reported to correlate with the Mcl-1 to Bcl-xL mRNA ratio or the
level of Mcl-1 gene amplification. Cell viability was assessed after an
18 hour, 100 nM dinaciclib treatment while target engagement and
induction of apoptosis was determined after 8 hours. With one exception,
all cell lines showed potent CDK9 target engagement as determined by loss
of RNAPII Ser2 phosphorylation and corresponding reduced Mcl-1 protein
levels. We observed that loss of cell viability, measured by ATP content,
directly correlated with the Mcl-1/Bcl-xL mRNA ratio. A dramatic increase
in PARP cleavage was also observed in cell lines with the highest
Mcl-1/Bcl-xL mRNA ratio. Furthermore, the extent of PARP cleavage
correlated with levels of caspase-3/7 activity. Bcl-2 levels did not
significantly impact the dinaciclib response. These data provide a
rationale for utilizing Mcl-1 dependency as a predictive biomarker for
dinaciclib anti-cancer response in solid tumor malignancies.

