Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin causes strong efficacy towards colon cancer stem cells
by modulating IL-4 caused CD44 expression


Cancer stem cells (CSC) are now recognized as the main cause for
initiation, promotion and progression of most of the epithelial cancers,
including colorectal cancer (CRC). Despite this fact, the efficacy of
chemopreventive agents towards CSC generation leading to cancer
initiation and tumorigenesis has not yet been well-defined. The present
study was aimed to provide a new direction to cancer chemoprevention
research by determining whether silibinin, a natural non-toxic
chemopreventive agent, has the potential to target CSC in CRC. In this
regard, we determined silibinin effect on the self renewal capacity of
the CSC population of CRC cell lines. We isolated different cell
populations (CD44+EpCAMhigh, CD44+EpCAMlow, and CD44-EpCAMlow) from the
CRC cell lines, SW480, HT-29 and LoVo, and subjected them to sphere
cluster formation assays. A limiting dilution approach (cell numbers
ranging from 1x104 to 300 cells) was employed to determine the isolated
fraction which was enriched in CSC population. Comparative analysis of
different populations, in terms of sphere formation, indicated that the
CSC enriched fraction was CD44+EpCAMhigh population. Two dilutions (1000
and 3000 cells/well) of the CSC enriched CD44+EpCAMhigh, CD44+EpCAMlow
and unsorted populations were then subjected to sphere cluster formation
assays, in the absence or presence (a one time treatment) of silibinin
(50-100M). The % of floating spheroids (colonospheres) generated in the
sphere cluster assays after 1-2 weeks were determined. The results
indicated a dose dependant effect of silibinin on both number and size
(volume) of colonospheres, with 100M silibinin showing a significant
reduction in the number and size of generated spheres in all three CRC
cell lines. Since formation of spheroids under specific in vitro
conditions is a measure of stemness, it is evident that silibinin has the
potential to target the self-renewal of CSCs in CRC cell lines. Since,
the role of cytokine interleukin (IL)-4 is also implicated in increased
resistance of CSC to chemotherapy agents and targeting IL-4 signaling
presents a rational approach for the prevention and treatment of CRC, we
next determined whether silibinin effect on CSC is mediated via blocking
IL-4 signaling in CRC cell lines. In this regard, treatment of all three
CRC cell lines with 100M silibinin was able to significantly reduce
IL-4-induced expression of both total CD44 and its variant CD44-v6
(highly expressed in CRC tumors) in a time (12-48h) dependant manner.
Subsequent in vitro studies showed this effect to be mediated in part by
the inhibitory effect of silibinin on IL-4-induced activation of the
transcription factor STAT-3 in terms of its Tyr705 phosphorylation in CRC
cells. Together, these results suggest that more studies are needed to
establish translational significance of silibinin efficacy on CRC CSCs as
this agent is already in clinical-trial in CRC patients.

