Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of E2F-mediated centrosome amplification in HER2
positive breast cancer


Centrosome amplification associates with most human cancers and has been
suggested to trigger tumor initiation and progression. Centrosomes are
the major microtubule organizing centers in animal cells. They are
duplicated once in each cell cycle and duplicated centrosomes establish
mitotic spindle bipolarity. Centrosome duplication is tightly regulated
because deregulated centrosome duplication leads to centrosome
amplification, multipolar and pseudobipolar mitotic spindles that
potentiate chromosome instability and may trigger tumorigenesis. One of
the tumor types in which the relationship between centrosome
amplification and tumorigenesis is well known are breast cancers, as most
breast tumors exhibit centrosome amplification. Centrosome amplification
arises through various mechanisms, such as deregulation of cell cycle
regulators, oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Our laboratory
discovered that HER2 positive breast cancer cells and K-RasG12D
pre-malignant mouse mammary lesions displayed overexpressed E2F1-3
transcriptional activators. Although E2Fs are involved in various
cellular processes, including the regulation of the cell and centrosome
duplication cycles and differentiation, the role of E2Fs in centrosome
amplification in breast tumors is unknown. To study the role of the E2F
activators in centrosome amplification, we first assayed centrosome
amplification in the E2F-overexpressing HER2 positive breast cancer
cells, HCC1954, JIMT1 and SKBR3. There was increased centrosome
amplification in the HER2 positive cell lines HCC1954, JIMT1 or SKBR3
relative to MCF10A control mammary epithelial cells. To find if
centrosome amplification shown in HER2 positive cells overexpressing
E2F1-3 was E2F-specific, the siRNA-mediated silencing technique was
applied to transiently knock-down the E2F activators (E2F1-3a) and cells
were assayed for centrosome amplification. In addition, to permanently
knockdown E2Fs in HER2 positive cells, shRNA-mediated silencing technique
will be applied. Western blots confirmed that E2Fs knockdown was
efficient, followed by decreased centrosome amplification in HER2
positive cells downregulated for E2F1 and E2F3a; results for E2F2 are
still awaiting. These data suggested that centrosome amplification
detected in HER2 positive cells is specific to the E2F activators. Future
experiments will involve the identification of E2F-dependent
transcriptional targets mediating centrosome amplification in HER2
positive cells.

