Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer in the metastatic niche: A role for stress-induced
dormancy


Breast cancer dormancy in the metastatic site allows tumors to avoid
clinical detection and evade treatment leading to recurrence after years
or decades, with devastating mortality rates. How the aggressive
carcinoma cells that initially underwent a cancer-associated Epithelial
to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) from the primary tumor to disseminate and
maintain a long-term dormant state in an ectopic site is unknown. We have
found that normal parenchymal cells of certain metastatic organs cause a
partial reversion of the EMT to a more epithelial phenotype (Mesenchymal
to Epithelial Reversion Transition, or MErT). Compared to carcinoma cells
in the primary breast tumor, MErT is characterized by increased
E-cadherin expression, MAPK and AKT signaling, and chemoresistance. While
this phenotype should reflect low proliferation or quiescence, the MErT
cells in vitro have heretofore maintained a highly proliferative state.
Herein we demonstrate that a pre-stressed hepatic microenvironment allows
for EMT cells to increase their MErT phenotype and to become dormant. Our
research strategy is to modulate the initial liver stress through
biochemical challenges applied to primary rat hepatocytes co-cultured
with hepatic resident cells and a human immortalized breast cancer cell
line (MDA-MB-231). Biochemical challenges (e.g. TGF, TNF, IL-6, EGF, HGF,
and DAMPS) are applied in varying concentrations and incubation periods
in order to pre-stress the hepatic culture. In order to maintain hepatic
metabolic function we implement a novel 3D perfused micro-well
bioreactor. As a secondary aim we explore whether E-cadherin expression
is required for metastatic seeding through splenetic injections in immune
compromised mice. We aim to uncover novel targets that are not strictly
against the cancer cells, but rather, against shared molecular pathways
across cancer, parenchymal, and non-parenchymal cells within the hepatic
niche. Sustaining and perhaps enhancing the ectopic site resilience may
yield therapies directed toward maintaining dormant carcinomas so that
secondary EMTs will be blocked and cancer recurrence greatly reduced.

