Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of BRAF-HDAC complex in presence of
trichostatin A, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and cisplatin in ovarian cancer


Objective: To investigate the regulation of the subunits of BRAF-HDAC
complex, a gene transcription repression complex, which regulates the
interaction of histone methylation, histone acetylation, DNA methylation
and DNA repair in response to chemotherapy in ovarian cancer cell lines
with different treatment strategies. We hypothesized that combining
different epigenetic modifiers with low dose Cisplatin would result in an
optimal therapeutic regime for ovarian cancer. Materials and Methods: Two
epigenetic modifiers Trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase
inhibitor and 5-aza-2- deoxycytidine (Decitabine), a demethylating agent
were evaluated in different doses alone and in combination with Cisplatin
on the expression of subunits of BRAF-HDAC complex, histone methylation,
acetylation and the associated pathways affected. Three cell lines,
A2780, Hey and SKOV3 were used. Spheroids were grown in serum free medium
and injected IP in SCID mice. Western blots confirmed protein expression.
Results: Different combinations of TSA, Decitabine and low dose Cisplatin
significantly inhibited the expression of the subunits LSD1 and CoREST in
the BRAF-HDAC complex, two proteins which together demethylate H3K4 and
H3K9. The BRAF-HDAC complex cofactor subunit BRAF35 was also
significantly suppressed by the combination treatment. The BRAF-HDAC
complex subunit repressor increased significantly after combined
treatment. indicating that the combination of TSA, Decitabine and
Cisplatin suppresses the expression of H3K4 and H3K9 methylation and
increases the expression of Histone H3 lys9/14 and Histone H4
ser1/lys5/lys8/lys12 acetylation. Along with these methylation and
acetylation changes, we found a decrease in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, cancer cell proliferation, chemoresistance and pluripotency.
Spheroid formation was decreased in vitro and there was no tumor
formation in SCID mice in presence of these epigenetic modifiers and low
dose Cisplatin. Conclusions: The combination of epigenetic modifiers and
low dose Cisplatin can regulate and modify the expression of subunits of
BRAF-HDAC complex, resulting in decreased expression of tri- and di-
methylated H3K4 and H3K9 and increased acetylation of Histone H3 and H4,
subsequently modifying the tumor biology and tumorigenicity of these
ovarian cancer cell lines. Further investigation of these mechanisms
could provide the development of more effective and less toxic treatment
for ovarian cancer.

