Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of two markers of hypoxia to study migration, re-oxygenation
and repopulation of originally hypoxic cells in MCF-7 tumor xenografts
following chemotherapy


Background: Hypoxia occurs in solid tumors: chronic diffusion-limited
hypoxia occurs distal from functional blood vessels, while acute hypoxia
may occur because of interruptions in blood flow. Well-nourished tumor
cells close to blood vessels tend to be rapidly proliferating but hypoxic
cells located farther away are slowly-proliferating. Chemotherapy may
spare hypoxic cells because of poor drug distribution to them and because
most drugs are selectively toxic to proliferating cells. Intervals
between administration of chemotherapy allow for recovery of normal
tissues (e.g. repopulation of bone marrow) but might allow re-oxygenation
and resumed proliferation of formerly hypoxic cells due to better supply
of nutrients to them, as is observed during radiotherapy. Therefore, it
is important to establish a technique whereby hypoxia can be studied
allowing for the assessment of different hypoxia-modulating therapies
that can be used to prevent tumor relapse. Methods: Two specific markers
of hypoxic cells (pimonidazole [pimo] and EF5) were injected into mice
bearing MCF7 tumor xenografts, and tumor cells labeled with one or both
markers were recognized in tumor sections (in relation to DioC7+ve
functional tumor blood vessels) using appropriate fluorescence-labeled
antibodies and imunohistochemistry. Proliferating cells were identified
by an antibody to Ki67. Mice were treated with pimo and then either
doxorubicin or saline one hour later; EF5 was given after a variable
interval of 24, 48, 72, 96 or 120 hours; mice were killed two hours after
the second injection. Changes in the location, proliferation and oxygen
status of formerly hypoxic (pimo+ve) cells were quantified by their
distance from blood vessels, Ki67 status and uptake of EF5 as a function
of time. Results: Following treatment with doxorubicin, the proportion of
hypoxic cells in the entire tumor decreased from1.5% (pimo+ve) prior to
injection to 0.7% (EF5+ve) at 24 hours. The proportion of pimo+ve
formerly hypoxic cells that are no longer hypoxic (i.e. EF5 - ve) at 24
hours was 75% after treatment compared to 18% in controls indicating
rescue of previous hypoxic cells that would have died in the absence of
treatment. The proportion of these pimo+ve cells that were cycling
(Ki67+ve) increased from 4.7% to 15.0% at 24 Hours and then slowly
decreased. Conclusions: There is a decrease in the proportion of hypoxic
cells in MCF7 xenografts following treatment with doxorubicin. Originally
hypoxic cells (that may have died in the absence of treatment) can move
closer to blood vessels, re-oxygenate, and repopulate the tumor.
Treatment directed to killing hypoxic cells (e.g. with hypoxia activated
pro-drugs) has the potential to improve the outcome of chemotherapy by
inhibiting tumor cell repopulation. Supported by are search grant from
the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.

