Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardization of cancer stem cell enumeration and isolation
methods allows cross comparison among different tumor entities


Growing knowledge concerning tumor heterogeneity has increased the
importance of analyzing tumor resident cell and stem cell subpopulations.
In particular, cancer stem cells (CSCs), also called tumor initiating
cells, have gained substantial interest in the research field over the
past few years. CSCs have been isolated from multiple tumor entities and
were shown to play a crucial role during tumor growth and metastasis.
However, isolation and analysis of CSCs even from single tumor entities
like melanoma showed contradictory results among different research
groups. This can at least partially be explained by variations in the
dissociation and isolation methods used. One critical point that has to
be considered during the analysis of putative CSC markers is that the
procedure used for dissociation of primary tissue prior to staining may
cause a technical bias. Aggressive proteases, such as trypsin, which
cleave off several CSC surface markers like ABCB5 or CD44, may cause
incorrect results concerning the differential expression of sensitive
markers (Civenni et al., 2011). A further source of non-reproducible
findings is the use of antibodies that are specific to sub-forms of cell
surface markers. Glycosylation and splice-isoform dependent epitopes, as
found for e.g. CD24 and CD133, are differentially expressed among tissues
and cell states. In particular, it was shown that the AC133 epitope but
not the entire CD133 protein expression is lost upon CSC differentiation
(Kemper et al., 2010). We have developed a standardized platform that
allows fast and highly reproducible CSC enumeration and isolation from
various tumor tissues. This platform includes automated and therefore
user independent procedures for dissociation of human and implanted mouse
tumor tissue without degradation of cell surface epitopes yielding high
amounts of single cells at viabilities around 90%. Furthermore, antibody
conjugates of clones recognizing epitopes shown to be relevant for CSC
analysis were generated and tested on cell lines as well as primary tumor
tissue allowing for the quantification and isolation of CSCs. As a proof
of principle, highly viable populations of CD133+ and CD45/CD24/CD44+
CSCs were efficiently isolated from a glioblastoma at 86% and an invasive
ductal mamma carcinoma at 94% purity, respectively. In addition,
optimized gating and exclusion strategies are presented avoiding
analytical bias for flow cytometry-based CSC quantification from primary
tissue as shown for human melanoma tissue. By using reliable methods for
the analysis of CSCs from various origins, a major cause of conflicting
results in this field may be minimized and comparisons of these
subpopulations among distinct tumor entities will be possible.

