Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of interleukin-7 and its signalling intermediates in
human neuroblastoma tumours.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial childhood malignant
solid tumour which shows remarkable biological heterogeneity. It has been
speculated that schwann cells influence NB tumour growth, by secreting as
yet to be identified soluble factors that serve as anti-proliferative and
differentiation signals for neuronal cells. Several gene expression
studies indicate that interleukin 7 (IL7) has increased expression in NB
specifically in tumours with a better prognosis, making IL7 a key
candidate for this soluble factor. In this study, the expression of IL7,
IL7 receptor (IL7R) and its downstream signalling proteins, including the
Janus Kinases (JAK1 and JAK3), Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (STAT5) and Phosphorylated STAT5 (pSTAT5) were analysed
using immunohistochemical stains in a cohort of 100 patients with stroma
poor NB and 24 with stroma rich ganglioneuroma (GN). The expression of
these proteins were correlated to the expression of the diagnostic
markers S100 (stromal marker), NB84 (neuroblast marker) and CD99
(negative marker for NB). The immunohistochemical analysis showed that
IL7 expression was strongly positive exclusively in schwannian stroma in
both favourable and unfavourable histology whilst staining ganglionic
cells as well. The levels of expression, as quantified by specialised
digital image analysis algorithms (Aperio, USA), revealed IL7, IL7R,
JAK1, STAT5 and pSTAT5 were all increased in GNs compared to NBs. There
was no correlated change in expression levels of JAK3 in the tumours.
Expression of pStat5 was found to be significantly reduced (t-test,
p=0.00013) in stroma poor NB compared to GN. Our findings implicate IL7
within the schwannian stroma of the tumour architecture as having a
paracrine signalling effect on neighbouring neuroblasts which may provide
the anti-proliferative and differentiation signals postulated. Further
investigation of the importance of IL7 in neuroblastoma will define the
biological significance of the IL7-Stat5 signalling cascade and whether
targeting the specific IL7 signalling pathway proteins will raise novel
treatment strategies.

