Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic tumor stromal cells express high levels of -glutamyl
transferase that may be employed to deliver a metabolism inhibitor to the
tumor mass


Tumors of the pancreas have the most prominent stromal/desmoplastic
reaction of all epithelial tumors. This reaction is mediated by the
cancer-associated stellate cells. These cells interact closely with
pancreatic cancer cells to promote cancer cell survival, local tumor
growth and distant metastasis (1). We have found that cancer-associated
human pancreatic stellate cells express up to 30-fold higher levels of
-glutamyl transferase (GT) on their surface than normal pancreatic
stellate cells. GT catalyzes the transfer of the -glutamyl moiety of
glutathione to an acceptor that may be an amino acid, a peptide or water
(forming glutamate). This observation suggests that this enzyme could be
used to deliver a GT-activated prodrug to the tumor mass. We have tested
this theory using the glutathionylated arsenical, GSAO. GSAO is converted
to GCAO by cell surface GT, which then crosses the plasma membrane and
inactivates the mitochondrial inner-membrane transporter, adenine
nucleotide translocase (2). The mitochondrial perturbation leads to
proliferation arrest and then cell death. GSAO was converted to GCAO by
cancer-associated stellate cells and this metabolism was blocked by the
GT inhibitor, ABBA. The activated GSAO inhibited proliferation of both
tumor and endothelial cells by 43 to 100% and 41 to 75%, respectively. We
also observed a positive correlation (R2=0.883) between the GT activity
of pancreatic tumor cells and proliferation arrest of co-cultured
endothelial cells by GSAO. We have established an orthotopic model of
human pancreatic cancer in mice where tumor cells are implanted without
or with cancer-associated stellate cells. The anti-tumor efficacy of
systemically administered GSAO is currently being evaluated in this
model. These observations suggest that the high expression of GT on
pancreatic tumor stromal cells may be employed to deliver a GT-activated
prodrug to the tumor mass. 1. Vonlaufen, A., Phillips, P. A., Xu, Z.,
Goldstein, D., Pirola, R. C., Wilson, J. S., and Apte, M. V. (2008)
Cancer Res. 68, 7707-7710 2. Dilda, P. J., Ramsay, E. E., Corti, A.,
Pompella, A., and Hogg, P. J. (2008) J. Biol. Chem. 283, 35428-35434

