Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dclk1 labels quiescent pancreatic progenitor and cancer initiating
cells


Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth
leading cause of cancer-related death in the US. Despite major efforts
pancreatic cancer has the highest mortality rate of all major cancers
with a 5-year survival rate below 5% while the survival rate for the
disease has not improved substantially in nearly 40 years. Recently,
doublecortin-like kinase 1 protein (Dclk1) was proposed as a marker of
putative quiescent stem cells in the gastrointestinal tract and in the
pancreas although no genetic fate mapping was performed. Additionally, it
was demonstrated that Dclk1 cells expand in the setting of inflammation,
hyperplasia and metaplasia. While clinical relevant mouse models of PDAC
exist the identity of the cell of origin for pancreatic cancer is still
debated. Aim: In order to investigate the role of Dclk1 cells in
pancreatic health and disease we generated a BAC transgenic mouse line
(Dclk1-CreERT) that expresses tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase under
the control of the endogenous Dclk1 gene regulation. Results: Using
genetic lineage tracing, we demonstrate that Dclk1 labels rare
long-lived, quiescent progenitor cells in the pancreas that can give rise
to ductal and acinar tissue. Furthermore, Dclk1 cells were found to
expand in the setting of pancreatic inflammation and malignancy.
Importantly, the Dclk1 lineage contributed significantly to pancreatic
regeneration after caerulein-induced pancreatitis. Finally, expression of
mutant K-Ras (G12D) in Dclk-1 cells leads to rapid onset (2-3 months) of
invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma that could be further
accelerated by caerulein-induced pancreatic injury (1-2 months).
Conclusion: Dclk1 labels rare quiescent progenitor cells in the pancreas.
These cells take part in the regeneration of the gland after injury and
are capable of giving rise to pancreatic cancer. Therefore, we propose
that Dclk1 could label the cell of origin in pancreatic cancer.

