Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effects of vitamin D in a carcinogen-induced mouse model
of lung cancer


Lung cancer accounts for the majority of cancer mortality in both men and
women. It is critical to better understand the biology of lung cancer
development as no preventive agents and few effective treatment options
exist for lung cancer. Epidemiological studies indicate that low serum
levels of 25(OH)D3 are associated with increased risk and poor prognosis
of lung cancer. Calcitriol, the active metabolite of vitamin D, induces
cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and differentiation in preclinical and
clinical studies, has limited toxicity, and hence, is an attractive agent
for chemoprevention. To investigate the preventive effects of vitamin D
on lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), pre-clinical studies were
conducted using a carcinogen-induced (CI) mouse model of lung SCC which
uses N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) applied topically to the back
of a SWR/J mouse twice weekly. Following 15 weeks of NTCU treatment, mice
begin to develop bronchial epithelial hyperplasia and in time, progress
through metaplasia, carcinoma in situ, and ultimately form lung SCC by
approximately 35 to 40 weeks. We conducted a preliminary study
investigating the effects of vitamin D on cancer progression in the CI
model where animals received NTCU (80 mM/week). 12 week old female mice
were randomized into one of three treatment groups: 1) vitamin D
deficient diet (DD) (0IU D3 in the diet), 2) sufficient diet (SD)
(2000IU/day D3 in the diet) and 3) SD with weekly intraperitoneal (IP)
injections of calcitriol (80 ug/kg) (SD+D). Animals treated with NTCU on
a DD, SD and SD+D had average serum 25(OH)D3 levels of 15, 70 and 75
nmol/L, respectively (normal range in mice is 70- 90 nmol/L). Preliminary
histological evaluation at 12 weeks revealed bronchial epithelial
hyperplasia in both the SD and SD+D groups. There were more advanced
changes including hyperplasia, metaplasia and dysplasia in the DD mice.
The histological evaluation of the DD mice at 24 weeks revealed even more
advanced disease, in that most mice had developed lung SCC. The
histological evaluation of the SD and SD+D groups at 24 weeks indicated
the presence of bronchial epithelial hyperplasia, squamous metaplasia and
dysplasia in all mice with some low level of carcinoma in situ. This
study indicates that mice deficient in vitamin D develop disease at a
more rapid rate suggesting that vitamin D status may play an important
role in progression of lung SCC. Supported by NCCAM F31 AT006487 &
R01-CA-067267.

