Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifiying the anti-Tr antigen in paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration


Introduction: Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD) is
characterized by subacute cerebellar ataxia which coincides with the
presence of specific tumour types and antineuronal antibodies. One
particular form of PCD is associated with Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL) and the
presence of antibodies against cerebellar Purkinje cells in several of
these patients sera. These later called anti-Tr antibodies recognize a
specific punctuate immunoreactivity in the large dendritic tree as well
as the soma of the Purkinje cells, but not in the axons. Although this
characteristic immunoreactive pattern is considered to be a good hallmark
for the presence of anti-Tr antibodies, further diagnosis is elaborate.
In order to aid this diagnosis, and to understand the pathogenic nature
of the PCD we aimed to identify the antigen recognized by anti-Tr
antibodies. Objective: We aimed to identify the long sought antigen
recognized by anti-Tr antibodies. Methods: To identify the antigen we
performed immunoprecipitation using four anti-Tr positive sera on total
rat brain extract followed by mass spectrometry. By Western blotting and
cell-based assays we subsequently determined the region of the epitope
recognized by the anti-Tr antibodies. Deletion and mutant constructs were
generated to further map the antigenic region. Results: We identified
Delta/Notch-like epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related Receptor (DNER) as
the Tr antigen. In a cell-based screening assay 191 control samples were
negative, whereas all of the 12 anti-Tr positive sera stained
HA-tagged-DNER expressing cells. Using deletion constructs we pinpointed
the main epitope to the extracellular domain. Glycosylation inhibitor
tunicamycin and N-glycosylation mutations in DNER abolished the anti-Tr
staining, indicating that DNER must be glycosylated to be recognized by
anti-Tr antibodies. Conclusion: Anti-Tr positive sera recognize DNER.
Using the cell based assay, presence of anti-Tr antibodies in patients
with PCD and HL can now be screened both quickly and reliably.

