Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between inhibition of novel histone demethylase (LSD2) and
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) in modulating
gene expression and inhibiting growth in human breast cancer cells


Epigenetic gene silencing plays a critical role in breast tumor
aggression. Our previous studies have shown that abnormal activities of
histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) are associated with aberrant gene
expression in breast cancer development. However, the precise molecular
mechanisms underlying the activity of KDMs in chromatin remodeling and
regulation of gene transcription in breast cancer are still elusive.
Recently, a novel mammalian histone demethylase LSD2 (also known as KDM1B
or AOF1) was identified. We have shown that LSD2 possesses the activity
to demethylate H3K4 in breast cancer cells. This clearly suggests the
existence of a more sophisticated FAD-dependent histone demethylase
family whose members play a role in chromatin remodeling and
transcription regulation in breast cancer. Here we demonstrated that
inhibition of LSD2 mRNA expression by shRNA suppressed migratory behavior
in human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. RNAi -mediated LSD2 deficiency
led to a significant re-expression of ER mRNA, in ER negative breast
cancer cells and upregulated ER-mediated transcription activity as
evidenced by ERE luciferase assay. Microarray studies indicated a unique
subset of genes whose expression was significantly changed by LSD2 KD in
MDA-MB-231 cells. The genes identified are extensively involved in
regulation of tumor cell proliferation, metastasis, cell signaling,
transcription regulation, and chromatin remodeling. For example, a panel
of the upregulated genes potentially plays a role in cell adhesion and
cell death such as CLDN1 & 11, CDH11, CASP5 & 10, PDCD4, and NCR3. In
addition, expression of several tumor suppressor genes such as ERBB2IP,
MTSS1, and S100A2 were up-regulated by LSD2 KD in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Moreover, treating LSD2 KD cells with the low doses of DNMT inhibitor,
5-aza-2-deoxycitidine (DAC) led to a robust reexpression of ER and CASP5
mRNA in MDA-MB-231 cells. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat in
LSD2 KD MDA-MB-231 cells also lead to the reexpression of ER as well as
other genes of interest such as CASP5, ESRRG, and MTSS1. Further
simultaneous treatment of LSD2 KD cells with DAC and vorinostat produced
a more robust transcriptional re-activation of ER, CASP5, and MTSS1 mRNA
expression. Finally, LSD2 KD MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited increased
sensitivity to growth inhibition induced by combination therapy of
vorinostat and DAC. Taken together, these data implicate an important
role for LSD2 in mediating expression of epigenetically silenced genes in
breast cancer cells and suggest that combined inhibition of LSD2 with
other epigenetic targets could have the potential to improve the
treatment of breast cancer.

