Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of obesity among subjects with a personal history of
cancer: A call for action among cancer survivors and care providers


Background: Studies have suggested that obesity is a risk factor for many
common cancers and has a negative impact on the prognosis of those with
cancer. Aim: To determine the prevalence of overweight and obesity among
cancer survivors. Methods: We used the 2007 Health Information National
Trends Survey (HINTS) data and identified those with (n = 966) and
without (n = 6,093) a personal history of cancer. We calculated
responders body mass index (BMI) using self-reported height and weight
data and formed 3 categories: BMI Background: Studies have suggested that
obesity is a risk factor for many common cancers and has a negative
impact on the prognosis of those with cancer. Aim: To determine the
prevalence of overweight and obesity among cancer survivors. Methods: We
used the 2007 Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) data and
identified those with (n = 966) and without (n = 6,093) a personal
history of cancer. We calculated responders body mass index (BMI) using
self-reported height and weight data and formed 3 categories: BMI < 25
kg/m*2 (normal); BMI 25 - 29 kg/m*2 (overweight); and BMI 30 kg/m*2
(obese). We used multinomial regression models to evaluate the
association of personal history of cancer with BMI categories and
calculated risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Results:
The mean age of responders was 54.2 years and 60.5% were females. Cancer
survivors were older (65.4 versus 52.4 years; P value Background: Studies
have suggested that obesity is a risk factor for many common cancers and
has a negative impact on the prognosis of those with cancer. Aim: To
determine the prevalence of overweight and obesity among cancer
survivors. Methods: We used the 2007 Health Information National Trends
Survey (HINTS) data and identified those with (n = 966) and without (n =
6,093) a personal history of cancer. We calculated responders body mass
index (BMI) using self-reported height and weight data and formed 3
categories: BMI < 25 kg/m*2 (normal); BMI 25 - 29 kg/m*2 (overweight);
and BMI 30 kg/m*2 (obese). We used multinomial regression models to
evaluate the association of personal history of cancer with BMI
categories and calculated risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence interval
(CI). Results: The mean age of responders was 54.2 years and 60.5% were
females. Cancer survivors were older (65.4 versus 52.4 years; P value
<0.001), but there were no differences by sex or education level. After
adjusting for age, sex, education, smoking, race, income, marital status
and health insurance status, cancer survivors were as likely to be obese
as responders without a history of cancer (Table). Conclusion: In this
nationally representative sample of US adults, there is a high prevalence
of obesity among cancer survivors. Maintenance of healthy weight should
be an integral part of routine care of cancer survivors.


