Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semiquantitative detection of aberrant methylation as a tumor
biomarker in the serum and plasma of patients with gastric cancer


Background: Epigenetic silencing of tumor-related genes, due to CpG
island methylation, is considered to be an important mechanism for the
development of many tumors, including gastric cancinoma (GC). DNA
methylation of multiple CpG sites in promoter regions of several tumor
related genes, such as hMLH1, p14, COX2, and APC has been analyzed in GC
so for. Circulating tumor DNA in serum/plasma has been demonstrated to
reflect the biological characteristics of tumors. Recently, the presence
of gene promoter methylation in serum/plasma DNA has also been
demonstrated in patients with cancers of lung, head and neck, liver, and
breast. So, in the present study, we attempted to determine the
feasibility and the clinical correlations of detecting tumor-associated
aberrant methylation in the serum/plasma of patients with gastric cancer.
Materials and Methods: We examined promoter methylation of 6 genes using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and methylation-sensitive high-resolution
melting (MS-HRM) in paired serum, plasma and tumor samples of 50 gastric
cancer patients. The tumor and the paired serum/plasma were investigated
for aberrant methylation in BLU, DAPK1, GADD45G, MGMT, p15 and p16. The
sensitivity of the HRM analysis was tested by using dilutions of fully
methylated DNA into unmethylated DNA. Results: MSP was used to assess
gene methylation in tumor samples. Promoter methylation in BLU, DAPK1,
GADD45G, MGMT, p15, and p16 were detected in 47%, 37%, 59%, 32%, 14%, and
43% of tumor tissues by MSP. MS-HRM was used to assess gene methylation
in serum/plasma samples concurrently. In the serum/plasma of gastric
cancer patients, BLU, DAPK1, GADD45G, MGMT, p15, and p16 were methylated
at frequencies of 26%, 21%, 23%, 11%, 9%, and 17%, respectively. Nineteen
(38%) gastric tumor samples displayed concurrent methylation in three or
more tumor genes. Aberrant methylation in one or more genes was found in
74% (37/50) serum samples and 70% (35/50) plasma samples. However, there
was not a significant relationship of gene methylation between gastric
tumor tissues and serum/plasma samples.Conclusion: These results suggest
that aberrant promoter methylation in serum/plasma can be detected in a
substantial proportion of gastric cancer patients. Detection of DNA
methylation in serum/plasma may be a biomarker for early detection of
gastric cancer. MS-HRM is powerful technique for the analysis of promoter
methylation. Application of HRM analysis to large amount of clinical
samples proves to be a fast and high-throughput way to investigate the
epigenetic status of genes.

