Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling pathway-targeted therapy suppresses tumor
progression and prevents metastatic spread in pancreatic cancer


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has the highest
mortality rate of any cancer type. The 5-year survival rate of 5%
remained largely unchanged in the last three decades. The paucity of
breakthroughs in treatment regimens and continued poor survival
demonstrates an acute need for improvement in therapy for this lethal
malignancy. Mounting evidence suggest that sustained re-activation of
Notch signaling pathway contributes to the initiation, progression and
maintenance of PDA. Recently, Notch signaling has been linked to the
viability of putative tumor initiating cancer stem cell populations in
pancreatic cancer. PF-03084014 is a selective -secretase inhibitor
developed by Pfizer. The present study was conducted to determine the
effect of PF-03084014 monotherapy and in combination with gemcitabine
(GEM) to suppress tumor progression and prevent metastatic spread in
preclinical models of pancreatic cancer. Methods: NOTCH-1 gene expression
was determined in a panel of 30 human pancreatic cancer xenografts by
Affymetrix gene array. We investigated the efficacy of PF-03084014 and in
combination with GEM in subcutaneously (s.c) implanted as well as
orthotopic models of pancreatic cancer. We also determined the treatment
effect on putative pancreatic cancer stem cell (CSC) populations. TUNEL
and Ki-67 staining were performed to determine whether the therapy induce
apoptosis and suppresses tumor cell proliferation. Results: A combination
of PF-03084014 and GEM is highly effective in producing durable tumor
regression compared to GEM in subcutaneously implanted pancreatic cancer
xenografts. Tumor re-growth curves plotted after 4 weeks of drug
treatment demonstrate that the effect of the combination therapy is
longer lasting than that of GEM. Notably, in a highly aggressive Panc265
orthotopic model, PF-03084014 and GEM combination was effective in
controlling the primary tumor growth as well as preventing metastatic
dissemination to organs as compared to GEM treatment. Flow cytometry of
sorted tumor cells from Panc215 (after 4 weeks of treatment) showed that
GEM treatment was not capable of diminishing the CSC pool as compared to
the vehicle treated mice. However, PF-03084014 alone, and the combination
of GEM with PF-03084014 resulted in a 3.72 and 3.04-fold decrease in
CD24+CD44+ tumor cells compared with GEM treatment, respectively. TUNEL
and Ki-67 staining demonstrated that combination therapy induced
apoptosis and suppresses cell proliferation. Conclusions: The findings
presented here provide strong rationale for the clinical investigation on
notch inhibition as a chemotherapeutic strategy to combat pancreatic
cancer.

