Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WT1 mediated regulation of growth control genes in leukemia


Prognosis and therapy of acute leukemia is influenced by
leukemia-specific genetic alterations, thus highlighting the importance
of identifying novel prognostic markers. One such potential marker, the
Wilms tumor gene (WT1), a zinc finger transcription factor, is expressed
in leukemic blasts and has been found to be mutated in approximately 10
percent of leukemia cases. Work in other tumor systems has shown that WT1
up-regulates expression of genes promoting cancer progression, including
the angiogenic and mitogenic factor VEGF. Microarray studies have also
correlated expression of JAG1 (Jagged 1) and CCNA1 (Cyclin A) with WT1 in
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) samples. We have identified potential WT1
binding sites within the promoters of both JAG1 and CCNA1 and have
compared the expression of these genes to that of WT1, using real time
quantitative PCR (QRTPCR), in pediatric leukemia and normal bone marrow.
Compared to normal bone marrow, we observed lower than normal levels of
WT1 in a majority of pediatric ALL samples, associated with lower than
normal levels of VEGF, JAG-1 and CCNA-1. Conversely in pediatric AML(M3)
we observed elevated levels of WT1 associated with elevated JAG-1 and
CCNA-1. Mutations of the WT1 zinc finger (ZF) DNA binding domain have
also been described in poor prognosis leukemias. To identify novel ZF
mutations we sequenced WT1 in twelve pediatric acute leukemia samples. No
ZF domain mutations were identified among these samples with high WT1
expression. However, a well-described SNP (rs 16754, also in exon 7),
identified as a good prognostic marker in Cytogenetically Normal AML, was
observed either as a homozygous or heterozygous variant of the WT1 gene.
Because a majority of WT1 mutations identified in leukemias are
frameshift mutations leading to a truncated protein lacking the ZF DNA
binding domain, we created a truncation mutant of isoform A-WT1 lacking
the ZF domain and assessed its function in K562 cells. Using QRTPCR we
quantified the effect of over-expression of wild type and mutant WT1 on
VEGF, JAG1 and CCNA1 expression. Compared to the vector control, wild
type WT1 upregulated levels of JAG1 and CCNA1 but not VEGF mRNA. Mutant
WT1 did not upregulate JAG1 or CCNA1. Our data and other studies have
shown that JAG1 is elevated in AML patient samples, implicating the NOTCH
1 pathway that promotes cell proliferation and blocks differentiation.
Thus, these results suggest that WT1 may act as an oncogene in K562
cells, in part by upregulating the growth promoting NOTCH-1 ligand, JAG1.
Similarly, cell cycle regulation by WT1, demonstrated in other systems,
may be mediated by transcriptional regulation of CCNA1. WT1 may
contribute to leukemogenesis through transcriptional regulation of genes
controlling cell proliferation.

