Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global phosphotyrosine survey reveals the evidence of activation
of multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in basal-like breast
cancer cells


About 10-15% of all breast cancers are basal-like breast cancers (BLBCs)
that are highly aggressive and lack effective targeted therapeutic
options as they lack ER, PR and Her-2. Reversible phosphorylation of
proteins is one the most important post-translational modifications and
is involved in almost all kinds of cellular processes. Tyrosine
phosphorylation (pY) accounts for a minority of total phosphorylation,
less than 0.1% by overall abundance. However, pY plays a
disproportionately large role in diseases especially in cancer. More than
half of the 90 tyrosine kinases identified in the human proteome have
been implicated in cancer through gain-of-function mutations, gene
amplification, overexpression, or as tumor suppressors and become
attractive therapeutic targets. To assess activated tyrosine kinase
signaling pathways in TNBCs, we collected a panel of 28 publicly
available triple-negative breast cancer cell lines and systematically
analyzed the invasiveness and anchorage independent growth of this panel
of cell lines. We carried out global quantitative phosphotyrosine
profiling using high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. In
all, we identified 2,133 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides from more than
800 proteins. A number of tyrosine kinases were found to be
differentially phosphorylated in different sets of breast cancer cells.
Pathway analysis revealed that phosphorylation level of certain oncogenic
kinases including EGFR, MET, FAK1 and SRC was elevated in a majority of
basal-like breast cancer cells. Notably, multiple members of EPH receptor
family, EPHA1, EPHA2, EPHA3, EPHB3 and EPHB4, were hyper-phosphorylated
in multiple basal-like breast cancer cells. Supervised clustering
analysis of phosphorylated proteins identified specific
phospho-signatures that correlated with invasiveness and anti-anoikis
colony formation ability. One of these hyper-phosphorylated proteins was
DYRK2, a dual specificity tyrosine kinase. We observed that DYRK2 had an
effect on colony formation and invasive ability on a subset of TNBC cell
lines. Overall, our global phosphoproteomic study confirms high
heterogeneity in the activation status of tyrosine kinases across triple
negative breast cancer cells and suggests that some of them are
attractive candidates as therapeutic targets.

