Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA based classification of non-BRCA1/2 hereditary breast
cancer tumors


Familial breast cancer comprises 5-10% of all breast cancer cases.
Germline mutations in the currently known BRCA1 or 2 high risk-breast
cancer genes are common in familial breast cancer, but they can explain,
20-25% of the overall familial risk. Still, the large majority of breast
cancer cases that arise in families with strong familial aggregation are
not explained by mutations in any know breast cancer susceptibility gene,
and are designated as BRCAX tumors. MicroRNA (miRNA) deregulation has
been extensively implicated in cancer pathogenesis. Specifically, in
breast cancer, there are miRNA expression profiles associated to specific
subtypes or biological features such as hormone receptor, HER2 status,
metastasis, progression or proliferation. However, there are no
publications describing miRNA expression profiles in hereditary breast
tumors. We established the miRNA expression profiles associated to
familial breast tumors from different genetic subtypes, BRCA1, BRCA2 and
BRCAX. The discovery of differentially expressed miRNAs may improve the
diagnosis of these tumors and will provide new insight into the molecular
biology of the tumors. We selected tumor areas from 80 FFPE samples (66
hereditary breast tumors, 10 sporadic and 4 normal breast samples). The
samples were analyzed by miRNA microarray expression profiling using
LNA-based Exiqon platform and interesting miRNAs were validated by
QT-PCR. Hierarchical clustering of BRCAX tumors revealed clear
heterogeneity, with 4 apparent groups. For class discovery we have used
Consensus clustering algorithm that confirmed the existence of 4
different subgroups among BRCAX tumors (A, B, C and D). Interestingly,
Group C clusters with BRCA1/2 mutated tumors, while Group A clusters
along with normal breast tissue. Group B appears as a homogenous group of
tumors, while group D represents a very heterogeneous group, lacking a
specific miRNA signature. Next, we identified miRNA signatures for each
of the well defined groups (A, B, C) and we performed pathway enrichment
analysis using IPA and identified associated biological processes for
each of the miRNA clusters. We found that miRNAs contributed to a better
definition of BRCAX group of tumors, which could potentially be
subclassified into distinct groups. The identification of key target
genes and pathways regulated by significant miRNAs would give as a better
understanding of the mechanisms of tumorigenesis.

