Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The roles of HDACs in chromatin remodelling and response to
chemotherapy in cancer


Background: Chromatin is dynamic in higher-order structure in response to
extracellular and environmental signals. We observed nuclear
morphological changes in clinical cancer tissues after chemotherapy.
Since chromatin structure dictates gene expression, and therefore
function, further investigation of this phenomenon may help us to better
understand therapeutic responses. We hypothesise that nuclear
morphological changes in cancer in response to DNA-damage by chemotherapy
are mediated by histone deacetylases (HDACs). Methods: Ovarian cancer
cell lines PEO1/PEO4 (platinum sensitive/resistant) were selected as in
vitro models, and primary ovarian cancer xenografts OV1002 and HOX424 as
in vivo models. Expression levels of HDACs and heterochromatin protein 1
(HP1) were screened by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) and western
blot after treatment with cisplatin. Immunofluorescence imaging was
undertaken using confocal microscopy and nuclear texture was measured in
Image J using GLCM texture analysis plugin. 38 ovarian cancer patient and
175 xenograft samples were assessed for HDAC and HP1 expression in
response to chemotherapy by quantitative immunofluorescence. HDAC2
expression was modulated by interfering RNAs (siRNA). Results: We
demonstrate nuclear morphological changes in clinical tumours,
xenografts, and cell lines in response to platinum chemotherapy. HDACs
and HP1 isoforms showed differential expression in a panel of 25 ovarian
cancer cell lines associated with response to chemotherapy with increased
expression in treated or resistant lines. Expression of HDACs increased
in PEO1 cells treated with cisplatin in a time-dependent fashion. This
was accompanied by quantifiable changes in nuclear texture (increased
heterogeneity), and high expression of HP1s at early time point (4-24h).
The proliferation of PEO1 cells was inhibited and HP1 protein expression
decreased after HDAC2 knockdown. In clinical specimens, HDAC8 and HP1
gamma expression significantly increased after chemotherapy, and class I
HDAC (1, 2, and 8) and HP1 expression were increased after carboplatin
treatment in carboplatin-sensitive xenografts. Chromatin conformation,
DNA damage response, and cell cycle progression showed sequential changes
over time with carboplatin treatment. Conclusion: These results
demonstrate alterations in chromatin structure after chemotherapy, and
implicate the role of class I HDACs in higher order chromatin changes and
the DNA damage response in ovarian cancer in vitro and in vivo.

