Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo profiling of migratory tumor cells identifies novel
mediators for invasion and dissemination in human breast cancer.


Breast cancer is one of the most frequent malignant neoplasms occurring
in women in developed countries and metastasis of breast cancer is the
main cause of death in these patients. Molecular profiling has led to the
identification of gene sets, or signatures, the expression of which in
primary tumors is associated with metastatic risk and poor outcome for
the patients. Early such signatures were derived from whole pieces of
tumor tissue. We now know that tumors are highly heterogeneous, that not
all cells within a tumor are migratory and invasive, and that the tumor
microenvironment gives spatial-temporal cues to tumor cells for invasion
and metastasis. Therefore, despite having prognostic value in patients,
early signatures have given little insight on the specific mechanisms of
metastasis and especially the crucial early steps of the metastatic
cascade: migration, invasion and entry of tumor cells into the systemic
circulation. Using an in vivo invasion assay, we isolated the migratory
tumor cell subpopulation from MDA-MB-231 derived orthotopic tumors and
compared their molecular profile to the average primary tumor cells, thus
deriving a gene expression profile specific for invasion and
dissemination of breast cancer. Unsupervised bioinformatics analysis of
this human invasion signature (HIS) shows that the most significant
upregulated gene networks in the migratory breast tumor cells include
genes regulating DNA repair, embryonic development and cell movement,
with TGF acting as a central regulator of the migratory phenotype.
Importantly, we developed a panel of patient-derived breast tumor
xenografts in mice by orthotopic engraftment of tumor tissue from
surgical resections, which we have used to directly validate our findings
from the MDA-MB-231 xenografts. Indeed, in both MDA-MB-231 and
patient-derived xenografts, we found a significant increase of nuclear
H2AX staining as well as increased nuclear accumulation of phospho-ATM
and Smad2/3 in the migratory tumor cells compared to the average primary
tumor cells. These findings confirm a novel link between activated DNA
repair pathways and tumor cell invasion in vivo, as well as identify
specifically the migratory subpopulation of a primary tumor to have a
gene pattern similar to embryonic development. In addition, we verified
that the function of selected genes from the HIS was required for in vivo
invasion and hematogenous dissemination in the MDA-MB-231 and the
patient-derived xenografts by use of specific inhibitors. Finally, the
HIS significantly predicts risk of metastasis in public breast cancer
databases independent of other clinical parameters. Overall, our data
suggests a molecular basis for the invasive properties of tumor cells in
human breast tumors in vivo and a rationale for new prognostic and
therapeutic target design.

