Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-148a: A novel oncogenic microRNA in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma is the most common and deadly malignant brain tumor. One
main reason of resistance of glioblastoma to therapy is the ability of
the tumor cells to migrate and invade the surrounding brain, rendering
total surgical removal of the tumor practically impossible. MicroRNAs
(miRNA) are small noncoding regulatory RNA molecules with emerging
critical roles in cancer. MicroRNAs modulate protein expression by
binding to the 3-untranslated region of mRNA and promoting RNA
degradation or inhibiting transcription. In this study, we analyzed data
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and found that microRNA-148a
(miR-148a) was one of few miRNAs that inversely correlated with GBM
patient survival. However, nothing is known about the role of this miRNA
in cancer and GBM. We therefore started a systematic study of miR-148a in
GBM. We first measured miR-148a levels in GBM and found that they were >
3-fold higher in GBM stem cells than in normal astrocytes and 15 times
higher in tumor specimens than in and normal brain. We then investigated
the functional effects of miR-148a on GBM malignancy. Inhibition of
miR-148a in GBM stem with anti-miR-148a strongly induced apoptosis.
Overexpression of miR-148a in GBM stem cells strongly promoted their
self-renewal ability. Transfection of pre-miR-148a into GBM cells
strongly promoted cell proliferation, migration and invasion though a
membrane coated with collagen IV, a commonly expressed matrix protein in
GBM. Therefore, miR-148a acts as an oncogene in GBM cells by promoting
cell proliferation, migration and invasion and inhibiting stem cell
differentiation. To elucidate the mode of action and targets of miR-148a
in GBM, we used a combined approach of miRNA target prediction analysis
and immunoblotting to identify oncogenes that are targeted and inhibited
by miR-148a. We selected proteins that are known to play roles in GBM and
cancer, and were able to confirm inhibition by miR-148a of MIG6 and BIM.
MIG6 is a negative regulator of EGFR (an important oncogene in GBM), and
BIM is a central pro-apoptotic molecule. Therefore, we predicted that
miR-148a might act as an oncogenic microRNA by inducing EGFR expression
and activation and inhibiting apoptosis. Using immunoblotting, we
demonstrated that miR-148a does in fact induce EGFR expression and
activation in GBM cells. Ongoing and future studies will assess the in
vivo effects of miR-148a and evaluate its usefulness as a new target for
GBM therapy. Altogether, we have uncovered miR-148a a new oncogenic
microRNA in GBM that acts via regulation of EGFR and BIM.

