Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Warburg effect in mammary atypia from high-risk women


Background: Aggressive cancers are known to consume glucose avidly and
produce lactic acid (rather than fully metabolize glucose via the
Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA) cycle). This shift toward lactate production,
even in the presence of adequate oxygen, is termed the Warburg effect.
The Warburg effect is thought to be a late event in breast cancer,
however, our studies in high-risk women provide evidence that the Warburg
effect occurs during cancer initiation. This is an important observation
as glucose-signaling can be readily targeted for breast cancer prevention
with minimal toxicity. Here we investigated the role of the Warburg
effect in breast cancer initiation in young high-risk women. Methods and
Results: Similar to fluorodeoxyglucose,
2-(N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)amino)-2-deoxyglucose (2-NBDG) is
a fluorescent glucose analog that can be used to track glucose uptake and
glycolysis. 2-NBDG spectroscopy provides a means to track glucose
metabolism in live mammary epithelial cells from high-risk women. We used
2-NBDG spectroscopy to measure glucose uptake in ER- breast cancer and
live atypical mammary epithelial cells from high-risk premenopausal
women. We observe that both triple-negative breast cancer and a subset of
atypia exhibits accumulation of 2-NBDG. There is growing recognition that
phosphoprotein signaling networks (rather than single genes) play a key
role in breast cancer initiation and progression. Our team used Reverse
Phase Proteomic Microarray (RPPM) profiling to test for activation of
phosphoprotein signaling networks in atypical RPFNA cytology from
high-risk premenopausal women in our cohort. RPFNA were obtained from two
independent sets of 39 and 38 high-risk premenopausal women; 45% of these
women were African American. The signaling network most highly expressed
in precancerous cells contained activated signaling proteins associated
with the Warburg effect (AKT/mTOR/PI3K), insulin signaling (pACC, IRS1)
and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) IL6/Stat3/vimentin.
Conclusions: This is the first evidence that abnormal glucose uptake and
the Warburg effect occurs during breast cancer initiation in high-risk
premenopausal women. These studies demonstrate our ability to identify
abnormal glucose and activated signaling networks associated with the
Warbug effect in atypical mammary cells from high-risk women.

