Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogenous expression of chemokine receptors in primary
patient-derived GBM lines; association of CXCR3, CXCR4, and CXCR7 with a
slow cycling sub-population


WHO class IV glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most malignant
and aggressive forms of primary brain tumors and despite multimodal
treatments patients have modest survival rates. The poor prognosis and
therapy resistance of glioblastoma are believed to be a consequence of a
subpopulation of glioma stem-like cells. As such, targeting functions
associated with this cell population is likely to yield new therapeutic
strategies. Roles for CXCR3, CXCR4, and CXCR7 in glioblastoma are well
documented although previously published studies involved primarily the
characterization of glioma cell lines grown in the presence of serum. Our
studies were undertaken to understand the roles of chemokine receptors
CXCR4 and CXCR7, and their ligands CXCL11 and CXCL12, in modulating
glioblastoma stem-like cell functions. Tumors xenografts developed from
patient-derived primary GBM cells cultured as gliomaspheres in serum-free
conditions expressed CXCR4, CXCR7, CXCL11, and CXCL12 in a manner similar
to expression patterns of these genes in human GBM tissues. Flow
cytometry analysis of CXCR4 and CXCR7 on various patient-derived primary
GBM lines indicated marked heterogenous expression of these receptors.
Variable percentages of CXCR4+, CXCR7+, and CXCR4+/CXCR7+ (double
positive) populations were evident. In contrast, chemokine receptors CCR3
and CXCR3 were co-expressed on a small but similar percentage of cells in
all cell lines. RT-PCR indicated that all lines expressed CXCL11 while
none expressed CXCL12. A slow cycling sub-population of cells, which
express stem-like cell markers and exhibit high tumorigenic frequencies,
were enriched for CXCR3, CXCR4, and CXCR7. CXCR4+ and CXCR7+
subpopulations were capable of forming spheres in serum-free culture
conditions and exhibited plasticity in regenerating the cellular
heterogeneity of their parental phenotype. In addition, both CXCR4+ and
CXCR7+ cells were able to initiate the formation of intracranial tumors.
In vitro functional studies showed that while CXCL12, but not CXCL11,
stimulated the migration of GBM cell lines, both of these ligands were
able to promote short-term proliferation. Collectively, the results
suggest that CXCR4 and CXCR7 may regulate the stem-like properties of GBM
cells. The high degree of heterogeneity in CXCR4 and CXCR7 expression
both within and between glioblastomas suggests that personalized
treatment of glioblastoma patients using selective antagonists that
target CXCR4 and CXCR7 may need to consider the complex expression
patterns and specific functions of these receptors.

