Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization to chemotherapy through interference with FOXO4 - a
pivotal node between senescence and apoptosis


Malignant transformation of damaged cells is restricted through
activation of potent tumor suppressive mechanisms as apoptosis and
cellular senescence. While apoptotic cells are cleared from the organism,
senescent cells are withdrawn from the cell cycle, remain present in the
organism and accumulate with age. Senescent cells retain the capacity to
become tumorigenic upon acquisition of additional mutations. Forcing a
shift from the senescence program towards apoptosis may therefore prove
clinically useful as treatment for senescence-escaped tumors.
Unfortunately, it is still unclear why certain cells undergo apoptosis
whereas others enter senescence in response to identical stimuli. We
establish the transcription factor FOXO4 as a pivot in this decision
process. FOXO4 expression is elevated in DNA-damaged cells, associated
with its recruitment to focal sites of DNA damage. Treatment of primary
cultures that would otherwise senesce in response to DNA-damaging insults
could be pushed towards apoptosis by interference with FOXO4 expression.
This formed the basis for a series of experiments addressing the
potential role of FOXO4 in tumor survival. Recently, the
BRAFV600E-specific drug Vemurafenib has been shown to significantly
enhance tumor-free survival rates of malignant melanoma patients carrying
this mutation, but in time recurrence tends to occur. Excitingly, we
observed that interference with FOXO4 expression in BRAFV600E-driven
malignant melanomas sensitized them to Vemurafenib as well as their
classical chemotherapeutic agent Dacarbazine. Several NRAS-mutated
melanoma lines could furthermore be spontaneously induced to apoptose by
FOXO4 interference. Finally, these observations are not limited to
melanoma and interference with FOXO4 also sensitized mammary carcinoma
cells toward 5-fluorouracyl and prostate carcinoma cells towards
Mitoxantrone. We are currently exploring the potential of targeted
anti-FOXO4 therapy in vivo to see whether FOXO4 could provide a general
Achilles heel in the survival of malignant carcinomas. This work is
supported by post-doctoral fellowship Buit-4649 of the Dutch Cancer
Society awarded to PLJDK and NIH grant AG017242 awarded to JC.

