Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of DNA methyltransferase target sites in cancer
cells


Aberrant DNA methylation is commonly observed in cancer and is
characterized by genome-wide hypomethylation and gene-specific
hypermethylation, which is thought to contribute to genomic instability
and tumor suppressor gene silencing, respectively. The DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) are responsible for the establishment (DNMT3A,
DNMT3B, DNMT3L) and maintenance (DNMT1) of DNA methylation patterns
genome-wide. The mechanism by which DNA methylation patterns are altered
in cancer is not well understood. Genome-wide unique and overlapping
target sites for each of the DNMTs are also unknown both in normal and
cancer states. Identification of DNMT target loci is essential in order
to better understand how aberrant DNA methylation occurs in cancer. To
study this process, DNMT mRNA levels were depleted both individually and
in a combinatorial fashion via RNAi-based techniques in embryonic
carcinoma cells. Following reduction in DNMT expression, the resulting
DNA and RNA was analyzed for genome-wide DNA methylation and gene
expression patterns, respectively. An affinity purification method,
Methyl-Binding Domain (MBD)-seq, was used to capture and enrich
methylated regions of the genome by utilizing the methyl-binding domain
of MBD2b. The enriched methylated DNA was then used to construct an
Illumina sequencing library. Global gene expression patterns were
analyzed by microarray for each RNA sample. Next generation sequencing
and microarray data were analyzed using several available algorithms
(e.g. MACS) and high-throughput data software packages (e.g. Partek
Genomics Suite) in order to construct and evaluate the DNA methylation
profiles and subsequent gene expression changes that result from DNMT
depletion. Our data show that distinct changes in DNA methylation
profiles occur among the various DNMT knockdown samples that permit us to
identify unique and cooperative target loci for each DNMT. Further
elucidation of DNMT target sites holds great promise for enhancing our
understanding of mechanisms that control aberrant DNA methylation that is
observed in cancer as well as provide insight and rationale for targeting
specific DNMTs in cancer therapies.

