Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific miRNA expression profiles of non-tumor liver tissues
predict the risk for multicentric occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: It is reasonable to investigate the non-tumor liver tissues
to predict a risk for development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We
have previously reported that specific gene-expression profiles of
non-tumor liver tissues (up-regulation of STMN1, down-regulation of
CYP1A2, etc.) can predict the risk for multicentric (MC) occurrence of
HCC. In this study, we thus examined whether specific miRNA expression
patterns of non-tumor liver tissues could also predict the risk for MC
occurrence of HCC. In addition, characteristics of miRNAs associated with
the development of HCC were investigated. Methods: 1. We divided the 35
HCC patients, who underwent hepatectomy, into 3 groups based on the
etiological factors of HCC; hepatitis B virus (HBV, n=10), hepatitis C
virus (HCV, n=7), and non-B non-C (NBNC, n=18). Non-tumor liver tissues
from 3 patients with metastatic liver tumors served as normal control
(NC). We analyzed miRNA expressions in non-tumor liver tissues using a
miRNA microarray (Agilent Technologies, 866 probes), and compared between
each HCC group and the NC group. 2. We divided the 20 HCC patients, who
underwent hepatectomy, into 2 groups; non-MC group (no MC recurrence more
than 3 years, n=10) and MC group (MC recurrence within 3 years after
hepatectomy, n=10). We identified specific miRNA expression patterns
associated with MC recurrence. Results: 1. A hierarchical clustering
analysis clearly divided each HCC group and the NC group. Compared to the
NC group, 25 miRNA, such as let-7 family, miR-451/144 family, miR-10b,
miR-16, miR-26b, miR-223, miR-326, and miR-328 were significantly
down-regulated in the NBNC group. Interestingly, most of these miRNAs
were associated with the expressions of caner stem cell markers, such as
CD44, CD133, AVCC1, ABCG2, and MDR1. In addition, miR-494, which reduces
the PTEN expression, was up-regulated in both the HCV and NBNC group
compared to the NC group. The expression of miR-328, which reduces the
ABCG2 (BCRP1) expression, was validated using RT-PCR. 2. A hierarchical
clustering analysis divided the non-MC group and the MC group. The MC
recurrence-related miRNA included let-7, miR-328, and miR18a*, which
regulates K-ras gene expression. Conclusions: The risk for MC recurrence
of HCC may possibly be predicted by not only the specific gene-expression
profiles but also the specific miRNA expression profiles of non-tumor
liver tissues in HCC patients. Moreover, the down-regulation of specific
miRNAs, which inhibit the expressions of caner stem cell markers, may be
associated with the MC occurrence of HCC.

