Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX1 and ELK1 directly regulate the transcription of EVI1 during
megakaryocytic differentiation


High expression of EVI1 is a negative prognostic indicator of survival in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The EVI1 gene (3q26) codes
for a transcription factor indispensable for the proliferation and
self-renewal of HSCs during embryogenesis and in the adult, and is
downregulated upon differentiation; however, the regulation of EVI1 in
megakaryocytic differentiation should be different, as it is highly
expressed in megakaryocytes and platelets, but not in other committed
hematopoietic cells. Our aim was to identify transcription factors
involved in the regulation of EVI1. Site-directed mutagenesis and ChIP
assays identified RUNX1 and ELK1 as putative transcription factors of
EVI1. Furthermore, knockdown of RUNX1 and ELK1 led to EVI1
downregulation, and their overexpression to upregulation of EVI1. Of
note, in a series of patient samples with AML at diagnosis (n=46), we
found a significant positive correlation between EVI1 and RUNX1, and EVI1
and ELK1 mRNA expression levels. RUNX1 has been reported as a key
transcription factor in megakaryocytic development. To investigate
whether RUNX1 could regulate EVI1 in this process, we treated K562 cells
with TPA. After the treatment, we observed an increase in RUNX1, as
previously described, and in ELK1 and EVI1. Knockdown of RUNX1 resulted
in a marked decrease of the megakaryocytic markers ITGA2B and ITGB3, and
of EVI1. Moreover, EVI1 knockdown led to the same effects by blocking the
differentiation process, suggesting that the role of EVI1 in
megakaryocytic differentiation would be through RUNX1. Interestingly,
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) showed that RUNX1 regulates
the transcription of EVI1 by acetylation of the histone H3 on its
promoter region. In conclusion, we demonstrate that RUNX1 and ELK1, two
proteins with essential functions in hematopoiesis, regulate EVI1 in AML.
Moreover, our results suggest that these transcription factors could
regulate EVI1 expression during megakaryocytic differentiation, and that
RUNX1 would activate EVI1 expression through acetylation of the histone
H3 on its promoter region. This study opens new directions to further
understand the mechanisms of EVI1 overexpressing leukemias.

