Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TUMOR lymphocyte infiltration, expression of CD4, CD8, FOXP3, CD34
molecules and their relationship with tumor evolution after primary
treatment in breast cancer patients


Considering that, approximately, only half of breast cancer patients
respond to present therapies, a better knowledge of breast cancer
biology, one of the most common neoplasms in women, will enable to design
better therapeutic approaches. It has been proposed that different tumor
characteristics like inflammatory infiltrate intensity, number of T
regulatory (Tregs) cells and density of tumor vasculature could be useful
to anticipate the response to therapy. Our aim was: a) to analyze the
lymphocytic infiltrate and the expression of CD4, CD8, CD34 (endothelial
marker) and Foxp3 (Treg marker) in primary tumors of breast cancer
patients, and b) to relate them with clinical evolution (disease free: DF
or relapsed: R) after 5 years from the primary treatment (surgery). There
were analyzed archive samples of ductal mammary tumors (n=27), mostly in
stages I and II. The expression of CD4 and CD8 in intra- and peri-tumoral
lymphocytes was determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and confirmed by
confocal microcopy; also the expression of Foxp3 in lymphocytes and tumor
cells and CD34 in endothelial cells was evaluated by IHC. The lymphocytic
infiltrate was assessed in histological sections stained with
hematoxylin-eosin. The quantification was done in 20 high magnification
fields and a score ranging from 0 (null) to 6 (high) was utilized. In DF
patients (n=22) the intratumoral lymphocytic infiltrate (median [range]:
3 [0-6]) was more intense than that of R patients (n=5), (2 [0-2]),
(P=0.05). For CD4, CD8, CD34 and Foxp3 molecules no differences between
groups of patients were observed, being their expression highly variable:
the score for CD34 varied from 1 to 6 and for the other three molecules
from 0 to 6, in either group. In conclusion, the presence of an intense
intratumoral lymphocytic infiltrate could be a prognostic marker of good
response to treatment, at least in the first 5 years after surgery. These
results warrant the study of higher number of tumor samples, since its
confirmation could give support for its use in the clinical setting.

