Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB4: A novel therapeutic target in glioblastoma multiforme


Introduction: Glioblastoma Multiforme or glioma is amongst the most
lethal and difficult to cancers to treat and kills 1,000 Australians and
12,000 Americans every year. The average age at diagnosis is 60 years and
the death rate for glioma has remained relatively unchanged for the past
20 years; highlighting the need for new therapeutic options for its
treatment. ErbB4, the fourth member of the EGFR family has both oncogenic
and tumor suppressive activity dependent upon isoform expression and
although ErbB4 is universally expressed in glioma, its functional role is
somewhat unclear. Aims: The aim of this study was to characterize the
expression of ErbB4 in a large cohort of glioma tissues at the protein
and mRNA level and determine if ErbB4 expression relates to tumor biology
and patient survival. Methods: Immunohistochemistry was performed on
paraffin sections of glioma tissue (n=68) and normal brain (n=5) for the
immunolocalisation of ErbB4 and EGFR (total and activated) and the ErbB4
ligand heregulin. Using a customized RT-qPCR assay, ErbB4 isoforms were
identified in snap frozen glioma (n=23) and normal brain (n=15). Results:
Patients diagnosed with glioma (n=68) had a median survival time of 15
months (range 1-120 months) with the average age of 632 years (range
21-80 years). ErbB4 and heregulin protein was demonstrated in all our
glioma and normal brain samples. At the mRNA level however, ErbB4
expression was reduced in the glioma samples when compared to normal
brain tissue. All six ErbB4 isoforms were demonstrated in all tissue
samples and ErbB4 was preferentially expressed as the JMa/Cyt2 isoform in
glioma. Histologically, ErbB4 activation (independent of EGFR activation)
occurred in 16% of patient samples and was localized to sites like the
leading edge of the tumor. The mean survival time for patients with high
levels of activated ErbB4 was 12 months, while patients with low levels
of activated ErbB4 had a mean survival time of 32 months. ErbB4,
activated ErbB4 and heregulin were also demonstrated in the vasculature
of the glioma but not normal brain. Conclusions: This study demonstrated
the preferential expression of the JMa/Cyt-2 isoform of ErbB4 in glioma
along with increased ErbB4 activation significantly shortening patient
survival times. Due to a potential angiogenic role of ErbB4 in glioma and
reduced patient survival times following ErbB4 activation, ErbB4 should
be considered a new therapeutic target in glioma.

