Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eliminating pancreatic cancer metastases through inhibition of
hedgehog and RAS signaling


Pancreatic cancer is arguably one of the most challenging human
malignancies, with the five year survival rate below 5%. Pancreatic
cancer is often found in advanced stages, and is unresponsive to
conventional cancer therapy. Thus, the need to develop novel treatment
strategies targeting metastasis of pancreatic cancer has never been
greater. The molecular hallmark of pancreatic cancer is an activating
mutation in the small GTPase KRAS. Unfortunately, efforts to target RAS
signaling are not very successful for pancreatic cancer treatment.
Recently, inhibition of hedgehog (Hh) signaling emerges as a new cancer
therapeutic option, but the available data from several current clinical
trials in pancreatic cancer show only modest activity. At present,
gemcitabine is the standard chemotherapy for metastatic pancreatic cancer
but the response rate is less than 10%, with the median survival of only
6-7 months. A new chemotherapy combination of 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan
and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) was recently studied in Europe with a
response rate of 30% and median survival of 11 months, but at a cost of
significant toxicity. In order to design treatment strategies based on
the molecular changes critical for cancer metastasis, we took the
advantage of the knowledge recently generated in our laboratory and the
newly developed molecularly targeted drugs currently in clinical trials.
We compared primary pancreatic tumors with metastatic liver tumors for
molecular alterations in an orthotopic mouse model, and discovered
elevated expression of Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and ERK1/2 phosphorylation
in liver metastases. Inhibition of Hh signaling or MEK activity alone
reduced primary tumor size but did not significantly affect distal tumor
metastases. In contrast, targeting Hh signaling and MEK activity in the
orthotopic mouse model dramatically decreased the primary tumor size and
nearly eliminated lung and liver metastases. Mice treated with two
inhibitors lived two weeks longer than those in other groups. While MEK
inhibition mainly interefered with cell proliferation, suppression of
ligand-dependent Hh signaling affected the tumor microenvironment. These
data indicate that simultaneous suppression of RAS and Hh signaling will
be more effective in future pancreatic cancer treatment.

