Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer reversal by dual strategy: A new molecular target?


Haste is a bad counselor when one is striving to address important
issues. The new technique, which I draw your attention to, was first
started in the 1980's and was completed in 2010 (Gosalvez, M. Thioproline
and the reversal of cancer. The Lancet, p. 1108, May 14 1983. M Gosalvez.
Mitochondrial Filamentation. AACR 101 Meeting. April 2010. Washington,
USA). Throughout these 30 years several molecular targets for a cancer
cure have been developed. The last hope, despite countless efforts,
malignant neoplasia genetic therapy, has not yet consolidated itself. We
trust that our colleagues, dedicated to therapeutic experimentation on
human beings, will now address this new possibility, either alone, or in
combination with other efforts. Better agents than Quelamycin
(Cortes-Funes H, Brugarolas A and Gosalvez M. Quelamycin: A summary of
Phase I Clinical Trials. Recent Results in Cancer Research, 74, 200-206,
1980. Eds. G Mathe and FM Muggia, Springer-Verlag. Germany) and
Thioproline (Brugarolas A and Gosalvez M. Preliminary clinical results
with Norgamem (thioproline) and Revercan (2-amino-2- thiazoline): The
first inducers of reverse transformation. In: Adjuvant Therapies of
Cancer. Mathe, Bonnadona and Salmon Eds.Springer-Verlag, Germany.1982,
346) can be gathered, with the precise cronotherapeutic emphasis, by
correctly measuring the mobility (Gosalvez M, Blanco M, Bueno M and
Balaguer R. Treatment of Leukaemia 1210 intravenous transplants with
tumour modifiers, redoubt cytotoxics and minor tranquilizers, Lubec G and
Rosenthal GA Eds. In: Aminoacids. Chemistry, Biology and Medicine. Escom
Sciences Publishers, 704-711, 1990. Gosalvez, M. Reversal of Cancer by
Dual Strategy. Madrid. Editorial Gober. 1992) of the patients under
study. Now, after sufficient time has elapsed for the consideration of
previous propositions, which have only had partial success, perhaps now
the right moment has arrived for our proposal. We believe that, after a
few years, the light at last will be seen at the end of the tunnel of
suffering for patients and their families. If this proves to be the case,
we could now, with the collaboration of everyone, tackle the possibility
of using cancer as a therapeutic agent. All the sciences around our
problem demand a great commitment for all involved.

