Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of circulating tumor cell capture from whole blood
using beads and microfluidics


Capture of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from blood shows promise as a
relatively non-invasive screen for early stage metastasis, treatment
efficacy, and disease progression. Capture rates exceeding 80% of CTCs
from whole blood have been demonstrated in microfluidic chips, with good
specificity and throughput at approximately 1 mL/h. The most common
approach is to design a high surface-area microdevice and functionalize
the surface with anti-EpCAM to capture epithelial tumor cells. As an
alternative to this monolithic design, we have developed a CTC capture
strategy based on functionalized beads for analyzing small numbers of
CTCs from whole blood. Beads for the device were commercially available
in a variety of sizes and surface chemistries or could be synthesized by
multiple techniques. We utilized avidin-functionalized beads to enable
capture using biotinylated antibodies (Ab) for surface-expressed
proteins. Critically, batches of beads were assayed in bulk and then used
for multiple experiments, avoiding characterization of each device. Beads
packed well as columns in microdevices, ensuring multiple surface
interactions as cells flow through. We simulated CTC-carrying blood by
spiking human breast cancer adenocarcinoma (MFC7) cells (prestained with
a membrane dye) into whole human blood between 1000 cells/mL and 105
cells/mL. Samples were delivered through the packed bed of beads using a
syringe pump. We found that adding Ab to whole blood samples provided
superior results to pre-coating the beads with the Ab. This approach was
tested for multiple bead compositions and enabled (1) use of less Ab, and
(2) higher capture rates, perhaps due to the rapid biotin:avidin binding.
Significant cell capture was observed when as few as 300 cells were
introduced into the device. At all cell densities, the majority of
captured cells bound to the first few rows of beads, with decreasing
capture frequency along the length of the column. Quantification of the
absolute number of captured cells was a challenge in whole blood samples
due to the large numbers of cells captured and optical distortion
effects. We estimated capture by observing the initial capture rates of
the same cells at the same densities in serum-spiked phosphate-buffered
saline. This indicated that during the initial stages of flow, over 80%
of the Ab-labeled cells were selectively captured. We conclude that the
device can handle higher flowrates and still capture the majority of
labeled cells. We are exploring the feasibility of this approach for
capturing even lower CTC concentrations (1 cell/ml to 100 cells/mL
range). Our bead/microfluidic approach simplifies CTC capture by enabling
bulk surface functionalization for multiple experiments and allowing
commercial sourcing of all functional elements. Further, there is
flexibility in antibody selection, such that alternate Ab could rapidly
be considered.

