Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cells lose their expression of lipoxygenases in order to
activate pro-survival and angiogenic pathways thereby establishing
successful macro-metastases


Metastasis is the major cause of cancer mortality. We therefore wanted to
study the possible genetic changes acquired by these cancer cells in
order to be endowed with metastatic capabilities. Several studies have
identified genes which are differentially expressed in primary and
secondary tumor growths. 15-lipoxygenase (ALOX15B) is one such gene. It
encodes for an enzyme that takes part in arachidonic acid metabolism and
has been characterized as a functional tumor suppressor in prostate
cancer. The expression and activity of ALOX15B is frequently suppressed
during the carcinogenic progress in the prostate, lungs, esophagus and
sebaceous glands. However the exact role of ALOX15B as a tumor suppressor
or the underlying mechanism behind its suppression in metastatic cancer
cells remains largely unknown. Our initial in silico analyses from
clinical samples showed that ALOX15B expression is attenuated in
metastatic prostate cancer, compared to normal tissue or primary prostate
cancer. Gene array studies across several cancer cell lines showed that
ALOX15B expression is inversely correlated with invasiveness of the cell
type. Gene clustering showed that ALOX15B is grouped with genes
associated with an epithelial phenotype. ALOX15B expression was knocked
down in immortalized non-transformed prostate as well as non/low invasive
prostate cancer cell line. This had no effect on the proliferative
indices in these cells, neither were the cells more resistant to
apoptosis under normal growth conditions. However the cells were endowed
with increased resistance to hypoxic stress. This was at least in part
achieved by increased production of VEGF-A. Analyses of several
pro-survival pathways identified that Akt signaling was hyper activated
in these ALOX15B knocked down cells. This in turn led to a decreased FoxO
transcriptional activity. Conversely, restoration of ALOX15B in low/non
metastatic as well as highly metastatic prostate cancer cell lines
decreased their basal level of Akt signaling along with increased FoxO
activity and a concomitant decrease in VEGF-A production. Further
experiments showed that ALOX15B regulates Akt activity by modulating its
phosphorylation status. Luciferase tagged rat prostate cancer cells were
engineered to over-express ALOX15B. Implantation of such cells in mice
showed that cells with restored expression of ALOX15B showed no
difference in growth kinetics of primary tumor growth, but a decrease in
luciferase activity in the liver of such mice. To summarize, our data
shows that loss of ALOX15B expression in prostate cancer cells endows
such cells with pro-survival benefits which allows them to establish
successful macro-metastases.

