Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A translational study of Tumor Treating Fields in non small cell
lung cancer


Background Lung cancer is the second most common cancer and the leading
cause of cancer related death in the US. Non-small-cell-lung cancer
(NSCLC) accounts for approximately 80% of all cases of lung cancer.
Prognosis of NSCLC remains poor despite extensive research. Tumor
Treating Fields (TTF, TTFields) are low intensity, intermediate frequency
alternating electric fields that have been demonstrated to disrupt cancer
cell replication. A phase III clinical trial has previously demonstrated
the efficacy of TTF in glioblastoma patients. Objectives This study was
designed to test the effects of TTF in NSCLC, both as a single therapy
and in combination with chemotherapies, from bench to the bedside.
Methods H1299 (Human NSCLC) and LLC1 (murine Lewis lung carcinoma) cells
were cultured while being subjected to different frequencies of low
intensity (1-2 V/cm) TTF alone or in combination with different
chemotherapies (cisplatin, pemetrexed, erlotinib and paclitaxel). An
autologous model of C57BL/5 mice bearing LLC1 tumors was used to test the
in vivo application of continuous TTF. A phase II clinical trial of TTF
in combination with pemetrexed (standard regimen) was performed in 42
stage IIIB and IV NSCLC patients following progression after at least one
line of chemotherapy. Treatment was made using 2 pairs of insulated,
non-invasive transducer arrays applied to the skin of the thorax. Results
In-vitro: The treatment of H1299 and LLC1 cultures with TTF for 72 hours
had a significant inhibitory effect on proliferation in both cell lines,
compared to control cultures. The optimal frequency for culture growth
inhibition was 150 kHz. The combination of optimal frequency-TTF with
different concentrations of chemotherapeutic agents led to further
decrease in culture growth rate, compared to TTF-nave cultures. In-vivo:
TTF resulted in a significant reduction of approximately 30% in tumor
volume and weight in mice bearing NSCLC tumors, as a monotherapy. This
therapeutic effect almost doubled in mice that were treated with
pemetrexed concomitant to the TTF. No pathological changes could be
demonstrated in healthy tissues excised from TTF-treated animals.
Clinical: NSCLC human patients with advanced-stage disease were treated
with TTF (median of 11.2 hours/day) using the NovoTTF-100L System
(NovoCure Ltd.) in combination with pemetrexed. Median progression-free
survival was 23 weeks, median overall survival was 13 months and
1-year-survival was 54% - an improvement over pemetrexed-treated
historical controls. The only device-related adverse event was mild to
moderate contact dermatitis. Conclusions The inhibitory effect of TTF in
different NSCLC models was demonstrated both as a single treatment and in
combination with chemotherapies. The promising efficacy and low toxicity
of TTF therapy combined with pemetrexed in NSCLC patients should lead to
further clinical investigation of TTF as a potential treatment for NSCLC
patients.

