Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective small-molecule kinase inhibitors of the c-Src:FAK complex


The c-Src protein-tyrosine kinase is the prototype of a large
non-receptor kinase family involved in a variety of signaling pathways in
virtually every cell type. In normal cells, c-Src controls cell-cell
adhesion, cell-matrix adhesion, and cell motility by interacting with and
phosphorylating focal adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins.
Focal adhesion kinase (FAK), a key component of focal adhesions,
activates c-Src by binding to its SH2 and SH3 domains and disrupting
their negative regulatory influence on the kinase domain. The c-Src:FAK
complex plays a major role in the migration and invasion of both normal
and cancer cells. Both c-Src and FAK are over-expressed and
constitutively active in many tumor types, enhancing focal adhesion
turnover, cell migration and metastatic potential. The goal of our
project is to determine whether distinct conformational changes occur in
the c-Src kinase domain as a function of binding to FAK that can be
selectively targeted with small molecule inhibitors. Using the FRET-based
Z-Lyte in vitro kinase assay, we first identified assay conditions where
recombinant, downregulated c-Src activation was dependent on a synthetic
phosphopeptide based on the FAK SH3- and SH2-binding motifs for c-Src. We
then screened a chemical library of about 600 kinase-biased inhibitors
for compounds that preferentially inhibited FAK-peptide-dependent c-Src
activation compared to c-Src alone. Remarkably, 13 compounds showed at
least five-fold selectivity for the FAK peptide:Src complex in the
primary screen. Several of these compounds are of the Type II kinase
inhibitor class and may exploit unique conformations of c-Src that are
induced by FAK peptide binding to the SH3 and SH2 region of c-Src. These
compounds are currently being evaluated for their impact on cell growth,
invasion and migration in both fibroblasts and epithelial tumor cell
lines. Discovery and development of selective inhibitors for a unique
FAK-induced c-Src conformation may provide a new approach to targeted
therapy for metastatic cancer.

