Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid accumulation inhibits DC ability for cross-presentation of
antigens in tumor-bearing mice


Professional antigen presenting cells dendritic cells (DCs) play an
important role in the initiation and maintenance of immune responses.
Numerous studies have demonstrated defective function of DCs in cancer.
However, the mechanisms of those defects remain not clear. Previously, we
have demonstrated that DCs in tumor-bearing hosts accumulate lipids via
up-regulation of the expression of scavenger receptor A (CD204). This
resulted in inability of DCs to effectively process exogenous antigens.
In this study we found that the DCs exposed to tumor-derived factors
(TDF) in vitro or isolated from tumor-bearing (TB) mice had increased
uptake of soluble protein ovalbumin (OVA). No defect in the activity of
lysosomal and endosomal proteases was detected. Using mass-spectrometry
we determined that TDF did not affect processing of OVA by DCs. At the
same time, DCs exposed to TDF or isolated from TB mice expressed lower
levels of OVA-derived peptide-MHC class I (pMHC) complexes and decreased
ability to stimulate OVA peptide specific CD8+ T cells (OT1). Using lipid
mass-spectrometry we found substantial accumulation of oxidized lipids in
DCs obtained from TB mice or generated in vitro in the presence of TDF.
To mimic accumulation of oxidized lipids in vitro, we treated bone marrow
derived DCs with linoleic fatty acid (LA) and oxidized agent
azobis-(2,4-dimethylvaleronitrile) (AMVN). DCs easily picked LA and form
lipid bodies similar to the process observed in the presence of TDF.
However, accumulation of LA did not result in defective processing of
OVA-derived epitope as was determined by measuring the level of pMHC on
DC surface and by stimulation of OT1 cells. AMVN at selected
concentration also did not affect OVA processing and presentation. In
contrast, combination of LA and AMVN significantly reduced the ability of
DCs to process antigens associated with OVA. No changes in the expression
of MHC class I and co-stimulatory molecules were observed. These data
indicate that oxidized lipids accumulated in DCs in tumor-bearing hosts
prevent cross-presentation of antigens, which may have important
implications for DC ability to induce tumor-specific immune responses.

