Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second neoplasms after childhood cancer and gene expression
differences in primary fibroblasts


Treatment of the primary neoplasm with radiotherapy or chemotherapy is an
established risk factor for second neoplasms (SNs) after childhood
cancer. As only a small percentage of the treated children suffer from
SN, other shared risk factors must be involved. A predisposition for the
occurrence of a SN might be a pre-existing somatic genetic defect
associated with DNA repair. We investigated the association between gene
expression involved in DNA-repair and the development of SNs after
childhood cancer. Designed as a feasibility study this project addressed
the possibility of obtaining samples for genetic analyses from former
patients through the German Childhood Cancer Registry. We recruited 20
patients with two neoplasms (the first occurring in childhood) and 20
matched patients with one neoplasm in childhood. Matching was by first
neoplasm, age and year of first diagnosis. Registered SN were confirmed
to be no relapses or alternative manifestations of the primary neoplasm.
Participants were not given financial rewards (except travel expense
compensation). Genetic counselling was offered independently of consent
to skin biopsy. We compared the DNA repair gene expression in cultivated
untreated primary fibroblasts of both patients groups using customized
cDNA microarrays (800 genes). For each sample of each subject, trimmed
means of the log-ratios were calculated for comparison between the
matched samples with paired sample t-tests, regarding the normalized gene
expression values (print-tip loess with variance stabilization
normalization and quantile normalization with the R package Arraymagic).
We used false discovery rate control by explorative Simes procedure to
account for multiple testing. Additionally, we used hierarchical cluster
analysis (complete linkage and two way clustering) to analyse whether
subjects group into the two groups using the 40 sequences with lowest
p-values in the paired-sample t-tests. We validated the results for five
selected genes by real-time PCR. Overall, 46% of the 52 contacted SN and
18 % of the 132 single neoplasm patients participated in the study. The
DNA-repair gene results showed small differences in the basal gene
expression of FTH1 and CDKN1A. As the study subjects were very
heterogeneous regarding their first and second neoplasms, we performed
two subgroup analyses in the most common groups: Subjects with lymphoid
leukaemia as a fist neoplasm (n=10) and subjects with thyroid carcinoma
as second neoplasm (n=6). FTH1 displayed a small p-value in both
subgroups, CDKN1A in the lymphoid leukaemia sample only. To our
knowledge, this is the first study using gene expression arrays in
untreated primary fibroblasts regarding second neoplasms after a
childhood neoplasm. We were able to recruit childhood cancer patients for
genetic analyses long after diagnosis. The biological importance of the
differences in the DNA-repair gene expression has to be elucidated yet.

