Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron increases the invasiveness of prostate cancer cells in vitro:
Mechanisms and inhibition by the antioxidant ebselen


The effect of iron on PC-3 prostate cancer cell invasiveness was
investigated using Neuroprobe filter membrane transmigration assays. PC-3
cells were pre-incubated with ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) for 6 hours.
Excess iron was removed before the assay. The PC-3 cells were placed on
an extracellular membrane preparation (Matrigel) in the upper wells of
the chamber and allowed to migrate onto the underside of a porous
membrane that allowed cell transmigration. The number of cells migrating
to the underside of the membrane was determined and used as a marker of
cell invasion. Pre-treatment with 100 M FAC caused a 4-fold increase in
PC-3 cell invasion when measured at 24 hours (PThe effect of iron on PC-3
prostate cancer cell invasiveness was investigated using Neuroprobe
filter membrane transmigration assays. PC-3 cells were pre-incubated with
ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) for 6 hours. Excess iron was removed before
the assay. The PC-3 cells were placed on an extracellular membrane
preparation (Matrigel) in the upper wells of the chamber and allowed to
migrate onto the underside of a porous membrane that allowed cell
transmigration. The number of cells migrating to the underside of the
membrane was determined and used as a marker of cell invasion.
Pre-treatment with 100 M FAC caused a 4-fold increase in PC-3 cell
invasion when measured at 24 hours (P< 0.05). The FAC concentrations that
induced PC-3 invasion were 100 times smaller than concentrations which
interfered with cell viability or proliferation rate. Western blot
analysis suggested that the effect of FAC exposure on PC-3 cell invasion
was mediated by p42/44 MAP kinase activity. Furthermore, the antioxidant
ebselen, a hydrogen peroxide inhibitor, decreased FAC-induced PC-3 cell
invasion. We also examined the mRNA expression of invasion-related genes
using a cDNA array and found a positive correlation between the exposures
to FAC and the invasion phenotype of prostate cancer cells. The data
demonstrated that the upregulation of genes, such as fractalkine and
plasminogen, after FAC treatment may be associated with iron-induced
invasion of prostate cancer. Our data suggest that iron overload may be
detrimental to patients with prostate cancer and that the effect of iron
on invasion may be inhibited by ebselen.

