Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3
by emodin through the induction of a phosphatase leads to the suppression
of HCC growth in orthotopic mouse model


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignancy
worldwide and the third cause of global cancer mortality. Activation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is commonly
encountered in tumor cells and is a critical mediator of oncogenic
signaling in HCC and controls the expression of several genes involved in
proliferation, survival, metastasis and angiogenesis. Current
drug-targeted therapies, besides being expensive, are associated with
serious side effects and morbidity. Thus, novel agents that can suppress
STAT3 activation have potential for both prevention and treatment of HCC.
In this study, we tested an agent, emodin, a quinone, for its ability to
suppress STAT3 activation in HCC cells and in nude mice model along with
prospectively testing the hypothesis of STAT3 inhibition in a virtual
predictive functional proteomics tumor pathway technology platform. We
present evidence that emodin can inhibit both constitutive and inducible
STAT3 activation in HCC cells. The suppression was mediated through the
inhibition of activation of upstream kinases c-Src, and Janus-activated
kinase-2. Vanadate treatment reversed the emodin induced down-regulation
of STAT3 activation, suggesting the involvement of SHP1. Indeed, we found
that emodin induced the expression of tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 and
deletion of SHP1 by small interfering RNA abolished emodin ability to
inhibit STAT3 activation and provide new evidence on the critical role of
SHP1 in mechanism of action of emodin. Emodin inhibited proliferation,
and produced a synergistic apoptotic effects in the presence of
paclitaxel and doxorubicin in HCC cells. When administered i.p., emodin
inhibited the growth of human HCC orthotopic tumors in male athymic nu/nu
mice. In conclusion, results from experimental and predictive studies
suggest that emodin exerts its anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
effects through suppression of STAT3 signaling cascade in HCC both in
vitro and in vivo.

