Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative expression profile of transmembrane mucin MUC1 in
breast cancer from American Indian and Caucasian women


Introduction: Considerable disparity exists in breast cancer incidence
and mortality among different racial/ethnic populations and geographic
locations. For unknown reasons, American Indian women of the Northern
Plains have a greater incidence and higher death rate due to breast
cancer than Caucasian women living in the same geographical region.
Additionally, American Indian women living in the Northern Plains also
have a much higher incidence and death rate due to breast cancer than
American Indian women living elsewhere in the United States. To
investigate the potential molecular basis for this cancer health
disparity, we have compared the expression profile of transmembrane
mucin, MUC1 on breast cancer cases from American Indian and Caucasian
women living on the Northern Plains. MUC1 is known to be overexpressed in
breast cancer and nuclear localization of MUC1 can have downstream
effects on cell signaling and increase oncogenic phenotypes. We are also
exploring the link between smoking, exposure to HPV infection, and the
development of breast cancer in American Indian women. Methods: We have
examined the expression profile of MUC1 in breast cancer tissue from
American Indian (n=40) and Caucasian (n=60) women. The staining was
analyzed by experienced pathologists and scored according to intensity
(0-4) and percent of cancer cells stained positive (0-4). A composite
score was calculated by multiplying the scores of intensity and percent
of cells stained. Tissues were categorized by modified Bloom-Richardson's
histological grade and the mean composite scores were compared amongst
American Indian and Caucasian groups. Results and Conclusions: We have
observed that grade 3 breast cancer samples from American Indian women
had a higher percent of nuclear MUC1 staining and a lower amount of p53
expression. This result correlates with previous data showing that MUC1
inhibits the expression of p53. In conclusion, breast cancer tissue from
American Indian women has a different expression profile of molecular
markers and this finding may help to explain the cancer health disparity.
Further investigation of these differences may promote understanding of
the etiological differences and may identify effective treatment
strategies for breast cancer in American Indian women.

