Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erythrocyte magnesium, TRPM7 Thr1482Ile polymorphism, and
colorectal adenoma risk


Background: Several epidemiologic studies indicate high intake of
magnesium may be related to a reduced risk of colorectal cancer and
adenoma. However, results from previous studies have not been consistent.
We reported previously the inverse association between dietary magnesium
and risk of colorectal adenoma primarily appeared in those who carried at
least one Thr1482Ile allele in the transient receptor potential
melastatin 7 (TRPM7) gene, which plays an essential role in the
homeostasis and sensing of magnesium. Serum magnesium is regulated in a
narrow range and previous studies indicate erythrocyte magnesium may be a
better biomarker of body magnesium status than serum magnesium.
Objective: To examine whether erythrocyte magnesium is associated with
adenoma risk and if the association is modified by the Thr1482Ile
polymorphism. Design: Included in this nested case-control study were
341adenoma cases and 343 matched polyp-free controls from the Tennessee
Colorectal Polyp Study (TCPS), a colonoscopy-based case control study
conducted in Nashville, TN. Total erythrocyte magnesium levels were
measured using flame atomic absorption spectroscopy. Genotyping assay was
performed using the TaqMan OpenArray platform. Multivariate logistic
regression models were used to estimate the odds ratio and 95% confidence
intervals as a measure of the strength of associations. The association
of each genotype with colorectal adenoma risk was evaluated under
dominant, recessive and additive models, respectively. Results: Overall
erythrocyte magnesium level was not associated with risk of colorectal
adenoma. However, erythrocyte magnesium tended to be associated with a
reduced risk among those who carried at least one Thr1482Ile allele in
the TRPM7 gene (rs8042919), particularly after adjusting for potential
confounding factors, such as age, assay batch, family history, and
dietary intakes of magnesium and fiber with the ORs (95% CI) of 0.19
(0.05, 0.76) and 0.34 (0.08, 1.49) respectively for the medium and
highest tertile of erythrocyte magnesium levels versus the lowest
tertile. In addition, among people with erythrocyte magnesium below the
median, we found people who carried at least one 1482Ile allele tended to
be at an elevated risk of adenoma with an OR (95% CI) of 1.7(0.85, 3.43),
compared to those who did not carry the polymorphism; while the
corresponding OR (95% CI) was 0.94 (0.49, 1.81) for those who carried at
least one Thr1482Ile allele if erythrocyte magnesium was above the
median. Conclusions: Our findings indicate the TRPM7 Thr1482Ile
polymorphism may interact with erythrocyte magnesium levels in relation
to colorectal adenoma risk even after controlling for dietary intake of
magnesium.

