Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of humoral response profiles of ovarian cancer
patients as diagnostic biomarkers


Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of cancer death among women and
is the leading cause of death among gynecologic malignancies as a result
of limitations in early diagnosis. It is associated with the induction of
humoral immunity, characterized by the generation of IgG against a wide
range of tumor-associated antigens. Although the role of circulating
tumor-reactive IgG is unclear, it has been demonstrated to correlate with
poor prognosis and survival. The use of tumor-reactive IgG as a potential
diagnostic and/or prognostic tool has been limited since most studies
have identified components with shared expression in non-neoplastic
tissue and failed to define targets exhibiting ubiquitous expression in
ovarian cancers. A number of these limitations result from the use of
recombinant proteins (translated in non-mammalian cells) as targets to
define immunoreactivity. The power in utilizing the autologous humoral
response is its ability to define alterations which might lead to the
altered appearance or aberrant association of antigen with other cellular
components, thereby resulting in the induction of humoral responses. We
therefore hypothesize that the ovarian patient humoral response to
specific tumor antigens can serve as diagnostic biomarkers of ovarian
cancer. To investigate patients humoral response to natural tumor
antigens, ovarian tumor cell lysates and tumor-derived exosomes were
separated into antigenic proteins by first dimension isoelectric focusing
via an immobilized pH gradient and/or rotofor fractionation. Reactive
proteins were further separated by second dimension SDS-PAGE, followed by
western immunoblotting using autologous or heterologous patient sera.
Circulating tumor-reactive IgG was found to recognize shared (MW 37-75
kD, pI 3.0-5.5) and distinct (MWexo 50 kD, pI 9.0-10.5; MWlys15 kD, pI
4.3-6.5) ovarian tumor cell proteins. Recognition of these antigenic
proteins was not observed using antibodies derived from normal control
patients. Collectively, our data supports that the circulating IgG
produced in the ovarian cancer humoral response recognizes specific tumor
antigens (many of which are shared among cancer patients) and will thus
have utility in diagnosing these patients. Further identification of
these antigenic proteins by mass spectrometry will produce specific
diagnostic targets and may provide insights on common driver mechanisms
in ovarian cancer.

