Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a robust nanoimmunoassay and immunohistochemical
assay for asparagine synthetase


The enzyme-drug L-asparaginase (L-ASP) has been used for four decades to
treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia. However, its unique mechanism of
action is still poorly understood, and its clinical efficacy has proven
unpredictable. Those problems have prompted a continuing search for
biomarkers that predict L-ASP response. We previously found that the
expression of asparagine synthetase (ASNS) is strongly negatively
correlated with L-ASP anticancer activity in ovarian cancer cell lines,
suggesting that L-ASP might be effective against a low-ASNS subset of
ovarian cancers if salient characteristics of the cell lines reflect
clinical ovarian tumors. However, quantitatively robust, single-antibody
assays for ASNS expression have been absent from the literature. We
therefore used a capillary-based isoelectric focusing (IEF) platform (the
NanoPro 1000) to screen twelve ASNS antibodies for their specificity and
sensitivity. Only two antibodies exhibited completely on-target activity
(as shown by signal ablation by ASNS siRNA) and sufficient sensitivity.
The on-target activity corresponded to a single band on Western Blot and
a single peak on the NanoPro 1000, suggesting the existence of just one
ASNS protein isoform. Optimized, final NanoPro assay conditions yielded
less than 8% CV, a 160-fold dynamic range, and Z-factor of 0.82,
indicating a robust assay that is amenable to high-throughput screening.
We next used the best ASNS antibody to develop an immunohistochemistry
(IHC) assay for ASNS. As with the NanoPro assay, optimized IHC conditions
yielded a large dynamic range of staining intensity, and staining was
completely ablated by ASNS siRNA. To test the hypothesis that subsets of
various cancers express very low levels of ASNS, we have initiated ASNS
IHC of more than 20 tissue arrays representing a wide variety of cancers.
Using a 3-point scoring system (0 = negative, 1 = low, 2 = high),
preliminary results indicate that 90/136 (66%) of bladder cancers, 29/60
(48%) of bone cancers, 16/76 (21%) of breast cancers, 29/115 (25%) of
brain cancers, 51/168 (30%) of colon cancers, and 7/64 (11%) of head and
neck cancers are ASNS-negative (score = 0), suggesting that a subset of
each cancer type might be sensitive to the drug L-asparaginase. Efforts
are underway to apply the NanoPro assay to the NCI-60 cell line panel and
to continue performing ASNS IHC to survey tissue arrays for ASNS
expression.

