Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of lenalidomide on antileukemia activity in vitro against
adult T-cell leukemia (ATL)


Background: Lenalidomide is an FDA approved agent for del 5q
myelodysplastic syndromes and in combination with dexamethasone for
previously treated multiple myeloma. Recently, phase II clinical trial
has shown its anti-tumor activity against recurrent and refractory T-cell
lymphomas. However, the mechanism underlining its effect is poorly
understood. Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is a mature T cell malignancy
caused by Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) that is endemic in
southwestern Japan, the Caribbean islands and Central Africa, and it
still remains as one of the most difficult malignancies to be cured. We
have evaluated the anti-ATL activity of lenalidomide in vitro using
HTLV-I positive cell lines. Methods: The effect of lenalidomide
(10-3-102M) and Fas antibody (25-400 ng/mL) was assessed on the
proliferation of HTLV-I positive cell lines by CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay. The cytotoxic effect against HTLV-I positive cell
lines of lenalidomide on IL-2 primed peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMNCs) as well as sorted CD56 positive and CD3 negative cells from IL-2
primed PBMNCs from healthy volunteers was studied by 51Cr releasing
assay. Results: Lenalidomide alone did not inhibit cellular
proliferation. Even 6 day incubation did not inhibit or stimulate
proliferation of HTLV-1 positive cell lines. Cytotoxic activity of IL-2
primed PBMNCs from healthy volunteers against HTLV-I positive cell lines
was enhanced by lenalidomide. Sorted NK cells have also shown enhanced
cytotoxic activities on HTLV-1 positive cells. That effect was observed
regardless of Tax or cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein (cFLIP)
expression. Therefore, even Fas resistant HTLV-1 positive cell lines were
succumbed to death by enhanced cytotoxicity by lenalidomide, whereas
lenalidomide did not interact Fas inducing apoptotic pathways.
Conclusions: These results have shown that lenalidomide enhances
cytotoxic effects against HTLV-I positive cells, without direct
anti-proliferative effect on those cell lines. That effect was mediated
through CD56 positive and CD3 negative cells stimulated by lenalidomide.
Further study is now on-going to elucidate the mechanism of those actions
in an in vivo setting.

