Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase: An oncogene that
increases gap junctional, intercellular communication


Gap junctions are channels that connect the cytoplasm of adjacent cells.
Gap junctional, intercellular communication (GJIC) is blocked in cells
transformed by oncogenes such as the middle Tumor antigen of polyoma
virus (mT), an oncoprotein which associates with and is
tyrosine-phosphorylated by cSrc family members. Specific phosphotyrosines
provide docking sites for the phosphotyrosine binding domain of Shc
(mT-tyr250) and the SH2 domain of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(mT-tyr315), resulting in the activation of their downstream signaling
cascades, Ras/Raf/Erk and PI-3 kinase/Akt, respectively. To examine the
effect of these mT-initiated pathways upon gap junctional communication
and neoplasia, GJIC was assessed in mT-mutant-expressing, rat liver
epithelial T51B cells which normally have extensive GJIC, using a novel
technique of in situ electroporation we developed. The results show that
although low levels of wt-mT are sufficient to interrupt gap junctional
communication, GJIC suppression still requires an intact tyr250 site,
that is activation of the Ras pathway. In sharp contrast, activation of
the PI-3 kinase pathway is not required for GJIC suppression. It is
remarkable that T51B cells expressing a mutant deficient in binding of
Shc, hence activation of the Ras pathway, are still morphologically
transformed and do grow into tumors in syngeneic rats, albeit with an
altered morphology. These results indicate that GJIC suppression requires
Ras but not PI-3 kinase/Akt signalling, and is independent of full
neoplastic conversion in rat liver epithelial cells. Since PI3k
activation by mT increases GJIC, we examined whether PI3k might have a
positive role upon GJIC. The results showed that PI3k pharmacological
inhibition eliminates GJIC, concomitant with apoptosis induction. We next
expressed a form of PI3k rendered constitutively active through the
addition of a myristylation signal (myr-PI3k). The results demonstrated
that myr-PI3k causes an increase in GJIC. Therefore PI3k, although in an
activated form it can act as an oncogene, it plays a positive role upon
gap junctional, intercellular communication.

