Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor regression in a 3-D melanoma model by the dietary flavonoid
fisetin is associated with inhibition of Akt/mTOR signaling


Melanoma, one of the most aggressive cancers with a relatively high
propensity for metastasis, is a leading cause of death among young
adults. Surgery remains the cornerstone of curative treatment in earlier
stages. Once the disease has metastasized the prognosis is grim as
metastatic melanoma does not respond to most systemic treatments. The
Akt/mTOR signaling, constitutively activated in melanoma, serves as a
convergence point for growth stimuli that contribute to the initiation
and maintenance of melanoma growth. Accumulating data suggest that
natural phenolic compounds including flavonoids, tannins and others play
an important role in cancer prevention and treatment. We recently showed
that a flavonoid fisetin, found in fruits and vegetables such as
strawberries, cucumbers etc. inhibits melanoma cell proliferation in
monolayer cell cultures and xenograft mouse model (Syed et al., JID
2011). To establish the relevance of this work to human melanoma, we
determined the effect of fisetin on melanoma growth employing a three
dimensional (3-D) human skin equivalent melanoma model comprising of A375
melanoma cells, cultured with epidermal keratinocytes and dermal
fibroblasts. The melanoma constructs were treated with fisetin (80 M)
every alternate day for 16 days and cross-section of the constructs were
taken at four day interval. H&E-stained images of cross-sections of
untreated constructs at days 12 and 16 showed nests of tumor cells and
many invading disseminated cells. In sharp contrast, fisetin-treated
constructs exhibited significantly less melanocytic lesions. Notably,
fisetin caused no detectable damage to the keratinocytes, fibroblasts, or
skin morphology present in this model. Immunohistochemical analysis of
these constructs showed significant decrease in the phosphorylated form
of Akt and mTOR proteins in fisetin treated compared to control sections.
Western blot analysis of fisetin treated melanoma cell (A375 and 451Lu)
monolayer cell cultures further showed a decrease in the protein
expression of PI3K (p85 and p110), inhibition of phosphorylation of Akt,
mTOR, and the downstream targets p70S6K, eIF-4E and 4E-BP1. Fisetin
increased the binding of TSC (tumor suppressor complex)-1 to TSC-2
thereby stabilizing TSC-2 and downregulated the protein expression of
Rheb, a positive regulator of mTOR signaling. Xenograft studies in mice
implanted with 451Lu melanoma cells showed concomitant suppression of Akt
and mTOR phosphorylation and upregulation of TSC-1/2, associated with
reduced tumor growth in the fisetin treated group. Collectively, our
studies indicate that fisetin targets both Akt and mTOR signaling which
in turn decreases the viability of melanoma cells. Our data suggest a key
role of Akt and mTOR in melanoma progression and identify fisetin as a
modulator of these targets. Fisetin, therefore can be a useful agent for
slowing the progression of melanoma.

