Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adoptive cell transfer of transgenic T cells elicited a two-wave
antitumor cellular immune response consisted of engineered and endogenous
T lymphocytes with different sets of functions


Background: Adoptive cell transfer (ACT) of transgenic T lymphocytes
expressing tumor antigen specific T cell receptor (TCR) can mediate an
objective response in 30%-50% of the metastatic melanoma patients and
result in long term tumor regression in certain subjects. However, little
is known about the fate of engineered T cells once transferred and the
dynamics of host immunity, important for understanding the biological
mechanism of the therapy and differing long term efficacy between
patients. Methods: We designed a comprehensive study that monitored the
transgenic and endogenous immune response in 8 metastatic melanoma
patients over 8-10 time points in an ACT therapy of transgenic F5 MART-1
TCR T cells, using newly developed, highly multiplexed clinical immune
diagnostics methods (Ma, C. et al. Nature Medicine 17, 738-743 (2011)):
(1) The abundance of 35 melanoma antigen specific T cell subsets was
enumerated by peptide/MHC tetramer microarrays. (2) The functional
performance of 6 phenotypically defined T cell subsets was evaluated via
the quantitation of 19 functional proteins secreted from single cells,
utilizing a clinical single cell barcode microchip coupled with
florescent activated cell sorting. (3) A panel of 37 blood proteins
incorporating melanoma associated markers, cytokines and chemokines were
measured by an ELISA-like assay. Results: The change of blood marker
abundance reflected the general course of the therapy, from
pre-conditioning, immune system recovery, immune response, to tumor
remission. Furthermore, we found that the TCR engineered T cells
sustained a 2-3 week duration anti-tumor response in all patients and
secreted large quantities of granzyme B, MIP-1 and MIP-1. However, this
first wave infused immune response vanished rapidly in terms of the
number of polyfunctional cells and the amount of cytokines secreted.
After day 30 a second wave anti-tumor immunity emerged, incorporating a
rebound of the MART-1 TCR engineered population and a new endogenous
multi-clonal melanoma specific T cell response. Both groups of cells
secreted IFN- and TNF-; however, later they shifted to inhibitory and
non-specific functions, such as TGF-, IL-10 and IL-13. The patient with
the most endogenous melanoma specific T cell populations emerged and the
strongest functions in the second wave response showed the most effective
long term tumor control; weaker second wave response was associated with
weaker therapeutic efficacy. Conclusions: The melanoma-specific T cells
within the ACT went through a process of in vivo functional changes that
correlated with clinical antitumor activity. The appearance and the
persistence of the second wave immune response featured by engineered and
newly appeared endogenous anti-tumor cellular immunity provided
indications of long term therapeutic efficacy.

