Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proinflammatory secretory chemokine CXCL8 regulates intercellular
cross-talk in the breast cancer tumor microenvironment


The cellular composition of the tumor microenvironment (TME) and soluble
effector molecules mediating intercellular cross-talk are important
therapeutic and preventive targets for breast cancer. Chemokines released
within the TME work in a synergistic and reciprocal manner to induce
malignant progression of tumor cells. CXCL8, a proinflammatory CXC
chemokine shown to be released within the TME, can act as a
chemoattractant, angiogenic factor, and inflammatory factor via cellular
receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2. However, the specific role of CXCL8 in the
signaling cascades within the tumor microenvironment has yet to be fully
classified and warrants further investigation. Treatment of human breast
cancer cell lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and T47D with 50nM exogenous CXCL8
enhanced the expression of CXCR2. The acquisition of chemokine receptors
by tumor cells, in this case CXCR2, can mediate phenotypic changes that
enhance migratory and invasive potential. Treatment of these human breast
cancer cell lines with 50nM exogenous CXCL8 resulted in phenotypic
morphology changes characteristic of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a phenomenon commonly exhibited by metastatic tumor
cells. We validated this phenomenon with 50nM exogenous CXCL8 treatment,
which led to enhanced expression of both Slug (Snail2) and Twist in all
three human breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we observed that
treatment with 50nM exogenous CXCL8 promoted the migration and invasion
of these breast cancer cell lines in an in vitro modified Boyden chamber
assay. These results suggest that CXCL2 secreted from cells within the
TME act to induce characteristic changes in human breast cancer cells,
propagating the transition to more aggressive tumors. Tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) are an important component of the heterogeneous
population of cells that make up the TME. Breast cancer cells exposed to
conditioned media from human monocytic cell lines THP-1 and U937,
previously differentiated with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA), exhibited distinct morphology changes characteristic of EMT and
enhanced migratory and invasive ability, similar to exogenous CXCL8
treatment. Together, our results suggest that CXCL8 can have profound
implications in determining the fate of tumor cells by engaging in
extensive cross-talk within the TME, thus providing a potential target
for the treatment and prevention of breast cancer tumor progression and
metastasis.

