Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific binding of modified ZD 6474 (Vandetanib) monomer and its
dimer with VEGF receptor 2


Introduction: Tumor angiogenesis is an important component of cancer
biology driven in part by the thesis that tumor vessel growth is a
necessary requirement for tumor growth. Angiogenesis does not only depend
on endothelial cell invasion and proliferation: it also requires pericyte
coverage of vascular sprouts for vessel stabilization. These processes
are coordinated by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). A
significant portion of research on tumor angiogenesis has focused on VEGF
and its blockage with the expectation that dramatic results would be
demonstrated in cancer patients as previously documented in animal
models. Vandetanib, also known as ZD6474, is an antagonist of the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) and the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR or HER1 or ErbB1). It is an orally
bioavailable small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of multiple growth
factors, and is now available in the US for the treatment of metastatic
medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). Methods: ZD 6474 monomer was purchased
modified to add a fluorescent dye (6-FAM). Its coupled ZD 6474 dimer was
also prepared using a PEG linker, similarly with FAM fluorescent dye. The
two compounds were compared in a series of in vitro studies using human
endothelial cell (HUVECs) and several cancer cell lines. We first looked
at VEGFR binding affinity and specificity with cell uptake and blocking
study. Then, the effects on cellular viability and angiogenesis were
compared using with tubular formation of HUVECs in vitro, also matrigel
plug assay, and bio-distribution test on VEGF over expressed U87 human
glioma tumor model in vivo. Results: Imaging of ZD 6474 dimer showed much
better binding and uptake in HUVECs and other VEGFR expressing cells than
ZD 6474 monomer, including during systemic delivery to tumors. However,
the therapeutic and anti-angiogenic effects were mixed, with most tests
showing the dimer to have same or weaker effects than the monomer.
Conclusion: This study provides a rational for the evaluation of dimeric
ZD 6474 as a potential imaging agent. Paradoxically, it also demonstrates
that the enhanced receptor binding achieved by multivalency does not
always translate into enhanced therapeutic effectiveness. Keyword:
Vandetanib (ZD 6474), anti-angiogenesis, VEGFR

