Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A therapeutic sphingosine 1-phosphate antibody improves
intratumoral oxygenation and sensitizes to chemotherapy in prostate
cancer animal model


Hypoxia promotes neovascularization, metastasis, and resistance to
treatments. The activation of the transcription factor HIF-1 has been
identified as the master mechanism of adaptation to hypoxia. We recently
identified the sphingosine kinase 1/sphingosine 1-phosphate (SphK1/S1P)
pathway as a new modulator of HIF-1 activity under hypoxia in multiple
cancer cell models including prostate cancer (Ader et al, Cancer Res,
2008). S1P elicits proliferation, survival, or angiogenesis, and is
believed to exert most of its actions as a ligand for a family of
specific GPCRs to elicit paracrine or autocrine signaling. We have
suggested that inhibiting SphK1/S1P signaling, which is upregulated under
hypoxia, may normalize the microenvironment and increase sensitivity to
chemotherapy, in the broader concept of normalization of tumor vessels as
tumor oxygenation is known to enhance response to chemotherapy (Ader et
al., Cancer Res, 2009). Methods: Quantification of intratumoral hypoxia
and angiogenesis, and treatment efficacy (primary tumor, metatasis
dissemination) using an orthotopic (o.t) xenograft model of fluorescent
hormone refractory prostate cancer cells. Results: We first provide in
vitro evidence that inhibition of the S1P exogenous signaling, through
pharmacological inhibition of its receptors or by taking advantage of a
monoclonal antibody neutralizing S1P, blocks HIF-1 accumulation and its
activity in prostate cancer cells under to hypoxia. Second, using an o.t
model of prostate cancer, we show that an anti-S1P antibody inhibits
intratumoral hypoxia and modifies vessel architecture and improves tumor
perfusion within 5 days of treatment. Third, we show for the first time
that an anti-S1P strategy sensitizes to docetaxel, the gold standard
treatment for hormone-refractory prostate cancer. A 5-day anti-S1P
antibody pretreatment markedly sensitizes to docetaxel in an o.t.
PC-3/GFP model established in nude mice. The combination anti-S1P
antibody together with docetaxel was not only accompanied by a smaller
primary tumor volume compared to docetaxel treatment, but also
significantly reduced the occurrence and number of metastases.
Conclusion: These preclinical data establish the proof-of-concept that
blocking the exogenous action of S1P induces vascular normalization,
improves intratumoral oxygenation and sensitizes to chemotherapy in
prostate cancer animal model.

