Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards identification of cancer stem cells in esophageal
adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Cancer stem cells (CSC) are characterized by stem cell
properties such as self-renewal potential and multilineage
differentiation capacity. CSC's are thought to be the main drivers of
tumor formation and progression and the main cause of therapy resistance
and metastatic spread. In contrast to other cancer types such as
glioblastoma and colon cancer, attempts thus far have not resulted in the
identification of a proven CSC population in esophageal cancer. Therefore
in this study we aim to identify and characterize CSC's in esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). Methods and Results: To address this goal, we
attempted to culture CSC's from primary untreated EAC biopsy material
using serum-free medium formulations that, however, have not been
successful thus far. As an alternative model we employed two EAC cell
lines, OE19 and OE33, which we were able to maintain as spheroids in
serum-free Neural Basal Medium thought to enrich for stem cell growth.
Dissociation of spheres and limiting dilution assays showed enhanced
spheroid forming potential in OE19 but not in OE33 when compared to cells
obtained from normal 10% FCS monolayer cultured counterparts. Next, the
expression of several known CSC markers was determined by FACS analysis
to determine self-renewal potential of sorted fractions in subsequent
limited dilution assays. Side population, ALDH1, CD44/CD24 fractions were
tested of which only CD44+ /CD24+ cells showed enhanced capacity to form
spheroids. Tumor growths of these populations are currently being
evaluated on immune-compromised mice. Other stem cell markers such as
OCT4 and SOX2 were enhanced in OE19 spheroids compared to 10% FCS
cultured cells. However, in OE33 spheroids expression of these markers
were unchanged or downregulated. Since EAC derives from dysplastic
epithelia with intestinal characteristics in Barrett's esophagus, we
examined the status of the Wnt pathway known to be involved in
maintenance of intestinal/ colon (cancer) stem cells. In the EAC cells
-catenin expression was present that could be enhanced by LiCl. Reporter
assays to determine Wnt- activity are in progress. Finally, the
sensitivity of spheroid versus monolayer cultured OE33 cells to 5-FU,
cisplatin and paclitaxel was evaluated. Sensitivity did not differ much,
although monolayer cultured OE33 cells were more resistant for 5-FU.
Conclusion: Given the differences in the two spheroid models regarding
spheroid forming potential, CSC-marker expression and chemosensitivity,
caution is warranted when using esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line
derived spheroids as model for CSC's. However, CD44 and CD24 might have a
potential as CSC-markers in EAC, which is currently further corroborated.

