Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immuno-phenotyping reveals cell types present in circulation of
breast cancer patients and elucidates their funstional potential


Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) have an identified role in
suppressing anti-tumor immunity through Jak/Stat pathway activation and
the generation of reactive oxygen species and arginase -1, thus promoting
cancer progression. There is robust data on the identification of
functionally suppressive MDSCs in preclinical models. However, such
knowledge is underdeveloped in human cancers. Specifically, the clear
identification of the true MDSC and their role in tumor immunoevasion,
cancer progression and metastasis is undefined. Therefore, comprehensive
identification of MDSCs and their ability to augment tumor-induced immune
suppression in newly diagnosed early stage breast cancer is warranted to
define their potential as a novel immunotherapeutic target. To delineate
the role of MDSCs in newly diagnosed, untreated breast cancer and their
tumor immunosuppressive effects in comparison to normal hosts, we
conducted a prospective trial of stage I-IV breast cancer patients
enrolled prior to initiation of systemic therapy and their age-matched
normal donors. The following immune cell subsets were analyzed:
regulatory T cells (CD3+/CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3+), MDSCs
(Linlo/HLA-DR-/CD33+/CD11b+), and DCs
(Lin-/CD14-CD4+/CD303+/CD1c+/CD141+). Functional assays of T cell
activation and MDSCs mediated-T cell suppression were performed. We
identified no significant differences in the percentage of regulatory T
cells or mDC2 between breast cancer subjects and normal controls. In
contrast, the percent of MDSC, pDCs and conventional DCs detected were
suprisingly significantly higher in the healthy donor population as
compared to breast cancer subjects. Breast cancer T cells showed reduced
capability to respond to external stimulus as measured by up-regulation
of CD25 and CD69 as well as T cell proliferation, although not
statistically significant relative to normal controls. Breast cancer MDSC
were significantly more suppressive of T cell activation relative to
normal controls. The granulocytic but not monocyte subset of MDSCs
(distinguished by CD15 expression) were identified as the main responders
to PMA stimulation. Our results demonstrate immune suppression in newly
diagnosed invasive breast cancer is characterized by increased immune
suppressive function of MDSCs in the absence of increased cellular
levels. When we looked at our cases with the highest MDSC levels, no
distinct trend towards advanced stage or poorer prognosis biologic
subtype was identified. These data support the identification of MDSCs in
breast cancer as a novel therapeutic target to improve treatment outcomes.

