Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the functional significance of FGFR2 SNP status in
breast cancer


Familial Breast cancer is now seen as a polygenic disease. Although
several major susceptibility genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, have been
identified in several cases, breast cancer susceptibility seems to arise
from a large number of genetic loci, each conferring a minor influence on
overall risk. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS), have
identified several SNPs that associate with increased risk of breast
cancer. Some of the most significant are located in the second intron of
the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, indicating that the
association with breast cancer is mediated through regulation of FGFR2.
Functional SNPs within this region map to binding sites for the
transcription factors Oct-1, Runx2 and C/EBP. Preliminary studies have
shown that the Runx2 site is functional only in the minor, disease
associated allele, resulting in increased expression of FGFR2 in cancer
from patients homozygous for that allele. Moreover, the increased risk
conferred by the minor FGFR2 allele is associated most strongly with ER+
breast tumours, suggesting a potential interaction between the two
pathways. Our approach is to study the functional role of this new risk
locus on the biology of cancer at the regulatory level. To study
allele-specific gene expression (ASGE), we are using two surrogate SNP
markers in the coding region of FGFR2, rs755793 and rs1047100. Taqman
analysis of cDNA and genomic DNA from a panel of breast cancer samples
allow us to evaluate the degree of SNP-dependent differential expression
in a high throughput manner. Thus our study ultimately will allow us to
test the hypothesis that the disease-associated allele of rs2981578
increases FGFR2 expression. Additionally, a genome editing approach using
Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFN) allows us to target the putative regulatory
SNP in breast cancer cell lines. A change, as small as a single
nucleotide, can be made on MFC7 cell line to create new in vitro models
that only differ in SNP status. These cell based models will be crucial
in the study of the influence of FGFR2 SNPs in tumour initiation and
progression. Thus our study will allow for the first time, investigation
of the true physiological function of SNP status on breast cancer cell
line behaviour.

