Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of optical imaging in a clinically relevant mouse
intrafemoral model of leukaemia


One of the challenges facing preclinical development in non solid
tumours, such as leukaemia, is the development and validation of
clinically relevant models, both to better understand the biology of
disease, and to provide reliable efficacy testing for novel agents. In
conventional animal models of leukaemia, cells are implanted using
intravenous injection, leading to inconsistent engraftment as cells are
not introduced directly to their biological niche. Disease burden is
measured using either terminal endpoints, such as hind limb paralysis, or
by fluorescence activated cell sorting on bone marrow or peripheral blood
samples. Neither of these strategies make it practical to identify
animals in the early stages of leukemic disease development, limiting
investigators ability to examine novel therapies in these models. The use
of preclinical imaging strategies, such as in vivo optical imaging,
allows disease progression to be followed at orthotopic sites and, in the
case of non solid tumours, to monitor systemic disease burden
longitudinally in an individual animal over time. Here we describe the
use of an intrafemoral (i.f.) transplantation method, in which cells are
implanted directly into the biological niche of interest, correlating
with the environment in which disease develops in patients.
Luciferase-labelled human leukaemia cell lines were injected into the
bone marrow cavity of the femur of severely immunocompromised NOG
(NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rynull) mice via the knee joint. Animals were followed
over a period of several weeks from initial transplantation, and disease
burden monitored and quantified using bioluminescent detection. This
model consistently gives rise to disease disseminating gradually from the
site of initial transplantation into systemic leukaemia. The ability to
quickly identify engraftment and the predictable development of disease
allows for therapeutic intervention at an early stage and extends the
window available for therapy. The model provides a clinically relevant
environment for the preclinical assessment of novel therapeutics for non
solid tumours.

