Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating thyroxine (T4), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and
hypothyroid status and the risk of prostate cancer


Background: Thyroid hormones are hypothesized to be associated with risk
of cancer because of their important role in cell differentiation,
growth, and metabolism. They have also been shown to increase the
proliferation of prostate cancer cells in vitro. Only one previous
prospective epidemiologic study has examined circulating thyroid hormones
and risk of prostate cancer, and this study provided support for the
hypothesized relationship. Thus, we undertook a prospective analysis of
thyroid hormones and prostate cancer risk in the Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Methods: Within the ATBC
Study, a randomized controlled trial conducted to determine the effects
of -tocopherol and -carotene supplements on cancer incidence in male
smokers, 402 prostate cancer cases were randomly sampled. Controls were
matched 2:1 to cases based on age at randomization and date of blood
collection. Conditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of prostate cancer by
quintiles of total and free thyroxine (T4), thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), and thyroid-binding globulin (TBG), as well as by categories of
thyroid status (i.e., hypothyroid, hyperthyroid, and euthyroid).
Multivariable models were adjusted for the following factors: BMI, serum
retinol, total cholesterol, -tocopherol, and -carotene, cigarettes per
day, years smoked, family history of prostate cancer, physical activity,
education, marital status, urban residence, intake of energy, dietary
vitamin D, fruit, vegetables, red meat, alcohol, and supplemental
calcium. Results: After multivariable adjustment, we observed that men
with TSH 2.2 IU/mL had a statistically significantly decreased risk of
prostate cancer compared to men with TSH Background: Thyroid hormones are
hypothesized to be associated with risk of cancer because of their
important role in cell differentiation, growth, and metabolism. They have
also been shown to increase the proliferation of prostate cancer cells in
vitro. Only one previous prospective epidemiologic study has examined
circulating thyroid hormones and risk of prostate cancer, and this study
provided support for the hypothesized relationship. Thus, we undertook a
prospective analysis of thyroid hormones and prostate cancer risk in the
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Methods:
Within the ATBC Study, a randomized controlled trial conducted to
determine the effects of -tocopherol and -carotene supplements on cancer
incidence in male smokers, 402 prostate cancer cases were randomly
sampled. Controls were matched 2:1 to cases based on age at randomization
and date of blood collection. Conditional logistic regression was used to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of prostate
cancer by quintiles of total and free thyroxine (T4), thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), and thyroid-binding globulin (TBG), as well as by
categories of thyroid status (i.e., hypothyroid, hyperthyroid, and
euthyroid). Multivariable models were adjusted for the following factors:
BMI, serum retinol, total cholesterol, -tocopherol, and -carotene,
cigarettes per day, years smoked, family history of prostate cancer,
physical activity, education, marital status, urban residence, intake of
energy, dietary vitamin D, fruit, vegetables, red meat, alcohol, and
supplemental calcium. Results: After multivariable adjustment, we
observed that men with TSH 2.2 IU/mL had a statistically significantly
decreased risk of prostate cancer compared to men with TSH < 2.2 IU/mL
(OR=0.70, 95% CI: 0.51 - 0.97, p = 0.03). This finding was similar in
relation to aggressive disease. When the T4 and TSH measurements were
combined to define men as clinically or sub-clinically hypothyroid or
hyperthyroid, we observed that hypothyroid men had a statistically
significant lower risk of overall prostate cancer compared to men who had
normal thyroid function (OR=0.48, 95% CI=0.28 - 0.81; p = 0.006). We
observed no association between hyperthyroid status and risk of prostate
cancer, although the number of cases in this category was small (n=9).
There were too few aggressive cases who were hypothyroid or hyperthyroid
to examine the association between thyroid status and disease
aggressiveness. Conclusions: In this prospective study of smokers, men
with elevated TSH and those classified as being in a hypothyroid state
were at decreased risk of prostate cancer. Future studies should examine
the association in other populations, particularly non-smokers and other
racial/ethic groups, and should be large enough to evaluate the
association between thyroid status and aggressive disease.

