Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New AXIN2 germline variant in a Spanish family with an attenuated
form of FAP without oligondontia or ectodermal dysplasia signs


Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is a colorectal cancer syndrome
caused mainly by mutations in the APC gene (50-80% of the cases), and
some mutations in MUTYH, usually in recessive and milder cases.
Additionally, the genetic cause of 20% of classic forms and 50% of
attenuated forms of the disease remain unclear. AXIN2 is a partner of the
APC protein in the b-catenin destruction complex. Mutations in AXIN2 have
been described in patients with oligodontia and other ectodermal
dysplasia features in association with colorectal neoplasia or
adenomatous polyps. We studied the AXIN2 gene in a series of APC/MUTYH
mutation negative families and identified a novel variant,
c.1387C>T;p.R463P, as the possible genetic cause of an attenuated FAP
phenotype (AFAP). The autosomal dominant AFAP phenotype was not
associated with any extracholonic manifestations or ectodermal dysplasia
features. However, hyperplastic polyps were observed in some
AXIN2-variant carriers. Thus, from a clinical point of view this family
displayed some features that differ from previously described families
with AXIN2 mutations. The variant c.1387C>T;p.R463P is located in the
b-catenin binding domain, an area highly conserved throughout evolution.
The variant segregates with the affected family members and was not
present in 800 healthy Spanish controls. We were able to confirm loss of
heterozygosity in 3 out of 5 polyps from the proband and his affected
sister. AXIN2 and b-catenin expression patterns were tested by
inmunofluorescence staining: both proteins are overexpressed in
adenomatous polyps compared with normal colorectal ephitelium from the
proband. Moreover, no colocalization of the two proteins could be
observed by confocal microscopy. These results support a possible
pathogenic role for this AXIN2 variant in our family and highlight the
implication of AXIN2 in some cases of FAP syndrome. We argue
comprehensives and functional studies will be necessary to clarify the
role of AXIN2 in familial colorectal cancer predisposition.

