Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth rates of tumors with numerous histologies remain constant
while patients are on therapy


Tumor Growth Rates Remain Constant while Patients are on Therapy:
Evidence that Continued Treatment does not Select for More Rapidly
Growing Tumors Background: Increasingly, clinical investigators continue
therapies with the hopes of improving survival. Where tumor growth is
occurring, such a strategy will only succeed if the rate of tumor growth
remains slow and unchanged while therapy continues. We tested this
assumption using a large database of tumor measurements in patients on
clinical trials. Results: We analyzed 2250 tumor growth curves from
patients with advanced cancer and diagnoses of multiple myeloma, breast,
renal, castration refractory prostate cancer (CRPC) or medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC). Patients received various therapies: sunitinib,
vandetanib, ixabepilone, capecitabine, bevacizumab, thalidomide, taxotere
and interferon alpha. Measurements comprised serum markers (M-spike, PSA,
CEA, calcitonin) and radiographic imaging. A simple computer-based model
allowed extraction of statistically valid results for growth and decay
rates (in over 85% of cases) and the fraction of surviving tumor in cases
where marked responses occurred (up to 30% of MTC and CRPC). Analysis of
the data obtained while patients were on therapy (including those still
alive when the study closed and also those who died but survived long
after therapy was discontinued) showed little evidence of an increase
(0.3%) or a decrease (0.7%, most being MTC) in growth rate while they
were treated, consistent with expansion of a pre-existing clone that is
relatively resistant. Also in those MTC and CRPC cases where there was no
detectable growth for a period of time, restoration of growth was
consistent with expansion of a pre-existing, inherently-resistant clone,
growing at a constant rate, rather than with emergence of a clone that
has acquired resistance. In cases where therapy continued well beyond a
year (median, 25%-75%: 498, 420-727 days) until just before death
(interval duration median, 25% to 75%: 95, 63-129 days), there was
neither evidence of acceleration nor the slowing that would be predicted
by a Gompertz model. Many patients in whom therapy reduced the tumor
growth rate to well below that of placebo, died sooner than expected.
Modeling their survival data and their tumor growth rates suggested a
return to the pre-therapy rate when treatment was discontinued.
Conclusion: Data obtained on tumor growth rates for 2250 patients
receiving therapy in clinical trials shows little evidence that tumor
growth rates change while patients receive treatment. Analysis of the
smaller sample of cases where death occurred within months after therapy
ceased suggests that while growth rates remain constant while patients
continue therapy, tumor growth returns to the pre-treatment rate when
therapy is discontinued. These observations support a strategy of
continuing therapy beyond the conventional criteria for discontinuation.

