Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Notch pathway as a new target in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors


Small molecule kinase inhibitors have dramatically improved the survival
of patients with Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST), yet most
patients develop resistance, urging us to understand better the molecular
mechanisms underlying this disease and identify new therapeutic
strategies. Notch signaling is a conserved developmental pathway known to
play a critical role in the development of several cancers, functioning
as a tumor promoter or a tumor suppressor. Given that the normal
progenitor cell for GIST, the Interstitial Cell of Cajal, has
characteristics similar to those of cells of neuroendocrine origin, we
hypothesized that Notch pathway impacts the biology of GIST cells. In a
previous study, we demonstrated that constitutively active intracellular
domain of Notch1 (ICN-1) induced growth arrest in GIST cell lines. Here
we report that ICN-1 downregulated KIT protein by a flow cytometric
analysis in the three cell lines analyzed (GIST-T1, GIST882, GIST48IM).
In parallel, inhibitions of Hes1, a major target gene of ICN-1, with a
dominant negative construct, upregulated KIT protein expression in vitro
(60% increase on western blot). This anti-tumor effect of Notch1 in GIST
leads to a therapeutic opportunity as we showed in the present study that
treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor, SAHA, caused a
dose-dependent upregulation of Notch1 (6 fold increase of the mRNA with
SAHA 2 m/L on GIST-T1, PSmall molecule kinase inhibitors have
dramatically improved the survival of patients with Gastrointestinal
Stromal Tumors (GIST), yet most patients develop resistance, urging us to
understand better the molecular mechanisms underlying this disease and
identify new therapeutic strategies. Notch signaling is a conserved
developmental pathway known to play a critical role in the development of
several cancers, functioning as a tumor promoter or a tumor suppressor.
Given that the normal progenitor cell for GIST, the Interstitial Cell of
Cajal, has characteristics similar to those of cells of neuroendocrine
origin, we hypothesized that Notch pathway impacts the biology of GIST
cells. In a previous study, we demonstrated that constitutively active
intracellular domain of Notch1 (ICN-1) induced growth arrest in GIST cell
lines. Here we report that ICN-1 downregulated KIT protein by a flow
cytometric analysis in the three cell lines analyzed (GIST-T1, GIST882,
GIST48IM). In parallel, inhibitions of Hes1, a major target gene of
ICN-1, with a dominant negative construct, upregulated KIT protein
expression in vitro (60% increase on western blot). This anti-tumor
effect of Notch1 in GIST leads to a therapeutic opportunity as we showed
in the present study that treatment with the histone deacetylase
inhibitor, SAHA, caused a dose-dependent upregulation of Notch1 (6 fold
increase of the mRNA with SAHA 2 m/L on GIST-T1, P<0.05), downregulation
of KIT and pKIT (9 fold decrease of pKIT on western blot with SAHA 2 m/L
on GIST-T1), increase in apoptosis (25-fold increase in the sub-G1
population with SAHA 2 mol/L on GIST-T1, P80 months for the high group;
P=0.005). These results identify a novel anti-tumor effect of Notch1 via
a crosstalk between the Notch1 and KIT pathways in GIST cells. This
finding may lead to new therapeutic strategies for GIST patients, in
particular after failure of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

