Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NVP-BYL719, a selective inhibitor of the class Ia PI3K isoform
alpha impairs angiogenesis and microvascular permeability.


Tumor blood vessels are distinctly abnormal in structure and function.
When compared to normal vessels, they are enlarged, tortuous, leaky,
poorly covered by pericytes and with a defective basement membrane. VEGF
is a prominent cytokine responsible for the hyperpermeable state of tumor
microvasculature to plasma macromolecules. The phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling pathway functions downstream of VEGF and
can activate the production of the free radical gas nitric oxide (NO)
through the enzyme endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), a key player for the
in vivo biological activity of VEGF. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of NVP-BYL719, a novel, synthetic low molecular
mass compound, which potently and selectively inhibits class I PI3K
isoform alpha activity, on vascular leakage in tumors and its impact on
tumor progression in an orthotopic breast cancer model (BN472) in
syngeneic rats. Effects on the vasculature were investigated in normal
and tumor tissues via tumor interstitial fluid pressure (IFP)
measurements in conscious animals via radio-telemetry and a modified
Miles assay. The antiangiogenic effect of NVP-BYL719 and its impact on
tumor progression was also assessed in an U87MG glioblastoma subcutaneous
xenograft tumor model. Pathway inhibition was confirmed using tumor
histology and Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) approaches. NVP-BYL719
inhibits VEGF driven tissue formation as well as neo-vascularization of
the newly formed tissue. Moreover, the compound strongly inhibited
microvessel permeability in normal tissue as determined in the modified
miles assay. Similarly, tumor interstitial fluid pressure (IFP), a
phenomenon that is directly dependent on tumor vessel permeability, was
significantly reduced (up to 43%) by NVP-BYL719 in a dose-dependent
manner, upon oral administration in BN472 mammary carcinoma grown
orthotopically in syngeneic rats. Concomitantly, tumor growth was
significantly inhibited in BN472 mammary carcinoma and U87MG xenografts.
The compound was well tolerated with no significant body weight loss at
any tested dose. In conclusion, our data suggest that NVP-BYL719, a Class
I PI3K selective inhibitor of p110 alpha, interferes with the tumor
vasculature system. Thus, the anti-angiogenic proprieties of NVP-BYL719
might participate to the antitumor activity (or efficacy) of the compound.

