Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines as water soluble microtubule
targeting agents


Microtubules play critical roles in cell functions, and microtubule
targeting agents have been successfully developed as anti-cancer drugs.
Based on the binding sites, microtubule targeting agents are divided into
three broad classes: vinca alkaloid, taxane and colchicine site binders.
Vinca alkaloids and taxanes, represented by vinorelbine and paclitaxel,
respectively, have been widely used in cancer chemotherapy. However, drug
resistance associated with over-expression of Pgp or III-tubulin has
greatly reduced the therapeutic value of these drugs (e.g., paclitaxel is
over 800-fold less active against Pgp over-expressing cancer cells).
Another persistent issue with vinca alkaloids and taxanes is their poor
water solubility. Administration of paclitaxel needs to be performed by
trained personnel with special reagents and equipment. Colchicine site
binders, such as colchicine or combretastatin A-4 (CA4), have not
received clinical approval for wide use in the treatment of cancer. Novel
water soluble colchicine site binding agents are potentially valuable
alternatives for use alone or in combination with existing microtubule
targeting drugs, especially in overcoming drug resistance. We previously
reported a series of substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine compounds as
water soluble, colchicine site binding agents. One of the highly active
compounds has shown sub-micromolar to nanomolar inhibitory activities
against the NCI-60 panel cell lines. The same compound exhibits enhanced
or equal inhibition against Pgp and III-tubulin over-expressing cell
lines. In a continuing effort to find new agents with these properties,
2,4-disubstituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine analogs AG114 - AG119 and
AG477A were designed and synthesized. Among the analogs tested, AG477A
showed an IC50 of 10 0.7 M in inhibiting tubulin assembly. In drug
resistance assays, AG477A showed sub-micromolar inhibitory activity
(IC50) against the Pgp over-expressing cell line NCI/ADR-RES (0.89 0.3
M), as compared with the parental OVCAR-8 cell line (1.2 M). In addition,
AG477A is readily converted to a highly water soluble hydrochloride salt,
which marks a significant advantage over existing microtubule targeting
agents in clinical use. Structure activity studies show a requirement for
the 4-position N-methyl-4-methoxyaniline moiety for antitubulin effects.

