Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response of reactive oxygen species to eicosapentaenoic and
calorie restriction in relation to mammary tumor prevention


Exposure of lipid biomembranes to reactive oxygen species (ROS) results
in the generation of a wide variety of lipid peroxidation products. Some
of these products, including 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE) can form protein
adducts which may impact pathways associated with tumorigenesis. We have
reported that calorie restriction protects against spontaneous mammary
tumor development in mice and have recently shown that this is
accompanied by a decrease in serum levels of lipid peroxidation products.
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) is known to inhibit mammary tumorigenesis;
however, this type of highly unsaturated omega-3 fatty acid has also been
shown to increase in vivo levels of lipid peroxidation products. In the
present study, the interaction of calorie restriction and dietary EPA was
investigated with respect to mammary tumor formation. Lipid peroxidation
products of ROS were also measured. From 10 weeks of age MMTV-Her2/neu
mice were fed a modified AIN-93M diet (10.2% kcal from fat) which had
either 100% soybean oil (SO) as the fat source or a blend of EPA (72%)
and SO (18%). Mice were further divided into groups which were ad
libitum-fed, (AL); chronic calorie restricted (CCR, received 75% of AL)
or intermittently calorie restricted (ICR, received 50% of AL for 3 weeks
followed by 3 weeks at 100% of AL) until 60 weeks of age or until mammary
tumor size required euthanasia. Mice were weighed and examined for
mammary tumors weekly. Serum thiobarbituric acid reactive substances
(TBARS) and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE)-protein adducts in mammary tissues
were measured to assess the extent of lipid peroxidation. In both diet
groups, mammary tumor incidence was highest in the AL group (SO 87%, EPA
63%). These groups also had the highest levels of serum TBARS and the
AL-SO group had the highest level of mammary tissue 4HNE-protein adducts.
The calorie restricted mice had lower levels of mammary tumor incidence
(CCR-SO 47%, CCR-EPA 40%, ICR-SO 59%) with the lowest level in the
ICR-EPA group (15%). The ICR-SO group had serum TBARS and mammary tissue
4HNE-protein adduct levels that were significantly lower than the AL-SO
group (pExposure of lipid biomembranes to reactive oxygen species (ROS)
results in the generation of a wide variety of lipid peroxidation
products. Some of these products, including 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE)
can form protein adducts which may impact pathways associated with
tumorigenesis. We have reported that calorie restriction protects against
spontaneous mammary tumor development in mice and have recently shown
that this is accompanied by a decrease in serum levels of lipid
peroxidation products. Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) is known to inhibit
mammary tumorigenesis; however, this type of highly unsaturated omega-3
fatty acid has also been shown to increase in vivo levels of lipid
peroxidation products. In the present study, the interaction of calorie
restriction and dietary EPA was investigated with respect to mammary
tumor formation. Lipid peroxidation products of ROS were also measured.
From 10 weeks of age MMTV-Her2/neu mice were fed a modified AIN-93M diet
(10.2% kcal from fat) which had either 100% soybean oil (SO) as the fat
source or a blend of EPA (72%) and SO (18%). Mice were further divided
into groups which were ad libitum-fed, (AL); chronic calorie restricted
(CCR, received 75% of AL) or intermittently calorie restricted (ICR,
received 50% of AL for 3 weeks followed by 3 weeks at 100% of AL) until
60 weeks of age or until mammary tumor size required euthanasia. Mice
were weighed and examined for mammary tumors weekly. Serum thiobarbituric
acid reactive substances (TBARS) and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE)-protein
adducts in mammary tissues were measured to assess the extent of lipid
peroxidation. In both diet groups, mammary tumor incidence was highest in
the AL group (SO 87%, EPA 63%). These groups also had the highest levels
of serum TBARS and the AL-SO group had the highest level of mammary
tissue 4HNE-protein adducts. The calorie restricted mice had lower levels
of mammary tumor incidence (CCR-SO 47%, CCR-EPA 40%, ICR-SO 59%) with the
lowest level in the ICR-EPA group (15%). The ICR-SO group had serum TBARS
and mammary tissue 4HNE-protein adduct levels that were significantly
lower than the AL-SO group (p<0.05 for both). In the EPA groups, there
was no difference between the AL, CCR, and ICR groups in either serum
TBARS or mammary tissue 4HNE-protein adducts. These results suggest that
higher levels of lipid peroxidation products are associated with a higher
incidence of mammary tumors. However, although the dietary combination of
ICR and EPA resulted in the greatest amount of mammary tumor inhibition,
this combination was not associated with the lowest level of lipid
peroxidation products. The relationship between EPA, calorie restriction,
and reactive oxygen species appears to be quite complex.

