Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CGH+SNP microarrays for copy-neutral aberration detection in
cancer research


Advances in cancer research have greatly benefited from high resolution
copy number (CN) measurements provided by oligo array Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH). The addition of single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) measurements to CGH microarrays enables the detection of
copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (cnLOH) events and allelic imbalances
arising from genomic instability during cancer development and
progression. Nonetheless, cancer studies face challenges associated with
genomes aneuploidy, polyclonality and mosaicism due to the admixtures of
tumor and normal cells. In the quest to decipher tumor complexity, the
power and sensitivity of Agilent's CGH+SNP platform has been expanded
with new computational methods capable of determining clonal fraction,
total CN and allele-specific CN in aneuploid samples. Genomic DNA from
hematology-oncology samples, cell lines and a genotyped control sample
was digested with AluI and RsaI restriction endonucleases to allow for
SNP profiling at the enzymes restriction sites. Experimental and
reference samples were differentially labeled and hybridized to the
Agilent Cancer CGH+SNP microarray, containing 20K cancer associated CGH
probes, 100K backbone probes and 60K SNP probes. The data were analyzed
using algorithms with extended capability to determine clonal fraction,
total and allele-specific CN of the aberrant clone. As expected,
significant diversity was found in different chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) tumors. In one CLL sample a small homozygous deletion and cnLOH
were identified on chromosome 13. In another CLL case a trisomy of the
entire chromosome 12 was observed, together with a small hemizygous
deletion and cnLOH on chromosome 18. An Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
(ALL) tumor sample was found to harbor an amplification on chromosome 6,
as well as two small amplifications on chromosome X. To assess the
ability of detecting low level mosaicism, we conducted a mixed sample
experiment whereby a sample with a known aberration was mixed at known
ratios with a matched sample not containing the aberration. The computed
clonal fraction, total and allele-specific CN matched the expected
values. We have shown that the new algorithms developed for cancer sample
analysis determined the genotypes, total copy numbers and clonal
fractions in aneuploid samples highly mixed with normal cell populations.

