Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D3 potentiates the antitumor effects of arsenic trioxide
in human leukemia (HL-60) cells


Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is an innovative form of therapy that has recently
been found to benefit acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients. Our
laboratory has demonstrated that ATO stimulates oxidative stress
therefore causing ATO-induced cytotoxicity in human leukemia (HL-60)
cells. Pro-oxidants have been known to play a role in free
radical-mediated oxidative stress. Vitamin D3, an active metabolite of
vitamin D, inhibits the growth of a number of cancer types such as
prostate, breast, colorectal, leukemia, and skin cancers. The specific
aim of this research was to determine whether co-exposure to vitamin D3
increases the efficacy of ATO through cytotoxicity, oxidative stress and
apoptosis associated with increased ATO toxicity in human leukemia
(HL-60) cells. In our current investigation, we performed the MTT assay
and trypan blue exclusion test to measure cell viability. We also
performed the lipid peroxidation assay to determine the levels of
malondialdehyde (MDA) production in HL-60 cells co-exposed to ATO and
vitamin D3 in combination. The results of trypan blue exclusion and MTT
assay indicated that vitamin D3 exposure potentiates the toxic activity
of ATO in HL-60 cells in a dose dependent manner. Co-administration of
vitamin D3 and ATO resulted in a significant (PArsenic trioxide (ATO) is
an innovative form of therapy that has recently been found to benefit
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients. Our laboratory has
demonstrated that ATO stimulates oxidative stress therefore causing
ATO-induced cytotoxicity in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. Pro-oxidants
have been known to play a role in free radical-mediated oxidative stress.
Vitamin D3, an active metabolite of vitamin D, inhibits the growth of a
number of cancer types such as prostate, breast, colorectal, leukemia,
and skin cancers. The specific aim of this research was to determine
whether co-exposure to vitamin D3 increases the efficacy of ATO through
cytotoxicity, oxidative stress and apoptosis associated with increased
ATO toxicity in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. In our current
investigation, we performed the MTT assay and trypan blue exclusion test
to measure cell viability. We also performed the lipid peroxidation assay
to determine the levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) production in HL-60
cells co-exposed to ATO and vitamin D3 in combination. The results of
trypan blue exclusion and MTT assay indicated that vitamin D3 exposure
potentiates the toxic activity of ATO in HL-60 cells in a dose dependent
manner. Co-administration of vitamin D3 and ATO resulted in a significant
(P<0.05) increase in MDA level compared to ATO alone. A statistically
significant and dose-dependent increase (p Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is an
innovative form of therapy that has recently been found to benefit acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients. Our laboratory has demonstrated
that ATO stimulates oxidative stress therefore causing ATO-induced
cytotoxicity in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. Pro-oxidants have been
known to play a role in free radical-mediated oxidative stress. Vitamin
D3, an active metabolite of vitamin D, inhibits the growth of a number of
cancer types such as prostate, breast, colorectal, leukemia, and skin
cancers. The specific aim of this research was to determine whether
co-exposure to vitamin D3 increases the efficacy of ATO through
cytotoxicity, oxidative stress and apoptosis associated with increased
ATO toxicity in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. In our current
investigation, we performed the MTT assay and trypan blue exclusion test
to measure cell viability. We also performed the lipid peroxidation assay
to determine the levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) production in HL-60
cells co-exposed to ATO and vitamin D3 in combination. The results of
trypan blue exclusion and MTT assay indicated that vitamin D3 exposure
potentiates the toxic activity of ATO in HL-60 cells in a dose dependent
manner. Co-administration of vitamin D3 and ATO resulted in a significant
(P<0.05) increase in MDA level compared to ATO alone. A statistically
significant and dose-dependent increase (p <0.05) was recorded in annexin
V positive cells (apoptotic cells) with increasing doses of vitamin D3 in
ATO-treated cells. This finding was confirmed by the result of DNA
laddering assay showing clear evidence of DNA fragmentation in ATO and
vitamin D3 treated HL-60 cells. Overall, the present study indicates that
vitamin D3 potentiates the antitumor effects of ATO at least part, via
cytotoxicity, oxidative stress, nucleosomal fragmentation and
phosphatidylserine externalization.

