Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell surface F1-ATPase, a new potential target in colorectal cancer


High concentrations of gastrin precursors have been observed in colon
tumors and in blood of patients with colorectal cancer while they are
absent in healthy subjects. These precursors are now established as
growth factors for colonic epithelial cells and play an important role in
colon carcinogenesis. The glycine-extended form of gastrin (G-gly) is the
first gastrin precursor for which growth factor properties have been
demonstrated. More recently, an in vitro study has also shown that G-gly
induces the tubule formation by human vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC)
in a similar manner to what is observed with VEGF. Several publications
are in favor of the existence of high affinity binding sites for G-gly at
the cell surface of gastrointestinal cells. However, the cell surface
protein mediating G-gly effects remains unidentified to-date. In the
present study, using SPR technology coupled to mass spectrometry, we
identify in the solubilized plasma membranes from human colorectal cancer
cells, the F1-ATPase as a binding protein for G-gly. This mitochondrial
protein was recently found located at the cell surface of lung and
prostate tumor cells and vascular endothelial cells, where it plays a
role in cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Using purified F1-ATPase we
confirmed by SPR a direct interaction between G-gly and this
multi-subunits transmembrane protein (Kd in the nanomolar range). In
addition by molecular modeling, we identified the motif in the G-gly
sequence (EE/DxY) which directly interacts with F1-ATPase as well as the
amino-acid residues in the alpha-and beta-subunits of the F1-ATPase which
bind this motif. We confirmed this molecular model by mutation of the
EE/DxY motif that resulted in a strong decrease of G-gly binding to the
F1-ATPase as well as a loss of the proliferative activity of the peptide.
Using immunofluorescent approaches and confocal microscopy, we
demonstrate for the first time the presence of the F1-ATPase at the cell
surface of normal or cancerous colonic epithelial cells in vitro and in
vivo. We also found that cell surface F1-ATPase activity is modulated by
G-gly on endothelial and colorectal cancer cells. Furthermore, the
proliferative effects of G-gly on both cell types, was blocked by a
specific inhibitor of the F1-ATPase (IF1) or antibodies targeting the
beta- subunit of the enzyme. These results suggest an important
contribution of cell surface ATPase in the pro-tumoral action of the
gastrin precursor, G-gly. Interestingly, an anti-tumor strategy using
monoclonal antibodies against the beta-subunit of ATPase has been
previously proposed for hepatocarcinoma since these antibodies have been
shown to reduce growth of these tumors. In view of our results, targeting
cell surface ATPase might also be a new therapeutic approach for colon
cancer.

