Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of pre-leukemic hematopoietic stem cells precedes
human acute myeloid leukemia


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive malignancy of hematopoietic
progenitors with poor clinical outcomes. Despite the power of
next-generation DNA sequencing to describe AML genomes and to identify
recurrent mutations, our fundamental understanding of the genomics of
leukemogenesis is incomplete. Founder mutations in the majority of AML
cases are unknown because pre-leukemic cells are clinically silent and
are outcompeted by their malignant descendants. Our limited knowledge of
founder mutations comes from infrequent cases of AML arising secondary to
antecedent clonal bone marrow disorders or rare instances of inherited
syndromes. Importantly, recent advances in AML stem cell biology now
enable the prospective separation of residual non-leukemic hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) from AML cells. We previously showed that non-leukemic
HSC contain clonal antecedents of AML in patients in long-term remission
post-therapy, and have proposed a model in which serial acquisition of
mutations occurs in self-renewing HSC. Here, we investigated this model
and the nature of founder mutations through the genomic analysis of de
novo AML and patient-matched residual non-leukemic HSC. Using exome
sequencing, we identified mutations present in eight individual AML
genomes (mean 10 mutations per patient) and screened for them in the
residual HSC. We identified several mutations present in residual HSC
that retained normal multilineage differentiation in vivo. These putative
early mutations detected in residual HSC include NPM1c, mutations in
TET2, and novel AML mutations in genes involving the cell cycle and mRNA
biogenesis. Putative late mutations absent from residual HSC and only
found in leukemic cells include FLT3 ITD and IDH1 R132H. Finally, through
single cell analysis, we determined that as we hypothesized, a clonal
progression of multiple mutations occurs in non-leukemic HSC.
Quantitative genetic analyses of the HSC compartment enabled us to
reconstruct the subclonal architecture of normal and pre-leukemic stem
cells. Consistent with mouse models, pre-leukemic HSC with TET2 mutations
outcompeted their normal counterparts. However, in most cases, normal HSC
were 6-50 times more numerous than pre-leukemic HSC. In two cases where
sequential populations of pre-leukemic HSC were identified, the less
mutated pre-leukemic HSC population was 10-25 times more numerous than
its more mutated descendent. This result contrasts with the classical
model of a linear succession of dominant pre-leukemic subclones. These
pre-leukemic HSC reveal the clonal evolution of AML genomes from founder
mutations, suggest a potential mechanism contributing to relapse, and
constitute a cellular reservoir that may need to be targeted for more
durable remissions.

