Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of canine lower urinary tract carcinoma cell
lines with variable DNA mismatch repair proficiency derived from a single
tumor


Deficiencies in the DNA mismatch repair system (MMR) have been well
described in a variety of neoplasms in humans; however, naturally
occurring animal models of MMR deficiency associated carcinogenesis are
lacking. Recently, our lab has shown that deficiencies in the MMR are
common in canine lower urinary tract carcinomas through the
identification of microsatellite instability and decreased expression of
MSH2. In order to further investigate MMR in the dog, cell lines were
derived from canine lower urinary tract carcinomas. Briefly, samples of a
prostatic urothelial carcinoma from an 8-year-old neutered male Beagle
were minced into 0.5-1mm3 pieces and incubated in culture plates with 1:1
DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin,
streptomycin, and l-glutamine. Resulting colonies of epithelioid cells
were harvested with 0.05% trypsin and subcultured. Two distinct cell
populations emerged following repeated subculture, which were
subsequently isolated from one another through selective trypinization.
Thus, two distinct cell lines, TYLER1 and TYLER2, were established. While
these cell lines were derived from the same tumor, they differ greatly in
terms of morphology and expression of DNA mismatch repair genes. Cells of
TYLER1 are polygonal with regular dimensions, and grow in fairly discrete
aggregates. Cells of TYLER2 are spindle-shaped to stellate, and grow in
haphazardly arranged interlacing patterns. Both cell lines express
cytokeratins confirming their epithelial origin; however, the specific
cytokeratins expressed by each line differs and both cell lines strongly
express vimentin. In contrast to the primary tumor, both cell lines
express prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP), a marker of prostatic
differentiation, and neither cell line expresses uroplakin III, an
urothelial marker. This is likely a reflection of plasticity of cells of
the lower urinary tract in terms of their ability to differentiate.
Comparing microsatellite sequences obtained from a blood sample from the
dog of origin to those in the cell lines, there is variability in the
length of select microsatellites suggesting functional MMR deficiency.
The gene and protein expression of MSH2 and MSH6 are significantly lower
in TYLER2 than TYLER1 as determined by Western blot and RT PCR,
respectively. In preliminary studies using XTT assays, the MMR deficient
TYLER2 cell line is more sensitive to gemcitabine and carboplatin than
TYLER1, although both are more sensitive to these agents than other
canine urothelial carcinoma cell lines that strongly express MSH2 and
MSH6. Overall, given the differences in apparent MMR expression and
differences observed in morphology and response to treatment, these cell
lines will undoubtedly prove valuable in future studies of MMR in dogs
and the effects MMR deficiency on cancer treatment response and
progression.

