Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of mTOR and PI3K inhibition on the
phosphorylation of polysome-associated proteins


The PI3K (phosphoinositide-3 kinase) pathway is upregulated in many
malignancies, including a significant proportion of human breast cancers.
PI3K dysregulation activates downstream targets, such as the
serine-threonine kinase AKT (also known as protein kinase B) and the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complexes, TORC1 and TORC2, serving
to enhance cell survival, growth, invasiveness, and angiogenic potential
as well as altering cellular metabolism. Many of these downstream
cellular responses are induced by PI3K/AKT/mTOR control of mRNA
translation initiation and elongation via phosphorylation of
polysome-associated effectors, such as eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4 components, its inhibitory binding protein (eIF4BP), and the 40S
ribosomal protein S6. Due to the importance of the PI3K pathway in
tumorigenesis, several different PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors are
under clinical development, including dual TORC1/C2 inhibitors (e.g.
INK128; Intellikine) and pan-inhibitors of all four isoforms of class 1
PI3K (e.g. GDC0941; Genentech). Despite the specificity of such mTOR and
PI3K inhibitors, it remains unclear which subsets of breast cancer will
respond to these agents and which biomarkers are best used to monitor and
distinguish their target-specific antitumor responses. Furthermore, known
translation-regulating phosphoproteins downstream of mTORC1 (e.g. eIF4B,
S6) can also be activated by alternative kinase pathways (e.g. PDK1)
downstream of PI3K. Therefore, we sought to discover
translation-associated biomarkers capable of distinguishing the
responsiveness of breast cancer cells to INK128 and GDC0941, focusing on
post-translationally modified proteins contained within the
polysome-enriched cell compartment. We used an antibody specific for
phospho-AKT substrates to probe 1-D and 2-D gel separated
polysome-enriched fractions from the HER2-positive breast cancer cell
line, SKBR3, following control or growth inhibiting doses of INK128 or
GDC0941. The 5-day SKBR3 IC50 doses (inhibiting cell proliferation by
50%) for INK128 and GDC0941 were found to be 16 nM and 565 nM,
respectively. Following 24 h exposure to identical doses of these two
drugs, INK128 significantly reduced the phosphorylation of a small subset
of polysome-associated proteins (including 30 kD and 50 kD species) while
GDC0941 had no apparent effect on these proteins, whose identification is
pending. These findings suggest that phosphorylation of specific
polysome-associated proteins likely mediates translational control
exerted by some downstream effectors of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
Furthermore these specific polysome-associated targets may serve as
biomarkers differentiating cell responses to TORC1/C2 from pan-PI3K
inhibitors.

