Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic role of androgen receptor in bladder cancer


Aims: Hormone receptors are the prototype predictive marker in breast and
prostate cancer. Hormone receptor positive cancers have a better
prognosis, increased tropism to metastasize into the bones and respond to
endocrine treatment options. The prognostic value of hormone receptor in
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (UCB) is less established. This may
in part result from technical limitations of immunhistochemical detection
methods. Interestingly, female gender has recently been identified as
strong adverse factor in advanced UCB (May et al., 2011). By analyzing
whole genome expression data from non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
patients, we have evaluated the potential of top candidate genes (ESR1,
PGR, AR, CYP19, HER2, RACGAP1) commonly used to stratify breast cancer
patients to predict bladder cancer progression. In view of the gender
specific effects, we have focused on the prognostic role of androgen
receptor expression on tumor invasion, disease progression and survival.
Methods: Affymetrix microarray data from 41 non-metastatic bladder cancer
patients undergoing curative surgery were analyzed. Prognostic value of
androgen receptor mRNA expression was analyzed by unsupervised Cluster
analysis, partitioning tests, Mann Whitney tests and Kaplan Meier
estimates of cancer specific survival. Results: Cluster analysis in the
microarray date of the superficial UCB cohort identified a hormone
receptor positive subtype and a proliferation dominated subtype of equal
size. Androgen receptor expression was negatively associated with cancer
specific death (r=0,42; p=0,005), while proliferation correlated with
increased risk of cancer specific death (r=0,46; p=0,003). In addition,
low androgen receptor expression was associated with higher tumor stage
(pTa vs pT1-4; p=0,017). In Kaplan Meier analysis, the cancer specific
survival was significantly better in tumors exhibiting high androgen
receptor levels (80% vs. 20 %; pAims: Hormone receptors are the prototype
predictive marker in breast and prostate cancer. Hormone receptor
positive cancers have a better prognosis, increased tropism to
metastasize into the bones and respond to endocrine treatment options.
The prognostic value of hormone receptor in urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder (UCB) is less established. This may in part result from technical
limitations of immunhistochemical detection methods. Interestingly,
female gender has recently been identified as strong adverse factor in
advanced UCB (May et al., 2011). By analyzing whole genome expression
data from non-muscle invasive bladder cancer patients, we have evaluated
the potential of top candidate genes (ESR1, PGR, AR, CYP19, HER2,
RACGAP1) commonly used to stratify breast cancer patients to predict
bladder cancer progression. In view of the gender specific effects, we
have focused on the prognostic role of androgen receptor expression on
tumor invasion, disease progression and survival. Methods: Affymetrix
microarray data from 41 non-metastatic bladder cancer patients undergoing
curative surgery were analyzed. Prognostic value of androgen receptor
mRNA expression was analyzed by unsupervised Cluster analysis,
partitioning tests, Mann Whitney tests and Kaplan Meier estimates of
cancer specific survival. Results: Cluster analysis in the microarray
date of the superficial UCB cohort identified a hormone receptor positive
subtype and a proliferation dominated subtype of equal size. Androgen
receptor expression was negatively associated with cancer specific death
(r=0,42; p=0,005), while proliferation correlated with increased risk of
cancer specific death (r=0,46; p=0,003). In addition, low androgen
receptor expression was associated with higher tumor stage (pTa vs pT1-4;
p=0,017). In Kaplan Meier analysis, the cancer specific survival was
significantly better in tumors exhibiting high androgen receptor levels
(80% vs. 20 %; p<0,0001). Discussion: Resembling to some extent the
situation in other cancer types, hormone receptors are prognostic factors
in early stage bladder cancer. These results may also explain the
recently described gender specific effects in bladder cancer. Moreover,
these results raise the possibility, that UCB patients may be stratified
according to their androgen receptor status in view of prognosis and
putative endocrine therapy options.

