Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In human endothelial cell line Wnt-beta-catenin pathway controls
transcription of lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1, a representative of
vertebrate-specific Lef1/Tcf1 sub-family enhancing matrix
metalloproteinase-2 transcription and endothelial cell invasion


Background: Wnt signaling is activated in many types of cancer and normal
physiological processes. Various Wnt-related secreted factors may
influence angiogenesis both in the tumor microenvironment and in normal
tissues by direct action on endothelial cells. The mechanism of this Wnt
action in angiogenesis is not well defined. Gradl D, Knig A, and Wedlich
D (2002) show that members of Tcf1/Lef1 sub-family generate stronger Wnt
throughput and Xenopus secondary axis induction per protein unit than
members of Tcf3/Tcf4 sub-family. This stronger activity might require
different, may be, stronger chemotherapy tools for angiogenesis control
than the tools necessary to prevent colon cancer where Tcf4 signaling is
prominent. We hypothesize that endothelial cells are responsive to Wnt
signals and that Lef1, a member of the vertebrate-specific
Wnt/beta-catenin throughput-inducing transcription factors sub-family
Lef1/Tcf1, mediates this responsiveness and promotes endothelial cell
invasion. Methods: A human endothelial cell line, EAhy926 was exposed to
Wnt3a or directly transfected with Lef1. Readouts included assessment of
nuclear -catenin, Wnt throughput with a SuperTOPflash reporter assay,
induction of Lef1 transcription, induction of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-2 transcription, cell proliferation and cell invasion through a
matrix in vitro. The effects on MMP2 were also evaluated in the presence
of Lef1 silencing siRNA. Results: Wnt3a increased nuclear -catenin
staining identified by DNA staining of nucleus with DAPI and up-regulated
Wnt/-catenin throughput without changing the activity of negative control
reporter with mutated Lef/Tcf binding sites (FOP). Wnt3a increased Lef1
transcription and activity of the Lef1 promoter. Both Wnt3a treatment and
Lef1 overexpression induced MMP2 transcription but this effect was
completely abrogated in the presence of Lef1 siRNA. Inhibition of Lef1
also reduced basal MMP2 levels suggesting that Lef1 regulates MMP2
expression even in the absence of exogenous Wnt pathway activation. Lef1
slightly enhanced proliferation of EAhy926 cells after prolonged periods
(96 and 120 hours post-transfection) and increased invasion by more than
two-fold. Conclusions: EAhy926 cell line activates canonical Wnt
signaling in response to Wnt3a ligand. A representative of
vertebrate-specific Lef1/Tcf1 sub-family Lef1 specifically regulates MMP2
transcription in these cells and promotes endothelial cell invasion. This
cell line provides a convenient alternative to primary human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) in the study of angiogenesis and the role
of Wnt signaling on endothelial cell function.

