Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased growth and malignant transformation of human prostate
epithelial cells by chronic exposure to arsenic and estrogen


Both Arsenic and 17-estradiol have been shown to induce growth and
neoplastic formations in prostate epithelial cells. Estrogens are
involved in prostate development and function at several stages. Arsenic
has mild estrogenic properties. However, the effects of the co-exposure
to physiologically relevant doses of these two chemicals on human
prostate epithelial cells are not known. We hypothesize that as compared
to the individual exposure, the co-exposure to arsenic and estrogen will
potentiate the cell growth and transformation in prostate epithelial
cells. Therefore, the objective of this study was to examine the effects
of chronic exposure to arsenic and estrogen both individually and in
combination on neoplastic transformations and increase cell growth. Human
prostate epithelial cells, RWPE-1 were treated for 6 months with
sodium-meta arsenite and 17-estradiol both alone and in combination at
concentrations of 100 pg/mL and 100 ng/mL. These treated cells were
maintained further for 3 months in culture media without arsenic or
estrogen supplementation. The effects of these compounds on cell growth
were determined by cell count and MTT assay, and malignant transformation
of cells was determined by anchorage independent growth assay on soft
agar. The mitogenic effects of these chemicals were further confirmed at
molecular level by cell cycle analysis using flow cytometry and gene
expression analysis by quantitative real time PCR. The result of this
study revealed that chronic exposure to arsenic and estrogen causes
increased cell proliferation and induces cell transformation as observed
in colony formation assay. The combination of these two chemicals had
potentiating effects on cell growth and transformation of RWPE-1 cells.
The increased percentage of cells in S-phase and increased expression of
CyclinD1 as well as the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl2 further confirmed the
mitogenic potential of these two chemicals in RWPE-1 cells. The present
findings of increased growth and transformation of arsenic and estrogen
treated cells and epigenetic changes observed in these cells together
suggest that these carcinogenic chemicals induce malignant transformation
in prostate epithelial cells at least in part through epigenetic
mechanisms.

