Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitor of ezrin inhibits metastasis in a
transgenic mouse model of osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma is the predominant primary bone cancer in children with a
low survival rate due to pulmonary metastasis. Research on the molecular
mechanism driving pulmonary metastasis implicates the cytoskeletal
protein ezrin as the critical component of the disease pathology. Ezrin
links the actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane proteins, and its
overexpression is associated with poor survival in patients and increased
invasion in osteosarcoma cell lines. We used surface plasmon resonance
technology to screen small molecule libraries for compounds directly
binding to ezrin. Two molecules, NSC305787 and NSC668394, were chosen
based on their ezrin binding affinities and ability to inhibit ezrin in
multiple functional, biochemical, cellular, and in vivo assays. To test
the anti-metastatic activity of these molecules in vivo, we utilized a
tissue-specific transgenic mouse model expressing Cre recombinase to
excise the Retinoblastoma (Rb) and p53 tumor suppressor genes in
osteoblast progenitor cells. These animals develop spontaneous
osteosarcoma with 100% penetrance and high frequency of liver and lung
metastases, mimicking human disease. We tested the anti-metastatic
potential of ezrin inhibitors that we discovered, NSC305787 and
NSC668394, in this clinically relevant mouse model. We started the
treatment on one group of animals at 2 months of age before any
detectable tumor is present and on a second group of animals only after
detection of smallest palpable tumor. Animals in each group were randomly
assigned to one of three treatment options: DMSO (Control), NSC305787, or
NSC668394. Animals were observed for primary tumor growth and metastasis
formation. All animals were euthanized when primary tumor volume reached
2.0cm3, when animals had severe cachexia, or when animals showed signs of
pulmonary insufficiency. Mice treated with NSC305787 and NSC668394 did
not show any changes in the growth of their primary tumors and
experienced similar survival times. However, our results suggest that
NSC305787 inhibits osteosarcoma metastasis to lungs as confirmed by
histopathological analysis. Therefore, when combined with adjuvant
chemotherapy and surgical resection of the primary tumor, targeting ezrin
with small molecules may yield a positive outcome and greater survival in
a clinical setting.

