Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomics of high-resolution esophageal adenocarcinomas
identify candidate driver genes in regions of large copy number
aberrations


Introduction: Esophageal cancer occurs with two distinct histologies_
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA). The
incidence of EA has risen over the past few decades and is now the most
common esophageal malignancy in the United States and Western Europe. The
genome of esophageal adenocarcinoma is highly unstable due to the large
number of amplification and deletion events. Presumably, such genomic
events drive tumor formation and disease progression by altering the
expression of genes within these regions. Several studies have reported
large regions of genomic instability especially spanning chromosomal arms
or in gene dense regions. Using a large patient cohort and
high-resolution data for DNA copy number and expression, this study aims
to identify potential driver genes and prognostic markers especially in
whole chromosomal aberrations and gene dense regions. Materials &
Methods: DNA copy number aberrations were explored in 116 esophageal
adenocarcinomas (EA) using Affymetrix SNP 6.0 microarrays. Additionally,
gene expression data from a subset of 110 of these tumors using
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 microarrays were analyzed. DNA copy number
aberrations were analyzed using Nexus 5.0 and GISTIC software while the
gene expression data was processed in Partek Genomic Suite. Copy number
and expression correlations for each gene in the regions of copy number
aberrations were calculated using t-test to compare samples with the
changes versus samples without the genomic aberrations. Results: We
identified at least 50 regions of gains and losses of which 12 regions
are either whole chromosomal arm aberrations or aberrations in gene dense
regions. Some regions with large number genes include gains at 1q (460
genes), 7q21-22 (80 genes), 10q21-22 (100 genes), and losses at 4q (98
genes), 5q (283 genes), 21q (82 genes). Copy number and expression
correlations for each gene in these regions considerably reduced the
number of genes that could be considered as candidate driver genes.
Furthermore, scouring the literature helped identify potential candidate
driver genes such as ANP32E (1q), VCL (10q), CDKN2AIP (4q), and ING2
(4q). Additionally, we report identifying copy number and expression
correlations of potential prognostic markers such as MCM4 (8q), CA9 (9p),
KLF5 (13q) that lie in focal/smaller regions of genomic instability but
at high frequencies. Conclusion: Analysis of the DNA copy number changes
identified several regions of frequent gains and losses. At least 12
regions span the chromosomal arm or are in the gene dense regions. Using
an integrated genomics approach with high-resolution DNA copy number and
expression data, we are able to identify potential driver genes and
prognostic markers that lie in these large amplification/deletion regions
in EA.

