Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shikonin causes cancer cell death by inducing mitochondrial
dysfunction


Shikonin, a naturally occurring napthoquinone, has been used in herbal
formulations for the treatment of several inflammatory diseases in
Traditional Chinese Medicine since decades. In recent studies, shikonin
revealed remarkable anticancer activities and thereby is a promising
candidate for cancer chemotherapy. However, the underlying cellular
mechanisms and targets of shikonin are still unknown. Here, we showed
that shikonin indeed exhibits strong cytotoxic effects on a panel of 15
different cancer cell lines also containing multi-drug resistant cells.
The strongest effects were obtained on U937 leukemia cells. To better
understand the underlying mechanisms, we performed a whole genome
expression analysis of these cells after shikonin treatment. Thereby
novel molecular key players and genetic networks responsible for the
effects of shikonin were identified. Induction of cell cycle arrest,
apoptosis and increased levels of reactive oxygen species and DNA damage
were revealed as striking cellular effects of shikonin. Furthermore,
whole sets of genes responsible for cytoskeletal formation and
mitochondrial energy metabolism were deregulated after shikonin
treatment. Using cell based assays we showed that shikonin indeed induces
G1/S phase cell cycle arrest and caspase 3/7 dependent apoptosis.
Furthermore we confirmed the induction of reactive oxygen species and
quantified the subsequent DNA damage. In addition shikonin significantly
prevents cancer cell migration and cytoskeleton formation by inhibiting
the dynamics of the microtubule system. The reason for all this secondary
effects was revealed by real-time kinetic uptake experiments based on the
intrinsic fluorescence of shikonin. Thereby a rapid cellular uptake and a
direct accumulation of the drug in the mitochondria were observed. This
caused a breakdown of the mitochondrial membrane potential within the
same time range of drug uptake, resulting in a failure of the respiratory
chain and the cellular energy production. As the mitochondrial structure
and metabolism differs strongly between cancer and normal cells,
targeting of mitochondria is a very recent and promising approach in
cancer therapy. Our results showed that mitochondria are the primary
targets of shikonin in cancer cells and thus we believe that shikonin has
the potential in future clinical application.

