Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of SIRT1 and p27 during progression of human cervical
cancer


Recent studies point to a close connection between cancer and ageing.
Cellular senescence when initiated early in cancerous cells results in
growth suppression due to permanent growth arrest. Sirtuins, belonging to
family of the NAD-dependent deacetylases, play a crucial role in cellular
metabolism and organismal ageing/ longevity. However, the role of human
Sirtuin isoforms in malignancies and cellular senescence is still not
clearly discernible. The present study is therefore designed to evaluate
the correlation of SIRT1 expression with proliferation marker Ki-67, and
growth arrest/senescence marker p27, during cervical cancer progression.
The expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 70 formalin fixed
archival human cervical samples: normal/ASCUS (N= 20), squamous
intraepithelial lesions (SIL N=20) and invasive squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC, N= 30 samples). All the intraepithelial lesions and SCC cases were
positive for human papilloma virus as detected by in-situ hybridization.
The SIRT1 expression was either absent or feeble in cytoplasm of
normal/ASCUS cervical epithelium, while a progressive increase in its
expression was noted in 65% of preneoplastic lesions (SIL). Intriguingly,
the invasive carcinoma showed heterogeneous pattern for both expression
and localization of SIRT1: ranging from negative to strong expression
levels and mixed localization pattern in cytoplasm only or both in
nucleus and cytoplasm. The growth arrest/senescence marker p27 showed
elevated level of expression in SIL cases compared to SCC (75%).
Interestingly, the increased nucleo-cytoplasmic expression pattern of
SIRT1 correlated well with the increased expression of p27 in the
intraepithelial preneoplastic lesion. In conclusion, our results suggest
activation of growth suppressive pathways by SIRT1-p27 regulation,
atleast in the in preneoplastic lesions of cancer cervix which may help
retard its progression to invasive cancer.

