Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary selenium and metastasis in a mouse model


The skeleton is a common site for breast cancer metastasis. Once breast
cancer cells enter the bone microenvironment, they alter the homeostasis
of the bone remodeling system in favor of osteoclasts, which results in
osteolysis. Breast cancer cells induce an osteoblast inflammatory
response resulting in the production of IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1, and COX-2,
known to promote osteoclastogenesis. Therefore, down-regulation of the
inflammatory response of the osteoblasts brought about by breast cancer
cells may reduce the activation of osteoclasts and decrease osteolysis.
IL-6, MCP-1, COX-2 are regulated by a common transcription factor, NF-B
which is sensitive to intracellular redox status; its activation can be
inhibited by cellular antioxidant enzymes. Two major antioxidant enzymes,
glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase are selenoenzymes. Their
dependence on selenium (Se) offers a way to increase their expression and
activity, block NF-B activation and thus inhibit the expression of its
target genes. The hypothesis was that inhibition of NF-B through dietary
selenium would prevent the osteoblast inflammatory response and
metastasis. To test the effect of dietary selenium in breast cancer
progression, one of five diets: three selenium supplementation diets
(sodium selenite, selenomethionine, and methylseleninic acid) or a
selenium-deficient or a selenium adequate diet was fed to Balb/c mice for
3 months before inoculation of a metastatic breast cancer cell line
4T1.2luc into the mammary gland. The growth and metastasis of the tumors
were followed by IVIS imaging. After 4 weeks, organs were collected and
prepared for Q-PCR analysis of the luciferase gene as an indicator of
metastatic burden. There was no significant difference in the development
or growth of the primary breast tumor and the metastatic patterns between
mice receiving the selenium-deficient or selenium-adequate diets. On the
other hand, selenium supplementation diets were shown to affect breast
cancer progression differently. Mice with sodium selenite supplementation
developed the most metastasis (15/15) and showed higher incidence of
breast cancer kidney and bone metastasis. The selenomethionine
supplementation diet (3ppm) reduced breast cancer primary tumor growth
and decreased overall tumor burden in major organs, such as lung, liver,
kidney and femur. Taken together, this study showed that dietary selenium
affected tumor growth and metastasis and that the selenomethionine
supplementation diet offered the most protective effect on breast cancer
progression. Support: American Institute for Cancer Research with
supplemental support from the National Foundation for Cancer Research.

