Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinctive phospho-proteome signatures in non-small cell lung
carcinoma tumors


Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) is a major, lethal cancer
worldwide. Various molecular and cellular abnormalities are found in
NSCLC, and an established theme is the alteration of protein
phosphotyrosine (pY), as exemplified by elevated epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) activity recognized in a subset of NSCLC. In order to
gain a broad perspective of pY-mediated signaling networks in NSCLC, mass
spectrometry was used to analyze pY-containing peptides affinity purified
from protease-digested xenograft tumors. Seventeen tumors representing
the major NSCLC subtypes adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) were characterized. The major classes of pY proteins detected were
cytoskeletal, protein kinases, and adhesion proteins. Pathways and
cellular functions enriched in the data set included focal adhesion,
adherens junction, and ErbB signaling. Five receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) were detected, with EGFR and EPHA2 most prevalent. Src-family
kinases (YES, LYN, FRK and LCK) and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) comprised
the majority of non-receptor tyrosine kinases measured. Analysis of
individual pY sites on 14 tyrosine kinases indicates their activation by
kinase domain activation loop phosphorylation, but also revealed
additional pY sites suggestive of regulation by trafficking/endocytosis
and inter- and intra-molecular protein-protein interactions involving,
for example, SH2 and SH3 domains, and extra-kinase domain regions.
Analysis of tumors based on protein-pY suggested subtypes distinguished
by their activated tyrosine kinase networks. Genetic analysis of 3 tumors
that displayed EGFR-associated phospho-proteome signatures confirmed that
they carried either EGFR activating mutations (in two ADCs) or increased
gene copy number (in one SCC). Western blot analysis of protein pY
confirmed different patterns of cellular protein pY among the tumor
phospho-types in agreement with the phospho-proteomic analysis.
Quantification of kinase and substrate pY sites, according to their
integrated extracted ion currents, revealed a set of phosphorylations
that constituted a molecular signature that differentiated between the
ADC and SCC subtypes. In summary, quantitative phospho-proteomic
profiling of NSCLC tumors is feasible and may have utility in the
categorization of individual tumors according to their networks of
activated tyrosine kinases and substrates.

