Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of 2nd generation
ezrin inhibitors for metastatic osteosarcoma


Though advancements in chemotherapy and surgical techniques have
ameliorated treatment of primary osteosarcoma (OS), the metastatic
phenotype remains a clinical challenge. Overall five-year survival rates
for patients with localized OS have improved to 60-70%, yet survival
rates of patients with metastasis remains at 20-30% with mortality linked
to metastatis-induced respiratory failure. Therefore, targeting
fundamental molecular events that lead to metastasis may yield
significant benefit to patients with OS. Accumulating evidence from
clinical samples and pre-clinical animal models suggests that ezrin is a
key regulator in the metastasis of OS cells. Ezrin is a multifunctional
protein that connects the actin cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix
through transmembrane proteins and a critical component for cell
motility, adhesion and shape. We have recently identified that a small
molecule, NSC 668394 acts as a potent and selective inhibitor of ezrin
function and inhibits migration in both in-vitro and in-vivo models.
Moreover, suppression of ezrin phosphorylation by NSC 668394
significantly reduced the metastatic behavior in cellular and animal
models and has thus emerged as an important lead inhibitor. Consequently,
we conducted a series of structure-activity-relationship (SAR) studies
that monitored direct binding; OS cell migration and HUVEC monolayer
invasion in real-time with surface-plasmon resonance and electrical
impedance technology. From our 2nd generation library, we have designed
novel candidate inhibitors which feature enhanced ezrin-binding affinity,
and improved anti-migration and anti-invasion activities. In addition to
their potency against the different stages of OS metastasis, these
compounds possess other desirable attributes for development including
good druggable physical-chemical characteristics and are currently
undergoing further preclinical evaluation.

