Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between serum hormone levels and pharmacokinetics
(PK) of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) in patients with refractory
ovarian cancer


Background: Pharmacokinetics (PK) of nanoparticle agents, such as
PEGylated liposomes, are dependent upon the carrier and not the
encapsulated drug. Previous studies have demonstrated a high degree of
interpatient variability in the PK of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin
(PLD). We have previously demonstrated that circulating monocytes play a
major role in clearance (CL) of PEGylated liposomes in patients. Estrogen
and testosterone, which are largely secreted via the gonads, have been
shown to modulate monocyte function and chemotaxis. In addition, estrone
is converted from other steroid hormones in adipose tissue. Thus, we
evaluated the relationship between serum hormone concentrations in blood
samples and PK of PLD in patients with refractory ovarian cancer.
Methods: PLD was administered at 30 or 40mg/m2 IV every 28 days with or
without concurrent carboplatin at an AUC = 5 in patients (n = 10) with
recurrent ovarian cancer. All patients had undergone bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO). Serial PK samples were obtained from time 0
h to 168 h and day 28 post PLD dose. Plasma was processed to measure
encapsulated and released doxorubicin using solid phase separation and
HPLC with fluorescence detection. CL of encapsulated doxorubicin in
plasma was calculated by non-compartmental methods. Prior to
administration of PLD, serum samples were collected and concentrations of
estrone, estrogen, testosterone, and dihydrotestosterone were measured.
Results: There was a direct linear relationship between encapsulated
doxorubicin CL and both testosterone (R2 = 0.72) and estrone
concentrations (R2 = 0.54) in all patients. When patients were subdivided
based on PLD monotherapy (n = 6) or PLD + carboplatin (n = 4), there was
a stronger relationship between encapsulated doxorubicin CL and both
testosterone (R2 = 0.88) and estrone concentrations (R2 = 0.86) in
patients receiving PLD monotherapy. Estrogen and dihydrotestosterone
concentrations were below quantification limits for the majority of
patients and thus were not evaluated. There was no relationship between
patient body weight and BMI and estrone concentrations (R2 = 0.25 and R2
= 0.13 respectively). Conclusions: These findings indicate that serum
hormone concentrations are associated with encapsulated doxorubicin CL
and thus may be useful for individualizing PLD therapy in patients with
ovarian cancer and other malignancies. Patient body weight and BMI were
not associated with estrone concentrations in patients with ovarian
cancer, suggesting phenotypic and/or genotypic differences in estrone
production in adipose tissue. Low estrogen concentrations are consistent
with the patients undergoing BSO surgery as standard treatment of ovarian
cancer. The relationship between hormone levels and PK of nanoparticles
needs to be further evaluated as a method to individualize nanoparticle
therapy.

