Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMEM (Tumor MicroEnvironment of Metastasis) in human breast cancer
is a blood vessel associated intravasation microenvironment unrelated to
lymphatics


Observations from intravital imaging (Wyckoff et al. Can Res 2007) and
the analysis of Mena function in tumor cells in vivo (Roussos et al. JCS
2011) has characterized an intravasation microenvironment (ME) involved
in the systemic dissemination of tumor cells from primary breast tumors.
We have identified the corresponding structure in FFPE tissue and called
it TMEM (Tumor MicroEnvironment of Metastasis). This microanatomic
landmark is defined as the direct apposition of a Mena-overexpressing
intravasation competent carcinoma cell, a perivascular macrophage, and an
endothelial cell. In a case control study of 60 patients, where each
matched pair differed only in their metastatic status - non-metastatic
vs. metastatic - the density of TMEM was assessed and found to be
significantly associated with development of systemic metastasis (p =
0.00006) (Robinson et al. Clin Can Res 2009). Although lymph node status
is considered an important prognostic factor in breast cancer, the direct
involvement of lymphatics in systemic tumor cell dissemination from
primary tumors has not been demonstrated. In addition, the relationship
of hematogenous- and lymphatic-mediated tumor cell spread is not
understood. The purpose of this study was to 1) assess intratumoral
lymphatic density in this same cohort, 2) determine if TMEM-like
structures associated with lymphatics exist, and 3) determine if
lymphaticTMEM-like structures correlate with systemic metastatic risk.
Cases were stained with a triple immunostain identical to that used in
the Robinson et al. study except that D2-40 (a lymphatic marker) was
used, rather than CD31 (a blood vessel marker). The marker for
macrophages (CD68) and invasive tumor cells (Mena) remained the same. Two
pathologists, blinded to outcome, evaluated for the presence or absence
of intratumoral lymphatics and quantitated the number of TMEM-like
structures per 10 high power (400x) fields in areas of highest
intratumoral lymphatic density. A TMEM-like structure was defined as the
direct apposition of a lymphatic (D2-40) endothelial cell with a
macrophage and invasive tumor cell. Intratumoral lymphatics were absent
in a majority of tumors in each of the 2 groups (18 of 30 non-metastatic,
16 of 30 metastatic; p=0.6). TMEM-like structures were rare and were
equally present in the 2 groups (3 metastatic and 3 non-metastatic
cases). Using the Wilcoxon (paired) signed-rank test, we found no
significant difference in the density of these structures between the two
groups (p = 0.4). Furthermore, TMEM-like structures did not correlate
with the presence of lymph node metastases (p=0.8). We conclude that
lymphatic vessels do not participate in the TMEM assembly that has been
associated with hematogenous metastasis. TMEM density assessment reflects
a hematogenous intravasation ME and offers a novel approach to the
assessment of metastatic risk.

