Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new approach to isolate label-free and viable circulating tumor
cells for monitoring cancer patient treatment response


The number of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) has been demonstrated as a
good indicator for cancer progression and for monitoring treatment
response of cancer patients. Most of the current methods for detecting
CTCs were based on positive selection using the antibody specific to
epithelial cell surface marker. In this study, we established a novel
PowerMag system for negative selection and enrichment of CTCs by
depletion of CD45+ cells. The efficacy of PowerMag system in CTCs
isolation was first analyzed by spiking prostatic PC3 cancer cells into
the peripheral blood from healthy volunteers. Our data revealed that,
when compared with the methods that have been reported, the PowerMag
system had high sensitivity (6-7 log10 enrichment), comparable recovery
rate (50-60%), broad detection range (more than 3 log10), and stable and
reproducible experimental results (r2=0.999). Notably, the cancer cells
obtained from PowerMag system were label-free and viable with the
capability for proliferation. To validate the feasibility of PowerMag
system in clinical application, the numbers and characteristics of CTCs
from 38 metastatic cancer patients with a total of 175 blood samples were
determined. At least two populations of CTCs with the surface markers of
EpCAM+CD45CD146 and EpCAMCD45CD146 were identified. The detection rate
reached 100% for the patients in the baseline level before treatment. The
change in CTCs numbers for both cell populations appears to correlate
with patient clinical outcomes after chemotherapy. As a whole, the
PowerMag system is proven to be capable of isolating CTCs from whole
blood effectively and economically, by which time- consuming sample
pretreatment and costly equipments are not required. PowerMag has paved
an alternation rout to monitor the progression and treatment response of
cancer patients.

