Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor effects of intratumoral (IT) hu14.18-IL2
immunocytokine (IC) compared to intravenous (IV) hu14.18-IL2 are
distinguished by increased activated tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) and IC retention


Introduction: Hu14.18-IL2 (APN301, Apeiron Biologics) is an
immunocytokine (IC) consisting of human IL2 linked to each IgG heavy
chain of the hu14.18 mAb, which recognizes the GD2 disialoganglioside.
Phase 2 clinical trials of IV hu14.18-IL2 IC in neuroblastoma and
melanoma are underway, with activity already demonstrated in
neuroblastoma. We have previously shown that intratumoral IC treatment
(IT-IC) results in enhanced anti-tumor activity in mouse models. These
studies were designed to determine the mechanisms involved in the
enhanced activity and to provide justification for future clinical
testing of localized IT administration of this and other immunocytokines.
Methods: We characterize tumor growth, survival outcomes, histology and
phenotype of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) by flow cytometry of
IT-hu.14.18-IL2 treatment of A/J mice bearing subcutaneous NXS2
neuroblastomas. Looking at these parameters, IT-IC treated mice are
compared to IV-IC treated, IT PBS treated and untreated mice. Data: Mice
receiving IT-IC show significant increases [by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and by flow cytometry] of NKp46+ Natural Killer (NK) cells and CD8a+
cytotoxic T cells in TIL populations compared to control tumor-bearing
mice. Improved survival and inhibition of tumor growth are observed in
mice receiving IT-IC vs. untreated mice or mice receiving IV-IC.
Comparisons within treatment groups, or independent of treatment groups,
show that the number of NK or CD8 T cells in the tumor correlates
inversely with change in tumor size. Analyses by IHC and flow-cytometry
show greater IC detection in tumor after IT-IC vs. IV-IC. Moreover, IT-IC
results in improved IC retention in tumors and increased NKG2D effector
receptors on intratumoral NKG2A/C/E cells and on CD8 T cells when
compared to control mice or mice receiving IV-IC. The augmented NKG2D
seen in TILs was not seen in spleen cells, supporting the localized
nature of the intratumoral changes induced by this treatment.
Conclusions: In this murine neuroblastoma model, enhanced antitumor
effects of IT hu14.18-IL2 compared to IV hu14.18-IL2 are distinguished by
increased activated TILs and IC retention, improved survival and
inhibition of tumor growth. These observations suggest that localized
administration of immunocytokines in human patients may show analogous
advantages over IV administration. In accordance, we have designed a
phase I/II clinical trial protocol investigating the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) and efficacy endpoints of intratumorally administered
hu14.18-IL2 in stage III/IV melanoma patients with recurrent or
refractory disease, and are working towards approval for its activation.
Supported by R01-CA-32685-27.

