Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of SIRT1 histone deacetylase by small-molecule
inhibitor Tenovin-1 imparts significant anti-proliferative effects in
human melanoma cells


Melanoma, one of the most lethal forms of skin cancer, remains resistant
to available treatments. Unfortunately, current treatment options are
insufficient for preventing the rapid metastasis and death associated
with this disease. Thus, additional target-based approaches are needed
for the management of this neoplasm. SIRT1, a member of mammalian
sirtuin-family and a class III histone deacetylase has been implicated in
several cancers. SIRT1 plays an important role in cell survival, as it is
involved in DNA repair and inhibits apoptosis and cellular senescene in
response to oxidative stress and DNA damage. It also favors cell survival
through its regulation of the FOXO transcription factors and the tumor
suppressor gene p53. Previous studies from our laboratory have
demonstrated that i) histone deacetylase SIRT1 is expressed at much
higher levels in melanoma cells than in normal human epidermal
melanocytes, and ii) inhibition of SIRT1 through shRNA-mediated RNA
interference or sirtinol-mediated activity inhibition resulted in
decreased growth, viability, and clonogenic survival of melanoma cells
(Nihal et al; In: AACR Annual Meeting: Proceedings; 2011 Apr 2-6,
Orlando, FL Abstract # 1647). Here, in order to determine if SIRT1 is a
viable target for melanoma management, we extended our studies to
determine the effects of Tenovin-1, which is a more specific and
efficient small molecule inhibitor of SIRT1, in multiple melanoma cell
lines, representing different stages of disease progression. For this
purpose, we employed i) A375 (primary and vertical-growth tumorigenic)
and HS294T (metastatic and tumorigenic), both of which are amelanotic
cell lines, and ii) G361 (metastatic and tumorigenic) melanin-producing
cell line. We determined the effects of Tenovin-1 on the expression
levels of SIRT1 protein in melanoma cells. Our data demonstrated that
Tenovin-1 treatment resulted in a dose dependent decrease in the level of
SIRT1 protein in all the melanoma cell lines tested. Further, we found
that Tenovin-1 treatment resulted in a concentration dependent decrease
in the growth and viability of melanoma cells, as shown by Trypan blue
exclusion and MTT analyses. Furthermore, we found that Tenovin-1 caused
an increase in protein level of the tumor suppressor p53 in a
concentration-dependent fashion. Taken together, our results suggested
that Tenovin-1 reduces melanoma cell growth via inhibition of SIRT1 and
subsequent increase in p53 activity. However, additional studies are
needed to confirm our results and to further establish the mechanism of
how Tenovin-1 mediated SIRT1 inhibition leads to melanoma cell death.
This includes the evaluation of other known SIRT1 targets such as the
FOXO transcription factors. Finally, in vivo studies are also required to
further determine the clinical relevance of our findings.

