Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D suppresses pro-inflammatory cytokines and microRNAs in
3D prostatic co-cultures


MiRNAs are involved in the progression and regulation of inflammation and
the immune response in cancer. Understanding the interplay between miRNAs
and inflammation in the prostate may be beneficial for the treatment or
prevention of prostate cancer (PCa) with anti-inflammatory agents such as
vitamin D. We previously found that vitamin D effectively blocked
inflammatory cytokine signaling and secretion in primary cultures of
normal prostatic epithelial cells. Because inflammatory signaling relies
on the crosstalk between epithelial, stromal, and immune cells, our new
studies use a human prostate 3-dimensional co-culture model of primary
human prostatic epithelial (PrE) cells and stromal (PrS) cells. Single
PrE cells seeded in matrigel were grown into spheroid structures termed
prostaspheres (PS). Simulating an inflammatory trigger from immune cells
with TNF- and IL-1 (T+I), we found a prolonged inflammatory response in
our co-cultures that persisted beyond 24 hours as compared to the
transient response in monolayer cultures. IL-6 expression increased and
persisted beyond 24 hours after T+I exposure in both the PrS and PS-PrE
cells. However, only in the PS-PrE cells did vitamin D blocked IL-6
expression. Cytokine array profiling revealed that vitamin D decreased
expression of many T+I-induced cytokine genes, including TNF, IL-1A,
IL-8, CCL7. CCL5, and CXCL10. MicroRNAs are also mediators of
inflammation. A miRNA microarray demonstrated that miR-146a, -155, and
-223, and other miRNAs were altered by cytokine stimulation in
co-culture. MiR-146a is a known mediator of inflammation and vitamin D
significantly reduced T+I-stimulated miR-146a expression in both PS-PrE
and PrS cells. These data demonstrate that vitamin D is involved in the
regulation of inflammation at both the mRNA and the miRNA level in a
novel 3D prostasphere co-culture model. As miR-146a is found to be
down-regulated in PCa, further studies will determine the role of T+I
and/or vitamin D in co-cultures of PS-PrE (normal) and PS-PrECa (Cancer)
on miR-146a to further understand vitamin D's inflammatory role in
cancer. Our model provides a more in vivo-like method to study
inflammation in PCa. We will fully validate these in vitro results in
laser-capture-microdissected patient tissue from a vitamin D clinical
trial, in which patients were supplemented with 400-40,000 IU/day of
vitamin D3 prior to radical prostatectomy. Our results should shed light
on the complex inflammatory signaling pathways in the prostate and
provide further evidence for anti-inflammatory benefits of vitamin D
supplementation.

