Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking Janus activated kinase-2 activation by DIM suppresses
ovarian tumor growth in vitro and in vivo


Ovarian cancer is one of the leading causes of gynecological deaths in
the United States and several other countries. Genetic alterations
including overexpression of EGFR and STAT-3 play a crucial role in the
signal transduction pathways that regulate key cellular functions such as
cell survival, proliferation, metastases etc. Several epidemiological
studies suggested a decreased risk of ovarian cancer in the population
consuming Brassica vegetables. 3,3-diindolylmethane (DIM) is an indole
compound present in Brassica vegetables. In our previous studies, we have
demonstrated that DIM induces apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells by
inhibiting the activation STAT-3. However, the exact mechanism of STAT-3
regulation by DIM was not clear. Accumulating evidences suggest that
Janus Activated Kinases (JAK's) play a crucial role in regulating STAT-3.
Our current results show that DIM inhibits the activation of JAK-2 by
blocking its phosphorylation at Tyr-1007/1008 in a
concentration-dependent manner in SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cells. Inhibition of
JAK-2 phosphorylation by DIM was as early as one hour after DIM
treatment. The expression of survivin was significantly reduced by DIM.
IL-3 is a cytokine that specifically activates JAK-2. Treatment of SKOV-3
or OVCAR-3 cells with 10ng/ml IL-3 for 15min not only increased the
activation of JAK-2 and STAT-3, but also induced the expression of
STAT-3. DIM treatment almost completely blocked IL-3 induced
phosphorylation of JAK-2 and STAT-3 in SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3 cells. Several
studies have shown that JAK's are regulated by EGFR, hence to test this,
cells were stimulated with EGF, a specific ligand of EGFR. As expected,
EGF treatment increased the activation of JAK-2 and STAT-3 in SKOV-3
cells. Nonetheless, DIM treatment blocked the phosphorylation of JAK-2
and STAT-3 induced by EGF. Furthermore, our in vivo studies demonstrated
that oral administration of 3 mg DIM for 40 days significantly suppressed
the growth of ovarian tumors xenografts in athymic nude mice. The tumors
of DIM treated mice exhibited reduced phosphorylation of JAK-2, EGFR and
STAT-3 and increased apoptosis. These results indicate that DIM induces
apoptosis in ovarian tumor cells by regulating JAK-2 activation in vitro
and in vivo. [Supported in part by R01 grants CA 106953 and CA 129038
awarded to S.K.S by National Cancer Institute, NIH]

