Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of miRNA expression in osteosarcoma


Epigenetic and genetic alterations of microRNAs (miRNAs) are frequently
seen in cancer, and are responsible for the deregulation of
differentiation and proliferation programs. The levels of transcription
of miRNAs have been directly linked to epigenetic silencing, i.e.
hypermethylation of CpG islands in tumors. Osteosarcoma is the most
common primary malignant bone tumor and shows complex genomic
aberrations. Using Illumina's Infinium technology we have profiled global
promoter methylation of the EuroBoNeT osteosarcoma cell line panel
(eurobonet.eu), in addition to a small panel of normal samples
(osteoblast primary cultures and normal bone). A list of miRNAs that
could be associated to a promoter CpG island was generated by identifying
miRNAs that are encoded within transcripts of protein-coding host genes,
or within 10 kb from a CpG island. Using an integrative approach, we have
analyzed miRNA expression patterns together with DNA methylation data.
Interestingly, hypermethylation of the upstream promoter seems to
strongly suppress miRNA expression, and a high inverse correlation was
observed between the degree of DNA methylation and expression of 17
miRNAs. The identified miRNAs were associated with hypermethylation in a
high proportion of the osteosarcoma cell lines and hypomethylation in
normal samples, suggesting that their transcription is regulated by
promoter methylation, and that their silencing may play a role in
osteosarcoma biology. To study this further, a subset of the cell lines
was treated with a DNA demethylation agent. The relative expression
levels of 8 miRNAs were found to increase upon treatment, as determined
by quantitative RT-PCR. Thus, the transcription of these miRNAs seems to
be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. The methylation status of CpG
islands associated with the most interesting miRNAs was then analyzed in
more detail using methylation-specific PCR and direct bisulphite
sequencing. We are currently expanding these investigations to a large
tumor set where we will use quantitative methylation-specific PCR as a
tool to determine the methylation status. Based on our findings,
methylation of CpG islands seems to play a crucial role in controlling
miRNA expression in osteosarcomas. This reveals new possibilities for
activation of tumor-suppressing miRNAs by epigenetic treatment of
osteosarcomas.

