Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common food additive carrageenan activates wnt signaling pathway
in mouse colon and human colonic epithelial cells


The Wnt--catenin signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in development
and disease. It is crucial for basic developmental processes, such as
cell-fate specification, progenitor-cell proliferation and the control of
asymmetric cell division. Recent studies suggest that self-renewal of
stem/progenitor cells by the canonical Wnt cascade is subverted in cancer
cells to allow malignant proliferation in intestine. Carrageenans are
highly sulfated polysaccharides, which are widely used as food additives
to improve the texture of processed foods, and are consumed at levels of
about 250 mg/day in the average diet. Reports of many investigators have
demonstrated that carrageenan induces inflammation, colonic ulcerations,
polyps, and colorectal tumors. We have reported distinct pathways by
which carrageenan induces the activation of NF-B and secretion of IL-8,
mediated through TLR4-BCL10 or reactive oxygen species (ROS) in colonic
epithelial cells. Our previous work also indicated that carrageenan
exposure caused activation of the Wnt--catenin pathway in colonic
epithelial cells. This investigation was undertaken to elucidate the Wnt
signaling mechanisms activated by carrageenan exposure, using NCM460
(INCELL) human colonic epithelial cells exposed to carrageenan (1 g/ml) x
24 h and colonic tissue from ten-week old C57BL/6J mice exposed to
carrageenan (10 - 100 g/ml) in their water for four weeks. Nuclear
-catenin in NCM460 cells and mouse colonic tissue was determined by
Western blot and ELISA and increased to two times the baseline level
following carrageenan. This increase in nuclear -catenin in NCM460 cells
was inhibited by the ROS quencher Tempol, but not by TLR4 or BCL10 siRNA.
TCF/Lef-1 reporter assay demonstrated increased nuclear binding post
carrageenan treatment in the mouse colon (to 4x baseline) and in the
NCM460 cells (to 6.3x baseline). Also, mRNA expression of cyclin D1 and
wnt9a was increased more than two-fold, and BMP4 expression was
decreased. In the NCM460 cells, these responses to carrageenan were
inhibited by Tempol, but not BCL10 silencing. Also, carrageenan-induced
increases in ROS and lipid peroxidation were inhibited by Tempol. Since
Wnt signaling is affected by free dishevelled 2 (dsh2), and dsh2 binding
to nucleoredoxin (NRX) is greater when NRX is in its reduced state, we
tested whether carrageenan exposure could impact upon the Wnt signaling
pathway by modifying the redox status of NRX. The ratio of free NRX to
NRX bound to dsh2 increased to six times baseline following carrageenan,
and was reversed by Tempol. These profound effects of carrageenan on the
Wnt signaling pathway in colonic cells can help to explain how diet can
contribute to development of colonic neoplasia.

