Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and functional analysis of Pim-1 kinase substrates
in prostate cancer


Protein kinases constitute one of the largest and most pleiotropic
families of proteins. Mutations leading to activation of protein kinases
and loss of function of phosphatases can have deleterious consequences
that lead to disease. Pim-1, a serine/threonine kinase, is one of many
kinases that may play a role in the etiology of malignant diseases
including lymphoma and prostate cancer. Recent studies indicate Pim-1 is
overexpressed in prostate cancer and is a highly plausible therapeutic
target. Paradoxically, a decrease in Pim-1 expression in later stages of
prostate cancer correlates with poor prognosis. Pim-1 has been known to
be an oncogene for more than two decades, however, our understanding of
how it functions is incomplete. A key underlying factor in this lack of
knowledge is that, to date, fewer than fifteen Pim-1 substrates have been
identified. The identification and validation of novel Pim-1 substrates
could elucidate biomarkers of Pim-1 activity and provide insight into the
molecular basis of Pim-1 function. A recent, innovative kinase-substrate
profiling method termed the Reverse In-gel Kinase Assay (RIKA) reverses
the role of kinase and substrate in a traditional in-gel kinase assay.
The assay involves the partial immobilization of an active kinase in a
denaturing polyacrylamide gel to determine which substrates from cell
lysates can be phosphorylated by the kinase within the gel. The potential
substrates are excised from the gel and identified using mass
spectrometry. Using a Pim-1 RIKA approach, 40S Ribosomal Protein 7 (RPS7)
was identified as a potential novel Pim-1 substrate. RPS7 was expressed
in E.coli to conduct preliminary in vitro studies. These in vitro studies
demonstrated that Pim-1 robustly phosphorylates RPS7. Further studies
were performed to identify sites of phosphorylation on RPS7, and
alanine-substitution mutants were generated that completely abolished
phosphorylation of RPS7 by Pim-1. These data indicated that RPS7 may be a
novel Pim-1 substrate. Studies to validate RPS7 as a direct target of
Pim-1 in vivo, and to determine the functional consequences of Pim-1
phosphorylation of RPS7 are in progress.

