Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis identifies functional prostate cancer risk
SNPs in genomic regulatory regions defined as enhancers


Prostate Cancer (PCa) genetic risk has recently been defined in numerous
genome-wide association studies (GWASs), which have revealed more than 50
disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphs (SNP), known as tagSNPs,
each at a different locus. More than 80% of these tagSNPs are in
intergenic regions of the genome for which functionality remains unknown.
Taking the 1000 genomes data into consideration, more than 10,000
correlated SNPs are revealed, which each define risk due to linkage
disequilibrium (correlated to the tagSNP with an r2>0.5). The above
therefore makes the identification of functional and/or causal SNPs not a
trivial task. Therefore, we hypothesize that at least some of these SNPs
affect non-coding genomic regulatory signatures, such as enhancers,
insulators or repressors. In order to reduce the number of candidate
functional SNPs, we developed an open-source (R/Bioconductor) package,
called FunciSNP (Functional Integration of SNPs), which systematically
integrates the 1000 genomes SNP data with chromatin features of interest.
To define functionality in non-coding DNA associated with PCa risk we
have utilized chromatin features generated by next-generation sequencing
technologies, which capture regions genome-wide for which both open
chromatin states and enhancers are likely. The open chromatin state
(DnaseI, H3K9,14ac), enhancers (H3K4me1), and active/engaged enhancers
(H3K27ac) were generated either by our lab, or harvested from the ENCODE
project, or retrieved from recent publications. All chromatin features
were identified in the same prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP). Thus, we
have identified 113 PCa risk correlated SNPs at androgen receptor
occupied regions (AROR), 1,545 at DNase1 sensitivity sites and 403 at
histone modified regions [H3K4me1 (160 SNPs), H3K9,14 ac (121 SNPs),
H3k27ac (122 SNPs)]; all features excluded transcription start sites of
known annotated genes. Interestingly, the majority of the identified
correlated SNPs (69%) are located in either chromosome 8 or 10. ARORs
coinciding with DNase1 sites revealed four novel SNPs correlated with
four GWAS tagSNPs. Of the four novel surrogate SNPs, two are located 4kb
upstream from KLK3, one is located within the 3 UTR of NKX3.1 and one is
located within an intron of RUVBL1. DNase1 sites coinciding with any
histone modification provided 17 novel SNPs correlated with 10 GWAS
tagSNPs. Of the 17 novel SNPs, four are located in 8q24 genomic region
and each are more than 100kb away from a known annotated gene. Each one
of above-mentioned novel SNPs is assessed for effects on potential
transcription factor response elements.

