Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical implication of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in hepatocellular carcinoma


[Background] EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition) was originally
proposed as a process of organogenesis. In recent years, the association
between EMT and cancer invasion and metastasis has been advocated and
actively investigated in various cancers. In addition, chemoresistance
and cancer stemness could be involved in EMT, and the elucidation of this
association might contribute to improved outcomes of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We utilized surgical specimens of HCC from our
department to examine the clinical implications of EMT. [Methods] One
hundred-one patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, who underwent
resection in our department between 1994 and 2003 were analyzed. The mRNA
expression of E-cadherin and Vimentin were measured by quantitative
real-time PCR and EMT status of each patient was determined as follows:
Vimentin/E-cadherin [Background] EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition) was originally proposed as a process of organogenesis. In
recent years, the association between EMT and cancer invasion and
metastasis has been advocated and actively investigated in various
cancers. In addition, chemoresistance and cancer stemness could be
involved in EMT, and the elucidation of this association might contribute
to improved outcomes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We utilized
surgical specimens of HCC from our department to examine the clinical
implications of EMT. [Methods] One hundred-one patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma, who underwent resection in our department
between 1994 and 2003 were analyzed. The mRNA expression of E-cadherin
and Vimentin were measured by quantitative real-time PCR and EMT status
of each patient was determined as follows: Vimentin/E-cadherin < 2 =
Epithelial (E), Vimentin/E-cadherin 2 = Mesenchymal (M). Moreover,
transcription factors which are involved in EMT (Twist, Snail, Slug,
Zeb-1, and Zeb-2) and also IL-6 and its receptor IL-6R were measured. The
correlation between these values and clinicopathological factors and
prognosis were analyzed statistically. [Results] 1. AFP values were
significantly higher in the epithelial group than in the mesenchymal
group (P = 0.029) and PIVKA-II values also tended to be higher in the
epithelial group as compared to the mesenchymal group. There was no
difference in overall survival, but a significant difference was found in
disease-free survival (P = 0.042), which showed that patients with a
mesenchymal tumor were more prone to have an earlier recurrence than
those with an epithelial tumor. 2. All transcription factors (Twist,
Snail, Slug, Zeb-1, and Zeb-2) were more highly expressed in mesenchymal
than in epithelial tumors, and in particular, Twist and Zeb-2 were
significantly overexpressed (P = 0.0002, P = 0.0017, respectively).
Overall survival and disease-free survival of Twist and Zeb-2 expression
tumors were examined, but there was no difference between these groups.
3. IL-6 expression was also significantly higher in mesenchymal than in
epithelial tumors, but there was no difference in IL-6R expression.
[Discussion] Analysis of EMT status in HCC has been performed in the
past, but the majority of these studies were done in vitro. Our study
using resected surgical specimens suggest that EMT could be involved in
cancer invasion and metastasis at the clinical level. In particular,
Twist and Zeb-2 might be important for inducing EMT in HCC and patients
with mesenchymal tumors are more prone to have early recurrence or
metastases after resection. In addition, IL-6 might be an important
factor for HCC EMT and could be a potential therapeutic target.

