Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of mouse oviductal glycoprotein (Ovgp1) promoter
driven SV40 T large antigen: fallopian tube cancer and leiomyosarcoma
mouse model


Recent molecular and pathologic evidence indicate that high-grade serous
carcinomas of the ovary, which are the most common type of epithelial
carcinomas, may arise from the distal part of fallopian tubes or tubal
carcinoma implants. Oviductal glycoprotein 1 (Ovgp1), a glycosylated
protein found in the epithelial cells in the oviduct, is the only
specific tubal marker so far. Ovgp1 promoter-driven SV40 large T-antigen
transgenic mice develop tumors in the female reproductive organs. To
characterize these tumors, we performed immunohistochemical analysis in
paraffin-embedded sections. Mice were sacrificed at 8 or 13 weeks old.
Macroscopically we observed large tumors in the uterus and cervix and
markedly enlarged region in the oviduct. Due to the large tumor in the
uterus and cervix, we could not keep the mice longer than 13 weeks.
Histologically, there were no major differences in these affected regions
between 8 weeks old and 13 weeks old mice. We observed, (i) relatively
small ovaries and ovarian follicular hyperplasia, (ii) intact ovarian
surface epithelium showing no atypical histology, (iii) atypical
epithelial hyperplasia within the oviduct (with endometrioid
architectural and cytologic features), (iv) leiomyosarcomatous
proliferation in the myometrium, and (v) squamous carcinoma in situ in
the cervix or early invasive cervical cancer with extensive papillary
architecture. We did not detect metastasis from the tumor to other
organs. The atypical abnormalities of the oviduct were more significant
in the proximal site to the uterus than the distal site. The proximal
oviduct demonstrated weak and spotty p53 expression, beneath the
epithelium, similar to p53 signature in the human oviduct. We
hypothesized that stem cell components may contribute to the tumor
development and that putative cancer stem cells could be identified by
stem cell markers. In the oviduct epithelium, Bmi1 expression was not
detectable. Cytoplasmic expression of Sox2 was observed in all epithelial
cells of the oviduct. There was little correlation between Sox2/Bmi1
staining and p53 staining in the oviduct. Interestingly, Sox2 and Bmi1
staining in the wild-type control mice showed immunoreactive cells
interspersed between glandular structures, a pattern similar to
previously described label-retaining cells in the endometrium. The
expression pattern in Ovgp1-SV40 mice, Bmi1 and Sox2 expression were more
obvious in the endometrial stromal area but not in the leiomyosarcoma
region, which implies that stem cell components in the endometrial region
may support the leiomyosarcoma progression in this mouse model. In
conclusion, Ovgp1-SV40 transgenic mouse is a useful model for studies
involving fallopian and lower genital tract carcinogenesis.

