Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinguished features of ERG oncoprotein expression among matched
cohorts of African-American and Caucasian-American prostate cancer
patients


Introduction and Objective: The ETS-related gene (ERG) proto-oncogene is
frequently overexpressed in prostate cancer (CaP) as a result of a
genomic rearrangement that places ERG under the control of the
androgen-dependent TMPRSS2 promoter. The initial report of quantitative
ERG mRNA expression in micro-dissected prostate tumor cells showed
significantly higher ERG expression in CaP of Caucasian-Americans (CA)
patients vs. African-American (AA) patients (Petrovics et al, Oncogene,
2005). Recent studies (Magi-Galluzzi et al, Prostate, 2011; Elliott et
al, USCAP Mtg., 2011) have also shown higher frequency of ERG
rearrangement or ERG oncoprotein expression in CaP of CA patients. We
evaluate the frequency and pattern of the ERG oncoprotein expression in
prostate tumors of matched CA and AA CaP patients to better understand
the biological basis for differences in prostate cancer between the two
populations. Methods: Ninety one AA and 91 CA CaP patients were matched
for age, Gleason score and pathologic stage. All underwent radical
prostatectomy between 1993 and 2010. Whole mount prostate specimens were
used for the immunohistochemical detection of the ERG oncoprotein by a
highly specific ERG monoclonal antibody (clone 9FY). Individual foci of
tumors were reported as either positive or negative. ERG staining data
was linked to clinico-pathologic data. Biochemical recurrence was defined
as two serum PSA measurements of 0.2 ng/mL or higher at least 8 weeks
from surgery. Results: A higher percentage of CA (61.8%) than AA (28.2%)
CaP patients had ERG positive index tumors and had at least one focus of
tumor positive for ERG. A higher percentage of overall tumor foci were
also positive for ERG in CA than AA CaP patients. There was high
concordance of ERG positive prostatic intra-epitheilal neoplasia (PIN)
and ERG positive CaP in both AA and CA patients. Conclusions: ERG
expression is more prevalent among CA than AA CaP patients in matched
cohorts. Differences in the pattern of ERG expression in CaP and
differing trends in biochemical recurrence between CA and AA patients
with ERG (+) index tumors suggest a dominant clonal selection of
ERG-positive tumors in CA patients. These differences in ERG expression
have the potential to delineate biological distinctions of CaP in the two
patient populations. Acknowledgement: This study was supported in part by
USU-CPDR and NIH grant CA162383 to SS.

