Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs35301225 (A/C/T) in
pre-miR-34a alters the cell cycle regulation


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common type of cancer in men in the
United States and is expected to result in 218,000 new cases and about
32,000 deaths in 2010. Recently, microRNA miR-34a has been associated
with many cancers including prostate cancer. It has been shown that tumor
suppressor p53 transcriptionally regulates the expression of microRNA-
miR-34a, which confers translational inhibition and mRNA degradation of
genes involved in cell cycle control and apoptosis. Several GWAS studies
have reported that Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in microRNA
coding genes (both in seed and mature sequence) or their target binding
sites may alter the strength of miRNA binding and deregulate target gene
expression. To our interest we aimed to explore the effect of germ line
polymorphism rs35301225 (A/C/T) residing in miR-34a (rs35301225) on the
cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Prostate (PC3 and LnCap) and breast
cancer (MDA-MB 231) cell lines were transfected with pre miRNA mimics
containing A/C/T alleles (rs35301225) of miR-34a and the expression of
CYCLIN D1, CDK4, CDK6 and proteins associated with cellular signaling
cascades, involved in cell cycle regulation were determined by Western
blotting. Luciferase assay was performed for the target evaluation. The
cell proliferation and apoptosis were measured by WST-1 assay and flow
cytometry respectively. The expressions of apoptosis-related proteins
were detected by Western blotting in the transfected cells. Western blot
analysis showed that CYCLIN D1, CDK4, CDK6 and other downstream molecules
were significantly down-regulated in the presence of C allele, whereas no
such reduction of expression was observed in the presence of A or T
allele. Cell proliferation assay showed that different alleles of miR-34a
also exert profound effect on proliferation pattern of cells. Flow
cytometry analysis also showed that cells with different alleles of
miR-34a may exert significant effect on cell cycle progression and
apoptosis. To explore if this phenomenon was confined to prostate cancer
cell lines or different alleles of mir-34a may alter cell function in
general, experiments were repeated with a breast cancer cell line,
MDA-MB-231. Interestingly the results obtained in breast cancer cell
lines were similar to that obtained in prostate cancer cell lines. The
results suggest that genetic variants residing in the mature miRNA may
exert a substantial effect on their expression and function, which needs
to be explored along with the biological effect of miRNAs.

