Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Kruppel-like factor 4 inhibits the growth and
migration in human hepatoma cells


The zinc-finger transcriptional factor Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), can
inhibit cell proliferation and maintain the differentiation of epithelial
cells by regulating the expression of genes with GC-rich promoters, plays
important roles in development and tumorigenesis. Recently, reduction of
KLF4 expression has been reported in multiple gastrointestinal cancers
such as gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), and this observation was associated well with tumor progression
and poor clinical outcome. However, the exact role of KLF4 in the
progression of HCC is still unclear. In this study, we used lentiviral
transduction method to overexpress KLF4 in a highly metastatic HA22T/VGH
hepatoma cell line. Using MTT and sulforhodamine B assay, we found that
cell growth was decreased in KLF4-overexpressing HA22T/VGH cells as
compared to parental cells. Moreover, wound healing assay revealed the
migration ability was significantly suppressed in KLF4-overexpressing
HA22T/VGH cells. Consistent with these findings, KLF4 overexpression also
resulted in the up-regulation of E-cadherin expression and concomitant
down-regulation of vimentin expression in HA22T/VGH cells. Moreover, our
preliminary finding showed that KLF4 knockdown by transfection of KLF4
shRNA caused the decrease in E-cadherin expression in HEK293T cells.
E-cadherin, a key adhesion molecule in the process of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis, was
regulated by many transcription factors such as Snail. Interestingly, in
this study we have found that KLF4 overexpression led to an obvious
reduction in the Snail expression in HA22T/VGH cells. Therefore, these
results together suggest that KLF4-induced E-cadherin expression may
result from regulation at E-cadherin transcription level or inhibition of
the expression of Snail. Furthermore, our findings also suggested that
the role of KLF4 may be associated with the cell growth, EMT process and
metastasis in the tumor progression of HCC.

