Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadherin-11 function is required for full neoplastic
transformation by v-Src


The signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) has
emerged as an important signal transducer with a role in cancer etiology.
Following activation of a number of growth factor or cytokine receptors
or expression of oncogenes such as vSrc, Stat3 is phosphorylated at
tyr-705, dimerizes and migrates to the nucleus where it activates
transcription from a number of genes involved in cell division and
survival. We recently discovered a novel pathway of activation of Stat3,
triggered by cadherin engagement. Stat3 activation was caused by a
striking upregulation of the Rac GTPase and IL6, and induced
downregulation of the p53 antioncogene, upregulation of anti-apoptotic
genes and a potent survival signal. A large number of oncogenes such as
vSrc activate the E2F transcription factor, found to be hyperactive in
many cancers. E2F induces the expression of genes involved in cell
division, as well as a number of receptor tyrosine kinases, that can, in
turn, activate Stat3. However, at the same time E2F is a potent apoptosis
inducer, hence the high demand of transformed cells for survival signals.
Since cadherin engagement activates Stat3, a potent survival signal, we
examined the effect of downregulation of cadherin-11 upon transformation
of mouse Balb/c3T3 fibroblasts by vSrc. Cadherin-11 knockdown through
shRNA expression with a retroviral vector caused a dramatic reduction in
Stat3 activity. At the same time, expression of vSrc in cadherin-11
knockdown cells failed to cause transformation; in the contrary, vSrc
expression induced apoptosis. These data indicate that cadherin-11 is
necessary for full neoplastic transformation of mouse fibroblasts by
vSrc. This is especially remarkable because Src has been shown to have a
negative effect upon, although not eliminate cadherin function, since
Stat3 activity was, in fact increased in vSrc-expressing cells upon
cadherin engagement. Therefore, it appears that the residual amounts of
cadherin-11 present are sufficient to activate Stat3 and prevent
apoptosis induced by the Src/E2F axis.

