Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung derived fibroblasts influence extracellular matrix
composition and dissemination of lung cancers


There is increasing evidence of the central contribution of tumor
microenvironment to cancer development and progression. The elucidation
of the role of different cellular components to this mechanism might
therefore provide novel insights on the transformation process and
potentially indicate targets for innovative therapeutic intervention. In
particular, it has been shown that fibroblasts isolated from invasive
breast lesions can contribute to tumor growth through the CXCR4/SDF1
pathway and that human prostatic carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
can drive the progression of initiated non-tumorigenic epithelial cells.
Recently a gene-expression signature derived from lung CAFs was shown to
have prognostic value in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. To
further investigate the contribution of fibroblasts to lung cancer we
established primary cultures of CAFs and matched normal fibroblasts (NFs)
from resected NSCLC and performed co-injection experiments in nude mice
with A549 lung cancer cells. Co-injection of fibroblasts generally
resulted in tumors of bigger size and/or increased take rate when cells
were injected at low doses. Time-course experiments revealed presence of
human cells in the stromal component of xenografts up to one month after
injection, indicating possible involvement also in the progression phase.
To evaluate the contribution of fibroblasts to extracellular matrix
composition of tumors we therefore analyzed by real-time PCR with human
specific primers the expression levels of 14 extracellular matrix (ECM)
related genes in 63 tumors generated by co-injection of lung cancer cells
and fibroblasts (CAFs or NFs). Compared to tumors generated by injection
of A549 cells alone, heterotypic tumors displayed strongly increased
levels of COL6A3 and MMP2 (p0.03), slightly increased levels of SPARC and
reduced CTSL and CTSC (p0.01) indicating influence of fibroblasts on ECM
composition. Tumors generated by co-injections were also more likely to
metastasize to the lungs as determined by flow cytometry and real-time
PCR (31% vs. 17%; OR=2.56 95% CI 0.6-12.7). Moreover culturing of primary
lung cancer cells with CAF conditioned medium (CM) also resulted in
similar transcriptional regulations of ECM-related genes and increased
levels of MMP2 were detected in tumors derived from injection of CM
treated cells. Taken together these data demonstrate that cross-talk
between fibroblasts and cancer cells can dictate ECM composition and
regulate dissemination of lung cancer and suggest that identification of
factors responsible for this cross-talk could be instrumental in devising
novel therapeutic strategies.

