Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: REV1, DNA polymerase and the fanconi anemia proteins FANCD2 and
FANCI function together during repair


Fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosomal instability disorder characterized
by bone marrow failure, congenital abnormalities and increased incidence
of malignancies. Cells derived from FA patients exhibit cellular
hypersensitivity to interstrand crosslink (ICL)-inducing agents,
including mitomycin C (MMC) and cisplatin. ICLs are sensed and repaired
by a complex process which involves multiple DNA repair proteins
including the FA factors as well as proteins that function in nucleotide
excision repair, translesion DNA synthesis and homologous recombination
(HR). REV1 (a Y family translesion DNA polymerase) and DNA Polymerase
(Pol, comprised of the catalytic REV3 protein and REV7 accessory subunit)
play important roles in performing DNA replication across blocking
lesions. Previous studies have demonstrated an epistatic relationship
between Pol and genes encoding proteins comprising the Fanconi anemia
core complex with regards to resistance to ICLs. Additionally, REV1, Pol,
and the FANCD2/FANCI heterodimer have each been shown individually to be
involved in promoting HR repair, although the reasons for their
involvement remain unclear. Here, we show that human REV1 and REV3
exhibit an epistatic relationship with FANCD2 and FANCI in
homology-directed repair of a defined DNA double-stranded break and
cellular resistance to ICLs created by MMC. We also demonstrate that
MMC-induced chromosomal anomalies are increased in REV1 or REV3-depleted
cells and FANCD2 depletion does not further exacerbate this phenotype.
Additionally, we demonstrate for the first time that full length human
REV1 and REV3 interact with FANCD2 and FANCI in vivo as detected by
co-immunoprecipitation studies. We therefore propose a model where
replication fork stalling during HR repair DNA synthesis is resolved
through Pol-dependent translesion DNA synthesis which is regulated by the
Fanconi anemia pathway.

