Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colocalization of NQO1 with the mitotic spindle in human cells


NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is a flavoenzyme that catalyzes
the two-electron reduction of quinones. NQO1 has also been shown to
reduce superoxide to hydrogen peroxide and regulate ubiquitin independent
20S proteasome degradation of proteins such as p53. In normal tissues
NQO1 is expressed primarily in epithelium, endothelium and adipocytes
where it is believed to play a protective role. NQO1 is also expressed at
relatively high levels in many human solid tumors where it has been
targeted for its ability to bioactivate anti-tumor quinones.
Interestingly, immunohistochemical staining for NQO1 expression in
formalin-fixed human non-small cell lung cancer tissue sections revealed
strong staining for NQO1 on the mitotic spindles of cells in mitosis.
Immunocytochemical studies in combination with confocal microscopy using
human nontransformed and transformed cells (HUVEC, HBMEC, astrocytes) as
well as human cancer cell lines confirmed NQO1 staining of mitotic
spindles. Staining of mitotic spindles for NQO1 was not observed in cells
genotyped as homozygous for the NQO1*2 polymorphism or in cells
pretreated with siRNA directed against NQO1. Double-labeling experiments
using anti-alpha-tubulin and anti-NQO1 antibodies demonstrated
colocalization of NQO1 with spindle microtubules. Pretreatment with NQO1
inhibitors (ES936 or dicumarol) did not prevent binding of NQO1 to
mitotic spindles suggesting that binding is independent of the redox
state of the enzyme. In cells not undergoing mitosis there was no
apparent association of NQO1 with the cytoskeleton suggesting that
binding of NQO1 to microtubules may be specific for mitotic spindles.
Previous immunocytochemical studies by other investigators have shown
that p53 and 20S proteasome could also be found in association with the
mitotic spindle. Whether NQO1 binds directly to spindle microtubules or
the binding of NQO1 to the spindle is dependent upon the association with
other proteins such as p53 or 20S proteasome is currently under
investigation (Supported by NIH grant R01ES018943).

