Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetrandrine blocks cell cycle progression and promotes growth
arrest in prostate cancer cells by up-regulating CDK inhibitors (p21 and
p27) and suppressing cyclin expression.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer
deaths in men. De-regulated cell cycle progression is one of the
hallmarks of cancer cells. While many agents are available to inhibit
growth and proliferation of normal cells, we do not have efficient agents
that inhibit growth and proliferation of tumor cells, and no agents are
able to achieve growth arrest and inhibition of cell cycle progression in
castrate resistant prostate cancer. In this study we evaluated effects of
Tetrandrine (Tet: a bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid isolated from the
root of Stephania tetrandra) that has been shown to have diverse
biological properties, on cell growth, proliferation and cell cycle
progression in prostate cancer cells. Methods: Prostate cancer cells,
LNCaP cells (androgen dependent), LNCaP C-4 and C4-B (castrate resistant
lineages derived from LNCaP cells) cells were obtained from ATTCC. Cells
were maintained in select media and grown in 5% CO2 in a humidified
incubator maintained at 37C. Where indicated Tet (1-20 uM) was added to
the growth media for various time points as indicated. Cell growth and
proliferation was monitored by MTT assay and cell cycle distribution was
measured by FACS assay following labeling of the cells with Propedium
Iodide. Western Blotting was used to monitor changes in the levels of
various cell cycle related proteins. Results: Tet treatment inhibited
cell growth and proliferation in all three cell lines tested. The effects
of Tet on cell growth and proliferation were dose dependent with complete
growth inhibition at 20 uM. Tet treatment resulted in a significant
increase in cyclin dependent kinase inhibitory (CDKi) protein p21 (WAF1,
Cip1) and p27 (Kip1) and with p21 increase being most prominent.
Moreover, p21 was associated with Cyclin D kinases as monitored by IP
assays. Gene expression analysis revealed that Tet decreased mRNA levels
of cyclins. FACS analysis revealed that Tet treatment resulted in cell
cycle arrest in G1/G0 phase of cell cycle. Finally TET inhibited growth
of LNCaP-derived tumors in nude mice. These in vivo effects of TET were
also associated with a dramatic increase in p21. Conclusions: Tet
inhibits growth and proliferation of prostate cancer cells by effectively
blocking cell cycle progression, in part by mediating increase in p21
(WAF1, Cip1) and p27 (Kip1) proteins and suppressing cyclin expression.

