Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized treatment selection for therapy-resistant AML by
integrating ex-vivo drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) as
well as serial genomic, transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic profiling


Samples from recurrent, treatment-refractory cancers are rarely
available, but would be valuable in understanding the molecular drivers
of drug resistance. In leukemias, consecutive samples are readily
available during treatment. Hence, we explored here the progression of
adult acute myeloid leukemias (AML) by serial sampling and by integrating
data from multiple platforms. Next-generation exome and RNA sequencing,
and phosphoproteomic data were combined with comprehensive 240 cancer
drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) of leukemic blasts ex-vivo
before and after clinical relapse. The data were generated in an
experimental diagnostic setting, with intent to improve and personalize
treatment of patients with recurrent AML. A 54-year old AML-M5 patient
with a FLT-3-ITD mutation and a normal karyotype was monitored by serial
sampling. The patient was initially refractory to three consecutive
high-dose induction treatments and had limited therapy options. AML
blasts from the patient were screened with the DSRT platform. Results
implied that the blast cells were 710-times more sensitive to
temsirolimus and other rapamycin analogs as compared to normal BM cells,
and showed a 1100-fold increased sensitivity to dasatinib. Proteomic
analysis showed high phosphorylation of several signaling molecules, such
as the insulin receptor and mTOR. Sequencing identified WT1 mutations and
a NUP98-NSD1 fusion transcript, an infrequent event associated with poor
prognosis in AML. Based on the DSRT results, the patient received
compassionate off-label treatment with dasatinib, sunitinib and
temsirolimus, resulting in a remarkable clinical remission, normalization
of blast counts and a rapid recovery of neutrophil counts as a sign of
selective elimination of the leukemic cells. The patient relapsed 4 weeks
later, and at this point a new DSRT assay was performed, which showed the
blast cells to be completely resistant to temsirolimus and less sensitive
to dasatinib ex vivo. Consistent with this drug sensitivity profile was a
genomic evolution of a distinct AML subclone with new changes, such as
NF1 mutation and a microdeletion of the LEF1 gene, which were not
observed in the pre-treatment sample. Taken together, we have
demonstrated, how molecular profiling and functional ex vivo drug
sensitivity and resistance data can be used to individually optimize
patient treatment. Remission was achieved in a patient with advanced,
treatment-refractory AML. Serial sampling from human AML patients coupled
with molecular profiling and drug sensitivity testing may shed light on
clonal progression of disease, and the molecular events underlying drug
response.

