Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea polyphenols reactivate silenced tumor suppressor genes,
p16INK4a and Cip1/p21, by reducing DNA methylation and increasing histone
acetylation in UV-irradiated mouse skin and skin tumors


Overexposure of the human skin to solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the
major etiologic factor for the development of skin cancers, and
UV-induced epigenetic modifications have been implicated in the risk of
this disease. Epigenetic alterations can be inherited without changing
the DNA sequence and are believed to play a crucial role in
carcinogenesis including photocarcinogenesis. Epigenetic inactivation of
genes by promoter hypermethylation has been recognized as an important
mechanism by which tumor suppressor genes are shut down during
development of tumors. For the development of effective chemopreventive
agents and appropriate strategies for the prevention of skin cancers, the
consideration of their effects on UV-induced epigenetic modifications is
important. Earlier, we have shown that administration of green tea
polyphenols (GTPs) in drinking water of SKH-1 hairless mice inhibited
UVB-induced skin tumor development; however it is unclear how GTPs affect
UV-induced epigenetic modifications during the prevention of UV-induced
skin carcinogenesis. The present study was designed to investigate
whether administration of GTPs in drinking water of mice would reactivate
the expression of tumor suppressor genes in UV-exposed skin and skin
tumors, if it is so then what is the underlying mechanism? For this
purpose, SKH-1 hairless mice were exposed to UVB (180 mJ/cm2) with and
without the administration of GTPs (0.2%, w/v) in drinking water of mice
three times per week for 24 weeks. At the termination of the experiment,
skin tumors and tumor-uninvolved UV-exposed mouse skin biopsies were
harvested and subjected to the analysis of epigenetic biomarkers using
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, enzymatic activity assays
and real-time PCR. Our study shows that the administration of GTPs
decreased UVB-induced global DNA methylation levels in UVB-exposed skin.
GTPs decreased the levels of UVB-enhanced 5-methylcytosine (5-mC), DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) activity, messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein
levels of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. GTPs inhibited UVB-induced histone
deacetylation (HDAC) activity and increased levels of acetylated lysine 9
on histone H3 and acetylated lysine 5 and 16 on histone H4.
Administration of GTPs resulted in reactivation of the mRNA and proteins
of UVB-induced silenced tumor suppressor genes, p16INK4a and Cip1/p21.
Identical chemopreventive effects of GTPs were found when UVB-induced
skin tumors from mice treated with or without GTPs were analyzed for
tumor suppressor genes, the levels of Dnmts, and HDAC activity, etc.
Together, these data provide insight into the epigenetic mechanism of
action of GTPs against UV radiation effects that may contribute to the
chemoprevention of photocarcinogenesis and may have important
implications for epigenetic therapy.

