Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiorogan metastasis of human HER-2+ breast cancer in
immunodeficient mice


Metastatic spread is the major cause of morbidity and death among cancer
patients. In vivo studies of the metastatic process are severely hampered
by the fact that most human tumor cell lines derived from highly
metastatic tumors, such as human HER-2+ breast cancer, fail to
consistently metastasize in immunodeficient mice like athymic nude mice.
We studied whether a highly immunodeficient double knockout mouse,
Rag2/;Il2rg/, which lacks T, B and NK cell activity, was more permissive
to metastatic spread than the nude mouse. Metastatic dissemination in
Rag2/;Il2rg/ mice was widespread, and reached all sites commonly affected
in human patients, including lungs, liver, bones and brain.
Interestingly, metastatic spread from local tumors was only marginally
different between tumors growing orthotopically or subcutaneously, both
for what concerned the more malignant MDA-MB-453 cell line and the less
malignant BT-474. Intravenous administration of cells significantly
enhanced the metastatic spread of BT-474 cells, with the proportion of
affected mice attaining 100%. Different metastatic burdens were observed
in different organs, and the use of EGFP-tagged cells was instrumental in
allowing a precise detection of metastatic deposits in bones, liver and
brain. Quantitative evaluation of metastatic spread in Rag2/;Il2rg/- mice
was not limited to EGFP detection, for example we used qPCR with
human-specific primers to quantitate metastatic burden in the brain, and
flow cytometry to detect HER-2-positive disseminated tumor cells in the
bone marrow. The brain is a common site of metastatic spread, but tumor
growth in immunodeficient mice fails to reproduce this fateful property
of human tumors, unless unique cell lines, selected variants and/or
special injection routes are used. In contrast, spontaneous brain
metastases from local tumors were common in Rag2/;Il2rg/- mice, and their
frequency reached 100% after intravenous injection. Morphologic analysis
of brain deposits showed that multiple metastases were present, both
intracerebral and intraventricular or leptomeningeal, ranging from
minimal deposits of few cells to huge masses. In conclusion, human HER-2+
human breast cancer cells in Rag2/;Il2rg/ mice faithfully reproduce the
multiorgan metastatic pattern observed in patients, thus allowing the
investigation of metastatic mechanisms and the preclinical study of novel
antimetastatic agents.

