Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of Twist1 in the pathogenesis of malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM)


Background: MPM is caused by lethal neoplastic growth of the pleura
surrounding lungs. It is resistance to most standard anti-cancer
treatment regimens and needs discovery of newer therapeutic approaches.
MPM is characterized by massive loco-regional invasion of the malignant
pleural cells into the lung parenchyma. Twist1 is a transcription factor,
which promotes invasion and metastasis of tumor cells, increases
chemotherapeutic resistance and is involved in the pathobiology of many
cancers. Also recent studies have highlighted the potential of twist1 as
a therapeutic target in cancer. But there is no report investigating its
function in mesothelioma. Methods: We extracted total RNA from 53 frozen
resected tumor tissue specimens, comprised of 39 epitheloid, 7
sarcomatoid and 7 biphasic histotypes, along with paired normal tissue.
The RNA was labeled and hybridized to Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 microarray
to obtain transcriptomic profiles. Bioinformatic analysis of the
microarray data using a 2 sample t-test was applied, on a probe-by-probe
basis followed by Beta-uniform Mixture for multiple comparisons, to
determine the differences between tumor vs normal specimens. The
microarray results were validated by quantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) using Taqman assays on the ABI 7300
platform. For all qRT-PCR experiments the twist1 transcript levels were
determined relative to endogenous GAPDH as control using CT calculation.
We performed Western blot analysis on a panel of 16 mesothelioma cell
lines including Met-5A (SV-40 immortalized) and HCT-4012 (telomerase
immortalized) pleural mesothelial control cell lines. Results: The
bioinformatic analysis of microarray data showed that twist1 transcript
level was 8.7 fold higher in tumors (p = 1.1E-16) compared to paired
normal specimens. Using qRT-PCR, we compared twist1 transcript levels in
12 pairs of tumor vs paired normal tissue specimens and found that twist1
was upregulated to more than 10 fold in MPM tumors (p Background: MPM is
caused by lethal neoplastic growth of the pleura surrounding lungs. It is
resistance to most standard anti-cancer treatment regimens and needs
discovery of newer therapeutic approaches. MPM is characterized by
massive loco-regional invasion of the malignant pleural cells into the
lung parenchyma. Twist1 is a transcription factor, which promotes
invasion and metastasis of tumor cells, increases chemotherapeutic
resistance and is involved in the pathobiology of many cancers. Also
recent studies have highlighted the potential of twist1 as a therapeutic
target in cancer. But there is no report investigating its function in
mesothelioma. Methods: We extracted total RNA from 53 frozen resected
tumor tissue specimens, comprised of 39 epitheloid, 7 sarcomatoid and 7
biphasic histotypes, along with paired normal tissue. The RNA was labeled
and hybridized to Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 microarray to obtain
transcriptomic profiles. Bioinformatic analysis of the microarray data
using a 2 sample t-test was applied, on a probe-by-probe basis followed
by Beta-uniform Mixture for multiple comparisons, to determine the
differences between tumor vs normal specimens. The microarray results
were validated by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) using Taqman assays on the ABI 7300 platform. For all
qRT-PCR experiments the twist1 transcript levels were determined relative
to endogenous GAPDH as control using CT calculation. We performed Western
blot analysis on a panel of 16 mesothelioma cell lines including Met-5A
(SV-40 immortalized) and HCT-4012 (telomerase immortalized) pleural
mesothelial control cell lines. Results: The bioinformatic analysis of
microarray data showed that twist1 transcript level was 8.7 fold higher
in tumors (p = 1.1E-16) compared to paired normal specimens. Using
qRT-PCR, we compared twist1 transcript levels in 12 pairs of tumor vs
paired normal tissue specimens and found that twist1 was upregulated to
more than 10 fold in MPM tumors (p < E-4). Western blot showed that 10
MPM cancer cell lines had higher expression of twist1 protein compared to
Met-5A and HCT-4012 cell lines. The highest expression was seen in 2 of
the sarcomatoid cell lines - RS5 and DM3, suggesting a correlation with
metastatic phenotype since sarcomatoid tumors are highly metastatic in
nature. Conclusion: Our preliminary findings suggest that twist1 is
upregulated in MPM tumors and cell lines and may play a role in the
development of MPM. Further studies are needed to investigate its role in
the process of tumorigenesis and metastasis. Supported by Grants: DoD
W81XWH-07-1-0306 (I.I.W and AST), Fleming Foundation, IASLC Young
Investigator Award 2011-2013 (MS).

