Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of cetuximab against
colorectal cancer cells with wild-type and mutant KRAS


Cetuximab is a chimeric IgG1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) that targets the
extracellular domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). In
addition to direct EGFR inhibition, antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) is considered to be an important mechanism of action
of cetuximab. Recently, KRAS mutations in tumors have been shown to be a
negative predictive factor for response to cetuximab treatment for
colorectal cancer (CRC). KRAS activating mutations constitutively
transduce RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway signaling, which theoretically cannot
be suppressed by inhibition of the upstream receptor through the use of
cetuximab. Thus, KRAS mutations potentially contribute to the resistance
to the direct inhibitory effect of cetuximab. However, the influence of
KRAS mutations on cetuximab induced ADCC is not fully understood. In this
study, we investigated cetuximab-mediated ADCC against human CRC lines,
HCT116 and DLD-1, which carry mutated KRAS, and their derivative cell
lines, HKh2 and DKO-4 respectively, in which the mutated KRAS allele was
deleted by targeted disruption (KRAS wild-type). Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy volunteers and NK92, a natural
killer cell line, exogenously expressing Fc3A (CD16a) were used as
effector cells. We first determined the growth-inhibitory effect of
cetuximab alone using a WST-8 assay. Growth inhibition was observed only
in KRAS wild-type cell lines, but its effect was only slight. In a
standard short-term (4hr) ADCC assay that mainly evaluated lytic activity
via perforin/granzyme, ADCC activities were exhibited to a similar extent
against CRC cell lines regardless of the KRAS mutation status. We also
examined a long-term (24hr) ADCC assay under the perforin-inhibited
condition to evaluate the death receptor ligand-induced apoptosis, which
is another major mechanism of ADCC. In this assay, cetuximab-mediated
ADCC was induced in wild-type but not mutant KRAS cell lines. Similar to
a previous report, Hkh2 and DKO-4 displayed a higher sensitivity to
recombinant human Fas ligand (FasL) and TRAIL than did HCT116 and DLD-1,
respectively. Furthermore, blocking experiments with neutralizing
antibodies revealed that induction of apoptosis via Fas-FasL interaction
is involved in perforin-independent cetuximab-mediated ADCC against KRAS
wild-type cells. In conclusion, these results suggest that mutated KRAS
may contribute to the resistance to the antitumor effects of cetuximab
not only through direct receptor inhibition but also through ADCC
mediated by Fas-FasL interaction.

