Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isorhamnetin modulates PPAR activation pathway leading to the
suppression of proliferation, invasion and induction of apoptosis in
gastric cancer


Background: Gastric cancer, including cancer of the esophago-gastric
junction, is the fourth most common malignant tumor and the second-most
common cause of cancer-related death. Though treatment options such as
chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery are available, only a modest
survival rate has been observed, with the most common complications being
chemoresistance and tumor recurrence. Majority of gastric adenocarcinomas
have been related to chronic inflammation induced by Helicobacter pylori
infection. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors are
ligand-activated intracellular transcription factors that have been shown
to be involved in tumor growth. However, its role in gastric cancer
remains unclear. In this study, we report the anticancer effects of
Isorhamnetin (IH), a 3-O-methylated metabolite of quercetin on gastric
cancer cells, and its potential effect on the PPAR- activation pathway.
Method: Various gastric cancer cell lines were used in the study. To
investigate the effect of IH on gastric cancer cells, we used techniques
such as cell proliferation assays, wound healing assay, matrigel invasion
assay, western blot analysis, cell cycle analysis, real time PCR analyses
and live and dead assay. Whether IH could modulate activation of PPAR-
was also investigated by molecular docking analysis. Results: We found
that IH exerted strong anti-proliferative effect in gastric cancer cells
and, when combined with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin, increased
cytotoxicity. IH was found to increase sub-G1 accumulation and annexin-V
positive staining, indicating apoptotic induction. In addition, IH
activated caspases 8, 9 and 3 in a time-dependent manner. Migratory and
invasive properties of gastric cancer cells were also reduced in the
presence of IH. Interestingly, we report for the first time that IH was
able to increase PPAR- activity and down-regulate the expression of the
genes for Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and survivin in gastric cancer cells. More
importantly, the increase in PPAR- activity was prevented in the presence
of PPAR- specific inhibitor and PPAR- dominant negative plasmid,
suggesting that IH may act as a ligand of PPAR-. Also, we observed using
molecular docking analysis that IH indeed formed interactions with 7
polar residues and 6 non-polar residues within the ligand-binding pocket
of PPAR- that are reported to be critical for its activity. Conclusion:
Taken together, our novel observations suggest that IH may have potential
implication in gastric cancer prevention and treatment, and show for the
first time that the anti-tumor effect of IH may also be mediated through
modulation of the PPAR- activation pathway.

