Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of truncated HER2 receptor in circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) of breast cancer patients


Introduction: HER2 receptor is overexpressed in 15-25% of patients with
breast cancer. In HER2 positive breast cancer the administration of
trastuzumab has changed the outcome of disease. However, most patients
will eventually develop resistance to trastuzumab. The presence of a
truncated receptor with loss of the extracellular portion of HER2
(p95HER2) has been proposed as a potential mechanism of resistance.
Preclinical and clinical data suggest that the expression of p95HER2 is
associated with poor overall prognosis, resistance to trastuzumab and
sensitivity to lapatinib, a dual EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
We have recently shown that approximately 50% of breast cancer patients
express HER2 in their CTCs (Kallergi et al., 2007; Kallergi et al.,
2008). The aim of the present study was to characterize, for the first
time, the expression of p95HER2 in CTCs of breast cancer patients.
Methods: Triple staining immunofluorescent (IF) experiments were
performed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) cytospins of
patients with early (n=24) and metastatic (n=33) breast cancer who were
CK-19 mRNA-positive by real time PCR. Pancytokeratin A45-B/B3 antibody
(as a marker of CK-positive cells) was coupled with antibodies against
the extracellular and the intracellular domains of HER2. Slides were
analysed with either confocal laser scanning microscopy or with the Ariol
system. Results: Cytokeratin positive cells were identified in 17 (71%)
out of 24 early and in 20 (61%) out of 33 metastatic patients. HER2
positive CTCs were identified in 53% of early and 50% of metastatic
CTC-positive breast cancer patients. HER2-positive CTCs lacking the
extracellular domain of the receptor (p95HER positive CTCs) were
identified in 35% of metastatic and 12% of early breast cancer patients.
Exclusively p95HER2 positive CTCs were detected in 12% of patients with
metastatic but not in patients with early disease. Conclusions: These
data suggest that the truncated p95HER2 receptor is expressed in CTCs of
both early and metastatic breast cancer patients. This finding has
important therapeutic implications and may explain the observed increased
efficacy of the trastuzumab plus lapatinib combination in HER2 positive
breast cancer.

