Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the TGF pathway inhibits chemotherapy-induced
enrichment of breast cancer stem cells in triple-negative breast cancer


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most virulent form of breast
cancer and is associated with a worse prognosis compared to hormone
receptor- and HER2-positive tumors. The standard treatment of TNBC is
cytotoxic chemotherapy. TNBC patients tend to display an initial response
to chemotherapy; however, they exhibit higher recurrence rates and
overall poor long term survival. Reasons for this high metastatic
recurrence rate and mortality are believed to be the existence of a
chemo-resistant tumor-initiating population called cancer stem cells
(CSCs). CSCs are defined as cells with the ability to self-renew,
differentiate into non-tumorigenic cells, and initiate tumors in vivo.
CSCs isolated from breast cancer tissue display increased transforming
growth factor (TGF) and TGF type 2 receptor (TGFR2) mRNA expression
compared to the non-CSC population. Furthermore, breast CSCs exhibit
characteristics of the TGF-driven epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Therefore, we hypothesize that inhibiting the TGF pathway can
abrogate the breast CSC population and sensitize TNBC to chemotherapy,
thus reducing metastatic recurrences and tumor progression. From a cohort
of pre and post-chemotherapy treated TNBC patient samples we observed
increased TGF signaling receptors and ligands, CD44 and ALDH1 levels in
post-chemotherapy treated patients. We examined the effect of TGF1, the
TGF receptor 1/2 kinase inhibitor LY2157299, the TGFR2 receptor
neutralizing antibody TR1, and paclitaxel on the CSC population in TNBC
cell lines by 1) FACS analysis of CSC markers (ALDH, CD44, and PROCR);
and 2) mammosphere formation assays. Paclitaxel treatment resulted in an
enrichment of CSCs as measured by FACS and mammosphere formation (p0.005)
both in vitro and in SUM159 xenografts. Further, treatment with
paclitaxel upregulated TGFR2 and TGF1 mRNAs and phosphorylated SMAD2
levels from post-therapy SUM159 xenografts. LY2157299 and TR1 abrogated
TGF-mediated CSC enrichment and mammosphere formation (p0.01). Specific
targeting of TGFR2 and SMAD4 by RNAi decreased the CD44hi/CD24lo
population in both cell lines. SMAD4 downmodulation also decreased
mammosphere formation and interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression in three TNBC
cell lines. Finally, a combination of either LY2157299 or SMAD4 siRNA
with paclitaxel decreased CSC marker expression, IL-8, and mammosphere
formation compared to each treatment alone (p0.006) from bulk and sorted
CSC populations. These findings suggest that TGF signaling plays a
maintenance role in breast CSCs viability. Second, blockade of the TGF
pathway with genetic or pharmacological inhibitors can ameliorate or
prevent the enrichment of drug-resistant CSCs by chemotherapy. These
studies provide a rationale for studies of chemotherapy TGF inhibitors in
patients with TNBC using CSC markers as surrogates of clinical response.

