Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-1 suppression enhances combined anti-EGFR and
radiation-therapy of NSCLC


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer related death worldwide
and will account for nearly 160,000 deaths in the United States alone in
2010. Between 80-90% of all cases diagnosed are classified as non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recent studies have shown a significant
subpopulation of patients diagnosed with NSCLC have an activation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) domain resulting from gene
amplification, overexpression, or kinse-domain activating mutations. EGFR
inhibitors such as Erlotinib and Gefitnib have shown promising results in
this subpopulation of patients however median overall survival remains
poor. LSGAL1, Galectin-1 (GAL1), is a beta-galactoside-binding protein we
recently identified to play an important role in the activation of the
PI3-Kinase pathway located directly downstream of EGFR. Silencing
Galectin-1 in combination with an EGFR-inhibitor and radiation therapy
may be a promising therapeutic strategy for patients with NSCLC. Using a
short-hairpin RNA strategy we silenced GAL1 expression in four different
NCSLC cell lines and assessed their relative radioresistance via
clonogenic survival assay in the presence and absence of an EGFR
inhibitor. In order to elucidate the mechanism between GAL1 and EGFR,
western blotting and QPRC analysis was performed on downstream pathway
members, specifically the RAS/PI3-Kinase and RAS/ERK signaling cascades.
Functional assays focusing on proliferation/survival were carried out to
determine the effect silencing GAL1 had on the combination of EGFR
inhibition and radiation therapy in our NSCLC cell lines. Our preliminary
results suggest silencing GAL1 reduces the clonogenic survival of NSCLC
cells when used in combination with an EGFR inhibitor following
irradiation. In addition well known players within PI3-Kinase pathway
such as pAKT S473 appear to be altered in the absence of GAL1. Our
preliminary findings suggest GAL1 is a promising therapeutic target in
NSCLC when used in combination with an EGFR inhibitor and radiation
therapy and is worthy of further investigation.

