Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase Ib study of bavituximab plus carboplatin and pemetrexed in
chemotherapy naive stage IV non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Bavituximab (B) is a novel chimeric IgG1
phosphatidylserine-targeting monoclonal antibody. B selective binds to
phosphatidylserine complexed with 2-glycoprotein I exposed on tumor
vasculature resulting in enhanced immune response and inhibition of
existing as well as novel tumor vasculature. Pre-clinical data suggest a
synergistic action using phosphatidylserine-targeting antibodies in
combination with chemotherapy. B has previously been reported to be safe
and well tolerated when given in combination with paclitaxel and
carboplatin (C) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and has produced a
promising 43% overall response rate (ORR). Here, we report on the
currently enrolling trial of B in combination with pemetrexed (P) and C,
in treatment nave locally advanced or metastatic non-squamous NSCLC.
Methods: This is an ongoing open-label, single arm phase Ib study
(standard 3+3 design) of B (0.3mg/kg, 1mg/kg, and 3mg/kg) with fixed dose
CP. B is given weekly in combination with C (AUC 6) plus P (500mg/m2),
given every 3 weeks, maximum of 6 cycles. Patients may elect to continue
on maintenance B until disease progression. At the MTD, up to 16
additional patients will be enrolled to further characterize safety and
preliminary evidence of efficacy, using an adaptive design incorporating
an early stopping rule based on excessive proportion of DLTs observed.
The study objectives are to determine the safety, tolerability and
recommended phase 2 dose of B in combination with CP. We will also
estimate ORR, progression free and overall survival. DCE-MRI at baseline
and end of cycle 1 will be explored as a potential pharmacodynamics
biomarker in up to 10 patients. Due to theoretical concern for
prothrombotic effects of B, an optional but encouraged prothrombotic
evaluation will be performed on all consenting patients, consisting of
baseline and end of study Doppler ultrasound, and blood collection for
evaluation of D-Dimer and tissue-factor microparticles. Results: As of
November 2011, Cohort 1 is complete with 3 patients (67% female, 100%
white), median age of 59 (range 52-65y) at B dose 0.3 mg/kg. Safety data
for cohort 1 is as follows: grade 3 thrombocytopenia attributed to CP was
reported in one patient resulting in dosing interruption. No DLTs or SAEs
have been reported. Currently 2 patients are evaluable for response, with
both (100%) reporting partial responses. Conclusions: To date, the first
of 3 planned dose escalations has been well tolerated, with no unexpected
safety events. Response rates reported to date are encouraging, although
conclusions are limited due to the small number. Dose escalation is
ongoing and results will be updated.

