Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The early response protein EGR-1 mediates vitamin E
-tocotrienol-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells


Background: Vitamin E tocotrienols are bioactive components of cereal
foods such as oats, barley, rice bran, and palm, that have demonstrated
anticancer and chemopreventive activities in various types of cancer.
Recently we have shown that -tocotrienol is the most bioactive
tocotrienol against pancreatic cancer both in vitro as well as in vivo.
However, the molecular mechanism of action of tocotrienols in pancreatic
cancer has not been fully elucidated. In this work, we investigated the
early genes associated with Vitamin E -tocotrienol induced apoptosis, and
therefore identify novel pathways related with its anticancer effects.
Methods: Human pancreatic cancer MiaPaca-2 cells were treated with
-tocotrienol (50 M) and vehicle (ethanol) for 3 h and were subjected to
microarray analysis using costume Affymetrix for the identification of
early regulatory genes. Early growth response protein-1 (EGR-1) was one
of those early response genes induced by -tocotrienol. Then we evaluated
the protein expression of EGR-1 by real-time PCR and western-blot in
pancreatic cancer cell lines (MiaPaca-2 and Panc-1) after treatment with
-tocotrienol. Mechanistic studies were conducted trough siRNA knockdown
of EGR-1 and the rescue of Vitamin of -tocotrienol-induced apoptosis,
anti-proliferative effects and signaling pathways. Results: We identified
8 genes that were induced and 8 genes that were suppressed early after
treatment with -tocotrienol in MiaPaca-2 cells. Then we selected and
focused on the EGR-1 for signaling pathway analysis. Induction of protein
expression was noticed in both MiaPac-2 cells and Panc-1 (6 fold and 10
fold respectively;pBackground: Vitamin E tocotrienols are bioactive
components of cereal foods such as oats, barley, rice bran, and palm,
that have demonstrated anticancer and chemopreventive activities in
various types of cancer. Recently we have shown that -tocotrienol is the
most bioactive tocotrienol against pancreatic cancer both in vitro as
well as in vivo. However, the molecular mechanism of action of
tocotrienols in pancreatic cancer has not been fully elucidated. In this
work, we investigated the early genes associated with Vitamin E
-tocotrienol induced apoptosis, and therefore identify novel pathways
related with its anticancer effects. Methods: Human pancreatic cancer
MiaPaca-2 cells were treated with -tocotrienol (50 M) and vehicle
(ethanol) for 3 h and were subjected to microarray analysis using costume
Affymetrix for the identification of early regulatory genes. Early growth
response protein-1 (EGR-1) was one of those early response genes induced
by -tocotrienol. Then we evaluated the protein expression of EGR-1 by
real-time PCR and western-blot in pancreatic cancer cell lines (MiaPaca-2
and Panc-1) after treatment with -tocotrienol. Mechanistic studies were
conducted trough siRNA knockdown of EGR-1 and the rescue of Vitamin of
-tocotrienol-induced apoptosis, anti-proliferative effects and signaling
pathways. Results: We identified 8 genes that were induced and 8 genes
that were suppressed early after treatment with -tocotrienol in MiaPaca-2
cells. Then we selected and focused on the EGR-1 for signaling pathway
analysis. Induction of protein expression was noticed in both MiaPac-2
cells and Panc-1 (6 fold and 10 fold respectively;p<0.05) after 24 h
-tocotrienol treatment. -tocotrienol-induced apoptosis in MiaPac-2 cells
and Panc-1 cells (PARP1 cleavage and Annexin V) was associated with
induction of p-JNK, p-C-JUN, and EGR-1. Knockdown of EGR-1 in this two
cell lines partially rescued -tocotrienol-induced apoptosis. Conclusion:
Our data identifies EGR-1 as an early gene which is induced by Vitamin E
-tocotrienol in pancreatic cancer cells. Activation of the EGR-1 pathway,
may constitute a novel potential strategy for inhibiting pancreatic tumor
growth.

