Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplicon-targeted ultra-deep sequencing for the detection of KRAS,
BRAF, and PIK3CA actionable mutations


Background: Next-generation deep sequencing techniques have the potential
to revolutionize clinical testing, especially in the arena of mutation
detection. Molecular diagnostic testing for KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA
mutations has become an integral part of clinical practice for the
determination of treatment eligibility for anti-EGFR therapy. Purpose:
Here we investigate the feasibility of ultra-deep advanced sequencing
with the 454 GS Junior instrument (454 Life Sciences/Roche, Branford CT)
for the simultaneous detection of actionable mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and
PIK3CA in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) colorectal cancer
tissue. Methods: Advanced sequencing with a 4-amplicon panel was
performed on 17 de-identified residual FFPE colorectal cancer biopsy
specimens originally submitted for mutation analysis of one or more genes
by standard sequencing. The 4-amplicon panel was multiplexed for up to 4
samples through barcoding with molecular identifier (MID) sequences, for
a total of 16 amplicons per run. Results: Sequence analysis with
ultra-deep coverage of 3000-5000 reads detected KRAS mutations in 5 (29%)
tumor specimens, BRAF mutations in 3 (18%), and PIK3CA mutations in 4
(24%). Ten cases had a single mutation and one had two: PIK3CA E545K and
BRAF D594G. Coverage was equivalent for each of the four amplicons, and
in both the forward and reverse directions, providing a high level of
confidence for each mutation detected. Sequencing data was obtained for
each sample tested. When sample quantity allowed, Sanger sequencing
and/or castPCR (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) were performed as
method comparisons, and results were concordant. Conclusions: The use of
MIDs with ultra-deep advanced sequencing allowed the simultaneous
detection of mutations in multiple amplicons from multiple patients in a
single sequencing run. This proof-of-concept study confirmed that using
advanced sequencing to simultaneously test for multiple biomarkers in one
FFPE sample is feasible, and that amplicon-based advanced sequencing is a
robust and high-throughput platform for the detection of clinically
actionable mutations.

