Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a new multimodality voxel-based imaging biomarker
for therapeutic response assessment in GBM


The purpose of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic performance of
MRI based T1 and relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) maps analyzed a
multi-modality voxel-based analysis referred to as multi-parametric
response mapping (mPRM) for early chemoradiation response prediction in
patients diagnosed with high-grade gliomas. Patients (n=23) with Grade
III/IV glioma were recruited in a prospective imaging trial. Patients
underwent MRI before RT, 1 and 3 weeks after RT. The MRI protocol
included fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging (FLAIR),
quantitative T1 mapping, dynamic contrast-susceptibility T2*-weighted
imaging (rCBV) and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging (CE-T1w). All
images were co-registered to CE-T1w images acquired before RT. Following
co-registration, the tumor VOIs were manually contoured either on the
CE-T1w or on the FLAIR images and applied to the rCBV and T1maps. For
each patient, mid-treatment time point and VOI the percentage change, PRM
and mPRM techniques were used to analyze data. Briefly, PRM was performed
by calculating the difference in the rCBV values of each voxel within the
tumor at mid-treatment values with respective pre-treatment values. A
threshold was then applied to the absolute difference of the rCBV in a
voxel and all like voxels were summed to obtain tumor volume fractions
that showed significantly increasing (PRMrCBV+), decreasing (PRMrCBV-),
and unchanged (PRMrCBV0) rCBV values following therapy. We used the same
procedure for determining the PRM of T1 maps. mPRMs maps were computed by
combining both PRMs (T1 and rCBV) in a single color map. Receiver
operator characteristic analysis (ROC), assessed for 12 month survival,
was used to determine the optimal cutoff for each parameter. The patient
population was then stratified based on the optimal cutoffs obtained from
the ROC analysis. Overall survival for each parameter was determined
using Kaplan-Meier curves and the log-rank test. Standard PRM, using T1or
rCBV maps (specifically PRMT1+ and PRMrCBV- metrics) and percentage
change methods were found to be predictive of survival only for specific
time of acquisition and VOI used. It was determined that mPRMT1+/rCBV-
significantly identified patients resistant to therapy irrespective of
tumor volume delineation on CE-T1w or FLAIR images and the time point
mid-treatment used. Our results show that mPRM improves the sensitivity
of quantitative T1 and rCBV maps to predict overall patient survival.
This study introduces a new approach for analyzing and combining
multi-parametric MR images into a single multi-parametric response map.
The mPRM metric showed promise as an early and robust imaging biomarker
of treatment response in patients diagnosed with high grade gliomas. This
novel approach is a very sensitive tool for analysis of multiparametric
and/or multimodal data with enhanced sensitivity for early detection of
therapy response.

