Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of TS, TK, OPRT and DPD activities in
renal cell carcinoma


Introduction: Thymidylate synthase (TS) and thymidine kinase (TK) are the
key enzymes in the de novo and salvage DNA synthetic process,
respectively. Orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (OPRT) plays an important
role in the de novo pathway of DNA and RNA synthesis. In contrast,
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) is a key enzyme involved in
degradation of DNA and RNA. We examined the activities of TS, TK, OPRT
and DPD in 83 renal cell carcinomas and normal kidneys and evaluated the
clinical significance. Methods: TS, TK, OPRT and DPD activities in
non-fixed fresh frozen renal cell carcinomas and normal kidneys were
determined enzymatically by the FdUMP binding assay, the DEAE cellulose
disc method, the 5-FU phosphorylation assay and the 5-FU degradation
assay, respectively. Results: TS activity was 5-fold higher in renal cell
carcinoma compared to normal kidney. TS activity in Stage III/IV renal
cell carcinoma was 3-fold higher than that in Stage I/II renal cell
carcinoma. In addition, the level of TS activity in Grade 3 renal cell
carcinoma was 2-fold higher than that in Grade 1 and Grade 2 carcinomas.
TK activity was approximately 4-fold higher in normal kidney compared
with renal cell carcinoma. TK activity in Stage IV renal cell carcinoma
was 2-fold higher than that in Stage I-III renal cell carcinoma.
Furthermore, the level of TK activity in Grade 3 renal cell carcinoma was
2-fold higher than that in Grade 1 and Grade 2 carcinomas. OPRT activity
was approximately 7-fold higher in renal cell carcinoma compared to
normal kidney. OPRT activity in Stage III/IV renal cell carcinoma was
2-fold higher than that in Stage I/II renal cell carcinoma. The level of
OPRT activity in Grade 3 renal cell carcinoma was 3-fold higher than
those in Grade 1 and Grade 2 carcinomas. DPD activity was approximately
2-fold higher in normal kidney compared to renal cell carcinoma. The
higher stage and grade of renal cell carcinoma was, the lower DPD
activity was observed. The level of OPRT activity correlated with those
of TS and TK activities. However, DPD activity was not associated with TS
activity. High TS, TK, OPRT activities and low DPD activity predicted
worse prognosis in patients with renal cell carcinoma.Conclusions: The
present study has demonstrated that TS, TK, OPRT and DPD activities in
renal cell carcinoma correlated with the stage/grade status of renal cell
carcinoma. In addition, the levels of TS, TK, OPRT and DPD activities
were prognostic parameters in patients with renal cell carcinoma.

