Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The human homologue of frog (Xenopus laevis) anterior gradient
protein promotes metastasis via regulation of cellular adhesion


Our recent studies indicated a significant up-regulation of anterior
gradient protein-2 (AGR-2) in bone metastatic human prostate cancer
cells, PC3, following growth in bone marrow conditioned medium. Evidence
indicates that AGR2 belongs to the family of protein disulfide isomerases
and has been linked to intestinal mucus production, tumor growth and
metastasis of various adenocarcinomas and poor survival of patients with
breast and prostate cancers. Few recent reports have also reported the
regulatory elements of AGR2 function, but its specific role(s) in
tumorigenesis and metastasis is still unclear. In the present study, we
have analyzed the role of AGR2 in cancer progression and metastasis using
prostate cancer as a model. Human prostate cancer tissue microarrays and
autopsy tissues, obtained from University of Alabama at Birmingham
consortiums were immunostained for AGR-2 expression. Results were also
confirmed in a spontaneously developing transgenic adenocarcinoma of
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Further characterization of AGR-2 function
was determined in PC3 cells with targeted silencing of AGR-2 expressions
for tumor growth and metastases in vitro and in vivo. Results of our
study found AGR-2 expression mainly in the prostate luminar epithelial
cells, but no difference was observed between normal prostate gland, BPH
and early stages of prostate cancer in both human and TRAMP mouse.
Significant reduction in AGR-2 expression was observed in grade IV & V
prostate cancers. Interestingly, although declining AGR-2 was evident in
higher grade prostate tumors, significantly elevated AGR-2 expressions
were observed in the metastatic sites of the same individuals.
AGR-2-silenced PC3 cells formed tumors in SCID mice similar to control
cells whereas their ability to remain attached to various ECM proteins
were greatly compromised. Several key integrins, which mediates ECM
binding, were also found to be down-regulated in the AGR-2 silenced PC3
cells, suggesting loss of AGR-2 may be associated with their detachment
from the primary tumor and initiation of metastasis. AGR-2 is further
up-regulated in metastatic sites indicating its necessity for restoration
of integrins for attachment in a new microenvironment.

