Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a melanocortin receptor 1 targeted probe for
molecular imaging of melanoma


Melanoma is curable by means of surgical excision if diagnosed in early
stages, but once the metastatic stage is reached, prognosis is poor
because the tumor is resistant to most cures. Therefore, a melanoma
targeted probe that can deliver therapy to metastases at high dosages
could increase the chances of treatment. Melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R)
is overexpressed in most human melanoma metastases, thus making it a
promising target for imaging and therapy of melanomas. To confirm that
MC1R is a specific melanoma marker, mRNA and protein expression was
confirmed and quantified in tumor and normal unaffected patient tissue
samples. MC1R mRNA expression was highly and generally expressed among
melanoma samples surveyed. In contrast, MC1R expression was not elevated
in other skin cancers, normal skin and organs involved in toxicity and
clearance, i.e. heart, spleen, liver and kidney. To determine MC1R
protein expression in patient samples, immunohistochemistry was performed
on a melanoma tissue microarray containing 267 samples. None of the
normal skin samples (n = 19) had staining with a pathology score of 4.
Benign lesions (n = 65), samples of local invasion to regional lymph
nodes (n = 35) and metastatic melanoma (n=40) had moderate to high
staining in 15, 33 and 47% of the samples, respectively. We have
previously reported the development of a peptidomimetic ligand with high
specificity and affinity for MC1R. In this study, we have conjugated this
ligand to an infrared dye to generate a MC1R specific optical probe
(named ML-800). Our whole-cell binding assay using A375/MC1R human
melanoma engineered cells was used to determine the high binding affinity
of ML-800 (0.4 0.1 nM Ki). The cellular uptake of the probe was studied
in A375/MC1R cells by fluorescence microscopy both in vitro and in vivo
using a dorsal skin-fold window-chamber mouse model. The in vivo tumor
targeting of ML-800 was evaluated by intravenous injection of probe into
nude mice bearing bilateral subcutaneous tumors of A375 with low number
of MC1R receptors and A375/MC1R with high expression of MC1Rs.
Fluorescence imaging showed that the agent has higher uptake values in
A375/MC1R tumors than those in A375M tumors (P, 0.05), demonstrating
differentiation of probe retention in tumors with different levels of
expression. In conclusion, the imaging probe designed in this study
demonstrates the potential for the development of agents that can deliver
imaging contrast and therapy to melanoma metastases that express MC1R.
Since radiopeptides have proven their usefulness for diagnostic imaging
and radiotherapy, in the future, this ligand could be developed as a
targeted delivery vehicle for non-invasive nuclear imaging to detect
regional lymph node involvement, or delivery of radiotherapy.
Furthermore, by attachment to the MC1R ligand with a cleavable linker,
cytotoxins may also be targeted to tumor cells for receptor mediated
endocytosis and intracellular release.

