Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel rotational Raman imaging device for early cancer detection


A novel Raman imaging device that is capable of rotationally scanning
hollow structures has been developed to be used in conjunction with tumor
targeting Surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) nanoparticles. SERS
nanoparticles can act as excellent contrast agents in that they offer
ultra high sensitivity, and multiplexing capabilities due to the unique
spectral signatures associated with them. One key advantage of
multiplexing includes the ability to utilize several targeted SERS probes
to target and localize a multitude of unique biomarkers associated with a
specific disease, and effectively increasing cancer specificity. The
device can potentially be used to distinguish a variety of tissues of
interest in the colon such as: flat lesions, varying types of adenomas
and carcinomas. There are also applications beyond the colon, such as the
esophagus, stomach, oral cavity and bladder. In addition, multiplexing
can allow for real-time functional imaging. A 45-degree scanning mirror,
actuated with micromotor, is used to perform circumferential scans of the
lumen of the colon at a rate of 1 revolution per second and a spatial
resolution or approximately 1.5 mm. The device is able to be used with
currently available endoscopes by inserting it into the working channel
of an endoscope. The use of many (36) multi-mode fibers is used to
increase the flexibility of the fiber bundle so that it can be inserted
and used in a fully articulating endoscope while still being able to
collect a sufficient amount scattered Raman light. When in the
circumferential scanning mode, American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) regulations will allow us to increase the laser illumination power
to about 580 mW, resulting in a detection limit of approximately 1 pM of
SERS nanoparticles. One of the key features of our Raman device is that
it has been designed for efficient use over a wide range of working
distances. This is necessary to accommodate for imperfect centering of
the device within the colon, as well as variable working distances due to
folds and bends within the colon. These techniques could allow
endoscopists to distinguish between normal and cancerous tissues
instantly, as well as to identify flat lesions that are easily missed
during conventional screening endoscopy. After a suspicious region has
been identified, the rotating mirror can be held at a certain angle, and
used to help guide biopsies or resection of tissues in real-time.

