Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Per2 (PERIOD 2) mediates low-dose radiation-induced adaptive
response in human mammary epithelial cells


Introduction Central and peripheral clocks generate self-sustained
circadian rhythms that are intimately involved in metabolic and
physiological processes. Circadian deregulation is associated with many
human diseases including cancer, diabetes, and neurological disorders.
Epidemiological studies have shown that disruption in circadian rhythms,
such as nocturnal workers, is linked to an increased cancer risk
including breast carcinoma. This effect is likely related to the
perturbation of hormonal and cytokine circulation caused by deregulated
circadian genes affecting cell survival and proliferation. Mice with gene
deletion of Per2, a core component of the circadian rhythm, show higher
incidence of lymphoma. Moreover, the absence of Per2 altered the levels
of c-Myc and Cyclin D, two genes involved in the homeostasis of cell
proliferation. Recent work demonstrates that Cyr, a partner of Per2,
regulates cell death in response to chemotherapy agents. However, the
exact function of Per2 signaling pathway in maintaining cell homeostasis
against environmental stress conditions, such as low dose ionizing
radiation, has not been elucidated. Methods and Results Our current
studies aim to elucidate the contribution of PER2 in the low-dose
radiation-induced radioadaptive response of human mammary epithelial
cells (MCF10A). MCF10A and breast cancer cells (MCF7) treated with LDIR
at 4-hour intervals (i.e., 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24) showed highest PER2
expression at 8 hours in contrast to the absence of PER2 in MCF7 cells.
To examine whether LDIR-induced Per2 expression is responsible for the
cell death adaptation, MCF10 cells transfected with either Per2 siRNA or
scramble were exposed to different doses of IR (i.e., 10cGy, 10cGy + 5Gy,
and 5Gy). We found that knockdown of Per2 gene expression caused ablation
of the LDIR-induced radioadaptive response with a significant increase in
apoptosis of irradiated samples compared to controls. This finding was
translated by reduced clonogenic survival and increased apoptosis
assessed by flow cytometry analysis. Furthermore, mechanistic analysis
showed that phospho-glycogen synthase kinase-3 (p-GSK3) activation
mediated LDIR-induced PER2 expression, and subsequently the adaptive
protection of human mammary epithelial cells. Therefore, an enhanced
interaction between p-GSK3 and PER2 plays an active role in LDIR-induced
radiation protection. This data represents the first experimental
evidence that Per2 plays a critical role in protecting human epithelial
cells in environmental stress conditions. Conclusion Induction of Per2 by
LDIR treatment protects human breast epithelial cells against
subsequential exposure to high dose radiation-induced genotoxic effects.
Per2-mediated radioprotection requires p-GSK3 activation.

