Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential response dynamic of leukemia cells to GM-CSF and IL-3
stimulation in signal transduction pathways


GM-CSF and IL-3 regulate the survival, proliferation, differentiation,
and functional activation of hematopoietic cells. GM-CSF also contributes
to controlling the function of dendritic cells and T-cells. Aberrant
function of GM-CSF has been linked to multiple diseases including
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia,
rheumatoid arthritis, and alveolar proteinosis. GM-CSF and IL-3 share a
common c subunit on their receptor. Many studies have revealed that
dys-regulation of Ras/PI3K/Akt and Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk pathways are
responsible for hypersensitivities of GM-CSF and IL-3 in various
diseases. However, few data have distinguished the difference of signal
transduction pathways between the two cytokines. We previously reported
that JMML cells are selectively hypersensitive to GM-CSF in vitro, while
they show normal sensitivity to IL-3. Others documented that there was a
time gap between CREB responded to GM-CSF and IL-3 stimulation. In the
present study, we hypothesized that the signal transduction pathway of
GM-CSF has differential response dynamic from that of IL-3. We first
tested the CFU-GM growth pattern of a leukemia cell line, TF-1, in
response to GM-CSF and IL-3 stimulation. We found that the GM-CSF
dose-response curve was markedly shifted leftward, indicating that TF-1
cells were more sensitive to GM-CSF than to IL-3. This pattern is very
similar to that observed in primary JMML cells. We next investigated the
activities of the elements downstream in Ras pathway. After serum
starving in medium with 0.5% BSA for 16 hours, TF-1 cells were stimulated
with GM-CSF or IL-3 at a concentration range of 0.01-500pM. We found that
the total protein levels of CREB were consistently unchanged. On the
other hand, significant phosphorylation of CREB on serine 133 began to
occur at concentrations of GM-CSF at 10pM. Significant phosphorylation of
Erk was observed even at a concentration as low as 1 pM of GM-CSF.
However, this phosphorylation pattern was not seen until 100pM of IL-3,
and the level of phosphorylation was lower. The same dynamic, GM-CSF vs.
IL-3, was also found in pAkt and pSTAT5. In conclusion, our data
demonstrate that leukemia cells respond to GM-CSF and IL-3 stimulation in
different dynamic patterns in signal transduction pathways. This
indicates that the selective hypersensitivity to GM-CSF in some leukemia
cells may be caused by aberrant elements in signal transduction pathways
that are responsive to the low concentrations of GM-CSF stimulation. We
raise a concern that any study related to responsiveness of GM-CSF or
IL-3 stimulation should be interpreted cautiously; with specific
attention paid to the concentration levels and the length of stimulation,
in order to precisely characterize the function of GM-CSF and IL-3. This
observed differential response dynamic might apply to a broader
phenomenon in other cytokines or hormones in other tissues.

