Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signature of differential response to chemotherapy
in sporadic pediatric osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma is the most common pediatric bone malignancy. Genomic
instability, karyotypic heterogeneity and dysregulated gene expression
are typical of osteosarcoma tumors, for which treatment is often
multimodal and aggressive. Tumor necrosis in response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy is used to estimate outcome and survival, because reliable
clinical diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers have not yet been described
for this tumor. Our objective in the current study was to identify new
molecular biomarkers for osteosarcoma based on differential mRNA
expression levels of genes found to be consistently involved in the
pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. The NanoString nCounter System utilizes
color-coded probe pairs, which allow multiplexed expression analysis of
specific genes in solution-phase hybridization with digital output.
Advantages of the system are a higher sensitivity than microarrays and
the utilization of small amounts of total RNA without requiring cDNA
synthesis. We first determined the efficacy and consistency of the system
using total RNA extracted from snap-frozen and formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded osteosarcoma tissue specimens. We then verified that
the NanoString assay was consistent with RT-PCR analysis of our samples,
after which we subjected a cohort of osteosarcoma tumors to the
expression assay. Seventeen genes, including many with well-described
functions in osteosarcoma, were analyzed for expression in a cohort of
tumors as well as normal human osteoblasts. Expression values of normal
human osteoblasts were compared with those of tumors with more than 90%
necrosis post-chemotherapy (an indicator of good prognosis) and of tumors
with less than 90% necrosis post-chemotherapy (an indicator of poor
prognosis). Of note, we found that tumors with poor response to
chemotherapy had statistically significant up-regulation of CDKN1C, FOS,
and RUNX2. The RUNX2 gene is located at chromosome 6p21.1, which
frequently undergoes genetic amplification in osteosarcoma.
Amplification-related overexpression of RUNX2 has been previously
reported (Martin et al 2010, Sadikovic et al 2010) as a poor
prognosticator for chemotherapy response, and the involvement of bone
morphogenetic pathways downstream of RUNX2 are being addressed by
multiplex analyses of differential gene expression.

