Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated microfluidic bead-based immunosensor for multiplexed
determinations of ovarian cancer biomarkers at the point-of-care


Early detection of ovarian cancer could significantly impact clinical
outcome and hence patient survival. Given the biological heterogeneity of
ovarian cancer, multi-marker panels will be required. Validation of such
panels must utilize pre-clinical serum samples that are available only in
small quantities. Diagnostic platforms that are capable of rapid, precise
and multiplexed analysis of biomarkers in small quantities of serum
should facilitate validation of optimal biomarker panels. Once validated,
these platforms could permit rapid screening with finger-stick quantities
of blood at point-of-care. The Programmable Bio-Nano-Chip (p-BNC)
microfluidic immunosensor provides such a platform. In the p-BNC, serum
biomarkers are sequestered and assessed with a fluorescence-based
sandwich immunoassay, completed in nano-nets of sensitized agarose
microbeads localized in individually addressable wells, housed in a
microfluidic module, capable of integrating multiple sample, reagent and
biowaste processing and handling steps. Previously, we adapted the p-BNC
for the quantification of the CA125 biomarker with low LODs, high
precision and a short analysis time of 43 minutes. Here, we adapt the
p-BNC to simultaneously assess CA125 and HE4, a promising biomarker panel
implicated in early detection. The HE4 immunoassay was developed to
perform optimally with the previously established CA125 assay as the rate
determining step. Extensive cross reactivity analysis ruled out non-ideal
interactions between HE4 and CA125 reagents at the level of capturing
antibody, detecting antibody and individual analytes. Wash times were
optimized to maximize p-BNC performance. The dose-response curves
obtained for the individual analytes (singleplex) were similar to those
obtained with multiplex assays. Identical LOD values were noted for the
singleplex and multiplex immunoassays with 1.5-fold decrease in precision
for the multiplexed assays, demonstrating negligible loss of analytical
performance upon multiplexing. For clinical validation, 8 surgically
confirmed advanced stage patient sera and 8 age-matched healthy controls
were assessed on the multiplexed p-BNC. ROC curve analysis for the
CA125-HE4 biomarker combination, interpreted with a Risk of Ovarian
Malignancy Algorithm was able to discriminate diseased samples from
healthy controls with an AUC of 1.00. The p-BNC indicates strong promise
for robust, multiplexed, quantitative measurements of ovarian cancer
biomarkers, with high precision and sensitivity to yield clinically
pertinent information under 45 minutes. Incorporation of additional
biomarkers is underway to establish and validate an optimal panel for
early detection of ovarian cancer.

