Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxaliplatin as an alternative for the treatment of high grade
prostate cancers. Identification of serine hydroxymethyl transferases
(SHMT) as selective biomarkers of oxaliplatin sensitivity via the
modulation of DNA methylation.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer
in men. High Gleason grade PCa are characterized by aggressive tumors
with poorly differentiated cells and a high metastatic potential. They
are often refractory to chemical castration but still treated with
hormone therapy to which docetaxel or cabazitaxel are added when they
become resistant to the anti-androgen. Despite many clinical trials with
other chemotherapeutic agents, response rates remain low pointing towards
the need for new alternative therapies. Using an in silico approach based
on a 86 genes signature which could distinguish between low-grade and
high-grade tumors, we identified 9 genes (PCCB, SHMT2, DPM1, RHOT2,
RPL13, CD59, EIF4AI, CDKN2C, JUN) for which expression levels across the
NCI-60 cell lines panel was significantly correlated (pProstate cancer
(PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer in men. High
Gleason grade PCa are characterized by aggressive tumors with poorly
differentiated cells and a high metastatic potential. They are often
refractory to chemical castration but still treated with hormone therapy
to which docetaxel or cabazitaxel are added when they become resistant to
the anti-androgen. Despite many clinical trials with other
chemotherapeutic agents, response rates remain low pointing towards the
need for new alternative therapies. Using an in silico approach based on
a 86 genes signature which could distinguish between low-grade and
high-grade tumors, we identified 9 genes (PCCB, SHMT2, DPM1, RHOT2,
RPL13, CD59, EIF4AI, CDKN2C, JUN) for which expression levels across the
NCI-60 cell lines panel was significantly correlated (p< 0.05) to
oxaliplatin but not to cisplatin sensitivity. Among them, SHMT2 which is
overexpressed in high grade PCa, encodes the mitochondrial isoform of
serine hydroxymethyl transferase, which converts glycine to serine, which
is then exported to the cytoplasm to generate the one-carbon units that
are required for the biosynthesis of purines. SiRNA-mediated
donwregulation of SHMT2 in DU145 or LNCaP prostate tumor cell lines
rendered cells resistant to oxaliplatin but not to cisplatin. CHO 51-11
cells which express a catalytically inactive SHMT2 were also resistant to
oxaliplatin but not to cisplatin as compared to CHO K1 control cells. The
selective resistance to oxaliplatin was not due to the oxalate moiety
since addition of oxalate to cisplatin could not restore the level of
sensitivity of CHO cells to oxaliplatin. Selectivity could however be
attributed to the diamino cyclohexane (DACH) moiety of oxaliplatin since
CHO 51-11 cells were also resistant to
dichloro(1,2-diaminocyclohexane)-platinum(II). Resistance to oxaliplatin
could also be achieved by SHMT1 downregulation (the cytoplasmic form of
SHMT) or by an alteration of the pool of glycine and serine. SHMTs can
indirectly regulate the methylation status of DNA, and we showed that
siRNA-mediated downregulation of SHMTs in hypomethylated LNCaP cells
increased the global level of DNA methylation, as measured by 4 CpGs
methylation status of LINE-1. Interestingly, increased level of global
methylation status was associated with increased resistance to
oxaliplatin. Altogether, our results identified oxaliplatin as a
potential alternative for the treatment of high grade prostate cancers
and SHMT2 (and SHMT1) as selective markers of oxaliplatin sensitivity
which involves, at least in part, the regulation of global levels of DNA
methylation.

