Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling glioblastoma in the mouse: Insights from noninvasive
imaging


What can noninvasive imaging reveal about mouse models of brain cancer
and how closely they resemble their human counterparts? Glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive form of brain cancer. Genetically
engineered mouse models provide an appealing experimental framework in
which to address the critical need for improved diagnostic and
therapeutic strategies for GBM in a preclinical setting. An important
step in the validation of such models is to determine how well they
recapitulate salient features of human disease, most commonly from a
molecular or genetic perspective. While molecular characterization is
certainly imperative, we contend that it is also essential to validate
mouse models of GBM from an in vivo imaging perspective. In vivo imaging
can reveal not only tumor location and size, but also important
biological and physiological processes including vascularity, blood brain
barrier (BBB) permeability and necrosis. In addition, given the important
role of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the management of patients
with GBM, there is a wealth of human imaging data that can be readily
compared with analogous mouse data. Thus, our objective was to develop a
clinically relevant framework for performing (i) image-based
characterization of mouse models of GBM and (ii) comparisons with human
disease. We have utilized novel mouse models wherein genetic alterations
in the pRb, PTEN and Ras signaling pathways yield GBM. Clinically
motivated 3T MRI acquisitions were performed including pre-contrast T1
and T2 datasets, dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCEMRI) and a
post-contrast T1 acquisition. Image analysis was also guided by clinical
relevance. T1 and T2 images were qualitatively analyzed using the VASARI
lexicon developed for human GBM in the TCGA project. DCEMRI data was
mathematically analyzed using a two compartment model yielding Ktrans
parametric maps that are proportional to the BBB permeability. Human GBM
MRI data and VASARI features from the TCGA study were downloaded from
caIntegrator and compared with murine features using the 2 test. We found
that MRI has high sensitivity for GBM (97%) and accurately reflects
histologic extent ( =0.88) in mice. We observed marked inter and intra
lesion heterogeneity in BBB permeability, with some tumors showing over
10 times higher Ktrans in the rim compared to the center. Interestingly,
many VASARI features exhibited similar distributions in both mouse and
human GBM, however one feature was rarely found in mice (pWhat can
noninvasive imaging reveal about mouse models of brain cancer and how
closely they resemble their human counterparts? Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) is the most aggressive form of brain cancer. Genetically engineered
mouse models provide an appealing experimental framework in which to
address the critical need for improved diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for GBM in a preclinical setting. An important step in the
validation of such models is to determine how well they recapitulate
salient features of human disease, most commonly from a molecular or
genetic perspective. While molecular characterization is certainly
imperative, we contend that it is also essential to validate mouse models
of GBM from an in vivo imaging perspective. In vivo imaging can reveal
not only tumor location and size, but also important biological and
physiological processes including vascularity, blood brain barrier (BBB)
permeability and necrosis. In addition, given the important role of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the management of patients with GBM,
there is a wealth of human imaging data that can be readily compared with
analogous mouse data. Thus, our objective was to develop a clinically
relevant framework for performing (i) image-based characterization of
mouse models of GBM and (ii) comparisons with human disease. We have
utilized novel mouse models wherein genetic alterations in the pRb, PTEN
and Ras signaling pathways yield GBM. Clinically motivated 3T MRI
acquisitions were performed including pre-contrast T1 and T2 datasets,
dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCEMRI) and a post-contrast T1
acquisition. Image analysis was also guided by clinical relevance. T1 and
T2 images were qualitatively analyzed using the VASARI lexicon developed
for human GBM in the TCGA project. DCEMRI data was mathematically
analyzed using a two compartment model yielding Ktrans parametric maps
that are proportional to the BBB permeability. Human GBM MRI data and
VASARI features from the TCGA study were downloaded from caIntegrator and
compared with murine features using the 2 test. We found that MRI has
high sensitivity for GBM (97%) and accurately reflects histologic extent
( =0.88) in mice. We observed marked inter and intra lesion heterogeneity
in BBB permeability, with some tumors showing over 10 times higher Ktrans
in the rim compared to the center. Interestingly, many VASARI features
exhibited similar distributions in both mouse and human GBM, however one
feature was rarely found in mice (p< 0.001): a thick enhancing margin
which is a salient feature of human GBM and reflects a central region of
necrosis and a proliferative, vascular rim. In summary, we have developed
a new standardized framework for performing clinically relevant MRI
comparisons of mouse and human GBM. Remaining challenges include further
investigation on the molecular mechanisms for the observed heterogeneous
patterns of BBB permeability and the lack of central necrosis in mice.

