Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetraspanin CD63 interacts with extranuclear estrogen receptor
alpha and regulates non-genomic signaling pathways in breast cancer


Tetraspanin is a four transmembrane protein family whose members are
regarded as molecular linkers. They also serve as scaffold proteins for
many signaling processes. CD63 is a member of the tetraspanin family that
serves as a lysosomal protein. Estrogen receptor alpha (ER) plays
critical roles in breast carcinogenesis. Extranuclear ER could initiate
rapid estrogen responses by forming protein complexes with many signaling
molecules. Here, we report a novel protein complex formed between
tetraspanin CD63 and extranuclear ER. Immunoprecepitation (IP)
experiments in MCF-7 and BT474 cells showed that CD63 interacts with ER
at endogenous levels. IP experiments using extracts from different
cellular compartments (nucleus, cytoplasm and plasma membrane) showed
that the interaction between CD63 and ER is mainly located on the plasma
membrane. Moreover, using co-immunofluorescence (IF) staining, we found
CD63 co-localized with ER on plasma membrane and/or in the cytoplasm. To
further explore the effects of CD63 on ER signaling pathways, we stably
knocked down CD63 by shRNA in MCF-7 and BT474 cells. Interestingly, the
expression of ER was increased with lower expression of CD63. We further
examined ER from extracts of nucleus, cytoplasm, and membrane by western
blots, and found that ER in cytoplasm and/or membrane was increased by
knocking down CD63 whereas the ER level in the nucleus was not changed.
IF staining showed similar results. Furthermore, P-MAPK level was
up-regulated in both MCF-7 and BT474 cell lines with suppressed
expression of CD63. These data suggest that the tetraspanin CD63 may
facilitate the transport of ER between plasma membrane and/or cytoplasm
and nucleus, an important new function. CD63 may play a key role on
organizing and regulating non-genomic ER signaling pathways in breast
cancer.

