Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rationally designed peptidomimetics target androgen receptor
signaling in prostate cancer


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is
essential for prostate cancer development, growth, and progression at all
stages of disease. AR signaling occurs via both genomic and non-genomic
pathways and is mediated by AR interaction with cofactors. In our
laboratory, we have shown that the interaction between a cofactor, PELP1
(Proline, Glutamic acid, Leucine rich Protein 1) and AR is critical for
AR nuclear translocation in response to ligand and subsequent AR-mediated
genomic signaling. We hypothesized that disruption of the interaction
between AR and PELP1 using rationally designed peptidomimetics could
affect AR genomic signaling in prostate cancer. METHODS: We have
developed rationally designed bis benzamide scaffold-based helical
peptidomimetics analogous to the LXXLL motif on PELP1 that is presumed to
bind AR. Initially two peptidomimetics were created- the control D1 and a
LXXLL analogue D2. Prostate cancer cell lines were pre-treated with
peptidomimetics prior to incubation with androgen (DHT/R1881 (0.01-10nM))
and evaluated for proliferation. Immunofluorescence was used to examine
endogenous AR translocation to the DAPI-stained nucleus. RESULTS: Initial
toxicity assays using trypan blue exclusion revealed both D1 and D2 were
not toxic to the cells up to 500nM concentrations. We have shown that D2
(but not the control D1) prevents the formation of the AR-PELP-1 complex
as evidenced by the ability of D2 to prevent co-immunoprecipitation of AR
and PELP-1 in LAPC4 and LNCaP cell lines. This effect was overcome by
increased expression of either AR or PELP1. D2 was able to significantly
decrease DHT-mediated transcription from both minimal ARE luciferase
promoters and PSA gene expression, whereas the control D1 did not show
any activity. In microarray analyses, D2 was able to abrogate the induced
expression of more than 1500 of 1900 genes induced by DHT. Further, D2
was able to reduce DHT mediated proliferation of PCa cells in vitro in
dose-dependent manner, whereas the control D1 did not show any activity.
This ability of D2 to inhibit DHT-mediated proliferation was noted in all
androgen-responsive PCa cells LAPC4, LNCaP, RWPE1, C4-2 and CWR22v1, but
not PC-3 cells which lack AR expression. Interestingly, we noted that the
peptidomimetic D2 blocked translocation of AR to the nucleus compared to
the control D1. Finally, D2 blocked the proliferation of C4-2 sc
xenografts in nude mice. CONCLUSIONS: We have shown this peptidomimetic
is capable of blocking AR-PELP1 interaction, nuclear translocation of AR,
AR mediated genomic signaling as well as DHT-mediated proliferation of
prostate cancer cells in vitro. Selective targeting of PELP1-AR
interaction affects AR genomic signaling. These data strongly indicate
that this strategy may serve as a viable therapeutic target for
disrupting AR function in patients with prostate cancer.

