Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defective catagen entry in EGFR deficient skin precedes cutaneous
inflammation


Treatment of cancer patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitors causes perifollicular inflammation in the skin. Mouse models
with EGFR deficiency predicted this folliculitis and revealed that
abrogation of EGFR disrupts hair follicle cycling. We hypothesized that
the defect in progression through catagen resulting from EGFR deficiency
causes cutaneous inflammation. EGFR regulation of the hair cycle and
inflammation was investigated using skin-targeted deletion of Egfr
(Krt14-Cre+/Egfrfl/fl mice). Hair cycle stage was assessed using
histological criteria, analysis of follicular apoptosis and the position
of the dermal papillae. Dorsal hair follicles of control mice
synchronously entered catagen at 17 d and progressed to telogen by 21 d.
In contrast, Egfr mutant follicles asynchronously entered catagen, with
some follicles beginning catagen at 18 d or later, and others remaining
in anagen through 24 d. Mast cells were examined because follicular mast
cell precursors can facilitate the transition into catagen after their
maturation and degranulation. Failed catagen progression preceded an
inflammatory response in the mutant skin, which was characterized by a
40% or more increase in mast cell numbers beginning at 21 d. Mast cells
in mutant skin were more likely to be degranulated as well. Neutrophils
and macrophages increased in mutant skin by 28 d, subsequent to the
increase in mast cell numbers. Transcriptional profiling was performed at
17 d, the time of normal catagen onset, using follicular RNA obtained
from laser capture microdissection to identify EGFR-regulated mediators
of the inflammatory response. In silico analyses of these data identified
increased expression of 12 immune function genes in mutant hair follicles
including the mast cell proteases Chymase and Tryptase. Additionally, the
class I major histocompatibility (MHC) molecules H2-Q9, H2-Q7 and H2-D1
and class II MHC molecules H2-Eb1, H2-Dmb1 and H2-Dmb1/2 were
over-expressed in mutant hair follicles consistent with a role for
adaptive immunity in cutaneous inflammation following asynchronous
catagen. Thus, an aberrant catagen transition and upregulation of
pro-inflammatory genes preceded folliculitis in Egfr mutant skin.

