Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of inhibitors of
5-nucleotidase cN-II issued from virtual screening


Clinical and preclinical observations have lead to the hypothesis that
5-nucleotidase cN-II could constitute a therapeutic target in oncology,
either per se, either to increase the activity of cytotoxic nucleoside
analogues. We performed in silico screening of freely available chemical
databases, in vitro enzymatic assays with recombinant full length cN-II,
soaking experiments with crystals of truncated cN-II and biological
evaluation of inhibitors alone or in combination with cytotoxic
nucleoside analogues on cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. The top
ranked compounds from virtual screening contained an
anthraquinone-derivative (A) and a trisubstituted triazine (B) that were
selected for further studies. In vitro enzymatic assay experiments with
recombinant protein showed that compound A is a competitive inhibitor
with Ki of approximately 3 mM, whereas derivative B is a non-competitive
inhibitor with Ki of 1.1 mM. We also obtained crystallographic data at a
resolution of 2.0 after soaking experiments with crystals of truncated
cN-II. These showed interaction between A and F354/N154 situated in the
effector site 1 of cN-II, whereas B was not found in crystallographic
data even though crystals were degraded in presence of B over a longer
time. Derivative A showed different levels of cytotoxicity in vitro on
several cancer cell lines such as Raji (IC50=782 M), RL (IC50=210 M),
CCRF-CEM (IC50=824 M), MCF-7 (IC50=654 M), A549 (IC50=569 M) and HCT-116
(IC50=793 M), whereas B was much less cytotoxic. When used at 1 mM, A and
B did not modify IC50 of the nucleoside analogues cladribine, clofarabine
or fludarabine in CCRF-CEM cells. When used at 100 M, compound A
increased the induction of apoptosis in RL cells incubated with 0.5 or
1.5 M cladribine, 0.05 M clofarabine or 30 M fludarabine. The
administration of A (200 mg/kg, 5d/w, 4w) to mice xenografted with RL
cells, induced a delay of tumor development that was higher than in mice
treated with fludarabine (50 mg/kg, 1d/w, 4w). We showed that virtual
screening can be used for the identification of potent cN-II inhibitors,
and we produced clear evidences for the interaction of one inhibitor with
the enzyme. Our biological evaluation indicated interesting activity for
one lead compound that will be developed further in order to identify
candidates with higher biological activity.

