Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular target regulated by tumor suppressive microRNA-1 and
microRNA-133a in prostate cancer


(Background) Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed and
second leading cause of cancer death among men in developing countries.
Hormone-refractory PCa is currently difficult to treat and most clinical
trials for advanced PCa have shown limited benefits, with disease
progression and metastasis to bone or other sites. Thus, new prognostic
markers and effective treatment strategies are urgently needed. Our
expression signatures of human cancer including prostate cancer revealed
that the expression of microRNA-1 (miR-1) and microRNA-133a (miR-133a)
were significantly reduced in cancer cells. In human genome, miR-1 and
miR-133a located same chromosomal regions called cluster. In this study,
we investigated the functional significance of miR-1 and miR-133a and
identified the novel molecular targets regulated by miR-1 and miR-133a
commonly in PCa. (Methods) Cell proliferation, invasion and migration
assays were performed by restoration of mature miR-1 and/or miR-133a in
PCa cell lines (PC3 and DU145). Genome-wide gene expression analysis was
performed to identify the molecular targets of miR-1 and miR-133a by
microarray methods. A luciferase reporter assay was used to identify the
actual binding site between miR-1 and miR-133a and its candidate target
genes. Cell proliferation, invasion and migration assays were performed
to investigate the targets genes in PCa cell lines. To investigate of
expression of candidate target gene, immunohistochemistry was performed
by using PCa tissue microarray. (Results) Restoration of miR-1 and/or
miR-133a significantly inhibited cell proliferation, migration and
invasion in cancer cells. Genome-wide molecular targets search and
luciferase reporter assay showed that 6 genes: Transgelin2 (TAGLN2), WD
repeat domain 78 (WDR78), chromosome 4 open reading frame 34 (C4orf34),
purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), LAG1 homologue, ceramide synthase
2 (LASS2) and syntaxin binding protein (STXBP4) had putative target sites
of both miR-1 and miR-133a in their 3UTR. Among them, PNP mRNA was highly
expressed in the PCa clinical specimen compered with non-PCa tisses. The
mRNA and protein expression levels of PNP were markedly downregulated in
miR-1 and miR-133a -transfected PCa cells. A luciferase reporter assay
suggested that miR-1 and miR-133a directly bind to specific sites on 3UTR
of PNP mRNA. Silencing of the target genes inhibited cell proliferation,
migration, and invasion in PCa cells. Immunohistochemistry showed that
PNP expression level was significantly higher in PCa than normal prostate
tissues. (Conclusions) miR-1 and miR-133a function as tumor suppressor in
PCa. PNP was directly regulated by tumor suppressive miR-1 and miR-133a
commonly. PNP may function as oncogenes in PCa. Tumor suppressive miR-1
and miR-133a mediates novel molecular targets provide new insights of
molecular mechanisms of PCa oncogenesis.

