Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LuCaP prostate cancer xenografts: Models that allow clinically
relevant investigation of prostate cancer in a preclinical setting


PCa is an extremely heterogeneous disease and generating relevant data
invariably requires the use of multiple models. A paucity of pre-clinical
models that closely replicate the diversity of the disease seen in man,
has limited our understanding of PCa biology and evaluation of novel
therapeutic strategies. The objective of our studies was to establish and
characterize multiple novel PCa xenografts to enable the use of multiple
models in preclinical studies leading to the generation of clinically and
biologically relevant data. We have established 28 novel PCa xenografts
and our characterization studies show that these models portray the
characteristics and reflect the diversity of the disease observed in
patients. We have established xenografts from primary PCa and PCa
metastases from which 24 are adenocarcinomas and 4 are neuroendocrine
models. Unsupervised gene expression array clustering analyses revealed
(a) association between the xenograft and the originating specimen, (b)
pairing of androgen-sensitive lines with their castration-resistant
offspring, (c) a distinction between adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine
phenotypes and (d) that gene expression profiles were not significantly
altered by continuous passage in vivo for 2-8 years. Furthermore, we have
performed extensive characterization of these models that includes: (a)
basic histology, (b) serum PSA levels, (c) tumor doubling time, (d)
expression of multiple biomarkers by immunohistochemistry (IHC), (e)
oligo array profiles, (f) expression of the androgen receptor (AR) and
its splice variants, (g) bone response, and (h) response to therapy, i.e.
androgen ablation and docetaxel. Similar to patient tumor samples, LuCaP
xenografts display considerable diversity: they express variable amounts
of PSA (range from 0-1000 ng/ml/1 g), different levels of AR and AR
splice variants after castration, and significant heterogeneity in all
biomarkers evaluated. Heterogeneity was also observed in responses to
therapy; prolonged survival (PS) following androgen ablation or docetaxel
each ranged from 1 - 7.3 fold. Our characterization also show that seven
of our models elicit an osteoblastic reaction in the bone, five models
are PTEN negative, eight lines have the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, and there are
eight matched pairs of androgen-sensitive and castration-resistant
xenografts. In summary these 28 LuCaP PCa xenograft lines are highly
diverse and clinically relevant models to study PCa biology and evaluate
new treatment modalities. Results generated using a single model can
provide misleading information because of heterogeneity of PCa in
patients. Therefore use of multiple models and comparison of the results
is particularly important, providing superior insight into clinical
relevance.

