Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical activity and inflammatory and oxidative status markers in
Chinese women


Background: Leisure-time physical activity has been linked to lower
circulating levels of inflammatory markers. Few studies have examined the
association of non-recreational and household physical activity with
inflammatory and oxidative stress markers. This study comprehensively
evaluated the association of inflammatory and oxidative stress markers
with physical activity, overall and by domains of physical activity, with
a particular focus on both routine non-recreational and household
physical activity, in a subset of 1,005 participants of the Shanghai
Women's Health Study. Methods: Plasma cytokines (interleukin-6 [IL-6],
IL-1, tumor necrosis factor- [TNF]) and C-reactive protein and urinary
F2-isoprostanes and their metabolites were measured in 1,005 healthy
Chinese women aged 40-70 years. Usual physical activity was assessed
through in-person interview using a validated physical activity
questionnaire. Results: Recreational and non-recreational physical
activity contributed 6.2% and 93.8%, respectively, of energy expenditure
from overall physical activity in this study population of middle-aged
and elderly women. Two major sub-types of non-recreational physical
activity, routine physical activity (walking and biking for
transportation) and household physical activity, accounted for 49.6% and
38.2% of energy expenditure of overall physical activity. After adjusting
for age, body mass index, lifestyle and dietary factors, diseases of the
musculoskeletal system and connective tissue, Charlson comorbidity index,
and history of chronic infectious and inflammation-related diseases using
a general linear regression model, concentrations of IL-6, IL-1, and TNF
decreased with increasing quartiles of overall physical activity, with a
difference between extreme quartiles of 28.5% (P for trend = 0.002),
26.9% (0.005), and 18.4% (0.001), respectively. The inverse trends were
similar when the analysis was restricted to non-recreational physical
activity (P for trend = 0.004 for IL-6, 0.03 for IL-1, and 0.009 for
TNF), or its components walking and biking for transportation (P for
trend = 0.02, 0.048, and 0.005, respectively) and household activity (P
for trend = 0.07, 0.08, and 0.03, respectively). Recreational physical
activity was inversely associated with TNF level (P for trend = 0.01). No
significant associations were observed between physical activity and
oxidative stress markers. Interpretation: This study suggests that
overall physical activity (both recreational and non-recreational) may
reduce the circulating levels of inflammatory markers. Our finding of a
potential role of low-level physical activity, such as routine
non-recreational and household activity, in reducing inflammation may
have important public health implications because these types of
activities are the main contributor to total physical activity in elderly
women.

