Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver X receptor activation represents a novel strategy to block
Hedgehog signaling in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and enhance the antitumor
effect of gemcitabine


Background: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays a pathogenic role
in many human cancers, including pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and several
pathway antagonists have begun clinical testing. All of these novel
agents target Smoothened (Smo), a key regulator of Hh signaling, but
reported emergence of resistance mutations questions the durability of
this approach. Oxysterols, oxidized derivatives of cholesterol, can
modulate Hh signaling either through direct interaction with Smo or via
cross-talk with liver X receptors (LXR) that serve as their natural
receptors. Thus, oxysterols may represent mechanistically novel Hh
inhibitors, especially if they involve LXRs. Methods: We examined the
effects of LXR activation on the in vivo growth of pancreatic cancer.
Nude mice bearing pancreatic cancer xenografts derived from primary
clinical specimens were treated with a vehicle control, gemcitabine, the
non-steroidal LXR agonist TO901317, or the combination of gemcitabine and
TO901317 for 4-6 weeks. The LXR agonist TO901317 was used since it lacks
the ability to directly bind to Smo. Tumor volumes were measured to
assess response, and LXR and Hh pathway activities were quantified by
real-time RT-PCR for Hh (GLI1, PTCH1) and LXR (ABCA1) target gene
expression. Human specific primers were used to detect changes in tumor
cells, whereas mouse-specific primers were used to study stroma.
Intratumoral levels of gemcitabine triphosphate were quantified by
LC-MS-MS. Results: Administration of TO901317 alone did not impact tumor
growth compared to control treated animals similar to previous findings
with Smo antagonists. Treatment with gemcitabine alone decreased tumor
growth, However the addition of TO901317 to gemcitabine significantly
enhanced this effect to promote tumor regression. In vivo treatment with
TO901317 successfully activated LXR in both human tumor cells and murine
stromal cells as evidenced by increased expression of ABCA1. Moreover,
TO901317 inhibited expression of the Hh targets GLI1 and PTCH1 5- and
2-fold, respectively, in stromal cells and 5-fold in tumor cells.
Previous studies (Olive et al, Science, 2009) demonstrated that Hh
pathway inhibition improves drug delivery in vivo. Therefore, we
quantified intratumoral levels of gemcitabine triphosphate, the active
metabolite of gemcitabine, and found that it was significantly elevated
in tumors exposed to TO901317 (PBackground: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway plays a pathogenic role in many human cancers, including
pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and several pathway antagonists have begun
clinical testing. All of these novel agents target Smoothened (Smo), a
key regulator of Hh signaling, but reported emergence of resistance
mutations questions the durability of this approach. Oxysterols, oxidized
derivatives of cholesterol, can modulate Hh signaling either through
direct interaction with Smo or via cross-talk with liver X receptors
(LXR) that serve as their natural receptors. Thus, oxysterols may
represent mechanistically novel Hh inhibitors, especially if they involve
LXRs. Methods: We examined the effects of LXR activation on the in vivo
growth of pancreatic cancer. Nude mice bearing pancreatic cancer
xenografts derived from primary clinical specimens were treated with a
vehicle control, gemcitabine, the non-steroidal LXR agonist TO901317, or
the combination of gemcitabine and TO901317 for 4-6 weeks. The LXR
agonist TO901317 was used since it lacks the ability to directly bind to
Smo. Tumor volumes were measured to assess response, and LXR and Hh
pathway activities were quantified by real-time RT-PCR for Hh (GLI1,
PTCH1) and LXR (ABCA1) target gene expression. Human specific primers
were used to detect changes in tumor cells, whereas mouse-specific
primers were used to study stroma. Intratumoral levels of gemcitabine
triphosphate were quantified by LC-MS-MS. Results: Administration of
TO901317 alone did not impact tumor growth compared to control treated
animals similar to previous findings with Smo antagonists. Treatment with
gemcitabine alone decreased tumor growth, However the addition of
TO901317 to gemcitabine significantly enhanced this effect to promote
tumor regression. In vivo treatment with TO901317 successfully activated
LXR in both human tumor cells and murine stromal cells as evidenced by
increased expression of ABCA1. Moreover, TO901317 inhibited expression of
the Hh targets GLI1 and PTCH1 5- and 2-fold, respectively, in stromal
cells and 5-fold in tumor cells. Previous studies (Olive et al, Science,
2009) demonstrated that Hh pathway inhibition improves drug delivery in
vivo. Therefore, we quantified intratumoral levels of gemcitabine
triphosphate, the active metabolite of gemcitabine, and found that it was
significantly elevated in tumors exposed to TO901317 (P<0.03).
Conclusions: The LXR agonist TO901317 enhances the cytotoxic effects of
gemcitabine to promote tumor regression in a human xenograft model of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Therefore, LXR agonists, such as TO901317 and
oxysterols, may represent a novel strategy to target pathologic Hh
signaling within both tumor cells as well as the surrounding stroma.

