Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy of bladder cancer using bacillus calmette gurin
(BCG): Generation of cytotoxic T-cells is BCG strain dependent


Introduction: Forty years ago Zbar and colleagues demonstrated that
bacillus calmette gurin (BCG) is capable of provoking an immune response
against experimentally induced tumors. The conditions for successful
tumor immunity were defined by a i) limited number of tumor cells in ii)
close contact with a iii) sufficient number of bacteria and iv) the
ability of the organism to mount a BCG specific immune response. These
findings led to the development of what is currently the standard of care
for the treatment of patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
Whether the genetic drift between BCG strains that are routinely used in
treatment protocols for bladder cancer affects the generation of
successful tumor immunity is unknown. Here we compared two of the
commonly used BCG strains (Connaught and Tice) in the treatment of
bladder cancer in an animal model. Methods: Nave or bladder cancer
bearing (orthotopic implantation of syngeneic MB49 cells) Bl/6 mice
received either a single s.c. injection or weekly intravesical
instillation of 107 CFUs of BCG Tice or Connaught. Twelve days after the
4th intravesical treatment or after the single s.c. immunization, the
bladders, spleens and draining lymph nodes (DLN) were removed,
enzymatically digested and the resulting cell suspensions analyzed by
flow cytometry, including assessment of BCG specific CD8+ T-cells. Lymph
node extracts were cultivated for the enumeration of BCG CFUs. Tumor
bearing animals were assessed for their overall survival. Results: In
non-tumor bearing animals, BCG Connaught lead to a more robust influx of
adaptive immune cells into the bladder and primed significantly more BCG
specific cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells. Compared to BCG Connaught, BCG Tice was
less capable to disseminate into the draining lymph nodes (DLN), and
induced less Th1 polarized CD4+ T-cells in the bladder, DLN and spleens,
as assed by intracellular T-bet staining. These findings were independent
of BCG preparation (clinical grade versus laboratory grade) and were seen
for identical treatment doses. Finally, mice, orthotopically challenged
with MB49 bladder cancer cells, showed significantly better survival if
treated with BCG Connaught as compared to BCG Tice. Conclusion: Here we
show that different BCG strains significantly impact the immunological
response of adaptive immunity. Along with a stronger Th1 immune response,
favoring the generation of cytotoxic T-cells, BCG Connaught improves
survival as compared to BCG Tice in vivo. These findings implicate
potential consequences for clinical practice and corroborate testing of
different BCG strains in prospective clinical trials.

