Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-138 and its role in melanoma progression


miRNAs are non-coding RNAs that bind to mRNA targets preventing their
translation. It is predicted that over 30% of mRNAs are regulated by
miRNAs. Therefore these molecules are considered essential to many
biological responses, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis and stress
responsiveness. Loss or gain of miRNAs function contributes to
development of many diseases, included cancer. Melanoma rises from
malignant transformation of melanocytes. Despite being rare, it is
responsible for the greatest number of deaths promoted by all skin
cancers. One reason for this scenario is that melanoma metastatic is
usually incurable. To determine the role of miRNAs in melanoma
progression, the expression of several miRNAs were evaluated in a murine
model that mimics different stages of the genesis of this tumor. In that
model, several cell lines were obtained after submitting melan-a
melanocytes to sequential cycles of anchorage blockade. Among miRNAs in
which expression were altered, miR-138 has decreased expression in
intermediate phases of melanoma genesis and was selected for further
investigation. It was verified that mRNA of p53, Ezh2, MyoD and Sirt-1
are putative targets of miR-138. Interestingly, these mRNAs also have
inverse expression of miR-138 in the distinct lineages of this model.
Luciferase assay was done to confirm if miR-138 directly regulate such
mRNAs. Super expression of miR-138 in the cell lineages that have lower
levels of this miRNA was also induced. Functional experiments assessing
proliferation rate, migration and invasiveness capacity in these cells
expressing ectopic miR-138 were performed. The results indicate that
miR-138 deregulation is an important event of melanoma progression. The
targets of this miRNA are key components in pathways frequently disrupted
in cancer, like cell cycle and apoptosis control, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition regulation, and differentiation process. Thus,
miR-138 represents a strong candidate to therapeutic target. The
exploration of its role can contribute to improve the comprehension about
melanoma progression and elucidate new ways of interventions against
cancer. Supported by FAPESP.

