Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formation of chemotherapy resistance-inducing fatty acids by
mesenchymal stem cells depends on COX-1, thromboxane synthase and
intracellular calcium


The development of resistance to chemotherapy is considered to be one of
the most important obstacles to continued effective treatment of cancer
in patients. We recently have identified an important mechanism that is
responsible for systemic resistance to chemotherapy. Circulating
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) activated by chemotherapy secrete specific
polyunsaturated fatty acids that confer resistance to a broad spectrum of
anti-cancer agents. These factors were identified to be two distinct
platinum-induced polyunsaturated fatty acids (PIFAs)
12-S-keto-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic acid (KHT) and
4,7,10,13-hexadecatetraenoic acid (16:4(n-3)) that were able to induce
chemotherapy resistance in picomolar concentrations. Interestingly, the
production of these PIFAs is restricted to MSCs and mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs), other stem cells like hematopoietic stem cells and
cancer stem cells are not able to form the PIFAs after cisplatin
stimulation. Research from our lab showed that the production of these
PIFAs can be blocked by cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), thromboxane A synthase
(TXAS) and intracellular calcium inhibitors, suggesting that these are
important in the production of the PIFAs, and indicating that the PIFAs
are formed in the pathways of arachidonic acid (AA) and eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA). Lipid peroxidation with subsequent release of oxygen radicals
could be a trigger for the formation of PIFA. We therefore tested whether
reactive oxygen species (ROS) were involved in the production of the
PIFAs. Neither increasing ROS by hydrogen peroxide, nor scavenging of ROS
by glutathione in the MSCs influenced the level of resistance to
chemotherapy in mice. In addition, intracellular ROS levels in the MSCs
treated with cisplatin for various intervals did not change as was
determined by DCFDA fluorescence. Our findings provide a new paradigm on
how MSCs can induce a systemic protection against chemotherapy through
the secretion of two distinct fatty acids that are formed in response to
platinum-containing chemotherapy.

