Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of intersectin-1s in human lung cancer may
contribute to tumorigenesis


The expression of intersectin-1s (ITSN-1s), a granzyme B (GrB) substrate
and one of the trisomic genes that may provide protection against most
cancers in Down's syndrome, is significantly downregulated in human lung
cancer (LC) cells and tissue. To date, there is no information on the
cellular and molecular factors that modulate ITSN-1s expression or
whether downregulation of ITSN-1s can contribute to LC. Thus, we
hypothesize that loss of full-length ITSN-1s due to proteolytic cleavage
by GrB during an inflammatory response and the interplay between the
signaling events triggered by the two cleavage products, are part of a
complex common molecular mechanism involved in the oncogenic
transformation of cells. To address this hypothesis, we used cultured LC
cells and tissue, as well as a range of biochemical (Western blot, ELISA,
BrdU incorporation), molecular biology (plasmid DNA transfection, qPCR),
morphological (immuno-histochemistry, fluorescence microscopy)
approaches, soft agar colony formation and xenograft tumor formation in
nude mice to evaluate whether downregulation of ITSN-1s can contribute to
lung carcinogenesis. Western blot and immuno-histochemistry of LC cells
and lung tissue lysates showed significant decrease in ITSN-1s protein
levels, while qPCR revealed only slight decrease, if any, in ITSN-1s
mRNA. In vitro studies showed that GrB cleaves ITSN-1s and generates a
cleavage fragment (GrB-EHITSN) with high proliferative potential. Lung
epithelial cells expressing the GrB-EHITSN show 40% increase in BrdU
incorporation, selective activation of p38MAPK and downstream Elk-1
transcription factor. These findings are consistent with a p38MAPK and
Elk-1 pro-proliferative signaling pathway regulated by ITSN-1s.
Activation of p38 and Elk-1 was also detected by western blot using
phospho-specific antibodies, in all LC cells investigated. Expression of
the two GrB cleavage fragments of ITSN-1s, individually or together, in
human lung epithelial cells exerts a modulatory effect on the balance
p38/Erk1/2MAPK activation. Functional studies showed that ectopic
expression of ITSN-1s in the LC cells restored the p38/Erk1/2MAPK
balance, significantly reduced their proliferation rate as well as the
formation of colonies in soft agar and xenograft tumors in nude mice.
Altogether, our results suggest that downregulation of ITSN-1s can
promote the oncogenic transformation of cells.

