Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photochemical internalization (PCI) of immunotoxins targeting
cancer stem cell markers


The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory indicates that only a subset of the
cancer cells is capable of tumor-initiation, self renewal and
differentiation. CSC is also thought to be treatment resistant and
responsible for recurrence. Different antigens are being used to identify
CSC markers and are potential targets for CSC-based therapy. Due to the
expression of the same antigens on normal stem cells it is of paramount
importance that CSC-targeting cytotoxins are specifically and efficiently
delivered to malignant tissues. Photochemical internalization (PCI) is a
method for specific delivery of membrane impermeable macromolecules from
endocytic vesicles to the cytosol of targeted cells. In this study we
show that PCI increase the cytotoxic effect of immunotoxins (IT)
targeting stem cell markers on different cell lines. The IT consists of a
CSC-targeting mAb biotinylated to the ribosome inactivating plant (RIP)
toxin saporin. TPCS2a-PCI of one of the ITs showed to be very cytotoxic
at sub picomolar levels. Cytotoxicity of the IT was blocked by using
excess concentration of unconjugated Ab. In addition, no difference in
cytotoxicity was obtained between mAb-toxin and toxin alone in marker
negative cell lines, confirming specificity. In order to asses enrichment
of CSC-activity in vitro we used flow cytometry to sort cells based on
the degree of expression of CSC-markers and compared the ability of
different cell fractions to establish colonies in both 2D and 3D cell
cultures growing in serum-free stem cell media. Cells with high
expression of CSC-markers had significantly higher capacity to initiate
colonies than low expressing cells. CSC enrichment was confirmed by an in
vivo limiting dilution assay. The present study demonstrates that PCI is
an efficient method for selective killing of cancer cells expressing stem
cell markers and will be further explored for the targeting of tumors
that express these markers.

