Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel oral gallium compounds as modulators of cancer-related
accelerated bone loss


Accelerated bone loss is associated with a number of metabolic and
neoplastic conditions. Estrogen-receptor modulation, bisphosphonates
(BP), and RANKL-inhibitors (RLI) are useful for metabolic bone disease.
Parenteral BPs and RLIs are also associated with skeletal morbidity,
including osteonecrosis. No oral agent has yet proved suitable for
treatment or prevention of adverse skeletal-related events (SREs) in
cancer patients (pts) with bone metastases. Our prior work showed that
low-dose gallium (G) nitrate administered by subcutaneous injection (SC)
reduced markers of accelerated bone resorption in pts with bone
metastases from various tumor types, as well as advanced Paget's disease.
Moreover, extended therapy for 6-12 mos (0.5 mg/kg SC 2 wks on/2 wks off)
produced substantial increases in total body calcium (measured by neutron
activation analysis) in pts with myeloma receiving chemotherapy. However,
inorganic G-compounds also exhibit low oral availability. Therefore, we
synthesized a series of organic G-containing compounds to test their
suitability as facilitators of long-term G administration. This work
isolated several lead compounds that were then evaluated in animal
studies. Methods: Isolated compounds were administered by oral gavage to
dogs (Calvert Laboratories, Inc.), which then underwent serial blood
sampling over 24 hrs. The objective was to achieve target plasma
concentrations at specific times that had proved effective in acutely
normalizing elevated blood calcium in human subjects with cancer-related
hypercalcemia. Results: Various amino acid-like complexes yielded
unpredictable results. Proline and carnosine showed only modest oral
availability, compared with mandalate and histidine complexes that were
superior. Among other organic bidentate G compounds, G4544(a) achieved a
peak target, but time-to-peak (TTP) concentrations was delayed.
G-4544(b), the same complex but with reduced nitrate content, improved
TTP concentrations, but a follow-on study in human subjects failed to
reproduce observations in dog (Proc. AACR 2010). To date, the complexes
G4546 and G4547 yielded the best results, promptly achieving peak stable
concentrations consistent with target objectives. Conclusion: The organic
G compound, G4546, will be advanced into human clinical trials to
determine its suitability for extended treatment of oncology patients who
may develop accelerated bone loss.

