Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognosis of prostate cancer using gene expression changes in
stroma


Enormous efforts have been invested in the development of biomarkers for
prognosis of prostate cancer in order to address urgent questions
regarding overtreatment by radical methods. Nevertheless, few accepted
and clinically useful biomarkers have been developed. A possible barrier
to biomarker discovery may be accumulated genetic alterations in tumor
cells resulting in polyclonal/multifocal prostate tumors as well as
cell-type heterogeneity of prostate cancer between patients.
Tumor-adjacent stroma (tumor microenvironment) is less affected by
genetic alteration and might therefore yield more consistent biomarkers
for clinical tests. To this end we compared gene expression profiles in
stroma near tumor from high-risk patients that chemically relapsed
shortly after prostatectomy (Enormous efforts have been invested in the
development of biomarkers for prognosis of prostate cancer in order to
address urgent questions regarding overtreatment by radical methods.
Nevertheless, few accepted and clinically useful biomarkers have been
developed. A possible barrier to biomarker discovery may be accumulated
genetic alterations in tumor cells resulting in polyclonal/multifocal
prostate tumors as well as cell-type heterogeneity of prostate cancer
between patients. Tumor-adjacent stroma (tumor microenvironment) is less
affected by genetic alteration and might therefore yield more consistent
biomarkers for clinical tests. To this end we compared gene expression
profiles in stroma near tumor from high-risk patients that chemically
relapsed shortly after prostatectomy (< 1 year), and low-risk patients
either relapsed later than 4 years after surgery or who did not relapse
and had at least 4 years follow-up data available. We identified 131
differentially expressed genes in these two categories. We also
identified another set of 115 genes of which the expression levels are
significantly correlated with time-to-relapse for the relapsed patients.
Using the 19 genes that overlapped between the two gene lists, we
developed a PAM-based classifier by training on samples containing stroma
near tumor: 9 high-risk patient samples and 9 low-risk patient samples.
We then tested the classifier on 47 independent samples, including 38
samples containing stroma near tumor and 9 tumor-bearing samples
containing at least 90% stroma near tumor. The classifier predicted the
risk status of patients with an average accuracy of 87%. These results
indicate that the prostate cancer microenvironment exhibits reproducible
changes useful for predicting outcomes for patients.

