Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glioblastoma stem cell pathways through phage display
screening


Glioblastomas are the most common and lethal primary brain tumor with
conventional therapy offering only palliation. Their resistance to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy has been hypothesized to be due in part to
the therapeutic resistance of cancer stem cells (CSCs), a subpopulation
of cancer cells functionally defined by the ability to self renew and
propagate tumors. Development of effective and safe anti-CSC therapeutics
will require a selective targeting of CSCs without disruption of normal
stem cell maintenance. As phage display technology has been used in
cancer to identify, target, and image tumor cells, we employed phage
display technology to identify novel proteins specific to the functioning
of brain tumor stem cells. A M13 bacteriophage peptide library consisting
of 109 different combinations of 7 amino acid long peptide sequences was
screened for binding to functionally validated CSCs in both in vitro and
in vivo settings. In vitro screening was performed against CSCs isolated
from human glioblastoma tumors grown in culture following negative
selection on non-CSCs. In parallel, in vivo screening was also performed
by injecting the random phage library into immunocompromised mice with
either subcutaneous or intracranially xenografted glioblastoma cell
lines. The xenografted tumors were resected and divided into stem and
non-stem cells prospectively. Phage peptides bound to CSCs were collected
in order to isolate peptide sequences that selectively target the CSC
subpopulation. In silico analysis of the recovered peptide sequences from
both screens using a protein BLAST search revealed several novel proteins
that may play an important role in the maintenance and functioning of
glioblastoma CSCs. Gene expression analysis showed that several of these
genes are preferentially upregulated in glioma CSCs when compared to
their non-stem counterparts, suggesting these genes may play a vital role
in the unique functions of CSCs and be used to target and image CSCs.
These studies validate phage display screening as a method to discover
novel proteins and pathways that permit interrogation of CSCs.

