Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Universal detection of protein phosphorylation based on
multi-functionalized soluble nanopolymers


Protein phosphorylation, as the most common covalent modification of
proteins, plays a critical role in the regulation of many cellular
functions. Irregularities in phosphorylation network are a major cause of
onset and progression of many diseases, most notably cancer.
Consequently, detection of protein phosphorylation is essential in
further understanding of cellular signaling pathways and mechanisms of
cell growth and proliferation. To assist in effective phosphorylation
analyses, we introduce here a novel technique based on soluble
nanopolymers with excellent solubility, compact spherical shape and
chemical homogeneity. Soluble nanopolymers functionalized with Ti(IV)
ions have shown highly versatility and allow for highly efficient
analyses of phosphorylation and signaling pathways. We devise here a
novel strategy, termed pIMAGO (phospho-imaging), for effective detection
of phosphoproteins on a membrane (Western Blot format) or in a 96-well
plate (ELISA format). Unlike antibody-based strategies, the new method is
capable of selectively binding a phosphorylated residue independent of
amino acid microenvironment. It shows no preference for either of the
phosphosites, and thus holds great promise in biological analyses where
the site of phosphorylation is not known or its specific antibody is not
available. Using this technique, the phosphorylation levels of proteins
of interest under physiological conditions can be readily detected as
part of a standard Western Blot or ELISA procedures without the need for
radioactivity or expensive phosphosite-specific antibodies. The utility
of the approach has been demonstrated using standard mixtures of
proteins, by in vitro kinase and phosphatase assays, as well as with
kinase inhibitor screening and enzyme profiling. In addition,
multiplexing capabilities of pIMAGO are presented, a feature often
unavailable during antibodies-based detection. Finally, we further
confirmed that the technique is sensitive and specific enough to detect
endogenous phosphorylation changes by analyzing physiological signaling
in number of endogenous protein complexes isolated directly from cells.

