Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irinophore C, a liposomal formulation of irinotecan, has
anti-vascular effects in primary tumors of colorectal cancer grown
orthotopically in mice


Introduction: Colorectal cancer accounts for 10% of cancer deaths in
North America. Our group has developed a series of primary tumors from
human colorectal cancer tissue obtained during surgery. These tumors are
passaged orthotopically in mice and maintain the complexity and
heterogeneity of the original patient sample. We have used these tumors
to examine the cytotoxic and anti-vascular effects of Irinophore CTM, a
liposomal form of irinotecan, which is more efficacious and less toxic
than the parent drug. Materials and Methods: Primary tumor tissues from
colorectal cancer patients, were validated by a reference pathologist and
implanted subcutaneously in SCID mice. Tumors that grew successfully were
then passaged orthotopically on the ascending colon of new mice. When
these tumors reached 200mm3, groups of mice were treated with saline,
irinotecan (50mg/kg), or IrinophoreCTM (25mg/kg) once a week for 6 weeks.
Separate groups of tumors, A, B and C were harvested on days 3, 21 and 42
after treatment started, respectively. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
was used to assess tumor perfusion in mice from group B. Treatment
effects on tumor metabolism were assessed with 18F -fluorodeoxyglucose
and positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) for groups A and C mice.
Immunofluorescence staining was carried out on tumors from all treatment
groups to determine levels of cell proliferation, apoptosis, hypoxia, and
vessel density. Results: 4 of 14 samples were successfully propagated and
maintain their original morphology. Irinophore CTM treatment reduced
tumor volume by 54% to 92% compared to the untreated controls depending
on the tumor line. No toxic effects were seen with Irinophore CTM. The
aggregate data for cell proliferation (Ki67), necrosis (H&E) and cell
death (TUNEL) indicate that Irinophore CTM has sustained cytotoxic
activity compared to the free drug. Immunostaining data show irinotecan
treatment did not change blood vessel density in the tumors; however,
Irinophore CTM treatment did reduce vascular density in the tumors. The
volume transfer coefficient, Ktrans, derived from MRI, decreased when
tumors were treated with irinotecan, but increased with Irinophore CTM
treatment. Differences in the metabolic activity of the tumors were also
seen. Conclusion: Orthotopic models of colorectal cancer propagated from
patient tumors were successfully developed. These models retain the
characteristics of the original patient sample and are a good alternative
to xenograft models grown from immortalized cell-lines. The anti-tumor
activity of Irinophore CTM at lower doses is greater than irinotecan's,
and with fewer side effects. Treatment with Irinophore CTM also reduces
tumor metabolism and appears to improve vascular function. The data imply
that Irinophore CTM has sustained anti-tumor activity and multiple
mechanisms of action compared to irinotecan.

