Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intermittent hypoxia effect on osteoclastogenesis stimulated by
neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor that
is derived from the developing sympathetic nervous system and results
from the improper differentiation of neural crest cells. Neuroblastomas
show a tremendous clinical heterogeneity ranging from benign
ganglioneuromas to highly aggressive immature tumors. Hypoxia is a common
feature of solid tumors and is associated with their malignant phenotype.
Intermittent hypoxia (IH) which is characterized by cyclic periods of
hypoxia and reoxygenation, occurs in tumor cells that are dependent on
tumor blood vessels having intermittent perfusion fluctuations in blood
flow. The occurrence of IH episodes varies significantly in rapidly
growing malignant tumors. Bone is one of the target organs of metastasis
in advanced neuroblastoma. To invade the bone, tumor cells produce
osteoclast-activating factors that increase bone resorption by the
osteoclast. The present study focuses on how IH-conditioned neuroblastoma
cells modulate the differentiation of osteoclasts. IH-conditioned cells
were derived by exposing tumor cells to 10 repeated cycles of hypoxia
followed by reoxygenation. In order to assess the role of HIF-1
overexpression in osteolysis, we stably transfected human neuroblastoma
cells with an expression vector containing a HIF-1 cDNA. Additionally,
cells were stably transfected with a plasmid expressing HIF-1 shRNA or
luciferase shRNA and selected in neomycin. The expression of HIF-1
protein was analyzed by western blotting in IH-conditioned and stable
transfectants of neuroblastoma cells. Changes in gene expression were
determined by real-time PCR for IL-8, MCP-1, PTHrP, CXCR-4 and RANKL and
the expression of osteoclastogenic factors was found increased in
IH-conditioned and HIF-1 protein overexpressing cells. Conditioned medium
collected from IH-conditioned and HIF-1 cDNA overexpressing neuroblastoma
cells has shown enhanced osteoclast formation capabilities in the
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) assay. IH-conditioned and
HIF-1 protein overexpressing neuroblastoma cells secrete increased
amounts of VEGF protein, which has been found to promote osteoclast
activity. Calcium-sensing receptor (CaR) plays a pivotal role in
osteoclast differentiation. We found enhanced expression of CaR in RAW
264.7 (osteoclast precursors) cells treated with conditioned medium
collected from IH-conditioned and HIF-1 protein overexpressing
neuroblastoma cells compared with the control. Thus, IH was found to
enhance osteolytic capabilities of neuroblastoma cells in vitro in part
through HIF-1 protein stabilization.

