Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed immunoprecipitation-liquid chromatography-multiple
reaction monitoring mass spectrometry quantification of protein
expression and phosphorylation for breast cancer biomarkers


Introduction: Estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha), progesterone receptor B
(PR B), and the receptor tyrosine kinase, Her2, are tumor markers
classified by the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) as level
of evidence I in breast cancer. The quantitative evaluation of protein
expression and phosphorylation status of these targets in tumor tissues
will enable subtype classification and support clinical decision-making
and selection of targeted therapy in breast cancer. Experimental
Procedures: Breast cancer cell lines were used to develop peptide-based
quantitative assays for protein expression and phosphorylation using
immunoprecipitation (IP) and liquid chromatography-multiple reaction
monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM). Stable isotope-labeled standard
peptides were synthesized and developed as internal standards.
Multiplexed IP for ER alpha, PR B, and HER2 will be developed to enable
the enrichment of the proteins to enable quantification of the expression
and phosphorylation of these biomarkers in the same sample. The
sensitivity of each assay will be tested using serial dilutions of cell
lysate to evaluate requirements for analysis of clinical specimens. Data
Summary: LC-MRM assays for both unmodified and phosphorylated peptides
have been developed and characterized for each protein. Recovery using
multiplexed IP for these proteins is similar to recovery of individual
IP. Data have been generated for cell line models of stimulation and
treatment. For example, LC-MRM quantification of HER2 in cell line models
stimulated with EGF or Heregulin shows that protein expression is
unchanged, but phosphorylation increases; on the other hand, LC-MRM shows
clearly that phosphorylation of Her2 is inhibited with Lapatinib.
Conclusions: The ability to examine the protein expression as well as the
phosphorylation status in these biomarkers with quantitative mass
spectrometry will produce improved understanding of their role in the
development and progression of breast cancer and has the potential to
improve the selection of targeted therapeutics.

