Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and investigation of ethnic specific gene
expression differences in non-cancerous breast tissue


Disparities in breast cancer (BC) stage of presentation and survival are
well documented in patients of different ethnicities. These differences
are undoubtedly due to a combination of extrinsic and intrinsic factors.
Our group is focused on the genetic contributions to these disparities.
Recent observations by our group and others suggest not only the
involvement of specific genes contributing to BC risk in African-American
(AA) women, but that multiple distinct ethnic-specific gene expression
patterns exist in both matched cancerous and normal breast tissue
samples. We report the first results of a parallel study which is
addressing an unanswered question: are there ethnic-specific differences
in the transcriptome of normal breast tissue? We are completing gene
expression profiling studies in normal breast FFPE samples from 25 AA and
25 Caucasian (Cauc) women with no history of breast cancer. Laser capture
micro-dissection (LCM) is used to further identify and extract epithelial
vs stromal cells from each FFPE slide for use in RNA expression
profiling. RNA isolation and hybridization occurs in collaboration with
Almac Diagnostics (Dx) using their proprietary Breast Cancer DSA array.
Gene expression data analyses involves multiple statistical packages
developed for DNA microarray studies, and is focusing on comparison of
gene expression profiles across four study groups- AA vs Cauc samples and
epithelial vs stroma cells. For baseline comparison, a subset of this
study group (10 AA and 10 Cauc samples non-LCM dissected) has also been
analyzed. Results from these non-LCM dissected samples displayed
expression differences between AA and Cauc in 333 known genes. Applying
the stringency criteria of a fold change of two or greater and a
statistical p-value of 0.01, reduced the significant gene list to 61
genes. Initial pathway analyses indicate these genes are involved in cell
adhesion, G-protein signaling, apoptosis and survival pathways, and
cytoskeleton remodeling - all critical pathways for cell survival. These
initial results are being validated in the LCM-dissected samples, and our
latest results will be presented. Results from analyses of these normal
samples will be compared to our previous results obtained in matched
tumor-normal triple negative AA and Cauc breast cancer samples (as well
as publicly available data sets). Combined analysis of tumor and normal
breast expression (transcriptome) data will help to better understand the
possible significance of gene expression differences in breast tissue
between ethnic groups.

