Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of p53 target genes by ChIP-Seq and transcriptome
analysis combined with genome-wide p53-binding motif analysis in silico


p53 is one of the most important tumor suppressor genes. In approximately
half of all human cancers, p53 is inactivated as a direct result of
mutations in the p53 gene. Furthermore, mutation or deletion of p53 is
related to poor prognosis and resistance to chemotherapy and radiation.
The activation of p53 is induced by a variety of cell stresses, such as
DNA damage, oncogene activation, spindle damage and hypoxia. Activated
p53 transactivates a number of genes, many of which are involved in DNA
repair, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. In this study, we tried to
identify novel p53 target genes by the combination of
chromatin-immunoprecipitation, transcriptome analysis and a search of p53
binding motif in silico. We infected lung cancer cell, H1299 (p53 null)
with adenovirus vectors expressing FLAG-tagged p53, p63g and p73b, and
then performed chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with FLAG antibody.
The immunoprecipitated DNA was subjected to next-generation sequencing
(ChIP-Seq). The short sequences generated by ChIP-Seq were aligned to the
human genome sequence and peaks which indicate the binding of p53 family
protein were detected by several algorithms. We also searched p53 binding
motif, RRRCWWGYYY appeared inside genes and 10k base upstream from its
transcription start site, and selected ChIP-Seq peaks of which genomic
positions include p53 binding motif. Furthermore we analyzed mRNA
expression of H1299 cells by cDNA microarray including several long
intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) and next-generation sequencing
(RNA-Seq). We combined three categories of data, mRNA expression,
ChIP-Seq peaks and p53 binding motif in silico. As a result, we found
several genes which are upregulated by p53 family proteins and have
ChIP-Seq peaks with p53 binding motif in promoter regions or gene bodies.
These genes included not only well-known p53 target genes such as p21 and
MDM2 but also novel candidate genes. In addition, ChIP-PCR and reporter
assay confirmed the binding and responsiveness to p53. Thus, our approach
identified several novel target genes induce by p53. We are now analyzing
the role of these genes in p53 response pathway.

