Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wound-healing drainages contribute to triple negative breast
cancers aggressiveness


The triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) is an extremely aggressive
cancer subtype that although account for only 10-17% of breast cancers
carries the higher rate of distant recurrence and death than women with
other breast cancer subtypes and, unfortunately has limited treatment
options. The TNBC pattern of recurrence present a distant recurrence peak
at approximately 3 years and then declines rapidly thereafter. It's now
well known that growth-factors released during the healing process can
accelerate the early recurrences in breast cancer patients. We speculate
that wound healing drainages (WHD) stimulation may specifically
contribute to TNBC early relapse. To this aim, a panel of TNBC cell lines
(BT-549; HCC1937, MDA-MB-157; MDA-MB-231; MDA-MB-468; SUM159; SUM149) and
the luminal cell lines MCF7 were treated with WHD. All breast carcinoma
cell lines are induced to proliferate in response to more than 20
drainage fluids obtained from breast cancer patients, but median
proliferation level was 3-folds higher in TNBC- compared to luminal-cell
line. To identify which receptors/pathways can be activated and play a
driving role in TNBC progression, a reverse phase protein microarray
(RPMA) experiment on TNBC cells WHD stimulated was performed. We revealed
a specific activation of PDGFR, VEGFR and their downstream pathways,
whereas no significant changes were observed in other receptors, such as
EGFR, IRS, Met and ERB3. Conversely, PDGFR and VEGFR pathways were not
activated in MCF7. The type of activated receptors suggested the
involvement of angiogenic properties, besides canonical proliferation
pathways, upon WHD stimulation. To prove whether the receptors found
activated by WHD play a key role in in vitro and in vivo TNBC
progression, we targeted PDGFR, VEGFR and other receptors possibly
involved in proliferation and angiogenic capabilities with sunitinib
(targeting PDGFR, VEGFR, FGF and c-kit), anti-bFGF antibody (targeting
the ligand bFGF) and bevacizumab (targeting the VEGF) in TNBC cells
WHD-stimulated. Sunitinib and anti-bFGF antibody halved the proliferation
of TNBC cell lines, whereas bevacizumab modestly affect proliferation.
Notably, sunitinib and anti-bFGF antibody strongly inhibited MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-468 xenografts tumor growth (sunitinib: 80%, and 70% Growth
Index (GI), respectively; anti-bFGF antibody 70% and 60% GI,
respectively) whereas bevacizumab determined no more than 30% decrease of
tumor volume. In conclusion, WHD promotes TNBC progression probably by
sustaining both proliferation and angiogenic.

