Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ligand-independent activity of the mutant LNCaP androgen receptor
drives cell proliferation in hormone-independent LNCaP tumor cells


Androgen-dependent prostate tumor cells can adapt to androgen ablation by
up-regulating expression of the androgen receptor (AR). Increased
expression of AR may sensitize cells to residual androgens in the
environment or to de novo-synthesized ligands. We have shown previously
that hormone-independent LNCaP 104-R1 cells, which arise after long-term
androgen deprivation of androgen-dependent 104-S cells, express much
higher levels of AR than 104-S cells. LNCaP prostate tumor cells express
a mutant T877A AR that can be activated by progesterone, raising the
possibility that LNCaP cells progress to apparent hormone independence
during androgen deprivation by initiating de novo synthesis of
progesterone. In support of this, we have found that androgen-dependent
LNCaP 104-S cells grow independently of exogenous androgen after
lentivirus-mediated over-expression of T877A AR, but not wild-type (wt)
AR. This difference was attributable to the T877A substitution and not to
sequence differences in the N-terminus between wt and LNCaP cell-derived
AR. However, this growth was insensitive to the anti-androgen
bicalutamide, similar to the bicalutamide-insensitive growth of
hormone-independent 104-R1 cells. Lentiviral sh-RNAi-mediated knockdown
of AR resulted in growth inhibition in both 104-S and 104-R1 cells.
Analysis of T877A AR transactivation in 104-S and 104-R1 cells by
reporter gene assay revealed that T877A AR displayed significant
constitutive and bicalutamide-insensitive activity. Wild-type AR, on the
other hand, showed low basal activity in the absence of added ligand and
modest induction by bicalutamide. Co-expression of CYP11A1 (cholesterol
side chain cleavage enzyme) and HSD3B2 (3-beta hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-2), which sequentially generate pregnenolone and
progesterone, strongly activated T877A AR, but not wt AR in 104-S cells.
This activation could be inhibited by bicalutamide or ketoconazole, an
inhibitor of CYP11A1. Expression of CYP11A1 alone in 104-S cells
increased cell proliferation in the absence of androgen that was
bicalutamide-sensitive. This indicates that 104-S cells may express low
level but functional HSD3B activity, because pregnenolone does not
activate T877A AR. Secondly, the bicalutamide-sensitivity of
progesterone-driven cell proliferation and bicalutamide-insensitivity of
T877A AR-driven proliferation, together with the observations above,
suggest that de novo synthesis of progesterone or another ligand in LNCaP
cells is most likely not responsible for T877A AR-driven proliferation in
cells in which T877A AR is over-expressed. Rather, the T877A mutation may
confer upon the receptor constitutive ligand-independent activity.

