Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymoquinone-mediated suppression of NF- B activity causes
inhibition of cell viability and induces apoptosis in activated B-cell
sub-type of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma


Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common lymphoid
malignancy and constitutes approximately 40% of all cases of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Despite improvement in treatment protocols,
a large number of DLBCL cases remain refractory to treatment. DLBCL can
be further classified as three distinct subtypes: germinal center B
cell-like (GCB)-, activated B cell-like (ABC)-, and primary mediastinal
B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). ABC DLBCL has a worse survival after upfront
chemotherapy and is characterized by constitutive activation of the
anti-apoptotic nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) pathway. Yet the implication
of NF-B inhibition in ABC DLBCL need to be further elucidated. We have
previously shown that Thymoquinone (TQ), a natural compound isolated from
Nigella sativa, induces growth inhibition and induces apoptosis in
several NHL cell lines. However its role in inhibition of growth and
apoptosis has not been fully elucidated in ABC sub-type of DLBCL cell
lines. We found that TQ treatment inhibits cell viability and induces
apoptosis in a dose dependent manner in various ABC cell lines. Further
more, we found that TQ treatment causes inactivation of IB and
consequently inhibits NF-B activity by decreasing the expression of p65
subunit of NF-B in the nuclear compartment of ABC cell lines.
In-activation of NF-B survival pathway leads to induction of apoptosis
via the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway initiated by conformational
changes in the Bax protein leading to changes in the mitochondrial
membrane potential and release of cytochrome c in the cytosole. Once
cytochrome c is released, it leads to activation and cleavage of
caspases-9 and -3 and cleavage of PARP. This leads to caspase dependent
apoptosis in ABC cell lines. In addition, we also found that TQ treatment
causes up-regulation of death receptor 5 (DR5), an important and
essential receptor for tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing
ligand (TRAIL). However, up-regulation of DR5 does not play a role in
TQ-induced apoptosis in ABC cell lines. Interestingly, combination of
sub-toxic doses of TQ and TRAIL induces efficient significant apoptosis
in ABC cell lines. These data show that TQ can be used alone or in
combination with TRAIL to induce apoptosis in these aggressive sub-types
of DLBCL and may play an important role in the management of DLBCL in the
future.

