Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits IL-8 production and exerts anti-tumor effects in
colon cancer cells: therapeutic and preventive implications


Interleukin-8 (IL-8), a member of CXC subfamily of chemokines, plays
important roles in inflammation and cancer. The biological action of IL-8
is mediated through binding to its receptors, CXCR1 (IL-8RA) and CXCR2
(IL-8RB), which are members of the seven transmembrane G-protein-coupled
receptor family. Overexpression of IL-8 has been detected in many human
tumors, including colon cancer, and it is a major component of the
inflammatory tumor microenvironment. Functional studies have shown that
IL-8 acts as an autocrine/paracrine growth factor, and promotes growth,
invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis and chemoresistance in colon cancer,
implying that it could serve as a preventive and therapeutic target. In
this study, we examined the effect of honokiol, a biologically active
biphenolic compound isolated from the oriental medicinal plant Magnolia
officinalis/grandiflora, on two colon cancer cells lines, SW620 and
HCT116. Both the cell lines are highly tumorigenic and metastatic, and
express high levels of IL-8. Our data demonstrated that honokiol
inhibited the expression of IL-8 in both colon cancer cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner. IL-8 downregulation by honokiol was also
correlated with decreased activation of its transcriptional regulator
NF-B. Honokiol treatment enhanced cytoplasmic accumulation of NF-B with a
concomitant decrease in the nuclear fraction and reduced transcriptional
activity of NF-B-responsive promoter. This was associated with decreased
phosphorylation of inhibitor of kappa B alpha (IB-) leading to its
stabilization and enhanced cytoplasmic levels. In addition, honokiol
exerted growth inhibitory effects by inducing apoptosis and G1 phase cell
cycle arrest. Altogether, these findings suggest that honokiol could
serve as a novel preventive and therapeutic agent in colon cancer.

