Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor as a novel target for
inhibiting glioblastoma stem cells


Introduction: Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) are a subpopulation of tumor
cells that promote tumor invasion and angiogenesis, therapeutic
resistance and tumor recurrence. Here, we study the function of
hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor (HMMR) in human GSCs. HMMR is
hyper-expressed in human glioblastoma samples relative to lower-grade
glioma and non-neoplastic specimens. Hyper-expression of HMMR also
correlates with poor survival in glioma patients. HMMR is a
multifunctional oncogenic protein that plays essential roles in
tumorgenesis. Extracellular HMMR forms a complex with CD44 that upon
binding to hyaluronan activates intracellular signaling pathways that
regulate tumor cell survival, proliferation and invasion. Intracellular
HMMR associates with microtubules, interacts with the mitotic spindle and
contributes to tumor progression by promoting genomic instability. HMMR
and CD44 are two ubiquitous receptors for hyaluronan, which is a
prominent component of the microenvironment in most malignant tumors.
CD44 has been identified as a cancer stem cell marker and CD44 directly
regulates cancer stem cells in a variety of cancers including
glioblastoma. Critical evidence regarding the function of HMMR in actual
glioblastoma tumors and in the context of tumor-initiating GSCs is still
lacking. Results: We found that HMMR is ubiquitously expressed in a panel
of human glioblastoma-derived neurosphere cultures that are enriched for
GSCs. Targeting HMMR by lentivirus-mediated shRNA delivery potently
disrupted in vitro self-renewal of GSCs and inhibited the expression of
key GSC markers, such as CD133, SOX2 and Olig2. HMMR knockdown also
blocked the in vivo tumorigenic potential of GSCs in mouse orthotopic
xenograft model. Notably, disruption of HMMR in GSCs attenuated the
activity of Notch signaling, which supports the cancer stem cell
hierarchy in glioblastoma and various other cancer types. Significance:
This research identifies HMMR as a novel therapeutic target in the
treatment of glioblastoma by depleting the tumor-initiating GSCs. It also
introduces a novel hypothesis regarding the mechanistic crosstalk between
HMMR-mediated signaling and Notch signaling pathway. Understanding this
crosstalk between HMMR and Notch signaling will have a significant impact
on current efforts to target Notch driven mechanisms for GBM therapy.
Overall, these studies will lay an essential foundation for the
development of HMMR-targeting strategies, such as HMMR inhibitors or
monoclonal antibodies, as new therapeutic approaches targeting
glioblastoma.

