Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of microRNA and gene expression signatures from
several models of Docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines


Background: Docetaxel is the standard treatment for metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) since 2004 and overall
survival benefit in CRPC has been demonstrated in docetaxel-treated
patients. In spite of this benefit, a drug resistance is eventually
observed in all patients, leaving few therapeutic options. Therefore, it
is crucial to identify predictive markers that enable selection of
patients who will respond to treatment. Methods: Three
docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC3 and IGR-CaP1)
were obtained by continuous exposure to Docetaxel. A high-density genomic
profiling by cDNA microarrays (Agilent technologies) was performed to
compare sensitive and chemoresistant cell lines. The differential
expression levels of 377 microRNAs between resistant and sensitive
parental cell lines were measured by Taqman Low Density Array (TLDA,
Applied Biosystems technology). Each determination was generated from
biological replicates in the absence of drug. Results: A gene expression
signature of 583 genes was generated by the bootstrap method (Fold
change>2 for each doses of Docetaxel, P value Background: Docetaxel is
the standard treatment for metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) since 2004 and overall survival benefit in CRPC has been
demonstrated in docetaxel-treated patients. In spite of this benefit, a
drug resistance is eventually observed in all patients, leaving few
therapeutic options. Therefore, it is crucial to identify predictive
markers that enable selection of patients who will respond to treatment.
Methods: Three docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC3
and IGR-CaP1) were obtained by continuous exposure to Docetaxel. A
high-density genomic profiling by cDNA microarrays (Agilent technologies)
was performed to compare sensitive and chemoresistant cell lines. The
differential expression levels of 377 microRNAs between resistant and
sensitive parental cell lines were measured by Taqman Low Density Array
(TLDA, Applied Biosystems technology). Each determination was generated
from biological replicates in the absence of drug. Results: A gene
expression signature of 583 genes was generated by the bootstrap method
(Fold change>2 for each doses of Docetaxel, P value <10-5) in IGR-CaP1
cells. Based on the hypothesis of a biological effect due to increasing
drug, a second microarray expression profile was identified using a
5-parameters logistic regression model. This analysis led to the
identification of 486 genes associated with resistance to increasing
doses of docetaxel (with a P value 10-5 and a fold change between the
first and the last dose of drug 2). 45 genes were common in the two
analyses. A 65 miRs expression profile of docetaxel resistance was
determined in all three cell lines using two reference miRs.
Interestingly, we identified the under-expression of three clusters of
miRs in the resistant cells. In particular, the under-expression of the
miR 141-200c cluster was inversely correlated to the over-expression of
its target genes Jagged1 (JAG1) and dll1(DLL1), which were identified in
the gene expression signature. JAG1 and DLL1 are ligands for Notch
receptors, thus we are currently exploring the role of the
miR-200c/ZEB1/JAG1 axis and the Notch signalling pathway in mechanisms of
Docetaxel resistance. Conclusion: High-density microarray genomic and
microRNA profiling analyses comparing chemo-resistant versus sensitive
prostate cancer cell lines were used to identify signatures of genes and
microRNAs, and signaling pathways potentially implicated in Docetaxel
resistance. Ultimately, integration of data from gene and microRNA
expression will allow the identification of biomarkers to select patients
that could benefit from Docetaxel chemotherapy. It could also provide the
framework for formulation of novel therapies that may improve taxane
therapy efficacy in men with prostate cancer.

