Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic markers in early stage non small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC)


Conventional clinical and pathologic risk factors in stage I non
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) provide limited prognostic information.
Novel prognostic biomarkers are needed to identify patients with highest
recurrence risk who will receive the greatest absolute risk reduction
from adjuvant chemotherapy/radiation. Transcriptome, epigenome, and
global genetic variation analyses of resected NSCLC frozen tumor samples
(n=81; 29 stage 1A/52 stage 1B) were performed in order to develop an
integrated prognostic signature. Only tumors that were resected within 3
months of the first biopsy-proven diagnosis were used to reduce lead time
bias in timing of removal of the primary tumor. Here, the association of
gene expression with disease free survival (DSF) is described. Whole
genome expression data were quantile-normalized using the Illumina
GenomeStudio 2011.1 software. Log-transformed data were then processed in
Biometric Research Branch (BRB)-Array Tools. Prognostic models were
developed with the top ranking genes using the supervised principal
component survival algorithm (PCA). Risk group membership was then
assigned based on this multivariate model using leave-one-out cross
validation and class prediction modeling. Both models adjusted for age,
gender and tumor histology. For stage 1A cases, a 113 gene signature
selected by fitting a Cox proportional hazard model (Cox) was able to
discriminate between poor and good DFS (=0.001). Upon further analysis
using a class prediction algorithm support vector machine (SVM), we
identified an 18 gene classifier that predicted outcome SN=0.952,
SP=0.571). A 10-fold cross validation ROC curve reported a value of
0.748. For stage 1B cases, the Cox model identified 141 genes (=0.01),
but the SVM prediction algorithm showed reduced SN/SP (0.75/0.25) for a
12 gene classifier, indicative of possible increased heterogeneity among
the 1B cases. Nine genes overlapped between the PCA and class prediction
model gene signatures. These nine are members of common lung
tumorigenesis pathways, i.e. G-protein signaling regulation
(KRAS/BRAF/RASSFI); tyrosine protein kinase signaling (EGFR/ERBB2);
nucleotide excision repair (ERRC5 and ERCC6) and genes implicated in cell
differentiation regulated by miR200B (HGD) or miR338 (TXNRD1), miRNAs
independently found to be associated with prognosis in our cohort. These
initial results demonstrate that a gene expression profile can
distinguish stage I NCSLC tumors and predict prognoses, but require
further validation. Supported in part by NIH 5P50 CA090440, P30CA047904,
UPMC Institutional Funds.

