Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of isoliquiritigenin (ISL) on VEGF secretion in Human
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231


Breast cancer is the most frequent cause of mortality among females in
the world. The death reasons of most breast cancer patients were due to
the tumor metastasis from breast to other organs. The principal
mechanisms involved in metastasis are migration and invasion.
Unfortunately, there are almost no efficacious therapeutic modalities.
Thus, it is imperative to develop novel targets and agents to prevent
invasion and metastasis of breast cancer cells.This purpose of this study
is to investigate the anti-metastatic potency of ISL via modulation of
the expression of VEGF and MMP in the highly metastatic human breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. Based on ELISA and western blot analysis,
ISL treatment (0.1-10 M) for 24 h and 48 h reduced secretions and protein
levels of VEGF in a time- and dose-dependent manner. ISL decreased the
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF-1) protein expression, which is the
up-regulator of VEGF. According to chamber migration assay and wound
migration assay, ISL significantly suppressed the migration of MDA-MB-231
cells at 24 h and 48 h. Among human MMPs, MMP-2 and MMP-9 have been of
particular interest because they efficiently cleave the major components
of ECM. As confirmed by western blot and gelatin zymography assay, ISL
inhibited the protein expression and gelatinolytic activity of MMP-2/-9
at 48 h. To further clarify the signal pathway responsible for
ISL-downregulated cell migration in MDA-MB-231 cells, we examine the
effect of ISL on PI3K/Akt pathway and MAPK pathway, as well as the NF-B.
The expression of PI3K and phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase and Akt kinase were suppressed after ISL treatment. In
addition, NF-B DNA binding assay demonstrated that NF-B DNA binding
activity was inhibited after ISL treatment. Taken together, these
findings suggest the ISL inhibits p38, PI3K/Akt, and NF-B signaling,
resulting in the inhibition of VEGF, HIF-1, MMP-9, and MMP-2, and thus
suppresses migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. We believe that these findings
will provide the potential application of ISL on the treatment of
metastatic breast cancer.

