Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer screening among US adults with and without
doctor's specific recommendation regarding choice of screening modality


Background: Absence of a physician's recommendation is among the most
commonly reported barriers to undergoing colorectal cancer (CRC)
screening. It is unknown whether a physician's specific recommendation of
a particular screening modality, rather than a patient's choice from a
menu of screening options, improves CRC screening uptake. Aim: To assess
whether healthcare providers discussion of CRC screening options and
recommending a specific screening modality improve uptake of screening.
Methods: We used the 2007 Health Information National Trends Survey
(HINTS) to evaluate how respondents who were 50 years and older (n =
4,342) were informed of CRC screening. We used logistic regression
analyses to examine the association of recommendations and being current
with CRC screening (Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) within 1 year,
sigmoidoscopy within 5 years, or colonoscopy within 10 years). Results:
The mean age of responders was 64.9 years, 60.3% female, 81.5% white,
8.6% black, and 92.7% had health insurance. CRC screening discussions
occurred with 3,320 (77.5%) respondents; 94.7% of which occurred with a
doctor as opposed to a nurse or other health care professional.
Colonoscopy was the most recommended test. Overall, 2,824 (65.0%)
respondents were up to date with CRC screening regardless of the
screening modality. After adjusting for age, sex, race, highest
education, income, marital status and health insurance, having a
discussion about screening and receiving a specific test recommendation
were associated with being up to date with CRC screening (Table).
Conclusion: Uptake of CRC screening is better when providers discuss CRC
screening and make specific CRC screening test recommendations. Table:
Association of the patterns of CRC screening recommendations with being
up to date with CRC screening


