Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation is indispensable for ephrin A1 activity


Introduction: EphrinA1 belongs to the ephrin family of ligands that
interact with the Eph-related tyrosine kinase receptors. ephrin/Eph
regulatory pathways control a wide array of physiological cellular
functions, but have also been implicated in the development and
progression of malignancy. EphrinA1 specifically binds EphA2 receptor
that is highly over-expressed in gliobastomas (GBM), but not in normal
adult brain, inducing a receptor-mediated internalization and
down-regulation with subsequent tumor suppressing action, making this an
attractive target for the development of new anti-tumor therapeutics. Our
laboratory documented that a soluble monomeric functionally active form
of EphrinA1 is released from cancer cells. In the crystal structure of
ephrinA1/EphA2 complex, ephrinA1 was shown to be glycosylated on
Asparagine 26; however, there is no data available confirming the
presence or explaining the importance of this glycosylation. We have thus
initiated a study to investigate the role of glycosylation in ephrinA1
biological activity. Methods: EphrinA1-Fc tag was produced in Sf9 insect
cells with the Baculovirus expression system. Proteins were purified by
proteinG affinity and MonoQ ion exchange chromatography, using FPLC. The
purity of the proteins was estimated by SDS-PAGE and Western blots (WB).
EphrinA1 activity was evaluated on U-251 MG GBM cells by examining cell
morphology and EphA2 receptor down-regulation. Enzymatic de-glycosylation
with N-GlycosidaseF (PNGaseF) was performed as recommended by the
manufacturer. Tunicamycin was used to inhibit N-linked glycosylation at
the final concentration of 1 g/ml. Results: Enzymatic de-glycosylation
with PNGaseF caused a decrease in molecular weight of ephrinA1 detected
by SDS-PAGE. The same was observed by WB on ephrinA1 immunoreactive band
from PNGaseF treated U-251[ephrinA1+] conditioned media. Experiments
using the drug tunicamycin on U-251[ephrinA1+] cells showed a clear shift
in ephrinA1 gel mobility implying that the protein was expressed in an
unglycosylated form. We compared glycosylated ephrinA1 to de-glycosylated
ephrinA1 (Deg-ephrinA1) activities in both monomeric and dimeric forms on
cells expressing EphA2 receptor. Deg-ephrinA1 lost almost all of cell
rounding and EphA2 down-regulating abilities compared to the naturally
glycosylated form of ephrinA1. Additionally, we mutagenized ephrinA1
glycosylation site to perform additional experiments trying to clarify
the biological steps in which the glycosylation on ephrinA1 is critical
for protein biological activity. Conclusions: EphrinA1glycosylation is
essential for ephrinA1 activity through the activation of the EphA2
receptor. This observation was surprising, but it has important
implications for the understanding of the ligand-receptor productive
interactions and for the future production of novel ephrinA1-based,
EphA2-targeted therapeutics.

