Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PELP1 regulation of mTOR Axis: Role in breast cancer progression
and resistance


Hormonal therapy resistance is a major clinical problem. Emerging
evidence suggests that estrogen (ER) participates in extra-nuclear
signaling events in the cytoplasm / membrane and such actions may play a
role in therapy resistance. Recent studies suggested that mTOR pathway
play a critical role in ER-mediated cell proliferation and growth factor
signaling crosstalk. Proline, Glutamic-acid and Leucine-rich Protein 1
(PELP1) participates in ER extra-nuclear actions. PELP1 is a prognostic
indicator of shorter breast cancer specific survival and PELP1 expression
is predominantly in the cytoplasm in a subset of breast tumors. The
objective of this application is to test whether cross talk occurs
between mTOR-PELP1 signaling axis and whether mTOR targeting drugs can be
used to target PELP1 oncogenic functions leading to therapy resistance.
We have tested this hypothesis using ER-positive breast cancer cells that
over express PELP1 (MCF7-PELP1, ZR75-PELP1) and models cells lacking
PELP1 (MCF7-PELP1 shRNA, ZR-75-PELP1 shRNA). Vector transfected ZR75 and
MCF7 cells were used as controls. Rapamycin and AZD8055 were used as
pharmacological inhibitors to block mTOR pathway. Over expression of
PELP1 enhanced the estrogen and Heregulin mediated cell proliferation in
breast cancer cells. Rapamycin (107M) or AZD8055 (108M) treatment
significantly reduced PELP1 driven growth in both MCF7 and ZR75 cells
that are treated with estrogen. Similarly, Rapamycin and AZD8055
treatment of MCF7 and ZR75 cells significantly reduced PELP1 mediated
increase in cell growth of Heregulin stimulated cells. Mechanistic
studies using yeast two hybrid screen and reciprocal immunoprecipitations
demonstrated that PELP1 directly interacts with mTOR and PP2A. PELP1cyto
model cells that uniquely express PELP1 in the cytoplasm, exhibit
excessive activation of mTOR signaling pathway upon estrogen and growth
factor stimulation. Over expression of PELP1 in the breast cancer model
cells increased phosphorylation of mTOR axis components (phos-mTOR, -S6K,
-4EBP1,-AKT). Further, Knock down of PELP1 with siRNA significantly
reduced the activation of mTOR signaling components upon estrogen and
Heregulin stimulation. Immunohistochenistry studies using xenograft tumor
tissues with PELP1 overexpression and PELP1cyto driven tumors with PELP1
deregulation showed correlation of PELP1 expression with the activation
of mTOR signaling components and that PELP1cyto driven tumors have
excessive activation of mTOR signaling components. Combination therapy of
Tamoxifen and Rapamycin or AZD8055, sensitized PELP1 deregulated cells to
hormonal therapy. Our results suggest that PELP1 driven oncogenic
functions involve PELP1 modulation of mTOR signaling and blockade of mTOR
signaling render PELP1 driven tumors highly sensitive to therapeutic
inhibition.

