Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SFRP4 modulates EMT, cell migration and downstream Wnt signalling
in epithelial ovarian cancer.


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from
all female cancers. This poor overall prognosis results in part from late
diagnosis and a current lack of targeted therapy, stemming from the
current limited understanding of the initiating events of ovarian
carcinogenesis. There is a critical need for the identification of
ovarian cancer pathways and targets to aid in diagnosis, as prognostic
indicators and as targets for novel therapies. Wnt signalling is
essential for crucial components of carcinogenesis and metastasis
including differentiation, polarity, migration, adhesion and survival,
and hence the role of Wnt signalling in human cancer is increasingly
being investigated along with strategies to target pathway components.
The Wnt pathway is regulated at multiple levels, with the Wnt antagonists
or gatekeeper proteins receiving attention in recent years, due to their
frequent loss in cancer. Secreted frizzled receptor proteins (SFRPs) are
extracellular inhibitors of Wnt signalling that act by binding directly
to Wnt ligands or Frizzled receptors, and have been shown to function as
tumour suppressors in other cancer types. We have previously shown that
one of these inhibitors, SFRP4, is progressively lost in more aggressive
ovarian cancer phenotypes, such as Type II cancers (Jacob et al, 2011).
Furthermore, patients lacking SFRP4 expression had a poorer prognosis
than those expressing SFRP4. Here, we investigated the functional
consequences of SFRP4 modulation in ovarian cancer cell lines.
Re-expression of SFRP4 resulted in decreased expression of downstream
components of Wnt signalling, inhibition of cell migration, and
inhibition of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In parallel,
knockdown of SFRP4 resulted in ovarian cells upregulating markers of EMT.
These results indicate that modulation of an upstream gatekeeper of Wnt
signalling can have dramatic downstream effects on ovarian cancer cell
behaviour, as mediated through EMT. This raises the possibility that
SFRP4 may be a suitable marker of ovarian carcinogenesis, and that
targeting the Wnt signalling pathway may have potential as an ovarian
cancer treatment.

