Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo activation and expansion of natural killer cells from
advanced cancer patients with feeder cells from healthy volunteers


Purpose: Adoptive natural killer (NK) cell immunotherapy is a promising
approach for the treatment of malignancies. The difficulty to culture NK
cells from advanced cancer patients has been the limiting factor for
generating sufficient cell numbers for autologous adoptive NK cell
therapy. The aim of this study was to find the role of feeder cells in
expanding NK cells ex vivo. Experimental Design: NK cells (CD3CD56+) were
isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy volunteers
(HV) and cancer patients (CP) using immune magnetic beads, and
NK-negative fractions were used as feeder cells. Purified NK cells (0.2 x
106) were co-cultured with 4 x 106 feeder cells in fresh AIM-V media
supplemented with 10 ng/mL anti-CD3 mAb, 5% human serum and 1000 unit/mL
IL-2. On day 5 of culture, the anti-CD3 mAb-containing medium was washed
out, and fresh medium with IL-2 was added regularly throughout the
culturing period. Culture groups were compared for the fold-expansion, NK
purity, cytotoxicity, and receptor expression patterns of expansion
products. To characterize feeder cells, NK-negative fractions were
-irradiated and then were cultivated in the anti-CD3 mAb-containing
medium for 3 days. Results: Fold expansion of NK cells co-cultured with
feeder cells from HV (feeder- HV) was higher than with feeder cells from
cancer patients (feeder-CP). During the 14 days period of culture, NK
cells from advanced cancer patients co-cultivated with feeder-HV had
expanded on average 299.6-fold (range: 21- to 620-fold). On the other
hand, those co-cultivated with feeder-CP had expanded only on average
169.4-fold (range: 4.2- to 575-fold). The proportion of CD3CD56+ NK cells
in expanded cell cultures with feeder-HV was significantly higher than
that in cultures containing feeder-CP. Cultures grown in the presence of
feeder-HV contained 93.8% 7.0 (mean SD; n = 6) of CD3CD56+ NK cells and
those in the presence of feeder-CP, 83.6% 15.9. Cytotoxicity and receptor
expression patterns were not significantly different among the groups.
All of them were more cytotoxic in comparison to the freshly isolated NK
cells. Feeder-HV used in this study presented relative increase (% day 3
- % day 0) in CD3+CD4+T cells (31.3% 5.7; n = 4), while the feeder-CP
showed no relative change. In addition, IL-15, a cytokine inducing cell
proliferation of NK cells, was detected in the culture supernatants of
feeder-HV (53.8 pg/mL 29.2), but not in feeder-CP. Conclusions: Feeder
cells obtained from healthy volunteers have the potential to expand and
activate the NK cells from advanced cancer patients. The NK cell
expansion method described in here provides a good basis for acquiring
the large numbers of highly active NK cells from cancer patients for
autologous adoptive immunotherapy.

