Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The focal adhesion kinase is phosphorylated on serine732 by a
Growth factor-dependent pathway and contributes to the proliferation of
tumor cells


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a tyrosine kinase localized at the site of
focal adhesions (FA). FAK is identified as a key mediator of signaling by
integrins, the major family of cell surface receptors for extracellular
matrix, as well as by other receptors in both normal and cancer cells.
FAK plays a prominent role in tumor progression and metastasis regulating
cellular processes including migration, invasion, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, and angiogenesis. Integrin-FAK signaling has been
shown to activate a number of biological mechanisms through
phosphorylation and protein-protein interactions promoting tumorigenesis.
FAK seems also to have a role in the proliferation of tumor cells by its
biochemical and biological association to cytoplasmic kinases such as src
and ERK. However, the mechanisms that involve FAK in those processes are
not yet clarify. The best characterized FAK phosporylation event is the
auto-phosphorylation at the tyrosine397 (Tyr397) which creates a motif
that is recognized by various SH2 domain-containing proteins, such as src
which phosphorylates FAK on Tyr576. The c-terminal domain of FAK
undergoes to several serine-phosphorylation events whose role is not
well-understood. Previous studies in neural and endothelial cells (EC)
have shown a new role for FAK in the regulation of centrosome functions
during mitosis dependent on Ser732 phosphorylation. We have found that
EGF stimulation of selected starved melanoma, thyroid and high stage
ovarian tumor cells induced, in dividing cells, accumulation of
phosphorylated (P-)FAK on Ser732. Inhibition of cell/substrate adhesion
with specific anti-integrin antibodies demonstrated that P-FAKSer732
activation is not induced by integrin clustering. Confocal
immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation showed that, in these cells,
P-FAKSer732 is localized in a perinuclear site independently from FA and
P-FAKTyr397. Treatment of an high proliferative melanoma cell line with
the Rock inhibitor Y27632 partially decreased the levels of P-FAKSer732,
the cellular proliferation and impaired the mitotic spindle formation.
FACS analysis showed that the P-FAKSer732 decreased upon treatment with
the MEK inhibitor UO126 in a dose-dependent manner together with the
levels of P(Ser 10) -Histone H3 thus demonstrating that FAK is involved
in the mitotic process regulated by MEK/ERK activation. Indeed,
P-FAKSer732 co-localized with microtubules of the mitotic spindle in
proliferating cells and immunoprecipitated with the motor protein dynein
and with the acetylated tubulin of polymerized microtubules. The finding
of a novel role for FAK in tumor cells might provide the underpinning for
therapeutic strategies in selected solid tumors. Partially supported by
Italian Ministery of Health and Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul
Cancro (AIRC).

