Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail+ bone-metastatic cancer cells impair CTL induction via
induction of immunoregulatory MSCs


Purpose: Immunosuppressive mechanism in cancer patients is still
unintelligible due to its complexity including various immunoregulatory
members such as MDSCs, Treg cells and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
Particularly, the phenotype markers and the functional role of MSCs are
not fully defined yet in tumor immunology, although demonstrated in
regenerative medicine fields. We recently found that Snail+ tumor cells
undergoing EMT preferentially metastasized into bone marrow (BM) than
other organs such as spleen and lymph node, accompanying increase of
MSC-like cells. In this study, we elucidated the molecular mechanism and
the MSC features for the further understanding of immunosuppressive
mechanism in host with cancers. Results: When BM cells of C57BL/6 mice
were cultured with supernatant of murine snail-transduced melanoma
B16-F10 cells for 7-14 days, CD45-Vimentin+ mesenchymal cells were
significantly increased as compared with the control with mock
transfectant. These cells showed the ability to differentiate into
adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteocytes, indicating MSC generation by
Snail+ tumor cells. CD45- MSCs were also increased in BM of the mice 2-3
weeks after Snail+ tumor implantation. These Snail-induced MSCs (sMSCs)
showed much higher suppressive activity on T-cell proliferation followed
by Treg increase than the MSCs stimulated with mock-transfected B16-F10
supernatant. When B16-F10 cells were subcutaneously co-injected with the
sMSCs in mice, tumor growth and metastasis was significantly promoted in
C57BL/6 mice, but not in immunodeficient mice, implying requirement of
other immune cells for the sMSC efficacy. Utilizing EGFP+ mice or GFP+
B16-F10 tumor cells, we found that the co-injected sMSCs mainly migrated
and accumulated in lymphatic organs such as spleen. In the spleen,
CD11b+Gr1+ MDSCs and Foxp3+ Treg cells were increased, and CD8+ T cells
were disabled for IFN induction and tumor-killing, indicating CTL
impairment following accumulation of various immunoregulatory cells. The
sMSCs also significantly suppressed T-cell proliferation in vitro. On the
other hand, the co-injected tumor cells rapidly metastasized into BM of
the mice, suggesting EMT induction by the sMSCs. We identified the sMSC
markers and the sMSC inducers that produced from Snail+ tumor cells.
Blocking of the sMSC inducer with the specific siRNA resulted in decrease
of the sMSCs and tumor cells in BM, accompanying improvement of
anti-tumor immune responses in the mice. Conclusions: These results
suggest that Snail+ bone-metastatic tumor cells increase sMSCs that
induce MDSCs and Treg cells leading to systemic spread of
immunosuppression in host. The sMSCs also stimulate noninvasive tumor
cells to migrate into BM, resulting in further amplification of the
immunosuppressive cascade. Elimination of the sMSCs would be an useful
strategy for treatment of cancers.

