Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective requirement of BH3-only proteins for apoptosis induced
by targeted therapies in colon cancer cells and xenografts


Constitutive activation of pro-survival kinases has become a promising
target of recently developed small molecules, while their biomarkers and
resistance mechanisms remain largely unknown. In this study, we
investigated the role of several BH3-only proteins PUMA, Bim and Noxa in
apoptosis and growth suppression induced by different classes of targeted
agents, including selective small molecule inhibitors to c-Met, IGFR,
Hsp90, VEGFR and non selective kinases inhibitors in colon cancer cells
and xenografts. Using isogenic colon cancer cells with targeted deletion
in PUMA, Bim or Noxa, we demonstrated universal and persistent PUMA
induction by all of these agents, which is mediated by either
p53-dependent or -independent mechanisms. PUMA deficiency led to impaired
apoptosis and caspase activation in colon cancer cells, and significantly
blocked tumor cell apoptosis and therapeutic responses to these agents in
xenografts. On the contrary, modulation of upstream signaling such as
phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT was transient and involves diverse
transcription factors. Interestingly, only a small subset of agents
induced the expression of Bim or Noxa, or required Bim or Noxa for
apoptosis induction. Moreover, small molecule BH3 mimetics, or enhanced
PUMA levels resulted from another drug sensitized colon cancer cells to
apoptosis induced by majority of these agents. Our results establish a
critical role of the mitochondrial pathway and BH3-only proteins in
mediating sensitivity of colon cancer cells to a wide variety of
targeted-agents, and shed light on resistance mechanisms. In light of
recent data on BH3-only proteins in therapy-induced apoptosis in other
tumor types, our data suggest that modulations of selected BH3-only
proteins, rather than their steady-state levels, might sever as potential
biomarkers for predicting therapeutic responses in both treatment-nave
and pretreated patients, and provide a rationale for combination therapy
in clinical trials. These novel preclinical findings can help guide
future development and clinical use of targeted agents. Key words: kinase
inhibitors; PUMA; Bim; Noxa; apoptosis; resistance mechanisms, colon
cancer

