Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC antagonizes imatinib-induced differentiation in chronic
myeloid leukemia cells through downregulation of p27KIP1


Imatinib is a BCR-ABL kinase inhibitor and the most used drug in chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML). MYC (c-Myc) is a transcription factor frequently
deregulated in human cancer that exerts multiple biological activities,
including differentiation inhibition. We found that MYC expression is
higher in bone marrow cells form CML patients at diagnosis, as compared
with healthy controls. Moreover, high MYC levels at diagnosis correlated
with a poorer response to imatinib treatment. One of the major
characteristics of CML progression is the loss of cell differentiation.
We showed that low concentrations of imatinib induce erythroid
differentiation in the CML-derived K562 cell line. We have studied the
effect of MYC on the differentiation induced by imatinib using K562
sublines carrying inducible (by zinc cation) or activable (by
4-hydoxy-tamoxifen) MYC alleles. In both cell lines, MYC largely
prevented the erythroid differentiation induced by imatinib. The
differentiation inhibition mediated by MYC is not due to increased
proliferation of MYC-expressing cells or enhanced apoptosis of
differentiated cells in the presence of MYC. We previously reported that
p27/Kip1 (p27) overexpression induces erythroid differentiation in K562.
Thus, we explored the effect of imatinib on p27 levels and we found that
imatinib up-regulated p27 in a time- and concentration-dependent manner.
siRNA-mediated silencing of p27 antagonized the erythroid differentiation
induced by imatinib, indicating that p27 up-regulation is at least in
part responsible for differentiation. MYC abrogated the imatinib-induced
up-regulation of p27KIP1 concomitantly with the differentiation
inhibition, suggesting that MYC inhibits imatinib-mediated
differentiation of K562 cells by antagonizing p27 up-regulation. We
previously reported that MYC induced SKP2, a component of the ubiquitin
ligase complex that targets p27 for degradation. MYC was able to induce
SKP2 in the presence of imatinib. Thus, MYC-mediated inhibition of the
differentiating effect of imatinib in CML cells is in part a consequence
of the SKP2 induction of MYC, which in turn would down-regulate p27. The
results suggest that, although MYC deregulation does not directly confer
resistance to imatinib, it might be a factor that contributes to
progression of CML through the inhibition of differentiation.

