Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lineage-specific mechanisms regulating PDGFR oncogenic activity in
glioblastoma


The highly heterogeneous nature of human tumors is a confounding feature
which hinders understanding of the biology of cancer as well as design of
effective therapies. Although a number of oncogenes and tumor
suppressors, such as PI3K, Ras, TP53, CDKN2A, are frequently altrered
across cancers of different origin, it is now apparent that cell lineage
exerts a substantial effect on the distribution of genetic alterations in
tumors. Consistent with the more recent notion that normal tissue stem
cells or partially differentiated progenitor cells may serve as the cells
of origin that undergo oncogenic transformation, it is conceivable to
think that the cellular programs governing normal lineage development do
also underlie the tumorigenic mechanisms. Therefore, the recognition of
the tumor dependencies to oncogene functions in a lineage-specific
context may offer more meaningful approaches for targeted cancer therapy.
PDGF/PDGFRA signaling plays a particularly important role in the
development of the brain, as a potent mitogen of oligodendrocyte
precursor cells; it is also expressed in the type B neural stem cell
population in the subventricular zone of adult brain. PDGF signaling has
also been widely implicated in the formation of brain tumors. The Cancer
Genome Atlas effort has revealed that overexpression and/or amplification
of PDGFRA is the key feature of the proneural subtype of Glioblastomas
(GBM), which constitutes 20-30% of all GBMs, occurs in younger patients
and is extremely resistant to chemo- and radio-therapy. In proneural
GBMs, PDGFRA expression clusters together with other proneural
developmental genes such as Olig2 and Sox2. The targeting of PDGFR has
shown limited success in the setting of randomized clinical trials and in
in vitro studies employing stable tumor cell lines. However, using a
clinically relevant model, our data show that fresh patient-derived GBM
stem like cells (Pt-GSLCs) belonging to the proneural subtype are
particularly vulnerable to the inhibition of PDGFR, both in vitro and in
vivo, indicating a possible state of addiction to PDGFR signaling.
Interestingly, we observed that the neural transcription factor Olig2,
might play a role in PDGFR addiction. Inhibition of PDGFR decreased
phosphorylation of Olig2, while PDGFR-inhibitor resistant lines
upregulate the levels of Olig2 protein. Moreover Olig2 inhibition
potentiates the effects of PDGFR inhibition in proneural GBMs. Finally,
PDGFR and Olig2 inhibitors sensitize proneural GBM to radiation. These
results provide an indication that oncogene deregulation may be
conditioned by tumor lineage. We are now further investigating the
lineage-specific mechanisms regulating addiction to PDGFR of the
proneural subtype of GBM with the hope to establish new pharmacological
targets for the treatment of Glioblastoma.

