Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multivalent melanoma vaccine using primary human melanoma cells
and a vaccinia virus based antigen retrieval system


Melanoma is the fifth most diagnosed cancer in men and seventh most
diagnosed cancer in women and it is estimated that there will be over
70,000 new cases and 8,000 deaths in 2011. Prevention of both primary and
secondary melanomas requires the development of a melanoma specific
multi-valent vaccine. We have been involved in developing a vaccinia
virus based vaccine consisting of melanoma cell membrane antigens and
integrated vaccinia viral proteins, which serve as a potent adjuvant.
This melanoma vaccine, referred to as viral membrane oncolysate (VMO), is
composed of five primary cell lines derived from patient tumors each
independently infected with vaccinia virus and has been shown to induce
anti-cancer immune response in clinical trials. Notable results were
obtained in node positive subsets of patients that showed a positive
response in survival distribution function suggesting that this
preparation is an active therapeutic immunogen but the mechanism of
immune activation needs to be elucidated. In order for us to define the
immunogens that impart the clinical efficacy of the this melanoma VMO
vaccine, it is essential to characterize the primary cell lines with
respect to their phenotypic characteristics as well as to define the
melanoma antigen repertoire so that effective vaccine strategies can be
designed that do not rely exclusively on tumor derived primary cells. Our
study reveals that all the five primary cell lines expressed antigens,
such as gp100, CD146, and tyrosinase, similar to several commercially
available melanoma cell lines although at varying concentrations. In
addition, the five primary cell lines demonstrated varying
migratory/invasive properties using a Boyden Chamber assay and their
tumorigenic potential is being tested in nude mice. The cells were also
characterized with respect to BRAF mutations. We observed several
similarities between the antigenic profile of the primary and established
cell lines as well as some unique characteristics. We conclude that using
a combination of defined antigens from primary tumor cells is useful in
designing a pan-antigen immunotherapeutic vaccine. This melanoma pan
antigen vaccine can be an effective tool in primary prevention of
melanoma presumably having the highest clinical efficacy when combined
with unique antigens from primary cells.

