Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcr-Abl inhibition in leukemia cells creates metabolic addictions


Bcr-Abl kinase inhibitors are the standard therapy for chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML). While effective in controlling disease in
chronic phase, these inhibitors often fail to completely eliminate
Bcr-Abl+ CML cells and also fail to achieve durable remissions for
advanced CML and Bcr-Abl+ acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL). Our lab
employed a large-scale synthetic lethal shRNA screen to identify genes
involved in CML survival upon treatment with the Bcr-Abl kinase inhibitor
imatinib (IM) [Cancer Cell. 2010;18(1):74-87]. This screen identified
several genes involved in energy utilization including a component of
pyruvate dehydrogenase, dihydrolipoyllysine-residue acetyltransferase.
CML proliferation depends on Bcr-Abl-driven glycolysis for energy
production. Upon IM treatment, we hypothesized that these cells are
forced to rely on other sources of energy including the TCA cycle and the
electron transport chain, and that targeting alternative energy
production pathways will enhance IM-mediated elimination of CML cells.
Thus, we predicted that inhibition of mitochondrial respiration by
knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition would cooperate with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI) to eliminate Bcr-Abl+ leukemia. Indeed, our
experiments have shown that knocking down pyruvate dehydrogenase in human
blast crisis Bcr-Abl+ CML cells (K562) greatly sensitized cells to IM in
vitro. Conversely, supplementing the cell culture media with increasing
concentrations of methyl-pyruvate protected K562 cells from IM treatment.
Moreover, we found that the mitochondrial ATP-synthase inhibitor
Oligomycin A (OA) also synergized with IM to kill CML cells in vitro.
Interestingly, the doses of OA are far below the IC50 and do not affect
the oxygen consumption rates, indicating that mitochondrial respiration
is not inhibited. These OA doses alter mitochondrial transmembrane
potential and increasing superoxide levels. In addition, OA enhanced
elimination of Bcr-Abl+ cells by a Bcr-Abl TKI in vivo and prolonged
disease-free survival in a mouse model of Bcr-Abl+ B-ALL. Notably, drug
doses of OA used had no apparent adverse effects on these mice. Targeting
mitochondrial metabolism as an adjuvant drug therapy may prevent the
survival of residual Bcr-Abl+ CML cells upon tyrosine kinase inhibitor
treatment. This project is supported by pre-doctoral fellowship number
F31CA157166 from the National Cancer Institute, and Leukemia and Lymphoma
Society Grant

