Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypusine pathway gene expression examined by single molecule RNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization (smRNA-FISH)


The fate of any given mRNA has remained difficult to experimentally
follow and has left mechanisms of unexpected gene expression phenomena in
the dark. Examples are differential stability of mRNA expression from
different promoters, and inhibition of expression in trans from
co-transfected plasmids encoding N1-spermidine/spermine,
acetyltransferase and a second unrelated gene. Recent advances in single
molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smRNA FISH) now bring such
central aspects of cellular mRNA metabolism into view. Streamlining both
the design and synthesis of probe sets of multiple tiled singly labeled
20-mer oligonucleotides with balanced GC content have made most mRNAs
targetable. In contrast to traditional cell-disruptive RNA analyses -
northern blotting, QPCR, and microarrays - that yield average and
relative information on the content of the probed mRNA, smRNA FISH
affords discrete and cell-specific copy numbers. That added spatial
dimension can be applied to provide cell-to-cell variability and the
actual range of mRNA numbers in a given cell within the field of focus,
or to examine defined subsets of cells. The hypusine pathway genes
(EIF5A1, EIF5A2, DHPS, DOHH, and SAT1) are essential with deep
evolutionary conservation. The gene products are tightly linked to the
growth of the cell with aberrant expression in cells that have lost
proliferation control, and in several cancers. SAT1, encoding
N1-spermidine/spermine, acetyl-transferase, in particular plays a pivotal
function in regulating polyamine levels and in turn determining the cells
proliferative state. Recently, vectors episomally expressing SAT1 were
found to inhibit the expression from co-transfected plasmids. Inhibition
only occurred with enzymatically active SAT1. To gain a better
understanding of how the expression of the hypusine pathway genes may
contribute to the transformed phenotype, the fate of these mRNAs and
those of unrelated reporter genes was examined by smRNA FISH. Single cell
expression data for the hypusine pathway genes is presented and compared
with previous results from northern analyses. Data is also presented on
the further use of the probe sets to examine changes in the numerical and
spatial expression in cells after manipulation of the hypusine status.
Lastly, data on the expression - mRNA and protein - in cells
co-transfected with vectors for SAT1 and unrelated reporter genes is
presented, distinguishing between post-transcriptional events that may
cause the inhibition. In summary, we show smRNA FISH as a suitable tool
to disseminate post-transcriptional events for genes relevant to
polyamine homeostasis and regulated protein synthesis in normal and
aberrant cells.

