Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphrinA1 inhibits non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumor growth
via induction of miRNA-122


Introduction: Ephrin-A1 ligand exerts anti-oncogeneic effect in NSCLC
tumor cells through activation and down regulation of the EphA2 receptor.
Alteration in their expression levels is associated with aggressive tumor
growth. The underlying mechanisms for altered expression of Ephrin-A1 and
EphA2 receptor are yet to be defined. MicroRNAs (miR) are small
non-coding RNAs play a key role in tumorogenesis. MiR-122 directly
targets Bcl-w which harbours a putative miR-122 binding site in its
3-UTR. However, if EphrinA1 induces miR-122 expression in NSCLC is not
known. Here we demonstrate a novel mechanism of EphrinA1 mediated miR-122
signalling in the inhibition of NSCLC growth. Methods: NSCLC cell lines
(A-549 and H-23) were activated with Ephrin-A1 over time (3 hr, 6hr, 12hr
and 24 hr) and miR-122 expression was measured by Real-time PCR and In
situ hybridization. Furthermore, in order to understand the underlying
mechanisms EphrinA-1 mediated signalling, Bach-1 and Bcl-w protein
expression were studied through Western blotting analysis. In addition,
Tumor growth and Cell migration studies were performed in Ephrin-A1
activated and premiR-122 transfected NSCLC cells. Results: The data from
this study demonstrates that Ephrin-A1 activation of NSCLC enhanced
Bach-1 and miR-122 expression over time. When NSCLC transfected with
pre-miR-122, we noticed a significant down-regulation of Bcl-w gene and
protein expression, suggesting miR-122 specifically targets to
anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-w and induced apoptosis in NSCLC. In situ
hybridization demonstrated strong signals for miR-122 in EphrinA1
activated NSCLC cells as compared to control cells. Furthermore, knock
down of Bach-1 gene expression using siRNA, showed significant
down-regulation of miR-122, suggesting Ephrin-A1 mediated signalling is
regulated by the transcription factor Bach-1 via miR-122 in NSCLC. In
addition, this was confirmed by transfection of NSCLC by premiR-122 that
inhibited tumor growth and migration of NSCLC cells. Conclusions: Our
study suggests that Ephrin-A1 mediated signalling is regulated by the
transcription factor Bach-1 via miR-122 expression. MiR-122 targets the
anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-w and triggers apoptosis in NSCLC cells. The
present study provides a new insight into the complex regulating pathways
of Ephrin-A1/Eph receptor, and also understanding the direct role of
miRNA-122 in Ephrin-A1 mediated signalling pathway that may lead to new
therapeutic strategies for lung adenocarcinoma. Funding Source: RC1 form
Florida Department of Health; VA Merit Review

