Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly sensitive detection system of genetic alterations in
circulating tumor cells using a telomerase-specific replication-competent
adenovirus


Background: Malignant tumor cells often develop metastatic nodules at
distant organs through circulation in blood flow and result in poor
prognosis. Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is clinically an
important issue to evaluate the metastatic potential of primary tumors in
cancer patients. Furthermore, confirmation of genetic alterations in CTCs
provides us the critical information to clarify the molecular mechanism
in the acquisition of metastatic capability of tumor cells and to treat
tumor metastasis by molecular targeted therapy. We recently developed a
telomerase-specific replication-selective adenovirus (OBP-401;
TelomeScan) expressing the green fluorescence protein (GFP).
OBP-401-mediated GFP induction method was a simple and highly sensitive
imaging system to detect a small population of viable CTCs in the
peripheral blood. In this study, we assessed the potential of
OBP-401-mediated CTC detection system to analyze the genetic alterations
in CTCs. Methods: We used two types of human colon cancer cell lines
SW480 and HCT116 that have the mutations in codon 12 and 13,
respectively, of the K-ras gene. The detection method involved a 4-step
procedure, including the lysis of red blood cells, the subsequent
addition of OBP-401 to the cell pellets, the isolation of GFP-positive
tumor cells using a fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), and a
confirmation of genetic mutations by direct sequencing. DNA was extracted
from the captured cells using FACS and we investigated the mutation
status in the K-ras gene by direct sequencing. Results: When only 10
cells of SW480 or HCT116 cells were added in a 5 ml of blood obtained
from healthy volunteer, a total of 2-12 GFP-positive cells were captured
from OBP-401-infected blood samples using FACS Aria. We confirmed the
mutations in codon 12 and 13 of the K-ras gene in the FACS-captured cells
from blood samples containing SW480 and HCT116 cells, respectively, by
direct sequencing. Conclusion: These results suggest that
OBP-401-mediated GFP induction and FACS-based capture system are useful
methods to isolate small population of CTCs from peripheral blood samples
and to evaluate the genetic alterations in CTCs. The combination method
using OBP-401 and FACS would be a reliable strategy for the surveillance
of genetic alterations in CTCs.

