Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving the specificity of drugs which target the actin
cytoskeleton for cancer therapy


The actin cytoskeleton is fundamental in the regulation of cellular
processes involved in tumourigenesis and is therefore a highly desirable
chemotherapeutic target. However, the non-specific nature of
actin-targeting drugs makes them ineffective due to their toxic action on
the heart. We have designed a class of drugs that target the second core
component of actin filaments, tropomyosin. Tm5NM1, a cytoskeletal
tropomyosin isoform, is upregulated in a variety of tumour cells and
patient samples, and is known to promote tumour cell growth. Our lead
drug, TR100, targets Tm5NM1 and potentially other isoforms, reducing cell
proliferation in vitro in a panel of melanoma and neuroblastoma cell
lines and decreases the rate of tumour growth in vivo in melanoma and
neuroblastoma mouse models without affecting heart integrity. The
difficulty in improving the specificity of these anti-tropomyosin
compounds for Tm5NM1 was the lack of a suitable cell-based system to test
the drugs. NIH3T3 stable cells overexpressing fluorophore-tagged Tm5NM1
or the muscle-specific isoform fastTm now allows us to determine the
impact of our drugs on functionally distinct actin populations. Since
tropomyosin is a structural protein with no known measurable catalytic
activity it has previously been challenging to design a high throughput
assay to quantitate specific changes in actin filament architecture. High
content imaging provides a system to image actin filament integrity which
can be quantified using an algorithm designed in collaboration with the
CSIRO. Using this algorithm we can calculate the impact of the
anti-tropomyosin compounds on actin filaments in co-cultured stable
cells. Development of these assays will contribute to the design of more
specific drugs which target defined tropomyosin containing actin
populations highly expressed in cancer without showing toxicity in
muscle, thereby improving the therapeutic index of anti-tropomyosin drugs
for the clinical treatment of a wide array of cancers.

