Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted nanocarriers of siRNA for the treatment of cancer


RNAi technology has brought a new category of treatments for cancer. NFB
is a transcription factor which can inhibit apoptosis and promote cell
proliferation. Activation of NFB is linked to the progression of various
cancers. Inhibition of NFB and its downstream targets using NFB-siRNA
(NS) for cancer therapy has been investigated. However, for successful
siRNA delivery, it has to be delivered into the cytoplasm of cancer
cells. Naked siRNA is prone to degradation and has a plasma half-life of
less than five minutes. In addition, the relatively small size of the
siRNA leads to rapid renal clearance. These facts, together with the
negatively charged siRNA which limits permeability across cell membrane,
mean that successful delivery of naked siRNA is unlikely. Cationic lipid
based systems have emerged as the most attractive siRNA delivery, however
the use is limited due to poor transfection efficiency and toxicity. The
use of polymers (polyethyleneimines and polyesteramines) has been
hampered due to substantial toxicity. Natural polymer based delivery
systems (chitosan, gelatin, albumin) are biocompatible and biodegradable
with high physiological tolerance and low immunogenicity. The purpose of
this study was to develop NS loaded into gelatin nanocarriers (NS-GNCs)
that enables effective delivery in a targeted fashion to tumors. The
NS-GNCs were prepared using cationic gelatin by desolvation method. The
NS-GNCs were characterized for size, charge, entrapment, release and in
vitro efficacy against lung and breast cancer cells. The size and zeta
potential was found to be 180 4 nm and 16 2 mV respectively. Entrapment
efficiency was found to be 81 1.4 % and the release of siRNA was in a
controlled manner up to 48 h. The dose dependent in vitro efficacy of
NS-GNCs was studied using A549 lung cancer and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells compared to naked NS using untreated cells as a control. NS-GNCs
showed significantly (pRNAi technology has brought a new category of
treatments for cancer. NFB is a transcription factor which can inhibit
apoptosis and promote cell proliferation. Activation of NFB is linked to
the progression of various cancers. Inhibition of NFB and its downstream
targets using NFB-siRNA (NS) for cancer therapy has been investigated.
However, for successful siRNA delivery, it has to be delivered into the
cytoplasm of cancer cells. Naked siRNA is prone to degradation and has a
plasma half-life of less than five minutes. In addition, the relatively
small size of the siRNA leads to rapid renal clearance. These facts,
together with the negatively charged siRNA which limits permeability
across cell membrane, mean that successful delivery of naked siRNA is
unlikely. Cationic lipid based systems have emerged as the most
attractive siRNA delivery, however the use is limited due to poor
transfection efficiency and toxicity. The use of polymers
(polyethyleneimines and polyesteramines) has been hampered due to
substantial toxicity. Natural polymer based delivery systems (chitosan,
gelatin, albumin) are biocompatible and biodegradable with high
physiological tolerance and low immunogenicity. The purpose of this study
was to develop NS loaded into gelatin nanocarriers (NS-GNCs) that enables
effective delivery in a targeted fashion to tumors. The NS-GNCs were
prepared using cationic gelatin by desolvation method. The NS-GNCs were
characterized for size, charge, entrapment, release and in vitro efficacy
against lung and breast cancer cells. The size and zeta potential was
found to be 180 4 nm and 16 2 mV respectively. Entrapment efficiency was
found to be 81 1.4 % and the release of siRNA was in a controlled manner
up to 48 h. The dose dependent in vitro efficacy of NS-GNCs was studied
using A549 lung cancer and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells compared to
naked NS using untreated cells as a control. NS-GNCs showed significantly
(p<0.05) higher cytotoxicity against lung and breast cancer cells in a
dose dependant manner compared to naked NS. At 30ng/ml, NS-GNCs treated
A549 cells showed 46% cytotoxicity compared to 16% in naked NS treated
A549 cells. At 60ng/ml, NS-GNCs treated MDA-MB-231 cells showed 54%
cytotoxicity compared to 21% in naked NS treated cells. The increased
cytotoxicity with NS-GNCs can be attributed to the tumor specific
accumulation of positively charged GNCs by uptake through electrochemical
diffusion. Moreover, NS-GNCs showed comparable cytotoxicity as compared
to lipofectamine (tranfecting agent) in both the cancer cells. The
developed targeted NS-GNCs showed enhanced activity compared to naked NS
against cancer cells. This innovative delivery approach will help to
overcome the limitations and adverse side effects associated with current
delivery approaches. We are currently investigating NS-GNC conjugation
with RGD peptide to enhance the tumor specific delivery via receptor
mediated endocytosis.

