Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-kappa monoclonal antibody MDX-1097 cooperates with
Lenalidomide to enhance antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity of multiple
myeloma cells


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a malignancy of clonal plasma cells in the bone
marrow with median overall survival duration of 3-5 years. Recent
advances in the treatment and management of MM have improved progression
free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) and include the use of
high-dose chemotherapy, conditioned autologous stem cell transplantation,
immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) and proteasome inhibitors. Unfortunately,
despite these advances, the majority of patients will ultimately relapse
and die from their disease. In thIs context novel therapeutic approaches,
including the use of antibody-based therapies, are being investigated to
further improve the treatment of MM. Currently the anti-kappa monoclonal
antibody, MDX-1097, is being assessed as a single agent in a Phase 2
clinical trial for the treatment of kappa light-chain restricted (-type)
MM. MDX-1097 binds to kappa myeloma antigen (KMA) a tumor-specific
membrane-associated protein expressed on malignant plasma cells in
patients with -type MM. Previously we have demonstrated that MDX-1097
exerts its anti-tumour effects predominantly via antibody-dependent cell
cytotoxicity (ADCC) in the presence of either normal human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) or purified natural killer (NK cells).
Lenalidomide is an IMiD currently in use for the treatment of MM and has
been shown to exert its anti-tumor effects both directly, via apoptotic
mechanisms, and indirectly via a number of different mechanisms including
the augmentation of NK-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. In this study we
report that lenalidomide and MDX-1097 co-operate to promote enhanced ADCC
of MM cells via 2 different mechanisms. First, in vitro pre-incubation of
normal PBMC with lenalidomide (PBMC/Len) prior to co-culture with
MDX-1097 treated -type MM JJN3 cells resulted in increased ADCC compared
to co-culture with control PBMC from the same donor. Second,
pre-incubation of JJN3 cells with lenalidomide (JJN3/Len) resulted in
increased JJN3 cell surface expression of KMA resulting in enhanced ADCC
with PBMC when compared to control JJN3, with a further increment in cell
killing seen when utilising the PBMC/Len and JJN3/Len combination.
Finally, use of in vivo lenalidomide exposed PBMC isolated from a MM
patient treated with lenalidomide demonstrated that these PBMC/Len were
more effective in killing MDX-1097 treated JJN3 cells compared to PBMC
obtained from the same patient prior to lenalidomide treatment. This
study demonstrates that lenalidomide co-operates with MDX-1097 to enhance
ADCC-induced MM cell killing and provides a rationale for the clinical
evaluation of MDX-1097 and lenalidomide in the treatment of -type MM.

