Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated EGFR and PPAR regulate MUC1 expression in human uterine
and pancreatic cancer cell lines


The high molecular weight, transmembrane mucin, MUC1 is expressed at high
levels in many epithelial tumors including endometrial and pancreatic
cancers. Aberrant glcosylation and overexpression of MUC1 make tumor
cells poorly adherent, protect tumor cells from the host immune system,
promote metastases from primary sites and enhance resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs. MUC1 has three distinct domains: an extracellular
domain (ECD) composed of a tandem repeat region rich in serine, threonine
and proline; a transmembrane domain (TM) and; a short cytoplasmic tail
domain (CT) involved in a variety of signal transduction events.
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR/erbB) family members regulate cell
growth and survival in both normal and cancer cells. MUC1 interacts with
erbB receptors and also affects downstream signaling pathways in a
EGFR-ligand dependent manner. We previously demonstrated that the
Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor (PPAR) agonist rosiglitazone
severely inhibits progesterone stimulated MUC1 expression (Wang et al.
2010. Mol. Endocrinol. 24: 1368-1379). Two independent approaches were
used to determine if rosiglitazone as well as EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, AG1478 reduced MUC1 expression in a high MUC1-expressing cell
line, HES; the uterine adenocarcinoma cell line, HEC-1A; and in the human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines, HPAFII and CAPAN2. EGFR activation
by Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) stimulated MUC1 protein expression
(1.5-2 fold) in both uterine and pancreatic cancer cells. The PPAR
agonist, rosiglitatzone, markedly (> 90%) reduced EGFR-driven MUC1
expression detected by antibodies directed against the MUC1 ECD and CT.
Preliminary studies indicate that rosiglitazone effects on EGFR-driven
MUC1 expression is indirect. Furthermore, rosiglitazone treatments
enhanced EGFR degradation via the lysosomal degradation pathway in the
presence of EGF-family ligands in both uterine and pancreatic cancer cell
lines. A combination of biochemical and molecular biological assays have
been used to identify the transcriptional and signal transduction
pathways activated by EGFR, leading to increased MUC1 expression and the
impact of AG1478 and rosiglitazone on these events. Understanding the
molecular basis of how these agents reduce MUC1 expression may offer
novel therapeutic avenues to improve cancer chemotherapies.

