Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the miR-125b1 promoter in breast cancer cell
lines


In cancer cells, transcriptional gene silencing has been associated with
genetic and epigenetic defects. The disruption of DNA methylation
patterns and covalent histone marks has been associated with cancer
development. Until recently, microRNA (miRNA) gene silencing was not well
understood. In particular, miR-125b1 has been suggested to be a miRNA
with tumor suppressor activity, and it has been shown to be deregulated
in various human cancers. In this study, we characterized the promoter of
the miR-125b1 and the modifications associated with gene silencing. We
studied in silico the miR-125b1 locus to delimit the promoter region and
then, we characterized the promoter activity by the luciferase assay,
cloning a fragment in the 5 extreme close to the transcriptional start
site of the miR-125b1 gene. We found that this sequence has promoter
activity and it is unidirectional. Subsequently, we analyzed the DNA
methylation status in the CpG island promoter and found that it was
methylated in breast cancer cell lines compared with a non-transformed
breast cell line. To determine the effect of DNA methylation in the CpG
island of miR-125b1 on the expression of this gene, we performed a
qRT-PCR assay. We observed a significant reduction on the expression of
miR-125b1 in cancer cells lines in comparison with a non-transformed cell
line, suggesting that DNA methylation at the CpG island might reduce the
expression of miR-125b1. Our data suggest that the fragment in the 5
extreme close to the transcriptional start site of the miR-125b1 gene is
a functional and unidirectional promoter. Also, the CpG island in this
region is methylated in breast cancer cell lines and this methylation is
associated with the silencing of the miR-125b1 gene. This work was
supported by the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologa (CONACyT: 83959)
and the Programa de Apoyo a Proyectos de Investigacin e Innovacin
Tecnolgica of the Universidad Nacional Autnoma de Mxico (PAPIIT,
IN213311).

