Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of OLA1, a novel obg-like ATPase, in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Human OLA1 is a 45 kDa cytosolic protein that belongs to the YchF
subfamily of Obg-like P-loop GTPases and is ubiquitously expressed in
most tissues. YchF proteins are highly conserved from yeast to humans and
all have a greater affinity for ATP than GTP. Based on structure
analysis, OLA1 is predicted to be a regulatory protein that interacts
with its client protein(s) and exerts its downstream functions by the
conformational switch between the ADP- and ATP-bound forms. However, the
actual physiological functions of OLA1 are poorly understood. Our earlier
studies have suggested that OLA1 is a negative regulator of cellular
antioxidant response and functions through post-transcriptional
mechanisms (PNAS 2009; 106:15356). Oxidative stress, mediated by reactive
oxygen species (ROS), has been implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a fundamental phenotypic alteration closely associated
with cancer progression and metastasis. In this study we investigated the
effect of OLA1 on EMT and the possible underlying mechanisms. We first
demonstrated that the human lung epithelial carcinoma A549 cells, after
exposure to transforming growth factor (TGF)-1 for 3 days, underwent EMT
as evidenced by acquisition of a mesenchymal-like morphology,
down-regulation of epithelial-specific marker E-cadherin, and induction
of mesenchymal marker vimentin. However, knockdown of OLA1 with
sequence-specific siRNA in A549 cells resulted in a significant
attenuation of the TGF-1-induced EMT phenotypes, including those in
cellular morphology and the EMT markers E-cadherin and vimentin, as
compared with the cells transfected with the control non-targeting siRNA.
Next, we questioned if this inhibitory effect on EMT was through
inhibiting the Akt/GSK3/Snail pathway. When treated with TGF-1,
OLA1-knockdown cells showed impaired GSK-3 phosphorylation (indicating an
overactivation of GSK-3), and subsequently reduced abundance of the
transcription factor Snail that functions as the suppressor of E-cadherin
gene expression. Concurrently, OLA1-knockdown cells exhibited
significantly decreased TGF-1-mediated intracellular ROS production
assessed by DCFDA staining and flow cytometry analysis. Furthermore, we
found that treatment of H2O2 abrogated resistance of OLA1-knockdown cells
to TGF-1-induced EMT, evidenced by phosphorylation of GSK-3, upregulation
of Snail and changes in expression of EMT markers. These results suggest
that OLA1 plays an important regulatory role in EMT of human cancer
cells, and inhibition of OLA1 may have a negative effect on EMT, probably
through down-regulation of the ROS-dependent TGF-1 signaling pathway.

