Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1) lineage in the lung gives rise to
multiple cell types


Lung contains many highly specialized cells. Type I pneumocytes are
responsible for gas exchange, while type II pneumocytes secrete
surfactant which prevents alveoli from collapsing. Airways are lined by
non-ciliated secretory (Clara) and ciliated cells that eliminate excess
mucus and harmful particles, and rare pulmonary neuroendocrine cells
(PNECs) which regulate breathing and contribute to carcinogenesis. PNECs
have unknown histogenesis but differentiate prior to the other cells. The
neural transcription factor achaete-scute homolog 1 (Ascl1) is critical
for PNEC development and is associated with stem cell marker expression
in normal and neoplastic lung. Hence, we used in vivo lineage and fate
tracing strategy to investigate Ascl1-defined cells (ASDCs) during lung
development and injury repair. R26R-stop-lacZ (Rosa) reporter mice were
crossed with Ascl1-Cre and Ascl1-CreERTM mice, in which the Ascl1
promoter drives the expression of Cre or inducible Cre recombinase,
respectively (Battiste et al., Development (2007) 134:285-93). Following
recombination, ASDCs and their descendants will be permanently labeled
and were further characterized by immunohistochemistry using cellular
differentiation markers. Labeled cells in Ascl1-Cre/Rosa mice gave rise
not only to PNECs but also to neural, Clara, ciliated, alveolar type I
and type II cells. Interestingly, tamoxifen (TM) administration to
Ascl1-CreERTM/Rosa dams at embryonic day E9.5 labeled both airway and
alveolar cells, while TM injected at E11.5 only labeled airway cells.
Moreover, adult Ascl1-CreERTM/Rosa mice were administered TM followed by
naphthalene (Nap), which kills Clara cells. It is notable that in
addition to PNECs which are resistant to Nap, regenerating Clara cells
were now labeled during the injury repair. We conclude that ASDCs are not
limited to giving rise to neural cells or PNECs during pulmonary
development, but they also contribute to a range of non-neuroendocrine
cells such as Clara and ciliated cells as well as alveolar pneumocytes.
Further, the lineage participates in injury repair of the airway lining
in mature lung. The current Ascl1 lineage study provides a basis for
recent studies on mouse small cell lung cancer (Sutherland et al., Cancer
Cell (2011) 19:754-64) which suggested that both PNECs and
non-neuroendocrine cells such as alveolar type II pneumocytes may serve
as progenitors for this very virulent lung cancer type.

