Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics study of a thyroid
hormone-regulated secretome in human hepatoma cells


The thyroid hormone, 3, 3, 5-triiodo-L-thyronine (T3), regulates cell
growth, development, differentiation, and metabolism via interactions
with thyroid hormone receptors (TR). However, the secreted proteins that
are regulated by T3 are yet to be characterized. In this study, we used
the quantitative proteomic approach of stable isotope labeling with amino
acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled with nano-LC-MS/MS performed on a
LTQ-Orbitrap instrument to identify and characterize the T3-regulated
proteins secreted in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines
overexpressing TR1 (HepG2-TR1). In total, 1742 and 1714 proteins were
identified and quantified, respectively, in three independent
experiments. Among these, 61 upregulated two-fold and 11 downregulated
two-fold proteins were identified. Eight proteins displaying increased
expression and one with decreased expression in conditioned media were
validated using Western blotting. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR further
disclosed induction of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), a T3
target, in a time-course and dose-dependent manner. Serial deletions of
the PAI-1 promoter region and subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that the thyroid hormone response element on the promoter
is localized at positions 327/-312. PAI-1 overexpression enhanced tumor
growth and migration in a manner similar to what was seen when T3 induced
PAI-1 expression in J7-TR1 cells, both in vitro and in vivo. An in vitro
neutralizing assay further supported a crucial role of secreted PAI-1 in
T3/TR-regulated cell migration. To our knowledge, these results
demonstrate for the first time that proteins involved in the urokinase
plasminogen activator system, including PAI-1, uPAR and BSSP4, are
augmented in the extra- and intracellular space of T3-treated HepG2-TR1
cells. The T3-regulated secretome generated in the current study may
provide an opportunity to establish the mechanisms underlying
T3-associated tumor progression and prognosis.

