Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A-induced apoptosis in human breast cancer cells is
associated with suppression of inhibitor of apoptosis family protein
expression


Withaferin A (WA) is a promising cancer chemopreventive constituent of a
traditional Indian medicine (Ayurvedic medicine) plant, Withania
somnifera. This plant has been safely used for centuries in India for the
treatment of different ailments. We have shown previously that WA
treatment suppresses the growth of cultured (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) as
well as xenografted (MDA-MB-231) human breast cancer cells by causing
apoptosis but the mechanism of cell death is not fully understood. The
inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family proteins, including X-linked
Inhibitor of Apoptosis (XIAP), Survivin, cIAP1, and cIAP2, have emerged
as critical regulators of apoptosis by functioning as inhibitors of
caspases. The IAP family proteins are also implicated in adaptive
response to cellular stress and immune responses. The present study was
designed to determine the role of IAP family proteins in execution of
WA-induced apoptosis. Exposure of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells to WA
resulted in downregulation of XIAP, Survivin, cIAP1, and cIAP2 proteins
as judged by western blotting and immunocytochemical analysis. The
WA-mediated downregulation of cIAP2 and Survivin proteins was
attributable to their transcriptional repression. On the other hand, WA
treatment promoted proteasomal degradation of XIAP and cIAP1 proteins.
Overexpression of XIAP, Survivin, and cIAP2 in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells
conferred significant resistance towards WA-induced apoptosis. Moreover,
WA-mediated inhibition of MDA-MB-231 xenograft growth in vivo was
accompanied by statistically significant decrease in Survivin protein
expression in the tumor. The WA treatment caused activation of intrinsic
and extrinsic caspase pathways. Furthermore, the WA-induced apoptosis was
significantly attenuated in the presence of caspase inhibitors. In
conclusion, the present study indicates that WA-induced apoptosis in
human breast cancer cells is mediated by downregulation of IAP family
proteins. This investigation was supported by the US PHS grant CA142604
awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

