Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic biochemical tissue analysis: A novel in situ assay that
demonstrates potential as a diagnostic/prognostic for cancer


Work in the field of cell adhesion has undeniably shown that the full
spectrum of molecular bond properties is germane to biological
recognition and communication in physiologic and pathologic conditions,
including cancer. For example, the unique kinetic and tensile properties
of E-selectin bonds allow it to mediate cancer cell adhesion to the
endothelium and leukocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation. Typically
in a biochemical tissue analysis (e.g., immunohistochemistry), a
molecular probe (e.g., antibody) detects antigens by utilizing only one
property of the probe-antigen bond, specifically affinity, and other
aspects of the bond (e.g., dynamic biophysical properties) remain
unexploited. Therefore, we developed a dynamic biochemical tissue
analysis (DBTA) that allows exquisite control over the interaction
between the probe and the antigen to enhance characterization of
molecular recognition in situ. Specifically, we conjugated a recombinant
E-selectin construct to polystyrene microspheres and used the resulting
microspheres as the probe to investigate E-selectin ligand activity on
colon cancer, breast cancer, and normal tissues using DBTA. When
E-selectin microspheres were perfused over invasive colon adenocarcinoma
tissue sections at a wall shear stress of 0.80 dynes/ cm2, the
microspheres exhibited robust adhesion with the tissue. The adhesion of
E-selectin microspheres was significantly higher than that of negative
control (IgG conjugated) microspheres, demonstrating the specificity of
interaction of E-selectin microspheres with the tissue sections. To
demonstrate that modulating easily controlled assay parameters results in
discernible changes in adhesion, E-selectin microspheres of 10 and 15 m
diameters were perfused over the colon adenocarcinoma tissue sections at
different levels of shear stress, achieved by varying the volumetric flow
rate. The results showed that with increasing shear stress or particle
diameter, the adhesion of E-selectin microspheres to the tissue sections
decreased as predicted. To demonstrate that DBTA can be used for high
throughput analysis, colon and breast cancer tissue microarrays were
used. These microarray slides consisted of tissues from various
histopathological classifications. E-selectin microspheres exhibited
higher adhesion than the IgG microspheres to the majority of the cancer
tissues, showing the preferential expression of functional E-selectin
ligands on cancer tissues. Combined the results (i) convincingly
demonstrate the specificity of the DBTA assay, (ii) reveal the critical
role physical factors play in tissue analysis and (iii) demonstrate that
DBTA allows facile control over these key physical factors. Thus, we have
established a new approach for characterizing tissue that will lead to
novel diagnostic and prognostic assays for a large spectrum of
pathologies including cancer.

