Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of colonic cre-recombinase expression in carbonic
anhydrase1-cre transgenic mice by dextran sulfate sodium


We previously reported the development of C57BL/6-Tg(Car1-cre)5Flt
transgenic mice (CAC) with carbonic anhydrase-1 promoter/enhancer driven
expression of cre-recombinase (Cre) in approximately 10 percent of colon
epithelial cells. Here we report a novel observation in these mice that
expands their utility for colorectal cancer research. Our original goal
was to use CAC-Apc580/+ mice, with conditional deletion of one Apc allele
from colonic epithelial cells, to determine the mechanism of the
interaction between Apc allele deletion and dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS)-induced colitis on carcinogenesis. To detect cells with recombined
floxed alleles, CAC-Apc580/+ mice were crossed with
B6.129S4-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1Sor/J mice (Rosa26R), which have a
beta-galactosidase (Bgal) transgene preceded by a floxed stop codon. We
administered 0%, 0.65%, 1.35%, or 2% DSS in drinking water for 5 days to
8 wk old mice. Mice were killed and tissues harvested at 2 or 10 days
after DSS was withdrawn. Histologic sections of colon were scored for
ulceration and regeneration. Immunohistochemical labeling for Bgal was
used as a reporter of CAC expression and recombination of floxed alleles.
All levels of DSS caused ulcerative colitis, with severity increasing in
a dose dependent manner. With time, ulceration was repaired by
regeneration and hyperplasia of remaining epithelial cells. Surprisingly,
while only 10 percent of colon crypts express Cre in control mice, nearly
100% of regenerative foci and many adjacent hyperplastic crypts were
positive for Bgal after DSS exposure. After 2-3 epithelial replacement
cycles (10 d post-DSS), all 3 doses significantly increased Bgal labeling
(0.65% DSS-18.4%.06, 1.35% DSS-17.7% .04, 2% DSS-18.2%.06) relative to
controls (10.2%.04). Similar results were seen in CAC-Rosa26R mice with
normal Apc alleles, suggesting that the induction of the CAC transgene is
directly attributable to DSS. Despite similar allelic recombination
throughout the proximal and distal colon after DSS treatment, 10 wk old
CAC-Apc580/+ mice treated with 2% DSS for 5 days, developed more tumors
at 15 wks of age in the distal colon (74%) than in the proximal colon
(26%). This suggests that Apc allele deletion differentially influences
cancer risk in proximal versus distal colon, which is consistent with
observations of higher Apc mutation rates in human distal colorectal
tumors. In conclusion, we report that administration of DSS at doses as
low as 0.65% for 5 days to CAC mice causes mild ulcerative colitis that
induces transgene expression and recombination of floxed alleles
throughout the colon. This model provides a novel tool to differentiate
the impact of gene by environment interaction in colon epithelial cells
following colitis and offers an innovative approach to discover the
mechanisms responsible for disparate pathways to colorectal
carcinogenesis in the proximal versus distal colon.

