Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic studies of the dual Akt and JNK inhibitor
Chaetoglobosin K: Effect on downstream pathways and AP-1 proteins in
tumorigenic cells


We have previously shown that the anti-tumorigenic indolylcytochalasin
Chaetoglobosin K (ChK) concomitantly down-regulates Akt and JNK
activation in ras-transformed cells. This dual inhibition was found not
be regulated by Rac1, a Rho protein that is involved in both signaling
pathways, or MKK4, an upstream kinase of JNK. The purpose of this study
was to determine: 1) the effect of ChK on the activation of downstream
mediators of the PI3K/Akt (including mdm2), and JNK (including the
activator protein-1 (AP-1) proteins and stat3) signaling pathways; 2)
whether the upstream mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 7 (MKK7) is
involved in ChK's effect on JNK. The AP-1 transcription factor complex,
composed of proteins of the JUN, FOS, and ATF families, has become a
promising therapeutic target due to the proposed role of AP-1 activation
in tumorigenesis. In these studies, ras-transformed rat liver epithelial
cells were grown to confluence and treated with either ChK (5M or 10M) or
vehicle (DMSO) for 24 hours. Cell proteins were extracted and separated
using SDS-PAGE. Western blot analysis was performed using phosphorylation
site-specific antibodies to monitor changes in MKK7, c-JUN, ATF-2, mdm2,
and stat3 protein activation levels. The results of these studies
indicate that ChK treatment decreased c-JUN and ATF-2 phosphorylation,
but had no effect on stat3 phosphorylation. Additionally, ChK treatment
decreased mdm2 phosphorylation. ChK did not alter MKK7 activation levels
and, taking into consideration its lack of effect on MKK4, suggest ChK
does not inhibit JNK via its archetypical MAPK signaling pathway. These
studies indicate ChK may serve as a small molecule inhibitor of the AP-1
pathway proteins, as well as the Akt/mdm2 pathway. This data further
supports ChK's potential as a unique targeted tumor therapy. This project
was funded by NIH grant 1R15CA135415

