Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of tumor microenvironment on expansion of tumor initiating
cells in breast cancer metastasis


Breast cancer metastasis which ultimately results in breast cancer death,
is an event believed to be initiated by the migration of tumor initiating
cells (TIC) from the primary tumor to niches for micrometastatic disease.
Recent data suggests the tumor microenvironment promotes TIC. The
clinical relevance of secreted factors from the microenvironment on TIC
surrogate, mammosphere (MS) formation and MS sensitivity to drug therapy
was investigated using breast cancer patient fluids inherently
conditioned by the tumor microenvironment: post-operative seromas and
malignant pleural effusions. Fluids from 20 patients with breast cancer
(8 seromas and 13 pleural effusions) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSC)
from healthy donors were collected on IRB approved protocols. Cellular
components were eliminated from patient-derived fluids using
density-gradient centrifugation. MSC conditioned media (MSC-CM) was
collected from 3D cultures of primary MSC. Luminex multiplex array
platform was used to characterize 79 cytokine and growth factor
components of all fluids. In addition, MSC-CM and patient-derived fluids
were added to cultures of breast cancer cell lines: MCF-7, an estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive cell line; SUM149, a triple-negative inflammatory
breast cancer cell line; and SUM159, a triple-negative metaplastic breast
cancer cell line and MS forming efficiency was examined. Our results show
that pleural effusions and seromas are enriched for factors also secreted
by MSC such as MCP-1, GRO, IL-6 and IL-8. We found remarkable
similarities regarding the cytokines and growth factors profile in
pleural effusions and seromas. Both patient-derived fluids have
comparable amount of IL-2, IL-3, IL-4 and IL-10, as well as, VEGF, EGF
and FGF-b. IL-1 and IL-16 were significantly different between pleural
effusions and seromas. Seroma fluid from bilateral drains in a patient
with an invasive cancer and a contralateral benign mastectomy had very
similar cytokine concentrations. Moreover, MSC-CM and pleural fluids from
ER+ and ER- patients increased the MS formation efficiency of both
triple-negative cell lines while seroma fluids from ER+ and ER- patients
increased the MS formation efficiency of ER-positive cell line MCF-7.
Finally, we evaluated the impact of a panel of drugs on cell cultures
grown with MSC-CM and patient-derived fluids. We found that the effect of
chemotherapies on MS formation can be attenuated by patient-derived
fluids. Seroma and pleural effusion fluids from breast cancer patients
have similar cytokine profiles, change MS formation efficiency of
standard breast cancer cell models, and mediate sensitivity to therapy.
Here we demonstrate that host and microenvironmental factors are critical
for determining resistance to therapy. Future studies will investigate
the prognostic implications of factors that promote TIC survival in the
fluid tumor microenvironment.

