Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A proneural signature profile predicts response to Notch
inhibition in glioma stem cells


The Cancer Genome Atlas Network described genomic abnormalities and gene
expression-based molecular subtypes of GBM that showed a strong
relationship between subtypes, genomic alterations and different neural
lineages. Future studies are required to elucidate the intricate
relationship between tumor subtypes and treatment response. We have thus
embarked on a comprehensive effort to detecting expression signatures
that are associated with response to the therapy and these signatures may
allow prospective selection of patients with high likelihood of
responding to therapy. Notch signaling pathway is an evolutionarily
conserved pathway that plays an important role in multiple cellular and
developmental processes including cell fate decision, differentiation,
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and migration. Recent studies
indicate that the Notch signaling pathway regulates normal stem cells in
the brain, and glioma stem Cells (GSCs) with high Notch activity. We
investigated the effects of Notch pathway inhibition on GSCs growth using
commercially available inhibitors. Drug cytotoxicity test on 16 GSCs show
differential growth response to Notch inhibitors stratifying GSCs into
two groups: responders (6 cell lines) vs non-responders (10 cell lines).
Gene expression clustering identified a responder gene signature enriched
in 1: proneural genes such as Olig2, Sox-9, NKX2-2, and 2: Notch
signaling component such as Notch-1, Notch-3, Hes-3 and Hes-5. These
signature were validated by western blot analysis. Treatment with Notch
inhibitors reduced neurosphere formation in vitro accompanied with
attenuated Notch intracellular domain (NICD), Hes-1, Hes-3, and Hes-5. In
addition, the expression of nestin-the stem cell marker was reduced and
an increased expression of lineage differentiation markers TuJ1 and GFAP
was observed following Notch inhibition. In conclusion, we have
identified a responder signature for a group of glioma stem cells that
can be targeted by Notch inhibitors and this may allow the selection of
patients with high likelihood of responding to this therapy.

