Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protease-integrin regulates mitochondrial biogenesis in glioma
xenograft cells


Various studies have described mitochondrial dysfunction and its
association with several diseases, including cancer. Regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis via mitochondrial-nuclear genome encoded protein
signaling has been identified in recent literature. In the present study,
we explored whether matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) shRNA mediates
mitochondrial biogenesis and alters glioma proliferation. We found that
MMP-9 shRNA initiated mitochondrial biogenesis in glioma cells by
increasing the expression of mitochondrial transcription factor (mtTFA).
MMP-9 silencing elevated nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1) and -2
(NRF2), which are involved in transcription regulation of mtTFA.
Mitochondrial localization of mtTFA was more evident in MMP-9-treated
glioma cells as compared to untreated cells. In addition, MMP-9
suppression significantly increased the binding of mtTFA to light strand
and heavy strand promoter of mitochondrial genome as determined by
mitochondrial chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. MMP-9 transcriptional
suppression decreased the expression of phospho Akt and PI3K while
increasing PTEN expression in glioma xenograft cells. We also show that
dominant negative Akt increased mtTFA, NRF1 and NRF2, and decreased PI3K,
integrin v and integrin 3. Further, MMP-9 and Akt suppression increased
the nuclear and mitochondrial expression of mtTFA. As indicated by
increased copy number of displacement (D) loop, mitochondrial replication
was observed in both MMP-9- and Akt-downregulated glioma cells. As
confirmed by immunoprecipitation analysis, interaction of v3 integrin
with MMP-9 decreased. Studies with functional blocking of v3 integrin
indicated elevation of mtTFA, a decrease in phospho Akt, and
overexpression of D-loop; these data indicate MMP-9 mediates
mitochondrial biogenesis via v3 integrin-Akt/PTEN, which led to increased
mtTFA expression. Earlier studies from our lab also showed apoptosis
induction in these glioma cells by MMP-9 shRNA. Moreover, 4910 and 5310
glioma xenograft tissue sections from mice treated with MMP-9 shRNA
showed reduced expression of phospho Akt, and elevated PTEN and mtTFA
levels. Decreased co-localization of v3 integrin and MMP-9 was associated
with MMP-9-suppressed tumor sections. Further, RT-PCR and western blot
analyses showed increased expression of proteins involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis encoded both by mitochondrial and nuclear genome
in MMP-9 shRNA-treated glioma cells. Elevated levels of reactive oxygen
species and the results of the FACS analysis show increased mitochondrial
organelle stain in MMP-9-silenced glioma cells. Taken together, these
data provide new insight into MMP-9-mediated glioma proliferation
inhibition by mitochondrial biogenesis induced cell death.

