Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel protein kinase STK17A is a direct p53 target gene that
mediates response to genotoxic and nutritional stress in a cancer cell
context-dependent manner


STK17A (DRAK1) is a largely uncharacterized serine/threonine kinase that
belongs to the death-associated protein kinase family. Prior microarray
studies demonstrated that STK17A is induced with cisplatin in testicular
cancer-derived human embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells. We now demonstrate
the STK17A in a novel p53 target gene that is induced by a variety of DNA
damaging agents in a p53-dependent manner in a number of different cell
contexts. A consensus and functional p53 response element was found
upstream of the STK17A promoter and endogenous p53 was shown to bind to
this site in a cisplatin-dependent manner. Knockdown of STK17A conferred
resistance to cisplatin-induced growth suppression and apoptotic cell
death in EC cells. This was associated with up-regulation of detoxifying
and antioxidant genes and reduction in reactive oxygen species (ROS),
whereas overexpression of STK17A increased ROS levels in EC cells.
Interestingly, we found that STK17A is highly overexpressed in clinical
glioblastoma (GBM) and cell lines compared to its expression in normal
brain tissue and other cancers. High STK17A expression in GBM patients
correlated with poor clinical outcome and decreased survival. STK17A
knockdown in GBM cells decreased clonagenic cell growth, soft agar
tumorigenicity, and survival in response to genotoxic and nutritional
stress. Preliminary data will be presented implicating STK17A in the
regulation of autophagy and the proximal autophagy component, ULK1. These
findings indicate that STK17A may be added to a growing list of direct
p53 target genes involved in autophagy that includes TIGAR, Sestrins,
DAPK1 and DRAM and that by impacting autophagy STK17A may modulate
response to genotoxic and nutritional stress in a cell context-depend
manner. This study also suggests that STK17A is a potential novel
prognostic maker and therapeutic target for GBM.

