Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I/II clinical trial: Metronomic chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide (Cy) and celecoxib (Cel) in breast cancer patients
progressing after standard chemotherapy


Metronomic chemotherapy (MCT), the chronic administration at regular
intervals of low doses of chemotherapeutic drugs without extended rest
periods, allows chronic treatment with therapeutic efficacy and low
toxicity. Its molecular target is mainly the endothelial cell which is
less prone to develop drug resistance. The aim of the present two-stage,
phase I/II trial study was to determine the safety and efficacy of MCT
with Cy plus Cel in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients progressing
after standard chemotherapy and to identify early markers of therapeutic
response. Patient inclusion criteria: 21-80 years old, more than 3 month
of life expectancy, advanced breast cancer in progression after, at
least, anthracyclines, taxanes and capecitabine treatments, at least one
lesion according to RECIST criteria, ECOG scale 2, adequate bone marrow,
hepatic, and renal function, normal calcemia, signed informed consent.
Treatment: CY, 50 mg p.o./day + CEL, 200 mg p.o. bid. Study design: The
trial has two stages with a final number of 25 patients, looking for a
25% general response rate ( error=0.10; error=0.05). Primary end point:
clinical response, safety and tolerability. Toxicity: all the serious
adverse events are registered by CTCAE criteria and followed until their
resolution. Angiogenesis parameters: the serum level of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and thrombospondin 1 (TSP-1) were
determined by ELISA, and the circulating endothelial cells (CECs) and
circulating endothelial progenitor cells (CEPs) by flow cytometry. This
protocol was authorized by the School of Medicine Bioethics Committee and
by A.N.M.A.T. (National Regulatory Authority). During the first stage we
have incorporated 13 patients. The time of permanence varied from 4 to 64
weeks (median=13). Presently, 4 patients are still in treatment. It was
observed stable disease (SD) in 9/13 patients that lasted from 12 to 64
weeks (median=18) and partial response (PR) in 1/13. Treatment toxicity
was very low: hematologic (2/13, grade I and II), gastric (4/13, grade
I). There was no evidence of hepatic, renal or cardiac toxicities
associated with the therapy. The performance status evaluated with the
ECOG scale showed no modifications in 2/10 patients, a worse score in
3/10 and a better one in 5/10. The % of circulating CEPs showed a
significant increase in non-responder patients (p=0.008) The serum VEGF
concentration decreased as a function of time (p=0.004). Patients with
the lowest VEGF/TSP-1 ratios showed the highest permanence. We conclude
that the treatment showed a low toxicity profile, the therapeutic
response consisted of SD during different periods of time, and one PR
with no modifications or improvement of the performance status in a high
proportion of patients.

