Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systematic approach to the study of cancer stem cells applied to
ovarian cancer


Background: Tumorgenicity studies show that Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) but
not their differentiated counterparts efficiently generate tumors.
Therapeutically targeting CSCs could remove the malignant potential from
tumours, while circumventing chemoresistance, relapse and metastasis.
CSCs are difficult to study as they usually represent a small fraction of
tumors. We will present a systematic approach we developed to investigate
CSCs within any malignancy. We will present the data obtained thus far in
the application of this system to the study of Ovarian CSCs. Methods: We
developed a four phase model for investigating CSCs: Screening -
Validation - Characterisation - Identification of novel therapeutic
targets. Six cell lines modelling various stages of ovarian cancer
(A2780, A2780cis, IGROV-1, IGROV(CDDP), SK-OV-3 and 59M) and one cell
line (HIO-80) modelling non malignant ovarian surface epithelium were
screened for the presence of CSCs and somatic stem cells respectively.
Three flow cytometry based screens were implemented; ALDEFLUOR, Hoechst
Side Population and Cell Surface Protein Screens. Cells of interest were
isolated via Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting. Mouse Tumorgenicity and
Asymmetric Division Assays have been developed to validate putative CSCs
(pCSCs) as true CSCs. Hypoxic growth, chemotherapeutic and matrigel
invasion assays have all been developed to investigate the role of
Ovarian CSCs in these commonly observed phenotypes of Ovarian cancer.
Results: Six pCSC populations have been identified. No overlap has been
observed between the three screening approaches. ALDEFLUOR identified
pCSCs within A2780 and A2780cis. Hoechst Side Population identified pCSCs
within IGROV-1 and IGROV(CDDP). CD44/CD117 identified pCSCs within
SK-OV-3 and 59M. No somatic stem cells were identified within HIO-80. To
date pCSC and non-pCSCs have been sorted from two cell lines. In both
models the isolated pCSCs regenerated the non-pCSC phenotype. Both the
isolated pCSCs and non-pCScs from each model are resistance to cisplatin
and paclitaxel. In both cases the parent lines were chemoresistant, so
this finding is not unexpected. All pCSCs are currently being validated
via Mouse Tumourgenicity and Single Cell Asymmetric Division Assays. All
validated CSCs will be described. Conclusion: A systematic approach has
been established for the isolation and study of CSCs. Each type of
ovarian CSC appears to be mutually exclusive. This may reflect different
stages/histologies of ovarian disease, or perhaps the selective
conditions of tissue culture. pCSCs have been identified within
chemosensitive cell lines. Investigation of the differences between
chemoresistant and chemosensitive CSCs could elucidate the mechanisms
behind chemoresistant relapse.

