Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid and quantitative lateral flow point-of-care Therapeutic Drug
Monitoring (TDM) assays for LH and FSH


Introduction: Hormone manipulation therapies, such as long-acting
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists, are used in the treatment
of estrogen-dependent forms of breast cancer, as well as prostate cancer,
because down-regulation of Luteinizing Hormone (LH) and Follicle
Stimulating Hormone (FSH) leads to a decline in hormonal support to the
ovary and testis. Effectiveness of hormone manipulation therapies can be
monitored by quantitation of LH and/or FSH. Methods & Results:
Traditionally, these hormones are measured by ELISA assays that require
blood to be drawn at either a doctor's office or a diagnostic laboratory.
Here, we describe the development of rapid point-of-care tests for
detection of these hormones that are quantitative and applicable to
plasma, serum, as well as urine. These assays exhibit dynamic ranges of
17-170 mIU/ml for LH and 0.01-10 IU/ml for FSH. They exhibit linear
correlation between nominal and actual values, with correlation
coefficients greater than 0.95. They comply with FDA guidance for
bioanalytical assays. And they utilize cassettes that are read using an
optical reader with radio-frequency identification (RFID) capability, and
the data can be printed out or stored on the reader for uploading onto
the hospital database. The reader utilizes confocal optics with a low
distance-to-target ratio. The reflectometric measurement is converted to
activity units, using an established calibration curve embedded in the
RFID. The cassettes are made to be stable for up to 72 hours and can be
shipped to a central lab or doctor's office for quantitation if the
patient does not have access to the reader. Conclusion: Rapid and
quantitative point-of-care tests (POCTs) for LH and FSH have been
developed for field deployment directly at home, and the cassettes can be
read directly by the patient or can be shipped to the central
lab/doctor's office for reading. As TDM, these tests should allow for
more effective dosing of the patients and thereby improving effectiveness
of hormone manipulation therapy. The tests are also patient-centric,
inviting better compliance and patient participation in personalizing
his/her treatment. The simplicity of the assays would allow for their
deployment in underdeveloped regions lacking access to central
laboratories with specialized and expensive equipments. Clinical studies
are ongoing to evaluate the usefulness of these assays.

