Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-203 restricts the proliferation capacity of normal colon
and colon cancer stem cells by regulating the expression of Tcf4


The canonical Wnt/-catenin pathway plays a crucial role in driving
proliferation of normal colon epithelial cells and colon cancer cells.
Tcf4, which is encoded by the Tcf7l2 gene, is a critical downstream
molecule of the Wnt/-catenin pathway. Although several downstream target
genes of the Wnt/-catenin pathway have been identified (e.g. CD44, Lgr5
and EphB2 receptor which mark both normal colon stem cells (NCSCs) and
colon cancer stem cells (CoCSCs)), upstream regulators of this pathway
remain poorly characterized. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small
noncoding RNAs which suppress translation by binding to specific seed
sequences in 3untranslated region (3UTR) of target mRNAs. In this study,
we aimed to find miRNAs that are highly expressed during normal colonic
epithelial differentiation and can also regulate the canonical
Wnt/-catenin pathway; in addition, their roles in the regulation of
proliferation and differentiation in both normal colon and colon cancer
are investigated. We isolated similar numbers of immature progenitor
cells (EpCAMhigh CD44+; crypt base) and mature cells (EpCAMhigh CD44
CD66a+; top of the crypt) from both normal and colon cancer primary
samples by FACS and performed real-time PCR. In normal human colon, we
found that Tcf4 is highly expressed at the crypt base and is absent or
low at the top of the crypt. In primary human colon cancer, Tcf4
expression is higher in tumorigenic cells (the fraction containing the
CoCSCs) than the non-tumorigenic cells. Furthermore, we found several
miRNAs that are differentially expressed in the top and bottom of the
crypt of human and murine normal colon epithelium. One of the miRNAs,
miR-203, is downregulated both in human NCSCs and CoCSCs. MiR-203
suppresses Tcf7l2 expression by specifically targeting its 3UTR, as shown
with a luciferase reporter. Western blotting showed that Tcf4 protein
expression was decreased in colon cancer cell lines transfected with
miR-203. Moreover, miR-203 suppresses Wnt/-catenin signaling as assayed
by TOP-flash. Overexpression of miR-203 inhibited the organoid-formation
of murine normal colon and human xenograft CoCSCs in vitro. Furthermore,
miR-203 suppressed in vivo tumorigenic capacity of human CoCSCs when
injected subcutaneously in NOD/SCID interleukin-2 receptor chain null
(Il2rg(-/-)) immunodeficient mice. In conclusion, miR-203 is
downregulated in both in NCSCs and CoCSCs as compared to their more
mature progeny, and regulates the canonical Wnt/-catenin pathway by
suppressing the expression of Tcf4. These findings suggest that normal
stem/progenitor cells and CoCSCs share a similar molecular machinery to
regulate their proliferation capacity.

