Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p32 is a downstream effector of c-Myc induced glutamine addiction


Genetic alterations of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are the main
drivers not only of deregulated cell proliferation but also altered
cancer cell metabolism. Compared with normal cells, malignant cells
exhibit enhanced utilization of glucose and glutamine. As such, efforts
to understand the molecular basis of the addiction to these two nutrients
is likely to lead to the identification of new drug targets for the
specific killing of cancer cells. A major player in tumor cell addiction
to glutamine is the c-Myc oncogene. By stimulating the expression of
glutamine transporters and glutaminase, this transcription factor
promotes glutamine oxidation through the mitochondria. This rewiring of
glutamine metabolism must be sustained by efficient mitochondrial
function. The mitochondrial p32 protein was previously demonstrated to be
critical in mitochondria metabolism by maintaining oxidative
phosphorylation, yet the factors regulating its expression are not clear.
Deregulated c-Myc is a frequent feature of gliomas and recent discoveries
suggest the importance of metabolic alterations, in particular glutamine
addiction, in the pathogenesis of these cancers. Interestingly,
medulloblastoma can be clustered into six subgroups based on gene
signature and the c-Myc amplified subgroup exhibits high p32 expression.
In the present study, we hypothesized that p32 may be a downstream
effector of c-Myc induced glutamine addiction. Using a c-Myc and estrogen
receptor fusion protein construct in immortalized fibroblast, we
demonstrated that p32 expression was up regulated upon c-Myc nuclear
translocation. shRNA mediated stable knock-down of p32 in glioma cell
lines and patient-derived tumor initiating cells impaired cell
proliferation and tumorigenic potential in mouse models. Furthermore,
attenuation of p32 expression reduced glioma cells sensitivity to
glutamine deprivation and abrogated c-Myc induced glutamine consumption.
Additional work is underway to determine whether c-Myc and p32 work in
the same or parallel pathways to confer glutamine addiction on glioma
cells and to establish the implications of this co-operation on tumor
metabolism in vivo.

