Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of folic acid and docetaxel on the multidrug and folate
transporter ABCG2 in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second-leading cause of cancer related deaths in American men. It was
recently shown that a SNP (Q141K) that decreases the function of the
multidrug transporter ABCG2 affects survival outcomes in prostate cancer
patients. ABCG2 effluxes mono- and polyglutamated folates and
dihydrotestosterone; both are important for prostate growth. We have
shown that patients with this SNP have a shorter time to PSA recurrence.
Conversely, prostate cancer patients with Q141K and treated with
docetaxel had a longer survival time than wild-type patients, supporting
our hypothesis that ABCG2 transports docetaxel. Our goal is to determine
the role of ABCG2 in prostate carcinogenesis and progression, and if
dietary folate can regulate its expression. We observed a decrease of
ABCG2 mRNA and protein expression in response to excess levels (2.3M) of
folic acid compared to physiological (25nM) or low (2nM) folic acid in
the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. Because there is a CpG island in the
ABCG2 promoter, we hypothesized that ABCG2 expression is regulated by DNA
methylation. This hypothesis was supported when we observed that
treatment of LNCaP with decitabine, a methylation inhibitor, resulted in
significantly increased (p=0.01) ABCG2 mRNA expression. Furthermore, we
determined that LNCaP cells grown in low folic acid for 1 week were
significantly hypomethylated (p=0.01) at the ABCG2 promoter compared to
cells grown in excess folic acid. 5-hmC was recently discovered as a
potential intermediate base in the active demethylation process. We found
increased 5-hmC in cells grown in low FA relative to those grown in
excess FA at one site and no difference at three other sites. To test our
hypothesis that ABCG2 can efflux docetaxel we treated LNCaP cells with
1nM docetaxel for 8 days and observed a 5-fold increase in ABCG2 mRNA
expression, suggesting a role in docetaxel resistance. In HEK293 cells
transduced with ABCG2 or GFP (control) nearly twice as many cells
expressing ABCG2 survived docetaxel treatment after 48 hours. In
conclusion, we have found that 1) ABCG2 expression is regulated by the
availability of folate, via DNA methylation and that 2) ABCG2 may be
involved in the transport of docetaxel. Overall, we hypothesize that
decreased expression of ABCG2 or the presence of the ABCG2 SNP is
associated with disease progression before androgen independence because
more folate and DHT could be retained in the cancerous cells thus
promoting growth. After androgen independence and docetaxel treatment,
ABCG2 expression may increase to efflux docetaxel from the tumor and
cause docetaxel resistance. Dietary folate is easily modifiable;
therefore the ultimate goal of this study is to determine if we could
recommend a dietary component to the treatment regimen for prostate
cancer patients.

