Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophils regulate effector and inhibitory T cell function in
prostate cancer


A significant number of patients develop castration-resistant prostate
cancer, for which there is no cure. Our goal is to characterize the
effector and inhibitory mechanisms which modulate prostate cancer
progression. We have previously shown that CD8+ effector function is
transiently increased following castration of prostate-specific Pten-/-
mice. To determine inhibitory mechanisms responsible for the transient
increase in effector function, we evaluated the role of myeloid cells in
this model. We observed a heavy Gr-1+ cell infiltrate in the primary
tumors which was markedly increased early after castration. Phenotypic
profiling of tumor-infiltrating Gr-1+ cells from intact and castrated
mice showed uniform CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G+ marker expression and neutrophil
morphology. To determine the functional importance of these
tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs), we administered anti-Ly6G antibody
to intact Pten-/- mice. We found that depletion of TANs slightly
increased tumor burden prior to castration. In addition, the number of
regulatory T cells was elevated in the tumor after neutrophil depletion,
and the proportion of functional CD8+ T cells was unchanged. In contrast,
concomitant castration and neutrophil depletion did not change tumor
weight, early (2.5 wk) or late (5 wk) after castration. Although the
total number of CD8+ T cells in the tumor was increased by neutrophil
depletion early after castration, the proportion of functional CD8+ T
cells was unchanged. A striking increase in regulatory T cell (Treg)
numbers was also observed. In contrast, the number of CD8+ T cells and
the percentage of functional cells were increased late after castration
and neutrophil depletion. Furthermore, depletion of neutrophils decreased
intratumoral Tregs at 5 weeks post-castration. These data suggest that
TANs modulate the tumor microenvironment, rendering it increasingly
immunosuppressive late after castration. We have found that castration
increases systemic Tregs in Pten-/- mice. To determine whether Tregs
regulate neutrophil function in prostate tumors, we administered -CD25
antibody along with castration. Neutrophil numbers in
castration-resistant prostate tumors increased, and expression of TNF,
IL4R, iNOS, Arg, IL-6 and IL-12 by the neutrophils was also augmented.
Concomitantly, an increase in the proportion of functional CD8+ T cells
was observed. Interestingly, depletion of neutrophils abrogated the
augmentation of CD8+ CTL activation following Treg depletion, suggesting
that cross-talk between neutrophils and Tregs regulates CD8 effector
function. Thus, TANs in Pten-/- prostate tumors have anti-tumor potential
and can modulate both CD8+ effector T cells and Tregs within the tumor.
Our long-term goal is to understand how TANs control effector and
inhibitory arms of the immune system in order to improve outcomes
following immunotherapy.

