Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparing a topical-based curcumin to dietary curcumin in a skin
cancer model


Objective: Curcumin has been under investigation for its
anti-carcinogenic role in a variety of human cancers. However curcumin
clinical trials in skin carcinoma have not been reported. Skin squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) is an aggressive tumor associated with higher rates
of metastasis and recurrences, especially in the lymphatic rich head and
neck region. Low oral bioavailability has been a limitation in clinical
trials with curcumin. We investigated curcumin's chemopreventive
properties to prevent or delay skin SCC growth when administered
topically versus orally. We also wanted to determine biomarkers of
response for future chemopreventive trials given the aggressive nature of
the disease, problems of condemned skin, recurrences and metastases, and
rising health care costs. This is the first study comparing topical to
oral curcumin in a mouse model. Methods: 6-8 week-old SCID mice were
pretreated with 15 mg corn oil (control), 15 mg curcumin by oral gavage,
curcumin topical paste, or combined oral gavage and topical paste
(n=10/group) daily for 3 days prior to the subcutaneous injection of
SRB-12 P9 cells (aggressive skin SCC). Mice were treated and tumors
measured daily by digital calipers, and sacrificed on day 29. Tumors with
overlying skin and blood were collected. Results and Discussion: Tumor
volumes from all curcumin treated groups were significantly smaller
compared to the control group (pObjective: Curcumin has been under
investigation for its anti-carcinogenic role in a variety of human
cancers. However curcumin clinical trials in skin carcinoma have not been
reported. Skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is an aggressive tumor
associated with higher rates of metastasis and recurrences, especially in
the lymphatic rich head and neck region. Low oral bioavailability has
been a limitation in clinical trials with curcumin. We investigated
curcumin's chemopreventive properties to prevent or delay skin SCC growth
when administered topically versus orally. We also wanted to determine
biomarkers of response for future chemopreventive trials given the
aggressive nature of the disease, problems of condemned skin, recurrences
and metastases, and rising health care costs. This is the first study
comparing topical to oral curcumin in a mouse model. Methods: 6-8
week-old SCID mice were pretreated with 15 mg corn oil (control), 15 mg
curcumin by oral gavage, curcumin topical paste, or combined oral gavage
and topical paste (n=10/group) daily for 3 days prior to the subcutaneous
injection of SRB-12 P9 cells (aggressive skin SCC). Mice were treated and
tumors measured daily by digital calipers, and sacrificed on day 29.
Tumors with overlying skin and blood were collected. Results and
Discussion: Tumor volumes from all curcumin treated groups were
significantly smaller compared to the control group (p<0.001). Ex vivo
tumor volumes from all curcumin treated groups were significantly smaller
than the control (p= 0.004). There was no difference between the curcumin
gavage and topical tumor volumes (p = 0.19). Western blot analysis of
xenograft tumors showed significant inhibition of pS6, a well known
downstream target of MTOR inhibitors and MEK/ERK pathway in gavage and
combined treated groups but did not show the same inhibition of pMTOR or
p4EBP1. pERK and pSTAT3 was significantly inhibited in all curcumin
treated groups, and inhibition was more pronounced in the combined
curcumin group. There was no difference of pERK and pSTAT3 expression
between the curcumin gavage and topical group. IHC showed strong positive
pERK staining throughout tumors in the control group, and weaker, focal
staining in the curcumin-treated tumors. There was no difference in pERK
staining between the curcumin gavage and topical group. ELISA on pooled
serum obtained from mice showed the inflammatory marker IL-6 was
significantly inhibited in the topical group, but not in the groups
receiving systemic curcumin. Conclusion: Curcumin inhibited tumor growth
in all treated groups and topical curcumin was equally effective as oral
curcumin in inhibiting tumor growth. Combined with its anti-carcinogenic
effects, curcumin's local anti-inflammatory properties can contribute to
its role as a chemopreventive agent. Targets of the ERK pathway appear to
be promising biomarkers of response for future curcumin chemopreventive
trials in skin SCC.

