Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compensatory and non-compensatory alterations in LNCaP gene
expression following antisense therapy directed against bcl-2


Antisense oligonucleotides (oligos) have been employed against in vivo
and in vitro prostate cancer models targeting proteins associated with
growth and programmed death (apoptosis). In LNCaP cells we evaluated
monospecific (directed towards bcl-2) and bispecific (directed towards
bcl-2 and the epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR]) oligos which
targeted and comparably suppressed the expression of bcl-2, an apoptosis
inhibitory protein. Antisense oligos directed against bcl-2 are entering
clinical trials and it was of interest to see: 1) Whether such therapy
would produce non-specific effects which could compromise its efficacy;
and 2) To identify genes whose activity, if diminished, may have to be
either maintained or replaced for this type of therapy to be effective.
Cells were evaluated for the expression of non-targeted genes associated
with apoptosis (caspase-3, clusterin); androgen regulation (androgen
receptor [AR], p300), cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, interferon [IFN]); antigen
expression (prostate specific antigen [PSA], prostate specific membrane
antigen [PSMA], prostatic acid phosphatase [PAP]); and autocrine growth
(insulin like growth factor [IGF1]). As expected in this type of specific
gene therapy, most non-targeted proteins were unaffected. However, the
expression of several non-targeted genes were altered. Following the
suppression of bcl-2 activity by both mono- and bispecific oligos, LNCaP
cells compensated by both suppression of caspase-3 activity (an apoptosis
promoter) and enhanced expression of both AR and its p300 co-activator.
This suggests both an ability to reverse the effects of bcl-2 suppression
on apoptosis through decreased expression of the apoptosis promoter and a
possible stimulation of growth due to increased androgen sensitivity. It
also identifies caspase-3 as an essential gene whose expression must be
either maintained or replaced when bcl-2 activity is therapeutically
suppressed. Among the differentiation antigens, cell surface PSMA
expression was increased by bispecific oligos, whereas secretory PSA and
PAP were unchanged. This PSMA increase was associated with an increased
IFN expression induced by a unique double strand conformation
(intrastrand hybridization) of the bispecific oligos not seen in the
monospecific oligo. Increased PSMA expression could make LNCaP cells more
recognizable to cytotoxic T cells and/or potentiate prostate cancer
vaccines. If gene therapy is truly to be effective, the mechanisms for
compensatory changes which contribute to tumor resistance must be further
identified and controlled.

