Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel APIM-motif comprising peptide drug potentiates the action
of several chemotherapeutic drugs by blocking the interaction between
PCNA and key proteins involved in DNA repair, apoptosis and cell cycle
control


APIM is a 5 amino acids motif found to mediate interaction between a
series of proteins and Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) (Gilljam
et al. 2009). In addition to proteins essential for replication, PCNA
interacts with many proteins involved in DNA repair, epigenetic, cell
cycle control and apoptosis. While many housekeeping proteins interact
with PCNA via the PIP-box sequence, many repair, cell cycle, epigenetic
and apoptosis regulating proteins use the APIM-motif for interaction with
PCNA. Our data suggests that when the replication or transcription of DNA
is arrested due to DNA damage, or when the cells are in an
activated/stressed state, the post-translational modifications on PCNA
are altered in a way that catalyses a shift of a high affinity PCNA
binding housekeeping set of proteins to proteins involved in damage and
stress avoidance. Thus, the APIM-motif is used during a switch from
normal to stressed conditions. By introducing the APIM-motif in a peptide
sequence which is engineered to penetrate cells and enter the nucleus
(ATX-101), many normal cellular stress responses are inhibited and cells
are sensitized to cell death by apoptosis. In vitro experiments have
shown that over-expression or addition of APIM-peptides increases the
sensitivity of several cancer cells to a wide range of clinically
relevant anti-cancer therapies including inter-strand crosslinkers,
intercalating drugs, small molecule inhibitors of various signal
transductions pathways, cancer antibiotics or stress-inducing agents. In
some cancer cell lines and primary cancer cells from patients, e.g.
multiple myeloma cells cultured ex vivo with and without Bone Marrow
Stromal Cells (BMSC), ATX-101 induces apoptosis on its own whereas
primary normal cells are far less affected by the peptide. This effect of
ATX-101 is S-phase independent. In addition to inducing apoptosis as a
single agent, ATX-101 increases the sensitivity to melphalan in these
assays. Finally, we have obtained proof of concept in a multiple myeloma
model in mice; these results showed that ATX-101 significantly increases
the anti-cancer efficacy of melphalan in vivo in the absence of
detectable toxicity. Thus, by targeting PCNA with ATX-101 in combination
with different chemotherapeutic drugs, we can increase the therapeutic
window of a given therapeutic drug used at its maximum tolerated dose, or
alternatively, achieve the same levels of efficacy using sub-optimal drug
doses. Ref.: Gilljam KM, Feyzi E, Aas PA, Sousa MM, Muller R, Vagbo CB,
Catterall TC, Liabakk NB, Slupphaug G, Drablos F, Krokan HE, Otterlei M.
2009. Identification of a novel, widespread, and functionally important
PCNA-binding motif. J Cell Biol 186(5):645-654.

