Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer screening and treatment quality metrics across an
entire racially diverse metropolitan area: Chicago


BACKGROUND: In Chicago, IL, Black women are 62% more likely to die from
breast cancer (ca) than White women, a disparity exceeding the US breast
ca mortality disparity (41%) and New York City (27%). Geographic
variability in mortality rates suggests health system rather than
biologic differences as a significant cause. The Metropolitan Chicago
Breast Cancer Task Force's mission is to eliminate this disparity. In
2008, the Quality Consortium, a project of the Task Force, was
established to address this issue through quality improvement and soon
became the nation's first Patient Safety Organization dedicated solely to
breast health. METHODS: We collected aggregate screening and/or treatment
quality data for calendar year 2006 from 43 sites. Data from calendar
year 2009 has recently been accepted from 53 sites and is an update on
quality performance in Chicago. Environmental scans to review processes
in breast care were conducted at 27 sites and results are being coupled
with the new data to present a more complete picture of quality. The
proportion of patients with screening, diagnostic follow up and treatment
procedures aligned with clinical guidelines were used to determine
whether institutions met benchmarks. 7 screening measures and their
associated benchmarks included: proportions recalled for diagnosis
(benchmark 5-14%), lost to follow-up at imaging (BACKGROUND: In Chicago,
IL, Black women are 62% more likely to die from breast cancer (ca) than
White women, a disparity exceeding the US breast ca mortality disparity
(41%) and New York City (27%). Geographic variability in mortality rates
suggests health system rather than biologic differences as a significant
cause. The Metropolitan Chicago Breast Cancer Task Force's mission is to
eliminate this disparity. In 2008, the Quality Consortium, a project of
the Task Force, was established to address this issue through quality
improvement and soon became the nation's first Patient Safety
Organization dedicated solely to breast health. METHODS: We collected
aggregate screening and/or treatment quality data for calendar year 2006
from 43 sites. Data from calendar year 2009 has recently been accepted
from 53 sites and is an update on quality performance in Chicago.
Environmental scans to review processes in breast care were conducted at
27 sites and results are being coupled with the new data to present a
more complete picture of quality. The proportion of patients with
screening, diagnostic follow up and treatment procedures aligned with
clinical guidelines were used to determine whether institutions met
benchmarks. 7 screening measures and their associated benchmarks
included: proportions recalled for diagnosis (benchmark 5-14%), lost to
follow-up at imaging (<10%), lost to follow-up at biopsy (30%), and
diagnosed as stage 0 or 1 (>50%). Three treatment measures and associated
benchmarks included: proportions with treatment initiated within 60 days
of diagnosis (80%), breast-conserving surgery (BCS) who received
radiation (85%), and tested for hormone receptors (90%). RESULTS:
Preliminary results show that varying percentages of institutions were
able to show that they met benchmarks for recall rate (74%) lost to
follow-up at imaging (36%) and at biopsy (42%), timely follow-up imaging
(26%), ca detection rate (60%), proportion minimal (30%), proportion
early stage (26%), timely treatment (75%), radiation after BCS (70%) and
hormone receptor testing (90%). Environmental scans highlight areas of
concern in positioning, patient communication, timeliness and provider
handoffs. Complete and updated results will be available for
presentation. CONCLUSIONS: There has been substantial improvement in data
quality since the first cycle of data collection. Many mammography
providers were unable to show they could meet benchmarks. Many treatment
institutions demonstrated that they could meet standards of care. The
results of the environmental scans and data together are being used to
develop protocols and identify sites for quality improvement
interventions. Conclusions will be revisited and presented once analysis
is complete.

