Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational medicine enables rapid early clinical development of
AVL-292, a highly selective, orally available inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase, in a phase 1b clinical trial


Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) plays a key role in the signaling pathway
from the B cell receptor (BCR) that contributes to the proliferation and
survival of malignancies of B cell origin. AVL-292 is an orally available
and highly selective covalent inhibitor of Btk that is currently
undergoing Phase 1b clinical development for CLL and B-NHL. Using a novel
covalent probe that enables precise and quantitative assessment of Btk
molecular target engagement by AVL-292, we have pursued an innovative
early clinical development approach in healthy adult volunteers based on
this translational capability. 5 cohorts of up to 8 subjects (6 active, 2
placebo) were enrolled in a single ascending dose, placebo controlled
clinical study. The objectives of this study were to determine safety,
pharmacokinetics, and to determine the minimum dose and plasma
concentration of AVL-292 required to achieve complete Btk engagement.
Single oral doses of 0.5-7.0 mg/kg were administered to up to 6 subjects
per cohort. Samples for AVL-292 PK and Btk occupancy in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells enriched for B cells were collected immediately prior
to dosing and at several time points after dosing to determine the PK-PD
relationship. AVL-292 was found to be safe and well tolerated following
oral administration at all dose levels. All subjects that received an
oral dose of 1.0 mg/kg of AVL-292 achieved >80% Btk occupancy. 5 of the 6
subjects administered AVL-292 at 2.0 mg/kg achieved complete Btk
occupancy that was sustained through 24 hours even after plasma levels of
AVL-292 had declined. This prolonged duration of activity demonstrates
that covalent inhibition of Btk with AVL-292 enables continued activity
without requiring persistence of circulating drug. The minimum dose that
achieved complete target occupancy in this study (125 mg) was carried
forward as the starting dose in a Phase 1b study of hematological
malignancies of B cell origin. Subjects diagnosed with B cell
malignancies received single daily oral doses of AVL-292 in continuous 28
day cycles. Total Btk content was determined in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells at pre-dose, and Btk occupancy was determined 4 and 24
hours post dose on Day 1 and Day 28. Btk occupancy in this Phase 1b
clinical study confirmed observations in healthy volunteer subjects. The
relationship between inhibition of Btk activity and clinical response
will be determined in the current and future clinical studies. Performing
dose escalation in healthy volunteers enables rapid determination of an
active dose level for Btk occupancy and inhibition by AVL-292. This
innovative clinical trial design precludes the administration of
sub-therapeutic dose levels to patients with high medical need and
rapidly identified the therapeutic dose range and schedule for AVL-292
for use in treatment of patients with B cell malignancies.

