Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gap junction enhancer potentiates cytotoxic effect of cisplatin


Cisplatin is one of the most widely used anti-cancer drugs due to its
highly effective apoptosis induction and DNA damage function. However,
increasing reports of side effects and drug resistances indicate the
limitation of cisplatin in cancer therapeutics. Recent studies showed
that inhibition of gap junctions is one of the reasons that diminishes
the cytotoxic efficiency and contributes to drug resistance. Therefore,
identification of molecules that counteracts gap junctional inhibition
without decreasing the anticancer effect of cisplatin in combinational
treatment is essential to reverse resistance and potentiate drug
efficacy. This study investigates the effects of combinational treatment
of cisplatin and substituted quinoline PQ1, a gap junction enhancer, in
T47D breast cancer cells. Cell viability was studied by both trypan blue
method and morphology change. Ki67 was used as a marker to examine cell
proliferation. Gap junction activity was examined by scrap load/dye
transfer (SL/DT) and the expressions of connexins, the components of gap
junction. Expressions of apoptotic factors, caspase-8, caspase-9,
caspase-3, Bax, and Bcl-2, were measured by western blot analysis. Our
results showed that compared with single cisplatin treatment,
combinational treatment of PQ1 and cisplatin increased gap junctional
intercellular communication (GJIC) as well as expressions of connexins
(Cx26, Cx32 and Cx43), and subsequently decreased cell viability. Ki67
was greatly decreased by combinational treatment indicating the
inhibition of proliferation. Expressions of pro-apoptotic factors,
caspase-3, caspases-8, caspase-9, and bax, were activated or increased by
pretreating T47D cells with PQ1; whereas, the pro-survival factor, bcl-2,
was decreased by the pretreatment. Our studies imply that PQ1 has the
potential to be used in the combinational treatment to counteract the
drug resistance and potentiate the efficacy of cisplatin in breast cancer
treatment.

