Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lineage-specific transcription factor ASCL1 defines a subtype
of non-small cell lung cancer with poor prognosis


Introduction: Using genome-wide expression analyses several groups have
identified a neuroendocrine subtype of NSCLC (NE-NSCLC), occurring in
5-8% of all NSCLC, which has a poorer prognosis than typical NSCLC. To
determine a preclinical model for NE-NSCLC, we utilized whole-genome mRNA
expression array data from 119 NSCLC cell lines to identify a class of
NSCLC lines that fit the neuroendocrine phenotype. A gene expressed in
all putative NE-NSCLC cell lines is the potent neural-specific
transcription factor ASCL1. We found that ASCL1 is: necessary for the
survival of NE-NSCLC cell lines; correlates with stem cell marker
expression; and that an ASCL1-associated gene signature predicts for poor
prognosis in NSCLC. Aims and Methods: We hypothesize that ASCL1 acts as a
lineage dependent oncogene for NE-NSCLC and that associated with ASCL1's
function in the molecular pathogenesis of these lung cancers will be a
gene expression profile that contributes to the malignant phenotype,
which will provide insight towards therapeutic targeting of this subset
of NSCLC. To test this hypothesis we examined genome wide mRNA expression
data from 119 NSCLC lines with validation of selected genes by qRT-PCR,
ASLC1 ChIP-Seq data obtained on ASCL1 expressing NSCLC lines, the
clinical outcome of a 275 resected NSCLCs characterized for ASCL1, and
genome wide mRNA expression, performed functional analyses in NSCLC lines
with siRNA mediated knockdown of ASCL1 and downstream target genes, and
integrated this information using biostatistical and bioinformatics
approaches. Results and Conclusions: We identified 11 out of 119 NSCLC
cell lines (9.2%) that display a distinct neuroendocrine gene signature,
and 24/275 resected NSCLCs with high ASCL1 expression. The NSCLCs
expressing ASCL1 and the neuroendocrine gene signature had impaired
prognosis compared to the other NSCLCs. Knockdown of ASCL1 in
representative NSCLC lines reduced target gene expression, caused
significant cell cycle defects, and induced apoptosis. NSCLC cell lines
expressing ASCL1 demonstrate a cancer stem cell marker phenotype similar
to that of small cell lung cancer, providing clues to the pathogenesis of
the NE-NSCLC disease subset. ASCL1 ChIP-Seq data combined with genome
wide mRNA expression data identified a subset of genes whose expression
appears to be regulated by ASCL1. Our results suggest that neuroendocrine
gene expression in NSCLC is of clinical relevance, that ASCL1 is required
for survival of the NE-NSCLC disease subset, while the integrated ASCL1
ChIP-Seq and mRNA expression data provide a roadmap for systematically
searching for therapeutic targets for this phenotype and their
mechanistic role in a cancer stem cell (initiating cell) subpopulation
within these tumors.

