Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of sinomenine combined with low dose
cyclosporine A on acute graft-versus-host disease in a murine model


Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is now routinely used to
treat patients with cancers and other disorders of the blood and immune
systems. Allogeneic HSCT (allo-HSCT) is limited by acute
graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD), a significant cause of post-transplant
morbidity and mortality. Cyclosporine A (CsA) is used as the basis of
most immuno-suppressive regimens for the prevention of aGVHD, but is
limited by side effects at high doses. High plasma concentrations are
normally needed to ensure allograft survival in episodes of acute
rejection. Therefore, new drugs or treatment strategies are needed. Our
objective was to investigate the effect of sinomenine (SIN), a pure
alkaloid from the plant Sinomenium acutum Rehd.et Wils, in combination
with subtherapeutic dose of CsA on aGVHD in a murine model of allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation (allo-BMT). We used a MHC-mismatched allo-BMT
mouse model (H-2banti H-2d). Injection of lethally irradiated BALB/C
(H-2d) mice with C57BL/6(H-2b) spleen and bone marrow cells induces
severe aGVHD resulting in death within 2-3 weeks. To prevent aGVHD,
recipients were randomly divided into 5 groups and given CsA and SIN
alone or in combination. Subtherapeutic SIN (25 mg/kg, group A) or CsA (5
mg/kg, group B) alone could not prolong the mean survival time (MST) of
recipients after transplantation (MST 15.9 days for SIN and 16.0 days for
CsA, P>0.05). By contrast, combined therapy (SIN 25 mg/kg with CsA 5
mg/kg, group C) demonstrated synergistic effect resulting in significant
prolongation of MST (44.4 days, PHematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) is now routinely used to treat patients with cancers and other
disorders of the blood and immune systems. Allogeneic HSCT (allo-HSCT) is
limited by acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD), a significant cause
of post-transplant morbidity and mortality. Cyclosporine A (CsA) is used
as the basis of most immuno-suppressive regimens for the prevention of
aGVHD, but is limited by side effects at high doses. High plasma
concentrations are normally needed to ensure allograft survival in
episodes of acute rejection. Therefore, new drugs or treatment strategies
are needed. Our objective was to investigate the effect of sinomenine
(SIN), a pure alkaloid from the plant Sinomenium acutum Rehd.et Wils, in
combination with subtherapeutic dose of CsA on aGVHD in a murine model of
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (allo-BMT). We used a
MHC-mismatched allo-BMT mouse model (H-2banti H-2d). Injection of
lethally irradiated BALB/C (H-2d) mice with C57BL/6(H-2b) spleen and bone
marrow cells induces severe aGVHD resulting in death within 2-3 weeks. To
prevent aGVHD, recipients were randomly divided into 5 groups and given
CsA and SIN alone or in combination. Subtherapeutic SIN (25 mg/kg, group
A) or CsA (5 mg/kg, group B) alone could not prolong the mean survival
time (MST) of recipients after transplantation (MST 15.9 days for SIN and
16.0 days for CsA, P>0.05). By contrast, combined therapy (SIN 25 mg/kg
with CsA 5 mg/kg, group C) demonstrated synergistic effect resulting in
significant prolongation of MST (44.4 days, P<0.01). This effect was
similar to the therapeutic dose of CsA (20 mg/kg, group D) treatment (MST
41.0 days). Interestingly, we found that high dose SIN (50 mg/kg, group
E) alone could also significantly increase MST (33.4 days, PHematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is now routinely used to treat patients
with cancers and other disorders of the blood and immune systems.
Allogeneic HSCT (allo-HSCT) is limited by acute graft-versus-host disease
(aGVHD), a significant cause of post-transplant morbidity and mortality.
Cyclosporine A (CsA) is used as the basis of most immuno-suppressive
regimens for the prevention of aGVHD, but is limited by side effects at
high doses. High plasma concentrations are normally needed to ensure
allograft survival in episodes of acute rejection. Therefore, new drugs
or treatment strategies are needed. Our objective was to investigate the
effect of sinomenine (SIN), a pure alkaloid from the plant Sinomenium
acutum Rehd.et Wils, in combination with subtherapeutic dose of CsA on
aGVHD in a murine model of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
(allo-BMT). We used a MHC-mismatched allo-BMT mouse model (H-2banti
H-2d). Injection of lethally irradiated BALB/C (H-2d) mice with
C57BL/6(H-2b) spleen and bone marrow cells induces severe aGVHD resulting
in death within 2-3 weeks. To prevent aGVHD, recipients were randomly
divided into 5 groups and given CsA and SIN alone or in combination.
Subtherapeutic SIN (25 mg/kg, group A) or CsA (5 mg/kg, group B) alone
could not prolong the mean survival time (MST) of recipients after
transplantation (MST 15.9 days for SIN and 16.0 days for CsA, P>0.05). By
contrast, combined therapy (SIN 25 mg/kg with CsA 5 mg/kg, group C)
demonstrated synergistic effect resulting in significant prolongation of
MST (44.4 days, P<0.01). This effect was similar to the therapeutic dose
of CsA (20 mg/kg, group D) treatment (MST 41.0 days). Interestingly, we
found that high dose SIN (50 mg/kg, group E) alone could also
significantly increase MST (33.4 days, P<0.01). Body weight and
peripheral white blood cell count significantly improved under combined
therapy. On the 14th day post-transplantation, serum IL-2 level was
significantly reduced with the combined treatment. On the 25th day
post-transplantation, FACS analysis of the recipient peripheral blood
showed high percentage H-2 Kb positive white blood cells (group B 38.92%,
group C 83.50%, and group E 78.85%). Histopathology examination of liver,
gut, and skin from the recipients on day 14 after BMT showed decreased
aGVHD induced tissue damage in treated groups which have longer MST.These
data suggested a potential value of sinomenine in the prevention of aGVHD
with low dose CsA after allo-BMT. Sinomenine has markedly reduced side
effects and improved safety in this allo-BMT mouse model. The potential
application of sinomenine in transplantation and its mechanisms should be
further investigated.

