Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT activation by Pdcd4 knockdown upregulates cyclin D1 expression
and promotes cell proliferation


Programmed Cell Death 4 (Pdcd4) is a novel tumor suppressor that
frequently exhibits down-regulated expression in several types of cancer.
In colon cancer tissues, expression level of Pdcd4 is continuously
down-regulated in the order of normal-adenoma-carcinoma. Over-expression
of Pdcd4 has been demonstrated to inhibit
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced transformation and
tumor phenotype. In addition to cultured cells, Pdcd4 transgenic mice
that over-express Pdcd4 in the epidermis show significant reductions in
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)/TPA induced skin papilloma
formation and carcinoma incidence. Knock-out of Pdcd4 expression in mice
results in induction of lymphomas with frequent metastases to the liver
and kidney, and an increase in DMBA/TPA induced skin papilloma formation
and carcinoma incidence. These findings suggest that Pdcd4 suppresses
carcinogenesis not only at an early stage (tumor promotion), but also at
a late stage (tumor progression) in both cultured cells and transgenic
mice. Recently, we showed that aerosol delivery of pdcd4 cDNA into a
murine lung inhibits cell proliferation and enhances apoptosis in K-ras
null mice and AP-1 reporter mice. Moreover, immunohistochemical studies
showed that expression of Pdcd4 is inversely correlated with the
proliferation marker, Ki-76, in the human tissues of intraductal
papillary mucinous carcinoma. However, the mechanisms involved in these
processes remain unknown. In this study, we found that knockdown of Pdcd4
promoted cell proliferation and up-regulated cyclin D1 expression.
Previously, we demonstrated that Pdcd4 knockdown activated NF-B dependent
transcription. Mutations of NF-B binding sites on the cyclin D1 promoter
attenuated the cyclin D1 promoter activity induced by Pdcd4 knockdown. In
addition, knockdown of NF-B/IB kinase (IKK) or IKK, the kinase regulating
NF-B activation, inhibited cyclin D1 promoter activity and cyclin D1
expression, indicating that up-regulation of cyclin D1 by Pdcd4 knockdown
is contributed, at least in part, by NF-B activation. To investigate the
mechanism of how Pdcd4 knockdown activates NF-B, we found that the level
of AKT phosphorylation and AKT kinase activity were increased in the
Pdcd4 knockdown cells. Conversely, ectopic expression of Pdcd4 inhibited
AKT phosphorylation and cyclin D1 expression, suggesting that Pdcd4
regulates AKT activity and cyclin D1 expression. Furthermore, knockdown
of AKT in the Pdcd4 knockdown cells inhibited IKK phosphorylation, NF-B
activation, cyclin D1 promoter activity, and cyclin D1 expression as well
as cell proliferation. Taken together, these findings suggest that
activation of NF-B by Pdcd4 knockdown through AKT contributes to the
elevated cyclin D1 expression, thus provide new insights into how loss of
Pdcd4 expression promotes tumor development.

