Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential pharmacodynamic markers for HER3
targeted cancer treatment by a multi-technology approach


The implementation of pharmacodynamic (PD) markers in clinical drug
development is becoming a key element for guiding or defining the optimal
biological dose during Phase 1 dose escalation. In the past the main
focus during Phase 1 was to define the maximum tolerated dose of a novel
drug and the nature of its dose-limiting toxicity (DLT). Nowadays, in the
context of personalized cancer treatment and in particular with
well-tolerated antibody treatments, which often do not show any DLTs, PD
markers are used to monitor drug target inhibition and the modulation of
associated pathways. The correlation of PD effects with pharmacokinetics
(PK) data can therefore guide the dose selection for further clinical
development. Here we describe a hypothesis free approach using three
different technology platforms to identify potential PD markers for HER3
targeted treatment in pre-clinical models. The technology platforms were
selected to enable the evaluation of RNA, miRNA and protein expression in
the respective tumor models. By looking at RNA and protein modulation in
parallel the likelihood of identifying highly regulated signaling
networks might increase significantly. Five different mouse xenograft
models were treated once with 10 mg/kg of a glyco-engineered anti-HER3
antibody and tumors were explanted after 1 h, 24 h and 168 h
post-treatment. In addition, tumors from vehicle-treated control animals
were taken after 1 h and 168 h. Three out of five animal models are known
to respond to anti-HER3 therapy whereas the other two do not respond.
Tumor samples were analyzed for RNA and miRNA expression using Affymetrix
arrays and protein expression by reverse phase array (MD Anderson Cancer
Center). Data sets have been analyzed using biostatistics and
bioinformatics. The focus was to look for global PD effects across
xenograft models which are significantly modulated over time and are not
seen in any vehicle control. In addition, we investigated PD markers
which are dependent on the response status. Overall we saw that,
independent of the technology used, the samples of each individual animal
model cluster together. Based on our filter criteria we identified 19
candidate markers on the reverse phase array, 24 candidate genes within
gene expression profiling and 19 using miRNA profiling, which are
modulated after HER3 targeted treatment. Bioinformatics analysis revealed
that some selected molecules are located downstream of HER3 thus
suggesting a potential relevance within the HER3 signaling network and
specifically RAS activity was altered due to anti-HER3 targeted
treatment. Our goal was to compare PD signatures derived from RNA, miRNA
and protein array analysis to comprehensively map molecular changes after
targeted treatment. Nevertheless, it needs to be demonstrated that the
molecular changes, which have been identified in our pre-clinical models,
can be translated to clinics.

