Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAXgene Tissue: A new tissue fixation technology for simultaneous
preservation of morphology and nucleic acids


Introduction: PAXgene Tissue (PAXgene) is a new, formalin-free fixation
technology developed for simultaneous preservation of morphology and
biomolecules in tissue samples. PAXgene fixed, paraffin embedded (PFPE)
tissue is suitable for conventional histochemical and immunohistochemical
staining as well as for extraction of high quality nucleic acids.
Material and Methods: Cases of human lung, breast and colorectal cancer
were divided and fixed in formalin, PAXgene, or snap frozen in liquid
nitrogen (LN2). PAXgene fixed, stabilized specimens were stored for up to
four days at room temperature prior to processing. Formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded (FFPE) and PFPE tissue morphologies were compared using
H&E stain. RNA, miRNA and DNA were isolated from FFPE, PFPE and LN2
tissue. RNA expression was analyzed in 96-well RT-qPCR arrays with
pre-designed assays, and miRNA expression profiling was performed with
single Sybr-green or primer/probe based assays. DNA was analyzed by
agarose gel electrophoresis, long-range, and multiplex PCR. Results:
Morphology of PFPE samples was similar to or indistinguishable from FFPE
tissue. A high correlation of both RNA and miRNA gene expression results
was observed between PFPE and LN2 samples. For all PCR assays, Ct values
were within +/ 2 Ct. In contrast, poor correlation was observed between
RNA from FFPE compared to RNA from LN2 with differences of up to 10 Cts.
Correlation of FFPE to LN2 was higher in the case of miRNA but was still
not as high as that of miRNA from PFPE. High molecular weight DNA which
performed well in PCR could be isolated from LN2 and PFPE tissue, but DNA
from FFPE failed in long-range PCR and showed biased or no amplification
in multiplexed PCR. Conclusion: The PAXgene Tissue fixation technology
preserves morphology and nucleic acids in tissue samples. It enables
morphological and multimodal research biomarker testing with one sample.
PAXgene Tissue is for research use only. It is not intended for
diagnostic use.

