Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor signaling in ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (OC) is a rapidly progressive, highly lethal
disease. It is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death among
women. Over the last decades, there has been only modest improvement in
the treatment of OC. Nevertheless, recent clinical trials with inhibitors
of transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases such as fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) receptors (FGFRs) yielded some promising results in OC.
FGFRs are involved in malignant transformation, angiogenesis and
chemoresistance. Inhibition of FGFR-dependent signaling can overcome
resistance to standard therapies. Thus, FGFRs represent potential targets
for cancer therapy. Unfortunately, however, the biological and
therapeutic relevance of the FGF-FGFR system has not been elucidated yet
in OC. The aim of this study was to characterize the FGF-FGFR system, its
influence on malignancy-related cell properties and its potential role as
a druggable signaling pathway in OC cells. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis revealed that
expression of FGFs and FGFRs, leading to autocrine signaling loops with a
strong mitogenic potential, is a common event in OC. Immunoblotting
proved that the FGF signaling system is functionally active in these
cells. Conditioned growth medium was able to induce phosphorylation of
ERK1/2. Moreover, recombinant FGF-2 significantly elevated the growth
rate in approximately 50% of the OC cell lines as demonstrated by
formazan dye assay, whereas FGF-1 markedly induced migration in 66% of
the cell lines. The dependency of OC cells on FGFR signaling was further
evaluated by growth inhibition assays using the two small molecular FGFR
inhibitors PD173074 and dovitinib (TKI-258, CHIR-258). A-2780 cells were
found to be extremely sensitive to FGFR inhibition, while HEY and SKOV-3
cells showed moderate sensitivity. In contrast, OVCAR-3 cells were not
inhibited by these compounds. Together, our data suggest that FGFR
inhibitors reveal anticancer activity in a significant proportion of OC
cells even as single drugs. Thus, combination of conventional cytotoxic
intervention with blockade of the FGF-FGFR system might represent a
promising future strategy for the treatment of OC.

