Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 promotes intestinal tumor growth via DNA
methylation


Both chronic inflammation and DNA methylation have been implicated as
early events during colorectal cancer (CRC) carcinogenesis. The use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces the risk for
colorectal cancer (CRC) by 40-50%. NSAIDs exert some of their
anti-inflammatory or anti-tumor effects by inhibiting
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase (PTGS) 1 and 2. PTGS2-derived
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is a pro-inflammatory mediator and promotes tumor
progression. Promoter DNA methylation may promote tumor growth through
silencing tumor suppressor or DNA repair genes. Whether chronic
inflammation, specifically in this study the pro-inflammatory factor
PGE2, plays a role in DNA methylation and contributes to CRC
carcinogenesis is unknown. Here we demonstrated that PGE2 upregulated DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 and 3B, which resulted to increased DNA
methylation in the promoters of target genes O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT), cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1), CDKN2B, and MutL
homolog 1 (MLH1) in CRC cell lines. Meanwhile, the expression of MGMT,
CNR1, CDKN2B, and MLH1 were decreased. EP4 antagonist blocked the
upregulation of DNMT1 and DNMT3B while knockdown of DNMT1 or DNMT3B
attenuated the dwonregulation of MGMT, CNR1, CDKN2B, and MLH1 by PGE2 in
LS-174T cells. In ApcMin/+ mice, PGE2 treatment also increased the
expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3B and the DNA methylation of MGMT, CNR1,
CDKN2B, and MLH1 promoters, and reduced their expression. All these
alterations were accompanied by increases in both polyp number and size
in the intestines of ApcMin/+ mice. More intriguingly, a demethylating
agent 5-Aza-dC blocked the PGE2-induced DNA methylation and tumor growth
in ApcMin/+ mice. And a combination treatment with a selective PTGS2
inhibitor celecoxib and 5-Aza-dC more effectively reduced the polyp
number and size in ApcMin/+ mice in comparison with either single agent.
Furthermore, the levels of PTGS2 and PGE2 correlated with the expression
of DNMT1 and DNMT3B; The DNA methylation of MGMT, CNR1, and MLH1
correlated with the levels of PTGS2, PGE2, DNMT1, and DNMT3B in human
colorectal carcinomas. These results suggest that PGE2 can silence tumor
suppressor or DNA repair genes via DNA methylation to promote CRC
carcinogenesis.

