Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Psychological stress inhibits, while GABA potentiates, the
prevention of pancreatic cancer progression in xenografts by celecoxib


Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis and is associated with high levels
of psychological distress. We have earlier shown that beta-adrenergic
receptors, which are activated by stress neurotransmitters, regulate
pancreatic cancer cells via cAMP-dependent signaling in vitro and that
psychological distress promotes pancreatic cancer growth in vivo. The
observation that psychological distress acts as an ancillary factor in
growth promotion of pancreatic cancer have implications for cancer
prevention strategies where stress initiated growth stimulus may retard
the efficacy of cancer preventive regimens. Therefore this study tested
the hypothesis that psychological stress inhibits the cancer preventive
effects of celecoxib on pancreatic cancer progression whereas
-aminobutyric acid (GABA) which neutralizes the stress neurotransmitter
stimulated cAMP signaling may potentiate the chemopreventive outcome of
anti-cancer drugs. The effects of psychological distress in the absence
and presence of treatment (with COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib alone /
celecoxib with GABA co-adminstration) was tested in mice carrying
xenograft from human pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC-3. Neuroendocrine
responses (noradrenaline, adrenaline, cortisol & GABA), cancer
stimulating factors (VEGF & prostaglandin PGE2) and levels of cAMP were
measured by immunoassays in serum and xenograft tissue. Phosphorylation
of nicotinic receptors (4 and 7), beta-adrenergic receptors, celecoxib
targets (COX-2 & 5-lipoxygenase) and signaling proteins downstream of
-ARs were determined by semi-quantitative Western blots. The results show
a significant inhibition of cancer preventive effects of celecoxib by
psychological stress. By contrast, GABA significantly potentiated the
preventive effects of celecoxib in this tumor model. The effector
molecules of stress signaling via the cAMP pathway were downregulated by
GABA and celecoxib additionally inhibited COX-2 and 5-lipoxygenase lead
to significant inhibition of tumor growth in our xenografts model. Our
findings identify the interruption of stress-induced c-AMP-dependent
neuroendocrine stimulation as central regulator of pancreatic cancer that
negatively impacts cancer prevention. In addition, our data identify the
anti-stress GABA signaling as an effective adjuvant to standard
interventions which in turn shows induce in the COX-2 phosphorylation and
increase PGE2 level in the social stress groups which are inhibited by
GABA or celecoxib or combination treatment. Better understanding in the
above areas may help to develop new therapeutic for pancreatic cancer
development. Grant Support: RC1CA144640 and R01CA042829 with the National
Cancer Institute.

