Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosporylation of eIF4E confer resistance to cellular stress


Eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4E mediates eIF4F association with the
mRNA 5 cap structure and is an essential factor for canonical protein
translation. eIF4E can act as an oncogene when overexpressed in cell
lines and high levels of eIF4E and phosporylated peIF4E have been
described in a large number of human tumors. eIF4E has also been
described as a component of cytoplasmic stress granules and processing
bodies. Importantly, non-phosphorylated 4E-BP1 (often in response to
stress) binds eIF4E to suppress protein translation. We demonstrated
previously that high levels of peIF4E were associated with resistance to
this suppressor effect in carcinoma cell lines. Because the role of
peIF4E is not yet well established, we evaluated the role of eIF4E
phosphorylation on in vitro stress resistance. Breast carcinoma cell
lines (MDA-MB 231, MBA- MB 468 and HeLa cells) and an immortalized human
keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT) were infected with retrovirus expressing
wild type, hyperphosporylated (S209D) or hypophosporylated (S209D)
mutants of eIF4E. Cells were subjected to different types of stress
including oxidative (Arsenite), nutrient starving and cisplatin
treatment. Immediate and long term response to stress was evaluated using
colony formation, MTT cell proliferation assays, co-inmunoprecipitation
and immunofluorescence microscopy. A significantly greater recovery after
all forms of stress was observed in all the cell lines expressing
hyperphosporylated eIF4E-S209D. After treatment with arsenite there was
an increase of peIF4E, 4E-T and Hur and importantly higher increase of
levels of Hur, CyclinD1, Mcl-1 and eIF4G in eIF4E-S209D expressing cells.
Under normal condition we observed a unique colocalitzation of 4E-T and
eIF4E-S209D in cytoplasmic bodies. This complex colocalize with Ago2 but
not with markers of the stress granules (TIA-1) and processing bodies
(DCP1A). By co-immunopreciptation, we observed that peIF4E binds to its
carrier protein 4E-T, Ago2 and Hur. Conclusions: Phosphorylated eIF4E
confer resistance to several stress conditions, including oxidative
stress, DNA damage and nutrient deprivation. The fact that there was a
relevant and significant increase of proteins such as Cyclin D1, Mcl-1
and Hur suggests that phosporylated eIF4E has an important role in
selectively stimulating RNA translation under stress conditions, possibly
via the formation of a unique type of 4E-T/peIF4E cytoplasmic bodies.

