Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post translationally modified EVI1 regulates Np63 to delay cell
cycle progression and cell proliferation via the cyclin dependent kinase
p21


Several lines of evidence suggest that specific transcriptional events
are involved in cell cycle, proliferation and differentiation processes;
however, their deregulation by proto-oncogenes are involved in the
development of leukemia and tumors. One such proto-oncogene is Ecotropic
Viral Integration site I (EVI1) which can differentially effect cell
cycle progression and proliferation in cell types of different origin.
The proto-oncogene EVI1 which localizes in chromosome 3 (3q26.2) is
attracting considerable attention in the recent years because of its
reported involvement in late stage chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), high
risk myelodysplastic syndrome (both MDS and MDS-AML) and also in de-novo
acute myeloid leukemias (AML). Studies also indicate that EVI1 is
overexpressed in a subset of human colon cancers, ovarian cancers and
that EVI1 might induce disease progression and/or sensitivity to
chemotherapy. In this report we provide evidence of a pathway through
which EVI1 inhibits cell cycle progression and cell proliferation in
HT-29 colon carcinoma cells which was reported earlier to express high
levels of the proto-oncogene EVI1. Our bio-informatics analysis and
quantified chromatin immunoprecipitation data shows that EVI1 very
strongly binds to Np63 promoter element. Deletion mutant analysis
revealed that EVI1 binds to Np63 promoter element through its distal zinc
finger domain. RQ-PCR and luciferase assay revealed that the binding of
EVI1 to Np63 down regulates its expression by 4.5 fold and that down
regulation of Np63 induces the expression of p21 in HT-29 cells which
eventually delay cell cycle progression at G0/G1 phase. Concomitant
knocking down of EVI1 with a specific siRNA or transfecting Np63 in EVI1+
cells significantly rescued this phenotype, indicating the growth defect
induced by Np63 deficiency to be, at least in part, attributable to EVI1
function. We have reported earlier that EVI1 is post-translationally
modified and the modified forms of EVI1 divergently regulate the target
genes. Post-translational modification of proteins is a hallmark of
signal transduction and it allows existing proteins to react rapidly to
extra cellular events cascading to a total cellular response.
Interestingly, here we show that EVI1 is phosphorylated and the
unphosphorylated form of EVI1 failed to regulate Np63 that eventually
showed no change in cell cycle/cell proliferation pattern. Our findings
for the first time identify a possible link between two diverse signal
transduction pathways acting together in response to a
post-translationally modified oncogene that eventually delays cell cycle
progression and inhibits cell proliferation.

