Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: REGN1400, a fully-human ERBB3 antibody, potently inhibits tumor
growth in preclinical models, both as a monotherapy and in combination
with EGFR or HER2 blockers


ERBB3 is a member of the ERBB family of receptor tyrosine kinases, that
includes EGFR and HER2, well-established drivers of tumorigenesis. Recent
preclinical studies indicate that both EGFR and HER2 cooperate with ERBB3
to activate the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt survival pathway and to
promote tumor cell survival. Furthermore, ERBB3 activation has been
demonstrated to mediate resistance to EGFR inhibitors in non-small cell
lung cancer cell lines and to HER2 inhibitors in breast cancer cell
lines. Consistent with these findings, anti-ERBB3 monoclonal antibodies
have been shown to inhibit the growth of human tumor xenografts,
demonstrating the importance of ERBB3 for tumor growth in vivo. REGN1400
is a fully-human anti-ERBB3 monoclonal antibody that binds human ERBB3
with high affinity (KD 50pM) and potently inhibits binding of the ERBB3
ligand neuregulin 1 (IC50 30pM). REGN1400 inhibited phosphorylation of
ERBB3 and Akt in multiple human tumor cell lines in vitro, including A431
(epidermoid carcinoma), MDA-MB-175-VII (breast cancer) and FaDu (head and
neck cancer). In addition, REGN1400 strongly inhibited the growth of
these cell lines in vitro. Consistent with its potent effects on tumor
cell growth in vitro, REGN1400 strongly inhibited the growth of A431 and
FaDu tumor xenografts in a dose-dependent manner, providing 70% and 97%
tumor growth inhibition, respectively. Inhibition of FaDu tumor growth by
REGN1400 was accompanied by a significant decrease in tumor ERBB3
phosphorylation, as assessed by both western blot and
immunohistochemistry, confirming target inhibition in vivo. While
treatment of FaDu tumors with single agent REGN1400 provided almost
complete tumor growth inhibition, but not regression, the combination of
REGN1400 plus anti-EGFR antibody caused significant tumor regression.
Furthermore, combination treatment with REGN1400 plus the anti-HER2
antibody trastuzumab inhibited the growth of BT474 breast tumor
xenografts more potently than either single agent. These findings
indicate that ERBB3-directed therapies might be more effective when
combined with agents that inhibit other ERBB family members. Finally,
gene profiling studies in REGN1400-treated tumor cells revealed
upregulation of several genes that could promote resistance to REGN1400,
e.g., ERBB3 itself and ERBB4. Further analysis of tumor gene expression
changes induced by REGN1400 could provide insight into potentially useful
combination regimens. In summary, REGN1400, a novel anti-ERBB3 antibody,
exhibits significant antitumor activity in preclinical models, suggesting
the possibility that it could provide benefit to patients with multiple
types of cancer, either as a single agent or when combined with therapies
targeting other ERBB family members.

