Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of pro-inflammatory signaling pathways by aging
T-lymphocytes contributes to a more malignant phenotype in prostate
epithelial cells


Prostate cancer risk is determined largely by age. While some studies
have suggested that the slow growing rate of prostate cancer is
responsible for the link between aging and prostate cancer, the role of
aging T-cells in prostate cancer development remains largely unknown. The
objective of this study is to determine how age-related changes in
T-lymphocyte function contribute to prostate tumorigenesis. We
hypothesized that age related changes in T-lymphocyte function, to a
pro-inflammatory phenotype may promote prostate cancer development. For
our studies we used the GPAT-1 KO mice model. The GPAT-1 KO mice have
T-lymphocytes that mimic aged T-cells. Preliminary data shows that, in
agreement with what has been seen in human aged T-cells, aging-mimic
GPAT-1 KO T-lymphocytes generate more pro-inflammatory cytokines than
T-lymphocytes from age matched wild-type mice. These cytokines turn on
inflammatory pathways that stimulate proliferation, tissue disruption and
tumor growth. A cytokine array was used to detect the relative protein
levels of 40 different cytokines and chemokines in the sera from either
young GPAT-1 knockout (KO), young wild-type (WT) or old mice (22 months).
We observed a shift to a more pro-inflammatory cytokine profile in the
GPAT-1 KO and old mice. Many of the same cytokines that were elevated in
the sera from the old and GPAT-1 KO mice, such as IL-17 and IL-6, are
also implicated in promoting prostate tumorigenesis primarily through
induction of other inflammatory cytokines and transcription factors such
as, NF-kB and STAT3. The objective of this study was to determine if the
increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the sera from the
GPAT-1 KO mice correlates to a more malignant phenotype in prostate
epithelial cells. Malignancy in epithelial cells was assessed by the
following phenotypical changes: Immortalization, anchorage independence,
proliferation and invasiveness. Exposure to sera from the GPAT-1 KO mice
promoted phenotypical changes in epithelial cells that are indicative of
early tumorigenesis. Taken together our data suggests that
pro-inflammatory cytokines in the sera from mice with aging T-lymphocytes
may turn on pro-inflammatory pathways that contribute to a more malignant
phenotype in prostate epithelial cells. This is the first study to use
the GPAT-1 KO mice model to explore the relationship between aging
T-lymphocytes, inflammation and prostate tumorigenesis.

