Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine growth regulation by PEDF is mediated by ovarian steroid
hormones: Implications in the pathogenesis of endometrial carcinoma


The angiogenic inhibitor and neurotrophic factor, pigment
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) was first shown in the eye and is now
shown to be expressed in a number of tissues and to function in apoptosis
and growth inhibition. The importance of PEDF in growth regulation of the
endometrium is reflected in PEDF null mice, which develop endometrial
hyperplasia. Therefore, we hypothesized that PEDF is decreased in human
endometrial carcinoma with loss of growth inhibition. We show by
immunostaining (n=44) that PEDF expression is decreased in both stromal
and epithelial cells in atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), the
precursor to type I endometrial carcinoma (ECA; 80% of all ECAs) and ECA.
Whereas PEDF is highly expressed by primary endometrial epithelial cells
(EECs) and stromal cells, ECA cells synthesize less protein and stromal
cells isolated from malignant endometrium (cancer associated fibroblasts;
CAFs) synthesize 80% less PEDF mRNA (n=35) by quantitative real time PCR
and less PEDF protein. In addition, whereas exogenous recombinant PEDF
inhibits proliferation of ECA cell lines (e.g. HEC-1B by 40%; peak
response at 4nM), PEDF antibodies and PEDF siRNA stimulate proliferation
suggesting PEDF inhibits cell proliferation in an autocrine manner in the
endometrium. Estrogen (E2) stimulates and progesterone (Pg) inhibits
proliferation of the endometrium in a cyclical manner. Due to these
hormonal growth regulatory effects, E2 induces AEH and Type I ECA and Pg
is a successful therapeutic agent for these diseases. Therefore, we
further hypothesized that E2 decreases PEDF causing dysreglated growth
and conversely, that Pg might inhibit growth by increasing PEDF. Indeed,
we show that treatment of the ECA cell lines, HEC-1A, HEC-1B, KLE and
primary EECs with E2 decreased PEDF mRNA and protein expression, which
was blocked by the estrogen receptor (ER) antagonist, ICI 182,780. In
direct contrast, Pg increased PEDF mRNA and protein, which was blocked by
the antagonist, RU486. It is notable that the PEDF promoter contains two
putative PREs and one ERE thereby justifying these responses. Taken
together, our data implicate PEDF as an autocrine hormone-regulated
inhibitor of endometrial growth and suggest that the E2-driven decrease
in PEDF leads to dysregulated endometrial growth as an important
molecular target in the pathogenesis of type I ECA.

