Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET receptor as a key player responsible for malignant properties
and intracellular trafficking and fate of CXCR4 in cervical carcinoma
cells


Introduction Cervical carcinoma (CC) is one of the major causes of death
among women suffering from tumor especially in low and middle income
countries. MET activation is crucial in epithelial EMT, cell motility and
invasiveness under both normal and pathological conditions. Another
family of receptors that play a critical role in tumor initiation,
promotion and progression are chemokine receptors. One of the best
studied is a seven - span transmembrane G - protein coupled receptor,
CXCR4. CXCR4 promotes metastasis of tumor cells and its blockade inhibits
tumor growth. Recently we have shown that HGF/MET axis synergizes with
SDF-1/CXCR4 axis in stimulating CC cell chemotaxis and activation of
various intracellular pathways. Aim The aim of the study was to evaluate
the influence of MET receptor downregulation on cervical carcinoma cells.
Materials and methods HTB-35 CC cell line was transduced with MET and
LacZ shRNA expressing virus. Morphometry was performed with Nomarski
interference contrast optics and MIGRA software. F-actin organization was
evaluated using falloidin staining. The level of various genes expression
was estimated by real-time RT-PCR Cells were transfected by EGFP-CXCR4
plasmid using lipofectamine and intracellular trafficking of CXCR4 was
studied by immunofluorescence staining with confocal microscopy. Results
MET receptor downregulation changes the morphology of HTB35 shMET cell
line. Cells became smaller than wild type and shLacZ cells. Moreover,
F-actin was located under cells membrane and it did not form regular
stress fibers as they were observed in control cells. Downregulation of
MET receptor influences changes in gene expression responsible for
invasive phenotype and EMT. We have observed downregulation of CXCR4 and
Slug and upregulation of E-cadherin. In trafficking studies we have
observed different localization and polarization of CXCR4 receptor. In
MET deficient cells CXCR4 was partially located in Golgi but it did not
colocalize with AP1 and Sec-8 protein in exocytosis process. We have not
observed recycling back of the CXCR4 receptor with AP2 staining in MET
deficient HTB-35 cells. Conclusions The downregulation of MET receptor
expression is responsible for a change in the expression of genes
correlated with malignant phenotype and involved in EMT of CC cells. The
downregulation of MET expression is responsible for more epithelial
phenotype of HTB-35 cells. MET receptor downregulation influences
intracellular trafficking of CXCR4 what might have a significant clinical
implication for the treatment of tumor cells. Acknowledgement This study
was supported by research grant from the Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education NN 401142339, NN 401054839, NN 401010036, grant from
Jagiellonian University Collegium Medicum: K/ZDS/002279 and EMBO short
term fellowship ASTF 97-2010

