Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective evaluation of the BRCA1 - PARP pathway in breast
cancer tissues


Purpose: Poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and BRCA1
plays a key role in DNA repair and cellular stress response. Inhibitors
of PARP show promising clinical activity in metastatic, triple-negative
or BRCA-mutated breast cancer. However, a comprehensive analysis of the
PARP activity / BRCA1 methylation profile in non-BRCA1 mutated tumors has
not yet been assessed. Methods: We investigated cytosolic PARP activity
and BRCA1 methylation profile in 155 surgical tumour samples from
patients treated in our institution between January 2006 and November
2009 and evaluated their statistical association with classical breast
cancer predictive and prognostic factors. DNA methylation patterns in the
CpG islands of BRCA1 gene promoter were determined by a methylation
specific PCR distinguishing unmethylated from methylated alleles in a
given gene on the basis of sequence changes produced following bisulfite
treatment of DNA. Cytosolic PARP activity was evaluated using a
commercially available assay kit. Results: A total of 155 BC patients (50
HER-2 positive, 57 hormone receptors positive (HR+) / HER-2 negative and
48 triple negative tumors) were considered eligible for this study.
Median age was 54 years (range 29-75 years). Only one tumor was
classified as SBR score I and SBR Tubule formation score 1. No tumor was
SBR Nuclear pleomorphism score 1. Considering these results, SBR scores I
and II and SBR Tubule formation scores 1 and 2 were grouped for
statistical analyses. Mean PARP activity (U/mg of cytosolic protein) was
12.2 (standard deviation 17.02), with a median of 7.0 (range 1.0 to
114.2). The only clearly associated parameter was SBR Mitotic count
score. Bisulfite treatment was successfully performed for the whole 155
specimen. Eighteen tumors presented an hypermethylation of the BRCA1 gene
promoter. The hypermethylation status was significantly associated with
UPA and PAI-1 levels, SBR grade, SBR Mitotic count score, ER, PR and
HER-2 negative status, and then conversely triple negative (ER, PR and
HER-2 negative) profile. Twenty nine percent of the triple negative
tumors presented and hypermethylated status, comparing to 5 and 2% for
HR+/HER-2- and HER-2+ tumors respectively. No statistical association was
found between a hypermethylation status and the PARP cytosolic activity.
Conclusion: Cytosolic PARP activity is equally represented in TN, HER2+
and SBR II and III HR+ breast cancers. The only parameter clearly
associated with the cytosolic PARP activity was the SBR Mitotic count
score. In contrast, hypermethylation of the BRCA1 gene promoter appears
restricted to a subgroup of TN tumors expressing an aggressive phenotype.
No statistical association was found between a hypermethylation status
and the PARP cytosolic activity. These results could allow a more
accurate stratification of patients without BRCA1 famillial mutation in
the future PARP inhibitors clinical trials.

