Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) DNA recovery for
high-throughput genotyping of lung cancer tissues


Tumor biomarker evaluation, such as EGFR or KRAS mutation status, is a
main factor in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) treatment decisions.
For most NSCLC patients, tumor-specific biomarkers have not been
identified for effective therapy. This has been due in part to
difficulties obtaining the DNA quantity and quality from archival FFPE
clinical specimens necessary for high-throughput (HT) mutation analysis.
Activating mutations and copy number variation (CNV) analysis of key lung
cancer-related oncogenes in NSCLC FFPE tissues will allow for
identification of subsets of patients with oncogenotypes of which
treatment can be personalized. Thus, development of improved DNA recovery
methods from FFPE tissues is imperative. The goal of this study was to
improve DNA recovery from archival specimens for analyses by HT
genotyping technologies. DNA was extracted/isolated from 2 normal human
epithelial bronchial/4 NSCLC cell lines and 389 resected FFPE NSCLC
tissues using improved SPRI-TE/DNA cleanup and compared to standard
method (SM). Detailed tissue characteristics [whole tissue (WT), manual
microdissected (MMD), artificial core needle biopsy (aCNB)], thickness
(10 or 5 m), tumor area (cm2), % tumor cells, and % fibrotic/necrotic
tissue was recorded. DNA recovery quantity, quality and amplification
were assessed. HT genotyping methodologies for analysis of FFPE DNA
included 1) aCGH/qPCR for CNV, 2) DNA amplification for sequencing, and
3) Sanger, pyrosequencing, and MALDI-TOF MS SNP analysis for KRAS
mutation status. Data were analyzed by unpaired t-test with Welch's
correction, one-way ANOVA, and linear regression model for multivariable
analyses. Statistical significance was defined as p0.05. DNA recovery
using improved SPRI-TE/DNA cleanup was 5X higher than SM. DNA recovery
was significantly higher (p0.05) from: a) 2 x 10 m sections WT vs. MMD or
aCNBs, b) tissue area >1 cm2, and c) decreasing % fibrosis. aCGH was
successfully performed using DNA from FFPE NSCLC primary tumors (PT) and
brain metastases (BM), identified multiple chromosomal regions with
significant CNV. BM demonstrated significantly higher frequency of CN
gains than PT in 3 chromosomal regions: 8q24.3 (100% vs. 40%), 19q13.33
(90% vs. 20%), and 20q13.12 (60% vs. 0%). DNA amplification (WGA vs.
matched non-WGA) was evaluated for sequencing and resulted in correct
mutation calls (p0.05). KRAS mutation analysis by 3 methods resulted in
100% identical mutation calls. Using our improved SPRI-TE/DNA cleanup,
recovery of quantities and qualities of DNA from FFPE NSCLC tissues for
precise HT genotyping analysis was achieved. Best predictor of optimal
DNA quantity recovery is tumor area >1 cm2. FFPE NSCLC tissue DNA is
suitable for use in HT genotyping assays and discovery of
oncogene-specific genotypes which could be applied to personalized
medicine. This work was supported by The V Foundation.

