Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of Ang-2 and VEGF via a novel human bispecific
bivalent IgG1 CrossMAb shows potent anti-angiogenic, antitumoral, and
antimetastatic efficacy and leads to a reduced side effect profile
compared to single therapies


VEGF-A blockade has been extensively clinically validated as a treatment
for human cancers. Angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) expression has been shown to
function as a key regulator of blood vessel remodeling, tumor
angiogenesis, and metastasis. In tumors, Ang-2 is up-regulated and
associated with poor prognosis. Recent data demonstrated that Ang-2
inhibitors, both as single agents or in combination with chemo- or
anti-VEGF therapy, mediate anti-tumor effects. Additionally, it has been
shown that the Ang-2/-1/Tie and the VEGF/VEGFR systems act in
complementary ways suggesting that dual targeting may be more effective
than targeting each pathway alone. Based on bevacizumab and the Ang-2
selective antibody LC06 we have generated a novel human bispecific
bivalent IgG1 CrossMab antibody blocking VEGF-A and Ang-2 function
simultaneously. Here we show in multiple subcutaneous and orthotopic in
vivo models including models (semi-) resistant to anti-VEGF treatment
that the systemic application of the Ang-2-VEGF CrossMAb effectively
reduces angiogenesis, tumor growth and metastasis. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that a highly selective anti-Ang-2 approach has safety
related advantages in this model over an unselective treatment with an
antibody targeting Ang-1 and Ang-2 simultaneously. Whereas
anti-Ang-1/Ang-2 long-term treatment resulted in regression of healthy
vessels in the mouse trachea, an anti-Ang-2 selective treatment did not
affect the physiological vessels in the trachea of the mice at all. These
results imply a clear differentiation between selective Ang-2 and
unselective Ang-1/Ang-2 inhibition. Although anti-tumoral efficacy is
retained selective Ang-2 inhibition did not lead to a further impairment
of healthy vessels compared to anti-VEGF-A treatment only. Finally, we
demonstrate a clear disadvantage of Ang-2 monotherapy compared to
Ang-2-VEGF dual inhibition due to strong up-regulation of VEGF resulting
not only in revascularization and tumor growth, but also in toxicity with
macroscopic evidence of histopathological subcapsular peliosis-like
changes in the liver. These pathological effects were inhibited by dual
inhibition of Ang-2 and VEGF-A. Taken together, our data indicate that
Ang-2 and VEGF-A exhibit angiogenic synergy in a mutually compensatory
fashion and that their inhibition via the novel Ang-2-VEGF CrossMab
mediates potent anti-tumoral, anti-metastatic and anti-angiogenic
efficacy. Additionally the CrossMAb is expected to exhibtit a better side
effect profile compared to the respective monotherapies and thereby
represents a promising therapeutic agent for the therapy of cancer. These
data support the investigation of the Ang-2-VEGF CrossMAb in PhI clinical
trials scheduled for 2012.

