Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDC28 protein kinase subunit 1B (CKS1B) is a potential therapeutic
target in esophageal adenocarcinomas overexpressing the CDK inhibitor
p21Cip1/Waf1


Background: The incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and
gastroesophageal junction (EAC) has grown faster than any tumor type in
the United States and westernized countries, outpacing the next closest
cancer by almost 3 times. This rising incidence of EAC is associated with
the increasing prevalence of obesity and gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD). Due to the limited effect of current chemotherapy for this
cancer, the search for new therapeutic targets is disparately needed.
Chromosomal amplification is one mechanism by which cancer cells acquire
and maintain neoplastic phenotype and genes that are amplified and
overexpressed may represent potential therapeutic targets. Methods: DNA
and RNA from a cohort of 116 patients were analyzed using SNP and mRNA
expression microarrays respectively. Gene amplification was explored for
correlation with expression and patient survival. Results: 25% of tumors
harbor amplification at chromosome 1q which is significantly associated
with poor survival. Although the amplicon is non-focal spanning almost
the entire arm of chromosome 1q, only a subset of amplified genes
(including The CDC28 protein kinase subunit 1B, CKS1B) are significantly
overexpressed. CKS1B is an auxiliary protein required for ubiquitination
and cytosomal degradation of the CDK inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1/Waf1
by the SCFSKP2 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Both p27Kip1 and p21Cip1/Waf1
inhibits CDK2/Cyclin E complex during the G1/S cell cycle transition. The
endogenous protein expression of p27Kip1 is low among EAC cell lines.
However the expression of p21Cip1/Waf1 is differential being very high in
a subset of cells and low or undetectable in others. Knocking down CKS1B
by siRNA in six EAC cell lines results in accumulation of p27 Kip1 with
little or no effect on p21Cip1/Waf1 expression. CKS1B knockdown inhibits
monolayer cell proliferation only in cells with high endogenous
expression of p21Cip1/Waf1. Conclusion: We suggest that the combined
action of accumulation of p27 Kip1 and the endogenously highly expressed
p21Cip1/Waf1 triggers the response to CKS1B knockdown in EAC cell lines.
We thus propose the potential use of CKS1B as a novel therapeutic target
in esophageal adenocarcinomas with high p21Cip1/Waf1 expression.

