Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Persistence of drug-induced DNA interstrand cross-links
distinguishes bendamustine from conventional DNA cross-linking agents


Bendamustine has demonstrated substantial clinical efficacy in the
treatment of hematologic malignancies and continues to distinguish itself
from other alkylating agents. The mechanistic and clinical differences
associated with bendamustine may be directly related to its unique
structural features, although the precise mechanism of action is still
poorly understood. We have undertaken a detailed study of the drug-DNA
interactions of bendamustine. It alkylates DNA primarily at guanine-N7
positions with a sequence selectivity similar to other nitrogen mustards.
It produces DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs) in both solid tumor and
hematological tumor cells at doses that cause growth inhibition. ICLs
peak at 8h following a 1h treatment and persist over 48h in tumor cells
including those that are proficient at repairing (unhooking) ICLs formed
by melphalan or cisplatin. This persistence of ICLs is also observed in
multiple myeloma cells from patients who have relapsed on melphalan
therapy and which efficiently repair melphalan-induced ICLs compared to
cells from treatment naive patients. The peak -H2AX response follows the
ICL peak and also persists beyond 48h. Cells defective in ICL unhooking
proteins ERCC1 and XPF, or defective in homologous recombination repair,
show increased sensitivity to bendamustine, but at a level less than
observed for other nitrogen mustards or cisplatin. Real time PCR
profiling showed that at equivalent peak levels of DNA ICLs bendamustine
induced fewer changes in DNA damage signaling and DNA repair gene
expression compared to either cisplatin or melphalan. These data suggest
that the critical DNA damage produced by bendamustine induces a different
signaling and repair response to conventional cross-linking agents,
including other nitrogen mustards, which may be an important contribution
to its clinical efficacy.

