Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair biochip-based screening to identify Glycosylase/AP
endonuclease inhibitors: from the concept to the identification of
effective molecules


Base Excision Repair (BER) is the predominant repair pathway responsible
for removal of small base/sugar lesions. Three BER activities are
predominant in cells: correction of AP sites by APE1, removal of uracil
(U) by uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) and removal of thymine glycols (Tg)
by human Endonuclease III homolog (NTH1) or by NEIL1. Despite the
tremendous progress accomplished these last years, a lot of uncertainties
remain regarding the involvement of other redundant activities able to
act as a backup system for repair of these latter lesions. Many studies
link chemoresistance and overexpression of DNA repair enzymes. Enzymes
from BER pathways are attractive targets for anticancer drug development
since therapeutic modulation of repair proteins could potentiate effects
of genotoxic drugs. Identification of effective BER inhibitors is thus an
emerging promising approach. Here, we used a multiplexed fluorescent
oligonucleotide (ODN) cleavage assay on support to the screen of a small
compound (SM) library, using HeLa extracts containing the various DNA
repair components. Five fluorescent ODN duplexes containing
tetrahydrofuran (AP site), U (paired either with A or with G), Tg and
normal base pairs were addressed at specific sites on coated slides in a
96-well plate array format adapted for robotic handling. After (1)
automated screening of a chemical library of small molecules at 200M, and
(2) establishment of dose/response inhibition curves using the cell
extracts and 10 selected compounds, we eventually retained 4 molecules
possessing different repair inhibition spectra. Using the same assay, we
then performed inhibitory studies in the presence of different pure human
BER enzymes in order to identify the putative inhibitors targets.
Interesting inhibitory properties were found against Smug1, hAAG, hNEIL1
and hAPE1 (IC50 around 10M). We subsequently characterized the ability of
the 4 SM used at non toxic doses (range 2.5M) to potentiate the
cytoxicity effect of genotoxic drugs using MMR-proficient or MMR
-deficient cell lines. For some effective combinations, the reduction of
BER activities was further confirmed by the in vitro testing of extracts
prepared from the treated cell lines. However as the potentiating
properties were detected even in the presence of drugs known to induce
the formation of bulky adducts, the rationale behind these effects were
complex to establish. These results suggest that our knowledge on
drug-induced lesions and on the intricacy of repair pathways needs to be
refined. In conclusion, we demonstrated that our strategy is a fast and
efficient mean to identify SM able to target specific BER activities. The
identified compounds may be used to potentiate the effect of genotoxic
drugs, but also more widely for chemical genetic strategies, to turn off
specific functions in order to dissect and elucidate the DNA repair
mechanisms.

