Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nbk/Bik induced by flavopiridol switches GX15-070-induced
autophagy to apoptosis in human multiple myeloma cells


Combining the BH3 mimetic GX15-070 (GX, Obatoclax) with the CDK inhibitor
flavopiridol (FP, Alvocidib) leads to striking in vitro and in vivo
activity against human multiple myeloma (MM) cells, including those
resistant to conventional or novel agents. Synergism is associated with
both down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins (e.g., Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL)
and induction of BH3-only proteins e.g., Bim and Bik (Bcl-2-interacting
killer). While Mcl-1, Bcl-2, or Bcl-xL over-expression partially
attenuates FP/GX lethality, knock-down of either Bim or Bik almost
completely blocks apoptosis, suggesting a critical role for BH3-only
proteins in this setting. Here, we demonstrate that in contrast to Bim,
which directly triggers apoptosis, Bik promotes apoptosis by regulating
autophagy. Prevention of Bik induction by shRNA failed to block release
of Bak from Mcl-1, arguing against its direct action in apoptosis.
Sub-toxic concentrations (500-750 nM) of GX released beclin 1 from Bcl-2
and induced autophagy (e.g., LC3 conversion and autophagosome formation),
events occurring as early as 6 hr and sustained for 48 hr, but
unaccompanied by marked apoptosis. Confocal microscopy revealed that in
both drug-nave and bortezomib-resistant MM cells, co-exposure to GX/FP
strikingly increased autophagosomes extensively packed in the cytoplasm,
accompanied by robust apoptosis. This phenomenon was associated with
marked Bik up-regulation induced by FP +/ GX. Whereas Bim was
up-regulated and predominantly localized to the mitochondria, Bik was
induced and exclusively localized to the ER after FP/GX treatment.
Autophagy includes initiation, elongation, autophagosome formation, and
maturation to autolysosomes for cargo degradation. Interestingly, Bik
expression occurred subsequent to autophagy induction and was diminished
by beclin 1 or ATG5 shRNA, suggesting that Bik is induced during
autophagy and negatively regulates later stages responsible for cargo
clearance. Notably, whereas Bim shRNA diminished apoptosis but not
autophagy induced by FP/GX, Bik shRNA blocked both processes. Moreover,
beclin 1 or ATG5 shRNA significantly reduced apoptosis induced by FP/GX,
whereas dominant-negative caspase-9 failed to prevent autophagy. Finally,
overexpression of Bcl-xL, but not Bcl-2 or Mcl-1, largely attenuated Bik
expression and autophagy induced by FP/GX. Co-immunoprecipitation showed
that FP/GX-induced Bik bound to Bcl-xL, rather than to Bcl-2 or Mcl-1.
Together, these findings suggest a model where in the presence of FP, Bik
is expressed after autophagy induction by GX, and in turn interrupts
later stages of autophagy, thus interfering with the ability of cells to
remove cargo-loaded autophagosomes. Consequently, autophagosomes
accumulate in cells co-exposed to FP/GX, leading to robust apoptosis.
Thus, in this setting, Bik, acts as a switch that transforms autophagy
into apoptosis.

