Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox2 modulation of cancer stem cell behavior in GBM


Background and Objective: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive
primary brain tumor. GBM cells are phenotypically plastic and can present
cancer stem cell (CSC) properties, such as the ability to self-renew and
differentiate into the cells comprising the bulk of the tumor,
phenocopying the parental tumor in mouse xenografts. GBM CSCs express
neural stem cell (NSC) markers, including Sox2, a HMG-box transcription
factor that regulates the expression of genes associated with
self-renewal and differentiation. Culturing dissociated GBM tumors in
serum-containing medium typically results in loss of the CSC phenotype
and downregulation of Sox2, while serum-free neurosphere medium (NM) is
used for selection and propagation of CSCs. We have previously identified
a GBM specimen (GS1) which, contrary to the norm, retained Sox2
expression in low passage serum culture, along with the ability to
dedifferentiate into neurospheres in vitro, and to form tumors in rodents
(deCarvalho et al., Stem Cells 2010, 28:181-190). Here we investigate the
endogenous expression of Sox2 in GBM biopsies, xenograft tumors, and
cultured cells, and test the hypothesis that Sox2 may be a driver of the
cancer stem cell phenotype in GBMs. Experimental Approaches: Endogenous
expression of Sox2, downstream targets, and cell lineage markers, was
determined by immunohistochemistry. miRNAs targeting Sox2 were stably
expressed in GBM cells. The effect of Sox2 knockdown on clonogenicity,
global gene expression, proliferation in vitro, tumor formation and
morphology was determined. Results: Sox2 expression was heterogeneous
within and among the 26 GBM surgical specimens tested, ranging from 1% to
over 80% positive nuclei. Robust Sox2 expression was observed in over 80%
of 56 GBM orthotopic xenografts analyzed. Sox2 positive cells
co-expressed mesenchymal (vimentin), neural (nestin), and astrocytic
(GFAP) markers. Knocking down Sox2 expression significantly impaired the
ability of GS1 cells to form neurospheres, without affecting cell
proliferation, significantly altered the expression of known target
genes, such as Nestin, and genes in various signaling pathways, and
affected xenograft tumor formation. Sox2 protein levels in GBMs were
further regulated by post-transcriptional mechanisms. Conclusions: Sox2
is part of the signature gene set for the proneural GBM subclass. Our
results show that Sox2 protein expression is ubiquitous in GBM tumors and
xenografts, independent of patient survival or treatment status. Sox2 is
a master regulator of embryonic and neural stem cell phenotype, and our
data contributes to the view that it may have an important role in the
plasticity of GBM cells in acquiring CSC phenotype, with possible
implications for the pathology of GBMs.

