Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consumption of oxygen: a mitochondrial-generated progression
signal of advanced cancer


The majority of mortality from prostate cancer occurs when the disease
progresses to a highly malignant phenotype. Changes in the mitochondrial
genome such as mutation, deletion and depletion are common in cancer and
can determine advanced phenotype of cancer; however, detailed mechanisms
have not been elucidated. We observed that loss of the mitochondrial
genome reversibly induced overexpression and activation of
proto-oncogenic Ras, especially KRas-4A, responsible for the activation
of AKT and ERK leading to advanced phenotype of prostate and breast
cancer. Maturation of Ras, possibly prenylation of Ras, was required for
Ras activation and was induced by the overexpression of 3-
hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGR), the rate-limiting enzyme
of the mevalonate pathway. Hypoxia is known to cause accumulation of
intermediate sterols which induces proteasomal degradation of HMGR.
Well-differentiated and less aggressive prostate and breast cancer cells
with high mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content consumed a large amount of
oxygen and induced intracellular hypoxia. Loss of mitochondrial genome
content reduced oxygen consumption and an increase in oxygen
concentration (hypoxic-to-normoxic shift) in the cells. Inhibition of
oxygen consumption by the reduction of mitochondrial genome content
induced overexpression of HMGR through hypoxic-to-normoxic shift.
Subsequently, the endogenous induction of the mevalonate pathway
activated Ras that mediates advanced phenotype. Reconstitution of the
mitochondrial genome or external hypoxic condition, to reverse the
hypoxic-to-normoxic shift, diminished the endogenous induction of the
mevalonate pathway and the activation of proto-oncogenic Ras. Reduction
of mitochondrial genome content was associated with aggressive phenotype
of prostate cancer in vitro cell line model and tissue specimens from
prostate cancer patients in vivo. Our results elucidate a coherent
mechanism that directly links the changes in mitochondrial genome with
the advanced progression of the disease.

