Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the mTOR/NF-B signaling axis augments prostate cancer
treatment responses through suppression of a microenvironment-derived DNA
damage secretory program


Background/Rationale: Resistance to cytotoxic chemo- and radiotherapy is
a common event in advanced prostate cancers. While resistance is
established as a consequence of cancer cell intrinsic genetic and
epigenetic changes, emerging evidence indicates that therapy failure is
also caused by cell extrinsic factors such as cytokines, growth factors,
proteases and other soluble ligands generated from damaged stromal cells
in the tumor microenvironment (TMEN). We recently reported a unique
feature of stromal cells, namely a DNA damage secretory phenotype (DDSP)
resulting from genotoxic therapeutics. Thus, anti-cancer therapies that
cause DNA damage responses (DDR), unexpectedly, trigger pro-survival
signaling in neoplastic or pre-neoplastic cells and may promote
subsequent therapy resistance. Results: In this study, we show that
molecular inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) through
genetic or chemical approaches suppresses a cellular secretory program
resulting from exposure to genotoxic agents. We identified a physical
association between mTOR and the I-kappa-B kinase (IKK) complex which is
activated by DNA damage stimuli, and found IKK to be the major subunit
that directly interacts with mTOR while assembling the IKK complex.
Rapamycin abrogates IKK phosphorylation, IB degradation and the central
action-p65/p50 nuclear translocation. Thus, IKK catalytic subunits are
not equally implicated in propagating damage signals to NF-B, with IKK
playing the pivotal role. We determined that the mTOR/Raptor complex is
activated by genotoxic stress and promotes NF-B signaling. Suppressing
mTOR dramatically abolished transcriptional levels of NF-B target genes.
We also determined that paracrine-acting DDSP factors are regulated
through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms, as
upregulation of S6K and downregulation of 4E-BP1 play essential and
synergistical roles in synthesis of DDSP factors. Finally, we determined
that mTORC1 is the predominant mediator of the development of the DDSP
phenotype, and it receives signals from upstream kinases. Interestingly,
PI3K is not required for signal transduction of damage responses in
prostate fibroblasts, which occurs through Akt phosphorylation caused by
activated p38 MAPK signaling. Conclusions: These studies establish that
mTOR is a novel target for therapeutic intervention in the mitigation of
resistance mechanisms derived from the tumor microenvironment following
genotoxic cancer treatments. These studies suggest that mTOR inhibitors
may have efficacy in augmenting tumor responses to ionizing radiation
and/or chemotherapy.

