Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The gp130/Stat3 pathway enables Wnt induced regeneration and
tumorigenesis in the mouse intestine


The transcription factor Stat3 is frequently activated in human
intestinal tumors. Using a hyperactive gp130 mutant mouse, gp130Y757F (in
which the Socs3 site of the gp130 receptor is mutated leading to
constitutive activation of Stat3), we have recently demonstrated a key
role for Stat3 during inflammation associated colonic cancer (1).
However, although gp130Y757F mice are predisposed to gastric adenomas due
to hyper Stat3 activation, they do not develop intestinal tumors.
Deregulated Wnt signaling is also a key event in intestinal
tumorigenesis. Mice which are heterozygous for the negative Wnt regulator
Apc (ApcMin/+) develop multiple intestinal neoplasia, and in humans,
constitutive heterozygosity for Apc underlies familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP) syndrome. To investigate a possible interaction between
Stat3 and Wnt signaling in intestinal cancer we generated compound
ApcMin/+ mutant mice to modulate expression and/or activation of Stat3.
Compared to ApcMin/+ or gp130Y757F mice, corresponding gp130Y757F
ApcMin/+ mice have a significantly reduced lifespan associated with an
increase in the number of intestinal tumors. Conversely, when Stat3 is
reduced in ApcMin/+Stat3+/ mice the number of polyps in both the small
and large intestine is significantly reduced. Tumor initiation, but not
tumor growth, is promoted in gp130Y757F ApcMin/+ mice compared to
ApcMin/+ littermates. These results suggest that Stat3 is rate limiting
for Wnt induced intestinal tumourigenesis. In support of this data we
found that the in vitro colony forming potential of human colonic cancer
cells (SW480 cells) was reduced when gp130/Stat3 signaling was inhibited.
Importantly, inhibition of gp130/Stat3 did not reduce the colony forming
potential of SW480 colon cancer cells expressing full-length APC (by
stable transfection of APC), suggesting that Stat3 is only rate limiting
during cellular conditions of high Wnt signaling. We have recently
demonstrated that intestinal regeneration is characterized by high Wnt
signaling and requires an intact Wnt signaling pathway (2). Stat3 is also
rate limiting for intestinal regeneration in vivo and for intestinal
organoid assays in vitro. Together these data provide a novel role for
gp130/Stat3 signaling, which becomes rate limiting in situations of high
Wnt signaling in the intestinal epithelium including regeneration and
tumourigenesis. Mechanistically we find that Stat3 up-regulates Bcl2 (an
apoptosis inhibitor protein) expression and allows cells to evade
apoptosis, providing a survival advantage. Thus, compound gp130Y757F
Bcl2+/ mice have reduced regenerative capacity in vitro and in vivo. (1)
Bollrath and Phesse et al. 2009. Cancer Cell (2) Ashton and Phesse et al.
2010. Dev Cell

