Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-30a inhibits vimentin expression and as a prognostic
marker in breast cancer


Recent studies have suggested a significant role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
the regulation of cancer development. This study examined whether they
play a role in breast cancer progression.A miRNA microarray analysis was
performed on laser-capture microdissected breast tumors of different
lymph-node metastasis status showing different progression signatures,
indicated by overexpression of cyclin D1 and -catenin genes, to identify
specific miRNAs that exhibit significant differences in expression.
Functional interaction between the candidate miRNA (i.e. miR-30a) and the
gene (i.e. Vim gene, coding for vimentin, a protein involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition) possibly regulated by miR-30a was
verified. We further examined whether decreased expression of miR-30a was
associated with breast cancer progression.miR-30a negatively regulated
vimentin expression, by binding to the 3-untranslated region of Vim.
Ectopic expression of miR-30a was found to suppress the migration and
invasiveness phenotypes of breast cancer cell lines. More importantly,
breast cancer patients with decreased miR-30a level in primary cancerous
sites were found to be associated with poor clinical features (late tumor
stage and lymph node metastasis) and worse progression, demonstrating an
increased hazard ratio (HR) for recurrence or recurrence plus mortality
during the follow-up period (PRecent studies have suggested a significant
role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the regulation of cancer development. This
study examined whether they play a role in breast cancer progression.A
miRNA microarray analysis was performed on laser-capture microdissected
breast tumors of different lymph-node metastasis status showing different
progression signatures, indicated by overexpression of cyclin D1 and
-catenin genes, to identify specific miRNAs that exhibit significant
differences in expression. Functional interaction between the candidate
miRNA (i.e. miR-30a) and the gene (i.e. Vim gene, coding for vimentin, a
protein involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition) possibly regulated
by miR-30a was verified. We further examined whether decreased expression
of miR-30a was associated with breast cancer progression.miR-30a
negatively regulated vimentin expression, by binding to the
3-untranslated region of Vim. Ectopic expression of miR-30a was found to
suppress the migration and invasiveness phenotypes of breast cancer cell
lines. More importantly, breast cancer patients with decreased miR-30a
level in primary cancerous sites were found to be associated with poor
clinical features (late tumor stage and lymph node metastasis) and worse
progression, demonstrating an increased hazard ratio (HR) for recurrence
or recurrence plus mortality during the follow-up period (P<0.05). These
findings provide a support of clinical importance of miR-30a in mediating
breast tumor progression. Identification of miR-30a-mediated regulation
of vimentin might provide a promising therapeutic target in treating
breast cancer.

