Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for the high affinity IL13 receptor in glioblastoma
multiforme


IL13 Receptor alpha 2 (IL13Ra2) is one of two receptors for IL13 and is
found to be highly expressed in a number of cancers including, ovarian,
head and neck, pancreatic and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). IL13Ra2 has
been found to be expressed mostly in high grade GBMs but not in low grade
gliomas or normal brain tissue. IL13Ra2 has a short intracellular domain
that lacks a signaling domain and possesses a high affinity for IL13. It
is thought that in GBMs IL13Ra2 acts primarily as a decoy receptor for
IL13. However, recent evidence from pancreatic and ovarian cancer lines
indicates that IL13Ra2 initiates signaling pathways that influence cell
invasion and adhesion properties of cancer cells. We hypothesize the
IL13Ra2 might play a role in GBMs distinct for its decoy receptor
function. This study is designed to determine if IL13Ra2 possess
functional properties and can modulate the behavior of glioma cells
through its interaction with IL13. We examined the effect of IL13
interaction with IL13Ra2 in multiple glioma cell lines in vitro. A BrdU
based proliferation assay was utilized to determine the effect of IL13 on
the proliferation rate of glioma cells. Migration of glioma cells was
also examined over a 24 hour period following exposure to IL13. A shRNA
mediated knockdown of IL13Ra2 in glioma cells was also produced and the
resultant phenotype analyzed by phalloidin staining for cytoskeletal
actin and in the migration assay. Treatment of IL13Ra2 expressing glioma
cell lines with IL13 did not influence their proliferation rates in
vitro. However, cells that had been treated with IL13 demonstrated an
increased migration response. Knockdowns were found to have decreased
migration rates, both in the presence and absence of IL13. Knockdowns
were also found to have dramatic changes in phenotype with increased
cellular adhesion and altered actin structure. When the actin structure
was examined following IL13 treatment, normal cells appeared to have an
increase in peripheral actin and filopodia, while in knockdown cells
treated cells did not appear different from untreated controls. Our data
indicate that IL13 interaction with IL13Ra2 might contribute to changes
in the phenotype of glioma cells that promote their invasive properties.
Further research is needed to determine the underlying mechanism.

