Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sesamin synergistically potentiates the anticancer effects of
-tocotrienol in mammary tumor cells


Epidemiological studies have highlighted the ability of micronutrients in
plants to reduce the risk of breast cancer. Phytochemicals can interfere
with cell-signaling pathways that regulate cell proliferation and
differentiation. -Tocotrienol is a natural form of vitamin E that
displays a potent and selective anticancer activity against various
mammary cell lines with no discernible toxicity toward normal cells.
Sesamin is an abundant phytochemical in sesame seed oil which showed
antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activity against human breast cancer
cells. In addition, sesamin inhibits the metabolism of vitamin E isomers
and increases their bioavailability and efficacy. Preliminary growth
inhibition studies showed that combined treatment with subeffective doses
of -tocotrienol and sesamin synergistically inhibited the growth of
neoplastic murine +SA (ErbB2-positive) and human MCF-7 (luminal A,
ER-positive) mammary epithelial cells, as determined by MTT assay and
isobologram analysis. Additional studies were conducted to determine the
intracellular mechanisms mediating the synergistic anticancer activity in
+SA mammary epithelial cells. Flow cytometry analysis showed that
combined treatment of -tocotrienol and sesamin increased the percentage
of cells in G1 phase as compared to the vehicle-treated control group.
Western blot studies revealed that blockade in cell cycle progression is
associated with decreased expression of cyclin D1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6,
phospho-Rb, and E2F1 transcription factor, and corresponding increase in
levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor proteins, p27 and p16.
Additional Western blot experiments showed that the combined -tocotrienol
and sesamin treatment caused a marked decrease of ErbB2, ErbB3, and ErbB4
receptors phosphorylation. Furthermore, the combined low dose
-tocotrienol and sesamin treatment was associated with a relatively large
decrease in the intracellular levels of total or phosphorylated c-Raf,
Mek1/2, Erk1/2, PI3K, PDK1, Akt, p-NF-B, Jak1, Jak2, and Stat1 as
compared to all other treatment groups. Additional studies were conducted
to investigate whether the growth inhibitory effects of the combined
treatment is associated with a concomitant activation of apoptotic
pathways. Results showed that the combined -tocotrienol and sesamin
treatment did not activate early or late apoptosis events in the cell
indicating that the inhibitory effects of the combined treatment are
cytostatic, but not cytotoxic. In summary, these findings indicate that
sesamin synergistically increases the anticancer effects of -tocotrienol,
and combined treatment with these agents may provide some benefits in the
treatment of breast cancer in women. This study was supported by a grant
from First Tech International Ltd., and the Malaysian Palm Oil Council.

