Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-141 confers anoikis resistance of ovarian cancer cells by
targeting KLF12


Anoikis resistance is one of the fundamental capacities of metastatic
cancer cells to survive during invasion and dissemination. Emerging
evidences have documented that deregulation of miRNAs have been
associated with different aspects of tumorigenesis. In this study, we
aimed to identify putative miRNA candidates that govern this process
during metastasis of ovarian cancers. Using miRCURY LNA Array profiling
(1264 miRNAs) analyze on two categories of ovarian cancer cell lines:
high and low anchorage-independent growth ability. We firstly sorted out
a list of 9 miRNAs which were upregulated and associated with high
anchorage-independent growth ability in ovarian cancer cells. Amongst
these candidates, miR-141 retained the strongest anchorage-independent
growth ability examined by soft agar assay. Further real-time Q-PCR
analysis found that miR-141 was frequently upregulated in ovarian cancer
cell lines (n = 6) and clinical samples (n = 49) as compared with normal
ovaries (n = 12). Functional studies showed that enforced expression of
miR-141 increased both number and size of colonies formed in soft agar
assay, and cell growth in focus formation assay. Moreover, miR-141 could
enhance cell survival and proliferation in ovarian cancer cells in low
serum media. Conversely, inhibition of miR-141 expression by miR-141
inhibitor could abrogate the above tumorigenic functions in ovarian
cancer cells. On the other hand, by computational miRNA target prediction
and pMIR-REPORT miRNA luciferase assay, we identified a tumor suppressor,
Krppel-related zinc finger protein AP-2rep (KLF12), was
post-transcriptionally downregulated by miR-141. Previous studies have
documented that KLF12 is a tumor suppressor in inhibiting AP2-induced
tumorigenicity including anoikis resistance. Indeed, our biochemical
analyses using luciferase reporter assays in combination with mutational
analyses and Western blotting confirmed that miR-141 specifically
targeting KLF 3UTR and its expression. Taken together, our findings
suggest that miR-141 is an oncogene that can enhance anoikis resistance
in ovarian cancer cells through downregulation of KLF12. However, further
investigation in delineating molecular mechanism of miR-141 and KLF12 in
mediating ovarian cancer oncogenesis is warranted.

