Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the association between immune-related genetic
variations and virally mediated head and neck cancer


OBJECTIVES: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-related cancer of the oropharynx
(tonsil and tongue base) makes up an increasing proportion of head and
neck cancers. This raises the possibility that the host immune response
may modulate susceptibility to HPV-related head and neck cancer. The
overall goal of this project is to identify candidate immune-related
genes associated with an increased risk of developing virally-mediated
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). STUDY DESIGN: Data from a
two-phased Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) performed by the
International Head and Neck Cancer Epidemiology Consortium (INHANCE) was
evaluated for associations between genetic variants in candidate immune
related genes and the risk of developing HNSCC. METHODS: We analyzed the
GWAS dataset using a hypothesis-driven multi-candidate gene approach
which incorporates improved methods for data quality control and
candidate gene prioritization. This involved performing an association
analysis using multi-variate logistic regression with over 300,000 SNPs.
The candidate gene list, including over 900 immune-related genes, was
developed using the Gene Ontology (GO) database and prioritized by both
the GO priority score and a novel literature based ranking schema.
Separate association analyses were performed on all samples and then on
samples from patients with oropharyngeal cancer only. RESULTS: After
adjusting for multiple testing, 15 of the immune related candidate genes
had p values that reached significance in the association study performed
on oropharyngeal samples including CBFA2T3, MAPKAPK2, ZAP70, CRTAM, PBX1,
MAPK10, CD80, IL10, SOCS5, TGFBR1, EBF1, IGF1R, LYN, ITGAV. Mutations in
many of these genes have previously been implicated in cancer risk, viral
host-response, or epithelial immunity. CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis suggests
that the immune system may modulate risk of developing virally-mediated
HNSCC. Genes identified in this study may provide biomarkers for patient
or population risk assessments that can potentially be used in
implementing behavioral interventions, HPV vaccination, and other
preventative strategies. Validation of immune-related genes associated
with HNSCC susceptibility may provide clues to pathogenic mechanisms
driving the acquisition of virally-related HNSCC. This abstract has been
submitted on behalf of ARCAGE and the CE UADT.

