Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of Galectin1-glycan interaction impairs tumor growth
and metastasis in breast cancer by disarming the immunosuppressive
capacity of regulatory T cells


Galectin-1 (Gal1) is an endogenous lectin that emerged as a key regulator
of immune cell homeostasis. By binding to surface glycoconjugates, Gal1
modulates diverse physiological processes and also shapes the immune
response during cancer progression to a suppressive phenotype. For that
reason Gal1 has become a molecule with a profound impact in the tumor
microenvironment biology. In the present work we investigated whether
tumor Gal1 expression contributes to immunosuppression, tumor growth and
metastasis in breast cancer in order to validate the Gal-1-glycan axis as
a novel therapeutic target in these tumors. We used the highly metastatic
mouse mammary tumor model 4T1 which expresses high levels of Gal1. We
generated Gal1-deficient 4T1 cell line (4T1 KD) using a retrovirus
encoding a shRNA specific for mouse Gal1. After injecting Balb/c mice
with either 4T1 WT or KD cells we studied tumor growth, metastasis
formation and analyzed tumor-associated immune compartments. Silencing of
Gal-1 induced a marked reduction in both tumor growth and the number of
lung metastases. This effect was abrogated if a 4T1 WT tumor was
inoculated in the contralateral flank of these mice, suggesting that the
antitumor effect involves modulation of the immune system. In regard to
the latter we observed that 4T1 WT tumor-bearing mice exhibited a higher
frequency of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the lungs,
spleen, tumor draining lymph nodes (TDLN) and tumor microenvironment.
Remarkably, knocking down Gal1 reverted the systemic immune tolerance
that characterizes tumor progression, and decreased the frequency and
immunosuppressive function of Tregs as evidenced by a suppression assay
and expression of Tregs tolerogenic molecular markers as Foxp3, TGF- and
LAT. In this sense, mice bearing Gal-1 KD tumors were able to reject an
allogeneic B16 tumor similarly to tumor free mice. In addition,
antigen-specific proliferation of lymphocytes purified from 4T1
KD-bearing mice was increased when reestimulated ex vivo. Concomitantly,
blockade of tumor Gal1 was accompanied by a reduction of the IL-10/IFN
cytokines ratio. Finally, therapeutic administration of a Gal1
neutralizing mAb (F8.G7) to 4T1 WT tumor bearing mice not only induced a
reduction in tumor growth and lung metastasis formation but also reverted
tumor associated immunosuppression. These results are strengthened by the
observation that in human breast cancer biopsies Gal1 expression
correlates with tumor grade (Bloom-Richardson histopathological grade I
vs II-III). In conclusion our results indicate that disruption of Gal1
impairs tumor growth and metastasis via mechanisms involving reversal of
systemic immunosuppression and further validate the Gal1-glycan axis as
an attractive target in the therapeutic treatment of metastasic breast
cancer.

