Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer
cells requires -catenin activation via Akt/GSK3-dependent and
MTA1/Wnt1-dependent pathways


Perturbations in the adipocytokines-profile, especially higher levels of
leptin, are a major cause of breast tumor progression and metastasis; the
underlying mechanisms, however, are not well understood. In particular,
it remains elusive whether leptin is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Here, we provide first molecular evidence that leptin
induces breast cancer cells to undergo a transition from epithelial to
spindle-like mesenchymal morphology. Investigating the downstream
mediator(s) that may direct leptin-induced EMT, we found functional
interactions between leptin, metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) and
Wnt1 signaling components. Leptin increases accumulation and nuclear
translocation of -catenin leading to increased promoter recruitment.
Silencing of -catenin or treatment with small molecule inhibitor,
ICG-001, inhibits leptin-induced EMT, invasion and tumorsphere formation.
Mechanistically, leptin stimulates phosphorylation of glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK3) via Akt activation resulting in a substantial decrease in
the formation of GSK3-LKB1-Axin complex which leads to increased
accumulation of -catenin. Leptin treatment also increases Wnt1 expression
that contributes to GSK3 phosphorylation. Inhibition of Wnt1 abrogates
leptin-stimulated GSK3 phosphorylation. We also discovered that leptin
increases the expression of an important modifier of Wnt1 signaling,
MTA1, which is integral to leptin-mediated regulation of Wnt/-catenin
pathway as silencing of MTA1 inhibits leptin-induced Wnt1 expression,
GSK3 phosphorylation and -catenin activation. Furthermore, analysis of
leptin-treated breast tumors show increased expression of Wnt1, pGSK3 and
Vimentin along with higher nuclear accumulation of -catenin and reduced
E-cadherin expression providing in vivo evidence for a previously
unrecognized crosstalk between leptin and MTA1/Wnt signaling in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells.

