Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of an inv(16)-encoded CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion protein
in 34% of non-infant acute megkaryoblastic leukemias: A report from the
Pediatric Cancer Genome Project


Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia (AMKL) accounts for 10% of childhood
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Although AMKL patients with Down syndrome
(DS-AMKL) have an excellent 5 year event-free survival (EFS), non-DS-AMKL
patients have an extremely poor outcome with a 3 year EFS Acute
Megakaryoblastic Leukemia (AMKL) accounts for 10% of childhood acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Although AMKL patients with Down syndrome
(DS-AMKL) have an excellent 5 year event-free survival (EFS), non-DS-AMKL
patients have an extremely poor outcome with a 3 year EFS < 40%. To
define the landscape of mutations that occur in non-DS-AMKL, we performed
transcriptome sequencing on diagnostic blasts from 14 cases. Our results
identified chromosomal rearrangements resulting in the expression of
novel fusion transcripts in 12/14 cases. Remarkably, in 7/14 cases, we
detected an inversion on chromosome 16 [inv(16)(p13.3;q24.3)] that
resulted in the juxtaposition of CBFA2T3, a member of the ETO family of
transcription factors, next to GLIS2 resulting in a CBFA2T3-GLIS2
chimeric gene encoding an in frame fusion protein. GLIS2 is a member of
the GLI family of transcription factors that mediate sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signaling and has been demonstrated to play a role in regulating
expression of GLI target genes. Evaluation of a recurrency cohort of 52
samples including 24 additional pediatric cases and 28 adult cases
revealed 6 additional pediatric samples carrying the fusion for an
overall frequency of 34% in pediatric AMKL. To gain insight into the
mechanism whereby CBFA2T3-GLIS2 promotes leukemogenesis, we introduced
the fusion into murine hematopoietic cells and assessed its effect on in
vitro colony replating as a surrogate measure of self-renewal. Cells
transduced with a mCherry expressing retrovirus failed to form colonies
after the 2nd replating. By contrast, expression of either wild-type
GLIS2 or CBFA2T3-GLIS2 resulted in a marked increase in the self-renewal
capacity, with colony formation persisting through 12 replatings.
Immunophenotypic analysis of the CBFA2T3-GLIS2 expressing colonies
revealed evidence of megakaryocytic differentiation. GLI transcription
factors modulate expression of multiple downstream targets including
components of BMP, WNT, and SHH pathways. To interrogate these pathways
as potential contributors to the enhanced self-renewal capacity, we
conducted luciferase reporter assays and found that CBFA2T3-GLIS2
functioned as a strong activator of the BMP responsive element.
Furthermore, expression of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 in Drosophila resulted in
ectopic expression of endogenous dpp, the fly homolog of BMP4, and
conferred a dpp gain of function phenotype. Taken together these data
identify a novel inv(16)-encoded CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion protein as a
recurrent driver mutation in 35% of non-infant pediatric non-DS-AMKLs.
The alteration of a key transcriptional regulator within the SHH
signaling pathways in a substantial percentage of pediatric AMKL raises
the possibility that inhibition of this pathway or downstream activated
pathways may have a therapeutic benefit in this aggressive form of AML.

