Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patients primary ovarian cancer xenograft models
for test of anticancer agents


BACKGROUND Human xenograft tumor models established by transplantation of
human tumor cell lines into immunodifficient mice have been routinely
used for preclinical test of anticancer agents. But tumor cell lines have
a relatively low transplantability, which resulted in a limited number of
tumor models available for test of novel anticancer agents. Recently, we
have developed a large number of patients primary ovarian tumor xenograft
models by transplanting human fresh ovarian tumor tissues into nude mice,
which have been employed for preclinical test of clinically used drugs
and novel anticancer agents for their chemosensitivity screening. METHODS
The fresh ovarian tumor samples were collected from local hospitals. The
tumor fragments of 2-3 mm were subcutaneously implanted in the flanks of
nude mice by trocar needle. Sixteen tumor fragments were grafted into
four mice from one patient tumor tissue (passage 1). The clinically used
drugs included cisplatin, carboplatin, paclitaxel, and docetaxel. The
histology and gene sequence of the established primary tumor models were
analyzed and compared with patients original tumors. RESULTS A total of
76 patients ovarian tumor samples were implanted into nude mice; and 35
primary tumor models have been established with a tumor taking rates of
47% for the first passage. The tumor taking rates were higher in the
later passages ranged from approximately 70-100%. The therapeutic
efficacy of the test anticancer drugs was consistent with their clinical
findings. The patients primary ovarian tumor xenografts from all 5
passages retained a similarity in architecture, histopathological
morphology, and genomic mutation status to their patients original
tumors. CONCLUSIONS The patient primary tumor model system can provide a
larger number of models for selection of right models for preclinical
testing novel agents based on their anticancer mechanism. The primary
tumor models retain a similarity in histology and genomic mutation status
to their patients original tumors. They may predict more relevant
clinical response rate and higher correlation with clinical findings than
use of traditional xenograft models established from long-term cultured
cancer cell lines. Especially, they have advantages for test of
target-oriented therapeutics in new drugs development programs.

