Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for XMRV in prostate tumor promotion in vivo


Xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (XMRV) is a
retrovirusclosely related to murine leukemia viruses, which cause a
variety of cancersand immunological and neurological diseases in mice.
Whether XMRV plays a rolein cancer and other diseases remains
controversial; some studies show apossible association, but there is
currently no evidence that the virus is acausal agent for disease. Our
hypothesis was that the 3 long terminal repeat(LTR) from the XMRV genome
is responsible for its oncogenic activity inprostate cells. We chose
three regions from the XMRV 3 LTR and tested thepotential of these
regions in transactivating a cellular gene promoter whosehomolog is
transactivated by MMLV in mouse cells. We examined thetransactivation
potential in pre-cancerous and a panel of cancerous prostateepithelial
cells. Our results showed that for certain 3LTR regions inducenearly full
transactivating activity, while others might comprise inhibitoryregions.
Therefore, to better understand the mechanism by which the XMRV 3
LTRregions might be inducing or inhibiting transactivation, we tested
theirability to transactivate cellular genes related to transformation.
We used asreporters plasmids containing binding sites for cellular
transcription factors.The results showed several similarities in
transactivation, suggesting commonactivation pathways for 3LTR
transactivating activity. Finally, we tested ifXMRV infection could
enhance oncogenicity potential of prostate precancerousand cancerous cell
lines. We examined this in vitro by assessing the rate of colonyformation
in soft agar, and in vivo, using xenograft assays. The resultssuggested
that cell lines infected with XMRV had enhanced in vitro colonyformation,
as well as enhanced in vivo growth, however, addition of
anothertumorigenic genetic alteration was required in conjunction with
XMRV-infectionto induce enhanced tumor growth. Our data suggests that the
XMRV 3LTR may havea transactivating activity on cellular genes, and that
XMRV stimulatepromotion/progression and not initiation of tumorigenesis.
These results arenovel since they represent for the first examinations of
the role of XMRV intumorigenesis of prostate epithelial cell lines in
vitro and in vivo andexaminations of the 3LTR context of the virus upon
transactivation of cellulargenes as a potential mechanism of cellular
transformation.

