Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of the progression of lymph node metastases using
three-dimensional optical coherence tomography (OCT)


Several techniques have been developed to localize lymph nodes, primarily
sentinel lymph nodes, prior to resection during cancer surgery, and for
post-operative histological assessment. However, none of these existing
methods offer the potential for in situ assessment of lymph nodes and
their metastatic involvement, potentially during surgical procedures, and
for intraoperatively staging cancer. In this study, three-dimensional
optical coherence tomography (3-D OCT) was used for imaging and assessing
resected popliteal lymph nodes from a pre-clinical rat metastatic tumor
model over a 9-day time-course study after the injection of tumor cells
into the lymphatic system via the hindlimb footpad. The spectral-domain
OCT system utilized a center wavelength of 800 nm, provided axial and
transverse resolutions of 3 m and 12 m, respectively, and performed
imaging at 10,000 axial scans per second. OCT is capable of providing
high-resolution label-free images of intact lymph node microstructure
based on intrinsic optical scattering properties with penetration depths
of 1-2 mm. To verify OCT findings, the lymph nodes were sectioned at the
OCT imaging sites. Direct comparison of the 3-D OCT data and histology
revealed that microstructural changes in the lymph node were detectable
by the changes in optical scattering and the features visualized in the
OCT images. The results demonstrate that OCT is capable of
differentiating normal, reactive and metastatic lymph nodes based on
these microstructural changes. The optical scattering and structural
changes revealed by OCT from Day 3 to Day 9 correlate with inflammatory
and immunological changes observed in the capsule, precortical regions,
follicles, and germination centers found in the histopathology. We report
for the first time a longitudinal study of 3-D trans-capsule OCT imaging
of intact lymph nodes during metastatic infiltration. In a related
intraoperative clinical study, resected lymph nodes from the cancer
patients were imaged during the surgical procedure and the data was
correlated with histological findings. The imaged sites were marked with
surgical ink, and histology sections were taken for correlation with the
3-D OCT data. Clinical pathology reports were compared with OCT findings
to determine the accuracy of our results. These preliminary clinical
studies have identified scattering changes in the cortex, relative to the
capsule, which can be used to differentiate normal from metastatic nodes.
Our imaging studies of resected lymph nodes in both animal cancer models
and human cancer patients demonstrate the potential of OCT as a technique
for real time, in situ 3-D optical biopsy of lymph nodes for the
intraoperative staging of cancer.

