Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antitumor effect of HDAC inhibitor Tenovin-6 for gastric
cancer cells


Aim: Tenovin-6 is one of the small molecule inhibitors of Histone
Deacetylase (HDAC), which have been to shown to suppress cancer cell
growth and angiogenesis. In Japan, the mortality of gastric cancer is
still high and innovative strategies are required for patients with
advanced unresectable gastric cancer. We conducted this study to verify
anti-tumor effect of Tenovin-6 as a single agent for gastric cancer cells
and also in combination with cytotoxic agents including 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and cisplatin (CDDP) in vitro. Moreover, we validated the
effectiveness of Tenovin-6 on animal xenografted model.Methods: 4 gastric
cancer cell lines, MKN-45, NUGC-4 (p53 wild), NUGC-3 (p53 mutant) and
Kato-III (p53 null), were incubated with Tenovin-6 in dose and time
dependent manner. Cell viability was calculated by WST-8 assay after
treatment with Tenovin-6 alone or in combination with 5-FU or CDDP.
Protein expression of Sirt-1, p53, p21, DR5 and Caspase-3 were monitored
by western blotting to reveal mechanism of antitumor effects by
Tenovin-6. In vivo xenograft model established with human gastric cancer
cell line MKN-45 was treated with intraperitoneal administration of
Tenovin-6 at dose of 50 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks. Results: All 4 gastric
cancer cells decreased dramatically by addition of Tenovin-6 with 2.3 to
4.3 M of IC50. The decreasing trend was not different among cell lines.
The additive and synergic effects were shown with combination of 5-FU or
CDDP. The expression of Caspase-3, p21 and DR5 were increased by
Tenovin-6 in time dependent manner. In contrast, the expression of Sirt-1
and p53 was not changed in all periods. Also in vivo, single agent
therapy with Tenovin-6 significantly reduced subcutaneous xenograft tumor
growth in nude mice. Conclusion: Tenovin-6 showed excellent anti-tumor
effects in all gastric cancer cells via induction of apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest. It may be promising therapeutic material for gastric cancer
patients.

