Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of three types of cancers in southern part of Nigeria


There is an increase in the incidence of various cancers globally. It is
estimated that ten (10) million new cases of cancers are diagnosed every
year and fifty (50%) of this figure is from developing countries. As
death toll from infectious diseases decline globally, cancer is becoming
the most potent cause of death led by heart and cardiac diseases. This
study was carried out to establish the prevalence of three common cancers
that affect mainly women using the Southern parts of Nigeria as a case
study. Three age groups of women were used for this study: those below
forty (40) years, those between forty (40) and sixty (60) years and those
from sixty one (61) and above. The review checked major government owned
hospital records from 2006 to 2011 and the results are presented. It was
observed that 15% of women from 61 years and above suffered from breast
cancer within the period under review. About fifty five (55) % of breast
cancer cases occurred in women of age forty (40) years and below while
thirty (30) % of cases occurred in the age group forty (40) and sixty
(60) years. About four (4) % of breast cancer cases occurred in men.
Cervical cancer was more prevalent in women between ages 40-60 years
followed by those in age group 61and above. The percentage of women who
were diagnosed of cervical cancer in the age group 40-60 years was 37%,
percentage of those in age bracket of forty (40) years and below was 16%
and those in the age bracket of sixty one (61) years and above that
suffered from cervical cancer were 22%. The prevalence of uterine cancer
within the period under review was about nine (9) % and distributed in
these order; age group forty (40) years and below was 2%, 40-60 years, 3%
and 61 years and above was 4%. Thus the study shows that breast cancer
was more prevalent in women of 40 years and below, cervical cancer was
more prevalent in women of 40 years and above while uterine cancer was
low in all age groups. Studies have shown that incidence of breast cancer
is rising more in populations that hitherto enjoyed a low incidence rate
like many parts of Africa. However there is significant under reporting
of diagnosed cancer cases as well late reporting of cancer cases as a
result of illiteracy. It was suggested that increase in cancer
occurrences in the Southern part of Nigeria is largely due to lack of
adequate education and awareness on early detection, and life style of
patients. Early detection and treatment have been proven to be effective
against cancer proliferation and helps in a better prognosis for patients.

