Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of peptide deformylase in the apoptosis of c-Myc
overexpressing cancers


In prokaryotes, the removal of an N-terminal formyl group by the peptide
deformylase is required for post-translational protein processing. Our
identification of human mitochondrial PDF (HsPDF) and deformylated
peptides in the mitochondria shows that a similar post-translational
processing of the 13 human mitochondrial DNA-encoded, and formylated,
proteins can occur. Inhibition of HsPDF reduced proliferation of many
human cancer lines. We developed a monoclonal antibody to hsPDF;
profiling of cancer and normal cell lines by three immunoassays, flow
cytometry, immunoprecipitation and in-cell western, showed
over-expression of HsPDF in cancer cell lines. This data was confirmed at
the mRNA level by RT-PCR. As the c-myc oncogene regulates mitochondria
and metabolism in cancer, we investigated its role in regulating HsPDF.
In a tet-off c-myc cell line, the expression of HsPDF was regulated by
c-myc; inhibiting this protein resulted in the selective inhibition of
mitochondrial protein translation, and eventual death of myc-positive,
but not myc-negative cells. Furthmore, knocking down c-myc in a Burkitt's
Lymphoma cell line significantly reduced the expression of both the mRNA
and the protein levels of HsPDF relative to beta-Actin. The mechanism of
death by actinonin was apoptosis in two c-myc over-expressing cell lines.
Death was initiated with mitochondrial membrane depolarization, followed
by inhibition of mitochondrial translation, and eventually caspase-3
activation and apoptosis. To confirm the specificity of PDF in cell
death, we used two other hydroxamic acid peptidomimetics that do not
target HsPDF. These compounds did not result in apoptotic death.
Furthermore, inhibition of translation of the mitochondrial DNA by
chloramphenicol and tetracycline, two structurally different inhibitors
of the mitochondrial ribosome, which is upstream of deformylation,
followed by treatment with actinonin resulted in a delay and marked
reduction in apoptosis by actinonin, but not by staurosporine and the
HDAC inhibitors SAHA and Trichostatin A. Thus, death was not a result of
ATP depletion, but a unique PDF-mediated mechanism.

