Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated sigma-2 receptor/Pgrmc1 (progesterone receptor membrane
component 1) levels as a potential cancer biomarker in tumors and plasma


Cancers of the lungs and head and neck are one of the leading causes of
death, particularly in Kentucky, which leads the nation in multiple
categories related to smoking. Thus, there is an urgent need for new
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for airway cancers. The sigma-2
receptor is an intracellular receptor for numerous drugs and metabolites
and was recently found to be identical to Pgrmc1 (progesterone receptor
membrane component 1), a cytochrome-related protein implicated in
metabolism and hormone signaling. S2RPgrmc1 is up-regulated in multiple
types of cancer and is required for tumor cell proliferation and motility
in vitro and tumor formation and metastasis in vivo. Furthermore, small
molecule inhibitors of S2RPgrmc1 suppressed the growth of lung, breast
and cervical cancer cell lines. In the present study, we have analyzed
S2RPgrmc1 levels in clinical tumor samples from squamous cell lung
cancers (SqCLC), lung adenocarcinomas, head and neck cancers and others.
S2RPgrmc1 levels were increased in tumors throughout and correlated with
survival in lung cancer (n=43, p=0.02) and with grade in head and neck
cancer (higher in grade 2 versus 1, p=0.007). One of the cancer types
with highest S2RPgrmc1 expression was squamous cell lung cancer (SqCLC),
and treatment options for SqCLC are limited. S2RPgrmc1 was highly
expressed in SqCLC cell lines, and SqCLC cell survival was inhibited by
siRNA knockdown of S2RPgrmc1 or the S2RPgrmc1 inhibitor AG-205. S2RPgrmc1
is part of a family of secreted cytochromes, and we found that S2RPgrmc1
was significantly elevated in the plasma of 42 lung cancer patients
compared to non-cancer patients and was significantly higher in the
plasma of stage I lung cancer patients compared to stage 2-4 patients.
Purified, recombinant S2RPgrmc1 increased the proliferation of NSCLC cell
lines, suggesting that secreted S2RPgrmc1 may contribute to lung tumor
growth. Together, the results demonstrate that S2RPgrmc1 correlates with
key clinical endpoints in tumors and is a therapeutic target in some
cancers with few therapeutic options, particularly squamous cell lung
cancer. Furthermore, S2RPgrmc1 is a potential plasma biomarker for early
stage lung cancer.

