Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of tumor-antigen specific T cells under highly
controlled environmental conditions by utilization of a novel cGMP
compliant cell culture reactor


Large scale in vitro generation of tumor-antigen specific T cells for
adoptive transfer under good manufacturing procedures (GMP) conditions is
one of the major challenges for future clinical applications. The novel
Z(R)RP cell culture system consists of high precision control units for
gas and fluidics in combination with a class A micro laminar flow unit
and a GMP conform culturing unit which allows for maximal control of cell
culture conditions. This system is - to our knowledge - the only
commercially available product that fully complies with all regulatory
specifications required for advanced therapy medical products (ATMP)
production in the European Union. In addition, the Z(R)RP bioreactor
system also implements the guidelines of the International Conference on
Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Q10 and the requirements from 21 Code
of federal regulations (CFR) parts 210, 211, 600 and 1271, making this
system a potential candidate for the cGMP compliant production of human
cellular products for individualized medicine approaches. We studied the
potency of the Z(R)RP system for the generation of MART-1
antigen-specific T cells. Mononuclear cells (MNC) from healthy donors
were cultured in GMP grade media supplemented with 1% of autologous
serum. MNC were repeatedly pulsed with MART-1 peptide and culture outcome
was analysed with respect to cellular composition, relative expansion and
expression of cytokines of MART-1 specific T cells by flow cytometry. In
short term cultures of 5x10E8 cells for up to 2 weeks medium pH as well
as CO2 and O2 saturation was kept constant throughout culture duration.
Glucose and lactate levels were monitored daily and continuous influx of
fresh medium was adapted accordingly to match nutrient depletion and
metabolite production. Media glucose concentration was kept at >500mg/ml
and lactate concentrations at Large scale in vitro generation of
tumor-antigen specific T cells for adoptive transfer under good
manufacturing procedures (GMP) conditions is one of the major challenges
for future clinical applications. The novel Z(R)RP cell culture system
consists of high precision control units for gas and fluidics in
combination with a class A micro laminar flow unit and a GMP conform
culturing unit which allows for maximal control of cell culture
conditions. This system is - to our knowledge - the only commercially
available product that fully complies with all regulatory specifications
required for advanced therapy medical products (ATMP) production in the
European Union. In addition, the Z(R)RP bioreactor system also implements
the guidelines of the International Conference on Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
(ICH) Q10 and the requirements from 21 Code of federal regulations (CFR)
parts 210, 211, 600 and 1271, making this system a potential candidate
for the cGMP compliant production of human cellular products for
individualized medicine approaches. We studied the potency of the Z(R)RP
system for the generation of MART-1 antigen-specific T cells. Mononuclear
cells (MNC) from healthy donors were cultured in GMP grade media
supplemented with 1% of autologous serum. MNC were repeatedly pulsed with
MART-1 peptide and culture outcome was analysed with respect to cellular
composition, relative expansion and expression of cytokines of MART-1
specific T cells by flow cytometry. In short term cultures of 5x10E8
cells for up to 2 weeks medium pH as well as CO2 and O2 saturation was
kept constant throughout culture duration. Glucose and lactate levels
were monitored daily and continuous influx of fresh medium was adapted
accordingly to match nutrient depletion and metabolite production. Media
glucose concentration was kept at >500mg/ml and lactate concentrations at
<1500mg/ml. Antigen specific T cells as identified by tetramer staining
were expanded up to 350 fold. In comparison, standard control closed
system cultures in bags resulted in 10 to 40% lower yield of specific T
cells. In addition, overall cell yield was 25 - 90% higher from
bioreactor cultures than from closed bag cultures. Analysis of MART-1
specific CD8+ T cells revealed a more naive phenotype as shown by CD45RA
staining (65% in reactor vs. 20% in bag cultures). Production of
cytokines as demonstrated by intracellular FACS staining of
interferon-gamma and interleukin-4 was not significantly different in T
cell populations from bioreactor or bag cultures. Our results show the
superior potential of this bioreactor principle for expansion of high
numbers of tumor-antigenspecific T cells under fully cGMP compliant
conditions, which is pre-requisite for future individualized anti-tumoral
cellular therapies.

