Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET/VEGFR dual inhibition and prominent safety profile of TAS-115
are favorable for the combination with chemotherapeutic drugs


MET is known as a proto-oncogene, which involves in growth, migration,
metastasis and angiogenesis in tumor progression. Recently, it is
reported that MET also functions as chemo and EGFR-TKI resistant factor
in cancer cells. Particularly, HGF/MET signal seemed to reduce the
potency of conventional chemotherapeutic drugs in clinical. Meanwhile,
VEGF/VEGFR signal plays an important role in angiogenesis in tumor
growth, and is essential for the survival signal of endothelial
cells(ECs) to protect from the damage by chemotherapeutic drugs. Some
VEGFR inhibitors have already been approved for the treatment of several
carcinomas with monotherapy. Many clinical combination trials with VEGFR
inhibitor and chemotherapeutic agents have been tried, but its
therapeutic benefit are restricted. It is highly desire for improving
therapeutic benefit by combination therapy with VEGFR inhibitor and
standard chemotherapy. TAS-115, a novel oral MET/VEGFR dual inhibitor,
demonstrated not only potent efficacy but also prominent safety profiles
achieved by improvement of PK profile and cellular selectivity. Potent
MET/VEGFR dual inhibition provides significant anti-tumor effect from
lower dose for TAS-115. On the one hand, the improvement of PK profile
and cell selectivity led to better tolerability. As a result, therapeutic
window (MTD/ED50) of TAS-115 became wider than that of the pre-existing
VEGFR or MET/VEGFR inhibitors. These profiles give TAS-115 the long-term
dosing at full effective dose without severe toxicity. Moreover, in vitro
study, HGF completely suppressed the induction of apoptosis by 5-FU or
Paclitaxel in cancer cells expressed MET. Meanwhile, VEGF abolished the
cytotoxic effect by these chemotherapeutic drugs against ECs. It was
suggested that harmonization of both HGF and VEGF in tumor greatly
contributed to the resistance against conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs. The MET/VEGFR dual inhibition by TAS-115 improves the sensitivity
of chemotherapeutic drugs for both cancer cells and ECs via suppression
of function as chemo-resistance factor by MET and VEGFR. In fact, the
combination therapies with TAS-115 and conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs caused tumor regression or potent growth inhibition without sever
body weight loss in several xenograft models. Notably, TAS-115 markedly
enhanced anti-tumor effect of Paclitaxel, and brought tumor shrinkage of
approximately 80% in the combination. More important feature is that
TAS-115 has disturbed rapid tumor re-growth following Paclitaxel
treatment and the higher safety profiles of TAS-115 permits combination
therapy with chemotherapeutic drugs in chronic treatment. It is expected
TAS-115 demonstrates prominent therapeutic benefit in combination with
chemotherapy based on the synergistic action of the potent MET/VEGFR dual
inhibition and higher safety profiles.

