Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-proliferative effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) diclofenac and indomethacin in ovarian cancer cells


Epidemiological studies have shown that the regular use of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory (NSAIDs) drugs is associated with a reduced risk of
various cancers. In addition, in vitro and preclinical mouse model
experiments have demonstrated that NSAIDs decrease tumor initiation
and/or progression of several cancers. In an attempt to clarify the
mechanisms of tumor prevention by NSAIDs, we have studied the effects of
two NSAIDs, diclofenac and indomethacin, in several ovarian cancer cell
lines. Diclofenac and indomethacin treatment decreased cell growth by
inducing cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. To identify the possible
molecular pathways mediating the effects of NSAID treatment in ovarian
cancer, ovarian cancer cell lines were treated with diclofenac or
indomethacin and microarray analysis was performed. Among the genes
differentially expressed in the different cell lines were genes involved
in signaling, metabolism, and cell cycle regulation. Some of the genes
found downregulated following diclofenac or indomethacin treatment are
transcriptional target genes of E2F1 and E2F4, suggesting involvement of
these transcription factors in the response of ovarian cancer cells to
NSAID treatment. In addition, E2F1 was found downregulated at the protein
level upon treatment with diclofenac and indomethacin. The levels of
phosphorylated Rb protein also decreased upon treatment with NSAIDs,
suggesting activation of Rb and involvement of the Rb/E2F pathway in the
effects of NSAID treatment in ovarian cancer cells. In conclusion, NSAIDs
diclofenac and indomethacin exert an anti-proliferative effect in ovarian
cancer cells and we have identified a number of target genes and pathways
that may be important for the NSAID-induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. Current efforts are focused on determining the exact roles of
these genes and pathways in NSAID-mediated cancer growth inhibition.

