Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming the cancer epigenome by metabolic transduction


This study focuses on the key concept of metabolic transduction as an
important general mediator of cellular reprogramming in epithelial
cancers. As a result of multiple studies on epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in diverse
epithelial cancers, the role of developmental plasticity during
epithelial differentiation has emerged as a new area of research. Recent
data from our lab suggest that metabolites and intermediates in cellular
metabolism can act as secondary messengers to dynamically change and
globally reprogram epigenetic signatures during normal development,
tissue repair, and cancer. We refer to this process as metabolic
transduction. Central to this concept is the role played by the
C-terminal binding proteins, CTBP1 and CTBP2. Dimeric combination of
these factors act as metabolic sensors that function, in the presence of
the high energy intermediate NADH, to target multiple classes of
chromatin modifying factors, including histone deacetylase, histone
methyl-transferases, histone demethylases, DNA methyl-transferases to
specific locales throughout the genome. Therefore, CTBP has the potential
to mediate widespread changes in the epigenetic landscape and influence
broad programs of cellular behavior. Genome-wide profiling studies by
ChIP-seq reveal that CTBP controls a network of genes linked to cellular
events that influence cellular re-programing or plasticity including stem
cell transcriptional programs, angiogenesis, and EMT. These studies
combined with immuno-histochemical profiling of patient samples indicates
that CTBP plays an important role in driving progression of more
aggressive forms of breast cancer including Triple Negative Breast Cancer
and the basal-like subtypes. Recent studies in our group suggest a role
for CTBP in enabling plasticity of cellular fate in malignant cells.
Breast cancer cell lines capable of spontaneous de-differentiation into
side populations with tumor initiation cell characteristic, such as
Sum149PT, are highly enriched in CTBP and are dominated by CTBP
controlled pathways. This association has significance in diverse types
of cancer, since other transformed cell lines capable of spontaneous
de-differentiation into side population, including the endometrial
carcinoma cell line HEC-1A, show similar enrichment and dependency on
CTBP. These striking similarities suggest that CTBP may represent a
driver of a tumor cell plasticity, implicating this tumor cell feature as
a new hallmark of epithelial cancers. Therefore, strategies to target
CTBP, and cellular reprogramming in general, may provide new
opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

