Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel sequencing of RNA and DNA isolated from FFPE
tissue can be used for clinical studies


Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) patient tissue samples stored
globally in pathology archives represent an invaluable biobank for
clinical research. Unfortunately, nucleic acids isolated from FFPE
tissues tend to be fragmented and chemically modified, interfering with
many classical molecular analyses. Since massively parallel sequencing
(MPS) technologies rely on randomly fragmented nucleic acids, we have
focused a systematic study on the potential use of FFPE samples in
MPS-based clinical studies. Available FFPE extraction kits were evaluated
with respect to purification of RNA and DNA from different tissue types.
Although the quality of the extracted nucleic acids was found to be
highly dependent on the purification method used, it was possible to
isolate high molecular DNA and RNA from recent FFPE specimen (fixed
within one year). Extracted DNA and RNA from matching cryopreserved and
FFPE specimens were successfully used for the preparation of targeted
genomic (Exome-Seq) and whole transcriptome (RNA-Seq) sequencing
libraries. Illumina's TruSeq exome preparation protocol was used for the
preparation of Exome-Seq libraries and sequence analysis revealed that
between 95.0 and 98.8 % of the reads mapped to the human genome with
mismatch rates from 0.29 to 0.78 %. The preparation of RNA-Seq libraries
from FFPE RNA using classical methods based on poly(dA) selection
combined with oligo(dT) and random priming of cDNA synthesis is
problematic due to the RNA degradation and results in 3 biases and uneven
sequence coverage. In this study, multiplexed RNA-Seq libraries were
prepared using the ScriptSeq kit in combination with Ribo-Zero technology
(both from Epicentre). In brief, ribosomal RNA was depleted from
fragmented total RNA using Ribo-Zero followed by tagged random primed
cDNA synthesis, terminal tagged second-strand synthesis, multiplexed
amplification and purification. This approach results in strand-specific
and paired-end sequences of coding and non-coding RNA. Sequence analysis
of RNA-Seq libraries prepared from RNA isolated from a human lung tumor
revealed that 96 - 98 % of the reads could be mapped and that the
directional protocol worked correctly for at least 99 % of the reads.
Surprisingly, more than half of the mapped reads were found to be
non-human, mapping primarily to bacterial rRNA. As bacterial
contamination is a potential issue in many tissue samples, we are
presently testing improved versions of Ribo-Zero, including probes to
bacterial rRNA. These results will, together with results from applying
MPS to older matched FFPE and cryopreserved specimens, be presented at
the AACR meeting. This preliminary work demonstrates the potential
application of MPS to study FFPE samples. The results are promising
regarding the possible use of the concealed information of archived FFPE
specimens for large scale retrospective MPS-based genomic studies.

