Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 as therapeutic target for overcoming ATP-binding cassette
transporter-mediated chemoresistance in small cell lung cancer


Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) easily acquires multidrug resistance after
successful initial therapy. Overexpression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporters is important for the multidrug resistance. Among them, ABCB1
and ABCG2 are known to be upregulated in chemoresistant SCLC. We found
that human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression is also
upregulated in chemoresistant SBC-3/ETP, SBC-3/SN-38 and SBC-3/CDDP
cells, compared to chemosensitive SBC-3 cells. Lapatinib, a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of HER2, could not suppress proliferation of these
HER2-positive SCLC cells, but successfully restored chemosensitivity to
etoposide and SN-38 in SBC-3/ETP and SBC-3/SN-38 cells, respectively. The
reversal effect of lapatinib was thought to be caused by inhibition of
drug efflux-pump functions of ABC transporters, and was producible with a
clinically applicable concentration. Moreover, knocking down of HER2 by a
small interfering RNA weakened the effect of lapatinib on ABCB1,
indicating the involvement of HER2 in the inhibitory mechanisms. Notably,
we demonstrated that caveolin-1 and Src play key roles in modulating
ABCB1 function via HER2 inactivation. In SBC-3/ETP cells,
dephosphorylation of HER2 by lapatinib activates Src and successively
leads to increase caveolin-1 phosphorylation. Through this process,
caveolin-1 dissociates from HER2 and strengthens association with ABCB1,
and finally impairs the pump functions. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
treatment by lapatinib in combination with etoposide or irinotecan
significantly suppresses the growth of subcutaneous SBC-3/ETP and
SBC-3/SN-38 tumors in mice, respectively. Collectively, these results
indicate that combination therapy with lapatinib and cytotoxic agents
could conquer ABC transporter-mediated chemoresistance in SCLC,
especially in HER2-positive cases.

