Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-apoptotic activity of caspase-2 short isoform is
regulated by XPC protein


Caspase-2 (casp-2) is the most conserved caspase across species. The
casp-2 gene produces several alternative splicing isoforms. The inclusion
of exon 9 leads to the inclusion of an in-frame stop codon in casp-2
short isoform (casp-2S) mRNA, thus producing a truncated protein that
inhibits cell death, whereas the exclusion of exon 9 results in casp-2
long isoform (casp-2L) mRNA, whose protein product induces cell death.
Earlier it has been reported that casp-2 is required for stress-induced
apoptosis. However, that study could not have separated the roles of
casp-2L and casp-2S, since the siRNA used in their experiments actually
targeted both casp-2 isoforms. We have reported that targeted
RNAi-mediated down-regulation of casp-2S enhanced the UV-induced
apoptosis in XPC-deficient but not in XPC-proficient cells. However, by
using the siRNA targeting both casp-2L and casp-2S, we failed to find any
influence of casp-2 down-regulation on UV-induced apoptosis in these
fibroblasts. Similarly, casp-2 specific inhibitor z-VDVAD was unable to
reduce UV-induced apoptosis. In addition, the expression of casp-2S, but
not casp-2L is regulated by XPC protein. To gain insight into the
mechanism by which XPC down-regulates casp-2S, we examined the casp-2S
promoter activity and the enrichment of XPC protein on casp-2S promoter.
Our data clearly demonstrated that XPC protein can inhibit casp-2S
promoter through binding to the promoter region. Furthermore, our
cellular fractionation study demonstrated that casp-2L exclusively
resides in cytoplasm, while casp-2S can be detected in both cytoplasm and
nucleus. UV irradiation reduced the amount of nuclear casp-2S in
XPC-proficient cells, while this reduction is not prominent in
XPC-deficient cells, indicating that XPC protein facilitates the
depletion of nuclear casp-2S upon UV irradiation. This finding provides
an additional mechanism by which XPC facilitates DNA damage-induced
apoptosis. (Supported by NIH grants CA151248 to QEW and ES12991 to AAW.)

