Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring changes in NF-kB pathway regulation using highly
sensitive multiplex bioluminescent reporter assays


Monitoring gene activation and repression in cellular signaling pathways
requires specific tools. Reporter gene assays use a technique of
attaching a genetic regulatory element, or promoter, to a gene encoding
for a protein with enzymatic, chromophoric or fluorescent properties.
Cloned into a plasmid vector, these sequences can be transfected or
transduced into animal, plant or tissue culture cells. Reporter gene
expression can be measured via bioluminescent, chemiluminescent or
fluorescent output to quantify the element or protein activity in the
pathway affecting the regulatory element. Bioluminescent output is formed
through the catalysis of a substrate and the natural enzyme luciferase.
Present in many terrestrial and marine metazoans, bioluminescence is a
powerful instrument for mutational analysis of gene promoters,
transcription factor dynamics, and protein-protein interactions. Our
study confirmed the beneficial use of sensitive bioluminescent enzymes in
reporter gene assays with wide dynamic ranges and flexibility in signal
identification. Mutation of several of the luciferase genes resulted in
spectral shifting and narrowing of the photon reaction products relative
to the wavelength of the natural state. The mutations provide the ability
to spectrally resolve the modified luciferases in a single reaction. In
addition, multiplex assays relying on sequential addition of substrates
can be achieved through manipulation of the enzyme-substrate reaction
conditions. Marine copepod and ostracod luciferase enzymes are naturally
secreted, and reporter assays using these genes can capture real-time or
time course data by sampling the media of transfected cells or blood from
transgenic animals and assaying for luciferase. The distinct advantage of
these assays is that they are not destructive to the cells or animals.
Our study used spectral separation using Gaussia/firefly and multiplex
assays relying on sequential addition of substrates and Gaussia/Cypridina
to monitor changes in NFkB activity in response to small-molecule
agonists. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of dual-secreted
luciferase assays for sensitive real-time monitoring of NFkB activity in
media. Furthermore, these assays enable simultaneous detection of
spectrally resolvable luciferases using filter-based detection.

