Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity and pharmacokinetics of the
anti-FOLR1-maytansinoid conjugate IMGN853 is maintained over a wide range
of maytansinoid-to-antibody ratios


IMGN853 (M9346A-sulfo-SPDB-DM4) is an antibody-maytansinoid conjugate
consisting of the cytotoxic maytansinoid, DM4, covalently linked to the
humanized monoclonal antibody M9346A, which selectively binds to folate
receptor 1 (FOLR1). Trastuzumab emtansine and other antibody-maytansinoid
conjugates that have demonstrated favorable activity and safety in the
clinic have maytansinoid-to-antibody ratios (MAR) around 3.5. We assessed
the impact of varying MAR on conjugate activity and pharmacokinetics, to
determine whether a similar maytansinoid load is optimal for IMGN853.
Conjugates of M9346A were prepared with maytansinoid (DM4) loads per
antibody ranging from 1.4 to 5.7. All conjugates had high (>90%) monomer
content, low (IMGN853 (M9346A-sulfo-SPDB-DM4) is an antibody-maytansinoid
conjugate consisting of the cytotoxic maytansinoid, DM4, covalently
linked to the humanized monoclonal antibody M9346A, which selectively
binds to folate receptor 1 (FOLR1). Trastuzumab emtansine and other
antibody-maytansinoid conjugates that have demonstrated favorable
activity and safety in the clinic have maytansinoid-to-antibody ratios
(MAR) around 3.5. We assessed the impact of varying MAR on conjugate
activity and pharmacokinetics, to determine whether a similar
maytansinoid load is optimal for IMGN853. Conjugates of M9346A were
prepared with maytansinoid (DM4) loads per antibody ranging from 1.4 to
5.7. All conjugates had high (>90%) monomer content, low (<0.1 %) levels
of free maytansinoid, and normal distribution profiles by LC/MS.
Conjugates spanning the range of MARs demonstrated comparable binding to
FOLR1-expressing cells as assessed by flow cytometry and had comparable
in vitro cytotoxicity (based on DM4 concentration) against
antigen-positive cells. The plasma pharmacokinetics of
M9346A-sulfo-SPDB-[3H]DM4 conjugates with low (2.0), intermediate (3.6)
and high (5.1) MAR levels were evaluated in CD-1 mice. There was no
impact of varying maytansinoid load, and all conjugates had comparable
pharmacokinetic parameters, with plasma circulation half-life of about
5.5 days compared with about 12 days for M9346A. The anti-tumor activity
of conjugates with MARs from 1.4 to 5.7 was assessed in two
FOLR1-positive xenograft models (KB cervical carcinoma and IGROV-1
ovarian cancer) in SCID mice. Mice bearing established subcutaneous KB or
IGROV-1 xenografts were treated at doses known to be active without
causing complete tumor regressions (25 or 50 g/kg based on DM4
concentration, respectively) to allow detection of slight changes in
activity based on MAR. Interestingly, conjugates with low MAR were found
to have a therapeutic advantage over the higher MAR conjugates in the
high FOLR1-expressing KB model, with strong activity of conjugates from
1.4 to 4.7 MAR and a slight reduction in activity observed with the
highest MAR conjugates. Conjugate activity across the range of MAR was
similar in IGROV-1 tumor-bearing mice. High-quality conjugates over a
broad range of maytansinoid loads can be made with the sulfo-SPDB-DM4
linker format, with indistinguishable in vitro activities and without
affecting pharmacokinetic properties. The activity of conjugates across a
broad MAR range was comparable and not highly dependent on maytansinoid
load in high FOLR1-expressing xenograft models. These results, along with
the favorable safety and efficacy associated with antibody-maytansinoid
conjugates currently under clinical evaluation, led to the selection of a
MAR of 3.5 for IMGN853.

