Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifunctional nanoconstructs for tumor visualization using
contrast enhanced MRI


New multifunctional nanoconstructs using mesoporous Si particles (SiMPs)
and polymeric hydrogel particles (HG) are synthesized with superior MRI
efficacy and favorable pharmacokinetic properties. Clinically relevant
Gd3+-based contrast agents (CAs) for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
namely [Gd (DTPA)]2, [Gd (DOTA)]1- and superparamagnetic iron oxide
(SPIO) nanoparticles, were either i) encapsulated within the mesoporous
structure of the SiMPs or ii) covalently attached to SiMPs and HGs. The
size (from 400 to 2000 nm) and shape (discoidal, cylindrical, etc.) of
the nanoconstructs are accurately tailored during the fabrication process
to control the in vivo biodistribution. In tumor bearing mouse model,
discoidal particles with a characteristic size of 1000 x 400 nm were
found to accumulate at the tumor site more than other particles. The
incorporation of clinically used, FDA approved CAs into the mesoporous
structure of the SiMPs led to magnetic nanoconstructs exhibiting much
higher relaxivities as compared to free CAs in solution. In particular,
the relaxivity for [Gd (DTPA)]2 and [Gd (DOTA)]1 loaded SiMPs was
measured to be 25 mM1s1, which is more than 6 times larger than the r1
obtained for free CAs ( 4 mM1s1). The pore size played a dominant role in
that the relaxivity was observed to grow with a reduction in pore
diameter: r1 24 mM1s1 for small pore SiMPs (5-10 nm); and r1 10 mM1s1 for
huge pore SiMPs (30-40 nm). CAs covalently attached to SiMPs and HGs,
exhibited no such dependence on pore sizes but provided comparable
enhancement in r1. For SPIOs encapsulated in mesoporous SiMPs, a much
larger enhancement in relaxivity was observed with r2 220 mM1s1 for the
resulting nanoconstructs against r2 11.2 mM1s1 for free SPIOs. These
results suggest that geometrical confinement into mesopores is a general
strategy for enhancing the performance of both T1 and T2 MRI CAs.
Intravenous injection of SPIO-loaded SiMPs in melanoma bearing mice
decreased the contrast (T2-weigthed relaxation), confirming the high
level of accumulation of these nanoconstructs at the tumor site. For the
enhanced relaxivity and superior localization of imaging agents at the
target site, the proposed nanoconstructs provide an ideal platform for
early cancer detection by MRI. In addition, the easily functionalizable
surface of these nanoconstructs render them the ability to perform
cellular and molecular imaging using clinical MRI scanners.

