Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendritic cells are professional educators of Natural Killer cells


Dendritic cells (DCs) and Natural Killer (NK) cells are important
components of innate immunity. NK cells are the principal effectors of
the innate immune system and play an important role in tumor surveillance
and anti-viral immunity. It has been commonly accepted that CD56bright NK
cells are the main source of cytokine production while CD56dim are mostly
responsible for cytolytic activity and target cell killing. CD56dim NK
cells acquire KIR (Killer cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors or KIR)
receptors by a process called NK cell education or licensing. NK cell
education has been defined as the mechanism by which NK cell acquire
inhibitory KIR and how signaling by specific cognate ligands leads to
gain of NK cell function. DCs are antigen presenting cells which act as
sentinels for the immune system by engulfing pathogens, processing and
presenting them to CD4 and CD8 T cells. Interactions between dendritic
cells and natural killer cells have been extensively studied but the role
that DCs might play in NK cell education remains elusive and poorly
understood. We evaluated the in-vitro interaction between adult
monocyte-derived dendritic cells and natural killers cells from healthy
donors. Mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDCs) were co-cultured
with KIR negative and KIR positive NK cells in addition to different
concentrations of IL-15. After 5 days of co-culture; the KIR negative
population (0.8% KIR positive after 5 days of co-cultured) acquired up to
3.8% KIR expression when co-cultured with mdDCs (1:1 ratio) and 0.5 ng/mL
of IL-15. In addition, a population of NK cells which expressed 28% KIR
after 5 days of culture expressed up to 38% KIR when mdDCs and 0.5 ng/mL
of IL-15 were added to the culture. Of note, enhanced KIR expression (as
a marker of maturation) required both IL-15 and mdDcs as no effect was
seen when mdDcs or IL-15 were added alone. Aside from the differences
noted in KIR expression, a population of CD56dim NK cells became
CD56bright when both KIR negative (8.44% to 23.6%) and KIR positive (0.8%
to 24.9%) NK cells were co-cultured with mdDCs and IL-15. In conclusion,
our studies suggest that dendritic cells have the ability to educate NK
cells and that this process is dependent on IL-15, which can be
trans-presented through IL-15R on DCs. Dendritic cells in addition to
IL-15 may also revert a population of mature CD56dim NK cells to a
CD56bright NK cells, which are considered less differentiated, suggesting
that NK maturation can be bidirectional and may exhibit more plasticity
than previously recognized.

