Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of caloric restriction and high fat diet on
azoxymethane-induced carcinogenesis in LETO and OLETF rats


We showed recently that diabetic and mildly obese Otsuka Long-Evans
Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rats are more susceptible to azoxymethane
(AOM)-induced Zymbal gland and intestinal carcinogenesis than control
Long-Evans Tokushima Otsuka (LETO) rats. In the present study, we
examined the effect of caloric restriction (CR) and high-fat diet (HFD)
on AOM-induced carcinogenesis in these strains. Experiment 1:
Six-week-old male LETO and OLETF rats (n=21) were given s.c. injections
of 15 mg/kg AOM once weekly for 3 weeks, then fed, Group 1) control diet,
Group 2) 20% CR diet, or Group 3) HFD (control diet with 10% safflower
oil), and killed at 36 weeks of age. In LETO rats, the incidences of
colon tumors (adenoma plus adenocarcinoma) in Groups 1-3 were 45%, 33%
and 55%, respectively. Average number of tumors/rat in CR group was fewer
than that in HFD group (PWe showed recently that diabetic and mildly
obese Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rats are more susceptible
to azoxymethane (AOM)-induced Zymbal gland and intestinal carcinogenesis
than control Long-Evans Tokushima Otsuka (LETO) rats. In the present
study, we examined the effect of caloric restriction (CR) and high-fat
diet (HFD) on AOM-induced carcinogenesis in these strains. Experiment 1:
Six-week-old male LETO and OLETF rats (n=21) were given s.c. injections
of 15 mg/kg AOM once weekly for 3 weeks, then fed, Group 1) control diet,
Group 2) 20% CR diet, or Group 3) HFD (control diet with 10% safflower
oil), and killed at 36 weeks of age. In LETO rats, the incidences of
colon tumors (adenoma plus adenocarcinoma) in Groups 1-3 were 45%, 33%
and 55%, respectively. Average number of tumors/rat in CR group was fewer
than that in HFD group (P<0.05). In OLETF rats, the incidences of colon
tumors in Groups 1-3 were 76%, 48% and 62%, respectively. Zymbal gland
tumors in CR group developed later than those in control and HFD groups
in OLETF rats. Experiment 2: Male LETO and OLETF rats (n=5) were fed
control diet, 20% CR diet or HFD for 5 weeks, and killed at 24 weeks of
age. In LETO rats, serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, insulin and
leptin levels decreased by 20% CR, and increased by HFD compared to the
control group. In OLETF rats, those levels decreased by 20% CR, and
increased by HFD except leptin. Expression of hepatic IGF-1 and Sirt-1
mRNA elevated by 20% CR in both strains. The liver of OLETF rat HFD group
showed severe fatty change histologically. In conclusion, 20% CR
inhibited, and HFD promoted colon carcinogenesis in LETO rats. In OLETF
rats, 20% CR inhibited, but HFD did not promote colon carcinogenesis
because of early development of Zymbal gland tumors. Hyperinsulinemia
and/or hyperlipidemia may exert the promoting effect in rat
carcinogenesis.

