Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting FACT complex suppresses mammary tumorigenesis in
Her2/neu transgenic mice


We have recently found that expression of Facilitates Chromatin
Transcription (FACT) complex consisting of SSRP1 and SPT16 protein
subunits is elevated in many types of cancer comparing with normal
tissues. Moreover, survival of tumor cell, but not normal cells is
significantly compromised upon genetic knockdown of any of the FACT
subunits. In our recent studies we have shown that FACT is essential for
the transcriptional activity of NF-B and Heat Shock Factor 1 and
identified small molecules that inhibit activity of both transcription
factors by causing functional inactivation of FACT. Since both NF-kB and
HSF1 are activated in the process of transformation, we proposed that
FACT may be involved in tumor transformation and that inhibition of FACT
activity may prevent or reduce tumorigenesis. Objectives of our study
were: (i) to check if FACT level is changed in the process of
oncogene-induced transformation in vitro and in vivo; and (ii) to test
safety and efficacy of anti-FACT therapy with Curaxin-137 in prevention
of tumor formation in mice prone to cancer due to oncogene
overexpression. We used in vitro (Ha-ras12V) and in vivo (MMTV-neu
transgenic mouse model) models of transformation to monitor changes in
FACT subunits. We treated the MMTV-neu transgenic mice, in which mammary
carcinomas are spontaneously developed due to estrogen receptor-regulated
expression of the Her2 proto-oncogene, with Curaxin-137 to determine
whether the drug has any toxic effect on normal tissues and/or impact on
mammary carcinogenesis. Expression of FACT was elevated in the process of
transformation in all models tested. Chronic administration of
Curaxin-137 to MMTV-neu mice at doses not having any toxic effect,
inhibited tumor onset, delayed tumor progression, and prolonged survival
of mice in a dose-dependent manner. Curaxin-137 induced much stronger
changes in FACT in tumors than in normal organs, expressing FACT
(spleen). Thus, Curaxin-137 may be considered as a potential preventive
and/or early stage therapeutic agent for breast cancer.

