Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Organ specific biomatrix scaffolds for ex vivo characterization of
colorectal cancer metastases


Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
the United States with more than 140,000 new cases being diagnosed this
year. However, morbidity and mortality is not generally caused by the
primary tumor, but by metastases to other organs. There are few models in
which to study colorectal cancer metastasis, either in two-dimensional
(2D) monolayer tissue culture or in animal xenografts. Both of these
models have limitations. Standard 2D tissue culture, though inexpensive
and accessible, poorly mimics the metastatic process and xenograft models
are costly and technically challenging. Two of the most common sites of
colorectal metastasis are the liver and lungs, however, there are few ex
vivo models in which to study metastases to these sites. Advances in
materials science have led to the development of ex vivo tissue specific
models of extracellular matrices (ECM). We have utilized a novel
material, biomatrix scaffolds, to engineer a colorectal cancer metastasis
ex vivo model. We hypothesized that through the use of liver and lung
specific biomatrix, (1) we can better characterize the colorectal cancer
metastatic process by mimicking the organ specific microenvironment and
(2) more accurately determine the response to therapeutic agents to treat
metastases. In this study, we characterized biomatrix derived from rat
liver and lung as a growth substrate for human colon cancer cell lines.
We used the human colon cancer derived cell lines: HT29, SW480, CaCo2 and
Lovo. Chemotherapeutic response to oxaliplatin, irinotecan and
5-fluorouracil for these cell lines grown on biomatrix was examined. We
also used primary cultures of colorectal cancer metastases derived from
patient samples. The biomatrix scaffolds were generated through
decellularization of rat liver or lungs. We preformed mass spectrometry
and determined the ECM composition and the associated growth factors
found in lysates of liver and lung remain bound to the biomatrix in
concentrations similar to those found in vivo. Colorectal cancer cell
lines demonstrated different growth rates and morphologies when grown on
biomatrix, resulting in organized, 3-dimenasional growth of non-hollow
spheroids several hundred microns in diameter. We demonstrated
differential responses to chemotherapeutics and observed differential
gene expression via microarray analysis when colorectal cancer cell lines
were grown on biomatrix compared to plastic, collagen, or matrigel. We
also demonstrated increased tumor cell colony formation in primary
cultures of patient derived colorectal metastases on biomatrix compared
to plastic or collagen. In conclusion, we have developed a decellularized
tissue material, biomatrix, that can provide an ex vivo model of
colorectal cancer metastasis to aid in therapeutic drug development and
genetic characterization of metastasis.

