Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor adiponectin signaling underlies the association between
obesity and lethal outcome in prostate cancer


Background: Obesity is associated with poor outcomes in men with prostate
cancer. The biologic drivers of this relationship are poorly understood.
Adiponectin is produced by adipose tissue and has been shown to regulate
multiple pathways including inflammation, angiogenisis and insulin
sensitivity. Low circulating levels are associated both with obesity and
with lethal prostate cancer. Here we investigate whether adiponectin
signaling has a differential effect on cancer outcomes in the tumors of
obese compared to healthy weight men. Methods: The study cohort consisted
of men diagnosed with prostate cancer from the Physicians Health Study
(1982-2004) and the Health Professionals Follow Up Study (1986-2004) for
whom archival tumor specimens were available. Follow-up data for
development of metastases and cancer-specific mortality (defined as
lethal prostate cancer) was available through 2010. Gene set analyses was
undertaken for 116 men using gene expression profiling data from
cDNA-mediated annealing, selection, extension, and ligation (DASL) assay
of 6000 genes. Genes differentially expressed between lethal (n=30 lethal
events) and indolent disease among the obese and healthy weight men were
explored. Immunohistochemistry for adiponectin receptor 2 (ADIPOR2)
protein expression in tumors and adjacent normal was performed on tissue
microarrays representing tumor tissue from 1017 patients (n=98 lethal
events). Anthropometric measures were obtained from validated
questionnaires. Results: Gene set analysis identified distinct gene sets
that were enriched in the comparison of lethal to indolent among the
obese and healthy weight men. In the obese men, five gene sets were
enriched in the lethal cases with a false discovery rate Background:
Obesity is associated with poor outcomes in men with prostate cancer. The
biologic drivers of this relationship are poorly understood. Adiponectin
is produced by adipose tissue and has been shown to regulate multiple
pathways including inflammation, angiogenisis and insulin sensitivity.
Low circulating levels are associated both with obesity and with lethal
prostate cancer. Here we investigate whether adiponectin signaling has a
differential effect on cancer outcomes in the tumors of obese compared to
healthy weight men. Methods: The study cohort consisted of men diagnosed
with prostate cancer from the Physicians Health Study (1982-2004) and the
Health Professionals Follow Up Study (1986-2004) for whom archival tumor
specimens were available. Follow-up data for development of metastases
and cancer-specific mortality (defined as lethal prostate cancer) was
available through 2010. Gene set analyses was undertaken for 116 men
using gene expression profiling data from cDNA-mediated annealing,
selection, extension, and ligation (DASL) assay of 6000 genes. Genes
differentially expressed between lethal (n=30 lethal events) and indolent
disease among the obese and healthy weight men were explored.
Immunohistochemistry for adiponectin receptor 2 (ADIPOR2) protein
expression in tumors and adjacent normal was performed on tissue
microarrays representing tumor tissue from 1017 patients (n=98 lethal
events). Anthropometric measures were obtained from validated
questionnaires. Results: Gene set analysis identified distinct gene sets
that were enriched in the comparison of lethal to indolent among the
obese and healthy weight men. In the obese men, five gene sets were
enriched in the lethal cases with a false discovery rate <0.1. The second
most enriched set associated with lethality was the KEGG adiponectin
signaling pathway. We found that protein expression of ADIPOR2 in
prostate tumors, but not normal prostate, was higher among obese compared
to healthy weight men. Moreover, high expression of ADIPOR2 protein
expression was associated with a 3-fold greater risk of lethal outcomes.
Conclusion: Tumor adiponectin signaling appears to be key pathway
underlying lethal outcomes in obese men with prostate cancer. This work
supports the hypothesis that there are unique drivers of poor outcome
among obese men with prostate cancer.

