Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel anticancer drugs as substrates of organic
anion transporting polypeptide 1B3 using a cell viability assay


Organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B3 (OATP1B3) belongs to a
superfamily of transport proteins that mediate the uptake of a wide range
of endogenous and exogenous compounds into cells. Under normal conditions
OATP1B3 is selectively expressed at the basolateral membrane of human
hepatocytes. Recently, OATP1B3 expression has been detected in a variety
of different cancers and because of its multispecificity OATP1B3 is
thought to be a potential therapeutic target to enhance drug delivery
into cancer cells. Thus far, only a few anticancer drugs have been
identified as substrates of OATP1B3 including docetaxel, paclitaxel,
methotrexate and imatinib. Given that OATP1B3 can potentially be used as
a target for anticancer drug delivery we need to identify additional
anticancer drug substrates of OATP1B3. Therefore, we aimed at
establishing a cell based high throughput assay to screen the NCI
approved oncology drug set for novel cytotoxic substrates of OATP1B3.
Using a luminescent cell viability assay, we measured the viability of
wild-type and OATP1B3-expressing Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells in the
absence or presence of the anticancer drugs. After we identified positive
hits we further characterized them with respect to concentration
dependencies. We identified etoposide, bleomycin, oxaliplatin and
plicamycin as compounds that kill OATP1B3-expressing CHO cells at much
lower concentrations than wild-type CHO cells suggesting that these
compounds are substrates of OATP1B3. Using secondary assays we confirmed
that etoposide is a substrate of OATP1B3 and we are currently testing the
remaining compounds for direct uptake by OATP1B3. In conclusion, this
cell-based viability assay is a good tool to identify novel cytotoxic
OATP1B3 substrates that can potentially be used to treat
OATP1B3-expressing cancers.

