Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of the optimal route of administration of Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R to target breast cancer in nude mice


We have previously developed the genetically-modified strain Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R that selectively targets tumors. S. typhimurium A1-R is
auxotrophic for leu and arg, which precludes it from growing in normal
tissues but allows high tumor virulence. We report here the efficacy and
safety of three different routes of S. typhimurium A1-R delivery oral
(p.o.), intravenous (i.v.), and intra-tumor (i.t.) in nude mice with
orthotopic human breast cancer. Nude mice with MDA-MB-435 human breast
cancer expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP) were administered S.
typhimurium A1-R by either of 3 routes: (p.o.: 2 108 CFU/200 l; i.v.: 2.5
107 CFU/100 l; i.t.: 2.5 107 CFU/50 l) twice a week. Tumor growth was
monitored by florescence imaging and caliper measurement in two
dimensions. Treatment with S. typhimurium A1-R via all three routes
resulted in effective targeting and tumor growth inhibition. Efficacy was
observed earliest in the animals treated by i.v. injection.
GFP-expressing S. typhimurium A1-R were imaged to target, colonize, and
replicate in the human breast tumor, liver, and spleen as observed by
fluorescence imaging. Bacterial colonization of tumor and normal organs
at different time points were determined after S. typhimurium delivery by
either of the 3 routes. S. typhimurium A1-R targeted tumors at much
higher levels than normal organs with all 3 routes of administration. The
bacteria replicated and survived longer in the tumor than normal organs
with all 3 routes of administration. Two weeks after bacteria
administration by all 3 routes, the bacteria disappeared from normal
organs, but grew continuously in the tumor. The fewest bacteria were
detected in normal organs after oral administration, which suggests oral
administration has the highest safety. The i.v. route had the greatest
anti-tumor efficacy. There were no obvious toxic effects on the host with
any of the routes of administration. Non-tumor-bearing mice tolerated S.
typhimurium A1-R, p.o., twice weekly treatment and could survive as long
as untreated mice. The results of this study suggest that oral
administration was the most safe to the host and the i.v. route was most
effective for tumor targeting with S. typhimurium A1-R.

