Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of sarcophine-diol (SD) on melanoma B16F10 cell line


Sarcophine diol (SD) is a non-toxic semi-synthetic derivative of
sarcophine, a marine natural product. Previously, we studied the
chemopreventive effects of SD on non-melanoma tumor development using
both animal and cellular models. In this current study, we used the mouse
melanoma B16F10 cell line to investigate the possible effects of SD on
melanoma cell development. We found that SD at a 250 M concentrations
inhibits cell duplication. Melanoma cells treated with SD do not form the
contractile ring, a multi-protein complex involved in cell division. As a
result of cytoskeleton modification, cells treated with SD do not show
the ability to carry out de novo synthesis of DNA, and their DNA show a
high degree of fragmentation compared to untreated controls. To explore
the molecular mechanism(s) involved in the disassembly of the contractile
machinery, our studies show that SD treatment inhibits cell membrane
permeability for small molecular mass compounds (e.g. ethidium bromide
which is used as an indicator for cell permeability to Ca2+ ions). These
findings are consistent with the observation that SD increases cleavage
of phospholipase A2 (PLA2), resulting in low PLA2 enzymatic activity.
These findings are also consistent with the observation that SD, in a
time- and concentration-dependent manner, inhibits the expression level
of the cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2). As a result of the decline in membrane
permeability in SD treated cells and the negative effect of SD on the
protein level of phospholipase C (PLC), which both affect the activity of
contractile machinery, the non-dividing cells undergo apoptosis. The
latter notion is supported by findings that SD inhibits the expression of
STAT-3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription protein), and
cyclin D1 (an activator of cyclin-dependent kinase 4, Cdk4). SD treatment
also enhances the cellular level of the tumor suppressing protein 53
(p53) and stimulates cleavage of the nuclear poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(cleaved-PARP). SD also enhances the cellular level of cleaved-Caspase-3,
-8, -9 and stimulates enzymatic activities of Caspase-3, -8 and -9. All
these findings, in addition to inhibition of cell viability, suggest that
SD most likely inhibits melanoma cell growth by arresting the
cell-division cycle in a Go quiescent phase and simultaneously activates
apoptosis via extrinsic and intrinsic pathways.

