Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of new therapeutic strategies for rare cancers with
defined genetic lesions


Rare cancers are defined as those with an incidence of less than 0.05% in
a given population, yet collectively make up 20% of all cancers. A
proportion of these are characterized by a primary, driving genetic
lesion which disrupts normal cell regulation, resulting in malignancy.
Patients of rare cancer could potentially benefit from clinically
approved targeted therapies developed for other cancers; however their
rarity makes recruitment for clinical trials extremely difficult. Cell
lines derived from these patients often maintain the genetic lesions
present in the parent tumor, and therefore can serve as a platform to
evaluate the efficacy of novel therapeutic strategies. Here we describe
in vitro strategies for identifying novel treatment regimens for the
rare, simple karyotype cancer Myxoid Liposarcoma (MLS). MLS is
characterized by a single genetic event, the chromosomal translocation
t(12;16)(q13;p11), which occurs in >95% of cases. The gene product of
this translocation is the constitutively active fusion protein FUS-CHOP,
which alters the expression of transcription factors responsible for
regulating adipocytic differentiation. This drives the cells into a
perpetual state of proliferation in the absence of differentiation, thus
leading to malignancy. This study uses the cell lines MLS 402 and MLS
1765, which are derived from MLS patients, and express FUS-CHOP. Cells
were screened with a panel of anti-cancer treatments, including
antibodies, small molecule inhibitors and chemotherapies. Axitinib was
identified as an efficacious treatment both alone and in combination with
other therapies. Axitinib caused cell cycle arrest and induced apoptosis
as verified by Annexin V flow cytometry assay. This multi-kinase
inhibitor targets the membrane-bound receptors c-Kit, PDGFR/ and
VEGFR1/2/3. Western blot and bioplex assays were utilised to determine
the downstream target molecules inhibited by axitinib treatment. Axitinib
significantly reduced signalling activity through the AKT/mTOR and
MEK/ERK1/2 pathways. Axitinib also displayed additive and synergistic
anti-tumor activity with other targeted therapies. The establishment of
cell lines that retain the key genetic mutation found in rare cancers is
a useful approach for identifying novel therapeutic options.

