Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of autophagy and Atg3 in erlotinib-resistant lung cancer
and synergistic cell death with combination of erlotinib and cisplatin


Objective: Erlotinib is a mainstay anti-cancer agent for non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) but resistance to erlotinib is a major problem,
clinically. The combination of cisplatin and erlotinib has been suggested
to inhibit tumor growth more effectively than a single drug alone in
sensitive NSCLC. However, the mechanism underlying this finding remains
unclear. The specific role of autophagy in cancer and chemotherapy
resistance continues to be unclear (promotion vs. prevention of cancer).
In this study, we investigate whether combination low dose erlotinib and
cisplatin is effective against erlotinib resistant NSCLC and examined the
role of autophagy in erlotinib resistance. Methods: PC9, a NSCLC cell
line, was used to develop erlotinib resistant PC9 cells (PC9ER). Cell
survival was quantified with Alamar blue assay. LC3II and regulatory
proteins of autophagy were measured by western blot. Small interfering
RNA (siRNA) transfection was used to block translation of protein of
interest. Results: Combination low dose erlotinib and cisplatin resulted
in synergistic cell death in PC9ER cells (pObjective: Erlotinib is a
mainstay anti-cancer agent for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but
resistance to erlotinib is a major problem, clinically. The combination
of cisplatin and erlotinib has been suggested to inhibit tumor growth
more effectively than a single drug alone in sensitive NSCLC. However,
the mechanism underlying this finding remains unclear. The specific role
of autophagy in cancer and chemotherapy resistance continues to be
unclear (promotion vs. prevention of cancer). In this study, we
investigate whether combination low dose erlotinib and cisplatin is
effective against erlotinib resistant NSCLC and examined the role of
autophagy in erlotinib resistance. Methods: PC9, a NSCLC cell line, was
used to develop erlotinib resistant PC9 cells (PC9ER). Cell survival was
quantified with Alamar blue assay. LC3II and regulatory proteins of
autophagy were measured by western blot. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
transfection was used to block translation of protein of interest.
Results: Combination low dose erlotinib and cisplatin resulted in
synergistic cell death in PC9ER cells (p<0.0001) and a significant
decrease in autophagy (p=0.011). At baseline, there was a significantly
higher level of LC3II in PC9ER cells compared to sensitive PC9 (p=0.030)
suggesting autophagy may play a role in resistance. Rapamycin
significantly increased ER (p=0.0004) and 3-MA significantly sensitized
PC9ER cells to treatment (p=0.037). Upon examination of autophagy
regulatory proteins between PC9ER and PC9 cells, there was significantly
lower levels in p-mTOR (p=0.021) and higher levels of Atg3 in PC9ER at
baseline (p=0.018). Among the four treatment groups (control,
erlotinib-alone, cisplatin-alone, and erlotinib-cisplatin combination),
there was a specific decrease in Atg3 with combination treatment
(p=0.005). siRNA transfection of Atg3 resulted in the reversal of ER: 42%
more cell death with erlotinib-alone (pObjective: Erlotinib is a mainstay
anti-cancer agent for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but resistance
to erlotinib is a major problem, clinically. The combination of cisplatin
and erlotinib has been suggested to inhibit tumor growth more effectively
than a single drug alone in sensitive NSCLC. However, the mechanism
underlying this finding remains unclear. The specific role of autophagy
in cancer and chemotherapy resistance continues to be unclear (promotion
vs. prevention of cancer). In this study, we investigate whether
combination low dose erlotinib and cisplatin is effective against
erlotinib resistant NSCLC and examined the role of autophagy in erlotinib
resistance. Methods: PC9, a NSCLC cell line, was used to develop
erlotinib resistant PC9 cells (PC9ER). Cell survival was quantified with
Alamar blue assay. LC3II and regulatory proteins of autophagy were
measured by western blot. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection was
used to block translation of protein of interest. Results: Combination
low dose erlotinib and cisplatin resulted in synergistic cell death in
PC9ER cells (p<0.0001) and a significant decrease in autophagy (p=0.011).
At baseline, there was a significantly higher level of LC3II in PC9ER
cells compared to sensitive PC9 (p=0.030) suggesting autophagy may play a
role in resistance. Rapamycin significantly increased ER (p=0.0004) and
3-MA significantly sensitized PC9ER cells to treatment (p=0.037). Upon
examination of autophagy regulatory proteins between PC9ER and PC9 cells,
there was significantly lower levels in p-mTOR (p=0.021) and higher
levels of Atg3 in PC9ER at baseline (p=0.018). Among the four treatment
groups (control, erlotinib-alone, cisplatin-alone, and
erlotinib-cisplatin combination), there was a specific decrease in Atg3
with combination treatment (p=0.005). siRNA transfection of Atg3 resulted
in the reversal of ER: 42% more cell death with erlotinib-alone
(p<0.0001), 18% more cell death (p=0.002) in cisplatin treatment, and 9%
more cell death in erlotinib-cisplatin combination (p=0.047) compared to
the counterpart treatment groups without siRNA transfection. Conclusions:
Our data may suggest that autophagy may promote cancer survival and ER in
NSCLC, specifically by up regulation of Atg3 and targeting of Atg3 may be
the key to re-sensitizing erlotinib resistant cancers. In addition, it
seems erlotinib-cisplatin combination is an effective therapy by down
modulation of autophagy by targeting Atg3. Future pharmacologic therapies
specifically targeting Atg3 in complement to erlotinib therapy may be
effective in preventing and treating ER.

