Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An alternative mechanism of action for paclitaxel in breast cancer


Paclitaxel is a microtubule-stabilizing drug that binds to the -tubulin
subunit and accumulates in mitotic cells. As a chemotherapeutic agent,
paclitaxel is used for the treatment of a variety of cancers including
breast. Currently, no biomarker is available to predict which patients
will benefit from paclitaxel treatment. Paclitaxel studies in cells focus
primarily on relatively high concentrations of the drug, which cause
cells to die following long-term mitotic arrest. The clinically relevant
concentration of paclitaxel is currently unknown, although it is widely
speculated to be in the low nM range. Cells exposed to low concentrations
of paclitaxel complete mitosis with minimal delay, but frequently contain
multipolar spindles. In chromosomally stable breast cancer cells, low
concentrations of paclitaxel are sufficient to increase aneuploidy within
two days of exposure. These data suggest that the mechanism of cell death
due to low dose paclitaxel is likely to be quite different from the
mechanism of cell death caused by high dose paclitaxel. They also predict
that chromosomally instable (CIN) cells may be more sensitive to cell
death caused by low doses of paclitaxel. CIN cells have an existing level
of chromosomal missegregation, which is likely to be exacerbated by
treatment with low doses of paclitaxel. Since missegregation of large
numbers of chromosomes per division causes rapid cell death, these cells
may be more likely to die after low dose paclitaxel treatment as a result
of losing both copies of a vital chromosome. Chromosomally stable cells,
which do not normally missegregate chromosomes with each division, would
be more resistant to death following paclitaxel treatment than CIN cells.
These data suggest that CIN may be used as a biomarker to determine which
tumors are most likely to be sensitive to treatment with clinically
relevant concentrations of paclitaxel.

