Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of NSCLC through modulation of autophagy and
senescence


Introduction: Radiotherapy (IR) is a key treatment modality in the
treatment of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is
commonly combined with chemotherapy to prolong survival, although the
gain is generally quite modest. An underlying cause for the relatively
poor cure rate is the resistance to chemotherapy, which is partially
associated with the dysregulation of cell death signaling, particularly
apoptotic pathways. Thus, the current work was designed to exploit the
capacity of 1,25D3 (the hormonally active form of vitamin D) to
radiosensitize A549 cells. Experimental Procedure: In vitro studies
assessed the effects of 100nM 1,25D3 alone, radiation alone (6 Gy) and
the combination treatment of 100nM 1,25D3 concurrently with radiation in
A549 NSCLC cells. Cell viability was assessed over a period of 7 days and
sensitization to radiation was confirmed by clonogenic survival assays.
Senescence was measured by -galactosidase staining as well as C12FDG
fluorescence measurement by flow cytometry. Levels of the senescence
associated markers p21, pRb, and p53 were monitored by western
immunoblotting. Autophagy was inhibited pharmacologically using 5mM 3-MA
and 10M chloroquine. Autophagy induction was monitored by acridine orange
with quantification using flow cytometry, while autophagic flux was based
on degradation of p62. Results: 1,25D3 sensitized A549 cells to radiation
based on reduced clonogenic survival; viable cell counting indicated that
the combination treatment resulted in apparently irreversible growth
arrest with no significant recovery. -galactosidase staining, C12FDG
measurement by flow cytometry, and p21 expression levels were indicative
of senescence by Days 3 and 5 while acridine orange staining and p62
degradation demonstrated the induction of autophagy. Pharmacological
suppression of autophagy induced by 1,25D3 + IR resulted in a temporary
delay of senescence. Conclusions: For many years, cancer therapy has
relied on cytotoxic treatment strategies for the eradication of tumors
and overall patient survival. These therapies are associated with severe
and often harmful side effects. Recent studies have suggested that
therapy-induced senescence could provide an alternative strategy for
improving cancer therapy. Our studies demonstrate that treatment with
1,25D3 has the capacity to sensitize A549 cells to radiation treatment by
the induction of senescence that is preceded by autophagy. This model
could represent a novel, pro-senescence therapy treatment to promote
disease intervention and therapeutic gain for NSCLC.

