Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of activity and drug resistance with proteasome
inhibitors in multiple myeloma: Comparison of bortezomib and the
investigational drug MLN9708


Background: Therapy with proteasome inhibitors (PIs) is an effective
strategy against multiple myeloma (MM), but a significant proportion of
patients is primarily resistant or eventually becomes refractory.
Paradoxical activation of phospho-Akt, induction of HSP27 and excessive
proteasome activity in relation to polyubiquitinated protein burden are
all mechanisms for bortezomib resistance in MM cells in vitro.
Preclinical data showed investigational drug MLN9708, a specific,
reversible, orally bioavailable, small molecule PI, to be active in MM
cell lines, patient cells and mouse models and is currently under
clinical investigation. We compared the signaling pathways induced by
MLN2238, the biologically active form of MLN9708, and bortezomib to
outline differences that could be employed to design rational
combinations to overcome resistance. Results: We performed time course
experiments in MM.1S cells with EC50 doses of MLN2238 and bortezomib and
analyzed signaling pathways via western blotting. Compared to bortezomib,
MLN2238 induced earlier cleavage of caspase 8, 9, 3 and PARP and a
significant downregulation of XIAP starting at 12 hours. Early and
persistent phosphorylation of Bad, known to protect from mitochondrial
apoptosis, was observed in bortezomib-, but not MLN2238-treated cells, in
which phospho-Bad was reduced at 24 hours. Similarly, MLN2238 decreased
phosphorylated Akt and mTOR at 24 hours, while bortezomib-treated cells
only showed subtle changes. Interestingly, both drugs caused
downregulation of the mTOR downstream targets phospho-p70 S6 kinase and
phospho-4E-BP1, albeit of different intensity. Induction of heat shock
proteins was comparable with both PI, opening the possibilities for
combination therapy of MLN2238 with HSP90 inhibitors. Importantly, the
inhibitory effect on phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR and Bad persisted when
MM.1S cells were treated with MLN2238 in the presence of bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSC). Conclusion: We observed differences in several
crucial signaling pathways upon treatment of MM.1S cells with bortezomib
or MLN2238. In particular, treatment with the latter inhibited
phosphorylation of Bad, Akt and mTOR, suggesting a broader pro-apoptotic
and anti-proliferative profile, compared to bortezomib. MLN2238 retained
the capability of targeting these substrates also in the presence of
BMSC. Confirmatory data on patient-derived cells are under current
investigation in our lab. We believe that these data help understanding
the differences in PI pharmacodynamics and bortezomib escape. This will
allow us to design new drug combinations in the future that overcome
clinical resistance to PIs and improve MM patient survival.

