Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of synthetic lethal interactions in KRAS oncogene
dependent cancer cells reveals novel therapeutic targeting strategies


Oncogenic mutations in RAS genes are very common in many human cancers,
including those affecting the lung and the gastro-intestinal tract. RAS
mutant cancers tend to be resistant to most targeted therapies,
emphasising a clear need for the development of more effective
treatments. Oncogenic KRAS deregulates numerous downstream pathways,
resulting in cells with well-characterised selective advantages, but also
less well understood vulnerabilities. In a panel of twenty-six non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, half of which carry an activating
KRAS mutation, knock-down of KRAS using siRNA indicates that KRAS mutant
cells require KRAS expression to maintain viability. Moreover, KRAS
depletion produces a clear inhibition of ERK and AKT signaling. As RAS
proteins cannot be inhibited directly at present, we tested small
molecule inhibitors targeting pathways directly controlled by RAS, such
as RAS/RAF/MEK or PI3K/AKT/mTOR, as well as drugs directed against other
targets (such as HSP90, topoisomerases or the proteasome) in order to
affect tumour-specific vulnerabilities associated with the oncogenic
state. Viability assays showed that cells harbouring an activated KRAS
oncogene were more sensitive to MEK, RAF and IGF-1R inhibitors than cells
carrying only wild-type KRAS alleles. In contrast, no differential loss
of cell viability was observed when cells were treated with either PI3K
or AKT inhibitors. Combinations of IGF-1R inhibitors with MEK or RAF
inhibitors resulted in a synergistic anti-proliferative effect in KRAS
mutant cell lines. Similar effects were observed upon simultaneous
treatment with PI3K and MEK inhibitors. However, in this case, wild-type
KRAS cells were also affected by PI3K inhibition, resulting in a
less-pronounced differential effect. Pathway inhibition analysis showed
that, whereas MEK and PI3K inhibitors respectively decreased ERK and AKT
phosphorylation in all cell lines, IGF1R inhibitors decreased AKT
phosphorylation only in KRAS mutant cell lines. Inhibition of AKT
phosphorylation correlates with effectiveness of IGF-1R inhibitor in
blocking cell proliferation. Mechanistically, it appears that mutant KRAS
activation of PI3K requires coordinate input from IGF-1R. These findings
suggest potential therapeutic strategies for NSCLC tumours harbouring
KRAS mutations.

