Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peritoneal carcinomatosis depends for growth and spreading on
endogenous inflammatory cues generated by infiltrating macrophages


Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the most common terminal feature of
abdominal cancers. Interfering with the peritoneal immune
microenvironment is a promising tool for combinational therapy.
Preclinical studies on peritoneal carcinomatosis have been hampered by
the limited availability of models as well as non-invasive methods to
follow tumor growth. We set up ad hoc models via the orthotopic injection
of murine cells lines in immuno-competent mice and followed tumor growth
by imaging with [18F]2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose-PET ([18F]-FDG-PET).
Colon carcinoma (MC38), Mouse Ovarian Surface Epithelial Carcinoma cell
line (MOSEC) of C57BL/6 origin and adenocarcinoma cells (TS/A) of Balb/C
origin were injected intraperitoneally in syngeneic mice. The models
nicely recapitulated the histological features of the human disease:
carcinoma cells distributed along the cavity and yielded several masses
attached to the peritoneal lining. Animals were longitudinally followed
by imaging with [18F]-FDG-PET: tumor lesions selectively up-took the
radioactive tracer and we observed a significant correlation between
lesion dimension and metabolic radioactive volume. We characterized
leukocyte composition of the peritoneal liquid of tumor bearing mice by
multicolor flow cytometry, performing peritoneal lavage on live animals
at various time points during tumor growth. Tumor spreading induced the
recruitment of leukocytes, among which the most relevant population was
represented by CD45+CD11b+F4/80+ monocytes/macrophages. The depletion of
peritoneal monocytes/macrophages, via administration of clodronate
encapsulated in liposomes, lead to a substantial reduction of tumor
burden as well as leukocyte recruitment, and was paralleled by a
decrement in the extent of radioactivity distribution when imaging mice
with [18F]-FDG-PET. Moreover we found out that colon carcinoma cells upon
in-vitro treatment with stress-inducing stimuli, such as starvation and
chemotherapeutic agents exposure, produced factors involved in leukocytes
recruitment: this behavior was directly linked to the activation of
autophagic and apoptotic intracellular pathways. In conclusion,
[18F]-FDG-PET imaging allowed the non-invasive detection of peritoneal
adenocarcinoma lesions which spreading and growth was dependent on the
production of factors involved in leukocytes recruitment, specifically on
peritoneal monocytes/macrophages.

