Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Credentialing UHRF1 as a target for prostate cancer therapy


Alterations in DNA methylation are a hallmark of prostate carcinogenesis.
UHRF1 is an essential component in the machinery required for the
maintenance of DNA methylation in actively dividing cells. In S-phase,
UHRF1 binds nascent hemimethylated DNA and recruits DNA
methyltransferases to copy the methylation pattern to the daughter DNA
strand in a manner analogous to semi-conservative replication.
Additionally, it has been shown that UHRF1 interacts with methylated
histones and histone methyltransferases, making it an important
epigenetic regulator in proliferating cells. Because of its ties to
epigenetic gene silencing and cell proliferation, we hypothesized that
UHRF1 could serve as a target for prostate cancer treatment. In this
study, we have taken steps to credential UHRF1 as a therapeutic target in
prostate cancer and have developed a high-throughput UHRF1-DNA binding
assay to screen for UHRF1 inhibitors. We show that UHRF1 is overexpressed
in a panel of prostate cancer cell lines and it appears to track with
proliferation in prostate cancer tissue. Through loss-of-function studies
in prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145, we show that long-term UHRF1
depletion leads to a decrease in clonogenic survival and an overall
reduction in global levels of DNA methylation. Further, we find that
UHRF1 is required to maintain DNA methylation and epigenetic silencing of
hypermethylated genes in prostate cancer cells. Additionally, ChIP
experiments revealed that UHRF1 can be bound at the promoter CpG islands
of epigenetically silenced genes in prostate cancer cells. With the goal
of ultimately developing UHRF1 inhibitors, we have developed a
time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET)-based
assay, compatible with high-throughput screening, that can detect the
binding of the SRA domain of UHRF1 to hemimethylated DNA. In summary, we
have shown that UHRF1 plays a critical role in maintaining the DNA
methylation of epigenetically silenced genes in prostate cancer and have
developed an assay for high-throughput screening of UHRF1 inhibitors.

