Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tasquinimod suppresses the adaptive stress response within sites
of prostate cancer via disrupting zinc-dependent Histone Deacetylase 4
signaling.


Tasquinimod (i.e.,
N-ethyl-N-phenyl-5-chloro-1,2-dihydro-4-hydroxy-1-methyl-2-oxo-3-quinoline-
carboxamide) is a novel orally active potent inhibitor of tumor
angiogenesis with single agent efficacy which also enhances androgen
ablation, taxane-based chemotherapies, or fractionated radiation in
pre-clinical prostate cancer models [Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2010).
19: 1235-43]. Based upon its anti-angiogenic efficacy, tasquinimod is in
clinical development and has successfully completed phase I/II testing
and is presently in multi-center Phase III evaluation for the treatment
of castration resistant prostate cancer at an oral dose of up to1mg per
day. To clarify the molecular targets for tasquinimod's anti-angiogenic
efficacy, a library of quinoline-3-carboxamide analogs was screened based
upon inhibition of human endothelial cell sprouting in a 3-dimensional
assay to identify the active pharmacophore. These structure activity
relationship (SAR) studies document that the two carbonyl oxygens in the
quinoline-2-position and 3-position carboxamide side chain are essential
for activity. These SAR studies raised the issue of whether these two
carbonyl oxygens might function in bidentate metal binding. To test this
possibility surface plasmon resonance was used to evaluate binding of
tasquinimod to Zn bound proteins. These studies document that tasquinimod
binds with low nM affinity to Zn bound proteins. A combination of tumor,
cell, and molecular biology assays identified HDAC4 as one of the Zn
bound proteins to which tasquinimod binds. Using shRNA knock-down and
subsequent replacement knock-in, both human prostate cancer cells and
human endothelial cells require a critical level of nuclear HDAC4
function to survive in both cell culture and xenograft assays under
cellular stress conditions like acidic pH and hypoxia characteristic of
cancer growth. Survival under these stress conditions requires formation
of HDAC4/N-CoR/HDAC3 complexes which bind to and deacetylate
transcription factors, like HIF-1, altering transcription. Such
HDAC4/N-CoR/HDAC3 complex formation occurs through a structural Zn
binding domain in HDAC4. While tasquinimod does not inhibit HDAC
enzymatic activity directly, it binds HDAC4 and inhibits Zn-dependent
formation of HDAC4/N-CoR/HDAC3 complex thus inhibiting deacetylation of
HIF-1 preventing the adaptive transcription response needed for survival
under acidic/hypoxia conditions. The fact that tasquinimod phenocopies
the response of prostate cancer and endothelial cells to HDAC4 knock-down
identifies HDAC4 as one of the critical targets for tasquinimod's
mechanism of action.

