Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucocorticoid receptor function is essential for SOCS2-mediated
negative regulation of hepatic GHR signaling


GHR signaling plays an essential role in somatic growth and development
as well as in the maintenance of metabolic homeostasis. Target tissue
responsiveness to GH is dependent on postreceptor mechanisms to
circumvent unphysiological and off-target effects due to prolonged GHR
activation. GHR signals amongst others through the JAK2/STAT5 pathway.
SOCS2, a GH-STAT5-regulated gene, is a key negative regulator of GHR
sensitivity. Transcription of distinct GH-STAT5-dependent gene subsets
requires coactivator function of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). This
mechanism was shown to involve direct binding of GR to the STAT5
N-terminus. Earlier studies have implied that regulation of SOCS2 also
requires synergistic action of STAT5 and GR. Therefore, our aim is to
investigate the molecular interaction between STAT5 and GR to regulate
SOCS2 expression. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of the GR causes reduced
hepatic Socs2 mRNA expression approximately to the same extent as
STAT5-deficient livers. Furthermore, STAT5 activity was increased and
prolonged in GR-deficient livers upon exogenous GH administration. Genes
which are dependent on functional STAT5-GR protein interaction often
harbor potential STAT5 oligomer binding sites in their promoter regions.
Using bioinformatic screening, we found three STAT5 oligomer binding
sites in the murine distal Socs2 promoter region. First, binding of
activated STAT5 to the putative binding sites was confirmed by DNA
binding assays. Subsequently, we performed transactivation studies using
a luciferase reporter construct containing the relevant region of the
Socs2 promoter and an additional 3 region to assess the requirement for
putative enhancer sequences. Maximum luciferase activity was observed in
the presence of activated STAT5b and GR only. However, this pronounced
transactivation was severely impaired upon transfection of the
aminoterminally truncated STAT5 isoform (STAT5N). Additionally, direct
physical interaction of activated STAT5 and GR on the Socs2 promoter was
detected in GH/dexamethasone-treated control livers by re-ChIP assays. We
demonstrate that full Socs2 transactivation requires STAT5-GR
protein-protein interaction in hepatocytes. As the liver represents a
primary site of GH-mediated STAT5 activation, deregulated GR signaling
could lead to imbalanced liver GH sensitivity due to aberrant
SOCS2-mediated feedback inhibition.

