Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of multiple myeloma in a novel humanized bone marrow
xenograft model does not depend on CD138 expression


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable B lineage malignancy characterized
by an accumulation of monoclonal plasma cells in the bone marrow (BM) and
is responsible for 20% of deaths from hematological cancers. MM patients
present with an overproduction of monoclonal immunoglobulin, anemia, and
hypercalcemia resulting in susceptibility to infection and end organ
damage. Patients develop lytic bone lesions resulting in pathological
fractures and significant pain. Plasmacytomas, solid tumors comprised of
a single plasma cell clone, and extramedullary MM, presenting with
lesions in the liver, lungs, and other organs, have also been reported in
patients. Despite the development of potent new therapies, the median
survival of MM patients remains 3-5 years, suggesting that a
drug-resistant cancer stem cell (CSC) may be responsible for the
inevitable relapse. We developed a clinically relevant humanized BM
murine model of MM utilizing the NOD.Cg-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG)
mouse line (huBM/NSG model), sensitive enough to study the behavior of
the putative CSC populations. To recapitulate the clinical symptoms of MM
varying MM cell lines and primary cells from BM biopsies were
co-transplanted with human BM stromal cells via an intratibial injection.
Upon engraftment (5-15 weeks), mice developed systemic MM, plasmacytoma,
and extramedullary disease. huBM/NSG mice developed symptoms of MM,
including lytic bone lesions, elevated serum calcium, and low hemoglobin,
mimicking the human presentation of MM with bone lesions, hypercalcemia,
and anemia. In contrast to MM cell lines that induced disease without the
support of human BM stroma, primary MM cells were able to engraft mouse
bones and cause disease only when co-injected with human BM stromal
cells. To determine whether CD138 can be used as a reliable marker for
the MM-CSC, MM cells were sorted into CD138 positive and negative
populations and injected into huBM/NSG mice to determine engraftment
efficiency of each fraction. Surprisingly, both CD138+ and CD138- cell
populations were able to engraft MM in huBM/NSG mice in primary and
secondary transplants. Thus, it appears that CD138 expression is
irrelevant for the engraftment of MM cells and subsequent initiation of
the disease, suggesting that the MM-CSCs are present in both CD138+ and
CD138- fractions. Taken together our study presents a new in vivo model
of MM where the human BM microenvironment is reconstructed in the mouse
faithfully recapitulating MM as it presents in human patients. We further
establish that human stromal support is essential for the engraftment of
primary MM cells, historically a challenging process. Furthermore, our
data support the emerging findings that CD138 is not a reliable marker of
the MM-CSCs, suggesting that the previously demonstrated differential
engraftment of selected populations is likely an artifact of the less
sensitive animal models.

