Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodality approaches to treat hypoxic NSCLC tumor
microenvironment


In a previous study we found both in vitro and in an orthotropic NSCLC
model in SCID mice that survival of NSCLC cells in hypoxic
microenvironment is dependent upon Notch-1 signaling. Active Notch-1 was
expressed in hypoxic tumor microenvironment only. Notch-1 provides
survival stimuli through exacerbated Akt-1 activation due to suppression
of PTEN transcription and positive regulation of the transcription of
IGF-1 and its receptor. Hypoxic tumor environment is a problem for NSCLC
treatment because it is responsible for cancer resistance to
chemotherapy, tumor recurrence and metastasization. Also, hypoxic tumor
microenvironment is quiescent and represses mTORC-1 activity. We show a
number of experiments aimed at targeting hypoxic tumor tissue in the
orthotropic NSCLC model. We attempted to target the Notch-1/IGF-1R/Akt-1
axis using three agents (a -secretase inhibitor, MRK-003; a fully
humanized antibody against the human IGF-1R that promotes the receptor
degradation, MK-0646; a pan-Akt inhibitor, MK-2206, all drugs provided by
Merck Inc.) alone or in various combinations. We also used in combination
studies drugs that are used for the treatment of advanced NSCLC, namely
cisplatin and Erlotinib. The orthotropic model was established using two
cell lines non-dependent on Notch-3 signaling. siRNA to Notch-3 in A549
and H1437 affects neither the growth rate nor the survival of these
cells. All treatments (besides MK-2206) significantly prolonged the
median survival of mice compared to controls (16 mice/experimental arm).
MRK-003 treatment yielded specific death of hypoxic tumor areas. The
tumors excised from the mice reaching an end-point displayed a
significant reduction of markers of hypoxia as assessed by RT-qPCR using
human specific primers. Moreover, qPCR measurements of the ratio between
human/mouse GAPDH in DNA extracted from the whole brains and livers
showed a significant reduction in metastasization in MRK-003 treated
mice. MK-0646 was not specific to hypoxic tumor environment, but
substantially increased the median survival of treated mice compared to
controls. NSCLC cells evaded MK-0646 treatment by activating EGF-R and
ErbB3 exclusively both in vivo and in five cell lines in vitro. This
phenomenon is achieved at the level of protein stability. One outcome of
MK-0646 treatment is that cells poorly or not responsive to Erlotinib
become more responsive to it. Sequential treatment with MK-0646 (three
weeks), then combination of MK-0646 plus Erlotinib prolonged median
survival of mice dramatically. If the two drugs where administered in
combination from day one no survival advantage was observed in median
survival compared to mice treated with Erlotinib alone and was actually
less effective than MK-0646 used as single agent.

