Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maitake D-Fraction, a natural mushroom extract, synergizes with
Interleukin-2 for increased lytic activity of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells against various human tumor cell histologies


Maitake (Grifola frondosa) has been recognized by naturopathic physicians
as a medicinal mushroom capable of immune support. Maitake D-Fraction
(MDF), a component of the maitake mushroom isolated during hot-water
extraction, is rich in -Glucans and commonly prescribed as a dietary
supplement. Because MDF is widely available and easily tolerated, it is
highly desirable for the cancer patient looking for immune support via
natural products. Previous research has suggested that a dietary MDF
regimen can enhance immune function in humans. However, studies to
investigate the capacity of MDF to increase tumor immunity are lacking.
This study was designed to investigate whether human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) treated with MDF develop increased cytolytic
capacity against human tumor cells. Cytolysis mediated by MDF-activated
PBMC was compared to that of nave PBMC (media control) and PBMC that were
treated with interleukin-2 (IL-2). Immune mediated tumor cytolysis was
assessed used a standard Chromium-Release Assay and expressed as number
of lytic units (LU)/10^7 effector cells. Target cells for the assays
included the PANC1 pancreatic cancer cell line (PA) purchased from ATCC,
and single cell suspensions created from peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC)
and renal cell carcinoma (RC) tumors resected from patients. Against the
PA cells, the LU observed were 16.9 (media control), 12.9 (1ug/ml MDF),
23.8 (10ug/ml MDF) and 28.9 (100ug/ml MDF). The corresponding LU values
against PC cells were 7.6, 13.4, 14.2, and 12.1, respectively, and
against RC cells 12.3, 2.7, 2.0, and 8.2, respectively. Predictably, PBMC
stimulated with an optimally activating dose of IL2 (200U/ml) exhibited a
marked increase in LU against all target cells. Nevertheless, when PBMC
were stimulated concurrently with both IL-2 and MDF activation was
increased further. Thus, LU against PA target cells were 73.0 for PBMC
treated with IL-2 alone, and 110.6 for PBMC treated with IL-2 plus
100ug/ml MDF. The corresponding LU values against PC target cells were
37.1 (IL-2 alone), and 66.4 (IL-2 plus 100ug/ml MDF) and against RC
target were 94.0 (IL-2 alone) and 110.7 (IL-2 plus 100ug/ml MDF). This
study shows that MDF has the capacity to increase the lytic activity
produced by an optimally activating dose of IL-2, eliciting greater
killing of a variety of human cancer cells than what can be achieved with
IL2 alone. It is reasonable to assume that MDF can elicit a similar
effect at lower doses of IL-2. Given the toxicity of IL-2 observed in
humans, the potential to elicit the desired immune stimulation by
combining lower doses of IL-2 with MDF becomes highly desirable. Future
clinical trials should be designed to investigate the ability of MDF to
elicit optimal immune stimulation with more tolerable doses and schedules
of IL-2.

