Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting colon cancer stem cells using sulforaphane


Colon cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in the United States,
accounting for approximately 51,000 deaths each year. For patients with
advanced colon cancer, the 5-year survival rate is less than 10%. Recent
evidence suggests the existence of a small population of tumorigenic stem
cells responsible for tumor initiation, metastasis and resistance to
chemotherapy and radiation. Identification of the regulatory mechanisms
and signalling pathways involved in cancer stem cells will help in
designing novel agents to target this refractory cell population in colon
cancers. We are currently investigating the mechanism by which
sulforaphane, an isothiocyanate present in cruciferous vegetables such as
broccoli, Brussels sprouts and cabbage inhibits growth of colon cancer
cells. Our studies demonstrate that the compound had significant
cytotoxicity against HCT116 colon cancer cells in both a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Colon CSCs can be allowed to divide and grow in
ultra-low binding tissue culture dishes to form multicellular spheroids
called colospheres. Treatment with sulforaphane decreased the number and
size of the primary and secondary colospheres in a dose dependent manner,
suggesting that sulforaphane targets CSCs. To understand the mechanism of
inhibition of colospheres, the signaling pathways affected by
sulforaphane were dissected. Aberrant activation of Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway has been associated with renewal of cancer stem cells,
and in the development of several solid cancers. Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
upon binding to its cognate receptor patched, allows smoothened to
accumulate and activate Gli transcription factor. Treatment with
sulforaphane inhibited the expression of both Shh and smoothened in the
colon CSCs. Furthermore, it inhibited the expression of patched-1 and
Gli-1, downstream targets of the hedgehog signalling pathway. Taken
together, these data suggest that sulforaphane effectively inhibits colon
cancer stem cells by down regulating the sonic hedgehog pathway, thereby
inhibiting tumorigenesis (supported in-part by the US PHS grants CA
109269 and CA 135569 to SA and CA 151727 to AD).

