Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 drives luminal breast cancer stem cells in the absence of
HER2 amplification: Implications for efficacy of adjuvant trastuzumab


Although current breast treatment guidelines limit the use of HER2
blocking agents such as trastuzumab to women whose tumors display HER2
gene amplification, recent retrospective analysis by Paik et al., have
suggested that a wider group of patients may benefit from this therapy.
Utilizing breast cancer cell lines, mouse xenograft models and primary
human tumors and metastatic tissues, we provide a potential molecular
explanation for these unanticipated clinical finding by demonstrating
that HER2 is selectively expressed in the cancer stem cell (CSC)
population in luminal ER+ breast cancers that do not display HER2
amplification. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the effects of
trastuzumab on mouse tumor xenografts are highly dependent on the timing
of administration. While the effects of trastuzumab on established tumors
are limited to those with HER2 amplification, when this HER2 blocker is
given immediately after tumor inoculation simulating an adjuvant setting,
it significantly inhibits the growth of luminal tumors in the absence of
HER2 amplification. In addition, HER2 expression is increased in luminal
tumors propagated in mouse tibias as compared to primary tumors grown in
mammary fat pads. Utilizing co-culture experiments with human osteocytes,
we provide evidence that this regulated expression of HER2 is mediated by
RANK ligand present in the bone microenvironment. The clinical relevance
of these studies is demonstrated in breast cancer tissues by the
co-expression of HER2 and CSC marker ALDH1 in a subset of cells which are
selectively found at the invasive tumor front in luminal breast cancers.
Recapitulating the mouse xenograft studies, we demonstrate increased
expression of HER2 in bone metastasis compared to matched primary tumors
in 8 patients with luminal breast cancer. Our results have significant
clinical implications since they suggest that the benefits of adjuvant
HER2 targeting therapies may extend to patients with luminal breast
cancers who are currently classified as HER2-negative. Furthermore, these
results support the cancer stem cell hypothesis and emphasize the
clinical importance of targeting cancer stem cells in the adjuvant
setting.

