Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLK3 signals to paxillin in chemokine-induced migration and
invasion, and is necessary for breast cancer metastasis


Breast cancer metastasis is the major cause for mortality of patients
with invasive breast cancer. Metastasis involves multiple steps including
cancer cell invasion through basement membrane, intravasation, survival
in the circulation, extravasation and colonization of distant organs.
Identification of the signaling pathways through which prometastatic
factors promote cancer cell migration and invasion is key to develop
effective therapeutics for breast cancer. Mixed lineage kinase 3 (MLK3)
is a MAP3K involved in activating each of the three major MAPK signaling
pathways. The MLK3-JNK-AP-1 signaling axis has been shown to be required
in breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Herein, we demonstrate that
the prometastatic factors, CXCL12 and HGF, signal through MLK3-JNK to
induce phosphorylation of the focal adhesion scaffold, paxillin on Ser
178, which is required for migration and invasion of human breast cancer
cells. Furthermore, we show that MLK3 regulates the phosphorylation of
paxillin at Tyr 118 and promotes the interaction of FAK with paxillin,
which can be blocked by inhibition of MLK3. To further understand the
role of paxillin phosphorylation at S178, a nonphosphorylatable paxillin
mutant S178 A was generated. Expression of S178A blocks Y118
phosphorylation of paxillin in breast cancer cells. Silencing of mlk3,
inhibition of JNK, or expression of the nonphosphorylatable paxillin
S178A increases focal adhesion numbers and increases Rho activity,
suggesting that the MLK3-JNK-paxillin axis limits Rho activity in breast
cancer cells. Furthermore, MLK3 silencing is sufficient to prevent
formation of metastases in a mouse xenograft model of spontaneous breast
cancer metastasis. Our findings have identified a novel role of MLK3 in
regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and cytoskeletal remodeling in the
process of breast cancer cell migration and suggest that MLK3 may be a
potential therapeutic target for metastatic breast cancer.

