Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the inflammatory response in pancreatic cancer treatment


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is an aggressive malignancy, often diagnosed
late in the course of the disease, and very difficult to diagnose and
treat. To date, systemic treatment for pancreatic cancer, either a single
agent or combinations of agents, has shown only modest benefits; however,
growing understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of pancreatic
cancers, and the complex heterogeneous signals associated with them, may
help to target these pathways specifically and improve patient outcome.
There is evidence for a significant role of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and
COX-2-generated prostaglandin (PG) E2 (PGE2) during pancreatic
tumorigenesis. COX-2 has therefore become a potential chemotherapeutic
target for pancreatic cancer. Clinical trials combining Gemcitabine and
Celecoxib [1] or Gemcitabine+ Irinotecan and Celecoxib [2] have not shown
a significant benefit from celecoxib but there were relatively few
patients treated and they were not selected or stratified based on
biomarkers. We have measured the levels of 4 cytokines, including
Interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1, Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)- and Interferon
(IFN)- in patient blood samples at day 0, day 29 and day 50 following the
combination Gemcitabine - Celecoxib treatment. For all samples analyzed
and averaged, we show an increase in plasma TNF- (by 1.37 fold) and IL-1
(by 2 fold) concomitantly with a dramatic increase in IFN- (by 7 fold on
day 29, by 3 fold on day 50) and stable IL-6 using the Meso Scale
Discovery multiplex platform. One patient had a stable profile of all 4
cytokines and was shown to have partial response to the treatment. All
others exhibited a strong variation in their cytokines during the
treatment and did exhibit progression of the disease. Although the number
of patients enrolled in the trial [1] was low, these results showed an
interesting trend. These findings provide a basis for investigating
further the inflammation-linked pathways along the COX2/mPGE-S1/EP4/IL-6
axis in pancreatic cancer cells and animal models of pancreatic cancers
which will be subjected to the comparative treatment. [1]. Dragovich et
al., Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 31:157-162 (2008) [2]. Lipton et al., J. Clin.
Gastroenterol. 44:286-288 (2010)

