Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a new approach to kill non-small cell lung cancer
cells with resistance to standard chemotherapy using parthenolide
analogues


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women
worldwide. The poor prognosis of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is due, in part, to emergence of tumor resistance to
chemotherapy. Recent data indicate that human tumors including NSCLC
contain a small subset of cancer stem/ progenitor cells (CSC) responsible
for drug resistance and tumor maintenance. If such minute subsets of CSC
drive tumor formation and drug resistance, therapies targeting the bulk
tumor mass but not CSC will fail. We now confirm identification of
subpopulations of chemotherapy-resistant human NSCLC cells with
enrichment for CSC biomarkers and exhibiting significant CSC activity. We
identified CD133+/ALDH+ tumor stem/progenitor cells from human lung
cancer cells in vitro using established Aldefluor assays in combination
with labeled anti-CD133 antibodies. Estrogen, a known risk factor for
lung cancer progression, stimulated a modest increase in the numbers of
CSC. In contrast to control CD133-/ALDH- tumor cell subsets, CSC
subpopulations grew as tumor spheres and maintained self-renewal capacity
in vitro and exhibited a greater tumorigenic capability than non-CSC
subsets in vivo, properties indicative of CSC. Furthermore, resistance of
CSC-like cells to cisplatin (a standard chemotherapy for NSCLC treatment)
was fully reversed by treatment with parthenolide (PTL), a
naturally-occurring sesquiterpene lactone compound with strong antitumor
activity in leukemia and prostate cancer while sparing normal cells. The
antitumor effect of PTL appears due to its action as a potent inhibitor
of nuclear factor-B (NF-B) which is markedly activated by chemotherapy.
To target CSC and suppress tumor progression, we synthesized and tested
novel analogs of PTL with improved antitumor properties and aqueous
solubility. PTL analogs inhibit proliferation of H157 NSCLC cells using
both bulk cell preparations and CSC-subpopulations, with effects
significantly different from control at PLung cancer is the leading cause
of cancer death in men and women worldwide. The poor prognosis of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is due, in part, to emergence
of tumor resistance to chemotherapy. Recent data indicate that human
tumors including NSCLC contain a small subset of cancer stem/ progenitor
cells (CSC) responsible for drug resistance and tumor maintenance. If
such minute subsets of CSC drive tumor formation and drug resistance,
therapies targeting the bulk tumor mass but not CSC will fail. We now
confirm identification of subpopulations of chemotherapy-resistant human
NSCLC cells with enrichment for CSC biomarkers and exhibiting significant
CSC activity. We identified CD133+/ALDH+ tumor stem/progenitor cells from
human lung cancer cells in vitro using established Aldefluor assays in
combination with labeled anti-CD133 antibodies. Estrogen, a known risk
factor for lung cancer progression, stimulated a modest increase in the
numbers of CSC. In contrast to control CD133-/ALDH- tumor cell subsets,
CSC subpopulations grew as tumor spheres and maintained self-renewal
capacity in vitro and exhibited a greater tumorigenic capability than
non-CSC subsets in vivo, properties indicative of CSC. Furthermore,
resistance of CSC-like cells to cisplatin (a standard chemotherapy for
NSCLC treatment) was fully reversed by treatment with parthenolide (PTL),
a naturally-occurring sesquiterpene lactone compound with strong
antitumor activity in leukemia and prostate cancer while sparing normal
cells. The antitumor effect of PTL appears due to its action as a potent
inhibitor of nuclear factor-B (NF-B) which is markedly activated by
chemotherapy. To target CSC and suppress tumor progression, we
synthesized and tested novel analogs of PTL with improved antitumor
properties and aqueous solubility. PTL analogs inhibit proliferation of
H157 NSCLC cells using both bulk cell preparations and
CSC-subpopulations, with effects significantly different from control at
P<0.05. Dose-dependent increments of PTL analogs increase apoptosis of
CSC when compared with bulk cells. Moreover, PTL analogs inhibit cell
proliferation of H23, A549 and H1975 NSCLC cells with known resistance to
cisplatin (PLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and
women worldwide. The poor prognosis of advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is due, in part, to emergence of tumor resistance to
chemotherapy. Recent data indicate that human tumors including NSCLC
contain a small subset of cancer stem/ progenitor cells (CSC) responsible
for drug resistance and tumor maintenance. If such minute subsets of CSC
drive tumor formation and drug resistance, therapies targeting the bulk
tumor mass but not CSC will fail. We now confirm identification of
subpopulations of chemotherapy-resistant human NSCLC cells with
enrichment for CSC biomarkers and exhibiting significant CSC activity. We
identified CD133+/ALDH+ tumor stem/progenitor cells from human lung
cancer cells in vitro using established Aldefluor assays in combination
with labeled anti-CD133 antibodies. Estrogen, a known risk factor for
lung cancer progression, stimulated a modest increase in the numbers of
CSC. In contrast to control CD133-/ALDH- tumor cell subsets, CSC
subpopulations grew as tumor spheres and maintained self-renewal capacity
in vitro and exhibited a greater tumorigenic capability than non-CSC
subsets in vivo, properties indicative of CSC. Furthermore, resistance of
CSC-like cells to cisplatin (a standard chemotherapy for NSCLC treatment)
was fully reversed by treatment with parthenolide (PTL), a
naturally-occurring sesquiterpene lactone compound with strong antitumor
activity in leukemia and prostate cancer while sparing normal cells. The
antitumor effect of PTL appears due to its action as a potent inhibitor
of nuclear factor-B (NF-B) which is markedly activated by chemotherapy.
To target CSC and suppress tumor progression, we synthesized and tested
novel analogs of PTL with improved antitumor properties and aqueous
solubility. PTL analogs inhibit proliferation of H157 NSCLC cells using
both bulk cell preparations and CSC-subpopulations, with effects
significantly different from control at P<0.05. Dose-dependent increments
of PTL analogs increase apoptosis of CSC when compared with bulk cells.
Moreover, PTL analogs inhibit cell proliferation of H23, A549 and H1975
NSCLC cells with known resistance to cisplatin (P<0.01). These compounds
were able to sensitize cells to cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (PLung
cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women worldwide.
The poor prognosis of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is due,
in part, to emergence of tumor resistance to chemotherapy. Recent data
indicate that human tumors including NSCLC contain a small subset of
cancer stem/ progenitor cells (CSC) responsible for drug resistance and
tumor maintenance. If such minute subsets of CSC drive tumor formation
and drug resistance, therapies targeting the bulk tumor mass but not CSC
will fail. We now confirm identification of subpopulations of
chemotherapy-resistant human NSCLC cells with enrichment for CSC
biomarkers and exhibiting significant CSC activity. We identified
CD133+/ALDH+ tumor stem/progenitor cells from human lung cancer cells in
vitro using established Aldefluor assays in combination with labeled
anti-CD133 antibodies. Estrogen, a known risk factor for lung cancer
progression, stimulated a modest increase in the numbers of CSC. In
contrast to control CD133-/ALDH- tumor cell subsets, CSC subpopulations
grew as tumor spheres and maintained self-renewal capacity in vitro and
exhibited a greater tumorigenic capability than non-CSC subsets in vivo,
properties indicative of CSC. Furthermore, resistance of CSC-like cells
to cisplatin (a standard chemotherapy for NSCLC treatment) was fully
reversed by treatment with parthenolide (PTL), a naturally-occurring
sesquiterpene lactone compound with strong antitumor activity in leukemia
and prostate cancer while sparing normal cells. The antitumor effect of
PTL appears due to its action as a potent inhibitor of nuclear factor-B
(NF-B) which is markedly activated by chemotherapy. To target CSC and
suppress tumor progression, we synthesized and tested novel analogs of
PTL with improved antitumor properties and aqueous solubility. PTL
analogs inhibit proliferation of H157 NSCLC cells using both bulk cell
preparations and CSC-subpopulations, with effects significantly different
from control at P<0.05. Dose-dependent increments of PTL analogs increase
apoptosis of CSC when compared with bulk cells. Moreover, PTL analogs
inhibit cell proliferation of H23, A549 and H1975 NSCLC cells with known
resistance to cisplatin (P<0.01). These compounds were able to sensitize
cells to cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (P<0.01) when cells were exposed
to sub-optimal concentrations of cisplatin. Using Western blots, we find
that PTL congeners inhibit phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of
phospho-NF-B and activation of IKK/. Thus, targeted inhibition of NF-B
may reverse tumor drug resistance by interfering with known NF-B actions
to regulate genes involved in proliferation, DNA damage response,
antiapoptosis and angiogenesis. Further development of PTL analogs as
therapeutics may lead to new strategies to treat NSCLC in the clinic.
[Funded by CDMRP Lung Cancer Research Program LC 090297].

