Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase type kappa is a prognostic
marker, essential for regulating malignant behavior of glioma cells


Malignant gliomas have a poor survival resulting from rapid growth of the
tumor and extensive dispersion throughout the brain parenchyma. Discovery
of tumor-specific biomarkers hold great promise in improving survival and
thus call for better understanding of regulatory signals driving glioma
cell migration and dispersal. Using genome-wide exploration, we have
identified frequent genetic alterations at the Receptor protein tyrosine
phosphatase type kappa (PTPRK) locus. These PTPRK alterations were among
the top significant and very relevant to glioma biology since PTPRK is a
dephosphorylation regulator of tyrosine phosphorylation (TP) signaling, a
frequently altered signaling cascade in glioma as reported previously.
Understanding PTPRK function will provide relevant novel insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying glioma cell growth and migration.
PTPRK expression was analyzed by quantitative-RT-PCR and western blot.
Mutations of PTPRK were identified by sequencing full length PTPRK
transcripts from a subset of patients samples showing PTPRK loss of
heterozygosity. Two major PTPRK variants were cloned and expressed in
cells harboring altered PTPRK (U87MG cell line) to study their effect on
PTPRK phosphatase activity and functionality. PTPRK locus undergoes
allelic loss in glioma and contributes to cancer phenotype. It is an
independent prognostic marker in glioma. Patients with altered PTPRK
(23%) have shorter survival compared to those with normal PTPRK molecular
status (p=0.001, Log-rank test, 14 vs. 30 months). PTPRK mRNA as well as
protein levels were lower in tumor biopsies compared to non-tumor
specimens. Mutational analysis revealed missense mutations in the
phosphatase domain, resulting in altered PTPRK phosphatase activity,
possibly due to changes in active site conformation. Further, PTPRK
alterations changed expression profiles of the PTPRK protein as a result
of altered post-translational processing. Reconstitution of PTPRK
expression in glioma cells (U87MG cell line) harboring PTPRK deletions
suppressed cell growth and migration which was alleviated by the PTPRK
variants to differing extent. PTPRK knockdown via shRNA down-regulated
its onco-suppressive function compared to PTPRK expressing cells. Our
findings provide the first evidence of the key role of PTPRK expression
in glioma and shed light on the biological consequences of mutations in
the PTPRK gene which significantly alter PTPRK functionality. Biological
relevance of PTPRK variants will be determined and validated on a large
scale.

