Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prophylactic MUC1/Poly-ICLC vaccine in individuals with the
history of advanced colorectal adenoma


Background MUC1 is aberrantly expressed in a hypoglycosylated form with
lack of luminal polarity in variety of human adenocarcinomas including
colon cancer. Aberrant MUC1 is also highly expressed in colonic adenomas
where it may promote malignant transformation by interacting with-catenin
known to be an important pathway in colon carcinogenesis. We hypothesized
that induction of an immune response against aberrant MUC1 in individuals
with a recent history of adenoma may prevent adenoma recurrence and/or
their progression to colon cancer. We conducted a clinical study using
MUC1 peptide and Poly-ICLC adjuvant vaccine to evaluate the safety and
immunogenicity in individuals who are cancer free but at high risk for
developing colorectal cancer because of a recent history of advanced
adenoma. Method Patients with advanced colorectal adenoma which meets at
least one of following criteria: 1) 1cm in maximal diameter, 2) villous
or tubulovillous histology, 3) high-grade dysplasia, were vaccinated with
100g of 100aa MUC1 peptide (H2N-(GVTSAPDTRPAPGSTAPPAH)5-CONH2) admixed
with 500g of Poly-ICLC (TLR-3 agonist) as adjuvant, on week 0, 2, 10 and
one year later. Bloods were collected two weeks after each injection for
monitoring of general immunocompetence, development of anti-MUC1 antibody
and safety. Results The vaccine was well tolerated without any adverse
event grade 2 or higher. Among 36 evaluable patients, anti MUC1 IgG
antibody was elicited in 17 patients as measured on week12 (response rate
47.2%). This response rate and the high levels of IgG have never been
seen in response to MUC1 vaccines in cancer patients. Antibody titers
declined over time but could be boosted to previous or higher levels at 1
year, showing development of immune memory. Vaccine responders were
distributed across most HLA-DR and DQ types with similar frequency as in
the general population, indicating that the MUC1 peptide could be
presented by multiple Class II alleles. Immune competence of colon
adenoma patients evaluated by cytokine production of lymphocyte and
regulatory T cell frequency was generally equal to healthy individuals,
however myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) were significantly
increased in colon adenoma patients. Increase in MDSCs was especially
pronounced in non-responders to the vaccine. Conclusion MUC1 poly-ICLC
vaccine is highly immunogenic in this prophylactic setting and no
significant adverse events have been seen. Vaccine immunogenicity is
reduced in individuals with increased numbers of MDSC and this
immunosuppressive population might be used as a biomarker to select
patients most likely to respond.

