Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computer-assisted molecular design use for the discovery and
optimization of rationally-designed anticancer natural products.
Discovery of olive oil-derived oleocanthal as a c-Met inhibitor and
optimization of Veratrum alkaloids as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors


Dysregulation of the proto-oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met, which
encodes the high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and
the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway aberrantly associated with numerous
malignancies including basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma, prostate,
pancreatic and breast cancers. The Mediterranean diet is associated with
lower incidences of cardiovascular disease, age-related cognitive disease
and cancer. (-)-Oleocanthal is a naturally occurring minor secoiridoid
from extra-virgin olive oil with potent anti-inflammatory activity via
its ability to inhibit COX-1 and COX-2 and anti-Alzheimer's activity.
Cyclopamine and its 11-oxo derivative jervine are C-nor-D-homosteroidal
alkaloids with known potent teratogenic effects that induce cyclopic
malformations in sheep. The jervane Veratrum alkaloids cyclopamine and
jervine and the veratrane alkaloid veratramine were among the early known
natural products that blocked the expression of the Hh pathway targets
PTCH1 and GLI1, lowering Bcl2 levels and inducing apoptosis in many
tumors. Computer-assisted molecular design (CAMD) identified oleocanthal
as a potential virtual c-Met inhibitor hit. Oleocanthal inhibited the
proliferation, migration, and invasion of the epithelial human breast and
prostate cancer cell lines MCF7, MDA-MB-231, and PC-3, respectively.
Oleocanthal demonstrated anti-angiogenic activity and inhibited the
phosphorylation of c-Met kinase in vitro. CAMD study of our library of
natural, biocatalytic, and semisynthetic jervane and veratrane alkaloids
suggested that compounds with C-3-keto functionality with 4,5 or 1,2 and
4,5 exhibited high virtual Hh binding affinity scores and possible Hh
pathway activity. These compounds showed significant ability to inhibit
the growth, proliferation, and migration of the prostate metastatic
cancer cell line PC-3, which aided the establishment of a preliminary
structure-activity relationship. (-)-Oleocanthal and Veratrum alkaloids
can have potential therapeutic application for the control of c-Met- and
Hh-dependent malignancies.

