Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing of the small RNA transcriptome in cytologically normal
bronchial airway epithelium of smokers with and without lung cancer


Introduction: Based on the concept that cigarette smoke creates a
molecular field of injury in epithelial cells throughout the respiratory
tract, we have previously shown that mRNA expression differences in
cytologically normal airway epithelial cells in patients with and without
lung cancer can serve as a clinically-relevant lung cancer biomarker.
MicroRNAs are short, non-coding RNAs that can each regulate the
expression of hundreds of target genes and can be reliably detected in
clinical samples with variable quality. The goal of this study is to
generate a microRNA biomarker in the airway epithelium of smokers for the
diagnosis of lung cancer. Methods: Cytologically-normal bronchial airway
epithelial cells were collected via brushings of the mainstem bronchus of
smokers undergoing fiberoptic bronchoscopy for suspicion of lung cancer
(n=128). Subjects were followed after their bronchoscopy until a final
diagnosis of lung cancer (n=75) or an alternate benign diagnosis (n=53)
was made. The small RNA transcriptome ( 20). 98 of these microRNAs were
differentially expressed between current and former smokers and 56
microRNAs differentially expressed in the airway epithelium of smokers
with and without lung cancer (p 20). 98 of these microRNAs were
differentially expressed between current and former smokers and 56
microRNAs differentially expressed in the airway epithelium of smokers
with and without lung cancer (p<0.05; 18 expected by chance at this
threshold). Conclusions: We have sequenced the small RNA transcriptome in
the cytologically-normal proximal airway epithelium of smokers and have
identified microRNA expression profiles associated with smoking status
and/or a final diagnosis of lung cancer. In the future, a microRNA
biomarker will be developed on these samples using procedures outlined in
the MicroArray Quality Control (MAQC)-II project and tested on an
independent cohort in order to confirm their ability to serve as an early
diagnostic tool for lung cancer.

