Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism-based combinations of agents impacting the homologous
recombination and nucleotide excision repair pathways


Sapacitabine, a prodrug of the nucleoside analog CNDAC
[2-C-cyano-2-deoxy-1--D-arabino-pentofuranosylcytosine], has the
advantage of oral bioavailability. CNDAC has a unique action mechanism of
inducing single strand breaks following its incorporation into DNA
through a -elimination process. Such nicks caused by sapacitabine/CNDAC
are partially repaired through the transcription-coupled nucleotide
excision repair (NER) pathway [Cancer Res. 2008, 68:3881-89]. However,
DNA replication across the unrepaired nicks generates double strand
breaks which are mainly repaired by the ATM-dependent homologous
recombination (HR) mechanism [Blood, 2010, 116:1737-46]. Sapacitabine is
undergoing clinical trials with encouraging outcomes in AML or MDS
patients [J. Clin.Oncol., 2010, 28:285-91]. A trial of sapacitabine in
combination with cyclophosphamide and rituximab (SCR regimen) in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) relapsed from first line therapies has been
initiated in populations lacking ATM function. Other candidates for
clinical combinations with sapacitabine include bendamustine, an
alkylating agent, and oxaliplatin, which are currently used for treatment
of CLL. Primary adducts caused by each of these compounds are repaired by
NER. To explore mechanistic interactions between sapacitabine/CNDAC and
agents impacting the NER pathway, we used median effect analysis to
compare cellular clonogenic survival of drug combinations with survival
after single agents alone. First, cells deficient in HR components
(Rad51D, Xrcc3 and Brca2) were all sensitized to
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC, readily converted to the active
metabolite of cyclophosphamide, 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide), bendamustine,
ciplatin and oxaliplatin by 10- to 50-fold, whereas cells lacking the key
NER endonuclease XPF were more sensitive to these agents. This indicates
that HR is responsible for residual lesions not repaired by NER. Second,
CNDAC in combination with 4-HC presented additive to mildly synergistic
effect (combination index CI 1) in cells defective in Xrcc3, Rad51D,
Brca2 or XPF. Third, combination of bendamustine with CNDAC showed
additive loss of clonogenicity (CI 1) in cells lacking Rad51D or Xrcc3.
Fourth, combination of cisplatin or oxaliplatin with CNDAC also exerted
additive effects (CI 1) in HR- as well as NER-deficient cells. Finally,
cisplatin/oxaliplatin combined with CNDAC, both at relatively high
concentration ranges lethal to HR-defective cells, had no synergy in wild
type cells either. Together these results suggest that agents causing DNA
adducts, which are mainly repaired by NER process, are additive in their
interaction with sapacitabine/CNDAC. Thus, this study provides rationales
for sapacitabine-based combinational and targeted therapeutic strategies
for translation into the design of clinical trials.

