Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-binding protein HuR supports post-transcriptional regulation
of pancreatic cancer cell metabolism


Metabolic transformation towards a glycolytic phenotype is well described
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAs) and other cancers, yet the
underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown. To date,
literature has focused principally on genetic changes in cancers such as
somatic mutations. However, it is more likely that post-transcriptional
regulatory elements play a significant role in metabolic adaptive
responses given the rapid and dynamic nature of conditions in vivo. One
element, the RNA-binding protein HuR, has been shown to direct the
dynamic cellular response to various cancer-associated stressors by
translocating from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and augmenting target
expression. Recently discovered HuR-metabolic targets include HIF-1 and
the glucose transporter GLUT-1. We hypothesize therefore that HuR is an
important post-transcriptional regulator of cellular metabolism in
pancreatic cancer. We began by exposing pancreatic cancer cell lines
(MiaPaca-2, PL5, PL45, BxPC-3, ASPC-1, and Panc1) to the known glycolytic
inhibitors citrate and hypoglycemia. When citrate was added to culture
media at doses between 0.1 to 10 mM (for 2-12 hrs), we identified robust
HuR cytoplasmic translocation by both western blot and
immunofluorescence. When these cells are exposed to a known
-ketoglutarate agonist and hypoxia mimetic, Dimethyloxalylglycine, HuR is
also activated to the cytoplasm at doses between 0.1 and 1 mM. Similarly,
reducing the glucose in standard media (25mM) to physiologic levels (5mM)
and below (down to 0.5 mM) induces HuR cytoplasmic translocation.
Interestingly, with continued metabolic stress cytoplasmic HuR protein
returned to pre-stress levels after 24 hours of treatment. We then
studied the affects of these metabolic stressors (46 hours) on validated
HuR mRNA targets (dCK, HIF-1, and SUMO1), and observed upregulation using
quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of total RNA. Finally, we performed
ribonucleoprotein-immunoprecipitation (RNP-IP) of HuR bound mRNA cargo in
PDA cells and detected that the HuR target mRNAs dCK and HuR were
upregulated under conditions of hypoglycemia as compared to
normoglycemia. These data are the first to demonstrate that HuR is
activated to the cytoplasm in pancreatic cancer cells as a result of
metabolic stress. Additionally, we demonstrate that HuR activation during
changes in the metabolic mileau affects mRNA levels of HuR targets. Based
on these preliminary findings, HuR is a likely regulator of an acute
metabolic transformation necessary for pancreatic cancer cells. Ongoing
studies will elucidate HuR's role in adapting and maintaining the
metabolic phenotype that is characteristic of malignancy. This may
additionally lead to the discovery of novel metabolic targets regulated
acutely by these post-transcriptional mechanisms.

