Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-glycan IgM and IgG antibodies as new biomarkers for serous
ovarian cancers


Introduction: Patients with advanced-stage serous cancers (ovarian,
peritoneal and tubal) often develop ascites, a protein-rich fluid within
the peritoneal cavity which causes significant morbidity and is
associated with a poor prognosis. Aberrant glycosylation is a common
feature of these cancers and this may impact on the humoral immune
response. We hypothesized that serous cancer patients and healthy women
have different profiles of anti-glycan antibodies in plasma and ascites.
Method: Matched pairs of plasma and ascites were collected from 11
patients with advanced stage disease. A custom-made printed glycan array
(PGA) allowed the simultaneous detection of anti-glycan antibodies (AGAs)
to 203 chemically synthesised glycans, including some tumour-associated
carbohydrate antigens. Identified candidate AGAs were additionally
detected using a suspension array in an independent patient cohort of 230
patients. Candidates were selected by their discriminatory power between
cancer and healthy controls. One top candidate was further analyzed for
its biological behavior using ovarian cancer cell lines. Results: Using
PGA, we detected a multitude of AGAs in both plasma and ascites. Levels
of AGAs in serum and ascites correlated independent of ascites volume.
Serous cancer patients had significantly different levels of plasma IgM
to 31 glycans when compared to plasma of 14 healthy control patients,
with IgM levels being lower in the cancer group. Significant differences
in IgG plasma levels were found for 4 glycans. The trisaccharide P1, part
of the P blood group system, was selected for further analyses. Plasma
expression of P1 was found independent of cohort and method used. The
human serous ovarian cancer cell line, IGROV1, was shown to express P1
and was subsequently sorted into P1-high, P1-low, and P1-negative
subpopulations. We found that IGROV1/P1-expressing cells correlated with
faster tumor cell migration and invasion. Treatment with a human anti-P1
IgM (clone P3NIL100) inhibited the proliferation of these tumour cells in
vitro. Conclusion: P1 expression can be detected in ovarian cancer
patients in independent of cohorts. P1 seems to be involved in cancer
migration and invasion, and is therefore a potential target for ovarian
cancer diagnosis and therapy.

