Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of drug resistance targets in ovarian cancer using
a proteomic approach


Ovarian cancer ranks first in the number of deaths and second in the
number of new cases among gynecological cancers. In the majority of the
cases, surgery is the intervention of choice, but chemotherapy has
progressed considerably over the last years. First-line treatment for
advanced-stage disease is a combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel.
However, drug resistance has become a major obstacle to the successful
chemotherapeutic treatment of human cancers. Currently, there is no clear
consensus on treatment options for ovarian cancer patients who acquired
drug resistance, due to the lack of knowledge about drug resistance
mechanisms. There is an urgent need to explain how drug resistance occurs
and to identify proteins related to this phenomenon, so that inhibitors
can be designed. The aims of this study are to develop and optimise a
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis method to compare protein profile of
human ovarian cancer cell lines, which are sensitive or resistant to
anticancer chemotherapy, so that proteins related to drug resistance can
be identified using mass spectrometry. The parental ovarian cancer cell
line models PEO1 and SKOV-3 are used as drug sensitive reference cell
lines. Novel drug resistant models, derived from the parental lines, with
in vitro acquired resistance to paclitaxel and carboplatin are used
alongside their respective drug sensitive parental counterparts. Proteins
related to tumorigenesis or drug resistance, either new or previously
reported, were identified in at least one of the three cell lines. These
proteins belong to different classes and are responsible for distinct
functions within the cell, such as cytoskeleton and cell structure,
detoxification and stress response, and cellular metabolism. This is the
first proteomic study on these specific ovarian cancer cell lines using
paclitaxel and carboplatin. The results obtained will be useful for
further studies of resistance mechanisms and screening of resistance
biomarkers for the development of tailored therapeutic strategies.

