Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crenolanib, a novel Type I, mutant-specific inhibitor of Class III
receptor tyrosine kinases, preferentially binds to phosphorylated kinases


Introduction: Crenolanib (CP-868,596) is a benzimidazole tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI), known to potently inhibit the platelet derived growth
factor receptors (PDGFR) alpha and beta, and the Fms-like tyrosine kinase
3 (FLT3). Crenolanib has been evaluated as a single agent (Lewis N, et
al, J Clin Oncol 2009), and in combination with docetaxel axitinib
(Michael M, et al, Br J Cancer 2010), and was found to be well tolerated,
with transient elevation of liver enzymes at higher doses. We describe
here the characterization of crenolanib as a unique chemotype,
mutant-specific Type I TKI. Methods: The relative affinities of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors for phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated ABL1 have
been previously used to accurately distinguish type I from type II
inhibitors (Wodicka LM, et al, Chem Biol 2010). The effect of ABL1 A-loop
phosphorylation on crenolanib affinity was investigated in a competition
binding assay (Karaman MW, et al, Nat Biotech 2008). The binding
constants (Kds) of crenolanib for FLT3 (wild-type and five mutant
isoforms) were also determined using the KINOMEscan KdELECT Assay
(DiscoveRx, San Diego, CA), and compared with the Kds of 442 TKIs
reported (Davis MI, et al, Nat Biotech 2011). The Kds of crenolanib for
PDGFR, PDGFR, and c-KIT (wild-type and two mutant isoforms) are being
determined. Results: The Kd of crenolanib for phosphorylated ABL1 and
ABL(T315I) were 7- and 15-fold lower than the Kds for non-phosphorylated
ABL1 and ABL(T315I) respectively. Based on this higher affinity for
p-ABL1 relative to np-ABL1, crenolanib appears to be a Type I inhibitor.
Furthermore, crenolanib has a 10-fold affinity shift between the
non-autoinhibited and autoinhibited states of FLT3, which is in the range
of affinity shifts reported for other Type I TKIs, in contrast to the
100- to 1000-fold affinity shift reported for Type II TKIs. Crenolanib
also has the highest affinity for three constitutively activate isoforms
of FLT3 (FLT3-ITD, FLT3-D835Y, FLT3-D835V) compared to 442 kinases
reported (Davis MI, et al, Nat Biotech 2011). Crenolanib is a
next-generation, mutant-specific TKI, currently in Phase II development
in adult and pediatric gliomas, and in PDGFRAD842V-mutant GIST. The
unique and specific kinase inhibition profile is hypothesized to
translate to greater therapeutic effect, accompanied by fewer adverse
events in the clinic.

