Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib alone and in combination with SN-38 is active against
anaplastic thyroid cancer


Background: Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is the most aggressive
thyroid gland malignancy. Recent experimental evidences suggest a
rationale for the use of multitarget tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
Sunitinib showed evidences of activity in a phase I trial in different
tumors, including thyroid cancers. TKIs are usually more effective in
combination with standard chemotherapy. Among chemotherapeutic drugs,
preclinical studies using irinotecan seem to be very promising in
different types of thyroid carcinomas. The aim of this study is to
determine the activity of sunitinib alone and in combination with
irinotecan on endothelial and ATC cells. METHODS: Proliferation and
apoptotic assays were performed on human dermal microvascular endothelial
cells (HMVEC-d) and ATC (8305C, FB3) cell lines exposed to sunitinib (SU)
and SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, for 72h. The synergism
was determined with the method by Chou and quantified by the combination
index (CI), where CI 1 indicates synergism, additive effect, and
antagonism, respectively. Cell-based phospho-VEGFR-2 assay was performed
and ERK1/2 and Akt phosphorylation were quantified by ELISA kits. Cyclin
D1 and CDK2 gene expression were performed with real-time PCR and cyclin
D1 intracellular concentrations were measured by ELISA. 8305C xenografts
in nude mice were treated with sunitinib (50 mg/kg/day) and tumour
volumes were measured. RESULTS: A strong antiproliferative and
pro-apoptotic activities were determined by SU on both endothelial and
cancer cells, synergistically enhanced by SN38. Phospho-VEGFR-2 levels
significantly decreased after SU treatments in activated endothelial
cells; ERK1/2 and Akt phosphorylation was significantly inhibited by SU
in endothelial and cancer cells, although at lower concentrations in the
endothelial ones. Moreover, SU treatment greatly inhibited the expression
of the cyclin D1 and CDK2 genes in both endothelial and cancer cells,
decreasing the cyclin D1 protein intracellular concentration. In vivo
administration of sunitinib was effective and determined a significant
tumor regression. CONCLUSIONS: SU demonstrated a highly significant
antiproliferative and proapoptotic activity, for activated endothelial
and ATC cells. Moreover, the simultaneous combination of sunitinib and
irinotecan determined a high synergism on endothelial and ATC cells,
suggesting a possible translation of this schedule into the clinics.

