Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The essential role of Gi2 in prostate cancer progression


Basic and clinic research data have suggested that signaling of
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is amplified in malignant prostate
tumors and facilitates the transition of primary cancer cells to the
androgen independent stage. Oxytocin (OXT) is a neurohypophyseal peptide
hormone that regulates normal prostate functions. However, the
information is very limited about the effect of OXT on prostate cancer
progression. The effect of OXT is mediated by a GPCR that promiscuously
activates multiple G-proteins including Gq and Gi. Recently, we have
shown that OXT receptor (OXTR) is the primary target of OXT in androgen
independent prostate cancer cell lines (DU145 and PC3). Moreover,
activated OXTR has been shown to promote migration of PC3 cells via a
pertussis toxin (PTx) sensitive Gi/o-protein dependent mechanism. In the
present study, OXTR was shown to be increased in advanced prostate cancer
tissues when compared with normal prostate tissues. Expression of OXTR
protein is detected in DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines but not
in the immortalized prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1). OXT treatment (100
nM) inhibited the foskolin (5 M) induced cAMP accumulation in PC3 cells,
as indicated by the cAMP luciferase reporter assay. This data has
provided direct evidence that supports the involvement of Gi in the OXTR
signaling in PC3 cells. There was no difference in expression of Gi
isoforms (Gi1-3) at the mRNA level between normal (PrEC, RWPE1 and RWPE2)
and prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, DU145, PC3, and PC3M). However,
western blot analysis showed that Gi2 is the only Gi family member
detectable in PC3 cells. PTx (100 ng/ml) has been shown to abolish the
OXT-induced migration of PC3 cells. Overexpression of PTx resistant Gi2,
but not wild type Gi2, restored the effect of OXT in PTx pretreated PC3
cells. Accordingly, genetic silencing of Gi2 expression by siRNA
eliminated the OXT-induced migration of PC3 cells. Unexpectedly, knock
down Gi2 also inhibited the EGF (3 ng/ml) induce migration of PC3 and
DU145 cells. In conclusion, Gi2 may play an essential role in prostate
cancer metastasis.

