Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Power of FOLFOXIRI+B-mab as preoperative chemotherapy for multiple
liver metastases of colorectal cancer -Relationship between clinical
response and pathological response-


Background; R0 resection for liver metastases of colorectal cancer is one
of the promising treatment to improve prognosis of advanced colorectal
cancer. Recently, effective anti-cancer drugs and various regimens using
them were created and some advanced inoperable liver metastases were
converted to operable by those chemotherapy (CT). Therefore, development
of powerful regimens to shrink liver metastases strongly is an important
issue. In our department Phase I/II study of FOLFOXIRI+B-mab including
fluoroiuracil/oxaliplatin/irinotecan/bevacizumab for advanced liver
metastases of colorectal cancer as pre-operative CT has been conducted
now. In this study, this regimen's effect on shrinkage of liver lesions
from gross view of clinical response and micro view of pathological
response are evaluated. Methods: The study was designed as a single-arm,
open-label phase I/II trial. Phase I was conducted as sequential dose
escalation to define the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) of irinotecan.
Patients who are colorectal cancer with 4 or more liver metastases and no
other distant metastases are included. The regimen includes bevacizumab;
5 mg/kg, oxaliplatin; 85 mg/m2, l-LV; 200 mg/m2, 5FU; 400 mg/m2
administered on day 1, followed by 5FU; 2400 mg/m2 continuously
administered for 46 hours. Dose escalation of Irinotecan was planned from
level 1; 150 mg/m2, level 2; 180 mg/m2 and level 0; 125 mg/m2. In Phase
II, R0 resection rate of liver metastases as primary endpoint will be
evaluated using MTD of irinotecan estimated in Phase I. After 6 cycles of
the CT, R0 operability was evaluated. Now 6 patients were studied in
level 1 dose, in them, one patient dropped out because of DLT, 4 were
converted to R0 resection and another is waiting for resection. To
evaluate power of this regimen, macroscopic and microscopic response of
resected hepatic lesions of these 4 patients were investigated. Results:
Median number of metastases of each patient was 9 (4-21). Total number of
metastases of the 4 patients was 43. Median long span of the all tumors
was 12 mm (5-76 mm). All 4 patients showed PR in CT and median of
reduction rate was 38% (34-67%). Four tumors (9.3%) showed clinical CR.
Twelve tumor (27.9%) showed pathological CR, 26 (60.5%) were moderate
response (2/3 or more of tumor showed necrosis or disappear), and only
one (2.3%) was mild response. Conclusion; FOLFOXIRI+B-mab showed powerful
effect to shrink liver metastases of colorectal cancer. It is a good
regimen for pre-operative CT for liver metastases. Further investigation
of this study is still ongoing now.

