Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel strategy for targeted drug delivery to the tumor
vasculature by radiation-induced receptor expression on endothelial cells


One of the primary goals of a successful cancer treatment regimen is to
deliver an effective combination of radiation and/or drugs to tumors
while minimizing damage to normal tissues. Many anti-angiogenic agents,
while not able to control tumor growth, possess the ability to
selectively target the location and process of tumor blood vessel
formation. Conversely many chemotherapy agents are highly cytotoxic and
lack selective targeting ability thus decreasing the therapeutic ratio.
We are investigating a new drug delivery strategy exploiting the tumor
endothelium stimulated by ionizing radiation to preferentially target and
deliver a nanoparticulate formulation of arsenic trioxide (ATO)
encapsulated in liposomal vesicles or nanobins to the irradiated tumor
tissue. The targeting is via the 33 amino acid anti-angiogenic peptide,
anginex. The identification of galectin-1 as the receptor for anginex
expressed on activated endothelial cells involved in tumor angiogenesis
has revealed a solid basis for this therapeutic rationale. Unlike the
antiangiogenic agent Avastin, which is an antibody that targets the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) released by the tumor cells
into the microenvironment, this peptide binds to galectin-1, a tumor
endothelial cell specific antigen that is expressed in solid tumors. We
have made the novel discovery that galectin-1 expression is further
upregulated in the tumor after radiation exposure, particularly on the
endothelial cell surface. Exposure of murine SCK breast tumors to a
clinical radiation dose of 2Gy induced a substantial average increase of
141 +/ 49% in anginex uptake as assessed by [18]-F-labeled anginex
biodistribution. These results suggest that anginex may be an effective
targeting molecule for image and radiation-guided therapy of solid
tumors. To assist in delineating the exact mechanisms for our
radiation-guided drug delivery strategy, we have developed a system to
grow 3D tumor cell-endothelial cell spheroids and have observed increased
galectin-1 expression upon radiation exposure. We are using these
spheroidal cultures to implant tumors in dorsal skin fold window chambers
for intravital wavelength imaging of drug delivery to tumor tissue before
and after radiation exposure. Understanding how anginex uptake
selectively increases in endothelial cells after irradiation and its
nexus to radiation-sensitivity and drug delivery is our current focus.
Further studies are underway to characterize the in vivo targeting of
arsenic trioxide chemotherapy via anginex-conjugated nanobins in
combination with radiation exposure and assess the therapeutic potential
in our solid tumor model. Supported by NCI grant CA107160 and the Central
Arkansas Radiation Therapy Institute.

