Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic drug monitoring of Anthracyclines and Taxanes in
chemotherapy of breast cancer patients


Background: Anthracyclines (A) and Taxanes (T) remain amongst the most
active drugs in breast cancer chemotherapy. However, significant
toxicities are associated when administered at full doses in a number of
patients (pts), so careful dose adjustments should be made in order to
optimize their clinical effectiveness. A and T have high inter- and
intra-patient variability, and a correlation between exposure and
efficacy and toxicity has been demonstrated. Therefore, therapeutic drug
monitoring (TDM) of these drugs, based on the individual pharmacokinetic
(PK) parameters could personalize doses in order to diminish its toxicity
and/or to improve the clinical benefit. Methods: A total of 24 pts (92
cycles) were treated with either single drugs, or combinations of two of
these agents, usually with four initial cycles of A and 4 subsequent
cycles of T. The initial dose was calculated using body-surface
algorithm. Pts were monitored since the first cycle and subsequent doses
pharmacokinetically adjusted until the target plasma concentration was
reached. Bayesian estimates of individual PK parameters were calculated
using a population PK models previously published and used for PK-based
dose adjustment. Results: The main results are shown in the following
table: 43% of pts treated with A had the initial dose increased by an
average of 22% without toxicities grade II, except one pt which developed
mucositis grade II. For paclitaxel, initial dose was increased in 25% of
patients by an average of 22% with only one case of grade 2 asthenia.
However, docetaxel initial dose of 60-75 mg/m2 was more toxic than the
other drugs evaluated. The doses were reduced by an average of 22% due to
toxicities such as grade 3 neutropenia, grade 2 asthenia or grade 2
leucopenia. Conclusion: Standard dosing regimen of A and T in breast
cancer pts could be optimized by TDM in order to achieve the target
plasma concentration during the chemotherapy treatment and ensure that
pts receive the right dose.


