Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of lenalidomide in vitro and in vivo models of
bortezomib-resistant mantle cell lymphoma involving the modulation of
c-myc/p27 axis


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B lymphoid neoplasm
genetically characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) leading to the
overexpression of cyclin D1. As a consequence of its poor responses to
conventional chemotherapy and relatively short patient survival, new
therapeutic strategies are required. Despite the promising introduction
of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in the clinical practice, not all
the patients respond and relapse frequently occurres after initial
response. When comparing the behavior of both bortezomib-resistant and
bortezomib-sensitive cell lines in a xenotransplant mouse model, we
observed an increased tumorigenecity of bortezomib-resistant cells in
vivo, suggesting a major capacity of these tumors to interact with
lymphoid microenvironment. As the immunomoduladory drug lenalidomide has
been shown to modulate tumor-stroma interaction in several B cell
malignancies, we assessed the activity in vitro and in vivo of this agent
either alone or combined with the proteasome inhibitor in both
bortezomib-resistant and bortezomib-sensitive samples. Lenalidomide
single agent was found to exert modest antitumoral activity in 2/10 MCL
cell lines, corresponding to those cells with either primary or acquired
resistance to the proteasome inhibitor. Conversely, mice bearing
bortezomib-resistant tumors and treated for 3 weeks with a 10-50
mg/kg/day regimen of lenalidomide, showed a 30 to 45% reduction in tumor
burden when compared to vehicle-treated group (pMantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) is an aggressive B lymphoid neoplasm genetically characterized by
the t(11;14)(q13;q32) leading to the overexpression of cyclin D1. As a
consequence of its poor responses to conventional chemotherapy and
relatively short patient survival, new therapeutic strategies are
required. Despite the promising introduction of the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib in the clinical practice, not all the patients respond and
relapse frequently occurres after initial response. When comparing the
behavior of both bortezomib-resistant and bortezomib-sensitive cell lines
in a xenotransplant mouse model, we observed an increased tumorigenecity
of bortezomib-resistant cells in vivo, suggesting a major capacity of
these tumors to interact with lymphoid microenvironment. As the
immunomoduladory drug lenalidomide has been shown to modulate
tumor-stroma interaction in several B cell malignancies, we assessed the
activity in vitro and in vivo of this agent either alone or combined with
the proteasome inhibitor in both bortezomib-resistant and
bortezomib-sensitive samples. Lenalidomide single agent was found to
exert modest antitumoral activity in 2/10 MCL cell lines, corresponding
to those cells with either primary or acquired resistance to the
proteasome inhibitor. Conversely, mice bearing bortezomib-resistant
tumors and treated for 3 weeks with a 10-50 mg/kg/day regimen of
lenalidomide, showed a 30 to 45% reduction in tumor burden when compared
to vehicle-treated group (p<0.05). The corresponding biopsies harbored
several hallmarks of lenalidomide activity in malignant B cells such as
CD80 and CD40L upregulation, together with a remarkable decrease in
mitotic index, c-myc down-regulation, p27 cytosolic accumulation and
caspase-3 processing. Similarly, bortezomib-resistant MCL cell lines
treated for 72h with 1 microM lenalidomide showed lower c-myc levels, as
well as p27 accumulation, caspase-3/7 activity and apparition of
hypodiploid cells. When combined to bortezomib therapy (0.15 mg/kg, twice
a week), lenalidomide induced a 37% and a 66% inhibition of tumor growth
when compared to lenalidomide and vehicle groups, respectively (p=0.02).
In accordance, lenalidomide showed synergistic effect in vitro with
bortezomib in co-culture system associating the MCL cell line Jeko-1 to
the dendritic-like cells BDCM, by modifying the secretion pattern of
these latest. Altogether, these results suggest that single agent
lenalidomide is preferentially effective in MCL cases resistant to
bortezomib, by targeting c-myc-driven tumorigenesis. Additionally,
lenalidomide may overcome the protection offered by lymphoid tumor
microenvironment toward bortezomib treatment, thus warranting a promising
clinical activity of lenalidomide-bortezomib combination in MCL cases
refractory to bortezomib.

