Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TL32711, a novel Smac mimetic, exerts significant antitumor
efficacy in primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma model


Introduction. Pancreatic cancer is highly resistant to treatment.
Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) were overexpressed in pancreatic cancer
cells and IAPs downregulation were shown to induce sensitivity to death
receptor signaling, cytotoxic agents and radiation. TL32711, a novel Smac
mimetic, is a potent IAP antagonist that induces caspase-dependent
apoptosis and NFkB canonical pathway inactivation. Here, we investigated
the efficacy of TL32711 using a patient-derived primary pancreatic cancer
explant model that mirrors the disease's biological heterogeneity.
Methods. Effect of TL32711 alone and with TRAIL was evaluated in Panc1 by
immunoblotting and Trypan blue staining. Dose escalation studies were
performed in 2 primary pancreatic tumors at i.p. 30 mg/kg, 45 mg/kg and
60 mg/kg twice weekly and tumor volume were measured for 28 days. No
significant toxicity was observed in tumor-bearing mice at all dose
levels. An additional 6 primary pancreatic tumors were evaluated at 60
mg/kg. H&E slides of donor patients for these tumors were evaluated and
untreated tumors analyzed by gene microarrays to explore for potential
efficacy biomarkers. Tumor, plasma and liver samples were obtained from
dose escalation studies for pharmacokinetic analysis. Results. TL32711
treatment resulted in rapid cIAP1 degradation leading to caspase-3
activation in Panc1, and exerted a dose-dependent pro-apoptotic effect
that was synergized with TRAIL co-incubation in in vitro studies. In
primary tumor explant studies, TL32711 dosed at 60 mg/kg exerted
significant growth arrest/inhibition in 6 primary tumors (T/C range 0.1
to 0.2) and suboptimal growth inhibition in 2 (T/C 0.4). H&E slides of
resected pancreatic cancer specimens for 7 donor patients were available
for evaluation, and there was no relationship between histological
findings (inflammatory infiltrate, stroma, neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio
and necrosis) and in vivo TL32711 efficacy. Dose escalation studies
showed a dose-dependent growth inhibitory effect of TL32711 in 2 primary
tumors: 30mg/kg achieved significant growth inhibition in #17624 but not
#12872. Significant growth inhibition was achieved in both at >= 45
mg/kg. Pharmacokinetic analysis showed that TL32711 efficacy correlated
with tumor drug exposure and that tumor concentrations at the effective
doses were in the range of what is achievable in patients tumors at
clinically tolerable doses. Results from gene microarray analysis will be
summarized. Conclusions. TL32711 demonstrated significant single agent
efficacy in pancreatic cancer that correlated with tumor drug exposure,
and the efficacious tumor drug exposure here is achievable in tumors at
tolerated doses in clinical studies. Clinical trials evaluating TL32711
in pancreatic cancer are planned.

