Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) induces autophagy in inflammatory
breast cancer by regulation of the mTOR signaling pathway


The control of cell growth by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
signaling pathway and autophagy are relevant to disease, as altered
regulation of either pathway may result in tumorigenesis. Autophagy is a
regulated pathway involving the lysosomal degradation of cytoplasmic
components and organelles. Activation of the human autophagy-initiation
kinase (ULK1) is directly controlled by mTOR and is a critical part of
the autophagy machinery. In this study we test the autophagy inducing
effects of the medicinal mushroom Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) in the
patient derived inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) cell line SUM-149 and in
the non-cancerous mammary epithelial cell line MCF10A. IBC is a rare,
lethal and aggressive form of locally advanced breast cancer that has a
poor prognosis and no targeted therapy. Herein, we demonstrate that
Reishi modulates the expression of autophagy related molecules depending
on treatment time. At 2h post-Reishi treatment SUM-149 cells show that
ULK1, Atg5, Atg12, Beclin1 and the microtubule-associated protein 1 light
chain 3 (LC3) are 1.2 fold upregulated. Furthermore, autophagosomal
structures were identified in SUM-149 but not in MCF10A Reishi treated
cells. At 4h post-Reishi Atg5 and Atg12 (required for phagophore
formation) are 1.5 fold upregulated, while at 6h LC3 expression (involved
in autophagosome formation) is 2 fold upregulated compared to vehicle. We
also show that autophagy induction in SUM-149 cells is mediated via
downregulation of the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway. Reishi downregulates
PI3K (p85 and p110), mTOR phosphorylation and reduces the expression of
Raptor, which is the regulatory subunit of mTORC1, the complex that
directly regulates proteins involved in autophagy. Rictor, the regulatory
subunit of the mTORC2 complex, which inhibits autophagy indirectly
through Akt is also downregulated by Reishi. We demonstrate that Reishi
has great potential to be used as an anti-IBC-therapeutic. This project
was sponsored by Title V PPOHA grant number P031M105050 from the US Dept
of Education to UCC, and NIH/RCMI 2G12RR003035 to UCC.

