Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate-derived ETS factor expression decreases prostate tumor
cell aggressiveness in vitro and metastasis in vivo


INTRODUCTION: The metastasis of a prostate tumor is the leading cause of
prostate cancer deaths. Therefore the ability to prevent or limit the
malignant potential of tumor cells remains a significant and clinically
relevant goal. Prostate-Derived ETS Factor (PDEF) is a transcription
factor which regulates multiple gene products involved in prostate
tumorigenesis. There is an inverse correlation between the levels of PDEF
and tumor aggressiveness. In addition, PDEF protein expression is
inversely correlated with increasing tumor aggressiveness (increasing
Gleason Score), suggesting that PDEF may be a tumor metastasis
suppressor. Since PC3 cells express very low levels of PDEF and
metastasize well in metastasis models, they serve as a model to
determine: 1) if PDEF over-expression affects the metastatic capacity of
these cells in mouse models of metastasis and 2) which PDEF-regulated
gene product(s) may contribute to metastatic colonization. METHODS:
Standard migration (scratch), invasion (Boyden chamber), clonogenic, and
RNA to cDNA RT-PCR assays were performed. Cells were stably transfected
to express Luciferase. In vivo, 1 x 106 cells were injected in the
subcutaneous, tail vein, and intra-cardic mouse models and at various
time points there after, cells are non-invasively monitored by IVIS over
a twelve week period. RESULTS: Utilizing in vitro migration, invasion,
and clonogenic assays we demonstrated that PDEF over-expression resulted
in decreased tumor aggressiveness. PDEF re-expression differentially
regulated MMP9 and FAK compared to parental cells. Surprisingly, PDEF
expression had no effect on in vivo subcutaneous xenograft tumor growth;
however, using both tail-vein and intra-cardiac injection mouse
metastasis models we demonstrate that PC3 cells as well as PDEF
over-expressing PC3 cells disperse and home in around abdominal cavity.
We observed that over time PC3 cells survived and reestablished new
colonies. Conversely, PDEF over-expression significantly and dramatically
decreased the ability of PC3 cells to colonize metastatic sites compared
to parental cells. Twelve weeks post tumor cell injection, mice injected
with PC3 cells had well established micro-metastasis, while mice injected
with PDEF-over-expressing PC3 cells had no detectible metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate for the first time that the
re-expression of PDEF decreases the metastatic capacity of prostate
cancer cells in vivo, while having no effect on subcutaneous tumor cell
growth, thus establishing PDEF as a tumor metastasis suppressor gene.
Therefore, future studies to determine how PDEF is silenced in advance
disease may lead to increased mechanistic insight into the metastatic
process and eventually to several therapeutic options for the
re-expression of PDEF or the inhibition of PDEF-regulated gene products
to decrease or perhaps prevent prostate tumor metastasis.

