Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of sphingosine kinase 1 is necessary for angiopoietin
2-induced hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis


INTRODUCTION: Sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) is one of the two isoenzymes
that generate the potent bioactive sphingolipid mediator,
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). S1P promotes cancer cell survival,
proliferation and hemangiogenesis. The angiopoietin2 (Ang2)-Tie2 axis
also plays a significant role in hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the involvement of SphK1 in
Ang2-induced hem- and lymphangiogenesis. METHODS: Human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human lymphatic endothelial cells (HLECs)
were treated without or with an isozyme-specific inhibitor of SphK1
(SK1-I) and qPCR, western blot, ELISA, and tube formation assays carried
out. We also used a new method we developed to quantify both hem- and
lymphangiogenesis in the same sample in vivo by combining Directed In
Vivo Angiogenesis Assays (DIVAA) with Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting
(DIVAA/FACS). RESULTS: qPCR revealed that human HLECs like HUVECs express
high levels of SphK1 and the S1PR1 receptor. S1P rapidly stimulated
xocytosis of Ang2 from HLEC storage granules determined by ELISA. Ang2
activated Tie2 in HLECs as demonstrated by its rapid phosphorylation on
Tyr992, a major site responsible for its activation. Similar to Ang2, S1P
also stimulated phosphorylation of Tie2, which may be due to secretion of
Ang2. S1P is a potent hem- and lymphangiogenic factor for HUVECs and
HLECs, respectively, as demonstrated by enhanced tube formation.
Ang2-induced hem- and lymphangiogenesis was mediated at least in part by
SphK1 as shown by the inhibitory effect of SK1-I. Furthermore, both S1P
and Ang2 significantly induced hem- and lymphangiogenesis in vivo
determined by DIVAA/FACS. Similar to its effect on in vitro hem- and
lymphangiogenesis, inclusion of SK1-I in the angioreactors together with
Ang2 completely abolished its ability to stimulate both of these
processes. CONCLUSION: Activation of SphK1 is necessary for Ang2-induced
hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis through the SphK1/S1P and Ang2/Tie2
axes. This work was supported by NIH (K12HD055881) and Susan G. Komen for
the Cure (KG090510) to KT, NCI (R01CA61774) to SS, and Sumitomo Life
Social Welfare Services Foundation grant to MN.

