Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vesicular stomatitis virus as an oncolytic agent against
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Oncolytic virus (OV) therapy is an anticancer approach that utilizes
replication-competent viruses to specifically kill tumor cells. Such
selectivity is possible because many tumors are characterized by
defective innate immune responses which facilitate selective replication
of viruses in cancer cells. As a result, OV can infect, replicate within
and kill tumor cells. Successful virus replication in cancer cells leads
to the release of newly formed infectious virus particles that go on to
infect neighboring tumor cells. Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a
promising OV and has demonstrated preclinical success against a variety
of malignancies, however, VSV oncolytic potential has never been studied
in pancreatic cancer. About 95% of pancreatic cancers are pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas (PDA) which are highly invasive with aggressive
local growth and rapid metastases to surrounding tissues. PDA is
considered one of the most lethal abdominal malignancies with annual
deaths closely matching the annual incidence of the disease. Chemotherapy
is the primary treatment available; however, patients exhibit little
improvement or develop chemoresistance. Therefore, development of new
treatment strategies for patients suffering from PDA is of utmost
importance. There are several advantages of using VSV as an anticancer
therapy. VSV is a prototypic negative-strand RNA virus (family
Rhabdoviridae), and its basic biology and interactions with host immune
responses have been extensively studied. While VSV is sensitive to
IFN-mediated antiviral responses (and therefore unable to productively
infect healthy cells), it can specifically infect and kill tumor cells,
the majority of which are believed to be defective in Type I IFN
production and responses. In addition to tumor specificity, VSV has
several important advantages as an OV: (i) replication occurs in the
cytoplasm of host cells with no risk of host cell transformation, (ii)
cellular uptake in many mammalian cell types occurs rapidly with no cell
cycle dependency, (iii) the genome is easily manipulated for enhancement
of oncolysis and specificity, and (iv) there is no preexisting immunity
against VSV in humans. In this study, the oncolytic potential of VSV was
analyzed in a panel of 13 clinically relevant human PDA cell lines and
compared to other OV. VSV showed superior oncolytic abilities compared to
all other viruses tested, and was effective in killing the majority of
tested PDA cell lines. However, we identified some PDA cell lines that
showed resistance to oncolysis by all tested viruses. These results were
confirmed for several PDA cell lines in nude mice. We also conducted
initial analysis of PDA resistance to virus-induced cell death. Our in
vitro and in vivo results demonstrate that VSV has good potential as an
OV against PDA, while further studies are needed to better understand the
molecular mechanisms of resistance of some PDA cell lines to virotherapy.

