Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic apoptosis by combination of natural compound EGCG and
resveratrol in head and neck cancer: Potential role for AKT-dependent
signaling


Natural dietary agents have drawn great attention for cancer prevention
because of their wide safety margin and ready availability. Green tea is
one such agent that is widely used for chemoprevention (Amin et al. 2009,
Kim et al., 2010). Recent clinical trials suggest that green tea alone
might not be sufficient for chemoprevention of head and neck cancer (HNC)
(Tsao et al., 2009). Therefore, identification of compounds which exhibit
synergistic effects with green tea is warranted. In the current study, we
investigated combination of green tea component EGCG and resveratrol (a
major constituent of red wines and grapes), and found that their
combination strongly induced apoptosis as measured by annexin-V staining
and supported by cleavage of PARP and caspase 3. The combination of
resveratrol (15 and 20 M, which alone induce 10-15% apoptosis) with EGCG
(30-80 M, which also induce Natural dietary agents have drawn great
attention for cancer prevention because of their wide safety margin and
ready availability. Green tea is one such agent that is widely used for
chemoprevention (Amin et al. 2009, Kim et al., 2010). Recent clinical
trials suggest that green tea alone might not be sufficient for
chemoprevention of head and neck cancer (HNC) (Tsao et al., 2009).
Therefore, identification of compounds which exhibit synergistic effects
with green tea is warranted. In the current study, we investigated
combination of green tea component EGCG and resveratrol (a major
constituent of red wines and grapes), and found that their combination
strongly induced apoptosis as measured by annexin-V staining and
supported by cleavage of PARP and caspase 3. The combination of
resveratrol (15 and 20 M, which alone induce 10-15% apoptosis) with EGCG
(30-80 M, which also induce <10% apoptosis) strongly increased apoptosis
(to 60-80%) in multiple HNC cell lines. Data analysis for the combination
using CalcuSyn software suggests that the combination of EGCG and
resveratrol has synergistic apoptotic effects with combination index
between 0.4-0.7. Interestingly, a premalignant oral leukoplakia cell line
was sensitive to relatively lower doses of the combination (5 and 10 M
resveratrol, 10 and 15 M EGCG) than fully transformed cancer cell lines,
suggesting that the combination of EGCG and resveratrol might be a
suitable combination for prevention of HNC. To further elucidate the
mechanism of synergistic apoptosis, we found that combination of EGCG and
resveratrol strongly inhibited AKT and ERK phosphorylation along with its
several downstream targets including p-mTOR, p-S6 and p-4EBP1. Retroviral
transduction of constitutively active AKT significantly inhibited
apoptosis induced by the combination (p=.003). We also found that the
combination of EGCG and resveratrol strongly inhibited p-AMPK, a kinase
that regulates autophagy, a protective mechanism during energy stress.
The fact that inhibition of autophagy triggers apoptosis (Xu Y et al.,
2011) suggests that inhibition of p-AMPK might also play a role in EGCG-
and resveratrol-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, strong inhibition of
anti-apoptotic Mcl-1 and survivin by the combination was observed as a
consequence. Taken together, our studies identify a novel combination of
two natural dietary agents, EGCG and resveratrol, which induces
synergistic anti-tumor effects in both premalignant and fully transformed
HNC cells by targeting multiple signal transduction pathways. The
signaling pathways modulated by the combination of EGCG and resveratrol
are critical for development of HNC, thus our study provides an important
rationale for future preclinical and clinical development. (Supported by
U01CA101244, R01CA112643, and P50CA128613 to DMS)

