Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomics-based comparative analysis of mitochondria isolated
from human cisplatin-sensitive and resistant ovarian carcinoma cell lines


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the leading cause of death among women
with gynecologic malignancies and the fifth leading cause of cancer death
in women in the United States. Cisplatin is one of the most effective and
active agents in the treatment of advanced EOC, however, development of
chemoresistance is a major obstacle. A recurrent theme is emerging that
mitochondria and mitochondrial dysfunction are centerpiece in
contributing to an aggressive carcinogenic phenotype. Similarly, we
hypothesized that changes in the mitochondrial proteome are required to
support development of cisplatin resistance in human EOC. We applied an
organellar proteomics approach to elucidate quantitative alterations in
protein abundance in mitochondria enriched from an isogenic pair of
cisplatin sensitive (A2780) and resistant (A2780-CP20) human EOC cells.
Protein isolates from mitochondria were analyzed by high resolution
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and
quantitative determination of changes in the relative abundance level of
identified proteins was accomplished by spectral counting. This analysis
confirmed that there are substantial alterations in the mitochondrial
proteomic composition in cisplatin resistant EOC cells. Differential
proteins selected for western blot validation include hypoxia
up-regulated protein 1 (HYOU1), activated leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule (ALCAM), isoform 1 of dynamin-like 120kDa protein (OPA1), A
kinase anchoring protein 12 (AKAP12), and ferredoxin reductase (FDXR).
Our proteomic analysis demonstrated overexpression of HYOU1, ALCAM,
AKAP12, and OPA1 in the resistant EOC cells. This panel of protein
candidates have been implicated in other tumor types and are involved in
relevant cell mechanisms to include evasion of apoptosis, increased tumor
invasiveness, tumor hypoxia, cellular respiration, and mitochondrial
fragmentation.

