Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species-dependent ERK and JNK activation is
important to docasahexaenoic acid-induced cell cytotoxicity in human
ovarian cancer cells


Although abundant experimental evidences show that the Omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (3-PUFAs) prevent carcinogenesis, the exact
molecular mechanisms of the anti-cancer actions of 3-PUFAs in ovarian
cancer remain incompletely understood. In the present study, the
effectiveness of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a 3-PUFA, against ovarian
cancer cells was investigated. We found that DHA induced cell
cytotoxicity in three ovarian cancer cells including PA-1, MDAH2774 and
ID8. DHA treatment inhibited the cell proliferation of PA-1 cells in a
dose- and time-dependent manner. Meanwhile, DHA-treated ovarian cancer
cells showed increased levels of caspase-3 activity, Annexin-V staining
positive cells, TUNEL-positive cells and the portion of sub-G1 cells,
suggesting that DHA-induced cell death is mainly associated with
apoptosis. Western blot and immunocytochemistry assays revealed that DHA
also remarkably increased the levels of phospho-ERK and phospho-JNK in
both cytosol and nucleus. Moreover, knockdown ERK and JNK by small
interfering RNAs partially attenuated the apoptosis induced by DHA,
indicating that ERK and JNK activation is responsible for the apoptosis
in DHA-treated ovarian cancer cells. In addition, we determined that the
activation of ERK and JNK was associated with the reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production induced by DHA. ROS scavenger, N-acetyl-L-cysteine
(NAC), almost completely blocked the ERK and JNK phosphorylation as well
as the apoptosis triggered by DHA. Together, these results indicate that
DHA induces ROS and the ROS-dependent ERK and JNK activation is important
to DHA-induced cell cytotoxicity in human ovarian cancer cells. [This
research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology (2011-0006232 and 2011-0003060)].

