Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta catenin inhibitor ICG-001 attenuates proliferation of hepatic
tumor initiating cells in Pten deficient models


Progenitor or tumor initiating cells (TICs) are altered stem cells with
the capacity to form solid tumors. Tumor suppressor PTEN (phosphatase and
tensin homologue deleted on chromosome ten) is aberrantly expressed in
liver cancers. Liver specific Pten (Pm) mice develop liver cancer
following an extensive phase of chronic lipid accumulation and
demonstrate escalating levels of hepatic injury markers from 6-12M, prior
to hepatic progenitor cell proliferation. In addition, TUNEL analysis
revealed that hepatocytes from Pm mice undergo extensive apoptosis
relative to control mice. We hypothesize that hepatocyte cell death
induced by hepatic injury presents an opportunity for TICs to proliferate
and consequently form mixed lineage tumors. Attenuation of hepatic injury
by Akt2 deletion reduces progenitor cell proliferation and delays tumor
development. Our analyses also revealed that the Wnt/-Catenin signaling
pathway is the likely molecular mediator of TIC proliferation in our Pm
model. Wnt ligands including 7a and 10a as well as Wnt signaling receptor
Fzd 2 are induced. In this study, we investigate the role of the
Wnt/-Catenin pathway in the activation of hepatic progenitor cells in the
Pten deletion liver cancer model using novel Wnt/-catenin inhibitor
ICG-001. ICG-001 is a small molecule which specifically inhibits
-Catenin/CBP interaction. Coactivator CBP/-Catenin/T cell factor (TCF)
mediated transcription has been reported as critical for stem
cell/progenitor cell proliferation. Here we demonstrate that ICG-001
significantly attenuates proliferation of hepatic cancer stem cell line
P0 in vitro and also inhibits hepatotoxin induced proliferation of
hepatic TICs in vivo in liver Pten null mice. Our preliminary results
indicate that targeting the cancer stem cell niche may prove to be a
viable approach to inhibit liver tumorigenesis.

