Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidation products of green tea polyphenols induce inactivation of
PKC isoenzymes and induce cell death via modulation of selenoprotein
thioredoxin reductase and quinone reductase


Autooxidation of green tea polyphenols generates H2O2 and quinones which
have been implicated in cell death induced by these polyphenols. While
autooxidation of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the major green tea
polyphenol, has been shown in vitro where oxygen tension is high, the
role of reactive oxygen species in the action of EGCG in vivo is
currently gaining attention. When DU145 prostate cancer cells were
treated in vitro with EGCG, PKC isoenzymes were inactivated. This
inactivation was strongly correlated with EGCG-induced cell death.
Cell-permeable catalase partially blocked EGCG-induced inactivation of
PKC and cell death suggesting the involvement of H2O2 in these processes.
EGCG-induced cell death was enhanced by 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole, a
catalase inhibitor, suggesting an inhibitory role for intracellular
catalase in this process. Furthermore, the inactivated PKC isoenzymes
were regenerated to their active form by thiol agents in the test tube or
by the thioredoxin reductase (TR) system in cells. This suggests
sulfhydryl oxidation of PKC is induced by EGCG-mediated ROS generation.
Previously, others have demonstrated inactivation of TR by a quinone
generated by autooxidation of EGCG. We found that EGCG treatment of
intact DU145 cells inactivated TR, presumably by generation of quinone.
Such inactivation of TR enhanced the net increase in inactivation of PKC
due to a decrease in reversal of PKC oxidative modification. Thus, the
combined actions of H2O2 and quinones induce more inactivation of PKC and
cell death than either agent alone. Cotreatment of cells with auranofin,
a specific inhibitor of TR, enhanced EGCG-induced inactivation of PKC and
cell death. Conversely, a three-fold increase in the induction of TR, by
pretreatment of DU145 cells with selenite for 48 h, completely abolished
both EGCG-induced inactivation of PKC and induction of cell death. This
suggests a possible antagonistic interaction between selenium and EGCG.
Dicumarol, an inhibitor of phase II enzyme quinone reductase, enhanced
inactivation of TR, presumably by accumulation of quinones. Conversely,
an induction of quinone reductase by tertiary butylhydroquinone,
decreased EGCG-induced inactivation of TR, presumably due to less
accumulation of EGCG-derived quinones. This decreased inactivation of TR
subsequently led to a net decrease in inactivation of PKC isoenzymes and
cell death. This suggests that QR is a negative regulator of EGCG-induced
inactivation of PKC and cell death. Thus, EGCG oxidation products H2O2
and quinone appear to mediate EGCG-induced cell death via inactivation of
PKC isoenzymes and TR respectively. Furthermore, the data suggests that
both EGCG-induced PKC inactivation and cell death are antagonized by an
increase in TR and QR. This study was supported by the National Cancer
Institute grant CA099216.

