Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term significance (15 years) of pathological complete
response after dose-dense neo-adjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer


Purpose: As a contribution to the discussion of pathological complete
response (pCR) as surrogate end-point, after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
(NACT), we studied disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
at 15 years with THP-doxorubicin, vinorelbine, 5-Fluorouracil and
cyclophosphamide (TNCF regimen). Patients and methods: This retrospective
cohort study has been done in 61 patients treated with neo-adjuvant
semi-intensive chemotherapy. PCR rate was analysed separately in breast
(no histological evidence of invasive tumor cells and / or presence of in
situ carcinoma tumor cells) and in nodes (no metastasis). Univariate and
multivariate analysis (COX regression) have been used to assess the
potential prognostic factors with a median follow up of 13.8 years.
Results: Thirty two patients relapsed and 21 died. At 15 years, DFS and
OS were 53% and 88% respectively for the patients who achieved pCR
compared to 33% and 53% respectively for those who did not achieve pCR.
Multivariate analysis with COX model showed that pCR in breast and the
number of involved nodes at surgery were 2 factors who can significant
predict patients DFS and these two factors were significantly related.
Conclusion: In this current study, pCR in breast can be used as surrogate
marker to predict survival outcome, even with a long-term follow-up of 15
years. When pathological response was incomplete in primary tumor, the
number of involved nodes (n > 4 vs n Purpose: As a contribution to the
discussion of pathological complete response (pCR) as surrogate
end-point, after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy (NACT), we studied
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) at 15 years with
THP-doxorubicin, vinorelbine, 5-Fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide (TNCF
regimen). Patients and methods: This retrospective cohort study has been
done in 61 patients treated with neo-adjuvant semi-intensive
chemotherapy. PCR rate was analysed separately in breast (no histological
evidence of invasive tumor cells and / or presence of in situ carcinoma
tumor cells) and in nodes (no metastasis). Univariate and multivariate
analysis (COX regression) have been used to assess the potential
prognostic factors with a median follow up of 13.8 years. Results: Thirty
two patients relapsed and 21 died. At 15 years, DFS and OS were 53% and
88% respectively for the patients who achieved pCR compared to 33% and
53% respectively for those who did not achieve pCR. Multivariate analysis
with COX model showed that pCR in breast and the number of involved nodes
at surgery were 2 factors who can significant predict patients DFS and
these two factors were significantly related. Conclusion: In this current
study, pCR in breast can be used as surrogate marker to predict survival
outcome, even with a long-term follow-up of 15 years. When pathological
response was incomplete in primary tumor, the number of involved nodes (n
> 4 vs n </= 4) significantly predicted survival.

