Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-delivery of doxorubicin and siRNA using octreotide-conjugated
gold nanorods for targeted neuroendocrine cancer therapy


Introduction: Gastrointestinal (GI) carcinoids are neuroendocrine (NE)
tumors that secrete hormones causing carcinoid syndrome. Metastatic
carcinoids are not amenable to curative surgery. Therefore,
siRNA-mediated gene silencing, in combination with targeted chemotherapy,
may be a potential therapeutic strategy for patients with carcinoid
neoplasms. We have developed and assessed antitumor effects of a gold
nanorod (Au NR)-based nanocarrier conjugated with an anticancer drug
(doxorubicin (DOX)) and small interfering RNA (siRNA against carcinoid
tumor marker ASCL1, a protein required for NE cancer cell proliferation)
specifically targeting the NE cancer cells with overexpressed
somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) using octreotide (Oct) as an active -
tumor targeting ligand. Methods: Au NR-based nanoparticles (NPs) were
synthesized via a multiple step reaction. DOX was conjugated onto the Au
NR via hydrazone bonds. siRNA was complexed onto the cationic
poly(L-arginine) polymer. Oct targeting ligand was selectively conjugated
onto the distal end of PEG arms. A human GI carcinoid cell line (BON) was
treated with either non-targeted (Au-DOX) or targeted (Au-DOX-Oct) NPs
with or without siRNA, at a concentration of 1 g/ml for 30 and 120 or 24,
48, 72 hours. Based on the doxorubicin fluorescent intensity, the
cellular uptake of NPs was analyzed by flow cytometry and confocal laser
scanning microscope (CLSM). MTT assay and Western blot were used to
determine cell proliferation and assess ASCL1 expression, respectively.
Results: DOX release profiles from NPs were dependent on the
environmental pH values, which can minimize systemic spread of toxic
drugs during circulation. BON cells incubated with Au-DOX-Oct exhibited
higher cellular uptake than Au-DOX (14% and 44% increase after 30 min and
120 min, respectively) measured by flow cytometry. The CLSM observations
confirmed that the intracellular transport of Au-DOX-Oct is faster than
Au-DOX. MTT assay showed that Au-DOX-Oct-ASCL1siRNA has the strongest
inhibitory effect on carcinoid cell proliferation (more than 50% of
growth reduction). Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that
Au-DOX-Oct-ASCL1siRNA reduced the expression of ASCL1 much more than
other NPs. Conclusions: We have developed a multifunctional,
pH-responsive and tumor-targeting Au NR-based nanoplatform for anticancer
drug therapy. We showed that the presence of the surface ligand Oct
increased the cellular uptake of the NPs (Au-DOX-Oct) substantially in a
BON cell line compared to the non-targeted NPs (Au-DOX). Targeted NPs
with ASCL1siRNA were the most efficient in altering the neuroendocrine
phenotype of BON cells demonstrating the strongest anti-proliferative
effect. Thus, targeted delivery of anticancer drug (DOX) and genetic
material (ASCL1siRNA) specifically to the tumor tissue could achieve
therapeutic outcomes in treating carcinoid disease.

