Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HIF1-mediated metabolic alterations in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer related
deaths in the United States, with a five-year survival rate of less than
6%. Pancreatic tumors demonstrate high intra-tumoral hypoxia and low
oxygen tension, which causes the stabilization of transcription factor
Hypoxia-Inducible Factor1 (HIF-1). HIF1, in turn, mediates the metabolic
alterations that facilitate tumor progression and metastasis. The
objective of our study was to investigate the individual roles of HIF
factors in mediating metabolic alterations in PC. Our extensive
immunohistochemical studies in human pancreatic cancer tissue samples
demonstrate an up-regulation of glycolytic enzymes and HIF-1, in
comparison to the normal tissues. The gene up-regulations were even more
pronounced in the tumor cells as compared to the stroma. Additionally, we
screened a panel of PC cell lines and found that almost all the cell
lines demonstrate a significant increase in the uptake of [3H]-2DG, a
glucose analogue, under hypoxic conditions. There was also a concurrent
hypoxia-induced increase in lactate secretion and in the expression of
glycolytic genes, as determined by colorimetric assays and real-time PCR
analyses, respectively. To investigate the therapeutic efficacy of
targeting HIF factors in pancreatic cancer, we established stable
knockdowns for HIF-1 and HIF-2; in Capan-1, Capan-2, S2-013, CFPAC-1 and
T3M4 PC cell lines by utilizing short hairpin RNA technology. We then
performed metabolic assays in these cells to investigate the distinct
roles of HIF isoforms in the glycolytic phenotype of the PC cells. Our
results indicate that knocking down HIF-1 significantly reduces glucose
uptake under hypoxic conditions, while HIF-2 knockdown had no effect on
glucose uptake. Real-time PCR and immunoblotting analyses demonstrated
that knocking down HIF-1, but not HIF-2, reduced the levels of GLUT-1,
HK-2 and LDHA. NMR-based metabolomics studies also confirmed the effect
of digoxin-mediated HIF-1 inhibition on the levels of metabolic
intermediates. To confirm our findings in vivo, we performed orthotropic
implantation of control and HIF knockdown PC cells in athymic nude mice.
Our in vivo glucose uptake, tumor growth, and metastasis studies
confirmed our in vitro findings. Furthermore by utilizing a HIF-1
inhibitor, digoxin, we observed similar reduction in glucose uptake,
tumor growth and metastasis in orthotopic implantation models. Digoxin
treatment also improved survival in tumor bearing mice and a combination
therapy with gemcitabine further improved survival synergistically.
Overall, our results confirm the therapeutic potential of targeting HIF-1
to improve survival in PC.

