Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3C23K: an anti-human Mllerian inhibiting substance type II
receptor humanized monoclonal antibody for ovarian cancer targeted therapy


Asymptomatic in early stages, ovarian cancer is a silent killer
representing the fifth leading cause of female deaths in western
countries. Every year 56,967 women in Europe and USA die as a consequence
of this disease. The incidence of ovarian cancer is forecast to undergo a
13 % increase in the next eight years in the seven major developed
countries to reach about 72,000 annual cases in 2019. Due to the
limitations of the current therapeutic approaches, there is a strong need
for novel, more efficient, therapies. For this reason, we have produced a
humanized monoclonal antibody 3C23K targeting the human Mllerian
Inhibiting Substance type II Receptor (MISRII), expressed on most ovarian
cancer subtypes, including epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) representing
more than 90% of ovarian cancers. This monoclonal antibody derives from
the murine monoclonal antibody 12G4 and displays a particular
glycosylation profile known to favor effector recruitment (EMABling) as
previously demonstrated in vitro. In vivo, we also showed that 3C23K
exhibited a significant effect on tumor growth against several ovarian
tumor xenografted models derived from patient primary EOC tumors. In this
study, we first confirmed by peptide microarray that the epitope of 3C23K
antibody was strictly identical to that of 12G4 antibody and a 3D-model
of the full MISRII molecule was generated in order to better localize the
3C23K epitope. Furthermore, SPR studies demonstrated cross-reactivity of
3C23K with MISRII of rabbit, dog, pig, cow and primate. In vivo,
antitumor activity of 3C23K against xenografted EOC tumor models was
confirmed with various concentrations and treatment schedules. Moreover,
interestingly, we constructed a mutant form of 3C23K harboring two
mutations in the Fc region (G236R/L328R) in order to prevent binding to
both murine and human FcRs, and demonstrated that such a modification
abolished antitumor activity. This data confirmed in vivo that
recruitment of effectors is essential for 3C23K efficacy. Finally, in
order to anticipate clinical treatment of ovarian cancers, 3C23K was
tested in vivo in combination with carboplatin. Combination, when
compared with treatment of each product alone, resulted in more than
additive antitumor activity. Altogether these data showed that humanized
monoclonal antibody 3C23K represents a promising candidate for ovarian
cancer immunotherapy.

