Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stochastic control of abnormal morphogenesis induced by the ErbB2
oncoprotein


Activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 causes multiacinar
structures in 3D culture that are reminiscent of early-stage breast
tumors. The penetrance of the multiacinar phenotype is incomplete and
random, and dimerization with other ErbB family members gives rise to
quantitative differences in penetrance. Our goal is to understand the
mechanism by which a multiacinus initiates and why only a random fraction
of the cultured acini exhibit the morphogenetic defect when ErbB2 is
activated. Our working hypothesis is that acute differences (dichotomies)
in gene expression develop among acini and give rise to the distinct 3D
phenotypes induced by ErbB2. The transcriptional dichotomies that exist
before the appearance of the multiacinar phenoptype will be the ones most
likely to control it. We are using a new technique, called stochastic
profiling, that our lab developed for discovering transcriptional
dichotomies in a seemingly uniform cell population. We have established
single ErbB2 dimer clones with similar expression levels of ErbB2 and its
dimerization partner. Expression of the ErbB2 constructs was also
validated at the single-cell level in frozen acinar sections by RNA FISH.
Laser capture microdissection was used to select a small number of cells
(10-100 cells) from the fresh frozen 3D sections followed by RNA
extraction and small-sample cDNA amplification. The amplification
parameters were optimized for the ErbB2 clones in different culture
formats. We observed good quantitative linearity and amplification
efficiencies for a wide range of high- and low-abundance targets in a
2D-culture format. We are working to improve the amplification efficiency
of samples microdissected in the 3D-culture format. The long-term goal is
to link upstream acinus-specific expression programs to downstream
morphogenetic heterogeneities. The results from this project could
explain mechanistically why only a fraction of ErbB2-overexpression
breast cancers respond positively to ErbB2-targeted therapeutics.

