Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP-2 suppression abrogates irradiation-induced microtubule
formation in endothelial cells by inhibiting v3-mediated SDF-1/CXCR4
signaling


The majority of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors recur after the
radiation (IR) treatment by increasing angiogenesis and IR-induced
signaling events in endothelial cells that are involved in tumor
neovascularization; these signaling events have yet to be well
characterized. We observed that IR (8 Gy) significantly elevated MMP-2
expression and gelatinolytic activity in 4910 and 5310 human GBM
xenograft cells. In addition, endothelial cells treated with tumor
conditioned media (CM) obtained from IR-treated 4910 and 5310 cells
showed increased microtubule formation. Thus, we investigated the
possible anti-angiogenic effects of MMP-2 downregulation using siRNA
(pMMP-2.si) in IR-treated cells and further determined the effect of CM
obtained from mock, pSV (scrambled vector) and pMMP-2.si on endothelial
cell growth and vessel formation. pMMP-2.si-CM-treated endothelial cells
showed inhibited IR-CM-induced v3, SDF-1, CXCR4, phospho-PI3K and
phospho-AKT expression levels. In vitro angiogenesis assay showed that
the pMMP-2.si+IR decreased the IR-induced vessel formation in endothelial
cells. Immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation experiments indicated
the abrogation of v3-SDF1 interaction in pMMP-2.si-CM-treated endothelial
cells when compared to mock or pSV treatments. External supplementation
of either rhMMP-2 or rhSDF-1 counteracted and noticeably reversed the
pMMP-2.si-inhibited SDF-1, CXCR4, phospho-PI3K and phospho-AKT expression
levels and angiogenesis, thereby confirming the role of MMP-2 in the
regulation of v3-mediated SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling. In corroboration with
the in vitro results, the in vivo mouse dorsal air sac model also showed
reduced angiogenesis with the injection of pMMP-2.si-treated xenograft
cells whereas injection of mock or pSV-treated cells resulted in robust
formation of characteristic neovascularization. Collectively, our data
indicate the role of MMP-2 in the regulation of SDF-1/CXCR4
signaling-mediated angiogenesis in endothelial cells and demonstrates the
anti-angiogenic efficacy of combining MMP-2 downregulation and IR when
treating GBM in the future.

