Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accuracy of off-line bioluminescence imaging to localize targets
in pre-clinical radiation research


Introduction Pre-clinical methods of delivering focal radiation to
biological targets have made significant advances. Our group has
developed the Small Animal Radiation Research Platform (SARRP), which is
capable of using x-ray cone-beam CT (CBCT) to accurately guide delivery
of conformal radiation. However, CBCT is deficient in localizing small
orthotopic soft-tissue tumors. Bioluminescent imaging (BLI) is an
affordable, accessible and sensitive ancillary method of detecting such
tumors. In this study, we evaluate the setup accuracy of off-line BLI as
a means to guide focal irradiation of small tumor volumes. Methods
Athymic nude mice were used in accordance with institutional guidelines.
Human pancreatic carcinoma cells (MiaPaCa-2) stably expressing luciferase
were injected into a small glass bulb and sutured intra-abdominally to
the tail of the pancreas in euthanized mice. Two methods of animal
repositioning were employed during this process in which the animals were
either unrestrained (n=6) or restrained (n=5). Two dimensional (2D) BLI
and 3D bioluminescent tomography (BLT) were acquired of each supine mouse
carcass. An ink-dot marked the visual centroid of the surface BL image.
Carcasses were then transported to a SARRP for CBCT localization. Three
methods of image guidance were applied. Using visual setup, the animal
was positioned to align the ink-dot with the central axis of the SARRP.
In the CBCT-aided setup, the pose of each carcass was adjusted to
recapitulate its pose at the time of BLI. The 2D radial offset of the
true bulb centroid in CBCT from the central axis of the SARRP was
measured. In the 3D setup, the 3D contours of CBCT and BLT contours were
registered and the 3D radial offset between the 2 centroids was
calculated. Results Using the visual set up, single plane offsets of 2.2
mm +/- 1.2 mm and 2.5 mm +/- 1.5 mm were calculated between the isocenter
of the vertical beam and the centroid of the bulb in unrestrained and
restrained mice, respectively. After fusing the coronal 2D BL image to a
corresponding coronal CBCT image, the central axis of the vertical beam
was again aligned to the skin mark. The offset distances in a single
plane were 2.2 mm +/- 1.2 mm and 2.4 mm +/- 1.1 mm in unrestrained and
restrained mice, respectively. Finally, the offsets between the center of
mass of the BL source and the CBCT glass bead after 3D fusion were 1.5 mm
+/- 1 mm and 1.6 mm +/- 0.8 mm in unrestrained and restrained mice,
respectively. Conclusion Restraining mice between modalities did not
result in significant reduction of set up uncertainty. Similarly, use of
2D-BLI did not improve upon the visual set up method. The 3D-BLT fusion
represents the best that can be achieved with off-line localization. An
on-board approach with further improvement in BLT using prior information
of anatomic and optical properties should be investigated to further
improve localization uncertainty.

