Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Informational needs of prostate cancer survivors: Findings from
the Michigan Prostate Cancer Follow-Back Study


Introduction: Following diagnosis of prostate cancer, many patients are
left to decipher complicated medical terminology in order to make
informed decisions about their medical care. Little is known about
demographic, diagnostic, treatment, and psychosocial factors associated
with types of information sources sought by prostate cancer survivors, as
well as the information-seeking styles of these individuals. Methods:
7,763 prostate cancer survivors diagnosed from 1985-2004 were identified
through the Michigan Cancer Registry. The survey included questions on
(i) demographics (ii) diagnostics and treatments (iii) quality of life,
and (iv) informational needs. SPSS statistical software 19.0 was used in
analysis. Descriptive statistics were tabulated to evaluate informational
sources. Logistic and multivariate regression analyses were conducted
using multiple covariates to (i) assess whether the informational needs
of patients were addressed by providers, (ii) ascertain the significant
predictors associated with seeking information about prostate cancer from
any other source, and (iii) identify what factors influenced a person to
actively seek out information and (iv) determine what factors guide which
primary information source a survivor would use. Results: The survey
mailing yielded a 36.8% response rate. 82.6% reported that a healthcare
provider gave them information on prostate cancer, with 86.4% having
information provided by their urologist, 45.4% by their primary care
physician (PCP), and 29.2% by their oncologist. 37.9% responded that they
had looked for such information on their own. 29.4% of the survivors
reported that someone else had looked for information for them. The top
five sources of information included healthcare provider (59.2%), someone
with prostate cancer (39.4%), brochures or pamphlets (37.5%), National
Cancer Institute (NCI)/American Cancer Society (ACS) (36.1%), and
internet (31.0%). 51.2% of the survivors would go to their healthcare
provider first for information, with 18.8% resorting to the internet. Age
and race were significant factors in assessing whether informational
needs of survivors were addressed by providers. Age was a significant
predictor in both survivors seeking information about prostate cancer and
whether someone else had ever looked for information on their behalf.
Education was the only significant factor predicting which primary source
of information a survivor would seek. Conclusions: Over half of prostate
cancer survivors identified their health care provider as a primary
source of information on prostate cancer, highlighting the importance of
the provider in guiding men through the informed decision-making process.
More informational resources should be allocated to prostate cancer
survivors to ensure that are well-educated about their prognoses.

