Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pilot study of plasma biomarker candidates for pancreatic cancer
detection - a targeted proteomics approach


With the advances in genomics and proteomics, the number of biomarker
candidates associated with pancreatic cancer has increased explosively in
recent years. Many putative biomarkers have been discovered in pancreatic
tumor tissue and pancreatic juice; such targets will need to be
rigorously verified in plasma or serum for blood-based biomarker
development. Currently, validation of putative biomarkers in blood
largely relies on antibody creation for ELISA assays, and has been the
bottleneck for biomarker development. Analytical techniques to robustly
measure these proteins in plasma, which is arguably the most complex
biological matrix with protein abundance exceeding 10 orders of
magnitude, has been a challenge. In this study, we applied a mass
spectrometry-based targeted proteomics platform to directly detect
candidate biomarker proteins in plasma to evaluate their clinical utility
for pancreatic cancer diagnosis. The characterization of these protein
candidates used a clinically well-characterized cohort that included
plasma samples from patients with pancreatic cancer, chronic pancreatitis
and healthy age-matched controls. Based on the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis, two of the five candidate proteins tested,
demonstrated an Area Under Curve (AUC) value greater than 0.89 in the
detection of pancreatic cancer from healthy controls and chronic
pancreatitis controls. We further demonstrated that a composite biomarker
by combining two complementary independent biomarkers improves the
sensitivity for pancreatic cancer detection at 95% specificity. Based on
this evidence, these biomarker candidates merit further validation in
larger patient and control cohorts for their potential utility in
clinical application. In addition, we provide an analysis of the
reproducibility, accuracy, and robustness of the mass spectrometry-based
targeted proteomics platform. This information addresses important
technical issues that could aid in the adoption of the targeted
proteomics platform for practical clinical utility.

