Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NADPH oxidase NOX5 regulates the expression of the cell cycle
inhibitor p27kip1 in the human melanoma UACC-257 cancer cells


NADPH oxidase (NOX) family enzymes (NOX1-5 and DUOX1-2) generate reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and modulate cellular pathways that regulate
proliferation. While high doses of ROS are clearly toxic, the effects of
low doses of NOX-mediated ROS as signaling molecules are less clear.
Recent work has proposed that NOX5 plays a role in cell proliferation in
Hairy cell leukemia, Barrett's esophageal adenocarcinoma and in prostate
cancer cells, yet relatively little is known of the signaling pathways
mediated by NOX5. In this study we explored the functional role of NOX5
in cancer cells obtained from the NCI-60 cell line panel. Initial
screening of the NCI-60 cancer cell line panel for expression of the Nox
family members by real time PCR revealed several melanoma cell lines that
express Nox5. Of the NOX5 expressing NCI-60 human cancer cell lines,
subsequent studies were carried out in human UACC-257 melanoma cancer
cells. Two molecular approaches were undertaken to determine the
functional role of NOX5 in UACC-257 cells: 1) generating NOX5
over-expressing stable clones and 2) transiently silencing endogenous
NOX5 and the stably over-expressed NOX5. Redox-sensitive assays for both
intra- and extracellular ROS production confirmed that NOX5 is functional
and generates superoxide in both UACC-257 cells and stable
Nox5-over-expressing clones. NOX5 can be activated both by the protein
kinase C activating phorbol ester PMA and by the Ca2+ ionophore
ionomycin. Furthermore, this enzymatic activity is calcium- and flavin
dehydrogenase-dependent; both the calcium chelator BAPTA-AM and the
flavoprotein inhibitor DPI (200nM) significantly decreased NOX5-mediated
ROS production. Silencing NOX5 over-expression significantly inhibited
both endogenous and PMA-stimulated ROS production, suggesting that the
ROS production is NOX5-mediated. Furthermore, knockdown of both
endogenous and over-expressed NOX5 in UACC-257 cells resulted in
increased p27Kip1 expression. Conversely, over-expression of NOX5 in
UACC-257 cells resulted in decreased p27Kip1 expression both at the mRNA
and protein levels. As the AKT signaling pathways are known to modulate
p27Kip1 levels, we observed that knockdown of both endogenous and
over-expressed NOX5 in UACC-257 cells resulted in decreased Akt and GSK-3
phosphorylation. Studies to characterize additional mechanisms of
translational and transcriptional regulation of p27Kip1 by NOX5 are
ongoing. In summary, our findings suggest that NOX5 expression could
contribute to cell proliferation in human cancers in part due to the
generation of high local concentrations of extracellular ROS that
regulate the Akt/GSK-3/p27Kip1 signaling network.

