Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockage of OPN induction via HGF/cMET signaling in multiple
myeloma cells suppresses both MMP9 expression and RUNX2 expression of
BMSCs associating with bone erosion of MM patients


Dynamic interaction between multiple myeloma cells (MM) and bone marrow
stromal cells plays critical roles in progression of MM. Hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), one of these factors, as a c-Met ligand, activates
mitogenic activation protein kinase (MAPK). OPN binds with integrins and
CD44 variants and activates cell signaling involved in invasiveness,
angiogenesis and bone remodeling. Increasing lines of evidence provide
that HGF and OPN, respectively, associate with the progression of MM.
However, the role of HGF in MM largely remains unknown. In bone marrow
serum of MM patients, HGF expression correlated with OPN expression
(p=0,0095), suggesting that HGF derived from bone marrow stromal cells
stimulates OPN expression in MM cells. Firstly, we found that expression
levels of OPN in HFG-treated MM cells (fraction of CD138+ cells) obtained
from MM patients was higher than either HFG-treated bone marrow stromal
cells or HFG-treated MM cells (fraction of CD138- cells). Also, induction
of DKK1 by HGF, suggesting the inhibition of osteogenesis, was found in
U266 cells and RPMI8226, Both HGF-mediated MAPK and PI3K/AKT results in
activating NF-kB and increasing OPN expression and DKK1. Those
expressions were effectively down-regulated in U266 cells transfected
with shRNA c-MET. RUNX2 mRNA and MMP-9 mRNA was increased in bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSCs) treated with OPN. In addition, combined cMET
inhibitor and PI3K inhibitor effectively inhibited the RUNX2 and the MMP9
mRNA expression in both OPN alone treatment and co-treatment with OPN and
HGF in BMSCs. Taken together, since Induction of OPN and DKK1 by HGF in
MM cells could be one of the major factors for the progression of MM
through interaction of MM cells and BMSCs, blockage of HGF/cMET signaling
leading to increasing levels of OPN and DKK1 may help to prevent from
progressing bone erosion of MM patients.

