Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies on the mechanistic basis of the anticancer activity of
2,4-disulfonyl-PBN (OKN-007)


Sulfatase 2 (Sulf2) is a protein which resides in the extracellular
matrix of cancer cells and enzymatically removes sulfate from the
6-O-sulfate esters of heparin. Several tumors have been shown to be
enriched in Sulf2 in comparison to normal tissues where it is either
absent or present at very low levels. The action of Sulf2 alters growth
factor binding to the extracellular matrix of cells and has been shown to
be important in the development of many cancers including breast, lung,
liver, colon, and pancreas. Sulf2 mobilizes fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and stromal derived
growth factor-1 (SDF-1) bound to heparin. We found that OKN-007 acts to
weakly inhibit the aryl sulfatase activity of Sulf2 acting on the
substrate 4-methylumbelliferyl-sulfate (4-MUS) and to more effectively
inhibit the enzymatic activity of Sulf2 when it acts upon its natural
substrate the 6-O-sulfate ester of heparin. The Sulf2 enzymatic activity
was potently inhibited by suramin, a compound that has 6 phenyl-sulfonyl
groups as part of its chemical structure and has been shown to have
anti-cancer activity. Utilizing the natural substrate we have shown that
other sulfonyl-phenyl compounds act to suppress the activity of Sulf2. We
have conducted preliminary studies to see if OKN-007 has anti-cancer
activity in a breast cancer mouse xenograph model. Balb/c female
ovariectomized Estradiol pellet-implanted nude mice were implanted with
MCF-7 breast cancer cells and OKN-007 was administered at 250mg/kg/day in
the drinking water. The experiment was terminated at week 5 at which time
the data showed that OKN-007 decreased the average tumor volume by 33%.
OKN-007 has been shown to have anti-cancer activity in the rat C6 model
of glioma. The anti-cancer mechanism of action of OKN-007 is still
unknown. Recently we have explored the potential of OKN-007 to alter
cancer cell migration in a gradient involving the chemokine SDF-1 and its
cellular receptor CXCR4. The CXCL4/SDF-1 gradient is considered to be
important in the metastasis of primary cancers. Results with rat C6
glioma cells, U87MG human glioma cells as well as MCF-7 breast cancer
cells indicate that OKN-007 at low concentrations inhibits cancer
migration in a CXCR4/SDF-1 gradient. These observations need to be
explored in more depth utilizing animal models of cancer metastasis.
Research supported in part by US Army Concept Grant W81XWH-09-1-0352. Dr.
Floyd holds the Merrick Foundation Chair in Aging Research.

