Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoprotected, microencapsulated bacterial cytosine deaminase
mediated conversion of 5-fluorocytosine to 5-fluorouracil


Introduction Enzymes of non-human origin possess tremendous potential as
anticancer agents, especially in enzyme-prodrug therapy. Unfortunately,
these enzymes are recognized as foreign agents by the human immune system
and are targeted by an immune response. This immune reaction limits
enzymes efficacy, particularly in treatments requiring repeated dosing.
Current strategies for deimmunizing these therapeutic enzymes are
labor/time intensive and yield limited success. Encapsulating enzymes in
a hydrogel, such as sodium alginate, can confer immunoprotection and
enhance in vivo stability. Alginate serves as a barrier between enzyme
and host and its porosity can be controlled to prevent antibody
infiltration while allowing the diffusion of the prodrug and the drug.
The bacterial enzyme cytosine deaminase (bCD) mediates the conversion of
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to the anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We
encapsulated the bCD in sodium alginate microbeads and tested enzyme
efficacy post encapsulation as determined by conversion of 5-FC to 5-FU,
with concomitant cell kill assays. Methods bCD was encapsulated in sodium
alginate microbeads, 200 microns, using a NISCO microencapsulation system
(www.nisco.ch). The beads were incubated with 5-FC (25, 50, 100 and 200
microM), and conversion to 5-FU was monitored over time using
spectrophotometry. Unencapsulated bCD was used as controls. Then,
microbeads were incubated with 9L rat glioma cells in the presence of
5-FC. Cytotoxicity of the enzyme-prodrug system to 9L cells was evaluated
using an MTT assay. 5-FC alone in the absence of bCD and 5-FU were used
as controls. Experiments were repeated using beads stored for 72 h at 4C
and 37C and temperature effects on the stability of encapsulated bCD were
noted. Results summary We observed the complete conversion of 5-FC to
5-FU for all concentrations of encapsulated enzyme, albeit at a slower
rate than unencapsulated controls. Cytotoxicity of the encapsulated
enzyme-prodrug system toward 9L cells was similar to that of 5-FU alone,
and of unencapsulated controls, indicating that encapsulation had no
deleterious effect on enzyme efficacy. Though the enzyme kinetics were
slower for the stored beads (at 4C and 37C), these beads resulted in
similar cell kill. Our results suggest that sodium alginate
microencapsulation of bCD maintained the enzyme's functionality and may
therefore be a suitable platform for immunoisolative enzyme-prodrug
therapy. We are extending our work to other cancer cell lines and to in
vivo study of the anti-tumor effects of these encapsulated enzymes. This
system has the advantage of localized 5-FC to 5-FU conversion, thereby
potentially reducing systemic toxicity and increasing the locally
available dose of the toxic drug. The strategy can be extended to the
encapsulation of enzyme-producing cells that serve as de novo drug
factories.

