Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted photothermal-chemotherapy with doxorubicin-loaded hollow
gold nanospheres directed at EphB4 receptors


Photothermal ablation (PTA) is an emerging technique that uses
near-infrared (NIR) laser light-generated heat to destroy tumor cells.
Doxorubicin (DOX)-loaded hollow gold nanospheres (DOX@HAuNS) mediated
simultaneous PTA of cancer cells and local drug release, resulting in
enhanced antitumor activity. EphB4, a member of the largest family of
receptor tyrosine kinases, is overexpressed in numerous tumors. The
purpose of this study was to synthesize DOX@HAuNS conjugated to an EphB4
receptor-binding peptide, and evaluate the pharmacokinetics,
biodistribution, and antitumor efficacy of the resulting EphB4-targeting
DOX@HAuNS. A cyclic 17-mer peptide [c(TNYL-RAW) with high binding
affinity to EphB4 was conjugated to DOX@HAuNS through a PEG linker. The
cell uptake of c(TNYL-RAW)-conjugated Dox@HAuNS was examined in human
ovarian cancer Hey cells over-expressing EphB4. The biodistribution tumor
uptake of c(TNYL-RAW)-Dox@HAuNS was assessed at 24 h after intravenous
injection in nude mice bearing Hey and A2789 ovarian cancers, and in nude
mice bearing human MDA-MB231 breast tumors. Near-infrared (NIR)
light-triggered Dox release in tumor-bearing mice was evaluated using a
dual tracer-autoradiography technique. Antitumor effect was evaluated by
measuring the tumor grow delay in mice bearing Hey ovarian cancer. In
vitro, c(TNYL-RAW)-Dox@HAuNS were selectively taken up by Hey cells. This
resulted in increased tumor uptake of targeted nanoparticles in all three
EphB4-positive tumor models evaluated. Significantly higher cell killing
effect against EphB4(+) A2780 cells was shown with DOX@c(TNYL-RAW)-HAuNS
cells than with free DOX or DOX@PEG-HAuNS. In vivo, conjugation of
c(TNYL-RAW) onto PEG-HAuNS did not cause significant change on
pharmacokinetic properties of the nanoaprticles. DOX@c(TNYL-RAW)-HAuNS
and DOX@PEG-HAuNS were almost completely eliminated from the blood at 48
h after injection. Treatment with targeted c(TNYL-RAW)-Dox@HAuNS followed
by near-infrared laser irradiation (combined PTA and DOX therapies)
resulted in significantly increased tumor growth control as compared to
treatments with DOX@PEG-HAuNS-plus-laser (combined PTA and DOX therapies)
and with PEG-HAuNS-plus-laser (PTA therapy alone). Mice in all treatment
groups did not show lost in body weight, whereas free DOX caused 20% body
weight loss at the equivalent DOX dose level. Targeted
photothermal-chemotherapy exemplified by a single-agent nanoconstruct
c(TNYL-RAW)-DOX@HAuNS is a promising approach to effective anticancer
therapy.

