Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-150 expression induces differentiation of myeloid
leukemias


Blocked myeloid differentiation is a major feature of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) disease progression and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Normal myeloid differentiation is a tightly controlled process involving
the coordinated action of specific transcription factors, which are
dysregulated by chromosomal translocations, DNA mutations, epigenetic
changes, and aberrant gene and microRNA (miRNA) expression in leukemias.
Previously, we identified decreased miR-150 expression in CML and AML
cell lines and primary cells when compared to normal bone marrow, and
determined miR-150 expression is decreased in CML by the Bcr-Abl fusion
protein. Furthermore, lentiviral expression of miR-150 in AML cell lines
and primary CML patient samples induced myeloid differentiation as
detected by CD11b expression, morphologic differentiation, and colony
forming ability in methylcellulose, both in the absence and presence of
the differentiating agents. In this study, we elucidated the targets
responsible for miR-150 induced differentiation. Expression of the
validated miR-150 target MYB, a transcription factor involved in blocking
differentiation in progenitor cells, was only decreased in miR-150
expressing cells in the presence of differentiating agent all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). Furthermore, lentiviral overexpression of MYB
lacking miR-150 binding sites in the 3-UTR partially decreased the CD11b
expression in the presence and absence of ATRA in both control and
miR-150 expressing HL60 cells. These results suggest additional miR-150
targets are involved in differentiation besides MYB. To identify
additional miRNA-150 targets, we profiled changes in mRNAs associated
with the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) using
RNA-immunoprecipitation of Ago2 followed by microarray gene expression
profiling in miR-150 versus control HL60 cells. Furthermore, although
almost all functional investigations have focused on the mature strand,
we have found that miR-150 and its partner star strand miR-150* are
expressed at almost equal levels in normal myeloid hematopoietic cells,
and are investigating the individual contributions of their separate
targets in induction of differentiation. In conclusion, miR-150
expression promotes myeloid differentiation through targeting
transcription factor MYB and additional targets, while downregulation of
miR-150 in myeloid leukemias contributes to the block in differentiation.

