Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The integrin 6A splice variant regulates colon cancer cell
proliferation and the Wnt/-catenin pathway


Colon cancer is a major cause of death by cancer in North America.
Recently, we found that both subunits of the integrin 64 are up-regulated
in colon primary tumours. The 6 integrin subunit exists as two distinct
splice isoforms, 6A and 6B. It is the 6A isoform that was shown to be
associated with the proliferative cell population of the normal human
colon and up-regulated in colorectal cancer. The aim of this study was to
analyze the role of integrin 6A4 in human colon cancer, more precisely
its effect on cell proliferation and its mechanism of regulation. To
investigate the function of integrin 6A4 in colon cancer, expression of
splice variant 6A was specifically abolished, using shRNA technology, in
colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (Caco-2/15, T84, SW480, SW620, DLD-1 and
HT29). The function of splice variant 6A of the 64 integrin was
investigated in vitro and in tumour xenografts. In all colon cancer cell
lines tested, knockdown of the integrin 6A subunit resulted in a decrease
of up to 90% of the 6A variant without affecting the levels of the 6B
variant. Furthermore, no compensatory expression of 6B4 integrin was
observed following the abolition of the 6A subunit. In the majority of
colon cancer cell lines, the knockdown of 6A resulted in a significant
decrease in proliferation as show by BrdU incorporation. Moreover, it was
accompanied by reduced activity of the Wnt/-catenin pathway as measured
by a decrease of responsive -catenin/TCF promoter activity and increased
-catenin phosphorylation at Ser37/Thr41 by GSK3. Preliminary data
confirmed that in these cells, the Wnt/-catenin pathway can be stimulated
by pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 (SB216763), as displayed by a
decrease of -catenin phosphorylation at Ser37/Thr41 and an increase in
responsive -catenin/TCF promoter activity. Analysis of splice variants of
the 6 integrin subunit in human colorectal cancer revealed that 6A was
increased in 80% of tumours as compared to their matched resection
margins and a significant correlation was observed between expression of
6A and c-myc in the tumours. Furthermore, to determine the role of the
integrin 6A subunit on colon cancer tumorigenesis in vivo, control and 6A
knockdown T84, SW620, HT29 and DLD-1 cells were injected into nude mice.
Results showed that abolition of the integrin 6A subunit led to a
significant reduction in tumour growth for T84, SW620 and HT29 colon cell
lines. Moreover, analysis of tumours showed an increase in -catenin
phosphorylation at Ser37/Thr41 in T84 and HT29. Our results show for the
first time that splice variant A of the integrin 6 subunit regulates the
Wnt/-catenin pathway to promote cancer cell growth. Since 80% of colon
cancers display an up-regulation of integrin 6A expression, targeting
this integrin in colon cancers may offer new therapeutic value.

