Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apricoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, suppresses IL-27-mediated
STAT3 activation and potentiates its inhibition of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition in human non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction The cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) pathway has been implicated in
the molecular pathogenesis of many cancers. Apricoxib, a selective COX-2
inhibitor, has recently been demonstrated to inhibit epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human malignancies. EMT is a critical
process in cancer progression and metastasis whereby epithelial cells
undergo changes to a migratory, mesenchymal phenotype. The mechanism by
which apricoxib may alter the tumor microenvironment by impacting other
important pathways in EMT is poorly defined. To investigate this concept,
we utilized Interleukin-27 (IL-27), a member of the IL-12 family, which
signals through the JAK-STAT pathway and activates transcriptional
factors with opposing roles in carcinogenesis, STAT1 (tumor suppressor)
and STAT3 (oncogene). IL-27 has been shown to have anti-tumor activity,
but understanding of its mechanism is limited. We previously demonstrated
that IL-27 activates both STAT1 and STAT3 pathways in human non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and that the balance in STAT1 and STAT3
activation is important in inhibiting EMT. Here, we studied the effect of
apricoxib on IL-27-mediated STAT activation and EMT inhibition. We
hypothesize that apricoxib modulates STAT1 and STAT3 activation and
regulates EMT. Methods A human NSCLC cell line, A549, was pre-treated
with apricoxib (80nM-10M) for up to 24 hours prior to IL-27 stimulation
(50ng/mL). Activation of STAT1 and STAT3 proteins, demonstrated by
tyrosine phosphorylation, was measured by Western Blot analysis.
Additionally, epithelial markers (E-cadherin, -catenin, -catenin) and
mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin, vimentin, snail) were evaluated also by
Western blotting. Results IL-27 alone induced phosphorylation of STAT1
and STAT3 proteins compared to untreated control. Pre-treatment with
apricoxib resulted in decreased levels of IL-27-mediated STAT1 and STAT3
phosphorylation compared to the IL-27 alone group. Apricoxib alone did
not cause STAT1 or STAT3 activation. IL-27 treatment alone increased the
levels of E-cadherin, -catenin, and -catenin and decreased the levels of
N-cadherin, vimentin, and snail compared to untreated control.
Pre-treatment with apricoxib for 24 hours prior to IL-27 exposure
resulted in potentiation of IL-27-mediated reduction of N-cadherin,
vimentin, and snail and further increased the levels of E-cadherin when
compared to the IL-27 alone group. There appeared to be no impact on the
expression of -catenin or -catenin with the addition of apricoxib to
IL-27. Conclusions Apricoxib inhibits IL-27-mediated activation of STAT1
and STAT3, and potentiates the IL-27-mediated inhibition of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. These findings suggest that apricoxib may
regulate EMT through modulation of the STAT pathway.

