Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of local vitamin D metabolism in breast cancer using
an ex vivo tissue explant system


Vitamin D is an essential molecule obtained either by UV irradiation of
the skin, or ingested through diet or supplementation. Sequential
hydroxylations of vitamin D are required to generate the inactive
precursor 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25D), and the active metabolite
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25D) which activates the vitamin D receptor to
alter transcription of target genes. In addition to its role in calcium
homeostasis, vitamin D has been shown to have anti-proliferative,
apoptotic and immunomodulating effects. Furthermore, many epidemiological
studies have shown a link between a low vitamin D status and an increased
risk of breast cancer. However, the mechanistic basis of this link
remains unknown. We have utilized a breast explant system whereby fresh
tumour and matched non-malignant breast tissues are obtained from women
undergoing mastectomies. These tissues are placed on gelatin sponges in
tissue culture media supplemented with either 25D or 1,25D. Tissues are
then collected and analysed for alterations in gene expression and
biological response. This system allows for the analysis of dynamic
changes in viable tissue in response to exogenously applied compounds,
and can easily be used to examine other compounds of interest. Explanted
non-malignant and tumour tissue both displayed an increase in expression
of the vitamin D metabolizing enzyme CYP24A1 when directly treated with
1,25D. In response to the precursor molecule 25D, non-malignant breast
tissue showed a similar pattern of enzyme induction, indicating an intact
and competent vitamin D metabolic pathway in these tissues. Metabolism in
breast tumour tissue however was somewhat disrupted, with some cases
showing little potential in converting 25D to the active metabolite
1,25D. Proliferation markers have also been examined in the non-malignant
and tumour breast samples. Interestingly, some tumour specimens did not
show any change in proliferation despite favourable changes in gene
expression, indicating further dysregulation of vitamin D metabolism in
these samples. These data will have implications for any future clinical
studies of vitamin D supplementation to complement current
chemopreventative therapies.

