Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of EZH2 increases multipotent mammary stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation


BACKGROUND: A role for EZH2 in stem cell maintenance was recently
reported. Our lab has previously demonstrated that overexpression of EZH2
accelerates the initiation of ErbB2-induced mammary tumors. To understand
underlying mechanism, we investigated the role of EZH2 in regulation of
stem cells and luminal progenitor cells utilizing xenotransplantation
studies of preneoplastic mammary glands of EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu
transgenic mice. METHODS: Generation of crossing EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt;
neu transgenic mice was described previously. Mouse handling and
experimental procedures were conducted in accordance with the NIH Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the IACUC
of the UM. Stem cells (Lin-/CD49f+/ESA-) and luminal progenitor cells
(Lin-/CD49f+/ESA+) were isolated from the hyperplastic mammary glands of
8 weeks old EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu mice by flow cytometry (n=15 per
group). Stem cells and luminal progenitor cells were injected into
cleared fat pads of 3 weeks old FVB mice. After 5 weeks the mammary
glands were subjected to flow cytometry and histology. RESULTS:
Histologic study showed that only the stem cells, but not the luminal
progenitor cells, extracted from EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu transgenic
mice were able to form mammary outgrowths. Outgrowths of EZH2+;neu mice
had significantly increased epithelial proliferation and increased
numbers of terminal end buds (pBACKGROUND: A role for EZH2 in stem cell
maintenance was recently reported. Our lab has previously demonstrated
that overexpression of EZH2 accelerates the initiation of ErbB2-induced
mammary tumors. To understand underlying mechanism, we investigated the
role of EZH2 in regulation of stem cells and luminal progenitor cells
utilizing xenotransplantation studies of preneoplastic mammary glands of
EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu transgenic mice. METHODS: Generation of
crossing EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu transgenic mice was described
previously. Mouse handling and experimental procedures were conducted in
accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
and were approved by the IACUC of the UM. Stem cells (Lin-/CD49f+/ESA-)
and luminal progenitor cells (Lin-/CD49f+/ESA+) were isolated from the
hyperplastic mammary glands of 8 weeks old EZH2+; neu and EZH2 wt; neu
mice by flow cytometry (n=15 per group). Stem cells and luminal
progenitor cells were injected into cleared fat pads of 3 weeks old FVB
mice. After 5 weeks the mammary glands were subjected to flow cytometry
and histology. RESULTS: Histologic study showed that only the stem cells,
but not the luminal progenitor cells, extracted from EZH2+; neu and EZH2
wt; neu transgenic mice were able to form mammary outgrowths. Outgrowths
of EZH2+;neu mice had significantly increased epithelial proliferation
and increased numbers of terminal end buds (p<0.05) compared to EZH2
wt;neu outgrowths. EZH2 +;neu outgrowths had significant upregulation of
Ki67 and pSTAT5 proteins. Flow cytometry of the outgrowths revealed that
while all cell populations were increased, EZH2 induced a more pronounced
expansion of the stem cell and luminal progenitor cell populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that EZH2 overexpression in ErbB2 mice induces
an expansion of the multipotent mammary stem cell population with the
ability to regenerate the cellular heterogeneity of the mammary gland and
develop hyperplastic outgrowths. We found that EZH2 promotes
hyperproliferation and upregulation of STAT5 phosphorylation in the
mammary epithelium in vivo.

