Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute in vitro exposure to cigarette smoke particulate matter does
not induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung epithelial cells


The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program was first identified
from studies on embryogenesis and organ development, but has since been
found to play vital roles in tissue remodelling and tumorigenesis. EMT is
a biological process during which epithelial cells change their
morphology to adopt fibroblast-like characteristics. During EMT, cell
adhesion is lost while cells become more motile. A number of distinct
molecular events are required for a cell to undergo EMT including
transcription factor activation, cytoskeletal rearrangement, changes in
cell adhesion molecule expression and increased production of
extracellular matrix-degrading enzymes. EMT has recently been linked to
chronic inflammation and cigarette smoke exposure in the lung and is
believed to be involved in lung carcinogenesis. As the specific genes and
proteins involved in EMT have been well defined, they can serve as
markers to demonstrate the passage of cells through EMT in the context of
cigarette smoking. The purpose of this study was to develop an in vitro
model of EMT using immortalised human bronchial epithelial (BEAS-2B)
cells. EMT was induced in BEAS-2B cells using a 72 hour treatment with 5
ng/mL TGF-1. Expression of the following EMT markers were assessed at the
transcript level using reverse transcription real time-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR): alpha smooth muscle actin (-SMA), collagen 1,
fibronectin, vimentin, e-cadherin, slug and snail. Protein levels of
-SMA, fibronectin, -catenin, e-cadherin and zonular occludin-1 were
evaluated using immunocytochemistry techniques. This model was then used
to determine the effects of acute (72 hour) cigarette smoke particulate
matter treatment on EMT in BEAS-2B cells. Cells were treated with
particulate matter alone, and in combination with TGF-1. Particulate
matter did not induce EMT directly, nor did it influence EMT induced by
TGF-1 under the treatment conditions used in this study, based on marker
expression. It is possible that a more prolonged exposure to particulate
matter is required for EMT induction in BEAS-2B cells.

