Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 (UCHL1) in regulating cell
cycle of neuroblastoma cancer stem-like cells


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
childhood cancers. The 5-year survival of patients with advanced disease
is Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
childhood cancers. The 5-year survival of patients with advanced disease
is <40%. Relapse occurs in over 50% of patients. Evidence suggests that
most cancers contain a stem-like population that is resistant to current
therapeutics and can repopulate the tumor bulk after treatment. This cell
population is thought to be an underlying cause for cancer relapse.
Therefore, targeting the cancer stem-like cell (CSC) fraction can result
in treatment improvements. Previous proteomic work identified that UCHL1
(ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1) was differentially expressed in
the enriched CSC fraction of human NB cell lines, suggesting a possible
link between UCHL1 and CSCs. UCHL1 is part of the ubiquitin proteasome
system (UPS), which is responsible for degradation of proteins involved
in biological processes such as cell cycle control and the breakdown of
transcription factors. Deregulation of UCHL1 expression has been shown to
be associated with oncogenic properties; however, the function of UCHL1
in cancer progression is still not fully understood. We blocked the
hydrolase activity of UCHL1 using a small molecule inhibitor LDN-57444.
We treated the CSC fraction of NB cell line, SK-N-BE(2), with the
inhibitor and observed an impairment of sphere formation (read-out for
self-renewal). We then explored whether this was due to apoptosis. We
found through Annexin V staining that the percentage of apoptotic cells
was not significant between treated and control CSC cells. We also
observed caspase 3/7 activity was not significant between treated and
control groups. We performed cell cycle studies on inhibitor treated
CSCs, which showed an increase in the percentage of cells in the G1
phase. The cell cycle is an important process in self-renewal, division,
and cell differentiation. Global gene expression analysis on inhibitor
treated CSCs also indicated that several cell cycle regulator genes and
members of the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway were deregulated. Among
these genes were MYC, CCND2, LEF-1, TCF7L2, and CDKN2A. Likely, UCHL1 may
be functioning through the Wnt/-catenin pathway to affect MYC expression,
which would indirectly regulate the cell cycle. MYC has also been shown
to be a difficult therapeutic target; therefore, UCHL1 will be a more
viable target. We also performed in silico analysis to determine existing
associations between these genes using Sidekick. Several of the cell
cycle regulators were connected with components of the Wnt/-catenin
network. Targeting the UPS, which functions in cell development and
survival, has been shown to be successful in some cancers. These
observations suggest that UCHL1 functions in the maintenance of CSCs, and
targeting UCHL1 could lead to better design of therapeutic intervention
that improves quality of life and long-term survival of NB patients.

