Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluated mechanism of dual targeting using liposomal
doxorubicin-modified novel PEG by imaging analysis


[Purpose] Liposome is one of the useful drug carriers and it may be
applying to a lot of diseases from now on. One of the most reasons which
liposomes were using as medicine was improvement of circulation time in
bloodstream by modifying polyethyleneglycol (PEG)-lipid. We synthesized
novel PEG-lipid with two different PEG lengths of 2000 and 500 (different
double arms-PEG; DDA-PEG) for developing more superior passive targeting
liposome. In our previous study, doxorubicin (DOX) containing liposome
which was modified DDA-PEG (DDA-PEG modified liposomal DOX; DDA-LDOX) had
dual effect for primary and hepatic metastasis cancer. In this study, we
observed tissue distribution at primary tumor using the near infrared
fluorescence and analyzed hepatic metastasis by histological observation
for explain this dual effect. Moreover, this effect for pulmonary
metastasis was also evaluated. [Methods] Liposome
(DSPC/cholesterol/DSPG-Na/DDA-PEG = 100:100:60:7.5 mol) was prepared
according to the method of Bangham. For observing tissue distribution of
liposome at primary tumor model, liposome was contained indocyanine green
(ICG) as fluorescence probe. This liposome was injected in tail vein and
sequentially observed using fluorescent imaging device (Clairvivo OPT,
SHIMADZU). In histological observation at hepatic metastasis murine
model, M5076 ovarian sarcoma cells were inoculated in tail vein of mice.
These mice were injected liposome at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg (i.v.) as DOX on
6, 9 and 12 d after tumor inoculation. At 14 d, this liver was removed
and examined by microscope after HE stain. At assessment of pulmonary
metastasis, B16F10 melanoma cells were implanted in tail vein and treated
similarly to liver metastasis.[Results and discussion] In fluorescent
imaging of primary tumor, DDA-PEG modified liposome assembled into tumor
at 48 h after injection. This analysis supported our previous finding
that DDA-LDOX significantly decreased tumor size. Furthermore, it was
proved that DDA-PEG modified liposome or encapsulated drug remained in
tumor site for a long time. In histological examination for hepatic
metastasis, the tumor area in the liver was 5% by DDA-LDOX injection
(normal group: 90%). More lymphocytes around tumor thrombus were positive
for CD45. It was suggested that macrophage or lymphocytes, especially T
cell, were concerned in this therapy. Pulmonary metastasis was depressed
by DDA-LDOX compared with control or DOX containing PEG unmodified
liposome group. In DDA-LDOX group, DOX concentration in lung was 2.6
times higher than that in PEG unmodified liposome group. It is known that
metastasis is the most severe factor in cancer chemotherapy. Antitumor
agent containing DDA-PEG modified liposome may have not only superior
effect for primary tumor but also hepatic or pulmonary metastasis. Hence,
it was suggested that DDA-PEG modified liposome was useful drug carrier
for passive targeting.

