Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reductions in hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment after Listeria
monocytogenes-LLO based immunotherapy


As a consequence of increasing growth and outpacing blood supply, tumors
become hypoxic as they get larger, with the interior of the tumor
becoming extremely hypoxic. This makes therapeutic immune responses
difficult, as lymphocytes do not typically infiltrate the interior
regions of large tumors due to the hypoxic nature of these tumors.
Initial observations in preclinical studies after Listeria monocytogenes
(Lm)-LLO based immunotherapy specifically targeted to the hypoxia marker
CA9 show the hypoxic nature of the interior of the tumor microenvironment
is altered. Initially the tumors are extremely hypoxic (as evidenced by
HIF-1 and HIF-2 staining) however, after Lm-LLO-CA9 vaccination they show
reduced expression of these hypoxic markers. This change in hypoxia is
seen with irrelevant Lm vaccines that overexpress listeriolysin O (LLO)
and also with Lm vaccines targeting CA9 fused to LLO: however the change
is much more dramatic and complete in the case of the Lm-LLO-CA9
immunotherapy. The irrelevant Lm-LLO effect may be seen due to the fact
that the irrelevant vaccine is actually specific for a tumor associated
antigen being expressed by the tumor. This does limit the growth of the
tumor and may not allow it to reach the same level of hypoxia as an
untreated tumor. In current studies, an additional truly irrelevant
Lm-LLO vaccine is being added to see if there is a truly Listeria-driven
component to the hypoxic changes being observed. As compared to the nave
untreated tumors or an irrelevant Lm-LLO control, tumors treated with the
CA9 Lm-LLO immunotherapy show an increase in lymphocyte infiltration into
the interior areas of the tumor. Studies are underway to determine if
this increase in infiltration has an impact on the regression of these
tumors by combining the Lm-LLO-CA9 vaccine with a vaccine that is
specific for a tumor associated antigen. In addition, the function of
these infiltrating lymphocytes are being studied under normoxic and
hypoxic conditions, to determine if the infiltrating cells are functional
CTLs after the tumor's hypoxic levels change. Finally, studies are being
conducted to determine the exact signaling mechanism involved in the
hypoxic changes of the tumor microenvironment.

