Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperactive MAPK dysregulation of microRNAs contributes to the
ER-negative phenotype in breast cancer


We have previously shown that hyperactive MAPK (hMAPK) signaling in
breast cancer results in repression of estrogen receptor (ER) expression
and regulates genes thought to contribute to the aggressive phenotypes
displayed by ER- breast cancers. An hMAPK gene expression signature
previously described by our lab is strongly represented in many ER-
breast cancers, and has been shown to be present in a subset of ER+
tumors which have low levels of ER mRNA. In investigating the mechanisms
underlying this hMAPK mediated repression of ER, we found that ER mRNA
was rapidly destabilized by hMAPK suggesting that microRNAs might play an
important role in the hMAPK downregulation of ER and contribution to
breast cancer aggression. Using a breast cancer cell-line model of hMAPK
signaling, we identified a broad signature of 128 microRNAs that
complements our previous gene expression signature. We analyzed microRNA
expression data from two independent breast tumor datasets in which we
were able to also characterize tumors according to representation of the
hMAPK mRNA signature, and were able to further truncate our hMAPK
microRNA signature into a more compact and biologically relevant
signature. We show that this hMAPK microRNA signature associates strongly
with ER-negative status and increased tumor grade and importantly, is
significantly associated with increased recurrence and reduced overal
survival, and at 5 year timepoints serves as a better prognostic
indicator for recurrence or survival than ER status. Several microRNAs
that we identified as upregulated in the hMAPK microRNA signature have
been experimentally validated to target the 3UTR of ER and contribute to
the destabilization of the ER transcript, including miR-221/222 and
miR-22. We further investigated the role that the microRNAs within this
hMAPK microRNA signature occupy in facilitating down-regulation of ER and
progression toward more aggressive breast cancer. Use of a reporter
construct containing elements of the 3UTR of the estrogen receptor with
binding sites for several of these microRNAs suggested that hMAPK
signaling utilizes microRNA regulatory pathways to contribute to the
downregulation of ER. Using our cell line model of hMAPK signaling in
breast cancer we employed a variety of techniques, including microRNA
mimics, antagomirs, and pathway modeling to interrogate potential
mechanisms by which these hMAPK microRNAs act to deregulate ER and other
important genes and pathways involved in breast cancer. In summary, we
demonstrate that, in addition to established mechanisms hMAPK signaling
in breast cancer contributes to ER-negativity and tumor aggressiveness by
deregulation of microRNAs and their associated pathways. These data
support the importance of hMAPK microRNAs as important players in breast
cancer pathogenesis, and suggest that microRNAs or microRNA pathways may
offer a unique therapeutic window for breast cancer.

