Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A xenograft pancreatic cancer mouse model to study the function of
extracellular DNA in metastasis


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal cancers with the lowest
survival rate of all solid cancers. This is largely due to its highly
aggressive metastasis, which almost always leads to death. Understanding
the mechanisms and the process of pancreatic cancer metastasis is
critical towards its prevention and treatments. Although the etiology of
pancreatic cancer is not well understood, the relationship between
inflammation and the development of this cancer has been well recognized.
Extracellular DNA (exDNA) is a newly discovered component associated with
inflammation. exDNA production can be induced by interleukin 8 (IL-8),
one of the major inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine. IL-8 exhibits a
significantly elevated level in pancreatic cancer cell lines MiaPaCa-2
and BxPC3 and has been shown to play a role in stimulating pancreatic
tumorigenesis and metastasis. With this background, we initiated a study
to examine the presence of exDNA associated with pancreatic cancer cells.
We have discovered a large amount of extracellular DNA associated with
cultured pancreatic cancer cells but not with the normal pancreatic
cells. Here, we tested the hypothesis that pancreatic cancer cells
produce extracellular DNA to promote their metastasis. Our in vitro study
showed that removal of the exDNA by DNase I inhibited
metastasis-associated characteristics of cancer cells including cell
migration, invasion, and adhesion. To test our hypothesis in vivo, we
generated the orthotopic xenograft pancreatic cancer mouse model. We used
the pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaCa-2/LucE expressing luciferase to
induce tumors. We assessed the effect of DNase I treatment on pancreatic
cancer metastasis from pancreases, the primary tumor site, to different
organs. Tumors were examined directly in size and weight, and indirectly
by the bioluminescent signal intensity that corresponds to the tumor
size. Our preliminary data showed that continuous applications of a low
dosage of DNase I reduced the tumor incidences and the tumor size
measured by the chemiluminescence in all the organs examined. When mouse
tumor tissues were stained with DAPI, a DNA-specific fluorescent dye and
examined through immunohistochemistry (IHC) with DNA-specific antibody,
high level of exDNA was found in the tumor tissues. More exDNA was found
to be associated with the inflammatory area in the tumor tissues. We
conclude that extracellular DNA play a novel role in metastatic behaviors
of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and facilitate metastasis in vivo. To
our knowledge, this is the first report on the presence of exDNA
associated with pancreatic cancer tissues and the first report on the
inhibition of DNase I treatment on pancreatic cancer metastasis. Our
results open new avenues for understanding the metastasis of pancreatic
cancer, and facilitate the identification of new drug targets and
development of new treatments.

