Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cerebral microdialysis for simultaneous sampling of crenolanib
(PDGFR inhibitor) and erlotinib (EGFR inhibitor) in mouse models of glioma


Cerebral microdialysis, a technique used to monitor anticancer drug
disposition in the central nervous system (CNS), is commonly used to
sample extracellular fluid (ECF) for analysis of a single anticancer
agent. However, combining anticancer drugs represents a promising
strategy to overcome the highly resistant nature of some CNS tumors, such
as malignant glioma. To date, the feasibility of simultaneous sampling
multiple anti-cancer agents via cerebral microdialysis has not been
reported. Given the role of PDGFR and EGFR in providing multiple inputs
for sustaining PI3K signaling, critical for glioma cell survival and
proliferation, combining PDGFR and EGFR inhibitors represents a valid
treatment strategy for these tumors. The goals of the current study are
to 1) to optimize microdialysis conditions to sample crenolanib and
erlotinib as single agents or in combination from brain ECF (CbECF) and
tumor ECF (CtECF) and 2) to characterize CNS penetration of crenolanib as
a single agent and in combination with erlotinib. In vitro microdialysis
experiments to sample crenolanib and erlotinib from aCSF determined that
addition of 10% hydroxylpropyl betacyclodextrin increased the recovery of
crenolanib and erlotinib by 16.1 and 2.6 fold, respectively. Zero-flow
rate recovery method estimated stock concentrations with >85% accuracy.
Sensitive LC-MS/MS methods will allow us to detect very low
concentrations in the CNS (LLOQ for crenolanib and erlotinib is 0.1 and
0.5ng/mL, respectively). Unbound crenolanib concentrations in brain and
tumor ECF were determined in a spontaneous glioma model under
steady-state conditions achieved by using a miniosmotic pump loaded with
crenolanib which administered a dose of 300 mg/kg/day. Plasma
steady-state levels (Cpss) were 516.892.9ng/mL, mean SD. Crenolanib
penetration into tumors [PTumor = CtECF/Cpss] was 3-fold higher than in
normal brain [PBrain = CbECF/Cpss] (1.00.5 and 0.30.02, respectively). In
a murine orthotopic xenograft model bearing SJG2 pediatric glioma tumors,
crenolanib (300 mg/kg/day via miniosmotic pumps) inhibited PDGFR
phosphorylation (in vitro IC50 =8.1ng/mL) in 75% (3/4) of SJG2 tumors but
failed to inhibit AKT phosphorylation or to induce apoptosis. We
subsequently treated these animals with an EGFR inhibitor, erlotinib, and
tried to determine whether co-administration of erlotinib affected the
CNS penetration of crenolanib. Administration of 200 mg/kg/day crenolanib
and erlotinib simultaneously via a miniosmotic pump resulted in a
crenolanib Cpss of 210.1 57 ng/mL and an erlotinib Cpss of 634208 ng/mL.
To conclude, optimizing microdialysis technique enhances the ability to
simultaneously dialyze crenolanib and erlotinib in vitro. Studies to
determine the effect of co-administration of erlotinib on crenolanib CNS
penetration are ongoing.

