Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of gluconeogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma by
miR-23 directed downregulation of key gluconeogenic enzymes and the
transcription factor PGC-1


Although the mechanism and functional significance of high levels of
aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells (Warburg effect) have been extensively
studied, the possibility of altered gluconeogenesis that could
potentially facilitate glycolytic pathway has not been explored. To
examine this possibility, we investigated the potential alteration in
expression of the key enzymes in gluconeogenesis pathway and its
underlying mechanism using a mouse HCC model and primary human HCC. In
the mouse model, C57/BL6 mice fed choline deficient and amino acid
defined (CDAA) diet progressively develop nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH), foci of altered hepatocytes (FAH) and ultimately hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). The expression of genes encoding glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6PC), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK),
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP1), and pyruvate carboxylase (PC), key
enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis, as well as PGC-1, a transcription
factor that regulates G6PC and PEPCK expression, was drastically reduced
in the tumors. Increased serum ALT and decreased serum glucose levels
correlated well with the liver damage and inhibition of gluconeogenesis
in the tumor bearing mice. The mRNA levels G6PC, PEPCK, FBP1 and PGC-1
were also curtailed by 80% in the majority of primary human HCCs compared
to matching peritumoral livers. Further, the glucose 6-phosphatase
activity was markedly diminished in the mouse liver tumors and human
primary HCCs, and G6PC expression correlated with tumor grade in human
primary HCCs. The expression of miR-23a, a candidate microRNA targeting
PGC-1 and G6PC, was significantly elevated in mouse and human HCCs. We
established that PGC-1 and G6PC are direct targets of miR-23a and
demonstrated that their expressions are inversely related to miR-23a
expression in human HCCs. Furthermore, miR-23a negatively regulates
glucose production in mouse hepatocytes in culture. The miR-23a level was
upregulated following treatment of hepatic cells with IL-6 and
significantly reduced by phospho-Stat3 inhibitor or siRNA-mediated
depletion of Stat3, demonstrating the involvement of IL-6 signaling
pathway in miR-23a expression. Positive regulation of miR-23a expression
by IL-6-Stat3 signaling was further confirmed by ChIP analysis and
miR-23a promoter-luciferase assay. This study has convincingly
demonstrated severe compromise of gluconeogenesis in hepatocellular
carcinoma in both mouse HCC model and primary HCC and elucidated its
mechanism involving IL-Stat3-mediated activation of miR-23a, resulting in
hypoglycemia (supported, in part, by the grant CA 086978-10 from the
National Institutes of Health).

