Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preferential drug delivery to cancer cells than to normal cells by
using the Niosome-Chitosan Thermo-responsive Double Package System
(NCTR-DPS)


The main challenge of this research is to develop a localized, cost
effective drug delivery system that can provide control over the release
of drugs in ovarian cancer or brain tumor patients, in a manner that also
reduces chemotherapeutic toxicity. We have designed a drug delivery
system consisting of non-ionic surfactant vesicles (niosomes) packaged
within a biodegradable, temperature sensitive hydrogel (chitosan) network
(NCTR-DPS). Two chemotherapeutics, Paclitaxel and Carboplatin, conjugated
to BODIPY 564/570 (RED fluorescence dye) were encapsulated in the
NCTR-DPS. Their release was evaluated either in cell free system or
following incubation with human cell lines: glioma (U373), ovarian
carcinoma (OV2008), and two normal ovarian epithelial (MCC3 and I-Low)
cell lines. Cellular localization of Paclitaxel-RED in live cells was
evaluated using confocal microscopy and the level of direct fluorescence
quantified with LAS AF software. Confocal imaging of the cells verified
that the activity of the drugs remained intact within the drug delivery
system. The cellular drug delivery was confirmed by cell's toxicity
observed within two hours of incubation. The control study showed no
toxicity of the niosome-chitosan alone (without the chemotherapeutics).
Chitosan accumulation was greater on OV2008 cell surface than on MCC3 or
I-Low cells. Also, significantly higher Paclitaxel-RED fluorescence was
found in OV2008 compared to normal MCC3 cells, indicating a specific
interaction between chitosan and Mucin1 (MUC1) receptors over expressed
in ovarian carcinoma. These data were further confirmed by ATR-FTIR
(Attenuated Total Reflectance- Fourier Transform Infra-Red) spectroscopy
showing higher MUC1 levels in OV2008 than in normal epithelial cells. In
addition, in-vivo examinations of the NCTR-DPS were carried out in 8-week
old female mice (Strain: FVB/NJ) using Xenogen IVIS Spectrum to
quantitatively monitor release of tracer molecules.In-vivo examinations
revealed the release dependence on the packaging density; 25 - 40% of
release occurred within 24 hours, followed by a steady release for over
14 days. By the 14th day, 98% of dye was released. Higher percentage
release was observed for greater niosome chitosan ratios. Our results
showed that the time release of the drugs could be finely controlled by
varying packaging and crosslinking ratio in the chitosan network from 3:1
(loose network which translates into high release) to 5:1 (tight network
which translates into low release). This NCTS-DPS drug delivery system
can be injected directly to tumor sites preventing the need for surgical
implantation. It may have positive implications in the treatment of
ovarian cancer preferentially targeting tumor cells or brain tumors
because of its controlled and localized release.

