Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CSPG4 as a target of antibody-based immunotherapy for malignant
mesothelioma


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive tumor, resistant to
conventional therapies, with median survival of 1 year from diagnosis.
The lack of effective therapies available prompted us to implement
antibody-based immunotherapy against novel targets and to investigate
possible synergies with chemotherapy on MM. CSPG4 is involved in the
onset and progression of melanoma and other tumors, as well as in
neo-angiogenesis. CSPG4-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAb) have shown
anti-tumor effects in both preclinical and clinical trials of melanoma.
We hypothesized that targeting CSPG4 with a CSPG4-specific mAb would have
therapeutic efficacy against MM. We found that chondroitin sulphate
proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) was aberrantly expressed in 6 out of 8 MM cell
lines and in 24 out of 40 MM biopsies, with minimal expression in
surrounding non-malignant cells. The expression of CSPG4 in MM was higher
upon engagement of extracellular matrix components (ECM) and was
associated with increased MM cell viability and motility. Silencing of
CSPG4 expression by siRNAs supported this functional significance of
CSPG4 in MM. Consistently, the CSPG4-specific mAb TP41.2 inhibited MM
cell attachment to the ECM, resulting in decreased phosphorylation of FAK
and AKT, decreased expression of cyclin D1 and apoptosis. Moreover,
TP41.2 significantly reduced MM cell motility, migration and
invasiveness, and inhibited MM growth in soft agar. TP41.2 prevented the
outgrowth of human MM tumors in SCID mice and inhibited the growth of
established MM xenografts, resulting in significantly extended survival
of tumor-bearing mice. These results represent a novel approach for CSPG4
mAb-based immunotherapy of MM. Combinatorial strategies with
chemotherapeutic agents and with mAbs targeting c-Met related receptor
are ongoing, aimed at translating CSPG4-specific mAb into clinical
setting.

