Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of grapefruit intake on endogenous serum estrogen
levels in postmenopausal women


The inhibitory effect of grapefruit juice on the intestinal cytochrome
P450 3A4 system interacts with more than 60% of orally administered drugs
leading to elevation of their serum concentrations. While grapefruit has
been shown to lead to elevated serum levels of estrogens when hormones
are administered orally, there are no published data on the effect of
grapefruit intake on endogenous levels. To begin to address that data
gap, we conducted a dietary intervention study among healthy
postmenopausal volunteers to determine whether endogenous estrogen levels
are significantly affected by grapefruit consumption. We tested 4
grapefruit products: whole fresh grapefruit, fresh squeezed juice not
from concentrate, shelf-stable juice from concentrate, and grapefruit
soda. The majority of volunteers were recruited through the Love/Avon
Army of Women. The six-week study consisted of a run-in period of three
weeks, a two-week period of grapefruit consumption, and a one-week
wash-out period. Eight fasting blood samples were collected during the
study. An additional 5 samples drawn at 1, 2, 4, 8 and 10 hours after
initial grapefruit intake were collected during an acute-phase study.
Serum assays for estrone (E1), estradiol (E2), estrone-3- sulfate (E1S),
and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) were conducted. Sixty-two women
participated in the study, 10 of whom also participated in the acute
phase. Only the whole grapefruit had statistically significant effects on
endogeneous estrogen levels. The largest increases were seen in the women
with the highest BMI. The changes were evident at 24 hours and remained
relatively constant over the 2 week period. With whole grapefruit at the
average BMI of 26.6 kg/m2, E1S increased overall by 10.6% (p=0.031), and
at a BMI of 30 kg/m2 this increased to 16.4% (p=0.003). Approximately
double the effects were seen around 10 hours after whole grapefruit
consumption. The effects of fresh juice consumption were around 25% of
these increases but were not statistically significant. Small increases
in E1 were seen with whole grapefruit, but no increase was seen in E2.
The findings of the present study suggest an important interaction
between grapefruit consumption and serum levels of endogenous E1S. The
increase in E1S is difficult to interpret in term of risk of breast
cancer as we found only a small increase in E1 and failed to find any
increase in E2. More detailed studies are needed to gain an understanding
how the increased levels of E1S are not reflected in similar increases in
E1 and E2, and whether the increased E1S levels are reflected in an
increase in E1 and E2 levels in the breast itself.

