Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRG1 (SMARCA4) protein loss has profound effects on the
transcriptome of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines


Purpose: To study the gene expression profile of NSCLC cell lines with
BRG1 protein loss. Background: BRG1 is the major catalytic subunit of the
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex and provides ATPase activity
necessary for transcriptional regulation of multiple cellular pathways.
BRG1 is frequently inactivated in lung cancers and loss of BRG1 is
correlated with poor prognosis. Methods: Sixty eight NSCLC cell lines
were analyzed. BRG1 protein was detected by western blotting using
nuclear extracts. SMARCA4 deletions or mutations were identified by
NextGen sequencing and/or Sanger sequencing using genomic DNA or cDNA.
Published reports and SNP analysis were also used to verify our results.
Gene expression profiles were determined by Illumina human WG-6 V3
beadchip. Microarray expression data was analyzed by Significance
Analysis of Microarray (SAM) and Hierarchical clustering analysis.
Results: Twenty five NSCLC cell lines had lost BRG1 protein expression.
Sequencing analysis found homozygous mutations (deletions, nonsense,
splicing site) in twenty two of the lines. Among forty three NSCLC cell
lines with BRG1 protein expression, five had homozygous missense
mutations, four had heterozygous mutations. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that nearly 1500 transcripts were differentially up or down
regulated (false discovery rate Purpose: To study the gene expression
profile of NSCLC cell lines with BRG1 protein loss. Background: BRG1 is
the major catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex
and provides ATPase activity necessary for transcriptional regulation of
multiple cellular pathways. BRG1 is frequently inactivated in lung
cancers and loss of BRG1 is correlated with poor prognosis. Methods:
Sixty eight NSCLC cell lines were analyzed. BRG1 protein was detected by
western blotting using nuclear extracts. SMARCA4 deletions or mutations
were identified by NextGen sequencing and/or Sanger sequencing using
genomic DNA or cDNA. Published reports and SNP analysis were also used to
verify our results. Gene expression profiles were determined by Illumina
human WG-6 V3 beadchip. Microarray expression data was analyzed by
Significance Analysis of Microarray (SAM) and Hierarchical clustering
analysis. Results: Twenty five NSCLC cell lines had lost BRG1 protein
expression. Sequencing analysis found homozygous mutations (deletions,
nonsense, splicing site) in twenty two of the lines. Among forty three
NSCLC cell lines with BRG1 protein expression, five had homozygous
missense mutations, four had heterozygous mutations. Gene expression
profiling demonstrated that nearly 1500 transcripts were differentially
up or down regulated (false discovery rate <5%) among the cell lines
without BRG1 protein compared to the ones with WT BRG1. These transcripts
are involved in many important cellular functions including
proliferation, adhesion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, signaling
pathway, steroid receptor and oncogene expression. Hierarchical
clustering analysis using these transcripts distinguished NSCLC cell
lines without BRG1 protein as a group, different from other NSCLC cells
as well as immortalized respiratory epithelial cells, while NSCLC cell
lines with BRG1 missense mutations showed heterogeneity of expression
patterns. Conclusions: BRG1 protein loss is frequent in lung cancer cells
and has a distinct signature and profound effects on the transcriptome of
NSCLC cell lines. Our findings support the concept that BRG1 functions as
a master regulator of master regulators.

