Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginine depravation therapy with arginine deiminase and autophagy
inhibition is a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of
metastatic sarcomas that lack argininosuccinate synthetase expression


While sarcomas are a rare group of tumors, the poor response to current
clinical regimens represents an important unmet need in oncology. A
better therapeutic understanding of the biology and metabolism of sarcoma
growth is necessary to develop novel therapies to treat patients with
this group of tumors. Argininosuccinate synthase 1 (ASS1) is the
rate-limiting enzyme in the conversion of citrulline to arginine. When
ASS1 is not expressed arginine becomes an essential amino acid to a
cancer cell that must be delivered from the diet. Immunohistochemical
analysis of 701 patient specimens representing 45 subtypes of sarcoma
demonstrates that ASS1 is not expressed in over 85% of sarcomas (619 of
701 patient samples). This suggests that sarcomas may be sensitive to the
arginine deprivation therapy using pegylated arginine deiminase
(ADI-PEG20). Treatment of a panel of leiomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma,
alveolar soft part sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and
Ewing's sarcoma cell lines with ADI-PEG20 resulted in cell cycle arrest
but not apoptosis when ASS1 expression was low, whereas the ASS1 high
osteosarcoma cell line MG63 continued to divide. Response in sarcoma cell
lines is dependent on ASS1 expression, as bone sarcomas, soft tissue
sarcomas, complex cytogenetic sarcomas and translocation dependent
sarcomas all demonstrate cell cycle inhibition upon treatment with
ADI-PEG20. The IC50 for treated cell lines treated with ADI-PEG20 ranged
from 0.02-0.1ug/mL in ASS1 low sensitive cell lines. Treatment of
sarcomas that lack ASS1 with ADI-PEG20 induces autophagy. Depletion of
arginine by ADI-PEG20 in ASS1 negative sarcomas when combined with
chloroquine, an inhibitor of autophagy, induces cell death as measured by
Annexin V. Xenograft of the ASS1 low expressing osteosarcoma cell line
MNNG into nude mice followed by treatment with ADI-PEG20 demonstrated a
significantly slower tumor growth rate as compared to PBS treated
controls. Experiments are now ongoing in mice using the combination of
chloroquine and ADI-PEG20. Successful control of tumor burden by using
arginine deprivation therapy and autophagy inhibition in our preclinical
studies will help to justify and orient future clinical trials for this
innovative treatment for patients with sarcoma that lack ASS1 expression.

