Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in glioblastoma is
associated with an inflammatory and mesenchymal phenotype


Glioblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor and is
characterized by rapid angiogenesis-dependent (re)growth, cell
heterogeneity, and extensive local tissue infiltration. Antiangiogenic
therapy, among the most promising treatment developments, rapidly reduces
vascular permeability and delays glioblastoma progression but the therapy
itself ultimately promotes an aggressive treatment-resistant phenotype.
The aim of the present study was to identify mechanisms responsible for
glioblastoma resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. When mice bearing U87
and NSC11 xenografts treated with bevacizumab became moribund, tumor
tissue was extracted to obtain tumor cells with acquired resistance to
bevacizumab. U87 and NSC11 cells were dissociated and cultured in
serum-containing and stem cell media, respectively. To verify resistance,
the resistant cells were expanded in vitro and then re-implanted
orthotopically in nude mice. Mice were randomized to receive bevacizumab
or vehicle and followed for survival. As anticipated, tumors formed by
parental U87 and NSC11 cells were sensitive, whereas tumors obtained at
the time of acquired resistance to anti-VEGF therapy were resistant to
bevacizumab and did not have prolongation of survival compared to
untreated controls. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
resistance to antiangiogenic treatment, we performed gene expression
profiling using Affymetrix U133Plus_2.0 arrays comparing untreated and
bevacizumab-treated tumors. Comparison of anti-VEGF therapy-resistant
cell lines to untreated controls demonstrated an increase in genes
associated with a mesenchymal phenotype. Antiangiogenic therapy increased
the expression of genes of mesenchymal origin, cellular
migration/invasion, and inflammation including chemokine secretion,
myeloid cell chemotaxis and multiple markers reflecting a
pro-inflammatory environment. Consistent with these data, mice bearing
U87 resistant tumors showed significantly greater infiltration of F4/80+
myeloid cells compared to wild-type tumors. Comparing the mesenchymal
gene signature from Phillips et al with the gene changes in our
experiments using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA v2.07, Broad
Institute, MIT), we show that NSC11 tumors treated with bevacizumab
showed a highly significant correlation to the published mesenchymal gene
signature. In addition to the pro-inflammatory changes, invasion-related
genes were also upregulated. We found the U87 and NSC11 resistant cells
have significantly higher invasion rates in vitro compared with U87 and
NSC11 parental cell lines. Our studies identify prominent mechanisms of
glioblastoma resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. A better understanding
of resistance may provide new strategies to prolong the efficacy of this
therapy and accelerate the integration of combination therapies into
clinical trials.

