Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational genomics analyses of cholangiocarcinoma identify
patients who may respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Background & Aims: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a heterogeneous disease
with poor outcome that accounts for 5-10% of primary liver cancers. We
recently developed a characterization strategy using 104 resected CCAs.
Patients were classified into two distinct subclasses, based on overall
survival, early recurrence, and KRAS mutations. Class comparison
identified 4 survival subgroups (SGI-IV). Significantly, SGIII, the
patient group with the worst prognosis, was characterized by genes
associated with proteasomal activity and inflammation. Microdissection of
tumor compartments and immunostaining showed a prevalent deregulation of
HER2, EGFR and MET which suggests that select groups of patients may
respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in combination with
anti-inflammatory drugs. Methods: We applied integrative and
translational genomics by combining data from our patient cohort and 7
human CCA cell lines to investigate optimal treatment options for
subgroups of CCA. CCA lines were exposed to TKIs, trastuzumab and
lapatinib, and the anti-inflammatory drug celecoxib. Targets were
validated by transcriptomics, Western and immunostaining. The efficacy of
co-administering celecoxib and trastuzumab was examined in vitro and in a
model of TKI-resistant xenografts (30mg/kg celecoxib gavage bid,
0.45mg/dose trastuzumab i.p. twice weekly). Results: To assess receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) as potential drug-targets against CCA, we first
integrated the CCA cell lines with our patient cohort to establish
concordance between the cell lines and the tumor subclasses. The cells
were then exposed to trastuzumab and lapatinib for 7 days. Lapatinib, a
dual inhibitor of EGFR and HER2, was significantly more effective showing
50-80% growth inhibition compared to 15-20% inhibition achieved by
trastuzumab. Classification was confirmed by transcriptomics separating
the line based on drug response. TKI-resistance was observed in 3/7 lines
with 2/3 being positive for mutations in KRAS, supporting a link between
resistance to TKI-based therapies and activation of KRAS. A combination
of celecoxib and trastuzumab was effective in inhibiting growth of
TKI-resistant lines in vitro (P Background & Aims: Cholangiocarcinoma
(CCA) is a heterogeneous disease with poor outcome that accounts for
5-10% of primary liver cancers. We recently developed a characterization
strategy using 104 resected CCAs. Patients were classified into two
distinct subclasses, based on overall survival, early recurrence, and
KRAS mutations. Class comparison identified 4 survival subgroups
(SGI-IV). Significantly, SGIII, the patient group with the worst
prognosis, was characterized by genes associated with proteasomal
activity and inflammation. Microdissection of tumor compartments and
immunostaining showed a prevalent deregulation of HER2, EGFR and MET
which suggests that select groups of patients may respond to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in combination with anti-inflammatory drugs.
Methods: We applied integrative and translational genomics by combining
data from our patient cohort and 7 human CCA cell lines to investigate
optimal treatment options for subgroups of CCA. CCA lines were exposed to
TKIs, trastuzumab and lapatinib, and the anti-inflammatory drug
celecoxib. Targets were validated by transcriptomics, Western and
immunostaining. The efficacy of co-administering celecoxib and
trastuzumab was examined in vitro and in a model of TKI-resistant
xenografts (30mg/kg celecoxib gavage bid, 0.45mg/dose trastuzumab i.p.
twice weekly). Results: To assess receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) as
potential drug-targets against CCA, we first integrated the CCA cell
lines with our patient cohort to establish concordance between the cell
lines and the tumor subclasses. The cells were then exposed to
trastuzumab and lapatinib for 7 days. Lapatinib, a dual inhibitor of EGFR
and HER2, was significantly more effective showing 50-80% growth
inhibition compared to 15-20% inhibition achieved by trastuzumab.
Classification was confirmed by transcriptomics separating the line based
on drug response. TKI-resistance was observed in 3/7 lines with 2/3 being
positive for mutations in KRAS, supporting a link between resistance to
TKI-based therapies and activation of KRAS. A combination of celecoxib
and trastuzumab was effective in inhibiting growth of TKI-resistant lines
in vitro (P < 0.0001). In the xenograft model of TKI-resistant CCA
co-administration of celecoxib and trastuzumab significantly inhibited
the tumor growth (P Background & Aims: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a
heterogeneous disease with poor outcome that accounts for 5-10% of
primary liver cancers. We recently developed a characterization strategy
using 104 resected CCAs. Patients were classified into two distinct
subclasses, based on overall survival, early recurrence, and KRAS
mutations. Class comparison identified 4 survival subgroups (SGI-IV).
Significantly, SGIII, the patient group with the worst prognosis, was
characterized by genes associated with proteasomal activity and
inflammation. Microdissection of tumor compartments and immunostaining
showed a prevalent deregulation of HER2, EGFR and MET which suggests that
select groups of patients may respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) in combination with anti-inflammatory drugs. Methods: We applied
integrative and translational genomics by combining data from our patient
cohort and 7 human CCA cell lines to investigate optimal treatment
options for subgroups of CCA. CCA lines were exposed to TKIs, trastuzumab
and lapatinib, and the anti-inflammatory drug celecoxib. Targets were
validated by transcriptomics, Western and immunostaining. The efficacy of
co-administering celecoxib and trastuzumab was examined in vitro and in a
model of TKI-resistant xenografts (30mg/kg celecoxib gavage bid,
0.45mg/dose trastuzumab i.p. twice weekly). Results: To assess receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) as potential drug-targets against CCA, we first
integrated the CCA cell lines with our patient cohort to establish
concordance between the cell lines and the tumor subclasses. The cells
were then exposed to trastuzumab and lapatinib for 7 days. Lapatinib, a
dual inhibitor of EGFR and HER2, was significantly more effective showing
50-80% growth inhibition compared to 15-20% inhibition achieved by
trastuzumab. Classification was confirmed by transcriptomics separating
the line based on drug response. TKI-resistance was observed in 3/7 lines
with 2/3 being positive for mutations in KRAS, supporting a link between
resistance to TKI-based therapies and activation of KRAS. A combination
of celecoxib and trastuzumab was effective in inhibiting growth of
TKI-resistant lines in vitro (P < 0.0001). In the xenograft model of
TKI-resistant CCA co-administration of celecoxib and trastuzumab
significantly inhibited the tumor growth (P < 0.01, q = 3.7) after 2
weeks compared to control tumors and mono-therapies. Conclusion: Our
study has provided new insights into both pathogenesis and optimal
treatment options for CCA. We identified a subgroup of patients with poor
outcome who may benefit from TKIs. Furthermore, TKI-resistance was
effectively treated both in vitro and in vivo by co-administration with
celecoxib. Our data demonstrates that targeting AKT downstream of KRAS
sensitizes TKI-resistant CCA to TKIs, and provides a new treatment option
for this currently treatment-refractory cancer.

