Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput expression profiling of circulating tumor cells
from breast cancer patients as potential therapy decision indicator


Background: The aim of this study was to assess the molecular profiles of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
patients and to evaluate their potential as prognostic and therapy
indicators. Methods: Blood samples (5ml) of 77 MBC patients from Czech
and German Gynecological Cancer Centers were analyzed for CTCs using the
AdnaTest BreastCancer (AdnaGen AG, Germany) for the detection of EpCAM,
MUC-1 and HER-2 transcripts. Obtained cDNA molecules have been
gene-specifically pre-amplified for multimarker qPCR analysis measured on
Biomark (Fludigm, USA) microfluidic chip for 48 samples and 48 testing
positions (in total: 2304 rxn, 31 tumor specific-genes, 30 MBC samples,
respectively). qPCR- results have been analyzed by GENEX v.s. 5.0
software (MultiD, SE). Results: CTCs were found in 42% of the MBC
patients. Based on the AdnaTest, two distinct groups of CTC positive-MBC
patients have been identified after principal component analysis of the
gene expression data. The first CTC-positive group had relatively high
EPCAM, MUC1, KRT19, HER2, AURKA, and MCM expression. In contrast,
expression of PTEN, SATB1 and CD45 was low. The second CTC-positive group
showed lower expressions of AURKA, EPCAM, and KRT19 than the first group.
Furthermore, markers typically expressed in CD45 positive cells like
SATB1, AKT, PARP, PTEN, mTOR, but also oncogene MYC and tumor suppressor
TP53 were highly expressed in this group. The samples of CTC-negative MBC
patients were characterized by low expression of the cancer phenotype
associated genes EPCAM, KRT19, and MUC1, but showed comparably higher
expression of genes associated with a stem cell like phenotype such as
TWIST, ALDH1 and CD24. Conclusions: Based on our data, we conclude that
CTCs enriched by the AdnaGen-technology are heterogeneous and do not
necessarily express EPCAM. Even CTCs with low EPCAM expression but with
elevated KRT19 and AURKA levels may represent a subgroup of high risk
metastatic BC patients. Follow-up of the patients will show whether
specific gene profiles of CTCs will a) identify responders and
non-responders to breast cancer related therapies and b) be useful for
personalized therapy of MBC in the future.

