Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of BRCA1 and SUMO in ubiquitination of cyclinb1


BRCA1 is a breast and ovarian tumor susceptibility gene. The gene encodes
a protein that is a key player and an integral component of the signaling
cascades leading to cell cycle checkpoint arrest following genetic
insults induced by replication stress and/or DNA damage. In the absence
of BRCA1 expression and following such insults, cells fail to activate
the replication checkpoint or the DNA damage checkpoint and continue to
progress into mitosis. Thus, loss of BRCA1 expression results in
accumulation of genomic instability leading to cancer development. BRCA1
is an E3 ubiquitin ligase when it is bound to its partner protein, BARD1.
While a number of BRCA1 substrates have been identified, none of them
provide a clear mechanistic understanding of how BRCA1 enzymatic activity
relates to its multiple functions in checkpoint activation and tumor
suppression. Here we show that BRCA1 E3 ligase when activated by genetic
insults, mediates ubiquitination of the cell cycle protein cyclin B1
(CycB) and signals it for proteasomal degradation to prevent mitotic
entry. Previously it has been shown that high CycB expression is
associated with poor survival in breast cancer, and this overexpression
is more frequent among patient carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. We
recently identified a consensus SUMOylation site in CycB. Given that
BRCA1 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity is induced by SUMOylation, we wished
to determine if SUMOylation is a necessary step in the BRCA1-mediated
ubiquitination of CycB. By immunoprecipitation assays we found that
endogenous CycB binds to both the SUMO1 and SUMO2 proteins in U2OS cells
stably expressing GFP-SUMO1 or GFP-SUMO2. Basal levels of CycB
SUMOylation with either SUMO1 or SUMO2 are low. Following exposure to
ionizing radiation (IR), SUMOylation of CycB with SUMO1 increases in a
sigmoidal dose and time-dependent manner while, SUMOylation with SUMO2
follows a different kinetics. Ubiquitination of CycB increases following
SUMOylation. When exposed to proteosomal inhibitor alone, both SUMOylated
and ubiquitinated CycB accumulates in the cells. The association between
SUMO1/2 and CycB was confirmed in vitro by using bacterial pull-down
assays. In addition, we identified CycB in a BRCA1 and in a SUMO2
immunocomplex purified from U2OS cells, suggesting an association of
these proteins. By immunoprecipitations and FRET, using wild type and
Lysine-mutants of CycB we will identify whether the N-terminal KXE
consensus SUMOylation site within CycB is the site for these interactions
in basal and IR-treated cells. Studies are currently underway to
elucidate the significance of BRCA1 SUMOylation for CycB ubiquitination
and SUMOylation. In summary, we present data to show that SUMOylation
could be the bridge for BRCA1's ubiquitin ligase activity toward CycB in
order to regulate the G2-M transition, cell cycle checkpoint arrest and
thus, maintenance of genomic stability.

