Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and characterization of PEG-ylated porphyrins for
targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor in colorectal cancer
detection


ABSTRACT According to the National Cancer Institute, an estimated 102,900
(colon) and 39,670 (rectal) new cases were obtained in 2010. An estimated
51,370 people have died from colon and rectal cancers combined. This
makes colorectal cancer (CRC) the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. Consequently, the development of an in-vivo
imaging agent that is selective for CRC has long been needed. Much of the
detection for tumorigenesis relies on the efficacy in detecting small
tumors. Current agents are not selective and often stain tissue not
associated with the cancer cells making it difficult to delineate between
viable and tumorigenic entities. This project introduces a novel
macrocycle conjugated to polyethylene glycol linker, which we hypothesize
will serve as the template for a selective molecule with high
fluorescence yields that greatly increases earlier detection. Our
targeted remedy is a porphyrin that is conjugated to a peptide with an
affinity for the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR). Porphyrins are
characteristically aromatically stable, contain trademark absorption
bands in the visible and near-IR range, and have fluorescence quantum
yields much above the current fluorophores. This makes the macrocycle
optimal for confocal laser endomicroscopy (CLE) agent production.
Consequently, we use a polyethylene glycol linker in order to increase
water solubility, retain low toxicity, and to achieve high fluorescence
quantum yields, as well as high conjugation yields. In this research, we
were able to produce both precursors to the porphyrin-peptide conjugate,
MesoPOR-(mono)-3PEG and MesoPOR-(di)-3PEG. These molecules were
synthesized successfully with the use of peptide conjugation mechanisms.
Molecular weights were confirmed using Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption
Ionization Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-MS). Characterization was performed
using 1H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (1H-NMR) and Ultraviolet-Visible
Spectroscopy (UV-Vis) of the intended molecules. The synthesized
molecules, MesoPOR-(mono) 3PEG and MesoPOR-(di) 3PEG, will be useful in
peptide conjugation that targets EGFR. These peptide ligands will
increase selectivity and detect CRC via CLE.

