Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone (P4) and testosterone (T) concentrations in random
fine needle aspirates of the breast in pre- and postmenopausal women


Background: The availability of steroid hormones in the breast may be an
important measure of the potential for proliferation of hormone-dependent
breast cancer, and because retention of hormones may be influenced by
serum levels, in situ formation, and the presence of binding proteins and
lipids in the tissue, measurements of tissue concentrations are more
informative than serum concentrations alone. Methods: Subjects were
normal women, aged 36-65 yr, without breast cancer and not taking
hormones. Tissue was obtained by fine needle aspiration of the breast.
The cellular pellet was saved for analysis of DNA, and lipids were
extracted from the supernatant including the fatty layer. Previous work
had shown the cellular pellet contained a very little of the total
steroids of the sample. Triglycerides were precipitated from 90% methanol
at 20 C and the remaining lipids were applied to a C18 HPLC column for
purification in a gradient of methanol and acetonitrile in phosphate
buffer. Fractions containing P4 and T were analyzed by immunoassays. The
total DNA in the cellular pellet was isolated and quantified by UV
absorbance. The steroid content was expressed as either per mg of
purified lipid or per microgram of DNA. The data, when expressed as the
natural log of the concentrations, followed a normal distribution.
Differences in pre- and postmenopausal concentrations were analyzed by
group t-tests. Results: The geometric means of the hormone concentrations
are shown in the table. Comment: Despite the almost complete loss of
progesterone in serum of postmenopausal women, the concentrations in the
tissue are reduced but remain, on average, at more than 25% of the
premenopausal level, somewhat more than the previously reported
percentage in NAF of 5%. Relationships within individual women to other
risk factors will be explored. Testosterone is also maintained at a
relatively high level in the tissue of postmenopausal women, and may
serve as a substrate for aromatase.


