Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations of cohesin genes in myeloid malignancy


Myelodysplastic syndromes and related myeloid neoplasms (myelodysplasia)
are a heterogeneous group of clonal disorders showing deregulated blood
cell production and a predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia, whose
pathogenesis is only incompletely understood. So, to clarify the
molecular pathogenesis of myelodysplasia, we performed whole-exome
sequencing of paired tumor/control DNA from 29 patients with
myelodysplasia, leading to the identification of novel pathway mutations
of the splicing machinery in myelodysplasia (Yoshida et al., Nature,
2011). In addition to these pathway mutations, we also identified a
number of previously unreported gene mutations. Among these are a
missense and a nonsense mutation involving two cohesin components, STAG1
and STAG2 found in single cases, respectively. Cohesin is a multimeric
protein complex and enables post-replicative DNA repair and chromosome
segregation by holding sister chromatids together during mitosis. To
extend the findings in the whole-exome sequencing, we investigated
mutations of cohesin complex, including STAG2/STAG1, SMC1A, SMC3 and
RAD21, in 370 cases of myeloid malignancy by deep sequencing of pooled
DNA. In total, 38 mutations were identified in 36 out of the 370 cases,
where STAG2 and RAD21 accounted for most of the mutations. These
mutations occurred in a completely mutually exclusive manner, suggesting
a common impact of these mutations on the pathogenesis of myeloid
neoplasms. Most mutations of STAG2 and RAD21 were nonsense or frameshift
changes, or splice site mutations and widely distributed along the entire
coding region, causing loss-of-function of the proteins. On the other
hand, all mutations detected in SMC1A, SMC3, and STAG1 were missense
changes, indicating that their functions are essential for tumor
survival, complete loss of functions of which could lead to cell death.
In cytogenetics, 11 cohesin-mutated cases had normal karyotypes, and only
16 out of the 36 tumors with cohesion mutations showed abnormal
karyotypes, where most cases had near-diploid with only 2 patients having
complex karyotypes. So far, several lines of evidence suggest that
cohesin plays an important role for genomic stability and mutational
inactivation of STAG2 was shown to cause aneuploidy in human cells.
However, our results raise the possibility that alterations of cohesin
genes could be involved in carcinogenesis at least partly through
mechanisms other than causing aneuploidy. In this context, it is of note
that growing evidence have shown that cohesin forms long-range
chromosomal interactions and regulate gene expression in association with
CTCF, mediator, or transcription factors. Further functional study should
be warranted to gain new insights into the role of cohesin in the
pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies as well as other human cancers.

