Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of mannose-polyethyleneglycol-modified liposomes for
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura


[Objective]Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura(ITP) among
thrombocytopenia is an acquired autoimmune disease and is not clear on
the cause of disease. ITP is produced antibodies to the platelet by
immunological action and is thrombocytopenia with platelet phagocytosis
by macrophages in the spleen. There is a few deaths by the
thrombocytopenia, whereas its effective treatment has not been developed.
Polyethyleneglycol(PEG) modification of liposome as drug carrier is known
to provide blood circulation. The surface of macrophages is overexpressed
mannose receptor. Namely, mannose-PEG-modified liposome contained
cytotoxic agent is expected to accumulate in macrophage and show
cytotoxic effect. The effect of novel therapy for ITP was examined on
platelet count and tissue distribution of cytotoxic agent.
[Methods]Doxorubicin(DOX) as cytotoxic agent, containing liposome(LDOX),
PEG-modified LDOX(PEG-LDOX) and mannose-modified PEG-LDOX(Man-PEG-LDOX)
were prepared by remote loading method. ITP model mouse was created by
administration of anti-platelet antibodies. Each liposome was
administered from the tail vein in the ITP model mouse. On 24hr after
each liposome administration, the platelet count was measured and DOX
concentration was determined in each tissue. [Results]ITP model mouse was
reduced to 7.1% of normal platelet count by anti-platelet antibodies
treatment. In LDOX and PEG-LDOX groups, the platelet count does not
recover to normal level and DOX concentration in the spleen was low. In
contrast, the platelet count in Man-PEG-LDOX group recovered to normal
level. Furthermore, DOX concentration in the spleen after Man-PEG-LDOX
treatment showed a 2.7-fold of that in LDOX group. [Discussion]To be
effective splenectomy for ITP treatment, it is prospected that the
accumulation of cytotoxic agent in the spleen is useful. As liposome with
PEG-modification has been developed for avoiding the reticuloendotherial
system cells such as liver and spleen, this liposome can not show
accumulation in the spleen and cytotoxic effect on the macrophages. Thus,
PEG-modified liposome is unable to suppress platelets reduction by
macrophage phagocytosis. In contrast, after Man-PEG-LDOX administration,
DOX concentration in the spleen significantly increased, and thus the
platelet count was recovered by cytotoxic effect on the macrophages.
Furthermore, DOX accumulations in the heart and other normal tissue in
the Man-PEG-LDOX group were lower levels, and DOX induced adverse
reaction was expected to be not observed. In conclusion, Man-PEG-LDOX is
hoped to be effective as novel treatment for ITP.

