Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of MEK and Antizyme in keratinocyte stem cell expansion
and differentiation


Transgenic mice provide a valuable system to study the development of
skin tumorigenesis. Previous work from our lab has shown that mice
overexpressing constitutively active MEK in the basal layer of the
epidermis (K14-MEK mice) exhibit epidermal hyperplasia and spontaneous
skin tumor development. These tumors express high levels of ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC), the critical regulatory enzyme in the polyamine
biosynthetic pathway. Although polyamines are required for normal cell
growth, elevated levels of polyamines and ODC activity have been
associated with neoplastic transformation and tumor promotion in a
variety of tissues. Antizyme (AZ) suppresses ODC activity by targeting
ODC for degradation. We have observed that mice overexpressing AZ and MEK
in the skin (MEK/AZ mice) showed decreased tumor development compared to
mice expressing MEK alone. This has led to the hypothesis that the
upregulation of ODC caused by overexpressing constitutively active MEK
will result in expansion of epidermal stem cells and decreased
keratinocyte differentiation, in addition to the epidermal hyperplasia
and tumorigenesis already seen. Overexpression of AZ decreases ODC
activity and should reverse these phenotypes. Cell division in epidermal
stem cells is asymmetrical, providing one replacement stem cell and a
second transient amplifying (TA) cell. TA cells reside within the
interfolliclar epidermis (IFE) and after several rounds of division, give
rise to terminally differentiated cells in the suprabasal layers of the
epidermis expressing early differentiation markers K1/K10 and late
differentiation markers loricrin and involucrin. To determine the effect
of MEK and AZ expression on stem cell expansion, newborn pups and adult
mice were injected with BrdU using different wash out periods to label TA
cells and epidermal stem cells. Our results showed that skin from K14-MEK
mice had a significant increase in the number of TA cells within the IFE
and hair follicle, while mice expressing both the K14-MEK and K5-AZ
transgenes showed no difference in number of TA cells compared to
wild-type littermates. Additionally, K14-MEK mice had a significant
increase in the number of stem cells in the bulge region of the follicle,
while AZ expression repressed the MEK-mediated increase in this cell
population. Examination of primary keratinocyte cultures from the four
genotypes showed that K14-MEK keratinocytes had decreased levels of both
early and late differentiation markers compared to wild-type and K5-AZ
cells, and were resistant to Ca+2-induced differentiation. MEK/AZ
keratinocytes expressed similar levels of differentiation markers as
those from wild-type and K5-AZ mice, indicating that AZ was able to
attenuate MEK-induced suppression of differentiation. Our results suggest
that ODC and polyamines are key regulators of epidermal stem cell
expansion and proliferation/differentiation of keratinocyte progenitor
cells.

