Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new method for assessing fidelity of DSB repair shows
involvement of different DNA repair mechanisms at specific sites in human
genome


Introduction: Two major mechanisms of double-strand break (DSB) repair
are non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR).
Whereas NHEJ is error-prone and causes small deletions and other
mutations at the site of repair, HR is highly fidelic. Here, we introduce
a new method to identify mutations at the sites of DSB repair and apply
it to study the fidelity of repair at different sites in human genome.
Design: To enable the induction of DSBs at endogenous sequences in the
somatic genome of TPC-1 human thyroid cells, the cells were transduced
with a HA-ER-I-PpoI retrovirus (gift of Dr. Michael Kastan). DSBs were
induced by treating cells with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) which causes
I-PpoI to enter the nucleus. I-PpoI induction for 6h produced multiple
H2AX foci in about 75% of cells. We investigated the incidence of
mutations following I-PpoI induction at two DNA sites. One has an I-PpoI
site located within a coding gene, DAB1, on 1p32-p31and a second has an
I-PpoI site within an intergenic region on 2q21 that we designate as
2qIG. qPCR analysis revealed that 9-16% of target sequences were cleaved
at 6h post I-PpoI induction, which is consistent with previous
observations that showed that I-PpoI cleaves about 10% of the target
sites in human cells. Mutations at the I-PpoI cleavage sites were
detected after reducing the presence of wild-type amplicons by digesting
DNA and subsequent PCR products with I-PpoI prior to the resolution of
PCR products by capillary electrophoresis or prior to cloning and
sequencing. Results: Mutations at the sites of cleavage by I-PpoI were
determined after induction of I-PpoI for 6h, 24h, and 48h. After removal
of the majority (>97%) of wild-type sequences by digesting with I-PpoI,
resolution of the PCR products by capillary electrophoresis showed the
presence of various smaller size amplicons at the intergenic 2qIG site at
each time interval and in all three replicates of the experiment, but no
detectable abnormal size amplicons at the DAB1 gene site. Sequence
analysis of cloned PCR products from one experiment revealed that 157 out
of 252 sequences of the intergenic 2qIG site were mutant, whereas all 167
clones containing the DAB1 site were wild-type (PIntroduction: Two major
mechanisms of double-strand break (DSB) repair are non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR). Whereas NHEJ is
error-prone and causes small deletions and other mutations at the site of
repair, HR is highly fidelic. Here, we introduce a new method to identify
mutations at the sites of DSB repair and apply it to study the fidelity
of repair at different sites in human genome. Design: To enable the
induction of DSBs at endogenous sequences in the somatic genome of TPC-1
human thyroid cells, the cells were transduced with a HA-ER-I-PpoI
retrovirus (gift of Dr. Michael Kastan). DSBs were induced by treating
cells with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) which causes I-PpoI to enter the
nucleus. I-PpoI induction for 6h produced multiple H2AX foci in about 75%
of cells. We investigated the incidence of mutations following I-PpoI
induction at two DNA sites. One has an I-PpoI site located within a
coding gene, DAB1, on 1p32-p31and a second has an I-PpoI site within an
intergenic region on 2q21 that we designate as 2qIG. qPCR analysis
revealed that 9-16% of target sequences were cleaved at 6h post I-PpoI
induction, which is consistent with previous observations that showed
that I-PpoI cleaves about 10% of the target sites in human cells.
Mutations at the I-PpoI cleavage sites were detected after reducing the
presence of wild-type amplicons by digesting DNA and subsequent PCR
products with I-PpoI prior to the resolution of PCR products by capillary
electrophoresis or prior to cloning and sequencing. Results: Mutations at
the sites of cleavage by I-PpoI were determined after induction of I-PpoI
for 6h, 24h, and 48h. After removal of the majority (>97%) of wild-type
sequences by digesting with I-PpoI, resolution of the PCR products by
capillary electrophoresis showed the presence of various smaller size
amplicons at the intergenic 2qIG site at each time interval and in all
three replicates of the experiment, but no detectable abnormal size
amplicons at the DAB1 gene site. Sequence analysis of cloned PCR products
from one experiment revealed that 157 out of 252 sequences of the
intergenic 2qIG site were mutant, whereas all 167 clones containing the
DAB1 site were wild-type (P<0.0001). Most of the mutant 2qIG sequences
had 2-27nt deletions and the ligation sequences frequently had
microhomology that involved one or two nucleotides, which is highly
characteristic of NHEJ. Conclusions: We have established a new method to
assess mutations arising during the repair of DSBs and demonstrate that
mutations occur at sites of DSB repair in intergenic DNA but not at sites
of DSB repair in coding DNA. This suggests that repair of DSBs in coding
and non-coding DNA may involve different mechanisms.

