Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -santalol induces caspase-dependent apoptosis and G2/M phase cell
cycle arrest in human breast cancer cells


Alpha-santalol, an active component of sandalwood oil, has been shown to
have chemopreventive effects on skin cancer both in vitro and in vivo.
However, effects of alpha-santalol on other types of cancer have not been
studied. In this study, we examine the effects and mechanisms of action
of alpha-santalol on human breast cancer cells using estrogen receptor
(ER)- positive (MCF-7) and estrogen receptor- negative (MDA-MB-231)
breast cancer cell lines. MTT and BrdU cell proliferation ELISA results
showed inhibition of cell viability and proliferation in a time and
dose-dependent manner in both cell lines. Alpha-santalol at 25-150 M
concentration decreased cell viability after 12h treatment. In addition,
TUNEL assay and flow cytometry results revealed that alpha-santalol
significantly induced apoptosis in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Further,
immunoblotting and caspase activity assays showed involvement of
caspase-3, caspase-8 and caspase-9 in apoptotic cell death. Induction of
apoptosis by alpha-santalol was further confirmed by detecting the
cleavage of Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) through western blotting.
Cell cycle distribution of alpha-santalol treated MFC-7 and MDA-MB-231
cells were analyzed by fluorescence- activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis of propidium iodide staining. We observed that alpha-santalol
treatment arrests cell cycle at G2/M phase at 25M 75M concentration in
both cell lines. Taken together, our studies reveal a potential mechanism
for the chemopreventive effect of alpha-santalol on ER- positive and ER-
negative breast cancer cells through induction of apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest at G2/M phase. Alpha-santalol could be effective for the
prevention and treatment of breast cancer. (Supported by Translational
Cancer Research Center funded by South Dakota, Governors Office of
Economic Development)

