Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assay development for detecting cMET expression in circulating
tumor cells (CTC), a potential patient tailoring marker for evaluation of
cMET inhibitors


Hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor c-MET have been implicated in
tumor formation and progression as well as drug treatment resistance to
targeted agents such as EGFR inhibitors. cMET over-expression or gene
amplification has been reported in a wide variety of human malignancies
correlating with poor patient prognosis. A reasonable hypothesis for
experimental agents targeting the cMET receptor is that patients with
tumors expressing high levels of cMET may respond better. CTC counts are
prognostic of survival in metastatic breast, colorectal, and prostate
cancers (NEJM 2004;351:781-91; J Clin Oncol 2008;26:3213-21; Clin Can Res
2008;14:6302-9). CTCs are shed from tumors and are believed to be
representative of cells migrating to form distal metastasis. The presence
of these cells in blood provides an attractive and easy source for serial
monitoring of tumors without the limitations of traditional solid tumor
biopsy. We describe here the development of an assay that measures cMET
expression in CTCs. The CTC assay was developed using the Veridex
CellSearch System, and RUO reagents for enumeration of CTCs and a Lilly
proprietary cMET antibody (Ab) optD11. For assay development, cultured
tumor cell lines with differing cMET expression levels representing solid
epithelial tumor types were spiked into whole blood drawn into a CellSave
tube. For initial assay development, mouse whole blood was used and
results reproduced subsequently with human whole blood from healthy
subjects. The spiked tumor cells in blood samples were recovered using
the CellCapture Mouse/Rat CTC kit (for mouse blood) or CellSearch CXC kit
(for human blood), supplemented with the fluorescent dye (R-
phycoerythrin) conjugated anti-cMET Ab. cMET in the recovered tumor cells
was detected in the open/fourth channel on the CellTrack Analyzer II.
Several proprietary and commercial cMET antibodies were screened for
specificity and sensitivity. A commonly used commercially available cMET
Ab (Santa Cruz Biotechnology C28) was not able to discriminate between
cMET negative and positive cell lines. Results were confirmed by flow
cytometry and by western blot analyses. optD11 was selected for CTC cMET
expression assay development for the following reasons: a) ability to
detect different cMET levels among positive cell lines (H441, MKN45,
SNU5, SKOV3) while identifying SKBR3 as cMET negative; b) high affinity
for cMET to allow for an image acquisition time of 0.02-0.04 second in
the open channel; c) tolerance to the presence of LY2875358 (LA480), an
experimental therapeutic anti-cMET Ab, allowing evaluation of cMET levels
in CTCs post-treatment. The CTC assay for cMET expression, as well as a
CTC assay measuring cMET gene amplification are currently being
implemented in the early phase clinical studies for Lilly cMET inhibitors
(JSBA, NCT01285037 & JTBA, NCT01287546).

