Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the hemostatic status in patients with prostate
cancer using thromboelastography and tissue factor- microparticles


Coagulopathy is reported as the second most common cause of death from
cancers, particularly prostate cancer. DVT and pulmonary embolism are two
major thrombotic complications in prostate cancer and the risk is even
higher with chemotherapy and hormonal therapy. Thromboelastography (TEG)
is a global hemeostatic test that detects and specifies the type of
coagulopathy encountered through a vesicoelastic trace that reflects the
kinetics of the clot from the initial fibrin thread till and
fibrinolysis. We performed a hemostatic study in 27 patients (age range
59-88 years) diagnosed with prostate cancer at various stages (metastatic
and non-metastatic) as compared to a control group (n=9) matching the
same age range and with -ve pathology for prostate cancer. The study
included whole blood TEG and flow cytometry analysis of microprticles
(MPs) in plasma using Annexin V- FITC and anti-tissue factor - PE.
Analysis of the data revealed hypercoagulable state in all patients
except two who were maintained on coumadin as prophylaxis for previous
DVT. Hypercoagulability was indicated by shorter R time, increased alpha
angle, MA and clot index. The mean values for TEG parameters in the
patients were: R: 6.01 vs 9.8 minutes in the control group, alpha angle:
68.3 vs 53.1 degrees in controls, MA: 69.3 vs 57.9 mm in controls, and
CI: 3.32 vs 0.7 in controls. Paired student t test showed significant
differences as regards R time (P=0.009), MA (p=0.053) and CI (P=0.051).
Microparticle assay revealed significant elevation in the number of
microparticles carrying tissue factor in the patient group compared to
the control group (p=0.05). The mean plasma TF-MPs in patient group was
5,142 MPs/uL compared to 2,914 MPs/ uL in the control group suggesting a
link between elevated tissue factor and hypercoagulability observed in
these patients. To our knowledge, this is the first report for the use of
TEG in patients with prostate cancer. TEG is a relatively simple test
that uses a small volume of blood and can be a useful tool for evaluation
of patients thrombotic potential and may help identification of those who
may require anticoagulant prophylaxis.

