Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 downregulation protects SUM-149 cells following targeting of
choline phospholipid metabolism


Enzymes in the choline phospholipid metabolism pathway such as choline
kinase (Chk) and phopholipase D1 (PLD1) are being evaluated as novel
targets in cancer therapy since these enzymes are overexpressed in
aggressive cancers including breast cancer. We have previously shown that
single and double downregulation of Chk and PLD1 significantly reduced
cell proliferation in breast cancer cells. We also observed a close
association between Chk and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), an inducible enzyme
that mediates the inflammatory response and plays a role in cancer
invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. COX-2 inhibition is also being
considered as a strategy for cancer prevention or treatment. Here we
investigated the effect of the COX-2 downregulation combined with PLD1
and Chk downregulation using siRNA, on cell proliferation to achieve
improved control and minimize compensatory responses that allow the cell
to survive or adapt. The triple negative inflammatory breast cancer cell
line, SUM149, was used in this study. Cells were transfected with 25 nM
siRNA against COX-2 (siRNA-cox2), PLD1 (siRNA-pld1) or Chk (siRNA-chk)
either singly or combined for 48 h. Untreated cells and the transfection
reagent (DharmaFECT) treatment were used as negative controls. Immunoblot
analysis was done after 48 h transfection using antibodies specific to
COX-2, PLD1, Chk-, and GAPDH (as a loading control).
Proliferation/viability of cells was determined using the CCK-8 assay
(cell counting kit-8, Dojindo) at day 2 and day 5 after transfection.
After 48 h transfection with siRNA-pld1 or siRNA-chk, PLD1 or Chk-
protein were downregulated significantly and COX-2 protein was
upregulated. When we combined downregulation of Chk or PLD1 with COX-2
dowregulation, we established significantly lower COX-2 protein levels
compared to single knockdown of Chk and PLD1. COX-2 downregulation alone
did not significantly reduce proliferation. Downregulation of PLD1 or
Chk, however, significantly reduced proliferation compared to untreated
cells (PLD1: 75%, Chk: 68%). When we combined COX-2 downregulation with
PLD1 or Chk downregulation, cell survival was significantly higher than
with just PLD1 or Chk alone (PLD1: 46%. Chk: 28%). These results suggest
that COX-2 downregulation rescues cells following downregulation of PLD1
or Chk in SUM149 cells, identifying a different facet of COX-2 in the
choline phospholipid pathway. This work supported by R01 CA82337

