Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of Hedgehog acyltransferase antagonists as a novel way
to inhibit Shh signaling in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is among the leading causes of cancer-related
death in the US, with low response to standard therapy and high
recurrence rates. Abnormal overexpression of the secreted morphogen Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) has been implicated as an important contributor to
pancreatic adenocarcinoma in adults. Shh produced by pancreatic cancer
cells drives tumor growth through both autocrine and paracrine
mechanisms. The Shh pathway is thus an attractive therapeutic target.
Currently there is an unmet need for drugs effective in inhibiting this
pathway. In order to signal, Shh must be modified by attachment of the
16-carbon fatty acid palmitate, a reaction mediated by Hedgehog
Acyltransferase (Hhat). Here we show that Hhat drives the growth of human
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and report the development
of novel small molecule inhibitors of Hhat that can be used as
anti-cancer agents. We used lentiviral shRNA vectors to knockdown Hhat in
two human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines. Hhat depletion in AsPC-1
cells resulted in decreased autocrine Shh signaling, and a strong
reduction in both anchorage-dependent (80%) and anchorage-independent
(70%) cell proliferation. In Panc1 cells, Hhat depletion decreased
paracrine Shh signaling, as monitored by a co-culture assay of Panc1
cells and C3H10T1/2 mouse fibroblast reporter cells. Hhat knockdown also
led to decreased tumor growth in a Panc1 xenograft mouse model in vivo.
These findings provide proof of concept that Hhat plays an essential role
in pancreatic cancer. In order to identify small molecule inhibitors of
Hhat, we employed high-throughput screening (HTS) using an in vitro assay
that monitors palmitoylation of a Shh peptide by Hhat. This assay was
optimized for analysis by Scintillation Proximity Assay (SPA) technology.
A chemical library of 85,000 compounds was screened, 95 hits were
validated and 4 lead compounds were selected; structures were confirmed
by NMR analysis. Based on its ability to function as a dose dependent
inhibitor of Shh palmitoylation in vitro (IC50 = 0.895M) and in cells,
RU-SKI 43 was chosen for further analysis. RU-SKI 43 was shown to be a
specific inhibitor of Shh palmitoylation. It does not affect
palmitoylation of H-Ras or Fyn, nor does it alter myristoylation of
c-Src. Importantly, in the cell-based models of pancreatic cancer,
treatment with RU-SKI 43 resulted in a strong decrease in AsPC-1 cell
growth (75%), and in Panc1-driven paracrine Shh signaling (80%). A second
generation of Hhat inhibitors has been designed based on the structure of
RU-SKI 43. One of these compounds, RU-SKI 101, has an IC50 of 156 nM for
Hhat inhibition in vitro and is currently being tested as an anti-cancer
agent.

