Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Further characterization of the human myoma tissue organotypic
invasion assay


Background: The tumor microenvironment (TME) promotes cancer growth,
invasion and spread. Our human tissue (uterus leiomyoma) derived
three-dimensional organotypic model (Nurmenniemi et al. Am J Pathol,
2009), approximates the natural TME and was developed for invasion
studies. Here, the aim was to further characterize and modulate our model
in order to better understanding the role of TME in cancer invasion.
Methods: Intact or extensively rinsed (14 days) myoma discs were used for
analyzing the invasion depth of mobile tongue carcinoma (HSC-3) cells and
the degradation of type III collagen (IIICTP). Both broad spectrum
(GM6001 and E64) and more specific protease inhibitors (peptide G for
MT1-MMP and CTT2 for gelatinases) were added into the culture media.
Invasion depth of HSC-3 cells, co-cultured either with (a) phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-differentiated leukemic THP-1 macrophages
(PMAM); (b) with PMA, lipo-poly-saccharine (LPS) and interferon gamma
(IFN-) differentiated pro-inflammatory macrophages (M1); or with (c) PMA,
interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13 differentiated pro-tumorigenic macrophages
(M2); were analyzed. In a set of experiments, HSC-3 cells were
co-cultured with normal gingival fibroblasts (GF), or with human bone
marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). In addition, soluble myoma
tissue rinsing samples or myoma tissue species were analyzed with gel
electrophoresis, immunohistology and Western blot analyses. Results: We
found that HSC-3 cells invaded twice as deep, but degraded six times less
type III collagen when cultured on top of intact compared to rinsed myoma
discs. Peptide G, GM6001 and E64 significantly inhibited (pBackground:
The tumor microenvironment (TME) promotes cancer growth, invasion and
spread. Our human tissue (uterus leiomyoma) derived three-dimensional
organotypic model (Nurmenniemi et al. Am J Pathol, 2009), approximates
the natural TME and was developed for invasion studies. Here, the aim was
to further characterize and modulate our model in order to better
understanding the role of TME in cancer invasion. Methods: Intact or
extensively rinsed (14 days) myoma discs were used for analyzing the
invasion depth of mobile tongue carcinoma (HSC-3) cells and the
degradation of type III collagen (IIICTP). Both broad spectrum (GM6001
and E64) and more specific protease inhibitors (peptide G for MT1-MMP and
CTT2 for gelatinases) were added into the culture media. Invasion depth
of HSC-3 cells, co-cultured either with (a) phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA)-differentiated leukemic THP-1 macrophages (PMAM); (b)
with PMA, lipo-poly-saccharine (LPS) and interferon gamma (IFN-)
differentiated pro-inflammatory macrophages (M1); or with (c) PMA,
interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13 differentiated pro-tumorigenic macrophages
(M2); were analyzed. In a set of experiments, HSC-3 cells were
co-cultured with normal gingival fibroblasts (GF), or with human bone
marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). In addition, soluble myoma
tissue rinsing samples or myoma tissue species were analyzed with gel
electrophoresis, immunohistology and Western blot analyses. Results: We
found that HSC-3 cells invaded twice as deep, but degraded six times less
type III collagen when cultured on top of intact compared to rinsed myoma
discs. Peptide G, GM6001 and E64 significantly inhibited (p<0.005), but
CTT2 slightly induced HSC-3 invasion. In intact myoma, PMAM and MSC cells
promoted HSC-3 cells invasion (p=0.002). M1 macrophage cells reduced
(p=0.034), but M2 induced the HSC-3 invasion (p= 0.002). Intact myoma
tissue contained invasion-inducting and anti-apoptotic matrix
metalloproteinase-11 (MMP-11), and hypoxia- related factor lysyl oxidase
(LOX). Both MMP-11 and LOX could be removed from the myoma with rinsing.
Conclusions: Intact myoma tissue in vitro provides a rigid, hypoxic,
antiapoptotic highway for effective invasion and mimics well the
multicellular cancer environment in vivo. Collective or chain-type
migration of carcinoma cells in myoma can be modulated by
anti-proteolytic compounds, as well as co-culturing with mesenchymal or
inflammatory cells. In intact myoma, proteolytic degradation of collagen
matrix by invading cancer cells is not as crucial as in rinsed discs:
rinsed myoma is deprived of invasion inductive TME factors. In
conclusion, we highly recommend the use of the human myoma organotypic
assay for the cancer invasion studies. It also has potential to be used
for the identification and screening of anti-invasion cancer drugs.

