Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the gene expression network that underlies
cancer cell-platelet interactions and cancer progression


Understanding how cancer cells outgrow and escape from the primary site
is important for development of novel therapeutic scheme. Our recent
results from microarray-based gene expression profiling analysis
demonstrate differential expression of a cohort of genes (220) in the
circulating tumor cells, many of which play a role in haemostasis and
thrombosis. To screen for putative transcription factors that might
contribute to the metastasis-associated gene expression alterations (and
possibly the upregulation of haemostatis-associated genes), we first
undertook bioinformatics approach by analyzing differentially expressed
genes using GeneGo. From the list of potential transcription factors that
are identified from the bioinformatics approach, we selected two TFs
(CREB and Sp1) for further studies. Consistent with the upregulation of
selected genes, ChIP analyses demonstrated promoter occupancy by these
two TFs, and further a greater degree of binding in the
circulating/metastatic tumor cells. These results suggest their link to
the transcriptional induction of the target genes in these cells.
Interestingly, we also discovered that the levels of c-fos and Ser15
phosphorylation on p53 underwent an increase in these cells. To dissect
the signaling pathways that may underlie the observed transcriptomic
alteration, we again applied gene ontology analysis to pinpoint possible
signaling networks. Such profiling demonstrated an elevation of the
TGF2/BMP pathway and a downregulation of EGFR/ErbB signaling in
circulating cells compared with the parental line, possibly suggesting a
role of the corresponding pathways in the transcriptomic as well
phenotypic changes in the metastatic cells. In addition, changes in the
expression of several signaling cascade intermediates - Akt, Erk, JNK -
were also evident based on immunoblotting results. Our preliminary
results have revealed the potential involvement of several transcription
factors and signaling pathways in our metastasis experimental model.
Discussion of their implications and future work is also included.

