Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver is a major primary target for the Toll-like receptor-5
agonist CBLB502 providing radioprotective, antimicrobial and antitumor
responses


We have previously shown that activation of Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5)
by bacterial flagellin and by pharmacologically optimized flagellin
derivative CBLB502 protects mice and monkeys from lethal radiation injury
to the hematopoietic and gastrointestinal systems. Here, we report that
the liver is a major primary CBLB502 target organ in mice, with
hepatocytes specifically showing rapid and strong NF-kB and STAT3
activation. Livers from CBLB502-treated mice showed up-regulation of
numerous downstream genes encoding intracellular and secreted proteins
with anti-apoptotic, anti-microbial and immunomodulatory activities.
Unlike the TLR4 agonist LPS, the liver response to TLR5 agonists appears
to be direct and does not involve high levels of proinflammatory
cytokines. Thus, while LPS is toxic, TLR5 agonists have strong clinical
potential. The importance of liver for CBLB502 radioprotective activity
was confirmed by temporary occlusion of liver blood circulation which
completely abrogated the protective effect of CBLB502 on hematopoietic
precursor cells in irradiated mice. CBLB502 also protected liver tissue
itself, increasing mouse resistance to lethal Salmonella tiphymurium
liver infection and to hepatotoxic Fas agonistic antibodies. By testing
CBLB502 in combination with radiation treatment of experimental mouse
tumors in vivo, we demonstrated that its tissue protection properties are
limited to normal tissues with no tumor protection detected in any of
numerous mouse tumor models. Moreover, direct antitumor effects of
CBLB502 treatment was observed in several tumor models. Comparison of the
effect of CBLB502 on in vivo growth of isogenic pairs of tumor cell lines
differing in their TLR5 status showed that the antitumor effect of the
TLR5 agonist is TLR5 dependent and is associated with tumor infiltration
by immunocytes, presumably attracted following activation of TLR5
signaling in the tumor cells. Remarkably, CBLB502 caused an
immunotherapeutic effect in TLR5-negative tumors (CT26 colon
adenocarcinoma and A20 lymphoma) growing as experimental liver
metastases. Based on these results, we project clinical applications of
CBLB502 as an anticancer immunotherapeutic drug against liver metastases
independently on TLR5 status and TLR5-expressing tumors in other
locations as well as supporting care drug to reduce adverse
hepatotoxicity from radiation and chemotherapy.

