Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting constitutive NF-kB activation through Bruton's tyrosine
kinase (Btk) and the proteasome in mantle cell lymphoma


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL) with poor prognoses; novel agents are needed for its therapy.
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) has been identified as an essential kinase
for B-cell survival and it is activated through the B-cell receptor (BCR)
pathway. Btk has recently emerged as a promising target in MCL, as
demonstrated by recent clinical trials on the Btk inhibitor PCI-32765
(Pharmacyclics, Sunnyvale, CA), suggesting that elucidating critical
signaling pathways emanating through Btk will hold an important key to
deciphering the pathogenesis of MCL that can lead to the development of
more effective targeted therapies. In this study, we showed that Btk is
constitutively phosphorylated in most MCL cell lines except Rec1 and DB
SP53 and is variable among primary cells from patients. We demonstrated
that knockdown of Btk by siRNA diminished Btk expression, reduced
constitutive NF-kB activation by luciferase assays, leading to the cell
growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in MCL cell lines. MCL cells
treated with the Btk inhibitor PCI-32765 effectively inhibits Btk
activity, leading to reduced MCL cell growth with IC50 values range from
2-6 uM in Mino, Jeko1, Z138 and JMP1. Interestingly, the IC50 value in DB
SP53, which lacks both phosphorylated Btk and membrane immunoglobulins,
is 35 uM, suggesting that BCR signaling is not active in these cell
lines. PCI-32765 also induced caspase-dependent apoptosis in a dose- and
time-dependent manner in representative MCL cell lines and in patient
primary cells. We further demonstrated that PCI-32765 down-regulates
NF-kB activity through both, the canonical and alternative NF-kB
pathways. Since previous studies have indicated synergy between
proteasome inhibitors and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, we evaluated
whether there is synergism between PCI-32765 and the next generation
proteasome inhibitor Carfilzomib (Onyx Pharmaceuticals, South San
Francisco, CA). Our data suggest potential synergy between Carfilzomib
and PCI-32765 in represented MCL cell lines in terms of inhibiting cell
growth and induction of apoptosis. Both compounds also synergize to
inhibit NF-kB activation in MCL cells. In summary, our data suggest that
Btk is a key survival kinase in MCL and strategic targeting of
growth/survival Btk-mediated NF-kB pathways with novel therapeutic agents
such as PCI-32765 should provide a novel therapy regimen for MCL
patients. Combining PCI-32765 with the proteasome inhibitor Carfilzomib
can synergize its effect in MCL and may be a useful therapeutic strategy,
particularly for patients with relapsed/refractory MCL.

