Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune correlates of survival in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma
patients treated with glypican-3-derived peptide vaccine: Results from
phase I trial


Introduction: Glypican-3 (GPC3), a carcinoembryonic antigen, is an ideal
target of anticancer immunotherapy against hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), because it is overexpressed specifically in HCC and correlates to
a poor prognosis. In a preclinical study using a mouse model, we
identified HLA-A24:02-restricted GPC3298-306 (EYILSLEEL) and
HLA-A02:01-restricted GPC3144-152 (FVGEFFTDV) peptides, both of which can
induce GPC3-reactive cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs) without inducing
autoimmunity. On the basis of these results, we conducted a clinical
trial of GPC3-derived peptide vaccine for advanced HCC patients to
evaluate the vaccine's safety, tolerability, and immunological and
clinical responses. Methods: Thirty-three advanced HCC patients were
enrolled in this non-randomized, open-label, dose escalation phase I
trial. GPC3-derived peptide was administered in a liquid form emulsified
with incomplete Freund's adjuvant, and intradermally injected on days 1,
15, and 29. PBMCs, obtained from all patients before and after
vaccination, were examined by ex vivo IFN- enzyme-linked immunospot
(ELISPOT) assay. The primary endpoint was the safety of GPC3 peptide
vaccination. The secondary endpoints were immune response, as measured by
ex vivo IFN- ELISPOT assay, and clinical outcomes, as measured by tumor
response, time to tumor progression, and overall survival (OS). Results:
GPC3 vaccination was well-tolerated. One patient showed a partial
response, and 18 patients showed stable disease 2 months after initiation
of treatment. Four patients, of which 18 had stable disease, had tumor
regression or necrosis not meeting the criteria for partial response. The
median time to tumor progression was 3.4 months (95% CI, 2.1 to 4.6). The
median OS was 9.0 months (95% CI, 8.0 to 10.0). Tumor biopsy was
performed with adequate informed consent in 7 patients for the evaluation
of the therapeutic effect after vaccination. In 5 out of 7 cases,
infiltration of CD8-positive T cells into the tumor was increased after
vaccination. GPC3 peptide vaccine could induce the GPC3-specific CTL
response in 30 of 33 patients by ex vivo IFN- ELISPOT assay, and the
GPC3-specific CTL frequency after vaccination correlated with overall
survival. The analysis of all 33 patients showed that the median OS was
12.2 months (95% CI, 6.5 to 18.0) in patients with high frequency of
GPC3-specfic CTL, compared with 8.5 months (95% CI, 3.7 to 13.1) in those
with low frequency of GPC3-specfic CTL (p = 0.033). Conclusions:
GPC3-derived peptide vaccination was well-tolerated, and measurable
immune responses and antitumor efficacy were noted. Furthermore, this
study shows that peptide-specific CTL frequency can be a predictive
marker for overall survival in HCC patients receiving peptide vaccination.

