Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular analysis of pheochromocytoma after maternal transmission
of SDHD mutation elucidates mechanism of parent-of-origin effect.


In SDHD mutation families, paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas usually
occur only after paternal transmission of the mutation. This important
but unexplained parent-of-origin effect is not due to imprinting of SDHD
itself, as was initially suspected, since SDHD is biallelically expressed
in several tissues. In clinically affected individuals who possess a
paternally inherited SDHD mutation, there is loss of the entire maternal
chromosome 11 in tumour DNA, implying that tumorigenesis requires loss of
not only maternal (wild type) SDHD but also a further, imprinted, tumor
suppressor gene (TSG). We report the second case of an SDHD-related tumor
(a pheochromocytoma in a 33 year old woman possessing the common
pathogenic mutation, p.Pro81Leu) occurring after maternal transmission.
It is the first reported investigation of tumor DNA in this situation.
Tumor DNA revealed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at paternal 11q23 causing
loss of the wild-type SDHD allele and also LOH affecting maternal 11p15,
including H19. These two LOH regions were separated by a region
exhibiting clearly retained heterozygosity, containing SDHAF2 (a recently
reported paraganglioma TSG), which therefore appears uninvolved here.
This case provides strong molecular evidence that the tumorigenic
requirement for maternal 11p15 loss (in addition to inactivation of both
SDHD alleles) drives the observed parent-of-origin effect. Thus,
SDHD-related tumorigenesis most likely involves a three-hit mechanism
that includes (as one of the hits) loss of an imprinted (paternally
silenced and maternally active) TSG from chromosome 11, such as H19).
Tumor formation more commonly results from paternal inheritance of SDHD
mutations, as the necessary loss of both the wild type SDHD allele and
maternal 11p15 can then occur by a single event (loss of maternal
chromosome 11). These findings have important implications regarding the
clinical management of carriers of maternally inherited SDHD mutations,
who we confirm can develop pheochromocytomas, and the understanding of
the parent-of-origin effect.

