Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF beta-mediated epithelial to mesenchymal transition in non
small cell lung cancer: effects on stemness, invasiveness and
chemotherapy sensitivity


The developmental program of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
can be activated in tumor cells and is implicated in the metastatic
spread of tumor cells. EMT leads to loss of cell adhesion and increased
motility of cells and can be detected by down regulation of epithelial
makers such as E-cadherin and gain of mesenchymal ones such as vimentin
and fibronectin. Interestingly, EMT has also been implicated in enhancing
stemness properties of tumor cells and in causing chemotherapy
resistance. The aim of this study is to examine the invasive, stem-ness
and chemotherapy sensitive properties of mesenchymal and epithelial
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. In particular we use a TGF
beta-inducible EMT model of A549 cells. A pannel of NSCLC cell lines,
A549, H460, H322, SW1573, H1650 and H1299 were explored for epithelial
(EpCAM. E-cadherin) and mesenhymal markers (N- cadherin, Vimentin and
Fibronectin). Only A549 cells exhibit epithelial characteristics while
remaning cell lines were either mesenchymal in nature or weekly
expressing epithelial markers. Treatment of A549 cells with TGFbeta
induced EMT as confirmed by loss of epithelial and gain of mesenchymal
markers by FACS and WB analysis. This process was independent of Src
since knockdown of Src did not effect EMT activation. Other kinases are
currently evaluated for mediating EMT in this model. A549 mesenchymal
cells (M) cells were somewhat more resistant to cisplatin and paclitaxel
compared to parental A549 cells, whereas no marked difference in the
response to proapoptotic TRAIL was found. Furthermore, using wound
healing assays A549M cells showed higher rates of migration. Possible
effects of EMT on stem cell properties in A549 cells were studied next.
A549M cells displayed enhanced spheroid formation potential when cultured
in serum free Neurobasal media (NBM) that was associated with an increase
in Sox-2 expression. To further explore stemness of A549(M) cells,
currently the expression of stem cell markers such as CD133, CD24, CD44
is examined. In conclusion, our results thus far suggest that in A549
NSCLC cells, induction of EMT by TGF beta results in chemoresistance,
higher migratory potential and increased stem cell properties. The
in-vitro results observed will be extended by in-vivo assays. For this
purpose we are establishing orthotopic NSCLC mice models.

