Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulator of G-protein signaling 2 blunts cellular viability
mediated by a stabilized lysophosphatidic acid analogue (2S-OMPT) in the
presence of chemotherapy in an ovarian cancer cell model of
chemoresistance


Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) enhances growth, survival, viability and
proliferation in numerous models. Thus, the receptors for LPA are also
implicated in oncogenic signaling and represent a group of druggable
therapeutic targets in cancer. Regulator of G protein Signaling 2 (RGS2)
is a GTPase activating protein (GAP) that deactivates the G alpha
subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins, turning off G protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) signaling. In our previous studies examining
computational bioinformatics, we demonstrated that reduced RGS gene
expression develops with the occurrence of drug resistance in ovarian
cancer cell lines. The purpose of our study was to investigate whether
the LPA receptors are also involved in mediating viability as a result of
enhanced GPCR signaling due to reduced RGS proteins in this
chemoresistance model. This is important since RGS proteins can
deactivate G alpha subunits of many different GPCRs, and are not specific
to merely the LPA receptors. If a druggable GPCR is mediating viability
in chemoresistance, it is critical to identify which ones are
responsible. To test this idea we used the metabolically stabilized LPA
analogue L-sn-1-O-oleoyl-2-O-methylglyceryl-3-phosphothionate (2S-OMPT)
as a potent non-hydrolyzable agonist for LPA receptors at a concentration
(10 M) sufficient to activate multiple LPA receptors. We hypothesized
that if LPA signaling was not involved, then OMPT would override any
contribution of RGS2 on modulating the viability response in the presence
of chemotherapy. Using a tet-off promoter system, we generated an
inducible stable model of RGS2-expressing HeyA8-MDR cells, which we have
previously confirmed are resistant to taxanes. After 48 h OMPT
pre-treatment, HeyA8-MDR-RGS2-inducible cells were exposed to cisplatin
for 24 h and evaluated for viability. IC50 values for cisplatin were
lower in the RGS2-induced HeyA8-MDR cells that were not pretreated with
OMPT, a demonstration of enhanced sensitivity to cisplatin in the
presence of RGS2. All conditions pre-treated with OMPT demonstrated
enhanced viability even in the presence of chemotherapy; however, ovarian
cancer cells that were pretreated with OMPT and cultured in tet-free
medium to induce RGS2 expression showed a significant blunting of
viability. This supports the interaction between LPA receptors and RGS2
in the control of drug sensitivity in ovarian cancer chemoresistance and
provides a mechanism for our current and previous observations.

