Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of epithelial and stromal cell networks in prostate
cancer by gene expression profiles


Recent studies have highlighted tumor microenvironment as important in
carcinogenesis and progression. Especially in prostate cancer (PC), it
has been suggested that tumor microenvironment plays an important role in
progression, acquisition of androgen independence, and distant
metastasis. However, little is known about the genetic basis of human PC
microenvironment. The prognosis of PC is related to invasion and
metastasis. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has gained
considerable attention as a conceptual paradigm to explain invasive and
metastatic behavior during cancer progression. EMT is a normal
physiologic process by which cells of epithelial origin convert into
cells with mesenchymal characteristics. It has been proposed that EMT is
induced by cancer cells during metastatic dissemination from a primary
organ to secondary sites, but how EMT occurs during PC invasion and
metastasis remains uncertain. To clarify the mechanism of PC progression
and metastasis, we investigated cross-interaction of PC epithelial cells
and stromal cells by analyzing genome-wide gene expression profiles. We
hypothesized that PC cells could affect on stromal cells to change their
characteristics into so-called cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
which might contribute to cancer invasion and metastasis. Likewise, CAFs
could affect on surrounding normal epithelial cells to change their
characteristics into PC cells. We first analyzed three of genome-wide
gene expression profiles; normal human prostate stromal cells (PrSC)
co-cultured with human prostate cancer cells (LNCaP), LNCaP co-cultured
with PrSC, and human prostate epithelial cells (PrEC) co-cultured with
cancer-associated PrSC which is PrSC previously co-cultured with LNCaP.
Before microarray analysis, we confirmed the overexpression of
alpha-smooth muscle actin in PrSC co-cultured with LNCaP, which means the
transition from normal stromal cells to CAFs. We then analyzed networks
among PC cells, stromal cells, and surrounding normal epithelial cells by
analyzing gene expression profiles and validated our data using real-time
PCR, immunohistochemistry, and bioinformatics. These data provide clues
to the molecular mechanisms underlying PC invasion and metastasis, and
suggest candidate genes the products of which might serve as molecular
targets for the treatment of PC.

