Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocarcinogenesis induced by transgenic expression of hepatitis
B virus in mice


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer death
worldwide and chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the most
important risk factor of HCC. However, it remains unclear whether HBV
plays any direct role in carcinogenesis. We have established two
independent transgenic mouse lines expressing a mutant HBV (preS2 mutant)
that is found at a significant higher frequency in people with HCC than
those without. These mice do not show any evidence of chronic liver
injury, but by 2 years of age a majority of the male mice developed
hepatocellular neoplasms, including HCC. We also found a significant
increase in hepatocarcinogenesis independent of inflammation in a
transgenic mouse line expressing wildtype HBV. The significant increase
of HCC incidence in all three HBV transgenic lines argues that HBV
contributes directly to the development of HCC in the absence of chronic
inflammation. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced unfolded protein
response activation and -catenin truncation/mutation were found in the
HCC samples, which may contribute to the hepatocacinogenesis. To screen
other candidate genes critical in the HCC development, we performed mouse
whole genome microarray analysis and identified a group of genes whose
expression levels increased in the livers of the HBV transgenic mice and
often further increased in HCC compared to that of the non-transgenic
littermates. Using quantitative RT-PCR, we confirmed the expression
pattern in 8 out of 10 selected genes that are known to involve in the
control of cell survival/proliferation, mobility and intercellular
signaling. Among the eight genes, Fabp5 encodes a retinoic acid-binding
protein that is known to be overexpressed in various types of human
tumors, including HCC, and is implicated in tumor cell survival and
proliferation. We also found that Fabp5 is highly expressed in HCC cell
lines and in the HCC of our HBV transgenic mice by Western Blot.
Immunohistochemistry/immunofluorescence staining confirmed that
hepatocytes in HCC overexpress Fabp5. More importantly, Fabp5 expression
is significantly elevated in the liver of 4-month old HBV transgenic mice
long before HCC development. Therefore our findings suggest that HBV
expression may disrupt regulation of proteins important for cell survival
and proliferation and contribute directly to hepatocarcinogenesis.

