Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblasts mediate extracellular matrix
remodeling and three-dimensional invasion of scirrhous gastric carcinoma
cells


Scirrhous gastric carcinoma (SGC; also called diffusely infiltrative
carcinoma, Borrmann's type-IV carcinoma, or the linitis plastica-type
carcinoma) have the worst prognosis among various types of gastric
cancer, owing to highly progressive invasion, frequent metastasis to
lymph nodes, and high incidence of peritoneal dissemination. SGC cells
rapidly and diffusively infiltrate through the submucosa without forming
obvious tumor mass and induce extensive stromal fibrosis, resulting in
thickening and stiffening of the gastric wall. Because histophathological
analyses have shown that massive proliferation of stromal fibroblasts
occur within lesions of SGC, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have
been proposed to support the progression of SGC. However, biological and
molecular basis of the interaction between SGC cells and CAFs remains
largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the roles of CAFs in
invasion and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by SGC cells. When
44As3 SGC cells were co-cultured with CaF37 SGC-derived fibroblasts on 3D
Matrigel, they formed large cell aggregates that invade into the
Matrigel. Other SGC cell lines, HSC59 and HSC44PE, but not differentiated
non-SGC gastric caner cell lines, MKN7, MKN1, and MKN74, formed invasive
cell aggregate with CaF37 cells. Time-lapse imaging of SGC and CaF37
cells, and of fluorescent microsphere embedded in the Matrigel revealed
that this process is associated with extensive contraction and remodeling
of ECM. In order to further characterize the ECM remodeling activity of
CAFs, we cultured 44As3 and CaF37 cells on fluorescent gelatin-coated
coverslips. CaF37 cells caused disruption of the gelatin matrix and this
activity was further promoted by co-culturing them with 44As3 cells.
Immunoblotting and immnofluorescence analyses revealed that
phosphorylation of myosin light chain was significantly increased in
CaF37 cells co-cultured with 44As3 cells. Finally, a myosin II inhibitor
blebbistatin blocked the three-dimensional invasion and ECM remodeling by
44As3 and CaF37 cells. These results indicate that SGC cells promote
actomyosin-mediated contractility of stromal fibroblasts to remodel ECM
during invasion.

