Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of (+)-discodermolide-Taxol hybrids with microtubules


Taxol and discodermolide are both microtubule stabilizing agents that
bind to the -tubulin subunit of microtubules. Based on our results that
the hydrophobic binding pocket of -tubulin is occupied by the Taxol side
chain but not by (+)-discodermolide, and that the two drugs act
synergistically in cancer cell lines, a small library of
(+)-discodermolide-Taxol hybrids was synthesized (J. Med. Chem. 54:6319,
2011). Cytotoxicity assays demonstrated a 2-9-fold increase in
antiproliferative activity by the hybrids compared to discodermolide in
the human cancer cell lines, A549 and MCF-7. Hybrids containing a tether
of 3 carbons that connect discodermolide with the Taxol side chain,
exhibited the best activity. Tubulin assembly assays were performed with
the two most potent hybrid molecules. Like discodermolide, these two
hybrids increased tubulin assembly rapidly without a lag period. Tubulin
polymerization studies using purified bovine brain tubulin demonstrated
that they also had the greatest effect on the formation of polymerized
microtubules. These results also were observed in intact A549 cells and
in 100,000 x g supernatants prepared from these cells. We have previously
shown that [3H]2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol photolabels a peptide containing
amino acid residues 217-231 of -tubulin. A 5-fold molar excess of
unlabeled compound inhibited the photolabeling of purified bovine brain
tubulin by 94%, demonstrating the specificity of this photolabeling.
Microtubule stabilizing agents (MSAs), such as Taxol, epothilone B,
discodermolide and ixabepilone, each at a 5-fold molar excess, inhibited
the photolabeling by 24%, 92%, 100% and 41%, respectively, indicating
that discodermolide is the most potent inhibitor of the photolabeling. In
contrast, two other MSAs, laulimalide and peloruside that are known to
bind to a different site in -tubulin, exhibited stimulatory effects on
the photolabeling. Both drugs, at a 5-fold molar excess, increased the
labeling by 30-40%. [3H]2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol (0.5 - 20 M) was used to
study the kinetics of the inhibitory effects of the hybrid molecules on
photoaffinity labeling of tubulin. Discodermolide-Taxol hybrids inhibited
the photolabeling of bovine brain tubulin in a dose dependent manner. The
concentrations that inhibited by 50% were lowest for the two most potent
hybrid molecules. Therefore, the tubulin polymerization activity and the
binding affinity of the hybrids to -tubulin correlated with their
antiproliferative activity. Other biological properties of the
discodermolide-Taxol hybrids including senescence and antitumor activity
are being evaluated.

