Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The emerging role of thioredoxin-1 on ROS and metabolic
reprogramming in cisplatin resistant lung cancer


Cisplatin resistance remains a major problem in treating lung cancer. We
have discovered that all cisplatin resistant (CR) cells, regardless of
their signaling mechanism, possess decreased levels of thioredoxin-1
(TRX1) in vitro and in vivo resulting in higher basal levels of ROS
(Reactive Oxygen Species) accumulation. Although decreased TRX1
contributes to higher ROS levels in CR cells, we have found that these CR
cells also possess elevate number and active mitochondria as evidence by
increased oxygen consumption (4x higher than parental cells) and more
intense mitochondria specific fluorescence (mitoTracker) as well as
significantly higher mitochondrial membrane potential. These factors
could also contribute to higher ROS production. Higher mitochondria
activity and ROS also suggest that CR cells may rely more on oxidative
metabolism (OXMET). We validated the involvement of specific OXMET
components as well as the impact of TRX1 on CR cell metabolism. We
examined key proteins in the TCA cycle in SCLC1 (parental), SR2
(resistance counterpart), and TRX1 over-expressing SR2 cells (SR2TRX+).
We found that citrate synthetase, the first rate determining enzyme in
the TCA cycle, is not changed but ATP-citrate lyase levels exhibit a
3fold increase. Fumarase (FH) which participates in the maintenance of
succinate and fumarate equilibrium is increased in SR2 (1.8fold), but
attenuates in TRX1 transfected cells, SR2TRX+. This finding implies that
SR2 produces more fumarate, a known by-product from urea cycle. We then
evaluated argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) and argininosuccinate lyase
(ASL), the two key enzymes in urea cycle which generate arginine. While
ASL shows no changes, ASS mRNA is 30fold higher in SR2 compares to SCLC1.
These results indicate that SCLC1 require an exogenous arginine supply
for their growth while SR2 do not. Indeed, we found that SCLC1 could not
withstand arginine free media supplement with citrulline (only 30% of
cells survive after 48h). In contrast, SR2 which expressed ASS can
survive in arginine free media with 80% of cells still viable at 48h.
Importantly, over-expression of TRX1 suppresses ASS in SR2 which in turn
sensitizes them to arginine deprivation. It is also known that HIF1
negatively regulates ASS and TRX1 is known to increase HIF1. Thus lower
TRX1 found in CR cells most likely increase ASS via decreased HIF1
expression. Here, we found that HIF1 is less in SR2 which may also
contribute to decreased glycolysis. To consider this possibility, we
assay lactate production and found lower amount of lactic acid in media
from CR cells (0.013 vs. 0.009 nM/well/cell, SCLC1 vs. SR2; p=Cisplatin
resistance remains a major problem in treating lung cancer. We have
discovered that all cisplatin resistant (CR) cells, regardless of their
signaling mechanism, possess decreased levels of thioredoxin-1 (TRX1) in
vitro and in vivo resulting in higher basal levels of ROS (Reactive
Oxygen Species) accumulation. Although decreased TRX1 contributes to
higher ROS levels in CR cells, we have found that these CR cells also
possess elevate number and active mitochondria as evidence by increased
oxygen consumption (4x higher than parental cells) and more intense
mitochondria specific fluorescence (mitoTracker) as well as significantly
higher mitochondrial membrane potential. These factors could also
contribute to higher ROS production. Higher mitochondria activity and ROS
also suggest that CR cells may rely more on oxidative metabolism (OXMET).
We validated the involvement of specific OXMET components as well as the
impact of TRX1 on CR cell metabolism. We examined key proteins in the TCA
cycle in SCLC1 (parental), SR2 (resistance counterpart), and TRX1
over-expressing SR2 cells (SR2TRX+). We found that citrate synthetase,
the first rate determining enzyme in the TCA cycle, is not changed but
ATP-citrate lyase levels exhibit a 3fold increase. Fumarase (FH) which
participates in the maintenance of succinate and fumarate equilibrium is
increased in SR2 (1.8fold), but attenuates in TRX1 transfected cells,
SR2TRX+. This finding implies that SR2 produces more fumarate, a known
by-product from urea cycle. We then evaluated argininosuccinate
synthetase (ASS) and argininosuccinate lyase (ASL), the two key enzymes
in urea cycle which generate arginine. While ASL shows no changes, ASS
mRNA is 30fold higher in SR2 compares to SCLC1. These results indicate
that SCLC1 require an exogenous arginine supply for their growth while
SR2 do not. Indeed, we found that SCLC1 could not withstand arginine free
media supplement with citrulline (only 30% of cells survive after 48h).
In contrast, SR2 which expressed ASS can survive in arginine free media
with 80% of cells still viable at 48h. Importantly, over-expression of
TRX1 suppresses ASS in SR2 which in turn sensitizes them to arginine
deprivation. It is also known that HIF1 negatively regulates ASS and TRX1
is known to increase HIF1. Thus lower TRX1 found in CR cells most likely
increase ASS via decreased HIF1 expression. Here, we found that HIF1 is
less in SR2 which may also contribute to decreased glycolysis. To
consider this possibility, we assay lactate production and found lower
amount of lactic acid in media from CR cells (0.013 vs. 0.009
nM/well/cell, SCLC1 vs. SR2; p=<0.05). Overall, our findings suggest that
alteration in tumor metabolism in CR cells is most likely mediated by
TRX1 through ROS. These findings may have future clinical application in
treating CR patients using agents which generate ROS or target
mitochondria.

