Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Internalization of the dual-specific immunotoxin
D2C7-(scdsFv)-PE38KDEL in malignant glioma cell lines


Aim: The aim of this study is firstly to examine if the D2C7-immunotoxin
(D2C7-IT) specifically binds to the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFRwt) and the EGFR-mutant EGFRvIII subsequently inducing cell death.
Secondly, to study the internalization of D2C7-IT after binding to
EGFRwt/EGFRvIII. Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a malignant
primary brain tumor and from diagnose median survival remains around 15
months. Tumor burden can be decreased by operation but eventually the
tumor recurs. Thus, novel treatment-strategies for GBM patients are in
great demand that would result prolonged median survival and increased
quality of life. While EGFRwt and EGFRvIII are not found in normal brain
tissue, expression of these are observed in malignant tissue of GBM, and
consequently the D2C7-IT has been designed to target both EGFRwt and
EGFRvIII. D2C7-IT comprises single chain disulphide stabilized fragment
variables (scdsFv) of the bivalent anti-EGFR/EGFRvIII antibody D2C7, a 38
kDa fragment of the pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE38), and finally a
C-terminal endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) retention motif: KDEL. In theory,
the D2C7-IT is internalized after binding to EGFR/EGFRvIII and the PE38
moiety is proteolytically cleaved in the endosomal compartment, which
releases the C-terminal toxic part of the PE38 into the cytosol. In the
cytosol, binding of the KDEL-receptor assures transport to the ER where
the toxic moiety inhibits protein synthesis and causes cell death.
Methods: Western blotting was applied for examining D2C7-IT-binding to
EGFRwt and EGFRvIII in different human malignant cell lines expressing
varying levels of EGFRwt or EGFRvIII. MTT assays were used for assessing
the impact of D2C7-IT on cell viability in these cell lines. Results: We
observed that D2C7-IT binds to cells expressing EGFRwt or EGFRvIII. In
addition, the binding on these cells could be inhibited by co-incubating
with either EGF or the D2C7 antibody in surplus. Furthermore, D2C7-IT
induced a moderate Tyr1173 phosphorylation (marker for internalization)
on EGFRwt expressing cells. Concordantly, EGF induced a high level of
EGFR-Tyr1173 phosphorylation on EGFRwt expressing cells, which was
reduced to a moderate level when co-incubating with D2C7-IT in surplus.
D2C7-IT reduced viability in cell cultures expressing EGFR or EGFRvIII
while D2C7-IT had no effect on EGFRwt/EGFRvIII negative cells. We are
currently trying to visualize the subcellular localizations of D2C7-IT
after internalization by fluorescent microscopy. Conclusion: These
preliminary results show that D2C7-IT specifically binds to EGFR and
EGFRvIII, and reduces viability of EGFRwt/EGFRvIII expressing cells in
vitro.

