Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB7 functions as a co-activator of estrogen receptor in the
development of tamoxifen resistance


Multiple factors including long term treatment with tamoxifen are
involved in the development of selective estrogen receptor modulator
(SERM)-resistance in ER positive breast cancer. Increased expression of
HER family members can also directly alter cellular responses to
tamoxifen, but the mechanism underlying the increased expression of the
HERs is not clear. In this report we show that HOXB7 interacts with ER,
and together they bind to the promoter or enhancer regions of
ER-regulated genes to enhance their transcription activity. We found a
number of novel HOXB7 binding sites at promoter regions, intron regions
and adjacent to ER-binding sites in ER-regulated genes through HOXB7 ChIP
on chiP using an Affymetrix promoter array. Potentially, HOXB7 and ER may
co-regulate about 84% of ER-target genes. HOXB7 overexpression renders
MCF-7 cells resistant to tamoxifen. Overexpression of HOXB7 results in
upregulation of HER2 and ER target genes while knockdown of HOXB7 with
siRNA in tamoxifen-resistant cell lines causes decrease of HER2 and ER
target genes expression and loss of tamoxifen resistance. Our data shows
that to mediate upregulation of HER2 and ER-target genes occurring in
tamoxifen resistance, the HOXB7-ER complex recruits ER coactivators and
promotes HER2- and ER-target genes transcriptional activity through
direct binding to the HER2 enhancer and regulatory regions of ER target
genes. However, depletion of HOXB7 negatively affects the binding
affinity of its cofactors to the HER2 enhancer element and ER-binding
sites. Also, we found that miR196a might control HOXB7 expression;
reducing miR196a levels in tamoxifen-resistant cells causes an increase
of HOXB7 expression. Further, miRNA 196a is regulated by c-MYC which
undergoes stabilization through the EGFR-HER2 signaling pathway. These
findings implicate overexpression of HOXB7 as a key event in the
initiation and maintenance of tamoxifen resistance. These studies suggest
that HOXB7 acts as a key regulator orchestrating two major groups of
target molecules, ER and HER2, in the oncogene hierarchy. Therefore, we
have provided additional evidence that supports the thesis that
functional antagonism of HOXB7 has the potential to circumvent tamoxifen
resistance.

