Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of a long non-coding RNA in oncogenesis of Ewing sarcoma


BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is the second most
common primary malignant bone tumor in children and adolescents. It is a
highly invasive disease with a 30% 5-year survival rate for patients with
metastatic disease. EFT are defined by a chromosomal translocation that
encodes for the fusion gene EWS-FLI1 in 90% of cases. This chimeric gene
functions as a transcription factor and regulates tumorigenesis-related
gene expression. Our hypothesis is that like protein-coding genes, the
non-coding genome in EFT is also important for the biology of Ewing
sarcoma. This study focuses on one such non-coding locus of the human
genome and explores its role in EFT pathogenesis. METHODS: Expression
profiles from a panel of 500 tissue samples including over 100 EFTs,
other primary tumors, and normal tissues were generated using Affymetrix
Human Exon 1.0 ST microarrays. Data were analyzed using institutional
software, Genetrix. RNA-Seq data was generated on two EFT cell lines
derived from a primary tumor and its metastatic derivative. Data was
validated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 33 cell lines including
EFTs and other tumors. Functional studies on EFT cell lines were
performed using various RNAi techniques and viral transductions. RESULTS:
Expression microarray profiles showed unannotated transcripts to be the
strongest discriminators of EFT from all other tumor types. One such
transcript, AK057037, was the most highly expressed RNA (1.07 x 1020) in
EFT. RNA-Seq analysis and PCR studies revealed that this transcript is a
multi-exonic, presumably, long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) with a maximum
predicted open reading frame of 137 amino acids that had no homology,
protein domains, or characteristic motifs. Validation studies confirmed
that this lncRNA was exclusively expressed in EFT. EWS-FLI regulates
expression of this transcript by directly binding to its promoter region.
Furthermore, functional data based on knocking down and overexpressing
the transcript showed that the lncRNA acts as an oncogene in EFT and
enhances tumorigenicity by increasing the metastatic potential of the
tumor cell lines. RNA-Seq results showed that the metastatic
tumor-derived cell line had increased transcriptional activity of the
lncRNA than the primary tumor-derived cell line. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay detected binding of the lncRNA to the polycomb
repressor complex 2 (PRC2) proteins. CONCLUSION: This study establishes
lncRNA AK057037 as a promoter of EFT pathogenesis. Its association with
the PRC2 complex suggests its role in chromatin modification. Targeting
this lncRNA may help improve outcomes in children with metastatic Ewing
disease. Using AK057037 as an example, we show that the non-coding genome
is important in EFT. Further work on the non-coding transcriptome may
reveal additional functional RNAs that contribute to the biology of this
disease.

