Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of murine models of breast cancer metastasis for the
evaluation of the efficacy of TGF- inhibitors as therapeutic agents


Preclinical models are elemental in understanding drug efficacy and
safety in vivo. Many existing models of breast cancer metastasis use
immune compromised animals, which are not appropriate for the evaluation
of novel therapeutics that modulate host immune response such as
inhibitors of transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling pathway. TGF-
has been shown to be a major immune modulator as well as a major driver
in epithelial-mesenchymal transition, which is believed to result in
tumor invasion and metastasis. In the current study we characterized a
pair of murine mammary cell lines derived from PyMT tumors in C57Bl/6
mice with respect to the effect of TGF- on their malignant phenotypes.
These cell lines, named Py-230 and Py-8119, represent luminal epithelial
and mesenchymal cell populations respectively in the tumor. In vitro
characterization revealed differences in viability, motility, and
transcriptional activation in response to treatment with TGF-. Py-230
cells were growth inhibited and exhibit epithelial-mesenchymal transition
upon treatment with TGF- whereas Py-8119 was non-responsive to TGF- in
these assays. These observations were consistent with higher Smad
activation by TGF- in Py230 cells than in Py-8119 cells. Furthermore,
intra cardiac injections were performed using luciferase-and
GFP-transfected PyMT cells in syngeneic animals, which were then treated
with either placebo or TRI KI (kinase inhibitor for TGF- receptor I). A
preliminary study with Py-230 cell-injected mice indicates that TRI KI
treatment appears to enhance bone metastasis. This outcome will be
compared with the effect of TRI KI on the metastatic potential of Py-8119
in our future studies. We believe that the development of mouse models of
tumor metastasis using murine mammary cells in a syngeneic background
will help illustrate the efficacy of TGF- inhibitors in abrogating
metastasis in an immune competent environment and also allow determining
the optimal dose and time of this novel intervention.

