Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel direct-acting vascular targeting agent NGR-TNF exerts in
vivo antitumor activity by inducing endothelial and tumor cell death in
the absence of proangiogenic bone-marrow derived cell recruitment


Treatment with either certain chemotherapy drugs at maximum tolerated
dose (e.g. paclitaxel, cyclophosphamide, 5-FU), vascular-disrupting
agents (VDAs; e.g. fosbretabulin, Oxi4503), or local irradiation can
rapidly induce mobilization and subsequent tumor homing of proangiogenic
bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs), such as circulating endothelial
progenitor cells (CEPs), CD11b/Tie-2-expressing monocytes (TEMs),
CD11b+Gr1+ neutrophils and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs).
Increase in several growth factors and chemokines, such as SDF-1, G-CSF
as well as osteopontin, contribute to the mobilization of these BMDCs
that can colonize the drug treated tumors preferentially at the viable
tumor rim that characteristically remains after treatment with drugs such
as VDAs. This process promotes angiogenesis and rapid tumor regrowth,
thus diminishing the overall antitumor activities of the aforementioned
treatments. NGR-TNF, presently in advanced clinical development, is a
direct-acting vascular targeting agent coupling the CNGRCG peptide (NGR),
homing to angiogenic blood vessels, and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF). Experiments performed in the Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) model,
suggested that when administrated at low doses, NGR-TNF causes a decrease
of tumor blood vessels density and induces apoptosis of tumor cells
without inducing cytokine-rebound and recruitment of pro-angiogenic BMDC.
In order to extend these results, we investigated whether NGR-TNF fails
to mobilize proangiogenic BMDC even after repeated treatments and in a
highly aggressive and metastatic tumor model. LLC and 4T1 mammary gland
carcinoma cells were subcutaneously implanted respectively into
immunocompetent C57BL/6J or Balb/C mice. Blood was obtained by cardiac
puncture or retro-orbital sinus bleeding, 4, 24 hours or 1 week after
single or repeated treatments with either NGR-TNF at low and high dose or
saline. Using flow cytometry CEPs were defined as
CD45/CD13+/flk-1+/CD117+/7AAD, TEMs as CD45+/CD11b+/Tie2+ and MDSCs as
CD45+/CD11b+/Gr1+ cells. At low doses, NGR-TNF exerts a control of 4T1
primary tumor growth, without inducing cytokine rebound and
pro-angiogenic BMDCs mobilization. In addition, even after repeated
administrations at low doses, NGR-TNF fails to mobilize or recruit to the
tumor site different subtypes of BMDCs. Therefore, low doses of NGR-TNF
exert an antitumor activity without inducing a reactive pro-angiogenic
host response, and as such provide an explanation and the rationale for
the successful use of lower dose NGR-TNF administration protocols in the
clinic.

