Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GE152: In vivo detection of tumor apoptosis as a tool for
assessment of therapeutic efficacy


A major challenge in personalized healthcare is predicting how effective
a drug treatment is. This is particularly the case in oncology, where
there is a call for better therapy monitoring to maximize drug treatment
effectiveness leading to improved patient survival and help reduce
healthcare costs. GE152, a nuclear imaging agent under development at GE
Healthcare, is being evaluated preclinically as a tool to assess
therapeutic efficacy by detecting tumor apoptosis. GE152 is based on a
99mTechnetium radiolabelled peptide that shows nanomolar affinity for a
specific cell death target, as demonstrated by studies using Biacore
technology. Biodistribution using the murine lymphoma (EL4) tumour
therapy model has shown increased tumor uptake and retention of GE152
following chemotherapy, with positive tumor:muscle and tumor:blood
ratios. Correlation of tumor apoptosis levels (determined by caspase
activity) with GE152 tumor retention suggest a trend of increasing agent
retention with rising levels of apoptosis (GE152 retention in low
apoptotic tumors is 4.9%ID/g; GE152 retention in high apoptotic tumors is
8.2%ID/g).Further validation of GE152 was carried out using an
apoptosis-specific inducible cell death model whereby HT29 colorectal
cancer cell xenografts engineered to inducibly express either a
constitutively active form of caspase-3 (which causes synchronous cell
death in vivo when exposed to doxycycline) or an inactive point mutant.
GE152 demonstrated greater uptake in tumors undergoing apoptosis (3.6%
ID/g) than in controls (1.2% ID/g), correlating with caspase activity
levels (and subsequent apoptosis) as determined both enzymatically and by
IHC and blood-borne biomarkers of cell death. These results are in
agreement with preliminary preclinical imaging studies using SPECT/CT,
where region of interest analysis has demonstrated increased post-therapy
tumor retention of GE152. We are currently optimizing the performance of
GE152 by assessing different radiolabelling precursors to improve imaging
agent pharmacokinetics. In addition to the current 99mTechnetium-based
approach, we are exploring 18F radiolabelling options that would allow
expansion of the agent's utility to PET imaging.

