Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel CD33/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody can effectively recruit
autologous T cells from AML-patients for in vitro cell lysis of CD33+
blasts


Bispecific T cell-engaging (BiTE) antibodies are single-chain antibody
constructs which combine dual specifity against CD3 on T cells and
against a tumor-associated antigen. Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials with
the CD19/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody blinatumomab have shown very high
response rates in patients suffering from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Here, we report on the potential of a novel
BiTE antibody targeting CD33 in redirecting autologous T cells for in
vitro lysis of blasts from acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Initial
antibody titration experiments showed that CD33 BiTE concentrations at
low picomolar ranges mediate effective lysis of leukemic cell lines. We
next analysed primary samples from AML patients, which were co-cultured
with mononuclear cells (MNC) from healthy donors in presence or absence
of specific BiTE antibodies at an E:T ratio of 1:1. After 48h of
incubation in the presence of 1ng/ml CD33 BiTE we observed a decrease of
both CD33+ AML blasts as well as CD33+ monocytes when compared to samples
with control BiTE or without BiTE. 1ng/ml CD33 BiTE specifically induced
strong upregulation of activation markers CD25 and CD69 on the vast
majority of all CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. We furthermore investigated
whether T cells from AML patients were able to mediate lysis of CD33+
leukemia cells by CD33 BiTE. T cells purified from peripheral blood or
bone marrow of newly diagnosed AML patients were tested for BiTE mediated
lysis of U-937 target cells. Redirected T cells from AML patients were
capable of eliminating leukemic cells in the presence of CD33 BiTE as
effectively as T cells from healthy controls. In consequence of this we
studied blast lysis and T cell behaviour in a completely autologous
setting using cryo-conserved samples from AML patients. Despite strong
activation of T cells only moderate lysis of myeloid cells was observed
after 48h, possibly due to low E:T ratios in these samples. Therefore, to
allow autologous T cell expansion, cells were cultured for up to 144h.
After this prolonged incubation, CD33 BiTE-mediated redirected lysis of
AML blasts and myeloid cells was observed in most but those patient
samples that had a very low initial effector-to-target (E:T) cell ratio.
To adress this problem, we stimulated autologous T cells in a first step
by incubating AML samples in presence of 1ng/ml CD33 BiTE for 7 days.
After purification of the expanded T cells we performed autologous
cultures with high initial E:T ratio (1:1). This led to fast, effective
and almost complete lysis of CD33+ target cells. Taken together,
autologous T cells from AML patients are effectively engaged and
activated by the novel CD33 BiTE and redirected for the elimination of
myeloblasts at low picomolar concentrations in vitro and may thereby
constitute a promising novel therapeutic option for the treatment of
patients with CD33+ acute myeloid leukemia.

