Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial dysfunction precedes tumor progression in ulcerative
colitis, but it is restored in advanced dysplasia and cancer


Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an inflammatory disease of the colon that
predisposes to colorectal cancer. Dysplasia and cancer arise in
pre-cancerous fields of inflammed epithelium, which harbor molecular
alterations in spite of histologically normal appearance. We previously
demonstrated that these molecular alterations include telomere shortening
and the loss of cytochrome C oxidase (COX, Complex IV, subunit I), which
is a marker of mitochondrial dysfunction. COX loss was more frequent in
UC progressors (patients with dysplasia or cancer) than in UC non
progressors (patients without dysplasia). Interestingly, COX expression
reappeared in dysplasia and cancer, suggesting that the recovery of
mitochondrial function is essential for further tumor progression. We are
confirming and extending these preliminary results by: (1) analyzing the
expression of additional electron transport chain proteins (complexes II,
III, IV subunit II, and IV subunit Va), mitochondrial fusion proteins
(Opa1 and Mfn1), and PGC1, the master regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis; (2) investigating the potential association between
mitochondrial abnormalities and telomere shortening; (3) quantifying
mitochondrial copy number in areas of COX loss; and (4) validating the
original COX results in a second, larger set of UC patients. The
expression of mitochondrial proteins was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
from serial sections of UC colon. Lightly-fixed paraffin-embedded colon
biopsies were used for telomere FISH and laser capture microdissection
with subsequent mitochondrial copy number quantification by Q-PCR. A
tissue microarray including all grade biopsies from 38 UC non progressors
and 37 UC progressors was immunostained with COX to validate the original
COX results. The serial staining of the four mitochondrial respiratory
proteins showed a striking correlation amongst them and with the original
COX pattern: loss early in progression and focal gain in later dysplasia.
Interestingly, Opa1, Mfn1, and PGC1 also showed very similar expression
patterns. Telomere shortening, however, was not associated with COX loss.
Preliminary quantification of mitochondrial copy number indicated that
the areas with COX loss had normal amounts of mitochondrial DNA. The
analysis of a larger number of biopsies in tissue microarrays confirmed
previous findings. In conclusion, our results indicate that a severe loss
of mitochondrial components, including all complexes of the respiratory
transport chain, occur early in UC progression. That loss is likely to be
of epigenetic origin, as it is reversible in later progression.
Downregulation of mitochondria biogenesis by PGC1 might be the underlying
mechanism, but it is not secondary to telomere shortening and it does not
appear to be accompanied by mitochondrial DNA loss. Further experiments
are warranted to unveil these intriguing results.

