Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Safety profile and therapeutic potential in breast cancer of
STX140, an original tubulin binding agent


STX-140 is an anti-tubulin binding agent which has demonstrated a good
anti-tumor efficacy profile. Although the binding site on tubulin differs
from other classical tubulin binders, one could anticipate the same type
of safety issues with such an agent, namely neurotoxicity. In order to
differentiate this compound, we evaluated its efficacy in a transgenic
model of mammary cancer, its neurotoxicity potential, and its therapeutic
index in a breast cancer model. STX140 efficacy was evaluated in C3(1)
Tag transgenic mice which develop mammary carcinomas. In those transgenic
animals, the disease progresses in a similar fashion to human breast
cancer, with the development of tumors which show the same histological
characteristics as the human pathology. In these mice, STX140 was able to
significantly increase the survival of the animals and to suppress the
emergence of metastases, whereas paclitaxel was completely inactive on
both parameters. Neurotoxicity potential was assessed in a thermal
hyperalgesia model in comparison with paclitaxel. Continuous oral
treatment of mice with STX-140 did not induce an increase sensibility to
heat as measured by the latency of paw withdrawal after a heat stimulus.
However, paclitaxel increased this heat sensitivity starting after the
second i.v. administration, underlying the neurotoxicity of this
compound, which is observed in the clinic. Finally, in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer xenografts, two different schedules of oral administration were
evaluated in order to determine the therapeutic index and PK parameters
were measured in parallel to the anti-tumor efficacy. Continuous (QD) and
intermittent (Monday, Wednesday, Friday; MWF) treatments were evaluated
and a large panel of doses were tested. The therapeutic index was
determined as the ratio of the exposure observed between the first toxic
dose and first active dose. The TI for the QD schedule was 2.1 and was
1.7 for the MWF schedule, showing the potential good safety index of this
compound. Taking into account the previous data reported elsewhere and
new data presented here, which underline the great efficacy and safety
profile of STX140, this compound is considered for further preclinical
and clinical development.

