Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ponatinib, a potent pan-BCR-ABL inhibitor, retains activity
against gatekeeper mutants of FLT3, RET, KIT, PDGFR/ and FGFR1


Introduction: Ponatinib was designed as a highly potent inhibitor of
native BCR-ABL as well as the T315I gatekeeper mutant that is resistant
to all approved therapies, and has demonstrated substantial activity in
patients with native or mutant BCR-ABL in a phase 1 trial. Activity
against T315I is due to a key design feature, the triple bond linker,
which enforces ligand linearity in this sterically demanding region of
the binding site. Ponatinib also inhibits the in vitro kinase activity of
a number of other clinically relevant kinases (FLT3, RET, KIT, PDGFR,
PDGFR, and FGFR1; IC50s of 0.2 to 13 nM), many of which have developed
resistance to existing therapies via mutation of the gatekeeper residue.
Here we assessed whether ponatinib might represent a more general
solution to gatekeeper mutant inhibition of these and other clinically
important kinases by virtue of its design features. Results: The cellular
activity of ponatinib was assessed using Ba/F3 cells transformed to IL-3
independence by expression of an activated kinase (via fusion to a TEL
dimerization domain). Ponatinib potently inhibited viability of cells
expressing activated FLT3, RET, KIT, PDGFR, PDGFR and FGFR1 with IC50s of
15, 8, 7, 1, 2 and 21 nM, respectively. In contrast, ponatinib did not
affect viability of parental Ba/F3 cells grown in the presence of IL-3
(IC50 >1000 nM). Kinase variants in which the gatekeeper residue was
mutated to isoleucine, leucine or methionine (all by a single nucleotide
change from the native sequence) were then transformed into Ba/F3 cells.
All of these variants have been shown previously, or in our studies, to
confer substantial resistance (i.e. >50-fold) to other targeted agents.
Ponatinib maintained substantial activity against all variants tested.
The smallest potency reduction (2- to 9-fold) was seen in variants
mutated to isoleucine, with FLT3F691I, KITT670I, PDGFRT674I, and
PDGFRT681I being inhibited with IC50s of 62, 26, 2 and 17 nM,
respectively. A slightly greater potency reduction (10- to 22-fold) was
seen in sterically more demanding leucine or methionine mutations, with
RETV804M, RETV804L and FGFR1V561M being inhibited with IC50s of 84, 178
and 202 nM, respectively. In all cell lines, cell viability effects were
accompanied by inhibition of receptor phosphorylation. Conclusion:
Ponatinib is a potent inhibitor of activated variants of FLT3, RET, KIT,
PDGFR, PDGFR, and FGFR1, in addition to BCR-ABL. Ponatinib also maintains
substantial activity against gatekeeper variants shown to mediate
resistance to other targeted agents, inhibiting their activity with IC50s
that are within range of known clinically achievable plasma
concentrations. These results suggest that ponatinib may offer a more
general solution to gatekeeper mutant inhibition and support clinical
testing in a variety of cancers driven by activated kinases.

