Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multispectral imaging of mismatch repair proteins in colorectal
cancers and tumor cells isolated from blood


DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is a system for recognizing and repairing
erroneous insertion, deletion and misincorporation of bases that can
arise during DNA replication and recombination, or some forms of DNA
damage. MMR is required for maintaining genomic stability and is highly
conserved from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. MMR defects are found in about
15% of sporadic colorectal cancer and in more than 90% of hereditary
non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)-associated tumors. Detection of
defective MMR through analysis of loss of MMR protein immunostaining in
colorectal carcinomas stratifies the risk of having an inherited cancer
predisposition syndrome and identifies patients who might benefit from
subsequent genetic testing and counseling. Multispectral imaging of
colorectal cancer (CRC) HCT116, HT29, SW480 and SW620 cells cultured in
chambered slides with multiplexed different color quantum dots (Qdots)
conjugated MMR proteins MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 shows that HCT116 cells
harbor defective MLH1 and PMS2, which is consistent with the finding from
conventional single protein immunofluorescence staining. Multispectral
imaging of CRC xenografted tumor sections with Qdot-conjugated antibodies
to MMR proteins demonstrates that the human colorectal HCT116 tumor
xenograft has MLH1 and PMS2 defects, consistent with individual protein
immunohistochemical staining. To explore the application of multispectral
imaging of MMRs in circulating tumor cells (CTCs), we spiked CRC cells
into human blood and recovered CRC cells with the FDA-approved Veridex
CellSearch system. Multispectral imaging of recovered CRC cells displayed
similar MMR expression spectrum to conventional single protein
immunofluorescence staining. The methodology may provide an adjunctive
screening tool for detection of MMR defects in CTCs from patients with
advanced disease. The utility of this novel assay for detection of MMR
gene expression abnormalities will be further examined in the colorectal
cancer clinic.

