Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local regulation of steroid hormones in the breast is related to
single nucleotide polymorphism of steroid metabolism genes


Background: The pattern of steroid hormone levels in nipple aspirate
fluid (NAF) significantly differs from systemic levels, but may be a
better predictor of breast cancer risk than the systemic environment. We
hypothesize that local production and clearance of estrogen precursors or
estrogen in the breast is affected by genetic variation in the enzymes
involved in steroid transport, biosynthesis, and metabolism, thereby
contributing to breast cancer risk. We examined the effect of functional
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on the concentrations of the NAF
steroid hormones, as compared to serum levels. Methods: NAF was collected
from both the contralateral unaffected breast of breast cancer patients
and controls (blinded study of 265 women). Selection criteria for SNPs
were; 1) known/potential functional significance on activity of the
resulting enzyme. 2) Expression in breast tissue. 3) Caucasian population
frequency of the minor alleles. gDNA was extracted from the plasma buffy
coat by a Qiagen kit, followed by TaqMan genotyping assays (Applied
Biosystems). The NAF and serum level of estradiol (E2), estrone (E1),
progesterone (P4), testosterone (T), androstenedione (A4), and
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) were measured by immunoassay. Hormone
levels were compared across genotype groups using the ANCOVA in SAS
(age-adjusted significance p Background: The pattern of steroid hormone
levels in nipple aspirate fluid (NAF) significantly differs from systemic
levels, but may be a better predictor of breast cancer risk than the
systemic environment. We hypothesize that local production and clearance
of estrogen precursors or estrogen in the breast is affected by genetic
variation in the enzymes involved in steroid transport, biosynthesis, and
metabolism, thereby contributing to breast cancer risk. We examined the
effect of functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on the
concentrations of the NAF steroid hormones, as compared to serum levels.
Methods: NAF was collected from both the contralateral unaffected breast
of breast cancer patients and controls (blinded study of 265 women).
Selection criteria for SNPs were; 1) known/potential functional
significance on activity of the resulting enzyme. 2) Expression in breast
tissue. 3) Caucasian population frequency of the minor alleles. gDNA was
extracted from the plasma buffy coat by a Qiagen kit, followed by TaqMan
genotyping assays (Applied Biosystems). The NAF and serum level of
estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), progesterone (P4), testosterone (T),
androstenedione (A4), and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) were measured by
immunoassay. Hormone levels were compared across genotype groups using
the ANCOVA in SAS (age-adjusted significance p < 0.05). Results: (See the
Table) Conclusions: There is no data yet to show that NAF hormone content
is related to breast cancer risk. This hypothesis will be tested in our
on-going study. Locally regulated biosynthesis and clearance of hormones
from the breast seems likely. Our data support such a phenomenon, since
NAF correlations with functional enzyme SNPs are more frequent than with
serum. The significant relationships between SNPs and NAF hormones, not
seen with the same serum hormone, support the notion that they are
determinants of breast cancer risk.


