Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth inhibition of glycolytic tumors by targeting
basigin/lactate-H+ symporters (MCTs): Metformin sensitizes MCT inhibition


Intense conversion of glucose to lactic acid via glycolysis is a feature
of rapidly growing cells often encountered in hypoxic tumor
microenvironments. To survive and expand, tumor cells must efficiently
export lactic acid to maintain intracellular pH. Cells possess several
systems for lactic acid extrusion. A family of H+-linked MonoCarboxylate
Transporters (MCTs) is represented by the ubiquitously expressed MCT1, a
H+/lactate symporter that operates in both directions. MCT4, a close
relative of MCT1, is up-regulated by HIF-1 and is highly expressed in
aggressive malignant tumors. In addition, the functional expression of
MCT1/MCT4 requires the interaction with the glycoprotein CD147/Basigin
also known as EMMPRIN, a protumoral protein involved in invasion.
Objectives: 1) Demonstrate that tumor growth is dependent on lactic acid
export and that both transporters MCT1/MCT4 represent key anticancer
targets. 2) Demonstrate whether the protumoral function of Basigin/CD147
is primary linked to lactic acid export or to other invasive functions.
3) Demonstrate whether Metformin, an inhibitor of mitochondrial complex
I, sensitizes glycolytic tumor cells to MCTs inhibitors. Methods: We
exploited two tumoral models. i) Ras transformed fibroblasts expressing
only MCT1/MCT2 and ii) the human colon adenocarcinoma cell line LS174T
expressing MCT1 and MCT4. We inhibited MCT1/MCT2 with the specific
astraZeneca compound AR-C155858 and knocked-down MCT1, MCT4 and CD147
with inducible shRNAs. In addition we knocked-out mct4 or basigin with
Zinc Finger Nucleases in LS174T cells. Results: First we demonstrated
that silencing or pharmacological blockage of MCTs, reduced pHi, the rate
of glycolysis and tumor growth in mice xenografts. This tumor growth
inhibition was recapitulated by a single silencing or knock out of
basigin/CD147 gene that also reduced the plasma membrane expression of
MCT1 and MCT4 and lactate transport up to 10-fold. Second, to gain
insight into CD147/Basigin function, we uncoupled MCTs from Basigin
expression. Inhibition of MCT1 in MCT4-null, Basigin-high expressors,
suppressed tumor growth. Conversely in Basigin-null cells, in which MCT
activity had been maintained, tumorigenicity was not affected. Thirdly,
we showed that tumor cells lacking Basigin or MCT4 become highly
sensitive to MCT1 inhibition when treated with Metformin. This synthetic
lethality demonstrated in vitro and currently being tested in vivo will
be discussed. Conclusions: These findings highlight that a major
protumoral action of CD147/Basigin is to control the energetics of
glycolytic tumors via MCT1/MCT4 activity and that blocking lactic acid
export provides an efficient anticancer approach. Furthermore, we reveal
that Metformin, by sensitizing normoxic cells to inhibitors of lactic
export (MCTs), could offer an interesting novel anticancer strategy for
rapidly growing tumors.

