Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RK-33, a novel small molecule for lung cancer therapy via
inhibition of NHEJ


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. More
importantly, only about 30% of non-small-cell lung cancer patients
respond to current combination therapy, which includes radiation and
platinum based compounds. Currently, there are limited molecular targets
that can be drugable for lung cancer treatment. Our investigation in
cancer biogenesis has identified an RNA helicase, DDX3, being
dysregulated in many cancer types including lung cancer. DDX3 is a member
of the DEAD-box RNA helicase family and contributes to cancer by
promoting proliferation, cell growth, transformation and inhibition of
apoptosis. Importantly, knockdown of DDX3 in the highly aggressive lung
cancer cell line, A549, abrogated its colony forming abilities. In our
efforts to abrogate DDX3 functions in vivo, we synthesized a tricyclic
5:7:5-fused diimidazodiazepine ring (RK-33) to fit into the ATP binding
domain of DDX3. Initial results confirmed the binding of RK-33 to DDX3
using a streptavidin pull down assay. Subsequently, we demonstrated the
effects of RK-33 in vitro and found a synergy between radiation and RK-33
in lung cancer cells. Also, treatment with RK-33 caused a cell cycle
arrest in G1 phase and decreased Cyclin D1 levels in A549 and H1299 lung
cancer cells. Furthermore, treatment with RK-33 resulted in decreased
radiation induced DNA break repair demonstrated by immunofluorescent
staining of A549 lung cancer cells with H2AX and 53BP1 antibodies. In
addition, we showed that the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) activity
in cancer cells was decreased by treatment with RK-33. However,
homologues recombination activity was not affected by RK-33. Impaired
NHEJ is known to increase radiation sensitivity hence inhibiting NHEJ by
RK-33 could improve radiation therapy. Following these encouraging
results observed in vitro, we initiated in vivo studies, using a lung
cancer model with immune competent mice by expressing Twist1 and Kras
selectively in the alveolar type II pneumocytes, which confers lung
tissue specificity. Following tumor development, confirmed by micro-CT,
the animals were treated with RK-33 (20 mg/kg) and different doses of
stereotactic radiation (15 Gy) using a small animal radiation platform.
Four weeks following treatment, tumor volumes were determined by micro-CT
and H&E staining after necroscopy. A 72% reduction of tumor load was
accomplished after treatment with RK-33 and radiation (15 Gy) compared to
28% tumor volume reduction in the radiation alone group. Interestingly,
there was less tumor reduction when RK-33 was used in combination with 3
Gy x 10 radiation treatment. No evident toxicity became apparent during
the treatment with RK-33. All experiments were done in replicates.
Conclusion: These in vitro and in vivo results indicate that RK-33 is a
promising and safe radiosensitizer, via inhibition of NHEJ, and could be
a promising new drug in combination with stereotactic radiotherapy for
lung cancer treatment.

