Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocytes either radioprotect or sensitize colorectal cancer
cells through nitric oxide-induced oxygen sparing in hypoxic
microenvironment


Purpose: Impaired tumor oxygenation remains a major obstacle to curative
radiotherapy in advanced primary tumors and metastases. In this study,
tailored to the liver metastases of colorectal cancer (CRC), we compared
the ability of tumor cells and normal host hepatocytes to metabolically
consume oxygen and induce hypoxia. Next, we examined the possibility to
re-oxygenate and thereby radiosensitize human CRC cells through the
physiological mediator nitric oxide (NO) that switches the mitochondrial
oxygen metabolism in hepatocytes from consumption to sparing. Methods and
Materials: To model tumor-relevant hypoxia, hepatocytes and tumor cells
were incubated in a tissue-mimetic co-culture system with limited
oxygenation, which was monitored by fluorescence and linked to hypoxic
radioresponse. To activate NO production through inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS), hepatocytes (or tumor cells) were exposed to a cytokine
mixture of IFN-, TNF-, IL-1 and LPS, and iNOS expression was examined by
RT-PCR, western blotting, and NO/nitrite production. Results: Primary
mouse hepatocytes consumed 10 to 40-times more oxygen than mouse CT26 and
human DLD-1, HT29, HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells, suggesting that
hepatocytes are the major effectors of hypoxic conditioning. At cell
densities of 0.6-1.2 mln/ml, hepatocytes induced
radiobiologically-relevant hypoxia within 20 min, and thereby
radioprotected tumor cells 2.0 to 2.5-times. Following exposure to
cytokines, hepatocytes revealed significant activation of iNOS-mediated
production of NO that targeted mitochondrial aconitase and complexes II,
and induced a profound respiratory self-arrest at up to 90 min. As a
result, the spared oxygen caused uniform re-oxygenation and
radiosensitization in a panel of CRC cell lines (by 1.9 to 2.7-times).
Next, both oxygen sparing and radiosensitization could be counteracted by
aminoguanidine, a metabolic iNOS inhibitor. Contrasting, all CRC cell
lines showed little if any iNOS expression and therefore could not
contribute to the oxygen-sparing and radiosensitizing effects of
NO-producing hepatocytes. Finally, the NO donor
S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine and the mitochondrial inhibitors
rotenone, antimycine A and sodium azide were able to block the
mitochondrial respiratory chain and to reverse both metabolic hypoxia and
hypoxia-induced radioresistance. Conclusion: Hepatocytes may profoundly
modulate the hypoxic microenvironment and either protect or sensitize CRC
cells to radiation, dependent on the mitochondrial respiratory switch.
Our study for the first time provides evidence that host liver cells
possess intrinsic radiosensitizing potential through NO-induced oxygen
sparing.

