Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of EZH2 and TTF-1 protein expression identifies a subset
of lung adenocarcinomas with better prognosis


Lung adenocarcinoma is a heterogeneous tumor with multiple phenotypes
that have been associated with prognosis. Recently, we reported that in
surgically resected adenocarcinomas, the presence of a solid histologic
pattern is associated with poor prognosis. To characterize molecular
targets and identify novel prognostic markers in lung adenocarcinoma, we
examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue microarrays (TMAs) the
expression of 75 proteins in archival tumor tissues obtained from 204
surgically resected tumors. We selected two top markers, EZH2 (enhancer
of zeste homolog 2) and TTF-1 (thyroid transcription factor-1) that had
significant correlation with solid and bronchioloalveolar patterns,
respectively, for more detailed clinico-pathologic analyses, including
patients outcome. EZH2 is part of a protein complex that promotes cancer
development by epigenetically silencing tumor suppressor genes. TTF-1 is
a transcription factor considered a potential lineage-survival oncogene
in lung cancer. For EZH2 and TTF-1 IHC expression analysis, we examined
320 surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas, stages I-III, with median
follow-up of 6.7 years. EGFR and KRAS mutation data were available in
most cases. High nuclear EZH2 expression in tumor cells correlated with
younger patient age (PLung adenocarcinoma is a heterogeneous tumor with
multiple phenotypes that have been associated with prognosis. Recently,
we reported that in surgically resected adenocarcinomas, the presence of
a solid histologic pattern is associated with poor prognosis. To
characterize molecular targets and identify novel prognostic markers in
lung adenocarcinoma, we examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue
microarrays (TMAs) the expression of 75 proteins in archival tumor
tissues obtained from 204 surgically resected tumors. We selected two top
markers, EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) and TTF-1 (thyroid
transcription factor-1) that had significant correlation with solid and
bronchioloalveolar patterns, respectively, for more detailed
clinico-pathologic analyses, including patients outcome. EZH2 is part of
a protein complex that promotes cancer development by epigenetically
silencing tumor suppressor genes. TTF-1 is a transcription factor
considered a potential lineage-survival oncogene in lung cancer. For EZH2
and TTF-1 IHC expression analysis, we examined 320 surgically resected
lung adenocarcinomas, stages I-III, with median follow-up of 6.7 years.
EGFR and KRAS mutation data were available in most cases. High nuclear
EZH2 expression in tumor cells correlated with younger patient age
(P<0.0001), smoking history (P120 score) correlated with better OS
(P=0.004; HR 0.62). We identified a subset (32%) of tumors with
low-EZH2/high-TTF-1 that demonstrated better outcome in multivariate
analysis, compared with other tumors, including RFS (P=0.004; HR 0.51)
and OS (P=0.0007; HR 0.49). These tumors were more frequent in patients
with female sex (P=0.003), never-smoking history (P=0.004), smaller tumor
size (P=0.018), lower TNM stage (P=0.024), and EGFR mutation (P=0.0001).
Our findings indicate that the combined analysis of the EZH2 and TTF-1
expression identifies a subset of lung adenocarcinoma patients with
better outcome after surgical resection with curative intent. Supported
by DoD grant W81XWH-07-1-0306

