Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-cancer effect of crocin against hepatocellular
carcinoma: A preclinical study


Background: This is a follow up of our study published in September issue
of Hepatology and featured in October issue of Science News that
documented the antic-cancer potential of saffron. Here, we show the
chemopreventive actions and mechanisms of saffron-based bioactive
ingredient; crocin, against diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced liver cancer
in rats. Methods: Administration of crocin at two doses of 100 and 200
mg/kg body wt per day was started two weeks prior to the DEN injection
and was continued for 22 weeks. Result: Crocin decreased the number and
the area of placental glutathione-S-transferase positive foci in livers
of DEN-treated rats. Furthermore, crocin counteracted DEN-induced
oxidative stress in rats as assessed by restoration of superoxide
dismutase, catalase, and glutathione-S-transferase levels and diminishing
of myeloperoxidase activity, malondialdehyde and protein carbonyl
formation in liver. The results of immunohistochemical staining of rat
liver showed that crocin inhibited the DEN-mediated elevations in numbers
of cells positive for Ki-67, cyclooxygenase 2, inducible nitric oxide
synthase, nuclear factor-kappa Bp-65 and the phosphorylated tumor
necrosis factor receptor. Crocin also blocked the depletion in the number
of cells positive for TUNEL and M30 CytoDeath in liver tissues of
DEN-treated rats. In vitro experiments carried out using HepG2 cells also
confirmed these findings and showed inhibition of NFkB activation,
increased cleavage of caspase-3, as well as DNA damage and cell cycle
arrest upon saffron treatment. Conclusion: The present study provides
evidence that crocin exerts a significant chemopreventive effect against
liver cancer through inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of
apoptosis. This report also shows some evidence that crocin protects rat
liver from cancer via modulating oxidative damage and suppressing
inflammatory response. This study is funded by Emirates Foundation.

