Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of colony formation and growth of malignant glioma
cells in soft agar using advanced colony counter system


[Introduction] Malignant gliomas are the most common primary tumors of
the central nervous system. The prognosis of patients with malignant
gliomas is poor in spite of current intensive therapy because of
inevitable regrowth or recurrence. Since glioma stem-like cells (GSCs)
are thought to play critical role in initiation, regrowth and recurrence,
effective therapy against GSCs is sought for. Efficient anticancer
therapies should suppress not only the growth of tumor mass but also
colony formation initiated by single cancer stem cell. Therefore, it is
essential to analyze the effect of anticancer therapies on both tumor
growth and colony formation. Regarding tumor growth, multicellular tumor
spheroid (MCTS) model is thought to be more plausible method than 2-D
culture because MCTSs resemble intervascular regions of solid tumors,
that is, MCTSs reproduce 3-D structure-specific features such as intense
paracrine, cell-cell adhesion related signaling, direct intercellular
transport of materials, gradient of oxygen and nutrients, and lower drug
penetration into the spheroids. Since GSCs form MCTSs in the standard
stem cell culture media, viability and growth of GSCs have been analyzed
mainly in this culture condition. However, regarding analysis of
clonogenicity, colony formation assay using GSCs has been a challenge
because GSCs aggregate in the stem cell culture media and evaluation of
the accurate colony number requires single cell culture system that might
need large number of wells/plates, especially for combination treatment,
and might not be always appropriate for high-throughput screening.
Therefore, a better approach is necessary. GelCountTM colony counter was
developed to analyze both number and volume of colonies. In this study,
we used soft agar and GelCountTM to analyze colony formation and growth
of malignant glioma cells including GSCs. [Materials and Methods] Human
glioma stem-like cells GSC11 and GSC20, or human malignant glioma cell
line U87-MG were cultured in agarose gel and treated with erlotinib,
sorafenib, imatinib or a polynuclear platinum compound BBR3610. The
colony number and the calculated total colony volume (total biomass) were
analyzed using GelCountTM colony counter system (Oxford Optronix Inc.,
UK). [Results] Glioma cells formed 3-D colonies in agarose, and the
colony number and the total biomass increased according to the Gompertz
function that is known to correlate with tumor growth in vivo. Each drug
suppressed increase of colony number and total biomass in comparable
concentration to that in 2-D culture. [Conclusions] GelCountTM allowed
accurate, rapid monitoring of colony number and size at many time points
without harm to the cultures. This system can be high throughput
screening method using GSCs and also bridge the gap between 2-D culture
assays and in vivo tumor formation assays.

