Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression profile of cancer/testis antigens (CTAs) in head
and neck cancer


Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most frequent
types of cancer. Despite significant improvements in the therapeutic
strategies, the overall survival rate in 5 years is around 50%. The
development of new therapies and their integration into the current forms
of treatment (surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy) is of great
interest to improve the therapeutic efficacy. Immunotherapy may provide
an alternative for current treatment approach, since the natural immune
response can be stimulated by active immunotherapeutic interventions
which may help in the control of the tumor progression and recurrence. A
requirement for the development of immunotherapeutic approaches is the
identification of immunogenic gene products expressed predominantly in
tumor cells. Cancer/testis antigens (CTAs) fulfill this prerequisite as
their expression is restricted to tumors with no expression in normal
tissues, except germ line cells. In this study we performed a search on
Oncomine, SAGE Anatomic Viewer, CTdatabase and PubMed databases to select
among the 153 CTAs genes those that might be expressed in HNSCC. This in
silico analysis allowed the selection of 60 CTAs genes to have their
expression evaluated in 89 tumors and in 20 normal mucosa by RT-PCR.
According this analysis, 13 CTAs were specificaly expressed in HNSCC
samples (>25% sensitivity) The expression of CTA1 was significantely
associated with perineural invasion (p=0,023) and vascular invasion
(p=0,003), whereas the presence of CTA2 or CTA3 was correlated with the
presence of tumor cells in the lymph nodes (p=0,023 and p=0,037,
repectively). Moreover, the CTA4 expression showed to be associated with
capsular rupture (p=0,005). We report here the identification of 13 CTAs
frequently expressed in HNSCC and the expression of some of them was
significantly associated with poor prognostic factors. These results
could be important for the development of immunotherapy strategies for
treating HNSCC patients.

