Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-fat diet induces an inflammatory tumor microenvironment in
MNU-induced estrogen receptor positive mammary tumors


The link between obesity and breast cancer has received much attention
because it is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, an
increased incidence of recurrence, higher death rates, and reduced
sensitivity to anti-hormonal therapy in post-menopausal women. In
addition, obesity is associated with a chronic, low grade inflammatory
status. Surprisingly, obesity can have different effects in
pre-menopausal women where patient outcome is actually better in obese
than lean women. This study was conducted to create an animal model to
examine the effects of high-fat (HF) diet on estrogen-dependent mammary
tumors in cycling rats. Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with
N-Methyl-N-Nitrosourea (MNU) at 6 weeks of age to induce mammary tumors.
The next day they received HF diet (45% kcal from fat) or normal fat (NF)
diet (10% fat) (n=6-7) and animals were kept on these diets for an
average of 15 weeks. Ninety-six percent of rats developed mammary tumors
and all the tumors were ER positive. The tumor volume, tumor weight and
tumor growth rate were not different between the HF or NF diet groups.
Also, the HF diet did not influence the body weight, liver weight and
adipose mass weight. However, the expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, such as TNFa and IL-1b, was significantly up-regulated in
tumors of the HF diet group compared to control. Macrophage infiltration
was also increased in the tumors of the HF diet group. There was also a
tendency of increased NFkB DNA binding activity in the HF diet group.
Moreover, macrophage infiltration was significantly correlated with the
amount of proinflammatory cytokine gene expression in the HF but not the
NF diet group. In agreement with clinical data, cycling rats on the HF
diet responded better to tamoxifen than did rats on the NF diet, with a
greater reduction in tumor size over 20 days of treatment. Taken
together, these results indicate that a HF diet induces a
pro-inflammatory tumor microenvironment without causing obesity in
cycling rats and that these tumors may be more responsive to endocrine
therapy. Our findings also provide a model for future studies into the
mechanism by which high fat diet may affect tumor growth and response to
therapy in premenopausal women.

