Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of GLI1 binding partners that regulate
transactivation or cell transformation


Activation of the GLI1 transcription factor and oncogene appears to play
a role in the genesis of desmoplastic medulloblastomas, basal cell
carcinomas, and some rhabdomyosarcomas. We identified interactions
between GLI1 and proteins that enhance the transactivating or cell
transforming function of GLI1. Such protein-protein interactions could
potentially be targeted in the treatment of some GLI1-related
malignancies. We focused on proteins interacting with GLI1
transactivation domains, believing these would be essential for
transactivation and cell transformation. Previously, we identified an
acidic alpha-helical transcription activation domain (TAD1; aa 1020-1091)
at the carboxyl terminus of the GLI1 protein. We show that TAD1
physically interacts with the coactivator TAF9 in vitro by pull down
assays and in rhabdomyosarcoma cells in vivo by proximity ligation assays
and co-immunoprecipitation. Inhibition of this interaction reduces
transactivation by GLI1 and the ability of GLI1 to transform RK3E cells.
We identify a second GLI1 transactivation domain (TAD2; aa 635-740),
which activates reporter gene transcription and accounts for the
TAD1-independent cell transforming ability of GLI1. TAD2 contains
conserved sequences among GLI1 family proteins, including a CBP binding
domain identified in GLI3. However, consistent with in vitro data from
others, we could not demonstrate interaction of TAD2 and CBP in
rhabdomyosarcoma cells in vivo by proximity ligation assay. To identify
TAD2 binding proteins, we performed yeast 2 hybrid screening and
identified other transcription factors (Y-Box1, HSF2, RBMX2, and ZMYM2),
cytoskeleton-associated proteins and membrane-associated proteins. Based
on a previously described GLI1-p53 inhibitory loop that controls stem
cell and tumor cell numbers, we demonstrate that p53 down-regulates TAD1
but not TAD2 function. Understanding the mechanism of transactivation and
cell transformation by GLI1 can provide novel targeted approaches to
inhibit the GLI1 transcription factor in cancer.

