Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein tyrosine kinase 6 directly phosphorylates p130
CRK-associated substrate to promote peripheral adhesion complex formation
and cell migration


Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is a nonmyristoylated intracellular
tyrosine kinase evolutionarily related to Src kinases. Aberrant PTK6
expression and intracellular localization have been detected in human
prostate tumors. Although the majority of total PTK6 is localized within
the cytoplasm of PC3 cells, a human prostate cancer cell line, we found
that the activated pool of PTK6 phosphorylated on tyrosine residue 342 is
localized at the membrane. Ectopic expression of membrane targeted PTK6
leads to enhanced activation of PTK6 at the membrane and the formation of
6 to 12 striking focal adhesion-like complexes localized at the periphery
of each cell, termed peripheral adhesion complexes. Using confocal
microscopy, we show that p130 CRK-Associated Substrate (p130CAS), FAK,
Paxillin and Vinculin, as well as increased levels of tyrosine
phosphorylated proteins and active PTK6 are localized within the induced
peripheral adhesion complexes. We determined that peripheral adhesion
complex formation is dependent upon PTK6 tyrosine kinase activity. We
demonstrate that p130CAS is a novel direct substrate of PTK6 that works
as a crucial adapter protein in PTK6 mediated formation of peripheral
adhesion complexes. We found that activation of ERK5 signaling downstream
of p130CAS is indispensible for this process. Knockdown of p130CAS
attenuates oncogenic signaling induced by membrane targeted PTK6,
including ERK5 and AKT activation. We show that formation of peripheral
adhesion complexes is associated with enhanced cell migration. PC3 cells
expressing membrane targeted PTK6 exhibit increased migratory ability,
which can be impaired by knockdown of p130CAS or ERK5. In contrast,
knockdown of endogenous PTK6 in PC3 cells reduces cell migration, which
is accompanied with decreased phosphorylation of p130CAS and ERK5. Our
study reveals a novel function for PTK6 at the plasma membrane, and
suggests that a PTK6-p130CAS-ERK5 signaling cascade plays an important
role in cancer cell migration and invasion.

