Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative molecular profiling in serous epithelial ovarian
cancer for identification of biomarkers of chemoresistance


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of death due to gynecological
cancers in women in the western world. Development of primary resistance
to carboplatin and paclitaxel poses a major challenge in the management
of serous epithelial ovarian cancer. To identify the molecular mechanisms
underlying the development of instrinsic resistance upon exposure to
standard first-line therapy for ovarian cancer, we used microarrays to
profile the 1) copy number alteration and SNP, 2) mRNA, 3) miRNA and 4)
methylation signatures in a cohort comprising 11 chemoresistant and 14
chemosensitive tumour samples. Copy number analysis showed significant
copy number alterations in the chemoresistant group (gains on chromosomal
regions, 4q, 6q, 8p, 8q, 19q, 7q and 22q; losses on 8p and 10q) compared
to the sensitive group. Gene expression data analysis using
R/bioconductor revealed a set of 248 discriminating genes in the two
cohorts. Pathway analysis of these genes using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
revealed enrichment in genes primarily involved in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition and PI3 Kinase pathway. Additionally, genes
related to the pro-inflammatory cytokine pathways, as well as drug
transport demonstrated significant differential expression between the
two groups. Ongoing concurrent comparative analyses of miRNA profiles
within this cohort have also identified several differentially expressed
transcripts including mir-34b, mir-155, mir-214, mir-200c and mir-143.
Some of these miRNAs have been earlier reported to be associated with
tumour progression. Further integrated analysis will elucidate the
synergistic roles that the genetic and epigenetic alterations in the
deregulation of these and other pathways involved in primary
chemoresistance. Our research findings will yield diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers that will lead to development of specific treatment
regimens for the improved control of serous epithelial ovarian cancer.

