Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the exomic profile of MSI colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in Western
countries. Of all CRC tumors, 15% display microsatellite instability
(MSI) caused by defective cellular mismatch repair. Cells displaying MSI
accumulate a high number of mutations throughout the genome, especially
in short repeat areas called microsatellites. Also point mutations occur
in excess in these tumors. Sporadic MSI CRCs are caused by biallelic
inactivation of the MLH1 gene, usually by promoter hypermethylation. The
MSI tumors have a genetic and clinopathological profile that
significantly differs from microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC. Overall, MSI
tumors have been studied much less than MSS tumors, mainly due to the
high number of mutations in MSI tumors, which makes data analysis and
identification of relevant mutations challenging. To date, several genes
have been proposed as MSI target genes based on targeted searches of
their mutation frequency in microsatellite areas. A few systematic
sequencing studies on colorectal cancer have been published, but none of
them focus on MSI tumors, making this study first of a kind. In this
study, the exome of 25 sporadic MSI tumors and corresponding normal
samples are sequenced to identify changes of somatic origin.
Bioinformatical tools are used to rank the genes and identify true driver
genes based on clustering of missense mutations. The most interesting
findings will be validated by direct Sanger sequencing. In addition to
corresponding normal specimens, samples from healthy Finnish blood donors
as well as data from other ongoing sequencing projects and sequence
databases are used as controls to exclude polymorphisms. The data of all
the 25 tumors has been analyzed and validation of the potential clusters
of missense mutations is in process. The pathological nature of the
changes will be confirmed by possible functional studies. This way we
wish to identify new driver genes in MSI CRC. A detailed understanding of
the molecular background of this tumor type is important for the
development of more efficient screening methods and personalized
treatments. By characterizing changes typical for different MSI tumors,
we wish to identify subtypes within the MSI tumor category that could be
exploited in treatment. Such understanding of MSI tumors could improve
the treatment and hence prognosis of patients diagnosed with MSI type CRC.

