Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker identification through integrative bioinformatics
analysis of serous epithelial ovarian cancer tumor samples


Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecological
malignancies and the fifth major cancer in women in the world. Once
diagnosed, ovarian cancer is usually treated by cytoreductive surgery
followed by platinum and taxane-based chemotherapeutic drugs. However,
resistance to chemotherapy is a major impediment in management of serous
epithelial ovarian cancer (SEOC). We hypothesize that a multifaceted view
of the alterations taking place at multiple cellular levels using
molecular profiling technologies will offer insight into the mechanisms
which play key roles in drug resistant ovarian carcinomas. Also, the
application of appropriate bioinformatic and statistical data processing
and analysis is of utmost importance in identification of key drug
resistance pathways. Current study is performed on 25 high-grade serous
epithelial ovarian tumor tissue samples from patients that demonstrated
favorable, or unfavorable response to chemotherapy treatment. Four
different microarray platforms were used for molecular profiling of the
full sample cohort at different molecular levels, namely: Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP), mRNA expression, miRNA expression and
promotor tiling arrays (methylation)., Integrative and systematic
analyses using up-to-date statistical approaches, such as empirical
Bayes, AUC, SAM, permuted t-test and lassoed PCA, among others, have been
employed on these large datasets obtained through the various
high-throughput platforms. Preliminary mRNA expression analysis
identified an enrichment of upregulated genes involved in cellular growth
and proliferation, cellular development as well as differential gene
expression changes in the TGFB1, TNF, PI3K, IFNG networks, between the
chemotherapy responsive and unresponsive groups. The major molecular and
cellular functions associated were cell-to-cell signaling, molecular
transport and cellular movement. Differences were also seen in the,
CTNNB1, LH and FSH networks as analysed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.
Additionally, genes involved in activation of NFB pathway showed
differential expression in the two groups. Furthermore, our ongoing
development of a streamlined database in which the multiple data types
obtained from our statistical analyses are stored, will allow for
localized or genome wide querying across the multiple levels of
biological data. These approaches and software will potentially elucidate
the synergistic roles that the various biological levels play in the
deregulation of pathways involved in primary chemoresistance. Our
research findings will lead to the determination of putative candidates
for diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers that can be targeted for
development of treatment regimens for the treatment of SEOC.

