Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biological relevance of CYP2D6 phenotype and low dose tamoxifen
activity within a randomized phase II pre-surgical trial.


Background: To further investigate tamoxifen (T) minimal active dose, we
conducted a window of opportunity study in estrogen receptor (ER)
positive breast cancer (BC) patients. The study was a three arms
randomized phase II double blind clinical trial. The participants were
randomized to tamoxifen 10 mg a week vs. raloxifene 60 mg a day vs.
placebo for 6 weeks, which was the average waiting list in our Institute
at the time of this study was conducted. The primary endpoint was tissue
change of Ki67LI. This result was previously reported and overall we did
not observe any KI67LI modulation by treatment. The clinical relevance of
CYP2D6 polymorphisms is controversial, and recently negative data have
been published. Here we present a significant biomarkers modulation by
low dose tamoxifen based on CYP2D6 subjects phenotype. Methods: DNA was
extracted from whole blood by the use of QIAamp DNA blood kit. We
employed the INFINITI analyzer for CYP2D6 genotyping, according to the
protocol of the manufacturer. A total of 14 SNPs were analyzed. To
determine the concentrations of tamoxifen and its metabolites, we used a
high-pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry system.
Expression of Ki-67, ER and PgR were determined by immunohistochemistry.
Serum concentration of SHBG and estradiol were measured by
chemiluminescent immunometric assay; IGF1 and IGFBP3 were determined by
enzymatic colorimetric methods. Results: CYP2D6 was analyzed in the 50
women who took tamoxifen. We found 40% of EM (extensive metabolizer), 48%
of IM (intermidiet metabolizer), 6% of PM (poor metabolizer) and 6% UM
(ultra-rapid metabolizer). The phenotypes were grouped in two classes:
active (EM + UM) and with a reduced activity (IM + PM). Among T
metabolites a significant accumulation of N-desmethyl-Tamoxifen was
present in the reduced activity group (mean plasma level 19.9 vs. 14.4
ng/ml reduced vs. active group p=.05). Endoxifen and 4-OH-Tamoxifen were
not significantly different in the two phenotype groups. Then we
correlated the phenotype with biomarkers modulations. The active
phenotype showed a significant different modulation in Ki67 with a median
chage of 2.5 in the active group and +3 in the reduced one. No
differences on ER or PgR expression were determined by the phenotype.
Among the circulating biomarkers, SHBG in the active group showed a
significant difference compared to the reduced one (median change 8.35
and 2 p=0.05) whereas the estradiol and IGF1/BP3 did not show any
difference between groups. Conclusions: CYP2D6 phenotypes interact with
the biological activity of low dose T. A reduced activity of the enzyme
induces an accumulation of N-desmethyl-Tamoxifen, whereas no significant
differences for Endoxifen. In spite of a similar Endoxifen concentration,
a reduced activity phenotype may influence T activity as demonstrated by
the different modulation of Ki67 and SHBG biomarkers.

