Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anticarcinogenic effects of melatonin on inhibition of fatty
acid transport and 13-HODE production in HT29 human colorectal cancer
occurs via receptor-mediated signal transduction


Over 620,000 people in the U.S. alone this year will be diagnosed with
either breast, prostate, or colorectal cancers, which represent nearly
50% of all reported malignancies. Patients with advanced stage breast,
prostate, or colorectal cancer have only a 35% survival rate at 5 years.
Epidemiological studies have indicated that the risk of these cancers is
increased in persons exposed to excessive sunlight or, interestingly,
ocular light at night, as experienced by night-shift workers. This latter
finding was shown to be associated with a suppression of the nighttime
production of the circadian neurohormone melatonin. Previous work from
this laboratory using perfused, tissue-isolated human breast and prostate
tumors showed that tumor growth and metabolism in vivo is dependent upon
uptake of linoleic acid (LA), the most prominent fatty acid in our
western diet, and its conversion to 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid
(13-HODE). In tissue-isolated human MCF-7 (steroid responsive and
non-responsive) and PC3 prostate tumors perfused in situ with arterial
blood, melatonin inhibits LA-uptake and conversion to 13-HODE, a
lipoxygenase product that stimulates EGF mitogenesis. The present study
explores the effects in vivo of melatonin (500 pM) on perfused, tissue
isolated HT29 colorectal carcinomas in nude rats. HT29 colorectal
carcinoma latency-to-onset and growth rates, respectively, of 12 days and
0.12 0.01 g/day; mean tumor weights were 5.6 0.2 g (n = 20). Colorectal
carcinomas perfused in situ with donor rodent blood for 2 hours
(Controls) revealed a tumor LA uptake and 13-HODE release of 0.86 0.08
g/min/g (20.0 1.6% of arterial supply) and 3.23 0.81 ng/min/g,
respectively. Incorporation of 3H-thymidine into tumor DNA and DNA
content, respectively were 25.9 1.6 dpms/g DNA and 2.7 0.1 g/g tumor.
Carcinomas perfused with arterial donor blood augmented with
physiological nocturnal levels of 500 pM melatonin showed a complete
inhibition of LA uptake, 13-HODE release, ERK 1/2, MEK, Akt, and GSK3
activities, and over a 90% reduction in tumor cAMP levels and
[3H]thymidine incorporation into tumor DNA. Addition of the non-selective
MT1/MT2 melatonin antagonist S20928, forskolin, 8-Bromo-cyclic-AMP, or
pertussis toxin completely reversed the tumor growth inhibitory response.
Also, addition of 13-HODE reversed the inhibition of 3H-thymidine
incorporation into tumor DNA, while having no effect on LA uptake. These
results are the first to demonstrate in HT29 colorectal carcinoma that
nocturnal melatonin levels suppress tumor growth via a melatonin
receptor-mediated signal transduction mechanism. An understanding of this
signaling pathway for the control of LA uptake in cancer could lead to
new approaches for therapeutic intervention and/or chemoprevention.

