Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: cFLIP-regulated and caspase-8-mediated limited cleavage of RIP1
promotes NF-kB activation and inhibits cell death induced by TRAIL


Although TRAIL is considered a potential anti-cancer agent, many types of
cancer cells possess intrinsic or acquired resistance to TRAIL. In
addition, TRAIL has been found to activate NF-B and enhance metastasis in
apoptosis-resistant cancer cells. Notably, caspase-8 activity and RIP1
expression have been shown to be essential for TRAIL-induced NF-B
activation. RIP1 is a dual-function molecule that can be either
prosurvival or prodeath depending on the cellular context. RIP1 contains
an N-terminal kinase domain (KD), a C-terminal death domain (DD) and an
intermediate domain (ID) between the KD and DD domains. The ID domain of
RIP1 is essential for its activation of the NF-B pathway, whereas the KD
domain is required for its induction of apoptosis and necrosis. We have
discovered that, in apoptosis-sensitive cells, caspase-8 cleaves RIP1 in
the KD and ID domains in response to TRAIL treatment, resulting in rapid
depletion of RIP1 and the induction of apoptosis. In apoptosis-resistant
cells, however, cFLIP inhibited caspase-8-mediated RIP1 cleavage in the
ID but not in the KD domain, producing a KD domain-deleted C-terminal
fragment, p51RIP1c. Stable expression of p51RIP1c in RIP1/ cells
significantly promoted NF-B activation and inhibited cell death induced
by TRAIL. Moreover, stable expression of the cleavage sites-mutated form
of RIP1 in RIP1/ cells, not only sensitized the cells to apoptosis
induced by TRAIL, but also to necrosis induced by oxidative stress.
Importantly, in Hodgkin's lymphomas that overexpress cFLIP, as well as in
tumor tissues derived from iMyc-Bcl-XL double transgenic mice, a portion
of RIP1 is constitutively processed to p51RIP1c. Collectively, these data
suggest that cFLIP-regulated and caspase-8-mediated limited cleavage of
RIP1 promotes NF-B activation and inhibits cell death, and that such
cleavage occurs constitutively in certain types of cancers. Thus,
inhibiting cFLIP-regulated RIP1 cleavage could be a new target for
maximizing the effectiveness of TRAIL as an anti-cancer agent.

