Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting E3 ligases in liver cancer stem cells with disruption of
TGF- signaling


Introduction: Hepatocellular Cancer (HCC) remains the 4th common cause of
cancer deaths worldwide. Because it is often diagnosed at an advanced
stage in a fragile cirrhotic patient, effective therapies whether they
are chemotherapy or biologically based are disappointingly few, with a
narrow therapeutic index. Recent studies support a key role for TGF-
signaling in suppressing these tumors. We have previously found that
deletion of Smad3/4 adaptor 2SP results in a dramatic and spontaneous
formation of liver (HCC) with exon 15 mutations in 11% of human HCC.
2SP+/ and 2SP+//Smad3+/ mice develop visceromegaly and multiple cancers
(70% of mice), including HCC spontaneously presenting a strong model of
the hereditary human cancer syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) as well as
the stages of human HCC. High levels of E3 ligases KEAP1 and PRAJA are
observed in human HCCs and in tumors of these mutant mice. Our hypothesis
is that disruption of the TGF- tumor suppressor pathway (through 2SP,
Smad3 and Smad4) leads to a proliferative potential in cells that then
acquire secondary events such as activation of E3 ligases (KEAP 1, PRAJA
and others), presenting these as potentially powerful new targets for
HCC. Methods & Results: (1) 2SP+/ and 2SP+//Smad3+/ mice are ideal models
for a human stem cell disorder (BWS) and HCC progression. (2) Inhibition
of PRAJA in the developing Zebrafish embryo leads to high levels of
apoptosis. (3) PRAJA is a key E3 Ligase that modulates 2SP and Smad3. (4)
PRAJA levels markedly over- expressed in human HCC cell lines and tumor
tissues and promotes HCC cell growth. (5) KEAP1 levels are raised in 2SP
knockout tissues and human HCCs (6) Knocking-down KEAP1 inhibits HCC
tumor cell growth. (7) Seven tumor suppressors are discovered to be
potential targets of KEAP1 in HCC. (8) Triterpenoid derivates (Oleanolic
Acid/RTA 402/RTA 405) inhibit KEAP1/Nrf2 pathway, as well as PRAJA and
inhibit HCC tumor cell growth. Conclusions: Our studies demonstrate that
E3 Ligases KEAP1 and PRAJA are dramatically raised in human and mouse
hepatocellular cancers when TGF- signaling is inactivated, inhibiting
KEAP1 or PRAJA reduces HCC growth. Determining the synergistic
therapeutic effects by targeting both KEAP1 and PRAJA will provide us
important insights into development of new therapeutic targets for HCC.

