Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of homologous recombination (HR) genes in
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) suggests BRCA1 as a potential
biomarker for sensitivity to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibition and disease progression


Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) present with excessive production of
terminally differentiated blood cells derived from myeloid progenitor
cells. 5-10% of Philadelphia (Ph)-negative MPNs, which include
polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET) and primary
myelofibrosis (PMF), may eventually progress to acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) with poor outcome. The lack of curative results with conventional
therapy demonstrates an urgent need to identify pathways perturbed in
MPNs which can be targeted. Previously, complete responses were observed
in MPN patients in a trial combining poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitor ABT-888 with carboplatin and topotecan which was associated
with in vitro PARP inhibitor sensitivity (McDevitt et al., ASH 2011). To
identify patients who will be sensitive to PARP inhibition, we
investigated mechanisms underlying this favorable response. PARP
inhibitors block repair of DNA single stand breaks, allowing these
lesions to persist. The ensuing increase in DNA double stranded breaks
(DSBs) cannot be repaired in cells defective in DNA homologous
recombination (HR) repair and results in an exquisite death response of
the malignant clone. Previously, we have observed using SNP-A arrays that
MPNs have frequent deletions including genes involved in repairing DNA
DSBs and cross-links: 13q (BRCA2), 9q (FANCC) and 11p (FANCF) (McDevitt
et al., ASH 2011). In this study, we examined the prevalence of
inactivation in HR repair genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, Fanconi Anemia genes, ATR,
ATM, BLM) via epigenetic silencing in MPN and AML patients using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). BRCA1 quantitative MSP (qMSP) revealed
promoter hypermethylation in 9% of 59 MPN patients which associated with
decreased BRCA1 transcript. BRCA1 methylation was also observed in AML,
and additional samples will be examined to clarify the role of epigenetic
silencing in disease progression. Hypermethylation of FANCC (3%) and
FANCL (3%) was observed in 30 AML samples at low frequencies, and has not
been observed in the MPN samples examined thus far. Ongoing studies
include SNP arrays to determine if epigenetic silencing complements
allelic loss to generate HR repair defects, DNA damage foci formation
assays with PARP inhibition to investigate functional defects in HR
repair in primary cells isolated from patients in the ABT-888 trial. In
addition, karyotypic profiles will be investigated to determine if
complex cytogenetics are associated with repressed HR repair. In addition
to studying how defects in HR repair, either via promoter methylation or
allelic loss, contribute to disease pathogenesis, our studies will also
determine if epigenetic silencing of HR genes can be used to identify a
subpopulation of MPN patients that will respond favorably to PARP
inhibition.

