Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy as a potential mechanism by which
pantoprazole, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), enhances the therapeutic
effect of docetaxel chemotherapy for solid tumors


Purpose: Luciani and colleagues (JNCI 2004; 96:1702-13) have shown that
PPIs can increase the effects of chemotherapy, most likely by modifying
the acid-base balance across the cell membrane of intracellular
organelles such as lysosomes. Lysosomes are required for autophagy, a
process important for the survival of cells under certain forms of stress
and a possible target for anticancer therapy. Here we evaluated the
effect of pantoprazole (PTP) to (i) inhibit autophagy, and (ii) modify
the cytotoxic effects of the anticancer drug docetaxel (DOC) in vivo and
in vitro. Methods: Autophagy was evaluated by assessing both endogenous
LC3B protein and with an optical LC3B fusion reporter (LC3B-GFP-RFP) that
enables monitoring of autophagosome formation and fusion with the
lysosome. Cytotoxicity of DOC +/PTP was evaluated by a colony-forming
assay for PC3 parental cells, and for cells transfected with shRNAs to
inhibit autophagy. Growth delay of three human xenografts was evaluated
following multiple doses of DOC+/PTP. The distribution of drug effects in
relation to blood vessels was quantified by H2AX, and cleaved caspase 3.
Results: PTP increased endosomal pH and inhibited autophagy in a dose and
time dependent manner. PTP alone was not cytotoxic but increased the
cytotoxicity of DOC for PC3 cells, with smaller effects against cells
with reduced ability to undergo autophagy. Pre-treatment with PTP
increased the growth delay caused by DOC in three different xengografts,
with minimal increase in toxicity. Effects of DOC evaluated by H2AX and
by cleaved caspase 3 decreased with increasing distance from tumour blood
vessels, but were enhanced by pre-treatment with PTP. Conclusions: PTP
increases the therapeutic effectiveness of DOC in vitro and in vivo, and
a potential mechanism is inhibition of autophagy. DOC is the preferred
chemotherapy for men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer, and we plan a phase II study of PTP + DOC in such patients.

