Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization in vivo of two different molecular mechanisms
involved in the development of bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy


Bortezomib (BTZ) is a chemotherapy drug with clinical efficacy in
patients with relapsed/refractory, relapsed and newly diagnosed multiple
mieloma (MM). It acts by inhibiting protein degradation by the
proteasoma, but its clinical use is limited by a dose-limiting
neurotoxicy and by the development of tumor resistance. BTZ-induced
peripheral neuropathy may occur in cancer patients from a variety of
mechanisms, among which proteasoma inhibition and the alteration of
microtubule's stability. To study in vivo these two different mechanisms
involved in the onset of neuropathy, we used a well-characterized rat
model of BTZ-induced peripheral neuropathy. Wistar rat were administered
with BTZ 0.20 mg/kg, three times/week for eight weeks. At the end of the
treatment period the relationship between neurotoxicity and the profile
of the proteasoma inhibition was evaluated in different tissues. The
level of 20S proteasoma inhibition was assessed by the proteasoma
activity assay into blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), sciatic nerve and
brain by fluorimetric assay at different time points. Moreover, we
examined microtubule polymerization in sciatic nerve by comparing the
distribution of acetylated tubulin (a post translational marker of
stabilized microtubule) between polymerized (P) and soluble (S) fractions
by western blot experiments. After eight weeks of treatment, we observed
BTZ-related neurophysiologic alterations and neuropathological damages in
the axons of sciatic nerves and in sensory neurons and satellite cells of
dorsal root ganglia, demonstrating the onset of a peripheral neuropathy.
The recovery of the proteasoma activity was observed within 24 hours from
the drug administration if BTZ was injected in a single acute dose; while
the proteasoma activity remained suppressed if the drug was chronically
administered. This effect was probably due to a cumulative effect of
chronic administration of BTZ on its biological target. Besides, in this
study we increase in the amount of acetylated-tubulin in the polymerized
fraction in BTZ-treated sciatic nerves as compared with control animals.
This preclinical work provide a potential explanation for the development
of BTZ-induced peripheral neuropathy, through the bortezomib's ability to
induce a chronic proteasoma inhibition and to suppress the cytoskeleton
dynamics. In conclusion, this model showed a toxic effect on peripheral
nervous system induced by a prolonged BTZ-induced of proteasoma
inhibition and stabilized microtubule. Therefore this model can be useful
for the study of de novo proteasoma synthesis that can be useful for the
recovery of its activity. Moreover this work will enable us to better
characterize the potential role of microtubule stabilization in the
neurotoxicity of bortezomib. Supported in part by grants from the
Fondazione Banca del Monte di Lombardia

