Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced migration and enhanced killing of glioblastoma multiforme
by mefloquine via alteration of sphingolipid levels


Purpose: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive and
common brain tumors. Current therapy for GBM is limited to surgery,
radiation therapy and chemotherapy using temozolomide (TMZ). However, the
emergence of resistance to TMZ and the ability of malignant gliomas to
migrate away from the primary tumor site often results in recurrence of
the tumor and failure of the initial therapy. This dire scenario
illustrates the urgent need to identify novel agents that will be
effective in TMZ-resistant tumors. In this study, we investigated the
anticancer potential of an FDA approved antimalarial drug, mefloquine
(MQ), in the in vitro model of GBM. MQ's impact on glioma viability,
proliferation and migration was studied in a number of wild type and
TMZ-resistant cells lines. We also evaluated the effects of MQ on
intracellular levels of sphingolipids, which are bioactive lipids and
have been recognized as the mediators of cellular proliferation and
invasion in GBM. Method: To study the effect of MQ on TMZ resistance in
vitro, we generated TMZ-resistant cell lines from established GBM cells.
We evaluated the effects of MQ on cellular viability and proliferation by
MTT assay and colony formation assay. Moreover, cell death was determined
by analyzing the effect of MQ on various markers of apoptosis (e.g.
cleavage of caspase 7 and PARP) using western blot. The effect of MQ on
the migration of both TMZ-sensitive and -resistant cells was evaluated
using wound healing scratch assay and Boyden chamber. To evaluate the
impact of MQ on sphingolipids, we employed a validated LC-MS lipidomic
assay to quantify the levels of various sphingolipids. Results: MQ was
able to reduce cellular viability and proliferation in both TMZ-sensitive
and -resistant GBM cells. MQ exerted its antitumor activity through
induction of apoptosis. Our results further demonstrate the ability of MQ
to reduce the migration of both TMZ-sensitive and -resistant GBM cell
lines. In addition MQ was able to reduce the intracellular levels of
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a pro-survival and pro-migratory
sphingolipid and increased the levels of ceramide, a pro-apoptotic
sphingolipid. Conclusion: Altogether our results demonstrate the ability
of MQ to reduce cellular viability and proliferation and to induce
apoptotic cell death in both TMZ-sensitive and -resistant GBM cells. It
is conceivable that MQ exerts these effects by altering sphingolipid
metabolism. These preliminary data suggests that MQ should be further
investigated for cancer therapeutic purposes for TMZ-resistant GBM.

