Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification and activation of GATA6 sustain oncogenic
lineage-survival in esophageal adenocarcinoma


Objective: To investigate the genomic amplification at chromosomal
18q11.2 in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), to identify the
selected-gene(s) in this amplicon and to define the potential oncogenic
mechanism of the amplified gene(s). Background: Gene amplification is a
tumor-specific event occurring during malignant transformation. Recent
studies have proposed a lineage-dependency (lineage-addiction) model of
human cancer whereby amplification of certain lineage transcription
factors predispose a survival mechanism in the lineage-related tumor
cells. Experiment designs: We utilized an integrative genomic strategy
including arrayCGH, SNP arrays, expression and tumor tissue arrays to
identify and investigate a recurrent gene amplification event at 18q11.2.
We assayed the roles of the identified target gene GATA6 using colony
formation assays and tumor cell implantation in SCID mice. The nature of
GATA6 as a lineage-survival oncogene was investigated using ectopically
expressed GATA6 in EAC cells and EAC cells with siRNA-mediated GATA6
knockdown. Assays of BrdU incorporation, BrdU/TUNEL, WST-1 proliferation,
cell morphology, caspase 3/7 activity, PARP cleavage, Affymetrix
expression arrays, antibody arrays, and western blot were all employed to
determine the possible mechanisms for cell apoptosis upon GATA6 silencing
in EAC cells. Results: We show that recurrent amplification at 18q11.2
occurs in 21% of EAC. Utilization of an integrative genomic strategy
reveals a single gene, the embryonic endoderm transcription factor GATA6,
as the selected target of the amplification. Overexpression of GATA6 is
found in EACs that contain gene amplification. We find that EAC patients
whose tumors carry GATA6 amplification have a poorer survival. We show
that ectopic expression of GATA6 together with FGFR2 isoform IIIb
increases anchorage-independent growth in immortalized Barrett's
esophageal cells. Conversely, siRNA-mediated silencing of GATA6
significantly reduces both cell proliferation and anchorage-independent
growth in EAC cells. We further demonstrate that induction of
apoptotic/anoikis pathways is triggered upon silencing of GATA6 in EAC
cells but not in esophageal squamous cells. We show that activation of
p38 signaling and up-regulation of TRAIL death ligand are detected in
apoptotic EAC cells upon GATA6 deprivation. Conclusion: Our studies
indicate that selective gene amplification of GATA6 during EAC
development and progression sustains oncogenic lineage-survival of
esophageal adenocarcinoma. In light of the lineage-addiction model of
human cancer, our present study suggests that therapeutic deprivation of
GATA6 in GATA6-amplified EAC may improve patient survival.

