Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of an HPLC-UV method for lapatinib
quantification in human plasma


Background and objective: Lapatinib is a 4-anilinoquinazoline that can
reversible and selectively inhibit both human epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR, HER1) and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2
(HER2) tyrosine kinases. As others tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs),
lapatinib shows a large interindividual variability in its
pharmacokinetics (PK). So, the variability in drug exposure to TKIs may
contribute to the variation in anti-cancer PD effect. Causes for this PK
variability are manifold during the different processes of ADME. Up to
date, only mass spectrometry detection is currently available to
determine lapatinib in human plasma. The purpose of this study was to
develop a simple and sensitive high-performance liquid chromatographic
method with UV-Visible detection for quantification of lapatinib
concentrations in human plasma to allow therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM)
of lapatinib in cancer patients. Methods: After a liquid-liquid
extraction with acetonitrile, lapatinib and sorafenib (internal standard,
IS) are separated on Ultrabase C18 column using a mobile phase consisting
of a mixture of 0.02 M ammonium acetate and acetonitrile in a proportion
47:53 pumped at a constant flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. The column was
maintained at 25C and the eluent was monitored at a wavelength of 260 nm.
Results: The calibration curve was linear in the range 200-10000 ng/mL.
The limit of quantification was determined to be 200 ng/mL. Lapatinib and
IS retention times were 3.2 and 10.6 min, respectively. Inter- and
intra-day coefficients of variation were less than 7%. The mean
extraction recovery from plasma was higher than 86%. Conclusion: The
simple, rapid and sensitive HPLC-UV method developed and validated for
the measurement of lapatinib in human plasma using sorafenib as IS can be
applied easily in routine clinical practice for the TDM of lapatinib.

