Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier enhances chemotherapy in a rat
orthotopic HCC model


Background and aims: Chemotherapy, as a regular treatment for
non-resectable and recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), its
efficiency is largely limited by the high incidence of chemo-resistance.
In the past several years, extensive evidence has demonstrated that tumor
cells are exposed to diverse levels of hypoxia (oxygen deficiency) in
vivo and this hypoxic stress acts as one of the major forces inducing
chemo-resistance in tumors. Additionally, some recent studies reported
that improving tumor oxygenation could enhance the therapeutic efficacy,
thereby serving as a novel strategy for cancer management. In this study
we aimed to examine whether a hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier could
increase tumor oxygenation and thus enhance the efficiency of TACE in a
rat orthotopic HCC model. Materials and methods: An orthotopic HCC model
was established and TACE performed as reported previously. Real-time
partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) inside tumor tissue was monitored with
OxyLab pO2TM. Efficacy of O2 carrier in delivering O2 to tumor was tested
by comparing pO2 measurements before or after systemic delivery of the
carrier. Sensitization of chemotherapy (cisplatin) in TACE by O2 carrier
was examined with 4 different therapeutic regimens, which included
cisplatin (1mg/kg) + O2 carrier (0.2g/kg), cisplatin (1mg/kg) + O2
carrier (0.4g/kg), cisplatin (3mg/kg) + O2 carrier (0.2g /kg), cisplatin
(3mg /kg) + O2 carrier (0.4g/kg). In each regimen, a separate group of
rats receiving mock buffer instead of O2 carrier was set as control. For
all the therapeutic regimens, single administration of O2 carrier or mock
buffer via tail vein was performed 1 hr before TACE. Tumor response was
evaluated at macroscopic and microscopic levels at day 21 after therapy.
Results: Both significant augmentation in pO2 readings inside tumor
tissues and a right-shift of pO2 frequency distribution were observed
after O2 carrier administration (0.4g/kg). Tumor growth was most
strikingly inhibited in rats treated with regimen combining 3mg/kg of
cisplatin and 0.4g/kg of O2 carrier. Alteration of average estimated
tumor volume in this regimen was 570 mm3 (pre-trx) vs 410 mm3 (post-trx)
in O2 carrier -treated rats in contrast to 620 mm3 (pre-trx) vs 1980 mm3
(post-trx) in comparable control rats (pBackground and aims:
Chemotherapy, as a regular treatment for non-resectable and recurrent
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), its efficiency is largely limited by the
high incidence of chemo-resistance. In the past several years, extensive
evidence has demonstrated that tumor cells are exposed to diverse levels
of hypoxia (oxygen deficiency) in vivo and this hypoxic stress acts as
one of the major forces inducing chemo-resistance in tumors.
Additionally, some recent studies reported that improving tumor
oxygenation could enhance the therapeutic efficacy, thereby serving as a
novel strategy for cancer management. In this study we aimed to examine
whether a hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier could increase tumor
oxygenation and thus enhance the efficiency of TACE in a rat orthotopic
HCC model. Materials and methods: An orthotopic HCC model was established
and TACE performed as reported previously. Real-time partial pressure of
oxygen (pO2) inside tumor tissue was monitored with OxyLab pO2TM.
Efficacy of O2 carrier in delivering O2 to tumor was tested by comparing
pO2 measurements before or after systemic delivery of the carrier.
Sensitization of chemotherapy (cisplatin) in TACE by O2 carrier was
examined with 4 different therapeutic regimens, which included cisplatin
(1mg/kg) + O2 carrier (0.2g/kg), cisplatin (1mg/kg) + O2 carrier
(0.4g/kg), cisplatin (3mg/kg) + O2 carrier (0.2g /kg), cisplatin (3mg
/kg) + O2 carrier (0.4g/kg). In each regimen, a separate group of rats
receiving mock buffer instead of O2 carrier was set as control. For all
the therapeutic regimens, single administration of O2 carrier or mock
buffer via tail vein was performed 1 hr before TACE. Tumor response was
evaluated at macroscopic and microscopic levels at day 21 after therapy.
Results: Both significant augmentation in pO2 readings inside tumor
tissues and a right-shift of pO2 frequency distribution were observed
after O2 carrier administration (0.4g/kg). Tumor growth was most
strikingly inhibited in rats treated with regimen combining 3mg/kg of
cisplatin and 0.4g/kg of O2 carrier. Alteration of average estimated
tumor volume in this regimen was 570 mm3 (pre-trx) vs 410 mm3 (post-trx)
in O2 carrier -treated rats in contrast to 620 mm3 (pre-trx) vs 1980 mm3
(post-trx) in comparable control rats (p<0.05). Microscopic examination
revealed that complete or nearly complete necrosis occurred more
frequently in rats received this regimen (21%) compared with all the
other regimens (010%). Conclusion: Hypoxic levels inside tumor tissue
could be alleviated by systemic delivery of a hemoglobin-based oxygen
carrier in the rat orthotopic HCC model. Pre-administration of a certain
amount of O2 carrier (0.4g/kg) could greatly improve the therapeutic
efficacy of cisplatin (3mg/kg) in TACE. Whether delivery of O2 carrier in
other ways (multiple dosages or continuous perfusion) is more efficient
in sensitizing cisplatin is worth further investigation.

