Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LHRH Peptide decorated cross-linked micelles for the targeted drug
delivery to breast cancer


We have recently developed a series of micellar nanoparticles (NPs) based
on linear polyethylene glycol (PEG) and dendritic cholic acids (CA) block
copolymer (telodendrimer), for the targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic
drugs in the treatment of cancers. The tumor targeting specificity and
efficiency of drug-loaded NPs might be further improved by the decoration
of cancer cell surface targeting ligands. LHRH (Luteinizing hormone
releasing hormone), a natural hormone peptide, is able to bind
specifically to the LHRH receptor, which has been reported to be
over-expressed in more than 50% breast cancer patients. In the present
study, we incorporated the passive targeting of our micellar NPs and the
active targeting of LHRH peptide into a single platform with an attempt
to further improve the therapeutic index of NPs delivered drugs in the
treatment of breast cancer. We synthesized the LHRH peptide on the
tentagel resin bead via the solid-phase peptide synthesis method, and
demonstrated that human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-435 were able to bind strongly with LHRH peptide beads. Besides
breast cancer cell lines, immunohistochemistry staining further
demonstrated LHRH peptide was able to specifically bind to human breast
tumor tissue as well as transgenic murine mammary carcinoma tissue, but
not to normal breast tissue. Alkyne-containing LHRH peptides were
successfully conjugated to the azide group at the distal PEG terminus of
PEG5k-Cys4-L8-CA8 telodendrimer (cross-linked micelle forming unit) via
the click chemistry. LHRH peptide ligand significantly enhanced the
intracellular delivery of cross-linked micelles in both MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells. In addition, the enhanced uptake of
LHRH-targeted micelles in those cells can be inhibited by the addition of
access of LHRH antibody, indicating the LHRH receptor-medicated
internalization. The co-localization of internalized FITC-labeled
LHRH-micelles with lysosomal compartment in human breast cancer cells
were also observed, suggesting that the endocytosis pathway is likely to
be involved in the internalization process. Furthermore, when loaded with
paclitaxel (PTX), LHRH-micelles had significantly higher in vitro
cellular toxicities against breast cancer cells as compared with the
non-targeted micelles. The in vivo biodistribution, tumor targeting
specificity and therapeutic efficacies of LHRH targeted micelles in
MDA-MB-231 xenograft mouse model are currently under investigation.

