Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTBhsp70 fusion protein targeting mesothelin augments tumor
specific T cell responses and prolongs survival in a murine model of
ovarian cancer


Background and Purpose: There is a clear logic to adjuvant immunotherapy
to enhance conventional treatment of ovarian cancer. Mesothelin (MSLN) is
a surface glycoprotein expressed at high levels by ovarian cancers and is
already a clinical target for immunotherapy. We have created a novel
immunotherapeutic agent that links a single-chain antibody variable
fragment (scFv) targeting MSLN to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) heat
shock protein 70 (Hsp70), which is known as a potent immune activator.
This fusion protein binds MSLN on tumor cells and activates antigen
presenting cells (APCs) through the interaction of MTBhsp70 with CD40 on
APCs, thus promoting tumor antigen presentation and cross presentation
and adjuvanting antitumor specific CD4 and CD8 T cell responses. We
tested the hypothesis that the MSLN targeted MTBhsp70 fusion protein
would improve survival and increase antitumor immune responses.
Experimental Procedures: The efficacy of the MSLN targeted fusion protein
was evaluated in a syngeneic mouse model of papillary ovarian cancer in
immune competent FVB/NJ mice. Mice received 4 intraperitoneal (ip)
treatments with experimental or control proteins from 7 days post ip
injection of BR5FVB ovarian cancer cells. Survival time was compared from
the day of tumor inoculation to that of the onset of disease (clinically
evident ascites). In immunological studies, mice were sacrificed 26 days
after tumor cell inoculation. Splenocytes were stained for CD3, CD4, CD8,
CD25 and Foxp3, and examined by flow cytometry. Splenocytes were
stimulated with MSLN or Her2/neu peptide, or mitomycin C-treated BR5FVB
cells. IFN-generated CD3+CD8+ T cells and CD3+CD8+ T Cell-surface
exposure of CD107a/b were detected by flow cytometry. To examine the role
of CD8+ T cells in the antitumor effect, we performed in vivo antibody
depletion experiments using standard methodologies. Results: MSLN
targeted MTBhsp70 fusion protein significantly delayed the onset of
disease compared to saline (p=0.0025) or an unfused mixture of the
component proteins, MTBhsp70 and scFv(MSLN) (p=0.0149). The survival
advantage of the fusion protein treatment was abrogated by CD8 T cell
depletion in tumor bearing mice. The fusion protein also reduced the
proportion of CD4+CD25+Foxp3 Treg cells (p=0.0159) and increased the
proportion of CD3+CD8+ T cells (p=0.0079) in the spleen compared to
controls. In preliminary studies, significantly greater CD8 T cell
responses were demonstrated in the spleen from the majority of fusion
protein-treated mice compared to controls. The MSLN targeted fusion
protein was also shown to evoke dendritic cell activation as well as
antigen presentation and cross presentation in vitro. Conclusion: MSLN
targeted MTBhsp70 fusion protein treatment of ovarian cancer
significantly enhances survival and slows tumor growth while augmenting
anti-tumor antigen responses in mice.

