Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-16 is an in vivo suppressor of gastrointestinal tumorigenesis


Commonly observed in colorectal cancer (CRC) is elevated expression of
the prostaglandin synthase cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). In normal intestinal
epithelium, the COX-2 mRNA is normally targeted for rapid decay through
RNA elements present within its 3-untranslated region (3UTR), whereas in
tumors rapid mRNA decay is compromised. To understand the mechanisms
controlling COX-2 mRNA fate, we show that the COX-2 3UTR can mediate mRNA
degradation through microRNA-mediated regulation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small non-coding RNAs that bind within the 3UTR of target mRNAs and
function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. MiR-16
was identified to bind the COX-2 3UTR and inhibit COX-2 expression by
promoting rapid mRNA decay. Given the importance of miR-16 in cancer
development, we examined miR-16 expression in CRC tumor specimens and
cancer cells and observed a 2-fold decrease in miR-16 levels.
Additionally, expression of miR-16 in cancer cells attenuated COX-2
expression and prostaglandin synthesis. The in vivo role of miR-16 in the
initiation and development of colorectal cancer was examined using
ApcMin/+ mice, a mouse model of intestinal neoplasia. To accomplish this,
endogenous miR-16 was inhibited in the GI tract using an anti-miR
oligonucleotide (AMO) against miR-16 containing 2-O-(2-Methoxyethyl)
modification with unmodified PO backbone. 50 mg/kg of AMO-16 or control
AMO containing 4 nucleotide-mismatch of the AMO miR-16 sequence were
administered by oral gavage to 8 week old ApcMin/+ and C57Bl/6 control
mice twice a week over a 3-week period. Specific inhibition of miR-16 in
intestinal tissue was observed. Over the treatment course, control mice
displayed normal growth characteristics. Gross and histological analysis
did not reveal any morphological changes in the GI tract of
AMO-16-treated C57Bl/6 mice. In contrast, a significant 2-fold increase
in small intestinal tumor burden was observed in ApcMin/+ mice treated
with AMO-16 compared to control AMO (55.7 +/ 5.0 vs. 99.1 +/ 7.9, P =
0.0001). Gene expression analysis showed increased COX-2 and several
miR-16 target cell cycle regulatory genes including cyclin D1, cyclin D3,
cyclin E1, and CDK6 in AMO-16-treated small intestinal tissue from
ApcMin/+ mice compared with AMO control treated mice, with the greatest
level of altered expression observed in the proximal portion of the small
intestine. These results identify miR-16 as a central
post-transcriptional regulator of COX-2 along with other transcripts
associated with promoting cancer cell proliferation, and reveal miR-16 to
have tumor-suppressor properties in GI tumorigenesis downstream of a
tumor-initiating event.

