Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tumor growth and angiogenesis by Wilms tumor 1(WT1)


Angiogenesis is required for the growth and metastasis of cancers.
Although hypoxia is the major driver of angiogenesis, there is clear
variation in angiogenesis between tumor types, and even between different
tumors of the same histology, suggesting that there may be other factors
that regulate tumor angiogenesis. One molecule that has been implicated
in angiogenesis is a transcription factor known as WT1. WT1 was
originally identified as a tumor suppressor gene, is overexpressed in
tumors of varied origins including sarcomas, carcinomas, and leukemias,
and high level WT1 expression often correlates with poor patient
survival. The role of WT1 in tumorigenesis and the mechanism by which
high WT1 expression confers a poor prognosis are both unclear. Here, we
show that expression of WT1 promotes clonogenic growth in soft agar and a
migratory phenotype in vitro. Tumors arising fromWT1-expressing SK-ES-1
(SKWT1A and SKWT1D) cells grew faster than control (SKNC), while tumors
arising from WT1-silenced MHH-ES (MHshRNA) cells grew more slowly than
control (MHNC). Because our laboratory and others have shown that WT1
regulates VEGF expression, we evaluated tumor vascularity using the
endothelial cell marker CD31. Quantification of CD31 positive area in
tumors grown from SKWT1A and SKWT1D showed 70 80 % more staining compared
to the controls. In contrast, CD31 expression is abolished in tumors
arising from MHshRNA cells. Also, immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis
showed enhanced expression of WT1 in tumor sections correlates with
increased expression of pro-angiogenic molecules such as VEGF, MMP9,
angiopoietin-1 (Ang1), and Tie2, further supporting our hypothesis that
WT1 plays a major role in regulating tumor angiogenesis. Interestingly,
MHHshRNA tumors exhibited decreased expression of VEGF, MMP9, Ang1, and
Tie2 proteins when compared to the MHHNC tumors. To investigate the
mechanism by which WT1 affects tumor growth and vascularity, we performed
a gene expression profiling in SK-ES-1 cells expressing different
isoforms of WT1. We identified a number of genes up- or downregulated by
WT1, including matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9). Luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that WT1 can regulate the activity of the MMP9
promoter, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that WT1 can
bind directly to the MMP9 promoter. Finally, IHC analysis of primary
Ewing's sarcoma samples demonstrate that, as was seen in cell lines and
xenografts, WT1, VEGF, CD31 and MMP9 expression levels in primary Ewing
sarcoma tissues are correlated with each other. In summary, our data
identifies MMP9 as a novel WT1 target gene and demonstrates the WT1
expression directly regulates tumor growth through an effect on
angiogenesis and supports the notion that development of therapeutic
strategies that target WT1 will provide effective treatment options for
WT1-expressing tumors.

