Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fliz-1 regulation of GATA-3 expression in mammary tumor cells


The GATA-3 transcription factor is a master regulator of cell fate
determination in the mammary gland. Mice lacking expression of GATA-3 in
the mammary gland fail to develop complete ductal branching or terminal
end buds, while depletion of GATA-3 from adult mammary glands leads to
loss of markers for luminal cell differentiation and to caspase-mediated
death of luminal cells. In human breast cancer, GATA-3 expression is
found in highly differentiated, estrogen receptor positive tumors with
good prognosis, while loss correlates with highly metastatic tumors
resistant to endocrine therapy. Regulation of GATA-3 expression is
incompletely understood, though a positive-cross regulatory loop with the
estrogen receptor alpha has been defined. The zinc finger protein Fliz-1
represses GATA-3 transcription in the T cell lineage, but its role in
mammary cells is unknown. We hypothesize that Fliz-1 also can repress
GATA-3 expression in mammary cells, leading to loss of estrogen response.
To test this hypothesis, we identified a mouse mammary tumor cell line
expressing high levels of Fliz1, and transfected the cells with a Fliz-1
silencing vector or negative control. Successful knockdown was confirmed
by RT/PCR. Cells with decreased Fliz-1 expression showed increased
expression of GATA-3 and estrogen receptor alpha mRNA relative to
controls. The Fliz-1-expressing cells formed tumors that were insensitive
to tamoxifen treatment when implanted in syngeneic BALB/c mice, while
cells with decreased Fliz-1 expression exhibited decreased tumor growth
in response to endocrine therapy. As a reciprocal experiment, we
constructed a fusion gene linking Fliz-1 with a C-terminal green
fluorescent protein tag. The fusion protein properly localizes to the
nucleus of transfected MCF-7 (human breast cancer) and COMMA-D (mouse
mammary epithelial) cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to show
that Fliz1-GFP binds to an intronic regulatory region within the GATA-3
gene in COMMA-D cells. These data provide evidence supporting a role for
Fliz-1 in control of GATA-3 expression in mammary cells and tumors.

