Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity of a fluorescent
nanobeacon for imaging colorectal cancer


Purpose: One of the potential molecular biomarkers associated with the
development and progress of colon cancer is the Thomsen-Friedenreich (TF)
antigen (Gal1,3GalNac-O-Ser/Thr). Yet while the TF antigen is
overexpressed in colon cancer, it is rarely expressed in normal colon
tissue. For example, it has been shown that TF-associated cancer is a
marker for poor prognosis in patients with colon cancer and for cancer
risk in people with ulcerative colitis. Therefore, it is plausible that
TF antigens are unique and can be used as a target for colon cancer
imaging. The ubiquitous association of the TF antigen with tumors is an
ideal in vivo antigen for early detection. Methods: In this work, we
developed and validated the sensitivity and specificity of a novel
nanobeacon for the detection of colon cancer using human cell lines and
specimens. The nanobeacon is comprised of a submicron-sized polystyrene
nanosphere encapsulated with a hydrophobic fluorescent dye, coumarin6.
The surface was modified with the peanut agglutinin (PNA) and
poly(N-vinylacetamide) (PNVA) moieties. Of note, the former binds to the
cancer-specific carbohydrate antigen, Gal-(1-3)GalNAc, with high
affinity, while the latter enhances the specificity of PNA for the
carbohydrates. Thus, the nanobeacon can detect colorectal tumors by
recognizing the tumor-specific TF antigen through the surface-immobilized
PNA with minimal background signal. Imaging is made via the fluorescence
signal obtained from the coumarin 6 encapsulated in the nanosphere's
core. We used optical imaging, a cell-sorting method and qPCR to quantify
the level of expression of TF and compared with immunohistochemistry
data. Results: The nanobeacon is specific for TF-associated cancer as the
study was performed in colon cancer cells and human specimens. The
cell-sorting analysis revealed that the biorecognition ability of the
nanobeacon was superior to the antibody method. For human cancer tissue
study, we observed that the nanobeacon's binding specificity to the
tissues was corroborated with the immunohistochemistry data, not only in
space, but also through signal intensity. The probe can detect different
levels of TF antigen expression in cancer tissue. To confirm further the
dynamic activity of the probe, we depleted the TF expression on human
colon cancer tissue by treating the tissue with O-glycanase, thereby
abolishing the fluorescence signal. Since the probe is designed to avoid
systemic distribution that may cause subsequent toxicity, we performed a
biodistribution study and found that the compound was not absorbed
through the intestine. As a result, the nanobeacon was not distributed to
the major organs including liver, kidneys and serum. Conclusion: These
data suggest that the nanobeacon is capable of detecting TF-associated
colon cancer. Moreover, in conjunction with colonoscopy, the nanobeacon
is suitable for us as topical contrasting agent.

