Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTUS1 as a potential progression marker at chromosome 8p in
bladder cancer


Aims and background: The search for sensitive and specific progression
and recurrence markers in bladder cancer is a major focus of many
urological research groups. The aim of this study was to identify
biomarkers on chromosome 8p in papillary urothelial carcinoma that give
evidence for progression from non-invasive pTa to invasive pT1 stage.
Candidate genes should be analyzed functionally in cell lines and
validated immunohistochemically using tissue micro arrays. Material and
methods: To find new progression markers 19 papillary urothelial
carcinomas (9 pTa and 10 pT1) were investigated with array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) on Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array
6.0. Therefore, tumor slides were manually microdissected, genomic DNA
was isolated and DNA was hybridized on Affymetrix Chip together with
reference DNA from 167 tumor-free patients. Computational analysis was
performed with free Software Genotyping-Console from Affymetrix. MTUS1
gene and protein expression were investigated in bladder cancer cell
lines and tumor tissue using qRT-PCR, Western blot and
immunohistochemistry. Results: aCGH revealed more chromosomal aberrations
overall as well as more deletions on chromosome 8p in pT1 tumors (50%)
compared to pTa tumors (11%). Several putative progression-associated
genes could be identified on 8p, for example SLC7A2, PDGFL, MTUS1, FGL1
and PCM1. MTUS1 (microtubule associated tumor suppressor 1) was chosen
for further analysis, as in other tumor types this gene is known to be
associated with frequent loss of heterozygosity at 8p22. However, to our
knowledge, not much is known about its role in bladder cancer. Western
blot analysis revealed expression of different isoforms in cell lines
(140, 80 and 60 kDa) and tumor tissue (mainly 80kDa). Immunohistochemical
staining of 128 papillary and 236 advanced tumors showed conflicting
results compared to the aCGH findings. Conclusion: Whereas loss of
genetic material at 8p22 harboring the MTUS1 gene is significantly
associated with a pT1 stage in papillary urothelial carcinoma, pT1 tumors
showed a significantly higher MTUS1 expression than pTa tumors as was
shown by immunohistochemistry. At least in the pT1 group, expression loss
contributed to worse overall survival, suggesting MTUS1 as a prognostic
marker. Functional effects of MTUS1 overexpression will be analyzed in
the future in RT112 cell line.

