Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-nicastrin monoclonal antibodies as therapeutics for invasive
breast cancer: Characterization and function


Background: Nicastrin (NCT) is a crucial structural and functional
constituent of the gamma-secretase (GS) enzyme which activates a range of
substrates (Notch1-4, CD-44, Her-4, E-cadherin, EpCAM etc.), with a
causative role in development and progression of malignant disease. NCT
is the only GS component with a single-pass transmembrane- and a large
extracellular domain (ECD). This makes NCT a potential target for
monoclonal antibody (Ab) therapy. NCT has a GS-substrate recognition
role, while other relevant functional regions of NCT ECD are still
unknown. We have previously determined that NCT is overexpressed in
breast cancers (BC) where its abundance confers worse overall survival in
the estrogen receptor negative patients and that its genetic silencing
inhibit BC cell invasion (Filipovic et al, Br Can Res Tr 2011). Methods:
Using genetic immunization with NCT cDNA, we raised and cloned rat
hybridomas expressing anti-NCT monoclonal Abs (NMA). Four clones (NMA1-4)
were selected and purified, based on their ability to recognise cell
surface NCT on BC cells and potency to inhibit BC cell
invasion/proliferation in vitro. Non-cell based binding of whole Ab IgGs
was measured by ELISA. Cell-based binding was assessed by FACS. BIACore
3000 was used for initial epitope mapping. Antigen for ELISA and BIACore
was the NCT-ECD protein.Results: From the four clones, three induce
functional cellular effects (NMA2-4). NMA1 clone recognises cellular,
cell surface NCT but has no functional effects on BC cells and was used
as negative control in all experiments. In MDA-MB-231 cells, Abs NMA2 and
NMA4 were equally potent at inhibiting invasion (>60%). NMA4 and NMA2
both arrested MDA-MB-231 cell proliferation up to 50%. In 3D Matrigel,
NMA2 and NMA4 conserved growth inhibitory effect and induced
re-polarization of BC acini. By ELISA, the highest Kd was determined for
NMA4. Cell-based quantitative FACS on non-permeabilized MDA-MB231s
allowed determination of Ab binding affinity to the endogenous antigen.
Binding affinity could be ranked in the following order: NMA1 = NMA2 =
NMA4 > NMA3. BIACore competitive binding determined that NMA2 and NMA4
Abs bind spatially distinct regions on NCT. Cell fractionation and
western blotting showed that NMA4 recognizes cell-membrane NCT. NMA2 and
NMA4 reduced Notch activation and vimentin levels in MDA-MB231 cells by
>50%. Conclusion: Our results suggest that anti-NCT Abs may be potential
therapeutics for invasive breast cancer. Data will be presented which
compare the relationship between BIAcore binding affinity,
cross-competition for NCT binding site and functional inhibition of cell
proliferation and invasion, indicating relevance of distinct NCT domains
for distinct cellular processes.

