Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Camalexin, the phytoalexin from Cruciferous Plants, decreases cell
proliferation and induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells


Camalexin, the phytoalexin produced in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana, accumulates in various cruciferous plants upon exposure to
environmental stress and plant pathogens. Besides moderate antibacterial
and antifungal activity, camalexin was reported to also exhibit
antiproliferative and cancer chemopreventive effects. We studied the
effects of camalexin treatment on viability of several prostate cancer
(PCa) cell lines and whether cytostatic/cytotoxic effects of
camalexin-treated prostate cancer cells were due to reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation. As models, we utilized LNCaP and its aggressive
subline, C4-2, as well as ARCaP cells stably transfected with empty
vector (Neo) control or constitutively active Snail cDNA that represents
an EMT model. Previous studies have shown that C4-2 and ARCaP-Snail cells
express more ROS than LNCaP and ARCaP-Neo, respectively. We hypothesized
that camalexin would decrease cell proliferation and increase apoptosis
in PCa cell lines and that the more aggressive cell lines expressing more
ROS would be more sensitive to camalexin. Our results showed that
camalexin treatments led to higher ROS as shown spectrofluorometrically
by the oxidation of H2DCFDA, and this was decreased by co-treatment with
NAC. Cell viability using MTS proliferation assay indicated that
camalexin treatments decreased cell proliferation more significantly in
C4-2 and ARCaP-Snail cells, as compared to LNCaP and ARCaP-Neo cells,
respectively, while PrEC normal prostate epithelial cells were
unaffected. Conversely, camalexin treatments increased apoptosis and
mitocasp activity, which assesses caspase3/7 activity. This was
associated with increased p21 and p27 anti-proliferative markers and
cleaved PARP apoptotic marker as shown by western blot analysis. NAC
reduced camalexin-induced ROS in ARCaP-Snail cells and abrogated
camalexin-mediated cell proliferation decrease and apoptosis increase,
showing that camalexin is mediating its effects through ROS. In
conclusion, camalexin retarded prostate cancer cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis via increased ROS generation. Interestingly, it was
more potent in aggressive PCa cells expressing higher levels of ROS and
did not affect normal cells. Hence, this phytoalexin has a strong
potential as a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of especially
metastatic prostate cancer cells that express high levels of ROS.
Supported by grants P20MD002285-01 & G12RR003062-22.

