Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dll4-Fc, an inhibitor of Dll4-notch signaling, suppresses liver
metastasis of small cell lung cancer cells through down-regulation of
NF-kappa-B activity


Purpose: The Notch signaling regulates cell-fate decisions during
development and postnatal life. Recent studies have demonstrated that the
signaling through Notch and its ligand Dll4 in tumor endothelial cells
plays an important role in cancer angiogenesis. Little is known, however,
about the role of Dll4-Notch signaling between cancer cells, and how it
affects on cancer metastasis. We therefore assessed the importance of
cancer cell Dll4-Notch signaling in cancer metastasis produced by human
small lung cancer cells. Experimental Design: On the basis of previous
studies, we generated retroviral vectors encoding a soluble dimerized
form of Dll4 fused to the human IgG1 Fc constant region (Dll4-Fc) that
acts as a blocker of Dll4-Notch interactions. Dll4-Fc was introduced into
human small cell lung cancer cell lines that express high level of Dll4
and Notch (SBC-3 and H1048 cells), and low level of Dll4 (SBC-5 cells).
The cells were intravenously inoculated to natural killer cell-depleted
SCID mice, and the multiple-organ metastases were evaluated. Result: The
number of liver metastasis in the mice inoculated with SBC-3 and H1048
cells expressing Dll4-Fc were significantly lower than that of liver
metastasis formed by control transfectant cells. However, the number of
liver metastasis formed by SBC-5 cells was not significantly different
between Dll4-Fc expressing and control cells, suggesting that Dll4-Notch
signaling in cancer cells plays important role in liver metastasis of
small cell lung cancer. Metastatic colonies in other organ such as lung,
kidney and bone were not affected by Dll4-Fc overexpression in each cell
lines. In order to study the molecular mechanism of the effect of Dll4-Fc
on liver metastasis, genes associated with metastasis were screened by
PCR array system. Seven genes (MMP7, IL1B, MMP1, S100A4, MMP10, CXCR4,
SERPINE1) were down-regulated in Dll4-Fc-overexpressing SBC-3 and H1048,
but not SBC-5 cells, compared with control transfectant cells. Since most
of the selected genes were NF-kappa-B target genes, we explored whether
NF-kappa-B is involved in cancer cell Dll4-Notch signaling. By using
luciferase assay, we observed that NF-kappa-B activity was down-regulated
in Dll4-Fc-overexpressing SBC-3 and H1048 cells, but not SBC-5 cells,
compared with control transfectant cells, indicating that Dll4-Fc
inhibits NF-kappa-B activity in small cell lung cancer cells by
suppressing Dll4-Notch signaling. Conclusion: These results suggest that
Dll4-Notch signaling in cancer cells plays a critical role in liver
metastasis of small cell lung cancer, by regulating the NF-kappa-B
signaling.

