Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex DNA damage cooperates with Ink4a/Ink4b/Arf loss to
generate high grade gliomas in transgenic mouse models


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are highly lethal brain tumors for which
exposure to ionizing radiation is the only known risk factor. GBMs are
characterized by alterations in three core signaling pathways: 1)
RTK-PI3K-Akt, 2) ARF-MDM2-p53, and 3) Ink4a-RB1. In order to objectively
evaluate the risk of developing malignant gliomas from exposure to
ionizing radiation, we have developed mouse models with brain-specific
deletions of Ink4a, Ink4b, Arf, or PTEN in logical combinations
representing the progression of primary or secondary GBMs. Specifically,
we examined whether complex, unrepairable DNA lesions, such as those
induced by charged particles, are more tumorigenic compared to simple
breaks that are efficiently repaired, such as those induced by
gamma-rays. Using CDKN2A knockout murine astrocytes in which the tumor
suppressors Ink4a and Arf have been deleted (abrogating RB1 and p53
pathways, respectively), we have previously shown that Fe ions are highly
tumorigenic compared to gamma-rays. Importantly, we find that loss of a
third tumor suppressor, Ink4b, is a critical event in tumorigenesis
triggered by charged particles. Based on our in vitro results, we are now
using transgenic mouse models with brain-specific deletions of these
three key tumor suppressors (Ink4a/b, Arf) to evaluate radiation-induced
gliomagenesis in vivo. Nestin-Cre; Ink4ab-/-; Arf f/f mice were
irradiated with a single dose of 1 Gy Fe ions or 4 Gy gamma-rays. While
gamma-induced damage is efficiently repaired by 1 day, unrepaired DNA
lesions are evident up to 1 month following Fe irradiation. Most
importantly, we find that combined loss of Ink4a/b and Arf cooperate with
DNA damage by Fe ions resulting in a high incidence (25%) of malignant
gliomas. These highly heterogeneous tumors arise with an average latency
of 4.8 months and are classified as high grade (III and IV) glial tumors.
Although tumors arising after gamma irradiation are also classified as
high grade, they arise with a longer latency (5.6 months) and occur at a
lower frequency (15%). To identify key genetic alterations involved in
radiation-induced gliomagenesis, tumors are being analyzed by array CGH
and microarray platforms. Strikingly, a 20- to 40-fold amplification of
the MET proto-oncogene is observed in a high percentage of tumors. As MET
is frequently amplified in human GBMs, it is likely that MET activation
may be an important event in tumorigenesis triggered by charged particles
in these mouse models. We are hopeful that a global and accurate picture
of the genetic changes underlying radiation-induced gliomagenesis will
emerge from this study. The data obtained will allow for comparison with
changes recently identified in human gliomas by large scale genomic
analyses and will allow us to understand whether radiation-induced
gliomas are fundamentally similar to those occurring spontaneously, both
in mouse models and in human patients.

