Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pigment epithelium-derived factor prolongs survival and enhances
the in vivo antitumor activities of low-dose chemotherapy in
castration-refractory prostate cancer


Background: The development of metronomic/low-dose administration of
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs has recently shown great promise in
the treatment of castration-refractory prostate cancer (CRPC). Pigment
Epithelium-Derived Factor (PEDF) is a natural angio-inhibitor which has
been shown to be down-regulated in prostate cancer. We have previously
demonstrated that the over-expression of PEDF in human CRPC PC3 cells
decreased tumor growth in vivo. In the present study, we further
validated PEDF anti-tumor properties in the highly metastatic CRPC
LNCaP-derivative CL1 cells. We also hypothesized that PEDF could enhance
the cytotoxic effects of low-dose docetaxel (Doc) and cyclophosphamide
(CTX) chemotherapies in vivo. Methods: Human CRPC PC3 and CL1 cell lines
were genetically modified to stably co-express the fluorescent DsRed
Express protein with PEDF. Resulting cell lines were characterized in
vitro for PEDF expression by Western blot and for proliferation by growth
curves and clone formation in Matrigel. PEDF anti-tumor effects were
assessed on established subcutaneous xenografts in mice treated with Doc
(5mg/kg ip every 4 days, 1mg/kg ip daily for 10 days, 0.5mg/kg ip every
other day), CTX (10-20mg/kg in the drinking water) or placebo. Survival
studies were performed by injecting CL1 cells, pre-mixed with 50nM
hr-PEDF or carrier control, into the left lobe of the dorsal prostate of
anesthetized mice. Results: We showed that PEDF inhibits the
proliferation and induces the differentiation of all CRPC cells tested in
vitro. Similarly, PEDF expression decreases the development of
subcutaneous PC3 and CL1 tumors in immune-compromised mice by 85% and
70%, respectively. In the survival study, we found that all control
animals die within 61 days after surgery while 50% of PEDF-pretreated
animals were still alive. Most importantly, we demonstrated that PEDF
enhances the cytotoxic effects of low-dose chemotherapy on established
tumors (best Doc dose: 1mg/kg for PC3 and 5mg/kg for CL1; best CTX dose:
10mg/kg for both PC3 and CL1). Conclusions: This data reinforces the
significance of PEDF as a potential new target for the treatment of
advanced prostate cancer. It also emphasizes PEDF as a promising new
agent to enhance the anti-tumor efficacy of low-dose Doc and CTX
chemotherapies.

