Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of monoclonal antibodies against the GPCR CXCR4 and
the ion channel Hv1 using virus-like particles


Antibodies against cancer targets are routinely used for facilitating
early detection of disease, for diagnosing and predicting disease
severity, and for guiding and monitoring therapeutic treatment. Ten of
the 11 FDA-approved cancer therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
target membrane proteins, and membrane proteins comprise >30% of existing
cancer biomarkers. MAbs that recognize conformation-dependent epitopes on
membrane proteins are usually the most valuable type of antibody because
they can bind to critical structures of the receptor that can be
exploited for its detection or inhibition. However, the development of
conformational MAbs against membrane proteins is especially challenging
because these proteins require a lipid environment to maintain their
native structure, can be difficult to purify, and are usually poorly
represented by peptide immunogens. To overcome these limitations, we have
developed a novel technology, the Lipoparticle, which incorporates high
concentrations (10-100 fold greater than cells or membrane preparations)
of properly folded and oriented membrane proteins onto the surface of
virus-like particles (VLPs). Here, we have used Lipoparticles as
immunogens to generate monoclonal antibodies against two important
membrane protein targets: the GPCR CXCR4, associated with tumor
metastasis, and the ion channel Hv1, implicated in B cell activation.
Lipoparticles containing each target were used to immunize mice,
eliciting sera with strong and specific immunoreactivity. Screening of
>900 hybridomas using Lipoparticles resulted in the identification of
CXCR4-specific MAbs validated for reactivity against surface expressed
antigen by immunofluorescence. Epitope mapping and functional studies
demonstrate that each MAb binds a conformational-dependent epitope on the
second extracellular loop capable of inhibiting ligand-dependent
signaling in vitro. Similar studies are currently ongoing to isolate MAbs
against the Hv1 ion channel, with strong sera responses against Hv1
detected in immunized mice. Our data highlight the utility of
Lipoparticles for generating MAbs and screening hybridomas to isolate
antibodies against challenging cancer membrane protein targets.

