Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog pathway inhibition delays regrowth of ovarian cancer
following paclitaxel and carboplatinum only if initiated immediately
after completion of chemotherapy


The high mortality associated with ovarian cancer is attributed to the
lack of any reliable early detection method, unknown pathogenesis of the
disease, and the development of recurrent and chemoresistant tumors.
Current efforts have focused on the identification of therapeutics that
may be used independently or in combination with current chemotherapeutic
regimens to reduce tumor volume. To date, limited research has focused on
preventing or delaying disease recurrence. The Hedgehog (Hh) signal
transduction pathway is inactive in most adult cells. Malignant
activation of the Hh pathway through the signaling protein Smoothened
(Smo) occurs in a broad range of cancers, including ovarian. IPI-926 is a
potent orally delivered small molecule that targets the Hh pathway by
inhibiting Smo. Recent studies from our laboratory provide evidence that
IPI-926 slows serous ovarian cancer growth in a primary human tumor
xenograft model. More importantly, IPI-926 delays the resurgence of tumor
growth typically observed after cytoreduction with paclitaxel and
carboplatinum (T/C) treatment. Our current objective was to assess
whether this effect of IPI-926 required that the Smo inhibitor be
administered during a critical window following T/C treatment to prevent
the resurgence of tumor growth. To test our hypothesis, mice bearing
human ovarian cancer xenografts were treated with vehicle or T/C. T/C
treatment was withdrawn following significant reduction (30-50%) in tumor
volume. The original vehicle treated cohort was divided into 2 arms which
then either received IPI-926 or continued on vehicle for the duration of
the experiment. Mice in the T/C cohort were divided into 3 groups. Group
1 received vehicle alone (T/C-Vehicle), group 2 received IPI-926
immediately following the last T/C dose (T/C-IPI-926) and group 3
received no vehicle or IPI treatment for 14 days following the last T/C
dose (Window). Group 3 was then maintained on IPI-926 treatment starting
at day 15 post-T/C withdrawal. The withdrawal of T/C led to a dramatic
increase in tumor volume in the T/C-Vehicle group. As previously
observed, tumor growth inhibition was maintained in mice receiving
IPI-926 immediately following the cessation of T/C treatment. In
contrast, delaying the administration of IPI-926 following T/C prevented
the suppression of tumor growth as evidenced by the increased tumor
volume. Our data suggest that blocking Hh pathway activity immediately
following chemotherapy maintains and prolongs the inhibitory effect of
chemotherapy on ovarian tumor growth. The absence of an IPI-926-mediated
inhibition of tumor resurgence following a 14-day delay in treatment
supports the concept that there is a critical period for tumor
re-establishment. Our data, along with those of others, suggest that the
early stages of ovarian tumor re-growth may be dependent on Hh pathway
signaling.

