Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The absence of cleaved caspase-3 in circulating tumor cells
detected using a non-enrichment-based assay


Background: The role of cleaved caspase-3 as an integral player in the
apoptotic process of mammalian cells has prompted the investigation of an
assay to detect cleaved caspase-3 in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) as
one way to assess CTC viability. Methods: Using a previously developed
non-enrichment based assay, nucleated blood cells and CTCs are adhered to
a single slide. An antibody for cleaved caspase-3 was incorporated into
the assay in addition to the existing antibodies for cytokeratin (to
identify tumor cells) and CD45 (to identify white blood cells), as well
as a nuclear stain (DAPI). The modified assay was initially tested on
cultured MCF 10a cells spiked into normal donor blood. Before spiking,
apoptosis was induced in these cells using staurosporine. Following
validation of the assay in cell lines, the assay was performed using
blood samples from 9 different breast cancer patients, as well as 3
different normal donor samples. Results: CTCs were detected in the
patient samples as single cells, as well as clusters. The results of the
assay showed that only 1 out of 896 detected CTCs was positive for
cleaved caspase-3 (0.11%). Of these CTCs, 134 of them were found to be in
clusters, and all 134 were negative for cleaved caspase-3, indicating
that whether in clusters or as single cells, the vast majority of CTC's
detected with this assay are not undergoing irreversible apoptotic
processes via cleaved caspase-3. The results also showed that 0.40% of
white blood cells in healthy donors expressed cleaved caspase-3, compared
to 0.51% of the white cells in cancer patients, indicating that healthy
donors and cancer patients express cleaved caspase-3 in their white blood
cells at nearly the same rate. Conclusions: The morphologic
characterization used in this platform to select healthy-appearing cells
identifies a population of circulating tumor cells with virtually no
evidence of caspase-related ongoing apoptosis, a finding that supports
the morphologic impression of viability.

