Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes using
immortalized lung bronchial epithelial cells and small airway epithelial
cells


We have immortalized human normal proximal bronchial epithelial cells
(HBECs) for the study of lung tumors arising in the central compartment
of the lung, and now have over 30 of these strains (growing in defined
KSFM media) including many isogenic derivatives with various oncogenic
changes (Can Res 2004, Can Res 2006). We have extended this by
immortalizing normal distal (small airway) epithelial cells that serve as
models for the study of tumors arising in the peripheral compartment of
the lung. Using Cdk4 and hTERT exogenous expression vectors (as used for
HBECs) and serum free defined media, we have immortalized (N= 19) human
small airway epithelial cells (HSAECs) from peripheral lung. We have
characterized the HBECs and HSAECs and found they have the property of
lung basal /stem cells. In the current study, we compared the genome-wide
RNA expression profile of HBECs/ HSAECs with 108 lung tumor cell lines
and identified a panel of genes that are differentially expressed in
these two cell types. We found 1200 genes that are 2 fold over expressed
in tumor cells lines compared with HBECs/HSAECs (p 0.005). Many known
lung tumor oncogenes such as members in cancer/testis (CT) antigen
families (XAGE/GAGE/MAGE), proliferation-promoting E2F2 transcription
factors, and Kinesin family are over-expressed in tumor lines validating
the comparison strategies. In addition, we found genes that had been
shown to be involved in other types of tumors but had not been reported
in lung tumors. Importantly, we found several genes that had not been
implicated as oncogenes previously, thus these are potential novel
oncogenes for lung tumor transformation. We also found 1300 genes that
are 2 fold over expressed in HBECs/HSAECs compared with tumor cell lines
(p 0.006). Many of the genes are lung basal cell markers (Keratin and
Laminin family members) or known tumor suppressor genes (p53 binding
genes and metallothionein genes) as expected. Like in the case of tumor
specific genes, we found several genes that had not been reported
functioning in the inhibition of tumor transformation. Thus, these are
candidate tumor suppressor genes. The current study showed that the
immortalized HBEC and HSAECs are ideal models for the discovery of novel
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.

