Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROS differentially regulates prostate cancer cell survival


In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that ROS accumulation correlates
with increasing aggressiveness of prostate cancer cells, and increased
expression of oncogenic molecules, such as CXCR4. CXCR4 is a G-Protein
Coupled Receptor that is heavily implicated in the metastatic
dissemination of prostate tumor cells to bone marrow. In cancer and other
cell models, CXCR4 expression and activity increases in response to
hypoxic environments and/or oxidative stress. Cells react by inducing
expression of a HIF1 transcription factor, which enhances expression of
targeted genes involved in adjusting to oxidative stress and cell
survival. HIF1 has been shown to directly induce the expression of CXCR4
in prostate cancer cells. Therefore, generation of ROS in tumor tissues
may critically influence CXCR4-mediated expression and functions,
ultimately encouraging cancer progression. In this study, we elucidate a
mechanism by which ROS induces CXCR4 expression and function in prostate
cancer cells. We initially investigated the role of ROS on the
phosphorylation of AKT (p-AKT) and ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2) in DU145 and 22Rv1
prostate cancer cell lines. Using H2O2 as our model of ROS, we found that
H2O2 induced a gradual expression of p-AKT and p-ERK1/2 by western blot
analysis, which was abrogated by the ROS scavenger N-acetyl cysteine
(NAC). It has been shown that PTEN is a negative regulator of AKT and
ERK1/2 signaling, and that ROS accumulation inactivates PTEN phosphatase
function; hence, we determined whether the increase in p-AKT and p-ERK1/2
expression was due to loss of PTEN function. By performing a phosphatase
assay, we found that H2O2 inhibited PTEN catalytic activity compared to
untreated cells, while NAC abrogated these effects in both cell lines.
The increase in ROS and loss of PTEN has been shown to correlate with
CXCR4-mediated function; therefore, we determined the role of H2O2 on
CXCR4 expression. We found that H2O2 induced CXCR4 expression in DU145
cells, but not in 22Rv1 cells. Furthermore, we investigated whether
ROS-mediated induction of CXCR4 was HIF1 dependent. Interestingly, H2O2
induced expression of HIF1 in DU145 cells, which was abrogated by siRNA
for HIF1. HIF1 expression decreased in 22Rv1 cells, which correlated with
apoptosis, as confirmed by Annexin-V analysis. Finally, we observed that
the H2O2-mediated increase in CXCR4 enhanced transendothelial invasion
and migration in DU145 cells in a CXCR4 dependent manner. Our study
suggests that ROS differentially regulates CXCR4 expression and function
in prostate cancer cells, suggesting that ROS plays a differential role
on heterogeneous tumor mass.

