Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel TrkA HTS assay using template directed self
assembly (TDA)


Tropomyosin-related kinases (Trks A, B, and C) are a family of
membrane-associated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) activated by
neurotrophins. RTKs are shown to be implicated in Alzheimer's disease,
depression, pain sensation and various cancers including tumor cell
growth and survival signaling. Inhibitors of Trk receptor kinases might
provide targeted treatments for neurodegenerative diseases, pain and
cancer. One strategy to indentify Trk isoform-specific inhibitors is to
develop an assay where compound libraries can be screened in a
more-native membrane associated lipid environment. Template-Directed Self
Assembly (TDA) is a biomimetic technology designed to restore
membrane-associated proteins to more relevant physiological conditions.
This technology utilizes recombinant histidine-tagged proteins bound to
the surface of nickel-chelated liposomes. Recombinant HIS-tagged proteins
are engineered on the correct terminus of the protein to reflect the
polarity of the enzyme with respect to the membrane. This allows the
HIS-tagged proteins to bind to the liposome creating an environment much
like a cellular membrane. The lipids in TDA are fully fluid within the
surface of the liposome and associated proteins can rotate freely.
Furthermore it promotes the formation of high-order structures such as
homo- or hetro-dimers and shown to recruit accessory factors. Coupling of
membrane associsted kinases to liposomes reconstitutes an environment
that confers proper polarity, stereochemistry, topology and other
critical properties, thereby creating a more relevant biochemical assay.
To date, we have shown that several RTKs have enhanced biochemical
specific activity and substrate specificity that resembles physiological
conditions when coupled to TDA. The TDA approach restores TrkA activity
to a more-native environment; therefore, we hypothesize that we will be
able to identify compounds that are more specific and selective. To
address the need of an enzyme assay near a lipid membrane environment, we
successfully developed a robust TrkA assay shown to exhibit up to 20-fold
increase in specific activity and a reduction in Km for ATP relative to
TrkA in a conventional assay. Furthermore, TDA-associated TrkA exhibited
a rapid and robust trans-activation, obviating the need for a
pre-activation step. Thus, assays of TrkA coupled to TDA have the
potential to identify more chemically diverse and specific inhibitors. We
are currently (1) validating the TDA assay with known inhibitors (2)
screening a focus library to identify novel hits (3) testing the primary
hits against a small kinase selectivity panel and (4) designing and
developing a TrkA specific reporter cell line to confirm the primary
hits. The advantages of the TDA technology will be also discussed against
other therapeutically relevant RTKs.

