Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway-based serum microRNA profiling and late-stage non-small
cell lung cancer survival


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the leading causes of cancer
mortality in the world. Nearly half of NSCLC patients are diagnosed with
late-stage (stage III or stage IV) disease with an overall 5-year
survival rate of less than 15%. Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) is
involved in cancer development, progression, and prognosis. Circulating
miRNAs have been suggested as promising biomarkers for early detection,
diagnosis, and prognosis of cancer. This ongoing study is to utilize a
pathway-based approach to screen and validate serum miRNA profiles as
predictors of survival using a large patient cohort of 348 late-stage
NSCLC patients. In the testing set, pre-treatment serum miRNA profiles of
four good- (survival time > 24 months) and four poor-survival (survival
time Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer mortality in the world. Nearly half of NSCLC patients are
diagnosed with late-stage (stage III or stage IV) disease with an overall
5-year survival rate of less than 15%. Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs)
is involved in cancer development, progression, and prognosis.
Circulating miRNAs have been suggested as promising biomarkers for early
detection, diagnosis, and prognosis of cancer. This ongoing study is to
utilize a pathway-based approach to screen and validate serum miRNA
profiles as predictors of survival using a large patient cohort of 348
late-stage NSCLC patients. In the testing set, pre-treatment serum miRNA
profiles of four good- (survival time > 24 months) and four poor-survival
(survival time < 6 months) patients were compared by Taqman miRNA
microarray. 145 highly expressed serum miRNAs were identified from
initial screening and 37 of them were mapped onto the 3UTRs of a panel of
23 genes in TGF- signaling pathway using computer-assisted miRNA target
prediction program. All 37 miRNA candidates were subject to large-scale
single-probe quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). The expression level of serum miR-30d, which targets TGFBR2
and was a previously reported serum marker for early-stage lung cancer
survival, was significantly higher in the poor-survival group than the
good-survival group (P = 0.0208) in our study population of late-stage
lung cancer. The level of serum miR-93-3p that targets SMAD7 was
significantly higher in the poor-survival group than the good-survival
group (P = 9x106). The 2-year overall survival rate in patients with high
serum miR-93-3p expression was significantly lower than that in those
with low expression with an adjusted HR of 1.59 (95% CI, 1.24 - 2.03) (P
= 2x104). In contrast, serum level of let-7g, that targets SMAD2, TGFBR1
and the activin A receptor family was significantly lower in the
poor-survival group than in the good-survival group (P = 7x104), and
patients with high serum let-7g expression was associated with a
significantly better two-year survival (HR=0.48, 95% CI, 0.37 - 0.62, P =
1x108). Our results suggest that serum miR-30d, miR-93-3p and let-7g may
become valuable biomarkers for survival in late-stage NSCLC patients.

