Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UVB irradiation induces nuclear translocation of TC-PTP in
keratinocytes


Ultraviolet B radiation (UVB) can cause DNA damage, induce gene mutations
and modulate intracellular signal transduction contributing to the
development of skin cancer. Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (Stat3) modulates various physiological functions,
including apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, and tumor angiogenesis
through regulation of gene expression, and its constitutive activation is
associated with human epithelial cancers. Recent studies demonstrated
that T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) dephosphorylates
activated Stat3 in keratinocytes after UVB irradiation. In the current
work, we report that TC-PTP translocates from the cytosol to the nucleus
and dephosphorylates Stat3 following UVB irradiation in keratinocytes.
Western blot analysis showed that TC-PTP mainly localized in the
cytoplasm of keratinocytes and translocated from cytoplasm to nucleus
upon UVB irradiation. Immunofluorescence analysis of the exogenous
expression of TC-PTP confirmed its nuclear translocation, and showed that
nuclear translocation of TC-PTP occurs independently of its phosphatase
activity. Nuclear translocation of TC-PTP was increased with increased
dose of UVB exposure. Dephosphorylation of Stat3 by TC-PTP was enhanced
after UVB irradiation of cultured keratinocytes with nuclear accumulation
of TC-PTP. Knockdown of TC-PTP with siRNA suppressed dephoshorylation of
Stat3 and enhanced cell viability in response to UVB irradiation. UVB
irradiation also induced expression of 14-3-3, a protein that has been
shown to be involved in the transport of proteins. Further studies
revealed that UVB-induced nuclear translocation of TC-PTP was effectively
inhibited by knockdown of 14-3-3, suggesting 14-3-3 is involved in
nuclear import of TC-PTP. These results indicate that TC-PTP plays an
important role as a regulator of Stat3 signaling in keratinocytes upon
UVB irradiation. Nuclear translocation of TC-PTP is regulated by a
14-3-3-dependent signaling pathway, resulting in the rapid
dephosphorylation of activated Stat3 in the nucleus.

