Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker discovery: Correlation of peripheral and tumoral markers
in matched tumor and plasma samples


The heterogeneous nature of cancer necessitates the identification of
markers to enable selection of appropriate patients for treatment and
maximal clinical benefit. Archival tumor specimens are often analyzed for
biomarkers, but may not reflect a patient's current state of disease.
Predictive biomarkers from matrices amenable to longitudinal analyses and
available through minimally invasive approaches could greatly improve
patient outcomes by ensuring that the right patient receives the right
drug. Peripheral markers are accessible and attractive, however, their
relationship to tumoral markers, tumor biology as well as to primary or
secondary clinical outcomes are not well understood. We examined the
correlations among potential predictive biomarkers in these compartments
by performing proteomic profiling of 300 analytes in 100 matched plasma
and tumor tissue samples derived from patients with colorectal cancer
(CRC), gastric, ovarian, and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) of
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) or adenocarcinoma (ADC) histology. Using
Luminex based assays, we identified markers which clearly distinguish
each tumor type from another and may be useful for patient enrichment.
VEGF has been implicated in processes essential to tumor growth and
disease progression such as angiogenesis, vasculogenesis and hypoxia.
Therefore, we examined the relationship between VEGF levels in plasma
samples and tumor tissue within individual patients and explored the
correlations among VEGF levels with those of other soluble proteins in
the same matrices as well as with a marker of blood vessel formation in
the tumors, microvessel density (MVD). We found the highest level of VEGF
in the plasma of CRC patients but NSCLC patients displayed the highest
level of VEGF in tumors. A poor correlation between tumoral or plasma
VEGF levels was observed in all of the samples except for those from
NSCLC SCC patients. MVD analysis of the tumors revealed that gastric and
NSCLC ADC patients have a higher density of capillary vessels than other
cancers. Surprisingly, no intra-patient correlation was detected between
tumoral levels or plasma levels of VEGF and MVD. However, modest
correlations between the MVD level in tumor tissues and select analytes
in plasma have been observed for some tumor types. Further evaluation of
these potential protein signatures in additional matched patient samples
and animal disease models is warranted to generate clinically testable
hypotheses for patient enrichment. The validity of these protein
signatures as predictive markers for response to targeted therapies must
be tested clinically. These novel and unexpected findings suggest that
some peripheral markers may accurately represent the biology of the tumor
and that matched sample analysis can provide an approach for biomarker
discovery and hypothesis generation.

