Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell heterogeneity and chromosomal abnormality in malignant
pleural effusion (MPE) samples of lung cancer


Tumor heterogeneity is a hallmark of cancer and different types and
stages of cancer express various cell surface markers and gene expression
profiles. To understand tumor cell heterogeneity in lung cancer, we have
developed a model using primary cells from malignant plural effusion
(MPE) from lung cancer patients. Using this system we have identified
CD44high expressing primary tumor cells within the MPE that form colonies
in soft agar in vitro, and tumors in SCID/NOD mice. RT-PCR analysis
revealed higher expression of cancer stem cell markers, Bmi-1, hTERT,
EZH2, and OCT-4 in CD44high cells than the CD44low cells. Thus, our
results indicate that primary tumor cells of MPE derived from lung cancer
patients show heterogeneity with respect to their tumorigenic potential.
To determine whether we could detect cytogenetic abnormalities in these
samples, we performed karyotypic analysis of the MPE samples. Fibroblast
cell line GM 05399 served as a control for these studies. Hyperdiploidy
was observed in all three MPE samples and in the control cell line H
2122. Abnormalities of chromosome 1p were observed seen in all the
samples that led us to perform FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization)
studies using a dual color 1p36 and 1q25 probe (control). We found LOH
(loss of heterozygosity) at 1p36 in two MPE samples and rearrangements of
both 1p/1q regions in the third MPE sample. Cell line H 2122 contained
one normal chromosome 1 and an unbalanced translocation of unknown origin
at 1p36 consistent with deletion of 1p. Our studies therefore suggest
that this 1p36 deletion could result in the inactivation of a tumor
suppressor gene and other sequences that include miRNA 34a also mapped to
this locus. Chromosomal rearrangements further indicate that cells with
multiple phenotypes including those related to metastasis, and
chemo-radiation resistance might be present in the MPE samples. These
studies provide a good basis suggesting that MPE would serve as a useful
model system for the identification of genes related to the progression
of lung cancer.

