Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of PPAR gamma in chemoprevention of renal cell carcinomas by
omega-3 fatty acids


Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma (RCC) is the tenth most prevalent cancer,
accounting for 80% of all renal cancers. Recent results of a 15.3 year
epidemiological study indicate that a diet of fatty fish offers
significant protection against RCC, results which were attributed to
omega-3 fatty acids. The question arises as to the molecular mechanisms
by which such omega-3 fatty acids exert their protective effect. Our
hypothesis is that omega-3 fatty acids exert their protective effects by
activating Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors (PPARs), which in
turn reduce the level of expression of Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF).
The level of HIF increases as a consequence of mutations in the von
Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene, which is key to the development of RCCs. In
order to begin to examine this hypothesis, primary cultures of renal
proximal tubule cells have been examined with regards to their growth
responses to PPAR agonists (as the RCC is of renal proximal tubule
origin). Fibrate drugs and thiazolidinediones (TZDs) have been identified
which have a high affinity for two different classes of PPARs, PPAR alpha
and PPAR gamma, respectively. We have observed that troglitazone, a PPAR
gamma agonist, caused a 4-fold increase in growth a concentration range
of 10-6 to 5 x 10-6 M. A physiologically produced PPAR gamma agonist,
Prostaglandin J2 (PGJ2), was also growth stimulatory, albeit to a lesser
extent. In contrast, fenofibrate, a PPAR alpha agonist, had no
significant affect. In order to examine our hypothesis that PPAR gamma
activation affects signaling through HIF, transient transfection studies
were conducted with HRE-Luc, a HIF regulatory element/reporter construct.
The level of expression of HRE-Luc increases during hypoxia, leading to
metabolic changes that promote tumorigenesis. Our studies with HRE-Luc
indicate that 5 x 10-6 M troglitazone reduces the increase in HRE-Luc
gene expression by over 50%. Similarly, troglitazone prevented the
increase in HIF which occurs under normoxia in the presence of the
hydroxylase inhibitor dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG).

