Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic tools for pancreatic cancer survival


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a devastatingly lethal disease with the median
survival time below six months after diagnosis. To extend survival time
of PC patients, the most optimal treatment strategy that accounts for
patient-specific clinical and demographic characteristics must be taken.
To assist clinicians and patients in choosing optimal treatment regimens,
innovative prognostic models and computing tools aimed at estimating
outcomes from prospective treatments are needed. In this study, the
impact of distinct demographic (race, gender, age at diagnosis, and
marital status) and clinical (tumor stage, grade, location within the
pancreas, histologic subtype, type of surgery performed) risk factors on
the survival of PC patients was analyzed. To do this, data from the SEER
9 database (1974-2008) were used. PC cases that were not first primary or
lacked histopathologic confirmation were omitted. Remaining data (nearly
90,000 PC cases) were characterized by age at diagnosis, stage, grade,
subsite, and histologic subtype, and stratified by gender and race. To
fully use the statistical power of the available data, we utilized a
recently developed procedure [Cancer Informatics. 2011; 10:31-44]. By
accounting for interrelated age-period-cohort effects, this procedure
allowed us to use PC data collected during 35 years in the SEER 9
registries, rather than limiting the utilized data to the commonly used
5-year long cross-sectional data. Initially, we estimated potential risk
factors by using univariate Cox proportional hazards (PH) regression
models. To build a multivariate Cox PH model, all variables that were
univariately significant were used as initial predictors of PC survival.
From these predictors, the final ones were determined by backward
elimination. The estimates of the significant risk factors were used to
build a prognostic statistical model for PC survival. This model allows
one to numerically estimate the probability for a patient to be alive at
any specified time after PC diagnosis, based on the patient's risk
factors. Validation performed by a bootstrap method and by using an
external dataset (namely, the subset of PC cases from the SEER 17
registries presented in the eight geographical areas that are not
included in the SEER 9 database) shows that the accuracy and precision of
outcomes assessed by this model exceed those provided by other analogous
tools. The computerized implementations (nomograms) of the resulting
model run on different types of devices (desktops, smart phones, and
tablets) and have user-friendly graphical user interfaces. The real-time
use of such nomograms will help clinicians and patients in choosing the
most appropriate treatments. After consideration of the
computer-generated assessments, clinicians will be able to assist PC
patients in making a more educated decision regarding potential
treatments.

