Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aligning xenograft models to glioblastoma (GB) patient tumors to
assess chemovulnerability of patients


Primary human tumor xenografts are able to capture the heterogeneity of
Glioblastoma (GB) and can be exploited to identify patterns within
genomic profiles that are indicative of vulnerability to specific
treatments. The Ivy Genomics-Based Medicine (IGBM) project accessed 40 GB
human xenografts in mice, and evaluated responses to 4 different
treatments. Additionally, gene expression data for 301 GB patient samples
from TCGA were investigated to find context-specific gene interactions
within patient data. We discovered 12 sets of genes with corresponding
subsets of samples with coherent expression profiles, termed contexts.
Each context was tested for enrichment of known GB subtype and patient
survival characteristics. Our goal is to align 39 xenografts to the 12
contexts, by establishing the similarity between the context samples and
the mapped xenografts, and characterize the contexts for their potential
therapeutic responses. We first eliminated confounding probe
hybridization from mouse tissue. Removal of such confounders was
inadequate to resolve gene expression disparity between xenografts and
patients. We then used Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to determine a set of
genes that retain similar distributions between the expression data sets,
resulting in 1,650 genes. Initial clustering analysis indicated that
xenografts could be aligned across GB patient samples, without any
apparent segregation. Xenografts were mapped to individual contexts using
various similarity metrics such as correlation or Mahalanobis distance
based on expression data, and the quality of alignment was measured using
Silhouette scores. We have also conducted preliminary survival analysis
for the xenograft subgroups (untreated) and compared it to the patient
data. Finally, we compared survival data of 12 treated xenografts to
determine if certain contexts are associated with improved or decreased
sensitivity to four different drug regimens (temozolomide (TMZ), TMZ PARP
inhibitor, BEZ235 and Sorafenib). The results indicated that xenografts
aligned to context enriched with classical subtype showed sensitivity to
the TMZ drug regimens, whereas contexts enriched with proneural subtype
were sensitive to TMZ PARP inhibitor and resistance to TMZ; xenografts
not associated with a subtype showed resistance to Sorafenib. While this
preliminary analysis needs to be strengthened with more xenografts,
aligning xenografts to GB patients with specific gene expression patterns
appears to be promising in finding drug targets for these patient groups.
This project has been funded in whole or in part with Federal funds from
the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under
Contract No. HHSN261200800001E. The content of this publication does not
necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and
Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or
organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. government. It is also
supported by the Ben&Catherine Ivy Foundation.

