Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a computational framework for disease knowledge
modeling and clinical treatment decision support and its application to a
rare cancer, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST)


The integration of increasingly diverse and disparate data about cancers
into routine, clinical decision making is a major challenge for
evidence-based medicine. Clearly, a comprehensive knowledge model for an
indication is the mandatory basis for any evidence-based treatment
prioritization. But the concepts and technologies required to collate
pre-existing disease and treatment data into useful models of molecular
etiology are unclear. Rare cancers represent a particularly pressing need
in this context: finding, combining and enriching the few existing
disease information and using it for treatment prioritization,
-especially in the off-label setting-, beyond the often poorly defined
standard of care. To address this, we have developed a novel framework
for computational disease knowledge modeling and tested its applicability
for clinical treatment decision support in the concrete case of a patient
with a recurrent rare cancer, -malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(MPNST). Our primary goal was to construct for the first time an
integrated disease knowledge model for MPNST by combining bioinformatics
and text data mining methods. Text data mining on scientific literature
(Pubmed) defined a basic corpus of 317 publications with a total of 145
proteins/ genes and sequence variants, associated with indication terms
for MPNST. This set was enriched in factors involved in the MPNST-related
tissue and cell biology, and candidate drivers of familial and sporadic
MPNST forms. From this core we identified 47 factors, for which
MPNST-associated genomic or transcriptomic aberrations had been reported.
Utilizing information on molecular pathway association, physical protein
interactions and cellular process association of these factors from an
integrated oncology data warehouse, we then built a network
representation of the molecular disease knowledge for MPNST. Our model
highlights and links several molecular modules potentially involved in
MPNST, such as deregulated receptor tyrosine kinases involved in cell
proliferation, adhesion and invasion, the downstream signaling pathways
PI3K/ AKT/ MTOR and RAS/ RAF/ MAPK, and their interactions with the
familial MPNST candidate genes NF1 and NF2. Using drug database and
clinical trial information we matched treatment options and associated
open protocols to our model and mapped the target promiscuity profiles of
drugs to network topography. This validated the clinical relevance of
molecular entities in our model and allowed treatment prioritization for
the patient based on the modeled disease knowledge. Our study
demonstrates the feasibility of computational disease knowledge modeling
in oncology and the utility of it in providing mechanistic evidence for
treatment prioritization in poorly understood rare cancers such as MPNST.

