Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALK-driven lung cancer: Potential therapeutic strategies for
treatment and prevention of drug resistance


The identification of oncogenic molecular drivers in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) has allowed biologically targeted therapies to improve
clinical outcomes in the treatment of NSCLC. ALK gene rearrangements are
observed in a sub-set of NSCLC patients who demonstrate high response
rates to treatment with the oral kinase inhibitor, crizotinib.
Unfortunately, disease progression is inevitable, either through
intrinsic or acquired resistance. A recently completed series of
crizotinib-resistant, ALK+ NSCLC patients by our group demonstrates two
broad categories of resistance: (1) continued reliance on ALK signaling
(via secondary mutations in the ALK kinase domain or ALK gene fusion copy
number gain) or (2) loss of reliance on ALK signaling (e.g. via reliance
on alternate oncogene signaling). Here we investigate potential
therapeutic strategies when ALK signaling is retained. In an effort to
minimize drug resistance to crizotinib in ALK+ NSCLC, we performed a
genome-wide shRNA synthetic lethal screen to identify genes whose
depletion synergizes with crizotinib in ALK+ NSCLC lines. We identified
several genes involved in nucleotide synthesis and DNA metabolism,
including dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and the trifunctional enzyme
encoded by GART, which are substrates for inhibition with pemetrexed.
Indeed, ALK+ NSCLC cell lines show increased sensitivity to pemetrexed in
vitro. Identification of this cellular process as critical for ALK+ NSCLC
is also consistent with clinical data demonstrating that patients with
ALK+ NSCLC exhibit an increased clinical benefit on pemetrexed compared
to other molecular subgroups of NSCLC. We also identified genes involved
in chaperone function in our synthetic lethal screen. As such, we
investigated whether proper folding and prevention of degradation was
essential for continued reliance on ALK signaling. Both non-mutated
EML4-ALK wild-type and EML4-ALK containing kinase domain mutations
(including a novel mutation, G1269A) are sensitive to HSP inhibition with
17AAG. By identifying critical cellular processes in ALK+ lung cancer and
employing therapies that target these pathways, improved treatment
strategies can be derived to treat and prevent resistance in this
molecular subtype of NSCLC.

