Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transducer of Cdc42-dependent actin assembly-1 (Toca-1) promotes
breast cancer invasion and metastasis


Metastatic breast adenocarcinomas display activation signatures for
signaling pathways like Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) that
trigger cell motility and tissue invasion. Transducer of Cdc42-dependent
actin assembly-1 (Toca-1) is an adaptor protein that promotes recruitment
of actin nucleation promoting factors to cellular membranes. Although
these actin regulatory proteins have been linked to breast cancer
invasion, the role of Toca-1 in this process has not been reported. In
this study, breast cancer cell lines with a range of invasive and
metastatic properties were used, including human MDA-MB-231 cells, rat
MTLn3 cells, and MTLn3-B1 cells expressing human EGFR. To test the role
of Toca-1 in these cell lines, we established stable Toca-1 knock-down
(KD) using lentiviral delivery of shRNAs specific for human or rat
Toca-1. Here, we report that Toca-1 is expressed in highly invasive
breast cancers cell lines, and that Toca-1 co-localizes with components
of invadopodia. Toca-1 localizes to the filamentous actin-rich core of
invadopodial protrusions in breast cancer cells that are actively
degrading the extracellular matrix (ECM). In MDA-MB-231 cells, Toca-1 KD
led to a significant defect in EGF-induced cell migration and invasion
compared to control cells. This correlated with a significant defect in
EGF- and Src-induced ECM digestion in Toca-1 KD compared to control
MDA-MB-231 cells. Next, control and Toca-1 KD cells were compared in
orthotopic mammary tumors that were xenografted in Rag2/:[[Unsupported
Character - Symbol Font ?]]c/ mice. Although Toca-1 KD remained effective
in primary tumors, no defects in tumor growth were observed. However,
mice bearing Toca-1 KD cell tumors displayed a significant reduction in
spontaneous metastases to the lung. Similar results were obtained for
weakly metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells and highly metastatic MTLn3-B1 cells.
In contrast, Toca-1 was not required for efficient lung seeding following
tail vein injection of MTLn3-B1 cells, suggesting that Toca-1 functions
at an early step in the dissemination of metastatic breast tumor cells.
Taken together, this investigation identifies Toca-1 as a pro-invasive
protein in breast cancer, and a potential therapeutic target to limit
tumor metastasis.

