Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase 1 (mPGES-1) is expressed in
neuroblastoma and may represent a novel target for therapy


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonic tumor of the sympathetic nervous
system and it is the most common extracranial tumor affecting young
children. Despite a very intensive treatment regimen high-risk
neuroblastoma patients still have a poor prognosis. Neuroblastoma cells
are enriched in arachidonic acid, over express COX-2 and produce
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) that acts as an autocrine or paracrine survival
and proliferation factor by induction of Akt signaling. Downstream of the
COX enzymes, specific synthases converts PGH2 into the different
prostaglandins. Microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase-1 (mPGES-1)
specifically converts PGH2 to PGE2 and is thought to primarily couple to
COX-2. The aim of this study is to investigate if inhibition of mPGES-1
could represent an alternative therapeutic approach to COX- inhibition in
neuroblastoma. We could detect expression of mPGES-1 in a panel of seven
human neuroblastoma cell lines. Stable knock down of mPGES-1 expression
using shRNA significantly reduced the clonogenic capacity and treatment
with the mPGES-1 inhibitor CAY1052 inhibited neuroblastoma cell growth in
vitro. By immunohistochemistry and western blot we could also detect
expression of COX-1, COX-2 and mPGES-1 in tumors from the transgenic
TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma. Treatment of homozygous TH-MYCN
mice with 10 mg/L diclofenac for two weeks, starting at the age of four
weeks, significantly reduced tumour weight compared to untreated animals.
Ex vivo analysis with LC-MS/MS of tumor tissues from diclofenac treated
animals revealed a significant decreased level of COX metabolites
compared to control. The expression of mPGES-1was not affected by the
treatment. Furthermore the number of cells staining positive for cleaved
caspase-3 were higher in the treated tumors indicating induced apoptosis.
In conclusion, our results show that mPGES-1 is expressed in
neuroblastoma therefore mPGES-1 might represent an alternative way of
reducing NB growth through specific PGE2 inhibition.

