Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD34+ progenitors resident in the human white adipose tissue
promote tumor angiogenesis, growth and metastases in orthotopic models of
breast cancer


Similarly to neoplasia, the human white adipose tissue (WAT) shows in
vivo a robust angiogenic switch when the growth rate exceeds a given
expansion threshold. Also, anti-angiogenic drugs have been found to
inhibit WAT development in postnatal mice. We have recently reported that
the human WAT is very rich in CD45-CD34+ progenitors that express high
levels of angiogenesis-related genes and can generate in culture
endothelial cells and tubes as efficiently as mesenchymal cells
(Martin-Padura et al, Cancer Res, in the press). Compared to the bone
marrow, WAT contains >250 times more CD45-CD34+ progenitors with
endothelial differentiation potential. The co-injection of human
WAT-derived CD45-CD34+ progenitors from lipotransfer procedures
contributed to tumor vascularization and significantly increased tumor
growth and metastases in several orthotopic models of human breast cancer
in immunodeficient NSG mice. At variance with human bone marrow-derived
CD34+ progenitors, which were found to incorporate only in perivascular
sites of tumor vasculature, confocal z-stack studies showed that mature
endothelial cells derived from human WAT-CD34+ progenitors lined the
lumen of fully functional cancer vessels where red cells were found to
circulate. Transwell and 3D time-lapse studies in collagen showed that
human WAT cells significantly promoted an EMT switch as well as breast
cancer cell directionality, migration and invasion towards a gradient of
several different chemo-attractants. Autologous lipotransfer for
tissue/organ reconstruction is used in patients who had surgical removal
of breast and other types of cancer. We have recently reported a study of
321 consecutive patients operated for primary breast cancer who
subsequently underwent a lipotransfer procedure, compared with two
matched patients with similar characteristics who did not undergo
lipotransfer (Petit et al, Ann Oncol, in the press). In this study, the
lipotransfer group exhibited a higher risk of local events compared to
the controls when the analysis was limited to intraepithelial neoplasia.
A second data revision after prolonged follow-up confirmed this
significant difference. The dissection of the different roles of purified
populations of WAT-derived progenitors and mature cells seems urgent to
clarify which WAT cell populations can be used safely for breast
reconstruction in cancer patients.

