Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A SNP538(G>A) in ABCC11/MRP8 determines sensitivity for
antimetabolites


Anti-metabolic drugs, such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) derivatives and
antifolate drugs, such as methotrexate (MTX) and pemetrexed (MTA) are
often used for widespread cancer treatment in current clinical practice.
5-FU is often used with 5-chloro-2, 4-dehydropyrimidine (CDHP) which
inhibits degradation of 5-FU by inactivating dehydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD) as DPD inhibitory fluoropyrimidines (DIF) in clinical
because it is known that there is inverse correlation between DPD and
sensitivity for 5-FU. MTA is new generation antifolate and the treatment
with MTA in combination with cisplatin provides a similar efficacy, with
better tolerability and more convenient administration than existing
platinum doublet treatments for advanced-stage non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Because thymidylate synthase (TS) gene which expression is
higher in squamous cell carcinoma compared with adenocarcinoma is
considered as the most powerful molecule for resistant to MTA, MTA is
only used for non-squamous cell lung cancer treatment. Thus, like DPD and
TS gene, biomarkers for these anti-metabolic anti-cancer drugs are
partially known. However, we can't predict the effects of these
anti-metabolic drugs for cancer treatment from these biomarkers because
DPD is inactivated by its inhibitor in advance and the MTA isn't used for
therapy of squamous cell carcinoma in which TS expression is high. So we
need to find new biomarker for anti-metabolic anti-cancer drugs which is
available for clinical use. ABCC11/MRP8 (ABCC11) is one of the
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters which involve the resistance for
some anti-cancer drugs. ABCC11 gene has a nonsynonymous SNP 538(G>A)
which is important for determination of the type of human earwax that is
expressed. We have previously shown that ABCC11 directly confers
resistance to MTA and 5-FU by enhancing efflux of the intracellular
anti-cancer drug. Therefore we examined whether ABCC11 is a predictive
marker for MTA and 5-FU sensitivity in NSCLC. At first, we analyzed the
relationship between the ABCC11 gene expression and IC50 for MTA or 5-FU
in NSCLC cells, but there was no correlation. Next, we classified NSCLC
cell lines into two groups based on the phenotype of SNP538(G>A) in
ABCC11: combined G/G and G/A group and A/A group. Then we compared the
distribution of the IC50 for MTA and found that the A/A group showed a
significant reduction of the IC50 compared with combined G/G and G/A
group in adenocarcinoma cell lines. We also compared the distribution of
the IC50 for 5-FU in combination with CDHP in NSCLC cell lines and found
same result. These results indicate that the SNP(538G>A) in ABCC11 gene
is an important determinant for sensitivity of MTA and 5-FU under
inhibition of DPD. Our results may suggest that ABCC11 SNPs is one of the
biomarkers for MTA and DIF.

