Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor effects using a combinatorial targeted
treatment strategy in a preclinical model of prostate cancer


Recently developed strategies use molecular targeting agents specifically
designed to target core regulatory signaling pathways of prostate
cancers. Growth factors mediate such signaling pathways that include the
PI3K/Akt/PTEN/mTOR and Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK as well as other essential
pathways. However various mitigating factors such a genetic variation,
molecular diversity, diverging and converging of signaling pathways make
it improbable that treatment with any single agent will result in any
long-term enhanced tumor. To overcome such problems we investigated the
toxicity and antitumor effects of combined targeted therapy with the mTOR
inhibitor everolimus and the mulitkinase inhibitor sorafenib in a
prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mouse model of human prostate
cancer. Non-castrated and castrated (castrate-resistant prostate cancer
model, CRPC) PSACre;PTENloxP/loxP mutant mice, harboring prostate tumors,
were treated with everolimus and sorafenib alone or in combination for 4
weeks beginning at 16 weeks of age. All mice appeared healthy and there
were no significant differences in body weights, appearance or
histological findings between treatment and control groups at the end of
the experiment. Our analysis shows that combination therapy has a
significant additive inhibitory effect on tumor growth in non-castrate
prostate cancer model (8.8 mm2, 7.7 mm2, 7.1 mm2 and 5.2 mm2 in control,
everolimus, sorafenib and combination treatment groups, respectively,
p=0.005). Ki67 expression was decreased and positive TUNEL apoptotic
bodies was increased in combination treatment groups compared to
everolimus and sorafenib monotherapy in both non-castrated and CRPC
treatment groups. We also show that combination therapy, but not
monotherapy, cooperated to inhibit phosphorylation of the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4B (eIF4B). Our study provides preclinical
evidence that a targeted combination treatment strategy with everolimus
and sorafenib is tolerable and leads to improved treatment efficacy over
single agent therapy.

