Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association of mitochondrial DNA content with bladder cancer
risk and outcome


Mitochondrion plays essential role in energy production and apoptosis
process from the initiation to regulation of apoptosis. Many studies have
showed the association of dys-regulated mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) with
the development and progression of cancer, aging and longevity, and
neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we will test the hypothesis
that variation in mtDNA content (also called mtDNA copy number) may be
associated with individual's bladder cancer risk and clinical outcome in
a case-control study of 1026 bladder cancer patients and 980
healthy-controls. We will also assess the association of mtDNA content
with progression/recurrence in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
patients and overall survival in muscle invasive and metastatic bladder
cancer (MIMBC) patients. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
in peripheral blood lymphocytes was used to measure mtDNA content. We
observed significantly lower mtDNA content in bladder cancer patients
(mean = 1.05, SD = 0.36) than controls (mean = 1.11, SD = 0.39) with P
value Mitochondrion plays essential role in energy production and
apoptosis process from the initiation to regulation of apoptosis. Many
studies have showed the association of dys-regulated mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) with the development and progression of cancer, aging and
longevity, and neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we will test
the hypothesis that variation in mtDNA content (also called mtDNA copy
number) may be associated with individual's bladder cancer risk and
clinical outcome in a case-control study of 1026 bladder cancer patients
and 980 healthy-controls. We will also assess the association of mtDNA
content with progression/recurrence in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
(NMIBC) patients and overall survival in muscle invasive and metastatic
bladder cancer (MIMBC) patients. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction in peripheral blood lymphocytes was used to measure mtDNA
content. We observed significantly lower mtDNA content in bladder cancer
patients (mean = 1.05, SD = 0.36) than controls (mean = 1.11, SD = 0.39)
with P value < 0.001. When we categorized the mtDNA content using the
quartile distribution in controls, Lower mtDNA content (less than 1st
quantile) was associated with 1.69-fold increased risk of bladder cancer
(95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.17 to 1.68), compared to those who have
higher mtDNA content (greater than 4th quartile). In patients with MIMBC,
we also observed the significant association of lower mtDNA content with
poor survival. After categorizing the mtDNA content using quartile
distribution in patients who were alive, there is a significantly
increased risk of death for patients with lower mtDNA content (hazard
ratio = 1.75, 95% CI = 1.11 to 2.77). There is also a significantly
reduced median survival time (44.5 months vs 25.4 months, log-rank P =
0.004). However, there is no significant association of mtDNA content
with progression/recurrence in NMIBC patients. In conclusion, low mtDNA
content is associated with significantly increased risk of bladder cancer
risk and poor survival. The resulted from our study will contribute to
personalized risk prediction and may also become potential molecular
targets for prevention.

