Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual PI3K/mTOR blockade by NVP-BEZ235 sensitizes head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma to radiotherapy


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer worldwide accounting for over 500,000 new cases annually.
Chemoradiotherapy is a mainstay of treatment. However, long-term survival
rate has only improved marginally; and the severe toxicity often
associated with chemoradiotherapy advocates a need for better
radiosensitization strategies. Akt/mTOR pathway is frequently activated
in HNSCC cells. This study sought to explore whether NVP-BEZ235, a novel
imidazo [4,5-c] quinoline derivative that inhibits PI3K and mTOR kinase
activity, has radiosensitization effect in the treatment of HNSCC. MTT
assays revealed that NVP-BEZ235 dose-dependently inhibited the growth of
two HNSCC cell lines, SAS and OC3 at low nanomolar concentrations; IC50
values were 27.87 nmol/L in SAS cells and 42.63 nmol/L in OC3 cells. By
using clonogenic assay and median effect analysis, we found that dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibition effectively sensitized SAS and OC3 cell lines to
radiation with CI (combination index) value Head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer worldwide accounting
for over 500,000 new cases annually. Chemoradiotherapy is a mainstay of
treatment. However, long-term survival rate has only improved marginally;
and the severe toxicity often associated with chemoradiotherapy advocates
a need for better radiosensitization strategies. Akt/mTOR pathway is
frequently activated in HNSCC cells. This study sought to explore whether
NVP-BEZ235, a novel imidazo [4,5-c] quinoline derivative that inhibits
PI3K and mTOR kinase activity, has radiosensitization effect in the
treatment of HNSCC. MTT assays revealed that NVP-BEZ235 dose-dependently
inhibited the growth of two HNSCC cell lines, SAS and OC3 at low
nanomolar concentrations; IC50 values were 27.87 nmol/L in SAS cells and
42.63 nmol/L in OC3 cells. By using clonogenic assay and median effect
analysis, we found that dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition effectively sensitized
SAS and OC3 cell lines to radiation with CI (combination index) value <1,
indicating a synergistic effect. By using flow cytometry analysis, when
SAS and OC3 cells were sequentially exposed to NVP-BEZ235 and radiation,
an increase in the subG1 population was observed, indicating that
NVP-BEZ235 sensitized HNSCC cells to radiation by augmenting apoptotic
cell death. In SAS xenograft nude mice model, combination therapy with
oral administration of 45mg/kg/day of NVP-BEZ235 and 3 Gy radiation for 5
days was well tolerated and significantly enhanced the antitumor effect
of radiation (p=0.005). Our results indicated that dual PI3K/mTOR
blockade effectively sensitizes radiotherapy for HNSCC. Clinical trials
along this line are warranted. (The study was supported by the grant
DOH100-TD-B-111-001)

