Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A reliable mouse model for hepatic metastasis of colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in
the United States and most deaths occur due to metastasis. Metastasis is
the spread of cancer cells from the primary tumor to distant organs and
is the final most devastating step of the disease. When colon cancer is
diagnosed prior to metastasis, the five-year survival rate is
approximately 90%, however, after metastasis has occurred, the survival
rate drops to less than 10%. Metastasis is a complex multistep process
that occurs through multiple interactions between cells in the primary
tumor and host derived cells in the primary tumor and target organ
microenvironment. The early stages provide an opportunity for early
diagnosis and therapeutic intervention to block its progression, however
they occur silently and undetected in the patient. Because of this,
little is known regarding the genetic and molecular events that direct
these steps and metastasis is often diagnosed at the final stage when
little can be done for the patient. To understand the mechanisms of the
early stages, it is important to develop a mouse model that can
faithfully recapitulate the progression of CRC from the growth of primary
tumor to liver metastasis, the frequent target organ. Current models
utilize splenic or portal vein injection which by-pass the early stages
of the disease. We established a mouse model of CRC with a high frequency
of spontaneous liver metastasis by cecal implantation of a highly
metastatic mouse carcinoma cell line, isolated by in vivo education of
CT26 colon carcinoma cells, into immunocompetent Balb/c mice. When
injected into the cecum of Balb/c mice, these cells give rise to liver
metastasis with a ten-fold higher frequency compared to the parental cell
line. They proliferate at a higher rate in vivo when injected into Balb/c
mice as compared to ex vivo in cell culture. They are more invasive than
CT26 cells in wound healing, matrigel invasion, and migration assays.
Analyses of blood sera from tumor bearing mice by immunoblotting suggest
that they can induce an in vivo microenvironment with a higher metastatic
potential compared to CT26 cells. We labeled these cells with mCherry
fluorescent protein and firefly luciferase to allow analyses of
metastatic progression by in vivo imaging, confocal microscopy, and flow
cytometry. We combined this model with transplantation of bone marrow
cells expressing the green fluorescent protein to begin to decipher the
complex interactions between tumor and bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs)
necessary to promote metastasis. Analysis of the liver in tumor bearing
mice showed that BMDCs are recruited into the liver prior to the arrival
of metastatic cells. Therefore, this model recapitulates all stages of
CRC growth and progression to liver metastasis and will facilitate the
elucidation of the genetic, molecular, and cellular mechanisms that
mediate the crosstalk between the primary tumor and target organ
microenvironment to promote hepatic metastasis.

