Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR kinase mediates dissemination and colonization of breast
cancer metastasis


Background: Early events of metastatic dissemination arise from the
ability of tumor cells to acquire a number of biological changes which
allow for their survival in distal microenvironments. Among the early
events that initiate disseminated tumor populations include
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and increased potential for
invasion that will ultimately lead to colonization of distal sites. The
PI3K/mTOR pathway has been linked to clinic-pathalogical features of
invasion and metastasis of multiple tumor types. Results: We sought to
investigate using both in vitro and in vivo models of metastasis a panel
of PI3K/mTOR selective inhibitors, in which INK128, a selective mTOR
kinase inhibitor in clinical development was included. Using live-cell
time lapse imaging experiments to monitor cell migration and invasion we
found that INK128 significantly inhibited motility and velocity of
metastatic breast cancer models in wound assays and decreased the ability
of tumor cells to migrate through membranes and matrigel. The ability of
INK128 to selectively inhibit tumor cell migration in vitro prompted us
to assess whether INK128 can prevent tumor dissemination in vivo. In
metastatic breast cancer xenograft models we monitored the growth of
tumors implanted in mammary fat pads (MFP) and metastatic dissemination
by serial noninvasive whole body bioluminescent imaging. We first
assessed and characterized the degree of spontaneous metastasis to the
lung, liver, auxillary lymph nodes, chest cavity of mice and subsequently
the effect of mTOR kinase inihibition on primary tumor growth on the MFP
versus overt metastatic dissemination upon daily, oral treatment with
INK128. We show that INK128 blocked drastically metastatic spread in a
dose-dependent manner without significantly affecting the growth of
primary tumors. Interestingly, we found that INK128 did not affect the
ability of breast cancer cells to enter into the lungs following an
alternative experimental lung metastasis model by lateral tail vein
injection but INK128 greatly diminished the capacity of breast cancer
cells to subsequently colonize and expand. Conclusion: Our results
position mTOR on a metastasis-sustaining axis that engages downstream
pathways to support the biological machinery of migration, invasion, and
fitness of initiating breast cancer cells during the establishment of
thoracic metastases.

