Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening and characterization of inhibitors of G-protein coupled
receptor kinase GRK6 as potential therapeutics for multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is one of the most common hematological
malignancies, but current therapy options are limited to high-dose
chemotherapy or high-risk stem-cell transplantation. It is clear that the
development of more selective and less toxic treatments for MM is greatly
needed. In a recent kinome-wide RNAi study by Tiedemann and colleagues
(2010), the G-protein coupled receptor kinase-6 (GRK6) was identified as
a critical kinase required for survival of MM cells. This study also
suggests that MM cells, but not other cell types, are dependent on GRK6;
and that gene silencing by shRNA or siRNA of GRK6, but not other GRKs,
results in decreased survival. At present, the G-protein coupled receptor
(GPCR) signaling mediated by GRK6 in MM cells is not well understood. Our
current research aims to identify the important GPCRs phosphorylated by
GRK6 and the signaling proteins/pathways implicated in survival of
multiple myeloma cells. Through gene silencing techniques and expression
of either the wild-type or kinase-dead form of GRK6 protein, we have
determined that a functional GRK6 kinase domain is required for survival
of MM cells. We have also demonstrated that the signaling pathway
downstream of CXCR4 phosphorylation by GRK6 is defective in cells
expressing the kinase-dead GRK6-mutant protein. This loss of signaling by
the GRK6-mutant protein was observed for other GPCRs found to be
important for survival of MM cells. These findings helped to validate
that the kinase domain of GRK6 is a potential target for MM, and spurred
the identification of small molecule kinase inhibitors of GRK6. Compounds
with high potency in preliminary biochemical assays were screened against
MM and non-MM cell lines to evaluate their activity and specificity in
vivo. Small molecule inhibition of GRK6 kinase activity is a novel
approach to the treatment of MM, as it specifically targets a protein
found to be critical for survival of these cells through an unbiased RNAi
study. Treatment options for patients with MM are limited and based on
our preliminary findings small molecule inhibitors of GRK6 offer an
alternative therapeutic approach to the treatment of MM.

