Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of IGF1R induces mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition
and inhibits the metastatic properties of triple negative breast cancer
cells


Next to skin cancer, breast cancer is the second most common cancer
diagnosed among American women and affects nearly 1.3 million women
worldwide each year. Aggressive, metastatic disease is directly
responsible for the majority of breast cancer-related deaths. Breast
tumors lacking expression of three receptors, estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2, are commonly referred to as triple
negative breast cancers (TNBCs) and make up 15-20% of all diagnosed
breast cancers cases. Disparities exist in terms of survival following
diagnosis of TNBC, and a devastating reality is that this diagnosis is
highly correlated with incurable, metastatic disease. Despite tremendous
advantages in treatments for hormone-sensitive breast tumors, a
significant number of women with TNBC experience disease progression due
to the unavailability of targeted therapies. Insulin-like growth factor-1
receptor (IGF1R) plays a role in breast cancer proliferation, adhesion,
invasion, and migration. Overexpression of IGF1R has been noted in 50% of
primary breast tumors and in nearly 65% of TNBCs. Consequently, high
IGF1R expression in breast cancers correlates well with, high tumor
grade, shorter disease-free survival, and poor prognosis. We report the
in vitro effects of IGF1R inhibition on the metastatic properties of
mesenchymal TNBC cells lines using two methods: (1) shRNA lentiviral
system and (2) picropodophyllin (PPP), an IGF1R tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. Stably transfected mesenchymal TNBC cells showed
down-regulation of IGF1R protein levels, which resulted in
mesenchymal-epithelial-transition (MET), as confirmed by up-regulation of
epithelial marker, E-cadherin, and down-regulation of mesenchymal marker,
vimentin. Importantly, this MET was accompanied by reduced colony
formation, cell motility, and invasion. Cell survival assays and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis revealed that PPP
also effectively decreased cell viability and induced cell death,
respectively, in TNBC cells. Furthermore, PPP dramatically inhibited cell
invasion and migration. Our findings indicate that inhibitors of IGF1R
exhibit promising anti-cancer activity in TNBC cells of mesenchymal
origin by triggering MET, inducing cell death, and reducing invasive and
metastatic properties. Given the very poor outcomes for patients with
metastatic TNBCs, we believe the use of IGF1R inhibitors warrant further
investigation as prospective anti-cancer options for treating a subset of
mesenchymal TN breast carcinomas.

