Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF1a downstream of Sonic hedgehog mitogenic and oncogenic
signaling and brain development and medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma, the most common solid malignant pediatric tumor,
originates during post-natal development in the cerebellum. It is
postulated that cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs) are
cells-of-origin for medulloblastomas associated with increased activity
of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway. In mice and humans, these cells
undergo a rapid peri-natal expansion phase in the external granule layer
(EGL) of the cerebellum, and this expansion requires Shh, which is
secreted by the Purkinje neurons underlying the EGL. Shh promotes CGNP
proliferation and maintains these cells in an undifferentiated state. To
carry out these functions, the Shh pathway interacts with and/or
regulates cooperating intracellular signalling pathways. We have
previously shown that interactions between Shh and insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) are required for the full mitogenic effect of Shh in CGNPs,
and IGF activity is prominent in human SHH medulloblastomas. Both IGF and
Shh drive mTOR activity, which is associated in certain contexts with
increased translation of hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1). HIF1 promotes
angiogenesis and is also associated with maintenance of a stem cell-like
state, i.e inhibition of differentiation. We asked whether Shh signaling
regulates HIF1 in CGNPs during cerebellar development and in mouse models
of SHH medulloblastoma. Using western blot and immunfluorescence
analysis, we observed increased HIF1a in CGNPs upon Shh treatment. In
vivo, HIF1 was localized to the nuclei of cells in the EGL. There was no
significant effect of Shh treatment on HIF1 mRNA expression, but exposure
of CGNPs to the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin resulted in reduced HIF1a
protein levels, indicating that the effects of Shh on Hif1 are
post-transcriptional. We also observed high levels of HIF1 in SmoA1
medulloblastomas, where it co-localized with its known targets pyruvate
kinase M2 (PKM2, a metabolic gene) and Oct4 (a hallmark of stem cells)
both in the perivascular niche (PVN) and tumor bulk. IGF2, an established
HIF1 target, was highly expressed in the PVN. mTOR activity promotes
increased HIF1 translation, and that HIF1 induces expression of IGF2,
forming a feed-forward loop leading to mTOR activation and increased HIF1
translation. When SmoA1 tumor-bearing mice were treated with the Wyeth
mTOR inhibitor CCI-779, HIF1 levels were reduced. These results are
consistent with HIF1 regulating VEGF, which we have previously shown to
be elevated in SmoA1 medulloblastomas, in an mTOR-dependent manner.
Moreover, the expression of HIF1 in both the PVN and tumor bulk is
consistent with mTOR activity being widely distributed throughout SmoA1
medulloblastomas, as determined by phosphorylation of the downstream mTOR
effector ribosomal protein S6. Taken together, these results suggest a
role for HIF1 in Shh mitogenic/oncogenic signaling in the developing
cerebellum and medulloblastoma.

