Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and preliminary validation of novel early detection
biomarkers for triple-negative breast cancer using preclinical plasma
samples from the Women's Health Initiative observational study


Background: One approach to develop new tools for detecting cancer early
is through the identification and validation of blood-based cancer
specific biomarkers. In applying this approach to breast cancer one
potential challenge is the disease's considerable heterogeneity.
Triple-negative (TN) breast cancer is a particularly lethal breast cancer
subtype that is known to have a unique biology. Consequently, there is a
clinical need to discover early detection biomarkers for TN disease, and
such biomarkers may be more readily identifiable given the more
aggressive nature and growth patterns of these tumors. Objective: To
discover and initially validate novel TN breast cancer specific early
detection biomarkers using preclinical plasma samples. Methods: We
conducted a nested case-control study of TN breast cancer within the
Women's Health Initiative (WHI) Observational Study (OS) consisting of 28
TN cases whose blood was drawn 17 months prior to their breast cancer
diagnosis and an equal number of matched controls. The 28 matched sets
were equally divided into a training set, used for discovery, and an
independent test set, used for validation, and interrogated using a
customized antibody microarray. Results: In the training set, of the 915
antibodies assessed, 55 (6.0%) were statistically significantly different
between cases and controls at pBackground: One approach to develop new
tools for detecting cancer early is through the identification and
validation of blood-based cancer specific biomarkers. In applying this
approach to breast cancer one potential challenge is the disease's
considerable heterogeneity. Triple-negative (TN) breast cancer is a
particularly lethal breast cancer subtype that is known to have a unique
biology. Consequently, there is a clinical need to discover early
detection biomarkers for TN disease, and such biomarkers may be more
readily identifiable given the more aggressive nature and growth patterns
of these tumors. Objective: To discover and initially validate novel TN
breast cancer specific early detection biomarkers using preclinical
plasma samples. Methods: We conducted a nested case-control study of TN
breast cancer within the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) Observational
Study (OS) consisting of 28 TN cases whose blood was drawn 17 months
prior to their breast cancer diagnosis and an equal number of matched
controls. The 28 matched sets were equally divided into a training set,
used for discovery, and an independent test set, used for validation, and
interrogated using a customized antibody microarray. Results: In the
training set, of the 915 antibodies assessed, 55 (6.0%) were
statistically significantly different between cases and controls at
p<0.05 and in the test set 128 (14.0%) were statistically different. Of
the 55 candidates identified in the training set, 15 were validated in
the test set at pBackground: One approach to develop new tools for
detecting cancer early is through the identification and validation of
blood-based cancer specific biomarkers. In applying this approach to
breast cancer one potential challenge is the disease's considerable
heterogeneity. Triple-negative (TN) breast cancer is a particularly
lethal breast cancer subtype that is known to have a unique biology.
Consequently, there is a clinical need to discover early detection
biomarkers for TN disease, and such biomarkers may be more readily
identifiable given the more aggressive nature and growth patterns of
these tumors. Objective: To discover and initially validate novel TN
breast cancer specific early detection biomarkers using preclinical
plasma samples. Methods: We conducted a nested case-control study of TN
breast cancer within the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) Observational
Study (OS) consisting of 28 TN cases whose blood was drawn 17 months
prior to their breast cancer diagnosis and an equal number of matched
controls. The 28 matched sets were equally divided into a training set,
used for discovery, and an independent test set, used for validation, and
interrogated using a customized antibody microarray. Results: In the
training set, of the 915 antibodies assessed, 55 (6.0%) were
statistically significantly different between cases and controls at
p<0.05 and in the test set 128 (14.0%) were statistically different. Of
the 55 candidates identified in the training set, 15 were validated in
the test set at p<0.05. Of these 15 candidates, 13 had higher levels in
cases compared to controls. The candidates with the strongest signals
included myosin-5A (log2 ratio=1.26), arfaptin-2 (log2 ratio=1.02),
integrin-beta1 (log2 ratio=0.99), phosphoserine aminotransferase (log2
ratio=0.94), beta-catenin (log2 ratio=0.92), mast/stem cell growth factor
receptor (log2 ratio=0.90), and IGFBP-2 (log2 ratio=1.18). Conclusions:
Several unique, novel candidate early detection biomarkers specific to TN
breast cancer were discovered and initially validated in preclinical
samples. These findings warrant validation in additional sets of TN cases
and controls to further evaluate their potential clinical significance.

