Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simplified approach to measuring thymidine kinase activity in
cells, tumors, and blood as a biomarker of tumor proliferative potential


Understanding tumor size and growth is essential for preclinical oncology
drug development, but costs and technical hurdles can prevent accurate,
repeated measurements of cell proliferation and tumor growth. Many
investigators instead measure the accumulation of nucleosides and analogs
(e.g., [18F]-FLT; [3H]-Thy; BrdU) in cells and tissues, a manifestation
of thymidine kinase 1 activity (TK1a). These methods can be costly and
laborious, and can generate significant hazardous waste, promoting the
use of even less-direct measures of cell division. Seeking further
insights into the role of TK1 in cancer, we developed rapid, robust,
non-isotopic methods that measure TK1a in tissue extracts and blood. In
this approach, samples are exposed to FLT in vivo or in vitro, promoting
its phosphorylation. Subsequently, nucleosides and their phosphorylated
metabolites are isolated for analysis by a simple organic extraction.
Using these methods, TK1a was measured in primary and transformed cells,
and showed excellent comparability with established proliferation assays
including 3H-thymidine incorporation, ATP generation, and fluorescent dye
dilution flow cytometry. In drug screens, our method was as sensitive as
commercial viability assays, and typically detected drug effects much
sooner than those less-specific measures. We also demonstrated
chemotherapy-induced alterations in TK1a in xenografted tumor tissue that
were comparable to results obtained using radioisotopes. Finally, this
approach was adapted to measure TK1a in blood samples. Consistent with
published reports, circulating TK1a correlated well with tumor burden in
solid tumor models and primary canine hematological cancer. These methods
require only small sample volumes (Understanding tumor size and growth is
essential for preclinical oncology drug development, but costs and
technical hurdles can prevent accurate, repeated measurements of cell
proliferation and tumor growth. Many investigators instead measure the
accumulation of nucleosides and analogs (e.g., [18F]-FLT; [3H]-Thy; BrdU)
in cells and tissues, a manifestation of thymidine kinase 1 activity
(TK1a). These methods can be costly and laborious, and can generate
significant hazardous waste, promoting the use of even less-direct
measures of cell division. Seeking further insights into the role of TK1
in cancer, we developed rapid, robust, non-isotopic methods that measure
TK1a in tissue extracts and blood. In this approach, samples are exposed
to FLT in vivo or in vitro, promoting its phosphorylation. Subsequently,
nucleosides and their phosphorylated metabolites are isolated for
analysis by a simple organic extraction. Using these methods, TK1a was
measured in primary and transformed cells, and showed excellent
comparability with established proliferation assays including
3H-thymidine incorporation, ATP generation, and fluorescent dye dilution
flow cytometry. In drug screens, our method was as sensitive as
commercial viability assays, and typically detected drug effects much
sooner than those less-specific measures. We also demonstrated
chemotherapy-induced alterations in TK1a in xenografted tumor tissue that
were comparable to results obtained using radioisotopes. Finally, this
approach was adapted to measure TK1a in blood samples. Consistent with
published reports, circulating TK1a correlated well with tumor burden in
solid tumor models and primary canine hematological cancer. These methods
require only small sample volumes (<50L serum or other biofluids, or a
few thousand cells), allowing serial blood collection for monitoring
tumor growth kinetics in rodents. These translational studies are
underway, and should greatly inform our understanding of the role of TK1
in tumor responses to treatment in vitro and in vivo.

