Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of TGF- signaling induces a switch from single to collective
cell migration in vivo


Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) has a dual role during
tumorigenesis initially as a suppressor and then as a promoter. In
stromal fibroblasts, TGF- signaling suppresses tumorigenesis in adjacent
epithelia, while its ablation potentiates tumor formation. Concurrently,
epithelial TGF- signaling regulates fibroblast recruitment and
activation. Yet, the role of TGF- in stromal-epithelial migration during
tumorigenesis is unknown. We hypothesize that TGF- is a critical
regulator of tumor-stromal interactions that promote mammary tumor cell
migration and invasion. We are using the chicken embryo chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) model to study this interplay by grafting both breast
cancer epithelial cells, isolated from either TGF- receptor II knockout
(TRII-deficient) or TRII floxed (control) mice, and fibroblasts onto the
CAM. Intravital microscopy revealed fibroblast stimulation of either a
single cell/strand migration of control cells or collective migration of
TRII-deficient cells, both along the vasculature. Epithelial clusters at
the epithelial-stromal boundaries of TRII-deficient tumors express
E-cadherin, p120, and -catenin, while control epithelia in these regions
express SMA. TRII-deficient tumors also exhibit a two-fold greater local
CAM metastasis than control tumors. Epithelial tumor RNA isolated by
laser capture microdissection was analyzed on a qPCR array. In
TRII-deficient epithelium compared to control epithelium, we found
upregulation of Igfbp4 and Tspan13 and downregulation of Col12, Bmp7,
Wnt11, Gng11, Vcan, Tmeff1, and Dsc2. Western and qPCR analyses validated
these targets in vitro. For current and future studies determining the
relevance of these targets to migration patterning, we achieved Wnt11
overexpression in TRII-deficient cells, as well as knockdown of Wnt11 and
Tmeff1 in control cells. Our findings about TGF- signaling in
stromal-epithelial interactions are important in identifying migratory
mechanisms that can be targeted as recourse for breast cancer treatment.

