Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide methylation array of human prostate tissues using
illumina infunium 450K bead chip reveals distinct DNA methylation
signatures with potential as clinical predictors


Prostate cancer (PCa) harbors a myriad of aberrant genomic and epigenetic
alterations. Epigenetic inactivation of genes in PCa is largely based on
transcriptional silencing by aberrant CpG methylation of CpG rich
promoter regions. Candidate gene-based studies have identified a handful
of aberrant CpG DNA methylation events in PCa. To better understand the
role of aberrant epigenetic alterations and identify biological pathways
likely to be affected by methylation mediated alterations in gene
expression in PCa, we have examined the methylation status of 450,000
(450K) cytosine microarray (illumina). The 450K microarray includes CpG
islands/shores/shelves/open sea, non-coding RNA and sites surrounding the
transcription start sites for coding genes, but also for the
corresponding gene bodies and the 3-UTR. We demonstrate that the 450k DNA
methylation array can significantly detect CpG methylation changes in
radical prostatectomy prostate tissue samples. Cluster analysis revealed
distinct DNA methylation profiles for prostate cancer tissues in
comparison with non-malignant tissues. A total of 225 CpG loci (p >
0.00049) showed differential methylation in the cancer tissues in
comparison with non-malignant tissues. Each of the 225 CpG locus was
validated in silico using an independent, publicly available methylome
dataset from the Cancer Genome Atlas. The majority of these loci were
informative particularly in the prostate cancer. Overall, cluster
analysis showed gene set enriched in pathways including transcriptional
modifications, apoptosis/autophagy, chromatin assembly, growth factor
signaling, cell cycle regulation and oxidative-redox reaction. This study
shows that CpG locus methylation arrays could reveal important biological
differences in the epigenome between prostate cancer and non-malignant
tissues and provide potential markers for disease detection and/or
progression.

