Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) induces gene expression of RASSF1A
through epigenetics mechanisms in breast cancer cells


Background: Epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and
post-translational histones modifications have an important role in
mammary tumorigenesis. Changes in DNA methylation include global
hypomethylation and hypermethylation of promoter regions of specific
genes. Several genes are hypermethylated in breast cancer, especially the
tumor suppressor gene RASSF1A, that have potential prognostic value.
Epigenetic events are important as therapeutic targets due to its
reversible feature. Dietary compounds can modulate the epigenetic
processes in cancer. Experimentally, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a member
of the omega-3 fatty acids, can reduce proliferation, induce apoptosis
and decrease the invasive potential of breast tumor cells. However, the
antitumor mechanisms of DHA and its ability to modulate epigenetic events
are not yet fully elucidated. Objectives: To verify DHA action on RASSF1A
expression and promoter region methylation in different human breast
cancer cell lines. Material and Methods: Three different breast cell
lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, SKBR-3) were treated or not with 100 M of DHA
for 72 hours. Real time quantitative PCR were performed for gene
expression quantification of RASSF1A. DNA methylation of the promoter
region of RASSF1A was evaluated by methylation specific PCR. The western
blot will be held for analyze of the histone 3 lysine 9 acetylated
(H3K9ac) protein. Moreover, we will evaluate the phases of the cell cycle
and apoptosis by flow cytometry. Results and Conclusion: Compared to
control cells (not treated), DHA increased RASSF1A expression on MCF-7,
but not in MDA-MB and in SKBR-3. These three transformed breast cells
lines show methylation in specific region of RASSF1A promoter, indicating
its role as a tumour supressing gene. DHA treatment increased RASSF1A
promoter region hypomethylation in MCF-7, but not in MDA-MB and in
SKBR-3. From this perspective, we can suggest that DHA could act by
epigenetic mechanisms and reactivate RASSF1A, previously silenced. This
action occured specifically in MCF-7, a less aggressive breast tumor cell
line. It is expected that the present results promote better
understanding of DHA role as a potential anti-oncogenic compound of
breast cancer.

