Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibit pancreatic cancer cell growth
in vitro and in vivo through induction of apoptosis and inhibition of
PI3K/Akt pathway


The American Cancer Society reported that 35,420 Americans died in 2009
because of pancreatic cancer. It is an aggressive malignancy that is
frequently diagnosed at an advanced stage with poor prognosis.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt is a potent survival pathway that
may mediate resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and conventional
therapies in pancreatic cancer patients. Thus, PI3K/Akt is considered as
a promising therapeutic target for this cancer. Dietary phytochemicals
offer promising options for the development of effective strategies for
the prevention of cancer, and thus can be utilized as complementary and
alternative medicine. Therefore, to develop newer and more effective
chemotherapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer, we have examined the effect
of grape seed proanthocyanidins (GSPs) on the growth of pancreatic cancer
cell lines and the molecular mechanisms underlying this effect using
PANC-1, AsPC-1 and Miapaca-2 cell lines as a model. The effect of GSPs on
pancreatic cancer cell lines was studied on cell proliferation, cell
cycle regulation, apoptosis and PI3K/Akt pathway using MTT assay, western
blotting and FACS analysis. In vitro treatment of pancreatic cancer cells
(Miapaca-2, PANC-1, and AsPC-1) with GSPs resulted in: (i) growth
inhibition, which was associated with G2/M-phase arrest, and includes the
inhibition of the expressions of cyclin B1, Cdc25B and Cdc25c proteins.
(ii) Induction of apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells by GSPs was
associated with the enhanced expression of Bax, and caspase-3 activation
while reduced levels of anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl2, Bcl-xl). (iii)
Blocking of PI3K/Akt pathway. Exposure of Miapaca-2 and PANC-1 cancer
cells to PI3K inhibitor (wortmannin) also resulted in a dose-dependent
induction of apoptosis in these cells. The in vitro data were further
verified using in vivo tumor xenograft model. Administration of GSPs
(0.2% and 0.5%, w/w) as a supplement of an AIN76A control diet resulted
in a dose-dependent inhibition of the growth of Miapaca-2 tumor
xenografts in athymic nude mice (35-65%; PThe American Cancer Society
reported that 35,420 Americans died in 2009 because of pancreatic cancer.
It is an aggressive malignancy that is frequently diagnosed at an
advanced stage with poor prognosis. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
is a potent survival pathway that may mediate resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs and conventional therapies in pancreatic cancer
patients. Thus, PI3K/Akt is considered as a promising therapeutic target
for this cancer. Dietary phytochemicals offer promising options for the
development of effective strategies for the prevention of cancer, and
thus can be utilized as complementary and alternative medicine.
Therefore, to develop newer and more effective chemotherapeutic agent for
pancreatic cancer, we have examined the effect of grape seed
proanthocyanidins (GSPs) on the growth of pancreatic cancer cell lines
and the molecular mechanisms underlying this effect using PANC-1, AsPC-1
and Miapaca-2 cell lines as a model. The effect of GSPs on pancreatic
cancer cell lines was studied on cell proliferation, cell cycle
regulation, apoptosis and PI3K/Akt pathway using MTT assay, western
blotting and FACS analysis. In vitro treatment of pancreatic cancer cells
(Miapaca-2, PANC-1, and AsPC-1) with GSPs resulted in: (i) growth
inhibition, which was associated with G2/M-phase arrest, and includes the
inhibition of the expressions of cyclin B1, Cdc25B and Cdc25c proteins.
(ii) Induction of apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells by GSPs was
associated with the enhanced expression of Bax, and caspase-3 activation
while reduced levels of anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl2, Bcl-xl). (iii)
Blocking of PI3K/Akt pathway. Exposure of Miapaca-2 and PANC-1 cancer
cells to PI3K inhibitor (wortmannin) also resulted in a dose-dependent
induction of apoptosis in these cells. The in vitro data were further
verified using in vivo tumor xenograft model. Administration of GSPs
(0.2% and 0.5%, w/w) as a supplement of an AIN76A control diet resulted
in a dose-dependent inhibition of the growth of Miapaca-2 tumor
xenografts in athymic nude mice (35-65%; P<0.05-0.01) compared to
non-GSPs-treated controls. The growth inhibitory effect of dietary GSPs
on the pancreatic xenograft tumors was associated with the induction of
apoptotic cell death of tumor cells, and induction of Bax expression and
activation of caspase-3 while decreased the expression of anti-apoptotic
proteins. Further, the levels of phospho-Akt and the proteins of PI3K
family (PI3K 110 and PI3K 85) were markedly decreased in the xenograft
tumors treated with GSPs compared with controls. Together, this
preclinical study provides evidence that the chemotherapeutic effect of
GSPs on the growth of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo is
mediated, at least in part, through the induction of apoptosis, G2/M
phase arrest and blocking of PI3K/Akt cell survival pathway.

