Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin regulates prostate cancer matrix composition and cell
attachment through an integrin alpha 1 dependent pathway


Prostate cancer (PCa) mortality is primarily attributed to metastatic
rather than primary, organ-confined disease. Acquiring a motile and
invasive phenotype is an important step in the development of metastasis.
This step involves remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and of
cell-matrix interactions, cell movement mediated by the actin
cytoskeleton, and activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK)/Src
signaling. Epidemiologic studies suggest that the metastatic behavior of
PCa may be an ideal target for chemoprevention. The natural flavone
apigenin is known to have chemopreventive properties against many
cancers, including PCa. Building upon our previous findings showing that
apigenin inhibits cell motility and invasion of PCa cells through the
FAK/Src signaling pathway, here we study the effect of apigenin on
integrin receptors, cell attachment, and ECM composition. By using an
alpha/beta integrin-mediated cell adhesion array, we found that integrin
alpha 1 (ITGA1) was the only integrin subunit to be down-regulated by
apigenin in PC3-M cells. ITGA1, whose only binding partner is integrin
beta 1, is a receptor for collagen and laminin. Integrin 11 gives cells
the ability to attach to collagenous substrata. As collagen and laminin
are important regulators of PCa cell survival, growth and metastasis to
bone, we next elucidated the effect of apigenin on PC3-M cell attachment
to laminin 1 and collagen IV. We found that apigenin decreases cell
attachment to both of these ECM molecules, suggesting a potential
anti-tumorigenic mechanism. It has been shown that integrin 11 can
regulate the synthesis of collagen. So we next tested whether apigenin
can alter the ECM deposited by PC3-M cells. We first tested whether ECM
deposited by apigenin-treated cells provided the same adhesive support to
PCa cells as the ECM deposited by the untreated cells. Interestingly,
even cells not treated with apigenin did not attach and spread well on
the ECM deposited by apigenin-treated cells, indicating that apigenin
treatment changes the composition of the ECM. Using Western blot to
evaluate differences in the composition of matrix deposited by control
cells and apigenin-treated cells, we found that apigenin-treated cells
produce much less collagen I and IV, thus correlating with the decrease
in adhesion and spreading. These results demonstrate that the
chemopreventive bioflavonoid apigenin may inhibit PCa cell adhesion
through a combined effect on integrin 11 cell surface expression and ECM
deposition.

