Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of galectin 3 as a novel BARD1 interaction partner


BARD1 (BRCA1-associated ring domain 1) was originally identified in a
yeast-two-hybrid (Y2H) screen as a binding partner of BRCA1. The
functional heterodimer BRCA1/BARD1 is required for several of the
cellular and tumor-suppressor functions of BRCA1. Both proteins interact
through the N-terminal RING domain to form a heterodimeric E3 ubiquitin
ligase that constitutes the major catalytic activity of the BRCA1-BARD1
complex. BARD1 is also associated to p53-mediated apoptosis, in a
BRCA1-independent manner. The carboxy terminus of BRCA1 is highly acidic
and contains two tandem BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domains, which are
characteristic of members of a large superfamily of proteins involved in
DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint control. These domains are
protein-protein interacting regions that mediate the association with a
number of other proteins with a role in DNA replication, DNA damage
repair pathway, transcription, cell cycle control, and ubiquitination. In
order to identify putative interaction-proteins with BARD1 C-terminal
region we performed a Y2H screening using BARD1 BRCT tandem domain (aa
554-777) to screen a human testis cDNA library. We identified, among
other hits, a cDNA coding for galectin 3 C-terminal region, residues
170-250 (OMIM 153619). Galectin 3 is a galactoside binding protein
involved in several cellular processes including apoptosis control and
RNA splicing. Moreover there are evidences that galectin 3 variants are
correlated with tumor development and progression in breast and thyroid
cancer. We confirmed galectin 3/BARD1 interaction conducting
co-immunoprecipitation analysis of ectopically expressed BARD1 and
galectin-3 in HEK293T cells. The interaction between endogenous galectin
3 and BARD1 were validated in HeLa nuclear extracts, and by confocal
microscopy. Using ectopically expressed galectin 3 fragments we
determined the interaction region (aa 100-215). Moreover, galectin 3
fragment comprising aminoacids 100-165 is able to disrupt the endogenous
interaction with BARD1. Co-immunoprecipitation assays suggested the
presence of BRCA1, BARD1 and galectin-3 in the same complex.
Interestingly the galectin 3 observed in this complex corresponds to a
mono-ubiquitinated form. This ubiquitination reaction occurs mainly in
the nucleus but is not BRCA1 dependent. The role of galectin 3 in DNA
damage pathway was investigated using galectin 3 silenced HeLa cells
exposed to increasing doses of ionizing radiation. These cells exhibited
a slightly increase in radioresistance, but no effect was observed in
cell cycle control. In addition the phosphorylation of histone H2AX seems
to be delayed after damage in cells lacking galectin 3. Other DNA damage
agents, such as carboplatin and etoposide did not affected differently
the cell viability of these cells. We are now evaluating the protein
interaction network of galectin 3 using a tandem affinity purification
approach.

