Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation of -dystroglycan in prostate cancer: Prognostic
implications and regulation by LARGE2


Cancer cells exhibit altered interactions with their extracellular matrix
microenvironment that are thought to underlie tumor progression and
metastasis. Dystroglycan (DG) is a receptor for extracellular matrix
proteins including laminins and perlecan that consists of a
ligand-binding subunit and a transmembrane subunit. DG protein expression
is reduced in numerous types of cancer, including prostate cancer.
Typically DG mRNA expression is not remarkably altered and mutations in
the DG gene have not been reported in any cancer to date. We have
investigated the basis for reduced DG expression in prostate cancer.
Using tissue microarray (n=50; Gleason score 6-8) we show that loss of
either or DG independently predicts Gleason score. We show that loss of
DG immunostaining in human prostatectomy samples (n=138) trended towards
predicting overall mortality independent of grade and stage with an
estimated hazard ratio of 1.32 (CI=0.92, 1.89; p=0.1381). Furthermore,
analysis of prostate cancer metastases in bone, lung and lymph node shows
a near universal loss of DG immunostaining. Importantly, we observed
cases in which DG is reduced while DG persisted in serial sections,
suggesting that these subunits may be differentially affected. In these
studies, we detected DG using a glycosylation-sensitive antibody IIH6.
Therefore, we investigated the basis of altered DG glycosylation using a
series of prostate cancer cell lines. We found that DG glycosylation is
heterogeneous across several prostate cancer cell lines. Importantly, we
found that an aggressive derivative of PC-3 cells lacks IIH6
immunoreactivity, but not core DG protein expression; whereas the bulk
PC-3 population is IIH6 positive. We evaluated the relative expression of
a panel of glycosyltransferases known to modify DG in these cell lines
and found that loss of IIH6 immunoreactivity is correlated with loss of
LARGE2 expression. This result contrasts with previous findings
implicating LARGE or iGNT with abnormal glycosylation of DG in breast and
prostate cancer respectively. Reduced expression of LARGE2 is also
observed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and is correlated with loss of
IIH6 immunoreactivity. We show that LARGE2 is involved in the functional
glycosylation of DG in prostate cancer cells. shRNA-mediated knockdown of
LARGE2 in prostate cancer cells does not affect growth rate, but does
increase transwell migration across laminin-1 substrate. Our results are
the first to implicate loss of LARGE2 expression as a means to explain
the loss of appropriate glycosylation of DG in prostate or other cancers,
and indicates that LARGE2 function may modulate prostate cancer
progression and metastasis.

