Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 at the crossroads of cell fate decisions in cerebellar
development and medulloblastoma


During post-natal cerebellar development, Granule Neuron Precursors
(GNPs) undergo a proliferative expansion in response to Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) signaling, prior to differentiation and migration to their final
niche. Aberrations in this tightly controlled process can tip the balance
toward persistent proliferation leading to Medulloblastoma (MB), or
toward apoptosis or premature differentiation leading to
neurodegeneratiion. Here, we report that MDM2, the principal inhibitor of
the p53 tumor suppressor protein, is required for cerebellum development
as well as for MB tumorigenesis. Our studies employed a novel hypomorphic
allele of Mdm2 (Mdm2puro) in combination with the Mdm2del7-9 null allele.
Mdm2puro/del7-9 mice express 30% of the wild-type level of MDM2.
Mdm2puro/del7-9 cerebella exhibit decreased foliation, reduction in GNP
numbers, and laminar disorganization. These phenotypes are attributed, in
part, to high levels of p53-dependent apoptosis. In addition, we have
recently determined through fate mapping studies that loss of MDM2 also
promotes the premature migration of GNPs. Global transcriptome analyses
of the Mdm2puro/del7-9 cerebellum supports dysregulation of the
transcriptional programs that regulate GNP differentiation. Further,
Western blot analyses reveal an increase in the pro-differentiation
protein, Numb, and the neuronal maturation marker, III-Tubulin, in GNPs.
A concomitant decrease in Gli1 and Gli2, two effectors of Shh signaling
known to be degraded by Numb, suggests an increase in Numb activity.
These experiments suggest that loss of MDM2 and subsequent increase in
p53 activity accelerates GNPs migration and possibly favors GNP
differentiation over proliferation. In complementary experiments, we
employed Shh-responsive primary GNP cultures from wild-type mice. Shh
stimulation of GNPs results in an increase in the steady state level of
MDM2 and an increase in MDM2 phosphorylation at Ser166, a modification
known to enhance the anti-p53 function of MDM2. These findings suggest
that Shh signaling may upregulate MDM2 to prevent p53 activation during
GNP proliferation. In keeping with the concept that GNP proliferation and
MB tumor formation are governed by similar mechanisms, we also observed
increased levels of p-MDM2Ser166 in Shh-induced preneoplastic lesions
(PNLs) and MB tumors in a Ptch1+/- mice, a model of human MB. Notably, a
70% reduction in the level of MDM2 in these mice abrogates the formation
of PNLs, supporting a key role for MDM2 in the initiation of some types
of MB. Overall, our results suggest that MDM2 mediated inhibition of p53
plays in important role in survival and migration of GNPs cerebellum
development. This role of MDM2 may be high-jacked by deregulated Shh
signaling in certain MB tumors thereby limiting the tumor suppressive
function of p53 and obviating a need for p53 gene mutations.

