Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between RET/PTC rearrangements, BRAF and RAS
mutations and radiation dose, age at exposure, and latency in
post-Chernobyl thyroid cancer


Introduction: Childhood exposure to I-131 from the Chernobyl accident was
associated with a dramatic increase in incidence of papillary thyroid
cancer (PTC). PTCs are characterized by several genetic alterations
including RET/PTC rearrangements and point mutations of BRAF and RAS.
Association between mutations and radiation doses has not been studied in
post-Chernobyl tumors. Design: We analyzed 70 PTCs diagnosed in a
Ukrainian-American cohort who were Introduction: Childhood exposure to
I-131 from the Chernobyl accident was associated with a dramatic increase
in incidence of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). PTCs are characterized by
several genetic alterations including RET/PTC rearrangements and point
mutations of BRAF and RAS. Association between mutations and radiation
doses has not been studied in post-Chernobyl tumors. Design: We analyzed
70 PTCs diagnosed in a Ukrainian-American cohort who were < 18 y.o. at
the time of Chernobyl and received 0.008-8.6 Gy of I-131 to the thyroid.
Thyroid doses were estimated based on radioactivity measurements taken
shortly after the accident, environmental transport models, and interview
data. BRAF and RAS mutations were identified by melting curve analysis
and RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 by real-time RT-PCR. All mutations were
confirmed by sequencing. Results: Identified mutations and patient
characteristics are shown in Table 1. Logistic regression analysis
demonstrated a significant decrease in I-131 dose for both BRAF and RAS
mutations (p=0.005 and 0.026). There were highly statistically
significant (pIntroduction: Childhood exposure to I-131 from the
Chernobyl accident was associated with a dramatic increase in incidence
of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). PTCs are characterized by several
genetic alterations including RET/PTC rearrangements and point mutations
of BRAF and RAS. Association between mutations and radiation doses has
not been studied in post-Chernobyl tumors. Design: We analyzed 70 PTCs
diagnosed in a Ukrainian-American cohort who were < 18 y.o. at the time
of Chernobyl and received 0.008-8.6 Gy of I-131 to the thyroid. Thyroid
doses were estimated based on radioactivity measurements taken shortly
after the accident, environmental transport models, and interview data.
BRAF and RAS mutations were identified by melting curve analysis and
RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 by real-time RT-PCR. All mutations were confirmed
by sequencing. Results: Identified mutations and patient characteristics
are shown in Table 1. Logistic regression analysis demonstrated a
significant decrease in I-131 dose for both BRAF and RAS mutations
(p=0.005 and 0.026). There were highly statistically significant
(p<0.001) differences between the trends with dose for BRAF and RAS vs
RET/PTC. Comparing with BRAF and RAS mutations, the age at exposure was
lower in cases with RET/PTC (p=0.001). RET/PTC3 was associated with a
shorter latency period as compared to other mutations (pIntroduction:
Childhood exposure to I-131 from the Chernobyl accident was associated
with a dramatic increase in incidence of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC).
PTCs are characterized by several genetic alterations including RET/PTC
rearrangements and point mutations of BRAF and RAS. Association between
mutations and radiation doses has not been studied in post-Chernobyl
tumors. Design: We analyzed 70 PTCs diagnosed in a Ukrainian-American
cohort who were < 18 y.o. at the time of Chernobyl and received 0.008-8.6
Gy of I-131 to the thyroid. Thyroid doses were estimated based on
radioactivity measurements taken shortly after the accident,
environmental transport models, and interview data. BRAF and RAS
mutations were identified by melting curve analysis and RET/PTC1 and
RET/PTC3 by real-time RT-PCR. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing.
Results: Identified mutations and patient characteristics are shown in
Table 1. Logistic regression analysis demonstrated a significant decrease
in I-131 dose for both BRAF and RAS mutations (p=0.005 and 0.026). There
were highly statistically significant (p<0.001) differences between the
trends with dose for BRAF and RAS vs RET/PTC. Comparing with BRAF and RAS
mutations, the age at exposure was lower in cases with RET/PTC (p=0.001).
RET/PTC3 was associated with a shorter latency period as compared to
other mutations (p<0.02). Table 1. Genetic alterations and corresponding
patient characteristics Conclusions: Our results demonstrate for the
first time that prevalence of BRAF or RAS point mutations in
post-Chernobyl tumors significantly decreases with increasing radiation
dose, in contrast to the lack of decrease for RET/PTC. RET/PTC
rearrangements are associated with younger age at exposure than point
mutations of BRAF and RAS. These data provide support for the potential
relationship between chromosomal rearrangements, but not point mutations,
and radiation exposure.


