Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-stage silicon vector-delivered tumor antigen and TLR ligands
for dendritic cell-based cancer immunotherapy


Immunotherapy has shown promise in cancer treatment but achieved limited
success in clinic trials. With this strategy, eliciting strong antitumor
immune response in vivo remains a challenge, largely due to the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and inefficient delivery of
cancer vaccine. Nanoparticle-delivered antigen together with adjuvants
provides a promising strategy to increase the vaccine delivery
efficiency. Recently, our group developed a multi-stage silicon vector
(MSV) system for protected and prolonged nano-scale drug delivery. MSV
delivered siRNA in vivo induced sustained knockdown of target gene
expression and subsequent anti-tumor efficacy in mice. Here we tested the
effect of MSV-formulated antigen peptides and Toll-like receptor (TLR)
ligands on dendritic cells. By formulating HER-2 antigen peptide together
with TLR4 ligand (MPLA) and TLR9 ligand (CpG), we found that
MSV-delivered antigen and TLR ligands were uptaken by mouse dendritic
cells after 1h co-incubation, and started to be released inside the cells
at 3 h after co-incubation. Moreover, MSV-delivered TLR ligands strongly
activated mouse dendritic cell expression of co-stimulatory molecules
such as CD80 and CD86. It also induced dendritic cells to produce large
amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-12.
In summary, MSV-delivered vaccine efficiently delivered antigen and
immuno-activating TLR ligands together into dendritic cells, and promoted
dendritic cell maturation and activation. Therefore, MSV formulation of
tumor antigen and TLR ligands may serve as a nano-scale cancer vaccine
with enhanced in vivo efficacy. Ongoing experiments include testing in
vivo T cell responses to MSV-delivered HER-2 antigen peptide and TLR
ligands, and determining the antitumor efficacy on mouse mammary gland
tumor model.

