Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Killing of Kras mutant colon cancer cells by the GBP cytokine, a
physiological PI3K inhibitor therapeutically effective in vivo


Activating Kras mutations are the most frequent oncogenic mutations in
human cancer. Numerous downstream pathways responsible for cell
proliferation and cell survival have been shown to be deregulated by
oncogenic Kras but there are no effective targeted therapies to date for
Kras driven oncogenesis. Mutant-activated Kras defines a subset of
patients for whom prognosis is poor and therapeutic options are limited.
We demonstrate that GBP, a cytokine produced by CD4+ and CD8+ activated T
cells, which operates by inhibiting class IA and class IB PI3K, is a
potent activator of apoptosis in Kras-mutant colorectal cancer cells,
even when co-harboring mutant-activated PIK3CA. Mechanics initiate with
inhibition of PI3K activity and Rac-independent actin reorganisation
assignable to phosphoinositide changes at the plasma membrane. Cyclin E
deregulation, arrest of DNA synthesis and Chk2 activation underscore
events critical to the activation of intrinsic apoptosis. Clustering of
CD95/Fas death receptors underscores events critical to the activation of
extrinsic apoptosis. In nude mice we present the first evidence that
tumor development is strongly inhibited. This first demonstration of
therapeutic efficacy against Kras-mutant colon cancer suggests that
Hu-r-GBP may be therapeutically effective against other cancers
harbouring activating Ras mutations. Wells, V. and Mallucci, L. (2009).
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase targeting by the -galactoside binding protein
cytokine negates akt gene expression and leads aggressive breast cancer
cells to apoptotic death. Breast Cancer Research 11, R2, 1-10. Wells, V.,
Downward, D. and Mallucci, L. (2007). Functional inhibition of PI3K by
the GBP molecule suppresses Ras-MAPK signalling to block cell
proliferation. Oncogene 26, 7709-7714. Mallucci, L. and Wells, V. (2007).
Alternative use of signaling by the GBP cytokine in cell growth
modulation and cancer control. From surveillance to therapy. In:
Apoptosis, Cell Signaling and Human Diseases. Ed. R. Srivastava. The
Humana Press Inc. Vol. I, 203-216. Patents US patent no. 7,994,113
granted August 9th 2011 PCT WO 2008/152392: Europe, Canada, Australia,
Japan, published

