Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Claudin-3 and claudin-4 regulate ovarian cancer growth rate and
metastatic potential through effect on integrin and -catenin signaling


Claudins (CLDNs) are the major structural proteins of tight junctions
between epithelial cells and aberrant expression of CLDNs in cancer cells
is common. We discovered that constitutive knockdown of CLDN3 or CLDN4 in
human ovarian cancer cells using shRNAi vectors increased their in vivo
growth rate by 2.3- and 3.7-fold, respectively. In this study we examined
the effect of knocking down CLDN3 and CLDN4 on the adhesion, migration
and invasion and explored underlying mechanisms. Knockdown of CLDN3 or
CLDN4 caused a 2.5- and 2.2-fold decrease in adhesion but increased
migration by 1.4- and 1.9-fold, and invasion by 2.9- and 3.8-fold when
measured in a Boyden chamber assay. To examine the effect of CLDN3 and
CLDN4 knockdown on the metastatic process, we molecularly engineered the
parental, CLDN3 knockdown (CLDN3KD) and CLDN4 knockdown (CLDN4KD) cells
to express the DsRed fluorescent protein and then injected one million
cells into the tail vein of nu/nu mice. Mice injected with either CLDN3KD
or CLDN4KD cells had significantly more metastases to the lungs and other
organs by day 42 compared with mice injected with the parental cells when
examined under Olympus OV100 fluorescence microscope. Quantification of
total lung metastatic burden in the same sets of mice by measurement of
RFP fluorescence in lung homogenates showed that there was a 1.7- and
2.4-fold increase in tumor burden, respectively, in the lungs of CLDN3KD
and CLDN4KD injected mice. We next asked whether the motile and invasive
phenotype of the CLDN3KD and CLDN4KD cells was the result of alteration
in formation of v3 complex, one of the integrins that plays an important
role in tumorigenicity and metastasis. Both flow cytometric analysis and
deconvoluting microscopic analysis demonstrated a marked reduction in v3
expression in the CLDN3KD and CLDN4KD cells. Suppression of E-cadherin
expression is regarded as one of the main molecular events responsible
for dysfunction in cell-cell adhesion, and the loss of E-cadherin is a
well-known prerequisite for tumor cell invasion. Interestingly, we found
that knockdown of CLDN3 and CLDN4 expression in the ovarian carcinoma
cells was accompanied by a 55% and 95% decrease, respectively, in
E-cadherin protein levels. Measurement of E-cadherin mRNA levels by
qRT-PCR showed a 60% and 83% reduction in the CLDN3KD and CLDN4 cells,
respectively. In association with the decrease in E-cadherin, -catenin
signaling was augmented as evidenced by a marked increase in nuclear
active (de-phosphorylated) -catenin, activation of TOPflash promoter
activity and the expression of the -catenin/TCF-regulated target genes
cyclin D1 and c-myc. Our findings demonstrate that CLDN3 and CLDN4 have
large effects on migration, invasion and metastasis of ovarian cancer
cells and suggest that the enhanced aggressiveness is associated with
diminished v3 signaling and elevated -catenin activity.

