Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of PHF11, a candidate tumor suppressor gene, in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background and aims: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has a high
incidence in China, with five-year survival rates in Hong Kong of only
10.7%. Loss of chromosome 13q regions is a frequent event in ESCC. A
candidate tumor suppressor gene (TSG), PHF11, located at 13q14.2 was
identified from our previous chromosome transfer study and shows 100%
down-regulation in 18 cancer cell lines, including 16 ESCC cell lines,
compared to expression in an immortalized normal esophageal epithelial
cell line. This study aims to investigate the functional role of PHF11 in
ESCC and to investigate the possible role of PHF11 in transcriptional
regulation or histone modification as the proteins in the plant
homeodomain finger (PHF) protein family are reported to contribute to the
two implicated functions. Methods: Real-time PCR was carried out to
validate the expression of PHF11 in tumor tissues of ESCC patients
compared to their respective normal counterparts. The two isoforms of
PHF11, PHF11a and PHF11b, were cloned into expression vectors and
transfected into ESCC cell lines, KYSE150 and KYSE180, respectively.
Clones expressing PHF11 were established for colony formation assay and
MTT assay. To identify the subcellular localization of PHF11, subcellular
fractionation was performed using immortalized normal esophageal
epithelial cell lines followed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Results:
Real-time PCR verified that 42% of the 41 patient samples showed at least
2-fold down-regulation in PHF11 expression. The colony formation assay
showed that the two isoforms of PHF11, PHF11a and PHF11b, have the
ability to suppress cell growth using two ESCC cell lines, KYSE150 and
KYSE180. The MTT assay also showed that both isoforms of PHF11 have the
ability to suppress cell proliferation. Our data showed that PHF11 is
localized in the nucleus of the immortalized normal esophageal epithelial
cell lines. Conclusions: It was observed that almost half of the patient
samples screened showed a significant down-regulation of PHF11,
suggesting its possible role as a candidate TSG. Suppression of colony
growth and cell proliferation in the PHF11 expressing clones indicate
that the protein may suppress tumorigenicity of ESCC cells. The nuclear
localization of PHF11 observed in the immortalized normal esophageal
epithelial cell line is consistent with a possible role in
transcriptional regulation or histone modification, though further
studies are required to further investigate this.

