Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 in the tissue microenvironment plays a direct role in normal
prostatic neoplastic transformation


Increased elevated levels of serum IL-6, the major inflammatory mediator,
has been shown to be associated with development of progressive diseases
in many types of cancers. We have previously shown that chronic exposure
of immortalized benign prostate epithelial cells to paracrine IL-6 can
induce tumorigenic transformation and further EMT
(epithelial-mesochymal-transition)-associated metastasis in xenografts
through stimulating autocrine IL-6 signaling and transactivating type I
Insulin-like Growth Factor Receptor (IGF-IR). Whether IL-6, as a result
of inflammation, in the tissue microenvironment can solely initiate
tissue-specific de novo tumorigenesis is unclear. To address this
question, we have generated a novel line of prostate-specific IL-6
transgenic mouse, in which human IL-6 (hIL-6) was expressed under the
prostate-specific probasin promoter. We found that enforced expression of
hIL-6 transgene in normal mouse prostate epithelium is sufficient to
induce neoplastic transformation of the prostate gland, demonstrated by
disappearance of base cell layer of the prostate gland and loss of
E-cadherin and increased proliferation of the epithelium. Expression of
the hIL-6 transgene also induced autocrine mouse IL-6 secretion in the
prostate gland and sustained activation of STAT3 pathway in the
epithelium and the stroma. Strikingly, IL-6 transgenic mice have
increased peri-prostatic adipose tissue in which STAT3 was highly
phosphorylated in comparison to the wild-type littermate. There is no
significant increase in infiltration of T cells or B cells in the
prostate of IL-6 transgenic animals. However, significantly increased
infiltration (PIncreased elevated levels of serum IL-6, the major
inflammatory mediator, has been shown to be associated with development
of progressive diseases in many types of cancers. We have previously
shown that chronic exposure of immortalized benign prostate epithelial
cells to paracrine IL-6 can induce tumorigenic transformation and further
EMT (epithelial-mesochymal-transition)-associated metastasis in
xenografts through stimulating autocrine IL-6 signaling and
transactivating type I Insulin-like Growth Factor Receptor (IGF-IR).
Whether IL-6, as a result of inflammation, in the tissue microenvironment
can solely initiate tissue-specific de novo tumorigenesis is unclear. To
address this question, we have generated a novel line of
prostate-specific IL-6 transgenic mouse, in which human IL-6 (hIL-6) was
expressed under the prostate-specific probasin promoter. We found that
enforced expression of hIL-6 transgene in normal mouse prostate
epithelium is sufficient to induce neoplastic transformation of the
prostate gland, demonstrated by disappearance of base cell layer of the
prostate gland and loss of E-cadherin and increased proliferation of the
epithelium. Expression of the hIL-6 transgene also induced autocrine
mouse IL-6 secretion in the prostate gland and sustained activation of
STAT3 pathway in the epithelium and the stroma. Strikingly, IL-6
transgenic mice have increased peri-prostatic adipose tissue in which
STAT3 was highly phosphorylated in comparison to the wild-type
littermate. There is no significant increase in infiltration of T cells
or B cells in the prostate of IL-6 transgenic animals. However,
significantly increased infiltration (P<0.01) of FoxP3+ lymphocytes was
seen in the stroma of the prostate in the IL-6 transgenic animals in
comparison to wild-type littermates. These data suggest that IL-6 as a
pro-inflammatory cytokine alone can induce tissue-specific tumorigenesis
through induction of autocrine IL-6 secretion and remodeling tissue
microenvironment. Our finding suggests that inflammation may play a
direct role beyond being the stimuli or fuel in tumorigenesis.

