Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of an Fc-enhanced anti-B7-H3 monoclonal
antibody with potent anti-tumor activity


Antigens that are tumor-specific or over-expressed on cancer cells
represent opportunities for developing target-specific antibody-based
therapeutics. Utilizing a non-target-biased intact cell-based
immunization approach, we have generated greater than 1600 mAbs to
cell-surface proteins that are expressed on cancer cells. A subset of the
mAbs exhibit differential reactivity to tumor cells compared to normal
cells. One of the differentially expressed proteins identified was B7-H3
(also referred to as CD276). B7-H3 is a member of the B7 family of immune
regulatory proteins. Over-expression of B7-H3 has been correlated with
disease severity and outcome in a growing number of cancer types, and
several lines of evidence support a functional role for B7-H3 in cancer.
In this report we describe the development of a humanized anti-B7-H3 mAb,
designated MGA271, which bears an engineered Fc domain that imparts
enhanced antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) through
increased affinity for the human activating Fc-gamma receptor IIIA
(CD16A) and decreased affinity for the human inhibitory Fc-gamma receptor
IIB (CD32B). MGA271 displays strong reactivity to multiple tumors
including kidney, prostate, pancreatic, breast, colon, gastric and
ovarian cancer as well as melanoma, but limited reactivity toward normal
human tissues. Independently of the donor's CD16A genotype, MGA271
mediates ADCC in vitro against human tumor cell lines representing these
tumor types, as well as to human lung and gastrointestinal cell lines
that exhibit properties of cancer stem cells. MGA271 exhibits potent
anti-tumor activity toward B7-H3-expressing tumor xenografts in mice
knocked-out for the murine CD16 gene and transgenic for the low affinity
allele of human CD16A. Single- and repeat-dose toxicology studies were
carried out in cynomolgus monkeys and no significant test article-related
safety findings were observed. Taken together, these data support the
clinical development of MGA271 for the treatment of patients who have
B7-H3-expressing cancers.

