Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolonged survival of patients with advanced renal cancer
responding to multi-peptide vaccine IMA901 after single-dose
cyclophosphamide


Translational research and the clinical development of therapeutic cancer
vaccines requires stronger scientific rationalization. Here we
demonstrate how immune response markers as well as biomarkers defining
the immune regulatory environment were utilized as guiding tools from
discovery to advanced clinical trials of IMA901, a novel therapeutic
vaccine for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). IMA901 consists
of multiple tumor-associated peptides (TUMAPs) confirmed to be naturally
presented in human RCC tissue by mass spectrometry, selected using
differential transcriptomics and preclinically validated by systematic
analysis of immunogenicity with artificial antigen-presenting cells. Two
consecutive independent clinical studies in a total of 96 HLA-A*02+
advanced/metastatic RCC patients were conducted. The phase I study
revealed that T-cell responses to multiple IMA901 antigens were
significantly associated with disease control and negatively associated
with the presence of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs). The subsequent
randomized phase II study demonstrated that pre-treatment with a single
low dose of cyclophosphamide (Cy) reduced Treg frequencies and prolonged
overall survival (OS) in patients who mounted an immune response to the
IMA901 vaccine. Additionally, T-cell responses to multiple IMA901
antigens were again associated with clinical benefit. Furthermore, a
comprehensive prognostic and predictive biomarker program was conducted.
Among cellular biomarkers, highly significantly elevated levels of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), IL-17-/IL-10-secreting T cells
and dysfunctional T cells in RCC patients vs. healthy individuals were
found. Two MDSC populations (CD14+ HLA-DR- and CD14- CD11b+ CD15+) were
significantly negatively associated with survival in vaccinated RCC
patients. Interestingly, both MDSC populations were also found to be
negatively associated with OS in an independent trial in colorectal
cancer patients (N=79) implying a broader role for these MDSC species.
Additionally, among over 300 serum biomarkers tested, apolipoprotein A-I
(ApoA1) and the chemokine CCL17 were found to be predictive for both
immune responses to IMA901 and survival of the RCC patients. The
knowledge acquired in these trials was used to design a randomized phase
III study. In this ongoing study, IMA901 is combined with the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor sunitinib based on the findings that sunitinib
downmodulates the two MDSC populations described above. Furthermore, in
this phase III study, the relevance of ApoA1/CCL17 will be explored by
prospectively defined subgroup analyses.

