Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advantages of patient primary tumor models versus tumor cell lines
established models for testing anticancer agents


BACKGROUND While the tumor xenograft models established by inoculation of
human cancer cell lines into immunodeficient mice have been widely used
for testing novel cytotoxic anticancer agents, new drug development has
moved from general cytotoxic agents to molecular target-directed
therapeutics. Consequently, there is a need to identify tumor types and
individual patient tumors that express the target and could benefit from
more selective therapies in clinical trials. Therefore, the in vivo
models used in preclinical development should be disease-oriented and
target-directed. Recently, we have developed patients primary tumor
xenograft models by transplanting patients fresh tumor fragments into
nude mice, which have been used for preclinical test of anticancer
agents. METHODS The fresh tumor samples were collected from local
hospitals. The tumor fragments of 1-2 mm were subcutaneously implanted in
the flanks of the nude mice. The histopathology and genomic mutation
status of primary tumor xenografts were analyzed and compared with
patients original tumors. The clinically used drugs included cisplatin,
paclitaxel, docetaxel, irinotecan, doxorubicin, 5-FU, gemcitabine,
gefitinib, and erlotinib, avastin. RESULTS A total of 748 patients
primary tumor samples have been implanted into nude mice, 256 patient
tumor-derived models have been established. The tumor taking rates of the
different tumor types in the first passage were colorectal (60%), ovarian
(47%), esophageal (63%), small cell lung cancer (100%), non-small cell
lung cancer (50%), gastric (28%), kidney (12%), glioblastoma (19%),
breast (7%), liver (10%), and acute lymphocytic leukemia (25%). The tumor
taking rates were higher in the later passages for the various tumor
types, ranged from approximately 70-100%. The clinically used anticancer
drugs produced tumor inhibition rates ranged from 20-90%, which were
consistent with their clinical findings. The patient primary tumor
xenografts from all five generations presented a similar
histopathological morphology and the same genomic mutation status as
their counterparts of the patients original tumors. CONCLUSIONS These
results suggest that patient primary tumor-derived xenograft model system
can provide a larger number of models within the same tumor histological
type for models selection based on antitumor mechanism of test agents.
They also provide a unique renewable source of tumor material for target
identification and biomarker evaluation. The preclinical results obtained
from primary tumor models may give a better predictive value than the
traditional human tumor xenograft models established by inoculation of
cancer cell lines. Especially, they have advantages for testing
target-oriented therapeutics in new drugs discovery and development
programs.

