Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cells by an anti-DLL4 antibody inhibits
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, delays tumor recurrence and
overcomes drug resistance in breast and pancreatic cancer


Accumulating evidence suggests that tumor growth, recurrence and
metastasis are driven by a subset of highly tumorigenic cells referred to
as cancer stem cells (CSCs) or tumor initiating cells. Several
investigators have demonstrated that CSCs are relatively resistant to
chemotherapy and that tumor recurrence and the development of drug
resistance after chemotherapy are mediated by residual cancer stem cells.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the process of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to drug resistance
and results in cells with CSC-like characteristics. We previously
demonstrated that targeting Notch signaling pathway by a novel anti-DLL4
antibody inhibited tumor growth and decreased cancer stem cell frequency.
Using patient-derived breast cancer and pancreatic cancer xenograft
tumors we found that residual tumors after conventional chemotherapy
(paclitaxel for breast cancer and gemcitabine for pancreatic cancer) were
enriched with cancer stem cells. Gene expression analysis of cell
populations enriched for CSCs revealed that several
mesenchymal-associated genes were up-regulated, whereas epithelial gene
was down-regulated. As shown by in vivo limiting dilution analyses,
treatment with anti-DLL4 antibody decreased cancer stem cell frequency.
Anti-DLL4 reversed chemotherapy-induced mesenchymal gene expression and
delayed tumor recurrence. The residual tumor cells treated with
conventional therapy eventually developed acquired drug resistance
following repeated treatment. Compared to the parental xenograft, the
resistant tumors had increased cancer stem cell frequency and tumorigenic
ability. Treatment with anti-DLL4 antibody inhibited growth of these
resistant tumors and re-sensitized them to the chemotherapeutic agent.
This effect was in part due to the ability of the antibody to decrease
cancer stem cell frequency in resistant tumors. The combination of
antibody and chemotherapeutic agent further decreased cancer stem cell
frequency compared to the parental tumor. Gene expression analysis
demonstrated that resistant tumors had increased expression of many genes
associated with EMT, multidrug resistance, DNA repair, and the Notch and
Wnt pathways. Importantly, treatment with anti-DLL4 suppressed many gene
expression changes in chemo-resistant tumors and resulted in a gene
expression profile more like the original (drug sensitive) tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that anti-DLL4 mediated anti-tumor
effect was associated with inhibition of EMT and induction of
differentiation markers. Our findings provide a rationale to target
cancer stem cells through interference with Notch pathway as a
therapeutic approach in patients who are refractory to chemotherapeutic
agents.

