Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel compounds from Allspice (Pimenta dioica) inhibit breast
cancer growth by autophagy induction


Background: Breast Cancer (BrCa) ranks second as cause of cancer death in
women, causing 40,000 deaths in 2010. Recent studies have shown that
novel plant-derived compounds used as dietary chemopreventive agents
prolong survival and reduce breast cancer deaths. Lack of mechanism of
action and limited bioavailability are the leading concerns for adopting
natural dietary compounds as chemopreventive or adjuvant therapeutic
agents against breast and other cancers. We identified several likely
anti-cancer compounds from water extract of Allspice, the unripe berries
of Pimenta dioica (Jamaican pepper). The compounds limit the growth of
breast cancer cells by novel mechanism and may synergize with main-stream
cancer therapeutics. Methods: An aqueous extract of Certified-organic
Allspice (AAE) was prepared and a solution of suitable strength was
tested on several BrCa cell lines (MCF-7, T47D, MDA-MB231, SKBr3) for
potential inhibition of proliferation, autophagy and estrogen-receptor
inactivation using commonly used analytical techniques. Potential effect
on estrogen receptor levels and transcriptional activities were
determined using quantitative-real time PCR, promoter luciferase assay
and immunoblotting. Results: AAE reduced the viability and clonogenic
growth of BrCa cells (IC50100g/ml) with limited activity (50% less
toxicity in quiescent cells). AAE induced cell-death was only associated
with several characteristics of autophagy, including increase in acidic
vesicular organelle content, levels of GFP-LC3-positive puncta, and
LC3-II protein level. Knockdown of ATG-7 gene expression by siRNA
partially prevented AAE-induced cell death by 40%. Autophagy was induced
by Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress but not changes in ATP levels.
Further, AAE caused inhibition of mTOR signaling pathway and enhanced
cytotoxicity combined with mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin. Furthermore, AAE
reduced Estrogen Receptor- protein as well mRNA levels in ER
positive-BrCa cell lines MCF-7 and T47D. The decrease in ER protein level
was only partially rescued by proteasome inhibitor MG132, indicating AAE
accelerates ER protein degradation. Activity based purification combined
with chemical identification strategies resulted in identification of one
compound Ericifolin, and several compounds in a highly enriched fraction
exhibiting same properties as that of AAE. Conclusion: We showed the
anti-cancer effects of aqueous extract of Allspice on BrCa cells, which
includes anti-proliferation by inducting autophagy after AAE treatment
and ER downregulation which has promising clinical application for BrCa
treatment. [Grant Support: R01 CA156776-01and Sylvester Cancer Center
(BLL)].

