Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal screening: A pathway for rational combinatorial
therapies for cancer


We hypothesize that many cases of both intrinsic and acquired resistance
to single agent targeted cancer drugs occur due to the activation of
compensatory signaling pathways. Combination therapies targeting both the
primary and compensatory pathways may be able to produce more robust and
durable responses. To identify these compensatory pathways and rationally
construct combination therapies, we performed a synthetic lethal screen
of 420 targeted small molecule inhibitor combinations on 17 cancer cell
lines, yielding over 5500 combinatorial tests. We identified both novel
and expected synergistic combinations. Among the expected combinations
was the combination of inhibitors of EGF Receptor with inhibitors of PI3
Kinase. Because this combination is currently being evaluated in clinical
trials, we have focused on examination of the cellular and molecular
mechanism(s) of the synthetic lethality. We found that inhibition of PI3
Kinase led to increased ERK activation, and conversely that inhibition of
MEK resulted in increased signaling through the PI3 Kinase pathway. Flow
cytometric analysis revealed that this synergistic cytotoxicity is both
due to a robust apoptotic response to combination treatment measured by
caspase 3 cleavage and also a decrease in proliferation upon combination
treatment measured by BrdU incorporation. Using Reverse Phase Protein
Arrays, we identified phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 as a
molecular biomarker of synergistic cytotoxicity with these agents. To
determine whether this biomarker reflects a mechanistic node in the
signaling network, we tested pharmacological inhibition of 70 kD
ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K) and found only modest cytotoxicity,
but also robust activation of ERK1 and 2. This increase could be blocked
by the addition of a pharmacological inhibitor of the EGF Receptor,
suggesting a negative feedback loop between p70S6K and the EGF Receptor.
Combined treatment with p70S6K and EGF Receptor inhibitors resulted in
synergistic cytotoxicity. Currently, we are identifying the node between
EGF Receptor and p70S6K signaling that could be responsible for this
synthetic lethality. Additionally, we are conducting xenograft studies
using inhibitors of this pathway that are currently in clinical trials,
to test the efficacy of this drug combination in vivo.

