Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendrimer-mediated multivalent binding strongly captures tumor
cells


Multivalent interactions, simultaneous binding of multiple ligands toward
their multiple receptors, commonly occur in physiological and
pathological events, which have been utilized to enhance targeting
efficacy. The multivalent binding can be leveraged to develop an
extremely sensitive device for detection of rare cells such as
circulating tumor cell (CTC). Accurate enumeration of CTCs is of clinical
importance in diagnosis and prognosis of cancer metastasis; however the
rareness of CTCs, comprising as few as one tumor cell in the background
of one million-one billion of normal blood cells, has made the effective
detection of the cells extremely difficult. Here we report a novel
surface chemistry that utilizes the multivalent effect for a highly
stable cancer cell capture. Poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers have been
reported as an excellent multivalent binding mediator due to their
deformability and multiple functional groups. PAMAM dendrimers were
conjugated with anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecules (aEpCAM), a
commonly used antibody for CTC detection. A direct, quantitative analysis
using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) revealed that the aEpCAM-dendrimer
conjugates exhibited a dramatically enhanced binding avidity by a
million-fold, compared to free aEpCAM. Dendrimers and aEpCAM were
successfully immobilized on the surfaces, as confirmed by x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy and fluorescence microscopy. The surfaces were
tested using in vitro cell lines (MDA-MB-361, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231 cells
as a CTC model). Surface immobilization of the dendrimer-aEpCAM
conjugates resulted in a significantly enhanced tumor cell detection than
the surfaces with the linear PEG-aEpCAM conjugates by 1.9 fold with
higher binding stability over agitation (up to 69.1-fold). The
enhancement through dendrimer-mediated multivalent binding effect was
further increased up to 7-fold with addition of E-selectin that recruits
the cancer cells onto the surface and induces their rolling under flow.
This study demonstrates a novel surface engineering approach to
exploiting the strong multivalent binding for sensitive detection of
tumor cells, which has great potential for clinically significant
detection of CTCs.

