Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PAMM (pulmonary assessment of metastatic morbidity)
diagnostic: A novel non-invasive method for evaluating lung metastasis in
murine models


Metastasis continues to be the most significant problem in the field of
cancer. The biological complexity that characterizes metastasis requires
relevant experimental systems for its study, necessitating the use of
animal models. When using murine models for pulmonary metastasis, it is
valuable to conduct longitudinal studies during which progression of
metastatic burden in the lung occurs. Current methods for evaluating
pulmonary metastatic burden in experimental mice are limited to advanced
imaging approaches or to the development of morbidity linked to pulmonary
metastasis. Unfortunately, clinical signs of morbidity are often vague
and unpredictable. A novel, inexpensive, clinical method to detect
advanced metastatic burden in mice before the development of significant
morbidity or mortality would be beneficial to the study of metastasis in
mice. With this goal in mind we have developed a novel, non-invasive
technique for assessing pulmonary metastatic burden in laboratory mice.
The PAMM (Pulmonary Assessment of Metastatic Morbidity) test is performed
by restraining an awake mouse and gently applying pressure with the index
finger under the xiphoid process. This pressure reduces the diaphragmatic
component to respiration. Mice with advanced lung metastases will show
signs of respiratory distress within 3 seconds of applying this pressure.
Application of this method in 4 models of pulmonary metastasis (n=27 mice
including sarcoma and mammary carcinoma histologies), amongst 3
independent users, yielded 100% positive and 100% negative predictive
values that were validated by post mortem examination. In summary, the
PAMM method is a simple, inexpensive, reproducible and efficient method
to assist in the detection of advanced pulmonary metastasis. This method
contributes to the humane care of mice included in longitudinal studies
of pulmonary metastasis.

