Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying cell surface receptor VAP targets to sensitize
melanoma to chemotherapy


Melanoma accounts for 79% of all skin cancer deaths. The incidence rate
has doubled throughout the past three decades, while the survival rate
remains consistently low. Melanoma is unusually lethal as it metastasizes
early and is highly resistance to all available chemotherapeutics. The
newest treatment utilizes a small inhibitor targeting the BRAF pathway,
considering the BRAF V600E mutation occurs in 65% of clinical melanoma
cases. Unfortunately, it is clear that there is both primary and acquired
resistance to the drug. Recent studies demonstrate that engaging
defective cell surface adhesion receptors known as integrins increases
the sensitivity of melanoma to traditional DNA damaging agents. Our
laboratory has identified a novel peptide denoted vinculin activating
peptide (VAP) that increases integrin engagement from within the cell by
targeting the integrin cytoplasmic binding partner, vinculin.
Furthermore, VAP sensitizes melanoma to DNA damaging agents in vitro and
in vivo. The goal of this project is to identify the cell surface target
of VAP. Both 1and 3 integrins are highly over-expressed in melanoma,
suggesting that VAP targets one or both of these defective integrins. To
test this possibility, melanoma cells lacking 1 or 3 integrins were
generated. In the absence of 1 integrins, VAP did not induce elevations
in p53 levels or increase apoptosis in melanoma cell lines treated with
cytotoxic agents. In addition, its ability to sensitize melanoma cells to
therapeutics in biological assays was ablated. Furthermore, the 1
integrin-dependency of VAP's effect was confirmed by examining melanoma
cells lacking 3 integrins. Ongoing experiments are testing the
requirement for 1 integrin in mouse models of melanoma. Taken together,
these findings suggest that 1 integrins are required for VAP to sensitize
melanomas to chemotherapy agents. The successful completion of these
studies will provide the mechanistic underpinning for a new class of
therapeutics that sensitize melanomas to chemotherapy.

