Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin-folate conjugate for increased bioavailability and
targeted delivery of curcumin to cancer cells


Specific types of high risk Human Papillomavirus (HR-HPV) types,
particularly the HPV type 16 and HPV 18 are known to cause cervical
cancer. The expression of two viral oncogenes E6 and E7 responsible for
tumorigenic transformation, is mainly dependent on specific host-cell
transcription factor, Activator Protein 1 (AP-1) which acts as a
signaling epicenter for cervical cancer. Although recently two
prophylactic HPV vaccines have been developed, there is no therapeutic
molecule available for the treatment of cervical lesions. We demonstrate
that Curcumin (Diferuloylmethane), a yellow pigment, used in traditional
medicines and present in the dietary spice turmeric (Curcuma longa), can
selectively down regulate HPV 18 transcription as well as AP-1 binding
activity. Curcumin can also reverse the expression dynamics of c-fos and
fra-1 in tumorigenic HeLa cells by mimicking their expression pattern in
normal cells. But the bioavailability of curcumin is extremely poor due
to its hydrophobicity, rapid metabolism and lack of specificity in
targeting cancer cells. Therefore, a folic acid-curcumin conjugate for
mutation has been developed by attaching one molecule of curcumin with
two molecules of folic acid (Cur-2FA) to make curcumin hydrophilic,
enhance its bioavailability and to target only cancer cells which
specifically express high level of folate receptors. The effect of both
native curcumin and Cur-2FA on HPV and AP-1 has been analyzed in HPV
positive cervical cancer and HPV negative breast cancer cell lines, by
band shift assay, confocal microscopy, flow cytometry and western
blotting including their cytotoxic potential and targeted cellular uptake
of curcumin. In comparison to native curcumin, curcumin-2FA has been
found to be atleast two times more effective in inducing down regulation
of HPV transcription, AP-1 activity and expression of its components
particularly c-fos and fra-1. Curcumin-2FA was found to be more potent
than curcumin in inducing apoptosis, inhibits tumor cell proliferation
and Cur-2FA conjugate was specifically taken up by cancer cells. In mice,
curcumin-2FA was more bioavailable and had a longer half-life than
curcumin. We demonstrate that this nontoxic low molecular weight
curcumin-2Folic acid conjugate formulation specifically targets cancer
cells which overexpress high affinity folate receptor and enhanced
cellular uptake facilitating increased bioavailability and targeted
delivery to cancer cells.

