Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF1 regulated expression of XPA contributes to cisplatin
resistance in lung cancer


Factors regulating nucleotide excision repair (NER) likely contribute to
the heterogenous response of advanced stage lung cancer patients to drugs
such as cisplatin. Studies to identify the genes in the NER pathway most
closely associated with resistance to cisplatin have not been conclusive.
We hypothesized that Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A (XPA)
because of its dual role in sensing and recruiting other DNA repair
proteins to the damage template would be critical in defining sensitivity
to cisplatin. Studies were conducted to identify factors regulating
transcription of XPA, to assess its role in modulating sensitivity to
cisplatin, and its expression in primary lung tumors. HIF1 was found to
bind with strong affinity to a hypoxia response element sequence in the
promoter of XPA. Modulating expression of HIF1 by siRNA or cobalt
chloride markedly reduced or increased transcription of XPA in lung
cancer cell lines, respectively. Protein levels of XPA were strongly
correlated with sensitivity to cisplatin (r = 0.868; p Factors regulating
nucleotide excision repair (NER) likely contribute to the heterogenous
response of advanced stage lung cancer patients to drugs such as
cisplatin. Studies to identify the genes in the NER pathway most closely
associated with resistance to cisplatin have not been conclusive. We
hypothesized that Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A (XPA)
because of its dual role in sensing and recruiting other DNA repair
proteins to the damage template would be critical in defining sensitivity
to cisplatin. Studies were conducted to identify factors regulating
transcription of XPA, to assess its role in modulating sensitivity to
cisplatin, and its expression in primary lung tumors. HIF1 was found to
bind with strong affinity to a hypoxia response element sequence in the
promoter of XPA. Modulating expression of HIF1 by siRNA or cobalt
chloride markedly reduced or increased transcription of XPA in lung
cancer cell lines, respectively. Protein levels of XPA were strongly
correlated with sensitivity to cisplatin (r = 0.868; p < 0.001) in cell
lines and sensitivity could be increased by siRNA depletion of XPA.
Expression of XPA determined in 54 primary lung tumors was increased on
average 5.2-fold when compared to normal bronchial epithelial cells and
correlated with levels of HIF1 (r = 0.58; p Factors regulating nucleotide
excision repair (NER) likely contribute to the heterogenous response of
advanced stage lung cancer patients to drugs such as cisplatin. Studies
to identify the genes in the NER pathway most closely associated with
resistance to cisplatin have not been conclusive. We hypothesized that
Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A (XPA) because of its dual
role in sensing and recruiting other DNA repair proteins to the damage
template would be critical in defining sensitivity to cisplatin. Studies
were conducted to identify factors regulating transcription of XPA, to
assess its role in modulating sensitivity to cisplatin, and its
expression in primary lung tumors. HIF1 was found to bind with strong
affinity to a hypoxia response element sequence in the promoter of XPA.
Modulating expression of HIF1 by siRNA or cobalt chloride markedly
reduced or increased transcription of XPA in lung cancer cell lines,
respectively. Protein levels of XPA were strongly correlated with
sensitivity to cisplatin (r = 0.868; p < 0.001) in cell lines and
sensitivity could be increased by siRNA depletion of XPA. Expression of
XPA determined in 54 primary lung tumors was increased on average
5.2-fold when compared to normal bronchial epithelial cells and
correlated with levels of HIF1 (r = 0.58; p < 0.01). Together, these
studies identify XPA as a novel target for regulation by HIF1 whose
modulation could impact lung cancer therapy.

