Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive biomarkers of the AKT inhibitor, GDC-0068, in single
agent and combination studies


Background: The PI3K/AKT pathway is frequently activated in cancer by
multiple mechanisms including PI3K activating mutations, PTEN loss, RTK
activation, and other means. GDC-0068 is a potent, highly selective,
ATP-competitive pan-AKT inhibitor that is currently in Phase 1a and Phase
1b clinical development. Here, we describe the cell line screening
efforts and xenograft studies that provide rationale for a predictive
biomarker strategy both for single agent studies and combinations with
chemotherapeutic agents. Methods: Cell line screening using GDC-0068 as a
single agent and in combination with other agents provided a means of
identifying predictive markers across various indications and drug
combinations. Single agent screens were performed with GDC-0068 in 9
prostate, 54 breast, and 18 ovarian cell lines. We evaluated combination
activity of GDC-0068 with docetaxel, doxorubicin, rapamycin and MEK
inhibitor in a panel of 24 cell lines and combination activity of
GDC-0068 with 5FU/Cisplatin (Folfox) in a panel of 11 gastric and 15 head
and neck cancer cell lines. We also evaluated both single agent activity
and combination activity in select xenograft models. Results: Single
agent screens identified PTEN loss, PIK3CA activating mutations, and RTK
activation (HER2 in breast) as key predictive markers in breast, ovarian
and prostate cell lines. Similarly, in prostate cancer xenograft models,
the highest tumor growth inhibition was seen in models with PI3K pathway
activation, e.g. via PTEN loss. In the GDC-0068 combination studies, MEK
inhibitors provided the most significant synergy across different
targeted and chemotherapy agents tested (rapamycin, docetaxel,
doxurubicin). In combination with 5FU/Cisplatin, we observed additive
effects in gastric and head and neck cell lines and this response was
best observed in cell lines with pathway activation: PTEN loss, PI3K
mutations or amplifications, and/or high pAKT. The in vitro results were
recapitulated in vivo with the combination of GDC-0068 with either
docetaxel or carboplatin enhancing the antitumor efficacy compared to
either single agent alone in multiple tumor xenograft models. All
combinations were well tolerated as assessed by animal body weights and
mortalities. Conclusions: Across various indications, PTEN loss or PI3K
pathway activation via PIK3CA activating mutations are strong predictive
biomarkers of GDC-0068 activity either as a single agent or in
combination studies and provide a strong diagnostic hypothesis for
evaluation in the clinic. Based on these results and others, GDC-0068 is
currently being tested for single agent activity in a diagnostically
selected Phase 1a expansion cohort in breast and prostate cancer, and in
multiple combination Phase Ib trials.

