Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA profiling of prostate cancer cell-derived large oncosomes
identifies a signature of invasion and metastasis


Introduction: We recently demonstrated that amoeboid prostate cancer
(PCa) cells shed large (1-10m diameter), bioactive membrane particles,
representing a new class of tumor microvesicles termed large oncosomes
(LO). LO can transfer oncogenic signals horizontally within the tumor
microenvironment, as demonstrated by activation of phospho-tyrosines and
Akt in recipient cells. Methods: We used differential ultracentrifugation
and immuno-flow cytometry with size beads to isolate oncosomes in the
1-10m diameter range. The method was applied to culture medium as well as
to the plasma of mice with prostate cancer. In order to identify oncosome
miRNAs relevant to metastasis, we performed a GeneChip miRNA 2.0 Array
screen of oncosomes shed by tumorigenic RWPE-2 PCa cells. Non-tumorigenic
RWPE-1 cells were also analyzed. Results: LO contained protease and
significantly stimulated migration of tumor and endothelial cells. LO
also contained Caveolin-1, the GTPase ARF6 and other proteins that we
used as markers to identify them in the circulation of mice with PCa, and
in murine and human tissues with metastatic disease. Oncosomes also
contained RNA. The miRNA profile of the oncosomes was compared to the
miRNA profile of the cells of origin. While the miRNA profile of RWPE-2
almost completely matched the profile of RWPE-1 cells, the profiles
differed significantly between LO isolated from the two cell lines. In
particular, RWPE-2-derived LO contained miR-1228*, miR-150*, miR-373*,
miR-135a*, miR-34b and miR-491-3p, which have been implicated in cancer
cell proliferation and migration. In particular, the miRNAs miR-135a* and
miR-373* target and inhibit the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which plays
a role in promoting a mesenchymal to amoeboid transition. miR-135a* and
miR-373* have also been demonstrated to stimulate cell invasion, and are
up-regulated in metastatic prostate and breast cancer. Target prediction
analysis identified members of pathways involved in metabolic
deregulation, and in oncogenic intercellular signaling and cell-cell
interaction specifically in the LO purified from the tumorigenic cell
line. Conclusions: Collectively, our results indicate that tumor cells
can use oncosome formation to actively export pro-oncogenic miRNAs and
that oncosomes therefore serve as a potential source of biomarkers of
tumor progression.

