Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concordance between mutations identified by bar-coded multiplexed
sequencing of BRAF, NRAS, and KIT in formalin fixed (FFPE) tissue from
melanoma patients using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) and
a real-time PCR assay


The standard chemotherapy for metastatic melanoma is dacarbazine,
however, progression free survival with dacarbazine is a dismal two
months. Efforts to improve the treatment of melanoma have focused on
specific molecular defects following the discovery that the majority of
patients have a mutation in one of three members of the BRAF-MAPK
signaling pathway: KIT, BRAF, and RAS. Recent clinical trials have shown
promise for drugs that target the molecular defects in melanoma,
including the recently approved mutant BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib. As new
drugs that target specific mutations move through clinical trials, the
opportunity to perform precision medicine is becoming a reality. To
deliver on the promise shown by the new generation of drugs it will be
necessary to detect specific mutations in patients so they can be matched
with the right drug. To this end, we have used an Ion Torrent Personal
Genome Machine to sequence the six most commonly mutated codons in
melanoma (BRAF 600, NRAS 12 and 13, NRAS 61, KIT 576, and KIT 642) from
formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue of late stage melanoma patients.
All six codons of interest were sequenced in forty-six patients and
mutations identified by comparison to normal controls. The A375 cell
line, containing the known mutation V600E in BRAF was used as a positive
control. Samples were sequenced in a multiplexed format using bar coding
of the amplicons which allowed 14 patients and two controls to be
sequenced simultaneously on each chip. Results were confirmed by real
time RT-PCR assay specific for the BRAF V600E mutation. We demonstrate
the feasibility of using rapid low cost next-generation sequencing to
provide robust detection of mutations in fixed patient samples.

