Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Echo-contrast monitoring of sorafenib early efficacy: animal model
for Ewing's sarcoma tumors


Background: Anti-angiogenic drugs are a pillar of the therapeutic
approach against cancer. Contrast ultrasound (CUS) can detect perfusion
modifications during anti-angiogenic therapy preceding tumor size
regression. However, contrast imaging would benefit from better
standardization of the technique. This work compares discrimination of
tumors in Sorafenib-treated and placebo mice using CUS evaluation of
relative blood volume (rBV), mean transit time (mTT) and wash in rate
(WiR). Methods: Ewing's sarcoma tumors were grafted orthotopically by
sub-capsular injection of 100 L of SK-NEP-1 cells (5 x 106cells/mL) in
the left kidney of nude fifteen mice (Elevage Janvier, Le Genest-St-Isle,
France). Contrast enhanced ultrasonography was performed using a clinical
ultrasound system Acuson Sequoia 512 with a 14 MHz probe (Siemens Medical
Solutions, Mountain View). The tumor area (A) was calculated according to
A = ( x L x w)/2. CUS (Sonovue, Bracco SA, Milan, Italy) with
destruction-reperfusion was performed using cadence pulse-sequence (CPS).
Data were acquired from each mouse at 14 days after tumor-cell injection.
The treatment was started at day 14 just after the CUS baseline. At day
14 (day of start therapy) the 12 mice were randomized into two groups.
One group received (6 mice) the anti-angiogenic treatment Sorafenib daily
(10mg/kg/jr) per os and the other group (6 mice) received corresponding
doses of placebo by the same route for 8 days. Image sequences were
recorded in DICOM format and analyzed with prototype software from Bracco
Suisse SA (Geneva, Switzerland) allowing selection of regions of
interest, approximate linearization of the data and fitting of flow
models to time-intensity data to estimate functional parameters within
the tumor. All parameters were normalized with respect to normal cortex
perfusion. Statistical analysis was performed using Wilcoxon Signed-Rank
tests. Results: Ultrasound estimates of the tumor size increased with
time for both groups, but tumor size was never significantly different
between the two groups. Before the normalization with the adjacent renal
cortex perfusion, the functional parameters did not present a significant
difference between the two groups. Therefore after normalization: the rBV
shows a significant difference Sorafenib vs placebo (p=0.008) at 8 days,
the mTT also becomes significant after 8 days of treatment (p=0.02). The
WiR shows a significant difference between groups at 8 days (p=0.005),
but also at 6 days (p=0.04). Conclusions: functional CUS was an effective
technique for monitoring the early response of anti-angiogenic treatment.
The parameters obtained by fitting flow models of destruction-reperfusion
demonstrated the capacity to standardize this angiogenesis analysis. Also
the normalization with respect to adjacent normal tissue appears to
reduce estimate variability and improve functional contrast assessment.

