Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLGA microspheres for MRI-guided localized transcatheter delivery
of sorafenib: development and preclinical feasibility studies


Purpose: Sorafenib is a multi-kinase inhibitor with efficacy for the
palliative treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, oral
administration limits the dose that ultimately reaches tumors and many
patients cannot tolerate associated systemic toxicities such as hand-foot
syndrome and cardiac ischemia. Local delivery of sorafenib-eluting
microspheres via intra-arterial transcather infusion should increase the
dose supplied to tumors while limiting the harsh side-effects. The
purpose of this study was to design and characterize sorafenib-eluting
microspheres that also permit MRI of the intra-hepatic biodistribution
post-infusion. Methods: Polylactide-co-glycolide (PLGA) microspheres
encapsulating sorafenib and an iron-oxide ferrofluid were synthesized via
a double emulsion solvent evaporation method. Microsphere encapsulation
properties were characterized using high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) for sorafenib encapsulation, and inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) for ferrofluid encapsulation. A
cell viability study was performed to investigate the therapeutic
efficacy of the microspheres (cell proliferation in McA-RH7777 HCC cell
line). An in vitro imaging study was then performed where the
microspheres were embedded in agar gels and imaged with MRI. Lastly, six
Sprague Dawley rats were catheterized and infused with 4-6 mgs of the
microspheres via the proper hepatic artery and imaged with MRI to
visualize the biodistribution of the microspheres. Prussian blue staining
was used to identify microsphere positions within hepatic tissue
specimens at necropsy. The agar phantom and rat MRI studies were
performed using a 7T Bruker Clinscan system. Results: The
characterization studies indicated that the Sorafenib-eluting PLGA
microspheres (roughly 10 microns in diameter) included 16.4% (w/w)
sorafenib and 0.81% (w/w) ferrofluid. Cell viability studies showed an
84% decrease in cell number compared to the control (50% compared to the
initial amount plated) after treatment of the McA-RH7777 cells with the
microspheres at a concentration of 36.6 g/mL for 72 hours. MRI phantom
studies demonstrated that T2* relaxation times decreased from 6.9 ms1 to
2.8 ms1 when microsphere concentrations increased from 0 to 2 mg/mL. For
rat studies, the intra-hepatic distribution of the microspheres was
clearly depicted in follow-up T2-weighted MRI images. Prussian blue
slides confirmed hepatic microsphere delivery. Conclusion: The designed
PLGA microspheres with sorafenib and ferrofluid permitted transcatheter
delivery to rodent livers and MRI visualization of the resulting
intra-hepatic biodistribution. This design allows for local delivery that
may ultimately reduce systemic toxicities and increase therapeutic
efficacy of sorafenib and other similar MKIs.

