Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between and PKC isoforms and retinoic acid system in
malignant phenotype reversion


Retinoids may exert some of their effects on cell differentiation and
malignant phenotype reversion through interaction with different PKC
isoforms. In this work we studied the crosstalk between retinoid acid
system (RA) and PKC signaling pathway and its implication in malignant
phenotype reversion using a murine mammary tumor cell line (LM3) and a
human breast cancer-derived cell line (MDA-MB231). ATRA (all trans RA)
treatment (1uM,72h) induced a significant growth inhibition in vitro in
LM3 cell line. This result was confirmed in vivo when LM3 cells were
injected orthotopically in female BALB/c mice while carrying subcutaneous
slow release ATRA pellets (10 mg). This phenomenon was associated with
the reduction of pErk1 levels (809%) and the increase of the cell cycle
inhibitor p27 in the nuclear fraction without altering Cyclin D1
expression in LM3 cell line. None of these modulations were observed in
ATRA unresponsive MDA-MB231 cell line. We determined by Western blot that
24h treatment with ATRA induced an increase of PKC and PKC levels,
detecting alpha isoform only in the membrane fraction and delta isoform
in the nuclear fraction. In contrast, in MDA-MB231 cells, PKC and PKC
expression was reduced after ATRA exposure. Interestingly,
pharmacological inhibition of PKC and PKC prevented retinoid receptors
activation by ATRA in LM3 cells, as evidenced by a reporter gene assay
(RARE-Luciferase). Western blot showed that pharmacological inhibition of
PKC (Rottlerin 1M, 24h) impaired ATRA-induced RAR1 translocation to the
nucleus while the pharmacological inhibition of PKC (G6976 5M, 24h) did
not affect this translocation. Moreover, immunoprecipitation assays
showed that only PKC co-immunoprecipitated with RAR1 after ATRA
treatment, suggesting a physical interaction between both molecules.
Rottlerin-ATRA treatment (72h) reversed the effect on proliferation rate
exerted by retinoid treatment. G6976-ATRA treatment (72h) significantly
decreased cell duplication rate compared with ATRA or G6976 treatment
alone, in an additive manner. Pre-treated LM3 cells with G6976 were
intravenously injected in female BALB/c mice that carried subcutaneous
slow release ATRA pellets in order to evaluate the importance of
combination therapy in the last stages of metastatic spread. We noticed
that this combined therapy produced a higher decrease in the number of
lung metastases, suggesting an additive effect. Our results indicate that
PKC/Retinoid Crosstalk is implicated in growth inhibition through the
induction of RA transcription genes that lead to cell cycle arrest and
differentiation. Finally we speculate that retinoid treatment combined
with PKC isoform modulators could be considered for treatment of PKC
positive breast cancer patients.

