Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation profiles of endometrial cancer and benign
endometrium suggest differences by mismatch repair status and possible
early detection markers


Background: Increased risk for endometrial cancer, the most common
gynecological malignancy in the United States, is related to obesity,
nulliparity, and postmenopausal hormone use. Several molecular pathways
and mechanisms are prominently involved in endometrial carcinogenesis
including mismatch repair deficiency (MMR), abnormalities in the PTEN
pathway and DNA methylation. We compared DNA methylation profiles in
endometrial cancers to identify markers related to MMR deficiencies and
contrasted results to normal endometrial tissue to identify potential
biomarkers for early detection. Methods: We conducted methylation
profiling on 148 paraffin embedded endometrial cancer tissues collected
in the population-based Polish Endometrial Cancer Study and 23 normal
tissues included within a study of benign endometrium at Magee Women's
Hospital. 1.0 mm tissue cores removed from target-rich areas of tissue
blocks were used for DNA extraction and bisulfite treatment. The Illumina
Golden Gate platform was used to assess CpG methylation at 1505 sites.
Microsatellite instability (MSI) testing using three markers (BAT25,
BAT26, and CAT25) was performed to identify MMR deficient cases. We
conducted unsupervised hierarchical clustering and class comparison
analyses to evaluate DNA methylation by MMR status among cancers and
class comparison and pathway analyses to identify differences in
methylation markers between normal and tumor tissue. Results:
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of methylation profiles in cancers
showed two major clusters with significantly different proportions of MSI
cases (61.4% versus 10.6%, pBackground: Increased risk for endometrial
cancer, the most common gynecological malignancy in the United States, is
related to obesity, nulliparity, and postmenopausal hormone use. Several
molecular pathways and mechanisms are prominently involved in endometrial
carcinogenesis including mismatch repair deficiency (MMR), abnormalities
in the PTEN pathway and DNA methylation. We compared DNA methylation
profiles in endometrial cancers to identify markers related to MMR
deficiencies and contrasted results to normal endometrial tissue to
identify potential biomarkers for early detection. Methods: We conducted
methylation profiling on 148 paraffin embedded endometrial cancer tissues
collected in the population-based Polish Endometrial Cancer Study and 23
normal tissues included within a study of benign endometrium at Magee
Women's Hospital. 1.0 mm tissue cores removed from target-rich areas of
tissue blocks were used for DNA extraction and bisulfite treatment. The
Illumina Golden Gate platform was used to assess CpG methylation at 1505
sites. Microsatellite instability (MSI) testing using three markers
(BAT25, BAT26, and CAT25) was performed to identify MMR deficient cases.
We conducted unsupervised hierarchical clustering and class comparison
analyses to evaluate DNA methylation by MMR status among cancers and
class comparison and pathway analyses to identify differences in
methylation markers between normal and tumor tissue. Results:
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of methylation profiles in cancers
showed two major clusters with significantly different proportions of MSI
cases (61.4% versus 10.6%, p<0.0001). Class comparison by MSI status
identified 52 differentially methylated genes with a p-value Background:
Increased risk for endometrial cancer, the most common gynecological
malignancy in the United States, is related to obesity, nulliparity, and
postmenopausal hormone use. Several molecular pathways and mechanisms are
prominently involved in endometrial carcinogenesis including mismatch
repair deficiency (MMR), abnormalities in the PTEN pathway and DNA
methylation. We compared DNA methylation profiles in endometrial cancers
to identify markers related to MMR deficiencies and contrasted results to
normal endometrial tissue to identify potential biomarkers for early
detection. Methods: We conducted methylation profiling on 148 paraffin
embedded endometrial cancer tissues collected in the population-based
Polish Endometrial Cancer Study and 23 normal tissues included within a
study of benign endometrium at Magee Women's Hospital. 1.0 mm tissue
cores removed from target-rich areas of tissue blocks were used for DNA
extraction and bisulfite treatment. The Illumina Golden Gate platform was
used to assess CpG methylation at 1505 sites. Microsatellite instability
(MSI) testing using three markers (BAT25, BAT26, and CAT25) was performed
to identify MMR deficient cases. We conducted unsupervised hierarchical
clustering and class comparison analyses to evaluate DNA methylation by
MMR status among cancers and class comparison and pathway analyses to
identify differences in methylation markers between normal and tumor
tissue. Results: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of methylation
profiles in cancers showed two major clusters with significantly
different proportions of MSI cases (61.4% versus 10.6%, p<0.0001). Class
comparison by MSI status identified 52 differentially methylated genes
with a p-value <0.001, including MLH1. Further, we observed associations
between age and BMI and methylation patterns in endometrial cancers.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed almost perfect separation of
endometrial cancers from normal endometrial tissues, reflecting
differential methylation of 332 genes at a p-value = 0.001. Higher
methylation levels were found in cancers compared to normal tissues, with
the most significant events in the PTEN pathway. Conclusions: Analyses of
methylation profiles in endometrial cancer show differences by age, BMI
and MMR status. Many genes show differences in DNA methylation in
endometrial cancers as compared to benign endometrial tissues. These data
suggest that methylation analyses may be important for understanding
etiological heterogeneity in endometrial cancer and for identifying
possible markers for early detection.

