Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel molecular therapy targeting Mcl-1 and modulating autophagy
in castration-resistant prostate cancer


Chemo/radioresistance markedly impair the efficacy of cancer therapy.
Anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins such as Bcl-xL, Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 are
overexpressed in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and
contribute to prostate tumor initiation, progression and resistance to
radiotherapy. A natural BH3-mimetic small molecule inhibitor of Bcl-2,
(-)-gossypol, shows promise in ongoing Phase II clinical trials for human
prostate cancer. We have recently shown that (-)-gossypol preferentially
induces autophagy in CRPC cells that have high levels of Bcl-2 and are
resistant to apoptosis, both in vitro and in vivo, but not in
androgen-dependent cells with low Bcl-2 and sensitive to apoptosis. We
have explored a series of gossypol derivatives and identified two novel
BH3-mimetic lead compounds that are more potent than the parental
compound in inducing autophagic cell death in CRPC. A novel pan-Bcl-2
inhibitor, apogossypolone (ApoG2), a derivative of (-)-gossypol, has a
better binding affinity to Mcl-1 and an improved antitumor activity, and
shows promising efficacy on a variety of cancers in vitro and in vivo.
Treatment with the ApoG2 prior to radiotherapy enhances cell death via
autophagic pathway in cancer cells which have high Mcl-1 and resistant to
apoptosis. In addition to abrogating Bcl-2/Mcl-1Beclin1 interactions,
ApoG2 activates the autophagic pathway Atg5-dependently which synergizes
with the effect of radiation. We further investigated the precise
mechanism governing the influence of ApoG2 on IR-induced cell death. Our
data suggest that, ApoG2 pretreatment suppresses IR induced Akt
activation and mTOR phosphorylation. In this way, it serves as a potent
radiosensitizer to affect autophagic cell death in cancer cells.
Administration of ApoG2 prior to IR further delayed tumor growth of
castration resistant prostate cancer xenograft model and increased
autophagic cell death in vivo. Together, our data demonstrate a novel
mode of action of ApoG2 as an enhancer of radiation induced autophagic
cell death and provide mechanistic details of its tumor cell killing
activities. These new insights into different modes of cell death induced
by Mcl-1 inhibitors may facilitate the rational design of clinical trials
by selecting patients most likely to benefit from the Mcl-1-targeted
molecular therapy.

