Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: in vivo Imaging of early inflammation response in bacterial
infection


Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) causes significant morbidity and
mortality worldwide and a prime cause in hospital infections.
Staphylococcus aureus bactereremia is prevalent in neutropenic cancer
patients, and malignancies form a sizeable risk factor for
methycillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) infections. Targeting the
virulence products is a promising approach for developing novel
therapeutics. A detailed understanding of the virulence factors and the
resultant immune response is quite essential for such development. Here,
we established an athymic mice model to assess the initial immune
response to S.aureus inoculation. As the polymorphonuclear
neutrophils(PMN)and macrophages are a part of the early response,
determination of its myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity in vivo is
established. MPO is an inflammatory heme protein and utilizes hydrogen
peroxide in the process of reactive oxygen species generation. 24 hrs
after the intra muscular injection of the S.aureus bacterial lysate, the
MPO activity was detected by i.p injection of luminal in mice. The blue
luminescence resulting from the MPO activity was imaged and the
luminescence images were overlaid on planar X-ray images for anatomical
co-registration. The results show a robust MPO activity in the mouse
bladder. This increase in MPO activity as a result of neutrophil
activation at the bladder region was further confirmed using non-invasive
X-ray contrast imaging of the bladder and co-registering the luminescence
and the X-ray density signals at the bladder. The initial response shown
here has similarities with the mechanism suggested recently for
myobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) treatment of bladder
cancer. Bacterial components, its structures that are involved in
eliciting the robust PMN infiltration in bladder will be very valuable in
the developing better bladder cancer anti-tumor treatments.

