Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the mechanisms by which Snail transcription factor
promotes resistance to chemotherapy in breast carcinomas


Snail (Snail1) is a zinc finger transcription factor that can induce EMT
and is expressed at high levels in tumors. Maspin is a potential tumor
suppressor, whose expression is lost as breast and prostate tumors
progress during EMT. Maspin can be transcriptionally repressed by
androgen receptor (AR) in prostate cancer cells. We hypothesized that
overexpression of Snail will inhibit maspin expression and confer
resistance to chemotherapy. Initially, we examined the expression of
Snail and maspin in a panel of breast epithelial and breast cancer cells
by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Preliminary results suggest that
breast cancer cells express variable levels of Snail that is higher in
breast cancer cells than in the normal MCF10A cells. We then utilized
MCF-7 cells transfected stably with an empty Neo vector (MCF-7 Neo) or
constitutively active Snail cDNA (MCF-7 Snail) that have been shown
previously to represent an EMT model, and examined maspin, estrogen
receptor alpha (ER-) and AR levels by western blot analysis. MCF-7 Snail
cells had upregulated levels of Snail and lower levels of maspin, ER- and
AR, as compared to MCF-7 Neo. MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7 Snail cells were also
xenografted into nude mice and tissue sections stained
immunohistochemically for Snail, maspin, and ER-. Tumor volumes of MCF-7
Snail tumor xenografts were significantly larger than the MCF-7 Neo
xenografts. MCF-7 Snail tissue sections expressed higher levels of Snail
and lower levels of maspin and ER- as compared to MCF-7 Neo sections.
MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7 Snail cells were also treated with estradiol (E2,
0.01uM), tamoxifen (TAM, 10uM), and docetaxel (DOX, 1uM) individually;
and in combination with E2 plus TAM and TAM plus DOX for periods of 24h
and 72h to analyze changes in cell morphology and EMT marker expression.
No effect on cell morphology or cell death was observed in MCF-7 Snail
cells after TAM treatments, whereas TAM induced cell death in MCF-7 Neo.
Expression of Snail was increased with E2 treatments and decreased with
TAM, DOX, and combination treatments in MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7 Snail. AR
expression decreased further in MCF-7 Snail cells and MCF-7 Neo following
treatments with TAM and DOX. Overall, the Snail overexpression appears to
promote resistance to TAM and DOX chemotherapeutic agents. The mechanism
of Snail-regulated EMT needs to be investigated further to determine
changes in breast cancer progression.

