Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of Bim by the BRAF inhibitor PLX4720 sensitizes human
melanoma cells to the BH3 mimetic ABT-737


Once melanoma has metastasized to distant sites it has proved difficult
to treat by a variety of chemotherapeutic and biological agents.
Significant advances have been made in identifying subgroups of patients
with activating mutations in signalling pathway proteins. In particular,
the finding that approximately 50% of melanoma have V600E mutations in
the BRAF serine/threonine kinase has resulted in the generation of a
number of new drugs which target the mutated active form of BRAF. One of
these drugs, Vemurafenib (PLX4032/RG704) has shown significant promise in
prolonging survival compared to standard chemotherapy, however reports of
patient relapse has prompted investigation into means of overcoming
acquired resistance to the agent. We report here that efficacy of the
PLX4032 analogue, PLX4720, is greatly enhanced by co-treatment with the
BH3 mimetic, ABT-737. Treatment with either agent is able to induce
apoptosis in melanoma cells, however the kinetics are typically slow,
with cell death occurring 48 or 72 hours post treatment. In this study,
while either agent was largely ineffective as a single treatment 24 hours
following treatment, addition of the combination of drugs rapidly induced
significant killing. We show that apoptosis was caspase-dependent, in
that inhibition of caspase activation almost totally blocked induction of
cell death by the combination of agents. Apoptosis was also associated
with activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway, with reduction of
mitochondrial membrane potential and activation of caspase-9. Exposure of
melanoma cells to PLX4720 rapidly decreased phosphorylation of the
pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Bim, resulting in strong upregulation as
early as 6 hours after addition of the compound. Strong upregulation of
Bim was shown by RNAi knockdown to play an important role in sensitizing
cells to co-treatment with ABT-737, by assisting in the inhibition of
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins. Further, the combination of agents
induced significant levels of apoptosis in melanoma cells derived from
patients harbouring the BRAFV600E mutation. Collectively, these results
show that the BRAF inhibitor PLX4720 sensitizes melanoma cells to
apoptosis by the BH3 mimetic ABT-737 in a Bim- and caspase-dependent
manner. Additionally, these studies identify a potential clinical
application for BH3 mimetics in overcoming resistance of melanoma to
treatment with BRAF inhibitors, increasing efficacy of this class of
agent and improving patient outcomes.

