Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TopModel: An online resource for predictive models in cancer


One goal of characterizing the genome-wide landscape of cancer cells is
to identify predictive signatures of onset, progression, and treatment
outcomes. Many computational approaches have been developed to discover
gene signatures with a range of success. The challenge still remains to
identify the best approach that, when trained on one cohort, remains
accurate in predicting outcomes on an unseen cohort. Thus far, no clear
themes have emerged that might provide clues about which method works for
a particular task. We have built a system called TopModel that
facilitates the identification of top-performing machine-learning
algorithms for a series of cancer-genomics challenges. The four
components of the system include: 1) a benchmark that includes several
cancer genomics datasets with outcome variables as targets to predict; 2)
a database of results derived from the application of thousands of
machine-learning and feature selection combinations; 3) a web interface
that allows bioinformaticians to evaluate their own prediction results;
and 4) a web interface that allows a biomedical researcher to upload data
on a sample or set of samples in order to receive a report on the
signatures predicted to exist in the sample(s). The cancer benchmark
component provides a common ground for the development and evaluation of
prediction methods for variables such as cancer subtype, drug response,
survival, and others. Several datasets have been loaded including
predicting survival in the TCGA cohorts, and the hundreds of drug
sensitivities in several cancer cell line cohorts. We demonstrate the
utility of the resource by comparing state-of-the art feature selection
methods to a new approach that uses locality on a genetic interaction
network. We evaluate the performance in terms of how well the features
generalize across datasets as a trade-off to the accuracy of prediction.
In addition to identifying high-value genome features, we explore the
robustness of the cancer state in the absence of these features. We
simulate gene knock outs by disconnecting these features in our pathway
models, inferring the pathway interaction network in the absence of these
features, and then reassessing using the top-performing predictive models
of cancer.

