Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibit the invasive potential of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells by targeting EGFR expression
and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is responsible for over
20,000 deaths every year in the United States, and often generates from
critical organs sites including the oral cavity, larynx, pharynx, and
tongue. Most of the deaths are due, in large part, to its propensity to
metastasize. Therefore, an approach that decreases the metastatic ability
of HNSCC cells may facilitate the development of an effective strategy
for its treatment and/or prevention. Naturally occurring bioactive
phytochemicals may serve as appropriate candidates for the prevention of
HNSCC metastasis. We have examined the effect of bioactive component
grape seed proanthocyanidins (GSPs) on the invasive potential of human
HNSCC cells and determined the molecular mechanisms underlying these
effects using various cell lines from multiple sub-sites, such as SCC1
(oral cavity), SCC5 (larynx), FaDu (pharynx) and OSC19 (tongue). Using in
vitro cell invasion assays, we observed that OSC19 cells, which was
metastasis-specific, have significantly higher (PHead and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is responsible for over 20,000 deaths every year
in the United States, and often generates from critical organs sites
including the oral cavity, larynx, pharynx, and tongue. Most of the
deaths are due, in large part, to its propensity to metastasize.
Therefore, an approach that decreases the metastatic ability of HNSCC
cells may facilitate the development of an effective strategy for its
treatment and/or prevention. Naturally occurring bioactive phytochemicals
may serve as appropriate candidates for the prevention of HNSCC
metastasis. We have examined the effect of bioactive component grape seed
proanthocyanidins (GSPs) on the invasive potential of human HNSCC cells
and determined the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects using
various cell lines from multiple sub-sites, such as SCC1 (oral cavity),
SCC5 (larynx), FaDu (pharynx) and OSC19 (tongue). Using in vitro cell
invasion assays, we observed that OSC19 cells, which was
metastasis-specific, have significantly higher (P<0.001) invasive
potential than SCC1, SCC5, and FaDu cell lines. Further studies were
extended with OSC19 cell line to determine the effect of GSPs on cell
migration. Treatment of OSC19 cells with GSPs (10, 20 and 40 g/ml) for 48
h resulted in a concentration-dependent inhibition of cell migration of
these cells. As EGFR is overexpressed in approximately 90% of HNSCC
tumors, the EGFR is considered as a promising target of HNSCC therapy. It
was found that the inhibitory effect of GSPs on cell migration was
associated with a reduction in the levels of EGFR. Treatment of cells
with gefitinib and erlotinib, small molecule inhibitors of EGFR, also
inhibited migration of these cells. EGFR pathway has been involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), an early event that occurs
during metastasis of cancers of an epithelial origin. Therefore, we
determined the effect of GSPs on EMT, and was found that the inhibition
of HNSCC cell migration by GSPs was associated with reversal of EMT,
which resulted in an increase in the levels of epithelial biomarker
(E-cadherin) while loss of mesenchymal biomarkers (vimentin, fibronectin
and N-cadherin) in cells. Similar effect on EMT biomarkers was also
observed when OSC19 cells were treated with erlotinib. As activation of
nuclear factor-B (NF-B) has been implicated in stimulation of EMT, we
further checked the effect of GSPs on NF-B activation. GSPs inhibited the
activation of NF-B/p65 in OSC19 cells, and treatment of cells with
caffeic acid phenethyl ester, an inhibitor of NF-B, also inhibited cell
migration. Together these results indicate that GSPs have the ability to
inhibit the invasive potential of HNSCC cells by targeting EGFR
expression and reversing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

