Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetics, cell cycle and drug-resistant ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal of the gynaecological
malignancies and currently stage III/IV disease is associated with a 25%
5 year survival rate. A major factor associated with advanced EOC is the
development of drug resistant disease, characterised by a lack of
response to platinum and taxane based agents. In an effort to clarify
mechanisms underlying chemorefractory EOC we have developed a number of
drug resistant cancer cell lines. DNA microarray screening of drug
resistant versus drug sensitive cell lines (combining a methylation
reversal step using demethylating agents) indicated down-regulation of a
number of genes with evidence of epigenetic silencing by promoter
methylation in many cases. We have identified P57kip2 a cyclin dependent
kinase inhibitor (CDKi) as a gene that is subjected to methylation in
carboplatin-resistance, as shown in the PEO1CarbR line. Using a siRNA
approach, silencing of the p57kip2 gene in drug sensitive parental PEO1
or SKOV-3 cells gave rise to a reduced sensitivity to platinum agents
i.e. cisplatin or carboplatin as assessed using apoptosis with the
annexinV assay and flow cytometry. Using chemosensitivity testing (MTT)
of PEO1 parental and PEO1CarbR lines versus seliciclib (a CDK2 inhibitory
drug) we saw an association with sensitivity to this agent with
down-regulation of p57kip2. The IC50 values obtained for the human
ovarian cancer cell line PEO1 and PEO1CarboR were 27.4 and 19.2M,
respectively (p = Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal of
the gynaecological malignancies and currently stage III/IV disease is
associated with a 25% 5 year survival rate. A major factor associated
with advanced EOC is the development of drug resistant disease,
characterised by a lack of response to platinum and taxane based agents.
In an effort to clarify mechanisms underlying chemorefractory EOC we have
developed a number of drug resistant cancer cell lines. DNA microarray
screening of drug resistant versus drug sensitive cell lines (combining a
methylation reversal step using demethylating agents) indicated
down-regulation of a number of genes with evidence of epigenetic
silencing by promoter methylation in many cases. We have identified
P57kip2 a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKi) as a gene that is
subjected to methylation in carboplatin-resistance, as shown in the
PEO1CarbR line. Using a siRNA approach, silencing of the p57kip2 gene in
drug sensitive parental PEO1 or SKOV-3 cells gave rise to a reduced
sensitivity to platinum agents i.e. cisplatin or carboplatin as assessed
using apoptosis with the annexinV assay and flow cytometry. Using
chemosensitivity testing (MTT) of PEO1 parental and PEO1CarbR lines
versus seliciclib (a CDK2 inhibitory drug) we saw an association with
sensitivity to this agent with down-regulation of p57kip2. The IC50
values obtained for the human ovarian cancer cell line PEO1 and
PEO1CarboR were 27.4 and 19.2M, respectively (p = <0.05). Cell cycle
analysis of seliciclib treated cells indicated a prolonged S-phase as a
marker of increased sensitivity to the drug and an increased apoptotic
response in p57kip2 silenced cells. Our data suggest that CDK inhibitors
such as seliciclib may have utility in tumours that show downregulation
of the endogenous CDKi p57kip2 and identification of such patients may
indicate a sub-group that respond preferentially to seliciclib. The same
screening platform also enabled us to identify wee1 and stratifin
(14-3-3) as genes significantly downregulated in taxane-resistant cell
lines. The 2 gene products are important in maintaining genomic stability
alongside other proteins such as Chk1 and ATR. Wee1 controls G2M by
keeping CDK2/Cyclin B inactive whilst binding of 14-3-3 isoforms enhances
its activity. Demethylation treatment using 5aza-cytidine and
Trichostatin A unmasked gene expression, indicating that these genes are
hypermethylated in taxane-resistant cell line. Current work aims to
confirm further the role of these 2 genes in drug resistance by a series
of knock-in and knock-out experiments.

