Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modification of the PI3K/Akt/HIF1 pathway in lymphoma
cells by HDAC inhibition


Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) strongly influence many cellular process
such as erythropoiesis, angiogenesis, energy metabolism, pH regulation,
cell migration and tumor invasion. Under normoxic conditions, HIF-1
possesses a very short half-life and is rapidly degraded by the ubiquitin
proteasome pathway and remains inactive. In hypoxia, HIF-1 is stabilized
and forms a complex with HIF-1 that allows HIF-1 to function as a
transcription factor. HIF-1 is activated only during hypoxia under normal
physiologic conditions. By contrast, HIF-1 is frequently activated in
cancer cells, including under normoxic conditions by oncogene products or
impaired activity of tumor suppressor genes. Recent studies have shown
that the expression of HIF1 is increased in a variety of human tumors a
significant fraction of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
follicular lymphoma patients, implicating a potential role of
dysregulated HIF activation. Constitutive expression of HIF-1 enhances
vascularization, increases glucose metabolism, and induces the expression
of anti-apoptotic proteins in cancer tissues, thus making it an
attractive target for cancer therapy. We hypothesized that epigenetic
modification of lymphoma cells by histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition
may modify HIF-1 expression and lead to cell death. We therefore studied
the role of the pan HDACi PCI-24781 (PCI) in HIF1 mediated cell death.
Western blot analysis of cells treated with 0.125M to 0.5M of PCI show
significant down regulation of HIF1 protein in all NHL cell lines. To
confirm that down regulation of HIF1 is an important factor in cell
apoptosis induced by PCI, we incubated cells with the small molecule
inhibitor of HIF1, PX-478 in combination with PCI. Combination of PCI and
PX-478 at concentrations of 0.5M and 10M respectively, showed an increase
in apoptosis as compared to either agent alone in all the DLBCL cell
lines. Moreover, knocking down HIF1 in SUDHL4 and OCI-LY3 cell lines
using shRNA followed by treatment with PCI also showed the similar
effect. We further show that down regulation of HIF1 by PCI is mediated
via the PI3K/Akt pathway and inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway by
LY294002 inhibits HIF1 protein expression. Furthermore pre-incubation of
cells with LY inhibits PCI-induced apoptosis. By contrast, constitutive
activation of AKT using Myr-Akt-CA shows an increase in HIF1 protein and
partial attenuation of PCI-induced apoptosis.We conclude that the
activation of the PI3K/Akt/HIF-1 pathway plays a critical role in
mediating hypoxia-induced drug resistance leading to unfavorable
treatment outcome in lymphoma. Our study suggests a mechanism by which
lymphoma cells become resistant to HDAC inhibitors.

