Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen leads to an increase in tumor cells with self-renewing
capacity in a mouse model of estrogen dependent breast cancer


About 75% of breast cancers are positive for estrogen receptor (ER).
Tamoxifen (TAM) has been the main treatment for the last 30 years,
however, 1/3 of patients that initially respond develop resistance.
Recent discoveries have led to hypothesis that considers a direct
involvement of stem cell populations (SCP) in cancer progression and
resistance to therapy. The aim of this work was to analyze the impact of
endocrine therapy on SCP in breast cancer. To do so we used the M05 mouse
mammary tumor (Simian et al., BCRT, 2009), a syngeneic model of estrogen
dependent, TAM sensitive breast cancer, together with the LM05-E cell
line derived from it and MCF-7 cells. When treated with TAM for 30 days
tumor growth was inhibited and immunofluorescence (IF) staining showed a
decrease in ER+/E-cadherin+ tumor cells together with an increase in the
stromal compartment and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM)
components, compared to vehicle treated controls. Tumors were digested
until a single cell suspension was obtained. Mammosphere assays (MA) were
carried out and quantified after 7 days in culture. A statistically
significant increase in mammosphere formation was achieved in the
cultures of tumors derived from TAM treated mice, compared to controls.
Next we tested whether this was true for tumors derived from TAM treated
and untreated animals that were subsequently passaged to untreated mice
and allowed to regrow. MA revealed that this was the case. IF studies
showed that those tumors that derived from the TAM treated mice contained
higher levels of 1 and 6 integrins as well as increased phopho-ser118-ER.
Next, to further establish a link between TAM and self-renewal capacity
in vitro, we treated LM05-E and MCF-7 cells with 4-OH-TAM 10-6M or
vehicle for 5 days and carried out MA. TAM led to an increase in
mammosphere formation. However, when TAM was added directly to the MA no
differences were detected between the treated and control groups
suggesting that only those cells that resist the treatment are able to
grow in suspension. Finally we had previously shown that fibronectin and
laminin conferred TAM resistance through 1 and 6 integrins respectively.
To test whether these factors lead to an increase in cells with
self-renewing capacity we treated LM05-E and MCF-7 cells with these ECM
components for 48 hours and then carried out MA and measured ALDH
activity. Compared to the control group we found a decrease in the % of
mammosphere forming cells as well as a decrease in ALDH activity in the
treated groups. Our results show that TAM leads to an increase in cells
with self-renewal capacity both in vitro and in vivo, and that
microenvironmental factors seem to have the opposite effect.
Understanding the effects of tamoxifen on the breast cancer SCP has
important implications for the development of strategies that could lead
to a decrease in recurrence in patients with ER+ tumors.

