Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abrogation of stromal TGF- signaling induces DNA damage and
genetic/epigenetic alterations in neighboring epithelia


Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in stromal fibroblast induces
epithelial cancer development, suggesting an important role of stroma in
epithelial homoeostasis. We investigated the underlying mechanisms in
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) development due to loss of TGF- signaling
in FSP1+ fibroblasts (Tgfbr2fspKO). We found that stroma specific
deletion of Tgfbr2 resulted a loss of p15 and p16, the cyclin dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitors in adjacent epithelia. In addition, there was an
increased p21 methylation in the promoter region of the p53 binding site.
These data suggest that multiple cell cycle checkpoints were compromised
in the epithelia of Tgfbr2fspKO mice. Consistent with these observations,
there was an increased cell proliferation in the epithelial compartment.
The mechanisms mediating the cross talk between the epithelia and the
stroma apparently involved inflammation that occurred only in the
Tgfbr2fspKO mice but not in Tgfbr2flox/flox mice. This is characterized
by an increased CD45+ leukocyte infiltration, increased cytokines
expression (IL-10, IFN- TNF- and GM-CSF) and elevated levels of iNOS,
COX2 and NFB. Interestingly, a significant DNA damage, featured by
8-Oxo-dG DNA adduct formation, and elevated expression of -H2AX, a
histone protein in response to DNA double strand break, was observed in
Tgfbr2fspKO mice. Inhibition of inflammation with COX2 inhibitor
(Celecoxib) or germ free housing condition, significantly delayed
epithelial hyperplasia/dysplasia and reduced DNA damage in Tgfbr2fspKO
mice. Examination of human esophageal cancers showed a downregulation of
TR2 in the stromal fibroblast, and an increased inflammation and DNA
damage similar to Tgfbr2fspKO mice. Together, our data demonstrate that
attenuation of stromal TGF- signaling induces inflammation that in turn
causes DNA damage, epigenetic and genetic alterations in epithelia.
Therefore, therapeutic targeting of inflammation and tumor
microenvironment may be useful in treating cancers with downregulation of
TGF- signaling in stroma.

