Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the MET dependent proteins expression in cervical
carcinoma cell lines


MET receptor and its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) are important
players in mitogenesis, morphogenesis and acquisition of migratory
phenotype. HGF/MET axis plays its role in neoplastic transformation
through activation of key oncogenic pathways and influencing dissociation
ability of cells leading to metastasis. Overexpression of MET receptor
has been observed in a variety of tumors. Cervical carcinoma (CC) is the
second most common malignancy in women worldwide, and it remains a
leading cause of cancer-related death for women in developing countries.
Clinical manifestation of CC is very diverse from in situ cancers to very
invasive and strongly metastatic to neighbouring and distal organs
(lungs, liver, bones). In this work we study the expression of MET
dependent proteins in cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa, HTB34, HTB35)
using mass spectrometry analysis. We prepared cervical carcinoma cell
lines with silenced MET gene. Cells were transduced with lentiviral
vector containing shRNA against MET. shRNA was designed based on siRNA
sequence silencing this particular gene in 80%. Silenced and wild type
cells were cultured and lysed. Proteins from various cell compartments
were isolated. 2-dimentional electophoresis and silver staining of the
gels were performed followed by software and mass spectrometry analysis.
We detected differences in proteins expression among wild type samples
and silenced HTB34 cell line in amount of proteins (examples: Heat shock
protein 75 kDa, Leukocyte elastase inhibitor). Analysed proteins were
also separated by 2D electrophoresis and we observed differences in pH of
these proteins among wild type and silenced probes (examples: TAR
DNA-binding protein 43, Succinate dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] flavoprotein
subunit, mitochondrial, Leukotriene A-4 hydrolase). Other proteins were
present either in wild type HTB34 (example: Importin subunit alpha-2,
Putative elongation factor1-alpha-like3,) or silenced HTB34 (example:
Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1-alpha catalytic subunit,
Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1-beta catalytic subunit, LIM and
SH3 domain protein 1). Analysis of these proteins gives as information
about particular proteins involved in MET dependent regulation of
cervical carcinoma cell lines. Characterization of HTB35 and HeLa
proteins is pending. The results of this study can be used to better
understand the biology of cervical carcinoma. They can be also used to
develop new therapeutic strategies to treat cervical carcinoma patients.

