Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening for genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in
Algerian breast/ovarian cancer families


Background: Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in women
in Algeria. To date, few molecular genetics studies of BRCA1 and BRCA2
germline mutations have been reported in the Algerian population. The
most frequent mutations encountered in BRCA genes are deletions or
insertions of a few bases or single-base substitutions that result in
premature stop codons. However, an increasing number of large genomic
rearrangements (LGRs) have been identified especially in BRCA1 gene,
whereas the frequency of genomic rearrangements in BRCA2 gene is low in
many populations. The objective of our study was to characterize genomic
rearrangements in 76 Algerian breast/ovarian cancer patients and
relatives tested negative for small point mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes. Methods: MLPA was performed on genomic DNA as described by
Schouten et al (2002). Screening for genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes of 76 patients and relatives were performed by using MLPA
commercial kits P002-B1, P087-B1 and PO45-B2, PO90-B2 respectively
(MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). To confirm the rearrangement
and to determine the exact site of its genomic breakpoints, we performed
long-range PCR of genomic DNA using the Expand Long Template PCR System
(Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Results: MLPA analysis of
the BRCA1 gene revealed two germline alterations in two unrelated
patients among 76. A novel deletion of BRCA1 exon 2 (c.-19-_80+del/p.)
and a novel genomic breakpoint in deletion of BRCA1 exon 8
(c.442-_547+del/p) were identified in two patients with breast/ovarian
cancer and bilateral breast cancer, respectively. No LGRs were detected
in BRCA2 gene. We found by using Long range PCR technique that our
patient with the BRCA1 exon 8 deletion is heterozygous for a 2.6 kb
deletion. Investigations aimed at determining the genomic breakpoint of
the BRCA1 exon 2 deletion described in our study is on going. Conclusion:
For the first time, we report here two genomic rearrangements in BRCA1
gene in Algerian breast/ovarian cancer patients. Our results reinforce
the idea that breast/ovarian cancer families tested negatively for small
point mutations should be routinely screened with MLPA for large genomic
rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.

