Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using Rac1 isogenic cells to model tumor metastasis


The Rho family of GTPases regulate a wide range of normal cellular
functions including cell growth and cytoskeleton dynamics, but it is
becoming increasingly apparent that when deregulated, proteins such as
Rac1 contribute to tumorigensis, tumour invasion and metastasis.
Overexpression of Cdc42 and Rac1 have been reported in human breast
cancer, and coincide with breast cancer progression, metastasis and
resistance to chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to generate a model
system to investigate how Rac1 activation affects the migratory
propensity of human breast epithelial cells. We utilised X-MAN isogenic
cells derived from MCF10A mammary epithelial cells which harbour a single
Q61L Rac1 mutation introduced by AAV-mediated homologous recombination,
paired with a parental cell line expressing the wildtype allele. This
system offers several advantages over conventional methods; protein
expression is driven from endogenous promoters, thereby eliminating the
caveats associated with transfection-based approaches. Using the X-MAN
isogenic cells we showed that introduction of the Rac1Q61L mutation
results in a profound effect on cell morphology. The most striking
phenotype was the appearance of large intracellular vacuoles, but
immunofluorescence studies also revealed cytoskeletal abnormalities with
Rac1Q61L cells showing evidence of microtubule disorganisation and
accumulation of newly polymerised actin fibers. These observations, in
conjunction with previous reports that activated Rac is associated with
cell migration, prompted us to address whether these cells may also have
a migratory phenotype. Using Transwell and scratch assays, we confirmed
that Rac1Q61L cells are more motile than their parental counterparts, and
this correlated with increased adhesive properties. Pathway analysis
revealed Rac1Q61L cells express higher basal levels of activated MEK and
ERK, both of which have been implicated in the migration of numerous cell
types. In conclusion, we have generated a pair of isogenic cell lines to
demonstrate how constitutive Rac1 activation results in cytoskeletal
changes and increased motility. Our data highlights the advantages of
being able to study clinically-relevant pathways in a
phenotypically-relevant assay, and how this platform could be exploited
to profile molecularly targeted agents aimed at reducing tumour invasion
and metastasis.

