Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conversion of triple negative breast cancer cells into HER2
positive cells - a novel therapeutic approach


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is defined by the lack
of estrogen-receptor alpha (ER) and progesterone receptor (PGR)
expression as well as absence of human epidermal growth factor receptor2
(HER2/neu) overexpression. This type of breast cancer is characterized by
a poor prognosis and significantly reduced survival rate compared to
other breast cancer subtypes. This is mostly due to the lack of targeted
agents like endocrine or anti HER2 targets. Breast cancers which express
HER2 are usually treated by chemicals targeting the human epidermal
growth factor receptor; either by blocking the extracellular domain of
HER2 through trastuzumab or the intracellular domain of HER2 through the
small molecule lapatinib. Both therapeutics lead to inhibition of
downstream signaling pathways like MAPK and PI3K signaling, resulting in
increased apoptosis as well as reduced proliferation. Methods: We
hypothesize that downstream effects e.g. reduced proliferation or
apoptosis might be induced in triple negative breast cancer cells when
HER2 is artificially overexpressed by transfection and cells get treated
as HER2 positive cells. Therefore, triple negative breast cancer cell
lines were stably transfected with HER2. These cells will be treated with
anti-HER2 agents. Molecular analyses will demonstrate whether
transfection with HER2 will yield a HER2 positive breast cancer phenotype
in that all downstream signaling mechanisms act similarly to a priori
HER2 positive cells. Results: Preliminary experiments suggest that
proliferation of breast cancer cells transfected with HER2 does not
change significantly. Treatment with HER2-specifically blocking antibody
trastuzumab leads to significant decrease of proliferation in HER2
transfected, initially triple negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
Only a moderate decrease in proliferation was observed when lapatinib, a
small molecule directed against both EGFR and HER2, was used in both
MDA-MB-231 wildtype and HER2-transfected cell lines. Additional results
will be presented. Conclusion: We surmise that firstly,
transdifferentiation of cancer might become a clinical tool to treat
cancer of poor prognosis and secondly that our results might shed light
on future therapeutic approaches e.g. small molecule compound screening
for endogenous HER2 reactivation / overexpression and subsequent targeted
treatment of cancers.

