Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) system by
the novel FGFR inhibitor BGJ398 modulates oncogenic signaling in human
gastric cancer cells, endothelial cells and pericytes


Expression of the FGFR system has been associated with poor prognosis in
patients suffering from gastric cancer. Moreover, activation of FGFRs has
been demonstrated to mediate tumor angiogenesis through regulation of
endothelial cell (EC) and pericyte motility and survival. Therefore, in
this study we sought to investigate the effects of targeting FGFR on
gastric cancer cells as well as on important components of the tumor
microenvironment by the novel FGFR inhibitor BGJ398. For the experiments,
human gastric cancer cell lines (TMK-1 and KKLS) as well as ECs and
pericytes (vascular smooth muscle cells, VSMCs) were used. The FGFR
inhibitor BGJ398 was provided by Novartis Oncology (Basel, Switzerland).
Effects of BGJ398 on tumor cell growth and chemoresistance were
determined by MTT assays. Impact of BGJ398 on motility of cancer cells
was evaluated by modified Boyden chambers. Signaling pathways affected by
BGJ398 treatment were assessed by Western blot analyses. To determine
effects of FGFR blockade on ECs and pericytes conditioned media from
gastric cancer cells was used. Results show that targeting FGFR by BGJ398
impaired growth of gastric cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner in
vitro. Furthermore, activation of Akt and Erk in cancer cells was
effectively inhibited while expression of c-Myc and HIF-1 was
substantially reduced. Additionally, therapy with BGJ398 led to
significant inhibition of constitutive migratory and invasive properties
of gastric cancer cells (PExpression of the FGFR system has been
associated with poor prognosis in patients suffering from gastric cancer.
Moreover, activation of FGFRs has been demonstrated to mediate tumor
angiogenesis through regulation of endothelial cell (EC) and pericyte
motility and survival. Therefore, in this study we sought to investigate
the effects of targeting FGFR on gastric cancer cells as well as on
important components of the tumor microenvironment by the novel FGFR
inhibitor BGJ398. For the experiments, human gastric cancer cell lines
(TMK-1 and KKLS) as well as ECs and pericytes (vascular smooth muscle
cells, VSMCs) were used. The FGFR inhibitor BGJ398 was provided by
Novartis Oncology (Basel, Switzerland). Effects of BGJ398 on tumor cell
growth and chemoresistance were determined by MTT assays. Impact of
BGJ398 on motility of cancer cells was evaluated by modified Boyden
chambers. Signaling pathways affected by BGJ398 treatment were assessed
by Western blot analyses. To determine effects of FGFR blockade on ECs
and pericytes conditioned media from gastric cancer cells was used.
Results show that targeting FGFR by BGJ398 impaired growth of gastric
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner in vitro. Furthermore, activation
of Akt and Erk in cancer cells was effectively inhibited while expression
of c-Myc and HIF-1 was substantially reduced. Additionally, therapy with
BGJ398 led to significant inhibition of constitutive migratory and
invasive properties of gastric cancer cells (P<0.05). Interestingly,
interference with FGFR by BGJ398 increased sensitivity for chemotherapy
with oxaliplatin and 5-FU in tumor cells. In ECs as well as pericytes
blockade of FGFR by BGJ398 significantly inhibited cell growth and
motility even upon stimulation with conditioned media (PExpression of the
FGFR system has been associated with poor prognosis in patients suffering
from gastric cancer. Moreover, activation of FGFRs has been demonstrated
to mediate tumor angiogenesis through regulation of endothelial cell (EC)
and pericyte motility and survival. Therefore, in this study we sought to
investigate the effects of targeting FGFR on gastric cancer cells as well
as on important components of the tumor microenvironment by the novel
FGFR inhibitor BGJ398. For the experiments, human gastric cancer cell
lines (TMK-1 and KKLS) as well as ECs and pericytes (vascular smooth
muscle cells, VSMCs) were used. The FGFR inhibitor BGJ398 was provided by
Novartis Oncology (Basel, Switzerland). Effects of BGJ398 on tumor cell
growth and chemoresistance were determined by MTT assays. Impact of
BGJ398 on motility of cancer cells was evaluated by modified Boyden
chambers. Signaling pathways affected by BGJ398 treatment were assessed
by Western blot analyses. To determine effects of FGFR blockade on ECs
and pericytes conditioned media from gastric cancer cells was used.
Results show that targeting FGFR by BGJ398 impaired growth of gastric
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner in vitro. Furthermore, activation
of Akt and Erk in cancer cells was effectively inhibited while expression
of c-Myc and HIF-1 was substantially reduced. Additionally, therapy with
BGJ398 led to significant inhibition of constitutive migratory and
invasive properties of gastric cancer cells (P<0.05). Interestingly,
interference with FGFR by BGJ398 increased sensitivity for chemotherapy
with oxaliplatin and 5-FU in tumor cells. In ECs as well as pericytes
blockade of FGFR by BGJ398 significantly inhibited cell growth and
motility even upon stimulation with conditioned media (P<0.05). In
conclusion, inhibition of the FGFR system by BGJ398 disrupts oncogenic
signaling, impairs tumor cell motility and improves chemosensitivity in
gastric cancer. Furthermore, antiangiogenic effects might be mediated via
direct effects on ECs and pericytes. Hence, targeting the FGFR system may
represent a promising approach to improve current therapy strategies for
gastric cancer and warrants further preclinical evaluation.

