Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive post-translational regulation of the thiamine transporter
THTR1 in breast cancer cells during hypoxic stress


Purpose: The cellular metabolic re-programming within hypoxic tumor
microenvironments involves adaptations that alter the cellular dependence
for glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway. However, enzymatic
activity within these pathways requires an adequate supply and cellular
pool of enzyme cofactors. In particular, thiamine is an essential
cofactor within key metabolic pathways that are responsible for energy
production and anabolic precursor synthesis. Previously, we have reported
on the hypoxia-mediated transcriptional regulation of the thiamine
transporters within breast cancer cells. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to further our understanding of hypoxia-mediated regulation of
thiamine transporters, by examining the intracellular localization and
plasma membrane expression of THTR1 during hypoxic stress. Methods:
Immunofluorescence was employed to visualize the intracellular
localization of THTR1 (SLC19A2) within the non-transformed breast
epithelial cell line, MCF10A and breast cancer cells, BT20 and BT474
after 1, 3 and 7 days of 1% O2 exposure. Cell surface biotinlyation
assays were utilized to assess changes in the plasma membrane expression
of THTR1 after hypoxia exposure. In addition, total THTR1 expression was
determined using Western blotting of whole cell lysates and qRT-PCR.
Results: The cellular distribution of THTR1 was predominantly localized
in the plasma membrane for the non-transformed MCF10A cells, but was
predominantly intracellular in the breast cancer cells, BT20 and BT474.
No change in total mRNA or cellular THTR1 protein expression was found
after hypoxic exposure. However, THTR1 exhibited a time dependent
increase in plasma membrane localization after 1% O2 exposure. This
observation was confirmed with an increase in THTR1 plasma membrane
expression using cell surface biotinylation pull down assays.
Conclusions: We conclude that hypoxic stress induces the intracellular
trafficking of the thiamine transporter THTR1 to the plasma membrane.
These results suggest that post-translational modification of THTR1
during hypoxic exposure may be an essential adaptive cellular response to
increase intracellular supply of thiamine to support glycolytic
metabolism.

