Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, gefitinib targets ZAP-70 over
expressing chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells


Most patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) initially respond
to chemotherapy but relapse. There is a subset of CLL patients that have
aggressive disease characterized by an over expression of the tyrosine
kinase ZAP-70. These ZAP-70+ patients have a poorer survival and are more
resistant to chemotherapy. The biological effects of ZAP-70 in CLL are
believed to be related to its ability to enhance activation of Syk with
subsequent triggering of down-stream modulators, such as ERK and AKT.
Normally, Syk is activated by increased phosphorylation by Lyn, which is
increased in CLL, or by activation of the B-cell receptor. Gefitinib is a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is presently used to treat lung cancer.
The drug inhibits epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
activity but has activity against >20 other kinase targets, including
members of the Src family of kinases, such as Lyn and Syk. We thus
evaluated the cytotoxic activity of gefitinib against primary CLL cells
using the MTT assay. Gefitinib was cytotoxic to ZAP-70+ (20% cells
positive) CLL samples (median IC50, 3.0 M) while ZAP-70- patients failed
to respond to gefitinib with a median IC50 of >15.0 M. Jurkat cells,
which are T cells that express high levels of ZAP-70, were more sensitive
to gefitinib than B cell lines that did not express ZAP-70 (BJAB and
NALM6). Further studies confirmed that gefitinib was inducing cell death
through apoptosis. Gefitinib was also effective against ZAP-70+ CLL cells
that were resistant to fludarabine and chlorambucil indicating a novel
mechanism of action to standard chemotherapy. Enhanced apoptosis was
observed in ZAP70+ CLL and Jurkat cells exposed to gefitinib and
fludarabine or chlorambucil, but this was not observed in ZAP-70- or the
B cell lines. In contrast, another EGFR inhibitor, erlotinib, had no
effect against ZAP-70+ CLL cells indicating that gefitinib was inhibiting
a kinase unaffected by erlotinib. When Jurakat and ZAP-70+ CLL cells were
treated with gefitinib, there was reduced total tyrosine phosphorylation
and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of ZAP-70, and Syk but no
difference in Lyn phosphorylation. Furthermore, gefitinib blocked B cell
receptor activation and mediated cell survival. Taken together, these
results indicate that gefitinib may be useful agent in the treatment of
ZAP-70+ CLL, either alone or in combination with fludarabine or
chlorambucil. Ongoing studies are determining the precise mechanism of
action of gefitinib in ZAP-70+ CLL and assessing its effects on the CLL
microenvironment.

