Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of frequently gained genomic regions in breast
circulating tumor cells


Introduction: Cells disseminate from the primary tumor and enter the
blood circulation early on. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) might be the
earliest detectable cells with metastatic abilities. Clinically, the
presence of CTCs is indicative of a negative prognostic impact. Decreased
numbers of CTCs are seen in response to chemotherapy, and persistent
chemo-resistant CTCs have been shown to be HER2+ although they originated
from HER2- primary tumors. Such discrepancies were also found with ER, PR
and EGFR status and have important implications with respect to treatment
alterations over the course of the disease. If the whole genome of CTCs
can be profiled, we could identify genomic alterations which may be
developed into CTC specific markers, to monitor and target them, to
prevent their spread to distant sites. We could also investigate how
these cells are represented in primary tumors and how they respond to
chemotherapy. Methods: CTCs were enriched from blood by immunomagnetic
CD45+ leukocyte depletion; fixed onto glass slides and stained for the
epithelial cell marker, pancytokeratin. Positively stained CTCs were
isolated by single-cell laser capture microdissection for whole genome
amplification (WGA) and copy number (CN) analysis with the Affymetrix
Genome wide SNP 6.0 array. CTCs were isolated from peripheral blood of
21/39 patients (54%, range of 1-20 cells) with locally advanced breast
cancer. Normal samples were obtained by performing WGA on the white blood
cell fraction of blood. Results: CN gains and losses were detected by
genomic segmentation, using a paired CTC-normal sample approach (Partek
Genomic Suite). Overall, regions with gains were more prevalent than
losses. The most frequent gains were on chromosome 1q21.3, 4q26, 6q16.3,
9q34.1-34.3, 11p15.4-15.5, 17q21-25, and 19. Regions 17q21-25 and 9q34
were associated with lymph node metastasis, tumor size, and higher CTC
counts. Genes within these regions which could potentially be implicated
in CTC dissemination are CCL5 (breast cancer progression), MMP28
(invasion), and PTPN1 (migration). Notably, CTCs were more homogenous for
gains on chromosome 19, which has been implicated in many types of
cancers. It houses the entire family of kallikrein protease genes, a
hallmark in prostate, ovarian and colorectal cancers; and was recently
found to contain 5 SNPs which are associated with BRCA1 mutations and
high risk breast cancer. We identified 5 peaks (0.3 - 9.5Mb) between
19p13.3-13.1 and 19q13.32-13.4, with an average CN of 3, in 15/17
patients. Conclusions: Whole genomic profiling of CTCs from breast cancer
revealed regions of CN gain, as well as specific CN signatures associated
with poor prognosis. Gains on chromosome 19 were most frequent,
warranting further investigations of genes that confer CTC-like
functionality to tumor cells. We will determine the heterogeneity of
these regions in primary breast cancer, and how they respond to
chemotherapy.

