Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reverse engineering the interplay between multiple myeloma and
microenvironment


We propose an innovative approach to build predictive computational
models of chemotherapy response for multiple myeloma (MM) patients. The
innovation of this work resides in the use of microfluidics to establish
gradients to mimic the heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment (bone
marrow, BM) and detailed computational models to map the cancer cells
response into the geometry of the BM. MM is a complex hematologic
malignancy, where a phenotypically heterogeneous population of malignant
plasma cells proliferates uncontrollably throughout the environmentally
heterogeneous microenvironment of the BM. It is known that the BM
microenvironment confers opportunities for MM cells to survive treatment
by soluble factors or adhesion and that these are among the main causes
of minimal residual disease and patient relapse. In this work we explore
a combination of microfluidics and computational models to characterize
the response of chemo-sensitive and chemoresistant human MM cell lines
(HMCL) to different drug combinations and protocols in the
microenvironment of the BM. First we cultured fluorescent HMCLs in
microfluidics under stable gradients of chemotherapy, oxygen, glucose and
pH, in single cell suspension or in co-culture with stromal cell lines.
Using live imaging we quantified replication and death in two dimensions
(time of exposure and drug concentration). We built cell-line specific
computational models of dose response based on the extracellular cues,
and integrated these models into a previously published spatial
computational model of the BM. We used these models to simulate the
growth and response to different drug combinations in hypothetical
patients. To our knowledge, this is the first time that a high-throughput
model of assessment of drug response in a controlled reconstruction of
the tumor microenvironment is proposed for MM. Our in vitro experiments
allowed the quantization of cell death, quiescence and proliferation
across time, which is not possible in regular dose response assays. The
use of a stable drug gradient also allowed us to observe migration of
live cells from areas of low to high drug concentration, being a putative
mechanism for evolution of drug resistance. The computational model built
from the in vitro multi-dimensional data was capable of reproducing
different levels of therapy response, ranging from complete to
refractory, with a complex signature of minimum residual disease
combining phenotypic and environmental resistance. Our simulations also
proposed optimum regimens of drug combination which will be explored in
pre-clinical models. This proof of principle, that such approach may be
used to build models of therapy in complex microenvironments with
unprecedented levels of details, has the potential of becoming a
translational tool for individual patient response. Each experimental
assay required 18K cells, making this approach feasible for MM patient
cell aspirates.

