Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating tumors cells (CTCs) in mice, using cancer
stem cell (CSC) markers and a novel cell surface marker, AnnexinA2


Detecting CTCs in plasma of patients with solid tumors has developed as a
novel method for early detection of metastatic growths (Mets) and relapse
of epithelial cancers. The current studies were undertaken to further
improve sensitivity/specificity of CTC assays, based on recent
developments. Accumulating evidence from many laboratories demonstrates
that annexinA2 is increasingly translocated to cell-surface of tumor
cells (labeled as CS-ANXA2), and is required for metastasis of cancer
cells. We discovered that metastatic transformation of cells was
associated with a significant increase in % CSCs co-expressing CS-ANXA2.
We hypothesized that Circulating-CSCs (labeled as CTSCs) will likely be
positive for CSC-Markers and CS-ANXA2, providing a more robust assay for
identifying metastatic-CTCs or CTSCs, which may have the highest
potential for seeding Mets; this novel possibility was examined in mice.
Athymic nude mice were inoculated with either heat inactivated
colon-cancer cells (HCT-116) (control, Gp1), or healthy sterile cells:-
which were inoculated either subdermally (to grow primary xenografts)
(Gp2) or intraspleenically (to grow liver/lung Mets) (Gp3). Mice were
euthanized, when distinct sub-dermal tumors were present in Gp2 mice
(wk3, post-inoculation) and blood plasma processed for depletion of WBC.
Un-depleted samples had 109 RBC+WBC cells in all mice. Gp1 mice were
negative for CTSCs or CTCs positive for CS-ANXA2. Gp2 mice had 40, 100
and 200 epithelial cells/ml blood, positive for CSC-Markers: DCAMKL-1,
LGR5 and CD44, respectively, suggesting that DCAMKL-1 may be the most
selective marker for CTSCs. Gp3 mice had significantly higher numbers of
CTSCs/ml blood, in the order of CD44 (220), LGR5 (160) and DCAMKL-1 (60).
CTCs, positive for CS-ANXA2, increased from 120 to 200/ml blood in Gp2
versus Gp3 mice, respectively, suggesting that high numbers of CTCs
positive for CS-ANXA2 may be an independent selective marker for
metastatic disease. Importantly, CTSCs in Gp3 mice, positive for either
CD44 or DCAMKL-1 were also positive for CS-ANXA2. Therefore presence of
circulating tumor stem cells (CTSCs) (positive for DCAMKL-1/CD44),
co-expressing CS-ANXA2, may provide the most accurate approach for
predicting presence of Mets or relapse of the cancer disease. Our studies
so far, using fresh plasma samples from patients with colorectal growths
(adenomas, adenocarcinomas Mets), supports this novel hypothesis. This
work was supported by NIH grants CA97959 and CA114264 to PS; NASA
NNX09AM08G and NNJ04HD83G to RU. CK and SS were equal contributors.

