Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of L1CAM in endometrial cancer


The L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM, CD171) was initially described as a
cell surface protein in the developing nervous system involved in neural
outgrowth and axon guidance. During the last years it became evident that
high expression levels of L1CAM are observed in many human carcinomas and
are linked to tumor progression. L1CAM expression in tumors can augment
cell motility and invasive potential and lead to constitutive NFB
activation. We showed before that in endometrial cancer (EC) the
expression of L1CAM was correlated with poor prognosis. ECs can be
subdivided in two types; a less aggressive type I and a highly aggressive
type II. We showed that L1CAM expression was absent in type I ECs,
whereas all cases of type II tumors (n=272) were L1CAM positive. We also
provided evidence that in L1CAM-negative EC cell lines L1CAM expression
can be upregulated by TGF-b1 treatment involving the transcription factor
SLUG. In the present study, we have investigated additional mechanisms
that can affect L1CAM expression. These mechanisms involve the
modification of histone proteins and their packaging to the DNA as well
as the direct modification of the DNA by DNA-methyltransferases (DNMTs).
We show that the treatment of EC cell lines with
Histon-deacetylase-Inhibitors (HDACIs) and/or DNMT inhibitors lead to
increased L1CAM expression at the mRNA and protein level. Furthermore, we
observed that the methylation pattern of the L1CAM-promoter differed
between L1CAM positive and negative cell lines. The RE-1 silencing
transcription factor (REST) complex seems to be responsible for the
silencing of the L1CAM expression in non-neuronal tissues. The REST
complex is associated with chromatin-remodeling complexes, the
recruitment of HDACs as well as DNMTs and thereby leads to the silencing
of the respective promoter element. We observed that the knockdown of
REST in L1CAM negative EC cell lines leads to a dramatic increase in
L1CAM expression. Likewise the overexpression of REST in L1CAM positive
EC cell lines diminished L1CAM expression. We conclude that the loss or
reduced expression of REST in concert with epigenetic elements could
represent an additional and novel mechanism to cause aberrant L1CAM
expression in ECs.

