Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel in vivo xenograft mouse model of human high-grade serous
ovarian cancer, with clinical, molecular and functional annotation
relevant for pre-clinical analysis


Background: The five year survival rate for women with ovarian cancer
(OC) is less than 40%. Crucial to improving the outcomes for ovarian
cancer patients is the development of accurate pre-clinical models of
human epithelial OC, which can be used to unravel the mechanisms
underlying its evolution and behaviour. Methods: We have generated a
novel xenograft model of human high-grade serous OC (HG-SOC) in order to
enable preclinical molecular and drug response assessment of individual
HG-SOC: this includes a comparison of standard OC xeno-transplantion
approaches (intra-peritoneal, subcutaneous and sub renal capsular), with
the novel use of the rodent ovarian bursa, the orthotopic site. Utilising
the rodent bursa may better replicate the relevant microenvironment and
increase the success of EOC xeno-transplantion. Other aspects designed to
optimize the model include the use of NOD-SCID-IL-2rg recipient mice,
systemic estrogen supplementation and transplantation of fresh human
HG-SOC fragments which have had no prior in vitro culture. Histological,
functional and molecular analysis of the novel xenograft cohort (at
baseline and following xenotransplantation) includes histological review;
documentation of in vitro Homologous Recombination (HR) DNA repair and
drug response capabilities (using novel -irradiation and explant drug
assays); classification according to molecular subtype (Tothill
classfier); documentation of NHEJ pathway status, BRCA1/2 status and
other DNA repair gene status. In vivo drug treatment studies are being
performed, with the choice of treatment targeted to the specific
molecular characteristics of the HG-SOC in question. Results: Fourteen
consecutive chemotherapy naive potentially HG-SOC samples have been
collected. Corresponding clinical data has been collected. Data
concerning DNA repair capability and response to DNA damaging agents will
be presented, including IHC for markers of DNA damage (H2AX), DNA repair
(RAD51) and apoptosis (capsase 3 cleavage). HG-SOC in this cohort have
been classified according to Tothilll (Tothill et al 2008). Eight
appropriate HG-SOC have been transplanted and 5 of the first 6 have
successfully xenografted, with phenotyping of xenografts underway. In
vivo analysis of response to cisplatin treatment and other relevant
therapeutics will be presented. Conclusions: A novel xenograft model has
been developed of human HG-SOC, which includes comparative
characterization of important prognostic features both in the baseline
panel of fresh human HG-SOC and in subsequent xenografts. This
clinically, functionally and molecularly annotated consecutive xenograft
cohort of HG-SOC will provide outstanding utility for the development of
improved therapeutic approaches.

