Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of angiogenic potential of breast cancer by the
inhibition of SAF-1 transcription factor activity


Angiogenesis plays an important role in the tumor growth and metastasis
by facilitating increased blood supply and thus fueling unwanted growth
factors and nutrients to the growing tumor. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) is recognized as a multifunctional angiogenic stimulator
that stimulates blood vessel formation and endothelial cell survival.
Recent therapeutic trials with anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab (Avastin),
although produced beneficial effects on some cancers including colorectal
and lung cancers, had very limited beneficial outcome in breast cancer.
The diverse response of avastin raised questions about the efficacy of
anti-VEGF antibody approach for breast cancer therapy. Despite the
disappointing outcome, it cannot be ignored that regulation of
angiogenesis plays a critical role in breast cancer. We hypothesized that
angiogenesis may be better controlled by blocking the synthesis of VEGF
protein as opposed to the present approach that attempts to block the
functions of VEGF by using antibodies. Induction of VEGF by a plethora of
physiological and environmental stimuli strongly suggests the presence of
multiple routes of VEGF synthesis, which are incompletely understood. We
present evidence for a novel mode of transcriptional induction of VEGF,
regulated by an inflammation-responsive transcription factor, SAF-1.
Incidentally, inflammatory breast cancer exhibits increased angiogenesis
and has a higher metastatic potential than noninflammatory breast cancer,
supporting the notion that chronic inflammation plays a strong role in
angiogenesis and in the progression of cancer. SAF-1 is present in high
abundance in human breast cancer tissues. We show that inhibition of
endogenous SAF-1 by antisense shRNA can markedly inhibit VEGF expression
and block cancer cell-supported vascular endothelial cell function and
angiogenesis. Furthermore, SAF-1 inhibition by shRNA reduces tumor growth
in mouse tumor model. We provide evidence that SAF-1-mediated induction
of VEGF remains suppressed by KLF-4 transcription factor which is
abundantly present in normal breast epithelial cells but absent in breast
cancer cells. Mutually exclusive interaction of KLF-4 and SAF-1 at the
VEGF promoter provides a mechanism for regulation of low-expression of
VEGF in normal breast tissues. In correlation, lack of KLF-4 in breast
cancer cells appears to be linked to un-restricted interaction of SAF-1
leading to the induction of VEGF expression. Together, our studies
provide a new insight into the molecular mechanisms of VEGF expression
regulated by SAF-1 and its impact in angiogenesis.

