Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BacMam-enabled biochemical and cellular assays to assess
inhibitors of full-length receptor tyrosine kinases


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are important pharmacological targets in
oncology. Current biochemical assays designed to assess compound efficacy
utilize truncated forms of the kinase lacking the transmembrane or
extracellular domains and fail to address how these domains might affect
the observed pharmacology. Purification of the full-length recombinant
receptor can be both costly and difficult to scale for large screening
campaigns. Additionally, because of the generic nature of most substrates
used in activity assays for RTKs, small amounts of contaminating kinases
can interfere with assay results. Numerous cell-based assays for pathway
analysis can also serve as readouts for these targets, but they are not a
direct measurement of kinase activity. To address these limitations, we
have employed a BacMam-mediated gene delivery system to express
full-length receptor tyrosine kinases with C-terminal green fluorescent
protein (GFP) fusions in a variety of cellular backgrounds. Expression of
these full-length RTKs has enabled the development of two complimentary
assay platforms. First, we present a competitive displacement assay that
uses a europium (Eu)-labeled anti-GFP antibody and an AlexaFluor
647-labeled active site probe to characterize compound binding to the RTK
in a lysate-based format. Here, the GFP moiety serves as an epitope tag
to allow for very specific and sensitive detection of compound binding,
discriminating compounds with sub-nanomolar affinity. Using the same
BacMam RTK-GFP constructs, we have also developed a simple,
addition-only, cell-based method to detect auto-phosphorylation of the
RTK via TR-FRET between a terbium (Tb)-labeled anti-phospho-tyrosine
antibody and the GFP moiety. Together, these tools can be used in a
high-throughput screening format with a fluorescence-based readout to
more fully characterize compound efficacy against full-length RTKs
expressed in native cellular contexts.

