Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aerosol azacytidine inhibits the orthotopic lung cancer in mice by
its demethylation function but not cytotoxic effect


Introduction: Silencing of key tumor suppressor genes by promoter
hypermethylation plays an important role in lung cancer carcinogenesis.
Reversing the hypermethylation in the early lung cancer cells adjacent to
the airway surface may have a potential to inhibit lung cancer
development. This study was to explore the therapeutic potential of
aerosol administered demethylating agent azacytidine (Aza) for the
treatment of bronchial epithelial premalignancy or lung cancer. Methods:
The demethylation and gene reactivation functions of Aza administered by
aerosol were detected by qPCR methylation array and western blotting
assay in the tumor tissues from the orthotopic human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) xenograft models in nude mice. The therapeutic efficacy
and toxicity of the aerosol Aza were also evaluate in the same lung
cancer models. An intravenous administered Aza with clinical equivalent
dose and schedule was used as a control. Results: The aerosol Aza is an
appropriate pharmaceutical inhalation formulation with about 80% of
droplets size distributing between 0.1 to 5 micron. This aerodynamic size
range ensures the aerosol droplets depositing in the lower airway. In
animal studies, aerosol administration of Aza significantly prolonged the
survival of nude mice with intratracheally inoculated human NSCLC tumors.
The %-increased life span was 5- to 10-fold higher than that of a
systemic treatment of Aza at a clinical equivalent dose. The aerosol
treatment did not cause any detectable lung toxicity or myelosuppression
(systemic toxicity of Aza), since the treatment dose was >100-fold lower
than the toxic dose. The lung tumors were resected after the aerosol Aza
treatment and the methylation levels of the 24 promoters that drive the
lung cancer related tumor suppressor genes (TSG) were detected. We found
that aerosol Aza significantly reduced the methylation level in 9 of
these 24 promoters. The dementhylating aerosol also resulted in the gene
reactivation in the protein level of several tested genes. Conclusions:
Aerosol administration of Aza has significant therapeutic advantages over
the systemic Aza. It can be given at a non-cytotoxic dose, thus its main
therapeutic efficacy is the demethylation function of Aza and the TSG
reactivation. In our case, the therapeutic index of aerosol Aza is
>800-fold higher than that of IV Aza. The clinical trial of aerosol Aza
is worth to be conducted. Acknowledgement: Supported by a NIH (NCI) grant
5R01CA154755-02

