Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine stimulation of VEGFR-2 by leptin is associated with
Notch signaling pathway and cancer stem cell marker expression


Obesity-related cancer is an increasing health problem. Leptin, the major
adipokine, has been suggested a major factor in these relationships.
Leptin is a pro-inflammatory, pro-angiogenic and mitogenic factor for
breast cancer cells. Recently, we described a comprehensive mechanism for
leptin induction of VEGF, and unveiled a novel crosstalk between Notch,
IL-1 and leptin (NILCO) in breast cancer. NILCO regulates VEGF/VEGR-2 in
breast cancer cells and could represent the integration of developmental,
pro-inflammatory and pro-angiogenic signals critical for leptin oncogenic
actions. However, the specific mechanisms for leptin-induced VEGFR2 are
unknown. To answer this question, we re-cloned mouse VEGFR-2 promoter and
prepared VEGFR-2 luc, then analyzed VEGFR-2 regulation and expression by
using several kinase inhibitors, leptin peptide antagonist 2 (LPrA2), a
VEGFR-2 kinase inhibitor (SU5416), as well as siRNA against VEGFR-2,
Notch1, Notch3 in 4T1 cells. Our results demonstrated that leptin-induced
JAK2/STAT3, MAPK/ERK 1/2, PI-3K/AKT1, PKC, p38 and JNK signaling pathways
may correlate with upregulated VEGFR-2. Moreover, leptin-induced
activation of Notch/VEGFR-2 was linked to the upregulation of cancer stem
cell markers CD44 and ALDH1. These leptin effects were inhibited by
siRNA-Notch1&3, leptin signaling antagonist (PEG-LPrA2), VEGFR2-kinase
inhibitor (SU5416) and siRNA-VEGFR-2. Our results show for the first time
how leptin's molecular signals regulate VEGFR-2 (an autocrine survival
process) that was associated to Notch and cancer stem cell marker
expression. These novel findings may help to design new strategies for
prevention/treatment of breast cancer through the abrogation of tumor
angiogenesis and breast cancer stem cell renewal in an obesity context.
[This work was supported in part by NIH/NCI1SC1CA138658-02;
NIH/ARRA/3SC1CA138658-02S1 and the Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished
Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP)].

