Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number variation in 13q32.1 associated with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the major lethal
upper gastrointestinal tract cancer in China. The highly regional and
family aggregative incidence of ESCC in China suggests that genetic
susceptibility contributed to pathogenesis. Copy number variation (CNV)
is an important form of gene structure variations and has been associated
with multiple complex diseases, such as malignant tumors. This study
aimed to identify the common CNVs correlated with ESCC susceptibility and
demonstrate the functional significances. Method: A genome-wide
associated study was conducted on 128 discordant sibling pairs of ESCC,
which were native residents in Yangquan area, Shan Xi Province of China.
The genomic DNA of peripheral blood leukocytes were extracted and
genotyping was detected using the Illumina HumanHap 610Q BeadChips. After
stringent quality control filtering, the CNVs-penotype association
analysis were performed using the paired Hidden Markov Model calling
algorithm in the Partek Genomic Suite with settings of length above 1kb
and minimum 10 consecutive probes. Another 223 Northern Chinese Han
people (111 ESCC patients and 112 health controls) were chosen to
validate the CNVs using quantitative real-time PCR assays. Then the
paraffin-embedded tissue samples of 16 ESCC patients with known
genotyping data were collected for immunohistochemistry. Last, the
highest frequency of variation region was cloned into luciferase reporter
vectors to investigate its biological significance in ESCC cells.
Results: A total of 57,774 individual CNVs covering all autosomes were
identified. Of them, 13q32.1 was identified as a critical enrichment
region, and it mainly was involved in one candidate gene. Conditional
logistic regression test showed that this region was significantly
associated with ESCC with the odd ratio being 65.289 (95%CI:
11.177-381.366; PBackground: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is
the major lethal upper gastrointestinal tract cancer in China. The highly
regional and family aggregative incidence of ESCC in China suggests that
genetic susceptibility contributed to pathogenesis. Copy number variation
(CNV) is an important form of gene structure variations and has been
associated with multiple complex diseases, such as malignant tumors. This
study aimed to identify the common CNVs correlated with ESCC
susceptibility and demonstrate the functional significances. Method: A
genome-wide associated study was conducted on 128 discordant sibling
pairs of ESCC, which were native residents in Yangquan area, Shan Xi
Province of China. The genomic DNA of peripheral blood leukocytes were
extracted and genotyping was detected using the Illumina HumanHap 610Q
BeadChips. After stringent quality control filtering, the CNVs-penotype
association analysis were performed using the paired Hidden Markov Model
calling algorithm in the Partek Genomic Suite with settings of length
above 1kb and minimum 10 consecutive probes. Another 223 Northern Chinese
Han people (111 ESCC patients and 112 health controls) were chosen to
validate the CNVs using quantitative real-time PCR assays. Then the
paraffin-embedded tissue samples of 16 ESCC patients with known
genotyping data were collected for immunohistochemistry. Last, the
highest frequency of variation region was cloned into luciferase reporter
vectors to investigate its biological significance in ESCC cells.
Results: A total of 57,774 individual CNVs covering all autosomes were
identified. Of them, 13q32.1 was identified as a critical enrichment
region, and it mainly was involved in one candidate gene. Conditional
logistic regression test showed that this region was significantly
associated with ESCC with the odd ratio being 65.289 (95%CI:
11.177-381.366; P<0.001). Quantitative real-time PCR assays replicated
CNV in this gene. The frequencies of the three genotypes in cases were
3.6% (1 copy), 74.8% (2 copies), and 21.7% (3 copies), which differed
significantly from those in controls (91.1% [2 copies], and 8.9% [3
copies]). Logistic regression analysis showed that the CNV in this gene
increased the risk of ESCC (odd ratio: 3.891; 95% CI: 1.53-9.91 P=0.004).
Additionally, 9 out of 11 patients containing 3 copies had positive
expression of the gene (2 positive and 7 strong positive), whereas only 1
out of 5 patients containing 2 copies had positive expression. Chi-Square
analysis showed that there was significant difference between two groups
of patients (P=0.018). The subsequently luciferase asaay further
comfirmed the enhancer activity of this CNV region. Conclusion: Common
CNVs at 13q32.1 was associated with ESCC susceptibility probably due to
its potential enhancer activity on regulating the gene expression.

