Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nucleolin in activation of NF-B signaling with Tip, a
carcinogenic factor of H. pylori


TNF- inducing protein (Tip), a carcinogenic factor secreted from H.
pylori, enters the cell through binding to nucleolin, a receptor of Tip
on the cell surface. Internalized Tip induces NF-B activation and TNF-
gene expression and finally induces tumor promotion in the stomach.
Nucleolin is a major protein in nucleoli, but significant amounts of
nucleolin localize on the cell surface of several gastric cancer cell
lines. We investigate the relationship between induction of both NF-B
activation and TNF- gene expression and the presence of nucleolin, the
latter of which acts as a shuttling protein of various molecules, such as
Tip, lactoferrin and AS1411, from cell surface to cytosol or nuclei.
Lactoferrin, iron-binding glycoprotein with 80 kDa, shows anti-cancer
activity and preventive activity of H. pylori infection. AS1411 is a
nucleolin targeted DNA aptamer associated with a potent anti-cancer
activity. First, we studied the effects of lactoferrin, AS1411, and
anti-NUC295 (an antibody recognizing cell surface nucleolin) on Tip
incorporation into the cells and Tip-induced TNF- gene expression.
Pretreatment of mouse gastric cancer cells (MGT-40) with lactoferrin
significantly inhibited the incorporation of Tip and Tip-induced TNF-
gene expression. However, pretreatment with AS1411 enhanced the
incorporation of Tip, and inhibited Tip-induced TNF- gene expression. It
is of interest to note that Anti-NUC295 enhanced both the incorporation
of Tip and Tip-induced TNF- gene expression. These results suggest that
both lactoferrin and AS1411 inhibit tumor promoting activity of Tip
mediated through inhibition of NF-B signaling. Thus we think that
nucleolin acts as not only a shuttling protein but also a direct
regulator of NF-B signaling. We discuss how lactoferrin and AS1411
inhibit NF-B activation induced by Tip-nucleolin complex, and how
nucleolin regulates the NF-B signaling pathway.

