Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ELK-1 regulates interferon-alpha8 expression via a polymorphic
region in the interferon-alpha8 promoter associated with outcome of
glioma patients


Several studies have demonstrated a significant immunological impact of
single nucleotide polymorphisms in Interferon (IFN)-related genes, such
as Toll-Like Receptor (TLR)3 and TLR4. We recently reported that patients
with the AA-genotype of a SNP in the IFN-alpha8 (IFNA8) promoter region
was associated with better overall survival of patients with WHO grade 2
and 3 gliomas compared to patients with the AC-genotype. Based on these
observations we hypothesized that the A-allele in the promoter of IFNA8
allows for enhanced transcription factor binding and expression levels of
IFNA8 compared with the C-allele. Analyses of THP-1 cells transfected
with a luciferase gene downstream of a short sequence containing the SNP
in the IFNA8 promoter demonstrated that the A-allele results in enhanced
promoter activity. In silico analysis suggested c-Krox and ELK-1 as
likely transcription factors that bind to the IFNA8 polymorphic region.
Co-transfection of plasmids encoding the c-Krox or ELK-1 and the
luciferase constructs revealed that ELK-1 negatively regulated promoter
activity with the A but not C-allele, while c-Krox could not affect
activity regardless of allele. Consistently, transfection of ELK-1 siRNA
into THP-1 cells resulted in increased promoter activity. To further
identify factors that contribute to the enhanced A-allele promoter
activity we assessed the effect drugs that inhibit intracellular
signaling pathways: PD98059 for inhibiting MEK/ERK, SB203580 a p38
inhibitor, and PPase-2B for de-phosphorylating small molecules. Use of
any of the inhibitor resulted in decreased activity of the A-allele
promoter activity indicating that multiple proteins or a protein common
to multiple pathways seems to be involved. Taken together our data
demonstrates that the A-allele in the IFNA8 promoter, which is associated
with better glioma patient survival, allows for enhances promoter
activation which is negatively regulated by ELK-1 and further regulate by
multiple signaling pathways.

