Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overview of the clinical ELLIPSE (ELucidating Loci Involved in
Prostate cancer SuscEptibility) Consortium (CEC)


Background The inherited link of prostate cancer (PrCa) has led to large
scale Genome Wide Association Studies (GWASs), which aim to identify
susceptibility loci associated with PrCa. Currently, these Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) have only been evaluated against overall
PrCa risk and several disease parameters. The challenge now is to
translate these genetic risk algorithms into the clinical setting. This
has led to NIH (National Institute of Health) funded post-GWAS
initiatives in PrCa and the establishment of the Clinical ELLIPSE
Consortium (CEC) to harmonise genetic, clinical and epidemiological data
from existing consortia around the world. This will provide the necessary
guidance in developing useful and powerful risk prediction models for
PrCa risk, including screening outcome and treatment effects. These risk
prediction models may have an immediate public health impact by providing
clinicians with the necessary tools to improve clinical decision making.
Methods Several projects are currently underway including the analysis of
Active Surveillance outcomes against these SNPs, and the analysis of the
PRACTICAL (PRostate cancer AssoCiation group To Investigate Cancer
Associated aLterations in the genome) consortium cohort, looking at the
association of these SNPs with disease parameters. Collaborations have
been established with ERSPC (European Randomized Study of Screening for
Prostate Cancer), STAMPEDE (Systemic Therapy in Advanced or Metastatic
Prostate cancer: Evaluation of Drug Efficacy) and RAPPER (radiogenomic)
consortia, to analyse these SNPs role in screening and treatment
outcomes. Results An inventory collected across the consortium showed
that there are 59688 cases and 191698 controls with clinical data. There
were also large numbers of tumour (11982 samples) and blood (43624
samples) available. These figures are very encouraging and discussions
are currently underway to access and combine data across the groups for
analyses. Conclusion The CEC provides the necessary framework needed to
foster successful collaborations and begin the transition from bench-side
research to bed-side care. Acknowledgments This project is supported by
The NIH grant: No. 1 U19 CA 148537-01 and Cancer Research UK.

