Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulation of local and systemic immune suppression by
GPI-anchored immune stimulatory proteins


Each day in the United States alone, approximately 3400 people are
diagnosed while another 1500 people die from cancer. Breast cancer is the
most common form of cancer among females and accounts for the second
leading cause of death among female cancer patients. In order to be
effective in a therapeutic setting, current immunotherapies must be able
to overcome the multiple layers of tumor-induced immune suppression such
as modulation of MHC expression and costimulatory molecules (CD80/CD86),
expression of inhibitory molecules PDL-1 and GITRL and the secretion of
immunosuppressive factors such as VEGF and TGF- into the tumor
microenvironment. These immunosuppressive factors promote the
recruitment, differentiation and expansion of regulatory immune cells
such as myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and regulatory T cells
(Tregs) into the tumor microenvironment. Using the 4T07 murine breast
cancer model we investigated the effects of expressing GPI-anchored
immune stimulatory molecules (GPI-ISMs), namely cytokines (IL-2, IL-12)
and the costimulatory protein B7-1, on the surface of the tumor cells.
BALB/c mice were challenged subcutaneously (s.c.) with either wild-type
4T07 cells (4T07-WT) or 4T07 cells expressing GPI-ISMs. We observed
significant splenomegaly in the mice challenged with 4T07-WT cells
relative to the mice challenged with 4T07 cells expressing GPI-ISMs. This
observed splenomegaly correlated with tumor size and a 4-5 fold increase
in the percentage of splenic CD11b+Gr1+ MDSCs indicating the role of
active immune suppression in the tumorigenicity of 4T07 breast cancer
cells. We then conducted studies to analyze the effect of GPI-ISMs on
infiltrating cells into the tumor microenvironment as well as in the
spleen and draining lymph nodes (dLNs). Three groups of mice were
challenged (s.c.) with the following cells mixed in a 1:1 ratio with BD
Matrigel (a solubilized basement membrane preparation derived from a
mouse sarcoma): 4T07-WT, 4T07-B7/IL-12 or PBS (control). Seven days post
challenge, the Matrigel/tumor, spleen and dLNs were harvested from the
mice, digested and analyzed for cellular infiltrates by flow cytometry.
We observed that the expression of GPI-ISMs on the surface of tumor cells
led to reduced angiogenesis as evidenced by a reduced level of blood
vessels and decreased presence of CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells and
CD11b+Gr1+ MDSCs locally at the tumor site and dLNs as well as
systemically in the spleen. Additionally, there was a decrease in
CD8+PD1+ exhausted T cells at the tumor site. Along with the inhibition
of immune suppressive cell populations, the GPI-ISMs increased the
presence of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as well as dendritic cells and B cells.
These observations suggest that components of the active immune
suppression evident in this model can be inhibited by expressing GPI-ISMs
on the surface of the 4T07 tumor cells and could be effective in a
therapeutic setting.

