Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical relevance of circulating tumor cells in esophageal cancer


Background: Current modalities to predict tumor recurrence and survival
in esophageal cancer are insufficient. Locoregional and distant relapse
is even common in lymph node-negative patients and more precise staging
methods are therefore needed. Little is known about the utility of
circulating tumor cells (CTC) as staging tool in esophageal cancer.
Methods: In a prospective study we identified CTC in peripheral blood of
esophageal cancer patients by two separate methods. We enrolled 85
consecutive esophageal cancer patients (03/2010-10/2011) who were
surgically resected (R0) and patients received neither neoadjuvant nor
adjuvant therapy. Peripheral blood was taken at the time of primary
surgery and CTC were detected by either manual MACS enrichment
(anti-cytokeratin plus anti-EpCam) with subsequent anti-cytokeratin
staining or the automated CellSearch system (cleared by the FDA for CTC
detection in metastatic breast, colon and prostate cancer) in parallel.
CTC detection rates and correlation with clinicopathologic parameters
were evaluated. The median clinical follow-up time is 11 months ranging
from 1 to 19 months. Results: So far, 67 patients have been analysed of
which 21 (31.3%) had CTCs using MACS, and 10 (14.9%) using CellSearch.
CTCs detected with MACS significantly correlated with tumor size
(p=0.040) and aggressive tumor biology as indicated by presence of
regional lymph node (p=0.040) and distant metastases (p=0.019). CTCs
detected with CellSearch correlated significantly with lymph node
(p=0.044) and distant metastases (p=0.045), while no correlation was
observed for tumor size or grading. CTC-positive patients had a worse
overall survival than CTC-negative patients when tested with the
CellSearch system (p=0.009). Conclusion: The presence of CTCs in patients
with resectable esophageal cancer correlates with clinicopathologic risk
factors.and predicts an unfavorable prognosis. Thus, our pilot study
suggests that CTC detection may contribute to an improved staging in
esophageal cancer.

