Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secretory phospholipase A2-IIa is a target gene of the
HER/HER2-elicited pathway and a potential plasma biomarker for poor
prognosis of prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among men in
the US. Currently, there is no validated noninvasive biomarker with high
specificity and sensitivity for prostate cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
Only one out of five biopsies is diagnosed with cancer in PSA positive
(>4 ng/ml) patients, while many aggressive cancers fail to be detected by
PSA screening. Although the value of PSA test in the active surveillance
remains to be validated, clinicians rely on it for cancer monitoring due
to the lack of alternatives. These clinical obstacles underscore the
urgent need for new biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Previous studies
showed that prostate cancer tissues overexpress secretory phospholipase
A2 group IIa (sPLA2-IIa) and sPLA2-IIa expression levels are increased
with cancer progression. We are the first to demonstrate that prostate
cancer cells secrete sPLA2-IIa and androgen-independent prostate cancer
LNCaP-AI cells, relative to androgen-dependent parental LNCaP cells,
express and secrete significant higher levels of sPLA2-IIa. We explored
the underlying mechanism of sPLA2-IIa overexpression and found that EGF
and Heregulin- enhanced expression of the sPLA2-IIa gene, which was
mediated by HER2 and HER3 activation. sPLA2-IIa is a NF-kB target gene.
The EGFR/HER2 dual inhibitor Lapatinib and the NF-kB inhibitor Bortezomib
inhibited sPLA2-IIa expression and secretion. EGF and Heregulin-
stimulated expression of the sPLA2-IIa gene at the transcriptional level
via HER/HER2-PI3K-Akt-NF-kB signaling. We further confirmed that human
sPLA2-IIa secreted by LNCaP xenograft in tumor bearing nude mice reached
detectable plasma concentrations, while it was not detectable in the
control mice. More importantly, plasma sPLA2-IIa was elevated in prostate
cancer patients. A Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis of
134 patient plasma specimens revealed that high levels of plasma
sPLA2-IIa, with the optimum cutoff value of 2.0 ng/ml, were significantly
associated with high Gleason score (810) relative to intermediate Gleason
score (67) prostate cancers and advanced relative to indolent cancers.
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was 0.73 and 0.74, respectively. In
summary, we found that elevated HER/HER2-elicited signaling contributes
to sPLA2-IIa overexpression and secretion in prostate cancer cells. Our
findings support the notion that high levels of plasma sPLA2-IIa may
serve as a poor prognostic biomarker capable of distinguishing aggressive
from indolent prostate cancers, which may improve decision-making and
optimize patient management.

