Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lumican as a novel differential diagnostic maker for Bowen's
disease and actinic keratosis


BACKGROUND: Lumican is a member of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan
(SLRP) family and regulates the assembly and diameter of collagen fibrils
in the extracellular matrix in human tissue. Mice homozygous for a null
mutation in lumican display corneal opacification and skin laxity. Recent
studies have shown that lumican is expressed in various types of
malignant tumors including breast, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer, and
osteosarcoma and malignant melanoma, and that it plays an important role
in the growth of tumors. However, little has been studied about the
expression pattern and role of lumican in non-melanoma skin cancer. In
this study, we examined the expression levels of lumican in in situ
lesions of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin, actinic keraotsis
and Bowen's disease, to discover whether lumican can be used as a novel
differential diagnostic marker for such skin tumors, particularly for
bowenoid actinic keratosis and Bowen's disease in sun-exposed areas of
the body. Bowenoid actinic keratosis and Bowen's disease are often
difficult to distinguish in both the clinical setting and commonly
prepared pathological specimens. Furthermore, invasive SCC arising in
actinic keratosis is considered low-risk clinically, while Bowen's
disease with invasion is considered high-risk. Thus, it is important to
distinguish between actinic keratosis and Bowen's disease, and reliable
differential markers for these diseases are required.METHOD: Twenty-nine
cases of actinic keratosis, including 4 of the bowenoid sub-type, and 37
cases of Bowen's disease, including 6 in sun-exposed areas of the body,
were selected from among patients undergoing surgical resection at the
Department of Dermatology at the Nippon Medical School from 2006 to 2010.
We evaluated lumican expression and mRNA in these cases using
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that Lumican was
expressed in 34 of 37 patients with Bowen's disease (91.8%), but was not
detected in any of the cases of actinic keratosis. In situ hybridization
analysis revealed that lumican mRNA was expressed in the cytoplasm of
immunohistochemically lumican-positive tumor cells in Bowen's disease.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that lumican plays an important role
in the pathogenesis of Bowen's disease and will be a useful marker for
the differential diagnosis between Bowen's disease and actinic keratosis,
particularly for bowenoid actinic keratosis and Bowen's disease occurring
in sun-exposed areas of the body.

