Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisd2 haploinsufficiency leads to non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) and accelerates hepatocarcinogenesis in mice


Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common chronic
liver disease. Hepatic steatosis (fatty liver) is a vulnerable factor
that could lead to liver damage, inflammation, fibrosis, cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, despite the high prevalence of
NAFLD, the genetic factor determining the disease progression remains
poorly understood. CISD2 is a previously uncharacterized novel gene
located within the overlapping region of HCC critical region and human
longevity region on chromosome 4q. We have recently demonstrated for the
first time that Cisd2 is a mitochondrial outer membrane protein which
mediates mitochondrial integrity and lifespan in mammals. Surprisingly,
we have observed phenotype similar to NAFLD in the liver of Cisd2
heterozygous (+/) knockout mice. Cisd2 haplo-insufficiency led to
abnormal lipid metabolism accompanying with fatty liver, cell death,
severe inflammation and fibrosis in the liver. Moreover, there was a low
incidence (1/18; 5.6%) of HCC developed at 16-18 months of age in the
Cisd2+/ mice. Interestingly, our results revealed a significant increase
of the Srebp1c which is the master regulator of lipogenesis; the increase
in Srebp1-c seems to further up-regulate the expression of its target
gene, fatty acid synthase (Fas), in the Cisd2+/ livers. In addition, we
found that liver fibrosis was associated with activation of hepatic
stellate cells, as revealed by increased expression of -MA, in the
Cisd2+/ livers. Furthermore, we provide evidence that Cisd2
haplo-insufficiency promoted hepatocarcinogenesis and accelerated HCC
development by 4-6 months in the transgenic mice expressing HBV X
protein. In summary, our results suggested that Cisd2 is likely to be a
haplo-insufficient tumor suppressor gene for HCC. Heterozygous deficiency
of Cisd2 led to NAFLD, and accelerated the progression of HBV-associated
HCC. Our data suggest that Cisd2 is a molecular target for the
development of chemoprevention and therapeutic strategy for NAFLD.

