Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of active Notch signaling in glioblastoma neurosphere
cultures


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and
aggressive primary brain tumor in adults, with a median survival of 15
months for newly diagnosed GBM patients. Brain cancer stem-like cells
(bCSC) are cancer cells with neural stem cell (NSC)-like properties found
in GBM and they are proposed a central role in tumor initiation,
progression, treatment resistance and relapse. The Notch receptor is
expressed in the normal NSC population and is important for NSC
maintenance and cell fate decision. The Notch signaling pathway is often
deregulated in GBM and recent results suggest that this pathway plays a
significant role in bCSC as well. The aim of the present project was
therefore to further elucidate the significance of Notch expression and
activation in GBM derived bCSC. Materials and methods: Human derived GBM
xenograft cells were cultured in serum-free media in order to establish
NSC-like neurosphere cultures. Notch modulation in the established GBM
neurosphere cultures was accomplished either by blocking the Notch
pathway using the -secretase inhibitor DAPT or by transfecting the cells
with the intracellular constitutive active Notch-1 domain. Results: The
established GBM neurosphere cultures expressed different levels of the
Notch-1 receptor and the Notch downstream target Hes-1, which implies
that the cultures have different Notch activation level. Cultures with
high Notch activation showed sensitivity towards DAPT treatment. This was
demonstrated by hampered cell viability, increase in the G0/G1
population, suggesting cell cycle arrest, and reduced ability to form
colonies in soft-agar, together proposing that Notch inhibition targets
the in vitro tumorigenic potential of these GBM neurosphere culture
cells. When examining the effect of Notch inhibition on a variety of stem
cell-like characteristics, only the primary sphere forming potential was
affected. As such, the number of spheres formed in primary culture was
reduced upon DAPT treatment while no effect was observed on the
self-renewing capacity or the level of differentiation. In opposite, when
the GBM neurosphere cells were transfected with the active part of the
Notch-1 receptor a decrease in the G0/G1 population and an enhanced
capability of soft-agar colony formation was observed as well as an
increase in the self-renewing potential and de-differentiation. All
cultures showed sensitivity towards artificial Notch-1 activation. These
data implies that constitutive active Notch signaling increases the in
vitro tumorigenic potential and affects the stem cell-like population in
the GBM neurosphere cultures. Conclusion: Based on the observed results
we propose that active Notch signaling is pivotal for the tumorigenic
potential but not for the bCSC characteristics in GBM neurosphere
cultures with elevated endogenous Notch activity.

