Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose-regulated protein 78 regulates crosstalk between apoptosis
and autophagy to determine antiestrogen responsiveness


While over 70% of breast cancers express estrogen receptor (ER+), drugs
targeting these receptors such as Tamoxifen (TAM) or Faslodex
(fulvestrant, ICI) often fail to cure these patients. Many ER+ patients
fail to respond (de novo resistance) or lose drug responsiveness
(acquired resistance), making endocrine resistance a major clinically
relevant problem. The molecular mechanisms of endocrine therapy
resistance still remain unclear. We show that antiestrogen resistant
cells with an acquired resistant phenotype overexpress glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78), which is not observed in de novo resistance.
Moreover, we show increased expression of GRP78 in MCF7/LCC9 (estrogen
independent, ICI resistant, TAM cross-resistant) when compared to the
MCF7/LCC1 (estrogen independent, TAM and ICI sensitive) breast cancer
cells and tumors. These data reflect the response of aromatase inhibitor
resistant breast cancers to second line antiestrogen therapy, and further
support the hypothesis that antiestrogen resistance and estrogen
independence are separate phenotypes. Targeting GRP78 with RNAi restored
antiestrogen sensitivity in endocrine therapy resistant cells (MCF7-RR
and MCF7/LCC9), whereas expressing GRP78 cDNA conferred resistance on
antiestrogen sensitive breast cancer cells (MCF7 and MCF7/LCC1). We show
that GRP78 integrates cellular signaling to inhibit apoptosis (as
determined by cleaved caspase-7, cleaved PARP, and annexin V staining)
and stimulate prosurvival autophagy (as determined by LC3-II, p62, and
GFP-LC3 punctate). Moreover, GRP78-stimulated autophagy is dependent on
TSC2/AMPK-mediated mTOR inhibition. Endocrine resistance induced by GRP78
overexpression is prevented through an inhibition of autophagy by ATG5
knockdown, while caspase inhibition prevented GRP78 RNAi-mediated therapy
resensitization. Furthermore, knockdown of GRP78 and beclin 1 (BECN1)
synergistically restores antiestrogen sensitivity in resistant cells. The
use of GRP78 to integrate the cellular functions of apoptosis and
autophagy to control cell fate raises the provocative question that this
signaling may be widely applicable and represent a major stress response
that explains how many different cell types could respond to stressors
and acquire resistance to therapeutic interventions.

