Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and preclinical evaluation of single agents with
antitubulin and antiangiogenic activity as antitumor agents


Agents that interfere with microtubules are important antitumor agents.
Tumor angiogenic mechanisms that are vital for tumor growth and
metastasis are targeted by antiangiogenic agents. Antiangiogenic agents
are usually not tumoricidal but are mainly cytostatic. Combination
chemotherapy with antiangiogenic and cytotoxic agents has shown
significant promise, and several studies with such combinations are in
progress in the clinic. Single agents with both antiangiogenic activities
and cytotoxicity could afford single agents that would circumvent the
pharmacokinetic problems of multiple agents, avoid drug-drug
interactions, be used at lower doses to alleviate toxicity, be devoid of
overlapping toxicities, and delay or prevent tumor cell resistance. We
have designed, synthesized and evaluated two novel compounds, AG119 and
AG425, that inhibit both vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
(VEGFR-2) for antiangiogenic effects and tubulin for cytotoxic effects in
single agents. Both compounds have comparable potency as sunitinib and
semaxinib against cell lines overexpressing VEGFR-2 and were equipotent
with semaxinib on VEGFR-2 mediated endothelial cell proliferation,
indicating a functional effect of these agents on VEGFR-2 inhibition
(IC50: semaxanib 68.2 4.2 M, AG119: 60.2 2.4 M, AG425: 52.3 3.8 M). The
novel compounds are effective and potent inhibitors (comparable to
combretastatin A-4) of bovine brain tubulin assembly (IC50:
combretastatin A-4 1.2 0.01 M, AG119: 3.5 M, AG425: 1.9 0.1 M). The
compounds were potent inhibitors of [3H]colchicine binding to tubulin,
indicating that these compounds, particularly AG425, bind at the
colchicine site. These agents cause microtubule depolymerization, arrest
cells in late G2/M phase and trigger apoptotic cell death. Moreover,
AG119 and AG425 are potent anticancer compounds in aggressive basal like
breast cancer (BLBC) and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines.
The novel compounds showed sensitivity in taxol resistant cells,
indicating that they are unlikely to be Pgp or MRP substrates [unlike
taxol], and these compounds possess relative selectivity of kill on tumor
versus normal cell types. In vivo these agents reduce tumor size and
vascularity in two flank xenograft models [the BLBC MDA-MB-435 model and
U251 glioma model] in immunodeficient mice, superior to docetaxel and
sunitinib, without overt toxicity to the animals.

