Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FKBP51 is a crucial modulator of melanoma plasticity and promising
molecular target for preventing melanoma metastasis


FKBP51, a protein with a relevant role in developmental stages in mammals
and other organisms, is highly expressed in melanoma and correlates with
tumor aggressiveness and resistance to therapy. We found that FKBP51
positively regulates melanoma cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype at the
transcriptional level. We also found that melanoma CSCs are endowed with
epithelial to mesenchimal transition (EMT) traits. The immunochemistry
study of 10 primitive cutaneous and 20 brain melanoma metastases showed
that melanocytic cells capable of extravasation and subverting the
architecture of metastatic tissue display intense FKBP51 nuclear signal
and cytoplasmic positivity for the CSC marker nestin. These findings
support the conclusion that the genetic programs of cancer stemness and
invasiveness overlap in melanoma, and that FKBP51 plays a pivotal role in
sustaining such a program. To confirm the role of FKBP51 in melanoma
invasion, we utilized an experimental metastasis model. Animal studies
were performed in accordance with NIH recommendations and the approval of
the local institutional animal research committee. Injecting SAN melanoma
cells into the tail vein of IL2-NOD-SCID mice produced prominent
multifocal lesions in lungs and liver. We systemically administered two
separate doses of FKBP51 siRNA to mice after the injection of melanoma
cells. Organ colonization was evaluated both in live animals and post
mortem. Qualitative PET/CT image analysis demonstrated low FDG uptake
limited to small areas in lungs and liver. By contrast, untreated mice
had diffuse metastatic liver and lung lesions and high FDG uptake in the
same organs. Quantitative analysis performed on PET/CT images revealed
that mean standardized uptake values (SUV) in treated mice were
significantly lower than in untreated mice, both for lungs and liver.
High Frequency Ultrasound examination revealed few or no liver metastases
in treated mice versus untreated mice. Post-mortem organ examination
showed a dramatic difference between the morphologically preserved organs
dissected from treated mice, and severely compromised organs from
untreated mice. The histological examination confirmed these findings.
Most interestingly, invading cells co-expressed FKBP51 and nestin. Our
study suggests a prominent role for FKBP51 in the pathogenesis of
metastatic melanoma; we envision that targeting this protein for melanoma
metastasis prevention may produce a successful outcome.

