Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra sensitive immuno-array based multiplexed assay capable of
profiling RTKs and signaling proteins, heterodimers, and growth factors
for routine analysis of clinical samples with limited availability


Patient stratification based on target protein expressions or mutations
alone has limitations in selecting efficacious therapeutic regimens for
solid tumors. Information on the activation status of signaling pathway
proteins as determined by their phosphorylation states and the level of
expression, profiling of growth factors responsible for its activation,
and their dimerization partners, can significantly influence clinical
decisions. Herein we report a comprehensive analysis of key receptor
tyrosine kinases (HER1, HER2, p95HER2, HER3, cMET, IGF1R, FGFRs, and
others) and their downstream signal proteins (PI3K, Shc, AKT, MEK, ERK,
PRAS40, RPS6, P70S6K, RSK), and dimerization partners (HER1:HER2,
HER2:HER3, HER1:HER3, and others), and secreted growth factors (AREG,
EREG, NRG1, HB-EGF, HGF, BTC, EGF, TGF, VEGF, and IGF-1) based on a
multiplexed immunoarray CEER (Collaborative Enzyme Enhanced
Reactive-immunoassay) platform. CEER platform utilizes the formation of
an unique triple-antibody-enzyme-channeling immuno-complex. This complex
requires co-localization of two detector-antibodies conjugated with
corresponding channeling-enzymes once target proteins are bound by the
capture antibodies. The immuno-collaboration between two detector
enzymes, glucose oxidase (GO, conjugated to anti-target protein
antibodies) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP, conjugated to
anti-phosphorylated sites within the target) via target-specific,
tyramide-mediated signal amplification enables target protein expression
/phosphorylation profiling with validated analytical sensitivity between
1 to 10 cells. Using the CEER platform, quantitative modulations of
target protein(s) in response to targeted agent(s) and treatment effect
on associated downstream and upstream pathway proteins were measured. Due
to the extreme sensitivity and specificity, CEER can be utilized in
clinical samples with limited availability (e.g., FNA or CTCs). A
comprehensive signaling pathway analysis can be a critical guide for
selecting effective clinical strategies for targeted drug combinations or
sequential therapeutic regimens. In addition, continued signaling pathway
profiling after drug administration can monitor drug response and provide
valuable information on potential drug resistance mechanisms.

