Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression in clinically normal oral mucosa of oral cancer
patients facilitates identification of markers predictive of OSCC outcomes


Oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) are among the most
common cancers worldwide. The overall 5-yr survival rate of OSCC patients
is approximately 50% but is higher than 80% in early-stage patients. The
high mortality of OSCC is due in part to late diagnosis and high
recurrence rates. Thus, early detection of OSCC and identification of a
good predictor of disease progression are important in improving OSCC
outcomes. To identify potential markers for early diagnosis and disease
progression, we used Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays to examine the gene
expression profiles of 167 primary OSCC from newly diagnosed patients, 58
normal oral mucosa from oral cancer patients (NCA) and 45 normal oral
mucosa from patients without cancer (controls), all of whom were enrolled
at three University of Washington-affiliated medical centers from 2003 to
2008. We first compared gene expression in the 45 controls to the 167
tumors using ANOVA implemented in Partek Genomics Suite software,
adjusting for age, sex, cigarette-smoking, alcohol use and HPV status. We
found 2,596 probe sets differentially expressed between tumors and
controls, using the criteria of a FDR of 0.05 and at least a two-fold
difference in the expression level. We then used linear regression to
compare the gene expression level of these 2,596 probe sets between
controls and NCA, and between NCA and tumors. Among 2,596 probe sets, 60
were significantly up-regulated and 11 were significantly down-regulated
in both comparisons using the Bonferroni correction with a p-value of
1.93x10-5 and a difference in gene expression greater than 1 standard
deviation of the expression in NCA. A cluster analysis on gene expression
of the 71 probe sets identified a subgroup of 45 OSCC patients with
highest/lowest expression of these probe sets. These 45 OSCC patients had
a higher risk of disease progression after treatment (defined by
persistence or recurrence of OSCC) and higher OSCC-specific mortality
when compared with the remaining 122 OSCC patients; the respective Cox
regression hazard ratio (HR) and 95% CI, adjusted for age, sex, and stage
for disease progression and OSCC-specific mortality were 2.7 (1.5-4.6)
and 3.8 (2.1-7.0). The top gene associated with both outcomes was
dermatan sulfate epimerase (DSE). A high level of DSE expression in tumor
(higher than mean expression among tumors) was associated with a higher
risk of disease progression (HR 2.8, 95% CI: 1.5-5.1) and of
OSCC-specific mortality (HR 6.0, 95% CI: 2.9-12.2) after adjusting for
age, sex and stage. DSE encodes a tumor-rejection antigen that could
potentially serve as a target for cancer immunotherapy. In conclusion, we
identified 71 probe sets in which dysregulation occurred in both NCA and
cancer samples. Some of these genes could potentially serve as early
diagnostic markers, markers to predict disease progression, or as
potential targets for new therapy.

