Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of differentially expressed microRNAs and other
non-coding RNAs in ependymomas


Ependymomas are tumors that present great challenges in treatment despite
the advances in neurosurgical techniques and adjuvant therapy. In order
to identify possible molecular markers that could improve clinical
management and better treatment, we have profiled ependymomas for the
expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) and other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs).
miRNAs are ncRNAs that can block mRNA translation and affect mRNA
stability. Several lines of evidence have recently shown that up or
down-regulation of miRNAs correlate with many human cancers indicating
that they can function as classical tumor suppressors and/or oncogenes.
In this study, we have evaluated with the use of TaqMan Low Density
Arrays (TLDAs) and RNA-Seq the expression profiles of non-coding RNAs in
ependymoma samples and normal brain tissue. We analyzed the miRNA
expression profile of 34 ependymoma samples using paraffin tissue
compared to 6 normal brain control samples enriched for ependymal cells.
miRNA expression profiles were correlated with clinico-pathological
parameters, morphological features and the location of the tumor in the
brain. We have been able to classify the tumors based on the miRNA
expression profile and to identify miRNAs that are differentilly
expressed in ependymomas when compared to normal samples. For example,
miR-135a, miR-594 and miR-34a were identified as over-expressed and
miR-485-5p and miR-383 as down-regulated (pEpendymomas are tumors that
present great challenges in treatment despite the advances in
neurosurgical techniques and adjuvant therapy. In order to identify
possible molecular markers that could improve clinical management and
better treatment, we have profiled ependymomas for the expression of
microRNAs (miRNAs) and other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). miRNAs are ncRNAs
that can block mRNA translation and affect mRNA stability. Several lines
of evidence have recently shown that up or down-regulation of miRNAs
correlate with many human cancers indicating that they can function as
classical tumor suppressors and/or oncogenes. In this study, we have
evaluated with the use of TaqMan Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) and RNA-Seq
the expression profiles of non-coding RNAs in ependymoma samples and
normal brain tissue. We analyzed the miRNA expression profile of 34
ependymoma samples using paraffin tissue compared to 6 normal brain
control samples enriched for ependymal cells. miRNA expression profiles
were correlated with clinico-pathological parameters, morphological
features and the location of the tumor in the brain. We have been able to
classify the tumors based on the miRNA expression profile and to identify
miRNAs that are differentilly expressed in ependymomas when compared to
normal samples. For example, miR-135a, miR-594 and miR-34a were
identified as over-expressed and miR-485-5p and miR-383 as down-regulated
(p<0.01; FDREpendymomas are tumors that present great challenges in
treatment despite the advances in neurosurgical techniques and adjuvant
therapy. In order to identify possible molecular markers that could
improve clinical management and better treatment, we have profiled
ependymomas for the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) and other non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs). miRNAs are ncRNAs that can block mRNA translation and
affect mRNA stability. Several lines of evidence have recently shown that
up or down-regulation of miRNAs correlate with many human cancers
indicating that they can function as classical tumor suppressors and/or
oncogenes. In this study, we have evaluated with the use of TaqMan Low
Density Arrays (TLDAs) and RNA-Seq the expression profiles of non-coding
RNAs in ependymoma samples and normal brain tissue. We analyzed the miRNA
expression profile of 34 ependymoma samples using paraffin tissue
compared to 6 normal brain control samples enriched for ependymal cells.
miRNA expression profiles were correlated with clinico-pathological
parameters, morphological features and the location of the tumor in the
brain. We have been able to classify the tumors based on the miRNA
expression profile and to identify miRNAs that are differentilly
expressed in ependymomas when compared to normal samples. For example,
miR-135a, miR-594 and miR-34a were identified as over-expressed and
miR-485-5p and miR-383 as down-regulated (p<0.01; FDR<0.05). We have also
identified and are currently confirming some of the targets for these
miRNAs. Finally, we have utilized high-throughput Whole Transcriptome
(WT) analyses with the SOLiD system to identify other differentially
expressed miRNAs and long ncRNAs in ependymomas. The transcriptome of 3
ependymomas and 2 controls were sequenced, thus generating approximately
5 Gb of data. In conclusion, using different strategies, we have been
able to identify ncRNAs that are differentially expressed in ependymomas
compared to normal ependymal tissue, some of which are of clinical
importance. Financial Support: Children's Memorial Research Center, The
Falk Brain Tumor Foundation and The Maeve McNicholas Memorial Foundation.

