Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of niche requirements in transient leukemia of Down syndrome


Background. Children with Down syndrome (DS; constitutional trisomy 21)
display an estimated 150-fold increased incidence of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML/AMkL). Leukemic blasts are detectable in the peripheral
blood of approximately 10% of newborns with DS. This pre-leukemic
disorder, known as Transient Leukemia (TL) or Transient
Myeloproliferative Disorder (TMD), predominantly undergoes spontaneous
resolution, although 20% of cases go on to develop AML later in life.
Available data suggest that TL is a disorder of fetal hematopoiesis,
triggered by somatic mutations of the hematopoietic transcription factor
GATA1. We hypothesize that the transition from fetal to post-natal
hematopoiesis results in the elimination of TL blasts in the majority of
cases, and that progression events acquired during the first three years
of life account for the transformation of Down syndrome TL to AML.
Methods and Results. During embryonic development, the fetal liver (FL)
constitutes the primary site of hematopoiesis. Data from our
xenotransplant model suggest that the post-natal bone marrow (BM)
environment provides insufficient or inappropriate cues for the survival,
proliferation and dissemination of TL blasts. To identify the unique
combination of signals provided by the FL but not the post-natal BM, we
reconstructed both hematopoietic niches in vitro by culturing primary
human TL cells on murine stromal cell lines derived from either FL
(Aft024) or adult BM (MS-5). We found that TL cells underwent a striking
>80-fold expansion in total cell number when cultured on FL-derived
stromal cells for 2 weeks. In contrast, BM-derived MS-5 stromal cells
supported only a moderate 8-fold expansion of TL cells, simultaneously
allowing for progressive induction of apoptosis, and inducing increased
myeloid differentiation. The superior ability of fetal-derived stromal
cells compared to those derived from bone marrow to support TL cells was
confirmed under hypoxic culture conditions, in keeping with their fetal
origin. Comparative gene expression analysis successfully identified both
soluble and membrane-bound components of the fetal hematopoietic niche
(modeled by Aft024), such as BMPs and mediators of cell adhesion, as
candidate regulators of TL cell growth. Conclusions. We have developed an
ex vivo culture system which allows the expansion of primary DS-TL blast
cells. We demonstrate that survival/proliferative signals are
preferentially provided by the fetal liver vs. adult bone marrow
environment, consistent with a fetal origin of TL blasts. Our current
focus is on the identification and functional validation of signaling
pathways that are essential for TL blast survival and whose interruption
in this pre-leukemic disorder may lead to prevention of subsequent AML in
children with Down syndrome.

