Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orphan nuclear receptor DAX1 exhibits suppressive effect on
prostate cancer cell growth


The nuclear receptor superfamily comprises a large group of
transcriptional factors involved broadly in many physiological functions
including control of embryonic development and cellular homeostasis. In
general, nuclear receptors can bind to specific DNA regulatory elements
(REs) as homo- or heterodimers. DAX1 (Dosage sensitive sex reversal
(DSS), adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) critical region, on chromosome
X, gene 1, NR0B1) is a unique ligand-independent orphan nuclear receptor,
which lacks the conventional DNA-binding domain (DBD) and in some cases
it functions as a coregulatory protein inhibiting the transcriptional
activity of other nuclear receptors by forming heterodimers. Previous
studies show that DAX1 may play an essential role in establishment and
maintenance of the steroidogenic axis of development, maintenance of
murine embryonic stem cell pluripotency and cancer development including
ovarian, breast and endometrial cancers. A recent report identified the
inverse correlation of immunoreactivity of DAX1 with Gleason score of
prostate cancer. In a preliminary investigation of expression patterns of
members of nuclear receptor superfamily in a panel of immortalized
prostatic epithelial cell and prostate cancer cell lines by
semi-quantitative and real-time PCR, we observed that DAX1 displayed a
variable expression pattern with low or undetectable levels in most
tested immortalized prostatic epithelial cell lines and prostate cancer
cell lines (including the classical LNCaP and PC-3) but high levels in
some prostate cancer cells (VCaP, DuCaP, RC-58T and DU145) and also an in
vitro model of transformed immortalized human prostatic epithelial cells
BPH-1CAFTD. In order to elucidate the possible functional roles of DAX1
in the prostate cancer cell growth regulation, we generated DAX1-stable
expression clones in two prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and PC-3,
which expressed low endogenous DAX1 levels, by retroviral transduction
for in vitro growth characterization. Our results showed that
overexpression of DAX1 in LNCaP and PC-3 cells suppressed their in vitro
cell proliferation, single-cell colony formation and
anchorage-independent growth capacity in soft agar. Moreover, luciferase
reporter gene assay showed that DAX1 suppressed the ERR-induced
transactivation of VEGFA. Our results suggested that DAX1 might perform a
suppressive growth regulatory role in prostate cancer cells. (Lin Jia is
supported by a RGC Hong Kong-PhD Fellowship Scheme)

