Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carnosol and carnosic acid, from rosemary, promote endoplasmic
reticulum stress and androgen receptor degradation in prostate cancer
cells


Background: Prostate cancer is one of the most prevalent forms of cancer
among men, especially in the United States. Previously, we have shown
that carnosol, a dietary diterpene from rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis), has a unique function in that it is a dual disruptor of
androgen and estrogen receptor alpha. Herein, we examined how carnosol
and another dietary diterpene from rosemary, carnosic acid, promote
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and modulate the activity and
expression of androgen receptor (AR). Materials and Methods: Experiments
were performed using the prostate cancer cell lines 22Rv1 and LNCaP
cells. Cell proliferation and cell viability were studied using BrdU and
MTT assay respectively. Western blotting, ELISA and siRNA were used to
evaluate the relationship between ER stress and androgen receptor
degradation. Results: Both, carnosic acid and carnosol, inhibited growth
and decreased the cell viability of 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The anti-proliferative effect was associated with
apoptosis as evidenced by a significant increase in levels of cleaved
caspase-3 protein. Interestingly, these diterpenes modulated proteins
associated with ER stress including BiP, IRE1 and CHOP. Furthermore, we
saw a dose-dependent decrease in expression of AR in 22Rv1 and LNCaP
cells when treated with either carnosol or carnosic acid. The proteasome
has been shown to be regulated by multiple proteins including proteins
associated with ER stress. The AR expression increased in presence of
proteasome inhibitor, MG-132, suggesting that decrease in AR expression
was due to proteasomal degradation. Carnosic acid and carnosol, also
showed a decrease in expression of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels
in a dose-dependent manner. Conclusion: Both, carnosic acid and carnosol,
induce ER stress-mediated apoptotic cell death in prostate cancer cell
lines, 22Rv1and LNCaP cells, leading to disruption of AR expression. Our
data suggests that these natural diterpenes possess strong anticancer
activity and should be evaluated further as potential chemopreventive
and/or chemotherapeutic agents for controlling prostate cancer.

