Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel sonodynamic therapy using hydroxyl radical generated from
ultrasound activated TiO2 for human epithelial carcinoma cells


Radical oxygen species, which are produced by the action of some
chemotherapy drugs, radiation and some types of anticancer agent, are
known to mediate cytotoxic activity by modifying the cellular homeostatic
redox balance. Photodynamic therapy uses photosensitizers activated by
light to induce cell death via formation of free radicals and is actually
used in clinical setting. However the limited tissue penetrability of
light has been a crucial problem because most of cancers often develop in
deep tissue. The generation of hydroxyl radical was investigated during
ultrasonic (US) irradiation and in the presence of titanium dioxide
(TiO2) (Shimizu, et al. Ultrason. Sonochem. 2008). In this study, the
effect of US combined with TiO2 particles on human epithelial carcinoma
cell (A431) was investigated in vitro and in vivo. TiO2 nanoparticles
used were uniform in size of about 200 nm in diameter. A431 (1.0x106)
were irradiated with US in the various density of TiO2 particles (0 to
10mg/ml). Cell viability was measured immediately after US irradiation (1
MHz, 2.0 W/cm2 for 30, 60, 120 and 300 sec) by using trypan blue
exclusion assay. The effect of the combination of TiO2 particle injection
(0.1, 1.0 and 10mg, day5) and US exposure (1 MHz, 2.0 W/cm2, 5 min
duration, day 5, 7, 9, 11, 13) on subcutaneously implanted A431 solid
tumors in female BALB c nu/nu mice were investigated by measuring tumor
volume. The cell viability was significantly decreased after US
irradiation in the presence of high dose of TiO2. In vivo results also
showed significant inhibition of tumor growth in groups treated with high
dose of TiO2 particles and US. The efficacies of US could not be
demonstrated combined with low dose of TiO2 particles. Our results
demonstrate the potent toxicity of TiO2 combined with US irradiation
against tumor in vitro and also the growth inhibition of tumors in a
mouse xenograft model. Moreover the cytotoxic efficacy of TiO2 was
dependent on the amount of TiO2 particles attaching to cancer cells.
These results suggest that the effective and low toxic method for
accumulation of TiO2 in the tumor (injection, arterial injection, DDS,
etc.) should be necessary for clinical use.

