Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of serum vitamin D levels and changes in breast density


Background: Mammographic density is an independent risk factor for breast
cancer associated with a large relative and attributable risk for the
disease. Given the prevalence of women with increased breast density, the
attributable risk may be as high as 33%. The largest factor influencing
density is heredity, but various lines of evidence suggest that
modification of breast density is associated with a decrease in breast
cancer risk. Studies have found vitamin D levels to be inversely related
to breast density. Here we present a cross-sectional analysis of vitamin
D and breast density in women enrolled in the Vermont Cancer Centers High
Risk Breast Program. Longitudinal associations and correlations of
vitamin D and breast density were evaluated. Methods: The High Risk
Breast Program database, for women with strong family history, BRCA
mutations, high risk pathology or prior chemoradiotherapy for Hodgkins
Disease, was initiated in 2003 and contains over 500 women. A subset of
51 women ranging in age from 31-69 with a mean lifetime Gail risk of 21%
is the subject of this analysis. Data collected included mammograms, a
medical and dietary history, BMI, and serum Vitamin D levels. Breast
density was interpreted (at baseline, 2 years and 4 years) from
mammograms using a visual analogue scale and reliability was evaluated.
Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed using SAS statistical
software. Results: The intra-observer variability for density
determination using a visual analogue scale was comparable to published
studies (R=0.82). Baseline BMI showed an inverse univariate trend with
percent of dense tissue at both time points (p=0.001). No correlation was
found between any determinant and change in breast density measured at
the 2 year time point. A subset of patients (n=37) was followed for 2
additional years. A model for change in percent dense tissue was obtained
for this subset of patients using multivariate analysis that included
baseline BMI and change in serum Vitamin D level (R2=0.23). The other
factors with a univariate relationship were not found to contribute to
the multivariate model. Conclusions: The HRBP database has become an
invaluable resource, significantly reducing the financial resources
necessary to complete this study and aiding the expansion of the study
when needed. Information has been gained with high potential impact on
prevention and early detection of breast cancer; first is the
reproducibility of the visual analogue scale, a method of quantifying
density which is readily available to clinicians and research staff with
little training and minimal resources. Second, this study illuminates the
importance of a longer follow up period for the detection of changes in
mammographic breast density. Third, this study validates the association
between serum vitamin D levels and percent breast density, and more
importantly the inverse relationship between change in vitamin D levels
and change in breast density.

