Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-23b is a tumor suppressor and a useful prognostic
biomarker in prostate cancer


Introduction and Objective: MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that
regulate the expression of >90% of all human genes, either inhibiting
target mRNA translation or inducing its degradation. These genes are
abnormally expressed in human malignancies, making their biological
importance increasingly apparent. The main objective of this study was to
investigate the role of miRNA-23b in prostate carcinogenesis and assess
whether miR-23b has any prognostic implication in prostate cancer (PC).
Methods: The methods employed in this study include quantitative-real
time PCR; methylation specific quantitative-real time PCR; western blot;
in-situ hybridization; fluorescence-activated cell sorting assays for
cell cycle distribution and apoptosis; assays for cell viability,
clonability, migration and invasiveness of prostate cancer cells.
Luciferase reporter and mutational assays and in-vivo studies in nude
mice were also performed. Results: The expression of miR-23b was
significantly suppressed or silenced in human PC tissue samples and cell
lines when compared with normal tissues and a non-malignant cell line.
The mechanism of miR-23b silencing in PC was found to be due to
hypermethylation that was reversed by 5Aza-deoxycitidine (5Aza)
treatments. Lower expression of miR-23b also correlated with higher
pathological stage and higher Gleason grade making it a useful prognostic
biomarker in prostate cancer. Ectopic expression of miR-23b induced G0/G1
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, suppressed cell proliferation, colony
formation, migration, and invasion in prostate cancer cells. miR-23b
exerted these functional effects by directly targeting the proto-oncogene
Src kinase. Over-expression of miR-23b significantly suppressed the
luciferase activity of reporter plasmid containing the 3UTR sequences
complementary to Src kinase, which was abolished by mutations in these
3UTR regions. Genistein treatment also induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, and suppressed Src kinase expression at the protein level in
prostate cancer cells. Genistein and miR-23b reduced the Src-regulated
downstream ERK/AKT pathway molecules and also inhibited Src kinase and
tumor cell growth in vivo. Conclusion: This is the first study
demonstrating that i) miRNA-23b is silenced by CpG hypermethylation in
PC; ii) miR-23b acts as a tumor suppressor and is a prognostic biomarker
in PC; iii) genistein, a nontoxic chemopreventive agent induces the
expression of miR-23b and iv) both genistein and miR-23b inhibited
oncogenic Src kinase in-vitro and in-vivo. The use of RNAi is currently
being implemented as a gene-specific approach for molecular medicine. By
the same principle, it is possible that reexpression of silenced miR-23b
by nontoxic chemopreventive agents may cause down-regulation of target
oncogenes thereby leading to the development of novel therapeutic
approaches for the treatment of prostate cancer.

