Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nek3 kinase in breast cancer pathogenesis: The role of paxillin
phosphorylation


Breast cancer progression to metastatic disease is responsible for the
majority of breast cancer related deaths. The acquisition of a motile and
invasive phenotype is a critical step in the metastatic process. The
hormone prolactin (PRL) is increasingly recognized as contributing to the
development and progression of human breast cancer. In particular, data
from our laboratory has shown that PRL serves as a chemoattractant for
breast cancer cells and can stimulate the formation of the focal-adhesion
complex that is necessary for cell motility. PRL mediates its biological
effects through binding to the PRL receptor (PRLr) and initiates several
downstream signaling cascades, including activation of the
serine/threonine kinase, Nek3. Nek3 regulates breast cancer cell
survival, motility and invasion and has been shown to interact with the
focal-adhesion adaptor protein, paxillin, in a PRL-dependent manner.
Interestingly, we have determined that knockdown of Nek3 by siRNA
significantly decreases the phosphorylation of paxillin, which suggests
that paxillin may represent a novel substrate of Nek3. Given these
findings, we sought to further elucidate the role of Nek3 in the
regulation of paxillin phosphorylation and function in breast cancer.
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis using mutant truncated proteins
demonstrated that Nek3 interacts with the C-terminal region of paxillin,
which contains 4 tandem LIM domains. Additionally, to determine the
specific site(s) of phosphorylation an in vitro kinase assay was
performed and it was determined that Nek3 directly phosphorylates
paxillin at T401 located in the LIM2 domain. It is known that LIM2 and
LIM3 comprise the focal adhesion targeting motif of paxillin and
phosphorylation in this region plays an important role in modulating its
activity. Ongoing studies will determine the biological effects of
Nek3-mediated phosphorylation at paxillin T401 by examining the effect on
breast cancer cell motility and invasion as well as the effect on
paxillin localization and function in the focal adhesion complex. These
studies will provide novel mechanistic insight into how Nek3-mediated
phosphorylation of paxillin contributes to the pathogenesis of breast
cancer. We propose that Nek3 is a potential novel therapeutic target for
the treatment of breast cancer.

