Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD87 is essential for mediating growth-factor induced angiogenesis
via distribution of integrin beta-1


CD87 (urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor, uPAR) expression has
been correlated with tumor progression most likely via its functional ole
as a central receptor for extracellular proteolysis, but also via its
role in initiating intracellular signal transduction. The role of CD87 in
angiogenesis has recently been elucidated. Thus, we observed that in
VEGF-stimulated ndothelial cells CD87 is essential for endothelial cell
survival as well as for n efficient growth factor- induced endothelial
cell migration. Thereby, the PI-anchored protein CD87 formed a complex
with its ligand urokinase uPA) as well as the inhibitor plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), which became redistributed to the leading
edge via low density lipoprotein receptor- (LDLR-) like proteins. In this
study, we analyzed the functional role of CD87 in integrin redistribution
during growth factor-induced endothelial cell migration. CD87, thereby,
directly interacted with integrin adhesion receptors (a5b1) as well as
with LDLR- proteins. Either by interfering with CD87/integrin nteraction
or by interfering with CD87/LDLR-protein interaction by using specific
interfering peptides, we observed disruption of integrin redistribution
to the leading edge in migrating cells. As a consequence diminished focal
adhesion formations were observed and endothelial cell migration was
diminished. In CD87-deficient HEK 293 cells as well as in endothelial
cells derived from CD87 -/- mice, expression of CD87 mutants
(mutL3/uPAR), which lacked the binding motif for LDLR, led to an impaired
cell spreading as well as a diminished migratory response towards VEGF,
while full length CD87 (wt/CD87) reconstituted this phenotype. That CD87
plays a central role in growth factor induced endothelial cell invasion
and capillary-like tube formation in vivo was demonstrated by a directed
in vivo angiogenesis assay (DIVAA), which was performed either in CD87
deficient or wild type animals in the presence or absence of interfering
peptides. Our data give novel insights into the central role of CD87 in
pro- angiogenic endothelial cell behavior as well as in its role in
angiogenesis. Thus, CD87 might lead to a novel therapeutic strategies in
tumor- angiogenesis.

