Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a direct transcriptional target of
EWS/FLI1 and a regulator of Ewing's sarcoma cell morphology, adhesiveness
and tumorigenicity


Ewing's sarcomas (EWS) are tumors typically formed by undifferentiated
small round cells that predominantly affect children and young adults.
The aggressiveness of EWS is illustrated by both the fact that about
25-30% patients present with metastases at diagnosis and the elevated
rate of lethal recurrence among them. In spite of therapeutic
combinations including chemotherapy, radiation and surgery, the 5-year
disease-free survival rate for EWS patients has remained low for many
years. Poor prognosis, lethal recurrence and long-term side effects point
to the urgent requirement of novel EWS targeted therapies. EWS is
cytogenetically characterized by the presence of chromosomal
translocations resulting in the fusion of the EWS gene with several ETS
genes, most frequently with FLI1, leading to the expression of chimeric
proteins that contain the transcriptional activation domain of EWS and
the FLI1 DNA binding domain. The EWS/FLI1 aberrant transcription factors
are responsible for the malignant phenotype of EWS and regulate a large
repertoire of target genes, many of which are critical determinants for
EWS development, and thus have the potential of providing novel
therapeutic options for EWS. In order to understand mechanisms of cell
cycle regulation by EWS/FLI1, we performed comparative array analyses of
EWS cells before and after knocking down EWS/FLI1 expression. Results
showed that EWS/FLI1 knockdown consistently down-regulated FoxM1, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that FoxM1 is a
novel direct transcriptional target of EWS/FLI1. Western hybridization
and immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that FoxM1 is indeed
abundantly expressed in EWS cell lines, patient tumors and EWS cell
derived tumors in nude mouse xenografts. Down-regulation of FoxM1
expression in by shRNA-mediated gene knockdown caused morphological
alterations, slowed the growth of EWS cells, and increased their adhesion
to the substrate in culture-plates. Accordingly, FoxM1 down-regulation in
EWS cells diminished their migration and invasiveness as well as their
tumorigenicity in nude mice. Alterations in the pattern of integrin
expression observed in FoxM1 knocked-down EWS cells may likely contribute
to their altered morphology, increased adhesion and the overall
downgrading of their malignant phenotype. These data identify FoxM1 as a
direct EWS/FLI1 target and as an important regulator of the
proliferation, morphology and tumorigenicity of EWS cells, and imply that
targeting FoxM1 may allow the development of new molecular therapeutic
strategies for EWS patients.

