Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comorbidities are associated with breast cancer in
African-American and Hispanic women


Objectives and Background: The presence of comorbidities, such as
diabetes mellitus type II and hypertension may influence health outcomes
from breast cancer. Women from underserved populations, particularly
African-American and Hispanic women suffer from a disproportionate burden
of comorbidities which may contribute to the health disparities observed
in these women. The aims of the present study were to evaluate the
distribution and association of comorbidities, specifically diabetes and
hypertension, in African-American and Hispanic women and breast cancer.
Furthermore, the present study investigated the consequence of
comorbidity on survival in underserved women with breast cancer. Methods:
A cross-sectional cohort of 428 African-American and Hispanic women from
Los Angeles was assessed to determine the association between comorbidity
and breast cancer. Clinical data were obtained by medical record
abstraction. The results were assessed using logistic regression with
multivariate analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was used to
evaluate disease-free survival. Results: Our study identified a high
frequency of comorbidity, especially hypertension and hypertension with
diabetes in African-American women (38% and 14%, respectively) and
Hispanic women (12% and 9%, respectively). Multivariate logistic
regression analysis revealed a significant association between multiple
comorbidity and breast cancer (odds ratio [OR] = 2.3; P=0.032).
Furthermore, multiple comorbidity was significantly associated with
obesity, especially in breast cancer patients (P Objectives and
Background: The presence of comorbidities, such as diabetes mellitus type
II and hypertension may influence health outcomes from breast cancer.
Women from underserved populations, particularly African-American and
Hispanic women suffer from a disproportionate burden of comorbidities
which may contribute to the health disparities observed in these women.
The aims of the present study were to evaluate the distribution and
association of comorbidities, specifically diabetes and hypertension, in
African-American and Hispanic women and breast cancer. Furthermore, the
present study investigated the consequence of comorbidity on survival in
underserved women with breast cancer. Methods: A cross-sectional cohort
of 428 African-American and Hispanic women from Los Angeles was assessed
to determine the association between comorbidity and breast cancer.
Clinical data were obtained by medical record abstraction. The results
were assessed using logistic regression with multivariate analysis.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was used to evaluate disease-free
survival. Results: Our study identified a high frequency of comorbidity,
especially hypertension and hypertension with diabetes in
African-American women (38% and 14%, respectively) and Hispanic women
(12% and 9%, respectively). Multivariate logistic regression analysis
revealed a significant association between multiple comorbidity and
breast cancer (odds ratio [OR] = 2.3; P=0.032). Furthermore, multiple
comorbidity was significantly associated with obesity, especially in
breast cancer patients (P < 0.05). There was also a trend towards
significance for the association between multiple comorbidity and
decreased five-year disease-free survival. Notably, the presence of
comorbidity significantly modulated five-year disease-free survival based
on breast cancer tumor subtype (P Objectives and Background: The presence
of comorbidities, such as diabetes mellitus type II and hypertension may
influence health outcomes from breast cancer. Women from underserved
populations, particularly African-American and Hispanic women suffer from
a disproportionate burden of comorbidities which may contribute to the
health disparities observed in these women. The aims of the present study
were to evaluate the distribution and association of comorbidities,
specifically diabetes and hypertension, in African-American and Hispanic
women and breast cancer. Furthermore, the present study investigated the
consequence of comorbidity on survival in underserved women with breast
cancer. Methods: A cross-sectional cohort of 428 African-American and
Hispanic women from Los Angeles was assessed to determine the association
between comorbidity and breast cancer. Clinical data were obtained by
medical record abstraction. The results were assessed using logistic
regression with multivariate analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was
used to evaluate disease-free survival. Results: Our study identified a
high frequency of comorbidity, especially hypertension and hypertension
with diabetes in African-American women (38% and 14%, respectively) and
Hispanic women (12% and 9%, respectively). Multivariate logistic
regression analysis revealed a significant association between multiple
comorbidity and breast cancer (odds ratio [OR] = 2.3; P=0.032).
Furthermore, multiple comorbidity was significantly associated with
obesity, especially in breast cancer patients (P < 0.05). There was also
a trend towards significance for the association between multiple
comorbidity and decreased five-year disease-free survival. Notably, the
presence of comorbidity significantly modulated five-year disease-free
survival based on breast cancer tumor subtype (P < 0.05). Implications
and Next Steps: In sum, our study highlights a cohort of women who may be
at a high risk for health inequalities due to the presence of comorbidity
and should be considered for intervention.

