Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMS1 / ASC is critical for primary ciliogenesis and participates
in cell migration


TMS1/ ASC encodes a bipartite signaling protein that functions in
programmed cell death and proinflammatory response. Loss of function of
TMS1/ASC through epigenetic silencing has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of several malignancies, including breast and prostate
cancer, although the precise mechanism by which TMS1 loss promotes
tumorigenesis remains unclear. Recently, we showed that, in breast
epithelial cells, TMS1/ASC silencing promotes resistance to detachment
induced apoptosis or anoikis through a mechanism that involves the
inhibition of procaspase-8 cleavage and Bim upregulation. Here, we
further characterized the role of TMS1 in breast epithelial cell adhesion
and motility. We found that while TMS1 was dispensable for adhesion to
fibronectin, it was necessary for efficient migration across a transwell
chamber towards a chemoattractant and in wound-closure. siRNA mediated
silencing of TMS1 inhibited breast cell invasion through a Matrigel
matrix. Subcellular localization studies showed that adhesion of breast
epithelial cells to a fibronectin substratum induced the aggregation of
TMS1 into barrel-like structures that formed at the apical cell surface.
Primary cilia are solitary, sensory organelles that serve as platforms
for multiple signaling pathways. Signalling from these organelles plays
an important role in linking environmental cues to cell growth control.
Interestingly, primary cilia are observed at much lower frequencies on
cancer cells. Physical and temporal similarities between the observed
TMS1 barrel-like structures and the basal structures of primary cilia
suggest that TMS1 may be linked to adhesion and migration activities by
regulating the function and/or biogenesis of primary cilia. To test this
hypothesis, we used HEK293 kidney epithelial cells expressing an
inducible myc-tagged TMS1 and TMS1-/- MEFs to explore the role of TMS1 in
primary ciliogenesis. We found that in the absence of TMS1, HEK293 cells
were unable to produce primary cilia, but cilia formation could be
induced upon TMS1 induction. Taken together, our studies provide evidence
of a novel non-apoptotic, inflammasome-independent role for TMS1 in
epithelial cell biology. Furthermore, TMS1 silencing may contribute to
carcinogenesis by conferring a tumor suppression disadvantage resulting
from primary ciliogenesis deficiencies. Supported by Department of
Defense/CDMRP Breast cancer grant W81XWH-08-1-0390 and NIH Institutional
Research and Academic Career Development Award (IRACDA) K12GM000680.

