Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol induces apoptosis via Cannabinol
Receptor 1 and modulates methylation of oncogenes and tumorsuppressors in
blasts derived from patients with acute lympoblastic or myeloid leukemia


Some cannabinol derivatives are said to possess antitumor efficacy. We
have evidence that the CB1/2 cannabinoid receptor agonist
Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psychoactive component of
marijuana, may have contributed to disease control in a patient with
acute myeloid leukemia. We speculated that THC may induce apoptosis in
native leukemic blasts and thus treated various leukemia cell lines and
ex vivo blasts derived from patients with either acute lymphoblastic or
myeloid leukemia in dilution series with THC. The antiproliferative
effect was measured using an XTT-based assay. Induction of apoptosis was
assessed by annexinV-based immunofluorescence analysis. The CB1
antagonist LY320135 or JTE-907, a selective CB2 inverse ligand agonist,
were used to confirm involvement of CB1 (mainly expressed in brain
tissue) or CB2 (expression in hematologic/lymphoid cells). THC was
obtained with permission of the Bundesopiumstelle, Germany. Indeed, we
demonstrate potent antiproliferative and proapoptotic efficacy of
Delta9-THC in a dose dependent manner in leukemia cell lines of lymphoid
and myeloid origin. Pretreatment with LY320135, but not with JTE-907,
resulted in a dramatic abrogation of the antileukemic effect seen with
THC monotherapy, arguing that THC-induced apoptosis is mediated via the
cannabinoid receptor CB1. Besides a proapoptotic effect, THC was able to
abrogate cellular differentiation blockage as observed in a change of
morphology. Of note, THC was able to induce apoptosis in a subset of
leukemia samples derived from patients with acute myeloid (mainly
undifferentited AML) or lymphoblastic leukemia. Due to the patient cohort
responsive to THC therapy, we speculated that epigenetic modifications
might be associated with MLL (mixed lineage leukemia) methyltransferase
function. In a global DNA methylation gene array, we could demonstrate
that THC leads to modulation of methylation status of histone
deacetylases, oncogenes and tumorsuppressors, some reported to be
regulated by MLL. Ongoing work is focussing on validation whether THC
treatment can be linked to MLL activity using an siRNA approach. In
conclusion, while not being able to directly correlate the disease course
of the above described patient to marijuana abuse, our in vitro results
nevertheless demonstrate that THC mediates antileukemic activity in
blasts of some patients ex vivo including that of our patient. Clinical
evaluation of cannabinol receptor agonists as low-toxic agents could thus
be considered in selected cases of patients with acute leukemia and this
approach should further be followed.

