Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of differentially expressed proteins in breast
cancer stem cells using proteomic profiling


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are now recognized as pivotal entity in the
development and progression of breast cancer. The CSCs are believed to be
responsible for recurrence/relapse of cancer because of their ability to
resist chemotherapeutic drugs. The present drugs in the clinics
predominantly target the highly proliferating cells sparing the slow
dividing and resistant cells. If the drugs targeting the cancer stem
cells evolve, there is a possibility of eradication of cancer. In this
direction it is imperative to understand the fundamental difference
between the cancer stem cells and the non cancer stem cells. Hence, a
basic understanding of genes expressed in CSCs vs non-CSCs needs to be
explored. A large number of high throughput and extensive Micro array
studies have been carried out to understand the normal and various breast
cancer subtypes however, the RNA profiles does not necessarily match the
protein profile, Therefore determination of protein levels is the key to
identify the novel targets for cancer stem cells. To address this issue
and to identify meaningful targets for breast cancer we have
characterized breast cancer stem cells from primary cultures of Her2/Neu
transgenic mice. We identified the altered proteins through LC-MS/MS
using an LTQ-orbitrap mass spectrometer and confirmed those results using
quantitative RT-PCR. We further performed insilico analysis, using
microarray datasets, for identification of group of genes, which in
combination can provide prognostic importance. We identified PTMA,
S100A4, S100A6, TNXRD1, COX-1, COX-2 and FTH1 as a group of genes, which
in combination were significantly associated with poor clinical outcome
of breast cancer patients. Among these genes FTH1 was identified as a
novel protein associated with prognosis of breast cancer, which is
overexpressed in enriched breast CSCs.

