Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and transcriptomic data integration in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia reveals a novel fusion gene involving
onco-miR-125b-2


Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a rare malignancy characterized
by increased peripheral monocytosis and dysplasia in a single- or
multilineage fashion. Gene mutations so far reported in CMML include
TET2, CBL, NRAS, KRAS, RUNX1 and EZH2 but their pathogenic role and
driver status in the disease remains unclear. Altered expression of the
microRNA miR-125b has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many types
of cancers, including myeloid leukemias and Down syndrome-associated
acute myeloid leukemia (DS-AML). In addition, this miRNA has been shown
to play an important role in hematopoiesis and the regulation of immune
cell response. Here, integration of data from next-generation
transcriptome sequencing, exome sequencing and array-CGH in a CMML
patient (trisomy 21 by cytogenetics) led to the identification of a novel
gene fusion event involving the nuclear receptor interacting protein
NRIP1 gene and the open reading frame C21orf34 (both at 21q21
approximately 1 MB apart). The fusion was validated by capillary
sequencing and found to involve two copy number transition breaks,
inversion of the intervening region and the upregulation of the 3 end of
C21orf34. This intronic region harbors a cluster of three miRNAs:
miR-let7c, miR-99a, and miR-125b-2. Based on genomic breakpoint analysis,
the gene fusion took place just upstream of miR-125b-2. Consistent with
this, only miR-125b-2 was highly expressed in the sample, and was
processed to a mature miRNA. By RT-PCR, increased expression of
miR-125b-2 was also observed in four other CMML patients and five CML
patients when compared to healthy bone marrow controls. In contrast, five
AML cases studied showed expression levels similar to or lower than that
of controls. Interestingly, one AML patient with trisomy 21 had very high
levels of miR-125b-2. We found the NRIP1-C21orf34 fusion only in our
index patient and therefore other mechanisms of miRNA deregulation at
21q21 in CMML/CML and AML+21 will also exist. In conclusion, we describe
for the first time a fusion gene involving miR-125b-2 in CMML, a
previously recognized and well-studied onco-miR, which is known to impact
on self-renewal of hematopoietic cell precursors. We also detected
overexpression of miR-125b-2 in all CMML samples studied suggesting a key
pathogenetic driver gene role for this micro-RNA. The assessment of
miR-125b-2 levels could potentially be applied to the diagnosis and
follow-up of patients with CMML.

