Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol induces autophagy in prostate cancer cells and
intervention suppresses the progression of PIN in animals


Resveratrol (3,4-trihydroxystilbene), a natural product is present in
significant concentrations in red wine, peanuts, walnuts etc. Emerging
evidence indicates that resveratrol exerts antitumorigenic activity in
various tumor models including prostate. Although multiple biological
effects on proliferation, apoptosis and activation of SIRT1 have been
demonstrated to be associated with resveratrol-induced activities, the
precise mechanism associated with resveratrol-induced SIRT1 activation
and cancer cell growth inhibition remains unclear. In addition, whether
resveratrol intervention suppresses the development and progression of
PIN (Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia) is unknown. In this study, we
examined the role of SIRT1 and the underlying mechanism involved in
resveratrol-mediated biological effects. Our results show that although
resveratrol significantly inhibited proliferation of multiple prostate
cell lines including RWPE-1, C42B, PC3 and DU145 at higher concentrations
(> 50 M); however, at lower concentrations (Resveratrol
(3,4-trihydroxystilbene), a natural product is present in significant
concentrations in red wine, peanuts, walnuts etc. Emerging evidence
indicates that resveratrol exerts antitumorigenic activity in various
tumor models including prostate. Although multiple biological effects on
proliferation, apoptosis and activation of SIRT1 have been demonstrated
to be associated with resveratrol-induced activities, the precise
mechanism associated with resveratrol-induced SIRT1 activation and cancer
cell growth inhibition remains unclear. In addition, whether resveratrol
intervention suppresses the development and progression of PIN (Prostatic
Intraepithelial Neoplasia) is unknown. In this study, we examined the
role of SIRT1 and the underlying mechanism involved in
resveratrol-mediated biological effects. Our results show that although
resveratrol significantly inhibited proliferation of multiple prostate
cell lines including RWPE-1, C42B, PC3 and DU145 at higher concentrations
(> 50 M); however, at lower concentrations (< 25 M), resveratrol prompted
cell proliferation. Interestingly androgen responsive LNCaP cells
exhibited resistance to resveratrol-mediated inhibition of cell
proliferation. Under these experimental conditions, we also observed
significant increase in autophagy without remarkable increase in
apoptosis. Given the role of Akt/mTOR signaling pathway as a negative
regulator of autophagy, we investigated whether resveratrol induce
autophagy via modulation of Akt/mTOR signaling. Our data indicate that
resveratrol-induced autophagy was associated with decreased levels of
mTORC1 activity and increased SIRT1 expression. Knockdown of SIRT1
enhanced prostate cell proliferation and attenuated resveratrol-induced
autophagy. Using prostate specific PTEN/ mice, we found that dietary
administration of resveratrol reduced the incidence of high-grade PIN
lesions significantly. These findings implicated an important role for
mTORC1/SIRT1 signaling axis in mediating resveratrol-induced upregulation
of autophagy and inhibition of apoptosis. [Supported by NIH CA137578
(APK)]

