Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient antigen presentation and induction of anti-tumor
immunity by dendritic cells loaded with antigens by electroporation


For successful dendritic cell (DC) therapy of cancer, it is important to
choose the optimal method to load DCs with antigens to induce higher
anti-tumor immunity, particularly tumor-specific CTL responses. The
co-incubation (Co) method is conventionally used to load DCs with tumor
antigens in DC therapy. Although DCs could uptake tumor antigens by
endocytosis in this method, they are thought to be processed in lysosome
and presented mainly on MHC class II, but not efficiently on MHC class I.
Electroporation (Ep) is one of the promising antigen-loading method
because it is reported that DCs could uptake much larger amount of
FITC-dextran by Ep in comparison with Co method. In this study, we
performed side-by-side comparisons of these two antigen loading methods
using murine bone marrow derived DCs. First, we compared antigen
presentation using purified ovalbumin (OVA) and OVA-specific OT-I CD8 and
OT-II CD4 T cells. To this end, DCs were loaded with OVA by either Co or
Ep, and subsequently cultured with T cells. Two or three days later, T
cell expansion and cytokine production were evaluated. As expected,
OVA-Co-DCs induced moderate expansion and cytokine production of OT-II T
cells, but had little effect on OT-I T cells. In contrast, OVA-Ep-DCs
potently stimulated both OT-I and OT-II T cells to expand and produce
cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-. Using monoclonal antibody specific for
MHC class I/OVA peptide complex, we confirmed efficient presentation of
the OVA peptide on MHC class I by OVA-Ep-DCs. Furthermore, when we used
the lysate of EG7 tumor cell line (OVA gene-transfected) as antigen
instead of purified OVA, Ep-DCs induced expansion of both OT-I and OT-II
T cells efficiently compared with Co-DCs. In the case of Alexa488-OVA,
unexpectedly, similar amounts of uptake were seen in Ep-DCs and Co-DCs by
FCM analysis. By using confocal microscopy, however, there was a critical
difference of intracellular localization of Alexa488-OVA. Although
Alexa488-OVA was localized in intracellular vesicles of both DCs, the
cytosolic localization was observed only in Ep-DCs, suggesting that
antigen loaded by Ep entered cytosol of DCs and would be processed by
proteasome and presented on MHC class I efficiently. Finally, to
determine the ability of these DCs to induce anti-tumor immunity in vivo,
mice were subcutaneously immunized twice at 7 days intervals with 3-5 x
105 cells of either OVA-Ep-DCs or OVA-Co-DCs and then challenged with 3 x
106 of EG7 cells at 7 days after the 2nd immunization. When OVA-Co-DCs
were used for immunization, tumor formations were partially prevented. On
the contrary, mice immunized with OVA-Ep-DCs were almost completely
protected from tumor formations. These results demonstrate that DCs
loaded with tumor antigens by Ep have greater antigen presentation
capacity, especially through MHC class I pathway, and could induce
stronger anti-tumor immunity in vivo than those loaded by Co.

