Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergent gene expression profiles in HPV-positive and
HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinomas


Up to 60% of oropharyngeal cancers and 25% of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) are due to high-risk Human Papillomavirus (HPV),
primarily HPV16. Differences in risk factors, age of presentation and
clinical behavior of these tumors indicate that HPV+ and HPV- tumors
develop with different molecular mechanisms and are biologically
distinct. To further investigate the molecular characteristics of these
tumors, we compared the gene expression profiles of three HPV- and four
HPV+ HNSCC specimens, obtained from the Medical University of South
Carolina ENT/Head and Neck Surgery clinic. All HPV+ tumors were positive
for HPV16 and expressed E7, as documented by real-time RT/PCR using
tumor-derived RNA. Gene expression profiles were determined on Agilent
4x44K human oligonucleotide microarrays. Identification of differentially
expressed genes (>2-fold change, pUp to 60% of oropharyngeal cancers and
25% of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are due to
high-risk Human Papillomavirus (HPV), primarily HPV16. Differences in
risk factors, age of presentation and clinical behavior of these tumors
indicate that HPV+ and HPV- tumors develop with different molecular
mechanisms and are biologically distinct. To further investigate the
molecular characteristics of these tumors, we compared the gene
expression profiles of three HPV- and four HPV+ HNSCC specimens, obtained
from the Medical University of South Carolina ENT/Head and Neck Surgery
clinic. All HPV+ tumors were positive for HPV16 and expressed E7, as
documented by real-time RT/PCR using tumor-derived RNA. Gene expression
profiles were determined on Agilent 4x44K human oligonucleotide
microarrays. Identification of differentially expressed genes (>2-fold
change, p<0.05) and pathway analysis were performed using GeneSifter
Software (Geospiza). Overall, 125 genes were up-regulated and 223 were
down-regulated in HPV+ in comparison with HPV- tumors. Gene Ontology
analysis of the dataset revealed that pathways related to cell cycle
control, mitotic checkpoint, regulation of cell proliferation, programmed
cell death and DNA metabolism were heavily affected in HPV+ tumors, while
pathways affected in HPV- tumors included regulation of cell motility and
migration, angiogenesis and integrin-mediated signaling. We confirmed by
Real-Time RT/PCR the differential expression of a panel of genes of
interest on these samples and several additional HNSCC specimens, and
then we extended our follow-up analysis to specimens from over 30 new
cases of HNSCC. Among the genes we targeted for follow-up is the MET
oncogene, which encodes the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor
receptor. MET is overexpressed about 5-fold in HPV- tumors, in comparison
with HPV+ tumors actively expressing E7. The MET product, which controls
growth, invasion and metastasis in cancer cells, has been recently
proposed as a new therapeutic target for HNSCC. Supported by grant
#P20MD001770 from the NIH/NIMHD.

