Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro modeling of tumor-derived endothelial cell derivation


Background: Tumor growth beyond a few millimeters in size requires the
development of a neovasculature. In addition to providing a portal for
the systemic dissemination of metastatic cells, this allows the tumor bed
to overcome the severe hypoxia, acidosis, and nutrient deprivation that
otherwise limits tumor growth. Early research presumed the development of
genetically and functionally normal tumor vasculature from normal host
tissue. Anti-angiogenic agents were thus developed to inhibit tumor blood
supply with the hope that the presumed normal tumor vascular endothelial
cells (EC's), would be less inclined to develop drug resistance. Thus
far, however, the experience with these agents has been one of only
incremental improvement in patient survival. We have previously
demonstrated that tumor cells can differentiate, in vivo, into an EC
phenotype and form functional tumor vasculature. Formation of these tumor
derived endothelial cells (TDEC's) offers a partial explanation for the
disappointing clinical results of the angiogenesis inhibitors and
suggests a new, complementary, therapeutic target. Objectives: To develop
an in vitro system that would recapitulate the tumor cell to EC
transition seen in vivo. We hypothesize that manipulation of culture
conditions to mimic the tumor microenvironment would result in a switch
to an EC phenotype. Design/Methods: A variety of human cancer cell lines
(H460 lung cancer, PC3 prostate cancer, OVCAR-8 ovarian cancer) were
cultured in 1% O2 in low glucose DMEM supplemented with EC-specific
growth factors. The cells were assayed for EC-specific proteins and
transcripts with western blotting, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry,
and rtPCR. Functionality was quantified by the uptake of acetylated-LDL
and the ability to vascularize tumor xenografts. Results: Human cancer
cell lines exposed to hypoxia and EC-specific growth factors increase
expression of a variety of EC-specific proteins including von
Willebrand's factor, ESAM, and VE-Cadherin, while down regulating the
epithelial specific cytokeratins. Inclusion of a twenty percent minority
of these in vitro-derived TDEC's in a tumor inoculum results in an
increase in both tumor growth rate and vascular density. These in
vitro-derived TDEC's are also found within the tumor neo-vasculature.
Conclusions: We have developed culture conditions that can, within a span
of only five days, induce many of the same phenotypic and functional
characteristics of the TDEC's isolated from tumor xenografts grown for
nearly two months. Furthermore, these cells are able to act as functional
endothelial cells in vivo. Potential uses for this system include the
ability to study the mechanistic underpinnings of the tumor cell to TDEC
transition and to identify pharmacologic inhibitors of this transition.

