Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure and inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase 4 (MEK4): A prostate cancer pro-invasion protein


Introduction: Metastasis of Prostate Cancer (PCa) represents the second
highest cause of death due to cancer among men in the United States. If
this unregulated movement of cells can be inhibited, mortality arising
from PCa will be greatly reduced. Our group has shown that
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 (MAP2K4/MEK4), a 399 amino acid
protein, activates pro-invasion signaling pathways in human PCa. Further,
we have shown that 4,5,7-trihydroxyisoavone (genistein) inhibits MEK4
kinase activity, cell invasion and metastasis of human PCa cells in a
murine model. While therapeutically effective, genistein represents a
non-chemically optimized natural product with additional undesired
effects such as estrogenic receptor stimulation. Recognizing that MEK4
represents a novel and important therapeutic target, we have sought to
characterize its structure, biochemical function and have synthesized
genistein analogs designed to target it. Summary of Results: Using X-ray
crystallography we have obtained a 3.38 resolution structure of the MEK4
catalytic domain. We are in the process of improving our resolution, and
of deriving 3D structures with inhibitors bound to MEK4. We have
evaluated biophysical interactions between MEK4 and ligands (i.e.,
genistein and its analogs). Ligand binding to a protein tends to increase
its stability, thereby increasing the temperature of denaturation, or
melting. Using a fluorescence thermal shift (FTS) assay, we demonstrated
that genistein and 6 of 39 novel analogs thermally stabilized MEK4 in a
concentration dependent manner, consistent with MEK4 binding. We
identified a similar pattern in 5 compounds from a commercial library,
one of which was staurosporine - a broad spectrum protein kinase
inhibitor. We developed and characterized a novel in vitro MEK4 kinase
assay, using kinase dead p38MAPK (K53A) as substrate. In human PCa cells,
MEK4 activates the p38 MAPK pro-invasion pathway. To date, we have used
this assay system to demonstrate that staurosporine inhibits MEK4 with
nanomolar IC50 values. Conclusions and Future Directions: MEK4 is a novel
target for therapeutic intervention in PCa. Our ultimate goal is to
synergistically utilize structural and biochemical information to inform
the synthesis of inhibitors that specifically and selectively act upon
MEK4 to inhibit human PCa metastasis in man.

