Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactivation of EWS-FLI1 suppressed FOXO1 expression as a novel
therapeutic strategy for Ewing's sarcoma


The EWS-FLI1 chimeric protein, characterizing Ewing's sarcoma (ESFT), is
prototypic for an aberrant oncogenic ETS transcription factor. The
mechanisms of transcriptional regulation leading to ETS-driven
tumorigenesis are poorly understood. In-silico analysis of time-resolved
expression data revealed enrichment of recognition motifs for forkhead
box (FOX) proteins in EWS-FLI1 repressed promoters. Several FOX genes
were found to be bound by EWS-FLI1 in ChIP-seq and transcriptionally
affected by EWS-FLI1 knockdown. We therefore hypothesized that EWS-FLI1
exerts an important part of its repressive activity via inhibiting FOX
proteins. Upon silencing of EWS-FLI1, both FOXO1 and FOXO3 proteins were
strongly induced in ESFT cells consistent with this hypothesis, but only
FOXO1 translocated to the nucleus. However, in the presence of EWS-FLI1,
FOXO1 is excluded from the nucleus as a consequence of phosphorylation.
Nuclear translocation was restored by either inhibition of CDK2,
augmented by chemical inhibition of PI3K, or by mutation of CDK2 or AKT
phosphorylation sites. Furthermore, ChIP experiments revealed that
EWS-FLI1 directly binds the promoter of FOXO1 in vitro suggesting a
multi-layered regulation of FOXO1 expression by transcriptional
repression and post-translational modification. Functional restoration of
nuclear FOXO1 expression in ESFT cells resulted in impaired proliferation
and significantly reduced soft agar colony formation ability. A
significant overlap between EWS-FLI1 repressed and FOXO1 activated genes
was observed. Treatment of ESFT cell lines with Methyl-Seleninic-Acid
(MSA) led to re-activation of endogenous FOXO1 in the presence of
EWS-FLI1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner, and induced massive cell
death, which we found to be at least partially FOXO1-dependent. Taken
together, these data confirm our hypothesis that a repressive
sub-signature of EWS-FLI1 regulated genes is due to suppression of FOXO1.
FOXO1 re-activation by small molecules may constitute a novel therapeutic
strategy in the treatment of ESFT. This study was supported by grant
22328-B09 from the Austrian Science Fund FWF.

