Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel genes critical to survival of MPNST cells
via medium throughput screening using lentiviral shRNA


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) is a soft tissue sarcoma
that is highly invasive and eventually lethal. About 50% of MPNSTs have
mutation and/or loss of the NF1 gene, while the rest are spontaneous.
Many MPNST also show mutations in p53 and/or homozygous deletion of
CDKN2. In an effort to identify novel genes that play key roles n MPNST
tumorigenesis, we performed a genome wide micro-array analysis using
human neurofibroma and MPNST (Miller et al., 2009). This analysis
identified 130 genes that are up-regulated >3 fold in MPNSTs as compared
to normal human Schwann cells. Over expression of these genes in tumors
as compared to normal cells suggested that some might be critical for
survival of MPNST cells. This hypothesis was directly tested by studying
effects on survival of MPNST cells in vitro post down regulation of the
130 genes using lentiviral short hairpin (sh) RNA. For each shRNA
experiment a sh non-targeting lentivirus was used as a negative control
and shSOX9, a construct previously shown to kill MPNST cells in vitro,
was used as a positive control for an effect on cell survival. Screening
was performed sequentially allowing for selection of genes with
significant effects on survival. In screen I, T265 MPNST cells were
exposed to each shRNA virus. In screen II, shRNAs were tested for effects
on adenocarcinoma cells (A549) vs T265 cells. These two round of screens
identified 10/130 genes specific for survival of T265 cells. Screen III
was performed on four different MPNST cell lines, including T265
(NF1-/-), 8814 (NF1-/-), S462TY (NF1-/-) and SSTS26T (sporadic MPNST
wild-type for NF1), to identify shRNA's with similar or different effects
on cell survival in the presence or absence of wild-type NF1 gene. No
significant difference in survival was observed for NF null MPNST cells
vs sporadic MPNST cell line for any gene. This approach facilitates a
streamlined pathway from genome wide gene expression analysis to
identification of novel genes critical to survival of cancer cells in
vitro. Future studies will be directed toward testing the identified
genes for roles in tumor formation and growth, and as potential MPNST
therapeutic targets.

