Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF as a potential survival factor for keratinocytes following UV
exposure in vivo


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most prevalent type of cancer.
These cancers, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), are primarily caused by chronic exposure to ultraviolet
light (UV) from the sun. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
produced by the skin in response to UV and is known to promote NMSC
indirectly through the induction of angiogenesis. Evidence is emerging
that VEGF can also promote skin carcinogenesis by directly affecting
epidermal keratinocytes and tumor cells. In addition, epidermal
keratinocytes express VEGFR-1 and proliferate and migrate directly in
response to VEGF. In endothelial cells, VEGF functions as a potent
survival factor by inhibiting apoptosis; however, it is not known if VEGF
promotes survival in keratinocytes. Keratinocytes undergo apoptosis in
response to UV exposure, a process that can be disrupted during
carcinogenesis. Here, the role of VEGF and VEGFR-1 in keratinocyte and
SCC-13 tumor cell survival after UV exposure was explored. Neutralizing
VEGF or VEGFR-1 activity or adding VEGF did not affect UV-induced
apoptosis, suggesting that VEGF-VEGFR-1 signaling is not important for
keratinocyte or SCC-13 survival in vitro. The role of VEGFR-1 in
keratinocyte survival was also examined in vivo. Mice with
VEGFR-1-deficient keratinocytes (K14-Cre/VEGFR-1fl/fl) were generated and
exposed to a single acute dose of UV light. Keratinocytes in the
epidermis of K14-Cre/VEGFR-1fl/fl mice showed a significant increase in
apoptosis 24 hours following UV exposure compared to K14-Cre/VEGFR-1+/+
controls. Future studies will investigate skin carcinogenesis in
K14-Cre/VEGFR-1fl/fl mice chronically exposed to UV light. Overall, these
results suggest that VEGFR-1 mediates the survival of keratinocytes
exposed to acute UV in vivo and points to a mechanism by which VEGF could
directly promote skin carcinogenesis.

