Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variability analysis of dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


INTRODUCTION: HCC is a highly vascular, rapidly fatal cancer and
antiangiogenic drugs have shown clinical benefit despite lack of
radiographic tumor shrinkage. We standardized imaging methods to assess
HCC in the woodchuck animal model (Marmota monax). This is a large unique
animal model of spontaneous HCC with several similarities to human
Hepatitis b(HBV) related HCC and such studies would allow utilization of
this model to assess the functional changes with currently used targeted
therapies. METHODS: Fourteen woodchucks infected at birth with known
titers of sera from a chronic infectious pool of chronic woodchuck
hepatitis virus (WHV), which is similar in structure and replicative
function to HBV. Serial measurement of WHV antigen titers was conducted.
Chronic WHV infection occurred in greater than 60% of woodchucks by 12
months. The WHV carrier woodchucks were screened with serial ultrasound
and ten animals which developed HCC at a median age of 24- 36 months were
included. Mediports were placed in the femoral vein under aseptic
precautions for intravenous (IV) contrast administration. DCE-MRI methods
for assessment of woodchuck HCC blood flow and size were optimized in a
1.5T magnet human head coil and IV gadolinium injected at 5cc per second
using a rapid injector. Four variables - the median Ktrans, median
AUCBN90, necrotic volume (NV) and total volume (TV) were analyzed by
Virtualscopics using published methods. A total of 44 images were
obtained, 32 were included in the study. Death due to disease progression
or missing paired data resulted in exclusion of 12 images. Statistical
analysis: We performed a variability analysis by calculating the
concordance correlation coefficient (CCC). This coefficient was
calculated for all four variables and compared at different time points.
RESULTS: The CCC calculated for images obtained on day 1 and day 8 images
was 0.85 for Ktrans, 0.59 for AUCBN90, 0.93 for NV and 0.99 for TV.
Strong concordance was seen in 3 of the 4 DCE-MRI variables recorded a
week apart. This lack of change over an 8-day period is expected with
this cancer. We also compared CCC for day 8 and day 14 with Ktrans 0.76,
AUCBN 0.6, NV 0.76, TV 0.89 showing less agreement than day 1 and 8. When
compared to day 14 and day 30 CCC for different variables were Ktrans
0.59, AUCBN90 0.38, NV 0.82, TV 0.85, suggesting a downward trend with
increasing time. Our data using this technique is able to identify
clinically relevant changes in tumor size with little variability in
short interval scanning. CONCLUSION: This is the first study validating
the accuracy of DCE-MRI in a translational animal model for HCC and has
potential to aid development of newer antiangiogenic therapies.

