Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The IGF1 inhibitor BMS-754807 synergizes with Lapatinib in
colorectal cancer cell lines


Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide.
Early screening has improved survival rates, but at the time of
diagnosis, a significant percentage of patients have advanced disease.
Despite improved chemotherapy regimens, the average rate of survival
remains less than two years. Drugs that target the epidermal growth
factor (EGF) pathway have proven to be beneficial in patients who retain
a wild-type KRAS. However 40% of colorectal tumors have a mutated KRAS,
and are resistant to EGF-based therapies. One new approach is to target
pathways that regulate cancer cell metabolism. The insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF1) pathway regulates cell growth and motility, activates
anti-apoptotic pathways and increases the frequency of cancer stem cells
(CSCs). We have previously shown that inhibition of IGF1 signaling with a
monoclonal antibody that blocks the IGF1R receptor, inhibited metastasis.
In the current study, we examined whether simultaneous inhibition of the
IGF1 and EGF pathways would be sufficient to block AKT activation and
induce cell death, and also whether the dual targeting of these pathways
would increase the cytotoxicity of other anticancer therapies. We report
here that the small molecule inhibitor BMS-754807, which blocks the IGF1
and insulin receptors with equal potency, effectively kills a panel of 8
human colorectal cancer cell lines as determined using cell viability
assays. The IGF-1R/IR dual inhibitor was found to reduce the size of the
cancer stem cell population in several cell lines when measured by
side-population analysis. No additional cell death was observed when the
IGF1 inhibitor was used in combination with 5-FU and Irinotecan, however,
when BMS-754807 was combined with an EGF pathway inhibitor synergy in the
induction of cell death was observed in a subset of colorectal cancer
cell lines. This effect was seen with the EGFR small molecule inhibitor
Lapatinib, but not with the monoclonal antibody Cetuximab. While both
Lapatinib and Cetuximab inhibited ERK activation, AKT activation was only
inhibited by combination therapy with BMS-754807 and Lapatinib. EGFR
activation was, furthermore, inhibited by BMS-754807 alone indicating
that there may be cross-talk between the two pathways. We have previously
reported that Lapatinib has off target effects in colorectal cancer cell
lines, which require higher doses of Lapatinib and induction of DR5 via
the JNK pathway. We are currently investigating whether the observed
synergy between Lapatinib and BMS-754807 involves off target effects of
Lapatinib, although the synergy observed is at doses thought to
specifically target the EGFR family. The synergy between BMS-754807 and
Lapatinib was observed in cell lines that have mutant BRAF as well as in
those with mutant KRAS. This drug combination may consequently provide a
new potential treatment strategy for patients who do not derive benefit
from current EGFR-based therapies.

