Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BH3-only protein, Noxa, is upregulated by estrogen and
promotes cell cycle progression in estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer cells


According to the American Cancer Society, breast cancer is the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in American women, with more than
200,000 new cases diagnosed annually. In addition, the vast majority of
breast cancers are initially hormone-dependent and 70% are estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive (Colditz, J. Natl. Cancer Inst., 1998; Hankinson
et al., Breast Cancer Res., 2004; and Harvey et al., J. Clin. Oncol.,
1999), highlighting the importance of estrogen signaling pathways in
breast oncogenesis. It has been well-established that
estrogen/17-estradiol/E2 stimulates cell growth and inhibits apoptosis in
ER-positive breast cancer cells; however, recent reports have
demonstrated that E2 paradoxically induces the expression of Noxa/PMAIP1,
a BH3-only pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family. In the present
study, we report on the mechanisms by which E2 upregulates Noxa
expression and the associated cellular effects on apoptosis and cell
cycle progression in ER-positive MCF7 human breast cancer cells. We
demonstrate that c-Myc, ER, and E2F1 are involved in the transcriptional
upregulation of Noxa following E2 treatment. Specific knockdown of c-Myc
and ER protein expression using siRNA technology inhibited E2-mediated
induction of Noxa expression. Furthermore, E2 also promoted the
recruitment of c-Myc and ER to the NOXA promoter in chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, suggesting that these two proteins are
indeed mediators of Noxa upregulation following E2 treatment. Although
p53 is an important regulator of Noxa transcription under conditions of
cellular stress, our data demonstrate that E2-mediated upregulation of
Noxa is a p53-independent process, as knocking down p53 with specific
siRNA did not block E2-mediated induction of Noxa. Consistent with this
result, E2 treatment failed to induce the recruitment of p53 to the NOXA
promoter in ChIP assays. Interestingly, E2-mediated upregulation of Noxa
was associated with cell cycle progression but not with apoptosis under
normal, unstressed cellular conditions. Cell cycle analysis by flow
cytometry showed that siRNA-mediated knockdown of Noxa caused cell cycle
arrest in G0/G1-phase and significantly delayed the G1-to-S-phase
transition following E2 treatment. Collectively, these data indicate that
Noxa expression is required for cell cycle progression in ER-positive
breast cancer cells, suggesting a novel role for the BH3-only protein
Noxa, outside of its traditional role as an apoptosis sensitizer.

