Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix metalloprotease inducer (EMMPRIN) and CD44
protein complexes are exclusively formed in basal- and normal-like breast
cancer cell lines


Extracellular Matrix Metalloprotease Inducer (EMMPRIN) is a
multifunctional glycoprotein that is involved in tumor cell invasion and
metastasis, and is a predictor for tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer.
EMMPRIN is implicated in development of therapy resistance by forming a
functional transporter complex through interaction with CD44 and
monocarboxylate transporter 4. Presence of EMMPRIN transporter protein
complexes may therefore be a better predictor for therapy resistance and
a direct target for drugs. In this study, we aimed to identify
EMMPRIN-CD44 protein interactions in a large panel of breast cancer cell
lines. EMMPRIN-CD44 protein interaction was investigated in a panel of 41
breast cancer cell lines, which represent the luminal (n=12), ErbB2
(n=13), basal (n=7), and normal-like (n=9) intrinsic subtypes, using in
situ Proximity Ligation Assay (isPLA). In addition, protein expression of
both EMMPRIN and CD44 in the cell lines was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). IHC and isPLA read-out was performed by
bright field microscopy and 0-1-2-3 scoring was applied to
none-weak-moderate-strong staining (IHC) or interaction (isPLA),
respectively. Moderate and strong EMMPRIN expression was observed in 50%
of luminal, 36% of ErbB2, 86% of basal, and 100% of normal-like cell
lines, and moderate to high CD44 expression was detected in 64%, 83%,
86%, and 100% in luminal, ErbB2, basal, and normal-like cell lines,
respectively. Interestingly, moderate to strong EMMPRIN-CD44 interaction
was exclusively detected in basal (64%) and normal-like (67%) cell lines,
whereas luminal and ErbB2 cells lines had no detectible, or only very
weak, EMMPRIN-CD44 interaction (square = 23.5, PExtracellular Matrix
Metalloprotease Inducer (EMMPRIN) is a multifunctional glycoprotein that
is involved in tumor cell invasion and metastasis, and is a predictor for
tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. EMMPRIN is implicated in
development of therapy resistance by forming a functional transporter
complex through interaction with CD44 and monocarboxylate transporter 4.
Presence of EMMPRIN transporter protein complexes may therefore be a
better predictor for therapy resistance and a direct target for drugs. In
this study, we aimed to identify EMMPRIN-CD44 protein interactions in a
large panel of breast cancer cell lines. EMMPRIN-CD44 protein interaction
was investigated in a panel of 41 breast cancer cell lines, which
represent the luminal (n=12), ErbB2 (n=13), basal (n=7), and normal-like
(n=9) intrinsic subtypes, using in situ Proximity Ligation Assay (isPLA).
In addition, protein expression of both EMMPRIN and CD44 in the cell
lines was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). IHC and isPLA read-out
was performed by bright field microscopy and 0-1-2-3 scoring was applied
to none-weak-moderate-strong staining (IHC) or interaction (isPLA),
respectively. Moderate and strong EMMPRIN expression was observed in 50%
of luminal, 36% of ErbB2, 86% of basal, and 100% of normal-like cell
lines, and moderate to high CD44 expression was detected in 64%, 83%,
86%, and 100% in luminal, ErbB2, basal, and normal-like cell lines,
respectively. Interestingly, moderate to strong EMMPRIN-CD44 interaction
was exclusively detected in basal (64%) and normal-like (67%) cell lines,
whereas luminal and ErbB2 cells lines had no detectible, or only very
weak, EMMPRIN-CD44 interaction (square = 23.5, P<0.0001). Our results
indicate that EMMPRIN-CD44 protein complexes are formed exclusively in
basal and normal-like breast cancer cell lines. These breast cancer
subtypes are associated with an aggressive phenotype and poor patient
survival. We speculate that active EMMPRIN-CD44 transporters are involved
in drug resistance, resulting in poor clinical outcome, and will
investigate this in more detail in clinical breast cancer specimens.

