Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD4+ T cells infiltrating human breast cancer are critical for an
effective anti-tumor immune response


CD4+ helper T (Th) cells are critical regulators of immune responses but
their role in breast cancer is currently unknown. The goal of this
project was to characterize CD4+ T lymphocytes infiltrating primary human
breast tumors (TIL), analyze T cell signaling pathways influenced by the
tumor microenvironment, correlate differential gene expression with the
presence of a specific CD4+ T cell subset(s) and identify a profile
predictive of positive patient outcome. Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 arrays
were used to analyze CD4+ T cells freshly isolated from the primary
tumor, axillary lymph node (LN) and blood (PB) of patients with ER+ and
ER- invasive breast carcinoma in the discovery set (10 patients).
Microarrays, flow cytometry and/or qRT-PCR were used to extend and
confirm the data in CD4+ TIL isolated from >60 primary breast tumors as
well as purified CD4+ T cells from healthy donors PB treated with
supernatant (SN) derived from fresh breast tumor tissue. Assessment of
the relative distribution of infiltrating mononuclear cells revealed that
the CD4+ T cell subset was consistently the principal component. We
detected gene expression changes in the CD4+ TIL compared to patient's LN
and PB counterparts that reflected altered cellular signaling pathways,
including significant suppression of the TCR/CD3 complex and downstream
signaling molecules along with a highly restricted pattern of Th cytokine
and chemokine expression. A comparison with publically available Th
profiling microarray data revealed that the TIL have characteristics of
an activated memory effector CD4+ T cell phenotype, with all the major
subsets (Th1, Th2, Th17, Treg, Tfh) represented. Although very few
differences were detected in a direct comparison between CD4+ TIL from
ER+ and ER- tumors, important changes in TIL (including a Th subset skew
and differential cytokine expression) from extensive versus minimally
infiltrated tumors were observed, with those containing an extensive CD4+
T cell infiltrate associated with a better clinical outcome. Gene
expression profiles of freshly isolated TIL were also compared with TIL
that had been rested overnight. These experiments revealed that the
rested TIL reverse expression in a number of critical cytokine and
signaling genes. PB CD4+ T cells from healthy donors treated with primary
tumor SN also displayed significant changes in gene expression, gaining
>75% similarity to freshly isolated CD4+ TIL. These experiments further
found that activation of CD4+ T cells in conjunction with tumor SN
treatment rapidly suppressed stimulation-induced changes in gene
expression. Together our data suggest that although activated CD4+ T
cells infiltrating breast tumors are quickly suppressed, tumors that
recruit higher levels of CD4+ T cells, even in the face of rapid
immunosuppression, produce a better memory T cell pool that is ultimately
capable of maintaining effective anti-tumor immunity in patients.

