Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and antitumor activity of proximicins A, B and C


Proximicins A, B and C are a family of three novel aminofuran antibiotics
isolated from marine actinomycetes of the genus Verrucosispora. The
distinctive features of these compounds are (a) the structural similarity
to the DNA-binding agents distamycin (4) and netropsin (5), and (b) the
presence in their molecular framework of an unusual -aminoacid,
4-aminofuran-2-carboxylic acid. Preliminary in vitro biological
evaluation of proximicins A - C against selected carcinoma cell lines has
shown that all compounds have a significantly higher cytotoxicity than
netropsin and distamycin. In addition, proximicins can activate
cell-cycle regulatory proteins involved in the transition of cells from
G1 to S phase, and proximicin C, in contrast to distamycin, can induce
up-regulation of p53 and p21 in gastric adenocarcinoma cells. The total
synthesis of the proximicins A, B and C was successfully carried out
starting from methyl 4-Boc-aminofuran-2-carboxylate and sufficient
quantities of each compound were prepared for extensive in vitro
evaluation. The anticancer activity of proximicins was investigated using
cellular methods. The compounds induced apoptotic cell death in L1236
(Hodgkin's Lymphoma) and Jurkat 16 (T-cell leukemia) cells as confirmed
by flow cytometric DNA fragmentation analysis. Proximicin B exhibited a
strong lethal effect in both L1236 and Jurkat 16 cell lines and apoptosis
induction was shown to be dose-dependent after 48 h treatment. Proximicin
C induced apoptosis only in Jurkat 16 cells, with L1236 showing higher
resistance to the drug. In addition, the proximicins cytotoxicity was
determined against selected cancer cell lines different from those
previously reported. Proximicin C exhibited significantly higher
cytotoxicity against U-87 MG (glioblastoma) and MDA-MD-231 (breast
carcinoma) cells compared to proximicin B. Further biological experiments
are currently underway to elucidate the mechanism of action of these
furan-based oligopeptides. In conclusion, given their interesting
molecular framework and their significant anticancer activity,
proximicins represent an attractive synthetic target and could be
potentially developed into anticancer drugs of broad utility.

