Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 assessment to define outcomes for breast cancer patients
treated with neoadjuvant therapy


Background: HER2 expression or amplification is now an established
companion diagnostic test. Now, as HER2-targeting neoadjuvant therapy for
breast cancer increases, the accuracy of the companion diagnostic tests
are revisited. Specifically, we seek to determine with the level of
expression of the target (HER2 protein) is associated with pathologic
response. In this study, we quantitatively assess HER2 expression both
before and after the neoadjuvant therapies to breast cancer in the BrUOG
BR-211B (NCT00617942) trial. Methods: We evaluated core biopsy samples
from breast cancer patients enrolled in a preoperative clinical trial
using trastuzumab, nab-paclitaxel and carboplatin combination therapy.
Tumor core biopsies were taken before and after 10 days of either
trastuzumab or nab-paclitaxel treatment. Combination chemotherapy was
given for 6 cycles. Automated quantitative analysis (AQUA), a
fluorescent-based method for analysis of in situ protein expression, was
used to assess HER2 and phospho-HER2 expression in the BruOG Cohort, a
study where patients who serially received Herceptin and Abraxane were
biopsied both before and after treatment. This study assesses the HER2
positive patient subset (n=27) Results: Of 18 evaluable patients, the 8
with a PathCR showed a mean HER2 levels of 10251 compared with 4766 in
the patients without PathCR (p=0.0047). This is notable in that a HER2
score of 2000 is equivalent to HER2 2+ in previous studies. Measurement
of Phospho-HER2 showed no difference in PathCR vs Non-PathCR groups. A
small subset (9) cases were measured for HER2 immediately after
treatment, but the study has accrued an insufficient number of cases to
statistically determine if there is a reduction in HER2 immediately
following treatment. Conclusions: High levels of HER2 are associated with
PathCR in the neoadjuvant setting. Levels of Phospho-HER2 are not
associated with response. Further studies are underway to determine
changes in levels of HER2 immediately after treatment.

