Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib induction of the unfolded protein response mediates
Epstein-Barr virus lytic activation but is separable from
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with many human cancers. Several
therapeutic strategies involving the pharmacologic activation of the EBV
lytic cycle for tumor killing have been described (1-2). We previously
identified bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor approved for the treatment
of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma, as a potent activator of
EBV lytic gene expression. The mechanism of action of bortezomib as
either a viral lytic activator or an anticancer drug remains poorly
understood. However, induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR) has
emerged as a central theme in both areas of investigation (3). In order
to further evaluate the role of the UPR in lytic activation, we treated
lymphoid and epithelial tumor cell lines with bortezomib and assessed
induction of the UPR and EBV lytic gene expression. We found
dose-dependent parallel induction of UPR and EBV lytic infection across
cell lines. However, an EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell line was
relatively resistant to both bortezomib-induced UPR and induction of EBV
lytic gene expression, but not resistant to bortezomib-induced cell
killing. To further investigate, we assessed induction of the UPR by
thapsigargin which leads to depletion of Ca2+ in the ER. Thapsigargin
induced the UPR and EBV lytic gene expression across all the cell lines
tested. Blocking ER stress and UPR activation, by cycloheximide treatment
or by BiP knockdown, diminished EBV lytic gene expression but had no
effect on cellular toxicity. Additionally, regulated knockdown of UPR
associated transcription factors (XBP1(s), c-Jun) blocked lytic
activation by both agents. Taken together, these results suggest that
induction of the UPR by bortezomib is tightly linked to EBV lytic
activation but may be separable from the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib.
References: 1. Fu DX, Tanhehco Y, Chen J, Foss CA, Fox JJ, Chong JM,
Hobbs RF, Fukayama M, Sgouros G, Kowalski J, Pomper MG, Ambinder RF.
Bortezomib-induced enzyme-targeted radiation therapy in
herpesvirus-associated tumors. Nat Med. 2008; 14(10):1118-22. 2. Feng WH,
Hong G, Delecluse HJ, Kenney SC. Lytic induction therapy for Epstein-Barr
virus-positive B-cell lymphomas. J Virol. 2004; 78(4):1893-902. 3.
Shirley CM, Chen J, Shamay M, Li H, Zahnow CA, Hayward SD, Ambinder RF.
Bortezomib induction of C/EBP mediates Epstein-Barr virus lytic
activation in Burkitt lymphoma. Blood. 2011; 117(23):6297-303.

