Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Putative role of Nrf2 as a tumor suppressor through inhibition of
angiogenesis


An increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a common biochemical
change in cancer cells. To investigate the mechanisms of ROS accumulation
during the process of tumorigenesis we employed a well-characterized
model of stepwise human mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) transformation.
Transformed MSC (tMSC) became dependent upon oxidative stress, as
treatment with antioxidants impaired their tumorigenic potential. The
increased ROS in tMSC was a consequence of a striking global
down-regulation of the cellular antioxidant machinery correlating with
reduced levels of the transcription factor Nrf2, a key regulator of the
cellular antioxidant response. Expression of constitutive active versions
of oncogenic H-Ras, Raf and PI3K/AKT led to decreased levels of Nrf2 in
non-transformed MSC. Down-regulation of Nrf2 plays a central role in the
defective ROS-scavenging capacity and oncogenic potential of tMSC, since
its over-expression induces antioxidants, reduces the levels of ROS and
impairs in vivo tumor growth. Mechanistically we show that restoration of
Nrf2 expression sensitizes transformed cells to apoptosis and reduces an
angiogenic response. Elevated Nrf2, in turn, led to destabilization of
HIF-1 and decreased expression of angiogenic factors such as
adrenomedullin and VEGF during hypoxic conditions. Moreover, we found a
significant reduction in both proliferation and sprouting of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells after being cultured in
hypoxic/conditioned media from tMSC over-expressing Nrf2 compared with
control. Down-regulation of Nrf2 during human cell transformation is not
restricted to MSC as Nrf2 expression was also down-regulated when human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) were genetically modified and transformed
with the same oncogenic elements used for MSC. We performed microarray
comparison studies and observed that expression of Nrf2 was
down-regulated in a panel of human tumors. Furthermore, expression of
Nrf2 and its downstream gene NQO1 was enhanced in breast cancer cell
lines such as MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 when the cells were treated with
U0126, an inhibitor of ERK1/2 pathway. These results suggest that
down-regulation of Nrf2 expression through activation of Ras/Raf/ERK
pathway is not unique to in vitro transformed MSC or HMEC, but also
occurs in established human breast cancer cell lines. Overall, our
results indicate that Nrf2 expression is reduced in certain human tumor
cells by mechanisms that involve activation of Ras signaling, and reveal
a new role for Nrf2 as a tumor suppressor through inhibition of
angiogenesis.

