Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcuminoid CLEFMA induces autophagy-associated apoptosis in lung
cancer


CLEFMA
(4-[3,5-bis(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid) is a novel curcuminoid discovered in our laboratory. Earlier we
showed that CLEFMA induces oxidative stress-dependent cell death in lung
adenocarcinoma H441 cells. Although apoptosis is the desired mechanism
for chemotherapy-induced cell death, the associated pathways are often
defective in lung cancers resulting in high levels of chemoresistance.
Therefore, drugs that induce alternate modes of cell death, such as
autophagy, may be beneficial. Drug-induced hyperinduction of autophagy is
classified as type 2 programmed cell death. In most circumstances,
autophagy parallels apoptosis, and such composite cell death is described
as autophagy-associated apoptosis. Whether autophagy plays a synergistic
or antagonistic role in overall cell death response to anticancer drugs
is an important focus in cancer research. In this study, we have
investigated the interaction between autophagy and apoptosis in CLEFMA
mediated cell death. Methods: The human non-small cell lung carcinoma
(H441) cell line was treated with CLEFMA (10 M) and the molecular
mechanisms of cell death were investigated. Growth inhibition was
assessed by MTT or hexosaminidase assay. Apoptosis was measured by flow
cytometry of annexin V-stained cells, RT-PCR and immunoblotting for
apoptosis-related biomarkers. Induction of autophagy was established by
electron microscopy and immunobloting for LC3B, ATG, beclin1, AKT and
mTOR. Autophagy was inhibited by 3-methyladenine (3-MA 1 mM) as well as
chloroquine and E64D+pepstatin combination. The tumor suppressive
efficacy of CLEFMA was demonstrated in H441 xenograft mice
intraperitoneally receiving 0, 5 and 10 g/day of CLEFMA for 32 days. The
mice were imaged for F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in tumor tissue.
Results: CLEFMA suppressed the viability of H441 cell line in a
dose-dependent manner (IC50 = 6.25 M). It induced cell cycle arrest at
G2/M phase with accompanying accumulation of p21 protein. Caspase 3/7
immunoblotting and annexin V flow cytometry confirmed the induction of
apoptosis. At the same time, we observed induction of LC3BII and
suppression of AKT/mTOR phosphorylation. The suppression of autophagy
significantly increased CLEFMA-induced cell death and increased caspase
cleavage. In the xenograft model, 5 and 10 g CLEFMA significantly reduced
the tumor volume by 72% and 96.2%, respectively; the tumor uptake of
F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose was also reduced. Conclusions: We demonstrate the
efficacy of CLEFMA as a potent tumor suppressive agent. The mechanistic
results suggest that autophagy is a survival mechanism in CLEFMA-treated
lung cancer cells and it antagonizes apoptosis.

