Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A non-invasive test for right-sided colonic neoplasia in diabetics
at increased risk, independent of drug therapy and demographics


Evidence accrues that screening colonoscopy in average-risk patients does
not reduce mortality from right-sided neoplasia. A non-invasive test that
differentially identifies right-sided neoplasia is urgently needed to
direct investigative colonoscopy. The metabolic syndrome is associated
with excess colorectal neoplasia but many medications that treat the
diabetic component of this syndrome may alter carcinogenesis pathways
(PPAR in de novo for thiazolidinediones etc) and may thus confound our
ability to design such a test. Methods: We investigated 122 patients, 45
diabetics and 77 non-diabetics at above average risk identified by
screening by a risk questionnaire, for colorectal cancer. The patients
were enrolled to participate in a prospective colorectal cancer screening
study at the Detroit VAMC and intake of metformin, thiazolidinediones,
ASA, NSAID, sulfonylureas, statins, insulin, and multivitamins was
determined. We ascertained demographics, nutritional parameters (total
caloric, protein and vitamin intake, BMI, alcohol intake, fried food,
etc). Primary outcomes were colorectal neoplasia (adenomas & cancers)
found on colonoscopy. Secondary endpoints were: adenoma-carcinoma
biomarker binding in body fluids and mucosal field effects using the
Adnab-9 monoclonal antibody. These diagnostic tests were also examined in
the cohort of 77 of non-diabetics to ascertain whethera specific test was
also applicable to the non-diabetic population at increased risk for CRC.
Results: Of 45 diabetic patients with evaluable data, 26.6% had
right-sided neoplasia. Of these 50% had positive binding compared to
13.8% without such neoplasia. There was a significant correlation between
Adnab-9 effluent binding and right-sided neoplastic lesions (OR 6.45;CI
1.48-26.39;pEvidence accrues that screening colonoscopy in average-risk
patients does not reduce mortality from right-sided neoplasia. A
non-invasive test that differentially identifies right-sided neoplasia is
urgently needed to direct investigative colonoscopy. The metabolic
syndrome is associated with excess colorectal neoplasia but many
medications that treat the diabetic component of this syndrome may alter
carcinogenesis pathways (PPAR in de novo for thiazolidinediones etc) and
may thus confound our ability to design such a test. Methods: We
investigated 122 patients, 45 diabetics and 77 non-diabetics at above
average risk identified by screening by a risk questionnaire, for
colorectal cancer. The patients were enrolled to participate in a
prospective colorectal cancer screening study at the Detroit VAMC and
intake of metformin, thiazolidinediones, ASA, NSAID, sulfonylureas,
statins, insulin, and multivitamins was determined. We ascertained
demographics, nutritional parameters (total caloric, protein and vitamin
intake, BMI, alcohol intake, fried food, etc). Primary outcomes were
colorectal neoplasia (adenomas & cancers) found on colonoscopy. Secondary
endpoints were: adenoma-carcinoma biomarker binding in body fluids and
mucosal field effects using the Adnab-9 monoclonal antibody. These
diagnostic tests were also examined in the cohort of 77 of non-diabetics
to ascertain whethera specific test was also applicable to the
non-diabetic population at increased risk for CRC. Results: Of 45
diabetic patients with evaluable data, 26.6% had right-sided neoplasia.
Of these 50% had positive binding compared to 13.8% without such
neoplasia. There was a significant correlation between Adnab-9 effluent
binding and right-sided neoplastic lesions (OR 6.45;CI
1.48-26.39;p<0.001). Adnab-9 effluent binding showed a 67% sensitivity
and 76% specificity for right sided lesions, True positive=50% and True
Negative=86% with a likelihood ratio of 2.75 (CI 1.33-5.67) for a
positive test and 0.44 (0.19-0.998) for a negative test. There was no
significant differential binding in the non-diabetic population
(OR1.74;CI 0.59-5.11). There were also no statistically significant
differences between the above medication groups or with other
characteristics that included age, diabetes duration, BMI, HbA1c, GFR,
and nutritional parameters with respect to neoplasia prevalence. Other
adenoma-carcinoma biomarker binding in stool or mucosa was not
significantly different between those with or without neoplasia.
Conclusions: Adnab-9 Effluent binding may differentially identify most
diabetics with right-sided colonic neoplasia independent of medication
and other parameters. Prospective studies will be needed to determine the
impact of this test in the reduction of mortality from right-sided CRC in
this high-risk group.

