Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of cMYC as a critical determinant of estrogen-independent
growth of estrogen deprivation-resistant breast cancer cells


Around two-third of all breast cancers express estrogen receptor alpha
(ER), which depend upon estrogen for proliferation of the ER positive
breast cancer cells. Aromatase inhibitors (AI) are used extensively to
treat postmenopausal patients, which block the synthesis of estrogen and
render an estrogen-deprived environment. Unfortunately, long-term
treatment with AIs is associated with AI-resistant breast cancers, which
by-passes the dependency on estrogen for the growth of the resistant
breast cancer cells. To mimic these resistant breast cancers we have
developed an estrogen-deprivation (ED) resistant cell line known as
MCF7:5C cells from the parental ER positive MCF7 cells by propagating
them in estrogen-free conditions for more than a year. MCF7:5C cells are
ER positive and grow spontaneously in vitro as well as form xenograft
tumors in the athymic mice in absence of estrogen (ref: Lewis et al.,
JNCI, 2005; 97(23):1746-59). To understand the underlying mechanism and
identify the molecular determinant responsible for the
estrogen-independent growth of these breast cancer cells we found that a
critical estrogen-regulated gene, cMYC, is upregulated in these
ED-resistant MCF7:5C cells. Basal levels of cMYC mRNA as well as the
protein level were elevated three to four fold as compared to parental
MCF7 cells which are dependent on estrogen for growth. Cell cycle
analysis revealed twice as many S phase MCF7:5C cells as compared to MCF7
cells under basal condition. Treating the cells with a cMYC inhibitor,
10058-F4, decreased the number of S phase cells and increased the cells
in G1 phase in MCF7:5C cells but not in parental MCF7 cells, in a dose
dependent manner. Interestingly, treatment with fulvestrant, a complete
anti-estrogen, which inhibits the growth of the MCF7:5C cells by 50% also
decreased the cMYC mRNA levels by similar extent. To understand the
precise mechanism by which high levels of cMYC transcripts are
synthesized in MCF7:5C cells we investigated the promoter of the cMYC
gene and found that under basal conditions the recruitment of
phosphor-serine-2-RNA polymeraseII, which is a marker of RNA elongation,
was significantly higher in MCF7:5C cells as compared to the parental
MCF7 cells. This study strongly indicates cMYC as a critical determinant
responsible for estrogen-independent growth of ED-resistant breast cancer
cells. Grant Support: This work (VCJ) was supported by the Department of
Defense Breast Program under Award number W81XWH-06-1-0590 Center of
Excellence; the Susan G Komen For The Cure Foundation under Award number
SAC100009.

