Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the fibroblast growth factor receptor axis in malignant
pleural mesothelioma


Background: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive
malignancy characterized by frequent resistance to chemo- and
radiotherapy. Fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and their high-affinity
receptors (FGFR) contribute to malignant growth in several tumor types
including thoracic malignancies while a role in MPM remains widely
undefined. Therefore, aim of the present study was to investigate the
expression and impact of FGFs and FGFRs in MPM and to evaluate their
potential suitability as new therapeutic targets. Material und Methods:
Expression of all known FGF and FGFR genes was assessed by expression
array analysis and confirmed by qRT PCR in MPM cell lines (n=10) and
normal mesothelial cells. Selected FGFs were also investigated by
immunohistochemistry on tissue samples. FGFR-specific tyrosine kinase
inhibitors and an adenovirus expressing dominant-negative FGFR1 were used
to block FGF signal transduction in MPM cell models. MTT and clonogenic
assays as well as spheroid formation assays and videomicroscopy were
performed to analyze cell growth, survival and migration. The effect on
downstream signal transduction was assessed by immunoblotting with
phosphorylation site-specific antibodies. Results: FGFR1 as well as the
ligands FGF2 and FGF18 were highly expressed in almost all MPM cell lines
investigated. Moreover, immunohistochemistry demonstrated high FGF
expression also in tissue sections. Stimulation with exogenous FGF2 in
contrast, led to a remarkable increase in cell migration and clonogenic
growth. In contrast, inhibition of FGFR1 by the specific small molecule
kinase inhibitor PD166866 lead to decreased proliferation, survival,
migration and spheroid formation in the majority of cell lines tested.
Adenoviral expression of dominant-negative FGFR1 further confirmed these
results. In addition, concomitant FGFR inhibition increased the efficacy
of currently used chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin. Also
combination of FGFR inhibition and radiation lead to enhanced
cytotoxicity. Conclusion: Taken together, these data suggest that FGFR
signals contribute to proliferation, survival, migration and chemotherapy
resistance of MPM cells and their inhibition should be further evaluated
as a potential new treatment strategy in MPM.

