Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of immunogenic epitopes from
CD133 and their potential for use to immunologically target cancer stem
cells


CD133 is a marker that identifies cancer stem cells (CSC) on many solid
tumors and its expression has been correlated with shortened survival.
Although expressed on many normal tissues and stem cells, CD133 is
overexpressed on CSC and normal SC are negative or express low levels of
MHC making them less sensitive to recognition by CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL). Potential CTL epitopes were identified by algorithms
to predict binding to HLA-A2. Binding studies showed high affinity
binding and low off rates for four candidate epitopes. CTL induction
studies using IL-12 secreting dendritic cells to stimulate CD8+ T cells
evaluated the immunogenicity of the candidate peptides after three or
four weekly in vitro stimulations. Multimer and IFN responses were
observed with CD133-753, 405 and 708 epitopes. Subsequent studies
demonstrated killing of T2 cells loaded with peptide. To evaluate the
potential for autoimmunity, mouse homolog peptides of the 753 and 405
epitopes that were shown to have high affinity binding to human HLA-A2
were used to immunize HLA-A2 transgenic mice (9CB6F1-Tg
(HLA-A*0201/H2-Kb) A*0201). Mice were immunized 3 times at 3 week
intervals in IFA + HBV helper peptide and spleens were harvested 2 weeks
after the last immunization and stimulated in vitro for one week with
peptide pulsed LPS stimulated- APC. An additional group was sacrificed 6
weeks after the last immunization and studied. IFN ELISpot assays showed
immune responses to the 753 and 405 peptides in 35% and 40% of mice.
Organs, including heart, lung, liver, kidney, stomach, intestine, brain,
bone marrow, gonads, and eyes from mice with immune responses were found
to be negative for lymphocytic infiltrations supporting a lack of
autoimmunity related to the immune response to these peptides. Together
these studies support the safety and immunogenicity of these peptides as
a potential vaccine to target CD133 cancer stem cells.


