Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased cytokine and chemokine expression in U87MG glioblastoma
cells after large clinically relevant single doses of ionizing radiation


BACKGROUND: Stereotactic radiosurgery is an established treatment option
that uses high, single fraction doses of radiation to target tumors.
Despite the best clinical strategies to eliminate brain tumors using this
technique or others (surgery, chemotherapy and/or other radiotherapy
techniques), post-therapy recurrence of brain tumors remains a major
challenge in patients. To better understand the radiation response, we
investigated how such high doses modulate the molecular signaling within
glioblastoma cell populations from several days to months after
irradiation. METHODS: The glioblastoma cell line, U87MG, was treated with
single doses of ionizing radiation between 0 to 16Gy in vitro followed
by: examination of cell proliferation; clonogenic survival; extraction of
RNA; and subcutaneous injection into nude mice to monitor tumor growth 24
hours after cell irradiation. Genome-wide expression profiling was run on
the Illumina HT-12 bead array platform and analysis for significant
expressed genes was performed along with network analysis using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis and GenePattern platforms. RESULTS: As expected, high
doses of radiation stunted growth of the U87MG cells from 0 to 14 days.
Long term, single cell clonogenic survival of the irradiated cells was
approximately 3% and 0.01% following 8Gy or 16Gy, respectively.
Genome-wide gene expression at 1, 4 and 6 days after irradiation of 8 or
16Gy has revealed a dose-dependent increase in inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines. Increased cytokine expression for IL-6 and IL-8 was validated
in vitro using qRT-PCR. In vivo, 100% of the untreated U87MG cells formed
tumors, whereas less than half of all irradiated treatment groups failed
to form tumors. In those samples that did grow despite irradiation, the
average time to tumor formation (volume = 300mm3) was 13, 32, 58 and 88
days for 0, 8, 12, and 16Gy respectively while the exponential fits to
tumor growth rate was shown to be accelerated after 8Gy but diminished
after 12 and 16Gy. IL-6 gene expression was found to be elevated in
tumors formed from irradiated cells versus control. CONCLUSION: The data
presented here provides novel insight into the cellular and molecular
modulation of glioblastoma cell populations by large, clinically
relevant, single doses of ionizing radiation. A salient finding is the
expression of inflammatory cytokines as a major player in the radiation
response at periods long after the irradiation insult. This study was
supported by NIH ICBP 1U54CA149233

