Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin inhibits TGF-beta-induced VEGF expression in human
prostate carcinoma cells via Smad2/3 and Src/FAK/Akt signaling pathways


Prostate cancer mortality is primarily attributed to development of
metastases rather than primary, organ-confined disease. Solid tumors,
such as prostate carcinomas, rely on establishment of vascular supply and
angiogenesis for their growth and metastasis. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) is a key regulator of blood supply establishment in
prostate tissue. VEGF production is regulated by two major mechanisms,
hypoxia (low oxygen supply) and various cytokines. Interplay between
hypoxia, cytokines, growth factors and angiogenic factors determines
development and progression of cancer. In our previous studies, we
demonstrated that the chemopreventive bioflavonoid apigenin (4, 5,
7-trihydroxyflavone) inhibited hypoxia-induced elevation of VEGF
production in prostate cancer cells at low oxygen conditions
characteristic for solid tumors. Low oxygen (hypoxia) and transforming
growth factor- are two major factors responsible for increased VEGF
secretion in prostate cancer. In metastatic prostate cancer, TGF- serves
as a promoter of prostate tumorigenesis. Activation of TGF- receptors
induces phosphorylation of its cytoplasmic effectors, receptor-regulated
Sma- and Mad-related proteins (Smads). Phosphorylated Smads translocate
to the nucleus and bind to DNA to regulate transcription of specific
genes, notably VEGF. Blocking of TGF- action inhibits tumor viability,
tumor cell migration and metastasis in prostate cancer. Therefore,
reduction of TGF- production and activity may be a promising target for
controlling tumor growth and ultimately prostate cancer metastasis. In
the present studies, we investigated the inhibitory effect of apigenin on
TGF--induced VEGF production and the mechanisms underlying this action.
We found that VEGF expression was induced by TGF- 1 in highly metastatic
human prostate cancer PC3-M and LNCaP C4-2B cells, and treatment with
apigenin markedly decreased VEGF production. Furthermore, apigenin
inhibited TGF-1-induced phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of
Smad2 and Smad3. We also found that apigenin inhibited Src, FAK and Akt
phosphorylation in PC3-M and LNCaP C4-2B cells. Further experiments
demonstrated that constitutively active Src reversed the inhibitory
effect of apigenin on VEGF expression and Smad2/3 phosphorylation. Taken
together, our results suggest that apigenin inhibits prostate
carcinogenesis by modulating TGF--activated pathways linked to cancer
progression and metastases, in particular the Smad2/3 and Src/FAK/Akt
pathways. These findings provide new insights into molecular pathways
targeted by apigenin, and reveal a novel molecular mechanism underlying
the antiangiogenic potential of apigenin.

