Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF-1R inhibition as a novel therapeutic strategy for small cell
lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which makes up approximately 15% of all
lung cancer cases, is characterized by short responses to standard
chemotherapy and a median survival duration of less than one year. New
therapies are critically needed to improve the outcome for patients with
this disease. Signaling through the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
(IGF-1R) leads to activation of the PI3K-AKT and MAP kinase pathways,
resulting in inhibition of apoptosis and stimulation of proliferation.
The IGF-1R pathway is commonly upregulated in SCLC. Recent evidence
suggests that inhibition of IGF-1R may be a potential treatment strategy
for many types of cancer, including SCLC. We sought to characterize the
relative sensitivity of SCLC cell lines to a novel IGF-1R tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, OSI-906, identify predictive biomarkers of sensitivity, and
evaluate the efficacy of OSI-906 in vivo on SCLC cell line xenografts and
primary patient xenografts as a single agent and in combination with
etoposide. We assessed the sensitivity of a panel of 16 SCLC cell lines
to OSI-906. Approximately one third of these cell lines were highly
sensitive to OSI-906, with an IC50 Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), which
makes up approximately 15% of all lung cancer cases, is characterized by
short responses to standard chemotherapy and a median survival duration
of less than one year. New therapies are critically needed to improve the
outcome for patients with this disease. Signaling through the
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) leads to activation of the
PI3K-AKT and MAP kinase pathways, resulting in inhibition of apoptosis
and stimulation of proliferation. The IGF-1R pathway is commonly
upregulated in SCLC. Recent evidence suggests that inhibition of IGF-1R
may be a potential treatment strategy for many types of cancer, including
SCLC. We sought to characterize the relative sensitivity of SCLC cell
lines to a novel IGF-1R tyrosine kinase inhibitor, OSI-906, identify
predictive biomarkers of sensitivity, and evaluate the efficacy of
OSI-906 in vivo on SCLC cell line xenografts and primary patient
xenografts as a single agent and in combination with etoposide. We
assessed the sensitivity of a panel of 16 SCLC cell lines to OSI-906.
Approximately one third of these cell lines were highly sensitive to
OSI-906, with an IC50 < 1 M, as measured by the MTS cell proliferation
assay. Treatment with increasing doses of OSI-906 resulted in dose
dependent inhibition of phosphorylated IGF-1R and phosphorylated AKT in
both sensitive and resistant cell lines, suggesting that while the IGF-1R
signaling pathway is intact in resistant cell lines, they rely on other
signaling pathways for survival. Expression profiling of our panel of
cell lines for components of the IGF-1R pathway including IGF-1R, insulin
receptor (IR), and receptor ligands (IGF-1 & IGF-II) did not suggest a
simple correlation between receptor/ligand expression and sensitivity to
OSI-906. Interestingly, OSI-906 sensitive cell lines appear to express
lower levels of phosphorylated ERK at baseline compared to resistant cell
lines. In addition, phospho-ERK is not inhibited by OSI-906 and is
upregulated in response to treatment in some resistant cell lines. We
tested the efficacy of OSI-906 alone and in combination with etoposide in
vivo using an H187 cell line xenograft model and two primary patient
xenograft models. OSI-906 alone resulted in approximately 50% tumor
growth inhibition in H187 xenografts and 30% inhibition in the primary
patient xenograft models compared to mock treated animals. There was no
evident synergy with etoposide in any of these models. Our preliminary
data support that IGF-1R inhibition may be a viable treatment strategy
for a subset of SCLC. Identification of the subset that will respond to
this therapy may be more complex than screening for expression IGF-1R
pathway components.

