Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular endotelial growth factor and transforming growth
factor-beta are enhanced in plasma of breast cancer patients resistant to
endocrine therapy


Although more than 2/3 of treated patients respond to the endocrine
therapy, most patients with metastatic breast cancer will develop
resistance. Estrogen modulate angiogenesis, in part, through the effects
on VEGF. It appears that other factor contributing to the resistance may
be a transforming factor-beta (TGF-beta). It is highly immunosuppressive
factor that inhibits the natural and specific immunity against tumors and
stimulates production of vascular endotelial growth factor /VEGF. Defects
in the immune response correlated with poor prognosis and therefore in
recent years, research focused on a precise description of the status and
function of the immune system and its possible effect in cancer patients.
The purpose of the study was to monitor immune responses in patients with
hormone receptor positive breast cancer resistant to hormone therapy,
particularly the examination of cellular (CD4, CD8, HLA-DR) as well as
humoral immunity. TGF beta, and VEGF production was monitored and we
analyzed the changes during hormonal treatment. Methods: 60 patients
included in the research project were implemented routine cancer
teratment with hormonal therapy. Basic parameters (histological type and
grade, the degree of expression of ER and PR, HER2, and the proliferative
marker) were established. Patients were evaluated by a cancer clinical
immunologist to exclude immune disorders, allergic or autoimmune origin.
TGF beta, VEGF were mesured by ELISA and anti-tumor cellular immunity
(CD4, CD8, antigen presenting cells) will be measured by flow cytometry.
Results In patients with resistance to hormone therapy mainly depression
in cellular immunity was found.Immunglobulin plasma level was dicreased
as well (mainly IgG4 subtype). Most patients have shown clinical symptoms
of immunodeficiency (frequent infections of respiratory or urinary tract,
herpetic infections) TGF beta as well as VEGF plasma level were
increased. Significant increase of autoantibodies production was found,
particulary in those, involved into blood coagulacion process/anti
phospholipide and anti cardiolipin autoantibodies. Conclusion Correlation
of these factors with resistance to hormonal therapy, and the state of
anticancer immunity could help in the future with the the prediction of
resistance to hotmonal therapy and contribute to the selection of
targeted immune therapy in cancer patients. Dedication: This project was
supported by grant IGA NT11168-3/2010

