Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Phase I, open-label study investigating the disposition of
[14C]-cabazitaxel in patients with advanced solid tumors


Background Cabazitaxel (Cbz) is a novel semi-synthetic taxane that
promotes the assembly of tubulin and stabilizes microtubules. In
preclinical studies, Cbz demonstrated efficacy in both
docetaxel-sensitive and -resistant tumor models (Bissery et al. AACR
2000). Furthermore, the Phase III TROPIC trial demonstrated that,
compared with mitoxantrone, Cbz improved overall survival in patients
with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer previously treated
with a docetaxel-containing regimen (hazard ratio 0.70; P Background
Cabazitaxel (Cbz) is a novel semi-synthetic taxane that promotes the
assembly of tubulin and stabilizes microtubules. In preclinical studies,
Cbz demonstrated efficacy in both docetaxel-sensitive and -resistant
tumor models (Bissery et al. AACR 2000). Furthermore, the Phase III
TROPIC trial demonstrated that, compared with mitoxantrone, Cbz improved
overall survival in patients with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate
cancer previously treated with a docetaxel-containing regimen (hazard
ratio 0.70; P < 0.0001). The human plasma pharmacokinetics of Cbz have
been described previously (Mita et al. Clin Cancer Res 2009), but
detailed analyses of the metabolism and excretion pathways of Cbz have
not yet been published in the literature. Methods Four patients with
advanced solid tumors (3 males; median age 52.5 years; performance status
0-1) received an IV infusion of 25 mg/m*2 [14C]-Cbz (50 Ci, 1.85 MBq)
over 1 hour at cycle 1. Blood, plasma, urine, feces and expired air
samples were collected at various times up to 14 days post-dosing.
Radioactivity determination was performed by liquid scintillation
counting, either directly (plasma, urine or CO2 traps) or after
combustion (whole blood and feces). Analyses were carried out using
liquid chromatography, with radioactivity and mass spectrometry detection
for metabolite profiling, quantification and identification. Subsequent
IV infusions were conducted every 3 weeks with non-radiolabeled drug
until disease progression, intolerance or other study discontinuation
criteria were reached. Results In plasma, Cbz was the main circulating
compound, representing approximately 70% of the radioactivity AUC. Seven
metabolites were detected, each accounting for 5% of the parent drug
exposure; none of these, including the pharmacologically active docetaxel
(di-O-demethyl-Cbz), were therefore considered relevant metabolites. In
excreta, the majority of the radioactivity was recovered in feces (mean:
76.0% of administered dose within 2 weeks); 3.7% of the dose was excreted
in urine within 1 week. No unchanged compound was excreted in feces and,
on average, only 2.3% of the dose in urine, revealing an extensive
hepatic metabolism of Cbz in humans. Approximately 20 metabolites were
detected in excreta; the main metabolites corresponded to combined mono-
or di-O-demethyl derivatives on the taxane ring, with hydroxyl or
cyclized derivatives on the lateral chain. Docetaxel
(di-O-demethyl-cabazitaxel) was only detected as traces in excreta.
Conclusions Cbz is extensively metabolized in patients, but no relevant
metabolites were observed in plasma, indicating that parent Cbz is the
only entity responsible for the pharmacologic activity. Cbz metabolites
are formed through 3 main metabolic pathways and are almost exclusively
excreted in the feces.

