Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-LOXL2 conjugated gold nanoparticles: therapeutic probes for
pancreatic cancer


PURPOSE: Multi-functional gold nanoparticles may play an important role
in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. The purpose of this study was to
demonstrate the feasibility of using these anti-LOXL2 conjugated gold
nanoparticles (anti-LOXL2@GoldMag) as therapeutic probes for the
treatment of human pancreatic cancer cells. MATERIALS & METHODS: Human
pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1, BxPC-3 and Capan-1 cells) was used
in this study. Western blot of LOXL2 expression in three cell lines were
analyzed and compared to EGFR proteins. GoldMag, the hybrid gold shell
and iron oxide core nanoparticles were purchases and their imaging
characteristics (R2 and R2* relativity) was measured. Anti-LOXL2@GoldMag
probes were constructed according to the instruction and the coupling
efficacy of anti-LOXL2 antibodies with GoldMag were tested using a mass
spectrophotometer. The specific targeting efficacy of anti-LOXL2@GoldMag
was tested using immunofluorescence staining and electronic microscope.
Pancreatic cancer cells were treated with anti-LOXL2@GoldMag at the
concentrations of 0, 35, 70, 140 and 280 g/ml and compared to anti-LOXL2
treatment alone at the same dosing concentration. After allowing for 48
hours incubation, the remaining number of viable cells was counted using
trypan blue staining; cell proliferation percentage was calculated based
on the total number of viable cells after treatment compared to the
controls. RESULTS: The therapeutic efficacy of anti-LOXL2@GoldMag
demonstrated similar therapeutic efficacy at both lower dose (18-51%
reduced total viable cells) and enhanced therapeutic efficacy at the
higher dose (86-99% reduced total viable cells) when compared to LOXL2
antibody alone. This suggests that binding of the LOXL2 antibodies to the
GoldMag nanoparticles doesn't inhibit immunotherapeutic efficacy. MRI
studies demonstrated that R2 and R2* measurements were well correlated to
GoldMag probe concentrations. CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrated
significant anti-neoplastic efficacy in three different human pancreatic
cancer cell lines. MRI could serve as a non-invasive imaging method to
monitor the biodistribution of gold nanoparticles. Further pre-clinical
investigations are now warranted in animal models of pancreatic cancer.

