Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic inflammation and survival of patients with prostate
cancer: Evidence from the Glasgow Inflammation Outcome Study.


Background: There is some evidence that pre-treatment systemic
inflammation may be associated with survival in patients with prostate
cancer; however, it is unclear whether this is independent of grade and
stage of cancer. We therefore investigated the role of inflammation-based
prognostic scores, the modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS) and
Neutrophil Lymphocyte Ratio (NLR), and their associations with Gleason
grade and socioeconomic circumstances in patients with prostate cancer.
Methods: Patients from a cohort, the Glasgow Inflammation Outcome Study,
who had diagnosis of prostate cancer, were included in this study. The
mGPS was constructed by combining C-reactive protein and albumin while
NLR by calculating the ratio of neutrophils to lymphocytes. We estimated
five-year relative survival using the age, gender and deprivation
specific life tables and relative excess risk of death by mGPS and NLR
categories after adjusting for age, socioeconomic circumstances and
Gleason grade. Results: Eight hundred and ninety seven prostate cancer
patients were identified; of those 422 (47%) died during a maximum follow
up of 6.2 years. Systemic inflammation appeared to have significant
prognostic value. The mGPS predicted poorer 5-year overall and relative
survival independent of age, socioeconomic circumstances, disease grade
and NLR. Raised mGPS also had a significant association with excess risk
of death (mGPS 2: Relative Excess Risk = 2.41, 95% CI 1.37-4.23) among
aggressive, clinically significant prostate cancer (Gleason grades 8-10).
Similarly, age-specific analyses were also carried out and raised mGPS
showed significantly higher risk of death among those with age 75 years.
Conclusions: The mGPS is a strong measure of systemic inflammation, when
compared to NLR. Prostate cancer patients with a raised mGPS had
significantly higher risk of death for overall as well high grade
disease. Inflammation-based prognostic scores predict outcome in patients
with prostate cancer and should be added to their routine clinical
assessment. Keywords: mGPS, NLR, prostate cancer, prognosis, Gleason
grade, systemic inflammation

