Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT3B7 alters E-cadherin expression and cell proliferation in
breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death among women in
the United States and the progression from non-invasive to
invasive/metastatic disease correlates with an increased risk of death.
Changes in DNA methylation have been shown to be important in breast
cancers. However, the mechanism by which cancer cells acquire and
maintain abnormal methylation is not well understood. DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) are responsible for monitoring and altering
DNA methylation patterns in cells. Interestingly, we have identified many
aberrant DNMT3B transcripts in cancer cells compared to normal cells.
Therefore, we hypothesize that aberrant DNMT3B isoforms alter gene and
protein expression to promote tumor progression in breast cancer cells.
Our studies indicate that the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 express many aberrant DNMT3B isoforms including DNMT3B7 and
DNMT3B6. Interestingly, the invasive MDA-MB-231 cells express increased
levels of DNMT3B7 and DNMT3B6 compared to the poorly invasive MCF-7
cells. To further our studies, poorly invasive MCF-7 cells were stably
transfected with a DNMT3B7 expression construct to determine the role of
this aberrant transcript in tumor progression. Preliminary data indicate
that the increased expression of DNMT3B7 in these cells correlates with a
significant increase in growth. Specifically, cells expressing more
DNMT3B7 grow faster than those with lower levels of the aberrant protein.
Furthermore, E-cadherin expression is inversely correlated with DNMT3B7
expression indicating that the expression of this aberrant protein may
lead to a more aggressive phenotype. Finally, soft agar assays have been
performed to determine the functional significance of these findings. The
novel results presented in this study suggest the need for additional
studies to determine the role of aberrant DNMT3B transcripts in cancer.
Ultimately, this work may lead to a better understanding of breast cancer
progression and the development of novel therapeutics.

