Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-associated gene expression in normal breast tissue provide
insights regarding associations between aging and aggressive tumor
characteristics


Age is the strongest breast cancer risk factor, with overall breast
cancer risk increasing steadily beginning at approximately 30 years of
age. Though several genomic studies have characterized differences in the
biology of tumors arising in younger vs. older women, understanding of
age-related gene expression in the non-malignant tissue is lacking.
Because non-malignant tissue represents the microenvironment and/or field
from which the tumor arises, an improved characterization of the
age-related change in normal breast may provide suggestions of important
pathways in the etiology of distinct breast cancer subtypes. To identify
age-related changes in the breast microenvironment, 96 normal tissue
specimens from reduction mammoplasty patients ranging in age from 14 to
70 were assayed by gene expression microarray. Significant associations
between gene expression levels and age were identified for 802 genes (481
increased and 321 decreased with increasing age). Enriched functions
included aging of cells, shape change, and chemotaxis, and enriched
pathways included Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Ephrin Receptor Signaling,
Oncostatin M signaling, and JAK/Stat Signaling. Applying the
age-associated genes to publicly available tumor datasets, the
age-associated pathways defined two groups of tumors with distinct
survival. The poor prognosis tumor group shared features of younger
breast tissue gene expression, providing a biological link to qualitative
patterns in age at incidence. Aggressive tumors common in younger women
(such as ER negative and basal-like breast cancers) harbor gene
expression patterns that reflect the normal tissue from which they arise.
For the young, these signatures portend more aggressive disease. These
data show that studies of normal tissue gene expression can yield
important insights about the pathways and biological selection factors
that are relevant during tumor progression.

