Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling regulates tumor-induced angiogenesis in
SPARC-overexpressed neuroblastoma


Despite existing aggressive treatment modalities, survival for advanced
stage neuroblastoma remains poor with significant long-term illness in
disease survivors. Advance stage disease features are associated with
tumor vascularity, and as such, angiogenesis inhibitors may prove useful
along with current therapies. SPARC (also known as BM-40 or osteonectin),
a matricellular protein, is known to inhibit the proliferation and
migration of endothelial cells stimulated by growth factors and induces
endothelial cell apoptosis. Here, we sought to determine the effect of
SPARC on neuroblastoma tumor cell-induced angiogenesis and to decipher
the molecular mechanisms involved in angiogenesis inhibition. SPARC
overexpression in neuroblastoma cells inhibited neo-vascularization in
vivo as determined by the mouse dorsal air sac model. In addition,
conditioned medium from SPARC-overexpressed neuroblastoma cancer cells
(pSPARC-CM) inhibited endothelial tube formation in vitro.
SPARC-overexpressed tumor cell conditioned medium decreased proliferation
(as determined by MTT assay and Ki-67 immunofluorescence) and induced
apoptosis in endothelial cells (as determined by TUNEL assay).
Furthermore, SPARC-overexpressed tumor cell conditioned medium inhibited
expression of the pro-angiogenic molecules VEGF, FGF, PDFG, and MMP-9 as
determined by human angiogenesis-PCR array. In addition to the inhibition
of growth factors, SPARC-overexpressed tumor cell conditioned medium
inhibited Notch signaling molecules in HMEC cells as determined by
Western blotting. Conditioned medium from neuroblastoma cells
overexpressed with Notch intracellular domain after SPARC overexpression,
induced growth factors and led to increased tube formation in vitro. In
vivo endothelial cell death was confirmed by co-localization studies with
TUNEL assay, and an endothelial marker, CD31, in tumor sections from
SPARC-overexpressed mice. Our data collectively suggest that SPARC
overexpression induces endothelial cell apoptosis in vivo and inhibits
angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo.

