Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The outcome of inhibition of stromal TGFRII in pancreatic cancer
is tumor cell-dependent


An elevated level of TGF- is a negative prognostic indicator for patients
with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Despite this, the function
of TGF- signaling in tumor microenvironment stromal cells is unclear. We
have studied how TGF--induced signaling in stromal cells (macrophages and
fibroblasts) impacts human pancreatic cancer cell lines (Capan-1,
MiaPaca-2, C5LM2 and Colo357) in vitro and in vivo. The TGFRII activity
in Raw 264.7 macrophages and 3T3 fibroblasts was inhibited with 2G8, a
monoclonal rat anti-mouse TGFRII IgG. Raw cells treated with 2G8 adopt a
predominantly pro-inflammatory phenotype in vitro as documented by
increased Hes1 and MCP-1 expression and inhibited tumor cell migration.
Colony formation in soft agar was inhibited by conditioned media (CM) of
Raw cells treated with 2G8 in all lines tested, except MiaPaca-2. Raw
cell CM inhibited tumor cell proliferation in vitro compared to control
media-treated tumor cells, but there were no significant differences
between CM from Raw cells treated with 2G8 vs. a control IgG. CM from 3T3
cells treated with 2G8 also inhibited tumor cell migration and soft agar
colony formation while control CM from 3T3 stimulated soft colony
formation. MiaPaca-2, Capan-1 and Colo357 cells were orthotopically
injected in SCID mice and were treated with saline or 2G8. 2G8 therapy
differentially affected primary tumor size, such that inhibition of
stromal TGFRII stimulated the growth of MiaPaCa-2 tumors but inhibited
the growth of Capan-1 and Colo357 primary tumors compared to treatment
with a control IgG. Interestingly, 2G8 which only blocks mouse TGFRII,
suppressed metastasis in mice bearing MiaPaca-2, Capan-1 and Colo357
tumors. Furthermore, in isogenic cell lines derived from a 5 week old
PDAC transgenic (p48-Cre; KrasG12D; Ink4alox/lox) mouse we also found a
differential response to 2G8 therapy. Subcutaneous tumors that arose from
clone MPLR 2D, were repressed by 2G8 therapy while subcutaneous tumors
that arose from clone MPLR3B were stimulated by 2G8 therapy. The nature
of differential response of the primary tumors and the mechanism of
suppression of metastasis is under vigorous investigation. Our data thus
far underscore the complexity and challenge of targeting the TGF- pathway
in pancreatic cancer.

