Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Some of oral squamous cell carcinomas might originate from minor
salivary glands, and these tumors shows aggressive biological behavior
and poor prognosis


Oral cancer massively invades the adjacent tissues and frequently
metastasizes to the regional lymph nodes. Most of the oral cancer is
histopathologically squamous cell carcinoma, and approximately 10 % of
the oral floor cancer is salivary gland cancer, such as mucoepidermoid
carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma. According to the clinical
behavior and histopathological features of the oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC), we hypothesize that OSCC might originate from either
oral squamous epithelium or minor salivary glands. In this study, we
attempted to clarify the possibility, in which some of the OSCC
originated from minor salivary glands by microarray and clustering
analysis. Furthermore, by using the eleven molecular markers which were
identified by the microarray and clustering analysis, we determined the
origin of OSCC, and compared their biological aggressiveness in the
patients. The mRNA expression profile of the samples obtained from 6
patients with OSCC was analyzed by the AB1700 Chemiluminescent Microarray
Analyzer on the Human Genome Survey Array containing 29,098 genes.
Clustering analysis was performed by GeneSping GX 7.3. Clustering
analysis by the expression level of the 917 genes, which were
differentially expressed at least 3-folds in normal oral squamous
epithelium and normal salivary glands, revealed that 6 samples can be
divided into 2 groups. The expression profile of one group (4 cases) was
similar to that of normal oral squamous epithelium, and that of another
group (2 cases) was similar to that of normal salivary glands.
Furthermore, we identified 11 genes from the 917 genes which can easily
determine the origin of the OSCC. Subsequently, we examined the
expression levels of 9 marker genes in 73 OSCC (45 men, 28 women) by
RT-PCR and determined the origin of the OSCC. Twelve cases from 73 OSCCs
(16%) were considered to originate from minor salivary glands, and these
tumors showed highly metastatic potentials and poor prognosis. In
conclusion, OSCC originates from either oral squamous epithelium or minor
salivary glands. OSCCs originating from minor salivary glands showed
aggressive biological behavior. Determination of the origin of the OSCC
is helpful to make a treatment plan for the patients with OSCC.

