Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) sample RNA quality
characteristics that will yield reliable measurement of lung cancer risk
test


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in the United States
with cigarette smoking the primary risk factor. Lung cancer has a low
survival rate because it typically is at an advanced stage when first
detected and treated. In previous studies a Lung Cancer Risk Test (LCRT)
was identified comprising transcript abundance measurement of 14 key
antioxidant, DNA repair and transcription factor genes measured in normal
bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) sampled after bronchoscopy. The LCRT
promises to identify high-risk individuals who will develop lung cancer.
This will enable even more focused selection for closer monitoring,
further reduce risk of false positive findings and markedly reduce cost
of implementation. An ongoing multi-institutional prospective cohort
nested case control trial, funded by NCI grant RC2148572 is intended to
test the validity of LCRT as an accurate test for lung cancer risk. More
than twelve test sites are providing NBEC samples for the LCRT study.
Accurate LCRT measurement will be dependent upon sample RNA quality.
Thus, the purpose of this study is to identify cut-off criteria according
to which NBEC RNA biospecimens can be expected to yield reliable
quantitative, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
results for the genes comprised by the LCRT. RNA quality of each
collected NBEC sample was measured using three parameters: quantity,
purity and integrity. RNA integrity was measured by one of two tests,
GAPD and GUSB. Each test used one reverse primer and two forward primers
and a sequence specific fluorescent labeled probe for signal detection.
The GAPD test yielded 70bp and 230bp products and the GUSB test yielded
60bp and 120bp products. The integrity of each unknown RNA sample was
determined by dividing the yield of longer product by that of shorter
product. Of 126 NBEC samples assessed so far, 77.8% provided > 500 ng
total RNA, 94.4% had A260/280 values > 1.5 and 95% gave integrity test
values > 0.5. To determine the specific cut-off threshold for each NBEC
RNA quality criterion above which LCRT results will be reliable, we
established an A549 cell line RNA integrity reference model by incubating
cell populations at room temperature for different amounts of time
following cytolysis, generating samples with varying decreasing
integrity. The LCRT will be measured in these intentionally degraded RNA
samples, allowing comparison between integrity levels and LCRT values.
The integrity level above which measurement of each gene comprised by the
LCRT can be expected to be reliable and accurate will be determined.

