Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target epigenetic regulation at a specific genomic region by using
DNA binding molecules and HDACi


Pyrrole-Imidazole (PI) polyamide molecule was originally designed from
structures of natural DNA binding molecule, such as Distamicine and
Diocarbamicine and has been recognized as a synthetic molecule which
binds the minor groove of Watson-Click base pair of double-stranded DNA
in a sequence-dependent manner. We hypothesized conjugates between this
synthetic DNA binding molecule and Histone Deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi)
of Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) should regulate histone
acetylation in a specific region of the genome. We have taken two
strategies to confirm this hypothesis. One is the candidate gene approach
and another is chemical library approach. We synthesized a PI polyamide
targeted the p16INK4a tumor suppressor gene and also synthesized a
library of sequence-specific PI polyamides conjugated with the potent
HDAC inhibitor, termed PIP-SAHA and screened their effect on the
expression of tumor suppressor genes and Yamanaka factors, respectively.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed SAHA-PIP induce
acetylation of Histone H4 and H3 in the promoter region of p16, Oct-4 and
Nanog. SAHA-PIP showed significant induction against c-Myc, Oct-3/4,
Sox-2, and Klf-4, respectively in MEF but did not show significant
induction of tumor suppressor p16 transcription. We also confirmed only
SAHA did not show such histon acetylation and transcription induction,
which implicated the role of PI polyamide conjugates in the induction of
histone acetylation in specific genomic regions. Furthermore, a
significant change in MEF morphology was demonstrated with our hit
SAHA-PIPs. Those data suggests that a capability of PIP-SAHA regulate
histone modification in a genomic sequence specific manner and promote
agents for reprogramming efficiency in order to generate iPSCs, although
the endogenous tumor suppressor gene expression was not observed,
probably by means of double lock epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor
gene.

