Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel five gene signature predicts overall and recurrence-free
survival in NSCLC


Gene expression profiling has been used to characterize prognosis in
various cancers. Applying systems biology approach to cancer stem cell
data generated from expression profiling of cell lines, a novel 5 gene
signature was identified. Earlier studies had shown that side population
cells isolated from established Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines exhibit cancer stem cell properties. Microarray data from side
population (SP) and main population (MP) cells isolated from 4 NSCLC
lines (A549, H1650, H460, H1975) were used to examine gene expression
profiles associated with stemness. Total RNA extracted from SP and MP
samples were used to generate cRNA targets, which were hybridized to
Human Genome U133A Plus 2.0 probe arrays. Raw data was processed and the
mean center expression level for each gene was determined. We searched
for differentially expressed genes that were over or under-expressed at
least two fold commonly in all 4 cell lines. It was found that 354 genes
were upregulated and 126 genes were downregulated in SP cells from all
the 4 cell lines, compared to MP cells; of these, 89 up and 62
downregulated genes (average 2 fold changes) were used for Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) and MetaCoreTM pathway analysis. Pathway
analysis demonstrated representation of 4 up regulated genes (TOP2A,
AURKB, BRRN1, CDK1) in chromosome condensation pathway and 1 down
regulated gene FUS in chromosomal translocation. The microarray data was
validated using quantitative RT-PCR on the 5 selected genes and all
showed robust correlations between microarray and qRT-PCR expression
data. Further, we analyzed two independent microarray gene expression
datasets that included 361 lung adenocarcinoma patients from NCI
Director's Challenge Set (DCS) for overall survival (OS) and 63
adenocarcinoma patients from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) for
recurrence free survival (RFS). Statistical analyses were done using R
package. Expression values were normalized using MAS5.0 and median
expression values were used to dichotomize into low and high expression
levels for 5 genes. To determine whether the gene signature correlates
with poor prognosis, we performed Kaplan-Meier and log-rank test
analysis. Kaplan-Meier analysis for survival showed significant trend for
all the 5 genes. These genes predicted poor survival of patients in 361
DCS as well as 63 adenocarcinoma samples from SKKU. Our results suggest
that genes involved in chromosome condensation are likely related with
cancer stem cell like properties and therefore predict survival in lung
adenocarcinoma. Further studies are needed to validate the key genes to
provide potential new targets to intervene progression of lung
adenocarcinoma. Our findings highlight gene signature for effective
identification of lung adenocarcinoma patients with poor prognosis and
designing more aggressive or tailored therapeutic properties for such
patients.

