Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of CYLD leads to acquisition of mesenchymal state
and increased migration via ligand-independent TGFR1 activation in human
oral squamous cell carcinoma cells


The 5-year survival of patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
has not changed apparently for the past 30 years. Although
cylindromatosis (CYLD) is thought as a potent tumor suppressor, its
biological significances in malignancies are largely unknown. The aim of
this study was to clarify the role of CYLD in OSCC progression. We
investigated expression of CYLD in OSCC including intraepithelial
neoplasia (IEN; n = 48) and invasive carcinomas (n = 133) tissues and
normal oral mucosal tissues (n = 35) by immunohistochemistry. In
addition, effects of CYLD knockdown by siRNA transfection on OSCC
progression using 5 OSCC cell lines (SAS, Tu4, HSC3, Ca9-22, and SCC-NA)
and HaCaT keratinocytes. Our immunohistochemical analyses revealed that
CYLD expression was significantly reduced at invasive lesions in OSCC
tissues whereas it was conserved in normal epithelium and IEN. In
addition, lower CYLD expression was associated with the correlation with
the increased tumor size, advanced clinical stage, and poor overall
survival in invasive OSCC. Accordingly, CYLD knockdown led to acquisition
of mesenchymal state and increased migratory activity in all the OSCC
cell lines as well as HaCaT keratinocytes. Notably, such EMT-like changes
were completely blocked by a TGFR1 inhibitor in all the OSCC cell lines,
but not in HaCaT keratinocytes. Furthermore, treatment with excess amount
of anti-TGF antibody (1D11) did not inhibit the EMT-like changes induced
by CYLD repression. These findings suggest that downregulation of CYLD
promotes invasion through EMT-like changes via ligand-independent TGFR1
activation in OSCC cells in mechanisms distinct from normal epithelium.
Further studies for these mechanisms probably provide new insights into
the biology including TGF switch and development of a novel therapy in
OSCC.

