Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue is alive: Preserving phosphoproteins and tissue morphology
in clinical trial samples


An urgent clinical goal is to identify subpopulations of cancer patients
that may respond to targeted kinase inhibitors and/or their
phosphorylated substrates. Consequently, phosphorylated signal pathway
proteins have emerged as a critical class of analytes for therapeutic
stratification. Technologies now exist that can measure protein
phosphorylations and map cell signaling pathways in a single core-needle
biopsy, thus relying on the inhibition of any kinase/phosphatase activity
within the sample immediately following excision. Unfortunately applying
these technologies to clinical samples has been hindered because
phosphoprotein epitopes are not adequately preserved by formalin fixation
and paraffin embedding, while freezing tissue samples may not be feasible
in multi-center clinical trial sites and cannot adequately preserve
morphology. To facilitate clinical trial molecular profiling, where
immediate snap-freezing of tumor biopsies is not feasible, we have
created a novel, one-step, room temperature preservative that stabilizes
proteins/phosphoproteins equivalent to snap-freezing and tissue/cell
morphology equivalent to neutral buffered formalin fixation. In addition,
our preservative solution simultaneously fixes and decalcifies bony
tissue, thus permitting molecular profiling of bony tissues that was
never before possible. We have utilized our Biomarker and Histology
Preservative (BHP-Cell and/or BHP-Tissue) in a breast cancer multi-site
clinical trial (US Oncology 05-074/GSK LPT109096) and a clinical research
multiple myeloma trial. BHP has been validated to a) function as a
transport medium while preserving histomorphology, b) maintain full
antigenicity for clinical immunohistochemistry (such as Ki-67, ER, PR,
Her2, p63, and phosphorylated epitopes), c) preserve phosphoprotein
epitopes for cell signaling pathway profiling by reverse phase protein
microarray (RPMA), d) be compatible with frozen sections or paraffin
embedding, and e) obviate the need for additional decalcification.
Preservation of tissue morphology has been demonstrated in 25 mouse,
feline, and human tissues with enhanced immunohistochemical properties
for >20 antigens using standard IHC protocols. RPMA data from LPT10906
shows differentially deranged signaling networks in the pre-treatment
biopsies for patients that did not have a pathologic complete response
compared to responders. Our multiple myeloma trial quantifies cell
signaling pathway expression pre/post kinase inhibitor treatment, in an
ex vivo treatment model, on both myeloma and bone marrow cells, preserved
in BHP. We are currently evaluating the integrity of nucleic acid
preservation in parallel with proteins to provide a universal one step
biospecimen tissue fixative for clinical trials.

