Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased miR-let7c level indicates transition from localized
bladder cancer to metastasis


Purpose/Objective(s): MicorRNAs are a group of short ribonucleic acid
molecules with an average of 22 nucleotides and play an important role in
regulation of gene expression. Because the microRNA profiles of tumor are
related to cancer development and prognostication, it becomes a new
frontier of cancer research. The current tools for studying microRNA like
microarray have limited dynamic range and poor sensitivity, and Taqman
microRNA assay has higher sensitivity but limited number of microRNAs.
The SOLiD system provides a sensitive and robust assay for discovery and
profiling of novel microRNAs using sequencing by ligation. The aim of
this study is to find key miRNA which can provide insights into the
cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Materials/Methods: 12 bladder cancer
FFPE samples were used in this study, including 6 cases of stage N0, 3
cases of stage N1 and 3 cases of stage N2. Total RNA from FFPE blocks was
isolated by Ambion RecoverAll Total Nucleic Acid Isolation kit according
to manufacturer's instructions. The concentration and quality of total
RNA were examined by Nanodrop 1000 spectrophotometer. The small RNA was
enriched by flashPAGE fractionation and the microRNA library was built
using Ambion SOLiD Small RNA Expression Kit with the barcode system (Life
Technologies, CA, US). 35 bp long reads were generated on the SOLiD
(version 3.0) sequencing system (Life Technologies) and were analyzed by
using the SOLiD System Small RNA Analysis Tool (Life Technologies).
Results: Analyzed samples were from male caucasian patients with a median
age of 63.5 years. Tumors were all grade 3 urothelial carcinomas.
Patients had T1-4 and M0-1 disease. We examined global miRNA expression
in bladder cancer FFPE samples, and SOLiD results revealed that the
expression of 10 microRNAs significantly differed between N0 stage and
N1/2 stage. miR-let7c precursor and mature miR-let7c were upregulated in
samples from patients with lymphnode metastasis. A previous study from
Leite et al. showed that miR-let7c expression was similar in matched FFPE
and frozen prostate cancer tissue with a Pearson's correlation
coefficient of 0.927. Conclusion: miR-let7c expression is associated with
the presence of lymphnode metastasis in high-grade urothelial bladder
cancer.

