Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between phytanic acid and alpha-methylacyl-CoA
racemase (AMACR) expression in the normal human prostate


Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) is an enzyme that is overexpressed
in prostate cancer, with lower levels present in normal prostatic
tissues. AMACR is involved in the metabolism of phytanic acid - a
branched chain saturated fatty acid that has been linked with elevated
risks of prostate cancer in several epidemiologic studies. Although
considerable research has been done on AMACR as a clinical biomarker in
prostate cancer, no study has evaluated the possible link between
phytanic acid and AMACR gene expression in the normal human prostate, and
thus the possibility that AMACR plays a causal role in prostate
carcinogenesis. Fasting blood and histologcally benign prostate tissue
samples were obtained from 31 men undergoing radical prostatectomy for
the treatment of localized disease. Concentrations of phytanic acid in
serum and tissues were determined by isotope dilution gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. RNA was extracted from epithelial cells
isolated from fresh-frozen prostate tissues by laser capture
microdissection, and AMACR mRNA levels were quantified using real time
polymerase chain reaction. Tissue phytanic acid concentrations were not
significantly correlated with serum levels nor with prostatic AMACR mRNA
levels. Notably, AMACR was significantly inversely correlated with body
mass index (Spearman correlation coefficient (r)= 0.43, p=0.02) and
directly correlated with Gleason score (r=0.35, p=0.05). Stratification
by body mass index revealed an unexpected inverse correlation between
wAMACR gene expression levels and phytanic acid concentrations in the
prostate (r= 0.95, p= 0.001) in obese men. In conclusion, blood and
tissue levels of phytanic acid were not correlated, which suggests that
blood measures should not be utilized as a surrogate measure of this
fatty acid in the target organ. Contrary to expectation, tissue phytanic
acid levels were significantly inversely associated with AMACR gene
expression levels in the prostate, but only among obese men.These
findings require confirmation in other, larger studies.

