Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In human breast cancer cells thyroid hormone signaling overshadows
estrogen signaling on SMP30 gene leading to induction of apoptosis


Crosstalk between thyroid and estrogen hormones actions have been
documented with regard to a variety physiological functions. Both of
these hormones regulate transcription of target genes by binding to their
nuclear receptors that interact with specific responsive elements
(estrogen and thyroid hormone response elements, i.e. ERE and TRE,
respectively. Recently, we have demonstrated that 3, 35 Triiodo L
Thyronine (T3) can induce apoptosis in ER+ve highly metastatic breast
cancer MCF-7 cells through downregulating Senescence marker protein-30
(SMP30) gene. SMP30 has also been reported to be downregulated by
17-Estradiol (E2) in prostrate gland and mammary epithelial cells.
Interestingly, thyroid receptors (TRs) and estrogen receptor (ER) share a
common response element, so we hypothesised a possible competition
between both the receptors in SMP30 promoter under different hormone
responses. To prove this hypothesis, gel retardation and luciferase
assays were conducted by taking hSMP30 promoter reporter construct
validated our findings of the putative ERE site. Competition Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) showed prominent TR binding irrespective
of thyroid and estrogen hormone treatment. As a result, there was a
significant repression found in whole promoter activity in presence of T3
and also in presence of both E2 and T3 treatment. Although the SMP30
promoter activity was same in response to E2 and T3 but the functional
consequences after downregulation of SMP30 in human breast cancer cells
were different. Overall our studies indicate that estrogen
signalling/downstream target molecules of E2 weren't affected by estrogen
mediated SMP30 downregulation however, SMP30 downregulation by thyroid
hormone synergized the effect of T3 by further inducing apoptosis in
human breast cancer cells. Thyroid hormone induced apoptosis in human
breast cancer cells was through activated p53 molecule.

