Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of neoadjuvant therapy for the number of lymph node
micrometastasis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


[Introduction] Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) often develops
lymph node metastasis. Several study demonstrated that micrometastasis
(MM) in lymph nodes was an independent prognostic factor for ESCC.
Recently effect of neoadjuvant therapy including chemotherapy and
chemoradiontherapy has been reported. The aim of this study was to
investigate the affect of on MM in lymph nodes for ESCC. [Materials and
methods] We retrospectively reviewed clinical data of consecutive162
patients with ESCC who underwent esophagectomy accompanied with systemic
lymphadectomy in our institution from 2000 to 2010. Firstly, we analyzed
the relapse free survival of 90 patients who underwent surgical resection
without neoadjuvant therapy and assessed the impact of MM in lymph nodes
on prognosis of ESCC by immunohistochemistry using anti-cytokeratin
antibody. Next we examined MM in lymph nodes of 72 patients who underwent
surgical resection with neoadjuvant therapy and evaluate the effect of
neoadjuvant therapy on MM in lymph nodes. [Results] Of 5414 lymph nodes
from 90 patients with cStage II/III (surgery group), we detected
311(5.1%) of overt metastasis detected by H&E staining and 124(2.3%) of
MM in lymph nodes. The clinicopathological factors related to the
postoperative relapse included pTNM Stage and number of lymph node
metastasis with MM. Otherwise, in neoadjuvant Group, Of 3466 lymph nodes
from 72 patients, we detected 154(4.4%) of overt metastasis and 19(0.4%)
of MM. In neoadjuvant group, the rate of MM was decreased from 2.3% to
0.4% as compared to that of surgery group. Importantly, the rate of MM in
upper mediastinal region was decreased by neoadjuvant therapy.
[Conclusion] We demonstrated the significance of micrometastasis in lymph
nodes for prognosis of esophageal cancer. Our findings suggested that
neoadjuvant therapy may reduce the number of micrometastasis. Neoadjuvant
therapy should be estimated as the standard therapy against esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

