Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioma spheroids obtained via ultrasonic aspiration are viable and
express stem cell markers: a new tissue resource for glioma research


Ultrasonic aspirators allow safe, rapid and accurate removal of brain
tumors. However, the tissue fragments removed are used surprisingly
little in research. The aim of this study was to investigate whether such
tissue fragments could be cultured as organotypic multicellular spheroids
and whether these spheroids could be used in cancer stem cell research.
Biopsy-derived spheroids have earlier been shown to represent an
important alternative to commercially available cell lines, but access to
biopsy tissue is often limited. Tissue fragments obtained by ultrasonic
aspiration from 10 glioblastomas and tumor biopsy tissue from seven of
these tumors were collected and cultured in serum-containing and
serum-free medium. After culturing, the fragments formed spheroids, which
were prepared for histological staining. For comparison, the
corresponding fixed non-cultured patient biopsies were also included in
the study. Hematoxylin eosin staining showed that viable glioma spheroids
were obtained from both ultrasonic and biopsy tissue using both
serum-containing and serum-free medium. Independent of the type of tissue
used for the spheroids, the immunohistochemical expression of GFAP
decreased, whereas the expression of VWF and the Ki-67 proliferation
index increased in spheroids cultured in serum-free versus
serum-containing medium. Independent of the type of medium, both
ultrasonic and biopsy tissue expressed significantly higher levels of the
investigated stem cell markers CD133, Nestin and Bmi-1 compared to the
non-cultured patient biopsies. In conclusion, we found that is was easy
to obtain viable glioma spheroids from ultrasonic tissue fragments.
Although differences in expression of the different markers were found,
the overall expression was preserved, thereby suggesting ultrasonic
tissue fragments as a new tissue resource for glioma research.

