Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CXXC motifs in the metal binding domains are required for
ATP7B to mediate resistance to cisplatin


ATP7A and ATP7B are copper (Cu) efflux transporters that are up-regulated
in many types of cancer that have acquired resistance to platinum
(Pt)-containing drugs. Over-expression of ATP7A or ATP7B in cultured
cells also leads to Pt drug resistance, but the mechanisms by which these
proteins mediate resistance are unknown. The N-terminal domain of both
ATP7A and ATP7B contains 6 metal binding domains (MBD) whose fold is
similar to that of ATOX1, a protein with which cisplatin (cDDP) is known
to bind. Each MBD contains a CXXC motif similar to that known to be the
cDDP binding site in ATOX1. This study explored the role of the MBDs of
ATP7B in mediating cDDP resistance. Gel filtration, gel electrophoresis
and UV spectrometry was employed to determine whether the sixth MBD of
ATP7B (MBD6), which is essential for Cu efflux, interacts with cDDP.
Recombinant MBD6 was produced as a maltose binding protein (MBP) fusion
protein in E. coli. Purified recombinant MBD6 interacted with cDDP very
rapidly and became multimerized producing dimers, trimers, tetramers and
pentamers. Purified wild type MBP-MBD6 bound 1.75 0.19 mol Pt/mol whereas
the MBP tag alone bound only 0.57 0.012 mol Pt/mol (p = 0.0057). MBD6
accumulated cDDP at a rate of 0.08 mol Pt/min/mol. Blocking the CXXC
motif in MBD6 with a thiol reactive agent, or converting the motif to
SXXS caused the loss of cDDP binding and multimerization. MBD6 in which
the CXXC motif was converted to SXXS bound only 0.42 0.013 mol Pt/mol of
protein. The reaction of cDDP with MBD6 was rapid as dimers and trimers
were detected with just a 10 min exposure to a 20-fold molar excess of
cDDP. cDDP reacted with MBS6 even after pre-loading of the protein with
Cu, presumably dislodging Cu from the protein. The interaction of cDDP
with MBD6 was strong and only very slowly reversible under extreme
reducing conditions. Using the lentiviral vector pLVX-mCherry-C1, we
constructed vectors capable of expressing mCherry-tagged wild type ATP7B,
variants in which either the first 5 (mC-ATP7B 1-5) or all 6 (mC-ATP7B
1-6) of the MBD were deleted, and a variant in which the CXXC motifs of
all 6 MBDs were converted to SXXS (mC-ATP7B SXXS). These constructs were
expressed in 2008 ovarian carcinoma and HEK293Tcell lines and their
effects on the intracellular accumulation and cytotoxicity of cDDP as
well as their traffic pattern following cDDP administration was
investigated. The wild type ATP7B conferred resistance to 2008 cells,
significantly reduced cDDP accumulation and exhibited cDDP- and
Cu-induced trafficking from the TGN to superficially located vesicles;
however, the other variants did not. We conclude that cDDP binds to ATP7B
and that, in the case of MBD6, the site of interaction is the CXXC motif.
Conversion of the CXXC motif in all 6 MBD rendered ATP7B unable to
mediate cDDP resistance of traffic from the TGN indicating that cDDP
binding to at least one of the MBD is essential to ATP7B-mediated
detoxification of cDDP.

