Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib overcome irinotecan resistance in colorectal cancer


Despite recent advances in the treatment of colon cancer, tumor
resistance is a frequent cause of chemotherapy failure. In the last
decade, several studies have shown that cetuximab, an anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody, can overcome acquired resistance to irinotecan
chemotherapy, but only in KRAS non mutant tumors. Thus, new treatment
options are needed to improve survival in patients with irinotecan
refractory and KRAS mutated colorectal cancer. In this study, we examined
if treatment with sorafenib, a potent inhibitor of Raf kinase and VEGF
receptor, could reverse the resistant phenotype in tumor, thereby
enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of currently used irinotecan
treatment. We used both in vitro and in vivo models to test the efficacy
of sorafenib either as a single agent or in combination with irinotecan.
We have first tested these different combinations on seven colorectal
cancer cell lines displaying different molecular characteristics (mutated
or not for KRAS, BRAF, p53 and PIK3CA). We have shown that sorafenib, as
a single agent, showed antitumor properties and the effects were more
pronounced when it was used in combination with the active metabolite of
irinotecan, SN38. Then we have tested these treatments on SN38-resistant
clones derived from the colon adenocarcinoma HCT-116 (KRAS mut) and SW48
(KRAS WT) cell lines, that show various levels (6 to 60 fold) of
resistance to SN-38 as compared to the corresponding parental cells.
Sorafenib has improved the anti-tumoral activity of SN-38 on all the SN38
resistant clones in vitro. Moreover, sorafenib sensitized tumor cells
derived from both SN38-sensitive and -resistant HCT116 cells to
irinotecan treatment in xenograft models. Signalling pathways involved in
this effect have been identified on xenografts using the proteome
profiler array. Altogether, our results show for the first time that
sorafenib can inhibit resistance to irinotecan and suggest that sorafenib
could be used to overcome resistance to irinotecan-based chemotherapies
in colorectal cancer, particularly in KRAS mutated tumors.

