Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mitotic kinase Aurora-A promotes breast cancer metastases by
inducing a CD24low/- basal-like stem cell phenotype


In this study we demonstrate that gain of HER-2/Neu expression in human
breast cancer xenografts harboring constitutive active Raf-1 induces
Aurora-A over-expression that ultimately drives the transition from a
luminal to a highly invasive basal-like phenotype. Over-expression of
Aurora-A was induced by phosphorylation and protein stabilization by
HER-2/Neu rather than increased Aurora-A gene expression. Moreover,
Aurora-A stabilization induced an increase of HER-2/Neu expression in
breast cancer cells defining a novel positive feed-back loop between
Aurora-A and HER-2/Neu oncogenic signaling pathways. Basal-like tumor
cells over-expressing Aurora-A and HER-2/Neu underwent to loss of CD24
surface receptor, expressed epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
markers and acquired stem cell-like properties such as mammospheres
formation and self-renewal. Pharmacologic inhibition of HER-2/Neu
signaling pathway with lapatinib in cancer cells over-expressing Aurora-A
demonstrated that Aurora-A was downstream to HER-2/Neu in the development
of EMT and stemness. To determine whether Aurora-A induced a cancer stem
cell-like phenotype through development of chromosomal instability and
tumor cell phenotypic heterogeneity, we performed a SKY analysis on the
breast cancer cell lines employed in this study. Our results demonstrate
that invasive breast cancer cells harboring a basal-like phenotype did
not develop higher chromosomal instability compared to luminal
non-invasive cancer cells, signifying that Aurora-A has a direct effect
on the development of basal-like breast cancer cells with stemness
properties. Importantly, pharmacologic inhibition of Aurora-A kinase
activity with the small molecule MLN8237 restored CD24 expression and
reversed EMT leading to the re-establishment of a luminal phenotype and
suppression of distant metastases. Our findings implicate for the first
time the mitotic kinase Aurora-A in the development and maintenance of
CD24 negative basal-like tumor stem cells responsible for breast cancer
recurrence and progression. These observations have also important
implications for the development of molecular targeted therapies to
inhibit Aurora-A kinase activity and stemness improving the overall
survival of breast cancer patients.

