Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of PERK and the unfolded protein response in the
development of resistance to antiangiogenic agents in renal cell carcinoma


Introduction: Intrinsic and delayed resistance of renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) towards agents targeting VEGF-signaling remains a major therapeutic
problem. The initial regression of RCC metastases observed in many
patients treated with VEGFR2 antagonists is due to the hypoxia and
diminished supply of nutrients resulting from the involution of tumor
microvasculature. However, hypoxia also elicits a series of adaptive
responses in tumor cells that enhance their survival, including
activation of the unfolded protein response. To investigate the role of
the unfolded protein response in the resistance of RCC to antiangiogenic
agents, we assessed the effects of suppressing PERK in RCC cell lines.
Experimental Design: A 786-O cell line was generated which was
transfected with tetracycline-regulable shRNA targeting PERK. The 786-0
PERK shRNA cell line was exposed to hypoxia (0.5% O2) and glucose
deprivation both in the presence and absence of doxycycline. Cells thus
treated were lysed after 24 hours for western blot analysis for PERK,
LC3, phospho-ACC, BIP, and phopsho-eIF2. Similarly treated cells were
also analyzed after 48 hours for viability by propidium iodide staining.
Xenografts were generated from 786-O PERK snRNA cells in nude beige mice
and grown to 10mm in size. Mice were then treated with saline,
doxycycline (2mg/ml in drinking water), sunitinib (50mg/kg) once daily by
gavage, or the combination of both doxycline and sunitinib. Results:
Treatment of 786-O PERK shRNA cells with doxycycline suppressed
expression level of PERK by approximately 80%. Knockdown of PERK
significantly increased cell death resulting from exposure of cell lines
to hypoxia and nutrient deprivation in vitro associated with diminished
expression of LC3. Treatment of mice bearing 786-0 PERK snRNA xenografts
with doxycycline or sunitnib alone had little effect on tumor growth
compared with saline treated mice. However, the combination of both
sorafenib and doxycline resulted in a sustained tumor growth arrest.
Conclusions: These data suggested that PERK and the unfolded protein
response have a critical role in the ability of tumor cells to survive
the insult of hypoxia and nutrient deprivation caused by the diminished
vasculature induced by antiangiogenic therapy. Therapeutic strategies to
oppose to unfolded protein response may be promising adjuncts to
antiangiogenc agents in RCC.

