Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of sunitinib on endothelial-pericyte cell interaction


Background: Sunitinib is a multitargeted tyrosine kinase receptor
inhibitor, which has been used for the last 5 years as an anti-angiogenic
drug for the treatment of metastasic renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Sunitinib treatment induces an initial favorable response in patients
with RCC, however, resistant to sunitinib occurs in the majority of
patients after 11 months of treatment. One of the mechanism that has been
hypothesized to explain the resistance of RCC to sunitinib is an increase
in pericyte cell coverage in the tumor vasculature. In vivo, pericytes
and endothelial cells are in close proximity and they frequently have
direct contact with each other through gap junctions.
Endothelial-pericytes interactions regulate vascular development,
endothelial cell permeability, vessel stabilization, vessel maturation,
and remodeling. Moreover, pericytes have been demonstrated to secrete
paracrine factors that stimulate signaling pathways implicated in
endothelial cell differentiation and survival. Previous studies have
shown that anti-angiogenic drugs may disrupt the physical interaction
between endothelial cells and pericytes in vivo. Moreover, in vitro
studies have demonstrated that the loss of endothelial-pericyte contact
may decrease the level of expression of SMA and NG2, the two most
important pericyte markers used in vivo. The aim of this study is to
analyze the endothelial-pericyte cell interactions in vitro and the
effect that sunitinib has in these interactions. Methods and Results:
HUVEC (Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells) and hPC-PL (Human
Pericytes from Placenta) cells were utilized to characterize in vitro the
effect of sunitinib in endothelial-pericyte cell interactions. The effect
of sunitinib in cell proliferation of each primary culture was determined
by using crystal violet and growth curve assays. Sunitinib, at 1uM
concentration, decreases proliferation rate of endothelial and pericyte
cells, process that was reversible after sunitinib withdrawal. Cocultures
of HUVEC and hPC-PL cells showed that both cells types start to
physically interact after 24 hours. After 48 hours of co-culture, hPC-PL
cells in close proximity to endothelial cells overexpressed the pericyte
markers NG2 and SMA, process that have been reported to be dependent on
gap junction formation. Use of conditioned media obtained from
endothelial cells did not induce overexpression of NG2 or SMA in hPC-PL
cells, which suggests physical contact between pericyte and endothelial
cells was necessary for pericyte to over-express NG2 and SMA. In
addition, co-culture experiments performed in the presence of sunitinib
did not affect the physical cell-to-cell interaction between HUVEC and
hPC-PL. Conclusion: These results indicate endothelial-pericyte cell
interactions are not only an important mechanism for endothelial survival
signaling, but also are necessary to maintain pericyte differentiation.

