Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of TNF- in PGE2-induced tumorigenesis in gastric cancer
mouse model


Accumulating evidence has indicated that chronic inflammation is
associated with cancer development. Mouse genetic studies have shown that
the proinflammatory mediator, PGE2, plays an essential role in
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis. Moreover, the proinflammatory cytokine
TNF- also plays a key role in tumorigenesis, including colitis-associated
colon cancer. However, the relationship between PGE2 and TNF- in
tumorigenesis has not yet been fully investigated. We previously
constructed a gastric tumor mouse model, Gan mice, that recapitulates
human intestinal-type gastric cancer, in which both the PGE2 pathway and
Wnt signaling are activated simultaneously in the stomach by transgenic
expression of the COX-2, mPGES-1, and Wnt1 genes. The induction of the
PGE2 pathway triggers an inflammatory response in the Gan mouse stomach,
and the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines is induced
in gastric tumor tissues. We herein examined the role of TNF- in the
PGE2-induced inflammation-associated gastric tumorigenesis by crossing
Gan mice with TNF- knockout mice. Importantly, the gastric tumorigenesis
in the Gan TNF- (-/-) compound mice was significantly suppressed in
comparison to the control Gan mice. Moreover, the -catenin level
decreased significantly in the gastric tumors of Gan TNF- (-/-) mice,
suggesting a role for TNF- in the promotion of Wnt signaling.
Interestingly, inflammatory cells, including macrophages and CD4+ T
cells, still infiltrated into the Gan TNF- (-/-) mouse tumors, and the
expression levels of IL-1 and IL-6 were almost the same as those in the
control Gan mouse tumors. Accordingly, it is possible that TNF- is an
important tumor-promoting factor for gastric tumorigenesis, although TNF-
is not essential for PGE2-induced inflammation in the stomach. Notably,
macrophages in the Gan TNF- (-/-) mouse tumors lost their expression of
the M2 marker CD206. It has been suggested that macrophages polarized to
the M2(-like) type are important for tissue remodeling and tumorigenesis.
It is therefore possible that TNF- is required for macrophage
polarization to a pro-tumorigenic status, which may be important for Wnt
activation and gastric tumor promotion.

