Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of immunosuppressive leukocyte inhibitory
immunoglobulin like transcript 3(ILT3) receptors increases with the
development and progression of ovarian tumors


Background: Immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment has been suggested
as one of the barriers to anti-tumor immune response in patient with
ovarian cancer (OVCA). Leukocyte Inhibitory Receptor Immunoglobulin-like
Transcript 3 (ILT3) has been proposed as a factor involved in the
suppression of immune response in several malignancies. However, the
expression and role of ILT3 in the development and progression of ovarian
tumors has not yet been studied. Objective: The goal of this study was to
examine the expression and association of ILT3 in ovarian tumors in
laying hen, a preclinical model of OVCA in humans. Methods: A cohort of
mature White Leghorn laying hens with normal or low egg laying rates were
evaluated by transvaginal ultrasound scan (15 normal hens and 30 hens
with OVCA).All hens were euthanized and serum and ovarian tissues from
all hens were collected and processed for immunohistochemistry (IHC),
Western blotting (WB) and RT-PCR. Presence of tumors and tumor staging
were confirmed by gross morphology and histology. Expression of ILT3 was
examined by IHC, WB and RT-PCR. Results: Immune cell like cells in the
ovarian stroma as well as epithelium of the normal ovaries and ovarian
tumors expressed ILT3. The intensity of ILT3 expression was significantly
higher in hens with OVCA than normal hens. Moreover, the intensity of
ILT3 expression varied with histological subtypes of ovarian tumors and
was significantly higher in serous OVCA than endometrioid OVCA. A band of
approximately 55kDa of ILT3 protein was detected in the homogenates of
normal ovarian surface epithelium or tumor epithelium as well as whole
normal or ovarian tumor extracts. Similar to IHC observations, protein
expression was stronger in hens with OVCA than in normal hens.
Conclusion: This is the first study to show that immunosuppressive ILT3
is expressed by ovarian tumor epithelium and the intensity of expression
increases as the disease progresses. Thus the results are consistent with
the hypothesis that ILT3 may be involved in the suppression of anti-tumor
immunity in OVCA. The laying hens may be a useful model to understand the
OVCA-associated expression of ILT3. This animal model also offers the
opportunity to develop and test anti-ILT3 therapy to enhance anti-tumor
immunity against OVCA in humans. Support: Department of Defense
(OC#93303) and Elmer Sylvia and Sramek Foundation.

