Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Viability screens in leukemic and breast cancer cells with pooled
lentiviral shRNA libraries identify potential therapeutic targets and
synergistic lethal interactions


Background: One strategy to circumvent problems with conventional
chemotherapy is to develop drugs against more specific cancer targets.
Another is to use molecularly targeted agent (MTA) combinations to
circumvent tumor resistance and increase the therapeutic index. Such
synergistically lethal (SL) MTA combinations, however, are not easily
predicted based on our rudimentary knowledge of cancer biology and drug
action mechanisms. Method: In the first strategy, our aim was to identify
genes modulating proliferation and survival in leukemic cell lines (K562,
Jurkat, and Raji) using a pooled lentiviral library expressing 27,500
shRNA targeting 5,043 human pathway-associated genes. Cells were
transduced by the viral library and collected at several time points.
Bar-codes were amplified from genomic DNA and sequenced (Illumina GAIIx).
In the second strategy, we have adapted the same approach to
combinatorially screen shRNA sequences targeting 40 DNA Damage and Repair
(DDR) genes to discover additive and synergistic combinations that
generate a synthetic-lethal phenotype. Human mammary epithelial cancer
(HMEC) cells were transduced with a 27K shRNA SL DDR lentiviral library
comprised of a redundant set of 16 binary shRNA constructs for each
possible gene-gene combination (1,600). The library-transduced HMEC cells
were grown for ten days, then bar-codes amplified and sequenced (Illumina
HiSeq2000). Results: The viability screen with leukemic cell lines
identified more than 250 essential genes for each panel of cells.
Subsequent validation using single shRNA-expressing constructs showed
that in each screen, about 80% of shRNAs identified did indeed lead to
cell death when transduced in cells. Analysis of the identified essential
genes for known biological interactions revealed several non-random
clusters of interacting proteins that provide some insight into signaling
pathways and protein networks specific to these cancers. The SL screen in
HMEC cells identified 10 SL shRNA pair candidates including known SL
shRNA pair PARP1/BRCA1. Additional analysis of lethal combinations
indicated redundant, complementary, and compensatory responses in cancer
cells. Conclusion: We believe that newly discovered
hematopoietic-specific genes represent potentially novel drug targets.
Moreover, they can be used to develop and establish both novel cancer
targeted therapies and myeloablative conditioning regimens with decreased
toxicity. Based on SL screen results in HMEC cells, we believe that
comprehensive experimental annotation of SL gene-gene interactions in a
wider range of cancer and normal cells will not only predict the most
promising synergistic lethal combinations but also allow the development
of a new generation of multi-specific, highly effective anti-cancer
therapeutics with unique mechanisms of action.

