Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR-targeted gold liposome for molecular imaging and therapy on
NSCLC cells


Nanotechnologies are in development for monitoring drug delivery and
therapeutic effect for cancer. However, tumor-targeted multifunctional
nanoparticles for imaging of and therapy of lung cancer are not
available. The Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed
in approximately 80% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is a
target for novel therapeutics, however, the clinical results using EGFR
inhibitors for NSCLC treatment had mixed results. These results indicate
that EGFR expression or its mutational status is solely not a reliable
marker to determine the outcome. Therefore, we have developed liposome
(120nm) encapsulated with colloidal gold that are conjugated to
therapeutic anti-EGFR antibodies (Katayama Chemical Industries Co. Ltd.
Osaka, Japan) to determine the molecular specific imaging of NSCLC. The
colloidal gold is used for optical imaging and the anti-EGFR antibody for
therapy. In the present study, we investigated in vitro effect of these
liposomes on EGFR-expressing (HCC827 and H1299) and EGFR-null (H520)
NSCLC cells. EGFR-targeted liposome exhibited a strong antitumor effect
on EGFR-expressing NSCLC cells. On the other hands, no significant growth
inhibitory effects were observed on non-targeted liposome-treated cells.
Intriguingly, treatment with EGFR-targeted liposome resulted in
significantly higher cell death as compared with anti-EGFR antibody and
liposome alone. Furthermore, reflected polarizing microscopy showed that
the concentration of EGFR-targeted liposome bound to EGFR-expressing
NSCLC cells increased, but EGFR-null cells did not. When EGFR was
inhibited pharmacologically, the binding efficiency of EGFR-targeted
liposome was attenuated on EGFR-expressing NSCLC cells. These findings
indicate that EGFR-targeted liposome are selectively bound and delivered
to EGFR expressing NSCLC cells but not the EGFR-null NSCLC cells. We are
currently determining in vivo effect of EGFR-targeted liposome using
subcutaneous HCC827 and H520 tumor models. Our findings demonstrated that
EGFR-targeted liposome is a promising agent for therapy and molecular
imaging of NSCLC.

