Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM transcriptional regulation mediated by BRCA1/E2F1 axis
controls DNA damage response in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death
affecting men worldwide. Chromosomal instability is a key feature in PCa
progression. Using genome-wide screen for factor binding in combination
with expression profiles, we previously reported BRCA1 binding to several
promoters involved in cell cycle regulation and DNA damage response. We
also generated a BRCA1 depleted xenograft model in order to study the
role of BRCA1 role in DNA damage response in vivo. We demonstrated that
BRCA1 expression status plays a central role in doxorubicin resistance in
PCa. One of the BRCA1 targets that emerged from these analyses was ATM
(ataxia telangiectasia mutated).Although it is well accepted that the
kinase protein ATM is a pivotal mediator in genotoxic stress, it is
unknown if its transcriptional regulation plays a role in the DNA damage
response. Our goal was to investigate ATM transcription regulation in PCa
under different genotoxic insults. Here we exposed PC3 cells to different
genotoxic agents and the ATM promoter activity was determined by a
luciferase reporter assay. We found that the topoisomerase II inhibitors
doxorubicin and mitoxantrone repressed ATM transcription; however
etoposide and methotrexate did not show significant changes. Using
BRCA1-overexpressing PC3 cell lines, we found that BRCA1 increases ATM
mRNA and promoter activity. Accordingly, BRCA1 depletion by shRNA
abolished ATM transcription induction. Furthermore, BRCT domain loss
(BRCA1BRCT) impaired the ability of BRCA1 to regulate ATM promoter
activity, strongly suggesting that BRCT domain is essential for ATM
regulation. Xenograft tumors generated by BRCA1 depleted PC3 cells
injected in nu/nu mice demonstrated that BRCA1 knock-down abolished ATM
transcriptional induction. Considering ATM phosphorylates BRCA1, we
investigated BRCA's ability to activate ATM promoter after inhibition of
the ATM kinase activity by KU55933. BRCA1 overexpressing PC3 cells
exposed to KU55933 showed significant decreased ATM promoter activity
compared to control cells suggesting ATM regulation by BRCA1 is not
mediated by ATM kinase activity. In addition, we performed
BRCA1-ChIP-qPCR using primers spanning every 500bp along ATM promoter; we
found that BRCA1 binds at 500bp upstream of the ATM transcription start
site which was disrupted by doxorubicin. We identified one E2F1 putative
DNA binding site at this region suggesting that BRCA1 association to ATM
promoter could be E2F1 mediated. Finally, E2F1 transfection in PC3 cells
significant decreased ATM transcription which was impaired by E2F1
dominant negative (E1-363). In summary, BRCA1/E2F1 complex binds and
induces ATM transcription. After genotoxic stress BRCA1 protein is
displaced from the ATM promoter and E2F1 downregulates ATM transcription.
Thus, BRCA1/E2F1 axis controls DNA damage response in PCa through ATM
transcriptional regulation.

