Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blueberries: Conventional cancer prevention


Coronary heart disease and cancer, besides remaining the two leading
causes of death in the United States, share another common trait: they
can both be attributed to lifestyle choices that increase their risk.
Epidemiological studies suggest that the consumption of both an
antioxidant and phytochemical-rich diet contribute towards the reduction
of heart disease and several cancer types. There has been a substantial
amount of interest in Vaccinium corymbosum, also known as blueberries,
due to their high antioxidant levels which have been show to help prevent
cancer of the colon, breast, and prostate. Blueberries exhibit a high
content of both phytochemicals such as flavonoids and tannins; and
antioxidants such as phenolic acid and resveratrol. Antioxidants provide
protection against oxidative stress, a condition that has been suggested
to contribute to a variety of diseases, including atherosclerosis,
Parkinson's disease, and cancer. The purpose of this study was to explore
the health benefits of organic vs. conventional blueberry consumption by
comparing the antioxidant content of their individual components,
including pulp, skin, seed, and juice using both the Hydrophilic Oxygen
Radical Absorbance Capacity (H-ORAC) and the Lipophilic Oxygen Radical
Absorbance Capacity (L-ORAC) assay. High-Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) was also used to identify and quantify the amount
of Vitamin C in both the organic and conventional blueberries. Blueberry
samples were obtained from local distributors and the assays were
replicated with five different lots of blueberries. Results indicated
that conventional blueberries (33,388 TE/100g pulp, seed, skin and
607,700 TE/L juice) have higher antioxidant levels than organic
blueberries (25,800 TE/100g pulp, seed, skin and 415,608 TE/L juice)
across all samples. Conversely, HPLC determined a slightly higher Vitamin
C content in the organically grown blueberries (592.879 g/g) compared to
conventional blueberries (386.947 g/g). These results suggest that
conventional blueberries may have a higher health benefit potential in
preventing cancer and many other degenerative diseases that plague the
world.

