Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of proteasome inhibition of caspase-8 regulation in cancer


Dissection of the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis has lead
to the development of new anti-cancer therapeutic strategies. Strategies
involve combination of a chemotherapeutic agent with a death inducing
ligand, such as TNF-alpha Related Apoptosis Inducing Ligand (TRAIL) to
induce apoptosis in cancer cells that are resistant to apoptosis. We
recently demonstrated that proteasome inhibition sensitizes TRAIL
resistant prostate cancer to TRAIL mediated apoptosis using both in-vitro
and in-vivo models, by stabilizing the active p18 subunit of initiator
caspase-8. Based on this data indicating a potential relationship between
caspase-8 and the proteasome, we hypothesize that caspase-8
ubiquitination and targeting to the 26S proteasome regulates the
extrinsic pathway of cancer cell apoptosis. This study pursues the impact
of proteasome inhibition on caspase-8 stability, trafficking and activity
following death receptor activation. The contribution of caspase-8
polyubiquitination in regulating the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is
determined, using subcellular fractionation, caspase-8 and polyubiquitin
immunoprecipitation (IP), and fluorescent microscopy techniques in
diverse experimental cell models. The cell lines analyzed include the
TRAIL resistant LNCaP prostate cancer cell line and caspase-8 deficient
neuroblastoma (NB7) cell line, engineered to re-express and test the
wild-type and non-cleavable mutant forms of caspase-8. Our findings
indicate that the non-cleavable forms of caspase-8 are capable of
inducing apoptosis comparably to wild-type caspase-8 upon treatment with
proteasome inhibitor and TRAIL. Moreover we provide evidence that
caspase-8 polyubiquitination occurs following caspase-8 processing into
its active subunits, processed caspase-8 accumulates at the DISC, and
ultimately cycles into the cytosol for proteasomal degradation. This
study identifies caspase-8 processing as a significant regulatory
mechanism in apoptosis outcomes in cancer cells, but not required for
caspase-8 activation. Together these data provide a better understanding
of caspase-8 regulation that can be used as a platform for identifying
new molecular targets such as E3 ligases responsible for caspase-8
regulation. Further defining caspase-8 regulation can lead to strategies
that enhance efficacy of current therapies or lead to development of new
more specific caspase-8 driven anti-cancer approaches. Funding provided
by DOD GRANT USAMRMC PC073314

