Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of cancer stem cells by self-assembled
miRNA-nanovectors


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of tumorigenic cells capable
of self-renewal and differentiation. These cells are highly resistant to
chemo/radiation therapy and may be responsible for tumor recurrence and
metastasis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in cancer initiation and
progression by regulating genes responsible for cell proliferation and/or
death. The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-34a is directly regulated by p53.
miR-34a targets Notch and Bcl-2, both of which are involved in the
self-renewal and survival of CSCs. We recently showed that miR-34a
potently inhibits tumorsphere growth and tumor-initiation of p53-mutant
pancreatic cancer, accompanied by reduction of CSCs and inhibition of
Bcl-2/Notch signaling pathways. However, like other gene therapeutics,
tumor-targeted delivery of miRNA, especially targeting to CSCs, remains a
great challenge. We have established a self-assembled nanovector system
that shows promising tumor specificity and efficiency for tumor-targeted
gene/siRNA delivery (US Patent No. 6,749,863 and 7,479,276 with
modification). The nanovectors show promising specificity and efficacy
for systemic p53 tumor suppressor gene therapy in human cancer models.
The first-in-human Phase I clinical trial of nano-p53 (NCT00470613,
ClinicalTrails.gov) by Chang EH group shows a promising safety profile,
efficient therapeutic gene expression in tumors and early tumor response.
We have modified this nanotechnology and established a nanovector
delivery system to deliver miR-34a, which resulted in a high transfection
efficiency and significant Bcl-2/Notch downregulation in pancreatic,
breast and prostate cancer cell lines, accompanied with reduced
tumorsphere growth in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. More
importantly, systemic injection of nano-miR-34a can delivermiR-34a to the
established pancreatic, breast and prostate cancer xenograft tumors and
reduce Bcl-2/Notch expression in these tumors. CSC population was also
reduced in the treated tumors. Our studies demonstrate that our
nano-miR-34a may provide a novel and effective molecular therapy for
human cancers with high Bcl-2 and p53 loss of function, potentially by
modulating cancer stem cells. Molecularly targeted miRNA therapy
delivered by nanovectors could be a powerful tool to correct the cancer
stem cell dysregulation. Supported in part by NIH grant CA121830(S1).

