Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of the representativity of
460 cancer cell lines as model systems for 88 different clinical cancer
types


Cell lines are routinely used as model systems in cancer research, drug
discovery and pharmacogenomics. An alarming number of cell lines have
been reported not to represent their original cancer type due to cross
contamination or due to having evolved or dedifferentiated extensively.
However, a systematic evaluation on the extent to which each cell line
accurately represent the corresponding in vivo tumors has not been done
across all types of tumors. The aim of this study was to comprehensively
examine how well cancer cell lines resemble the uncultured primary tumors
they supposedly are derived from and to identify genes and pathways which
are particularly coherent or divergent. We examined 1268 Affymetrix gene
expression profiles from 460 established cell lines and compared them
against reference gene expression data from 13 961 in vivo cancer
samples. These data originated from the In Silico Transcriptomics (IST
TM) database (www.medisapiens.com), a more comprehensive version of the
GeneSapiens database (Kilpinen et al. 2008), and were analyzed by the
Alignment of Gene Expression Profiles (AGEP) method (Kilpinen et al.
2011). AGEP compares gene expression profiles from individual samples to
groups of reference samples, and returns a gene-by-gene analysis of how
much, as well as how uniquely, the sample resembles each reference group.
We compared each of the 1268 cell line samples against 32 main cancer
groups as well as 88 specific cancer reference groups. Thus, our
comparison was unique in that it measured not only how well each of the
cancer cell lines resembled the expected in vivo tumor tissue, but also
how much they resembled all other tumor types. Our results showed that
38% of the cell lines had the highest similarity to the expected main
cancer type. This percentage was lower when looking at the more specific
groups (21%). Similar classification of individual clinical tumors to the
average tumor classes with the AGEP method achieved 88% accuracy. A few
cell line types had a high percentage of matches with the corresponding
clinical tumors, with melanoma (95% match), T-ALL (74%) and colorectal
cancer (79%) showing highest similarities. In contrast, pancreatic and
ovarian tumor cell lines showed the lowest match percentages to the
corresponding primary tumors (0%). We also studied the results on a
gene-by-gene basis and identified those genes that were contributing to
the match or discordant classification in each case. Interestingly,
several genes were common to the majority of cell lines that clearly
deviated from each of the primary tumor types (mostly cell cycle and cell
adhesion genes), while other differences were more cancer-specific, e.g.
MLANA and SILV genes, which were lost from some melanoma cell lines.
These results will be useful for selecting optimal cancer model systems
for each cancer type, and for each gene and pathway of interest.

