Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive action of Piper nigrum on cell proliferation and
apoptosis in skin papillomagenesis and its influence on the
levels/activity of enzymes associated with xenobiotic metabolism and
antioxidant status in Swiss albino mice


Piper nigrum a spice, has widely used in various systems of traditional
medicine. Therefore, the present study was designed to investigate the
chemopreventive potential of P. nigrum on cell proliferation, apoptosis
in DMBA-induced skin papillomagenesis and its influence on the
levels/activity of enzymes associated with xenobiotic metabolism and
antioxidant status in mice. Two different doses (2 and 4%) of P. nigrum
were given orally to the mice in the test diet at peri-initiational
stage. DMBA and croton oil was used to induce and promote skin
papillomagenesis respectively. For biochemical studies, mice were given
with the same doses of P. nigrum in the test diet for two weeks. There
was a significant reduction in (i) tumor burden to 3.0 and 2.4 (positive
control: 6.4); (ii) tumor volume to 1.7 and 2.4 (positive control: 4.7);
and (iii) tumor incidence 60 % and 50 %, respectively in case of 2 and 4%
test diet treated animals relative control (100%). P. nigrum treatment
resulted in upregulation of Bax with concomitant decrease in
antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 and PCNA in mouse skin tumors. P. nigrum
showed a significant increase in the content/activities of phase I and
phase II enzymes with the test diets. A significant enhancement in the
activities of antioxidant enzymes were observed at 2 and 4% test diets of
P. nigrum. Glyoxalase I activity and the content of reduced glutathione
were significantly elevated. Expectedly, the activity of lactate
dehydrogenase, exhibited a significant reduction at both the doses of
test diets. The Chemopreventive effect of P. nigrum could be credited to
its ability to inhibit cell proliferation and enhance apoptosis as well
as to modulate phase I, phase II enzyme systems and also antioxidant
status. The present findings may have some significance from the point of
view of lowering the risk of cancer in human population.

