Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated stress response activator causes cellular senescence
and inhibits growth in multiple tumor cell types


The Integrated Stress Response (ISR) is a program elicited by mammalian
cells to attenuate global translation in response to a variety of
stressors. There are four branches of the ISR, including those mediated
by PERK, which responds to endoplasmic reticulum stress, and GCN2, which
is activated by amino acid deprivation. Activation of these kinases
ultimately leads to translational upregulation of the transcription
factor ATF4, which modulates the expression of genes involved in amino
acid transport and synthesis, oxidative stress, and differentiation.
Complete abrogation of the ISR or its overactivation by pharmacological
agents in the presence of hypoxic or nutrient stress has been shown to
lead to cell death. Here, we employed a small molecule screen to identify
modulators of ATF4 expression via a reporter construct with the 5-UTR of
ATF4 fused to the luciferase gene. From this screen, a compound with
ATF4-activating properties was identified. Multiple assays have been used
to characterize the effects of this drug, referred to as E235, on both
transformed and normal cells. Specifically, we have shown that E235
induces the ISR in a dose-dependent manner in tumor cell lines (HT1080
fibrosarcoma, B16F10 melanoma) but not in normal human diploid cells. The
drug also reduces cell viability and proliferation at low M
concentrations, which does not appear to be dependent on apoptosis. By
performing live cell microscopy, we observed that after prolonged (>24h)
treatment with 1M E235, the majority of cells displayed senescence-like
morphology. This was confirmed by additional experiments, such as
staining for senescence-associated -galactosidase activity and
immunoblotting for the upregulation of the cdk inhibitor p21. Future
experiments will focus on establishing the roles of ATF4, p21 and p53 in
E235-mediated senescence.

