Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SC-1, a sorafenib derivative, induces apoptosis in epidermal
growth factor receptor wild type non-small cell lung cancer through the
inhibition of signal transducers and activators of transcription 3


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide, but currently there are no available target therapies for EGFR
wild type NSCLC patients. Sorafenib, a multiple kinase inhibitors, shows
therapeutic effects in renal carcinoma (RCC) and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Our data shows that the inhibition of signal transducers and
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3), a transcription factor involving
in cell proliferation and survival, represents a major mechanism whereby
sorafenib induces apoptosis in HCC cells (Clin Cancer Res 2010).
Therefore, we design and synthesize a sorafenib derivative, SC-1, which
is devoid of kinase activity (J Hepatol 2011). SC-1 shows higher potency
in inducing apoptosis than sorafenib. Here, we tested efficacy of SC-1 to
EGFR wild type NSCLC and examined the drug mechanism. Methods: EGFR wild
type NSCLC cell lines, A549 H292 H322 and H460, were used for in vitro
studies. Apoptosis was examined by both flow cytometry and western blot.
Signal transduction pathways in cells were assessed by western blot.
Results: SC-1 induced apoptosis in association with reducing the
phosphorylation of STAT3 (p-STAT3) in a dose- and time-dependent manner
in four NSCLC cells lines (A549 H292 H322 and H460). SC-1 demonstrates
dose-dependent anti-proliferation effects on cell viability in NSCLC cell
lines on MTT assay. Increased amount of SC-1 represented improvement cell
apoptosis by FACS in NSCLC cells. Western blot analysis showed SC-1
exhibit dose-dependent and time-dependent effect on cell apoptosis
through inhibition of STAT3 with reducing p-STAT3 and the
STAT3-regulating protein, Mcl-1, survivin and cyclinD1. Conclusions: SC-1
provides a proof of concept that targeting STAT3 signaling pathway is a
novel approach for the treatment of EGFR wild type NSCLC.

