Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aflibercept (VEGF Trap) impairs tumor growth and perfusion, and
restrains metastasis invasion in orthotopic models


Aflibercept (VEGF Trap), a potent angiogenesis inhibitor that binds to
all isoforms of circulating VEGF as well as to placental growth factor,
is currently in Phase 3 clinical trials in combination with chemotherapy
for several cancer indications. The VELOUR Phase 3 trial in oxaliplatin
pre-treated metastatic colorectal cancer showed that aflibercept in
combination with FOLFIRI significantly improved overall survival,
progression-free survival and response rate (in comparison with FOLFIRI
plus placebo), with some increases in adverse events. The aim of the
current study was to explore the effect of aflibercept on tumor vessel
function and determine the impact of a prolonged treatment regimen on the
development of metastases in orthotopic preclinical models. For the
functional evaluation of tumor perfusion by contrast enhanced ultrasound
imaging (CE-US), SCID mice underwent renal subcapsular implantation of
the human renal SK-NEP-1 Ewing sarcoma. The pattern of vascularization in
these rapidly growing tumors was found to be heterogeneous: tumor areas
in the proximal kidney remained highly perfused, while avascular areas
appeared in the distal kidney region which is likely a consequence of
spontaneous necrosis in large tumors. Aflibercept administered bi-weekly
at 40mg/kg for two weeks showed a statistically significant effect on
tumor growth (5% T/C). Aflibercept efficiently down-regulated tumor
perfusion inducing a reduction of tumor blood volume immediately after
the first injection, followed by subsequent stabilization and rebound two
weeks after the end of treatment. The MDA-MB-231-D3H2LN-luc breast tumor
model spontaneously induces lymph node metastasis when orthotopically
implanted into the inguinal mammary fat pads of SCID mice. Aflibercept
(at 25 mg/kg) or vehicle were administered bi-weekly for five weeks in
mice pair-matched by bioluminescent photon emission rates into
aflibercept treatment and control groups. This continuous aflibercept
treatment induced antitumor activity on the primary tumors with 19% T/C
based on bioluminescent signal at the end of treatment. Aflibercept also
controlled metastatic dissemination to the axillary regions with a median
21-day delay for lymph node invasion in treated mice. Conclusion: In an
orthotopic Ewing sarcoma model in mice, repeated administrations of
aflibercept reduced tumor perfusion and stabilized tumor growth. In an
orthotopic mammary carcinoma model, prolonged treatment with aflibercept
inhibited tumor growth and delayed spontaneous lymph node metastasis.
These outcomes are consistent with the mechanism of action postulated for
aflibercept which, upon prolonged treatment is expected to reduce the
density of tumor vasculature and the leakiness of tumor vessels, thereby
controlling tumor growth and metastatic dissemination.

