Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The unfolded protein response promotes tolerance to extreme
hypoxia through autophagy dependent maintenance of cellular metabolism


Oxygenation patterns in solid human tumors are highly heterogeneous both
amongst and within tumors, and individual cells can be exposed to mild or
extreme hypoxia. Hypoxia is known to influence the behavior of tumor
cells in an adverse manner, resulting in poor response to radiotherapy,
chemotherapy, and an increased metastatic capacity. The ability of cells
to tolerate extreme hypoxia and the unusual metabolic environments found
within tumors are not fully understood, but cell phenotype is influenced
through at least three important oxygen-sensing pathways: HIF, mTOR and
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Previously we have shown that the
PERK-eIF2 arm of UPR, which is activated rapidly in response to extreme
hypoxia, contributes to hypoxia tolerance in both cell lines and in human
tumor xenografts. Furthermore, we found that signaling through PERK
results in increased capacity for autophagy through direct
transcriptional regulation of the autophagy genes ATG5 and LC3b during
hypoxic exposure. We hypothesize that autophagy promotes survival during
hypoxia through regulation of metabolic homeostasis and control of
proteotoxicity. To elucidate the contribution of PERK signaling and
autophagy to cell survival and metabolic homeostasis we created a series
of isogenic cell lines with inducible expression of transgenes that cause
PERK or autophagy signaling deficiency. We analyzed the changes in
metabolism and in global metabolite levels during exposure to extreme
hypoxia in wild type, PERK deficient, and autophagy deficient variants.
Using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, we identified a series of
metabolites whose concentration varied in a time-dependent manner during
hypoxia. Importantly, we found that cells defective in PERK signaling
decreased levels of amino acids, increased fatty acids and evidence of
oxidative stress products. Both, PERK signaling and autophagy deficiency
resulted in accelerated glucose metabolism as evidenced by increased
consumption and lactate production during hypoxia compared to controls.
Together, these results suggest that PERK-dependent regulation of
autophagy contributes to maintenance of bio-energetic status, preventing
increased glucose flux and production of reactive oxygen species. Our
data also demonstrate that aggressive, therapy resistant hypoxic cells
may be selectively targeted by therapies that exploit the dependency of
these cells on autophagy for survival.

