Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I trial of EUS-guided intratumoral vaccination with
recombinant Panvac-F and systemic Panvac-V in patients with locally
advanced pancreatic cancer


Preclinical studies in our laboratory were the first to demonstrate the
superiority of intratumoral poxvirus vaccines in overcoming immune escape
and effectively treating murine solid tumor models. Murine models of
bladder and orthotopic mammary tumor demonstrated anergy to systemic
immunization using antigen encoding vaccinia recombinants while
responding to immunization into the tumor microenvironment. We present
here the translation of these findings to a Phase I trial in six patients
with locally advanced inoperable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas
(NCT00669734). The first dose cohort of patients were treated using a
combination of EUS-guided intrapancreatic tumor injection of recombinant
Panvac-F (Fowlpox encoding MUC-1, CEA, TRICOM, 108 PFU) in addition to
systemic Panvac-V (vaccinia, 2 X 108 PFU) and Panvac-F (109 PFU) boosts
(accompanied by subcutaneous rH-GM-CSF, 100 mcg X 4 days). Patients
received a total of 2 intrapancreatic injections of Panvac-F (2 weeks
apart) with systemic Panvac-V and Panvac-F boosts given with GMCSF
extending to day 71 (total of 2 intrapancreatic Panvac-F, 1 sc Panvac-V,
4 sc Panvac-F). Patients were allowed to transition to standard care at
day 35. Patients were evaluated for toxicity, tumor progression, and
serum CA 19-9 and CEA levels. Two of six patients were removed from study
after approximately two weeks due to rapid disease progression and died
one and six months after trial initiation. Of the remaining four, one had
received prior treatment with gemcitabine followed by capecitabine and
radiation and received no further treatment after vaccination; three
received post-vaccination standard treatment with gemcitabine. Of the 4
patients with followup of greater than 6 mos, all have stable disease
with no progression to metastasis (19 mos, 17 mos, 16 mos, 13 mos). One
pt had a DLT (pancreatitis) that resolved allowing completion of protocol
therapy. Results demonstrate that the first in human intrapancreatic
administration of recombinant poxvirus was well tolerated with the
complete regimen suggesting an encouraging period of stable disease. The
trial is currently accruing patients at intrapancreatic dose level 2 (109
PFU). This study is supported by the NCI Cancer Therapeutics Evaluation
Program (CTEP) and by NCI U01-CA07031 and P30-CA72720.

