Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shedding light on the molecular basis of tumor dormancy using
antiangiogenic nanomedicines


Based on clinical necessity for improved anticancer drugs and the
importance of understanding the mechanism underlying the angiogenic
switch phenomenon, we designed a targeted drug delivery system for the
treatment of bone-related angiogenesis-dependent malignances. Using
multidisciplinary approaches involving novel chemistry and molecular
imaging, we synthesized polymer-drug nano-conjugates of HPMA
copolymer-alendronate bound to TNP-470 or paclitaxel designed to target
the angiogenic switch of bone neoplasms such as osteosarcoma and bone
metastases. Antitumor efficacy of the conjugates was evaluated in
osteosarcoma- and breast cancer bone metastases-bearing mice revealing
improved anti-angiogenic and antitumor activity with reduced toxicity
compared with the free drugs. To obtain data regarding the
pharmacokinetic profiles of the drugs, we developed a novel prodrug
system that enables real-time monitoring of drug release by different
fluorescence imaging modalities. To further analyze host-tumor
interactions in response to treatment, we developed a model of tumor
dormancy based on mCherry-infected human osteosarcoma cells that allows
deep tissue signal penetration with an optical readout. This pair of
tumor cells that originate from the same parental cell line, enable
intravital non-invasive detection of early stages of cancer and
evaluation of treatment efficacy with the nanoconjugate. The pair has
similar growth rate in vitro. However, when inoculated into mice,
Saos-2-E cells established a vascularized and palpable tumor within one
month, while Saos-2-D cells remained avascular and non-palpable for a
year until they spontaneously escape. Phenotypic and molecular
(microRNA-based) differences between these two cell lines were evaluated
by in vitro and in vivo methods, with emphasis on changes related to the
angiogenesis process. Although slight differences between the Saos-2-D
and Saos-2-E cells were shown in vitro, when inoculated in vivo Saos-2-E
cells showed increased angiogenic potential compared with the Saos-2-D
cells. Our nanoconjugate was able to regress fast growing-angiogenic
human tumors to a dormant avascular phenotype.

