Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hu177 cryptic epitope: A novel biomarker for the monitoring of
treatment of ovarian cancer


Background: Distinct cryptic collagen epitopes are among the protein
fragments exposed by collagen type IV remodeling, and recent data
indicate that these cryptic epitopes may facilitate tumor migration and
angiogenesis. In studies with melanoma patients we tested the hypothesis
that melanoma can induce detectable changes in systemic levels of cryptic
epitope shedding, specifically the HU177 epitope and were able correlate
the levels of HU177 shedding with clinical and pathologic parameters (Ng
et al Clin Can Res, 14:6253,2008). In addition in a follow-up study the
increased shedding of the Hu177 epitope was shown to correlate with a
worse prognosis in primary melanoma (Hamilton et al, J Trans
Med8:19,2010). In this study we examined wether the serum levels of these
unique cryptic epitopes may be useful to monitor, in a phase II study
with ovarian patients, the course of the combination treatment of
continuous infusion topotecan with erlotinib over multiple cycles of
therapeutic intervention. Methods: We made use of our previously
published ELISA serum assay (Ng et al) of which the key components
involve the anchoring of the primary Hu177 directed antibody followed by
blocking with albumin and then incubation with patient serum. The assay
is further developed with a sandwich ELISA consisting of biotinylated
anti-collagen IV and an anti-biotin antibody conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase, followed by chromagenic color development. A parallel
examination of the Hu177 epitope was also conducted with a humanized
version of the Hu177 antibody (D93). Serial blood samples were monitored
for weekly time periods ranging from 6-20 weeks from 5 patients enrolled
in this study. Serum were collected and stored in multiple aliquots at
20oC. Results: All 5 patients demonstrated an eventual lowering of shed
epitopes, with the time course for a sustained reduction varying with
each patient. Once a nadir in the Hu177 epitope occurred it would last
from 4-6 weeks. In one patient (KL) the nadir levels were the most
sustained and developed late in the course of treatment who had
remarkable decreased changes in CA125 that was previously rapidly
increasing. This patient had platinum resistant peritoneal carcinomatosis
without any dominant masses. Upon failure of topotecan erlotinib as
demonstrated by rising markers and development of ascites and a pleural
effusion, the shed epitopes rapidly recurred starting at week 18 of the
treatment. Comparable serial data were found with the humanized D93
antibody although the sensitivity was more pronounced with the Hu177
antibody. Conclusions: Our interpretation is that this Hu177
determination may provide an indication of active invasion of
extracellular matrix (such as in the peritoneum) and may be a useful
indicator of a biological effect. We cannot exclude at this point that
erlotinib may be contributing to such effects by changes in the matrix.
Supported by a grant from the Chemotherapy Foundation

