Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Nek2 by novel small molecules affects proteasome
activity


Nek2 is a serine/threonine kinase that has been associated with
centrosome function and cell cycle progression. Nek2 overexpression has
been reported in several tumor types including breast and lung cancers.
We have previously shown that elevated expression of Nek2 in clinical
samples of multiple myeloma (MM) correlates with bortezomib resistance.
Furthermore, the overexpression of Nek2 in MM cell lines decreases
sensitivity to bortezomib and knockdown with RNAi sensitizes bortezomib
resistant cells. Due to the proteaseome inhibitory activity of
bortezomib, we hypothesized that Nek2 overexpression may increase
proteasome activity. 26S proteasomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation
from stably transfected Hela cells (+Nek2 or +GFP) and Nek2 was shown to
be involved in the 26S proteasome complex by western blot. Proteasome
activity assays were performed both biochemically and in cell culture
demonstrating that proteasome activity in Hela+Nek2 is significantly
higher than in Hela+GFP. Furthermore, the isolated 26S proteasomes were
incubated with novel Nek2 inhibitors (HCI-2184 and HCI-2389) resulting in
a significant reduction in proteasome function when used as single agents
or in combination with bortezomib. HCI-2184, a reversible inhibitor of
Nek2, demonstrated an IC50 value in the range of 13-38 nM, and HCI-2389,
an irreversible inhibitor of Nek2, showed an IC50 value between 8-26 nM.
Similarly, both compounds significantly increased the efficacy of
bortezomib in inhibiting the proteasome activity. These results were
confirmed in multiple cancer cell lines, including ARP1 (human MM cell
line), H299 (human lung cancer cell line) and K28 (mouse Leydig tumor
cell line). The effect of inhibiting Nek2 on cell cycle was also
investigated. The expression levels of cyclinB1 and cdc2, proteins
degraded by the proteasome for cells to exit mitosis, were increased in
HCI-2389 treated Hela+Nek2 and to a lesser extent Hela+GFP treated cells.
While Nek2 overexpression leads to the down-regulation of cyclinB1 and
cdc2, HCI-2389 treatment successfully rescued this effect. Flow cytometry
data showed that both treatments of HCI-2184 and HCI-2389 significantly
arrested Hela+Nek2 and Hela+GFP in G2/M phase after 24 hours at
concentration as low as 10nM. In conclusion, we have discovered a novel
biological function of Nek2 related to elevated proteasome activity. We
also demonstrated that our novel Nek2 inhibitors efficiently inhibit Nek2
function, resulting in reduced proteasome activity. These Nek2 inhibitors
have the potential to be applied clinically for treatment of the MM
patients resistant to bortezomib.

