Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in the DDR enzymes activation kinetics between normal
and cancer cells could be utilized to achieve targeted cellular
sensitivity towards genotoxic agents


The DNA damage response (DDR) pathway is a complex signalling network
that is activated when eukaryotic cells undergo DNA damage caused by
exposure to genotoxic agents. Depending upon the type and scale of DNA
damage, the DDR can either cause cell cycle arrest if the DNA lesions are
repairable, or trigger apoptosis if the DNA lesions are beyond the repair
capacity of the cell. A variety of enzymes take part in this complex
signalling network that decides cellular fate after DNA damage, and is
comprised of kinases, phosphatases and glycosylases. Here we explored the
kinetics of activation of these key enzymes, the rates of their product
formation and the interplay between them that impact the decision making
process of the cell. We exposed normal (MCF10A, HaCat) and breast cancer
cell lines (MCF7, MDA MB231, MDA MB468) to different combinations of
radiomimetic drugs, UV radiation and enzyme inhibitors in a time and dose
dependent manner and looked at the resulting enzyme activation rates of
DDR kinases such as ATM, ATR, Chk1, Chk2, and DDR phosphatases PP2A and
WIP1. We studied the effects of such enzymatic activation on their
substrates P53, E2F1, BRCA1 and -H2AX and examined its outcome on cell
survival. Firstly, we have identified key differences in enzyme
activation kinetics that impacted the cell fate decision between normal
and cancer cell lines. In addition we established treatment regimes based
on those differences that bias the cell fate decision towards apoptosis
in cancer cells and cell cycle arrest and repair of DNA in their normal
counterparts. Thus, we have demonstrated a link between the rate of
induction of different enzyme activities in the DDR pathway, the
resulting product formation and cellular sensitivity to genotoxic agents.
We have successfully used such information to devise a combinatorial drug
treatment regime that is selective for cancer cells. Elucidation of the
enzyme activation kinetics in a time and dose dependent manner of the
proteins governing cell fate decision can be used to achieve targeted
cellular selectivity and sensitivity with lesser side effects on normal
cells.

