Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id-1 gene and protein as novel therapeutic targets for metastatic
cancer


During normal development and embryogenesis, helix-loop-helix Id proteins
regulate the differentiation programs of many tissues. Moreover, recent
studies have shown that dysregulated Id expression contributes to cancer
progression and metastasis. Specifically, we found high levels of one of
the Id family members, Id-1, in breast, prostate, brain and head and neck
tumor cells which were highly aggressive, and low levels of Id-1 in
non-invasive tumor cells. Ectopic expression of Id-1 in non-aggressive
human cancer cells rendered them highly proliferative and invasive, and
induced high levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression.
Conversely, human metastatic cancer cells became significantly less
proliferative and invasive in culture when Id-1 protein expression was
decreased by antisense RNA or shRNA directed against the Id-1 gene. Next,
we asked whether Id-1 could be exploited as a therapeutic target to treat
metastatic cancers. Using tumor-bearing animals and systemic gene
targeting technique, we showed that reduction of Id-1 levels, and
consequently MMP expression, could significantly decrease the metastatic
spread of cancer cells. Further, several molecular pathways underlying
Id-1 effects on epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
neoangiogenesis were also identified in certain types of cancer. These
results suggested that Id-1 gene and/or protein could be a promising
target for development of therapeutic strategies to reduce cancer
metastasis. Since Id-1 expression is scarce in most mature adult tissues,
a majority of normal cells would not be affected by systemic therapy
targeting this gene. We determined that a cannabinoid compound, CBD,
could specifically inhibit the expression of the Id-1 gene and, as a
result, cancer cell proliferation and invasion in culture and tumor
metastasis in vivo. In tumor-bearing mice, we observed significant
anti-metastatic effects after daily treatment with CBD. Id-1 expression
in tumor cells from lung foci was significantly down-regulated as well as
Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation. Finally, CBD prolonged the survival
of tumor-bearing mice even though the treatment was initiated after the
establishment of metastases. Overall, our data suggest that Id proteins
act as key regulators of tumor metastasis and suggest the use of Id genes
as novel therapeutic targets.

