Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-134 expression is oncogenic for oral cancer


Introduction Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most
prevalent malignant diseases around the worldwide. Understanding the
pathogenetic basis of these tumors will bestow profound benefits in
resolution of this disease, to validate individualized therapy and
reduction in medical resources consumption. MicroRNA (miRNA) is a short,
non-coding RNA that regulates gene expression by controlling mRNA
translation. Which can affect biological and pathological processes.
Dysregulation of miRNA function might lead to human disease including
human cancers. Upregulation of miR-134 in OSCC was observed in a our
previous study. However, the clinical implications and functions of
miR-134 in oral tumorigenesis remain unclear. Methods Quantitative RT-PCR
was used to analyze the miR-134 expression in OSCC tissue pairs. The
oncogenic phenotypes including proliferation, migration and
anchorage-independent colony formation were assayed in cells with miR-134
expression or miR-134 blockage. The xenografic tumorigenecity was assayed
on nude mice model. TargetScan predicted WW domain-containing
oxidoreductase (WWOX) a tumor suppressor gene to be putative targets of
miR-134. To test the targeting activity of miR-134, antisense sequences
complementary to miR-134 sequences and the 3 untranslatedregion (UTR) of
WWOX containing predictive miR-134 target sites were cloned into the
pCMV-LacZ plasmid at the 3-end of the lacZ coding sequence; these
reporter plasmids were designated miR-134-asR and pCMV-LacZ-WWOX3UTR,
respectively. Results miR-134 was found to be markedly upregulated in
cancerous tissues than in non-cancerous matched tissues in OSCC tissue
pairs. Higher miR-134 was associated with the more advanced tumor size
and vascular invasion. Transfection of miR-134 precursor transiently
upregulated miR-134 expression in OSCC cells. It increased oncogenic
potential of OSCC cells. Conversely, the in vitro oncogenic potential of
OSCC cells was attenuated after blocking of miR-134 expression. Stable
SAS OSCC cell subclone with ectopic miR-134 expression was established by
lentiviral delivery. Ectopic miR-134 expression increased the
tumorigenicity of SAS subclone. Downregulation of WWOX mRNA expression
and protein expression was found in SAS-miR-134 cells compared with
controls. Conversely, upregulation of WWOX mRNA expression and protein on
miR-134 LNA treatment relative to controls was found. Conclusion This
identified for the first time that miR-134 is oncogenic to oral
epithelium and its expression level could be validated as a diagnostic
marker of OSCC. Our findings suggest that miR-134 contributes to the
development of OSCC by targeting WWOX.

