Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment of breast cancer cells with epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG) and Tamoxifen delays cell-growth in long-term culture:
Implications for recurrent breast cancer


Recent health surveys have revealed that green tea is one of the most
commonly consumed natural products among breast cancer survivors.
Although breast cancer survival has increased during the past two decades
due to adjuvant endocrine therapy with antiestrogens (AE) such as
Tamoxifen (TAM) and Faslodex (FAS) the risk of acquired
endocrine-resistance still persists for many women. This can be mimicked
by a prolonged culture of breast cancer cells with sequentially
increasing concentrations of 4-hydroxy tamoxifen (4OHT; 1 nM -1 M),
applying a selection pressure for cells to acquire resistance to 4OHT.
Such cells maintain their resistant phenotype even after removal of the
pressure (Brunner et al., 1993). The aim of this study was to determine
whether a green tea polyphenol (EGCG) can affect the development of
TAM-resistance in breast cancer. We tested the efficacy of EGCG, in this
long-term [LT] cell culture model. Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7
cells (n=2/group) were cultured in media containing: i) Vehicle (0.01%
EtOH;, LT-V); ii) LT-4OHT (1 nM to 1 M; increasing every 3rd passage;
LT-4OHT); or iii) 4OHT (1 nM to 1 M) + EGCG (100 nM;single dose;LT-EGCG).
Growth rate was recorded for each passage (P), measured as the time
required reach confluence (70%), after which the cells were subcultured.
We will present results of this LT study including mechanisms by which
EGCG may alter resistance-development, focusing on signaling pathways
such as ER, NFkB and unfolded protein response (UPR) known to be involved
in endocrine resistance. During the initial passages (P1-P6; [4OHT] 5 nM)
the cells grew at the same rate regardless of the treatment. Starting at
P8, time to confluence was delayed for LT-4OHT ([10 nM]; 7d) compared to
the LT-V. This delay was even more pronounced at P15 ([100 nM]; 21d),
suggesting that cells were under a growth inhibition/selection pressure.
The growth rate of LT-EGCG did not differ from LT-4OHT prior to P15, but
in subsequent passages a delay was evident (14 to 18 d). To test whether
the cells maintained their (delayed growth) phenotype, they were first
cultured in regular media for 24h and tested for growth inhibition by
4OHT (1 nM-1M) and FAS (100 nM). LT-V cells (P27) were more susceptible
to the inhibitory effects of 1 M 4OHT (73 11% versus 0 M 4OHT) than
LT-4OHT cells (P19; 105 40%), confirming the development of resistance in
LT-4OHT cells. In contrast, LT-EGCG cells had retained their sensitivity
to 4OHT, similar to LT-V (P19; 75 8%). All treatment groups were equally
responsive to FAS (30%). These results suggest that EGCG may delay the
development of a 4OHT-resistance in breast cancer cells. It will be
confirmed whether the effect prevails after removal of selection pressure
(4OHT). This data will provide a better understanding of green tea's
potential to prevent TAM-resistance in breast cancer patients.

