Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conditioned media enhances proliferation and mobility in triple
negative breast cancer cells


Background. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most
aggressive forms of breast cancer and disproportionally affects African
American women. This subtype of breast cancer is characterized by the
absence of the estrogen, progesterone, and HER2/neu receptors. Our
research has provided insight on understanding that the microenvironment,
specifically noncancerous cells, play in enhancing cancer progression and
metastasis. However, the role of adjacent noncancerous cells in the
metastatic phenomenon is poorly understood. Therefore, the aims of this
project were: 1) to determine if conditioned media from MCF-10A cells
would enhance proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells and 2) to
evaluate the ability of the effects of migration of the conditioned media
on the MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells. Methods. Crystal violet and
alamar blue dye exclusion assays were performed to measure proliferation
in the different medias. The trans well migration assay was used to
evaluate motility enhancement based on the media used, either conditioned
media and the Cellometer was used to evaluate whether the MDA-MB-468 and
MCF-10A cells shared the same microenvironment. Results. Conditioned
media is made from base medium with a concentration of 1.0 g/L glucose
with .5% FBS exposed to non-cancerous MCF-10A cells that have been driven
into crisis. This conditioned media encouraged robust and continuous
proliferation of the tumorigenic MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cell lines.
HGCM was extracted in our lab using sterile technique and reused to
analyze the proliferative effects on cancerous and non-cancerous cells.
MDA-MB-231 cells demonstrated significant proliferation when compared to
the control. MDA-MB-468 cells demonstrated a similar response. The trans
well migration assay demonstrated that the GFP labeled MDA-MB-468 cells
had a higher percentage of motility than with MCF-10A cells in standard
media. Conclusions: Taken together, these data indicate that factors
secreted into the microenvironment from noncancerous cells may contribute
to the mobility of TNBC cells and the conditioned media contains unknown
factors that promote the cell mobility of the MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468
cells.

