Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small volatile organic compounds extracted from advanced
pancreatic cancer patient blood samples: Development towards a diagnostic
method


Introduction Analysis of biological samples for volatile organic compound
(VOC) profiles or fingerprints can potentially be utilized as a
non-invasive, early stage diagnostic tool for disease related to
metabolic processes. A hypothesis was presented in 1989 that dogs could
detect malignant tumors by scent and several studies of canine scent
detection for cancer followed. Our team has taken an analogous approach
using solid phase microextraction in combination with capillary gas
chromatography time of flight mass spectrometry (SPME GC-TOFMS) in place
of canine scent detection to discover indicators for pancreatic cancer, a
deadly cancer difficult to detect in its early development stage. VOCs
are not commonly considered in biomarker analysis of clinical samples
which usually require extensive pre-processing. The VOC fingerprint from
a biological sample presumes many such substances are products,
by-products, and waste resulting from human metabolism (and/or symbiotic
microbiom) of nutrients and intermediates from endogenous processes,
absorbed environmental contaminants, and endo/exogenous bacterial
metabolism. Methods IRB approval was obtained to enroll patients with
advanced pancreatic cancer and healthy volunteers. Blood was collected in
pre-conditioned vacutainers from 11 patients and 5 healthy volunteers,
all non-smokers, no chemotherapy in preceding 5 days, and analyzed within
2 weeks. SPME GC-TOFMS is a means for eliminating the biological matrix
and pre-concentrating specific ranges of complex volatile fraction
polarities at low concentrations and a very sensitive analytical
instrumental platform for the characterization of VOC chromatographic
profiles extracted from the 3ml blood samples. Multivariate statistical
methods were used to analysis retention time exact mass observations and
integrated peak areas. Results Even with the numerous variables
contributing to an already diverse underlying metabolism of each
participant, our chemometric approach did discriminate between healthy
volunteers and the cancer patients with a 5% prediction error using a
leave one out statistical analysis for 37 samplesb from the 16 subjects.
Key retention time and exact mass observations from a fiber specific SPME
were associated to preliminary molecule identifications via NIST data
base searches. Our procedures for system tune, calibration, and
monitoring achieved a response stability over a 1 month period of 10% rsd
and accurate mass measurement of at least 5 mDa (30 - 300 Da) using
benzene-d6, BFB, and naphthalene-d8. Conclusions VOC fingerprints from a
SPME GC-TOFMS analysis of blood can be successful in discovering
differentiating indicators related to APC. Future work will involve other
SPME fibers and more samples. (Supported by the IBIS & Scottsdale Health
Care Foundations)

