Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of metastasis of intratesticular inoculation of B16FO
melanoma cells by a novel nutrient mixture in male athymic nude mice


Testicular cancer (TC) is rare, but still represents one of the most
common diseases in young men between the ages of 20-45. However, men of
any age can develop this disease. The incidence in Caucasians is greater
than in African Americans. Risk factors include undescended testis,
Klinefelter syndrome, and HIV positive patients. If left untreated, it is
almost certainly fatal. Metastasis is the major cause of cancer death.
The most common place for TC to spread in the body is to the lung. In
this investigation, we studied the effect of a novel nutrient mixture
(NM) containing ascorbic acid, amino acids and green tea extract that has
been shown to exhibit anti-cancer activity, on inhibition of B16FO
melanoma cells inoculated intratesticularly. Male athymic mice (n=12),
10-12 weeks of age, were inoculated with half a million B16FO melanoma
cells in 100 L of PBS into the right testis; the left testis was left
untreated. After inoculation, the mice were randomly divided into two
groups. Group A (n=6) was fed a regular mouse chow diet, while the mice
in Group B (n=6) were fed the same diet but supplemented with 0.5% NM.
Four weeks later the mice were sacrificed and the abdominal cavity was
opened. Mice in the control group (Group A) exhibited extensive
metastasis in the peritoneal cavity, which was totally masked by B16FO
melanoma cells. The testis was severely enlarged and replaced by invading
malignant melanoma cells. The remaining testicular tissue was represented
by necrotic seminiferous tubules. The capsular region of the testis was
severely infiltrated with a population of mixed cells. In contrast, in
the NM fed group (Group B), there was no evidence of peritoneal
metastasis, but the testes were enlarged. Seminiferous tubules in the
area of invasion showed evidence of degeneration. In all groups, there
was no metastasis to liver, kidney and spleen. However, severe lung
metastasis was observed in the control group (2 out of 6) and mild in the
test group (2 out of 6). In conclusion, these results suggest that NM has
potential to suppress tumor metastasis.

