Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of CUDC-907, a dual PI3K and HDAC inhibitor, in
hematological cancer models


Recent evidence indicates that both PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway and
HDAC are validated targets in hematological cancers. In order to overcome
primary resistance and prevent secondary resistance resulting from
compensatory/feedback mechanisms in cancer cells, CUDC-907 was designed
to inhibit all isoforms of Class I PI3K and Class I and II HDAC, based on
previous observations that synergistic effects can be achieved by
inhibition of both HDAC and PI3K in cancer cells. In cell proliferation
assays, this compound displays potent anti-proliferation activity in
hematological cancer cell lines including non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL),
and multiple myeloma (MM). Mechanistically, CUDC-907 is able to
simultaneously suppress PI3K-Akt-mTOR as well as other essential
signaling pathways due to epigenetic modifications via HDAC inhibition.
CUDC-907 is orally bio-available in dogs, has a long half-life in murine
tumors, induces apoptosis and inhibits cancer cell proliferation in
xenograft tumors. In efficacy studies in NHL and MM models, CUDC-907 is
more efficacious than either a single-agent PI3K or HDAC inhibitor
reference compound or a combination of the two agents given at maximally
tolerated doses (MTD). Furthermore, CUDC-907 is more efficacious than the
PI3K-selective inhibitor CAL-101 when dosed at MTD doses. These
observations are related to our findings that, all isoforms of PI3K are
expressed in most hematological cancer models. Therefore, the efficacy of
isoform selective PI3K inhibitors may be limited only to those cancers
driven by a specific PI3K subtype. In addition, a synergistic antitumor
effect can be achieved in efficacy studies when CUDC-907 is combined with
standard of care agents in both NHL and MM models. In conclusion, through
broad network disruption, CUDC-907 may offer a greater therapeutic
benefit than isoform-specific PI3K inhibitors as a novel anti-cancer
treatment of hematological malignancies.

