Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for DOK2 methylation in platinum resistance and tumor
suppression in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of cancer in women, affecting
close to 22,000 women in the year 2011, of which nearly 15,500 will die.
It is difficult to detect until it reaches advanced stages and becomes
malignant. Currently, the standard treatment for ovarian cancer is
platinum-based therapeutics, such as Carboplatin or Cisplatin, combined
with Taxol. Unfortunately, approximately 25% of patients are inherently
platinum-resistant and all patients who suffer from recurrence will have
developed acquired platinum resistance. The genetic/epigenetic causes of
this resistance are poorly understood. Epigenetic events are reversible
and the identification of genes altered by this mechanism may lead to
studies on how to reprogram the process leading up to resistance. To
examine the ovarian epigenome, we utilized an array based method,
Methylation Oligonucleotide Microarray Analysis (MOMA), to analyze a set
of 50 primary ovarian tumors and 12 ovarian normal samples. We identified
epigenetic differences that segregated with platinum response and then
associated this with expression data to identify gene candidates
transcriptionally repressed and methylated in patients resistant to
platinum. Next, a pooled shRNA screen was performed on candidate genes to
identify those that were functionally relevant to platinum resistance.
One of the validated candidate genes identified through the pooled shRNA
screen was DOK2, an adapter protein downstream of tyrosine kinase, which
has been shown by others to be a lung cancer tumor suppressor. We show
that suppression of DOK2 by short hairpin RNAs in ovarian cell lines
conferred resistance to platinum treatment. To elucidate the mechanism
for resistance, we measured the influx of platinum into the cells using
C-14 tagged carboplatin. As a result, uptake of carboplatin was found to
be decreased with DOK2 suppression. Consistent with DOK2 having tumor
suppressor activity, knockdowns in ovarian cell lines increases growth
and migration. Furthermore, loss of DOK2 induces invasive and tumorigenic
phenotypes in ovarian cell lines. DOK2 is already a proven tumor
suppressor in lung cancer, and our experiments indicate DOK2 has tumor
suppressor features in ovarian cancer as well. We show that DOK2 is a
tumor suppressor in ovarian cancer and that the loss of DOK2 also
contributes to platinum resistance. Understanding DOK2 function will help
us understand ovarian cancer development, progression as well as therapy
resistance.

