Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs for early detection of lung cancer


Introduction: Early detection of lung cancer by screening of high risk
populations (identified by epidemiological and life-style factors) has
the potential to save many lives. However, effective screening is reliant
on minimally invasive techniques, such as CT screening, bronchioalveolar
lavage (BAL) and blood tests, and the identification of suitable
biomarkers. CT screening is effective in reducing mortality, but
generates a large proportion of indeterminate nodules that must be
further characterised. MicroRNAs (miRNA) have great potential as
biomarkers due to their tissue-specific and cancer-specific expression
patterns. We have identified tumour-specific miRNAs for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), using a combination of screening on TaqMan microRNA
TLDA cards and validation with qRTPCR assays, with the aim of utilising
these as biomarkers in the early detection setting. Methods: Our sample
group consisted of 31 frozen samples from 20 Liverpool Lung Project (LLP)
NSCLC patients, including 10 adenocarcinomas (Ad), 10 squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) & matched normal tissue. Two further validation sets
consisted of equal numbers of Ad and SCC tumour/normal pairs (124 in
total). MiRNA was prepared from tumour and normal specimens using Qiagen
MicroRNeasy kits. Reverse transcription and pre-amplification was
performed using Applied Biosystems MegaPlex Pools and miRNAs were
quantified on a 7900HT Real-Time PCR System with TaqMan Array Human MiRNA
Card Set v3.0 (covering 754 human miRNAs). Ct values were exported using
SDS v2.3 data and RQ Manager software and further analysed in
Bioconductor. Validation qRTPCR was performed with individual miRNA
assays, following reverse transcription with MegaPlex pools. Results:
When Benjamin-Hoechst-adjusted-p value 4.0 fold-change in the cancer
group. A subset of 22 miRNAs including miR-34a, miR-96, let-7g and
miR-183 was identified with the greatest expression in tumours.
Differential expression of all 22 miRNAs was confirmed in an independent
set of 24 tumour/normal pairs. Using these 22 validated miRNAs we
performed discriminative modelling and identified a model based on just 8
markers that gave a specificity of 100% and a sensitivity of 98%. This
panel was validated, with 97% specificity and 91% sensitivity, in a 2nd
independent sample set containing 48 tumours and paired normal samples.
Conclusion: A number of miRNAs was identified that showed good
discriminatory power individually, but greatest sensitivity and
specificity when combined as an 8 member panel. The lung cancer specific
miRNAs we have identified provide a potential source of early detection
biomarkers. Their applicability to minimally-invasive samples is being
evaluated in a range of samples including plasma and bronchial lavage.

