Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic hsa-miR-1323 down-regulates MYCN/ALK and reveals PAG1 as
a novel tumor suppressor for neuroblastoma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 22-24 nucleotides non-coding RNAs that can
simultaneously influence the levels of multiple target genes and
therefore have the potential to strongly silence cancer gene networks.
MYCN and ALK are well established oncogenes implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of neuroblastoma. Using multiple web based
algorithms we have identified potential tumor suppressor miRNAs that can
control the pathogenesis and/or progression of neuroblastoma by
down-regulating both MYCN and ALK. We found hsa-miR-1323 as a candidate
tumor suppressor for neuroblastoma. Lipofectamine based mimic
transfection and lentiviral vector based over-expression of miR-1323 in
cell lines led to a decrease in MYCN and ALK transcripts as well as
signals from luciferase reporter constructs carrying the 3-UTR of MYCN or
ALK validating MYCN and ALK as direct targets of miR-1323. However,
unexpectedly for this predicted tumor suppressor microRNA, gain of
function studies for miR-1323 in neuroblastoma cell lines demonstrated
increased proliferation, colony formation and tumor growth of orthotopic
xenograft tumors. As SiRNA against MYCN strongly limits neuroblastoma
proliferation, our data suggests that miR-1323 targets an alternative
tumor suppressor pathway which by-passes the growth suppressive effects
of MYCN inhibition and drives proliferation. Further bio-informatics
analysis of putative miR-1323 targets pointed to PAG1 (or Cbp) as a
possible tumor suppressor target of miR-1323. The transmembrane adaptor
protein PAG1 inhibits proliferation driven by the Src family of kinases
(SFKs) through multiple mechanisms and is a known tumor suppressor in
leukemia and non-small cell lung cancers. Importantly, analysis of PAG1
in clinical cohorts of neuroblastoma reveals that low expression of PAG1
strongly correlates with poor overall survival compared to patients with
high levels of PAG1 expression (p MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 22-24
nucleotides non-coding RNAs that can simultaneously influence the levels
of multiple target genes and therefore have the potential to strongly
silence cancer gene networks. MYCN and ALK are well established oncogenes
implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of neuroblastoma. Using
multiple web based algorithms we have identified potential tumor
suppressor miRNAs that can control the pathogenesis and/or progression of
neuroblastoma by down-regulating both MYCN and ALK. We found hsa-miR-1323
as a candidate tumor suppressor for neuroblastoma. Lipofectamine based
mimic transfection and lentiviral vector based over-expression of
miR-1323 in cell lines led to a decrease in MYCN and ALK transcripts as
well as signals from luciferase reporter constructs carrying the 3-UTR of
MYCN or ALK validating MYCN and ALK as direct targets of miR-1323.
However, unexpectedly for this predicted tumor suppressor microRNA, gain
of function studies for miR-1323 in neuroblastoma cell lines demonstrated
increased proliferation, colony formation and tumor growth of orthotopic
xenograft tumors. As SiRNA against MYCN strongly limits neuroblastoma
proliferation, our data suggests that miR-1323 targets an alternative
tumor suppressor pathway which by-passes the growth suppressive effects
of MYCN inhibition and drives proliferation. Further bio-informatics
analysis of putative miR-1323 targets pointed to PAG1 (or Cbp) as a
possible tumor suppressor target of miR-1323. The transmembrane adaptor
protein PAG1 inhibits proliferation driven by the Src family of kinases
(SFKs) through multiple mechanisms and is a known tumor suppressor in
leukemia and non-small cell lung cancers. Importantly, analysis of PAG1
in clinical cohorts of neuroblastoma reveals that low expression of PAG1
strongly correlates with poor overall survival compared to patients with
high levels of PAG1 expression (p <0.001). We have confirmed that
miR-1323 targets PAG1 transcript via qRT-PCR assays, and this is
associated with increased p-ERK levels in neuroblastoma cell lines. We
therefore propose that miR-1323 mediated repression of PAG1 activates the
Src-dependent oncogenic pathways, overriding its effect on MYCN or ALK,
and contributing to the aggressive clinical behavior of high-risk
neuroblastoma. These studies further demonstrate the complexity of
microRNA functions in normal and cancer cells and mandate careful
evaluation of putative tumor suppressive microRNAs as therapeutic tools.

