Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The characterization of drug-tolerant cancer cell populations by
Colony Lysate Array (CoLA)


[Background] Increasing evidences indicate that heterogeneity within
cancer cell population plays a critical role in response to cytotoxic
stresses including drug treatment. We characterized human cancer cell
populations that formed colonies in the presence of anticancer drugs at
cellular and molecular levels. [Materials and Methods] For colony
formation, human cancer cells (HCT-116, HeLa, HT-29, MCF-7, and MKN-45)
were sparsely disseminated (10 cells/cm2) in the presence of anticancer
drugs (cisplatin, docetaxcell, gefitinib, and sorafenib). To characterize
the drug-tolerant individual colonies, we established colony lysate array
(CoLA), a tool used for the protein expression analysis of a
single-colony, using modified reverse-phase protein lysate microarrays
(RPAs). [Results] For in vitro modeling of cancer relapse after curative
treatment, we consistently observed cell populations that form colonies
under 0.1- 10 M drug concentrations. Interestingly, the 50%
colony-inhibition concentration was consistently more than 10-fold higher
than that of growth-inhibition for cell-based assays. CoLA assay allows
one to use a lysate from a single colony for hierarchical clustering by a
panel of cancer stem cell (CSC) markers. Unlike FACS analysis, CoLA is
advantageous in detection of full fractions of proteins including those
in the nucleus. Thus far, we have found that MKN-45 colonies in the
presence of cisplatin expressed CD44, a putative CSC marker in a
concentration-dependent manner. Pre-treatment of actinomycin D (AMD), an
RNA synthesis inhibitor strongly suppressed MKN-45 colony formation in
the presence of cisplatin; however cycloheximide, a protein synthesis
inhibitor did not affect the colony formation. [Discussion] Differences
in drug concentrations between the colony-inhibition and the
growth-inhibition indicate that colony formation and simple cell growth
are functionally different. The CD44 expression in MKN-45 colonies in the
presence of cisplatin may suggest that these colonies emerged in the
presence of drugs acquired a CSC-like phenotype. The suppression of
colony formation by AMD may also suggest that the colonies require de
novo RNA synthesis for the gain of drug resistant phenotype. [Conclusion]
The drug-tolerant cell populations exhibit a CSC-like phenotype and
require de novo RNA synthesis for the gain of drug resistant phenotype,
possibly involved in the heterogeneity of cancer cell population.

