Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic phenotype switching regulated by epigenetic marks along
melanoma genesis


Melanoma is the most aggressive form of skin cancer and its incidence is
increasing worldwide. Although melanoma is highly curable when early
diagnosed, the metastatic melanoma detains the worst prognosis and
remains one of the most resistant cancers to treatment. In this light,
continuous efforts are made to better understand the pathogenesis of this
disease. It has been strongly suggested that aberrant epigenetic events,
occurred in specific steps, are important to the establishment and
progression of tumor genesis as the occurrence of point genetic
mutations. Based on a murine model of malignant transformation, the aim
of our group has been identify and understand the effective participation
of epigenetic mechanisms in the generation of a transformed phenotype.
The study model of melanoma genesis was established in vitro by
submitting non-tumorigenic melanocytes (murine melan-a cell line) to
sequential cycles of anchorage blockade, proposing that microenvironment
interference may lead to intracellular alterations with important gene
expression impact. Our cell lines represent distinct phases of melanoma
genesis (melan-a melanocytes, 4C pre-malignant melanocytes, 4C11-
non-metastatic and 4C11+ metastatic melanoma) and, on an overview, it was
observed clearly morphological differences, mainly in intermediate stages
of progression, suggesting a transient change from epithelial to
mesenchymal phenotype (from melan-a to 4C and 4C11- cell lines) along
malignant transformation. This transitory modification was accompanied by
a switch in the EMT markers expression, like Snail1 and your targets,
-catenin, E-cadherin and N-cadherin. In parallel, Chd1 (chromatin
remodeling factor), Nanog (pluripotency factor) and Jarid1b (histone
demethylase) are highly expressed in these intermediate phases (4C and
4C11-), characterizing an open chromatin configuration. Interestingly,
expression of most of these genes appear to be controlled by epigenetic
mechanisms, both DNA methylation and chromatin modification. We
hypothesized that during melanocyte malignant progression associated with
sustained stress, an opened chromatin occurrence would facilitate cells
to undergo changes in gene expression which allow cell adaptation to new
environment and all these alterations are orchestrated by epigenetic
events. Supported by FAPESP.

