Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of vimentin in FAK-mediated cell adhesion and metastasis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States.
Specifcally, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is responsible for about
80% of lung cancer deaths and has a 5-year survival rate of only 15-25%.
This poor survival statistic results from diagnosis at advanced stages of
the disease when metastasis of the primary tumor has already occurred;
therefore, identifying the molecular mechanisms guiding metastasis is
crucial for advances in treatment. The intermediate filament vimentin is
overexpressed in metastatic cancers and its expression correlates with
increased invasive capacity and reduced patient survival. A population of
vimentin filaments localizes to focal adhesions, which attach to the
extracellular matrix and are required for cell motility. Focal adhesions
are composed of a complex of proteins, including focal adhesion kinase
(FAK), which is overexpressed in NSCLC. Since evidence suggests that both
FAK and vimentin co-localize at focal adhesions, we hypothesize that
vimentin acts through FAK to regulate cell adhesion and thereby cell
migration. Our results show that vimentin depletion leads to decreased
cell adhesion and migration, with decreased FAK activation and
expression. We show that vimentin filaments directly enter total FAK and
pFAK- Y397 sites at the cellular leading edge of motile lung cancer
cells. Using immunoprecipitation, we show vimentin interacts with several
members of the focal adhesion complex, suggesting that vimentin can
regulate focal adhesion activity. To address the mechanism by which this
may occur, we hypothesize that the phosphorylation state of vimentin,
which is important for cell migration, is crucial for proper functioning
at focal adhesions. This is the focus of our future work with the goal of
identifying potential new therapeutic targets to block metastasis and
improve lung cancer patients prognosis.

