Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-translational phosphorylation is essential for nanog-mediated
tumorigenesis


Objectives: Nanog is a transcription factor intimately involved in
embryonic stem cell pluripotency. Emerging evidence indicates that Nanog
plays a critical role in oncogenesis, in part through regulation of the
cancer initiating cell population. We investigated the role of
post-translational phosphorylation as a regulatory mechanism to control
Nanog function in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Methods:
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry was used to
identify the PKC-mediated phosphorylation sites on Nanog.
Phosphorylation-insensitive Nanog mutants (T200A and T280A) were
generated and assessed for in vitro and in vivo phenotype. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and co-immunoprecipitation experiments were
performed to determine Nanog recruitment and association with p300. ChIP,
electrophorectic mobility shift assay, and luciferase reporter assay were
used to assess Nanog regulation of Bmi-1. Forward and reverse genetic
experiments were carried out to determine the role of the Nanog-Bmi-1
signaling node in HNSCC. Results: Phosphopeptide mapping identified that
Nanog is phosphorylated by PKC at multiple resides, including T200 and
T280. Phosphorylation-insensitive Nanog mutants (T200A and T280A) showed
a loss-of-function phenotype due to impaired p300, a transcriptional
co-activator, recruitment resulting in a defect in target gene promoter
activation. Ectopic expression of phosphorylation-insensitive Nanog
mutants in HNSCC cells significantly reduced cell proliferation, colony
formation, invasion, migration, and the cancer initiating cell
population. Additionally, in vivo tumor initiating ability was severely
compromised in HNSCC cells expressing phosphorylation-insensitive Nanog
mutants; 87.5% (14/16), 12.5% (1/8), and 0% (0/8) for empty vector,
T200A, and T280A, respectively. Nanog occupied the promoter of Bmi-1 at
two distinct regions to directly regulate Bmi-1 levels. Genetic ablation
and rescue experiments demonstrate that Bmi-1 is a critical downstream
signaling node for the pleotropic pro-oncogenic effects of Nanog.
Conclusion:Taken together, our study revealed, for the first time, that
post-translational phosphorylation of Nanog is essential to directly
regulate Bmi-1 and promote tumorigenesis.

