Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wilms tumor gene, WT1, regulates E-cadherin expression and
migration of prostate cancer cells.


Carcinoma of the prostate is one of the most common malignancies and
second leading cause of death among American men. Even though patients
with localized disease have high survival rates, patients with detectable
metastasis have a median survival of only 12-15 months. One key step in
the metastatic process is the loss of E-cadherin expression associated
with tumor invasion. However the regulation of E-cadherin gene expression
in prostate cancer (PrCa) cells is not well understood. Recently, the
zinc finger transcription factor, WT1 was shown to regulate E-cadherin in
NIH 3T3 cells and epicardial cells. We have previously reported the
presence of WT1 protein in high grade prostate tumor sections, with
little or no WT1 staining in non-neoplastic or benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) tissues. However, the significance of WT1 expression in
prostate cancer has not been established. The objective of this study was
to determine whether WT1 might contribute to increase migration of PrCa
cells by repressing E-cadherin expression. Using quantitative real-time
PCR (QRTPCR), WT1 and E-cadherin mRNA levels were measured and found to
be inversely related in PrCa cells. Similarly, QRTPCR results showed a
decrease in E-cadherin mRNA in GFP/WT1 transfected PrCa cells, while
E-cadherin levels were increased in PrCa cells with suppressed WT1
expression. Titration of WT1 levels also affected the migration of PrCa
cells in wound healing and transwell migration assays. Silencing of WT1
by siWT1 RNA decreased the migratory potential of PC3 cells and the
overexpression of GFP/WT1 increased the migration of LNCaP cells. A
bioinformatics approach was used to identify potential WT1 binding sites
in E-cadherin promoter, then direct in vivo binding of WT1 to the
E-cadherin promoter in the chromatin of PrCa cells was confirmed by
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation. Transcriptional control was quantified by
co-transfection of a GFP/WT1 expression construct with E-cadherin
promoter constructs. Results showed that WT1 decreased the activity of
the proximal E-cadherin promoter in PC3 cells and DU145 cells. Using site
directed mutagenesis, a newly identified WT1 binding site located 146 bp
from the transcription start site was shown to be required for the
repression of the E-cadherin proximal promoter by WT1. Overall these
results demonstrate that WT1 transcriptionally down-regulates E-cadherin
expression and thereby increases migration of PrCa cells. This finding
suggests that the biological significance of WT1 expression in high grade
prostate cancer lies in its contribution to cell migration and
potentially to the promotion of metastasis. Supported by NIHR15CA11360
and the Ohio Board of Regents.

