Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-100 in ovarian cancer cell lines


MicroRNA (miRNA), small non-coding RNA sequences that regulate gene
expression, have the potential to function as tumor suppressors or
oncogenes. To determine the contribution of miRNA to ovarian oncogenesis
this project sought to identify dysregulated miRNA and their targets in
ovarian cancer cell lines. miRNA expression profiling was performed on 6
serous epithelial ovarian cancer (SEOC) cell lines and normal ovarian
surface epithelial (OSE) cells. miRNAs differentially expressed between
SEOC and OSEs were selected for further analyses and candidate target
genes identified by prediction algorithms. miRNA expression was restored
by transient transfection of miRNA mimics or stable transduction of
lentiviral vectors expressing miRNA precursors. The effects on the
expression of 2 predicted targets, SMARCA5 and FRAP1, were investigated
using a luciferase reporter system, quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) and
immunoblotting. The effect of miRs on cellular proliferation was also
explored. Expression profiling identified miR-100 as having >5-fold lower
expression in SEOC vs OSE cells. Seed sequences or binding sites for
miR-100 were identified in the 3UTRs of SMARCA5 and FRAP1. Using a
luciferase expression system in OVCAR-3 cells, a miR-100 mimic repressed
expression of SMARCA5 3UTR by 40 % (pMicroRNA (miRNA), small non-coding
RNA sequences that regulate gene expression, have the potential to
function as tumor suppressors or oncogenes. To determine the contribution
of miRNA to ovarian oncogenesis this project sought to identify
dysregulated miRNA and their targets in ovarian cancer cell lines. miRNA
expression profiling was performed on 6 serous epithelial ovarian cancer
(SEOC) cell lines and normal ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells.
miRNAs differentially expressed between SEOC and OSEs were selected for
further analyses and candidate target genes identified by prediction
algorithms. miRNA expression was restored by transient transfection of
miRNA mimics or stable transduction of lentiviral vectors expressing
miRNA precursors. The effects on the expression of 2 predicted targets,
SMARCA5 and FRAP1, were investigated using a luciferase reporter system,
quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) and immunoblotting. The effect of miRs on
cellular proliferation was also explored. Expression profiling identified
miR-100 as having >5-fold lower expression in SEOC vs OSE cells. Seed
sequences or binding sites for miR-100 were identified in the 3UTRs of
SMARCA5 and FRAP1. Using a luciferase expression system in OVCAR-3 cells,
a miR-100 mimic repressed expression of SMARCA5 3UTR by 40 % (p<0.0001),
and FRAP1 3UTR by 30% (pMicroRNA (miRNA), small non-coding RNA sequences
that regulate gene expression, have the potential to function as tumor
suppressors or oncogenes. To determine the contribution of miRNA to
ovarian oncogenesis this project sought to identify dysregulated miRNA
and their targets in ovarian cancer cell lines. miRNA expression
profiling was performed on 6 serous epithelial ovarian cancer (SEOC) cell
lines and normal ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells. miRNAs
differentially expressed between SEOC and OSEs were selected for further
analyses and candidate target genes identified by prediction algorithms.
miRNA expression was restored by transient transfection of miRNA mimics
or stable transduction of lentiviral vectors expressing miRNA precursors.
The effects on the expression of 2 predicted targets, SMARCA5 and FRAP1,
were investigated using a luciferase reporter system, quantitative RT-PCR
(qPCR) and immunoblotting. The effect of miRs on cellular proliferation
was also explored. Expression profiling identified miR-100 as having
>5-fold lower expression in SEOC vs OSE cells. Seed sequences or binding
sites for miR-100 were identified in the 3UTRs of SMARCA5 and FRAP1.
Using a luciferase expression system in OVCAR-3 cells, a miR-100 mimic
repressed expression of SMARCA5 3UTR by 40 % (p<0.0001), and FRAP1 3UTR
by 30% (p<0.0005). No effect of the mimic was observed when the predicted
miR-100 binding sites in each gene's 3UTR were mutated. Stable
transduction of OV202 cells with pre-miR-100 resulted in a 3-5 fold
increase in miR-100 expression. This stably transduced SEOC cell line
showed decreased cellular proliferation, and repressed transcript and
protein levels of SMARCA5/SNF2H and FRAP1/mTOR compared with the cell
line transduced with the empty lentiviral vector. We identified miR-100
as a modulator of cellular proliferation in OV202 cells, possibly through
regulation of SNF2H, a chromatin remodelling factor, and mTOR a
phosphatidylinositol kinase-related kinase. miR-100 is located in an area
of frequent chromosomal loss in aggressive SEOC suggesting a mechanism
for reduced expression in these cells. Future work will investigate the
potential of miR-100 as a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of
ovarian cancer.

