Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intercellular transfer between metastatic breast cancer and the
endothelium mediated by tunneling nanotubes


Intercellular communication is a fundamental mechanism for maintaining
cell homeostasis, facilitating the evolution of multicellular organisms.
Classical modes of intercellular communication primarily focus on
paracrine and endocrine signaling mechanisms or direct cellular exchange
of cytoplasmic contents through gap-junctions. Recently, a novel
mechanism of cellular communication was discovered that allows for direct
transfer of intercellular contents through thin nanotubular projections
forming continuous connections between cells. These structures, referred
to as tunneling nanotubes (TNTs), have been found in a variety of
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell types. TNTs mediate transfer of a diverse
array of intercellular contents including organelles, proteins, and
pathogens. Here we report, TNTs allow for intercellular communication
between metastatic breast cancer cells and the endothelium, introducing a
potentially novel mechanism for breast cancer progression. Human
endothelial cells were allowed to undergo tubulogenesis in a 3D matrigel
matrix. To the preformed endothelial vessels, metastatic breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells were added. The resulting phenotype was characterized
using both fluorescent and electron microscopy. Interestingly, when added
to the human endothelial cells, the metastatic breast cancer cells
preferentially align and incorporate within the endothelial vessels,
invading the tubular structures, instead of forming the expected mammary
bodies. The physical proximity between the cell types facilitates the
formation of TNTs that originate from the metastatic breast cancer cells
to form continuous membrane connections with the endothelial vessels. To
test for transfer of intercellular contents, the metastatic breast cancer
cells were loaded with fluorescently labeled small molecules. Transfer of
intercellular contents was quantified using both fluorescent microscopy
and flow cytometry. The TNTs were found to transfer a variety of
intercellular contents from the metastatic cells to the endothelium
including green fluorescent protein, CFSE, and quantum dots. Between
20-40% of the isolated endothelial cell population received transfer of
intercellular contents from the metastatic cells. Communication via the
TNTs occurred quickly, with the membrane structures forming 4-6hrs post
seeding, and intercellular transfer beginning at 6hrs and peaking at
approximately 16-20hrs. In conclusion, TNTs provide a novel mechanism for
communication between the tumor compartment and the angiogenic component,
introducing a new paradigm of cancer progression where tumor cells can
directly manipulate the surrounding cell populations to facilitate cancer
pathology.

