Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A subset of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines is
Mcl-1-dependent and responds to cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)9 inhibition
in vitro and in vivo


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 13% of lung
cancer cases, and current treatment options are limited to radiation
and/or chemotherapy, which frequently lead to drug resistance. Recently,
multiple SCLC cell lines have been found to be responsive to the
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibitor, ABT-737, both in vitro and in vivo. Clinical
trials of the related orally-bioavailable compound ABT-263 have shown
promising activity in SCLC patients. However, a subset of SCLC cell lines
that express Mcl-1, another anti-apoptotic protein, are resistant to
ABT-737. Therefore, drugs targeting Mcl-1 may be particularly useful in
this disease. Here, we have investigated dependence of a panel of SCLC
cell lines on Mcl-1 for survival. A subset of Mcl-1-expressing SCLC cell
lines, including NCI-H82, NCI-N417 and SHP-77, demonstrate apoptosis upon
Mcl-1 knockdown. However, other SCLC cell lines, including NCI-H69,
NCI-H196 and SW1271, are not responsive to Mcl-1 knockdown. In addition,
the dependence of SCLC cell lines on Mcl-1 for survival can be predicted
by BH3 profiling, a methodology that measures dependence of a cell on a
variety of anti-apoptotic proteins. We have also investigated the
efficacy of Flavopiridol, a potent inhibitor of the transcriptional
cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)9, against the panel of SCLC cell lines.
Flavopiridol acutely down-regulates Mcl-1 expression in all SCLC cell
lines tested; however, only Mcl-1-dependent cells, including NCI-H82,
NCI-N417 and SHP-77, undergo abrupt apoptosis. In contrast, cells that
were not found to be Mcl-1 dependent are not effectively killed by
Flavopiridol. We have further investigated the activity of Flavopiridol
against Mcl-1-dependent SCLC in vivo utilizing nude mice bearing NCI-H82
xenografts. Flavopiridol treatment results in substantial tumor growth
inhibition in this aggressive and chemotherapy-refractory model. To
potentially stratify patients who would be predicted to be responsive to
Flavopiridol treatment, we have performed MCL-1 gene fluorescence in situ
hybridization in SCLC cell lines and deidentified patient specimens.
MCL-1 gene copy number gains exist in both patient and cell line samples,
and copy number gain of MCL-1 or MYC in cell lines correlates with Mcl-1
dependence. Strategies for targeting MCL-1 and MYC copy number gains will
be discussed further. Finally, we have demonstrated that the combination
of Flavopiridol and ABT-737 significantly reduces viability in
Mcl-1-independent SW1271 cells compared to treatment with either drug
alone. Taken together, our studies suggest that Flavopiridol-mediated
cdk9 inhibition may effectively target Mcl-1-dependent SCLCs, including
those resistant to Bcl-2/Bcl-xL inhibition.

