Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of vitamin E compounds with docosahexaenoic acid on
induction of apoptosis in human triple negative breast cancer cells


Successful treatment of triple negative (ER-, PR-, HER2-) breast cancers
(TNBC) remains elusive because of the limitations of currently available
chemotherapeutic agents for TNBC, drug resistance and drug toxicities.
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid, has been
shown to exhibit anticancer actions both in vitro and in vivo in a
variety of cancers, including human breast cancer. Here, we report that
DHA induces apoptosis in TNBC cell lines, which is associated with
cleavage of caspase-8 and -9. DHA induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress evidenced by the increased levels of ER stress markers, GRP78,
CHOP, and spliced XBP-1, and induced increased levels of death receptor
DR5 protein expression. siRNAs to CHOP and DR5 blocked DHA-induced
apoptosis and siRNA to CHOP blocked DHA-induced upregulation of DR5,
indicating that DHA induces ER stress mediated death receptor dependent
apoptosis in TNBC cells via CHOP. Furthermore, our data show that DHA
mediated increases in levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), apoptosis
and ER stress can be blocked by antioxidants; N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC) and
alpha-tocopherol (T) indicating that ROS plays a critical role in
DHA-induced apoptosis and ER stress. In contrast to T, gamma-tocotrienol
(T3), another form of vitamin E, cooperated with DHA to induce apoptosis
and ER stress in TNBC cells. siRNAs to CHOP and DR5 blocked the
combination effects mediated by DHA + T3 on induction of apoptosis and ER
stress. Taken together, our data, for the first time, demonstrate that
DHA induces apoptosis in TNBC cells via activation of an ER stress
mediated DR5 dependent pro-apoptotic pathway. Our data also show that
different forms of vitamin E exhibit different combinational effects on
DHA-induced apoptosis; namely, blockage by T and enhancement by T3.
(Funding for these studies was provided by the Clayton Foundation for
Research).

