Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome wide identification of susceptibility loci in breast cancer
survival


Background: Recently, many studies have been conducted to identify the
susceptibility loci related with breast cancer risk, but few studies have
examined the genetic variations for survival. Objectives & Methods: To
identify the susceptibility loci for breast cancer recurrence or
all-cause of death, genome wide survival analysis were performed with
2,171 histologically confirmed incident breast cancer cases. For a
genetic association study, DNA was genotyped using Affymetrix SNP Array
6.0 including about 0.9 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
We examined the association between genetic variance and disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) using Cox proportional hazard
regression model adjusting for known prognostic factors. Results: During
a median of 5.8 years of follow-up, 297 women recurred and 152 women
died. Three SNPs in 2 genes (ARHGAP28 and LGI4) and four intergenic SNPs
were identified for DFS (Padjusted Background: Recently, many studies
have been conducted to identify the susceptibility loci related with
breast cancer risk, but few studies have examined the genetic variations
for survival. Objectives & Methods: To identify the susceptibility loci
for breast cancer recurrence or all-cause of death, genome wide survival
analysis were performed with 2,171 histologically confirmed incident
breast cancer cases. For a genetic association study, DNA was genotyped
using Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 including about 0.9 million single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We examined the association between
genetic variance and disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) using Cox proportional hazard regression model adjusting for known
prognostic factors. Results: During a median of 5.8 years of follow-up,
297 women recurred and 152 women died. Three SNPs in 2 genes (ARHGAP28
and LGI4) and four intergenic SNPs were identified for DFS (Padjusted
<106) and five SNPs in 4 genes (CADPS, KCNH7, LGI4, and TGFBRAP1) and one
intergenic SNP were associated with OS (Padjusted Background: Recently,
many studies have been conducted to identify the susceptibility loci
related with breast cancer risk, but few studies have examined the
genetic variations for survival. Objectives & Methods: To identify the
susceptibility loci for breast cancer recurrence or all-cause of death,
genome wide survival analysis were performed with 2,171 histologically
confirmed incident breast cancer cases. For a genetic association study,
DNA was genotyped using Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 including about 0.9
million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We examined the
association between genetic variance and disease-free survival (DFS) and
overall survival (OS) using Cox proportional hazard regression model
adjusting for known prognostic factors. Results: During a median of 5.8
years of follow-up, 297 women recurred and 152 women died. Three SNPs in
2 genes (ARHGAP28 and LGI4) and four intergenic SNPs were identified for
DFS (Padjusted <106) and five SNPs in 4 genes (CADPS, KCNH7, LGI4, and
TGFBRAP1) and one intergenic SNP were associated with OS (Padjusted
<106). Most significant associated SNP with DFS was located in ARHGAP28
(Padjusted =7.40 X 107) and this showed decreased risk of recurrence
(aHR=0.6, 95% CI=0.50-0.74). SNP of CADPS was most significantly
associated with OS (Padjusted = 9.04 X 107), and showed increased risk of
all-cause of death (aHR=2.1, 95% CI=1.56-2.83). Conclusions: Our results
suggest that the promising SNPs might associate with the breast cancer
recurrence and survival in Korean women. We will confirm these findings
in the replication stages further.

