Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalizing gastrointestinal cancer treatment by the utilization
of TumorGraft technology


Malignancies of the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract share similarities
in their symptoms, histology, genetic composition and sites of
metastasis, but differ in their incidence rates. While colorectal cancer
is common with over 130,000 new cases annually in the US alone, small
intestinal adenocarcinoma is relatively rare with only 2500 new cases
annually. Nevertheless, the overall clinical benefit of standard of care
therapeutics is negligible, thereby underlining the need for novel
therapeutics, especially personalized approaches. Champions Oncology
focuses on personalizing cancer treatment via generating Tumorgraft
models from each patient's individual whole tumor. The current study
describes the attempt to identify a personalized solution for two
patients with metastatic colorectal and duodenal cancers. Using Champions
revolutionary Tumorgraft technology, personalized trials were performed
in vivo. Tumor fragments, obtained from the patient's liver metastases,
were implanted into immunodeficient mice in a manner that preserves the
biological properties of the original tumor and supporting stroma. Once
the Tumorgrafts models were established, individual therapeutics and
combinations were evaluated to identify treatment regimens likely to be
maximally effective in the clinic. Each drug study encompassed 16
different treatment groups, including FDA-approved, as well as
investigational agents. Of the different treatment arms in the colorectal
model, two demonstrated partial response with tumor growth inhibition
values of 152 and 149% for irinotecan/cetuximab/sunitinib and
bevacizumab/cetuximab/irinotecan, respectively. While the combination of
cetuximab/irinotecan resulted in stable disease in the duodenal model as
well, complete responses were observed in all mice treated with eribulin
as a single agent. Mutation status analysis of the tumors revealed wild
type KRAS. Additional molecular characterization is ongoing to determine
other potential signatures of response. The results from the Tumorgraft
study were recommended to the patients and their medical oncologists and
new lines of treatment were commenced subsequently. The results from
these Tumorgraft studies, the molecular profile of the tumors, and
correlation with clinical outcome will be presented. Results demonstrate
the application of Personalized Tumorgraft models to personalized
oncology and their impact on the future of cancer treatment.

