Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive DNA methylation profiling of human hepatocellular
carcinoma


Transcriptional inactivation of several tumor suppressor genes via
epigenetic mechanism has been reported in many types of cancers,
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and thus has been considered as
critical events in multistage carcinogenesis. We conducted a
comprehensive genome-wide analysis to elucidate distribution and
characteristics of genes that subject to cancer-related DNA methylation
in human HCC, especially on the context of development of methylation
alteration in early stage of human hepatocarcinogenesis. With written
informed consent, five well-differentiated HCC tissues and two
corresponding matched non-cancerous liver tissues were obtained at the
time of hepatectomy (2 tumors) or orthotopic living-donor liver
transplantation (3 tumors and 2 non-tumors). After bisulfite
modification, the converted DNA was subject to hybridization on Infinium
Human Methylation BeadChip 450K (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA) that
includes 485,764 cytosine positions of the human genome including gene
promoters and repetitive DNA elements. The methylation level for each CpG
dinucleotides was represented as a beta value according to the
fluorescent intensity ratio. In order to identify alteration of
methylation profile between well-differntiated HCC and non-tumor liver,
difference of average beta values between tumor and non-tumor was
calculated. Of 25,978 CpG loci that represent each gene, differences of
average beta values of 24,805 loci (95.5%) were within 30%. These were
considered as constitutively methylated or unmethylated. Tumor-specific
demethylation was found at 589 loci representing 414 genes. Of these,
85.0% were located outside CpG islands, shore or shelf. Tumor-specific
demethylation rarely occurred within CpG islands (3.4%). On the other
hand, tumor-specific DNA methylation was found at 137 loci representing
108 genes. Of these, 65.7% were located within CpG islands. According to
previously published information (Lee, TI. et. al. Cell 125:301-313,
2006), 39 genes (36%) out of these 108 genes with tumor-specific
methylation have been reported to be occupied with polycomb group protein
SUZ12 in embryonic stem cells. Tumor-specific methylation occurring at
CpG islands, especially of polycomb target genes, may contribute to
hepatocarcinogenesis. This finding further suggests an importance of
epigenetic mechanism on developing human HCC.

