Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of -catenin lysine 394 as a novel charge button and
ubiquitination site by Rad6B


Clinical evidence suggests that -catenin accumulation in breast cancer is
associated with poor prognosis. Accumulation of -catenin occurs even
though activating mutations are rare. However, the mechanisms responsible
for stabilization of -catenin in breast cancer are not well known. We
have previously shown that Rad6B stabilizes -catenin by polyubiquitin
modifications that render -catenin insensitive to 26S proteasome. Rad6B
silencing in breast cancer cells with autocrine Wnt activity inhibits
-catenin polyubiquitination and -catenin mediated transcriptional
activity. In this study, we identify the Rad6B-induced site of -catenin
ubiquitination. To map the lysine(s) of -catenin that are ubiquitinated
by Rad6B, in vitro ubiquitination assays were performed with recombinant
Rad6B and extracts of COS7 cells transiently transfected with various
lengths of myc-tagged -catenin. These experiments indicated lysine
residues located between amino acids 181-422 of -catenin as potential
targets of Rad6B mediated ubiquitination sites. To identify the Rad6B
responsive ubiquitination site(s) in -catenin, lysines 312, 335, 345, 354
or 394 located in the transcriptional regulatory domain in armadillo
repeats (ARM) 5-7 were mutated to arginine as this maintains the charge
distribution and minimizes the risk of disturbing the superhelical
armadillo domain structure. In vitro ubiquitination assays identified
K394 located in ARM 7 as the major site of Rad6B-induced ubiquitination.
In vivo ubiquitination assays in Wnt silent MCF-7 breast cancer cells
showed impairment of K345R- and K394R--catenin ubiquitination. The impact
of these mutations on -catenin mediated reporter transactivation was
determined in MCF-7 cells. Whereas K312R, K335R, K345R or K354R mutations
caused none to marginal drop in TOP-mediated reporter activation as
compared to wild type -catenin, K394R mutation of -catenin caused 50%
drop in TOP/Flash activity. Consistent with the TOP reporter
transactivation data, expression of Rad6B, itself a -catenin/TCF
transcriptional target, was reduced in K394R--catenin transfected MCF-7
cells. In vitro ubiquitination assays using recombinant wild type or
catalytically inert Rad6B and a synthetic 29 amino acid -catenin peptide
encompassing the K394 residue confirmed Rad6B ubiquitination of K394. We
observed decreased expression of K394R--catenin in vivo. Treatment with
the proteasomal inhibitor MG132 failed to rescue its expression,
indicating that decreased expression is not due to proteasomal
degradation. These data reveal K394 as a novel site of -catenin
ubiquitination and a novel charge button that may be important for
maintaining the overall structure and stability of -catenin.

