Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochemical characteristics of functional domain of KITENIN: Its
implication in AP-1 signal activation and colorectal cancer cell motility


Background & aims: KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin) is
not only a membrane-associated protein but also a functional protein
promoting the invasiveness of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Recent
studies about the mechanism of KITENIN function in the CRC cells indicate
that KITENIN plays a pivotal role in tumor initiation and promotion
through activating the activator protein-1 (AP-1) signaling. However, the
contribution of each functional domain of KITENIN to AP-1 signaling is
still unknown and the biochemical properties of C-terminal region of
KITENIN were investigated. Methods: To compare the biochemical and
functional properties of KITENIN deletion mutants with wild-type KITENIN,
the various mutant constructs of C-terminal region (238-512 aa) were
generated and being expressed in the 293T and Caco2 cells. AP-1 activity
was measured via AP-1 luciferase reporter assays, and the cellular
phenotypes of these cells expressing KITENIN mutants were examined via in
vitro cell invasion and wound-healing assays. Results: KITENIN mutant
with deletion of C-terminal 63 amino acids (DCKIT) markedly increased the
AP-1 activity in contrast to other deletion mutants and wild-type
KITENIN. Also, DCKIT increased the degradation of Dvl2 and stability of
c-Jun, which are responsible for AP-1 activation by KITENIN. The
C-terminal fragment of KITENIN (KICD, roughly 30 kDa) was generated and
preferentially translocated to the nucleus after PMA treatment, but its
functional significance is under investigation. A mutant construct of
408ALRA411-KITENIN was obtained by mutation of YXX motifs, which directs
the clathrin-dependent endocytosis of membrane-spanning proteins. This
mutation did not influence the AP-1 activity, cell invasiveness, and cell
migration by KITENIN but disrupted the interaction of KITENIN with Dvl2.
Moreover, co-expression of this mutant with ErbB4 exhibited more
attenuated AP-1 activity than that of forced expression of wild-type
KITENIN and ErbB4. These results indicate that endocytosis of KITENIN and
subsequent interaction with Dvl2 is essential to activating AP-1 signal
and modulating cell motility by KITENIN. Conclusion: These biochemical
properties of deletion mutants of KITENIN suggest that the C-terminal
region of KITENIN is an important component for modulating AP-1 signal
and CRC cell motility by KITENIN.

