Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model-driven investigation of VEGF binding to endothelial cells
and implications of the spatial organization of the cell membrane


VEGF signaling plays an important role in the development and maintenance
of blood vessels and it has received much attention due to its role in
tumor development and other pathologies. Recent developments in
therapeutics have highlighted the complex and often contradictory
features of cell signaling mediated by the VEGF ligand and receptor
family. The aim of this study is to constrain the effective parameters of
a minimal mathematical model [1] of the first steps in VEGF signaling,
namely, the molecular transformations that occur from the presentation of
VEGF ligand in the extracellular space to the formation of activated
ligand-receptor complexes on the cell membrane. This study addresses
unique properties of VEGF due to its bivalent nature. Bivalence
complicates signal initiation, which requires the formation of a complex
of two receptors cross-linked by a ligand. Unlike the initial capture of
ligand from the surrounding volume, the second binding step occurs
between proteins bound to the cell membrane, and is therefore modulated
by the lateral mobility of the receptors, which in turn reflects the
limitations to free movement due to various features of the cell
membrane. The kinetics of cross-linking are reflected in (i) the degree
of reversibility of VEGF binding to the cell, and (ii) the phenomenon of
high dose inhibition. Thus, the empirically derived kinetics that defines
the well mixed model [1] help integrate binding data with high resolution
imaging and single particle tracking studies of the cell membrane, two
classes of experimental information that are hard to compare directly.
The binding of VEGF to human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC)
has been well studied in the literature, and was the basis of the
original parameterization of the model [1]. However, those experiments
did not pursue the distinction between the two different binding steps,
and the kinetics of cross-linking was not well determined. To address
this, we use a synthetic compound, single-chain VEGF [2], conjugated to a
fluorescent tag (scVEGF-Cy5.5). This ligand has two functional binding
sites and its binding affinity and physiological effect on cells
expressing VEGFR-2 closely reproduce those of VEGF165. We used flow
cytometry to quantify the binding of scVEGF-Cy5.5 to HUVEC in vitro. We
obtained dose response curves and time courses for total binding in
solution, for incubation times from 30 - 120 minutes and ligand
concentrations from 0.1 - 200 nM. The data show possible signs of high
dose inhibition in the 100 nM range, and allow us to estimate a range for
the characteristic time of cross-linking. Subsequent experiments will
directly probe this time range, based on use of this versatile probe for
imaging studies of receptor localization and mobility in the cell
membrane. References: [1] MacGabhann F and Popel AS, Biophys.Chem.
128:125-139 (2007) [2] Backer MV et al, Nat.Med. 13:504-509 (2007)

