Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathologic associations with colorectal cancer molecular
pathways in a cohort study of older women


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a molecularly heterogeneous
disease. Three molecular pathways (traditional, serrated and alternate)
have been recently proposed based on integrated combinations of
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG island methylation phenotype
(CIMP), BRAF mutation, and KRAS mutation status (Gastroenterol
2010;138:2088-2100). To our knowledge, clinicopathologic associations
with these CRC pathways have not been previously described. Methods: Data
and tissue resources were obtained from the population-based Iowa Women's
Health Study, which recruited 41,836 randomly selected women, ages 55-69
years, at study entry (1986). Incident CRC cases were ascertained by
annual linkage with the Iowa Cancer Registry. Archived, paraffin-embedded
tissue specimens were collected from 732 CRC cases diagnosed through
12/31/2002. Established laboratory methods were used to characterize CRC
cases by MSI (MSS/MSI-L or MSI-H), CIMP (neg, low, or high), BRAF
mutation (wt or mut), and KRAS mutation (wt or mut) status. Molecular
pathways were defined as: traditional (MSS/MSI-L, CIMP-neg, BRAF wt, and
KRAS wt); serrated (any MSI, CIMP-high, BRAF mut, and KRAS wt), alternate
(MSS/MSI-L, CIMP-low, BRAF wt, and KRAS mut), or other pathway.
Chi-square tests and analyses of variance were used to compare
clinicopathologic features at CRC presentation (age, anatomic subsite,
tumor grade, and SEER stage) across the molecular pathways. Results:
Comlete and informative MSI, CIMP, BRAF and KRAS data were obtained for
491/732 (67%) CRC cases. Clinicopathologic associations are shown in the
Table. Conclusions: These data suggest that distributions of age at
diagnosis, subsite, and tumor grade, but not SEER stage, differ across
the traditional, serrated, and alternate carcinogenic pathways, which may
have implications for molecularly-targeted CRC prevention and/or therapy
strategies.


