Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining a pipeline to use next generation sequencing for genetic
testing in hereditary cancer


One of the emerging Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) applications is
amplicon resequencing, which can be applied to screen for mutations in
defined genes with diagnostic value. However, in this scenario, methods
and protocols are still poorly developed. To address this need, we have
established a study workflow that integrates experimental work and
bioinformatics analyses. Our Unit of Genetic Testing for Hereditary
Cancer is using kits for Multiplex Amplification of Specific Targets for
Resequencing (MASTR) from the Multiplicom Company in order to generate
highly homogeneous gene specific libraries for point mutation detection.
Currently we have completed a proof of concept for the Breast Cancer
Susceptibility kit (BRCA1 and BRCA2). We analysed a training set of 267
variants in 28 samples, and a validation set of 137 variants in 14
samples. Results from the GS Junior were combined with those resulting
from the analysis of the homopolymer sequences in each gene. Sanger
confirmation was performed in all the identified DNA variants. Low
coverage (One of the emerging Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
applications is amplicon resequencing, which can be applied to screen for
mutations in defined genes with diagnostic value. However, in this
scenario, methods and protocols are still poorly developed. To address
this need, we have established a study workflow that integrates
experimental work and bioinformatics analyses. Our Unit of Genetic
Testing for Hereditary Cancer is using kits for Multiplex Amplification
of Specific Targets for Resequencing (MASTR) from the Multiplicom Company
in order to generate highly homogeneous gene specific libraries for point
mutation detection. Currently we have completed a proof of concept for
the Breast Cancer Susceptibility kit (BRCA1 and BRCA2). We analysed a
training set of 267 variants in 28 samples, and a validation set of 137
variants in 14 samples. Results from the GS Junior were combined with
those resulting from the analysis of the homopolymer sequences in each
gene. Sanger confirmation was performed in all the identified DNA
variants. Low coverage (<=38x; 1.2% of the target) regions were also
Sanger sequenced. The bioinformatics analysis combined the Variant
Identification Pipeline software (VIP, De Shrijver, JM et al. BMC
Bioinformatics 2010) together with a set of in-house designed R scripts
in order to obtain both a Coverage Report as well as a Variant Calling
Report. The first training set of 28 samples showed a sensitivity and
specificity of 97.6% and 100%, respectively. After the improvement of the
kit and the analysis pipeline, the validation set of 14 samples
demonstrated an excellent specificity and sensitivity of the pipeline
(100% both). In conclusion, we showed that a combined algorithm both at
the experimental as well as at the bioinformatics level allows the
interpretation of NGS results with a good specificity and sensitivity for
diagnosis purposes. We are now finishing our proof of concept for genes
responsible for Hereditary Colorectal Cancer, results will be presented
at the meeting. This work has been supported by Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation, Carlos III Health Institute ISCIII
(RD06/0020/1050; RD06/0020/1051; PI10/01422; CA10/01474); The Government
of Catalonia (2009SGR290) and The Spanish Association Against Cancer.

