Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusion toxin BLyS-gelonin inhibits growth of B-NHL cell lines in
vitro and in vivo


B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) is a member of the TNF superfamily of
cytokines. BLyS is expressed by cells of myeloid origin and is one of
many soluble factors that regulate human B-cell activation. The
biological activity of BLyS is mediated by three cell surface receptors:
B-cell-activating factor-receptor (BAFF-R/BR3), transmembrane activator
and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor (TACI) and B-cell
maturation antigen (BCMA). These receptors are expressed by normal and
malignant B-cells at various stages of development. To target malignant B
cells expressing BLyS receptors, the recombinant plant-derived toxin
gelonin was fused to the N-terminus of BLyS to generate the fusion toxin
BLyS-gel. Gelonin is an N-glycosidase that removes a critical adenine
from eukaryotic 28S rRNA, disrupting ribosome function and inhibiting
protein synthesis. Importantly, gelonin is not toxic to cells unless
coupled with a targeting moiety that can enter the cell. BLyS-gel was
used to treat a panel of nearly 50 malignant non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
cell lines expressing BLyS receptors. NHL subtypes mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL), diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and B cell precursor-acute
lymphocytic leukemia (BCP-ALL) were preferentially sensitive to BLyS-gel
mediated cytotoxicity, with EC50 values in the low picomolar range.
BLyS-gel cytotoxicity was mediated primarily by BR3 and TACI in sensitive
cell lines; however, cell surface expression of these BLyS receptors did
not necessarily confer sensitivity to BLyS-gel. The internalization of
BLyS-gel was confirmed in both sensitive and resistant cell lines,
indicating resistance was not due to a lack of internalization. As
expected, BLyS-gel treatment inhibited protein synthesis in sensitive,
but not resistant cell lines. In most cell lines, cell death seemed to be
mediated by the ribotoxic stress response. This response involves
activation of p38 MAPK and JNK/SAPK, and BLyS-gel mediated cytotoxicity
was inhibited by the p38/JNK inhibitor SB203580. Finally, BLyS-gel
treatment significantly prolonged survival in three distinct disseminated
xenograft models (BCP-ALL, DLBCL & MCL) in SCID mice, and BLyS-gel was
shown to specifically localize to sites of disease. Together, these
findings suggest BLyS has potential as a targeting ligand for the
therapeutic delivery of toxins and/or drugs directly to malignant B cells.

