Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung cancer progression by efficient cre-mediated deletion of Pten
and Smad4


Introduction: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the
world and the incidence of pulmonary adenocarcinoma, the most common type
of lung cancer in the United States has been increasing in recent years.
Mouse models have played a crucial role in understanding the tumor
biology and progression of disease. The need for more clinically relevant
preclinical mouse models for lung cancer is clear. Most mouse models for
lung cancer use adenoviral delivery or cre recombinase models that result
in development of cancers of the distal air ways. The tumors resulting
from these mouse models are usually a mixed phenotype with mice
developing adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and benign adenomas
depending on the combination of genetic alterations. We wanted to study
lung cancer in the setting of more efficient cre that is present in the
proximal as well as the distal lung epithelium. Utilizing this
cre-system, we created a double knockout murine model with conditional
ablation of pten and smad4 genes and wanted to compare tumor development
and progression in these mice when compared to wildtype or smad 4 d/d or
pten d/d mice. Methods: All mice were maintained at our core facility
under approved protocols. The efficient cre system was accomplished by
inserting the iCre recombinase into the Clara Cell Secretory protein
locus. Tissues were collected at the time of sacrifice and compared to
wild-type mice. Methods include Microarray analysis, RT-PCR,
Immunohistochemistry and CHIP-Seq. Results: When compared with wildtype
mice, smad 4 d/d or pten d/d alone mice, we have recognized that this
particular mouse model has reproducibly developed proximal lung cancers
that stain negative for SPC, a marker for distal airways. Additionally,
this mouse model has developed metastatic disease, with metastasis to
stomach. The immunohistochemistry results confirmed that the metastasis
site was positive for TTF-1. Immunohistochemistry for EMT makers show
that there is gradual loss of E-Cadherin. Conclusions: We have
successfully created a mouse model with CCSPicre/Pten/Smad4 that results
in proximal lung tumor development that advances to metastatic disease.
Previous studies showed that tissue specific knockout of Smad 4 results
in malignancy including gastric polyposis, pancreatic cancer, mammary
gland epithelial hyperproliferation and SCC of the skin. Our results add
to the previous findings in that loss of Smad4 in conjunction Pten may
provide a novel platform to study lung cancer especially as it relates to
proximal lung cancers that metastasize.

