Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib plus hormone ablation and radiation therapy for patients
with high-risk localized prostate cancer: Results from a
multi-institutional phase I study


Background: Novel strategies are needed to improve the long-term outcomes
of patients (pts) with high-risk prostate cancer treated with hormonal
ablation and external beam radiation therapy (XRT). Preclinical data
suggest that angiogenesis inhibitors normalize vasculature, reduce
hypoxia, and improve the therapeutic index of XRT. To assess the
feasibility of combined VEGFR/PDGFR inhibition in combination with XRT, a
Phase I study with sunitinib was initiated. Methods: Seventeen men with
adenocarcinoma of the prostate with cT2c-cT4 or Gleason 8-10 or PSA >
20ng/ml received initial hormonal ablation (leuprolide 22.5mg every 12
weeks + oral bicalutamide 50mg daily) for 4-8 weeks prior to oral
sunitinib 12.5, 25, or 37.5 mg daily for 4 weeks as lead-in, then
concurrently with and 4 weeks post XRT (prostate and proximal seminal
vesicles received 75.6 Gy in 42 fractions with at least 50 Gy for the
distal seminal vesicles). A 3+3 sequential dose-escalation design was
employed to assess the frequency of dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) and
establish a maximal tolerated dose (MTD) of sunitinib. Results: The first
4 pts enrolled on 37.5 mg experienced a DLT during lead-in. *With 2 pts
unexpectedly experiencing Grade 3 neutropenia and a third experiencing
Grade 3 thrombocytopenia, a drug-interaction with bicalutamide was
suspected. The protocol was revised to replace these pts and omit
concurrent bicalutamide. Of these first 4 pts, 3 were dose reduced to 25
mg and successfully completed full treatment, while 1 pt withdrew. Of the
next 3 pts subsequently enrolled at 37.5 mg, 2 of 3 on concurrent therapy
have experienced DLTs (G3 diarrhea with concomitant sunitinib-induced
thyrotoxicosis; G3 proctitis). Conclusions: Using a daily dosing regimen
and a lead-in phase, the MTD of concurrent sunitinib, hormonal ablation
and XRT was 37.5mg daily. The recommended Phase 2 dose of sunitinib for
further study is 25mg daily.


