Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cannabinoid Win55, 212-2 enhances the response of breast
cancer cells to radiation


Win55, 212-2 (Win2) is a full efficacy agonist for the endocannabinoid
system, which is the target of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the
psychoactive compound in marijuana. Cannabinoids have demonstrated
antiproliferative actions in many preclinical cancer models both in vitro
and in vivo. The current studies were performed in the MCF-7, MDA-MB-231,
or 4T1 breast cancer cell lines. Trypan blue exclusion was utilized as a
measure of cell viability. Flow cytometry with propidium iodide was used
for cell cycle analysis, while apoptosis and necrosis were assessed by
Annexin V/PI staining. Win2, at concentrations of 4, 8 and 12M, enhanced
the antiproliferative effects of ionizing radiation (2, 4 and 8 Gy doses)
in MCF-7 cells. The combination of Win2 and IR was also shown to be
effective in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells. This interaction was confirmed in
vivo in 4T1 cells using 5mg/kg Win2 administered twice weekly in
combination with one 10Gy dose of radiation. Win2 (8M) for 24 hrs and 1 x
2Gy radiation was used for all subsequent experiments (Win/IR).
Interestingly, neither THC nor the non-psychoactive cannabinoid,
Cannabidiol, enhanced the response to radiation in MCF-7 cells,
suggesting a possible drug-class specific effect. A time course study
using Win/IR in MCF-7 cells suggested that Win2 and IR each alone induced
growth arrest while the combination caused cell death. Cell cycle
analysis indicated that at 24 hrs radiation alone (2 Gy) had no
significant effect on cell cycle distribution; however, Win2 either alone
or in combination with radiation produced a robust G1 accumulation. At 48
hrs, Win2 alone or in combination with radiation caused a significant
increase in the subG1 population, implicating necrosis or apoptosis;
however Annexin V/ PI staining was not consistent with either mode of
cell death. The absence of apoptosis or necrosis lead us to believe that
autophagy may be involved; however, the late autophagic inhibitor,
Chloroquine (CQ), was unable to alter the effects of Win/IR, suggesting
that autophagy is also not playing a primary role. Taken together, the
absence of strong evidence for apoptosis, necrosis or autophagy suggests
that the subG1 population could reflect necroptosis, and studies are
underway to assess this possibility. Although the mechanisms of
drug-radiation interaction remain to be defined, it is clear that Win2
does enhance the effects of radiation in breast cancer cells.

