Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered receptor glycosylation confers cisplatin resistance in
ovarian and colon cancer cells


Chemotherapy resistance is a significant clinical obstacle in the
treatment of cancer. Platinum-based drugs are a mainstay of treatment in
many solid cancers; however, tumor resistance to these drugs hampers long
term efficacy. Resistance is multi-factorial, and theories to explain
resistance are incomplete. In this study we report a novel mechanism for
resistance to cisplatin involving changes in receptor glycosylation.
Previous work in our lab has demonstrated enhanced colon cancer cell
survival in cells expressing ST6Gal-I, a Golgi glycosyltransferase that
adds the negatively-charged sugar, alpha2-6-linked sialic acid, to
selected membrane proteins. We showed that sialylation of the Fas death
receptor by ST6Gal-I decreases apoptotic signaling in response to Fas
agonists by blocking DISC formation and receptor internalization.
Elevated ST6Gal-I expression has been reported in many cancers, including
ovarian and colon, and its expression is negatively correlated with
patient prognosis. Interestingly, cisplatin has been demonstrated to
mediate its cytotoxic effects, in part, through Fas receptor upregulation
and activation, although the mechanism is not currently understood.
Combining these results and observations, we investigated whether
ST6Gal-I-mediated sialylation of the Fas receptor inhibits apoptotic
signaling in response to cisplatin treatment, contributing to intrinsic
cisplatin resistance. We determined the extent of cisplatin-induced
apoptotic cell death by blotting for cleaved caspase-3, a terminal
caspase, and detected decreased levels of activated caspase in ST6Gal-I
expressing ovarian and colon cell lines. This result was observed in both
a low endogenous ST6Gal-I cell model with forced ST6Gal-I expression, as
well as a high endogenous ST6Gal-I expression cell model with shRNA
ST6Gal-I knockdown. We also show sustained viability in cells expressing
ST6Gal-I after cisplatin treatment by measuring a peptide protease
substrate which is cleaved in live cells. Conversely, we detected a
decrease in viability in non-ST6Gal-I expressing counterpart cell lines
indicating that cells lacking ST6Gal-I expression are more sensitive to
cisplatin-mediated cell death. Finally, we observed that
cisplatin-mediated cell death is attenuated by treating cells with
blocking antibodies to Fas, consistent with other studies implicating
this receptor in cisplatin efficacy. Our findings suggest a novel
mechanism contributing to platinum drug resistance in cancer cell
populations and identify ST6Gal-I as a promising target for therapeutic
intervention.

