Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High copy number of the MET gene predicts resistance to EGFR-TKI
in non-small cell lung cancer patients.


Background Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR gene
mutations have shown a dramatic responses to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). However, it is recognized that, clinically, drug
resistance eventually emerges and this limits the mean duration of
response. Although mechanisms of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI, such as
T790M secondary mutation and MET amplification, have recently been
described, other mechanisms of resistant to EGFR-TKI should be identified
to broaden the therapeutic strategy for NSCLC in patients with EGFR gene
mutations. Patients and Methods We evaluated 26 lung tumor samples from
NSCLC patients who had received EGFR-TKI treatment from 2009 to 2011 at
Nippon Medical School Hospital. Status of copy numbers and amplification
of the MET gene were examined by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and estimated by high throughout automated image analysis. Results
High copy number (>4 copies/cell) was observed in 6 patients (27%) and
amplification (MET/CEP7 2.0) was seen in 0 of 26 NSCLC patients. MET gene
copy number status was not correlated with EGFR gene mutation, gender,
histology, or smoking history. In 2 of the 6 cases with high copy number,
high copy numbers were found at both the pre- and post-treatment stages.
Among the 6 patients with high copy number, 5 patients achieved partial
response (PR) and one patient showed stable disease (SD) with EGFR-TKI
therapy. However, the 6 patients with high copy number had statistically
significantly shorter progression-free survival (PFS) than the 20
patients with low copy numbers. (p=0.048, log-rank test). The median PFS
of patients with High copy number and low copy numbers was 9.5 months and
24.4 months, respectively. Conclusion Detection of high copy number of
the MET gene by FISH may be useful for predicting response to EGFR-TKI.
The correlation between MET gene copy number and response to EGFR-TKI
should be further evaluated using larger sample sizes.

