Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High affinity CD3 RECRUIT-TandAbs for T cell-mediated lysis of
malignant CD19+ B cells


The TandAb technology enables the development of innovative antibody
therapeutics for improved treatment of various diseases. This platform
has been primarily applied to oncology and comprises of CD3 RECRUIT- and
CD16A RECRUIT-TandAbs for activation of T and NK effector cells,
respectively, and lysis of target cells expressing specific surface
antigens. The CD3 RECRUIT-TandAb AFM11 is a human bispecific tetravalent
antibody with two binding sites for the -chain of CD3 and two binding
sites for CD19. CD19 is expressed at early stages of B cell development
and persists until the final differentiation into plasma cells. Thus,
CD19 represents an attractive target for the treatment of various B cell
malignancies including leukemias and lymphomas that lack CD20 expression
or are refractory to anti-CD20 antibody therapies. In vitro cytotoxicity
assays employing tumor cell lines demonstrate high potency of AFM11 in
mediating target cell lysis: EC50 values are in the low to sub-picomolar
range depending on CD19+ target cell lines and primary B-CLL tumor cells.
Cytotoxic activity of tetravalent AFM11 is superior to those of
alternative bivalent antibody formats. High affinity binding of AFM11 to
CD3 and CD19 (low to sub-nanomolar range) contributes to efficacious T
cell recruitment. This binding was determined by flow cytometry and by a
label-free biosensor that measures real-time binding kinetics on live
cells. Therapeutic recruitment of T cells has a potential for a
devastating cytokine release if it results not in a site-specific but
rather systemic activation. Thus, functional in vitro assays were used to
demonstrate that high affinity and bivalent binding of AFM11 to CD3 is
not sufficient for triggering activation signals in T cells. AFM11
activates T cells only in the presence of CD19+ target cells, and
specifically mediates lysis of these cells without affecting
antigen-negative bystander cells. In the absence of target cells and at
high concentrations AFM11 induces down-modulation of the CD3/TCR complex
from the surface of T cells. The latter may contribute additional safety
to therapeutic potential of CD3 RECRUIT-TandAbs without affecting the
efficacy, since AFM11-treated T cells can be re-engaged for target cell
lysis. In vivo AFM11 demonstrated a robust dose-dependent inhibition of
tumor growth in a study with Raji xenografts in NOD/scid mice and
reconstituted human PBMC. Altogether, these data suggest that AFM11 is a
highly efficacious novel drug candidate for the treatment of
hematological malignancies and displays an advantageous safety profile.

