Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide acts a promoter of the enhanced permeation and
retention effect in a xenograft pancreatic carcinoma model


Pancreatic cancer is the forth most common cause of cancer death
worldwide and today there is no effective treatment. Gemcitabine and
5-fluorouracil have been approved for this indication, but merely show a
poor response rate with a small benefit in overall survival. The use of
albumin as a carrier for drugs is a potential therapeutic option for the
treatment of this tumor indication, and we could recently show that
INNO-206, an albumin-binding prodrug of doxorubicin under clinical
evaluation, produces significant tumor growth inhibition and reduction of
metastases in an orthotopic tumor model in mice (Graeser et al. Invest.
New Drugs 2009, 28, 14-19). Since important benefits of drug-albumin
conjugates can be attributed to the enhanced permeability and retention
of the tumor vasculature (also known as the EPR effect), we were
interested in how to further enhance this effect in pancreatic tumors
which generally only exhibit a moderate vascularization. Maeda and
co-workers have described three methods of EPR alteration: by the use of
donors of nitric oxide such as nitroglycerin, by temporarily elevating
the blood pressure with angiotensin II, and by treatment with a kininase
II inhibitor such as enalapril in combination with angiotensin II. Thus,
we set out to compare these methods in the MiaPaCa-2 xenograft model in
nude mice. Instead of angiotensin II which has a very short half-life of
a few seconds, we used the longer acting peptide endothelin I for
inducing hypertension. The tumor-bearing mice were treated with
nitroglycerin (topically, 1 mg per tumor), with endothelin I (3.7 g/kg),
and with enalapril (10 mg/kg) in combination with endothelin I (3.7 g/kg)
followed by an injection of the dye Evans Blue (10 mg/kg) which strongly
binds to serum albumin thus forming a stable dye-albumin complex. Animals
were sacrificed after 1 h, 6 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 168 h, respectively, and
the tumors were dissected. The concentration of Evans Blue was determined
after extraction of the tumor tissue with formamide. The lowest
concentrations of Evans Blue correlating with respect to tumor uptake of
serum albumin were found in the control group as well as the group
treated with endothelin I. Higher levels of the dye were found in the
mice treated with the combination enalapril/endothelin I whereas the
highest concentrations were found after treatment with nitroglycerin.
Generally, the concentrations of the dye increased with time and reached
a maximum at the end of the experiment. These results indicate that
vascular permeability for albumin can be enhanced most effectively by the
NO donor nitroglycerin in mice bearing pancreas tumor xenografts. This
seems to be a viable method for enhancing the EPR effect that is worthy
of further investigation also with other nitric oxide releasing drugs.

