Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 124I-CLR1404 and 131I-CLR1404: Broad spectrum diapeutic agents for
cancer cell-targeted PET imaging and molecular radiotherapy


Selective delivery of therapeutic and diagnostic agents to malignant
tumors versus normal tissues continues to be an important goal in cancer
research and clinical practice. We have been developing cancer specific,
iodinated phospholipid ether (PLE) analogs for tumor imaging and
molecular radiotherapy. These PLEs localize in cancer cells selectively
via plasma membrane lipid rafts, more abundant in cancer cells compared
to normal cells, using them as portals of entry. Isosteric iodine
substitution in CLR1404 affords either a diagnostic/imaging agent (e.g.
using 124I for cancer-selective PET imaging) or a molecular
radiotherapeutic agent (e.g. using 131I for cancer-selective
cytotoxicity), both of which are in clinical development. We suggest the
term diapeutic to describe such drugs which can be used in one form to
identify and characterize patients who will benefit from a specific
therapy and, in another form, to effect that therapy. A fluorescent
analog of CLR1404, CLR1501, as well as a radioactive homolog displayed
increased, lipid raft-dependent selective uptake and prolonged retention
in a wide variety of cancer cell lines in comparison to normal human
cells. Intracellular accumulation was observed in organellar membranes
(ER, Golgi, mitochondria, autophagosomes). Lipid raft involvement in
uptake was supported by co-localization of CLR1501 and lipid raft
molecular markers. Lipid raft-dependence of uptake into cancer cells was
confirmed by the finding that it was significantly decreased after
disruption of lipid rafts with Filipin III. In vivo, nuclear imaging with
radioiodinated CLR1404 revealed tumor-selective uptake and retention in
52 of 54 rodent cancer models tested, including human tumor xenograft,
transgenic and spontaneous tumor models. In these models, 124I-CLR1404
clearly imaged both primary tumors and metastases. In vivo tumor
conspicuity was apparent by 24 hours after i.v. administration and
appeared undiminished at 120 hours. In contrast, the extra-tumoral
124I-CLR1404 PET signal decreased dramatically over the same time period
as the agent was excreted. By 48 hours, no other tissues or organs showed
significant labeling above the background of the blood compartment. Tumor
uptake was not seen in models of benign hyperplasia. SPECT/CT imaging
after administration of 131I-CLR1404 to cancer patients in the context of
a Phase 1a dosimetric clinical trial also demonstrated selective uptake
into malignant tumors, including metastases. Used in tandem, these
chemically identical isosteres offer a personalized, diapeutic approach
to cancer therapy, with 124I-CLR1404 imaging serving as an ideal
qualitative and quantitative biomarker for subsequent treatment with
131I-CLR1404.

