Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic smoking increases tumorigenicity and imparts resistance to
platinum-based chemotherapy partly by down-regulating Smad3 in non-small
cell lung cancer


Inactivating mutations in TGF- receptors and Smad signal transducers that
contribute to resistance to TGF-, are associated with only very small
number of NSCLC. The Smad3/Smad4 pathway is important for TGF--induced
tumor suppressor functions like growth inhibition and apoptosis in normal
epithelium and in the early stages of tumor progression. Epidemiological
studies have demonstrated that most cases of lung cancers (85-90%) are
directly attributable to cigarette smoking. However, nothing is known how
smoking is involved in inhibiting tumor suppressor functions of TGF- and
whether or how the TGF- signaling proteins might be involved in the chemo
resistance of platinum-based drugs in smokers. To address this issue,
lung adenocarcinoma A549 and immortalized bronchial epithelial HPL1A
cells were chronically treated (300 days) with cigarette smoke condensate
(CSC) and dimethyl sulphoxide, as a control to mimic the conditions of
long-term cigarette smoking. Prolonged exposure of these cells to CSC
resulted in a decreased Smad-mediated TGF-- signaling due to reduced
expression of Smad3 through histone deacetylation. Long-term CSC
treatment reduced apoptosis, increased cell viability; decreased
TGF--mediated growth inhibition, and enhanced tumorigenicity both in
vitro and in vivo. Re-expression of Smad3 in the long- term CSC treated
cells reversed the cancerous phenotypes observed due to long- term CSC
treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of tissue microarrays revealed
that Smad3 expression is lower in smokers compared to non-smokers. This
is supported by the results from public databases. However, low
expression of Smad3 is not a prognostic biomarker to predict the survival
outcome of patients with lung cancer. The long long-term CSC treatment
also rendered the cells resistant to platinum-based chemotherapy by
up-regulating Bcl2. Blocking the effect of Bcl2 both by small molecule
inhibitor ABT-737 and siRNA approaches re-sensitized the cells to
platinum-based chemotherapy. The re-expression of exogenous Smad3 in the
long long-term CSC treated cells decreased the Bcl2 levels and
re-sensitized the cells to platinum-based chemotherapy. Thus, down
regulation of Smad3 by smoking conditions increases the expression of
Bcl2 resulting in the resistance to platinum- based drugs in our model
system. Collectively, these data provide evidence that cigarette smoking
promotes tumorigenicity and makes the cells resistant to platinum-based
chemotherapy by abrogating apoptosis, partly by reducing the expression
of Smad3. In the current era of personalized medicine, there is a
pressing need to identify predictive biomarkers for stratifying smokers
to predict the response to contemporary platinum-based chemotherapy. The
low expression of Smad3 can be a putative predictive biomarker of smokers
for platinum-based chemotherapy.

