Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -Tocopherol protects cells from lipid peroxidation and rescues
tumorigenic phenotypes in CS/CSL patients with germline SDHx variants


Cowden syndrome (CS), a Mendelian autosomal-dominant disorder,
predisposes to breast, thyroid, and other cancers. Germline mutations in
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) have been found in 25% of classic
CS individuals accrued from the community. Additionally, we have shown
that germline variations in succinate dehydrogenase genes (SDHx) occur in
8% of 608 PTEN mutation-negative CS and CS-like (CSL) individuals
(SDHvar+), compared to 0/700 controls (pCowden syndrome (CS), a Mendelian
autosomal-dominant disorder, predisposes to breast, thyroid, and other
cancers. Germline mutations in phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) have
been found in 25% of classic CS individuals accrued from the community.
Additionally, we have shown that germline variations in succinate
dehydrogenase genes (SDHx) occur in 8% of 608 PTEN mutation-negative CS
and CS-like (CSL) individuals (SDHvar+), compared to 0/700 controls
(p<0.0001, Fisher's 2-tailed exact test). SDHx genes encode for
mitochondrial complex II which lies at the crossroads of electron
transport and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. We previously showed that
SDHx variants result in elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) and in
disruption of such mitochondrial metabolites as flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
equilibrium in CS/CSL patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells. Consequently,
improper NADH quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1)-p53 interaction results in
destabilization of p53 and apoptosis resistance. Here we further
demonstrate that elevated ROS production results in higher lipid
peroxidation in SDHvar+ cells compared to healthy control cells. This
increased oxidative stress led to increased mutation accumulation in
mitochondrial hypervariable region II (HVRII) in samples with SDHx
variants compared to controls. Interestingly, -tocopherol treatment, but
not other antioxidants, can rescue SDHvar+ cells from apoptosis
resistance. This lipid soluble vitamin E, functions as a peroxyl-radical
scavenger, protecting SDHvar+ cells from oxidative damage. We observed
down regulated lipid peroxidation in SDHvar+ cells after -tocopherol
exposure, as well as recovered p53 expression and FAD/NAD levels. We
conclude that -tocopherol selectively protects SDHvar+ cells from redox
stress and downstream tumorigenic reprogramming, which may have
intriguing clinical implications such as using vitamin E as a potential
preventive adjunct for CS/CSL individuals with SDHx variants.

