Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective elimination of drug resistsant melanoma cells by
-phenylethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC)


Drug resistance is a major problem in clinical treatment of malignant
melanoma. A characteristic feature of melanoma is the abnormally high
levels of basal free radicals produced in transformed melanosomes when
compared to normal melanocytes. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) activate
pro-oncogenic signaling pathways that promote cancer progression,
metastasis and contribute to chemotherapeutic drug resistance. However,
an excessive overload of ROS in cells beyond a certain tolerance limit
may trigger oxidative damage and cell death. Thus cellular ROS modulation
presents a valuable therapeutic strategy for melanoma. Based on the above
observations, we hypothesize that causing ROS agglomeration in cells,
either through depletion of antioxidants or by initiating uncontrolled
ROS production, is a plausible strategy to selectively kill melanoma
cells, and that -phenylethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a natural compound
known to disable cellular GSH antioxidant system, will be effective for
this purpose. We showed that that PEITC exhibited potent inhibitory
effect on malignant melanoma cells with an average IC50 value of
approximately 3 M. Interestingly, MEL624 and HS294T cells, which are
resistant to existing antitumor agents used in melanoma treatment such as
AZD6244 and Vemurafenib, were highly sensitive to PEITC. The cell death
was primarily apoptotic; the effect of PEITC could be partially reversed
using the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD. Furthermore, treatment of cells
with PEITC lead to an aberrant increase in reactive oxygen species
levels, as evidenced by FACS analysis using the fluorescent ROS dyes
DCF-DA, DAF-FM and dihyroethidium. ROS increase upon PEITC treatment
occurred as early as one hour, indicating that seemed to a primary event
leading to subsequent cell damage. This increase in ROS was associated
with a decrease in the glutathione levels in cells, suggesting that
depletion of the glutathione antioxidant could be the reason for the
abnormal ROS elevation induced by PEITC. This was further verified by
using PEITC in combination with the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, which
completely rescued the cells from the toxic effect of PEITC. Importantly,
normal melanocytes were minimally sensitive to PEITC. In addition,
combination of PEITC with other standard melanoma drugs like carmustine
and temozolomide exhibited synergistic effect, suggesting the possibility
of using this compound to overcome drug resistance. This was further
validated through in vivo studies in mice, where a combination of PEITC
with BCNU seemed to reduce the tumor burden. The cytotoxic effect of
PEITC was also validated in primary cancer cells isolated from melanoma
specimens from patients. Thus PEITC proves to be an effective
antimelanoma agent that warrants further investigation.

