Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor is a main driver of aggressiveness in colorectal
cancer through the class III -tubulin pathway


Colorectal cancer is still one of the deadliest diseases in western
countries, particularly for those patients in which the diagnosis is
performed at advanced stage. To identify useful predictive biomarkers of
the outcome, we assessed using immunohistochemistry the expression of
class III (TUBB3) and class V -tubulin (TUBB6) in a retrospective
clinical study on 180 colorectal cancer patients. When stratified by
gender, we noticed that only in females a significant link between poor
survival, metastatic disease and the expression of both TUBB3 and TUBB6
was found, while in males no relationship was detectable. In order to get
insights into this phenomenon, we analyzed the expression levels of both
tubulin isotypes in a panel of 22 colorectal cancer cell lines (13 from
males and 9 from females) in basal conditions and after serum starvation,
as a stimulus capable to activate the expression of this survival
pathway. Male cell lines exhibited a relative resistance to serum
starvation and higher levels of the tubulin isotypes, while only in
female there was the activation of the pathway under stressing
conditions. These findings indicate that in males the survival pathway
related to TUBB3/TUBB6 is constitutively active, while in females it is
activated by environmental stressors. In order to test if androgens could
be responsible for the constitutive activation of this pathway in males,
we analyzed the expression of androgen receptor (AR) in the 22 cancer
cell lines. A statistically significant correlation was found between AR
and TUBB3 (R= 0. 53, p= 0.0062) and TUBB6 (R=0.41; p=0.048) at the gene
level. The pivotal role of androgen receptor in driving this pathway was
demonstrated after constitutive silencing of AR in two models (SW480 and
COLO-320) with high AR and TUBB3/TUBB6 expression. Knock-down of AR was
associated to a significant reduction of the expression of both TUBB3 and
TUBB6, along with decreased clonogenic activity and increased sensitivity
to agents such as oxaliplatin and SN-38. Mortality for colorectal cancer
is different by gender and higher in males. The molecular basis for such
difference is unknown. In this study, we have demonstrated that in female
cell lines (and probably patients) the activation of the survival pathway
mediated by TUBB3 and TUBB6 is driven by microenvironmental stress like
serum starvation. Those tumors which grow in the most compelling
microenvironments will overexpress both proteins and will exhibit an
aggressive behavior. In male this correlation is lost since the survival
pathway is constitutively active and not dependent on microenvironmental
conditioning. This makes that the disease intrinsically more aggressive
and less sensitive to treatments. The involvement of AR in the activation
of this survival pathway opens the avenue to clinical trials assessing
the efficacy of antiandrogens in the management of advanced colorectal
cancer.

