Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes and risk of multiple myeloma


Background and Objective: DNA repair is an essential process for
development and differentiation of all cells, including plasma cells.
Associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA repair
genes and multiple myeloma risk have been reported but generally not
replicated. In a pilot study, we observed suggestive evidence of an
association between multiple myeloma risk and five nonsynonymous SNPs in
DNA repair genes (rs25489 in XRCC1, rs1801516 in ATM, rs2227999 in XPC,
rs2228528 in CSB and rs2228615 in ICAM5). The objective of this study was
to examine the effect of these five SNPs on multiple myeloma risk in a
large multi-center analysis. Methods: We conducted a pooled analysis in a
multi-ethnic sample of 489 multiple myeloma cases and 939 controls.
Studies contributing samples included two population-based case-control
studies conducted in Los Angeles and Seattle/Detroit that used the
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) cancer registries to
identify cases, and three nested case-control studies using subjects from
the Multiethnic Cohort (MEC), the Health Professionals Follow Up Study
(HPFS), and the Nurses Health Study (NHS). The SNPs coded for an amino
acid substitution, and were assumed to have the same effect across ethnic
groups, and thus subjects from all racial/ethnic groups were included in
the analysis. Assuming a log-additive inheritance model, odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated for
allele-specific risk comparing cases to controls using unconditional
logistic regression, adjusting for age, race/ethnicity, sex, and study
site. Results: We observed a 40% decreased risk per variant T allele in
the XRCC1 SNP rs25489 (OR=0.60, 95% CI=0.40, 0.91, p-value=0.02). The
minor allele frequency in cases and controls was 3.4% and 5.6%,
respectively. Non-significant OR's His). Several studies have shown
diminished DNA repair capacity associated with the variant allele of this
SNP, an effect which may be relevant to multiple myeloma etiology.
Replication in additional studies is needed to validate this finding.

