Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in DNA methylation between the African and European
HapMap populations


Background: DNA methylation plays an important role in regulating gene
transcription, and the genome-wide landscape of DNA methylation is
altered in cancer: hypermethylation and silencing of tumor suppressor
genes as well as hypomethylation of repetitive elements and target genes
can contribute to cancer initiation and progression. As a complex trait
itself, there is considerable inter-individual and inter-ethnic
variability in DNA methylation patterns. To further explore the baseline
variation of DNA methylation and its regulation, we have gathered
genome-wide DNA methylation data on individual CpG methylation sites in a
collection of human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the HapMap
Project. Methods: We profiled DNA methylation in 73 unrelated African
(YRI - Yoruba people from Ibadan, Nigeria) and 60 European ancestry (CEU
- Caucasians from Utah, US) LCLs using the Illumina Human Methylation 450
BeadChip. This chip interrogates >485,000 CpG methylation sites per
sample at single-nucleotide resolution and assigns each site an average
beta value for methylation level. We controlled for potential batch
effect due to array hybridization using COMBAT and removed probes that
contained known SNPs or mapped ambiguously to the reference genome. In
our final analysis dataset, we included 46,236 probes on autosomes that
showed relatively high variation (top 25% percentile) across the LCL
samples based on coefficient of variation. The Wilcox rank sum test was
performed to identify differential methylation sites between the YRI and
CEU samples. Results: In total, 988 CpG probes (708 genes) were found to
be differentially methylated between these two populations (pBackground:
DNA methylation plays an important role in regulating gene transcription,
and the genome-wide landscape of DNA methylation is altered in cancer:
hypermethylation and silencing of tumor suppressor genes as well as
hypomethylation of repetitive elements and target genes can contribute to
cancer initiation and progression. As a complex trait itself, there is
considerable inter-individual and inter-ethnic variability in DNA
methylation patterns. To further explore the baseline variation of DNA
methylation and its regulation, we have gathered genome-wide DNA
methylation data on individual CpG methylation sites in a collection of
human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the HapMap Project. Methods:
We profiled DNA methylation in 73 unrelated African (YRI - Yoruba people
from Ibadan, Nigeria) and 60 European ancestry (CEU - Caucasians from
Utah, US) LCLs using the Illumina Human Methylation 450 BeadChip. This
chip interrogates >485,000 CpG methylation sites per sample at
single-nucleotide resolution and assigns each site an average beta value
for methylation level. We controlled for potential batch effect due to
array hybridization using COMBAT and removed probes that contained known
SNPs or mapped ambiguously to the reference genome. In our final analysis
dataset, we included 46,236 probes on autosomes that showed relatively
high variation (top 25% percentile) across the LCL samples based on
coefficient of variation. The Wilcox rank sum test was performed to
identify differential methylation sites between the YRI and CEU samples.
Results: In total, 988 CpG probes (708 genes) were found to be
differentially methylated between these two populations (p<1 x 106, false
discovery rate Background: DNA methylation plays an important role in
regulating gene transcription, and the genome-wide landscape of DNA
methylation is altered in cancer: hypermethylation and silencing of tumor
suppressor genes as well as hypomethylation of repetitive elements and
target genes can contribute to cancer initiation and progression. As a
complex trait itself, there is considerable inter-individual and
inter-ethnic variability in DNA methylation patterns. To further explore
the baseline variation of DNA methylation and its regulation, we have
gathered genome-wide DNA methylation data on individual CpG methylation
sites in a collection of human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the
HapMap Project. Methods: We profiled DNA methylation in 73 unrelated
African (YRI - Yoruba people from Ibadan, Nigeria) and 60 European
ancestry (CEU - Caucasians from Utah, US) LCLs using the Illumina Human
Methylation 450 BeadChip. This chip interrogates >485,000 CpG methylation
sites per sample at single-nucleotide resolution and assigns each site an
average beta value for methylation level. We controlled for potential
batch effect due to array hybridization using COMBAT and removed probes
that contained known SNPs or mapped ambiguously to the reference genome.
In our final analysis dataset, we included 46,236 probes on autosomes
that showed relatively high variation (top 25% percentile) across the LCL
samples based on coefficient of variation. The Wilcox rank sum test was
performed to identify differential methylation sites between the YRI and
CEU samples. Results: In total, 988 CpG probes (708 genes) were found to
be differentially methylated between these two populations (p<1 x 106,
false discovery rate <5% by Bonferroni correction). Some of these sites
are located in cancer-related genes. For example, two CpG islands of
FANCA (Fanconi anemia A), a gene implicated in acute myeloid leukemia
that has reported racial differences, had higher DNA methylation levels
in Africans. Furthermore, the global distribution of differentially
methylated sites was enriched in gene bodies, 3UTRs, and CpG island
shelves and shores (Fisher exact pBackground: DNA methylation plays an
important role in regulating gene transcription, and the genome-wide
landscape of DNA methylation is altered in cancer: hypermethylation and
silencing of tumor suppressor genes as well as hypomethylation of
repetitive elements and target genes can contribute to cancer initiation
and progression. As a complex trait itself, there is considerable
inter-individual and inter-ethnic variability in DNA methylation
patterns. To further explore the baseline variation of DNA methylation
and its regulation, we have gathered genome-wide DNA methylation data on
individual CpG methylation sites in a collection of human lymphoblastoid
cell lines (LCLs) from the HapMap Project. Methods: We profiled DNA
methylation in 73 unrelated African (YRI - Yoruba people from Ibadan,
Nigeria) and 60 European ancestry (CEU - Caucasians from Utah, US) LCLs
using the Illumina Human Methylation 450 BeadChip. This chip interrogates
>485,000 CpG methylation sites per sample at single-nucleotide resolution
and assigns each site an average beta value for methylation level. We
controlled for potential batch effect due to array hybridization using
COMBAT and removed probes that contained known SNPs or mapped ambiguously
to the reference genome. In our final analysis dataset, we included
46,236 probes on autosomes that showed relatively high variation (top 25%
percentile) across the LCL samples based on coefficient of variation. The
Wilcox rank sum test was performed to identify differential methylation
sites between the YRI and CEU samples. Results: In total, 988 CpG probes
(708 genes) were found to be differentially methylated between these two
populations (p<1 x 106, false discovery rate <5% by Bonferroni
correction). Some of these sites are located in cancer-related genes. For
example, two CpG islands of FANCA (Fanconi anemia A), a gene implicated
in acute myeloid leukemia that has reported racial differences, had
higher DNA methylation levels in Africans. Furthermore, the global
distribution of differentially methylated sites was enriched in gene
bodies, 3UTRs, and CpG island shelves and shores (Fisher exact p<1 x
104). The differentially methylated sites were enriched in pathways and
Gene Ontology terms such as cell adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, and
pathways involved in development such as WNT and Hedgehog. Conclusions: A
substantial number of CpG methylation sites were differentially
methylated between individuals of African and European ancestry. These
differentially methylated CpG sites appeared to be enriched in certain
genomic regions and pathways. Future integration of this dataset with
other available resources of these samples (e.g., genotypes, mRNA
expression) will help elucidate the complex networks of genetic and
epigenetic regulation (e.g., through modified cytosine quantitative trait
loci, mQTLs), and their contribution to complex traits, such as drug
response.

