Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assay development for the discovery of semaphorin 3B-inducing
agents from natural product sources


The family of semaphorins has been found to regulate cell adhesion and
cell motility, the immune response, angiogenesis, and tumor progression.
The semaphorins are emerging as regulators of key processes of tumor
progression. Semaphorin 3B, in particular, has been found to inhibit
proliferation and promote apoptosis. Since there is yet no screening
assay available to be used in drug discovery for this crucial target, the
present study focuses on the development of a new absorbance-based
bioassay to search for new semaphorin 3B inducers from natural sources.
Among the parameters considered include the type of cancer cell line, the
time of incubation, the type of lysis buffer, secondary effects that
affect absorbance levels, and ways to minimize false positives. Vitamin D
and actinomycin are being used as controls in this assay. Vitamin D acts
as a positive control since it is a semaphorin 3B inducer. Comparison of
the levels of induction of the active substances to that of the positive
control provides an indication about the level of potential a hit will
have if being developed as a drug. Actinomycin inhibits transcription by
binding to DNA at the transcription initiation level. When using
actinomycin in this assay, its effect is considered to be proportional to
that of semaphorin 3B inhibitors. Hence, actinomycin serves as a negative
control to discriminate inducers from inhibitors of semaphorin 3B. The
use of both controls, therefore, offers the opportunity to discover
selective and highly potent semaphorin 3B inducers of natural origin. The
assay has been standardized in a 96-well plate format to optimize
sensitivity, selectivity, accuracy, robustness, and cost effectiveness. A
library of natural product compounds isolated from higher plants,
filamentous fungi, and cyanobacteria is currently being screened using
this new bioassay. A total of 50 samples have been tested already with
two samples exhibiting low induction levels. The most active substances
will be further tested using a series of immunoblot secondary assays to
validate the potential hits. Additionally, the screening assay presented
could be modified to discover new small molecules or drug-like scaffolds
as inhibitors or inducers of other semaphorins. Thus, an assay to
identify compounds that selectively and potently affect this pathway may
lead to new ways of understanding the cell signaling mechanism of these
agents, which could be beneficial for the discovery of new natural
product leads for cancer treatment. Program project grant P01-CA125066-S1
funded by the National Cancer Institute, NIH.

