Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A non-catalytic function of Rev1 in translesion DNA synthesis and
mutagenesis is mediated by its stable interaction with Rad5


DNA damage tolerance is a major cellular mechanism in response to
unrepaired DNA lesions during replication. It allows replication to
completion in the presence of DNA lesions that block replicative
polymerases. Damage tolerance consists of two major mechanisms: template
switching and translesion DNA synthesis. Translesion synthesis directly
copies damaged sites of the DNA template during replication.
Consequently, error-prone translesion synthesis constitutes the major
mechanism of base damage-induced mutagenesis. In eukaryotes, translesion
synthesis is carried out by the Rev1-Pol pathway. Rev1 possesses a dCMP
transferase activity, and is a member of the Y family of DNA polymerases.
Additionally, it is widely believed that Rev1 plays non-catalytic
functions in translesion synthesis. However, the non-catalytic function
of Rev1 is not clearly defined. Using the yeast model system, we have
investigated non-catalytic functions of Rev1 in translesion synthesis and
base damage-induced mutagenesis. Specifically, we examined the role of
Rev1-Rad5 interaction in translesion synthesis of UV damage and a
site-specific 1, N6-ethenoadenine (a DNA lesion of lipid peroxidation
products). Although Rad5 is better known for its role in template
switching, it stably interacts with Rev1. Interaction domains in the Rev1
and Rad5 proteins were defined. Translesion synthesis and mutagenesis
required Rad5 in cells. Disrupting the Rev1-Rad5 interaction by mutating
Rev1 did not affect the dCMP transferase of Rev1, but led to inactivation
of the translesion synthesis pathway. These results show that Rad5 is an
indispensible component of the Rev1-Pol pathway for translesion synthesis
and base damage-induced mutagenesis, and a non-catalytic function of Rev1
in translesion DNA synthesis is mediated by its stable interaction with
Rad5.

