Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the stem cells in the epithelium of human
Fallopian tube


Fallopian tubes, are one of the critical components of the female genital
tract, providing environment for transport of gametes, the fertilization
process and passage of the zygote to the uterus. Recent clinical studies
reinforced a focus on the Fallopian tube and its potential contribution
to the etiology of serous ovarian carcinoma (Dietl et al. 2011).
Previously, we have shown that the Wnt signaling pathway plays a role in
regulation of epithelial homeostasis within a tubal mucosa and the tissue
response during the infection processes (Kessler et al. 2011). We were
interested in identifying epithelial progenitors which could mediate cell
renewal and turnover in the epithelium. Primary epithelial cells were
isolated, from the clinical fragments of human fallopian tube. In
addition to expression of epithelial markers (EpCAM and Cdh1) we could
confirm presence of cells with robust expression of pluripotency markers
OCT4, NANOG, SOX2 and CD133. This suggests existence of not only
differentiated epithelial cells within the culture but also of epithelial
progenitor cells and actively proliferating cells, which might explain
detected rapid growth of the culture. Cells were seeded in 3D within a
Matrigel matrix, to ensure an in vitro environment which closely
resembles the in vivo situation. Knowing about the importance of the Wnt
pathway for epithelial homeostasis in the tube, as it is as well the case
for well characterized ex vivo models of gastrointestinal tract cells
(Sato et al 2009), we have provided a cocktail of growth factors
stimulating Wnt (R-spondin1, Wnt3) in addition to the Noggin and
epidermal growth factor (EGF). Only in the presence of EGF, cells
aggregated in a ball-like compact mass. Stimulation of Wnt pathway on the
other hand resulted in formation of organoid like hollow structures
resembling the epithelium of mucosal folds. Indeed, confocal imaging of
paraffin sections revealed an epithelial monolayer of apico-basal
polarized cells within the organoid like structures as assessed by
polarity markers like Muc1. Interestingly, individual cells within
organoid like structuress were positive for SOX2 while OCT4 was detected
in broader domains. Activity of Wnt signaling in the organoid like
structures was confirmed using live cell imaging of a lentiviral GFP-TCF
reporter. Organoid like structures could be grown and maintained in vitro
by serial passage. Furthermore, testing of the effects of growth factors
on polarization and growth of cells in 2D culture revealed a positive
effect of Noggin on proliferation of epithelial progenitors, while the
complete organoid cocktail promoted cell adhesion and differentiation.
Taken together, we find evidence for existence of pluripotent progenitor
cells within the Fallopian epithelium. Identification of a stem cell
niche in vivo and investigation of its stemness potential would be of
great importance for the understanding of pathological sequels in the
female genital tract.

