Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: From genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to functional genomics
of prostate cancer: exploring the role of candidate transcripts through
RNAi-based analysis


Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple
genomic regions that harbor single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with human prostate cancer. Determining the biological basis
of association data requires the identification of molecular phenotypes
that correlate to these sequence variants. However, many of these
variants are located in intergenic regions or gene deserts, making it
difficult to identify the underlying biological mechanisms these
association studies suggest. Two SNPS identified by prostate cancer GWAS
include rs10486567 located within intron 2 of JAZF1 gene on chromosome
7p15.2, and rs4430796 located on chromosome 17 near the HNF1B gene. JAZF1
(JAZF zinc finger 1) is a putative transcriptional repressor. SNPs in
JAZF1 have also been associated with height body stature, and risk of
type-2 diabetes and systemic lupus erythematosus. HNF1B (HNF1 homeobox B)
is a homeodomain containing transcription factor; SNPs at this locus show
an inverse association with risk of type-2 diabetes and this locus has
also been identified as associated with endometrial cancer
susceptibility. As the function of JAZF1 and HFNB1 is poorly
characterized we are using RNAi based loss-of-function analysis,
initially in a prostate cancer cell line, to assess the molecular
consequences of silencing these genes. First the transfection conditions
for the prostate cancer cell line LNCAP were optimized for synthetic
siRNA transfection and multiple siRNAs (from two different vendors)
corresponding to JAZF1 and HFN1B were assessed for efficiency of gene
specific silencing. To assess the functional consequence of silencing in
an unbiased manner we have generated gene specific expression profiles
for JAZF1 and HFN1B in LNCAP cells. Briefly, gene expression microarray
analysis was conducted on RNA prepared 72 hours post siRNA transfection
and expression profiles were generated from data using three different
siRNAs corresponding to each gene transfected in triplicate compared to
negative control transfected cells. Following silencing of JAZF1
approximately 150 genes were identified as showing significant changes in
gene expression, with over 500 other genes showing evidence of altered
expression but not at significant level. Following silencing of HFN1B,
over 250 genes were identified as showing significant changes in gene
expression, with over 400 other genes showing evidence of altered
expression but not at significant level. Further analysis and validation
of these expression profiles is ongoing.

