Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of various dietary fibers on intestinal carcinogenesis in
Min mice


Colorectal cancer is among the most prevalent types of cancers and its
development has been associated with components in the diet. Dietary
fibers seem to display a protective role, and in the search for what
mechanisms may be involved increased focus has been directed at the
effect of fibers on the gut micro flora. This project has included
studies aimed at generating new knowledge about how various types of
dietary fibers influence the intestinal tumorigenesis, inflammatory
status, composition of bacteria in various intestinal segments and the
interrelationships between these factors. Three different fibers were
tested; a finely ground cellulose preparate, inulin and mask (a dried and
finely milled brewers spent grain). All fibers were present in the diet
in a lower and a higher concentration (5 % and 15%). The test diets were
given to multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min) and wild type (Wt) mice from
weaning until euthanation at week 11. The Min mice carry the same
mutation as seen in the human familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
syndrome that results in spontaneous development of colorectal tumors.
The majority of sporadic human colorectal tumors are also mutated in the
same signaling pathway. Colon carcinogenesis was induced by two
subcutaneous injections of azoxymethan (day 7 1 and14 1 after birth). At
euthanation a blood sample from the hepatic portal vein was obtained and
the small (Min mice) and large intestine (Min and Wt mice) were removed
and fixed. The coecum and spleen were weighed and snap frozen. Individual
weights and diet consumption were recorded. Scoring of tumors in the
small and large intestine displayed a weak but significant difference in
tumor development between the different diet groups. The inulin 5% diet
resulted in reduced tumor number compared to the cellulose (small and
large intestine) and the mask (large intestine) fibers. Analysis by
Multiplex of a large range of inflammatory cytokines in plasma revealed
the presence of individual animals with high levels of certain cytokines.
This variation seems to be independent of fiber type in the diet.
However, analysis of several data from the individual animals with
respect to any correlation between cancer development and cytokine level
is presently under evaluation. Furthermore, a pilot screening of the
micro flora in feces from selected representative animals demonstrated
interesting differences in species variation when related to the various
fibers tested and the two different doses included. All animal recordings
in this study are done on the individual level; correlations between
tumor development, inflammatory status and intestinal micro flora will
therefore be made at several levels. In summary, our results demonstrate
that various types of fibers influence the development of tumors to
various degrees. Further evaluation of the data is in progress and may
reveal associations between tumor development, inflammatory status and
the intestinal micro flora.

