Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo passaging of primary pancreatic tumor enriches for stem
cells and PEAK expression


The aim of this study was to select a more aggressive variant of a human
pancreatic cancer cell line by serially passaging primary pancreatic
tumor in nude mice and to evaluate for changes in tumor morphology as
well as expression of stem cell markers and PEAK. Mouse models of human
pancreatic cancer were established by orthotopically injecting 1x106
brightly-fluorescent BxPC-3 RFP pancreatic cancer cells into nude mice.
Mice were subsequently followed with weekly whole body imaging using the
Olympus OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System to follow tumor progression
and time to metastasis. When deemed premorbid, the mice were sacrificed
and their abdomens exposed for intravital imaging. Primary pancreatic
tumor, a periportal metastatic deposit and ascites were removed from the
premorbid mouse to establish cell lines. One million cells of the
passaged primary pancreatic cell line were then orthotopically injected
into another set of nude mice. Serially passaging continued until the
life-span of the mouse with tumor stabilized. We subsequently analyzed
samples of primary and metastatic lesions from the serially passaged
tumors for analysis of stem cell markers and PEAK expression. With serial
in vivo passaging of tumor, we were able to generate a more aggressive
variant of human pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC-3 that displayed a more
rapid primary tumor growth and a shortened overall survival in mice
harboring tumor. Overall survival decreased from a mean of 20 weeks in
mice with the parental cell line (P0) tumor to 7 weeks in mice with
third-passage primary (P3) tumor. Additionally, tumor take was more
readily established with the more aggressive cell line and time to
metastasis within the abdominal cavity was shortened despite implanting a
consistent number of cells at each passage. While mice harboring the
parental line did not demonstrate evidence of metastasis until
approximately three months post implantation, mice with P3 tumor
developed metastatic disease by the second month after implantation.
Real-time PCR evaluation demonstrated enrichment of the stem cell
population in P3 compared to the parental cell line (P0). While there was
an 2.5-fold increase in CD24 and EpCAM markers in the P3 primary tumor,
CD44 had a 4-fold increase. Furthermore, P3 primary tumor had a 4-fold
increase in PEAK expression while the periportal metastatic lesion from a
P3 primary tumor had a 5.5-fold increase in the expression of PEAK.
Further understanding of these in vivo effects on tumor initiation,
progression and metastasis can aide in discovery of effective therapies
to treat this dismal disease.

