Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1): An auspicious target for state of the art
anti-angiogenic therapeutic strategies and new insights in prostate
carcinogenesis


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of death among males.
Angiogenesis is critical during tumor initiation and progression. The
arrival of anti-angiogenic agents as cancer treatments joining the ranks
of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy has been a source of renewed
hope. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) counteracts oxidative and inflammatory
damage. It has become increasingly clear that in addition to its effect
on blocking proliferation, invasion and migration, other mechanisms
including a direct effect on angiogenic factors may account for its
anti-tumoral role in PCa. To further assess its properties, we
investigated its potentiality to modulate PCa associated-angiogenesis. In
the present study, we identified in PCa cells a set of inflammatory and
pro-angiogenic genes down-regulated in response to HO-1 overexpression,
in particular VEGFA, VEGFC, HIF1, KDR and 51 integrin. Our results
indicated also that HO-1 counteracts oxidative imbalance reducing ROS
levels. An in vivo angiogenic assay showed that intradermal inoculation
of PC3 cells stable transfected with HO-1 (PC3HO-1) generated tumours
less vascularised than controls, with decreased microvessel density and
reduced CD34 and MMP9 positive staining. Interestingly, longer term grown
PC3HO-1 xenografts displayed reduced neovascularization with the
subsequent down-regulation of VEGFR2 expression. Furthermore, using
immunofluorescence and structured illumination microscopy we visualized
NFB retention in cytoplasm and demonstrated a higher rate of
co-localization with HO-1 under HO-1 over-expression. These observations
correlated with repressed nuclear factor B (NF-B)-mediated transcription
from an NF-B responsive luciferase reporter construct, induced
accumulation of IB and decreased IKK mRNA levels under HO-1 modulation.
These evidences strongly suggest that HO-1 may regulate angiogenesis
through this pathway. Taken together, these data supports an
unprecedented role of HO-1, challenging the angiogenic-switch in prostate
carcinogenesis outlining a rationale for its development as an anticancer
target in PCa.

