Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A let-7 signaling pathway targets metastatic genes enriched in
tumor initiating cells


Stem-like Tumor Initiating Cells (TICs) have been isolated from a number
of tumors including breast, and they are likely involved in all aspects
of tumor biology including metastasis. Recent studies have established a
link between epithelial stem-like properties and the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a step that leads to invasion
and metastasis. Identifying key signaling pathways that regulate both
tumor initiating and metastatic events could enable more accurate
prognosis and reveal important mediators of the process that could serve
as novel therapeutic targets. Previous studies from our laboratory and
others have shown that let-7 inhibits breast tumor initiation and
metastasis. Previously, we have shown that BACH1, a transcription factor
that is a direct target of let-7, promotes metastasis. Using gene
expression arrays to quantify transcription in BACH1 depleted cells, we
show that BACH1 regulates a number of downstream targets including Bone
Metastasis Signature (BMS) genes. Utilizing an approach based on
experimental and clinical validation, we identify genes implicated in
both tumor initiation and metastasis. Gene set analysis confirmed that
the BACH1 target genes significantly correlate to the metastatic pathway
including BACH1, let-7 and BMS gene expression across a set of more than
1200 primary human tumors, and, in tumors selected for a basal phenotype,
the expression levels of individual BACH1 target genes can significantly
stratify metastasis free survival in patients. Using FACS to sort
metastatic breast cancer cell lines, we see a significant increase in the
transcription levels of BACH1 regulated genes when comparing TICs to
non-tumor initiating cells. Additionally, in metastatic cell lines known
to be enriched in TICs, BACH1 depletion reduces the population of cells
expressing cell surface markers (CD44+CD24-/lowESA+) specific to a tumor
initiating phenotype. And finally, gene set enrichment analysis indicates
that BACH1 and the BACH1 target genes are enriched in human and mouse
primary breast TICs relative to non-initiating tumor cells. Taken
together, these results suggest that let-7 regulates a signaling cascade
involving BACH1 and BACH1 target genes that promotes both tumor
initiation and metastasis.

