Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKR induces apoptosis via PP2A activation and Bcl-2
dephosphorylation in IL-3 dependent murine bone marrow stem/progenitor
cells


The Interferon-induced double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR)
was originally found to be activated by viral infection leading to
inhibition of new protein synthesis and apoptosis. Recently multiple
studies have reported decreased expression and function of PKR in
leukemia cells, although the exact role of PKR in the process of
oncogenesis remains unclear. Since leukemias are clonal disorders
originating in a primitive pluripotent leukemic stem cell (LSC) which is
regulated by multi-potential hematopoietic growth factors including
interleukin-3 (IL-3). Thus, studying how PKR regulates apoptosis in IL-3
dependent (CD123+) pluripotent stem/progenitor cells is expected to
reveal PKR's role in leukemia. PKR expression was either knocked down (by
78%) using a specific ShRNA or directly inhibited (57%) by treating cells
with a specific PKR inhibitor. Results revealed that inhibition of PKR
was associated with a reduction of PP2A activity, a 2.3 fold increase in
Bcl-2 phosphorylation and inhibition of apoptosis following treatment
with 100uM hydrogen peroxide for 48 hours. In addition, okadaic acid (an
inhibitor of PP2A) had a similar effect to PKR inhibition on both Bcl-2
phosphorylation (1.74 fold increase) and stress-induced apoptosis. By
contrast, treatment of cells with the PP2A activator, FTY 720, resulted
in decreased Bcl-2 phosphorylation (by 2.24 fold) and enhanced apoptosis
in response to treatment of cells with chemotherapy (etoposide or
doxorubicin) or hydrogen peroxide. To test the role of PKR in growth
factor- withdrawal mediated apoptosis in bone marrow stem/progenitor
cells, CD123+(IL-3R[[Unsupported Character - Symbol Font ?]]+) bone
marrow cells from wild type, PKR transgenic (over-expressed) and PKR
null(-/-) mice were exposed to different stresses including IL-3
deprivation or hydrogen peroxide. CD123+ cells isolated from PKR null
mice had a significantly lower percentage of apoptosis while CD123+ cells
from PKR transgenic mice had increased apoptosis compared to cells from
wild type littermate mice. These results demonstrate that PKR negatively
affects hematopoietic cell survival by enhancing apoptosis following
stress in a mechanism that involves PP2A activation and Bcl2
dephosphorylation. Taken together these results may indicate that
inhibition of PKR's pro-apoptotic function in bone marrow pluripotent
stem/progenitor cells may contribute to tumorigenesis in hematopoietic
malignancies.

