Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effects of p53-pathway restoring compound Prodigiosin
in colorectal cancer involve effects on apoptotic signaling, angiogenesis
and cancer stem cells


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of death due to cancer
in USA. Restoration of wild-type (wt) p53 function alone has been shown
to cause tumor regression in mice with minimal toxicity. p53-restoration
compounds may provide a tumor-specific therapeutic regimen to overcome
the resistance and toxicity associated with current CRC therapy.
Utilizing a p53-responsive luciferase reporter-based screen we identified
the fluorescent red bacterial pigment Prodigiosin as a potent p53 family
transcriptional activator. Anti-tumoral properties of Prodigiosin have
been reported for various types of cancer both in vitro and in vivo with
minimal toxicity to normal tissues but the p53 mechanism has not been
previously recognized. Prodigiosin has been shown to induce
mitochondria-dependent apoptosis in cancer cells, but the role of the
pro-apoptotic protein Bax in anti-tumor efficacy of Prodigiosin in CRC
has not been clearly defined. Using fluorescence microscopy we determined
that Prodigiosin localizes to the mitochondria in CRC cells. Results of
trypan-blue dye exclusion tests reveal that HCT116 wild-type and Bax-null
cells were equally sensitive to Prodigiosin-induced cell death. Thus, Bax
played a minor role in Prodigiosin-induced cell death. The p53 family
transcriptional activation by Prodigiosin is independent of the p53
status of the CRC cells. In vivo Prodigiosin induced p53 transcriptional
activity and reduced tumor volume in subcutaneous xenografts of CRC
cells. Prodigiosin induced apoptosis, inhibited cell proliferation and
suppressed angiogenesis in vivo in CRC cells. Emerging evidence suggests
that CRC tumors contain a rare population of CRC stem cells (CSCs)
capable of self-renewal that are responsible for long-term sustenance of
the tumor, local tumor recurrence and metastatic relapse. CSCs are
therapy resistant since they are dormant and possess various efflux
mechanisms. We hypothesize that anti-tumor effects of Prodigiosin involve
targeting of the CSC population by p53 restoration in CSCs. With flow
cytometric analysis for Prodigiosin fluorescence we determined that
Prodigiosin is not effluxed from CRC cells. We have previously
demonstrated that efflux of calcein AM is a marker for the cancer stem
cell population. Here, we report that Prodigiosin is retained by the
calcein low population (CloP) and induced apoptosis in CloP, as
determined by fluorescence microscopy. Prodigiosin suppressed the ability
of CRC cells to be serially passaged in vitro. Ongoing work involves
determination of: mechanism of anti-angiogenic effect of Prodigiosin;
effect of Prodigiosin on CSC frequency, self renewal and tumorigenicity;
synergy of Prodigiosin with chemotherapeutic drugs for CRC in targeting
CSCs. This work was supported by the NCI Developmental Therapeutics
Program through NCI Contract N01-CN-43302.

