Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of head and neck cancer with infrared-based
molecular imaging


Introduction Head and neck cancer (HNC) is notoriously difficult to treat
and the five-year survival rate has improved very little over the past
thirty years. Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) mouse models
are invaluable tools for furthering mechanistic HNC research. Molecular
imaging (MI) is a promising new modality that may improve current HNC
mouse models. Visible florescent proteins (VFPs) have been widely used
with animal models for tumor detection using MI. However, the low
emission wavelength of VFP results in its overlapping with the
auto-fluorescence of many tissues and causes insufficient penetration
into deeper tissues, preventing the application of VFP to track local and
metastatic tumor progressions. The recent development of
infrared-fluorescent protein (IFP) with Biliverdin as a chromophore has
greatly advanced in vivo molecular imaging of deep tissues in animals.
Hypothesis The ultimate goal of this study is to develop a novel
orthotopic mouse model of HNC with regional spreading and distant
metastasis tumors that closely mimics human HNC and can be accurately
detected by a noninvasive IFP-based molecular imaging (MI) system.
Methods A stable human HNC cell line expressing IFP was established. This
stable cell line was used for generating a mouse model with HNC. The
tumor formation and tumor progression with this model were accurately
monitored by a MI system. Results The IFP signal was clearly detected in
our mouse model of HNC. Scanned imaging demonstrated a progression
pattern of tumor growth in this model. The tumor can be detected earlier
with molecular imaging than by conventional external caliper measurement.
Unlike surgical measurement, the tumor can be quantified without
disturbing the tumor environment. More important, our data suggest that
local-regional metastasis tumors can be detected with this model.
Conclusion This novel animal model represents an orthotopic human HNC
model. The IFP signals penetrate tissues well and can be detected in the
deep tissues with this model. Thus, our model has the potential to be
used for monitoring tumor spreading and metastasis of advanced stage HNC.

