Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential functions of neuropeptide Y in Ewing's sarcoma -
hypoxia as a switch


Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a group of aggressive pediatric malignancies
triggered by a fusion protein, EWS-FLI1, acting as an aberrant
transcription factor. A sympathetic neurotransmitter neuropeptide Y (NPY)
and two of its receptors (Rs), Y1 and Y5, have been identified as
EWS-FLI1 target genes up-regulated in ES. Paradoxically, we have shown
that this EWS-FLI1-driven Y1R/Y5R/NPY autocrine loop stimulates ES cell
death. On the other hand, however, microarray data associated high
expression of Y2Rs, which are not detectable in ES cells in vitro, with a
metastatic phenotype of the disease. These seemingly contradictory
observations raised the question as to the localization and functions of
Y2Rs in ES tumors. Previously, we have shown that aside from being an
apoptotic factor for ES cells, NPY also stimulates ES tumor
vascularization via Y2Rs present on endothelial cells (ECs). This effect
is further enhanced by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV), an enzyme that
converts NPY to the Y2/Y5R-selective agonist, NPY3-36. Here, we have
shown that this Y2R/NPY3-36/DPPIV growth promoting system is up-regulated
by hypoxia and may contribute to ES progression. In Y2R-negative ES
cells, exposure to 0.1% oxygen induced expression of Y2Rs and
significantly up-regulated Y5Rs, while levels of Y1Rs remained unchanged.
This shift in R pattern was accompanied by an increase in the expression
of DPPIV and NPY itself, leading to the elevated release of the peptide,
most likely as a Y2/Y5R-agonist, NPY3-36. These changes were observed at
both mRNA and protein levels and confirmed by accumulation of Y2R- and
DPPIV-positive ES cells in hypoxic areas of ES xenografts. Importantly,
the induction of Y2R expression was particularly apparent in ES cancer
stem cells (CSCs), which were identified based on the high activity of
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). This shift in NPY R expression pattern was
accompanied by changes in functions of NPY, which under hypoxic
conditions stimulated ES CSC proliferation and migration in a
Y2/Y5R-dependent manner. In addition to its effect on ES cells, NPY's
angiogenic actions are augmented by hypoxia via up-regulation of Y2 and
Y5 Rs in ECs, thereby sensitizing these cells to NPY. Consequently, the
proliferative effect of ES conditioned media on hypoxic ECs was increased
and this effect was NPY-dependent. Moreover, simultaneous increases in
NPY release and DPPIV activity in hypoxic ES cells enhanced the
angiogenic potential of conditioned media derived from these cells. The
clinical relevance of our findings was confirmed by Y2R expression in ES
and ECs cells in human tumors and by elevated NPY in sera of ES patients.
In summary, hypoxia shifts the activity of NPY in ES from Y1/Y5-mediated
tumor cell death to Y2/Y5R-driven stimulatory effects on ES CSCs and ECs.
These hypoxia-driven activities of NPY may contribute to ES progression
and explain the clinical association between high Y2R expression and
metastatic phenotype of the disease.

