Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in molecular background of colorectal liver and lung
metastases


BACKGROUND: Mutations in the KRAS oncogene occur in 30-60% of the
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Constitutively activation of the
KRAS protein leads to growth, proliferation, and survival of CRC cells.
KRAS mutation is an early event during colorectal carcinogenesis,
therefore all tumor cells including metastatic cells are expected to have
the same mutation status. We investigated the KRAS mutation status in
primaries and metastatic tissue of patients with liver and lung
metastasis. METHODS: Patients with histological confirmed CRC who
underwent surgical resection of the primary tumor and biopsy or surgical
resection of the corresponding liver (n = 304) or lung metastasis (n =
90) were included. KRAS mutation analysis was performed for codons 12 and
13 using sequencing analysis. We used Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to
further evaluate a patient with a discordance in KRAS mutation status
between the primary and metastasis. RESULTS: KRAS mutations were detected
in 35.3% of the 304 primary tumors with liver metastases. In 11 cases
(3.6%), we found a discordance between primary tumor and metastasis: 5
primary tumors had a KRAS mutation with a wild-type metastasis, 1 primary
tumor was wild type with a KRAS mutation in the metastasis, and in 5
cases the primary tumor and the metastasis had a different KRAS mutation.
NGS of the patient with a wild type primary tumor and a KRAS mutation in
the liver metastases revealed a KRAS mutation in 7.5% of the primary
tumor cells. KRAS mutations were detected in 46.7% of the 90 primary
tumors with lung metastases. The KRAS mutation frequency in lung
metastases was 55.6%. A discordance in KRAS mutation status between
primary tumors and metastasis was observed in 8 cases (8.9%). In all
these patients the primary tumors had a KRAS wild-type while the lung
metastasis showed a KRAS mutation. CONCLUSION: We observed a higher KRAS
mutation frequency in primary CRC with lung metastases compared to
primary CRC with liver metastases (p=0.038). Increased discordance in the
lung metastases might indicate that these originate in very small
subclones of the primary.

