Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadmium activates translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP)
and p38 MAPK as possible pathways for prostate cancer cell aggressiveness


Cadmium is a known cause of lung cancer, but in the prostate there is
conflicting evidence for the role of cadmium as a causative agent in the
prostate. Recent lines of evidence however suggest that cadmium
overburden is associated with more aggressive prostate cancer. Since
cadmium does not appear to cause direct genotoxic damage, its mechanism
of action on cancer progression is not clear. Here we address the
hypothesis that cadmium activates two key molecules: p38 MAP kinase and
Translationally Controlled Tumor Protein (TCTP). The hypothesis was
tested in in vitro with PC-3 prostate cancer cells and clinically
relevant, sub micro molar concentrations of cadmium at various time
points. Activation of p38 MAPK was analyzed using phospho- specific
antibodies against p38 MAPK by western blot analysis. Results of this
study showed that p38 MAPK was phosphorylated within 45 minutes following
cadmium treatment. This activation of p38 MAPK by cadmium in PC-3 cells
was inhibited TCTP in presence of a p38 MAPK inhibitor (SB203580). This
inhibitor also markedly attenuated cadmium-induced invasion and migration
of PC-3 cells in Boyden chamber experiments. In addition, our mechanistic
studies show that treatment of PC-3 cells with cadmium activated a novel
stress related gene, namelyTCTP, which was recently identified as an
anti-apoptotic protein and target for tumor reversion process. The
cadmium- mediated expression of TCTP in PC-3 cells was confirmed by real
time PCR and western blot analysis. From our previous experiments, we
know that overexpression of TCTP in LNCaP prostate cancer cells enhanced
its migratory rates in a Transwell chamber assay and we are now testing
the role of TCTP in cadmium-induced PC-3 cells invasion. Thus, results of
our study suggest that TCTP and p38 MAPK may have a prominent role in
cadmium mediated cell migration and prostate cancer progression.

