Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel gain of function of deltaNp63 in tumor angiogenesis


Background: The p53 families of transcription factors (p53, p63, and p73)
are known to be involved in cell stress response, development and tumor
suppression. It has been shown that multiple splicing sites and
alternative promoter regions lead to each of these proteins having
multiple isoforms. The TA isoforms, which contain the transactivation
domain, have been shown to induce apoptosis and inhibit cell-cycle
progression, suppressing tumorigenesis, while the deltaN isoforms enhance
proliferation and inhibit apoptosis, promoting tumorigenesis. Previous
studies have shown that the deltaN isoforms are overexpressed in various
types of tumors and somehow modulate the expression of proangiogenic and
antiangiogenic factors in a different way thus determining the overall
angiogenic activity of tumors. Methods: Since expression of deltaNp63
isoform in primary tumors has been shown to correlate with poor
prognosis, we attempted to analyze their relationships with tumor
angiogenesis. One quick assessment of angiogenesis is the measurement of
the ability of endothelial cells to form three-dimensional structures
(tube formation) that mimics angiogenesis in vitro. In the presence of
angiogenic mediators, endothelial cells form tubes on collagen or fibrin
clot coated dishes. To test whether overexpression of oncogenic deltaNp63
in HEK-293T can stimulate tube formation in endothelial cells (like
HUVEC), we performed the endothelial tuber formation assay. In addition,
we tested in human primary human cells whether there is any a strong
correlation between overexpression of oncogenic deltaNp63 isoform and
VEGF secretion. Moreover, we performed gene affymetrix as well protein
micro array analysis in primary cells compared to cells overexpressed
deltaNp63 isoform. In addition, we used siRNA technics to verify any
potential role of deltaNp63 isoform in tumor angiogenesis Results: We
found that overexpression of oncogenic isoform of p53 family member
deltaNp63 in HEK-293T cells resulted in stimulation of tubular structures
in HUVEC cells, which can be observed and counted under the microscope.
As 293T cells lack functional p53, these results strongly suggest a gain
of function for deltaNp63 isoform. In addition, in contrast to
pcDNA-electroporated NHFB, used as a control for detection of endogenous
VEGF, deltaNp63 overexpressed NHFB show 4 to 5-fold increased VEGF
production. Interestingly, our gene expression array showed that ADAMTS8
were induced around 20-Fold in the presence of oncogenic Np63.
Conclusions: We found that deltaNp63beta increased VEGF and ADAMTS8
production by p53 independent manner. Our further studies showed that
elevated deltaNp63 induced stabilization of HIF-1alpha protein resulting
in VEGF secretion in p53 deficient cells. Furthermore, we showed, in the
presence of deltaNp63beta isoform, the stabilization of HIF-1alpha and
induced ADAMTS8 secretion was dependent on increased STAT3
phosphorylation.

