Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of a p53 codon 249 hotspot mutation in the urine of the
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the 5th most frequent cancer worldwide,
has a 5-year survival rate of 14% because it is difficult to diagnose
early. The goal of this project is to construct a panel of
circulation-derived DNA markers to use in a urine test for the early
detection of HCC to improve its prognosis. The HCC-specific p53 codon
249T mutation was the first candidate DNA marker used to explore the
criteria needed to detect HCC-derived DNA markers in urine of patients
with HCC in a sensitive, noninvasive manner. We showed previously that
urine contains circulation-derived DNA fragments that are mostly fewer
than 300 bp, designated as low-molecular-weight (LMW) urine DNA. The LMW
urine DNA contains DNA from tumor tissues when tumors are present. The
tumor-derived DNA fragments offer the potential to develop absolutely
noninvasive urine tests for the detection of any cancer with known DNA
biomarkers. A locked nucleic acid clamp-mediated PCR assay for the p53
249T mutation, targeting only 41 nucleotides of the template, followed by
melting curve analysis, was developed and tested using patient urine
samples. Total urine DNA samples from 17 patients with HCC were
fractionated into high-molecular-weight (HMW) (>1 kb, mostly
cell-associated) DNA from the urinary tract and LMW (Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), the 5th most frequent cancer worldwide, has a 5-year
survival rate of 14% because it is difficult to diagnose early. The goal
of this project is to construct a panel of circulation-derived DNA
markers to use in a urine test for the early detection of HCC to improve
its prognosis. The HCC-specific p53 codon 249T mutation was the first
candidate DNA marker used to explore the criteria needed to detect
HCC-derived DNA markers in urine of patients with HCC in a sensitive,
noninvasive manner. We showed previously that urine contains
circulation-derived DNA fragments that are mostly fewer than 300 bp,
designated as low-molecular-weight (LMW) urine DNA. The LMW urine DNA
contains DNA from tumor tissues when tumors are present. The
tumor-derived DNA fragments offer the potential to develop absolutely
noninvasive urine tests for the detection of any cancer with known DNA
biomarkers. A locked nucleic acid clamp-mediated PCR assay for the p53
249T mutation, targeting only 41 nucleotides of the template, followed by
melting curve analysis, was developed and tested using patient urine
samples. Total urine DNA samples from 17 patients with HCC were
fractionated into high-molecular-weight (HMW) (>1 kb, mostly
cell-associated) DNA from the urinary tract and LMW (< 1 kb, mostly
circulation derived) DNA and subjected to the p53 249T mutation assay.
Encouragingly, samples from 9 of 17 patients with HCC contained
detectable p53 249T mutation in the LMW urine DNA fraction and only 1 of
17 matching HMW urine DNA fraction samples was found to contain p53 249T
mutated DNA. These findings suggest that the assay target template size
of 41bp is suitable to detect HCC-derived DNA markers in urine and that
the p53 249T mutation detected in LMW urine DNA is derived from the
circulation. Next, we tested a larger number of samples of LMW urine DNA
from patients with HCC. Overall, we detected the p53 249T mutation in
50.8% of the LMW urine DNA samples from patients with HCC (60/118). Of
the 49 subjects whose urine was positive for the p53 mutation before
surgery, the p53 mutation was no longer detectable in the urine of 29 of
those patients after surgical removal of the tumor. This result suggested
that the p53 249T mutations detected in the urine before surgery were
derived from the surgically removed HCC. For controls, we tested LMW
urine DNA from patients with hepatitis and cirrhosis and from normal
subjects or patients with colorectal cancer and found that 0 of 32 normal
(0%), 0 of 31 colorectal cancer (0%), 7 of 69 hepatitis (10.1%), and 6 of
47cirrhosis (12.8%) samples contained detectable amounts of p53 249T
mutated DNA. A urine test that includes multiple DNA markers for HCC
screening and recurrence monitoring is currently being explored.

