Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic tyrosine kinases are localized to mitochondria and
regulate cancer metabolism by phosphorylating key components of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase complex


The Warburg effect describes the observation that cancer cells take up
more glucose than normal tissue and favor aerobic glycolysis. Many tumor
cells rely on aerobic glycolysis instead of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation for their continued proliferation and survival. This may
be, in part, due to attenuated mitochondrial function, which is suggested
to be achieved through inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC)
in cancer cells. Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) is the first and most
important enzyme component of PDC, which catalyzes the conversion of
pyruvate to acetyl-CoA that subsequently enters into the Krebs cycle to
produce ATP and electron donors including NADH. PDH activity is
negatively regulated by phosphorylation at several serine sites.
Phosphorylation of PDH by PDH kinase (PDHK) results in the inactivation
of PDC, while dephosphorylation by pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase
(PDP) restores PDC activity. Thus, PDHK and PDP coordinate to regulate
the phosphorylation and consequently activation status of PDH. In cancer
cells, c-Myc and HIF-1alpha are believed to promote inhibition of PDC by,
in part, upregulating gene expression of PDHK. However, how oncogenic
signals regulate PDH, and/or coordinate PDHK and PDP activity to inhibit
PDH and ultimately attenuate PDC activity in cancer metabolism still
remains unclear. We recently reported that, surprisingly, functional PDC
can form in mitochondria outside of matrix in some cancer cells.
Moreover, several oncogenic tyrosine kinases including FGFR1, FGFR1
fusion tyrosine kinase, and FLT3-ITD mutant, as well as BCR-ABL and JAK2
V617F mutants, are localized to different mitochondrial compartments
including outer membrane and matrix, respectively, in cancer cells, where
they phosphorylate PDHK1, PDP1 and PDHA. Our studies demonstrate that
tyrosine phosphorylation enhances PDHK1 kinase activity by promoting ATP
and PDC binding, which promotes cancer cell metabolism, proliferation and
tumor growth. In consonance with these findings, we found that tyrosine
phosphorylation attenuates PDP1 phosphatase activity but inhibits PDHA
enzyme activity. These data suggest that mitochondrial oncogenic tyrosine
kinases regulate PDC activity by inhibiting PDHA1 enzyme activity
directly through tyrosine phosphorylation and indirectly by enhancing and
attenuating PDHK1 and PDP1 activity, respectively. These findings
represent an acute mechanism underlying the Warburg effect, in addition
to the long-term regulation that is believed to be regulated by c-Myc and
HIF-1alpha.

