Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualizing cancer vaccine clearance in vivo using magnetic
resonance imaging


Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a powerful tool in the evaluation of
immunotherapies, since it permits non-invasive longitudinal assessment of
tumor growth, and as our group has previously demonstrated, it allows
monitoring of immune response via volumetric changes in lymph nodes (LNs)
adjacent to (inguinal LNs) or distant from (popliteal LNs) the site of
vaccination. MRI also offers potential for visualizing the uptake
behavior of vaccines such as DepoVaxTM, a novel liposome-in-oil-based
vaccine platform developed by Immunovaccine Inc. In the context of cancer
immunotherapy, this platform uses tumor-associated antigens (TAA),
adjuvant and stimulator of T helper cells encapsulated in liposomes and
suspended in oil. The oil substrate of the DepoVaxTM immunotherapy
vaccine platform acts as an adjuvant that greatly increases the potency
of the vaccines, eliciting a strong cytotoxic T-cell response, and also
permits longitudinal visualization of the vaccine site with MRI. However,
this does not reveal any information about the clearance time of the
individual vaccine components, particularly the TAAs. By attaching
superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) to the TAA and then encapsulating it
in liposomes, it is possible to visualize the biodistribution of the TAA
over time using MRI and evaluate whether there is truly a slow clearance
of the antigen from the depot site, facilitating a prolonged immune
response. In this study, tumor-bearing mice challenged with C3 cells
(HPV16 tumor model) were evaluated for the longitudinal clearance of the
DepoVaxTM vaccine components using SPIO conjugated to the TAA or
associated with the lipid component of the vaccine. The SPIO-conjugated
antigen was also tested in a Montanide oil emulsion vaccine as a control.
Over the course of this study, we observed the vaccine being distributed
to the surrounding tissue from the injection site, and the antigen was
actively transported from the vaccine depot site. The iron-labeled
antigen cleared slowly but consistently, decreasing by approximately 40%
over 35 days. This study provides direct in vivo evidence that DepoVaxTM
resides at the vaccine injection site for a prolonged period of time,
increasing exposure to antigen in a controlled fashion, which is likely a
key factor in the enhanced immune response elicited by this novel depot
vaccine.

