Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZ20, a novel potent and selective inhibitor of ATR kinase with in
vivo antitumour activity


The DNA damage response (DDR) comprises a range of mechanisms that ensure
the integrity of the genome. As part of the DDR and in response to
specific DNA damage, the master kinases ATM, ATR and DNA-PK are activated
in a coordinated fashion inducing cell cycle arrest and repair of the
damage before resuming DNA replication. Alternatively they may induce
apoptosis if the DNA damage is incompatible with cell viability. Due to
their genetic instability, tumour cells may be more reliant on the DNA
damage response and so inhibiting specific DDR components may lead to
antitumour activity while minimizing toxicity in normal tissue. ATR
(Ataxia telangectasia and Rad 3 mutated) is recruited at specific sites
of DNA damage, namely ssDNA (single stranded DNA) coated with RPA
(Replication Protein A). ATR activates downstream substrates that
regulate replication fork progression, cell cycle checkpoint, and DNA
repair proteins. Here we report the discovery of AZ20, a novel potent and
selective inhibitor of ATR kinase identified by screening a subset of the
AZ compound collection against the target enzyme. In vitro, AZ20
decreases pChk1 Ser345, pChk1 Ser317 and pChk1 Ser296 levels in a
concentration-dependent manner. Prolonged exposure with AZ20 increases
H2AX pan-nuclear staining, indicative of replication stress. This is
associated with S-phase arrest and increase in phospho-histone H3. AZ20
induces growth inhibition and cell death in vitro and its profile of
activity is distinct from other cytotoxic agents such as platinum
derivatives, permetrexed or docetaxel. The cytotoxic effect of AZ20 can
be increased in combination with the selective ATM inhibitor KU-60019.
AZ20 induces significant tumour growth inhibition in vivo at well
tolerated doses. This is associated with a persistent elevation of H2AX
pan-nuclear staining in xenograft tissue, but a transient increase in
mouse bone marrow at therapeutic doses, suggesting a favourable
therapeutic index.

