Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A specific isoform of Gli1 binds the Gli-binding site of the c-jun
and c-fos promoters


Gli1 participates in the transcriptional regulation of c-jun, which in
turn, participates in the transcriptional regulation of genes in
nucleotide excision repair. The c-jun promoter and the c-fos promoter
have identical Gli-binding-sites that bind Gli1. C-jun and C-fos form the
transcriptionally active heterodimer Activator Protein 1, AP1. AP1, is
the positive transcriptional regulator for ERCC1, and other DNA repair
proteins. Gli1 is a transcription factor in the Hedgehog pathway, and
there are five known isoforms of the Gli1 protein that exist in human
cells. We have investigated whether there is a specific isoform of Gli1
that binds to the transcriptional regulatory sequences of c-jun and of
c-fos. Detailed studies were performed in cisplatin-resistant A2780-CP70
human ovarian cancer cells. EMSA studies demonstrated the presence of a
Gli protein in these cells which bind to the Gli-binding-site, as well as
the consensus Gli-binding sequence. Supershift EMSA assays show that Gli1
binds the Gli binding sites of c-jun and of c-fos. Southwestern blot
analyses of protein lysates from A2780-CP70 cells demonstrated that only
one of the five known Gli1 protein isoforms, the 130 kDa, bind the
Gli-specific binding site in the promoter of c-jun and c-fos. No Gli2
protein binds this specific binding site in the c-jun promoter, in these
cells. To further confirm the 130 kDa Gli1 isoform was responsible for
binding the c-jun promoter, the full-length Gli1 with a C-terminal myc
tag was transfected into cells, and the protein products were assessed by
immunoprecipitation and Southwestern blot analysis. The transfected full
length Gli1-myc generated a 130 kDa protein that binds the Gli1-specific
binding site in the promoter of c-jun. The presence of this 130 kDa Gli1
isoform was also documented in: six additional human ovarian cancer cell
lines, and ten clinical ovarian tissue samples. Seven were ovarian cancer
tissue and three were non-cancer ovarian tissues. The 130 kDa Gli1
isoform was present in all specimens examined, but protein levels were
six-fold higher in malignant tissues. We conclude that the 130 kDa
isoform of Gli1 bind the Gli-binding site in the promoters of c-jun and
c-fos. Therefore, Gli1 may be the transcriptional regulator of c-jun and
c-fos, and thereby regulates the transcription of ERCC1 and genes of
nucleotide excision repair.

