Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide characterization of hypoxic breast cancer transcriptome


Hypoxia is a common feature of most solid tumors and is associated with
poor prognosis in breast cancer. In the current study, we investigated
the hypoxia transcription landscape of an ER positive breast cancer cell
line [MCF7] using high throughput strand-specific total RNA sequencing
(tssRNA-seq). MCF7 cells were grown under hypoxia and normoxia (24 hours,
1% O2), and we found about 7.3% of annotated genome got significantly
differential expressed in hypoxic stress, which includes 79% (1293) up
regulated and 21% (344) down regulated transcripts (P value of 1.5).
Analysis revealed deregulation of a range of non coding transcripts
including piwiRNA (0.36%), miRNA (0.098%), sn/snoRNA (0.028%), tRNA
(4.5%), lncRNA (6.5%) under hypoxia (P value of 1.5). Many non-poly A
transcripts and natural anti-sense transcripts (n=71) were detected and
differently expressed in hypoxia. We characterized two significant up
regulated natural anti-sense transcripts in hypoxia and found that these
transcripts are long (>200bp), lack of protein coding frames, localized
in nucleus and found highly expressed (range fold >5-15) in different
hypoxic breast cancer cell lines. To define which hypoxic altered
transcripts are dependent on, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), we
suppressed HIF-alpha subunits in hypoxic MFC-7 cells using short
interfering RNA and subjected them to mRNA-seq. Results revealed that
HIF-1, HIF-2 and combined HIF-1/2 knockdown resulted in significant
down-regulation of 179, 84 and 149 transcripts, respectively, which were
up regulated in hypoxic MCF-7 cells. Despite detection of previously
reported HIF dependent transcripts, we detected a substantial number of
HIF dependent transcripts (n=64) that were not reported before as hypoxia
regulated genes. To our understanding, this is first study to show
hypoxia dependent natural anti-sense transcripts and genome-wide HIF
dependent transcripts analysis at single base pair resolution in hypoxic
tumors. These finding will open new avenues in our efforts to understand
the hypoxia induced transcriptional response.

