Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a high resolution mass spectrometry method for the
observation and characterization of unknown adducts in human DNA


The development of analytical approaches for identification of DNA
adducts may provide important tools to help clarify their role as
biomarkers of exposure and as potential markers of cancer risk. New
sensitive mass spectrometric methods are needed to screen for previously
unidentified modified bases to allow for identification of adducts of
multiple types, potentially leading to the identification of base
modification patterns in DNA from human tissues. Liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is now the method of choice for
characterization and quantitation of DNA adducts in tissue samples. We
have developed a unique LC-High Resolution-MSn-based DNA adductomics
approach which has the potential to identify previously uncharacterized
DNA adducts in human tissues because it possesses the required
combination of sensitivity, specificity, and generation of chemical
information that is absent from previous MS techniques. DNA hydrolysis
produces deoxynucleosides (dR) which upon ionization can undergo
fragmentation resulting in loss of deoxyribose, resulting in an overall
[M+H - 116.0474]+ ion. This universally observed fragmentation can be
used to identify the analyte as a dR. The methodology described here uses
the appearance of this fragment ion at high mass tolerance to trigger a
second fragmentation step (MS3) leading to production of fragment ion
spectra which provide additional structural information. An additional
fragmentation step (MS4) is triggered for those MS3 spectra, which
contain ions corresponding to one of the four nucleobases to provide
confirmation of base identity. The final output is an LC chromatogram of
DNA adducts in which each peak provides an accurate mass sufficient for
unambiguous molecular formula determination and extensive fragmentation
data potentially leading to its structural identification. We performed
preliminary experiments to test the performance of our approach on
mixtures of 18 DNA adducts selected to represent modifications of all
four nucleobases and modifications at various reactive sites and with
differing polarity. All 18 DNA adducts showed clear, sharp and symmetric
peaks in the full scan and [M+H - 116.0474]+ ions upon MS2 fragmentation
which then triggered the MS3 event on the product ions. The fragmentation
spectrum of each adduct contained the ion corresponding to the mass of
the base it was derived from and triggered the fragmentation of the base
ion in the MS4 event. To test the effect of a real sample matrix on DNA
adduct detection, the mixture of 18 DNA adducts was added to a human
leukocyte DNA sample which had previously been passed through the
purification and enrichment steps used for our LC-MS/MS analysis of
N2-ethyl-dGuo. All 18 DNA adduct standards were detected as clear and
sharp peaks. These results clearly demonstrate the potential of this
method for DNA adduct detection and identification in human tissues.

