Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amino acid transporters ASCT2 and LAT1 ubiquitously function in
N-myc (+) epithelial and mesenchymal human HCC cells exhibiting a wide
array of mTOR and glycolytic reliance for growth


Amino acid transporters ASCT2 and LAT1 are coordinately enhanced in a
broad array of human cancers where they associate in the plasma membrane
and are proposed to work cooperatively to activate mTOR signaling through
a tertiary-active transport mechanism involving glutamine (ASCT2) and
essential branch-chain amino acids (LAT1). Silencing of ASCT2 expression
in liver cancer cells has been shown to induce apoptosis and inhibit mTOR
signaling while Myc expression has been implicated in promoting ASCT2 and
LAT1 expression as well as a glutamine-intensive metabolic profile
typical of many cancers, which helps support the switch to aerobic
glycolysis (Warburg effect). In particular, ASCT2 and LAT1 are nearly
undetectable in normal liver but are enhanced in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). To test the relationship between amino acid transporters, myc
expression, metabolism and mTOR, we examined the expression and function
of ASCT2 and LAT1 as a function of N-myc and C-myc status, reliance on
glycolysis for growth and sensitivity to rapamycin (mTOR) in a broad
panel of 14 human HCC lines (7 Group I (epithelial) and 7 Group II
(mesenchymal)). We hypothesized that transporter expression is
proportional to myc expression, and that glycolytic reliance and both
transporters are enhanced in the more aggressive Group II HCC lines. Our
results show that all human HCC lines are N-myc-, ASCT2- and
LAT1-positive, and variably c-myc positive, with no clear correlation
between specific myc isoform and transporter expression levels. In
general, LAT1 protein expression was uniformly high in all mesenchymal
HCC lines, but more variable in epithelial HCC, while BCH-inibitable
leucine uptake rates displayed a wide array of values in both HCC groups;
the same was true for ASCT2 protein and glutamine uptake activities.
Treatment of HCC cells for 24 hours with ASCT2 and LAT1 substrate
inhibitors GPNA and BCH, respectively, failed to inhibit mTOR signaling
as indexed by 4EBP1 phosphorylation. Inhibition of glycolysis and growth
with 3-bromopyruvate was generally more pronounced in epithelial HCC, but
variably evident in both HCC groups. Rapamycin-dependent growth
inhibition was variable between HCC lines and showed no preferential
epithelial or mesenchymal HCC efficacy. Collectively, the results suggest
that N-myc, ASCT2 and LAT1 are ubiquitously expressed in both epithelial
and mesenchymal human HCC cells, where they help drive growth in cells
variably reliant on mTOR signaling and glycolysis. Thus, both
transporters remain the subject of ongoing investigation as targeted
therapies for HCC.

