Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A screen for new cancer specific drugs that target centrosome
clustering


Most normal cells have two centrosomes that form bipolar spindles during
mitosis, while cancer cells often contain extra centrosomes. Such cancer
cells then achieve bipolar division by clustering centrosomes into two
functional poles. Our lab has previously shown that inhibition of
Integrin-linked kinase, which is a signaling and scaffold protein in
focal adhesion and is also a centrosomal protein, results in scattered
centrosomes and multipolar spindles, which leads to cancer specific cell
death (Fielding et al., 2011, 30:521-534, Oncogene). A major problem with
clinically used anti-mitotic drugs, such as taxol, is their toxicity in
normal cells. Our goal is to develop new drugs that act specifically on
cancer cells through targeting extra centrosomes without affecting normal
cells. To discover new drugs, we established a high-content screen that
automatically detects cells with de-clustered centrosomes. BT-549, a
breast cancer cell line, was used for the screen, since it is known to
effectively cluster centrosomes. The Canadian Chemical Biology Network
enabled us to test chemical libraries predicted to have drug-like
properties. For screening, cells were grown in 96 well plates, treated
with test compounds for 5 hours, and subjected to immunofluorescence to
examine centrosome arrangement in mitotic cells. Images were taken and
analyzed with an automated fluorescence imager, Cellomics Array Scan VTI.
We have thus screened over 6000 compounds from which we identified 18
hits. Fifteen of these were confirmed to inhibit centrosome clustering in
the cells cultured under standard conditions, and induce an arrest in
mitosis. Three compounds are structurally similar, suggesting a common
structural motif as preventing centrosome clustering. To compare the
effects of these drugs on normal and cancer cells, the viability of
several breast and other cancer cell lines, an immortalized model of
normal human mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A), and freshly isolated
primary normal human mammary epithelial cells were examined after two
days of drug treatment using the MTT assay. These comparisons identified
some compounds that selectively reduced the viability of cancer cells,
but not normal mammary epithelial cells suggesting their potential for
cancer-specific therapy. These small molecules are currently being tested
in orthotopic and xenograft models, and will be studied for target
identification and mechanism of action for further drug development.

