Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of estrogen-ER axis in racial disparity of prostate
cancer


Purpose: The role of estrogens and estrogen receptors (ERs) in the
disproportionate incidence and mortality of prostate cancer (PCa) has not
been established. Although ER has been implicated in PCa progression, its
ethnic-based expression and underlying mechanisms are not fully
understood. The aim of this study is to establish correlation between
estrogen-ER axis and clinical outcome in African American (AA) in
comparison to Caucasian American (CA) men. Patients and Methods:
17-Estradiol (E2) was determined in the blood procured from normal (n=30)
and PCa patients (n=50) by ELISA. The expression of ER was assessed using
an NCI-designed ethnicity-based tissue microarray (TMA) slide
encompassing 150 each of AA and CA PCa tissue cores, 17 BPH, 13 normal
biopsies, and 3 PCa cell lines (LNCaP, DU-145 and PC-3). Validation of ER
in situ was validated by qRT-PCR in matched microdissected tumors and
normal glands from both populations. Results: In comparison to normal
subjects, circulating E2 levels were significantly (p=0.0160) elevated in
AA-men than in CA-men with PCa. Additionally, a significant difference in
E2 blood levels (p=0.0015) was observed between AA and AA PCa patients.
Histoscore analysis demonstrate intense nuclear immunoreactivity
(p=0.0018) against ER in tumors of AA than CA men. This notion was
further validated by qRT-PCR on LCM-procured tumor cells (p=0.0315). In
the adjusted multivariate analysis there was no correlation between ER
expression and any clinical parameters in PCa tissues. In AA, there was a
positive correlation between Gleason score (GS) and age but a negative
correlation was found between GS, age and PSA-recurrence free. However,
no correlation was found in CA. Conclusion: Together, high circulating
levels of blood estrogens and mRNA levels coupled with a differential
expression of ER in PCa tissues suggest a potential role for estrogen-ER
axis in the development of castrate-resistant prostate cancer in AA men.
Key words: E2, ER beta, mRNA, TMA, histoscore, African Americans, health
disparities.

