Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histopathological characteristics of mucin-depleted foci in
patients with sporadic colorectal cancer


Introduction: In experimental models, Mucin-depleted foci (MDF), formed
by dysplastic crypts devoid of mucin production have been recognized to
be correlated with colorectal carcinogenesis and to serve as
preneoplastic lesions of colorectal cancer (CRC). In humans, there is
only one report of identification of MDF mainly in patients with familial
adenomatous polyposis, however the histological characteristics of human
MDF was not discussed sufficiently in this report. Therefore, we
conducted this study to identify MDF in sporadic CRC patients and to
evaluate the histological characteristics of human MDF. Materials and
Methods: Colonic samples from 53 patients of sporadic CRC were stained
with Alcian blue and examined for the presence of MDF. Subsequently, the
samples were also examined for the presence of aberrant crypt foci (ACF)
by methylene blue staining. We classified MDF into two categories,
namely, flat-MDF and protruded-MDF (having the characteristics of both
ACF and MDF), and analyzed their histological characteristics. Results:
We found a total of 354, 41 and 19 colonic mucosal lesions with a mean
multiplicity of 44, 38.9 and 66.9 crypts (ACF, flat-MDF and
protruded-MDF, respectively). The density of MDF was 0.0082 lesions/cm2.
ACF identified in sporadic CRC patients corresponded to hyperplastic or
non-dysplasic lesions. On the other hand, MDF (both of flat-MDF and
protruded-MDF) identified in these patients corresponded to low-grade
dysplasia. In addition, we found that Paneth cell metaplasia and
inflammatory cell infiltration were specific histological features of
MDF. These histopathological characteristics have been reported to be
associated with the development of CRC. Conclusions: This is the first
report of a study conducted to investigate the density and
histopathological characteristics of MDF in a large sample of sporadic
CRC patients. Our results indicate that MDF might represent preneoplastic
lesions in human colorectal carcinogenesis.

