Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a potential tumor suppressor function for SNX9
by mining public genomic data


Members of the sorting nexin (SNX) family of proteins are involved in
intracellular trafficking and endocytosis processes, with functions
essential to regulation of cell surface receptor levels and subsequent
signaling by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Detrimental mutations and
altered expression of SNX genes have been found in several cancers and
tumor cell lines. A recent publication (Mao et al. AJCR 2011) identified
a chromosomal translocation that created a SNX9:UNC5C fusion gene in
prostate cancer cells. UNC5C is a known tumor suppressor gene. Although
SNX9 is known to regulate degradation of EGFR, a well-established
prognostic marker for lung cancer, no tumorigenic role has been
identified for SNX9. We investigated associations of SNX9 to cancer
phenotypes by mining curated public genomic data available in NextBio.
Integration of diverse datatypes such as gene/miRNA expression,
methylation, and copy-number variation in NextBio allowed us to uncover
several lines of evidence which indicated that SNX9 activity is altered
in many types of cancer. i) Loss of the SNX9 gene was observed in many
different cancers including multiple myeloma, leukemia, lymphoma,
melanoma, glioblastoma, renal clear cell carcinoma, and breast cancer.
ii) Hypermethylation of SNX9, indicative of overall gene silencing,
occurred in colorectal cancer, breast cancer and glioblastoma. iii) The
miRNA predicted to target SNX9, miR-493-5p, was up-regulated in prostate,
testicular, liver, and lung cancers. iv) SNX9 gene expression was down
regulated relative to normal tissues in multiple myeloma, leukemia,
lymphoma, cancers of the skin, breast, prostate and more. Correlations
within the data suggest an association between the loss of SNX9 and more
aggressive or recurrent disease; SNX9 is reduced in higher grade,
metastatic clear cell carcinoma relative to lower grade, non-metastatic
clear cell carcinoma. In myeloma and leukemia patients, lower SNX9
expression in primary tumors correlated with earlier relapsing disease.
SNX9 expression was also lower when comparing recurring with primary
acute myeloid leukemia. Querying our PharmacoAtlas application revealed
that SNX9 gene expression was altered by a number of anti-neoplastic
therapies. For example, paclitaxel, bortezomib, and letrozole treatments
were each found to increase SNX9 gene expression in breast cancer cells
whereas doxorubicin treatment resulted in decreased SNX9 expression. The
integrative analysis of curated public genomic data drawn from thousands
of studies strongly supports a hypothesis that SNX9 is a putative tumor
suppressor and biomarker for more aggressive forms of cancer. As genomic
technologies are applied to patient evaluation and therapeutic guidance,
integrating multiple lines of evidence from research and clinical data to
identify biomarkers such as SNX9 will increasingly inform clinical
decision making.

