Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocytoma initiation by Rb family inactivation induced
dedifferentiation of mature astrocytes.


Astrocytomas are the most common primary human malignant brain tumors.
Despite standard-of-care surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, no
curative treatment for these devastating diseases is currently available.
Tumor-initiating cells (TICs), a small population of tumor cells is shown
to be responsible for astrocytoma initiation and progression. Though
their presence has been convincingly shown, there is considerable debate
about their origin. By using genetically engineered mice, we hypothesis
that loss of Rb family, induces dedifferentiation of mature astrocytes
which are capable of evolving into TICs. Our lab has developed an adult
mouse model where inactivation of retinoblastoma (Rb) family proteins by
expressing N-terminal 121aa of large T antigen (T121), initiates grade II
astrocytoma. pRb inactivation and mutant KrasG12D activation leads to
grade III astrocytoma and further PTEN inactivation results in Grade IV
glioblastomas. We have utilized the Rb family inactivation model to
investigate the dedifferentiation of mature astrocytes. We have performed
IHC using progenitor markers, Sox2 and nestin and a proliferation marker
Ki67 and observe the presence of these markers coinciding with T121
expression suggesting a possible dedifferentiation of mature astrocytes.
Quantitative analysis of the overlap between Sox2 and Ki-67 with T121
indicates that the marker presence is specific to T121 expression. In
addition to these markers, we also show that S100 an astrocyte
differentiation marker is downregulated in pRb inactivated cells further
supporting the hypothesis of possible dedifferentiation of mature
astrocytes. Since T121 expression is induced in all GFAP expressing
cells, there is a possibility that the GFAP expressing cells in the
germinal areas such as SVZ and dentate gyrus could be migrating into the
cortex and form the observed progenitor cells. To address this issue we
used lenti-Cre to focally induce T121 expression in the cortex. Sox2
expression, along with the reduced expression of differentiation marker
S100 in these cells, suggests that the dedifferentiation events are
independent of the germinal zones in the adult brain. As a functional
assay to identify progenitor/ stem cells we performed neurosphere assay.
In our assay conditions, wildtype adult cortex was unable to generate any
spheres compared to T121 expressing cells. We found that the longer the
post induction time the higher the sphere forming ability of T121 cells.
The multilineage ability of these T spheres cells was confirmed by
inducing differentiation into different neural lineages. To test the
tumor forming ability of the sphere cells, we have performed subcutaneous
injections and awaiting the results. Thus we conclude that in our system
inactivation of Rb family members induced dedifferentiation in mature
astrocytes.

