Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor accessiblity and composition play a major role on the
efficiency of efflux transporter inhibitor - cytotoxic drug combination:
Analysis with a mathematical model


Efflux transporters from the ABC family confer resistance to various
anticancer drugs. Efflux transporter inhibitors were designed to reverse
chemoresistance to cytotoxic drugs. Efficacy of such association is
impacted by numerous factors in xenografted animals, such as tumor
environment and biology. No study aims at quantifying the importance of
these factors on the efficiency of association of cytotoxic-efflux
transporter inhibitor. In-silico approach, through the development of
mathematical models, allows testing the influence of such factors. This
work aimed at evaluating the impact of tumor accessibility and
composition, on efflux transporter inhibitors - cytotoxic combination
with a mathematical model. Two studies (S1, S2) were carried out in mice
xenografted with HEK293 cells overexpressing the ABCG2 transporter. Mice
received irinotecan (CPT11) alone or combined to a new ABCG2 inhibitor,
MBLI87. Tumor size was periodically measured during 4 weeks. Designs of
both studies were similar but mice received a more intense dose of MBLI87
in S2 and delay of treatment onset was longer in S2. To model tumor
growth, a multiscale model was developed including 4 submodels: - PK
model of plasmatic drug disposition - Cellular interaction model of the
cytotoxic drug accumulation in tumor in presence of inhibitor - Tumor
growth model of the natural evolution of disease - Pharmacodynamic model
of cytotoxic drug effect on tumor growth Cellular interaction model was
based on in-vitro experiments and quantified the magnitude of CPT11 and
its metabolite SN38 active efflux and the MBLI87 inhibition constant. A
rate constant describing drug diffusion from plasma to tumor represented
tumor accessibility. Three types of tumoral tissues were considered:
proliferative, hypoxic and necrotic. Only proliferative tissues could
grow and cytotoxic drugs could only affect proliferative cells. Model
parameters were estimated with a non-linear mixed-effects approach using
NONMEM software. Model was able to predict correctly tumor growth from
our data. Addition of MBLI87 to CPT11 slowed the growth of tumors in S1
and S2. Our model showed that cytotoxic potency was equivalent in S1 and
S2 but proportion of proliferative cells was smaller at treatment onset
and drug active efflux was greater in S2. Equilibration between plasma
and tumor was faster in S2 attesting better tumor accessibility owing to
better vascularization. As a consequence, a different intensity in
resistance reversion was found between S1 and S2: tumor size was 50%
greater at day 40 in S2. This mathematical model quantified the role of
tumor accessibility and composition on the efficiency of an efflux
inhibitor - cytotoxic drug combination. It can be used as a simulation
framework to optimize this type of interaction or as a template for early
evaluation of other efflux transporter inhibitors.

