Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of alternative and classical NF-kappaB signaling
patterns: Connections to branching morphogenesis and mammary tumorigenesis


NF-kappaB transcription factors including p65 (RelA), RelB, p105/p50, and
p100/p52 play roles in mammary development and tumorigenesis. While most
studies have focused on classical NF-kappaB signaling (p65/p50),
alternative NF-kappaB signaling is elevated in human primary breast
tumors and in human breast cancer cell lines. In addition, we have
reported that overexpression of p100 within the mouse mammary epithelium
during pregnancy and lactation led to ductal thickening and hyperplastic
foci. To determine the contribution of alternative NF-kappaB signaling to
mammary development and tumorigenesis, we have developed murine
transgenic models that enable us to inducibly express activators or
inhibitors of classical or alternative NF-kappaB signaling in the mammary
epithelium by adding doxycycline to the drinking water of mice.
Modulation of both the classical and alternative pathways will enable us
to determine the roles that each arm plays independently or
synergistically. Using immunoflourescent staining we have identified
distinct patterns of expression of the alternative and classical pathways
in mammary epithelium, a previously undescribed phenomenon. Classical p65
signaling was found within the luminal cell population and p100/p52
signaling was observed almost exclusively within the basal cell layer.
Upon induction of constitutively activated IKK2 or a dominant negative
IKBalpha, two regulators of the classical NF-B pathway, alterations in
branching morphogenesis were observed within the developing virgin gland.
These branching phenotypes were associated with a break down in the
previously observed classical/alternative signaling pattern, as luminal
cells were now expressing low levels of p100/p52. Furthermore, this
patterning is disrupted during the development of polyoma middle T
oncogene induced tumors in which we also observe alternative signaling no
longer confined to the basal layer. Ongoing experiments with our newest
transgenic model are designed to determine the effects of inducing
alternative signaling, through overexpression of p52, within the mammary
epithelium. Our models may reveal novel roles for the alternative
NF-kappaB pathway in maintaining the basal/luminal structure of mammary
epithelial ducts and connect aberrant p100/p52 signaling to tumor
progression, potentially identifying a novel therapeutic target.

