Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid nanoparticle-mediated delivery of siRNA to extrahepatic
tumors


While lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) proved to be effective in delivering
siRNA to the liver and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) via systemic
administration, they showed inferior or no efficacy in the extrahepatic
tumor models. To understand the underlying mechanism for LNP activity in
delivering siRNA to extrahepatic tumors, we determined siRNA
biodistribution and gene-silencing activity of the LNP-siRNA
nanoparticles containing different percentages of a polyethylene glycol
(PEG) lipid, distinct PEG lipids with a short (C-14) or long (C-18) alkyl
chain, or an identical composition with different particle sizes in mouse
subcutaneous tumor xenograft models derived from either human HCC (Hep3B)
or colon cancer (HT29 or HCT116) cells. We show that the LNPs containing
C-18 DSA PEG exhibited a higher retention of siRNA in both Hep3B and HT29
tumors than those with C-14 DMA PEG following an intravenous
administration. Intriguingly, LNPs containing 2% of DSA or DMA PEG
resulted in similar levels (50%) of target knockdown in Hep3B tumors
while those containing 6% of DSA or DMA PEG caused no target silencing.
Also, none of these LNPs reduced target expression in HT29 tumors despite
the retention of siRNA in tumor tissues. When LNPs with an identical
composition (2% DMG PEG) but different particle sizes (80 nm vs. 120 nm)
were tested, we observed a comparable and moderate suppression of target
expression in Hep3B tumors, but no target knockdown in HCT116 tumors.
This is despite the fact that the expression of low density lipid
receptor, which is shown to be involved in mediating LNP efficacy, is
detected in HT29 and HCT116 tumors. Finally, intratumor injection of LNPs
only induced minimal target silencing in subcutaneous tumors while
provoking significant target knockdown in the liver. Together, enhanced
tumor retention of siRNA might not be readily translated to target
silencing activity in tumors. Other factors such as the efficiency of
transfecting tumor cells and the passive targeting effect through
opsonization could impact on LNP efficacy in extrahepatic tumors.

