Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E-cadherin regulates stemness and bone metastasis of prostate
cancer cells


Prostate cancer (PCA) is the most common non-cutaneous cancer and is the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in American men. Bone
metastasis of PCA cells is main cause of high mortality; therefore, a
better understanding of the metastatic events might help to develop newer
strategies that would lower the PCA burden. Recent studies suggest that
cancer stem cell population not only sustains the growth and
heterogeneity of the primary tumors but also metastasis. Here, we
analyzed the role of E-cadherin, a transmembrane protein, in regulating
the stemness and bone metastasis of PCA cells. First, we transfected
human PCA PC3 cells with shRNA specific for E-cadherin or random shRNA,
and selected cells with stable knock-down of E-cadherin (ShEC-PC3 cells)
and respective control cells (Sh-PC3 cells). ShEC-PC3 cells showed
mesenchymal phenotype, shorter doubling time, enhanced invasiveness and
clonogenicity. Importantly, compared to Sh-PC3 cells, ShEC-PC3 cells also
formed significantly higher number and bigger sized prostaspheres
suggesting an increase in the stem cell population with E-cadherin
knock-down. Cell sorting for established stem cell phenotypic markers
(CD44hiCD24lo) confirmed a two-fold increase in stem cell population
along with a nine fold higher CD44hi/CD44lo population in ShEC-PC3 cells
compared to Sh-PC3 cells. Western blot analysis showed that E-cadherin
knock-down increases the expression of stemness markers (CD44, Notch1 and
Egr-1) and EMT markers (Vimentin, phospho-Src, beta-catenin and NF-kB).
Importantly, we observed a remarkable increase in SNAI1 expression in
cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions with E-cadherin knock-down. We also
observed a remarkably higher SNAI1 expression in the prostaspheres formed
by ShEC-PC3 cells, and SNAI1 knock-down by specific siRNA completely
inhibited the prostaspheres formed by ShEC-PC3 cells, further validating
the critical role of SNAI1 in regulating the self-renewal capability of
stem cells in ShEC-PC3 cells. Next, to define the role of E-cadherin in
PCA metastasis, we orthotopically injected Sh-PC3 or ShEC-PC3 cells in
the prostate of nude mice and after 4 weeks, imaged the mice using IR-dye
(EGF optical probe). Mice injected with ShEC-PC3 cells showed remarkable
metastasis to distant organs mainly to the bones, while mice injected
with Sh-PC3 cells showed only prostate localized growth. We also observed
increased expression of several molecules that are important in PCA bone
metastasis namely CXCR4, uPA, RANKL and Runx2 with E-cadherin knock-down.
Overall, these results suggest the important role of E-cadherin in
regulating the stemness and bone metastasis of PCA cells, which have
significant translational implications as E-cadherin is mostly silenced
epigenetically in cancer cells. We conclude that it might be possible to
prevent metastasis in PCA patients with localized disease through
re-activating E-cadherin expression in PCA cells.

