Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD56 targeted chimeric antigen receptors for immunotherapy of
multiple myeloma


We have developed an adoptive T cell therapy strategy for treating
multiple myeloma using chimeric antigen receptors targeting CD56. CD56 is
strongly expressed by malignant plasma cells in 70% of patients with
myeloma and represents a potential immunotherapy target. CD56 is also
expressed at lower levels on normal tissue types including neuronal
cells, NK cells and a subset of activated T cells. A second generation
CAR was constructed containing the scFv of the murine monoclonal antibody
against human CD56 (N901) as well as the CD28 transmembrane and
cytoplasmic signaling domains. CD56 CAR cells were generated by
retroviral transduction of human T cells and showed antigen dependent
proliferation and cytokine secretion in vitro when stimulated with CD56
positive myeloma cells. In vitro cytotoxicity assays showed significant
lysis (40-50% lysis at effector to target ratios > 5:1) of CD56 positive
myeloma cell lines compared with a control prostate specific membrane
antigen (PSMA) targeted CAR. To further assess the antitumor activity of
CD56 CARs in vivo we developed a systemic xenograft model of myeloma by
injecting the OPM2 myeloma cell line, modified to express the firefly
luciferase gene, intravenously into NOD/SCID Il2rnull mice.
Bioluminescence imaging showed tumor progression predominantly within the
bone marrow recapitulating the human disease phenotype. If untreated hind
limb paralysis occurred at approximately 35 days following injection of
3x106 tumor cells. Cohorts of mice were then treated by intravenous
injection of either 1 or 5 x106 CD56 CAR cells or control PSMA CAR cells
at 7 days following tumor injection, when disease was firmly established.
At the 1x106 T cell dose tumor development was significantly delayed
compared to controls (median survival of 49 days compared with 34 days
respectively, p=0.02) but 7/8 mice eventually progressed and had to be
euthanised. In contrast all mice receiving 5x106 cells (n=8) showed
complete tumor regression and remained tumor free at 3 months.
Interferon- secreting CD56 CAR cells were detected in the peripheral
blood of these mice and correlated with tumor bulk with numbers
eventually declining to low levels that persisted even at 3 months. These
results demonstrate for the first time the impressive anti-tumor efficacy
of a CD56 targeted chimeric antigen receptor in a systemic xenograft
model of myeloma. CD56 CAR therapy therefore represents an attractive
immunotherapy option and its use in patients with relapsed refractory
myeloma should be considered.

