Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of HPV infection in penile cancer and its association
with p16 and MGMT protein expression levels and pathologic variables


INTRODUCTION: Penile carcinoma is an infrequent tumor. However, in
developing countries it is a common disease and in specific regions it
may represents the most frequent tumor among men. The most important
prognostic clinical factor is the presence of lymph node metastasis,
which is associated with significant reduced survival to the penile
carcinoma patients. Nevertheless, until the present date it was not
possible to establish clinical or molecular prognostic markers. Various
factors are associated with increased risk for de development of this
disease, such as poor hygienic habits, lack of circumcision and HPV
infection. HPV DNA can be detected in 20% to 80% of penile squamous cell
carcinomas (PSCC). However, the role of HPV on patients prognosis is
still uncertain. METHODS: We evaluated the frequency of HPV infection in
189 PSCC samples. The presence or absence of HPV DNA was established
using generic primers (GP5+/GP6+) specific for the L1 gene of several
HPVs. Specimens positive for HPV DNA were genotyped by dot blot
hybridization using radioactive probes. We also evaluated the expression
levels of the proteins p16 and MGMT through immunohistochemistry. These
two proteins show aberrant levels in a wide range of tumors. Protein
expression was quantified using an automated image system (ScanScope XT -
Aperio), which determined the percentage and intensity of positive cells.
The quantification was used to determine if there was loss of expression
or normal (positive) expression. RESULTS: HPV infection, characterized by
detection of viral DNA on the samples, was observed in 19.6% (37) of the
cases. Among the positive HPV samples, 51.3% were infected by HPV16,
21.6% by HPV18 and 2.7% by both HPV16 and 18 concomitantly. The presence
of HPV infection was more frequent among tumors with thickness lower than
5mm, suggesting that PSCC with HPV are less aggressive. This finding is
in agreement with some studies that showed better prognosis of tumors
with HPV infection. The immunohistochemistry assays showed reduced p16
expression in 35.4% (63) and loss of MGMT in 90.1% (146) cases. None
association was observed between HPV infection and p16 protein
expression. It is well established that the presence of HPV is associated
with p16 positive expression. One interesting observation was that MGMT
positive expression was associated with positive viral infection. Until
this moment, there is no study describing this association in PSCC
neither in other tumor types. It was observed an association between p16
reduced levels and poor differentiated tumors, this pathologic variable
is associated with bad prognosis. MGMT loss of expression was associated
with the presence of lymph node metastasis, suggesting that expression
status of this protein can be a molecular marker for PSCC.

