Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperative cross-talk between neuroblastoma subtypes confers
resistance to anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibition


Neuroblastoma is a pediatric solid tumor that can be stratified into
stroma-rich and stroma-poor histological subgroups. The stromal
compartment of neuroblastoma is composed mostly of Schwann cells and they
play critical roles in the differentiation, survival and angiogenic
responses of tumor cells. In certain neuroblastoma cell lines, the
coexistence of neuroblastic N-type and substrate-adherent S-type is
frequently observed. One such cell line, SK-N-SH, harbors a F1174L
oncogenic mutation in the Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) gene.
Treatment of SK-N-SH with an ALK chemical inhibitor, TAE684, resulted in
the outgrowth of S-type cells that expressed the Schwann cell marker,
S1006. Nucleotide sequencing analysis of these TAE684-resistant (TR)
sublines revealed the presence of the ALK F1174L mutation suggesting
their tumor origin, although ALK protein was not detected. Consistent
with these findings, TR cells displayed 9-fold higher IC50 values than
N-type cells. Also, unlike N-type cells, TR cells have readily detectable
phosphorylated STAT3 but weaker phosphorylated AKT. Under co-culture
conditions, TR cells conferred survival to N-type cells against the
apoptotic effect of TAE684. Co-cultivation also greatly enhanced the
overall phosphorylation of STAT3 and its transcriptional activity in
N-type cells. Finally, conditioned medium from TR clones enhanced cell
viability of N-type cells and this effect was Phosphatidylinositol
3-Kinase-dependent. Taken together, these results demonstrate the ability
of tumor-derived S-type cells in protecting N-type cells against the
apoptotic effect of an ALK kinase inhibitor through upregulating
pro-survival signaling. This project was supported by MACC funds,
Advancing a Healthier Wisconsin, Wisconsin Breast Cancer Showhouse
(O.W.), NIH CA133669 (H.G. and A.M.C.) and the Children's Research
Institutes of the Children's Hospital of Wisconsin.

