Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of recruitment of non small cell lung cancer patients
into clinical trials


Background: Clinical trials are a major step for the assessment of new
molecules or novel treatments that may change the medical practice.
Accurate estimation of patient recruitment plays a major role when
planning clinical trials with new treatment modalities for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Method: We performed a systematical review
of all published results from NSCLC clinical studies in Journal of
Clinical Oncology and Journal of Thoracic Oncology between January 2009
and December 2010 by focusing on the parameters considered to be relevant
for patient recruitment: number of patients, sites and enrollment period,
indication, Phase of trial, type of study sponsor, geographic region,
type of drug and line of treatment. Results: Of 104 studies identified
within PubMed, data from 51 studies could be integrated into the final
analysis. Fifty-three studies were omitted from this analysis as
recruitment data were missing. Most of trials were performed in the
metastatic or advanced setting. Overall, a mean enrollment of 0.64
Patient/Month/Site (range, 0.02 to 7.14) was estimated and the highest
mean recruitment rate estimated was 1.81 Patients/Month/Site
corresponding to 9 single-center studies. The mean enrollment rates in
Patient/Month/Site were 0.57 for Phase I trials, 0.78 for Phase II trials
and 0.33 for Phase III trials. University-sponsored trials were able to
enroll patients with the highest mean rate of 1.48 Patient/Month/Site.
Trials conducted in only European sites recruited patients with the
highest mean rate of 1.40 Patient/Month/Site (8 studies). The majority of
the studies evaluated treatments based on targeted therapy alone or
combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Thirty-five (69%) studies assessed
first-line treatment but the highest recruitment rate of 1.02
Patient/Month/Site was estimated for second- and subsequent lines of
treatment. The statistically significant differences were mainly found
when comparing the mean recruitment rates for (i) the different types of
sponsor and (ii) the number of sites involved in the study. These best
recruitment rates were found for University driven studies and in
single-center trials. Conclusions: Study design aspects as phase I dose
escalation and randomization are systematic burden to patient
recruitment. Thorough planning of the study to optimize and adapt the
treatment concept used in the study and attract the interest of the
investigators and patients are key to recruitment. In that respect, phase
II trials on targeted agents as single agents or in combination with high
potential to impact the standard treatment showed 2-fold higher than mean
enrollment rate for multi-center trials.

