Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NK cells are indispensable for suppression of tumor growth and
metastasis in transgenic mice overexpressing chemokine CXCL14/BRAK


[PURPOSE] We reported previously that the forced expression of the
chemokine CXCL14/BRAK (BRAK) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) cells decreased the rate of tumor formation and size of tumor
cell transplants compared with those of mock vector-treated cells in
athymic nude mice or in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice,
even though the growth rates of these cells were the same under in vitro
culture conditions. The aim of this study was to determine whether BRAK
transgenic mice (Tg) would show resistance to tumor cell transplant and
tumor metastasis or not, and if so, to find the mechanism of tumor
suppression. [EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES] Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells
or B16 melanoma cells were injected subcutaneously into dorso-lateral
region of Tg or wild type (Wt) C57BL/6J mice. Tumor cells were also
injected intravenously via a tail vein into Wt, SCID mice or NK
cell-deficient NOG mice to investigate colonization to the lungs. Tg or
Wt mice were also pre-injected with NK cell function inhibitory anti-NK
1.1 antibody or anti-asialo GM1 antibody to see the role of NK cells in
BRAK-dependent tumor suppression in vivo. Melanoma cells that had been
engineered to express the BRAK gene under the control of doxycycline
(B16-luc-2-LMT3-Tet/OnBRAK) were also used. [RESULTS] Sizes of LLC or B16
melanoma cell tumors in the Tg mice were significantly smaller than those
in the control Wt mice, indicating that BRAK, first found as a suppressor
of tumor growth of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, also
suppressed the growth of carcinomas of other tissue origins. This
suppression was attenuated by the injection of anti-asialo-GM1 antibody.
Colonization of LLC cells or B16 melanoma cells to the lungs was also
suppressed in the Tg mice, and this suppression was attenuated by the
treatment with anti-asialo-GM1 antibody or anti-NK 1.1 antibody. When Wt
mice were fed doxycycline-containing sucrose solution after the injection
of B16-luc-2-LMT3-Tet/OnBRAK cells, the number of metastatic nodules in
the lungs was significantly lower than that for the mice fed control
sucrose solution. In the case of SCID mice, the number of metastatic
nodules was 4 times higher that for the Wt, but still the number was
significantly lower than that for the BRAK-expressing melanoma cells. On
the other hand, when the B16-luc-2-LMT3-Tet/OnBRAK cells were injected
into NK-cell-deficient NOG mice, the number of metastatic nodules was ten
times higher than that in the Wt mice; and also no difference was
observed between BRAK-expressing and non-expressing melanoma cells,
indicating NK cell activity to be indispensable for suppression of
tumor-cell metastasis to the lung. [CONCLUSION] High expression of the
BRAK gene either in host cells, or tumor cells resulted in suppression of
growth and metastasis of tumor cells, and NK cells were indispensable for
either suppression.

