Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation and frequency of myeloid subsets in peripheral blood is
associated with clinical outcome in prostate cancer patients treated with
Prostate GVAX and anti-CTLA4


Blockade of the CTLA-4 immune checkpoint can enhance anti-tumor responses
and prolong survival, but it can also lead to the development of severe
and potentially life-threatening immune-related adverse events (IRAE). To
avoid unnecessary exposure to this risk, it is essential to identify
biomarkers that correlate with clinical activity and can be used to
recognize and select patients that will benefit from immune checkpoint
blockade. We therefore performed extensive immune monitoring in a phase
I/II dose escalation/expansion trial of combined Prostate GVAX (a
GM-CSF-secreting allogeneic prostate cancer vaccine) and
antiCTLA-4/ipilimumab immunotherapy in patients with Castration Resistant
Prostate Cancer (CRPC). Here we report on the effects of the treatment on
circulating myeloid cells and the identification of potential
myeloid-related biomarkers. The GVAX/ipilimumab combination was
clinically active with PSA declines of more than 50% in 5, and PSA
stabilizations in 12 of 28 patients. Regressing bone and lymph node
metastasis were observed in 2/5 PR patients. Flowcytometric monitoring of
myeloid subsets in peripheral blood before and after Prostate
GVAX/ipilimumab treatment revealed some striking differences between
patients who benefited from therapy and patients who did not. Significant
treatment-induced decreases of conventional and plasmacytoid Dendritic
Cell subsets (cDC and pDC, respectively) were observed, which were
paralleled by increased DC activation and recruitment to the vaccination
sites. Treatment-induced activation of BDCA1/CD1c+ cDC and 6-sulfo
LacNAc+ inflammatory DC was associated with significantly prolonged
over-all survival (OS). In contrast, increased frequencies of
CD11b+CD14CD15+ granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and
high pre-treatment levels of CD14+HLA-DRlo/ monocytic MDSC were
associated with reduced OS. Together with similar analyses of T cell
subsets, these studies have yielded an immune profile with predictive
value for clinical outcome. The profile is characterized by pre- or
on-treatment activation of immune effector subsets and low frequencies of
regulatory/suppressive subsets. It may thus provide a potentially useful
tool for patient selection and should be validated as such in other
patient groups treated by antiCTLA-4 blockade.

