Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin-Notch-Wnt axis affects drug resistance in breast cancer


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly
aggressive form of the disease whose incidence is disproportionate in
obese African American and Latina women. TNBC is commonly associated with
acute early onset, poor survival and acquired drug-resistance. Obesity,
characterized by high levels of leptin, is frequently found among these
ethnic groups. We hypothesize that intact leptin-Notch-Wnt signaling
crosstalk affects the development of drug-resistance in TNBC. Objective:
To determine whether leptin signaling induces Notch/Wnt pathway
crosstalk, decreasing the effectiveness of cisplatin in TNBC cells.
Materials & Methods: TNBC cells (MDA MB 231 and HCC1806) and ER+ MCF-7
(as control) were treated with pharmacological doses of leptin and
agonists of the Notch and Wnt pathways JAG1-17 mer peptide and Wnt-1,
respectively. In addition, the cells were challenged with the leptin
receptor, Notch pathway, and Wnt pathway antagonists LPrA2, DAPT, and
Wnt-1 respectively. The impact of these molecules on cisplatin
anti-cancer effects was also determined. Activation of Wnt
(total/p-catenin), expression of Notch (Notch 1-4 and JAG1/Dll-4 and
targets: survivin/Hey2), cell proliferation and apoptosis were determined
by Western blot and flow cytometry. -catenin levels were also
investigated by immunofluorescence. We also determined the impact of the
inhibition of leptin signaling (via LPrA2) on the expression of Wnt and
Notch in DMBA-induced breast cancer from DIO (diet-induced obese) mice.
Results: We found that leptin increased the levels of -catenin mainly in
TNBC cells. Similarly, inhibition of leptin signaling decreased Wnt/Notch
expression in DMBA/DIO-breast cancer. Interestingly, leptin increased
expression of Notch and attenuated the detrimental effects of cisplatin
on breast cancer cells. Wnt-1 affected Notch levels but its effects were
less pronounced. Conclusions: Leptin is able to induce the Notch and Wnt
signaling pathways in breast cancer. Cisplatin effects were attenuated by
leptin in TNBC probably through its crosstalk with Wnt and Notch
signaling pathways. These results are particularly relevant for TNBC and
obese patients, and suggest that leptin inhibition could be useful in
increasing the chemotherapeutic effectiveness in TBNC by disrupting
leptin-Wnt-Notch crosstalk. [This work was supported in part by
NIH/NCI1SC1CA138658-02; NIH/ARRA/3SC1CA138658-02S1 and the Georgia Cancer
Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP); CREDO (MSCR)
2R25RR017694-06A1 (to L.S.C); NIH/NIGMS R25 GM058268 and NCRR 5P20RR11104
(to T.Z.M); and facilities and support services at MSM (NIH RR03034 and
1C06 RR18386)].

