Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol potentiates the lethality of HDAC inhibitors in acute
myelogenous leukemia cells


Previous studies from our group and others have shown that interference
with NF-B RelA acetylation/activation significantly potentiates the
activity of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) in human leukemia and
other transformed cells (Dai et al., Mol Cell Biol 25; 5429,2005; Dai et
al., J Biol Chem 286:34036, 2011). The natural polyphenol resveratrol
(RSV) is an activator of the class III HDAC SIRT1. Recently, preclinical
evidence of RSV activity in leukemia has been described. In addition,
clinical trials have established that RSV is very well tolerated in
humans, with plasma concentrations > 250 M achievable. Based upon these
considerations, we hypothesized that a SIRT1 agonist, by deacetylating
RelA, might enhance the antileukemic activity of clinically relevant
HDACIs. To test this possibility, the impact of RSV on HDACI antileukemic
activity was investigated. Co-administration (24 hr) of RSV (50 M) with
LBH589 (15 nM) or vorinostat (1.5 M) synergistically induced
mitochondrial injury (cytochrome c and AIF release), caspase activation,
and apoptosis in AML cell lines (e.g., U937 cells). Of note, caspase 8
cleavage/activation was particularly pronounced after co-treatment,
suggesting a potentially important functional role for the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway in RSV/HDACI interactions. Similar interactions were
also observed in AML cell lines bearing FLT3-ITD (e.g., MV4-11) and in
primary AML blasts. These events were associated with deacetylation of
RelA accompanied by inactivation of NF-B, increased ROS formation, a
marked increase in DNA damage (reflected by H2A.X formation, an indicator
of double strand DNA breaks), and abrogation of RSV-mediated S phase
arrest. Genetic knockdown of SIRT1 by shRNA resulted in increased RelA
acetylation and NF-B activity, consistent with SIRT1 deacetylase actions.
However, SIRT1 knockdown increased rather than decreased HDACI lethality,
suggesting the contribution of NF-B independent RSV actions to cell
death. On the other hand, cells expressing dominant-negative caspase 8
were substantially protected from HDACI and HDACI/RSV lethality. Finally,
co-administration of the antioxidant TBAP sharply reduced ROS generation,
diminished caspase 8 activation and H2AX formation, and prevented cell
death in cells exposed to HDACI/RSV. Together, these findings indicate
that clinically relevant concentrations of RSV significantly increase
HDACI antileukemic activity through a process involving induction of
oxidative injury (ROS), promotion of DNA damage, engagement of the
extrinsic caspase cascade, potentiation of mitochondrial injury, and
interruption of cell cycle regulation, culminating in apoptosis. They
also imply that factors other than RelA deacetylation by RSV are
primarily responsible for the enhanced antileukemic activity of this
regimen.

