Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardized and validated ATCC breast cancer panels: A tool for
the rapid validation of biological hypotheses.


Advances in personalized medicine rely on knowledge of validated markers
that predict response to treatment. The availability of such information
could significantly impact preclinical drug optimization and reduce the
cost of clinical trials. Conversely, improving drug efficacy based on
clinical data requires performing studies in defined biological systems.
These defined systems typically are clonal cell lines, which have been
key in advancing our understanding of numerous disease states, including
cancer. A number of recent comprehensive studies have demonstrated that
individual cell lines are restricted along discreet lineages and
therefore do not recapitulate tumor heterogeneity observed in patients
However, the use of a combination of such cell lines reflected the
clinical diversity observed in patient. (Neve et al, 2006; Kao J et al,
2006; Keller PJ et al 2010). We postulated that the use of carefully
characterized cell lines combined into biologically relevant panels might
provide valuable insights into studies on target validation, lead
optimization, mechanisms of action and evaluation of efficacy in various
patient subgroups. The lack of uniform culture conditions among various
tumor cell lines hampers the design and conduct of experiments using such
cell line panels and complicates the interpretation of the results
obtained from them. We therefore undertook to combine panels of breast
cancer cell lines that represented major clinical manifestations of the
disease and culture them under standardized conditions. We were able to
establish culture conditions that maintained the expression of mRNA and
cell surface proteins for validated therapeutic and clinical markers.
Using a small collection of clinically validated and investigational
compounds we provide several example about how carefully selected and
characterized cell panels can be used to carry out pharmacology studies
and address questions pertinent to tumor biology and anti-cancer drug
development.

