Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new functional classification of lung and breast cancers based
on siRNA mediated knockdown of 48 NRs and 72 CoRegulators


Introduction: Nuclear receptors (NRs) and their co-regulators (CoRegs)
are master regulators of key transcriptional processes important in
cancer pathogenesis and could provide molecular biomarkers for prognosis
and personalizing new cancer targeted therapy. Aims and Methods: Our goal
is to functionally classify a panel of 54 lung cancer, 20 breast cancer,
and several immortalized human lung and breast epithelial cell strains
based on their growth and survival response to siRNA mediated knockdown
of 48 NRs and 72 CoRegs. Following knockdown of individual NR/CoRegs,
changes in growth patterns are quantified and statistical methods are
used to identify disease subgroups of similar responders. These subgroups
are then integrated with our legacy datasets for clinical demographics,
cancer cell oncogenotype and genome wide molecular characterization, and
responses to standard and targeted chemotherapy. Results and Conclusions:
A diverse, representative panel consisting of lung cancer, breast cancer,
and normal epithelial cell lines was tested by siRNA transfection. After
optimization to determine transfection conditions, all cell lines were
screened using a focused siRNA library targeting all 48 NRs and 72 CoRegs
(each gene is targeted by pools of 4 different siRNAs, Qiagen). Screening
experiments were performed in triplicate, in 96 well plates, in a
five-day MTS assay and assays were repeated 3 times. Correlation between
replicates for the same cell line is >0.84 and knockdowns were validated
by qRT-PCR. We found: 1) NR/CoReg-specific knockdown could have no
effect, increase, or decrease tumor cell viability in a cell line
dependent manner. 2) Overall 70% of the NRs or CoRegs reduced cell
viability in at least one tumor line when their expression was knocked
down (examples included NURR1, PRMT1, RXRalpha, BRCA1). 3)
NR/CoReg-specific tumor cell toxicity was validated independently by
siRNA knockdown combined with a liquid colony formation assay. 4)
Knockdown of several NR/CoRegs selectively killed tumor but not normal
epithelial cells. 5) Tumor cell lines could be stratified into
functionally unique categories based on their changes in growth following
NR/CoReg-specific knockdowns. We conclude that siRNA mediated knockdown
of a large number of NRs and their CoRegs identifies genes that show
tumor cell selective toxicity, and that tumor lines vary in their siRNA
response phenotypes. These data strengthen the concept for NR/CoReg
targeted therapy of lung and breast cancer and also the need to
personalize such therapy.

