Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term survival in a phase II atudy of belagenpumatucel-L (TGF-
antisense modified tumor cell vaccine) in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).


Background: Cancer therapeutics vaccines continue to be investigated in a
variety of solid malignancies. Belagenpumatucel-L (Lucanix), a
therapeutic vaccine comprised of 4 TGF-2 antisense gene-modified
allogeneic NSCLC cell lines. Phase II trial finished its enrollment in
March of 2004 and was published in 2006. We now report an updated
survival analysis with over 5 years of follow up. Methods: Three arms,
open label clinical trial enrolled seventy-five subjects. 2 stage II, 12
stage IIIA, 15 stage IIIB, and 46 stage IV patients were randomized into
three dose cohorts of 1.25, 2.5, or 5 107 cells/injection. Several
cellular (ELISPOT and cytoplasmic cytokine expression) and humoral
(antibody ELISA) immunity assays were also performed and correlated with
survival. Results: Median follow up for all patients was 14.5 months and
for patients with stable disease 44 months. Median survival for all
subjects was 14.5 months and one-year, two-years and five-year survival
were respectively 55%, 35% and 20%. Stages IIIB/IV subjects enrolled into
cohorts 2 and 3 (N=40) had a median survival of 15.9 months and one-year,
two-year and five-year survivals were respectively 61%, 41% and 18%. For
stage IIIB/IV patients with non progressive disease following frontline
chemotherapy, median survival was 44.4 months and five-year survival was
50%. For subjects who progressed following frontline chemotherapy, median
survival was 14.1 months and five-year survival was 9.1%. Subjects who
demonstrated an increase in both cellular and humoral immune reactivity
following treatment had a significant survival advantage over subjects
who showed an increase in only one measure of immunity with a median
survival of 32.5 months vs. 11.6 months (p = 0.015). Conclusion: Long
term follow up of a phase II clinical trial confirmed encouraging
survival for patients with stage IIIB/IV disease. Based on these data, we
have instituted an international, randomized, pivotal Phase III trial to
evaluate the efficacy of belagenpumatucel-L in a maintenance setting in
stage III/IV NSCLC patients who have stable disease or better following
frontline chemotherapy. The trial is designed to enroll 506 patients and
is powered to measure a 3.5 month survival difference. There are two
planned interim analyses. To date, 285 patients have been enrolled in 8
countries. Confirmation of the phase II data in a randomized, phase III
setting would provide an important improvement for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer.

