Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EPHB4 as a potential therapeutic target for esophageal cancer


Despite substantial improvements in screening, diagnosis, and treatment
of esophageal cancer, the prognosis of this disease remains bleak.
Survival at 5 years for all esophageal cancer patients taken together,
with amenable treatments and with or without surgery ranges from 5-20%
(Cancer Facts and Figures. American Cancer Society 2011). Although a
multidisciplinary approach to include surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy, alone or in combination, attempts to improve the survival
of this aggressive disease, these statistics underscore the continued
need for attention to this disease and for identification of new targets
in its treatment. We have been studying the role of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) in cancer, particularly the EphB4 receptor, which has
become increasingly associated with the pathobiology of adult cancers
over the past several years. It has been shown to be aberrantly expressed
and/or to play an oncogenic role in cancers of the breast, bladder,
ovary, uterus, colon, head and neck, and prostate through its effects on
cellular motility, growth, and migration, as well as on tumors ability to
induce neoangiogenesis. To date, its role and potential as a target for
therapy in different cancers have not been thoroughly investigated and
remain poorly understood. Targeted inactivation of EphB4 and its ligand
Ephrin-B2 have demonstrated that both are essential for angiogenic
remodeling and embryonic survival (Adams and Klein 2000; Kim, Hu et al.
2008). In this report, we determine that EphB4 is overexpressed, has
increased gene copy number and is involved in enhanced motility and
migration in esophageal cancer. Archival patient samples consisting of 93
squamous cell carcinoma, 100 adenocarcinoma and 25 adjacent normal
control samples as well as four adenocarcinoma and nine squamous cell
carcinoma cell lines were used for the studies. Extensive mouse modeling
of esophageal cancer was also used. We have reported that there is
consistently higher expression of EphB4 in both squamous and
adenocarcinoma compared to adjacent normal tissue with a statistically
significant correlation between EphB4 expression and higher grades of
squamous cell carcinoma. In a chemically induced esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma model in mice, EphB4 was found overexpressed compared to normal
controls. This study identifies EphB4 to be an important pathway in
esophageal neoplastic lesions. It would now be useful to bring this to
clinical fruition.

