Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The liver-X-receptor- is involved in the induction by Tamoxifen of
breast cancer cell differentiation and death


Hormonotherapy with Tamoxifen (Tam) is one of the main strategies used
world-wide for the treatment of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.
However, partial responses, tumor recurrence and acquired resistance to
Tam may involve mechanisms unrelated to Estrogen Receptors (ER). Studies
on non-ER related mechanisms of action of Tam led us to find that it
induced breast cancer cell differentiation and death through the
modulation of sterol metabolism and the stimulation of sterol oxidation
(de Medina et al, Cell Death Differ, 2009), and that Tam inhibited
cholesterol epoxide hydrolase (ChEH). ChEH catalyzes the trans hydration
of cholesterol-5,6-epoxides (CE) and this activity is a property of the
microsomal antiestrogen binding site (AEBS) (de Medina et al, PNAS,
2010). In the present study we report that Tam and AEBS ligands
stimulated the oxidation of cholesterol into CE and induced the
accumulation of CE in MCF-7 cells through the inhibition of ChEH at
therapeutic concentrations. Since CE has been reported to be a modulator
of Liver-X-Receptors (LXR), we investigated the impact of Tam and other
AEBS ligands on LXR-dependent gene expression: Tam and AEBS ligands
modulated the expression LXR-dependent genes in MCF-7 cells. This effect
had a 24 to 48 hour lag time while the effect of direct LXR modulators
was observable after 6 hours, suggesting an indirect action of AEBS
ligands. The involvement of CE in the control of transcription by Tam and
AEBS ligands was supported by the observation that vitamin E, which
inhibited the formation and the accumulation of CE, totally blocked this
transcriptional modulation. We found that knocking down LXR- using
interfering RNAs in MCF-7 cells blocked the transcriptional modulation of
LXR-controlled genes induced by CE, Tam and AEBS ligands. Finally, we
found that the knock down of LXR- reproduced the vitamin E inhibition of
the induction of differentiation and death of MCF-7 cells. Altogether,
these data showed that LXR- is implicated in the anticancer action of Tam
and identified a new signaling pathway that could explain sensitivity and
resistance to Tam.

