Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to HER2 targeted therapy: A common mechanism


There are currently two FDA approved targeted therapies being utilized in
the clinic to treat Her2+ breast cancer, trastuzumab and lapatinib.
Acquired resistance has become a major concern and several mechanisms for
resistance have been proposed. The upregulation of a truncated
transcriptional variant of Darpp-32, known as t-Darpp, is a
characteristic shared by several independently developed
trastuzumab-resistant cell lines. Moreover, exogenous t-Darpp
overexpression is sufficient for conferring trastuzumab resistance. No
consistent mechanism, however, has been identified for lapatinib
resistant cells. By inhibiting signaling through Her2+ pathways such as
PI3K/Akt and Erk, lapatinib induces a strong apoptotic response by
down-regulating survivin and inducing BIM. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp both have
been linked to apoptosis, with t-Darpp identified as having
anti-apoptotic properties through its regulation of Bcl-2. The purpose of
the current study was to determine if t-Darpp or other dysregulated
apoptosis proteins play a role in lapatinib resistance.
Lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 cells (Her2+, ER-) were selected by continuous
exposure to increasing concentrations of lapatinib (0.3-2.0M) over the
course of one year. Using Sulforhodamine B and colony forming assays, we
found that individual clones and pools of SK/LapR cells were, on average,
50-fold resistant to lapatinib, relative to parental SKBR3 cells. This
resistance phenotype was stable even after cells were maintained for 1
month outside of drug. As observed in trastuzumab resistance and similar
to previous reports of lapatinib-resistant cells, we found that SK/LapR
cells had sustained PI3K/Akt signaling in the presence of lapatinib,
whereas parental cells did not. Additionally, survivin inactivation and
BIM induction by lapatinib seemed to be partially impaired in SK/LapR
cells. Finally, SK/LapR cells appeared to down-regulate Darpp-32 and
up-regulate t-Darpp, similar to what we have reported in BT474 cells
selected for resistance to trastuzumab. Although t-Darpp overexpression
is sufficient to confer resistance to trastuzumab, this does not appear
to be the case for lapatinib resistance SK.tDp cells transfected with a
t-Darpp cDNA are not resistant to lapatinib. Experiments are currently
underway to determine if the t-Darpp overexpression that we observe in
SK/LapR cells is required for lapatinib resistance. Identifying a shared
mechanism of resistance to lapatinib and trastuzumab would provide a
novel therapeutic target that could be widely used among Her2+ breast
cancer patients to ameliorate acquired drug resistance.

