Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer companion diagnostic platform based on objectively
defined tumor co-expression patterns stratifies multiple clinical and
therapeutic endpoints comparison to existing molecular subtyping
definitions


Gene expression profiles of human breast tumors have greatly expanded our
understanding of the genes and pathways that underlie breast cancer.
Profiling studies have also supported a molecular classification of
breast cancer. The resulting molecular subtypes Luminal, Basal-like,
ERBB2+, and Normal-like were shown to have different prognostic and
predictive characteristics. Related studies have led to a proliferation
of multigene prognostic and predictive diagnostic tests. Two independent
multigene tests, OncoType Dx and MammaPrint, have been shown to be
helpful in predicting the risk of recurrence of patients with early stage
breast cancer. Current multigene tests consistently prioritize the
proliferation, estrogen receptor (ER), and ERBB2 pathways. An alternative
approach to identifying key molecular variables within breast cancer is
based on a definition of objectively defined tumor co-expression
patterns. To this end, we defined co-expression patterns within 56
independent breast cancer molecular profiling datasets representing
>5,000 unique patients. We then performed a meta-analysis across datasets
to define the most robust, consistently occurring co-expression patterns.
These patterns, termed modules, recapitulate the proliferation, ER, and
ERBB2 pathways, but also monitor expression of other important variables
including core cancer cell growth pathways, immune signaling and
microenvironment, and hallmark genomic aberrations. An important feature
of co-expression patterns is that a small number of genes serve as an
effective surrogate for each module. Thus, we created a single multigene
qPCR test that measures the expression of 18 distinct breast cancer
modules and validated the test for use with formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples. In retrospective microarray
scoring analyses with key clinical datasets, and with analysis of FFPE
specimens from breast cancer cohorts, we demonstrate that breast cancer
modules can be used to recapitulate the molecular subtypes of breast
cancer and to have prognostic and predictive properties similar to the
current multigene tests. Because they recapitulate existing molecular
tests, while also reading out many additional axes of molecular
variability, breast cancer modules provide a universal assay with broad
application to companion diagnostics development.

