Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TWIST1, a B-RAF effector, promotes invasion and is a novel
regulator of MMP-1 in human melanoma cells


Metastatic melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer due to its
highly aggressive and chemotherapy-resistant nature. Therefore,
determining the factors impacting melanoma advancement toward metastasis
is an important and clinically-relevant task. Importantly, RAF/MEK/ERK
signaling is hyperactive in the great majority of melanoma cells and is a
driver of melanoma growth and invasion. In addition, the TWIST1 protein
is up-regulated in melanoma and its expression correlates strongly with
poor clinical prognosis. However, the mechanism underlying TWIST1
up-regulation, as well as the role of high TWIST1 expression in traits
associated with the progression of melanoma, has yet to be uncovered. In
this study, we report that disruption of RAF/MEK/ERK signaling strongly
represses TWIST1 at the mRNA and protein level. We further show that
TWIST1 protein levels are especially high in B-RAF mutant cells as well
as in vertical growth phase melanoma cells, which are those that first
begin to invade downward into the deeper dermal layers eventually leading
to metastasis. To that effect, depletion of TWIST1 in several invasive
melanoma cell lines significantly reduces Matrigel invasion. The inverse
phenotype is apparent when TWIST1 is overexpressed in low
TWIST1-expressing, non-invasive melanoma cell lines. Additionally, we
tested the effect of altered Twist expression in three-dimensional
collagen spheroid outgrowth assays, which mimic both tumor architecture
and the in vivo collagen-rich dermal layer. We observe significant
reduction in spheroid outgrowth when invasive cell lines are depleted for
TWIST1 as well as increases in outgrowth when non-invasive cells
overexpress TWIST1. Alterations to spheroid outgrowth were not as a
result of apoptotic changes or proliferative rate. Importantly, we have
found matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) to be a downstream effector of
TWIST1. Furthermore, TWIST1 acts as a mediator between activated B-RAF
signaling and MMP-1 in a dose-dependent and direct manner at the level of
transcription. Our findings uncover the novel interplay between B-RAF,
TWIST1, and MMP-1 which is likely important in the progression of
melanoma towards metastasis.

