Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of AGR2 results in compromised chief cell differentiation and
preneoplastic metaplasia of stomach


Background: AGR2 represents Anterior Gradient 2, initially discovered in
Xenopus where its expression at the anterior pole of the developing
embryo induces forebrain and cement gland formation. In salamanders, AGR2
plays a role in nerve-dependent limb regeneration. AGR2 induces foci
formation and anchorage independent growth in vitro. Increased AGR2 is
observed in adenocarcinoma of the prostate, breast, pancreas, esophagus
and ovaries. AGR2 overexpression transforms NIH3T3 cells resulting into
tumor xenografts in nude mice. AGR2 induces expression of amphiregullin,
EGFR ligand by affecting Hippo signaling pathway. In normal tissues it is
expressed in the secretory lineage, paneth, enteroendocrine and goblet
cells of the small intestine. AGR2's expression and role in stomach
development and disease has not been studied. Stomach consists of three
main regions: the fundus, lined with squamous keratinized epithelium, the
corpus and the pylorus (glandular stomach). The corpus glands consist of
the parietal cells, chief cells, foveolar cells, enterochromaffin cells,
neck cells and stem cells. Parietal cells secrete acid for digestion,
chief cells make digestive enzyme, pepsinogen and the foveolar cells
secrete mucus. Proposed functions of neck cells include a role in mucus
secretion or as a progenitor for chief cells. AGR2 is expressed by neck
cells in the normal stomach. Hypothesis and methods: AGR2 expression in
neck cells is critical for normal development of the stomach. This
hypothesis is tested by generating a conditional AGR2 knock out mouse in
which the floxed exons are excised with CMV induced expression of
Cre-recombinase. Immunohistochemisty with lineage specific antibodies was
performed to analyze the phenotype. Results: AGR2 loss results in weight
loss and enlarged stomach in the mice. Histological analysis of stomach
from AGR2 knock out mice demonstrates that AGR2 expression in the mucus
neck cells is dispensable to terminal differentiation of chief cells.
Loss of AGR2 results in incomplete maturation of chief cells. AGR2 loss
is accompanied with increased cell proliferation in the stomach compared
to the litter mate controls. The dividing cells exclude the lineage
markers: H-KATPase (parietal cells), Muc5AC (faveolar cells), and
intrinsic factor (chief cells). A significant expansion of TFF2 positive
cells is observed that is also referred to as Spasmolytic
polypeptide-expressing metaplasia (SPEM). In humans, SPEM is associated
with precancerous stomach and is observed upon parietal cell loss.TFF2 in
the normal stomach is expressed in the neck cells. Previous studies show
that loss of parietal cells results in SPEM in the stomach. Loss of AGR2
triggers expansion of TFF2 expressing cells/SPEM before the loss of
parietal cells. Conclusions: AGR2 expression in neck cells is critical
for terminal differentiation of chief cells. Loss of AGR2 results in
hyperplasia and SPEM in the stomach

