Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel clinical candidate AT13148 is an oral multi-AGC kinase
inhibitor with potent pharmacodynamic and antitumor activity and
demonstrates a mechanism of action distinct from AKT inhibitors


The AGC kinase AKT is a key component of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, which is frequently deregulated in cancer,
making AKT a target of major therapeutic interest. However, PI3K
signaling through both AKT-dependent and AKT-independent mechanisms
involving other AGC kinases, such as p70S6K, PKA, SGK and ROCK, is
important in a range of cancers. Hence, the pharmacological inhibition of
these multiple AGC kinases may increase response rates and minimize
clinical resistance compared with targeting AKT alone. The clinical drug
candidate AT13148 is a multi-AGC kinase, ATP-competitive inhibitor,
identified utilizing high-throughput X-ray crystallography and
fragment-based lead discovery techniques. Screening of this oral small
molecule against a panel of kinases at 10M revealed >80% inhibition of
the structurally related AGC kinases AKT, PKA, ROCK2, p70S6K, MSK,
RSK1/2, and SGK. We demonstrate that AT13148 has antiproliferative
activity in a range of in vitro models harboring relevant genetic
abnormalities, including PTEN, KRAS, PIK3CA and HER2 aberrations. AT13148
caused substantial blockade of AKT, p70S6K, PKA, ROCK and SGK substrate
phosphorylation and induction of apoptosis in both a concentration and
time-dependent manner in cancer cells with clinically relevant genetic
defects both in vitro and in vivo. Antitumor efficacy in HER2-positive,
PIK3CA-mutant BT474 breast, PTEN-deficient PC3 human prostate cancer and
PTEN-deficient MES-SA uterine tumor xenografts was demonstrated. We show
for the first time that induction of AKT phosphorylation at serine 473 by
AT13148, as reported for other ATP competitive inhibitors of AKT, is not
a therapeutically relevant reactivation step for this compound. We used
gene expression microarray studies to characterize the underlying
molecular mechanisms of action of AT13148 and the selective AKT inhibitor
CCT128930, and observed the induction of upstream regulators including
insulin receptor substrate-2 and PIK3IP1 due to compensatory feedback
loops, consistent with blockade of AKT signaling. These studies also
showed that AT13148 and CCT128930 have distinct molecular effects in
cancer cells: AT13148 had a predominant effect on apoptosis genes and
caused a greater apoptotic phenotype, while CCT128930 modulated genes in
the network regulating cell cycle. This finding emphasizes the functional
differences of AT13148 as a multi-AGC kinase inhibitor in contrast to a
more AKT-selective inhibitor. In view of the potential mechanistic
advantages detailed above, and the potent antitumor activity observed at
well tolerated doses against established human tumor xenografts with
clinically relevant genetic drivers, the clinical utility of such an AGC
kinase inhibitor strategy will now be assessed in a first-in-human Phase
I trial of AT13148.

