Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated genomics approach to identify novel drivers of
oncogenic pathway activity in human cancer


Human cancers are defined by molecular and clinical heterogeneity. The
molecular diversity of human tumors is a significant contributing factor
to the inefficiency of current therapeutic regimens and the high failure
rate of developing new anti-cancer therapies. One of the major
contributing factors to this variability is the enormous diversity and
complexity of genome alterations. In order to understand the molecular
complexity driving tumor development and to identify novel therapeutic
targets to enhance treatment efficacy and overcome therapeutic
resistance, we have developed an integrative genomics approach to
identify novel drivers of oncogenic pathway activity and applied this
strategy to investigate serous ovarian cancer. Since it has been
demonstrated that mutations in many different genes can result in the
activation of an oncogenic signaling pathway resulting in enhanced cell
proliferation and transformation, our analysis focused on regulation of
pathway activity rather than the mutation of a single gene. As such, we
utilized 18 previously developed and validated gene expression signatures
of oncogenic pathway activity as a framework to integrate multiple,
disparate forms of genomic data. We first identified 1,020 high-grade,
late stage serous ovarian tumors with Affymetrix U133 expression data
from multiple published studies and the predicted oncogenic pathway
activity was determined for each tumor. Of these tumors, >500 had matched
aCGH data which were used to identify statistically significant
chromosomal alterations directly and indirectly associated with each
pathway. This strategy was validated by identifying associations between
pathway activity and copy number alterations of known pathway drivers. We
next compiled a dataset of ovarian cancer cell lines with U133 expression
data and for which genome-wide shRNA proliferation data was available.
These data were used to identify essential genes required for cell
viability in pathway-dependent manner. The resulting genes were analyzed
by DAVID and GATHER to validate that this strategy identified key pathway
components. Finally, by integrating results obtained from the aCGH and
shRNA analyses, we identified known and candidate genes associated with
oncogenic pathway activity that are required for cell viability and are
amplified in human tumors. These analyses have identified alterations of
putative and known regulators of pathway activity that often exist
independent of each other in human tumors suggesting that examining the
mutational status of a single gene is an incomplete measure of pathway
activity and that this strategy is able to identify novel regulators, and
therefore potential therapeutic targets, of oncogenic signaling pathways
required for tumor proliferation. Additional studies are underway to
investigate the role identified candidate genes play in pathway activity
and tumor proliferation.

