Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 6 as a novel regulator of the immunogenicity
and aggressiveness of melanoma


Melanoma is currently the fastest growing cancer in incidence according
to the World Health Organization. Currently, few therapies provide
significant prolongation of survival for metastatic melanoma.
Immunotherapy is an attractive modality with potentially few side effects
due to the antigen specificity of adaptive immunity. The latest therapy
approved by the FDA for the treatment of melanoma was ipilimumab, an
antibody against CTLA-4, a key regulator of T-cell activity; however,
this therapy offers modest improvements in overall survival. Overcoming
mechanisms of tumor-mediated immune suppression requires targeting
multiple pathways. One strategy that has gained attention has been the
use of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi). Indeed, HDACi treatment
has been shown to augment the expression of immunologically relevant
genes such as MHC and costimulatory molecules. Furthermore, we have
previously demonstrated inhibition of IL-10, a potent anti-inflammatory
cytokine, upon treatment of macrophages with HDACi. However, most studies
to date have used pan-HDACi, which inhibit all 11 zinc-dependent HDACs.
Therefore, the use of more selective HDACi might be preferable in order
to minimize side effects. Herein, we demonstrate that HDAC6 is a
molecular target in melanoma. Both pharmacologic and genetic disruption
of HDAC6 in B16 murine melanoma cells using HDAC6-selective inhibitors
(HDAC6i) and targeted shRNA (HDAC6KD), respectively, led to inhibition of
proliferation, characterized by G1 arrest measured by propidium iodine
staining for DNA content. Furthermore, treatment with HDAC6i led to
enhanced expression of immunologically relevant receptors including MHC I
and MHC II. In vivo, subcutaneous injection in wild type mice of HDAC6KD
B16 cells led to delayed tumor growth as compared with control cells.
However, this effect was abrogated in experiments using SCID mice, which
lack T- and B-cells, suggesting a critical immune component for tumor
control in vivo. The mechanism(s) by which HDAC6 regulates tumor
immunogenicity are yet to be defined. One possible mechanism arises from
protein immunoprecipitation studies which demonstrate that HDAC6
interacts with, and potentially regulates of STAT3, an important survival
and pathogenic factor in melanoma, which also has implications for immune
tolerance. Finally, the expression HDAC6 was found to be upregulated in a
majority of melanoma patient tumor biopsies by gene microarray analysis,
as compared with normal skin. This observation was supported by
immunohistochemically-stained patient melanoma tissue microarray. Taken
together, HDAC6 presents as an attractive therapeutic target in melanoma
by both delaying tumor growth and conferring a more attractive immune
target, providing rationale for the development and use of selective
HDAC6i. Moreover, the current availability of HDAC6i enhances the
translational implications of this work.

