Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systems biology approach reveals common metastatic pathways in
osteosarcoma


Background Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
children and adolescents. The survival rate of patients with metastatic
disease remains very dismal. Nevertheless, metastasis is a complex
process and a single-level analysis will not likely identify its key
biological determinants. In this study, we used a systems biology
approach to identify common metastatic pathways that are jointly
supported by both mRNA and protein expression data in two distinct human
metastatic OS models. Results mRNA expression microarray and N-linked
glycoproteomic analyses were performed on two commonly used isogenic
pairs of human metastatic OS cell lines, namely HOS/143B and SaOS-2/LM7.
Pathway analysis of the up-regulated genes and glycoproteins separately
revealed pathways associated to metastasis including RAS-related
G-proteins signaling, cell cycle regulation,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition, cell adhesion, and WNT signaling.
However, no common significant pathway was found between the two
metastatic models, suggesting a very different biological nature of the
cell lines. To address this issue, we used a topological significance
analysis based on a shortest path algorithm to identify topological nodes
that remained hidden from the independent transcriptomic and
glycoproteomic analyses. Pathway analysis of the significant topological
nodes revealed a striking concordance between the models and identified
important common pathways, including Cytoskeleton remodeling/TGF/WNT,
Development/WNT signaling, Cytoskeleton remodeling/Cytoskeleton
remodeling, and Cell adhesion/Chemokines and adhesion. Of these, the
Cytoskeleton remodeling/TGF/WNT was the top ranked common pathway from
the topological analysis of the two cell line models. The up-regulation
of proteins in the Cytoskeleton remodeling/TGF/WNT pathway in the
SaOS-2/LM7 and HOS/143B models was further validated using a Reverse
Phase Protein Array platform. Conclusions In this study, we used a
systems biology approach by integrating genomic and proteomic data to
identify key and common metastatic mechanisms in OS. The use of the
topological analysis revealed hidden biological networks that are known
to play critical roles in metastasis. Since WNT signaling has been
previously implicated in OS and other tumors, further characterization of
this common pathway and other topological pathways may lead to a novel
therapeutic strategy for curing metastatic OS.

