Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell assays of heterogeneity and clonality in leukemia


A range of hypotheses have emerged as to why imatinib (a targeted
inhibitor of bcr-abl) seems unable to eliminate the most primitive
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells, such as bcr-abl amplification and
clonal evolution. The biology of the CML imatinib-resistant cell is of
critical importance to understanding why despite high percentages of
initial clinical responses to imatinib (>80% of patients in chronic phase
at some point obtaining complete cytogenetic remission), resistance,
relapse and/or progression occurs in 20-30% of cases and most patients in
remission still have residual disease detected by sensitive PCR
monitoring of the CML specific bcr-abl transcripts. In acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) as well, patients are typically treated with a
chemotherapeutic regimen that leads to clinical responses in 80-95% of
patients. However, over half of these patients will relapse and
eventually die of disease suggesting that a subpopulation of leukemic
cells are capable of both surviving treatment and causing regrowth of the
tumor. In both diseases, it has not been definitively established what
the identity of the cells responsible for resistance and relapse is, nor
what combination of mutations, gene expression changes, and alternative
splicing events are required for these cells resistant phenotype.
Assessing changes in gene expression in the bulk samples provides a
valuable overall picture of the phenotype of the predominant cell type is
or if there are large changes in expression in less frequent cells, but
will completely mask changes exhibited by rare cells. One limiting factor
in our ability to study more levels of heterogeneity in leukemia
subpopulations is the lack of appropriately powerful and sensitive
techniques to assay more complex facets of cellular behavior in such
small populations. We have developed several multiplexed, high
sensitivity analysis techniques and applied them to study multiple facets
of cell behavior and identity in rare cell samples, down to the single
cell level. By analyzing expression and genotype in smaller samples,
direct from cells, we can analyze heterogeneity in expression and
alternative splicing, combined with both cell surface markers and the
presence of multiple mutations. These innovative techniques have allowed
us to study clonality in AML samples in detail via a robust assay that
can identify multiple mutations occurring concurrently in single cells.
We have also optimized a protocol to simultaneously assay gene expression
of 24 in 100-500 cell samples from flow sorted leukemia cell populations.
Finally multiplexed assays for alternative splice variant detection in
single cells has enabled us to study whether alternative splice variant
expression of several genes occurs concurrently in the same cells, or in
different cells of the population. With these techniques in hand we have
the unique opportunity to begin studying the biology of these diseases
from a previously unrealistic angle.

