Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic influence on ethnic disparities in non-small cell lung
cancer


African Americans are more likely to develop lung cancer and die from it
than any other ethnic group. Complex biological, environmental, political
and cultural factors contribute to this disparity. The purpose of the
current project is to examine the relationship between epigenetic
factors, gender, ethnicity and outcome in a retrospective study of
patients with surgically-treated early stage lung cancer. Fixed primary
tumor tissues from a private (RMC) and a public (JHS-CCH) institution
were analyzed in this study. The RMC group consisted of 132 patients with
stage Ib, IIa and IIb NSCLC, 22% African-American (AA) and 52% female.
The JHS-CCH group consisted of 88 patients, 62% AA and 43% female. Five
year survival was achieved by 85% of women vs 67% of men in the RMC group
(Chi square p=0.022). 68% of Caucasians vs 53% AA survived five years in
the RMC group (p=0.186). To investigate the role of epigenetic influences
on survival, promoter methylation of Ras association domain family
protein 1, RASSF1A, was investigated. Associations between inactivation
of the RASSF1A tumor suppressor and poor outcome in lung and other
cancers have been reported in several studies. Promoter methylation was
quantified using pyrosequencing. Percent methylation of RASSF1 at
cytosine position 36 (A of ATG=+1) was more frequent in AA (41% of cases)
than in Caucasians (20% of cases) in the RMC group (p=0.023) compared to
69% of cases in the JHS-CCH group. Methylation levels of RASSF1 at all
CpG sites tested were higher in the JHS-CCH group than in the RMC group.
Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed on dichotomized hypermethylation
status compared to five-year survival (5YS). Promoter hypermethylation of
RASSF1 was significantly associated with shortened 5YS in AA (p=0.005),
compared to Caucasians (p=0.197) in the RMC group. Although 5YS was
marginally shortened with hypermethylation of RASSF1 in men in the RMC
group (p=0.123), no significant effects were seen with regard to gender.
These results suggest that biomarkers can have differential effects,
based on genetic background and support analysis of epigenetic biomarkers
to address disparities and develop more personalized treatment strategies
for individual patients.

