Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative stress induced by sodium ascorbate:menadione
sodium-bisulfate combination results in lysosomal and mitochondrial
changes that lead to prostate cancer cell death


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of death in American males and therapy
targeting hormone refractory prostate cancer is urgently needed.
Treatment of prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, LNCaP-C42, DU-145 and
PC3) with either sodium ascorbate or menadione sodium-bisulfate alone
induced cell killing (as measured by the MTT cell proliferation assay)
only at high concentrations, while the combination (apatone) potentiated
cytotoxicity 4- to 20-fold with exposure times as short as 1hr. Apatone
treatment induces the reactivation of DNase I and II resulting in
autoschizis, a caspase independent form of cell death. Cell cycle arrest
(G1/S and G2/M blocks), increased hydrogen peroxide and lipid
peroxidation levels, decreased cellular thiol levels, and increased
intracellular Ca2+ levels were observed following apatone treatment. To
further understand the mechanism(s) of action of this cytotoxic drug, the
effects of apatone treatment on the lysosomal and mitochondrial membranes
in DU-145 prostate cancer cells were measured by live cell fluorescence
microscopy. Examination of lysosomal membranes using the metachromatic
fluorochrome, acridine orange, revealed rapid permeabilization of the
lysosomal membrane. The effect of apatone on mitochondrial membrane
potential was also examined, using JC-1 staining, and revealed
de-polarization of the mitochondria membrane, which occurred on a delayed
time scale when compared to lysosomal activity. The in vivo anti-tumoral
activity of apatone was evaluated in nude mice inoculated subcutaneously
with DU-145 cells. Oral apatone significantly reduced the growth rate of
the solid tumors (pProstate cancer is a leading cause of death in
American males and therapy targeting hormone refractory prostate cancer
is urgently needed. Treatment of prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP,
LNCaP-C42, DU-145 and PC3) with either sodium ascorbate or menadione
sodium-bisulfate alone induced cell killing (as measured by the MTT cell
proliferation assay) only at high concentrations, while the combination
(apatone) potentiated cytotoxicity 4- to 20-fold with exposure times as
short as 1hr. Apatone treatment induces the reactivation of DNase I and
II resulting in autoschizis, a caspase independent form of cell death.
Cell cycle arrest (G1/S and G2/M blocks), increased hydrogen peroxide and
lipid peroxidation levels, decreased cellular thiol levels, and increased
intracellular Ca2+ levels were observed following apatone treatment. To
further understand the mechanism(s) of action of this cytotoxic drug, the
effects of apatone treatment on the lysosomal and mitochondrial membranes
in DU-145 prostate cancer cells were measured by live cell fluorescence
microscopy. Examination of lysosomal membranes using the metachromatic
fluorochrome, acridine orange, revealed rapid permeabilization of the
lysosomal membrane. The effect of apatone on mitochondrial membrane
potential was also examined, using JC-1 staining, and revealed
de-polarization of the mitochondria membrane, which occurred on a delayed
time scale when compared to lysosomal activity. The in vivo anti-tumoral
activity of apatone was evaluated in nude mice inoculated subcutaneously
with DU-145 cells. Oral apatone significantly reduced the growth rate of
the solid tumors (p<0.05) without inducing significant bone marrow
toxicity, changes in organ weight or pathologies associated with these
organs. Overall, these results support an apatone induced cell death
mechanism involving a non-apoptotic cell death pathway initiated by
oxidative stress in a pro-oxidant tumor environment. This stress
ultimately leads to damaged lysosomes, mitochondria and other cellular
organelles. This novel mechanism of action has been demonstrated to be
highly effective both in vitro and in vivo, indicating that the sodium
ascorbate:menadione sodium-bisulfate combination (apatone) can provide
another urgently needed therapy for the treatment of hormone refractory
and possibly hormone dependent prostate cancer.

