Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) 3-UTR maintains high expression
of the SOD1 gene in cancer cells


Background: Superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), the ubiquitously expressed and
predominant superoxide dismutase, catalyzes the conversion of superoxide
ions into hydrogen peroxide which will be further detoxified by catalase
or glutathione peroxidase. The SOD1 gene has been reported to be
over-expressed in human cancer cells, and targeting SOD1 has been
proposed as a new strategy for cancer therapy. While the transcriptional
regulation of the SOD1 gene has been well-characterized, the contribution
of the SOD1 3-UTR to SOD1 gene expression has not been previously
examined in any model systems. Methods: The full length (325 bases) and
different fragments of the SOD1 3UTR were amplified from human cancer
cells. Each of the amplified products was inserted into a pGL3-promoter
reporter vector downstream of the luciferase cDNA. The reporter
constructs were transfected into Panc-1 (pancreatic cancer), A2780
(ovarian cancer), and HepG2 (liver cancer) cells and luciferase activity
was analyzed. The wild type pGL3-promoter vector and the antisense
orientation of the SOD1 3-UTR reporter construct served as controls.
Luciferase mRNA stability was examined by reverse transcriptase real-time
PCR. Western blot was performed to examine endogenous SOD1 protein
expression levels. Results: The luciferase activity was 10 (HepG2) and 70
(A2780 and Panc-1) fold higher in cells transfected with the full-length
SOD1 3-UTR compared with those in control cells. The dramatically
increased luciferase activity was likely attributed to enhanced
luciferase mRNA stability as analyzed by real-time RT-PCR. Significantly
reduced luciferase activities were found in cells transfected with the
reporter constructs bearing different fragments of the SOD1 3-UTR. Most
noticeably, transfection with the reporter construct bearing a deletion
of the first 200 bases of the SOD1 3-UTR brought the reporter activity
down to a level similar to that in controls. Further deletion analysis
showed that the secondary structure of the SOD1 3-UTR may also play a key
role in SOD1 3-UTR-mediated gene expression and the putative AU-rich
elements are unlikely to confer the sustained SOD1 gene expression.
Moreover, we found that the full-length SOD1 3-UTR can serve as a decoy
or competitor to attenuate endogenous SOD1 protein expression, indicating
the involvement of trans-acting RNA binding factors in maintaining high
expression of the SOD1 gene. Summary: The SOD1 3-UTR maintains the high
expression of the SOD1 gene in human cancer cells likely through
increasing SOD1 mRNA stability. The interaction of the SOD1 3-UTR with
the trans-acting RNA binding proteins is required to maintain SOD1 gene
expression. We are actively working on identifying these RNA binding
proteins and their interacting cis-elements in the SOD1 3-UTR in our
model systems.

