Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHT-782 an inhibitor of the KRAS signaling nanocluster protein
CNKSR1 blocks mutant KRAS signaling and cell growth but does not inhibit
wild type KRAS cell growth


KRAS is the predominant form of mutated RAS (mut-KRAS) found in 25% of
patient tumors across many cancer types. Mut-KRAS plays a critical role
in driving tumor growth and resistance to therapy, and its effects are so
powerful that it overrides the activity of many molecularly targeted
signaling drugs being developed for cancer today such that they cannot be
used in patients with mut-KRAS. Using a global siRNA screen and an
isogenic MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cell line with and without oncogenic KRAS,
we searched for genes that when inhibited would block the growth of
mut-KRAS cancer cells without affecting wild type-KRAS (wt-KRAS) cell
growth. A top hit in the screen was CNKSR1 (connector enhancer of kinase
suppressor of RAS 1), a protein associated with KRAS in the RAS membrane
signaling nanocluster. siRNA knockdown of CNKSR1 inhibited the growth of
mut-KRAS non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines but not NSCLC cell
lines with wt-KRAS. CNKSR1 is a multidomain protein with a pleckstrin
homology (PH) domain, a 100 to 120 amino acid, highly conserved but low
sequence identity 3D superfold. PH-domains are found in a number of
signaling proteins where they are responsible for binding to membrane
phosphatidylinositols-3-phosphates (PIP2/3). Over expression of the
PH-domain of CNKSR1 in H1373 mut-KRAS NSCLC cells inhibits cell growth
suggesting it has a dominant negative effect over native CNKSR1, and that
the PH-domain of CNKSR1 is necessary for the effects on mut-KRAS
activity. We used in-silico docking of large compound libraries and
identified 7 small molecule compounds with predicted low micromolar
binding affinity for the PH-domain of CNSKR1. Surface plasmon resonance
spectroscopy confirmed the in-silico predictions with binding to the
recombinant PH-domain of CNKSR1. The most active compound was PHT-782
(Kd=1.8 M). PHT-782 inhibited mut-KRAS signaling and the growth of
mut-KRAS isogenic and NSCLC cell lines (IC50 30 M) as effectively as
siRNA knockdown of KRAS. Importantly, PHT-782 did not block the growth of
wt-KRAS cell lines at concentrations up to 100 M. In mice PHT-782
exhibited a plasma t12 > 4 hr, and had moderate antitumor activity
against a mut-KRAS xenograft model without observable toxicity at doses
up to 200 mg/kg. To improve potency and selectivity we have undertaken
further iterative in-silico lead optimization using a proprietary
computational modeling platform PHuDock. We have identified several
candidates with improved binding potency and optimal pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic properties. The results of our studies show that the PH
domain of CNKSR1 can be targeted by small molecule inhibitors and that
the agents selectively block mut-KRAS signaling and cell growth, thus
creating a therapeutic potential for patients with oncogenic KRAS for
which there is currently no effective therapy.

