Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic implications of TSPO in human colorectal cancer


Translocator protein (TSPO), previously referred to as peripheral
benzodiazepine receptor, is an 18kDa outer mitochondrial membrane protein
involved in a number of cellular processes including steroid synthesis,
cholesterol metabolism, proliferation, and apoptosis. Elevated TSPO
expression has been linked with disease progression, diminished survival,
and aggressiveness in a number of cancers. Studies conducted in our
laboratory have demonstrated that positron emission tomography (PET)
imaging with TSPO targeted probes can be used to non-invasively quantify
TSPO levels in tumors. These imaging studies suggest that TSPO ligand PET
may be a valuable clinical cancer imaging biomarker. In the current
studies, TSPO expression in human colon cancer and paired liver
metastases was evaluated using tissue microarrays. These arrays were
constructed using 99 primary colon cancers and 95 matched primary colon
cancers and liver metastases from Vanderbilt patients with known clinical
outcomes. Among these, we found that nearly 2/3 of the colon cancers were
positive for TSPO expression (64%). Similar to previous studies in other
organ sites, elevated TSPO expression was significantly associated with
higher tumor grade in the Vanderbilt cohort of CRC patients. Among
patients with grade 2 or grade 3 tumors, an individual with elevated TSPO
expression was 3 times more likely to have a grade 3 tumor than a grade 2
tumor. In comparing matched primary colon cancers and associated liver
metastases, we found a strong concordance between TSPO levels and
localization across matched specimens. No correlation was observed
between TSPO expression and Ki67 or pEGFR levels suggesting the
potentially unique information provided by the measurement of TSPO
levels. In conclusion, clinically relevant prognostic information can be
obtained by the measurement of TSPO expression in colorectal cancer.
Thus, TSPO targeted PET may be a promising-non invasive biomarker in this
setting.

