Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER stress-mediated unfolded protein response inhibits angiogenesis
and breast tumor growth


Normal vasculature is quiescent in healthy adults with each endothelial
cell dividing once every 10 years. But, angiogenesis is crucial for the
growth and metastasis of breast cancer, and has been targeted for
developing therapeutics. The current treatments are effective in only a
small percentage of the total patient population. In addition, they are
expensive, and accompanied by a host of side effects detrimental to
patient's quality of life. Our laboratory has recently established that
tunicamycin (an antibiotic and a glucosamine-containing pyrimidine
nucleoside) interferes with the dynamic process of asparagine-linked
protein glycosylation inhibiting angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo
Matrigel implants. It causes cell cycle arrest in G1 and induces
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated unfolded protein response
(upr), and apoptosis by down regulated expression of Bcl-2 and cyclin D1,
and upregulated expression of GRP-78/Bip and caspases3, 9 and 12. High
expression of ATF6 and PERK in capillary endothelial cells indicates
transcriptional and translational attenuation. Irreversibility of
cellular proliferation by either IGF-1 or VEGF or inhibition of cell
growth by clonogenic assay supports that tunicamycin can stand tumor
microenvironment. There is down-regulation of phosphotyrosine kinase
activity as well as the phosphoVEGFR1 and VEGFR2 levels. Most
importantly, tunicamycin reduces the progression of a double negative
(ER/PR/EGFR+) grade III breast adenocarcinoma and a triple negative
(ER/PR/EGFR) breast tumor xenograft in nude mice. Histopathology
indicates reduced microvascular density and low tumor mitotic index along
with reduced K-67 and VEGF expression. A significant reduction of
N-glycan expression on the vessel wall correlates with the vessels size,
and a high expression of GRP-78/Bip in CD144 positive vessels supports
vessel death due to ER stress-mediated upr. WGA staining of tumor
epithelia indicates loss of structural integrity with a high GRP-78/Bip
expression, and has raised a question if induction of ER stress in tumor
epithelia is an indirect effect of nutrient deprivation due to reduced
blood flow in the absence of angiogenesis or does tunicamycin directly
induce ER stress in the tumor cells. To test this hypothesis we have used
a triple negative MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line and cultured
them with tunicamycin in a custom made media. Our results show that
tunicamycin inhibits cell proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner as well as the colony formation. Expression of cyclin D1, wild
type p53, phopspho p53(ser 392), Bcl-2 and caspase-3 supports cell cycle
arrest followed by induction of apoptosis. High expression of GRP-78 and
PERK/phosphoPERK concludes that tunicamycin can induce ER stress-mediated
upr in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Supported in part by grants from
Susan G. Komen for the Cure (BCTR06582) and NIH/NCRR/RCMI G12-RR03035 (KB)

