Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An EMT gene expression diagnostic predicts resistance to EGFR and
MEK-targeted therapies in cell lines and patients


The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cells results in
the acquisition of metastatic properties and may contribute to
chemoresistance. Several studies have shown that transition to a
mesenchymal phenotype leads to decreased dependence on EGFR-RAS signaling
and insensitivity to EGFR inhibitors. To better understand the importance
of EMT as a general predictor of drug response, we defined an EMT gene
signature derived from a meta-analysis of differential gene expression
signatures representing genes up-regulated following transfection of
breast cell lines with various EMT regulators (Taube et al., 2010 Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 107:15449-54). We then determined the expression of the
EMT signature across cell line panels and determined whether it predicted
sensitivity or resistance to various targeted therapies. Consistent with
previous results, expression of EMT signature was significantly
associated with resistance to an EGFR inhibitor, lapatinib. Similarly,
the EMT signature also predicted resistance to PQIP (IGF1R), GSK1120212
(MEK), GSK690693 (AKT), and perifosine (AKT/PI3K), suggesting that EMT
may be a common resistance mechanism to a number of drugs that target
growth factor signaling. As more of these targeted agents are entering
clinical trials, the ability to characterize the signature may have
important implications for drug development. To study the relevance of
the EMT signature in clinical tumors, we compared the signature to a
collection of tumor co-expression patterns, known as OncoScore modules,
which were defined from 40,000+ tumor microarray experiments. Notably,
the EMT signature was significantly associated with a major tumor
co-expression pattern representing mesenchymal and/or stromal phenotype
observed in almost all major solid tumor types. In retrospective
microarray scoring analyses of key clinical datasets, the
mesenchymal/stromal module predicted resistance to cetuximab. This
finding was validated with an independent cohort of colorectal cancer
patients treated with cetuximab using the Oncoscore Colon diagnostic.
Oncoscore Colon is a qPCR test optimized for formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue that measures the twelve key colon cancer
transcriptional modules, including the mesenchymal module. Because the
mesenchymal/stromal module monitors a fundamental phenotype of cancer
cells important for drug response, this validated qPCR test has broad
application to companion diagnostics development and personalized
medicine.

