Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The EPR effects of Elastin-like polypeptide of differnt molecular
sizes in animal tumor models


Elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) biopolymers are thermally responsive
macromolecular carriers that are soluble in aqueous solution at
physiological temperature (37 C), but aggregate when the temperature is
raised above its transition temperature (Tt, 42 C). We have developed
this carrier system for the delivery of anticancer therapeutic peptides
and small molecule drugs, which has the potential to be targeted to the
tumor site by applying local hyperthermia. Molecular size is one of the
key determinants of trans-vascular transport of therapeutic agents in
tumors as it affects not only the retention in the tumor but also the
transition temperature of the macromolecule. As an effort to develop the
optimal ELP carrier system, three Bac-ELP macromolecular drug carriers
with a clinically relevant range of molecular weights (35, 60 and 120kD)
were designed. The three sizes of ELP were initially synthesized and
modified by the addition of the cell-penetrating peptide Bac on the
N-terminus. In order to measure enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effects of the three sizes of conjugates, we compared the distribution of
conjugates in tumors of animals and their pharmacokinetics in the three
fluorescently-labeled Bac-ELP constructs. First, we confirmed that the
transition temperature of all 3 constructs fall between the ideal
concentration ranges of 10 - 40 M. In distribution studies with
tumor-bearing mice, three peptides showed increased uptake in tumors
during the initial 8 hours after local hyperthermia was applied, but the
elimination patterns from the tumors differed according to size over a 3
day period. Local hyperthermia was found to produce a more prolonged
retention of ELP conjugates in tumors except in the 35 kD Bac-ELP
(Bac-E80), which was the smallest construct tested. In addition, the
pharmacokinetic analysis showed that the two larger polypeptides have
long half-lives and increased AUC in comparison with Bac-E80. From all
these results, we suggest that the larger ELP conjugates (60 and 120kD)
have advantages over 35kD of Bac-E80 in terms of enhanced permeability
and retention effects when combined with local hyperthermia.

