Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to antiangiogenic therapy in preclinical
models of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


Purpose: The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is ubiquitously
expressed and targeted with FDA-approved agent bevacizumab in many types
of cancer including colon, lung and renal carcinoma. In head and neck
cancer, bevacizumab is under active clinical investigation. However, its
efficacy in most cases is limited, with only modest response rates
observed in the clinical trials. These incomplete drug responses suggest
the presence of alternative signaling mechanisms that compensate for VEGF
blockade. The proinflammatory cytokine, Interleukin 8 (IL-8) is known to
promote tumor angiogenesis, and is coexpressed with VEGF in HNSCC. Hence,
IL-8 signaling may be a possible mechanism of resistance to anti-VEGF
therapy. Experimental Design: In this study, we assessed the efficacy of
bevacizumab in preclinical HNSCC models to identify tumors that were
sensitive or resistant to the treatment. In order to identify potential
mediators of bevacizumab resistance, we evaluated the angiogenic profile
of HNSCC cells from the non-isogenic pair of sensitive and resistant cell
lines by performing angiogenesis antibody array. We further examined the
potential contribution of IL-8 signaling to the in vivo growth of
bevacizumab-resistant xenografts, using shRNA-mediated knockdown of the
IL-8 gene. Results: HNSCC cell lines showed a range of response to
bevacizumab in vivo. Interestingly, the resistant cell lines expressed
high levels of proangiogenic factors including IL-8, IL-1a and VEGF
compared to the sensitive cell lines. Further, combined inhibition of
VEGF and IL-8 in the resistant xenografts resulted in a significant
reduction in tumor volume and microvessel density compared to targeting
VEGF alone. Conclusions: Our results indicate that HNSCC xenografts
display a differential response to anti-VEGF therapy. IL-8 was the most
differentially expressed protein in the angiogenic signature of the
bevacizumab-resistant and sensitive cells. Finally, abrogation of IL-8
signaling sensitized the resistant xenografts to anti-VEGF therapy. These
findings suggest that IL-8 may be associated with anti-VEGF resistance in
HNSCC. Hence, co-targeting of VEGF and IL-8 may improve antiangiogenic
therapeutic efficacy.

