Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of tyramide signal amplification technology to high
content analysis of cellular kinase translocation assays


Deregulation of cellular kinase signaling pathways plays a key role in
the ability of cancer cells to sustain uncontrolled proliferation, resist
apoptosis, and undergo metastasis. The activation of kinase transduction
pathways commonly involves the translocation of various molecular
components of the pathway from one subcellular compartment to another.
For example, growth factor stimulation of cells activates signaling
pathways that are regulated by the level of phosphorylation of protein
kinases such as protein kinase C (PKC) and protein kinase B (PKB/Akt);
PKC and Akt are first recruited from the cytosol to the cell membrane
where the phosphorylation event occurs. High Content Analysis (HCA)
assays have become important tools in screening for potential new drugs
to modulate aberrant signaling pathways. Confocal imaging provides the
highest degree of spatial resolution, and can also yield lower background
signals than wide-field imaging. The downside of confocal imaging is that
it requires longer signal acquisition times, and it may be difficult to
detect targets present in low abundance. The longer acquisition time can
also result in decreased throughput when HCA is used as the detection
mode for high throughput screening. Tyramide signal amplification (TSA)
is an enzyme-based technology that has previous been used to enhance
signal sensitivity in immunochemical staining procedures. We have applied
TSA technology to the HCA of cellular kinase translocation assays using
the Operetta High Content Imaging System in confocal fluorescence mode.
HeLa cells were treated with compounds that induced kinase cytosol to
plasma membrane translocation. Kinase localization was measured using a
texture-based image analysis algorithm. We compared the signal intensity
with and without TSA amplification. We will present data showing that TSA
enhanced the signal intensity by at least an order of magnitude without a
loss of resolution. As a result, the detection antibody can be reduced
5-fold, and the exposure time reduced 10-fold. In conclusion, TSA
amplification of HCA kinase translocation assays can significantly
increase sample throughput when screening compound libraries.

