Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-335 suppresses neuroblastoma cell invasiveness by direct
targeting of multiple genes from the non-canonical TGF-beta signalling
pathway


MicroRNAs are post-transcriptional gene regulators that play a ubiquitous
role in cellular functioning. Aberrant expression of miRNAs has been
correlated with many cancer types, including neuroblastoma. Neuroblastoma
is an often fatal pediatric cancer derived from precursor cells of the
sympathetic nervous system. The single most important indicator of
unfavourable metastatic disease is amplification of the MYCN oncogenic
transcription factor. MiR-335 is significantly down-regulated in MYCN
amplified tumors (Bray et al Plos One 2009; 4:e7850) suggesting a
possible tumor suppressive function. This study aims to determine if
miR-335 functions as a tumor suppressor in neuroblastoma and to elucidate
the mechanism by which it elicits this effect. Ectopic up-regulation of
miR-335 significantly reduced the motile and invasive capacity of
neuroblastoma cell lines. Inversely, down-regulation of miR-335
significantly increased their migratory and invasive potential. mRNA
expression profiling arrays in conjunction with the miRNA target
prediction algorithm TargetScan identified potential targets of miR-335.
Three of these candidate genes, ROCK1, MAPK1 and LRG1, were selected for
further investigation because of their known or predicted involvement in
cell migration and invasion. Down-regulation of these genes by miR-335
was validated at mRNA and protein levels and direct targeting by miR-335
was confirmed by luciferase reporter assays. siRNA-mediated inhibition of
each of these three genes recapitulated the diminished cell migration and
invasion associated with miR-335 up-regulation. ROCK1 and MAPK1 are
members of two of the major branches of the oncogenic non-canonical
TGF-beta signalling pathway, whose signals converge to tightly regulate
the phosphorylation or activation status of the motor protein myosin
light chain (MLC). LRG1 is a putative TGF-beta pathway member that has
been proposed to bind to TGF-beta receptor II. We demonstrate that siRNA
mediated inhibition of ROCK1, MAPK1 and LRG1 leads to a significant
reduction in phosphorylated levels of MLC protein. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that up-regulation of miR-335 inhibits phosphorylation or
activation of MLC through targeting of these three genes. Finally, we
demonstrate using a MYCN repressible cell line and MYCN ChIP-chip
experiments that miR-335 is directly repressed by the oncogenic
transcription factor MYCN. Therefore, we conclude that miR-335 is
directly repressed by MYCN in MYCN amplified neuroblastoma tumors leading
to the increased expression of the oncogenic non-canonical TGF-beta
pathway members ROCK1, MAPK1 and LRG1 which function to enhance the
metastatic propensity of the tumor cells.

