Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycolytic gene expression in ER-positive breast cancer tumors:
Comparison with metastasis scores


Background: The proliferation genes of metastatic expression scores for
ER-positive tumors are thought to be critical. While the correlation
between these scores and distant metastasis has clinical utility, further
improvements of predicted risk and a better understanding of the
underlying biological processes is desirable. Since cell survival,
proliferation, and cellular metabolism are integrated, we asked if
expressions of the genes of the glycolytic pathway are associated with
predicted metastatic risk. Methods: RNA was extracted from 46 breast
cancer tumor blocks collected at the Blumenthal Cancer Center with
Institutional Review Board approval. A previously described metastasis
score (MS) (Tutt et al) consisting of 14 proliferation genes was
determined by RT-PCR and with categorization as either high or low risk.
These tumors had been previously profiled using Oncotype Dx and
categorized using Oncotype Dx and TAILORx cut points. Thirteen glycolysis
pathway genes (GLUT1, HK1, HK2, PKM1, PKM2, ENO3, LDHA, LDHB, PGK1,
PKFFB4, PFKL, PFKM, and KHK) were profiled. Data were analyzed using
Eisen's Cluster program. Results: In a preliminary analysis of 46 tumors,
we identified 27 tumors that were predicted to be at high risk for
distant metastasis based on MS. Clustal analysis of the glycolysis
pathway genes divided the tumors into two major groups. Of the 20 tumors
that displayed higher levels of glycolytic expression, 19 had a high MS
and 1 had a low MS. Of the 26 tumors with lower glycolytic expression, 8
had a high MS and 18 had a low MS. Four of the 20 higher glycolytic
expression group were categorized as high risk using Oncotype Dx
cutpoints while 5 were categorized as high risk using TAILORx cutpoints.
Of the 26 lower glycolytic expression group, 1 tumor was classified as
high risk by either Oncotype Dx or TAILORx criteria. Seven tumors in each
of the higher and lower glycolytic expression groups were classified as
intermediate risk with Oncotype Dx cutpoints;12 and 19 were classified as
intermediate risk in the higher and lower glycolytic expression groups,
respectively, with TAILORx cutpoints. A 2.5 to 12 fold range in
glycolytic gene expression was observed between the tumors; the largest
ranges were observed with LDHA, LDHB, PGK1 and PKM1. Discussion: Tumors
that were highly proliferative based on MS showed higher expression of
the glycolysis pathway genes. However, there was a subset of tumors that
displayed discordant proliferative and glycolytic expression. Although
the tumors with high MS cluster together, the expression level of the
composite genes differ between tumors, suggestive that different pathways
may be involved. The predominance of intermediate Oncotype Dx categorized
tumors made the interpretation of association difficult. Studies with
clinical outcome data will be required to assess the utility of the
inclusion of glycolytic gene expression in predicting metastatic risk.

