Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast adipose mesenchymal stem cells and mammary fibrosis


Introduction: At a biochemical level, the most common symptom of aging
and its related pathologies (i.e. cancer) is the accumulation of altered
or abnormal proteins. Aberrant proteins can induce oxygen free radical
generation and inflammation; additionally an abnormal inflammatory
response can lead to over-production and deposition of extracellular
matrix (ECM) components, leading to fibrosis. The linkage between
fibrosis and cancer is well established in the lung; alternatively breast
fibrosis is a less understood phenomenon. Fibrosis is characterized by
the excess production and altered composition and crosslinking of the
ECM. Myofibroblasts are the principal mediators of fibrosis, producing
abundant ECM as well as inflammatory and angiogenic factors; chronic
tissue fibrosis is associated with tumor development. Likewise, stromal
cells within the breast tumor microenvironment can provide
tumor-promoting effects. Yet, very little is known regarding the role of
local-adipose mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the development of cancer.
Objectives: If breast density and fibrosis are both associated with less
fat and more connective tissue, we reason that resident breast MSCs
(b-MSCs) are chemoattracted toward mammary glandular elements where they
trigger a desmoplastic response characterized by their
transdifferentiation into myofibroblasts, rather than differentiating
along an adipocytic lineage; thus proposing that b-MSCs, an understudied
yet abundant stromal constituent, contribute early in the development of
breast cancer. Moreover, if b-MSCs contribute to fibrosis, it is critical
to understand and deter this early fibrotic initiation factor.
Preliminary Data, Methodology, and Future Directions: Affymetrix data,
qRT-PCR, and western blotting results reveal that undifferentiated b-MSCs
constitutively express multiple matrix metalloproteinases and chemokine
receptors, which could guide these stromal cells from local fat stores
into the parenchyma, activating a cascade of events leading to fibrosis.
qRT-PCR reveals b-MSCs express multiple members of the epidermal growth
factor (EGF) receptor family, most notably HER1. Soluble heparin binding
epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) and EGF modestly effects b-MSC growth,
but markedly enhances migration. Moreover, HB-EGF and EGF interfere with
adipogenic differentiation. Future studies will analyze the fibrogenic
response initiated by b-MSCs in co-culture with normal, pre-malignant and
malignant breast epithelial cells and evaluate the effectiveness of the
dipeptide, carnosine, on reducing fibrogenesis. Support: This work was
supported by a DOD Breast Cancer Research Program Idea Award (BC094734)
to L.E.

