Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local mucosal CD8+T cell response is required to inhibit the
growth of orthotopic head and neck and lung cancers


Tumors may be located at mucosal or non-mucosal sites. However, the
clinical benefit of preferentially inducing an anti-tumor immune response
in the anatomic site of tumors has never been addressed. We set up
orthotopic models of head and neck and lung cancers to compare the
systemic and local anti-tumor immune response after administration of a
cancer vaccine by mucosal and systemic routes. We also selected a non
replicative delivery system, the B subunit of Shiga toxin (STxB), as a
mucosal vector able to target dendritic cells. We show that intranasal
immunization of mice with STxB based vaccine is the best route to elicit
polyfunctional specific CD8+T cells in cervical and mediastinal lymph
node than the use of non vectorized antigen or the intramuscular route.
In line with these results, nasal mucosal administration of a model tumor
antigen (E7 polypeptide from HPV 16) targeted to dendritic cells by STxB
is more efficient to inhibit the growth of established orthotopic head
and neck and lung cancers expressing the E7 antigen, than the
administration of non vectorized antigen or the use of intramuscular
route. A higher infiltration of CD8+T cells was detected 7 days after
tumor graft, when mice were previously intranasally immunized with
STxB-E7, than in mice vaccinated by the intramuscular route. Specific
anti-E7 CD8+T cell tumor infiltration, was only observed after nasal
immunization. Indeed, depletion of CD8+T cells inhibited the clinical
efficiency of tumor vaccine demonstrating their role in tumor protection.
In contrast, both routes completely controlled the growth of a
subcutaneously E7 expressing tumor, which correlated with a similar
induction of anti-E7 CD8+T cells in the spleen. Analysis of Integrin and
chemokine receptor expression on tetramere positive cells showed that
intranasal immunization induced higher levels of CD103 on T cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage than intramuscular immunization with the same
vaccine. This study emphasizes the need to elicit a potent anti-tumor
response at the anatomic site of tumor and not just in the systemic
compartment to induce tumor regression. This was achieved by i)
administration of the vaccine by the intranasal route which was efficient
in inducing CD8+T cells response at both locoregional and systemic sites
allowing the control of both mucosal and non mucosal tumors. ii) The
targeting of antigen to dendritic cells by STxB. This study is relevant
to humans, as 30% of head and neck cancers express HPV16. Our results
support the development of STxB-E7 vaccine administered by the i.n. route
for the treatment of these HPV associated head and neck cancers. More
generally, this study provides direct evidence for the
compartmentalization of tumor immunity, a critical finding for the design
of better cancer vaccines.

