Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3-D imaging of human colorectal cancer tissues with optical
clearing: Spatial analysis of the tumor vasculature through transparent
specimens


Introduction: Microscopic analysis of tumor vasculature in the endoscopic
and surgical biopsies is a valuable diagnostic tool to evaluate cancer
treatment at different stages. However, the standard microtome-based
2-dimensional (2-D) histology provides only limited perspective of the
dispersed vasculature. To provide a global view of the vascular network,
in this research we employed optical clearing to generate transparent
specimens for penetrative, 3-dimensional (3-D) visualization of the tumor
vasculature in the human colorectal cancer tissues. Methods: Colorectal
cancer tissues were obtained from colectomies and endoscopic procedures.
Samples of normal mucosa were obtained at least 5 cm apart from the
carcinoma. Nuclear and CD34 immuno-staining were used to reveal the
mucosal microstructure and vasculature. Optical clearing use of immersion
solution to reduce random scattering as light travels across media (Liu
et al., Neurogastroenterol Motil 23:e446, 2011; Fu & Tang,
Gastroenterology, 139:p1100, 2010) was applied to prepare transparent
specimens for 3-D imaging via confocal microscopy. Afterward, the
specimens were extensively washed with saline to reverse the clearing
step and then underwent the standard microtome-based 2-D histology. Avizo
projection algorithms were used for image rendering and analysis.
Results: The improved photon transmission resulting from optical clearing
led to penetrative imaging (up to 300 m) of the mucosal microstructure
and vasculature with high definition. In the normal mucosa, we observed
the peri-cryptic capillaries being orderly arranged as a network embedded
in the hexagonal honeycomb structure of stroma. In comparison, the
vessels in the colorectal carcinoma became dilated and distorted with
irregular and disoriented architecture embedded in the deformed mucosa.
Significantly, our 3-D image data provided a continuous flow of the
anatomic information for panoramic projection and spatial analysis of the
vessel density to compare and distinguish the normal and the tumor
vasculature. In addition, matched tissue information was observed between
the 3-D confocal and the standard H&E and IHC images, indicating our
optical method is reversible and can serves as an add-on to the current
2-D histological evaluation of the colorectal cancer. Conclusion: Our
optical method connects 3-D microscopy of the human colorectal cancer
tissues to the standard microtome-based 2-D histology. This approach is
particularly useful in 3-D projection and spatial analysis of the
vasculature for future clinical evaluation of the colorectal carcinoma.

