Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR as a novel target for the treatment of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) is a rare and highly
aggressive tumor type that accounts for approximately 5-10% of soft
tissue sarcomas. MPNSTs arise either spontaneously or in patients with
type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1). These tumors are highly resistant to
chemotherapy and there are no effective treatment options. It has been
demonstrated that MPNSTs with NF1 mutations are highly sensitive to the
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. However, inhibition of this pathway by
rapamycin in sarcomas has been shown to release negative feedback
inhibition of IGF-1R and activate AKT (pAKT). We have shown that
treatment of MPNST cell lines (MPNST and ST8814) with rapamycin activates
AKT, but not through IGF-1R, since IGF-1R is not expressed in these
cells. This would suggest an alternate route for rapamycin induced AKT
activation. To understand this process, we treated MPNST and ST8814
cells, with or without rapamycin, and used cellular lysates to determine
whether the release of negative feedback by mTOR inhibition was mediated
by alternate receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Using RTK array profiling
(R&D Systems), our results indicate that both p-PDGFR and p-PDGFR are
activated in response to rapamycin. Using imatinib (STI571) to target
both PDGFR and PDGFR, we show that imatinib blocks rapamycin induced
reactivation of pAKT. In order to rule out off target effects of
imatinib, knockdown of PDGFR using siRNA followed by treatment with
rapamycin recapitulates the effects observed with imatinib treatment. The
combination of imatinib and rapamycin in MPNST cells resulted in a
significant decrease in cell proliferation when compared to either of the
two drugs alone. Mouse xenograft studies also show that tumor growth
volume is decreased significantly when xenografts are treated with
imatinib in combination with rapamycin compared to either drug alone.
Taken together, our data strongly suggests that in MPNST cells, PDGFR
pathway is involved in rapamycin mediated release of the negative
feedback loop that activates pAKT. Furthermore, the targeting of PDGFR in
combination with inhibitors of mTOR could provide a new therapeutic
approach for the treatment of this disease.

