Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodal optical imaging for detection of oral neoplasia


Despite advances in treatment methods the 5-year survival rate for
patients with oral cancer in the United States is still only 61%, in part
due to late stage diagnosis and subsequent difficulty of surgical
treatment for advanced disease. To improve the ability of clinicians to
detect early stage disease and to treat advanced cancers, we developed a
multimodal optical imaging system (MMIS) to evaluate tissue structure in
vivo at macroscopic and microscopic scales. The MMIS noninvasively
measures changes associated with the development of precancer and cancer,
including alterations in tissue autofluorescence properties (due to loss
of collagen integrity, epithelial thickening, metabolic changes, and
microvascularization) and alterations in tissue morphology (nuclear
enlargement and crowding within the epithelium). The macroscopic imaging
component of the MMIS acquires autofluorescence images of tissue with an
excitation wavelength of 405 nm, a field of view of 45 mm, and spatial
resolution of 0.1 mm. Loss of autofluorescence intensity is quantified by
calculating the normalized red-to-green ratio in widefield
autofluorescence images. Regions of tissue that display reduced
blue-green autofluorescence are examined further using the
high-resolution imaging component of the MMIS, which is a compact
fluorescence microscope coupled to a fiber-optic imaging probe with a 720
m diameter field-of-view and 4.4 m spatial resolution. High-resolution
imaging is performed at an excitation wavelength of 455 nm following
topical application of proflavine, a fluorescent contrast agent which
predominantly stains cell nuclei. Alterations in nuclear size and
crowding are quantified by calculating the mean nuclear-to-cytoplasm
ratio in high-resolution images. The MMIS was used to measure 100 sites
in 30 patients undergoing surgery for oral cancer or precancer.
Histopathology results from tissue specimens collected from the measured
sites were used as the gold standard. Tissue specimens with a
histopathologic diagnosis of dysplasia (mild, moderate, or severe) were
further evaluated for molecular alterations by immunohistochemical
staining for the markers Ki-67, p63 and PHH3. The MMIS correctly
classified 98% of pathologically confirmed normal tissue sites and 95% of
sites graded as moderate dysplasia, severe dysplasia, or cancer. MMIS
measurements also correlated with molecular markers in 87% of sites with
mild dysplasia. Following stratification of mild dysplasia sites by
biomarker status, multimodal optical imaging classified all 100 measured
sites with 93% sensitivity and 96% specificity. These findings support
the ability of MMIS to guide the clinician in identifying neoplastic
tissue, and potentially those sites with elevated risk of malignant
transformation. This would have considerable impact on the detection and
treatment of oral cancer and other epithelial malignancies.

