Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enriched miR-126 bioactivity marks the primitive compartment in
human AML and regulates leukemia stem cell numbers


Previous work has shown miRNAs are dysregulated in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), however, there is little known regarding miRNA expression and
function in human leukemia stem cells (LSC). In order to elucidate the
role of miRNA in LSC, we performed miRNA profiling on fractionated
subpopulations of primary AML patient samples. Supervised analysis guided
by the in vivo SCID leukemia initiating cell (SL-IC) capacity of each
sub-population generated a unique miRNA signature associated with LSC
enriched fractions. The biological activity of our top candidate,
miR-126, was confirmed at single cell resolution by using a novel
bidirectional lentivirus miRNA reporter system in vitro and within
primary AML patient samples xenografted into immune-deficient NSG mice.
These data suggest that primitive AML cells may express high levels of
bioactive miR-126 relative to more differentiated blast populations. To
test this hypothesis, we FACS sorted miR-126 genetic reporter vector
transduced primary AML patient samples and transplanted these populations
into immune-compromised secondary mouse recipients. The results of these
proof-of-concept experiments demonstrates our ability to prospectively
isolate LSC enriched fractions in all 4 AML patient samples tested using
only a single biomarker, miR-126. Finally, to understand the functional
relevance of miR-126 expression within primitive human AML cells, stable
enforced expression and knockdown of miR-126 was achieved using
lentiviral vectors. Enforced expression in four primary AML xenografts
resulted in a several fold increase of CD34+CD117+ lentivirus marked
leukemia cells after 12 weeks. In addition, the miR-126/OE cells showed
reduced differentiation marker expression (CD14, CD15) with no
significant differences in AML graft size. To determine if the expanded
population had SL-IC activity or was a downstream leukemic progenitor,
limiting dilution assays were performed by transplantation of FACS sorted
lentivirus marked cells into secondary recipient mice for 12 weeks. A
3-20 fold increase in LSC activity was observed with miR-126 forced
expression compared to control cells. These data suggest that high levels
of miR-126 bioactivity support self-renewal/maintenance of primitive AML
cells at the cost of aberrant differentiation. We performed microarray
analysis of a primitive human AML cells after miR-126/OE and miR-126/KD.
The principal signalling pathway(s) under direct control of miR-126 in
primitive AML cells were revealed by subjecting our array data to Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in combination with several published
miRNA target prediction algorithms. In summary, this work demonstrates
that miR-126 is more abundant and biologically active within the leukemia
stem/progenitor cell compartment of the AML functional hierarchy and
serves to regulate AML stem cell numbers.

