Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of metastatic breast cancer by E2F transcription factors


Metastasis is the leading cause of mortality in breast cancer and the
purpose of this study was to examine the role of the E2F transcription
factors in mediating the dissemination of the primary cancer. E2F
transcription factors have previously been demonstrated to play a
critical role in regulation of cell cycle progression. However, in prior
work we have demonstrated that gene expression signatures for the E2Fs
have variable levels of activation in a heterogeneous tumor model. Using
predictive bioinformatic methods to assess the probability of gene
pathway activation, we have predicted variable roles for the E2Fs in key
mouse models of breast cancer, including Myc, PyMT and Neu. We then
genetically tested these computational predictions by interbreeding E2F
knockout mice to the various transgenic tumor models. These crosses have
revealed that the E2Fs have unique roles in tumor initiation and
progression depending upon the oncogene driving the initial tumor. There
are differential effects on tumor latency with the loss of individual E2F
alleles, including decreased latency with E2F2 loss in the PyMT
background but increased latency and reduced incidence in the Myc
background. Moreover, we have observed key differences in tumor
progression, with loss of E2Fs affecting the heterogeneity of the
resulting tumors. In addition to tumor initiation, we have observed
striking differences in tumor progression with loss of E2Fs increasing
metastasis in the Myc model but reducing metastasis in the PyMT model. In
order to determine the mechanism of action for these effects, we have
undertaken a gene expression analysis from both primary tumors and the
metastases. Comparison of tumor models in the various backgrounds has
allowed us to generate a list of E2F target genes that have effects on
metastasis. Comparison of these genes to human breast cancer has revealed
that the key genes also have critical roles in metastatic human breast
cancer survival. These E2F targets include genes that have previously
been identified as metastasis suppressors and are being validated in this
process. Taken together, this work suggests a critical role for the E2F
transcription factors, not only as mediators of cell cycle but in
regulating the metastatic progression of metastatic breast cancer. These
data also illustrate the power of combining various genomic and gene
expression analysis techniques with both mouse models and clinical data
associated with gene expression analysis in human breast cancer. Using
this approach we are able to predict and test for the role of critical
pathways, such as the E2Fs, in the progression of breast cancer.

