Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plumbagin, a plant derived napthoquinone, inhibits the metastatic
growth of human prostate cancer PC-3M luciferase cells in an orthotropic
xenograft mouse model


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common malignancy in men and the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the Western World.
Androgen ablation therapy remains the gold standard for the treatment of
PCa. Despite the initial success of androgen ablation therapy, resistance
to anti-androgen therapy manifests by progression to hormone refractory
PCa, which accounts for majority of PCa patient deaths. Plumbagin (PL), a
novel plant derived napthoquinone isolated from the roots of medicinal
plant Plumbago zeylanica L has been shown for its anti-cancer activity
against various types of cancer. We have previously shown that PL induces
apoptosis and inhibits the growth of human PCa cells in vitro as well as
in vivo model systems. PL treatment also inhibited the spontaneous
development of prostate tumor in the TRAMP mouse model. Here, we
determined the anti-metastatic potential of PL in an orthotopic xenograft
mouse model. Highly aggressive and metastatic PCa PC3M luciferase cells
(2X106) were injected into the prostate of athymic nude mice. Three days
post-injection, mice were randomly divided into two groups. One group of
mice was administered with PL (2 mg/kg body wt. i.p five days in a week)
in 0.1 ml of PBS containg 10% DMSO for 7 weeks. Vehicle group mice were
administered with 0.1 ml of PBS containg 10 % DMSO. Prostate tumor
development and distant metastasis into liver, lungs, and lymph nodes
were examined weekly by bioluminescence imaging of live mice and compared
with vehicle treated mice. We observed that PL treatment significantly
inhibited the growth of PC3M cells xenograft tumors and metastasis as
determined by significantly reduced photon intensity in PL-treated mice
compared to control group mice. We also performed bioluminescence imaging
of excised prostate, liver, lungs and lymph nodes for distant metastasis
quantification. Results demonstrated that PL significantly inhibited
prostate tumor growth and distant metastasis in lungs compared with
vehicle treated mice. These results were further confirmed by
histopathology. All the control and PL-treated groups mice demonstrated
orthotopic tumor formation in the mouse prostates. Control mice showed
large metastasis foci in the lungs, liver and lymph nodes. None of the
mice from PL-treated group showed metastasis in the liver, but these mice
showed significantly less and smaller size of metastatic foci in the
lungs compared to control mice. All the enlarged regional lymph nodes
were positive for metastasis in both PL-treated and control mice. Our
data suggest that PL has an anti-metastatic potential against PCa. PL
could be used as a novelchemopreventive natural agent for the treatment
of PCa. (Support: NIH grant, CA138761).

