Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HER2 expression and phosphorylation in breast cancer
CTC samples by CEER


Survival rates of metastatic breast cancers (mBCAs) are considerably low.
Often, tumor cells at the primary site may not reflect the profile of the
tumor cell population in recurrent disease. Circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) isolated from peripheral blood offer a non-invasive disease
monitoring modality. Identification of reliable molecular markers within
(CTCs) from patients with recurrent disease may further improve breast
cancer survival. Hence, we have developed a multiplexed immunoassay for
monitoring activated HER2 protein and their expression levels using a
multiplexed immuno-microarray platform. Collaborative Enzyme Enhanced
Reactive-immunoassay (CEER) was utilized to analyze HER2 profiles in CTCs
isolated from 76 BCA patients (stages III to IV) with HER2 negative
primary disease. The CEER technology utilizes the formation of a unique
immuno-complex requiring co-localization of two detector antibodies
around capture antibodies immobilized on immuno-array to profile HER2
protein expression and activation. The collaboration between two
channeling-enzymes conjugated on two detection antibodies in proximity,
enables the profiling of the target proteins with extreme sensitivity and
specificity. Approximately 25% of HER2 negative BCA patients in this
cohort showed varying levels of HER2 activation in CTCs isolated from the
recurrent disease. About 8% of patients with HER2 activation in CTCs also
showed significant HER2 over-expression. This suggests mechanisms of HER2
activation either through formation of receptor heterodimer (in samples
without HER2 over-expression) or homodimer (in samples with HER2
overexpression) formation. The distinct HER2 discordance between primary
tumor and recurrent disease demonstrates an urgent need for routine
monitoring of HER2 status in CTCs found in mBCA patients. Incidence of
HER2 alterations in CTCs should be considered in selecting effective
treatment regimens for BCA patients with relapsed disease. Furthermore,
CEER can be used for profiling other druggable targets for guiding
effective clinical strategies including rational targeted agents.

