Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the ERK1/2 pathway by RanBPM


Ran binding protein-M (RanBPM, also called RanBP9) is a
nucleo-cytoplasmic protein that has been implicated in a multitude of
cellular roles, including the regulation of transcription, protein
modifications and stability, and extracellular receptor signaling
pathways. However its function within the cell remains largely unknown.
Previous studies in our lab have identified RanBPM as a pro-apoptotic
protein that mediates its effects through modulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL
levels. Here we present evidence that RanBPM functions to regulate
apoptotic activation through regulation of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway.
First, we determined that siRNA-mediated knockdown of RanBPM expression
led to elevated Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL mRNA expression, suggesting regulation
by RanBPM at the transcriptional level. Additionally, expression of
RanBPM affected ectopically expressed Bcl-2 protein levels. Together,
these findings suggested that RanBPM regulated the expression of Bcl-2
and Bcl-XL at both the transcriptional and post-translational levels. The
ERK1/2 signaling cascade has previously been shown to regulate the
expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL at both the transcriptional and
post-translational levels. We found that that RanBPM-deficient cells
exhibited enhanced ERK1/2 phosphorylation and activation, while
re-expression of RanBPM led to a marked decrease in the levels of
phosphorylated ERK1/2. Furthermore, enhanced ERK1/2 activation in
RanBPM-deficient cells contributed to the elevated levels of Bcl-2
expression observed in these cells, as inhibition of ERK1/2 activation
correlated with decreased Bcl-2 protein expression. We characterized
regulation of ERK1/2 signaling by RanBPM, and identified that RanBPM
targets this pathway downstream of Ras, through modulation of c-Raf
stability. Our studies revealed that downregulation of RanBPM expression
promotes phosphorylation and stabilization of c-Raf, leading to elevated
c-Raf protein expression. Finally we observed that downregulation of
RanBPM expression promotes cellular transformation, as RanBPM-deficient
cells exhibit increased cell growth rates and enhanced cell migration.
Together, these findings suggested that RanBPM acts as a novel inhibitor
of ERK1/2 signaling, and that downregulation of RanBPM expression leads
to oncogenic transformation.

