Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent methods to investigate cellular metabolic status:
NAD(P)/NAD(P)H levels, redox potential, and hydrogen peroxide
concentration


Cancer is a disease defined by uncontrolled cell growth where cellular
energy metabolism pathways must evolve for tumors to survive and
proliferate. NAD(P) and NAD(P)H play a major role in oxidative
phosphorylation and their role in aerobic glycolysis is of great
interest. Additionally, NAD(P)/NAD(P)H act as co-factors for enzymes
involved in cancer pathogenesis through regulation of chromatin
structure, DNA repair, and transcription (e.g. sirtuins and
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase). The study of how NAD(P)/NAD(P)H are
generated and utilized during adaptive cancer cell energy metabolism
would benefit from the development of a rapid, sensitive, and homogeneous
assay to measure the level of these nucleotides. We developed a
bioluminescent assay for measuring NAD(P)/NAD(P)H that can detect 0.1 M
NADH and has a 1000-fold dynamic range. The assay is well suited for high
throughput screening (Z = 0.92, S/B = 95) and has been used to screen the
LOPAC library. By coupling other reactions with NAD(P)/NAD(P)H
measurement, we analyzed the levels of metabolites and the activity of
enzymes, including isocitrate dehydrogenase and pyruvate dehydrogenase,
in enzyme preparations and crude cell lysates. This method is applicable
for measuring cellular NAD and NADH levels directly from cell culture
without further sample handling. This assay is based on a novel
proluciferin derivative that is processed in vitro through an enzymatic
reaction. The released luciferin is detected in a coupled
luciferin/luciferase reaction and the luminescent signal is correlated
with the amount of NAD(P)/NAD(P)H present in the sample. As an extension
of this approach, similar proluciferin chemistries were developed to
detect the reducing potential of metabolically active cells. This robust
luminescent assay can detect the reducing potential of less than 100
cells/well in 96-well format and distinguish small changes in cell
number. Multiple cell lines were treated with cancer therapeutic
compounds and the performance of the proluciferin approach was compared
to commonly used colorimetric (e.g. MTT, MTS, and XTT) and fluorogenic
(e.g. resazurin) methods. The proluciferin assay resulted in comparable
pharmacological responses, significantly increased signal window, and
superior sensitivity. Additionally, the proluciferin-based approach has
been extended to other metabolic readouts. For example, novel
proluciferin substrates were developed and applied to the detection of
hydrogen peroxide in cells and in biological samples through a
HRP-independent process. Bioluminescent assays provide greater
sensitivity and dynamic range than most fluorescent or colorimetric
assays, and are better suited for high throughput screening. Applying
these assays to the study of cancer cell energy metabolism will provide a
significant advantage over existing methods.

