Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Organic Anion Transporting Polypeptides (OATPs): A potential new
molecular target for imaging/therapy of hormone dependent breast cancers


The purpose of this research is to explore the potential of Organic Anion
Transporting Polypeptides (OATPs), a family of membrane-associated uptake
transporters, as a novel molecular target for imaging and treatment of
breast cancers. It has been reported that some of the OATP isoforms (e.g.
OATP1A2, OATP2B1) are over expressed (up to ten times) in breast cancer
tissues as compared to surrounding normal tissues. Furthermore,
estrone-3-sulpahte (E3S), a predominant source for tumour estrogen in
post-menopausal patients with hormone dependent breast cancers has been
characterized to be a substrate for many of the OATP isoforms. This
suggests that the two- three times higher E3S concentration reported in
malignant tissues, as compared to the surrounding normal tissues, could
be due to higher expression and/or increased functional activity of OATPs
in breast tumour tissues. By characterizing the differential expression
and function of OATPs in breast epithelial cells and breast cancer cells,
their potential as novel molecular targets can be established. In this
study, the gene and protein expression of seven OATPs (i.e. OATP1A2,
OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OATP1C1, OATP2B1, OATP3A1 and OATP4A1) that are known
to recognize E3S as a substrate, were compared in normal breast
epithelial cells (MCF10A), hormone dependent breast cancer cells (MCF7)
and hormone independent breast cancer cells (MDA/LCC6-435, MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-468) by real time qPCR and immunoblotting. OATP mediated E3S
uptake was also characterized by transport experiments. Six of the seven
OATPs (except SLCO1C1) were found to be expressed in breast cancer cells
at the transcript level. Expression of SLCO1A2, 1B1, 1B3, 2B1 and 3A1 was
exclusive, similar or significantly higher (pThe purpose of this research
is to explore the potential of Organic Anion Transporting Polypeptides
(OATPs), a family of membrane-associated uptake transporters, as a novel
molecular target for imaging and treatment of breast cancers. It has been
reported that some of the OATP isoforms (e.g. OATP1A2, OATP2B1) are over
expressed (up to ten times) in breast cancer tissues as compared to
surrounding normal tissues. Furthermore, estrone-3-sulpahte (E3S), a
predominant source for tumour estrogen in post-menopausal patients with
hormone dependent breast cancers has been characterized to be a substrate
for many of the OATP isoforms. This suggests that the two- three times
higher E3S concentration reported in malignant tissues, as compared to
the surrounding normal tissues, could be due to higher expression and/or
increased functional activity of OATPs in breast tumour tissues. By
characterizing the differential expression and function of OATPs in
breast epithelial cells and breast cancer cells, their potential as novel
molecular targets can be established. In this study, the gene and protein
expression of seven OATPs (i.e. OATP1A2, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OATP1C1,
OATP2B1, OATP3A1 and OATP4A1) that are known to recognize E3S as a
substrate, were compared in normal breast epithelial cells (MCF10A),
hormone dependent breast cancer cells (MCF7) and hormone independent
breast cancer cells (MDA/LCC6-435, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468) by real
time qPCR and immunoblotting. OATP mediated E3S uptake was also
characterized by transport experiments. Six of the seven OATPs (except
SLCO1C1) were found to be expressed in breast cancer cells at the
transcript level. Expression of SLCO1A2, 1B1, 1B3, 2B1 and 3A1 was
exclusive, similar or significantly higher (p<0.001) in cancer cell lines
compared to the normal breast epithelial cells (MCF10A). At the protein
level, expression of all the OATP isoforms was observed to be either
exclusive or higher in the cancer cell lines as compared to the MCF10A
cells. Specificity of OATP mediated E3S uptake was observed only in the
cancer cells with significantly higher total uptake in the MCF7 cells.
Estimation of the transport kinetics (Km and Vmax) of E3S uptake by the
breast cancer cell lines, demonstrated E3S transport efficiency to be 10
times greater in the hormone dependent breast cancer cells than in the
hormone independent cells. Taken together, these data suggest that i)
OATPs can be a potential molecular target for hormone dependent breast
cancers in post menopausal patients and ii) E3S can be used a ligand for
actively targeting hormone dependent breast cancers.

