Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drugging the undruggable: Small molecule inhibition of the Ras
oncoprotein


Background: Ras is a nucleotide-dependent switch that converts from an
inactive GDP-bound state to an active GTP-bound state when activated by
guanine nucleotide exchange factors, such as SOS. Active RasGTP then
binds to and activates downstream signaling effectors. Ras is the most
frequently mutated oncogene and hyperactive mutant Ras constitutively
signals to effectors to promote cell survival, proliferation and
metastasis. Thus, Ras oncoprotein has been considered by the cancer
community to be one of the most important oncology drug targets. Despite
the enormous interest and extensive exploratory efforts in industry and
academia, small molecules that bind to Ras in a well-defined manner and
exert inhibitory effects have not been uncovered to date. We describe in
this abstract the identification and characterization of small-molecule
inhibitors of the Ras oncoprotein. Materials and Methods: To explore a
new means of directly targeting Ras, we used a fragment-based lead
discovery approach via an NMR-based screen. Hits from the fragment screen
were characterized for their interactions with Ras by NMR and X-ray
crystallography and for their effects on Ras activation and signaling in
reconstituted biochemical assays in vitro and in cellular assays in vivo.
Results: From the fragment-based screen, we identified a group of small
molecules that each bind to a common site adjacent to the switch I/II
regions in the Ras protein. X-ray crystallography studies of three
compound-Ras complexes indicate that the binding site can be expanded
upon ligand binding. Nucleotide exchange factors, notably SOS, are
required to convert inactive RasGDP to active RasGTP. We determined that
the compound-binding site is located at the interface of Ras and SOS. A
subset of our Ras-binding molecules indeed inhibited SOS-mediated
nucleotide exchange. Further mechanistic studies revealed that through
steric hindrance the compounds block the formation of the Ras-SOS
complex, a key intermediate of the exchange reaction. At the cellular
level, our compounds inhibit the formation of active RasGTP and prevent
Ras signaling to downstream effectors. To define the potential clinic
utility of these compounds, we performed biological characterization of
Ras-driven tumors and identified a subset of Ras mutant tumors that
depend on nucleotide exchange factors for the activation of Ras,
suggesting a specific profile for the use of exchange inhibitors.
Conclusions: We conclude that the compounds act as competitive inhibitors
of nucleotide exchange to prevent the activation of Ras. The discovery of
a binding pocket on Ras with functional significance represents a
breakthrough finding that will offer a new direction for therapeutic
intervention of the Ras oncoprotein. Our findings provide new
opportunities to target the undruggable Ras oncoprotein.

