Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical profile of AZD3514: A small molecule-targeting
androgen receptor function with a novel mechanism of action and the
potential to treat castration-resistant prostate cancer


The androgen receptor (AR), an important molecular target in the
aetiology and progression of prostate cancer, has been found recently to
drive key signalling responses in castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) after classical androgen ablation therapies have failed. Here we
describe the biological characterisation of AZD3514 an oral drug that
targets AR function, with a novel mechanism of action that can result in
down-regulation of AR protein. AZD3514 binds to the AR ligand binding
domain and has selectivity for binding to AR over other nuclear hormone
receptors. In vitro AZD3514 inhibits cell growth in prostate cancer cells
expressing wild-type (VCaP) and mutated (T877A) AR (LNCaP), but is
inactive in AR-negative prostate cancer cells, indicating a dependency on
AR for efficacy. In vivo, we assessed activity initially in the
Hershberger castrated rat assay in which oral dosing of AZD3514 (100mg/kg
once-daily for 7 days) significantly inhibited testosterone-induced
growth of sexual accessory organs. Studies to investigate the mode of
action of AZD3514 revealed a number of cellular events associated with
loss of AR function. Consistent with an inhibition of AR signalling,
AZD3514 caused a rapid reduction in PSA synthesis in vitro; with a
significant decrease in PSA mRNA being evident in LNCaP cells within 2 -
3 h of compound treatment. Additional experiments in LNCaP cells and U2OS
AR-transfected cells, demonstrated that AZD3514 inhibits an
androgen-induced translocation of AR from the cytoplasm to the nucleus
within a comparable time-frame. In addition to the effects on AR
localisation and AR-dependent transcription, AZD3514 treatment also
reduced AR protein in LNCaP cells maintained in steroid-depleted
conditions; an effect which was evident within 6 - 8h, and maximal at 18
- 24h. The ability to down-regulate AR under such conditions
differentiates AZD3514 from the AR antagonists bicalutamide and MDV3100,
which do not reduce AR protein levels. Administration of AZD3514 (100
mg/kg/day orally) for 3 days to Copenhagen rats bearing R3327H Dunning
prostate tumours, indicates that AZD3514 treatment also reduces tumour AR
in vivo. AZD3514 has also been shown to reduce AR protein expression, PSA
synthesis and cell growth in vitro in a subclone of cells serially
maintained in the presence of bicalutamide (LNCaP-CR) and an
androgen-independent subclone of cells that was serially maintained in
steroid-depleted medium (LNCaP-AI), suggesting that this novel mechanism
of AR inhibition can deliver activity in CRPC.

