Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GUCY2C opposes systemic genotoxic tumorigenesis by regulating
AKT-dependent intestinal barrier integrity


Background & Aims. The barrier separating mucosal and systemic
compartments is formed by tight junctions annealing epithelial cells
together, which limit paracellular exchange that threatens compartmental
homeostasis. GUCY2C recently emerged as an intestinal tumor suppressor
coordinating AKT1-dependent crypt-villus homeostasis. Here, the
contribution of GUCY2C to barrier integrity opposing colitis and systemic
tumorigenesis is defined. Methods. Gucy2c/ and villinERT2-ROSA-Guca2a
mouse models, as well as in vivo ligand supplementation models were
examined for tight junction structure by expression profile, electron
microscopy, and immunoblot analysis. Barrier integrity was quantified by
oral FITC-dextran after barrier disruption with DSS. Systemic
genotoxicity and tumorigenesis were examined in mice with and without
GUCY2C signaling. The role of AKT in tight junction regulation was
examined in Akt+/ mice and in Caco2 cells using shRNA or AKT mutants.
Results. Gucy2c/ mice exhibited disrupted tight junctions, associated
with reduced junctional proteins and barrier hyperpermeability.
Conversely, ligand activation of GUCY2C in mice increased junctional
proteins and reduced barrier permeability. Further, eliminating GUCY2C
exacerbated, while activation reduced, DSS-induced barrier disruption and
colitis. Moreover, eliminating GUCY2C amplified, while activation
reduced, oxidative DNA damage and tumorigenesis in lymph nodes, liver and
lung. GUCY2C regulated barrier integrity by repressing AKT1 which
increased the junction proteins occludin and claudin 4 in mice and Caco2
cells. Conclusions. GUCY2C defends the intestinal barrier, restricting
permeability to maintain homeostasis in mucosal and systemic
compartments. The pathophysiological significance of GUCY2C-dependent
barrier protection is highlighted by its impact on colitis and systemic
genotoxicity and tumorigenesis in multiple organs. Its translational
potential is underscored by the imminent regulatory approval of oral
GUCY2C ligands, which can be used for chemoprophylaxis in inflammatory
bowel disease and cancer.

