Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cells as potential new therapy for
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality in the
US, despite significant improvements in diagnostic imaging and operative
modalities. The 5-year survival rate remains less than 6% because of
microscopic or gross metastatic disease at time of diagnosis. Although
the treatment of pancreatic cancer remains a huge challenge, it is
entering a new era with the development of new strategies and trial
designs. Because there is an increasing number of novel therapeutic
agents and potential combinations available to test in patients with
pancreatic cancer, the identification of robust prognostic and predictive
markers and of new targets and relevant pathways is a top priority as
well as the design of adequate trials incorporating molecular-driven
hypothesis. Over the past decade, increasing evidence suggested that stem
cells play a crucial role not only in the generation of complex
multicellular organisms, but also in the development and progression of
malignant diseases. Most tumors have been shown to contain a subset of
distinct cancer cells that is responsible for tumor initiation and
propagation. These cells are termed cancer stem cells or tumor-initiating
cells and they are highly resistant to chemotherapeutic agents. Here, we
examined the efficacy of combined treatments of CEP1101 and gemcitabine
in human pancreatic cancer cells, and pancreatic CSCs (CD133, CD44,
CXCR4, SSEA3/4, Oct4, ALDH, Telomerase & Nestin) from the same donors.
CEP1101 inhibited the growth of CSCs, while gemcitabine suppressed the
viability of non-CSCs. In vivo studies showed that CEP1101 combined with
gemcitabine eliminate the engraftment of human pancreatic cancer and
CSCs, more effectively than the individual agents. These data demonstrate
that administration of CEP1101, which targets CSCs, may constitute a
potential therapeutic strategy for improving the efficacy of gemcitabine
to eradicate pancreatic cancer. This study shows potential molecular
therapeutic targets to eradicate the tumor - and metastasis-initiating
cells and their progenies for the evaluation of new effective combination
therapies against locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer.

