Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multivalent dendrimeric peptides as new biomarker probes for the
detection of cancer metastasis


Malignant tumor cells overexpress and release lipid vesicles called
exosomes into the body fluids to facilitate their movement and metastasis
to other parts of the body. It was found that an increased secretion of
exosomes in the peripheral blood is correlated with lung cancer and
melanoma metastasis. The hallmarks of exosomes are their highly curved
surface (d = 30-100 nm) that is distinct from other extracellular lipid
vesicles and their enrichment with the anionic lipid phosphatidylserine
(PS) in the outer leaflet of the membrane bilayer. These properties
provide an opportunity in selectively targeting exosomes as potential
cancer biomarkers. Current clinical methods that are being used to
classify metastatic patients are not accurate or reproducible, are often
problematic, and do not indicate whether or not treatment is reducing
metastasis. Furthermore, these methods involve invasive procedures. We
aim to develop a novel, minimally invasive, peptide-based diagnostic tool
to detect and visualize exosomes and measure exosome oversecretion in
cancer patients. The successful creation of this diagnostic tool for
cancer metastasis will help in the proper diagnosis and therapy for
cancer patients. We chose the small peptide Bradykinin (BK) as our core
molecule because it was recently reported that this peptide
differentially interacts with nanometer size synthetic lipid vesicles,
with preferential binding for vesicles with higher anionic lipid
composition. Our earlier studies on a BK analogue showed that it
selectively binds to synthetic lipid vesicles with d = 55 +/ 5 nm,
dimensions that mimic the size of exosomes. We hypothesized that by
creating a library of multivalent, dendrimeric analogues of BK, we could
increase its binding affinity to lipid vesicle models that would
translate to the detection of exosomes in body fluids. The peptide was
prepared by microwave-assisted solid phase synthesis, was modified with
Lys-Gly spacers, the epsilon-amino of the Lys residue was deprotected and
converted into an azide, and the peptide was labeled with a fluorophore,
cleaved from the resin, and purified by high performance liquid
chromatography. We also synthesized a series of dendrimer-type, alkyne
functionalized, aromatic small molecules as scaffolds in the preparation
of the multivalent dendrimeric peptides. The azide-functionalized BK
analogue was conjugated to the scaffolds using solution phase
Copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition reaction (Click chemistry).
We investigated the curvature sensing ability of the peptides using
synthetic liposomes and exosomes from the plasma of a rat model using a
combination of spectroscopic techniques. The lipid vesicle detecting
properties of these peptides and their potential as new diagnostic tool
for cancer metastasis shall be reported herein.

