Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABTL0812: A new drug class with oral antitumor action inhibiting
mTOR activity and DHFR expression


ABTL0812* is a lipid analogue that has shown high efficacy by the oral
route in mouse models of cancer. Here we show that two clinically
validated targets are responsible for the cytotoxic effect of ABTL0812:
mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), as shown by the dramatic reduction
in S6 phosphorylation, and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), as shown by
its reduced expression, resulting in autophagic cell death. Moreover, the
compound's cellular potency increases with incubation time, and it has a
long lasting cytotoxic effect after removing the compound from the
incubation medium. In vivo efficacy was determined in a human lung cancer
xenograft model by subcutaneously injecting A549 human lung
adenococarcinoma cells into nu/nu mice. ABT0812 was administered daily at
two dose levels and its impact on tumor volume was measured. ABT0812
showed a similar efficacy to docetaxel but with much lower toxicity, and
better efficacy than erlotinib. Histological analysis of the tumors
revealed increased necrotic area, more inflammatory cells and fewer cells
undergoing mitosis. Additionally, plasma levels of ABTL0812 were
inversely correlated with tumor volume, reinforcing the
concentration-effect relationship. A parallel study was performed to
evaluate ABTL0812 efficacy in a pancreatic cancer model. Nu/nu mice were
subcutaneously injected with MiaPaCa-2 cells and the volume of xenograft
was used as a measurement of efficacy. Again, ABTL0812 showed a
statistically significant reduction of tumor volume, increased tumor cell
death, and better tolerance than gemcitabine in the mice. DMPK properties
in rats and dogs showed very low in vitro hepatic metabolism, 50%
bioavailability and half lives that calculate to single daily oral
administration. Safety pharmacology studies with very high doses of the
compound showed no impact on the central nervous system. Ongoing
toxicological studies show that the margin between efficacy and toxicity
is broad. In conclusion, ABTL0812 is a lipid analogue that hits two
clinically validated targets: mTOR and DHFR. This multitarget property
increases antitumor efficacy and reduces drug resistance. In addition,
preliminary in vivo results indicate that the potential therapeutic
margin will be high. * Protected by PCT WO 2010/106211, by Escrib Ruiz
PV, et al., licensed to AB-Therapeutics, SL.

