Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kevetrin targets both MDM2-p53 and Rb-E2F pathways in tumor
suppression


Our studies showed that Kevetrin, a small molecule currently under
development, has potent antitumor activity in several wild type and
mutant p53 human tumor xenografts e.g. A549, PC-3, MDA-MB-231, HT-29,
NCI-H1975, HCT-15, K-562, LNCaP. To investigate the mechanism of action
of its antitumor activity in different xenograft models, we assessed
Kevetrin's effects on apoptosis and cell cycle progression. Rb-E2F and
MDM2-p53 pathways are crucial regulators of cell cycle progression.
Remarkably, both Rb-E2F and MDM2-p53 pathways are defective in most, if
not all, human tumors. There is extensive crosstalk between the Rb-E2F
and MDM2-p53 pathways, especially between the transcription factors E2F1
and p53, which influence vital cellular decisions. In wild type p53 human
lung carcinoma (A549), Kevetrin showed a concentration dependent increase
in activation of p53 by Western blot analysis. Activated p53 triggered
apoptosis by inducing the expression of PUMA. Kevetrin also increased the
expression of the target gene p21, an inhibitor of cell cycle
progression. Kevetrin induced apoptosis in a transcriptional independent
way by altering the E3 ligase processivity of MDM2. Kevetrin strongly
induced apoptosis in multiple tumor cell lines characterized by
activation of caspase3 and PARP. E2F1 is a pivotal transcription factor
that integrates signals from a variety of G1/S phase regulators and
modulates diverse functions, such as DNA synthesis, mitosis, apoptosis
and senescence. E2F1 overexpression, observed in most tumors, is
associated with tumor growth. Cells which overexpress E2F1 proved to be
immune to induction of senescence. A recent study showed that depletion
of E2F1 hinders cell cycle progression and induces senescence. Kevetrin
down regulated E2F1 expression in various p53 wild type and mutant cell
lines. Kevetrin also down regulated the E2F1 target gene thymidylate
synthase (TS) in various tumor cell lines. Several reports have shown
E2F1 overexpression correlates with TS expression. Effective inhibition
of TS by Kevetrin could play a crucial role in tackling the problem of
resistance. Kevetrin acting through both major pathways of tumor
suppression, Rb-E2F and MDM2-p53, has far reaching consequences. Due to
the complexity of proapoptotic and antiapoptotic pathways with multiple
players involved and redundant signaling networks, blocking only one
antiapoptotic factor may not result in robust antitumor activity.
However, Kevetrin acts via multiple targets to produce potent efficacy in
various xenograft tumor models. We have also demonstrated that Kevetrin
is non-genotoxic. DNA damaging drugs result in rapid phosphorylation of
H2A.X at Ser 139 by PI3K-like kinases; however, Kevetrin did not induce
phosphorylation of H2A.X. Since Kevetrin was well-tolerated in GLP safety
pharmacology and toxicity studies, we have submitted an IND application
for a Phase I clinical trial at Dana Farber / Harvard Cancer Center for
2012.

