Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of c-Cbl function, by inhibiting Cdc42, confers
tamoxifen sensitivity on basal-like (triple negative) breast cancer cells


Our present work offers a new means by which cancer cells become
resistant to anti-cancer treatments and mechanism-driven approaches for
overcoming such resistance. Specifically, here we demonstrate a
previously unrecognized mechanism of tamoxifen (TMX) resistance distinct
from loss of estrogen receptor on basal-like (triple negative) breast
cancer cells, which are among the most challenging tumors to treat with
current therapies. Our present finding emerged from trying to understand
the puzzling differences in regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
degradation in normal progenitor cells and in breast cancer cells. When
glial progenitor cells become slightly more (15-20%) oxidized, such as by
exposing them to TMX, we find sequential activation of Fyn (a member of
the Src-family of kinases) and c-Cbl (an E3 ubiquitin ligase) is
activated. Phosphorylation of c-Cbl causes ubiquitylation of its target
proteins and thus increases the degradation of its target proteins, such
as particular RTKs, including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR,
our specific target in this study). In contrast to normal progenitor
cells, basal-like breast cancer cells exposed to TMX show increased Fyn
activation but no increase in c-Cbl phosphorylation. We now have found
that oxidation-induced activation of c-Cbl in basal-like breast cancer
cells is inhibited due to expression of Cdc42. Cdc42 sequestered c-Cbl,
prevented its activation and prevented EGFR from being degraded.
Restoration of c-Cbl function, by genetically or pharmacologically
inhibiting Cdc42 activation, reduced EGFR levels in these cells. More
critically, restoring c-Cbl function sensitized these cells to TMX both
in vitro and in vivo. Analysis of tumor growth in vivo showed that
reducing the levels of Cdc42 both reduced the size of tumors and made
them more sensitive to TMX. The results provide a novel defense mechanism
that basal-like breast cancer cells utilize to prevent EGFR degradation
which may have high relevance to treatment of these tumors. Of particular
importance is the ability of Cdc42 knockdown to confer TMX sensitivity on
these otherwise resistant tumor cells.

