Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a new circulating tumor cell detection and
isolation assay based on automated on-chip imaging flow cytometry
technology


Backgrounds: Counting of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is now a
promising tumor biomarker. Although CTCs could also serve as a source of
tumor cells, this application is limited under the now established
methods due to shortage and uncertain viability of CTCs identified and
isolated. The aim of the present study is to develop a non-destructive
approach to efficiently detect and isolate viable CTCs using the indices
of their detailed shapes acquired from the imaging flow cytometry.
Method: The device was designed based on the automated on-chip imaging
flow cytometry system, consisted of a disposable microfludic cell sorting
chip, a phase-contrast/fluorescent microscopy module, and a real-time
image-processing unit with a 10,000 images/s high-speed camera. Following
two kinds of samples were prepared to evaluate the method: in vitro
cultured human leukemia HL60 cells labeled with GFP, and a peripheral
venous blood obtained from a rat model of CTC consisted of tumor
autografts of highly metastatic syngenic cancer cells labeled with GFP.
After 3 weeks of implantation, 2 ml of heparinized blood were obtained
from the subclavicular vein, and used for the analysis. We confirmed the
existence of CTCs by culturing a part of blood sample followed by
detection of GFP doped cancer cells grew up in vitro. Results and
Discussion: HL60 cells in PBS flew smoothly through the microfludic chip
at fluidic velocity up to 100 mm/sec, even at a high concentration of
5107 cells/ml, and the high-speed camera clearly detected each single
image of GFP doped cell. For blood samples, as direct injection of
undiluted samples caused clog of microfluidic channels, we used the
samples 3 times diluted with PBS, and we have successfully detected the
fluorescent signals and the images of doped cancer cells at fluid
velocity of 75 mm/sec with 50 l of the diluted sample. Because the number
of CTC is believed to be limited, the preceding devices for CTC analysis
are based on enrichment of CTC with immunomagnetic technology or with
size filtration, those may loss and also give some damage to CTCs.
However, our imaging flowcytometry assay has succeeded in detection of
CTCs to the single cell level with simultaneous detection and real-time
analysis of single cells fluorescence intensities and their detailed
shapes with 10,000 events/s intervals in the continuous flow of directly
applied blood samples without enrichment steps. Although confirmation by
cell culture from the isolated CTC is now undergoing, the results
indicated that this technology could give to avoid cell damage and to
obtain viable cells based on their new indices, i.e., shape and cluster
formation. Conclusion: The system applied for this study based on the
automated on-chip imaging flow cytometry with the cell image-based
sorting with high-speed camera could be a promising tool for CTC analysis
and widen the applications of CTCs in research field.

