Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted exosomes from cultured bladder cells are enriched for
distinct miRNAs detected in circulation of metastatic bladder cancer
patients


Exosomes are small nanovesicles (30-100 nm) secreted from the cell
surface of most cell types. The vesicles are secreted at increased levels
by cancer cells and can be detected in body fluids of cancer patients.
Exosomes function in paracrine delivery of proteins, RNA, and DNA into
recipient cells. By this, exosomes are speculated to be involved e.g. in
pre-metastatic niche formation at distant sites. Here we present a
characterization of exosome vesicles isolated from bladder cancer cells
as examined by electron microscopy, dynamic light scattering and by
western blotting of common exosome protein markers. The expression of 671
unique human miRNAs by qPCR was analyzed in both exosomes and donor cells
from: 1) cultivated normal urothelial cells (NHU), 2) T24 bladder
carcinoma cell line (non-metastatic) and its metastatic isogenic
derivates FL3 and SLT4 and 3) UMUC3 bladder carcinoma cell line (moderate
metastatic) and its highly metastatic isogenic derivative LUL2. Several
miRNAs were detected in the vesicles yet absent in their parental donor
cell indicating a possible preferential vesicular packaging. miRNAs
miR92a, -106a, -20a, -21, -16, and let-7a/b/d/e were detected among the
top100 ranked miRNAs in all vesicles. Among the top30 enriched exosomal
miRNAs, miR-223 and-383 were detected in all cancer vesicles, and miR-921
in the highly metastatic vesicles (FL3, SLT4, LUL2). The release of
miRNAs (miR-21, -16, and let7b) from FL3 cells into the culture media was
time-dependent and a fraction of these miRNAs were stable to RNaseOne
degradation indicating possible protection inside the vesicles.
Examination of miRNAs in human plasma samples also suggested resistance
towards endogenous RNAse degradation as well as towards repetitive
freeze/thawing. The profiling of miRNA expression by Affymetrix
microarray analysis of crude exosome-containing fractions of human plasma
samples (10 healthy controls and 10 cases of metastatic bladder cancer)
showed significant upregulation in cancer plasma of e.g. miR-92a, -106a,
-23a, -20a, -21, some of which were the same as the miRNAs highly
expressed in the tumor vesicles. The significant increase was confirmed
by q-RT-PCR for miR-92a and -23a and validated on an independent set of
plasma samples (8 healthy controls and 8 metastatic cancer cases). Our
results suggest that specific miRNAs are encapsulated into exosomes in
bladder cancer and that these may be detected in circulation in advanced
stages of bladder cancer.

