Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serotonin: A known neurotransmitter functions as an angiokine to
support cancer progression


Platelet aggregation leads to significant serotonin release from its
major storage and results in increasing of serotonin levels at injury
site and thrombotic tumor environment. Many studies have shown that
platelet activation plays a crucial role in tumor progression; however,
the role of serotonin in angiogenesis and tumor progression has not been
well studied. In this study, we have tested the hypothesis that 5-HT
promotes angiogenesis, and antagonizing 5-HT activity has anti-angiogenic
benefit in controlling tumor growth. Real time PCR and western blot
studies showed that endothelial cell expressed 5-HT receptor 1B (HTR1B)
in higher level than other 5-HT receptors. Endothelial cell proliferation
and tube formation were significantly affected by blocking HTR1B and the
cAMP and IP1 assays have revealed the HTR1B as the inhibitory type of
GPCR. Stimulation of endothelial cell with 5-HT or HTR1B agonist has led
to activation of two individual signaling pathways: ERK and Akt / mTOR.
In further studies, p70S6K was recognized as the merging point of these
signaling. These kinases have been also activated by known angiogenic
factors (VEGF and FGF) but the mechanism of activation was different from
serotonin and it was through their tyrosine kinase receptors. In
contrast, pretreatment of endothelial cell with a selective HTR1B
antagonist have led to blockade of the 5-HT induced kinases activation.
We also demonstrated angiogenic promoting activity of 5-HT with a mouse
Matrigel plug (in vivo angiogenesis model system) and antiangiogenic
potential of antagonists against HTR1B with an ex vivo tumor angiogenesis
model (xenograft CAM assay) and xenograft mice model of human ovary
cancer (SKOV-3). Selective HTR1B antagonist displayed the synergistic
effect (combination index analysis) in blocking tumor-induced new blood
vessel formation when it was applied in combination with Sutent (VEGFR2
antagonist). HTR1B antagonist also showed preclinical efficacy in the
xenograft model of human ovary cancer by reducing over 50% in tumor size
and blood vessel density marker.The results of this study enhanced our
understanding of the serotonin-signaling pathway in human endothelial
cells during angiogenesis. This research also revealed the potential of
5-HT signaling as the new target for antiangiogenic development.

