Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics of Actinomycin D in an
animal model and pediatric patient population


ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters, such as ABCB1 (MDR1/P-gp), are
expressed throughout the body to protect against exogenous toxins. ABC
transporters control removal from the body of anti-cancer drugs such as
doxorubicin and etoposide via biliary or renal excretion. Actinomycin D
(Act D) has been used successfully to treat adult and childhood cancers
for over 30 years. It continues to play a key role in the treatment of
Wilms tumour patients, with 5-year survival rates >80% currently
observed. Although Act D is generally well tolerated, severe hepatic
toxicity has been associated with treatment. It has previously been
demonstrated that Act D exposure is associated with a large degree of
inter-patient variability in children with cancer. As common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ABC transporters have previously been
shown to alter clinical exposure to various anti-cancer agents, we have
carried out translational and clinical studies to investigate the
transport of Act D using well established cell line and animal models.
Growth inhibition (GI) and intracellular accumulation studies, over a
range of Act D concentrations (0-10M), were initially carried out to
determine the role of ABC transporter expression in MDCKII-WT and ABCB1,
ABCC1, ABCC2 and ABCG2 over-expressing cell lines. To assess the
importance of ABCB1 and ABCC2 transporter expression in vivo, Act D
pharmacokinetics and exposure were determined in Abcb1a/1b and Abcc2
knockout mice over 6 hours. In addition, liver, kidney and brain tissue
samples were analysed to assess Act D tissue accumulation. Further
pharmacokinetic sampling has also been carried out from children
receiving Act D as part of their standard treatment, with analysis using
a validated LC/MS method. Blood samples were obtained from all patients
for pharmacogenetic analysis. Following treatment with Act D, a 59-fold
decrease in Act D sensitivity was observed in ABCB1 over-expressing cells
(GI50: 745nM), a 2-fold decrease in ABCC1 (GI50: 25.7nM) and a 3-fold
decrease (GI50: 40.4nM) in ABCC2, as compared to the parental cell line
(GI50: 12.7nM). Intracellular accumulation of Act D was lower in ABCB1
cells compared to the parental cell line, following incubation with Act D
for 6 hours. This effect was abrogated by use of the ABCB1 inhibitor
verapamil. In vivo pharmacokinetic analysis revealed a 64% higher AUC0-6h
in mice with no Abcb1a/1b expression and a 22% lower AUC0-6h in Abcc2-/-
mice compared to WT. Pharmacokinetic analysis of samples obtained from 71
patients indicated a large inter-patient variability in Act D exposure
(AUC0-24h range: 1.7 - 19.4 g/ml.min). Ongoing investigations into
pharmacogenetic variation in ABCB1 and ABCC2 tagSNPs in these patients
provide novel preliminary data relating to links between ABCB1 haplotypes
and Act D exposure in children with cancer.

