Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic expression of pepsinogen I in gastric diseases sequence
and relationship with Helicobacter pylori infection


Serum PG I and PG I /PGII levels seemed to be related to the functional
changes in the stomach, and their use as serological biopsy in gastric
cancer and precancerous diseases has been reported over 20 years. But the
dynamic expression of pepsinogen I in situ of gastric mucosa and the
value to detect gastric cancer and precancerous diseases, relative to the
serum pepsinogen I is still unclear. Helicobacter pylori is a
gram-negative bacterium that colonizes the stomach. More than 50% of the
adult population are infected with H. pylori worldwide. Numerous studies
have reported that healthy volunteers and gastric ulcer patients with H
pylori infection have increased serum pepsinogen I levels which decrease
after H pylori eradication. The evidence whether expression of
pepesinogen I in situ affected by H pylori infection is not available. We
thus conducted this study to investigate the dynamic expression of
pepsinogen I in superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis, gastric cancer
and also H.pylori-associated gastric lesions and evaluate the application
value of pepsinogen I in classifying gastric cancer and its precancerous
diseases, and also the influence of H pylori on pepsinogen I expression.
The expression of pepsinogen I was determined by immunohistochemistry
method in 185 cases with mucosa taken from gastric corpus as well as from
antrum. H.pylori infection was determined by histological examination and
ELISA. Serum pepsinogen I and II were determined by ELISA. We found that
Pepsinogen I was only expressed in the gastric corpus. There were 185
cases from gastric corpus and the positive rate of pepsinogen I
expression in superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis and gastric
cancer decreased significantly in sequence (PSerum PG I and PG I /PGII
levels seemed to be related to the functional changes in the stomach, and
their use as serological biopsy in gastric cancer and precancerous
diseases has been reported over 20 years. But the dynamic expression of
pepsinogen I in situ of gastric mucosa and the value to detect gastric
cancer and precancerous diseases, relative to the serum pepsinogen I is
still unclear. Helicobacter pylori is a gram-negative bacterium that
colonizes the stomach. More than 50% of the adult population are infected
with H. pylori worldwide. Numerous studies have reported that healthy
volunteers and gastric ulcer patients with H pylori infection have
increased serum pepsinogen I levels which decrease after H pylori
eradication. The evidence whether expression of pepesinogen I in situ
affected by H pylori infection is not available. We thus conducted this
study to investigate the dynamic expression of pepsinogen I in
superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis, gastric cancer and also
H.pylori-associated gastric lesions and evaluate the application value of
pepsinogen I in classifying gastric cancer and its precancerous diseases,
and also the influence of H pylori on pepsinogen I expression. The
expression of pepsinogen I was determined by immunohistochemistry method
in 185 cases with mucosa taken from gastric corpus as well as from
antrum. H.pylori infection was determined by histological examination and
ELISA. Serum pepsinogen I and II were determined by ELISA. We found that
Pepsinogen I was only expressed in the gastric corpus. There were 185
cases from gastric corpus and the positive rate of pepsinogen I
expression in superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis and gastric
cancer decreased significantly in sequence (P<0.05;100% vs. 83.3%vs0.0%),
and the over-expression rate also decreased along with the sequence:
normal, superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer
(p0.05) and the ratio of sPGA to sPGC decreased along with the above
groups. (P0.05) and the ratio of sPGA to sPGC decreased along with the
above groups. (P<0.05). In conclusion, expression of PGI in situ has
positive correlation with the degree of malignancy of gastric mucosa. and
it is good biomarker for the diagnosis of gastric cancer and precancerous
diseases. Also, The expression of PGI has positive correlation with
H.pylori infection, and maybe is an important part in the H pylori-
related damage or a good marker for screening H.pylori infection.

