Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug resistance towards vincristine in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia is mediated by the PI3K-Akt pathway


Contemporary acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) therapy involves the use
of powerful anti-mitotic agents such as vincristine (VCR). VCR targets
the microtubule cytoskeleton and disrupts important cellular processes,
leading to cell death. Nonetheless, around 20% of patients relapse and
become resistant to most drugs. At present, mechanisms of resistance
toward VCR remain elusive despite its extensive clinical use, warranting
a more in-depth study with respect to ALL. Five VCR-resistant (VCR-R)
subclones were established by gradually exposing five ALL VCR-sensitive
(VCR-S) cell lines (Jurkat, REH, SEM, RS4;11, 697) to incremental doses
of VCR. Comparing resistant to sensitive cells, the IC50 at 48h increased
3-6 logs. Both VCR-S and VCR-R cell lines were subjected to cell cycle
analysis by flow cytometry using propidium iodide staining. After a 48h
exposure to VCR, cell death for VCR-S cells was the result of a typical
G2/M phase arrest. In contrast, a G2/M phase arrest did not precede the
VCR-induced cell death of VCR-R cells. VCR-R subclones were also observed
to be more resistant to vinblastine, an alternative tubulin binding
agent. In addition, there was increased resistance towards other
chemotherapeutic drugs such as prednisolone, dexamethasone, daunorubicin
and doxorubicin, indicating that resistance to VCR may contribute to
cross-resistance after a prolonged incubation. The PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway is known to play important roles in cancer cell
proliferation and survival. The combination of inhibitors with other
chemotherapeutic agents also has the potential to enhance leukemic cell
death. To further investigate if the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway is
involved in VCR resistance, we screened a panel of twelve kinase
inhibitors (Merck) which selectively targets this pathway. Interestingly,
PDK1/Akt/Flt Dual Pathway Inhibitor KP372-1, was highly potent toward all
cell lines with IC50 less than 100nM. Our results also showed that the
administration of PI3K Inhibitor VIII, Akt Inhibitor IV and PI-103, as
well as pan-selective PI3K inhibitors Wortmannin and LY294002 in
combination with VCR was able to promote increased levels of cell death.
Cell cycle analysis also revealed that the combination treatment elicits
different methods of cell death between VCR-S and VCR-R cells. This is
especially evident upon the co-treatment with pan-selective inhibitors.
Optimising the sensitivity of ALL cells and/or reversing resistance to
VCR promise to maximise the therapeutic value of this important
chemotherapy. This study provides evidence that VCR resistance
potentially contributes to cross-resistance. Our data also shows that the
PI3K-Akt pathway may be involved in VCR resistance in ALL, providing a
valid rationale for further studies and the future application of
inhibitors in clinical settings.

