Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lapatinib could not prevent heregulin-induced HER2-HER3
signalling, and addition of pertuzumab to lapatinib increases drug
sensitivity and inhibition of HER signalling


Lapatinib is an EGFR/HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that has been
approved for clinical use in HER2 positive breast cancer patients who
have progressed on previous Trastuzumab containing regimens. However,
lapatinib monotherapy only delays tumour growth in HER2 positive
xenograft models and has only modest clinical activity in breast cancer
patients. There is a further need to understand its mechanisms of action
and resistance. We aimed to assess the acute effect of lapatinib on HER2
phosphorylation in HER2 positive breast cancer cells since previous work
from our lab showed that inadequate suppression of HER2 phosphorylation
by gefitinib and trastuzumab may lead to acquired drug resistance.
Traditionally, the phosphorylation status of HER proteins is determined
by phosphor-tyrosine western blotting followed by immunoprecipitation.
The limitation of this technique includes false positive due to signals
from co-precipitated proteins of the same size as target, which is even
more prominent with the HER family of protein. With the use of
phosphorylated protein-specific antibody, we found that, contrary to
general belief, lapatinib could not abolish HER2 phosphorylation in HER2
over-expressed breast cancer cell lines under serum-supplemented
condition. It was thought that the growth factors in the serum activate
other HER receptors to maintain HER2 phosphorylation. Indeed, Lapatinib
could reduce phospho-HER2 level in serum-starved breast cancer cell
lines; however, it failed to reverse heregulin-induced HER signalling
activation and downstream MAPK and AKT signalling. The combination of
lapatinib and pertuzumab drastically inhibited ligand-induced HER family
phosphorylation and downstream signalling. HER3 was reported as an
important biomarker for resistance in HER family targeted therapy. This
novel combination could inhibit HER3 phosphorylation and its downstream
AKT pathway more than lapatinib or pertuzumab alone; this finding also
correlated with cancer cell viability, as the combination of lapatinib
and pertuzumab reduced cell viability more than either drug alone. These
results might indicate a new strategy of drug combination to tackle
resistance in HER2 targeted therapy.

