Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perifosine alone and in combination with antimetabolites
interferes with NF-kB pathway activation in colon cancer cell lines


Background: Perifosine, a novel, first-in-class, oral Akt inhibitor, in
combination with the antimetabolite Capecitabine is currently in Phase
III clinical trials for the treatment of refractory advanced colorectal
cancer. We have shown previously that Perifosine in combination with
antimetabolites displayed synergistic cytotoxicity and apoptosis in colon
cancer and other cell lines [1]. Constitutive NF-kB activation is
frequently observed in colorectal cancer and, moreover, is associated
with resistance to chemotherapy [2]. Hence we analysed, wether
downregulation of the NF-kB pathway contributes to Perifosine mechanism
of action and to the observed synergism with antimetabolites in colon
cancer cell lines. Methods: Cellular NF-kB activation in nuclear extracts
was measured by the TransAm NF-kB p65 ELISA (Active Motif, USA)
monitoring binding of NF-kB to its response element. To allow for higher
throughput of NF-kB pathway analysis a monoclonal SW620 colon cancer cell
line ectopically expressing a NF-kB response element driven reporter gene
(Promega, USA) was established. Cellular cytotoxicity and apoptosis
assays as well as western blotting were performed according to standard
procedures. The analysis of drug combinations was conducted by CalcuSyn
software (Biosoft, UK) [3]. Results: Perifosine pretreatment decreased
TNF-induced NF-kB activation in SW620 cells in both independent assay
sytems with IC50 values of about 7-10 M. This effect seems to be
specific, since the results were not mimicked by cytotoxic effects of
Perifosine. Some of the antimetabolites alone upregulated NF-kB activity
in the reporter gene assay. In the presence of these antimetabolites
Perifosine was still capable to downregulate NF-kB activity. Conclusions:
In summary, these results demonstrate that downregulation of the NF-kB
pathway may contribute to the mechanism of action of Perifosine.
Moreover, cotreatment with Perifosine has the potential to interfere with
the development of antimetabolite resistance due to NF-kB activation in
colon cancer. Further experiments addressing Perifosine's mechanism of
action in combination with antimetabolites in gastric cancer cell lines
are ongoing. References [1] Aicher et al. (2010), Perifosine in
combination with antimetabolites induces synergistic effects on
cytotoxicity and apoptosis in human colon, multiple myeloma, breast,
renal, and liver tumor cell lines. AACR-NCI-EORTC International
Conference, Berlin, Germany. [2] Sakamoto and Maeda (2010), Expert. Opin.
Ther. Targets 14, 593-601 [3] Chou (2006), Pharmacological Reviews 58,
621-681

