Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of blood mitochondrial DNA copy number and
risk of renal cell carcinoma


Background: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is vulnerable to mutations, and the
number of copies of mtDNA per cell may increase to compensate for DNA
damage. Recent studies have evaluated blood leukocyte mtDNA copy number
and risk of various types of cancer, including renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). Although alterations in mtDNA copy number have been associated
with cancer risk, the direction of this association has been inconsistent
between studies with prospective and retrospective blood collection. One
case-control study found that low mtDNA copy number was associated with
an increased risk of RCC; however, this association has not been
investigated prospectively. Methods: We conducted a nested case-control
study of RCC risk in relation to mtDNA copy number in the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial. A total of 230 cases and
469 controls matched on age, sex, race, date of blood collection and
specimen type were included. Measurements of mtDNA copy number were
performed in triplicate using a fluorescence-based QPCR assay. Assay
results were highly reproducible, with a coefficient of variation of 5.3%
for replicate QC samples from a single individual and an intraclass
correlation coefficient of 0.69 for duplicate samples collected an
average of 3.6 years apart from 45 controls. To evaluate risk of RCC in
relation to mtDNA copy number, we calculated odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) using unconditional logistic regression models
adjusted for all matching variables as well as history of hypertension,
body mass index, smoking history, and family history of kidney cancer.
Subjects were assigned to quartiles of mtDNA copy number based on the
distribution among controls. Results: Median mtDNA copy number was higher
for cases than for controls (131 vs. 121; P=0.001, Wilcoxon rank-sum
test). Relative to subjects in the lowest quartile of mtDNA copy number,
the ORs for subjects in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th quartiles were 1.0 (95% CI
0.6-1.6), 1.5 (95% 0.9-2.3), and 1.9 (95% CI 1.2-3.1), respectively
(Ptrend = 0.003). The association between mtDNA copy number and RCC was
stronger among men (highest vs. lowest quartile, OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.3-4.4)
than among women (OR 1.3, 95% CI 0.5-3.2; Pint = 0.24). Results were
similar in conditional logistic regression analyses of matched sets, and
when we restricted to subjects with mtDNA from buffy coat specimens and
to cases diagnosed more than two years after sample collection.
Conclusions: Results of this study, to our knowledge the first
prospective investigation of mtDNA copy number and RCC risk, suggest that
high mtDNA copy number is associated with an increased risk of RCC,
particularly among men. Although our findings were inconsistent with
prior case-control evidence, most prospective studies of other cancers
(e.g., lung, pancreas, non-Hodgkin lymphoma) have reported positive
associations. Replication of these findings in other prospective cohorts
is needed.

