Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of CNA signatures in prostate cancer: Narrowing
chromosome regions related with occurrence, prognosis and recurrence
after treatment


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in males and, despite its high
incidence, only limited data are available on which genes or chromosome
regions are specifically involved in its initiation and progression. We
studied 72 prostate tumor samples by array-CGH, using a platform
containing 60.000 oligonucleotides spread over the whole genome (60K
Agilent Technologies). No chromosome alterations (CNA) were detected in
13 samples. The array-CGH profiles of the remaining samples showed losses
at 8p and gains on 8q, often with narrow peaks of amplification, in 50%
of the tumors. Additionally, losses at 6q, 13q and 16q were observed in
25% of the samples. Although these results are in general agreement with
the location of alterations described earlier, the altered chromosome
segments are often several megabases long. Mapping of minimum regions
altered in several tumors, or pronounced copy number changes in smaller
segments, permits a more precise definition of the relevant chromosome
regions that are relevant for tumor development and progression. Current
prognostic variables include prostatic specific antigen (PSA), the
pathologically defined Gleason score (GS) and T-category (of the TNM
staging). There is a great heterogeneity within the intermediate risk
group and further genetic markers are needed to refine disease diagnosis
and prognosis. So, we analyzed the copy number alteration signatures for
the intermediate risk group, Gleason 7. In the comparison between samples
related as GS 6 versus GS 7, we found that losses on 5q21.1 and gains on
7q11.21 are more frequent in GS 7. In other hand, losses on 22q13.33 are
more frequent in GS 7 than in GS 8 and 9, while losses on 6q21 and 18q21
are correlated with GS 8 and 9. Additionally, we have medical follow-up
of only 46 of the 72 samples. Fifteen of these patients had present
recurrence after treatment. We analyzed this group versus the group with
no recurrence. Losses at 2p21, 6q12, 7q36.3 and 16q13 are more frequent
in the group of patients in which there is recurrence of the tumor. This
suggests that these alterations could also be hallmarks for recurrence.
Further studies with array-CGH of prostate tumors samples will ultimately
lead to defining much smaller regions of overlap than at present, which
in turn will indicate which specific individual genes and/or combinations
of genes are the real drivers in prostate cancer or could act as
hallmarks for prognosis and recurrence.

