Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 inhibition reduces bone tumor growth in animal models:A role
for celecoxib treatment in cAMP/protein kinase A-induced tumors


Background: Carney Complex (CNC) is a multiple neoplasia syndrome
characterized by skin lesions, endocrine and other tumors, including
osteochondromyxomas. It is caused by inactivating mutations in the
PRKAR1A gene encoding the regulatory type 1A subunit of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase A (PKA). This subunit is the main suppressor of activity
of catalytic subunit (PRCKACA) of PKA which regulates cell proliferation
and differentiation. Loss of PRKAR1A increases PKA activity and causes
tumors in CNC-affected tissues. Mice with deletion of one prkar1a allele
(prkar1a+/) develop various CNC-like tumors and multiple tail osteotic
lesions. Further deletion of a prkaca allele on the prkar1a+/ background
unexpectedly increases the number and severity of bone lesions and
reduces their age of onset. Recent data indicate that increased PKA
activity stimulates the inflammasome without inflammation in mouse and
human cells. The released prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) further increases cAMP,
which in turn activates PKA and Wnt signaling and promotes the growth of
these bony tumors. These data led us to investigate celecoxib, which is a
selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and therefore of PGE2's
release, in prkar1+//prkac+/ mice. Methods: Eleven out of twenty-two mice
6-12 months old were exposed to celecoxib-containing diet (1,500 mg/kg of
NIH-31 diet). The remaining mice were fed the standard NIH-31 diet. After
a six-week treatment, we looked at the number, the PKA and
phosphodiesterase (PDE) activities, c AMP levels and histology of bony
lesions. Sixteen and seven days before sacrifice, mice were injected with
calcein which labels bone forming surfaces. From calcein fluorescence
observed under microscope, the rate of apposition of cortical bone at
periosteal side was measured. This rate reflects tumor growth rate
because growing tumors remain encapsulated by cortical bone forming at
periosteal side and resorbing at endosteal side. Results: Celecoxib
reduced the rate of tumor growth by two-fold as measured by calcein
labeling (p=0.016). Histological examination revealed decreased
cellularity in the lesions of treated animals due to treatment effect on
the tumor cells. Treatment reduced PKA enzymatic activity in the tail
tumors as measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (4.0 vs 3.0
CMP/ug protein, p=0.07) whereas cAMP levels and total PDE activity did
not change. The expression of all inflammasome-related genes (ets-1,
caspase-1, il1b and cox2) was down-regulated by at least 70% in the bone
tumors from treated animals compared to controls. Conclusion: COX-2
inhibition reduces PKA activity and bone tumor growth in prkar1+//prkac+/
mice. Since local tumor control is clinically meaningful for patients
with cAMP-induced tumors, celecoxib may merit consideration as the first
molecular targeted therapy in this setting.

