Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integral view of copy number alteration and commonly targeted
genes in MDS found a new aspect of correlation and interrelationship with
mutated components of the RNA splicing machinery


Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of chronic
myeloid neoplasms showing a predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). The recent discovery of novel pathway mutations of the RNA
splicing machinery provided a new insight into the pathogenesis of MDS.
These splicing pathway mutations are highly prevalent among all MDS
subtypes, accounting for 45 to 85% of the cases. However, the frequency
of mutations shows substantial variations among disease subtypes, the
genetic/biological basis of which has not been clarified. In addition,
the impact of splicing pathway mutations on prognosis has been poorly
defined. To explore the genetic basis for these differences, we analyzed
genome-wide copy number lesions and the spectrum of gene mutations that
may coexist with splicing pathway mutations in a set of 283 cases with
myelodysplasia, using SNP array karyotyping and target sequencing of
common gene targets in MDS, including TET2 and EZH2. The effects of the
splicing pathway mutations on clinical outcomes were evaluated together
with those of these accompanying genetic lesions. Splicing pathway
mutations were identified in 160 (57%) among 8 components of the splicing
machinery, which occurred in a mutually exclusive manner. SNP array
karyotyping revealed 138 cases (49%) showing copy number alterations, in
which 7q- and/or 5q- were the most frequent abnormalities. Interestingly,
the splicing pathway mutations were found at a significantly lower
frequency among patients with 7q- and/or 5q- (pMyelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS) are a heterogeneous group of chronic myeloid neoplasms showing a
predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The recent discovery of
novel pathway mutations of the RNA splicing machinery provided a new
insight into the pathogenesis of MDS. These splicing pathway mutations
are highly prevalent among all MDS subtypes, accounting for 45 to 85% of
the cases. However, the frequency of mutations shows substantial
variations among disease subtypes, the genetic/biological basis of which
has not been clarified. In addition, the impact of splicing pathway
mutations on prognosis has been poorly defined. To explore the genetic
basis for these differences, we analyzed genome-wide copy number lesions
and the spectrum of gene mutations that may coexist with splicing pathway
mutations in a set of 283 cases with myelodysplasia, using SNP array
karyotyping and target sequencing of common gene targets in MDS,
including TET2 and EZH2. The effects of the splicing pathway mutations on
clinical outcomes were evaluated together with those of these
accompanying genetic lesions. Splicing pathway mutations were identified
in 160 (57%) among 8 components of the splicing machinery, which occurred
in a mutually exclusive manner. SNP array karyotyping revealed 138 cases
(49%) showing copy number alterations, in which 7q- and/or 5q- were the
most frequent abnormalities. Interestingly, the splicing pathway
mutations were found at a significantly lower frequency among patients
with 7q- and/or 5q- (p<0.0001), where multivariate analysis revealed that
7q- and/or 5q- were independently and significantly associated with the
lower frequency of spliceosome mutation (p = 0.001 for 7q- and p =
0.029). 7q- and/or 5q- with complex karyotypes were associated with a
significantly poor prognosis (p = 0.025, log-rank test), the presence of
the splicing pathway mutations had no impact on prognosis. Interestingly,
however, the presence of 7q- and/or 5q- do not seem to be a risk of poor
prognosis among those patients carrying a splicing pathway mutation,
suggesting that the presence of a splicing pathway mutation could have a
beneficial effect on the prognosis of patients with 7q- and/or 5q-. In
total, 172mutations were identified among 117 samples, including 41 TET2
(25%), 32 RUNX1 (20%), 26 ASXL1 (16%), 24 RAS (15%), 22 TP53 (14%), 17
IDH1/2 (10%), 10 CBL (6%) and 10 EZH2 (6%) mutations. No specific
association between splicing pathway mutations and other coexisting
mutations, except that the SRSF2 mutations were significantly associated
with lower numbers of accompanying gene mutations compared with that of
the U2AF35 mutations (N=14) (OR 6.2 95%CI 1.1-35), which may be of
potential interest in the light of the previous report that SRSF2 was
involved in the regulation of DNA stability and that depletion of SRSF2
can induce genomic stability.

