Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting FGFR4 in colorectal cancer cells


Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFRs) are involved
in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and survival as
well as tumor development and therefore constitute prominent targets for
cancer therapy. Over-expression of FGFR4 has been described in various
cancer types and was also related to tumor aggressiveness. Reports
concerning the role of FGFR4 in colorectal cancer (CRC) are still under
dispute. In our study we found FGFR4 expression to be significantly
up-regulated in human CRC tissue compared to normal mucosa. CRC cell line
models over-expressing FGFR4 were created by transfecting SW480, HCT116
and HT29 colon carcinoma cells with a FGFR4 expression vector. This
resulted in an increase of cell proliferation and colony formation under
standard tissue culture conditions and colony outgrowth in soft agar was
stimulated. In xenografted SCID mice tumor growth was significantly
increased by FGFR4 over-expression. siRNA mediated knock down of FGFR4 in
the high FGFR4 expressing cell lines HCT116 and HT29 resulted in
decreased cell proliferation, viability and colony outgrowth in
2-dimensional growth assays. Additionally a dominant negative FGFR4
adenoviral construct inhibited 3-dimensional anchorage independent growth
and suppressed tumor growth in vivo almost completely. Ongoing
experiments analyze the effects of a soluble FGFR4 variant on
2-dimensional and 3-dimensional growth. FGFR4 up-regulation resulted in
activation of survival pathways via FRS2 and PI3K leading to
phosphorylation of GSK3 and S6. Signaling effects by blockage of FGFR4
dependent signaling via siRNA and the dominant negative adenoviral
construct are currently being investigated. Based on our results we
identified the FGFR4 as an important oncogene in the carcinogenesis which
is involved in the tumor growth regulation of CRC in vitro and in vivo.
Consequently FGFR4 should be regarded as a new therapeutic target in CRC.

