Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUMOylation of EAPII/TTRAP/TDP2 modulates its function


ETS1 Associated Protein II (EAPII, also called TTRAP, TDP2) was
originally identified by two-hybrid screening as a novel protein that
interacts with both ETS1 and the cytoplasmic domain of CD40 receptor.
EAPII may represent a novel component in signal transduction processes
that regulates eukaryotic gene expression in response to extracellular
signals. In support of this hypothesis, we have demonstrated that EAPII
negatively modulates ETS1 transcriptional activity and attenuates
synergistic transactivation by ETS1 and NFB. However, the mechanism by
which EAPII transduces signals is elusive. In this report, we provide the
evidence of EAPII protein sumoylation in vivo. Sumoylation is an
important posttranslational modification that involves conjugation of the
small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) to lysine residues of the targeting
proteins. EAPII is sumoylated by both SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3. Sumoylation
analysis of cell fractions revealed that sumoylation by SUMO-2/3 mainly
occurs in the nucleus while that by SUMO-1 in cytoplasm. Since EAPII
protein possesses no SUMO consensus motif (KxE), we constructed a series
of EAPII truncated mutations to determine the potential sumoylation
site(s). Our data indicated that the noconsensus sumoylation site(s) may
reside between amino acid residues 68 and 279. Interestingly, C-terminal
deletion (Del 279-362) significantly increases the sumoylation,
suggesting that the C-terminus might contain an inhibitory domain for
EAPII sumoylation. It has been hypothesized that sumoylation may mediate
extracellular signals in response to stresses, hypoxia and cytokines.
Whether EAPII sumoylation interferes with its repressive activity on ETS1
transcription remains to be elucidated, and determination of the
signaling pathways that may modulate EAPII sumoylation will provide a
better understanding of the modulation of ETS1 functions in specific
pathphysiological microenvironments.

