Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 functions as an oncogene in the
progression of triple negative breast cancer


Introduction: L-glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system and activates both ionotropic and metabotropic
glutamate receptors. The metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are a
family of G protein-coupled receptors. mGluR1 (gene: GRM1) is included in
Group I of these receptors and have been shown to activate
phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. Aberrant
extracellular glutamate signaling has been implicated in carcinogenesis;
specifically, the aberrant expression of mGluR1 in melanocytes plays a
critical role in the development of melanoma. Previously in our
laboratory, we detected mGRM1 expression in triple negative breast cancer
cells. We therefore evaluated its role in regulating the phenotype of
these cells and found that mGluR1 expression is oncogenic in triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) progression. Methods: We determined the
role of mGluR1 in TNBC progression using the MCF-10 triple negative
series of cell lines, which represent the progression from normal mammary
epithelium (MCF10A) to atypical hyperplasia (MCF10AT1) to ductal
carcinoma in situ (MCF10.DCIS.com), and finally to malignant
(MCF10.CA1D). GRM1 was overexpressed in MCF10A and MCF10AT1 and silenced
MCF10.DCIS.com and MCF10.CA1D. We then determined whether mGRM1 has a
transforming role through in vitro studies of proliferation, invasion,
migration and anchorage-independent growth. We also inhibited mGluR1
signaling using two pharmacologic inhibitors: Riluzole, which is
FDA-approved for amyotropic lateral sclerosis, and BAY36-7620, which is a
specific noncompetitive inhibitor of mGluR1. Effects were evaluated on
proliferation and anchorage independent growth. Finally, MCF10AT1 cells
were transduced with a lentiviral construct driving mGluR1 expression and
injected into athymic nude mice. The growth and histology of the
resultant xenografts were compared with control LacZ transduced cells.
Results: mGluR1 overexpression increased proliferation,
anchorage-independent growth, and invasiveness in MCF10AT1 and not in
MCF10A cells, while knockdown of mGluR1 expression resulted in a decrease
in proliferation, anchorage independent growth and invasiveness in
MCF10.CA1D cells. Pharmacologic inhibition of mGluR1 signaling in
MCF10.CA1D cells resulted in a decrease in proliferation and anchorage
independent growth. Transduction of MCF10AT1 cells with GRM1 resulted in
transformation to carcinoma in 10/11 of the resultant xenografts compared
to 2/9 for wild type and 3/11 for LacZ controls. Conclusions: mGluR1
expression and activity increases cell proliferation, anchorage
independent growth, and invasion in vitro. In vivo, mGluR1 drives
progression of MCF10AT1 cells from hyperplastic lesions to frank
carcinoma. We therefore conclude that mGRM1 plays a role of an oncogene
in the progression of TNBC and represents a therapeutic target.

