Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predict prostate cancer aggressiveness quantitatively using a
nanoparticle test


BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignancy and the
second leading cause of cancer death in American men. Using digital
rectal examination combined with PSA test, most prostate cancer cases are
now detected at early stage. However, due to the lack of accurate tests
to distinguish aggressive cancer from indolent tumor, prostate cancer is
often over-treated. Over-diagnosis and treatment of low risk prostate
cancer has serious and long-lasting side effect: as high as 70% of the
patients who receive radical prostatectomy treatment will suffer a loss
of sexual potency that cannot be remedied by drugs such as sildenafil
citrate. Currently the most relevant prognostic factor to predict a
patient's risk of death due to PCa is the Gleason score of the biopsied
tissue samples. However, pathological analysis is subjective, and the
Gleason score is only a qualitative estimate of the cancer malignancy.
METHOD: We report for the first time a gold nanoparticle-serum protein
IgG adsorption test that not only can distinguish prostate cancer from
normal and benign conditions, but also is capable of predicting the
aggressiveness of prostate cancer quantitatively. To conduct the test, a
prostate tissue lysate sample is spiked into a human IgG solution and the
spiked sample is mixed with a citrate-protected gold nanoparticle
solution. IgG is known to adsorb to citrate-protected gold nanoparticles
to form a protein corona on the nanoparticle surface. From our study, we
discovered that certain tumor-specific molecules can interact with the
serum IgG and change the adsorption behavior of IgG to the gold
nanoparticles. This change is reflected in the nanoparticle size of the
assay solution that is detected by a dynamic light scattering technique.
RESULTS: An inverse, quantitative correlation of the average nanoparticle
size of the assay solution with tumor status and histological diagnostic
grading was observed from the nanoparticle test. IgG solutions spiked
with prostate tumor tissue exhibit significantly smaller nanoparticle
size than the solutions spiked with normal and benign tissues. The higher
grade the tumor is, the smaller the nanoparticle size is. Based on the
assay results and various control experiments, a mechanism was proposed
to explain the observed differences: IgG protein, either as a monomer or
oligomer, causes gold nanoparticle cluster formation when the proteins
are adsorbed to the nanoparticles. When tumor tissue lysates are spiked
into the IgG solution, the specific binding of tumor-specific molecules
with IgG inhibits the crosslinking of the gold nanoparticles, leading to
a decreased average particle size of the assay solution. CONCLUSION: The
nanoparticle test reported here provides a quantitative measure of the
prostate cancer aggressiveness. This test could become a more accurate
diagnostic/prognostic tool to assess the prostate tumor aggressiveness
than the current diagnostic practices.

