Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora A and BRCA1 cooperate to control cytokinesis failure
leading to aneuploidy in ovarian cystadenoma cells


Aneuploidy, defined by a chromosome number that is not a multiple of the
haploid number, is a hallmark of cancer. In order to study the mechanism
of aneuploidy development in ovarian cancer, we used cell strains derived
from benign ovarian cystadenomas, the benign counterparts of the type of
ovarian cancer that develops in BRCA1 mutation carriers. The cells were
transfected with SV40 Large T Antigen, conferring the equivalent of a p53
mutation, which is present in nearly all cancers that develop in BRCA1
mutation carriers. These cells are not immortal and invariably reach
crisis after up to 50 population doublings in vitro. We previously showed
that this crisis event, which is not triggered by telomere attrition, is
associated with a cell cycle arrest at the M phase, and that decreased
BRCA1 expression allows cells to overcome this crisis event, resulting in
tetraploidy and subsequent aneuploidy. The finding that cells recovering
from crisis undergo sudden changes in their ploidy status strongly
suggests that such recovery is characterized by initiation of a new cell
cycle without first completing cytokinesis. We used time-lapse
photography to test this hypothesis. Such studies revealed that a
significant proportion of cells treated with siRNA against BRCA1
recovered from a cell cycle arrest during the mitotic phase without
undergoing cytokinesis, resulting in bi-nucleation. We further
hypothesized that Aurora A plays a role in regulating this process, in
part, by acting as an upstream regulator of BRCA1 expression. Here we
show that Aurora A protein and kinase activity are both up-regulated
while levels of BRCA1 expression are down-regulated in cells as they age
in culture. Levels of BRCA1 expression increased upon knockdown of Aurora
A kinase, further suggesting an inverse relationship between expression
levels of these proteins. Inhibition of Aurora A prevented recovery from
mitotic arrest as evidenced by an increase in BubR1 and Mad2, two
components of the mitotic checkpoint complex and a decrease in Cdc27, a
component of the anaphase promoting complex. Genomic DNA profiles of
cells treated with siRNA against Aurora A showed decreased tetraploidy
and microscopic examination showed decreased multinucleation. Time-lapse
photography of cells approaching crisis, treated with siRNA against
Aurora A showed that the M phase arrest was prolonged compared to
controls and invariably led to apoptosis in contrast to cells treated
with siRNA against BRCA1. Down regulation of Aurora A in a younger cells,
not approaching crisis, did not induce a mitotic arrest. We conclude that
decreased BRCA1 expression in cells approaching crisis leads to recovery
from a mitotic arrest without completion of cytokinesis, leading to
tetraploidy and subsequent aneuploidy. Although decreased Aurora A
expression does not induce a mitotic arrest, it prevents recovery from
such arrest, resulting in cell death from apoptosis.

