Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of Slc5a8 in mice promotes metabolic syndrome, colonic
inflammation, and colon cancer: A phenomenon dependent on dietary fiber
content


SLC5A8 is a candidate tumor suppressor that is silenced in colon cancer.
It is a transporter that mediates concentrative entry of short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs: acetate, propionate, and butyrate) into colon cells.
SCFAs are produced at high concentrations in colon by bacterial
fermentation of dietary fiber (acetate, 60 mM; propionate, 20 mM;
butyrate, 10 mM). Among SCFAs, propionate and butyrate are inhibitors of
histone deacetylases (HDACs). These HDAC inhibitors induce
differentiation in normal colon cells but cause apoptosis in colon cancer
cells. They also suppress colonic inflammation. We postulate that the
transporter is silenced in colon cancer to prevent the entry of these
HDAC inhibitors into tumor cells. We have demonstrated the
tumor-suppressive function of SLC5A8 in vitro in colon cancer cells and
hence hypothesized that deletion of Slc5a8 in mice would promote
inflammation and cancer in colon. Surprisingly however, there was no
difference between wild type (WT) mice and Slc5a8-null (KO) mice in
progression of colonic inflammation and colon cancer in experimental
model systems when mice were fed optimal dietary fiber. SLC5A8 transports
butyrate and propionate with a Michaelis constant of 0.05 mM; under in
vivo conditions where butyrate and propionate are present at >10 mM in
colon, the transporter plays only a minor role in the entry of these
compounds into colon cells. At high concentrations, they diffuse into
cells bypassing the transporter. As such we postulated that Slc5a8-null
mice would have enhanced colonic inflammation and colon cancer only under
low-fiber dietary conditions where butyrate/propionate concentrations in
colon are low enough that the transporter is obligatory for their entry
into colon cells. To test this hypothesis, we maintained WT and KO mice
with a low-fiber diet starting at 4-weeks of age. We found that, under
these conditions, the KO mice gained more weight than WT mice, became
obese with increased abdominal fat, and exhibited hyperglycemia. When
dextran sulfate sodium was administered in drinking water (2% for 1
week), KO mice died from severe colonic inflammation whereas WT mice were
able to withstand the treatment and did not die. We then examined the
incidence of colon cancer in these mice by crossing them with ApcMin/+
mouse. Under optimal dietary fiber conditions, there was no difference
between Slc5a8+/+/ApcMin/+ mice and Slc5a8-/-/ApcMin/+ mice in the
incidence of colon cancer. But, under low-fiber dietary conditions, the
incidence of colon cancer was much higher in Slc5a8-/-/ApcMin/+ mice than
in Slc5a8+/+/ApcMin/+ mice. These studies show that Slc5a8 indeed
functions as a tumor suppressor in colon in vivo, but only if dietary
fiber content is low. In addition, under these dietary conditions, Slc5a8
also protects against metabolic syndrome and colonic inflammation.

