Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow microenvironment mediated redox adaptation confers
drug resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Clinical and laboratory studies in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) suggest that the bone marrow microenvironment protects blast cells,
thus influencing disease relapse. This study was designed to identify the
mechanisms by which bone marrow stromal cells could mediate
chemoresistance in ALL cells. An in vitro organotypic extracellular
matrix-bone marrow stromal cells (ECM-BMSC) culture system, that
sustained primary cells without the addition of exogenous factors, was
created. ECM-BMSC derived conditioned medium (CM) conferred
broad-spectrum chemoprotection to ALL and other cancer cells. Multi drug
resistant sub-clones (MDRS), derived by exposing ALL cells in CM to
Mitoxantrone, retained chemoresistance even beyond 50 passages in normal
medium. Chemoprotective effect was retained in the Proteinase K, RNase
and heat resistant, Clinical and laboratory studies in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) suggest that the bone marrow
microenvironment protects blast cells, thus influencing disease relapse.
This study was designed to identify the mechanisms by which bone marrow
stromal cells could mediate chemoresistance in ALL cells. An in vitro
organotypic extracellular matrix-bone marrow stromal cells (ECM-BMSC)
culture system, that sustained primary cells without the addition of
exogenous factors, was created. ECM-BMSC derived conditioned medium (CM)
conferred broad-spectrum chemoprotection to ALL and other cancer cells.
Multi drug resistant sub-clones (MDRS), derived by exposing ALL cells in
CM to Mitoxantrone, retained chemoresistance even beyond 50 passages in
normal medium. Chemoprotective effect was retained in the Proteinase K,
RNase and heat resistant, < 3kDa fraction of CM; transmission electron
microscopy demonstrated the presence of stromal cell derived exosomes in
this fraction. Confocal microscopy confirmed the uptake of
ultra-centrifuged fluorescently labelled (PKH 67) stromal exosomes by ALL
cells which then developed a resistant phenotype. Stromal derived
exosomes and MDRS were enriched in miRNA expression (TaqMan Human miRNA
array V3), compared to parent cells, with 92% concordance. Ingenuity
pathway-based analysis of the unique miRNA pattern predicted
dysregulation of mitochondrial function and oxidative phosphorylation.
SILAC based phosphoproteomics and U133A V2 gene expression array analysis
revealed aberrant PI3K/AKT and oxidative phosphorylation activity. A
kinase inhibitor screen showed that PI3K/AKT inhibitors were most potent
in reversing CM mediated chemoresistance. Exposure to CM initially (24
hours), pAKT activity and ROS level decreased to lower than the basal
level, with upregulation of CDKN1B and MCL-1, and a decreased
mitochondrial membrane potential. shRNA knockdown of CDKN1B restored
normal growth rate but not chemosensitivity. MDRS that were resistant to
exogenous H2O2 induced apoptosis, regained sensitivity after MCL-1
knockdown. Upregulation of ROS and downregulation of MCL-1 using PEITC
lead to cell death in chemo sensitive and resistant cells. Our study
identifies that the microenvironment produces soluble factors that
induces a redox adaptation in ALL cells leading to chemoresistance. This
can be overcome by the simultaneous inhibition of the antioxidant system
(to increase ROS) and suppressing antiapoptic proteins (to eliminate the
mitochondrial membrane safeguard). Tumour protection by the
microenvironment is likely to be common to other cancers. Future
therapeutic strategies need to consider targeting the host-tumor
interactions in adjunct to conventional chemotherapy.

