Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: D-alpha-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate (TPGS) induces
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest selectively in breast cancer cells by
targeting aberrantly activated pathways engaging survivin signaling


D-alpha-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate (TPGS) is a
water-soluble derivative of natural vitamin E, formed by the
esterification of vitamin E succinate with polyethylene glycol (PEG).
TPGS is finding applications in nanoparticle formulations where it acts
as an emulsifier and serves as a promising vehicle for the delivery of
anticancer drugs with poor water solubility, bioavailability and cellular
uptake. Furthermore, TPGS inhibited the growth of human prostate and lung
carcinoma cells both in vitro and in vivo by promoting apoptosis. The
objectives of the present study were to: a) determine if there are
differences between normal and cancer cells in response to TPGS treatment
and b) to elucidate the pathways leading to apoptosis. For this purpose
we used multiple breast cancer cell lines as well as normal immortalized
breast cells, in order to assess the ability of TPGS to induce cell
death. In addition, we thoroughly investigated the mechanism of cell
death induction in MDA-MB-231 cells and in MCF-7 cells. The results of
our study clearly show that TPGS can effectively decrease cancer cell
number by triggering apoptotic signaling pathways as well as by inducing
G1-phase cell cycle arrest. In marked contrast, the cell number of normal
immortalized MCF-10A and MCF-12F cell lines was not significantly
affected by TPGS treatment. The decreased levels of full length PARP, in
the presence and absence of the 89 kDa product, suggests that TPGS
triggered both caspase -dependent and -independent pathways of programmed
cell death, depending on the tissue context. Furthermore, we observed a
decrease in the Bcl-2/Bax ratio and release of AIF and Endo G from the
mitochondria to the cytoplasm in MCF-7 cells suggesting that these
effectors are involved in the induction of caspase-independent apoptosis.
The selective chemotherapeutic effects of TPGS may possibly be attributed
to down regulation of the anti-apoptotic proteins Survivin and Bcl-2 that
are overexpressed in most cancer cells. The inhibition of cell
proliferation at G1 observed in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells may also
relate to the two-fold decrease in Survivin mRNA and subsequent
elimination of Survivin protein levels. In conclusion, our results show
clearly that TPGS is selectively cytotoxic to cancer cells and suggest
that this vitamin E derivative, in combination with other drugs, may be
useful in the treatment of tumors that are resistant to
caspase-activating therapeutic agents. The current use of TPGS as a
vehicle for the delivery of anticancer drugs, and the insights gained
from this study regarding its mode of apoptotic action provides
unsurpassed opportunities for the combination cancer chemotherapy
approach.

