Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDE5 inhibitors suppress proliferation and augment the epithelial
barrier by activating PKG2 in the colon


Increasing cGMP levels has emerged as a potentially important suppressor
of tumorigenesis in the colon, but the downstream signaling is poorly
defined and a viable therapeutic strategy remains to be established. The
present study has tested whether type 2 cGMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKG2) mediates the homeostatic effects of cGMP in the colon. In
addition, the feasibility of using phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitors
therapeutically to increase cGMP levels in the colon mucosa has been
examined. PKG2 is a central effector of cGMP in enterocytes, and
consistent with a growth-inhibitory and differentiation-promoting role,
knockout animals showed crypt hyperplasia and reduced mature goblet cells
in the colonic mucosa. This phenotype is similar to guanylyl-cyclase C
(GCC) knockout animals, which have also been reported to exhibit
increased susceptibility to colon tumorigenesis. The possibility that
PKG2 signaling might be activated pharmacologically, was examined using
PDE5 inhibitors to regulate colonic proliferation and differentiation.
These experiments demonstrated that intraperitoneal administration of
clinically relevant PDE5 inhibitors provoked a rapid increase cGMP levels
in the colon mucosa of mice. Moreover, prolonged treatment with PDE5
inhibitors led to reduced proliferation in the colonic crypts and a
dramatic increase in mature goblet cells. Consistent with the importance
of PKG2 in this process, the PDE5 inhibitors did not inhibit
proliferation or increase goblet cell numbers in PKG2 knockout animals.
The increase in goblet cell density in PDE5 inhibitor-treated animals was
striking (50%, 85%, and 44% relative to controls in the ascending,
transverse and descending colon respectively). Reduced basal epithelial
apoptosis measured in PDE5 inhibitor treated animals suggested the the
increased goblet cells could have a barrier-protective effect. To test
this possibility further, the effect of PDE5 inhibitor treatment on
epithelial damage by dextran sulfate sodium was measured. These studies
demonstrated a significant attenuation of disease activity by PDE5
inhibitor treatment in this colitis model. In summary, our results
demonstrate a central role for PKG2 in the regulation of proliferation
and differentiation in the colon mucosa. In addition, this pathway can be
exploited using PDE5 inhibitors, suggesting that these agents could be
part of a novel therapeutic strategy for colon cancer prevention.

