Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in DNA methylation pattern of primary bladder tumours
correlate with their metastatic potential


Introduction: The prognosis for patients with metastatic bladder cancer
is poor with a 5-year survival rate of only 6%. Early prediction of the
metastatic risk in primary tumours can lead to improvements in prognosis
and therapy. Currently, there are no parameters available that enable an
individual risk assessment for patients with metastatic bladder cancer.
Therefore, identification of new reliable prognostic markers for early
prediction of tumour spread is required. The aim of this project is to
determine whether changes in DNA methylation correlate with the
metastasis risk and to identify a specific DNA methylation pattern that
provides a reliable tool for prognosis assessment. Materials & methods:
Genomic DNA was isolated from 23 invasive bladder tumour tissues with and
without lymph node metastases. For enrichment of methylated fragments
genomic DNA was incubated with 5-Methylcytosin antibody. Input and IP
were labelled with Cy3 and Cy5. Labelled DNA was hybridizes onto CpG
island microarrays. Cluster analysis enabled selection of differentially
methylated candidate genes. The actual methylation state was confirmed by
cleavage of genomic DNA with methylation dependent restriction enzyme
(McrBc) followed by quantitative PCR. Results: In total, 201 promoter CpG
islands show highly significant differences in DNA methylation between
metastasised and non-metastasised primary bladder tumours (pIntroduction:
The prognosis for patients with metastatic bladder cancer is poor with a
5-year survival rate of only 6%. Early prediction of the metastatic risk
in primary tumours can lead to improvements in prognosis and therapy.
Currently, there are no parameters available that enable an individual
risk assessment for patients with metastatic bladder cancer. Therefore,
identification of new reliable prognostic markers for early prediction of
tumour spread is required. The aim of this project is to determine
whether changes in DNA methylation correlate with the metastasis risk and
to identify a specific DNA methylation pattern that provides a reliable
tool for prognosis assessment. Materials & methods: Genomic DNA was
isolated from 23 invasive bladder tumour tissues with and without lymph
node metastases. For enrichment of methylated fragments genomic DNA was
incubated with 5-Methylcytosin antibody. Input and IP were labelled with
Cy3 and Cy5. Labelled DNA was hybridizes onto CpG island microarrays.
Cluster analysis enabled selection of differentially methylated candidate
genes. The actual methylation state was confirmed by cleavage of genomic
DNA with methylation dependent restriction enzyme (McrBc) followed by
quantitative PCR. Results: In total, 201 promoter CpG islands show highly
significant differences in DNA methylation between metastasised and
non-metastasised primary bladder tumours (p<0,01). In metastasised
tumours 74 CpG islands are hypermethylated and 127 CpG islands are
hypomethylated. Data base research for identification of candidate genes
resulted in 61 hypermethylated and 58 hypomethylated genes that can
clearly assigned to the identified promoter associated CpG islands.
Validation of methylation level of candidate gene RASSF1 resulted in
higher methylation in metastatic tumours (mean methylation: 38%) than in
non-metastatic tumours (mean methylation: 26%). RASSF1 methylation shows
strong correlation to T stage (r=0,65). Methylation of candidate gene
KISS1R shows significant differences between patient groups (p=0,001).
Mean methylation in metastatic tumours is 48% and in non-metastatic
tumours 22%. Conclusion: Primary bladder tumours show significant
differences in their DNA methylation pattern in correlation to their
metastatic potential. KISS1R methylation is strongly associated with the
metastatic risk of primary tumours. Further analysis will demonstrate the
correlation between changes in DNA methyaltion and expression of
corresponding genes. The impact of DNA methylation on tumour behaviour
shall be determined in functional analysis.

