Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing a patient-derived heterotransplant mouse model of
head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSCC)


There are approximately 47,000 new cases of head and neck cancer
diagnosed in the United States each year. The survival rate has not
improved significantly in the past 30 years. The development of new
therapies for HNSCC and the understanding of its biology both depend upon
clinically relevant animal models. There are several existing animal
models for HNSCC that include chemically-induced cancer models, syngeneic
models using animal cancer cells, transgenic mice, and xenograft models
using cultured human HNSCC cell lines injected into immunocompromised
mice, either subcutaneously or orthotopically. An increasingly promising
xenograft model, the heterotransplant model, is developed by surgically
implanting tumor tissue directly from a patient into an immunocompromised
mouse. The resulting tumor is serially passaged in vivo and never
cultured on plastic. We have transplanted 20 HNSCC primary tumors from
untreated patients directly into mice that included 17 tongue tumors, one
maxillary gingival tumor, and two from the floor of the mouth. Although
several tumors grew initially in mice, only 2 of 20 (10%) established
tumors that could be serially passaged and used for therapeutic and
mechanistic studies. One cell line has been established from a tongue
heterotransplant (HOSC1). The two established heterotransplants
maintained the histological appearance of the original tumors. To test
the biological and molecular signaling response of HNSCC to targeted
therapy, we utilized one heterotransplant that was passaged into 40 mice.
Both the Src inhibitor dasatinib and the JAK inhibitor INCB16562 modestly
inhibited tumor growth; the combination was significantly more effective
than the single agents. Likewise, the tumors treated with the combination
had significantly more apoptosis and less proliferation than control
tumors. Consistent with our published in vitro results, Src inhibition
did not result in STAT3 inhibition, but JAK inhibition abrogated STAT3
activation. Src was inhibited in vivo by dasatinib. Our results
demonstrate that the heterotransplant model of HNSCC has promise as an in
vivo model to test the efficacy of anti-cancer drugs. The low take rate
is problematic but will be addressed in the future by intra-operative
biopsies and larger tumor specimens.

