Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the phosphorylation of eIF4 molecules sensitizes
EGFR expressing breast cancers to EGFR inhibitors


Triple-negative breast cancers have a poor prognosis and lack an
effective targeted therapeutic. Even though 50% of triple-negative breast
cancers express epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), they are
resistant to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Although the
activation of several tyrosine kinases including Met, c-Src, and IGF-IR
have been found to correlate with EGFR TKI resistance, the mechanism of
this de novo resistance is still being elucidated. The BT20 breast cancer
cell line has amplified EGFR expression yet is resistant to EGFR TKIs.
Phospho-proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry was used to identify
proteins that remain phosphorylated after gefitinib treatment. These
proteins included Raptor, PDK1, and GSK3, implicating the Akt and mTOR
pathways in EGFR TKI resistance. Despite activation of these pathways,
BT20 cells were resistance to the mTOR antagonist temsirolimus. However,
temsirolimus was able to sensitize BT20 cells to gefitinib which led to a
synergistic decrease in cell survival. Similar results have been observed
by others using different inhibitors; however, the mechanism of this
synergistic decrease in cell survival has not been identified. These data
suggest that EGFR and mTOR activation regulate cell survival through
parallel signaling pathways and that both pathways need to be inhibited
to abrogate growth and survival. This is supported by the observation
that the PI3Kinase/Akt signaling pathway was unaffected by gefitinib or
temsirolimus treatment alone. In addition, the combination of EGFR and
mTOR inhibitors had no effect on PI3Kinase/Akt or Ras/MAPK signaling,
despite the synergistic decrease in cell survival. However, further
immunoblotting showed a pronounced inhibition in activation of the eIF4
family in the mTOR translational control pathway with dual treatment of
gefitinib and temsirolimus, an abrogation not significantly observed with
either treatment alone. These results suggest that inhibiting mTOR
signaling alone is insufficient to modulate the translational control
pathway in BT20 cells and that EGFR signals independent of mTOR to
activate this pathway. These data demonstrate that phosphorylation and
subsequent regulation of these translational control molecules may be
critical to the survival of BT20 cells. Indeed, the combination of
gefitinib and temsirolimus stimulated apoptosis in BT20 cells, supporting
the idea that inhibiting the mTOR pathway will sensitize breast cancers
expressing EGFR to gefitinib inhibition. In summary, these data provide
strong evidence for the presence of a de novo EGFR TKI resistance pathway
in breast cancers that occurs through the activation of the mTOR pathway
and therapy for EGFR positive breast cancers could be improved with dual
treatment of EGFR TKI and an mTOR antagonist.

