Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling of breast cancer associated fibroblasts
and their adjacent counterparts


Abstract Breast cancer has a major impact on the health of women
worldwide including Saudi Arabia, where it is considered the most
frequently diagnosed cancer (22% of all female cancers) and the leading
cause of cancer deaths among women. Breast carcinomas are complex
neoplasms that develop by the accumulation of different mutations in the
epithelial cells. However, increasing evidence suggests that changes in
the cellular microenvironment contribute to tumorgenesis through
paracrine effects. Fibroblasts, the predominant cells of the stromal
breast carcinomas, play an important role in the development and spread
of cancer cells. However, the nature and the mediators of the crosstalk
between cancer cells and their stromal fibroblasts are still not well
defined. In this study we performed genome wide expression analysis on 5
Carcinoma-Associated Fibroblasts (CAFs) and their corresponding Tumor
Counterpart Fibroblasts (TCFs) (from the same breast cancer patients) as
compared to 3 normal breast fibroblasts (NBFs) from breast cancer free
patients admitted for plastic surgery. To this end, Affymetix's latest
Gene Chip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array, which has more than 54,000
probe sets, was used. A threshold of 2 fold was considered as significant
difference in the analysis of the microarray data. We performed 3
different comparisons; CAFs with TCFs, CAFs with NBFs and TCFs with NBFs.
The analysis of the microarray data showed that the number of genes that
were differentially expressed between CAFs and NBFs reached 101, and only
42 genes were differentially expressed between CAFs and TCFs.
Interestingly, 77 genes were found to be differentially expressed between
TCFs and NBFs. This data was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. Next, we
used Ray Bio Human cytokine Antibody Array 5 Map, which has 80 probed
cytokines, and showed differential expression profile of different
cytokines secreted by TCF, CAF and NBF cells, confirming that TCFs are
different than CAFs and NBFs indicating that TCFs are indeed active
stromal fibroblasts. Moreover, we examined the expression level of -SMA,
TGF- and SDF-1 proteins (3 well known markers of active fibroblasts) and
found their expression higher in TCFs than NBFs. In addition, we
performed ELISA against SDF-1, VEGFA and IL-6 (3 cytokines known to
promote breast carcinogenesis) and found their levels higher in TCFs than
in NBFs conditioned media. Therefore, despite the fact that TCFs exist in
histologically normal breast tissues, they are not physiologically
normal, but rather present some features of active fibroblasts and
thereby they may participate in breast cancer development / recurrence.

