Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 standard isoform regulates the mesenchymal phenotype in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells, and associates with a poor prognosis in
patients.


Purpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) in many tumors have been identified
using CD44, either individually or in combination with other markers and
are involved in tumor progression and metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is known to induce cancer invasion, metastasis, and CSCs
properties. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms which integrate
EMT and CSCs properties remain largely unknown. In this study, we test
the hypothesis that CSCs markers play an important role in regulating EMT
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Experimental Design: The relationship
between the CSCs markers and EMT markers was investigated in HCC cell
lines. The EMT markers, invasive phenotype, the relevant transcriptional
factors and signaling pathways induced by CD44 were examined in vitro.
The clinicopathological importance of CD44 standard isoform (CD44s)
expression was analyzed by an immunohistochemical analysis, and the
correlation of CD44s and EMT markers was determined in 150 patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma. Results: HCC cell lines with high CD44
expression showed decreased E-cadherin expression and increased vimentin
expression. CD44s mRNA was dominant form of CD44 mRNA present in HCC cell
lines with the mesenchymal phenotype. Overexpression of CD44s in HCC
cells induced the mesenchymal phenotype and increased tumor cell
invasion, whereas knockdown of CD44s in HCC cells led to loss the
mesenchymal phenotype and decreased tumor cell invasion. CD44s expression
was associated with E-cadherin low expression (P=0.039) and vimentin high
expression (PPurpose: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) in many tumors have been
identified using CD44, either individually or in combination with other
markers and are involved in tumor progression and metastasis.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to induce cancer
invasion, metastasis, and CSCs properties. However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms which integrate EMT and CSCs properties remain
largely unknown. In this study, we test the hypothesis that CSCs markers
play an important role in regulating EMT in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Experimental Design: The relationship between the CSCs markers and
EMT markers was investigated in HCC cell lines. The EMT markers, invasive
phenotype, the relevant transcriptional factors and signaling pathways
induced by CD44 were examined in vitro. The clinicopathological
importance of CD44 standard isoform (CD44s) expression was analyzed by an
immunohistochemical analysis, and the correlation of CD44s and EMT
markers was determined in 150 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Results: HCC cell lines with high CD44 expression showed decreased
E-cadherin expression and increased vimentin expression. CD44s mRNA was
dominant form of CD44 mRNA present in HCC cell lines with the mesenchymal
phenotype. Overexpression of CD44s in HCC cells induced the mesenchymal
phenotype and increased tumor cell invasion, whereas knockdown of CD44s
in HCC cells led to loss the mesenchymal phenotype and decreased tumor
cell invasion. CD44s expression was associated with E-cadherin low
expression (P=0.039) and vimentin high expression (P<0.001). CD44s
expression was related to a large tumor size (P=0.003), multiple tumors
(P=0.032), and poor tumor differentiation (P=0.020), and a shorter
disease-free (P=0.023) and overall survival (P=0.013) in patients with
HCC. Conclusions: our study will be valuable for understanding the
relationship between CSCs and EMT, and the identification of new
treatment targets for future HCC treatment.

