Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipoic acid analogs induce ROS, leading to potent mitochondrial
enzyme inhibition, metabolic dysfunction and cell death in tumor cells


The targeting of tumor cell metabolism has emerged as an attractive
candidate for chemotherapeutics. In particular, tumor cell mitochondria
are dramatically reprogrammed to generate large amounts of biosynthetic
intermediates to fuel cell division. We previously described a novel
class of non-redox active lipoic acid analogs (thioctoids) which effect
dramatic inactivation of the mitochondrial enzyme complex pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH) (PMID:21769686). We have recently completed a
comprehensive metabolomic study indicating that thioctoids down-regulate
multiple mitochondria-associated enzymes. Each of these target enzymes
are key control points for entry of carbon into the TCA cycle, including
the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex and the branch-chain
dehydrogenase/amino trasferase complex. In addition we will present data
that reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a direct regulatory role in these
inactivations and are a major contributor to the resultant cell cycle
arrest and multiple cell death pathways which follow. Taken together, our
results indicate that thioctoids are potent inhibitors of tumor cell
mitochondrial energy metabolism, owing, apparently, to the central
regulatory role of lipoic acid in mitochondrial lipoamide
dehydrogenase-containing enzyme complexes. We hypothesize that thioctoids
are misread by these complexes resulting in increased levels of ROS
leading to the further shutdown of redox-sensitive metabolic enzymes and
ultimately cell death. As a consequence of these novel properties,
thioctoids attack tumor-specific metabolism far more broadly and
pervasively than other agents directed at individual metabolic steps or
activities. Thioctoids are exceptionally well tolerated in animal studies
and as a result may have high clinical potential. They are currently in
early stage human clinical trials.

