Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of metformin on a non-small cell lung cancer cell line
with an EGFR mutation


Background:Metformin, one of the most widely prescribed oral agents for
treating diabetes mellitus, has been speculated to have antineoplastic
effects. The effects, however, have not been fully understood.
Experimental Design:A human non-small-cell lung cancer cell line, PC9
(with an EGFR mutation of the exon 19 E746-A750 deletion), was used to
evaluate antineoplastic effects of metformin in vitro and in vivo. For in
vitro experiments, the cells were exposed to metformin, gefitinib or
cisplatin to observe inhibitory effects on cell proliferation. At 24, 48
and 72 hours after the start of the culture with the agents, cell cycle
analysis, measurements of caspase 3, 8 and 9 activities, and evaluation
with Hoechst staining and APOPercentage TM assay, respectively, were
performed. For in vivo experiments in SCID mouse with a xenograft
subcutaneous tumor, gefitinib (150 mg/kg, oral gavage) or metformin (250
mg/kg, i.p.) was daily administered to the mice. Results:Gefitinib at a
concentration of 0.03 M, cisplatin of 1.5 g/ml and metformin of 10 mM
exerted equivalent inhibitory effects on cell proliferation in vitro. At
these particular concentrations, metformin did not induce significant
apoptosis over control as assessed by Hoechst staining, APOPercent assay
and caspase 3 activity, whereas gefitinib and cisplatin did induce
apoptosis dramatically. Metformin failed to alter cell cycle
distribution, whereas gefitinib and cisplatin caused G1/G0 an S phase
accumulation, respectively. Metformin did not inhibit growth of already
grown subcutaneous tumors, whereas the tumors shrank dramatically with
gefitinib treatment. After almost complete disappearance of the tumors by
gefitinib, however, they regrew by gefitinib withdrawal. Metformin did
significantly suppress the regrowth of the tumors after gefitinib
withdrawal. Conclusions: Metformin has inhibitory effects on growth of a
human non-small cell lung cancer cell line with a sensitive EGFR mutation
in vitro and in vivo, and its mechanism may not depend on apoptosis or
cell cycle alteration. Although the agent does not suppress growth of
already grown tumors, it significantly suppresses tumor regrowth after
gefitinib withdrawal.

