Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K-mediated AMPK inactivation leads to a preneoplastic switch to
glycolytic metabolism


Most proliferating and tumor cells generate the energy required to
support rapid cell division by aerobic glycolysis instead of oxidative
phosphorylation (Warburg effect). By extension, in order to meet the
increased requirements of proliferation, they often display essential
changes in energy metabolism and nutrient uptake pathways. Several
oncogenes, including Myc HIF-1a, and AKT, drive this switch directly, by
targeting Hexokinase II, Lactate Dehydrogenase A, Pyruvate Kinase M2, and
Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Kinase 1. The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
is a highly conserved protein kinase complex that plays a central role in
the regulation of cellular energy homeostasis. The fact that AMPK is an
evolutionarily conserved energy sensor and plays a role both downstream
and upstream of defined tumor suppressors, suggests that it may function
as a tumor suppressor; however, the exact contribution of AMPK to tumor
progression is unclear. We have generated a Pten/- mouse model in which
the PI3K pathway is selectively activated in the thyroid epithelial
cells, leading to hyperplasia which progresses to follicular carcinoma.
The early hyperplastic lesions exhibit a dramatic down-regulation of the
expression levels of many tricarboxylic acid cycle proteins due to
reduced mRNA expression, which results in enhanced compensatory
glycolysis (over 3-fold increase in lactate production in mutants vs.
wt). In addition, the expression of most mitochondrially-encoded genes is
heavily down-regulated, and none of the genes and proteins classically
associated with the Warburg effect is found deregulated in the mutant
thyroid cells. In this context, while AMPK is found to be activated in wt
thyroids through phosphorylation on Thr172, AMPK is inactivated in mutant
thyroids through PI3K-dependent phosphorylation on Ser485. Pten/ mice
treated with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide 1-ß-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR,
IP 500 mg/kg/day for 4 weeks) display a restoration of the metabolic and
mitochondrially-encoded gene expression, as well as a significant
decrease in the lactate production. Pharmacological PI3K inhibition in
human tumor-derived thyroid cancer cell lines increases the expression
levels of both TCA cycle and OXPHOS genes. Moreover, it also causes AMPK
reactivation through Thr172 phosphorylation with a concomitant reduction
in pAMPK Ser485. Based on these compelling data, we propose a novel
mechanism leading to a Warburg-like effect in preneoplastic lesions: PI3K
activation initiates through AMPK inactivation a coordinated
rearrangement of the expression of metabolic genes, which favors aerobic
glycolysis at the expense of TCA/OXPHOS. Further elucidation of this
process will lead to innovative targeted approaches to selectively
disrupt tumor progression, while preserving normal metabolism in non
mutated cells.

