Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SCF F box protein, Skp2, is a key component of an E3 ubiqutin
ligase that governs estrogen receptor stability


Breast carcinoma is the most common cancer among women in developed
countries, and about 70% of these tumors express estrogen receptor (ER).
ER is a transcription factor and master regulator of estrogen stimulated
proliferation and its expression indicates potential for response to
estrogenic stimulation. A majority of ER positive breast cancers
initially respond well to selective estrogen receptor modulators (such as
tamoxifen) or to aromatase inhibitors. Understanding the regulation of ER
levels and its role in transcription of estrogen driven genes is thus
highy germane to breast cancer therapy. There is evidence that for many
transcription factors, activation is linked to factor degradation.
Moreover, estrogen stimulation is known to activate ER proteolysis. Given
the importance of estrogen as a driver of breast cancer progression, we
have investigated mechanisms governing ER proteolysis. S phase
kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) is an F box component of a
multi-protein SCF ubiquitin ligase that acts on multiple substrates.
Levels of Skp2 have been reported to be inversely related with the levels
of ER in breast cancer. Here we report that SCFSkp2, comprised of Skp2,
in association with Skp1, Cul1 and Rbx1, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for
ER. Ectopic expression of dominant negative Cul1 increases ER levels by
impeding ER degradation in breast cancer cells. Knockdown of Skp2 impairs
estrogen-triggered ER proteolysis, while ectopic Skp2 expression
decreased ER stability. We show that Skp2, Skp1, Rbx1 and Cul1
co-precipitate with cellular ER and the formation of this ER/SCFSkp2
complex is cell cycle regulated and parallels CDK2 activation. We also
show ER is an in vitro substrate that is ubiquitylated and degraded by
SCFSkp2. The involvement of CDK2-dependent ER phosphorylation in estrogen
activated ER/SCFSkp2 binding, ER proteolysis and the functional
consequences of this on ER transcriptional activity are under
investigation. These data suggest that Skp2 plays an important role in
the regulation of ER stability, and potentially in the biologic action of
this key steroid hormone receptor in breast cancer.

