Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induced expression of DUSP4 and PPM1A in ER-negative breast cancer
cells suppresses proliferation and invasion


Background: ER-negative breast cancers are poor prognosis tumors that
occur more commonly in young women. Current treatments for ER-negative
tumors include cytotoxic chemotherapy, or for those ER-negative breast
cancers that overexpress HER2, the anti-HER2 antibody herceptin. Targeted
therapy for ER-negative tumors, particularly those that do not express
HER2 (triple-negative breast cancer) is urgently needed. We previously
identified kinases that are critical for the growth of triple-negative
breast cancer. In this project, we investigated whether phosphatases are
differentially expressed in ER-negative as compared to ER-positive breast
cancers. We hypothesized that: (1) the specific phosphatases that govern
the growth of ER-negative cancers are different from those of ER-positive
cancers, (2) Induced expression of those phosphatases that are lowly
expressed in ER-negative breast cancers will suppress the growth and
invasion of ER-negative breast cancers. Methods: Using 277 human breast
tumors (56 ER-positive and 221 ER-negative) from the Baylor Breast Center
tumor bank, we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix microarray studies.
cDNA was synthesized and Biotin-labeled and was then hybridized onto an
Affymetrix HGU133A GeneChipTM, comprised of 22,000 genes. Statistical
analysis of phosphatases was done with dChip software, and phosphatases
more highly (>1.5 fold; FDR=0.05) or lowly (1.5 fold; FDR=0.05), and 29
lowly-expressed (1.5 fold; FDR=0.05), and 29 lowly-expressed (<0.66-fold;
FDR=0.05) phosphatases in ER-negative human breast cancers. We selected
two lowly expressed phosphatases (DUSP4 and PPM1A) for further study.
Induced expression of DUSP4 and PPM1A in ER-negative MDA-MB-468 cells
inhibited anchorage-dependent and -independent growth. Induced expression
of DUSP4 and PPM1A also suppressed the invasion of MDA-MB-468 cells. We
are currently investigating the cellular and molecular consequences of
induced DUSP4 and PPM1A expression in other ER-negative and ER-positive
breast cancer cell lines. Conclusion: We identified a set of highly
expressed and lowly expressed phosphatases in ER-negative breast cancers
as compared to ER-positive cancers. Two phosphatases (DUSP4 and PPM1A)
when expressed in an ER-negative breast cancer cells inhibit growth and
invasion of these cells. By identifying the molecules that regulate
breast cancer cell growth we will identify potential new targets for the
treatment of these aggressive ER-negative breast cancers.

