Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deactylases in multiple myeloma: Expression, inhibition and
resistance to inhibition


Deacetylases (DACs) are a highly conserved group of enzymes that regulate
a myriad of cellular functions through deacetylation of histones,
transcription factors and molecular chaperones. Altered DAC expression is
significantly associated with poor prognosis in solid and haematological
malignancies, however the expression pattern and correlation of
dysregulated expression to patient outcome has not been characterized in
multiple myeloma (MM) cells. To address this, quantitative PCR was
performed for DAC1-11 on MM (n=60) and normal plasma cells (n=11)
purified from bone-marrow (BM) samples. Analyses revealed that median
levels of all DACs, with the exception of DAC1 and DAC11, were
significantly altered in MM. Interestingly, patients with increased DAC1,
2 and 6 levels had a significantly shorter progression-free survival from
diagnosis compared to patients with lower levels. Inhibitors to DACs
(DACi) are currently being used in clinical trials of multiple myeloma
(MM), either alone or in combination with other novel and conventional
anti-MM agents. Despite the rapid advancement in the use of DACi in MM
therapy, it is still not clear which DAC needs to be inhibited to attain
maximal MM cell death. To determine this, pan-inhibitors (LBH589 and
SAHA) or isoform-specific inhibitors (FK228 and Tubacin) were tested for
their cytotoxic potential on BM mononuclear cells from MM patients
(n=10). Flow cytometric enumeration of CD38hi/CD45neg/APO2.7pos cell
populations was performed to determine the proportion of apoptosis after
48 hours. Results indicated that inhibiting Class I DAC induced maximal
MM cell death (75-90%) in 7/10 patient samples tested. Further
experiments will include specifically targeting Class I DAC (DAC1, 2, 3
and 8) to determine which of these contribute to MM cell biology.
Although DACi clinical trials show promising results, some patients are
non-responsive to DACi therapy. Human myeloma cell lines (HMCLs) were
used as a paradigm to identify genes associated with DACi resistance.
Gene expression analysis was performed on nine HMCLs pre-determined to be
DACi-sensitive or -resistant to identify genes differentially regulated
between these categories. Of the 97 genes that were differentially
regulated, 35-genes had >80% correlation (positive or negative) to
DACi-sensitivity. Future work will include validation of these genes to
identify candidate biomarkers that can be used to predict the response of
an MM patient to DACi-response. In conclusion, this study has established
that DAC levels are altered in MM and this dysregulation correlates to
poor outcome, and inhibiting class I DAC is critical to induce maximal MM
cell death. In addition, preliminary data indicates the existence of a
gene signature associated with DACi-sensitivity in MM cells providing the
framework to identify candidate biomarkers to predict response of an MM
patient to DACi therapy.

