Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the metabolism and DNA adduct formation of
2-amino-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole in human hepatocytes


2-Amino-9H-pyrido[2-3-b]indole (AC) is a heterocyclic aromatic amine
(HAA) and considered to be a possible human carcinogen by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Like other HAAs, AC
is metabolized in the liver and can undergo bioactivation to produce
highly electrophilic derivatives that can form DNA adducts by covalent
binding to DNA. Among the HAAs, AC is of particular interest because it
is present at high levels in tobacco smoke and ubiquitous in the
environment. AC was shown to form high levels of DNA adducts in primary
cultured human hepatocytes. The adduct levels were higher than those
formed by other HAAs such as
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) or
2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline (MeIQx) and comparable to
those derived from 4-aminobiphenyl (4-ABP), a known human carcinogen. An
understanding of the metabolism of AC and its potential to form DNA
adducts would provide a better assessment of the human health risk posed
by AC. Indeed, the metabolism pathways of MeIQx, PhIP and AC are
different. These differences in metabolic processing of HAAs can lead to
variable levels of DNA adducts formed in humans and impact the
interindividual susceptibility towards these procarcinogens. Knowledge
about the metabolism of AC in humans is unknown. We have analyzed the
role of human cytochromes P450, especially CYP1A2, in the metabolism of
AC and DNA adduct formation. The ring-oxidized 3-HO-AC and 6-HO-AC
sulfate and glucuronide conjugates, AC-N2-Gl, N2-acetyl-AC and the
glucuronide conjugates of 2-hydroxyamino-9H-pyrido[2,-3-b]indole
(HONH-AC) and the deoxyguanosine DNA adduct, dG-C8-AC, were identified
and quantified by liquid chromatography coupled with multistage mass
spectrometry in human hepatocytes in primary culture. The levels of DNA
adducts formed after a 24hr-treatment with AC were (2 folds) lower when
cells were pre-treated with furafylline, a specific CYP1A2 inhibitor;
however, the levels of most of the metabolites formed were not
significanly affected by furafylline. Our data suggests that CYPs other
than CYP1A2 may be involved in AC metabolism, while CYP1A2 is the main
enzyme involved in the production of reactive metabolites leading to the
formation of DNA adducts. The identification of CYPs and Phase II enzymes
involved in AC metabolism in human hepatocytes are under study to fully
understand the health risk of AC to humans.

