Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol increases sensitivity of human peritoneal cancer cells
to macrophage-mediated cytolysis


The peritoneal cavity contains numerous cells of the immune system
capable of mediating antitumor effects. The persistence of cancer in this
environment is thought to be due, in part, to the capacity of these cells
to circumvent immunologic detection and destruction. Nevertheless, the
presence of an immune system within the peritoneal cavity provides the
opportunity to elicit tumor cytolysis by resident and/or circulating
immune cells mobilized from the peripheral blood. One strategy that may
be applicable in this setting is the introduction of compounds into the
peritoneal cavity that enhance the sensitivity of malignant cells to
activated immune cells. Ideally, these compounds would be tolerated by
normal tissues while exerting clinical effects on tumor tissues. In the
current investigation, we explored the capacity of the natural product,
resveratrol, to modulate sensitivity of human peritoneal cancer cells to
the lytic effects of activated human peripheral blood monocytes (PBM).
PBM were primed with gamma interferon (IFN) followed by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as a second signal. Target cells consisted of
newly established cells lines from surgical specimens of patients with
peritoneal carcinaomatosis (PC) or metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC).
Cytolysis was determined following activation with a 24 hour 51Chromium
release assay. Control activation of PBM with medium elicted 25 lytic
units (LU) and The peritoneal cavity contains numerous cells of the
immune system capable of mediating antitumor effects. The persistence of
cancer in this environment is thought to be due, in part, to the capacity
of these cells to circumvent immunologic detection and destruction.
Nevertheless, the presence of an immune system within the peritoneal
cavity provides the opportunity to elicit tumor cytolysis by resident
and/or circulating immune cells mobilized from the peripheral blood. One
strategy that may be applicable in this setting is the introduction of
compounds into the peritoneal cavity that enhance the sensitivity of
malignant cells to activated immune cells. Ideally, these compounds would
be tolerated by normal tissues while exerting clinical effects on tumor
tissues. In the current investigation, we explored the capacity of the
natural product, resveratrol, to modulate sensitivity of human peritoneal
cancer cells to the lytic effects of activated human peripheral blood
monocytes (PBM). PBM were primed with gamma interferon (IFN) followed by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as a second signal. Target cells consisted of
newly established cells lines from surgical specimens of patients with
peritoneal carcinaomatosis (PC) or metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC).
Cytolysis was determined following activation with a 24 hour 51Chromium
release assay. Control activation of PBM with medium elicted 25 lytic
units (LU) and < 5 LU against untreated CRC and PC cells respectively.
These values were not changed significantly when resveratrol-pretreated
tumor cells were used as targets. In contrast, PBM fully activated with
IFN/LPS elicted 224 and 118 LU against untreated CRC and PC respectively
and 316 and 199 LU against resveratrol-pretreated CRC and PC
respectively. These results were investigated further to determine the
effects of resveratrol pretreatment on expression of genes associated
with immunologic sensitivity. A real time PCR assay indicated
significantly increased expression of death receptors of the TNF
superfamily as a consequence of resveratrol pretreatment. Subsequent
studies demonstrated that recombinant TNF and TRAIL ligands could
significantly inhibit proliferation of resveratrol-pretreated CRC and PC
greater than media-pretreated cells. The results of this study
demonstrate that human peritoneal cancer cells can be rendered
significantly more sensitive to the cytolytic effects of activated human
monocytes and macrophages when exposed to the natural product,
resveratrol. Given the substantial quantity of macrophages in the
peritoneal cavitry of humans, and the influence of malignant tissues on
increasing these numbers further, modalities designed to exploit the
tumor cytolytic effects of peritoneal macrophages for the treatment of
human peritoneal cancers should be explored.

