Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involving of PGD2 signal pathway in the RIG1-mediated suppression
of cell invasion in testis cells


Retinoid-inducible gene 1 (RIG1), also called tazarotene induced gene 3
(TIG3), belongs to the HREV107 gene family that contains five members in
humans. Proteins of the HREV107 family share four conserved domains, a
proline-rich motif located at the N-terminus, followed by a conserved
H-box, the NC domain and a C-terminal transmembrane domain. RIG1 is
expressed in high levels in well-differentiated tissues, but the
expression of RIG1 decreases in cancer tissues and cancer cell lines.
RIG1 stimulates cellular differentiation of keratinocytes, which is
mediated by the activation of type I tissue transglutaminase. In
addition, RIG1 was shown to inhibit the RAS signal pathways in cervical
and gastric cancer cells. However, the direct interactions of RIG1/Type I
tissue transglutaminase or RIG1/RAS were observed in cervical cancer
cells. Until now, the mechanisms of anti-cancer /induced-cellular
differentiation effects caused by RIG1 induced proteins have not been
reported. We have found that Prostaglandin D2 synthase (PTGDS) interacted
with RIG1 by yeast two hybrid screens. Further, we found PTGDS
immunoprecipitated with RIG1 in NT2/D1 testis cell lysate. We also found
PTGDS co-localized with RIG1 at the endomembrane. In RIG1-transfected
cell, increasing expression of PGD2 production can be observed after
stimulating by PTGDS. Thus, this indicated RIG1 can enhance PTGDS
activity. Otherwise, cAMP and SOX9 are targets for PGD2 signaling. Our
results revealed that cAMP but not SOX9 were upregulated in
RIG1-expressing NT2/D1 testis cells. Pervious study indicated that RIG1
is a phospholipid-metabolizing enzyme (PLA) which involved in the
phospholipid metabolism and the PLA activity is essential for the PGD2
production. RIG1 upregulated the PGD2 and cAMP production will not be
affected in PLA inhibitor AACOCF3 treated-RIG1-expressing NT2/D1 cells.
Silencing of PTGDS expression significantly decreased RIG1-mediated cAMP
and PGD2 production. These results suggested that RIG1-induced PGD2
production is mediated by increasing the PTGDS activity but not PLA
activity of RIG1. Either cell death or cell viability was not affected in
RIG1-expressing cells. However, RIG1 significantly inhibited the cell
migration and invasion in NT2/D1 cells. Knockdown of PTGDS expression but
not treating cells with AACOCF3 can alleviated RIG1-induced invasion and
migration suppression of NT2/D1 cells. This result indicated that RIG1
will cause cell invasion suppression though the PGD2 signaling pathway.
In conclusion, RIG1 can interact with PTGDS to enhance its function and
further suppress the NT2/D1 cell migration and invasion. Our study
suggested that RIG1-PGD2 signaling might play an important role in cell
differentiation of testis.

