Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast Cancer MethylSeq: Analysis of bisulfite converted breast
cancer genomes using microdroplet-based targeted sequencing


Targeted sequencing using microdroplet-based PCR provides a method to
selectively and uniformly amplify thousands of genomic regions of
interest (ROIs) for efficient next generation sequencing (NGS). Recently,
this approach has been adapted for the analysis of bisulfite-treated DNA,
enabling strand-specific determination of cytosine methylation status
with single-base pair resolution. This droplet PCR-based targeted
approach significantly reduces cost and improves sequencing depth
compared to whole-genome sequencing, allowing researchers to power larger
studies to discover and validate how methylation and genomic aberrations
affect cancer development. Here we report results from our ongoing work
using a breast cancer targeted panel (Breast Cancer MethylSeq Panel) for
sequence specific analysis of both epigenomic methylation and genomic
mutation in breast tumor samples. The panel includes PCR primer pairs
designed to target 2,700 ROIs, leaving room for an additional 1,300
target ROIs of interest to be added by individual researchers. Use of
this single panel will provide information about CpG methylation and
genomic sequence enabling analysis of multiple content types including:
A) cell subtype; B) genomic mutation; C) surrogate gene expression
subtypes using promoter CpG islands or other methylation markers; D)
copy-number variation (CNV); E) Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH); F)
methylation-mediated gene silencing and loss of imprinting. The Breast
Cancer MethylSeq microdroplet library, comprising individual primer pairs
for PCR in droplets, will be tested and validated using a set of 64
bisulfite-converted samples including 8 breast cancer cell lines, a range
of ER positive and negative tumors and TCGA samples, and a set of 8
metastatic tumors from a single individual. We will report overall
sequencing success metrics, as well as concordance with metadata on the
various ROI classes (A-F above). The deep and comprehensive breast tumor
sequencing enabled by this targeting panel will allow researchers to
identify epigenomic alterations and genomic mutations across a range of
assay types using just one assay. The goal for development and validation
of this panel is to provide the breast cancer research community a unique
tool for identifying and correlating cancer subtypes with clinical
outcomes.

