Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-translational modification of E2F1 in malignant melanoma


Malignant melanoma has the highest fatality among all skin cancers. No
current treatment significantly enhances survival once metastasis is
established. Previous studies have shown that E2F1, a transcription
factor, is over-expressed in melanoma cells. However, the mechanism
through which E2F1 is elevated remains unknown. E2F1 is known to be
involved in many important biological processes, including cell cycle
progression, DNA damage, DNA repair, differentiation, development,
autophagy and apoptosis. This underscores the importance of E2F1 in
carcinogenesis. Normally in late S phase, E2F1 is recognized by the E3
ligase p45 SKP2 and undergoes ubiquitination and finally degradation in
26S proteasome. Our overall hypothesis is that E2F1 escapes proteasomal
degradation in melanoma cells due to changes in post-translational
modification. In this study we have used melanoma cells of increasing
disease progression. Our results show that although the primary melanoma
cells have high level of E2F1 message and protein, it is unstable. On the
other hand the more metastatic melanoma cells have low levels of E2F1
which is however very stable. Consistent with this result,
post-translational modification of E2F1 including the phosphorylation at
Serine 337 and the acetylation at Lysine 117 increase with melanoma
progression, which suggests that these post-translational modification
sites might play an important role in stabilization of E2F1 and keep it
functionally active in the more metastatic cell lines. E2F1 knockdown
data also shows that E2F1 KD can inhibit cell proliferation in early
stage melanoma cells but not in the more metastatic cells, which also
suggest that inhibition of post-translational modifications and stability
of E2F1 may be a more effective way to inhibit melanoma progression to
more advanced stages. Abrogation of acetylation is expected to cause E2F1
protein instability. On the other hand, if acetylation is potentiated,
the stabilized E2F1 will continue to promote progression through the cell
cycle. We are currently testing whether the ectopic expression of the
continuously acetylated E2F1 protein can rescue proliferation inhibition
caused by E2F1 down-regulation, and drive metastasis and a mutant E2F1
with abrogated acetylation can block rescue of the proliferation
inhibition in the E2F1 down-regulated melanoma cells.

