Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knowledge and acceptability of the HPV vaccine among high-risk men
attending an STD clinic in Puerto Rico


Background: Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) is the most common sexually
transmitted infection. Men aren't exempt from HPV-related cancers. Due to
the recent recommendation of the Centers for Disease Control to vaccinate
young men against HPV, understanding HPV knowledge and the factors that
might influence HPV vaccine acceptability is fundamental for effective
prevention programs. Given that a high incidence and mortality rate of
HPV-related cancers (oral, penile, anal), particularly among high-risk
populations in Puerto Rico, studies which evaluate knowledge and
willingness of the HPV vaccine are necessary. Objective: To describe HPV
vaccine knowledge and acceptability among men younger than 26 years old
who attend the Centro Latino Americano de Enfermedades de Transmisin
Sexual (CLETS) in Puerto Rico. Methods: A cross-sectional study
consisting of 206 HIV+/HIV- men 18 years and older was conducted. Survey
included demographic characteristics and assessments of sexual practices,
alcohol, cigarette and drug-related risks. Also, study evaluated the
study participant's HPV knowledge, perceived risk and vaccine
acceptability. Only those participants younger than 26 years old were
included in this analysis (n=46 or 22.8% of the total sample).
Descriptive statistics analyses were performed in order to describe an
epidemiological profile of high-risk men attending the clinic, their
knowledge of HPV vaccine and acceptability. Results: The mean age of the
study participant was 21.702.35 years. Almost half (45.8%) reported
visiting the STD clinic for the first time at the time of the interview.
More than a third of the study participants reported the use of illicit
drugs (34.8%). Regarding sexual identity, 30.4% of them reported being
homosexual/bisexual and 30.4% have engaged in the last sexual intercourse
in high-risk sexual practices (lack of condom use). Self-reported
prevalence of HIV is 6.5%. Among those who met the recommended age
criteria for HPV vaccination, less than a third know about the HPV
vaccine (28.3%). However, more than half (76.9%) are willing to get
vaccinated against the HPV vaccine. Sources of information of the HPV
vaccine were by their female sexual partners (20.3%), a female sexual
partner who received the vaccine (6.3%) or a male sexual partner (1.5%).
Reported reasons that will increase willingness to get vaccinated against
HPV among high-risk men include if the physician recommends it (95.7%),
if other health care professional recommends it (87.0%) and if the health
insurance covers the vaccine (91.3%). Conclusion: Knowledge of the HPV
vaccine in high-risk men in Puerto Rico is generally poor. However,
within those who know about the vaccine, acceptability is high.

