Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mining for novel JAK3 mutations in pediatric patients with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Background: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer
occurring in children. Treatment strategies have been based on risk
stratification comprising clinical and biologic features. Despite success
in treating ALL, children continue to relapse, and recurrent ALL is
difficult to cure with contemporary chemotherapy, suggesting a
drug-resistant phenotype and an urgent need of a better understanding of
the biology of ALL that will ultimately lead to the development of an
alternative therapeutic approach targeting specific molecules associated
with the pathogenesis of ALL. JAK3 is preferentially expressed in
hematopoietic cells and mediates signals through a common gamma chain
shared by receptors for various cytokines. Consistent with JAK3 function
in the hematopoietic development, activating mutant alleles of JAK3 have
recently been identified in several different types of blood cancer, and
functional analyses of a subset of these alleles showed that the
mutations can cause lethal hematopoietic malignancies in animal models.
Given the central role of JAK3 in the regulation of hematopoiesis, it is
likely that additional genetic alterations that activate JAK3 will be
identified in other blood malignancies. Objective: We proposed that
somatic mutations in JAK3 occur in a subset of pediatric patients with
ALL, and that these mutations represent an important therapeutic target
which can be leveraged to improve outcomes for ALL patients with JAK3
mutant. Results: A large set of DNA samples extracted from fresh bone
marrows of ALL patients for mutations in JAK3 were analyzed. In 91
clinical specimens, a substitution of Val for Ile at amino acid position
722 was identified in 12, and an identical silent mutation was identified
in 4. We found a significant increase in the phosphorylation levels of
JAK3, Stat5, Erk1/2 and Akt in Ba/F3-JAK3V722I cells, compared with those
in Ba/F3-JAK3WT cells. Furthermore, we found the expression of JAK3V722I
transforms Ba/F3 cells to factor-independent growth, whereas
JAK3WT-transduced cells retain the dependence on IL-3 for proliferation.
Importantly, the transforming ability of JAK3V722I in the cells was
abolished by treatment with the known JAK3 inhibitor CP-690550.
Conclusion and Future Directions: These results suggest that
IL-3-independent growth of Ba/F3-JAK3V722I cells resulted from persistent
JAK3 activation and JAK3V722I-mediated transformation can be blocked by
JAK3 inhibitors. In order to model the effects of JAK3V722I in vivo, we
are employing a murine bone marrow transplantation assay to express
MIG-JAK3WT and MIG-JAK3V722I constructs. Our preliminary studies reveal
engraftment (>10% GFP positive) of both MIG-JAK3WT and MIG-JAK3V722I
transduced cells 2 weeks after transplantation.

