Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescence in situ hybridization versus qPCR as means to detect
Merkel cell polyomavirus in Merkel cell carcinoma


Background: Merkel cell polyoma virus (MCPyV) is detected in 80% of
Merkel cell carcinomas (MCC). The clonal integration and tumor specific
mutations in the large T Antigen (LTAg) gene strongly implicate an
oncogenic impact of the virus. To date the relationship between the viral
presence and cancer induction, development or clinical prognosis is
discussed controversial. Yet almost all studies are based on quantitative
virus detection e.g. PCR or qPCR. Material and Method: In order to gain
additional information about the quality of the viral presence on the
single cell level we performed FISH analysis of formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded (FFPE) MCCs (n= 62) on tissue micro arrays (TMA),
determined the FISH pattern and correlated the results of the FISH
analysis with the qPCR data. We grouped the MCCs according to different
FISH evaluations and correlated them with the respective qPCR data on the
basis of a determined cut-off. MCPyV FISH was established using the MKL-1
cell line which harbors integrated copies of MCPyV DNA. For MCPyV-qPCR
the LT3 primer pair was used on whole tissue sections. Results:
MCPyV-FISH on FFPE MKL-1 cells revealed punctate signals compatible with
viral integration. The MCPyV FISH positive MCC cores (76%) mainly
revealed two different signal patterns: a punctate pattern (85%) which
correlated with a moderate relative viral presence and in some areas the
punctate pattern was combined with a diffuse pattern (15%) indicating the
episomal presence of the virus which is linked to viral replication. If a
pattern mixture was seen this was associated with very high qPCR values.
Comparing MCPyV FISH and qPCR data the results correlated highly with 83
% in the MCPyV positive evaluated group, whereas the negative group
showed a concordance of 93 %. The mean of the qPCR values of all MCPyV
positive cores differed significantly from the negative cores (p=
0.0076). The FISH signals were in some tumor areas from the same patient
heterogenic in intensity, pattern and localization. Conclusion: While the
qPCR using the LT3 primer pair was highly sensitive to detect MCPyV
sequences in the respective MCC cases, the MCPyV FISH analysis highly
concordantly revealed the quality of the viral presence, i.e. viral
integration or episomal presence and morphological sublocalization in the
tissues.

