Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-2 and chemosensitivity
in esophageal adenocarcinoma


The overall long-term survival for patients with esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) remains poor. Despite improved understanding of the
progression from Barrett's esophagus to dysplasia to adenocarcinoma,
patients commonly present with advanced stage disease and demonstrate
resistance to conventional therapy, with response rates below 40%.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of resistance is crucial for
predicting and overcoming this resistance. Twenty EAC tissues obtained
from patients subsequently treated with chemotherapy were examined using
Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarrays. Genes differentially expressed in
disease-free patients compared to patients with recurrent disease were
identified. One such gene, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-2
(IGFBP-2), is a member of the IGF signaling pathway, which has been shown
to play pivotal roles in cell growth, differentiation, survival,
transformation, and metastasis. Increased IGFBP-2 expression has been
reported in many advanced tumor types and has been previously linked to
chemoresistance, making it a promising potential target in EAC. Mean
IGFBP-2 levels were significantly higher in patients with recurrent
disease and increased expression was associated with worse outcome
independent of stage. Of three EAC cell lines examined (Flo-1, OE33,
OE19), Flo-1 cells showed the highest IGFBP-2 expression at both the mRNA
and protein levels. To examine the role of IGFBP-2 in chemoresistance,
Flo-1 cells were pre-treated with siRNA to IGFBP-2 followed by
chemotherapy in the presence or absence of serum and analyzed using WST-1
cell proliferation assays. Knocking down IGFBP-2 sensitized Flo-1 cells
to cisplatin in the presence of serum and increased proliferation in
serum-free conditions, suggesting that IGFBP-2 may be anti-proliferative
in this EAC cell line. In addition, treatment of Flo-1 cells with both
acute and chronic doses of cisplatin decreased expression of IGFBP-2.
Stable transfection of IGFBP-2 into low-level IGFBP-2-expressing OE33 and
OE19 cells did not alter cellular proliferation/chemosensitivity,
migration, or epithelial-mesenchymal transition as determined by WST-1,
wound healing, and Western analyses, respectively, possibly due to
amplification of the ErbB2 gene in these cell lines. Although preliminary
data suggest that IGFBP-2 may mediate chemoresistance in EAC, its effects
may be masked by more potent genetic alterations. Further analysis of the
IGF signaling pathway is warranted to determine its significance in the
chemoresistance of EAC.

