Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) reveals a
critical role in promoting the TGF-induced EMT and metastasis of
non-small cell lung cancer cell (H460)


Although transforming growth factor (TGF) is anti-cancer identified, it
was also known to promote tumor malignancy by enhancing the growth,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), tissue invasion and
metastasis in a variety of cancer cells, including non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs). The aim of this study was to know the contribution of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) to TGF-promoted EMT and
metastasis in NSCLCs. The degree of EMT, cell scattering, migration and
invasion, and protein expression of PPAR were first analyzed and compared
between H460 and CH27 cells with or without TGF treatment (both are NSCLC
cell lines). Chemical or shRNA blocking assay was also utilized to
further confirm the importance of PPAR in promoting TGF-induced tumor
metastasis. Finally, signaling pathway(s) responsible for
TGF/PPAR-mediated metastasis was evaluated. The results demonstrated that
TGF can effectively triggered the EMT, cell scattering, migration and
invasion in H460 cell, but only a slight EMT was seen in TGF-treated CH27
cell. Meanwhile, PPAR expression was induced by TGF in H460 cells but
remained unchanged in CH27 cell. This indicated that PPAR may involve in
TGF-mediated metastasis. Co-treatment of TGF with GW9662 (a specific PPAR
inhibitor) significantly blocked TGF-promoted metastasis of H460 cell
indicating the presence of PPAR was indeed critical for TGF-attributed
tumor metastasis. TGF appeared to act through P38 signaling pathway to
trigger the expression of PPAR and the subsequent activation of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR)/c-mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor
(c-MET) signaling pathway and the reduction of E-cadherin that eventually
led to the EMT and metastasis of H460 cell. Additionally, TGF also act
through P38 to trigger the expression of -catenin which could bind to and
up-regulate the expression of PPAR. Blocking of -catenin activity,
however, did not interfere with the metastasis indicating -catenin may
not play a direct role in promoting the metastasis of H460 cell.
Nevertheless, we can not preclude the possibility that -catenin may still
act through PPAR to regulate the metastasis of H460 cell, indirectly. In
summary, TGF-induced EMT and metastasis in H460 cell was PPAR-dependent
and GW9662 revealed a therapeutical value in the control of NSCLCs (H460).

