Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp90-dependent stabilization of active NPM-ALK kinase: Structural
insights by mutagenesis of the ALK catalytic domain


Background. Among the posttranslational modifications occurring in
eukaryotic cells, phosphorylation is the most critical for proteins, as
phosphate-mediated conformational switching of catalytic and
non-catalytic motifs impacts expression and activity through changes in
structure stability. Activation by phosphorylation is the rule for
protein kinases, including oncogenic protein tyrosine kinase NPM-ALK
(nucleophosmin-anaplastic lymphoma kinase) in Anaplastic Large Cell
Lymphomas, though it renders the kinase prone to degradation. For several
of them, however, the maintenance of functional stability is provided by
the molecular chaperone Hsp90, through the recognition of specific motifs
within the catalytic domain. Objectives. Herein, we determined whether
NPM-ALK kinase activity facilitates Hsp90 binding, and whether structural
motifs within NPM-ALK catalytic domain favor or impair Hsp90 interaction.
Design/Methods. To test this hypothesis we prepared a series of N- and
C-terminal deletion mutants of wild-type NPM-ALK, as well as inactive
point mutants by site-directed mutagenesis of the NPM-ALK ATP-binding
site and activation loop. Results. Using NPM-ALK constructs in COS7 and
293T cells, we showed that Hsp90 strongly interacts with wild-type
NPM-ALK, but fails to co-adsorb with inactive point mutants and with
deletion mutants lacking the entire kinase domain. By comparison, binding
to Hsp90 family members Hsc70 and Hsp70 is independent of NPM-ALK
activity, suggesting a greater dependence of active NPM-ALK on Hsp90
function. Accordingly, phosphorylated NPM-ALK associated with Hsp90 and
co-chaperone cdc37, and pharmacological inhibition of NPM-ALK prevented
the interaction of NPM-ALK with both proteins. Of note, mutants unmasking
the C-helix motif in the N-terminal lobe of the catalytic domain
maintained the ability to bind Hsp90, whereas mutants lacking C-helix did
not. Conclusions. Our findings, therefore, suggest a model in which, in
addition to a role in folding nascent NPM-ALK, Hsp90 provides an ongoing
folding support to activated NPM-ALK kinase, by protecting
self-phosphorylated NPM-ALK from ubiquitination through recognition of
specific unstable motifs within its catalytic domain.

