Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and characterization of a folate receptor alpha-specific
ligand for distinguishing cancer tissue from sites of inflammation


The vitamin folic acid has been extensively utilized to target
chemotherapeutic and imaging agents to cancer cells that over-express a
folate receptor (FR).1-2 Importantly, both folic acid and conjugates of
folic acid bind with similar affinity to the two major isoforms of FR;
i.e. FR- which is primarily expressed on tumor cells and FR- that is
upregulated on activated macrophages. Since some cancer patients may
simultaneously suffer from an inflammatory disease that is characterized
by accumulation of activated macrophages, folate targeting of
therapeutic/imaging agents to either pathology is not currently
possible.3 We have, therefore, undertaken to identify a targeting ligand
that can deliver attached imaging and therapeutic agents selectively to
FR- expressing tumor cells while avoiding uptake by FR- expressing
activated macrophages. In this poster, we demonstrate that a reduced and
alkylated form of folic acid, N5, N10-dimethyl tetrahydrofolate (DMTHF),
exhibits the desired selectivity for FR-. Preliminary in vitro analysis
of the affinity of DMTHF for FR- was performed by incubating increasing
concentrations of a radioactive conjugate of DMTHF, termed
99mTc-DMTHF-chelate, with KB cells (a human nasopharyngeal cancer cell
line known to express FR-). The 9mTc-DMTHF-chelate was found to associate
with FR expressing KB cells with an apparent Kd of 38 nM in a manner that
was quantitatively inhibited by 100-fold molar excess of free folic acid.
The negligible affinity of 9mTc-DMTHF-chelate for FR- was further
established by demonstrating its inability to image sites of
inflammation4 in animals induced to develop ulcerative colitis,
atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, or muscle trauma. Selectivity for
FR- over FR- was also tested in mice bearing both an FR- expressing tumor
and dextran sulfate-induced ulcerative colitis. Thus, comparison of the
uptake of equivalent doses of 99mTc-DMTHF-chelate and
99mTc-folate-chelate (a radioimaging agent5 that binds FR- and FR-
equally) revealed that 99mTc-DMTHF-chelate was selectively enriched in
FR- tumors, whereas 99mTc-folate-chelate was concentrated in both FR-+
tumors and FR-+ sites of inflammation. Similar FR- selectivity was
further confirmed with multiple DMTHF-targeted fluorescent dyes. Taken
together, the above experiments show that DMTHF will bind selectively to
malignant cells expressing FR- in the presence of inflammatory
macrophages expressing FR-. References 1.Low, P. S.; Henne, W. A.;
Doorneweerd D. D. Acc. Chem. Res. 2008;41:120-129. 2.Kularatne, S. K.;
Low, P. S.; Current opinion Chem Biol. 2009;13:256-262. 3. Low, P. S.;
Antony, C. A. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2004;56:1055-1058. 4. Ayala-Lopez, W.;
Xia, W.; Varghese, B.; Low, P. S. J Nucl Med. 2010;51:768-774. 5. Leamon,
P. C.; Parker, M. A.; Vlahov, I. R. Bioconjugate Chem. 2002;13:1200-1210.

