Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-141 inhibits proliferation and invasion by suppressing
the Wnt signaling pathway in renal cell carcinoma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are highly conserved, single stranded, non-coding RNAs
of approximately 22 nucleotides that regulate gene expression by
posttranscriptional silencing of specific target mRNAs, by repressing
translation or cleaving RNA transcripts. miRNAs regulate diverse cellular
processes such as cell-cycle progression, proliferation, apoptosis and
development. miRNAs have been shown to function as oncogenes or tumor
suppressor genes. MicroRNA-141 has recently been reported to play a role
in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and the
expression of miR-141 is inversely correlated with tumorigenicity and
invasiveness in several human cancers. The function of miR-141 in renal
cell carcinoma has not been studied, therefore we studied the functional
effects of miR-141 on renal cell carcinoma. We found that miR-141 was
down regulated in human kidney cancer tissues compared with adjacent
normal tissues. We also found that miR-141 was down regulated in renal
cell carcinoma human cell lines, 769P, 786-O and ACHN compared with
normal kidney cell line, HK-2. Transfection of miR-141 into renal cell
carcinoma cells promoted apoptosis, inhibited in vitro cell proliferation
and inhibited cell invasion. We found that miR-141 has a binding site in
3UTR of the TCF7L2 (Transcription factor 7-like 2) gene which can
activate the canonical Wnt pathway. miR-141 was found to down regulate
expression of TCF7L2 by targeting its 3 UTR as shown by luciferase
reporter assays in renal cell carcinoma. Luciferase assays using T cell
factor (TCF) reporter plasmids also showed that miR-141 represses TCF/LEF
transcriptional activity, indicating that miR-141 suppresses the
canonical Wnt pathway in renal cell carcinoma. Our results demonstrate
that miR-141 suppresses malignancy by targeting TCF7L2 and inhibiting the
Wnt signaling pathway in renal cell carcinoma. Source of Funding: Grants
R01CA138642, VA Research Enhancement Award Program (REAP), and VA Merit
Review grants

