Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor splice variants determine taxane sensitivity in
prostate cancer


Androgen ablation therapy is the mainstay for prostate cancer (PC)
treatment, however, it is not curative, as many patients progress to a
castration-resistant stage (CRPC). CRPC remains driven by active androgen
receptor (AR) signaling. Several AR splice variants lacking the ligand
binding domain were recently identified in PC. These variants are
constitutively active in the nucleus, rise in response to castration, and
are thought to mediate disease progression in CRPC. Taxane chemotherapy
improves survival in CRPC. We have recently shown that taxanes impair the
ligand-induced nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activity of
full-length AR (AR-FL), downstream of microtubule (MT) stabilization.
This is due to AR binding MTs and using them for its nuclear accumulation
with the aid of the dynein motor protein. However, the effect of taxane
treatment on the nuclear accumulation and activity of the AR variants is
not known. As the variants are expressed in CRPC, we sought to examine
the mechanism underlying AR variant nuclear accumulation and the impact
of taxane treatment on their function. We have focused our studies on two
clinically relevant AR splice variants ARv567 and AR-V7 and assessed
their ability to bind MTs, translocate to the nucleus with dynein and
response to taxane treatment. Our data showed that the two variants
behave differently on all aspects. Microtubule co-sedimentation revealed
that ARv567 is associated with MTs, in contrast to the significantly
reduced association displayed by AR-V7. Dynamitin overexpression
inhibited the nuclear accumulation of AR-FL and ARv567 but had no effect
on AR-V7, suggesting that AR-V7's nuclear translocation is independent of
dynein-based MT transport. To examine the impact of taxane treatment on
variant activity we microinjected GFP-tagged AR-FL, or variants into the
nucleus of PC3 cells and monitored the dynamics of AR nuclear
translocation using live-cell confocal microscopy and AR transcriptional
activity using ARE luciferase reporter assay. Our data showed that
taxanes significantly inhibited the nuclear accumulation and activity of
AR-FL and ARv567 but not that of AR-V7. Human xenograft models expressing
the ARv567 exhibited greater tumor volume decreases in response to taxane
treatment as compared with xenografts expressing either AR-FL or other
variants. Taken together our data reveal that functional MTs are required
for AR's nuclear transport in a ligand independent manner, as in the case
of ARv567. However, this does not apply to AR-V7 which is not under MT
control and thus, remains insensitive to taxane treatment. We are
currently narrowing down the MT binding domain on the AR by serial
mutagenesis and are testing their MT binding abilities. These data
suggest that inhibition of AR nuclear accumulation underlies, in part,
the activity of taxanes in CRPC and that the presence of the variants may
determine the clinical efficacy of taxane chemotherapy.

