Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting signaling networks via RNAi to improve therapy for
ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the second most common gynecologic
malignancy, and the leading cause of death from gynecological cancers. At
the time of presentation, most ovarian cancers are no longer dependent on
single genetic determinants for growth and/or survival, and targeted
therapies used as single agents typically do not work in this disease. We
hypothesized that network-based synthetic lethality screens would help
identify critical pathways to target in combination therapy. We have used
RNAi screening with a targeted library to identify a set of gene
candidates that influence the response of EOC cells to the Src-targeting
agent dasatinib, a promising agent for treatment of EOC. We identified
sets of siRNAs that specifically modulated cell resistance to dasatinib,
or directly affected EOC cell survival. We then compared this set of
siRNAs with previously identified modulators of response to
EGFR-targeting agents and cytotoxic drugs, contrasting action in EOC cell
lines versus other types of cancer cell lines. From a set of 60 siRNAs
intrinsically reducing cell growth and survival, some (16 siRNAs) were
specific for EOC cells. In contrast, 38 siRNAs antagonized the response
of EOC cells to dasatinib, and are promising drug treatment-resistance
biomarkers. We concluded validation of EOC-specific hits. Mapping the
pattern of drug treatment-resistance hits together with drug
treatment-sensitive hits revealed suggestive clusters of very closely
interacting proteins clustering with well validated modulators of cancer
cell survival, implying we have identified key cancer signaling nodes.
Screening candidates, e.g., PTPN12, Spry4, and HSPA8, which cluster with
well-validated cancer-related signaling hubs, are being examined. These
studies offer an opportunity to employ a functional approach to identify
critical drug response-modifying genes that can be therapeutically
targeted as biomarkers and drug targets to improve EOC treatment outcomes
with emerging targeted agents. (This work was supported by the fellowship
grant from Sass Foundation for Medical Research, Inc, Roslyn, New York to
H. Liu, NIH FCCC-UPenn ovarian cancer SPORE (P50 CA083638), and NIH (R01
CA140323).)

