Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using embryonic melanoblast transcriptome analysis to identify
novel mechanisms promoting metastatic melanoma


Melanomas are among the most aggressive of cancers, especially in their
ability to metastasize. Although melanoma only makes up Melanomas are
among the most aggressive of cancers, especially in their ability to
metastasize. Although melanoma only makes up <6% of all skin cancers, it
contributes to over 70% of skin cancer deaths. We hypothesize that late
stage metastatic melanoma can exploit pathways employed by embryonic
melanoblasts to achieve a more aggressive malignant phenotype. In the
present study, we paint a novel picture of the oncological landscape
based on the melanoblast developmental signature to reveal the intimate
connection between tumorigenesis and developmental processes. While this
theory is largely unproven, there are mechanistic links between the
processes regulating development and malignancy. Other studies have
identified common pathways between embryonic development and cancer. For
instance, the Wnt pathway, in particular -catenin signaling, has been
identified as both a key regulator of cell fate during development and
overactive in several malignancies including melanoma. We have, for the
first time, using next generation RNA-sequencing, isolated and sequenced
the transcriptomes of murine embryonic melanoblasts at several key
representative developmental stages utilizing a newly developed
genetically engineered mouse model with melanocyte-specific GFP
expression. To see the overall classes of gene expression behavior and to
identify and characterize genesets whose expression is common and equally
important to melanomagenic and developmental processes, a heat map was
generated using the top 1000 most variable genes. Furthermore, a gene
list was shortlisted based on compared levels of expression. From that a
distinct group was identified and found to be related to early neural
expression, epigenetic regulation, collagens, G-protein coupled receptors
and calcium regulators. As we were interested in dominant oncogenic
metastatic lesions, we favored the genes that were expressed highly in
embryos but not in differentiated melanocytes. Fold change increase and
fold change decrease were calculated relative to earlier embryonic
readout with a cut off value of 10-fold. By using a novel approach to
filter genes expressed highly in embryonic melanocytes and poorly in
differentiated melanocytes from the 1000 most variable genes, we selected
the top 50 genes and further screened those using mouse and human
melanoma cell lines relative to melanocytes. This extensive genomic
comparative analysis has identified and validated a dozen potential
oncofetal genes that are highly expressed in embryonic melanoblasts as
well as metastatic melanoma cell lines relative to adult differentiated
melanocytes. In this project, we propose to identify and characterize
gene sets whose expression is common and equally important to both
melanomagenesis and melanoblast developmental processes.

