Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plk1 decreases DNA double strand break (DSB) formation during
replication- stalling genotoxic stress


Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is a regulator of the mitotic checkpoint, and
is involved in adaptation, which is the progression of cells into mitosis
with damaged DNA. Deregulation of Plk1 activity is linked to cellular
transformation. Recent studies suggest Plk1 activity to be critical for
resumption of cell cycle progression during recovery from DNA damage.
However, the ability of Plk1 to affect the DNA damage response remains
relatively unclear. The aim of the present study was to determine the
ability of Plk1 to affect the DNA damage response in the face of
different forms of DSB-inducing genotoxic stress. We employed the
respiratory carcinogen, hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)], the anticancer drug
and topoisomerase II inhibitor, etoposide, as well as the oxidizer, H2O2.
We have previously shown that Plk1 activation was sufficient to bypass
the G2/M checkpoint in normal human lung cells (HLFs), in the presence of
Cr(VI)-induced acute genotoxic stress. In the present study, we measured
DNA DSB induction in HLFs by the respective genotoxins under the
condition of Plk1 activation by using the comet assay and H2AX
immunofluorescence staining. Transfection of HLFs with the constitutively
active (c/a) Plk1 T210D mutant resulted in increased Plk1 protein
expression 24h-48h post transfection. We used equitoxic concentrations of
the different genotoxins and found that DNA DSBs increased > 2 fold after
exposure to 3 M Cr(VI), 12.5 M etoposide, and 150 M H2O2, respectively,
and persisted for at least 4h. Consistent with DNA DSB formation, Cr(VI)
exposure was associated with G1 arrest, at least at 4h, as determined by
BrdU incorporation. Expression of the c/a T210D mutant increased Plk1
activity in vitro, and abrogated both Cr(VI) and etoposide-induced DNA
DSBs as early as 30 min, and up to 4h post-treatment, in comparison to
the vector control-transfected cells. In sharp contrast, treatment with
150 M H2O2 induced a similar level of DNA DSBs in both the c/a T210D
mutant- and vector-transfected cells. These data highlight the ability of
Plk1 to decrease DNA DSBs uniquely under conditions of
replication-stalling genotoxic stress. Given the documented roles of
aberrant DNA damage response and Plk1 activation in cellular
transformation, there is a critical need to define the molecular
mechanism(s) by which Plk1 mediates decreased DNA DSBs after genotoxin
exposure and delineate the pathways responsible for Plk1 activation. We
postulate that the ability of Plk1 activation to abrogate DNA DSB
formation after either Cr(VI) or etoposide exposure may occur at the
expense of genomic stability. Supported by NIH grants CA107972 and
ES017334 to SC and ES09961 and ES05304 to SRP and PhRMA foundation to GC.

