Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase II study of panitumumab plus irinotecan as second-line
therapy for advanced esophageal adenocarcinoma


Background: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a lethal cancer, and the
incidence is increasing. Our group demonstrated that over-expression of
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) correlated with reduced
survival in EAC. Panitumumab (P) is a fully human IgG2 monoclonal
antibody against human EGFR. Cetuximab combined with irinotecan (I) has
shown activity for second-line treatment of advanced colorectal cancer
(CRC). P alone is active in EGFR expressing CRC as well. Our group has
empiric evidence for the activity of cetuximab + I as third-line
treatment for advanced EAC. As such, a phase II study was designed to
evaluate P + I as second-line therapy for advanced EAC. Trial Design: The
primary endpoint is overall response (OR) as measured by RECIST
(cross-sectional imaging every 2 cycles). Secondary endpoints include
overall survival, safety/toxicity and correlative studies. Patients with
confirmed EAC with history of one prior treatment are treated with P 9
mg/m2 on day 1 and I 125 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 of each 21 day cycle to a
maximum of 6 cycles. Inclusion criteria include confirmed EAC, measurable
disease, no prior I or P, PS Background: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC)
is a lethal cancer, and the incidence is increasing. Our group
demonstrated that over-expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) correlated with reduced survival in EAC. Panitumumab (P) is a
fully human IgG2 monoclonal antibody against human EGFR. Cetuximab
combined with irinotecan (I) has shown activity for second-line treatment
of advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). P alone is active in EGFR expressing
CRC as well. Our group has empiric evidence for the activity of cetuximab
+ I as third-line treatment for advanced EAC. As such, a phase II study
was designed to evaluate P + I as second-line therapy for advanced EAC.
Trial Design: The primary endpoint is overall response (OR) as measured
by RECIST (cross-sectional imaging every 2 cycles). Secondary endpoints
include overall survival, safety/toxicity and correlative studies.
Patients with confirmed EAC with history of one prior treatment are
treated with P 9 mg/m2 on day 1 and I 125 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 of each
21 day cycle to a maximum of 6 cycles. Inclusion criteria include
confirmed EAC, measurable disease, no prior I or P, PS <2 and normal
organ function. A Simon two-stage design is used with power of 80% and a
type I error of 0.05. 18 patients will be tested in the first stage and
will terminate the trial if 2 or fewer respond. A total of 43 patients
will be studied. Blood and tissue are obtained to analyse the role of
FC-R receptors as well EGFR pathway components and kras mutations.
Enrollment: The 1st patient was enrolled in May 2009. Through August
2011, 7 patients received treatment. Preliminary results: Of the 7
patients treated, all are white males, median age 62. 2 patients
completed 6 cycles. 1 patient received 3 cycles, 3 received 2 cycles and
1 patient completed 1 cycle. 3 patients are still alive. However, only 1
patient is still in the trial. 4 patients received dose reductions due to
grade 3 or 4 side effects, including GI disturbances (5), fatigue(1),
skin rash(1), electrolyte imbalances(2) and hematologic abnormalities
(5). Reasons for discontinuation included progressive disease (PD, 5
patients) and patient refusal (2). The longest survival was 338 days1 of
the 2 patients who completed 6 cycles. The second patient who completed 6
cycles is alive at 307 days. 1 patient completed 3 cycles and survived
213 days after PD. 1 patient survived 174 days followed PD after 2
cycles. 2 patients completed 2 cycles and are still alive, surviving 151
(pt refusal) and 103 days respectively. The shortest survival was 85 days
who completed only 1 cycle. Conclusion: Preliminary data from this Phase
II trial suggests that patients with advanced EAC might benefit from P+I
regimen as 2nd line therapy. 3 additional centers will open the trial.
Accrual is ongoing, and correlative studies will follow. This project
used the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and was supported in
part by award P30CA047904

