Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-126 reduces the tumorigenicity of melanoma cells in vitro and
alters the melanoma microenvironment


The microRNA (miRNA) miR-126 is highly expressed in endothelial cells and
often reported as down-regulated in cancer. The present study thoroughly
examines the functional relevance of miR-126 in melanoma progression and
suggests a central role of this miRNA as prognostic marker and modulator
of the melanoma microenvironment. Initially, the expression of miR-126
was quantified in two independent, isogenic cell line model series of
melanoma progression. To further explore its functional role, two stable
over-expression cell lines were generated and subjected to an extensive
series of in vitro assays. Subsequently, the prognostic relevance of
miR-126 was assessed via in situ hybridization on a large melanoma tissue
microarray cohort. In both melanoma cell line systems, miR-126 expression
was inversely correlated with the level of tumorigenicity.
Over-expression of miR-126 in vitro resulted in a significant decrease in
colony formation, both in the presence and absence of anchorage, while
cell viability remained unaffected. Using a three-dimensional spheroid
invasion assay, over-expression of miR-126 significantly reduced cell
invasiveness. In addition, a substantial reduction in tumor cell adhesion
to VCAM-1 coated micro-channels was observed when the adhesive capacity
of miR-126 over-expressing cells was examined under shear stress using
the Cellix's Microfluidic Platform. Using in situ hybridization on tissue
microarrays containing melanoma tissue, miR-126 expression was evident in
the tumor vasculature whereas melanoma cells did not appear to express
miR-126. Analysis of the degree of vascular staining revealed a
significant association between lower vascular miR-126 expression and
lower T-stage. In addition, high vascular miR-126 scores were
significantly associated with prolonged overall survival, in particular
in high grade tumors (T-stages 3 and 4). Overall, miR-126 over-expression
was shown to trigger a less aggressive phenotype in melanoma cells in
vitro. Nonetheless, its clinical relevance in melanoma may primarily be
mediated by the tumor vasculature. Depletion of miR-126 has previously
been linked to a number of tumor relevant phenotypes, including
inflammation. Vascular up-regulation of the miR-126 target protein VCAM-1
may mediate increased tumor infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages,
which are known to play a crucial role in tumor development and
prognosis. This renders miR-126 an exciting target for closer
investigation with regard to its role in the melanoma microenvironment.

