Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCPS as a cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma susceptibility gene


DCPS is a candidate cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
susceptibility gene as determined by allelic imbalance mapping of over
400 matched SCC and normal DNA samples. DCPS is one of three genes
located in a region of 11q24 showing strong evidence of preferential
allelic loss. Consistently, by immunohistochemistry it shows no protein
expression in 23% of SCCs and decreased expression in 30% of SCCs. There
are high levels of protein expression in all of the normal skin tissues
assessed. DCPS, a decapping scavenger enzyme, impacts aspects of mRNA
metabolism, such as pre-mRNA splicing and decay. The hypothesis driving
this research is that DCPS acts as a tumor suppressor and that in humans
there are alleles conferring greater resistance to tumors, which are
selectively lost during tumorigenesis. To test whether DCPS acts as a
tumor suppressor, we studied functional effects of increasing and
decreasing expression of DcpS in a mouse keratinocyte cell line. Pre-mRNA
splicing was examined by quantitative assessment of different splice
forms of mini-gene transcripts between low, endogenous, and
overexpression cell lines. Preliminary data suggest that first intron
splicing occurs more efficiently in DcpS overexpression cell lines and
that there is no change in second intron splicing in DcpS overexpression
cell lines. In stable DcpS knockdown cell lines, no differences were
observed in first or second intron splicing. Differences in mRNA
stability were assessed between the three levels of expression by mRNA
stability assays. Preliminary data suggest that DcpS knockdown cell lines
have more stable mRNA of the two tested transcripts than endogenous and
overexpression cell lines. By MTT assays to measure proliferation, DcpS
knockdown lines exhibited more growth than endogenous and overexpression
lines between 24 and 48 hours, but there were no differences at later
time points. Future studies will examine apoptosis, migration, and cell
cycle parameters in these cell lines. This research has the potential to
identify a new mechanism of cancer susceptibility involving RNA splicing
and stability, improve cancer risk screening, and identify therapeutic
and preventative targets.

