Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEKK1 regulates DMP1 transcriptional activity via phosphorylation
and predicts breast cancer patient outcome


Breast cancer remains a significant public health issue in the
industrialized countries. Physicians depend on surgery, cytotoxic
adjuvant chemotherapy, or radiation for treatment of breast cancer
patients. Few novel therapies are approved for clinical use. Although
existing therapies are effective in controling the disease in many
patients, the cytotoxic side-effects make them limited. This is
especially the case in the patients with early stage breast cancer whose
prognosis with surgery alone is good and avoiding adjuvant chemotherapy
would spare them toxic side effects. On the other hand, significant
fraction of patients relapses and develops metastasis. Therefore, it is
critical to identify markers for better breast cancer patient
stratification based on their prognosis that would guide physicians in
selection and aggressiveness of therapies. Recently, we linked
transcription factor DMP1 (cyclin D binding protein 1, Dmtf1) as a
critical tumor suppressor that blocks proliferative signals from ErbB2
and oncogenic Ras by activating p14Arf-p53 pathway. hDMP1 is hemizygously
deleted in 50% of human breast tumors that retain wild-type ARF and p53.
In this study we identified an upstream kinase, MEKK1, which cooperates
with Dmp1 to activate Arf transcription. In constitutively active form
(C-terminal kinase domain or CA-MEKK1), MEKK1 increased transcriptional
activity of Dmp1 via direct phosphorylation, while the full length
(regulatory and kinase domain) form behaved as a feedback inhibitor by
increasing Dmp1 ubiquitination. Phosphorylation sites on DMP1 that
increase its transcriptional activity were mapped to the C-terminal
transactivation domain. Expression of CA-MEKK1 in breast cancer cell
lines activated endogenous Arf-p53 pathway. hMEKK1 is located on human
5q11 chromosome, a locus frequently deleted in breast and lung cancer.
Since MEKK1 appeared to be an activator of p53 tumor suppressor pathway,
we wondered if MEKK1 is involved in human cancer. Using DNA from breast
cancer patient tumors and matched normal tissue, we analyzed hMEKK1 gene
deletion using specific loss of heterozygosity (LOH) primers. MEKK1 was
found hemizygously deleted in 20% of patients. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed reduction of MEKK1 protein intensity to LOH(+) compared to LOH
(-) patients. In the independent cohort of breast cancer patients, we
show that low MEKK1 mRNA expression is associated with adverse outcome.
Here we show that constitutively active MEKK1 is a novel activator of
Dmp1-Arf-p53 pathway via Dmp1 phosphorylation. The MEKK1 gene was
frequently deleted in breast tumor tissue and its expression was
correlated with disease outcome. Overall, MEKK1 is a potential
prognostic/predictive indicator for breast cancer and could be used by
physicians to better stratify patients.

