Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global levels of H3K27me3 track with differentiation in vivo and
are deregulated by MYC in prostate cancer


Both embryonic stem cells and various cancer cell types contain abundant
amounts of decondensed chromatin. However, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for altering chromatin states in stem cells and cancer cells
are not well understood. One factor may be the oncogenic transcription
factor, MYC. MYC is overexpressed in many tumor types and affects a wide
array of essential cellular processes including ribosome and
mitochondrial biogenesis, metabolism, and cell cycle progression. MYC is
also a key factor in reprogramming of somatic adult cells into induced
pluripotent stem cells. Less well known is that MYC also affects global
chromatin structure where it is required to maintain open or active
chromatin. We hypothesize that in prostate cancer, MYC affects global
chromatin structure keeping it in a more open conformation thus
maintaining the cells in a less differentiated state resembling that of
stem cells. We show by immunohistochemistry that compared to the more
differentiated luminal cells, less differentiated stem-like cells in the
basal compartment of the human and mouse prostate contain lower levels of
the polycomb heterochromatin mark, H3K27me3. This link to the
differentiated state of normal cells is also found in a number of other
human and rodent tissues characterized by hierarchical differentiation
and rapid turnover of stem cell compartments. Further, in MYC-driven
prostate cancers in mice, global levels of H3K27me3 are reduced in both
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and invasive adenocarcinoma
lesions. This pattern of global H3K27me3 reduction in PIN and invasive
prostate cancers is also observed in humans, correlates with global
chromatin decondensation, and correlates with increased markers of
disease aggressiveness (e.g. Gleason score and pathological stage). In
prostate and breast cancer cells, experimentally forced reductions in MYC
levels result in increased global levels of H3K27me3. These findings
suggest that increased levels of decondensed chromatin in normal
stem/progenitor cells and in cancer cells are associated with global loss
of the H3K27me3 polycomb mark, and furthermore, MYC overexpression could
be one mechanism for this H3K27me3 deregulation.

