Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol targeting of carcinogen-induced brain endothelial cell
inflammation biomarkers MMP-9 and COX-2 is Sirt1-independent


Background: The occurrence of a functional relationship between the
release of metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the expression of cyclooxygenase
(COX)-2, two inducible pro-inflammatory biomarkers with important
pro-angiogenic effects, has recently been inferred. While brain
endothelial cells play an essential role as structural and functional
components of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), increased BBB breakdown is
thought to be linked to neuroinflammation. Chemopreventive mechanisms
targeting both MMPs and COX-2 however remain poorly investigated. In this
study, we evaluated the pharmacological targeting of Sirt1 by the
diet-derived and antiinflammatory polyphenol resveratrol. Methods: Total
RNA, cell lysates, and conditioned culture media from human brain
microvascular endothelial cells (HBMEC) were analyzed using qRT-PCR,
immunoblotting, and zymography respectively. Results: Tissue scan
microarray analysis of grade I-IV brain tumours cDNA revealed increased
gene expression of Sirt-1 from grade I-III but surprisingly not in grade
IV brain tumours. HBMEC were treated with a combination of resveratrol
and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), a carcinogen known to increase
MMP-9 and COX-2 through NF-B. We found that resveratrol efficiently
reversed the PMA-induced MMP-9 secretion and COX-2 expression. Gene
silencing of Sirt1, a critical modulator of angiogenesis and putative
target of resveratrol, did not lead to significant reversal of MMP-9 and
COX-2 inhibition. Decreased resveratrol inhibitory potential of
carcinogen-induced IB phosphorylation in siSirt1-transfected HBMEC was
however observed. Conclusion: Our results suggest that resveratrol may
prevent BBB disruption during neuroinflammation by inhibiting MMP-9 and
COX-2 and act as a pharmacological NF-B signal transduction inhibitor
independent of Sirt1.

