Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR suppresses breast tumor progression by inducing cell
polarization and inhibiting cell invasion


Background: Disruption of tissue polarity is one of hallmarks of breast
cancer development, which is associated with cell invasion and cancer
dissemination. Therefore, identifying proteins and pathways that modulate
cell polarity is crucial not only to advancing our knowledge of breast
cancer, but also to discovering potential therapeutic targets. Methods:
To identify potential regulators of tissue polarity, we analyzed
over-represented DNA motifs in the promoter regions of the polarization
genes that are significantly up-regulated genes in polarized human
mammary epithelial cells in a physiologically relevant three-dimensional
(3D) culture system. We assessed the protein levels of ROR by
immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry in malignant and non-malignant
human mammary epithelial cells as well as human breast cancer tissue
array. To explore the functional significance of ROR down-regulation the
malignance of breast cancer cells, we restored ROR expression in
malignant T4-2 cells, MDA231 cells and silenced ROR expression in
non-malignant S1 cells. The growth and malignant phenotypes of these
cells were examined in 3D culture and xenograft model. Results: Results
from promoter analysis suggest that ROR is a potential regulator of
mammary tissue polarity and is inactivated in disorganized HMECs.
Expression of ROR protein is significantly reduced in malignant breast
cancer cell lines and this reduction is associated with disruption of
acinar structure in 3D culture. Both mRNA and protein level of ROR were
significantly reduced in human breast cancer tissues. Restoring ROR
expression in T4-2 and MDA-MB 231 cells significantly suppressed
proliferation, invasion and the malignant phenotypes in 3D culture.
Silencing ROR expression in non-malignant S1 cells disrupts the polarized
acinar morphogenesis. Restoring ROR expression in T4-2 and MDA-MB 231
cells also inhibits the tumor growth in nude mice. Moreover, patients
with reduced expression of ROR in cancer tissue have significantly
shorter survival. Conclusion: Together these results indicate that
inactivation of ROR promotes the breast cancer development and
progression by enhancing cell invasion and disturbing normal tissue
architecture. ROR provide a potential therapeutic target for breast
cancer.

