Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB-2 inhibits Notch-4 expression and activity in breast cancer
independent of ER function


Amplification, over-expression, and/or hyperactivity of ErbB-2 occur in
50% of breast tumors which include both luminal A/B and the HER2+
subtypes. Metastatic breast tumors that overexpress ErbB-2 are generally
resistant to anti-hormonal or anti-HER2-targeted therapy. We have
published that either 17beta-estradiol or overexpression of ErbB-2
suppresses Notch activity and this is reversed by inhibitors of estrogen
receptor (ER) or ErbB-2. Furthermore, we demonstrated that when breast
tumors are treated with a Notch inhibitor (gamma-secretase inhibitor or
GSI) in combination with tamoxifen (ER+ cells) or trastuzumab (ErbB-2+
cells), ER+ breast tumor xenografts regress or ErbB-2+ xenografts do not
recur. Based on these published findings, we asked in the current study
by what mechanism does ErbB-2 inhibit Notch signaling. We used both
genetic and pharmacologic approaches to address the hypothesis that
ErbB-2 hyperactivity was sufficient to suppress Notch independent of ER
function. Our results showed that Notch-4 transcription is specifically
and significantly decreased when ErbB-2 or Heregulin-beta1 is
stably-overexpressed in MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, the data demonstrated
that while 17beta-estradiol inhibits Notch-4 mRNA and protein expression,
which was reversed by fulvestrant, the inhibition on Notch-4 by ErbB-2 or
by Heregulin-beta1 overexpression was independent of ER activity. In
addition, we confirmed that ER status was an independent factor by
specifically targeting ErbB-2 using lapatinib in ER negative SKBr3 breast
cancer cells and the results showed that Notch-4 mRNA and protein
increased to more than 100 fold compared to vehicle treatment. We have
recently published that c-Fos is a potential transcriptional repressor of
Notch-4 in breast cancer cells and in agreement, we identified that c-Fos
levels were significantly elevated in breast cancer cells
stably-overexpressing either ErbB-2 or Heregulin-beta1. The biological
significance of Notch-4 overexpression was investigated in two relevant
resistant models in vitro and in vivo. Resistance to lapatinib was
prevented by co-treatment of a GSI plus lapatinib. Resistance to
anti-hormonal therapy using long-term estrogen deprived MCF-7 cells was
reversed by a GSI treatment. MCF-7/HER2 breast tumor xenografts regressed
to undetectable levels with the combination of a GSI plus trastuzumab
under conditoions where estrogen was deprived. In conclusion, results
from the current study suggest that ErbB-2 overexpression or
hyperactivity via Heregulin-beta1 is a potent inhibitor of Notch-4
expression possibly by increasing c-Fos expression. Furthermore, the
regulation of Notch-4 expression is independent of ER function. More
importantly, anti-ER or anti-EbB-2 targeted therapy de-repress Notch-4
expression and thus sensitize breast cancer cells to a Notch inhibitor
such as a GSI to prevent or reverse resistance.

