Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo activity of small molecule HIF2 inhibitors


Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a central regulator of the cellular
response to hypoxia. Hypoxia promotes HIF activity by increasing its
stability, transcriptional activity and translation. HIF target genes
involved in several cellular processes including proliferation,
angiogenesis, metabolism and promotion of the stem-cell phenotype. In
normoxic conditions, HIF- is recognized for degradation by the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein (VHL). Loss-of-VHL function leads
to constitutive expression of HIF regulatory subunits and consequent
over-expression of HIF-target genes. We and others have shown that HIF2a
is necessary and sufficient for the development of VHL-related renal cell
carcinoma. We have developed small molecules that repress HIF-2
translation, in vitro, by enhancing the binding of Iron-Regulatory
Protein 1 (IRP1) to the Iron-Responsive Element (IRE) within the 5-UTR of
HIF-2 mRNA (Zimmer M. et al. Molecular Cell 2008;32: 828-848). We showed
that these small molecules down-regulate HIF2a expression in vitro, in
all renal cell carcinoma cell lines. To validate these small molecules in
vivo, we tested their efficacy on wild-type zebrafish embryos. Treatment
of 3 days post fertilization zebrafish embryos with 100microM of the
hypoxic mimetic DMOG or hypoxia dramatically upregulated the expression
of HIF-target genes, such as Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (Vegf),
erythropoietin (Epo) and prolyl-hydroxylase 3 (Phd3). Pre-treatment of
embryos with the small molecule HIF2a inhibitor 76 potently decreased the
DMOG-induced upregulation of HIF target genes. The IC50 values of these
small molecules were significantly less in vivo than in vitro. We are
currently testing the efficacy of HIF2a inhibitors in rescuing the VHL
zebrafish phenotype and prolonging survival of VHL mutant zebrafish
embryos. In addition, data on the efficacy of these inhibitors on the
growth of human renal cell carcinoma cells as tumors in the nude mouse
xenograft assay will be presented.

