Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing a new population of adult mouse submandibular gland
stem cells


Xerostomia or dry mouth is a hyposalivation condition that leads to
difficulty in speaking, eating, mucosal pain, and enhanced risk of dental
and mandibular infection. It can be due to damage of salivary gland
nervous system, medications, systematic diseases such as diabetes and
Sjogen's syndrome, and radiotherapy (RT) for head and neck cancer.
Current available treatments are ineffective due to limited residual
glandular function. Stem cell transplantation therapy may be a very
promising future direction in treating this severe condition. Using
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) method, we have successfully
identified a new population of stem cells from adult mouse submandibular
gland. Among all the populations of cells evaluated, the
c-Kit+/Sca1+/CD24+/lin cells generated the highest number of salispheres
when cultured in vitro, at least 4 folds more than c-Kit+ or Sca1+ only
cells. The c-Kit+/Sca1+/CD24+/lin cells also expressed significantly
higher level of embryonic salivary stem cell marker keratin 5 (CK5) and
the basolateral secretory duct maker keratin 14 (CK14), when compared to
the CD24+/lin epithelial cell population. MTT assay showed salispheres
derived from c-Kit+/Sca1+/CD24+/lin population exhibited 10 folds higher
enzyme activity than control populations. These spheres continued to
express stem cell markers c-Kit and Sca1 after Day 21 and proliferate
(Ki67 staining) actively after 14 days in vitro. In addition, these
salispheres differentiated into functional acinar cells, indicated by
a-amylase staining. More importantly, the dissociated 1st generation of
salispheres was capable of generating 2nd salispheres in vitro,
indicating the self-renewal property of the these cells. In conclusion,
we have identified a subpopulation of adult salivary gland cells that
exhibit stem cell properties. Future work will focus on (1) gene
expression studies to further elucidate the molecular characteristics of
these cells and (2) confirming their renewal capacity in vivo via
transplantation studies.

