Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin E delta-tocotrienol prevents azoxymethane-induced colon
carcinogenesis progression in Fisher-344 rats


Background: Chemoprevention by bioactive food components has emerged as
an alternative approach for the prevention of colorectal carcinogenesis.
We have shown that natural vitamin E delta-tocotrienol is the most
bioactive tocotrienol against pancreatic cancer. This study evaluated the
efficacy of vitamin E delta-tocotrienol feeding in the prevention of
azoxymethane-induced colorectal polyps and cancer formation in Fisher-344
rats. We also evaluated the antitumor activity of vitamin E
delta-tocotrienol in colorectal cancer cell lines and in APCmin mouse
model. Methods: The in vivo antitumor activity of delta-tocotrienol was
evaluated in azoxymethane-treated Fisher-344 rats. Rats were administered
azoxymethane (15 mg/kg, SC, 2 x in 2 weeks) then randomly selected into 3
groups: 1) No treatment, 2) Vehicle (ethanol extracted olive oil, 1
ml/kg, PO twice daily and 3) Delta-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg, PO) twice
daily for 20 or 40 weeks. The animals were euthanized and the colons were
examined for polyps and cancers. Colon tissues were fixed in buffered
formalin, embedded, cut and stained with H & E and scored. The APCmin
mice were treated with 1) vehicle (olive oil, 1 ml/kg, PO) twice daily
for 2 weeks and 2) Delta-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg, PO) twice daily for 2
weeks. Mice euthanized and colon tissues isolated and evaluated for
proliferation and apoptosis by immunohistochemistry staining. The in
vitro anti-tumor activity of delta-tocotrienol was preformed in human
colorectal cancer cell lines HCT-116, HT-29 and SW 480. Results:
Delta-tocotrienol feeding to azoxymethane-treated rats significantly
reduced (75%, pBackground: Chemoprevention by bioactive food components
has emerged as an alternative approach for the prevention of colorectal
carcinogenesis. We have shown that natural vitamin E delta-tocotrienol is
the most bioactive tocotrienol against pancreatic cancer. This study
evaluated the efficacy of vitamin E delta-tocotrienol feeding in the
prevention of azoxymethane-induced colorectal polyps and cancer formation
in Fisher-344 rats. We also evaluated the antitumor activity of vitamin E
delta-tocotrienol in colorectal cancer cell lines and in APCmin mouse
model. Methods: The in vivo antitumor activity of delta-tocotrienol was
evaluated in azoxymethane-treated Fisher-344 rats. Rats were administered
azoxymethane (15 mg/kg, SC, 2 x in 2 weeks) then randomly selected into 3
groups: 1) No treatment, 2) Vehicle (ethanol extracted olive oil, 1
ml/kg, PO twice daily and 3) Delta-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg, PO) twice
daily for 20 or 40 weeks. The animals were euthanized and the colons were
examined for polyps and cancers. Colon tissues were fixed in buffered
formalin, embedded, cut and stained with H & E and scored. The APCmin
mice were treated with 1) vehicle (olive oil, 1 ml/kg, PO) twice daily
for 2 weeks and 2) Delta-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg, PO) twice daily for 2
weeks. Mice euthanized and colon tissues isolated and evaluated for
proliferation and apoptosis by immunohistochemistry staining. The in
vitro anti-tumor activity of delta-tocotrienol was preformed in human
colorectal cancer cell lines HCT-116, HT-29 and SW 480. Results:
Delta-tocotrienol feeding to azoxymethane-treated rats significantly
reduced (75%, p<0.002) the number of polyps formation compared to
untreated or vehicle treated rats. Moreover, the number of colon cancer
formation was reduced (70%, pBackground: Chemoprevention by bioactive
food components has emerged as an alternative approach for the prevention
of colorectal carcinogenesis. We have shown that natural vitamin E
delta-tocotrienol is the most bioactive tocotrienol against pancreatic
cancer. This study evaluated the efficacy of vitamin E delta-tocotrienol
feeding in the prevention of azoxymethane-induced colorectal polyps and
cancer formation in Fisher-344 rats. We also evaluated the antitumor
activity of vitamin E delta-tocotrienol in colorectal cancer cell lines
and in APCmin mouse model. Methods: The in vivo antitumor activity of
delta-tocotrienol was evaluated in azoxymethane-treated Fisher-344 rats.
Rats were administered azoxymethane (15 mg/kg, SC, 2 x in 2 weeks) then
randomly selected into 3 groups: 1) No treatment, 2) Vehicle (ethanol
extracted olive oil, 1 ml/kg, PO twice daily and 3) Delta-tocotrienol
(200 mg/kg, PO) twice daily for 20 or 40 weeks. The animals were
euthanized and the colons were examined for polyps and cancers. Colon
tissues were fixed in buffered formalin, embedded, cut and stained with H
& E and scored. The APCmin mice were treated with 1) vehicle (olive oil,
1 ml/kg, PO) twice daily for 2 weeks and 2) Delta-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg,
PO) twice daily for 2 weeks. Mice euthanized and colon tissues isolated
and evaluated for proliferation and apoptosis by immunohistochemistry
staining. The in vitro anti-tumor activity of delta-tocotrienol was
preformed in human colorectal cancer cell lines HCT-116, HT-29 and SW
480. Results: Delta-tocotrienol feeding to azoxymethane-treated rats
significantly reduced (75%, p<0.002) the number of polyps formation
compared to untreated or vehicle treated rats. Moreover, the number of
colon cancer formation was reduced (70%, p<0.001) with delta-tocotrienol
feeding compared to untreated or vehicle treated rats. In colonic tissues
of APCmin mice, delta-tocotrienol feeding decreased proliferation
(Ki-67), induction of p27, and induction of apoptosis (caspase-3)
compared to vehicle treated mice. Delta-tocotrienol also inhibited cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis in HCT-116, HT-29 and SW 480 cell
lines, through induction of nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-kB) and
degradation of beta-catenin. Conclusion: These data show the efficacy of
natural vitamin E delta-tocotrienol against the early stages of
colorectal carcinogenesis as well as anti-proliferative and apoptotic
activity in colorectal cancer both in vitro and in vivo. Delta
tocotrienol likely targets NF-kB and beta-catenin signaling pathways,
suggesting its potential clinical usefulness for the prevention of human
colorectal cancer.

