Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic determinants of PAH-DNA adduct level and nucleotide
excision repair among non-smokers in a high risk area for esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) play a role in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in high risk areas where even
non-smokers are highly exposed to these compounds. Their early biological
effect is the formation of DNA adducts, mediated by phase 1 and 2
pathways and nucleotide excision repair (NER). We aimed at finding a
genetic model to explain inter-individual variations in PAH-DNA adduct
level among people with similar exposures. Methods: In 111
randomly-selected female non-smokers from the Golestan Cohort Study in
Iran, 21 SNPs in 14 genes related to xenobiotic metabolism and 13 SNPs in
9 DNA repair genes were studied (Table). NER capacity was evaluated by a
comet assay, and DNA adduct level was measured by 32p-postlabelling.
Multivariate regression was used to assess the effects of the number of
risk alleles, NER capacity, and environmental exposures on the
log-transformed PAH-DNA adduct levels. Models were compared by Akaike's
information criterion (AIC). Results: Mean PAH-DNA adduct level was
5.76+3.13 per 108 nucleotides (range: 1.71 - 18.57). The level of PAH-DNA
adducts was significantly lower in homozygotes for N-acetyltransferase 2
(NAT2) slow alleles and excision repair cross-complementing (ERCC)-5 T/T
genotype, and higher in individuals with myeloperoxidase (MPO) G/G
genotype. The sum of risk alleles in these genes had a significant
correlation with the log-adduct level (r=0.4, pBackground: Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) play a role in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma in high risk areas where even non-smokers are highly exposed to
these compounds. Their early biological effect is the formation of DNA
adducts, mediated by phase 1 and 2 pathways and nucleotide excision
repair (NER). We aimed at finding a genetic model to explain
inter-individual variations in PAH-DNA adduct level among people with
similar exposures. Methods: In 111 randomly-selected female non-smokers
from the Golestan Cohort Study in Iran, 21 SNPs in 14 genes related to
xenobiotic metabolism and 13 SNPs in 9 DNA repair genes were studied
(Table). NER capacity was evaluated by a comet assay, and DNA adduct
level was measured by 32p-postlabelling. Multivariate regression was used
to assess the effects of the number of risk alleles, NER capacity, and
environmental exposures on the log-transformed PAH-DNA adduct levels.
Models were compared by Akaike's information criterion (AIC). Results:
Mean PAH-DNA adduct level was 5.76+3.13 per 108 nucleotides (range: 1.71
- 18.57). The level of PAH-DNA adducts was significantly lower in
homozygotes for N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) slow alleles and excision
repair cross-complementing (ERCC)-5 T/T genotype, and higher in
individuals with myeloperoxidase (MPO) G/G genotype. The sum of risk
alleles in these genes had a significant correlation with the log-adduct
level (r=0.4, p<0.001). The table shows gene level coefficients for
multivariate analysis. The model including environmental exposures, phase
1 SNPs and NER capacity had the best fit (AIC=93.7). NER capacity itself
was affected by a polymorphism in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
gene. Conclusion: We observed a high level of PAH-DNA adducts with great
inter-individual variation, which could be best explained by a
combination of environmental factors, number of polymorphisms in phase 1
genes and DNA repair capacity.


