Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High quality DNA obtained with an automated DNA Extraction method
with 15 to 40 year old formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks
from normal and cancer tissues


DNA and RNA have been used as markers of tissue quality and integrity in
tissues the last decade. In this research study, kidney, liver, colon,
lung, and breast genomic quality were analyzed in tissues from surgical
cancer patients and post-mortem cases obtained with an IRB approved
protocol and informed/or next of kin consent. DNA extraction was
performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (FFPE) from both
groups of cases from the 1970's through the 2000's and formalin fixed /
long term 70% ethanol storage(15 + years). To extract the DNA from the
FFPE tissues, we soaked all tissues in xylene to remove the paraffin,
digested the tissue with a proteinase K solution, and used an automated
extraction machine to extract the DNA. A similar SOP was used for the
formalin fixed/ 70% long term ethanol-stored tissue, except the tissue
was first homogenized rather than soaked in xylene. DNA quality and yield
were evaluated using a spectrophotometer. Gel electrophoresis was used to
evaluate the length of the DNA in about 20% of the 200 samples. Samples
that had optical density (OD) readings above 1.60 and below 2.10 with a
DNA yield above 100 g/mL were deemed to be high quality DNA. FFPE tissues
yielded the highest DNA concentration and quality (OD reading of 1.87 and
yield of 625 ug/ml) with greater than 95% of the samples meeting the
above specifications, while the formalin fixed/long term 70% ethanol
stored tissue yielded both the lowest DNA concentration and quality
(yield of 52 ug/ml and OD reading of 1.48). In conclusion, the results
show that high quality DNA can be extracted from FFPE tissue using an
automated DNA extraction procedure with paraffin blocks from the early
1970's to present, and the DNA extracted is useful for clinical and
experimental studies. The DNA from tissues stored in aqueous media
(formalin fixed / long term 70% ethanol storage) may be useful in some
research applications, but the DNA is partially degraded compared to the
tissue stored in paraffin blocks.

