Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histological and biological effects of substituted quinolines (gap
junction enhancers) in a spontaneous mammary tumor model


Effective use of antineoplastic drugs depends on the ability to balance
the killing of tumor cells against the inherent toxicity to the host.
Antineoplastic agents that act primarily on rapidly dividing and growing
cells produce multiple side effects and are dose limiting. In recent
years, there has been the development of biologic response modifiers
aimed at enhancing innate anti-tumor defense mechanisms. Previous
publications showed that substituted quinolines possess potent inhibitory
activities against breast cancer cells through the enhancement of gap
junction intercellular communication. These drugs decrease 71% of
xenograft breast tumors in nude mice. The objective of this project is to
evaluate the effect of substituted quinolines in a spontaneous mouse
mammary tumor model (PyVT). PyVT mice were used at three different stages
(pre, early and late) to characterize histological and biological changes
in the treated animals compared to controls. Substituted quinolines cause
a decrease of tumor growth rate by 112%, 77%, and 57% in the pre, early,
and late stages of tumor development, respectively. Treatment during the
pre and early stages of tumor formation also resulted in a decrease in
the total number of tumors. Western blot analysis of the pre stage tumors
show that the gap junction protein connexin 43 is more expressed in
treated animals compared to control and the contrary for connexin 46. In
the early and late stages, connexin 43 is expressed less in treated mice
than controls, and vice versa for connexin 46. The expression of these
connexins in control tissue suggests that this is due to an overall
increase in connexin 43 and a decrease in connexin 46 during tumor
development and metastasis. Histology of vital organs showed no
significant alteration in treated animals compared to controls. These
findings provide evidence that substituted quinolines cause a significant
tumor reduction in a spontaneous mammary tumor model with no obvious
adverse effects.

