Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SAR125844: a potent and selective ATP-competitive inhibitor of MET
kinase


The tyrosine kinase MET is a membrane receptor that is essential for
embryonic development and wound healing in normal cells. Stimulation of
MET by its natural ligand, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), induces
cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Abnormal MET activation
(over-expression of MET protein, amplification or mutations of the MET
gene) has been observed in multiple human cancer types. We report herein
the discovery of a potent and selective small molecule inhibitor
(SAR125844) with potential therapeutic application in cancer patients
with deregulated MET-dependent malignancies. Our initial hit
identification approach was based on the biochemical screen of an
in-house kinase inhibitor biased library where a series of benzimidazole
sulfonate derivatives were identified with sub-micromolar MET inhibition.
In particular, the initial hit exhibited an IC50 of 140 nM vs MET but it
also had strong affinity for CDK9 (IC50= 6 nM), a CDK isoform involved in
gene transcription. Chemical modifications of the series to dial out CDK9
affinity and remove potential normal cell cytotoxicity led to a more
selective derivative with IC50's of 80nM and 1355nM vs MET and CDK9
respectively. Further sub-structural exploration allowed us to identify a
heteorocyclic moiety which was shown by X-ray data to specifically
interact with Tyr1230 in a non active conformation of the protein. The
resulting highly favourable U-shape mode of binding in MET of
representative examples from these series (e.g. IC50= 1nM) was not
tolerated in CDK9 (IC50 > 10M). Final multi-parametric medicinal
chemistry optimisation led to SAR125844 with single digit nanomolar
antiproliferative activity on MET-amplified cell lines. SAR125844 is
highly selective for MET kinase in a panel of 275 kinases tested, with
only 5 other protein kinases inhibited at IC50 values below 300 nM. This
compound exhibits also satisfactory eADMET in vitro properties and has
shown moderate total plasma clearance, large volume of distribution and
moderate to long terminal elimination half-life in rats.

