Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profile of chemoresponse of microdissected
papillary serous tumors of the ovary identifies POLH and REV3L as
potential therapeutic targets


Treatment of advanced stage ovarian carcinoma often involves
cytoreductive surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel
and either cisplatin or carboplatin. Most tumors have either inherent or
develop acquired resistance to chemotherapy, resulting in patient demise
from their cancer. The mechanism of drug nonresponse
(refractory/resistance) remains unknown and currently there is no
clinically useful molecular predictor of response. Here, we determined
the gene expression profile of 52 microdissected advanced stage papillary
serous ovarian cancer and identified gene expression signatures
predictive for nonresponse to chemotherapy. To generate a predictive gene
signature, class prediction algorithms were applied to genes
differentially expressed between resistant and sensitive tumors
(pTreatment of advanced stage ovarian carcinoma often involves
cytoreductive surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel
and either cisplatin or carboplatin. Most tumors have either inherent or
develop acquired resistance to chemotherapy, resulting in patient demise
from their cancer. The mechanism of drug nonresponse
(refractory/resistance) remains unknown and currently there is no
clinically useful molecular predictor of response. Here, we determined
the gene expression profile of 52 microdissected advanced stage papillary
serous ovarian cancer and identified gene expression signatures
predictive for nonresponse to chemotherapy. To generate a predictive gene
signature, class prediction algorithms were applied to genes
differentially expressed between resistant and sensitive tumors (p<0.001)
using leave-one-out cross-validation. We developed a predictive 96-gene
signature for tumor refractory and 29-gene signature for tumor resistance
to chemotherapy. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR validated the results of
the cDNA microarray analysis. To further validate our array results and
demonstrate therapeutic value of these targets, we pursued several novel
genes to determine whether over expression will render ovarian cancer
cell lines resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Overexpression of EDIL3,
GNA13 and POLH genes imparted cisplatin resistance to the ovarian cancer
cell lines. As DNA Polymerases contribute to cell survival and the
emergence of resistant cells by allowing cells to replicate beyond
cisplatin adducts to avoid replication arrest and cell death, we decided
to evaluate the potential therapeutic value of the genes POLH (DNA
polymerase eta) and REV3L (DNA polymerase zeta) using short interfering
RNA (siRNA) approach. Reduced gene expression via gene specific siRNA
molecules renders ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780-CP20 and UCI 107)
sensitive to cisplatin in vitro. Further, we validated these results in
an orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer using liposomal (DOPC) siRNA
approach as these nanoscale liposomes can penetrate deeply into the
tumor. A combination of siREV3L/siPOLH-DOPC with cisplatin resulted in a
significant reduction in mean tumor weight compared to mice treated with
nonspecific control siRNA (77% reduction; Mann Whitney test, P=0.0140),
compared to mice treated by nonspecific control siRNA with cisplatin (72%
reduction; Mann Whitney test, P=0.0108), and compared to those mice
treated with combination siREV3L/siPOLH-DOPC (68% reduction; Mann Whitney
test, P=0.0070). In conclusion, here we report gene profile signatures of
the chemoresponse of ovarian cancer. POLH and REV3L identified as
potential therapeutic targets which can serve as targets for specific
molecular therapeutic molecules that can increase the sensitivity of
ovarian cancer to standard chemotherapy.

