Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AP-1 activation and a functional SNP242 regulates the LY-6K gene
expression in human breast cancer cells


Background: Lymphocyte antigen 6 complex locus K(LY-6K), a member of
LY-6/uPAR receptor superfamily and cancer-testis antigen, is a novel
breast cancer biomarker. Also LY-6K is target antigen for the head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma, and lung and esophageal carcinoma. Elevated
LY-6K induces cell invasion and metastasis through activating the
Raf-1/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. However, the molecular mechanisms that
mediate regulation of human LY-6K gene expression are completely unknown.
Material and Methods: Within the pGL3-basic reporter vector, the
3050/+182 bp fragment, truncated and mutated fragment upstream of the
LY-6K gene was subcloned and measured promoter activity. Subsequently,
multiple cis elements were identified using several gene tool software
(TFSEARCH, TRANSFAC, PROMO and MATCHTM) in the promoter of human LY-6K
gene. We investigated the transcription factor and the effect of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on LY-6K promoter activity and
transcription factor binding using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), and supershift
assays. Results: LY-6K gene was expressed in estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR)-negative breast cancer cell lines. A novel
AP-1 binding site in the LY-6K promoter regulates LY-6K gene expression.
A polymorphic C/G-SNP at the 242 nucleotide position in the promoter
region (rs2585175, called SNP242) was validated to be located in a PAX-3
transcription binding motif, which is appear with the presence of the
G-allele resulting in a 54% decrease in LY-6K promoter activity by
interfering binding of AP-1 transcription factor. Discussion: The
activity of the AP-1 transcription factor plays an important role in cell
mobility of breast cancer cells via the promoting of LY-6K gene
expression. LY-6K expression is dependent on not AP-1 transcription
factor, but also functional SNP242 G-allele. These results suggested that
the polymorphism rs2585175 (SNP242), in close proximity of the LY-6K
promoter, lead to LY-6K downregulation, and thus, may reduce the risk of
breast cancer.

