Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glioma cell proliferation and tumor development by
Sox21


Sox2 and Sox21 are two transcription factors important for the
developing, as well as the adult, CNS, and they are often co-expressed.
Sox2 is an embryonic stem cell marker, whereas ectopic forced expression
of Sox21 has been shown to induce differentiation in embryonic stem
cells. Further, Sox2 is important for maintenance of neural stem cells
whereas Sox21 is important for neurogenesis. These two
transcriptionfactors are thus in opposite relation to each other and it
is believed that a proper balance between them is needed to regulate
target genes. Sox2 is highly expressed in brain tumors and up to 97% of
GBM samples express Sox2. While the expression of Sox2 has been shown in
GBM, in primary glioma cells and established glioma cell lines, less is
known about Sox21 in glioma. We have previously shown that Sox2 and Sox21
are co-expressed in adult and childhood brain tumors and are in a
functional relationship in glioma cells. Sox2 keeps glioma cells in a
proliferative state whereas over expression of Sox21 reduces Sox2
expression and decreases cell proliferation with an increased tendency of
apoptosis and differentiation of the glioma cells. We have now further
elucidated this effect in vivo by injecting established inducible-Sox21
glioma cell lines subcutaneously into the flank and orthotopically into
the brain of SCID mice. Regardless of the injection site, increased Sox21
expression in these tumors reduces tumor growth. The tumors from treated
mice were significantly smaller in size and there is a significant
increase in survival time. This effect was dependent on the time of Sox21
induction, where an earlier turn on gives even smaller tumors. Total
depletion of Sox2 was not achieved despite forced Sox21 expression.
Further we show that Sox2 deficiency leads to an inability to form
tumors. With its dual effect, the ability to decrease Sox2 expression and
the ability to aberrantly differentiate tumor cells, Sox21 becomes a very
important factor for future research around therapeutic possibilities in
GBM.

