Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Steroid receptor coactivator-2 mediates oncogenic reprogramming of
cancer cell metabolism


Steroid receptor coactivators/p160 (SRC) are frequently amplified and
overexpressed in various human cancers which mediate transcriptional
functions of nuclear receptors and other transcription factors, providing
survival advantage to cancer cells. Recent findings from genomic
profiling of human prostate tumors have identified SRC-2 (also known as
NCOA2/TIF2), one of the SRC family member as the major oncogene. SRC-2
was found to be significantly enhanced in 8% of primary tumors and 37% of
metastatic tumors, and its expression positively correlated with disease
recurrence. This suggests SRC-2 oncogene may play crucial role in the
development and metastatic progression of prostate cancer. The current
study is aimed to understand the molecular function of SRC-2 in the
pathogenesis of prostate cancer. RNAi mediated knockdown of SRC-2 in
cultured prostate cancer cell lines significantly reduced the cell
viability and this phenotype was rescued by ectopic overexpression of
SRC-2. Since SRC-2 coactivator is a master regulator of key metabolic
pathways in normal cellular physiology, we investigated its role in
cancer cell metabolism. Depletion of SRC-2 severely impairs accumulation
of lipid droplets, suggesting SRC-2 regulates lipogenesis in cancer
cells. Lipid biosynthetic pathways are integral part of cancer cell
growth generating fatty acids and cholesterol required for the biogenesis
of membrane. Lipids derive majority of carbon chain from glucose flux by
diverting pyruvate into acetyl coenzyme A, an important precursor for
lipid biosynthesis. Initial screening identified SRC-2 regulates
expression of key metabolic enzymes 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
reductase (HMGCR), pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), fatty acid synthase
(FASN), and stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1) involved in fatty acid and
cholesterol biosynthesis. Interestingly we found expression of HMGCR,
FASN and PDH is dramatically increased in metastatic C4-2 cells compared
to parental LNCaP cells, and their expression can be reversed by SRC-2
depletion. Ongoing studies will further examine the regulation of glucose
and pyruvate metabolism by SRC-2 and its importance in cancer cell
metastasis. Although it is well known that many tumours exhibit increased
glycolysis, less clear is how associated metabolic pathways are affected
and whether they contribute to cancer cell proliferation. These analyses
will allow us to identify unpredictable nodes of metabolic regulation by
SRC-2 oncogene and may provide rational treatment approaches for
targeting tumor metabolism.

