Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt antagonist SFRP4 acts as a tumor suppressor gene in gastric
carcinomas


Secreted frizzled-related proteins (SFRPs) function as Wnt signaling
antagonists and have important implications in carcinogenesis. SFRP4, a
member of the SFRP family, have been found to be down-regulated by
promoter hypermethylation in various cancers. However, functional
significance of SFRP4 has not been investigated in gastric carcinoma. In
this study, we examined aberrant DNA methylation and expression of SFRP4
in gastric cancer cell lines, and we found that SFRP4 was hypermethylated
and down-regulated in 9 out of 10 (90%) gastric cancer cell lines.
Bisulfite DNA sequencing confirmed the densely methylated SFRP4 promoter
region and addition of the demethylating agent 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
and/or histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A restored the mRNA
expression of SFRP4. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis showed that
SFRP4 gene promoter is frequently methylated in gastric cancer tissues
(75%) but not in adjacent normal gastric tissues. We then investigated
whether methylation of SFRP4 is associated with age, sex, tumor stage,
histology, and overall survival. No significant association was found
between the methylation status of SFRP4 and these clinicopathological
variables. However, promoter methylation of SFRP4 was found to be
significantly correlated with poor survival in gastric carcinomas (p =
0.045). Restoration of SFRP4 function in non-expressing gastric cancer
cells induced tumor suppressor-like features such as induces gastric
cancer cell apoptosis, inhibits cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration, and invasion. Conversely, knocking down SFRP4 by small
interfering RNA in gastric cancer cell lines promotes cell proliferation
and inhibits apoptosis. In addition, over-expression of SFRP4 repressed
Wnt target genes and induced changes in the expression of numerous genes
related to cell cycle, proliferation, invasion, metastasis, and apoptosis
in gastric cancer cells. Our results suggest that promoter
hypermethylation is one of the important mechanisms of SFRP4 gene
silencing in gastric carcinogenesis and that SFRP4 methylation in gastric
carcinoma is associated with a poor outcome in such patients.

