Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of core component of miRNA machinery, Tudor-SN,
impedes NSCLC resistance to chemotherapy


Lung cancer (LC) is among the most common tumors liable for worldwide
highest mortality rate. It has a poor prognosis and symptoms related to
disease occur at an advanced stage where therapy response becomes less
effective. Resistance to radio- and chemotherapy of all tumors in general
and LC, in particular, is a complex phenomenon. Evasion of cell death is
one of the key hallmarks of both tumorigenesis and resistance to
treatment. Differential expression of microRNAs (miRNAs or miRs), a class
of small non-coding RNAs, 19-25 nucleotides in length, and proteins
involved in miRNAs maturation (Drosha, Exportin-5, Dicer1, PACT,
Tudor-SN, Argonaute-2, and FXR1) have been linked to carcinogenesis and
therapy resistance. Nevertheless, comprehensive information is needed to
better understand their function in tumor formation and
resistance/sensitization to therapy. Therefore, the aim of this study was
to investigate the role of miRNA machinery in chemoresistance of a
selected panel of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines
(U1810, H661 and A549) resistant to treatment. It was revealed that
knockdown of Drosha, Dicer-1 and Ago-2 was not sufficient to sensitize
them to subsequent treatment with either cisplatin, 5-FU, etoposide or
camptothecin (CPT), while silencing of Staphylococcal nuclease domain
containing 1(SND1/p100/TSN), a key component of RISC complex, led to
increased sensitivity of NSCLC cells to the DNA-damaging agents. Besides
its function as a component of the multiprotein complex involved in miRNA
functioning, TSN is known to act as a transcriptional activator and
oncogene in many cancers. Additionally, it is cleaved during apoptosis,
losing its pro-carcinogenic function. Our results show that these NSCLC
cells with TSN-knocked down exhibited much stronger response to treatment
with CPT and cisplatin compared to wild-type cells, as monitored by
enhanced cleavage of PARP, increase in percentage of subG1 cells and
potentiation of caspase-3-like activity. Overall, obtained data suggest
that this nuclease can play an important role in the resistance of NSCLC
cells to chemotherapy and can be used as a potential target to increase
sensitivity of lung tumors to this type of treatment.

