Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Airway gene expression alterations associated with lung cancer
chemoprevention using green tea extract


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and
in the world. Identifying an effective chemopreventive agent for lung
cancer would reduce lung cancer mortality by reversing, preventing, or
delaying carcinogenic progression. Several randomized, controlled lung
cancer chemoprevention trials have produced neutral or harmful results;
with the exception of oral iloprost that demonstrated a small, but
significant improvement in histology after 6 months of treatment in
former smokers. One of the challenges in lung cancer chemoprevention
trials have been the lack of surrogate endpoints to establish drug
efficacy. In this study we use molecular profiling to study alterations
assoicated with changes in airway histology and treatment with a
promising chemopreventative, green tea extract. Airway epithelial cells
were collected from patients with bronchial dysplasia during bronchoscopy
at baseline, on-treatment, and post-treatment with green tea extract or
placebo ranging from 2 to 6 months (n=27 patients, n=63 samples). RNA
from the samples was processed and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene
1.0 ST arrays. Gene-level expression data was obtained using the Robust
Multiarray Average (RMA) algorithm and ANOVA and linear modeling
strategies were used to identify gene expression alterations associated
with dysplasia regression and green tea extract treatment. Cancer and
smoking-related pathway gene expression signatures were used to predict
the pathway activation of each sample using a binary regression model.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to identify important
biological pathways. Airway gene expression alterations associated with
dysplasia regression were identified and pathways such as p53 and mTOR
signaling were enriched among genes up-regulated in airways with
dysplasia. The E2F3 oncogenic pathway was also found to be significantly
altered in airways with dysplasia (pLung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer death in the United States and in the world. Identifying an
effective chemopreventive agent for lung cancer would reduce lung cancer
mortality by reversing, preventing, or delaying carcinogenic progression.
Several randomized, controlled lung cancer chemoprevention trials have
produced neutral or harmful results; with the exception of oral iloprost
that demonstrated a small, but significant improvement in histology after
6 months of treatment in former smokers. One of the challenges in lung
cancer chemoprevention trials have been the lack of surrogate endpoints
to establish drug efficacy. In this study we use molecular profiling to
study alterations assoicated with changes in airway histology and
treatment with a promising chemopreventative, green tea extract. Airway
epithelial cells were collected from patients with bronchial dysplasia
during bronchoscopy at baseline, on-treatment, and post-treatment with
green tea extract or placebo ranging from 2 to 6 months (n=27 patients,
n=63 samples). RNA from the samples was processed and hybridized to
Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Gene-level expression data was
obtained using the Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) algorithm and ANOVA
and linear modeling strategies were used to identify gene expression
alterations associated with dysplasia regression and green tea extract
treatment. Cancer and smoking-related pathway gene expression signatures
were used to predict the pathway activation of each sample using a binary
regression model. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to
identify important biological pathways. Airway gene expression
alterations associated with dysplasia regression were identified and
pathways such as p53 and mTOR signaling were enriched among genes
up-regulated in airways with dysplasia. The E2F3 oncogenic pathway was
also found to be significantly altered in airways with dysplasia
(p<0.05). The effect of green tea extract on airway gene expression was
more pronounced among former versus current smokers. As a result, the
degree to which pathways were modulated by green tea extract varied with
smoking status. Pathways related to metabolism of xenobiotics, and
glutathione, and retinol were decreased among treated current smokers
while genes related to oxidative phosphorylation and DNA repair were
increased in treated former smokers (FDR q-valueLung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer death in the United States and in the world.
Identifying an effective chemopreventive agent for lung cancer would
reduce lung cancer mortality by reversing, preventing, or delaying
carcinogenic progression. Several randomized, controlled lung cancer
chemoprevention trials have produced neutral or harmful results; with the
exception of oral iloprost that demonstrated a small, but significant
improvement in histology after 6 months of treatment in former smokers.
One of the challenges in lung cancer chemoprevention trials have been the
lack of surrogate endpoints to establish drug efficacy. In this study we
use molecular profiling to study alterations assoicated with changes in
airway histology and treatment with a promising chemopreventative, green
tea extract. Airway epithelial cells were collected from patients with
bronchial dysplasia during bronchoscopy at baseline, on-treatment, and
post-treatment with green tea extract or placebo ranging from 2 to 6
months (n=27 patients, n=63 samples). RNA from the samples was processed
and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Gene-level
expression data was obtained using the Robust Multiarray Average (RMA)
algorithm and ANOVA and linear modeling strategies were used to identify
gene expression alterations associated with dysplasia regression and
green tea extract treatment. Cancer and smoking-related pathway gene
expression signatures were used to predict the pathway activation of each
sample using a binary regression model. Gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) was used to identify important biological pathways. Airway gene
expression alterations associated with dysplasia regression were
identified and pathways such as p53 and mTOR signaling were enriched
among genes up-regulated in airways with dysplasia. The E2F3 oncogenic
pathway was also found to be significantly altered in airways with
dysplasia (p<0.05). The effect of green tea extract on airway gene
expression was more pronounced among former versus current smokers. As a
result, the degree to which pathways were modulated by green tea extract
varied with smoking status. Pathways related to metabolism of
xenobiotics, and glutathione, and retinol were decreased among treated
current smokers while genes related to oxidative phosphorylation and DNA
repair were increased in treated former smokers (FDR q-value<0.05). Our
studies suggest that airway gene expression is altered in high-risk
smokers with premalignant airway lesions and that this airway field of
injury can be modulated by treatment with green tea extract especially
among former smokers. We are currently investigating whether airway
gene-expression can serve as an intermediate biomarker of response to
green tea extract and identify those smokers who are most likely to
benefit from this type of chemopreventive strategy.

