Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transfection of high mobility group protein AT-hook 1 (HMGA1)
is associated with the development of androgen independency in prostate
cancer cells


The level of HMGA1 is low in androgen-dependent prostate cancer cell line
(LNCaP), but is high in androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines
(DU145, PC-3). We have reported that the level of HMGA1 expression in
prostate cancer cells is correlated with the extent of chromosomal
aberrations (Can Res, 2002) and that transfection of HMGA1 into prostate
cancer cell lines induces unbalanced chromosomal rearrangement and
expression of matrix metalloproteinase 2 (Prostate, 2004). This suggests
that HMGA1 is a strong candidate gene playing a potential role in the
progression of prostate cancer. These findings have prompted us to
evaluate the effect of HMGA1 on androgen independency, which is
associated with the progression of prostate cancer. The
androgen-dependent LNCaP cell line was induced to an androgen-independent
subline (LN95) by being maintained for long term in the absence of
androgen. The absence of androgen induced a 2.5-fold increase in the
level of HMGA1 in the LN95 cell line. Androgen deprivation in vitro for 4
days as well as that for 8 days in vivo induced significant increase in
the level of HMGA1 in parental LNCaP. On the other hand, the level of
HMGA1 in normal prostate of mice 4 days and 11 days after castration as
well as sham operation was almost undetectable. The cell proliferation
rates of LNCaP cell transfected with HMGA1a vector (LN-H1) and LNCaP cell
transfected with control empty vector (LN-EV) were determined with
various concentrations (0-1nM) of dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by WST-8
assay in order to examine the effect of HMGA1 on androgen sensitivity.
The expression of HMGA1 protein in LNH1 was confirmed to be 3.2-fold as
high as that in LNEV. In low concentration (0-0.01 nM) of DHT, LNEV cell
could not keep proliferation over day 6, while LNH1 could maintain
proliferation over day 6. The cell proliferation rate at day 8 of LN-H1
grown in low concentration (0-0.01 nM) of DHT was about 2-fold higher
than that of LN-EV. In contrast, both LN-H1 and LN-EV cells grew equally
well in higher concentrations (0.1-1 nM) of DHT and could also keep
proliferation over day6. Suppression of HMGA1 in DU145 and PC-3 by siRNA
decreased cell proliferation rate and colony formation ability by 40% and
10-fold, respectively, in androgen-deprived medium. These data suggest
that HMGA1 is associated with the transition of prostate cancer cells
from androgen-sensitive to androgen-independent growth and plays a role
in the cell growth of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.

