Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) in prostate
carcinogenesis


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer among older men and the second
leading cancer-related cause of death in them. It is responsible for
nearly 30,000 deaths per year in the United States. The causes for the
development of prostate cancer are not clearly known although age and
genetic factors play a key role in the etiology of this cancer.
Epidemiological and experimental studies suggest that deregulated
androgen levels and chronic inflammation also predispose to prostate
cancer. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms which result in
prostate cancer are not yet well known. Therefore, this study focuses on
characterizing the role of High Mobility Group Box 1 protein (HMGB1), a
co-activator of sex hormone receptors and a pro-inflammatory cytokine in
the development of prostate carcinogenesis. In this study, we used an
immortalized normal prostate cell (RWPE-1) to test if expression of HMGB1
in these cells will activate oncogenic signaling and transform them to a
malignant phenotype. To achieve this, RWPE-1 cells were transfected with
HMGB1 gene; stable lines were constructed and designated as RWPE-HMGB1.
Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry showed that majority (73%) of
RWPE-1 cells over expressing HMGB1 was in the G2/M phase followed by
polyploidy state (25%). Importantly, RWPE-HMGB1 cells when exposed to
R1881 (synthetic androgen) treatment proliferated significantly in a time
dependent manner compared to control RWPE-1 cells. Interestingly, the
proliferative effects of HMGB1 in RWPE-1 cells was inhibited by
anti-androgenic treatment (casodex) implicating HMGB1 to be a
co-activator of androgen receptor in prostate cells. Further mechanistic
studies revealed that expression of HMGB1 in RWPE-1 cells stimulated
androgen receptor expression and PSA secretion in these cells. In
addition, our studies also identified HMGB1 as an activator of two key
extracellular (Extracellular signal-regulated kinase [Erk] and Toll-like
receptor-4 [TLR-4]) pathways in RWPE-1 cells resulting in the inhibition
of caspase-3 activation and prevention of PARP-1 cleavage suggesting
HMGB1 is an inhibitor of apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Overall,
results of our study have identified a potential role of HMGB1 in
prostate cancer which may help design drugs to target HMGB1 in preventing
prostate carcinogenesis.

