Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RasGRP1 induces autophagy in primary human epidermal keratinocytes
resembling fail-safe mechanisms triggered by oncogenic Ras


RasGRP1 is a guanyl nucleotide exchange factor for Ras that is abundantly
expressed in lymphocytes, regulating their maturation and activation. Its
aberrant expression has been associated to transformation in various cell
types, although the role in human cancer remains largely unexplored. Our
lab has previously demonstrated expression of RasGRP1 in epidermal
keratinocytes, followed by studies that showed a critical role in skin
carcinogenesis in mouse models of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
through its ability to increase the dosage of active Ras. To explore
whether RasGRP1 could contribute to transformation of human
keratinocytes, we utilized primary epidermal keratinocytes (HEK) isolated
from neonatal foreskin. In a model of tissue reconstruct, or 3-D culture,
HEK manipulated to overexpress RasGRP1 (RasGRP1+) failed at generating a
stratified epithelium. In fact, the RasGRP1 + cells underwent changes
resembling autophagy and cell death in culture, with vacuolated cytoplasm
as well as rounded bodies. Autophagy was confirmed at the molecular level
by measuring increases in the LC3-II species by Western blot and the
formation of a LC3 punctate pattern by immunofluorescence. Surprisingly,
there was no caspase-3 activation in the RasGRP1+ HEK despite the
morphological signs of apoptosis, although we noticed an increase in the
expression of the BH3-only protein NOXA as early as 48 hours post RasGRP1
overexpression. Since oncogenic signals are known to induce fail-safe
mechanisms that restrict cell expansion, we presumed that the changes
observed in the HEK cell overexpressing RasGRP1 were due to Ras
hyperactivation (oncogenic)-induced cell death. As predicted, levels of
active Ras-GTP were 3 times higher in the RasGRP1+ cells compared to the
wild type HEK, with a preponderance of the H-Ras isoform being activated.
In line with these observations, enforced expression of an oncogenic
version of the H-Ras isoform (H-RasQ61L) also resulted in cytoplasmatic
vacuolization of HEK and increases in LC3-II levels. In contrast to the
RasGRP1+ cells, H-RasQ61L caused activation of caspase-3 while increases
in NOXA were delayed compared to those caused by RasGRP1. While RasGRP1
and oncogenic H-RasQ61L differ in some aspect of their downstream
molecular pathways, probably as a result of the magnitude of Ras
activation, the present findings reveal a novel RasGRP1-Ras axis that can
lead to oncogenic signals in human keratinocytes. This warrants further
investigation into the potential participation of RasGRP1 in keratinocyte
transformation, particularly contributing to cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma.

