Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The glucose analog 2-DG selectively inhibits AKT and ERK in
endothelial cells via interference of N-linked glycosylation and induces
endothelial cell apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.


BACKGROUND: As every step in tumor angiogenesis is an energy consuming
process, targeting endothelial (EC) glucose metabolism is a rational
strategy for angiogenesis inhibition. We recently showed that
interference with endothelial glucose metabolism by the glucose analog
2-deoxy-D-Glucose (2-DG) inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, at
concentrations lower than those required to induce tumor cell
cytotoxicity. The objectives of the current study are to further
understand the basis for EC sensitivity to 2-DG in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Time dependent effects of 2-DG were studied on EC tube formation
at 4, 8 and 18 hrs. Apoptosis was assessed by the TUNEL assay at 24, 48
and 72 hours. The effects of low antiangiogenic concentrations (0.6 mM)
of 2-DG on ERK, AKT and mTOR pathways were assessed in endothelial
(HUVEC) and cancer (MDA-MB-231, HT-29, 786-0) cells by western blot. The
in vivo effects of intraocular 2-DG administration on newly forming
(CD-105) and total (lectin) tumor vessels were evaluated in the LHBETATAG
retinoblastoma model. In vivo EC apoptosis after 2-DG treatment was
assessed by TUNEL/CD31 staining of treated tumors. RESULTS: Inhibition of
HUVEC capillary formation by 2-DG occurred as early as 8 hours after
treatment, and the effects were clear at 18 hours compared to controls.
EC apoptosis was non-significantly increased at 24 hours, and was
prominent at 48 and 72 hours. Antiangiogenic 2-DG concentrations (0.6 mM)
significantly inhibited phosphorylation of Akt473, S6 and Erk at 24
hours. On the other hand, 2-DG did not affect these pathways in
MDA-MB-231 or HT-29 cells, while they occurred at a lower level in 786-0
cells. Mannose successfully reversed AKT, S6 and ERK inhibition only in
HUVECs, but not in 786-0 cells, suggesting that the EC selective
inhibition of ERK and AKT are mediated by inhibition of N-linked
glycosylation, while other mechanisms mediate the effects in cancer
cells. Importantly, these effects were 2-DG specific, as other glucose
analogs (FDG) and the glycolytic inhibitor oxamate did not significantly
affect ERK or AKT. Intraocular 2-DG administration decreased tumor
microvasculature, and importantly, induced EC apoptosis, as demonstrated
by TUNEL+/CD 31 co-localization. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that in
angiogenic ECs, 2-DG's inhibition of N-linked glycosylation targets
critical proliferation and survival pathways. 2-DG mediated Inhibition of
AKT and ERK pathways may explain the significant endothelial sensitivity
cytotoxic and pro-apoptotic effects of 2-DG in vitro and in vivo, and
further support targeting EC glucose metabolism as a viable strategy for
angiogenesis inhibition.

