Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A synthetic lethal screen identifies genetic determinants for
gemcitabine sensitivity in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is notorious for its devastating disease course and
prognosis. Gemcitabine is a widely used regimen for pancreatic cancer
treatment but lack of response and resistance often limits its use. To
identify the genes and mechanisms involved in determining gemcitabine
sensitivity in pancreatic cancer, we completed a loss of function genetic
screen using RNA interference to identify genes which when silenced are
synthetically lethal with a low dose of gemcitabine in human pancreatic
cancer cells. We optimized an assay using ATR or CHK1 siRNA as positive
controls and ATM or non-targeting (NT) siRNA as negative controls. Our
siRNA library included 4,474 siRNAs corresponding to 1,006 unique human
genes arrayed in a one-gene:one-well format in 96-well plates. Genes
chosen for our library consisted predominantly of nuclear enzymes,
including but not limited to kinases, phosphatases, ubiquitinylation
proteins, sumoylation proteins, acetylases, deactylases, nucleases,
helicases, and chromatin modifiers, which we reasoned were more likely to
function directly in DNA repair processes and be targetable. MIA PaCa-2
cells were transfected with 25 nM siRNA and treated 48 hours later with
or without 13 nM gemcitabine for 72 hours prior to the cell proliferation
assay using WST-1 reagent. Using this assay, we identified 87 genes which
when silenced caused gemcitabine sensitization and 42 genes which when
silenced caused gemcitabine resistance. Positive hits included 16 known
genome maintenance genes including well-characterized ATR signaling
pathway genes - CHK1, RAD9, HUS1, and CDC25A, 5 putative ATM/ATR
substrates, and 20 genes identified in previously published DNA damage
sensitivity screens. 21 of the genes are somatically mutated or
differentially expressed in pancreatic cancer, suggesting that our
gemcitabine sensitivity genes may function as useful predictive
biomarkers or novel targets for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

