Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Applying new light to the detection and treatment of brain cancers
using targeted photodynamic therapy


Currently, an estimated 11.4 million people in the US have been affected
by cancer and this number is expected to double by 2020 as indicated by
the NIH NCI in 2006. Each year approximately 20% of these people are
expected to die of cancer, with brain cancers among the most deadly.
Brain cancer patients have a median life expectancy of only 6-10 months
after diagnosis, and those with recurring brain cancer survive less than
20 weeks after any therapeutic regime. Consequently, there is a critical
need to develop and improve the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of
brain cancers, including gliomas. Theranostic drugs have the potential to
do all of these and are becoming lifesaving alternatives. However, the
current standard of care suffers from lack of specificity and systemic
toxicity, often requiring invasive surgical procedures. These are
significant obstacles when dealing with minimizing offsite damage to the
healthy brain while maximizing treatment efficacy in the tumor. Our study
presents a novel drug delivery platform using targeted-gold nanoparticles
(Au NP) to deliver a therapeutic photodynamic therapy (PDT) drug,
phthalocyanine 4 (Pc 4), across the blood-brain tumor barrier (BBTB),
which allows both detection and treatment of gliomas within mere hours.
Targeting Pc 4 to cancer-specific biomarkers concentrates the drug
specifically at the brain tumor, significantly reducing collateral damage
to healthy brain tissue. Once Pc 4 is delivered, it offers selectivity
based on its defined light activation. Our targeted delivery vehicle
possesses several advantages over systemic drug delivery: greater control
over bioavailability of the drug, controlled release of Pc 4 directly to
the site, lower concentration of drug required for PDT effect, and
avoidance of systemic drug exposure. The drug delivery mechanism of
targeted-Au NP Pc 4 was investigated utilizing in vivo and in vitro
fluorescence imaging, immunohistochemistry, elemental analysis,
biodistribution studies, and therapeutic efficacy. We are able to target
cancer biomarkers specifically, deliver hydrophobic drugs across the
BBTB, increase drug accumulation into the tumor, alter drug localization,
and enhance PDT killing affect. As a result, this study presents a unique
application of PDT to the treatment of brain tumors using
photosensitizing drugs like Pc 4.

