Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Awake the sleeping: Gene specific re-expression of epigenetically
silenced candidate tumor suppressor genes in cervical cancer by
artificial transcription factors


Recently, we reported diagnostic marker gene promoters that are
hypermethylated in cervical cancer. As hypermethylation is often seen for
tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), such marker genes might exhibit tumor
suppressive activities upon re-expression. In this study, we aim to
specifically upregulate candidate TSGs (C13ORF18, EPB41L3 and CCNA1)
using self-designed Artificial Transcription Factors (ATFs). An advantage
of this approach is that genes are re-expressed from their natural
promoter allowing all splice variants to be expressed in natural ratios
In cervical cancer cell lines, DNA methylation status
(methylation-specific PCR, bisulfite sequencing) and gene (re)expression
levels (qRT-PCR) were determined, also after treatment with a DNA
demethylating agent (5-Aza-2-Deoxycytidine (DAC)) and a histone
deacetylase inhibitor (Trichostatin A (TSA)). Sequence specific
DNA-binding domains were constructed by engineering zinc finger proteins
and fused to a strong transcriptional activator. Functional effects of
re-expression of the genes were studied using cell
survival/apoptosis/cell growth assays. Histone marks were identified
using chromatin IP, before and after treatment with ATFs. C13ORF18,
EPB41L3 and CCNA1 silencing in cervical cancer was associated with DNA
hypermethylation and these genes could be re-expressed in a dose
dependent manner using DAC. Gene-specific re-activation of the genes
could be achieved by the ATFs: Up to 300-fold in negative (methylated)
cells and up to 80-fold in positive (unmethylated) cells. Co-treatment of
ATFs with DAC or TSA further enhanced the effect of the ATFs. The
hypermethylation status of the genes was associated with low levels of
histone acetylation and repressive histone marks (H3K9me3, H3K27me3).
Interestingly, preliminary data show that re-activation of the silenced
genes increased the histone acetylation, while repressive histone marks
decreased, indicating that ATF-induced re-expression was associated with
changes in the epigenetic code. Furthermore, it was found that specific
re-activation of the genes inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis.
These data confirm our hypothesis that hypermethylated cancer-specific
genes can be re-activated, resulting in a strong anti-tumor effect.
Furthermore, this is the first time that these genes are reported as TSGs
in cervical cancer. The great advantage of gene-specific DNA targeting is
that only the TSGs of interest are upregulated, while current genome-wide
epigenetic drugs also target metastasis inducing genes, and can therefore
enforce cancer growth. Currently, the DNA binding domains are fused to
epigenetic effector domains to explore the ability of gene specific
epigenetic editing. Financed by NWO-VIDI to MR.

