Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation of mammary epithelial cells by inactivation of p53
and PTEN generates cancer stem cells driven by an IL-6/TGF-beta
inflammatory loop


The PTEN and p53 tumor suppressor genes, frequently inactivated in human
breast cancers have been shown to be regulators of normal and malignant
breast stem cell self-renewal. In addition, inactivation of tumor
suppressors in preneoplastic lesions are implicated in tumor progression
from ductal situ in carcinoma (DCIS) to invasive ductal carcinoma. To
determine the relationship between stem cell self-renewal and
carcinogenesis, we examined the effects of PTEN and p53 knockdown on
normal mammary epithelial cells obtained from reduction mammoplasties, as
well as in the non-transformed mammary cell line MCF10A. Simultaneous
knockdown of PTEN and p53 in normal mammary epithelial cells generated
hyperplastic and DCIS-like lesions when these cells were transplanted
into the humanized mammary fat pads of NOD/SCID mice. In MCF10A cells
knockdown of PTEN and p53 synergized to expand the stem cell compartment
transforming these cells and generating highly metastatic tumors in
NOD/SCID mice. Stem cell expansion was driven by activation of an
inflammatory loop involving both IL-6 and TGF-b. This inflammatory loop
was mediated by both AKT/b-Catenin and Stat3/NF-kB pathways. Conversely
collective inhibition of these pathways including TGF-b, IL-6 and
Wnt/b-Catenin and Stat3/NF-kB was necessary to revert back this stem cell
phenotype. This may suggest that synergistic activity of these pathways
may contribute to the expansion and transformation of mammary stem cells.
The expanded cancer stem cells were highly metastatic and invasive and
displayed properties of EMT. The IL6-R antibody tocilizumab blocked this
loop resulting in a reduction of CSCs and thus inhibiting tumor growth in
mouse xenografts. These studies suggest that loss of PTEN and p53
transforms mammary epithelial cells by activating an inflammatory loop
mediated by IL-6 and TGF-b, generating CSCs with an EMT phenotype. Since
CSCs drive tumor growth and metastasis, targeting the self-renewal by
interfering with this CSC, inflammatory loop represents a rational
strategy for breast cancer prevention and therapy.

