Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial mesenchymal transition: A mechanism of resistance to
VEGF pathway inhibition in genitourinary cancers


Background: Targeting tumor angiogenesis by inhibiting the VEGF pathway
is now an established treatment modality for several solid tumors.
Especially in renal cell carcinoma, sunitinib has significantly improved
progression-free survival and impacted overall survival. However,
resistance to sunitinib develops in virtually all patients. Emerging
clinical evidence suggests that epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT), a cellular phenotype observed with aggressive malignancy and
metastasis, is associated with resistance to angiogenesis inhibitors. To
better study and characterize this clinical observation we set out to
generate well-defined preclinical kidney and prostate cancer models of
EMT mediated resistance to the angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib.
Approach: Two genitourinary cancer cell lines, ACHN (kidney) and DU145
(prostate), which regress on sunitinib treatment, were forced to stably
overexpress the EMT activators Twist1, Snail or ZEB1. All these cells
demonstrated EMT phenotype by in vitro studies, and were xenografted
subcutaneously into immunocompromised mice (NOD/SCID) for in vivo
studies. Mice were treated with sunitinib once the tumors reached a size
of 0.5mm3 or larger, and the tumor response was assessed. Correlative
studies for microvascular density and blood vessel maturation were
performed. Mechanism of resistance was studied by evaluating the ability
of cancer cells to induce pericyte and endothelial cell migration.
Results: E-cadherin downregulation, a hallmark of EMT, was seen in all
the Twist, Snail, or ZEB1 overexpressed cells. Compared with the wild
type cells, the EMT cells showed mesenchymal morphology. Functionally,
all the EMT cells showed an increased ability to proliferate and migrate,
as well as the ability to grow in an anchorage independent manner. The in
vivo growth of all the EMT tumors was accelerated; importantly, tumors of
ACHN-Twist and DU145-ZEB1 continued to grow under sunitinib treatment
while the other tumors shrunk. In addition, ACHN-Twist and ACHN-ZEB1
cancer cells spontaneously metastasized to the lung. Intriguingly,
although immunohistochemistry studies showed no difference in resistant
tumor vasculature between sunitinib treated and untreated mice, the
pericyte coverage was markedly reduced in sunitinib sensitive tumors. The
Boyden chamber assay showed the resistant cancer cells (ACHN-Twist and
DU145-ZEB1) induced significant pericyte and endothelial cell migrating
toward cancer cells. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated for the first
time that the induction of EMT in preclinical models could lead to
sunitinib resistance in kidney and prostate cancers. Blood vessel
maturation by pericyte coverage is a potential mechanism of resistance in
EMT cancers and could therefore be a target to overcome resistance.

