Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic analysis of the ketogenic diet versus KetoCal as
adjuvant treatments for malignant glioma


Patients with malignant brain tumors have a median survival of
approximately one year following diagnosis, regardless of currently
available treatments which include surgery followed by radiation and
chemotherapy. Improvement in the survival of brain cancer patients
requires the design of new therapeutic modalities that take advantage of
common phenotypes. One such phenotype is the metabolic dysregulation that
is a hallmark of cancer cells. It has therefore been postulated that one
approach to treating brain tumors may be by metabolic alteration such as
that which occurs through the use of the ketogenic diet (KD). The KD is
high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet that has been utilized for the
non-pharmacologic treatment of refractory epilepsy. We and others have
shown that this diet enhances survival in mouse models of malignant
gliomas. There are varying formulations of the diet that alter the ratio
of fats to carbohydrates & protein, and it is not clear whether any one
is more effective than another. Bio-Serv F3666 (Frenchtown, NJ) is a
rodent KD with a 6:1 ratio of fat:carbohydrate & protein. We have
previously shown that ad libitum feeding of this diet significantly
increased survival in albino C57BL/6 mice (NCI, Frederick, MD)
stereotactically implanted with GL261-luc2 cells, a syngeneic
bioluminescent mouse model of malignant glioma. Radiation in combination
with KD was synergistic, and survival was significantly increased over
either treatment alone. Ad libitum feeding of KetoCal (KC; Nutricia North
America, Gaithersburg, MD); a nutritionally complete, commercially
available 4:1 (fat: carbohydrate & protein) ketogenic formula used for
the treatment of pediatric epilepsy, also resulted in a significant
increase in survival. However, the combination of radiation with KetoCal
caused the tumors to completely regress in 9 of 11 mice, and the tumors
did not recur when these animals were switched back to standard rodent
chow. The mechanism(s) by which the KD and KC exert their anti-tumor
effects are not completely understood. We have begun to compare these 2
formulations to identify their anti-tumor effects. Animals on KC showed a
more pronounced drop in blood glucose than those maintained on KD. Blood
levels of -hydroxybutyrate were significantly higher in animals fed KC
than those in animals fed KD. Total AKT was reduced in tumor tissue from
animals fed KC, but not in animals fed KD; however, phospho-AKT(Thr308)
was reduced in tumor and non-tumor tissue from animals maintained on KD,
but not those maintained on KC. Furthermore, tumor tissue from animals
fed KD had a more pronounced decrease in insulin growth factor-1 than did
tumor tissue from animals fed KC. These data suggest that the mechanisms
leading to increased survival may be different in animals fed KC versus
those fed KD. A greater understanding of the effects of different
ketogenic formulations will allow for a more rational approach to its
clinical use.

