Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variants of uncertain clinical significance in cancer
predisposition genes: Development of a family studies program for
reclassification


The identification of genetic variants of uncertain significance is a
fairly common, albeit unwelcomed result of gene sequence analyses. The
frequency at which these variants are identified will likely continue to
increase with the introduction of next-generation sequencing panels and
the recent availability of clinical exome sequencing. When applied to
testing for cancer predisposition syndromes, accurate variant assessment
and classification helps to guide screening, treatment, family planning,
and testing of at-risk family members. Multiple resources are available
to assess genetic variants: population-based cohort allele frequencies,
published literature, in silico prediction tools, gene-specific
databases, evolutionary conservation data, and co-segregation studies.
Ambry Genetics, a CAP-accredited and CLIA-certified commercial clinical
laboratory providing genetic services focused on clinical diagnostics and
genomic services, has developed and implemented a complementary family
studies program to collect co-segregation data for variants of unknown
significance identified through diagnostic testing. The Ambry family
studies program is available to all specialties, but is especially active
for genes associated with cancer predisposition and intellectual
disability. Data collected from the cancer family studies program is
combined with published literature, database information, and data
compiled with Ambry Variant Analyzer (AVA), a novel bioinformatics tool,
to allow for a comprehensive interpretation of all variants of uncertain
clinical significance in cancer predisposition genes. In less than one
year, the program has grown to 60 active cancer family studies at the
time of submission and a current rate of >5 new applications per week.
Variants successfully reclassified due to family studies data include the
p.Y327D missense alteration in MEN1 and in-frame deletions in both TP53
and MLH1. Variant reclassification leads to the automatic generation of
amended reports for any individual previously identified by our
laboratory as a carrier. Immediately distributed to health care
professionals, these reports offer the most up-to-date clinical
interpretation possible improving medical decision making and clarifying
risk of disease. Here we provide an overview of the family studies
program and discuss successful variant reclassification via the Ambry
model.

