Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualizing immune surveillance in lung metastasis progression


As stipulated by the Paget and Fuchs seed and soil analogy, the
establishment of metastases depends on the microenvironment of target
tissue; as such, it also depends on the tissue immunosurveillance system.
Anti-tumor immune responses are subdued in advanced tumors by various
immune suppressory mechanisms, such as by tumor associated CD4 FoxP3
regulatory T-reg cells. But how immune suppression sets in at the sites
of metastasis, and how it could be overcome there remains unclear. Using
multiphoton and confocal microscopy, we have visualized the immune cell's
dynamics that is triggered by various metastatic cancers in the lungs. We
found that single, blood-carried cancer cells that settle in the
capillary bed triggered strikingly rapid recruitment of CD11c dendritic
cells (DCs), which were heterogeneous. Some of those DCs wrapped around
the singular cancer cells while other probed their intracellular content
by acquiring tumor-derived vesicles. These phagocytic DCs then carried
away their cargo towards the draining lymph nodes, thereby initiating
tumor antigen cross-presentation. After 24-48 hours, micrometastases
became surrounded by T cells that were highly enriched in T-reg. The
motility patterns and cell depletion experiments showed that T-reg
largely ignored tumor cells but were attracted by the phagocytic
tumor-associated DCs. In result of these interactions, the phagocytic DCs
became the foci of highly dynamic three-cell interactions between T-reg
and the effector T cells, sequestering most T cells at the tumor margin.
In this context, we tested the impact of immunomodulatory therapies. The
immune cell dynamics that we uncovered in metastases was responsive to
therapeutic immune modulation aimed at the tumor-associated phagocytic
DCs and also at Programmed Death (PD-1) pathways. Taken together, our
intravital dynamic imaging results highlight the duality of
metastasis-associated phagocytic DCs. On the one hand, these cells
provide tumor antigen cross-presentation and recruit T cells to nascent
secondary tumors, but on the other hand, they aid metastasis progression
by promoting early on the contact of tumor-infiltrating T cells with
T-reg.

