Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Methyl-6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine classical
antifolates as selective folate receptor substrates, glycinamide
ribonucleotide formyltransferase inhibitors and antitumor agents


The important role of reduced folates in one-carbon transfer reactions
has rendered folate metabolism an attractive target in cancer
chemotherapy for decades. Clinically used antifolates enter cells via
folate uptake systems, such as the reduced folate carrier (RFC), folate
receptors (FRs), and the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT).
Toxicity of clinically used antifolates is due to their lack of
selectivity for tumor cells, since these antifolates are transported by
RFC which occurs in normal as well as tumor cells. FRs are not usually
expressed in normal cells. However, the isoform of FR is abundantly
expressed in certain tumor cells, such as ovarian, endometrial, etc.
Thus, selective FR-targeted antifolates that also possess cytotoxic
activity without transport by RFC would likely circumvent the major
toxicities of currently used antifolates. 2-Methyl-6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates were designed to evaluate the
importance of the 2-amino group for transport by RFC, FR, and /or PCFT,
as well as for inhibition of -glycinamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (GARFTase) in de novo purine biosynthesis, compared
with the 2-amino analogs. The most active compound in our series, AG179,
showed an IC50 of 1.6 nM in inhibiting proliferation of KB human tumor
cells, and was 3-fold less potent than the corresponding 2-amino compound
AG71 (0.55 nM). In Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells engineered to
individually express the major folate transporters, AG179 also inhibited
growth of FR-expressing RT16 cells but was inactive toward RFC-expressing
PC43-10 and PCFT-expressing R2/PCFT4 CHO cells. The 2-amino analog, AG71,
is inert toward RFC but is avidly transported by PCFT and is cytotoxic
toward PCFT-expressing cells. In KB cells, growth inhibition by AG179
like AG71 is protected by excess adenosine and 5-amino-4-imidazole
carboxamide, establishing GARFTase and de novo purine biosynthesis as the
likely intracellular targets. These results establish that replacement of
the 2-amino group of AG71 with a methyl group has a limited impact on FR
uptake and anti-proliferative activity, however, this replacement has a
profound impact on cellular uptake by PCFT. This report will present the
details of the design, synthesis, biological evaluation and molecular
modeling of the title compounds.

