Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor effects of tetrahydrobiopterin are mediated
through beta-catenin in breast cancer cells


Nitric Oxide (NO) can promote apoptosis in some cells, whereas it
inhibits apoptosis in others. This complexity is an indication of the
importance of NO source (NO donors vs. endogenous), location of that
source, NO concentration and cell type in understanding the role of NO.
Current experiments examine NO-dependent pathways involved in tumor cell
survival from a new perspective of Nitric Oxide synthase (NOS)
dysregulation. Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is a necessary cofactor of NOS
and can be readily oxidized to BH2 in an inflammatory environment, such
as that found in solid tumors. When BH4 levels are low, electron transfer
in the active site of the enzyme becomes uncoupled from L-arginine
oxidation resulting in the production of O2 instead of NO. The uncoupled
enzyme therefore becomes a generator of peroxynitrite (ONOO), which is
produced rapidly by the reaction of O2 with NO. In normal tissue the
ratio of BH4 to BH2 (which when utilized by NOS the enzyme is uncoupled)
is 40-70:1 and sometimes greater. We examined BH4 levels by HPLC in MCF7
and MDA-231 cells in tissue culture and in flank tumor xenografts. Our
experiments showed that the BH4:BH2 ratio in tissue culture and flank
tumor xenografts is around 1. These findings show that NOS in tumor cells
as compared to normal cells is uncoupled. Subsequent experiments focused
on the ability to manipulate BH4 levels through exogenous sepiapterin
(SP), converted to BH4 through sepiapterin reductase and dihydrofolate
reductase, or through overexpression of GTP cyclohydrolase I, the
rate-limiting enzyme in BH4 production. Both tissue culture cells and
flank tumor xenografts showed a 10-15-fold increase in BH4:BH2 when given
SP in the tissue culture media or in the drinking water of mice. To
ensure that increasing the BH4:BH2 ratio leads to enhanced NOS coupling,
the production of NO was measured by cGMP formation and O2 levels were
assessed by HPLC. As hypothesized NO levels went up and O2 levels went
down. To directly examine the effects of manipulating the BH4:BH2 ratio
cells were treated with varying concentrations of SP. MCF7 cells when
exposed to SP showed a 2-fold decrease in colony formation and after 3
days of treatment had no viable cells, which was assessed by the MTT
assay. Effects of SP on MDA 231 cells were not as dramatic, but by using
the MTT assay we were able to show that the growth rate of the cells was
cut in half. To assess the effects of SP on xenografts, we used an
ex-vivo clonogenic assay. This assay also showed that colony formation is
significantly reduced upon treatment of the animals with SP. Previous
studies in colon cancer cells have shown that when PKG, the major pathway
activated by NO, is activated -catenin levels are reduced. In our
experiments MCF7 xenografts showed a significant decrease in -catenin
levels after treatment with SP. These results represent a potential new
therapeutic strategy in the treatment of solid tumors.

