Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Karyometry in atypical endometrial hyperplasia: A Gynecologic
Oncology Group study


Treatment for atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH) is based on
pathologic diagnosis. About 40% of AEH is found to be carcinoma at
surgery. The histopathologic classification of endometrial lesions is a
difficult task requiring extensive experience. The Gynecologic Oncology
Group (GOG) conducted a study (GOG 167A) that was designed to estimate
the frequency of endometrial cancer in hysterectomy specimens in subjects
who had a biopsy diagnosis of atypical endometrial hyperplasia. This
study's objective is to derive an objective characterization of nuclei
from cases diagnosed as AEH or superficially invasive endometrial cancer
(SIEC). Cases from GOG study 167A were classified by a central pathology
committee as AEH (n=39) or SIEC (n=39). High resolution digitized images
of cell nuclei were recorded. Features of the nuclear chromatin pattern
were computed. Classification rules were derived by discriminant
analysis. Nuclei from cases of AEH and SIEC occupy the same range on a
progression curve for endometrial lesions. Cases of AEH and SIEC both
comprise nuclei of two phenotypes: hyperplastic characteristics and
premalignant/neoplastic characteristics. The principal difference between
AEH and SIEC is percentage of premalignant/neoplastic nuclei. When this
percentage approaches 50-60% superficial invasion is likely. SIEC may
develop already from lesions at the low end of the progression curve. AEH
comprises cases which may constitute a low risk group involving Treatment
for atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH) is based on pathologic
diagnosis. About 40% of AEH is found to be carcinoma at surgery. The
histopathologic classification of endometrial lesions is a difficult task
requiring extensive experience. The Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG)
conducted a study (GOG 167A) that was designed to estimate the frequency
of endometrial cancer in hysterectomy specimens in subjects who had a
biopsy diagnosis of atypical endometrial hyperplasia. This study's
objective is to derive an objective characterization of nuclei from cases
diagnosed as AEH or superficially invasive endometrial cancer (SIEC).
Cases from GOG study 167A were classified by a central pathology
committee as AEH (n=39) or SIEC (n=39). High resolution digitized images
of cell nuclei were recorded. Features of the nuclear chromatin pattern
were computed. Classification rules were derived by discriminant
analysis. Nuclei from cases of AEH and SIEC occupy the same range on a
progression curve for endometrial lesions. Cases of AEH and SIEC both
comprise nuclei of two phenotypes: hyperplastic characteristics and
premalignant/neoplastic characteristics. The principal difference between
AEH and SIEC is percentage of premalignant/neoplastic nuclei. When this
percentage approaches 50-60% superficial invasion is likely. SIEC may
develop already from lesions at the low end of the progression curve. AEH
comprises cases which may constitute a low risk group involving <40% of
AEH cases. These cases hold a percentage of 40 % of nuclei of the
preneoplastic phenotype. Nuclei of the preneoplastic phenotype in AEH
lesions are almost indistinguishable from nuclei in SIEC, where this
percentage exceeds 60%. While karyometric assessment does not provide a
distinctive diagnostic criterion for an individual patient, it does
provide a measure of risk for the development of invasive disease.
Studies to support the diagnostic assessment of endometrial lesions by
computer aided morphometric analyses go back over 30 years. These efforts
were aimed at two objectives, the diagnostic distinction between benign
and cancer, and procedures that allow a stratification of patients into
risk groups for the development of myometrial invasion. The percentage of
nuclei of preneoplastic phenotype in AEH lesions might serve as criterion
for assessment of risk for the development of invasive disease.

