Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mechanisms of drug resistance in leukemia cells associated
with changes in HoxA9 and microRNA expression


The acquisition of resistance to anticancer drugs is a key obstacle to
successful cancer therapy. An increasing number of studies have
investigated the roles of microRNAs in drug resistance. We previously
reported that the upregulation of miR-135b and miR-196b correlated
positively with acquired drug resistance in the human T-cell leukemia
cell line, CCRF-CEM (CEM), and that the elevation of expression of these
two microRNAs in response to the DNA damaging agent etoposide appears to
be histiotype-specific (T-T Ho et al, Proceedings of the 102nd Annual
Meeting of the AACR 2011). To develop a mechanistic understanding of why
these microRNAs are differentially expressed, we have studied miR-196b,
which maps between the HoxA9 and HoxA10 genes on chromosome 7p15.2,
suggesting that miR-196b and HoxA genes might be co-activated. Indeed, we
found upregulation of HoxA9 mRNA after short-term (48 h) exposure of CEM
cells to the topoisomerase II inhibitors etoposide and doxorubicin. Of
note, we also found that HoxA9 is constitutively overexpressed in
multidrug-resistant CEM/VM-1-5 cells. Of interest, we found that HoxA9 is
clearly associated with drug resistance, as knockdown of HoxA9 using
esiRNA (a heterogeneous mixture of siRNAs that all target the same mRNA)
partially sensitized multidrug-resistant CEM/VM-1-5 cells to etoposide.
This indicates that the expression of miR-196b is linked to HoxA gene
transcription and to drug responsiveness. We subsequently confirmed that
the expression of HoxA9 mRNA follows the same pattern in other leukemia
cells. For example, both miR-196b and HoxA9 are upregulated in response
to short-term etoposide exposure in HL-60 (acute promyelocytic leukemia),
but not in solid tumor-derived MCF7 (breast cancer cell line) and its
etoposide-resistant subline MCF7/VP, or Rh30 (rhabdomyosarcoma cell line)
and its etoposide-resistant subline, Rh30/V1. We are presently assessing
the role of HoxA9 in drug resistance in other leukemia cell lines and
investigating the mechanistic basis for this effect. In summary, we
report here a novel mechanism of anticancer drug resistance in leukemia
cells that is associated with HoxA9 and specific changes in microRNA
expression. This is the first report that HoxA9 may impact on anticancer
drug resistance. (Supported in part by R01 CA40570 from NCI to WTB, and
in part by UIC.)

