Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail expression is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition and a poor prognosis in malignant pleural mesotheliomas


Introduction: Malignant pleural mesotheliomas (MPMs) are aggressive
tumors with a poor prognosis. Regarding tumor histology, however, the
survival has been reported to be lower in patients with non-epitheloid
tumors than in those with epitheloid tumors. Therefore, in order to
identify molecular targets for the treatment against MPM patients, we
investigated several molecules associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition, such as Snail, Twist, E-cadherin and N-cadherin. Methods: We
studied one hundred and nine patients with MPMs, including 61 epitheloid
tumors (55.9%), 21 sarcomatoid tumors (19.2%), 20 biphasic tumors (18.3%)
and 7 desmoplastic tumors (6.4%). Immunohistochemical assays were
performed to evaluate the intratumoral expressions of Snail, Twist,
E-cadherin and N-cadherin. Results: Among 109 MPMs, 41 tumors (37.6%)
were Snail-high tumors, 30 tumors (27.5%) were Twist-high tumors, 18
tumors (16.5%) were E-cadherin-positive tumors, and 35 tumors (32.1%)
were N-cadherin-positive tumors. Regarding tumor histology, the nuclear
expression of Snail expression was significantly higher in
non-epithelioid tumors than in epitheloid tumors (PIntroduction:
Malignant pleural mesotheliomas (MPMs) are aggressive tumors with a poor
prognosis. Regarding tumor histology, however, the survival has been
reported to be lower in patients with non-epitheloid tumors than in those
with epitheloid tumors. Therefore, in order to identify molecular targets
for the treatment against MPM patients, we investigated several molecules
associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition, such as Snail,
Twist, E-cadherin and N-cadherin. Methods: We studied one hundred and
nine patients with MPMs, including 61 epitheloid tumors (55.9%), 21
sarcomatoid tumors (19.2%), 20 biphasic tumors (18.3%) and 7 desmoplastic
tumors (6.4%). Immunohistochemical assays were performed to evaluate the
intratumoral expressions of Snail, Twist, E-cadherin and N-cadherin.
Results: Among 109 MPMs, 41 tumors (37.6%) were Snail-high tumors, 30
tumors (27.5%) were Twist-high tumors, 18 tumors (16.5%) were
E-cadherin-positive tumors, and 35 tumors (32.1%) were
N-cadherin-positive tumors. Regarding tumor histology, the nuclear
expression of Snail expression was significantly higher in
non-epithelioid tumors than in epitheloid tumors (P<0.001). Furthermore,
the E-cadherin expression was significantly lower in Snail-high tumors
than in Snail-low tumors (P=0.046). As a result, the E-cadherin
expression was significantly lower in non-epithelioid tumors than in
epitheloid tumors (P=0.013). In addition, the Snail expression was
significantly higher in Twist-high tumors than in Twist-low tumors
(P=0.007). The frequency of N-cadherin-positive tumors was also
significantly higher in Twist-high tumors than in Twist-low tumors
(P=0.005). Regarding patient survival, the overall survival was
significantly lower in patients with Snail-high MPMs than in those with
Snail-low MPMs (P=0.002), especially among patients with non-epitheloid
tumors (P=0.009). A multivariated analysis also demonstrated that the
nuclear expression of Snail was a significantly factor of a poor
prognosis in MPM patients (P=0.014). Conclusions: Snail expression is
associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition and a poor prognosis
in MPMs. The Snail could be a potential molecular target for the
treatment of MPM patients.

