Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser 2.0


As the rate of cancer genomic information production has increased so has
the task of managing the computational infrastructure required to host,
visualize and analyze that data. The UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser
(https://genome-cancer.ucsc.edu) provides a variety of tools to help
researchers analyze their data. It includes sortable genomic heatmaps
linked to patient clinical attributes that can be explored on demand. A
user can run statistical tests between user defined groupings of samples,
genomic signature evaluations, and toggle between chromosomal and custom
gene sets views. The browser is linked to the UCSC Genome Browser; thus
inheriting and integrating the Genome Browser's rich set of human
biological and genetic data that enhances the interpretability of the
cancer genomics information. UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser 2.0 has been
released with drastically enhanced user. Other recent improvements in the
Cancer Genomics Browser have been in response to the growing number of
collaborative cancer analysis projects. Designed with the privacy issues
that come along with patient data in mind, cancer browser accounts
provide user-specific sessions, gene sets, genomic profiles, and
user-specific data tracks controls. In addition to the public portal, the
Cancer Genomics Browser also supports projects that require secured
access control. The system hosts results from TCGA, SU2C (Stand Up To
Cancer), LINCS (Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures),
GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) and the ISPY trials along with information
from individual labs. Researchers that have been authenticated to
multiple projects can see the results from all of their projects in a
single page. The other aspect of working with multiple collaborative
cancer projects is the issue of properly defining data interchange
formats. For the Cancer Genome Browser we have created a specification
called cgData, which will be used by UCSC to consolidate various types of
information from TCGA. cgData is a designed to provide the variety of
file formats that are required to describe the heterogeneous data
required for the browser. Formats for defining expression matrices,
genomic probe definitions, clinical feature data, mutation information
and sample mapping have all been specified to enable rapid integration of
new data into the Cancer Genome Browser. This format is being developed
in collaboration with partners from SU2C and LINCS, and utilities to
convert The Broad Institutes TCGA Firehose analysis and MSKCC cBio portal
information have already been developed. The publicly available data is
organized into downloadable releases on a monthly basis.

