Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Routine micro-sampling and LC-MS/MS quantitation for PK and PK/PD
determination in mice


Serial micro-sampling is a viable and advantageous approach for
pharmacokinetic (PK) screening or efficacy determinations (PK/PD) in
small animals such as mice. Serial micro-sampling can eliminate the need
to sacrifice one animal per time point, decrease the inter-animal
variability commonly observed in small animal PK/PD studies, allow for
determination of the PK profile in the same animals as the PD, and reduce
the sample volumes required for analysis. Previously published papers
described serial bleeding of mice and analysis by either capillary
LC-MS/MS or by conventional LC-MS/MS. With the advent of even more
sensitive mass spectrometers, detection of analytes in smaller sample
volumes is possible routinely. Therefore, the major difficulty associated
with micro-sampling is the handling of the small volume samples required
to yield accurate and precise quantitative results. Balb/c or CD-1 mice
were dosed IV/PO with selected cancer drug candidates. At specified time
intervals, whole blood samples (10uL) were collected via the tail vein.
The drug candidate was isolated from mouse whole blood, and quantified by
LC-MS/MS. To allow re-analysis of ALQ samples with additional dilution,
the standard curve range was increased 10-fold with additional higher
concentration standards which were only used if needed. Appropriate
concentrations of standard and internal standard were added to 10uL of
control whole blood to yield concentrations of 2-100000 ng/mL. The assay
using 10L of blood was sensitive to 2 ng/mL, and accurate to better than
80% of nominal. Replicate quality control samples showed very good
reproducibility, with precision better than 20% CV, and recovery greater
than 80%. For comparison, the same assay was conducted using a more
traditional volume of 100 L of plasma taken from the same rat as the 10 L
of blood. The results show that the low volume blood method is comparable
to the typical approach, and that low volume sampling is appropriate for
routine PK or PK/PD studies in small animals such as the mouse. The upper
limit of quantitation for standards and quality controls was 10,000
ng/mL. Standards and quality controls were prepared at much higher
concentrations (25000, 50000 and 100000 ng/mL), and used with additional
dilution if the unknown samples analyzed were above the limit of
quantitation. When the latter was the case, the results showed acceptable
precision and accuracy with the diluted extract. Therefore, this
procedure allows quantitation of samples above the linear range of the
assay without the need to re-extract samples. Serial micro-sampling in
mice can be used routinely to reduce animal numbers, decrease
experimental variability and obtain a full PK profile in the same animals
as the PD determination (e.g. mouse xenograft assays). Because of the
high sensitivity and selectivity of LC-MS/MS systems, micro-sampling is
an effective means of performing quantitative analyses in volume-limited
studies.

