Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of 28 patient derived colorectal cancer
xenografts and analysis for response markers to an antiangiogenic
treatment


We have recently described an extended panel of new primary human CRC
xenografts and their preclinical chemo-sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs
(Poster 1584/3 AACR Annual Meeting 2010). These models consider more
thoroughly the heterogeneity and genetic instability of tumors in a way
ultimately enabling treatment decisions on an individualized basis. The
approach is based on large scale screening for activity in new in vivo
models combined with extensive characterization of these models (gene
expression and mutations). Bioinformatic methods are used to further
evaluate the mechanism of action of new drugs in colorectal cancer, to
investigate possible resistance mechanisms and provide a rationale for
combination therapies. Here we describe the evaluation of an
antiangiogenic treatment in this panel of primary patient derived
colorectal cancer models. Primary colon carcinoma tissue samples were
collected using a standardized procedure. Tumor pieces were transplanted
into immunodeficient mice immediately after surgery. A panel of 28 stably
passagable colon cancer xenografts could be established as permanent
tumor models. The results obtained so far, show that these
patient-derived colon cancer models feature a high coincidence with the
original tumor regarding histology and gene expression profiling.
Response analysis in a subset of 19 xenografts evaluating the
treated-to-control (T/C) ratios of tumor volumes revealed that the human
specific VEGF antibody bevacizumab induces a meaningful biological effect
(T/C below 50%) in 13 of 19 models. A first comparative genome-wide gene
expression analyses of this subset revealed reasonable genes and pathways
possibly involved in bevacizumab sensitivity. We will extend this
investigation to all 28 tumor models in order to enhance the statistical
robustness of the preliminary data. Our approach demonstrates that
analysis of drug sensitivity together with bioinformatics correlations
can provide candidate markers for further studies. An early
implementation of such an approach in the drug development process could
be helpful for the identification of predictive markers helping to select
tumors likely to benefit from the drug as well as provide a rationale for
combinations to be tested in clinical trials. These new strategies may
help to better integrate research results in clinical development and may
increase the success of new anti-cancer drugs in clinical studies.

