Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of two metastasis suppressors, Nm23-H1 and Gelsolin,
in the proliferation and motility of MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells


Recent studies have highlighted the fact that the metastatic process can
be separate from tumorigenesis. Nm23 was the first metastasis suppressor
gene to be identified, although the biochemical basis for Nm23's
anti-metastatic properties remains to be fully elucidated. Therefore we
undertook an mechanistic study of Nm23 binding partners hypothesizing
that Nm23's interaction with other proteins may play a role in regulating
metastasis. Our data identify a new interaction with the metastasis
suppressor Gelsolin, which demonstrates synergistic phenotypic effects.
Gelsolin was identified as a binding partner of Nm23-H1 using
co-immunoprecipitation assays and mass spectrometry analysis. Gelsolin is
an actin binding protein involved in actin-cytoskeleton remodeling
through its actin-severing, -capping and newly discovered -nucleating
activities. Two-way co-immunoprecipitations were performed in 4T1 cells
and several human breast carcinoma cell lines (MCF7, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-435) to confirm the association. The potential interaction of
Nm23-H1 and Gelsolin was investigated by overexpressing each protein, or
the combination, in human MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells. With regard
to in vitro motility, overexpression of Nm23-H1 reduced motility in
Boyden chambers by 63.1% as compared to vector clones, while Gelsolin
overexpression reduced motility by 29.6% and the combined overexpression
of both genes reduced motility by 82.3% (pRecent studies have highlighted
the fact that the metastatic process can be separate from tumorigenesis.
Nm23 was the first metastasis suppressor gene to be identified, although
the biochemical basis for Nm23's anti-metastatic properties remains to be
fully elucidated. Therefore we undertook an mechanistic study of Nm23
binding partners hypothesizing that Nm23's interaction with other
proteins may play a role in regulating metastasis. Our data identify a
new interaction with the metastasis suppressor Gelsolin, which
demonstrates synergistic phenotypic effects. Gelsolin was identified as a
binding partner of Nm23-H1 using co-immunoprecipitation assays and mass
spectrometry analysis. Gelsolin is an actin binding protein involved in
actin-cytoskeleton remodeling through its actin-severing, -capping and
newly discovered -nucleating activities. Two-way co-immunoprecipitations
were performed in 4T1 cells and several human breast carcinoma cell lines
(MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435) to confirm the association. The potential
interaction of Nm23-H1 and Gelsolin was investigated by overexpressing
each protein, or the combination, in human MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma
cells. With regard to in vitro motility, overexpression of Nm23-H1
reduced motility in Boyden chambers by 63.1% as compared to vector
clones, while Gelsolin overexpression reduced motility by 29.6% and the
combined overexpression of both genes reduced motility by 82.3%
(p<0.001). Invasion assays showed similar trends with Nm23-H1
overexpression reducing invasion by 42.7% as compared to vector, Gelsolin
overexpression reducing invasion by 33%, and the combination reducing
invasion by 85.4% (pRecent studies have highlighted the fact that the
metastatic process can be separate from tumorigenesis. Nm23 was the first
metastasis suppressor gene to be identified, although the biochemical
basis for Nm23's anti-metastatic properties remains to be fully
elucidated. Therefore we undertook an mechanistic study of Nm23 binding
partners hypothesizing that Nm23's interaction with other proteins may
play a role in regulating metastasis. Our data identify a new interaction
with the metastasis suppressor Gelsolin, which demonstrates synergistic
phenotypic effects. Gelsolin was identified as a binding partner of
Nm23-H1 using co-immunoprecipitation assays and mass spectrometry
analysis. Gelsolin is an actin binding protein involved in
actin-cytoskeleton remodeling through its actin-severing, -capping and
newly discovered -nucleating activities. Two-way co-immunoprecipitations
were performed in 4T1 cells and several human breast carcinoma cell lines
(MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435) to confirm the association. The potential
interaction of Nm23-H1 and Gelsolin was investigated by overexpressing
each protein, or the combination, in human MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma
cells. With regard to in vitro motility, overexpression of Nm23-H1
reduced motility in Boyden chambers by 63.1% as compared to vector
clones, while Gelsolin overexpression reduced motility by 29.6% and the
combined overexpression of both genes reduced motility by 82.3%
(p<0.001). Invasion assays showed similar trends with Nm23-H1
overexpression reducing invasion by 42.7% as compared to vector, Gelsolin
overexpression reducing invasion by 33%, and the combination reducing
invasion by 85.4% (p<0.001). With regard to proliferation, neither single
gene had a prominent effect on cell proliferation, but overexpression of
both Nm23-H1 and Gelsolin resulted in an anti-proliferative effect, 28.8%
of vector or single gene transfectants, p =0.028. The data demonstrate an
additive interaction of two metastasis suppressors in motility and
invasion, and synergy in proliferation. Since Gelsolin is involved in the
actin-cytoskeleton organization, regulating actin polymerization and
depolimerization, we investigated the role of Nm23 in these processes. In
both MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cell lines, Gelsolin overexpression showed an
increase in F-actin depolimerization (3-fold and 6.2-fold increase
respectively) compared the vector clones. Moreover we observed that in
both the MDA-MB-231- and 4T1- Nm23-overexpressing cells, F-actin
depolimerization increased 8-fold and 5-fold respectively as compared to
vector. Studies analyzing the in vivo effect of the co-overexpression of
the two proteins are ongoing. The data provide an insight into the
interaction of metastasis suppressors and may represent a step for the
understanding of their biological mechanisms.

