Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive evaluation of PEGylated gold nanorods for two photon
photoluminescence image guided radiation therapy enhancement


Nanoparticle formulations of gold have shown a tremendous potential in
various biomedical applications. The use of high atomic number (Z)
materials presents an attractive approach in enhancing the therapeutic
efficacy of the radiation therapy. The high Z number for gold (Z=79)
makes them an ideal candidate for radiosensitization enhancement. The
ability of the anisotropic gold nanorods to sustain the resonating
surface plasmon with minimal damping results in highly efficient
two-photon induced photoluminescence imaging. Here we present the
synthesis and in vitro characterization of PEGylated gold nanorods as
efficient radiosensitizing agents which can be imaged using inherent
two-photon photoluminescence without a conjugated fluorophore. We have
synthesized gold nanorods with an aspect ratio of 2.5 and functionalized
the surface with different ratios of methoxy and amine PEG for modulating
the charge and imparting the functional groups. The cellular uptake
behavior in prostate cancer cell line PC3 was studied and the results
indicated a robust uptake of the amine functionalized nanorods. The
quantitative estimation of the nanorods uptake was performed with BCA
assay as amount of nanorods present in per microgram of protein. Two
photon photoluminescence imaging also confirmed a robust cellular uptake
of the amine functionalized nanorods. The radiation damage enhancement of
the gold nanorods was confirmed using PC3 cells. The cells treated with
gold nanorods were irradiated with kilovoltage X-rays. A H2AX assay was
used for quantitation of the DNA damage with and without nanorods as
controls. The results indicated an increased highly efficient DNA damage
in cells treated with gold nanorods. The outcome of this research will
enable further application of targeted nanorods in advanced animal models
as efficient radiation dose enhancement agents wherein two-photon
photoluminescence imaging will provide a real time assessment of the
therapeutic response and disease progression.

