Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG pethylator phenotype (CIMP) methylation pattern in Puerto
Ricans Hispanics colorectal cancer patients


Introduction: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), characterized
by extensive promoter methylation, seems to be a distinct epigenotype of
colorectal cancer (CRC). CIMP hypermethylation blocks transcriptional
activation of several genes associated with tumor suppression, cell
cycle, DNA repair, differentiation and apoptosis. Moreover, CIMP
hypermethylation is an important epigenetic change associated with gene
silencing, poor prognosis and lower response to chemotherapy in CRC
patients. However, prevalence of CIMP status and specific
clinicopathological features has not been examined in Puerto Rican
Hispanic CRC patients. In this study, we determined the CIMP status in PR
Hispanics with CRC and examined its association with phenotypical
characteristics. Methods: Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was used to
evaluate DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G, IGF2,
NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1, hMLH 1, CRABP1 and p16) gene in eighty-nine CRC
cases. No-CIMP status was defined as the absence of methylation, CIMP-Low
status as one to four methylated loci, and CIMP-High status as five or
more methylated loci. Clinicopathological characteristics were correlated
with CIMP status using Wilcoxon rank tests, Chi square and Fisher exact
t-tests, as appropriate using STATA 10.0. Results: Eighty-nine CRC cases
(mean age at diagnosis 60.5 10.3 years; 49 males) were evaluated. Tumors
were mostly located in the distal colon (71.0%). The 5.6 percent (5/89)
of CRC cases were CIMP-High, 88% (87.6/89) were CIMP-Low, and 6.7% (6/89)
were No-CIMP. CRABP1 (69.7%), IGF2 (48.3%) and p16 (43.8%) were the three
most commonly methylated genes. CIMP-High/Low tumors were more common
among women and among individuals 60 y/o (borderline statistical
significance). There were no significant statistical associations between
CIMP status and tumor staging, differentiation, tumor location or
survival. Discussion: We report the CIMP status in Puerto Rican Hispanics
with CRC. CIMP-hypermethylation may be less frequent among Hispanics than
previously reported in other racial and/or ethnic groups, with a discrete
clinicopathological phenotype and gene methylation pattern. A
comprehensive understanding of the differences in epigenetic silencing of
promoter regions by hypermethylation will shed light on the mechanisms
resulting in colorectal tumorigenesis in Hispanic patients. Current
efforts are underway to characterize a large number of Puerto Rican
Hispanics CRC patients which may help tailor screening and therapeutic
strategies for this population.

