Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin induces Notch in endothelial cells: Role of VEGFR-2
transactivation


Notch signaling is essential for breast cancer (BC) angiogenesis and its
dysfunction is implicated in many cancers. Leptin (a pro-angiogenic,
pro-inflammatory and mitogenic factor) induces the expression of
VEGF/VEGFR-2 and Notch in BC cells. Moreover, the binding of leptin to
its receptor (OB-Rb) in endothelial cells (EC) was shown to
phosphorylate/transactivate VEGFR-2 inducing angiogenic features. We
hypothesize that leptin is an inducer of Notch in EC and that this effect
could occur upon leptin-mediated transactivation of VEGFR-2, thereby
inducing angiogenic changes in EC. To this end, HUVEC cells were
challenged with leptin, leptin inhibitor (LPrA2) VEGFR-2 kinase inhibitor
(SU5416) and Notch signaling inhibitor (DAPT). Leptin-dose and
time-course effects on expression of Notch (receptors: Notch1, Notch2,
Notch3 and Notch4; ligands: JAG1, Dll-4 and targets: survivin and Hey2)
were determined by WB and real time RT-PCR. The impact of LPrA2, SU5416
and DAPT on leptin-induced VEGFR-2 phosphorylation and Notch expression
was also determined. The effects of leptin and inhibitors on EC
proliferation, migration and tube formation were investigated. Results
from our studies show for the first time that leptin is a potent inducer
of Notch signaling in EC. Moreover, leptin-induced VEGFR-2
phosphorylation was closely related to leptin effects on Notch and the
angiogenic features of EC. Therefore, leptin secreted either by adipose
tissue or BC cells may contribute to tumor angiogenesis by acting
directly on cancer cells inducing VEGF secretion or through EC inducing
VEGFR-2/Notch crosstalk. Present results underline the notion that
combinatory therapies targeting both Notch and leptin signaling could be
a new strategy for BC treatment. [This work was supported in part by
NIH/NCI1SC1CA138658-02; NIH/ARRA/3SC1CA138658-02S1 and the Georgia Cancer
Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP)].

