Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating T cells are activated and depleted during progression
of high-grade gliomas: Implications for T cells therapy of GBM


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) remains frustratingly impervious to any
existing therapy. We have previously shown that GBM is sensitive to
recognition and lysis by ex vivo activated T cells, a minor subset of
lymphocytes that innately recognize autologous stress-associated target
antigens via the T cell receptor and/or NKG2D. However, circulating T
cell counts and function are significantly reduced in patients with GBM.
We sought to determine the role of T cells in the immune response to
high-grade gliomas in C57BL/6 mice bearing GL261 cell line-derived
intracranial gliomas. Examination of mice 15 days after intracranial
tumor placement and prior to development of neurologic symptoms revealed
small infiltrating high-grade gliomas near the injection site.
Concurrently, the peripheral blood T cell count was significantly
increased when compared to control mice that received only the
methylcellulose vehicle (p=0.0003). T cell expansion was confined to the
T cell compartment, and a substantial proportion of T cells in
tumor-bearing mice expressed Annexin-V (20%-45%) indicating progression
to apoptosis. Annexin-V expression in control mice was confined to 2-5%
of T cells, significantly less than tumor-bearing mice (pGlioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) remains frustratingly impervious to any existing
therapy. We have previously shown that GBM is sensitive to recognition
and lysis by ex vivo activated T cells, a minor subset of lymphocytes
that innately recognize autologous stress-associated target antigens via
the T cell receptor and/or NKG2D. However, circulating T cell counts and
function are significantly reduced in patients with GBM. We sought to
determine the role of T cells in the immune response to high-grade
gliomas in C57BL/6 mice bearing GL261 cell line-derived intracranial
gliomas. Examination of mice 15 days after intracranial tumor placement
and prior to development of neurologic symptoms revealed small
infiltrating high-grade gliomas near the injection site. Concurrently,
the peripheral blood T cell count was significantly increased when
compared to control mice that received only the methylcellulose vehicle
(p=0.0003). T cell expansion was confined to the T cell compartment, and
a substantial proportion of T cells in tumor-bearing mice expressed
Annexin-V (20%-45%) indicating progression to apoptosis. Annexin-V
expression in control mice was confined to 2-5% of T cells, significantly
less than tumor-bearing mice (p<0.0001). GL261-derived tumors expressed T
cell target stress-associated NKG2D ligands H60, MULT-1 and RAE-1, yet T
cells did not infiltrate the intracranial tumors. In a separate
experiment, we found no survival advantage between wild-type (WT) mice
over T cell-deficient (C57BL/6-/) tumor-bearing mice. Based on this
observation that activated T cells did not invade the tumor, we treated
mice with a stereotactic intracranial injection of 1.5 x 106 ex vivo
expanded/activated T cells approximately 15 minutes following placement
of 5 x 106 GL261 glioma cells. Mice that received intracranial T cells
were protected from tumor development at site of injection, although
distant tumors did eventually form. These data suggest that T cells are
stimulated in glioma-bearing mice and that depletion in T cells observed
in mouse glioma models and human GBM are likely due to activation-induced
cell death in response to the tumor. Activated T cells do not traffic to
the tumor parenchyma; however, an antitumor effect can be achieved by
direct placement of ex vivo activated T cells in the vicinity of
microscopic disease, suggesting a potential post-resection strategy for
treatment of minimal residual GBM.

