Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel cell permeable peptide inhibitors of PELP1 oncogenic
functions


Estrogen receptor (ER) is the fundamental transcription factor in breast
cancer progression and a majority of breast cancers start as ER positive.
Therapies targeting ER are effective; however, many eventually develop
resistance and recur as metastases. ER signaling is mediated by
coregulator proteins that can have altered expression and/or function
that promotes therapy resistance and metastasis by enhancing
hormone-independent ER signaling and by epigenetic changes. An
alternative strategy for inhibiting ER signaling in therapy resistant and
metastatic tumors is to inhibit the function of ER coregulators. PELP1 is
an ER coactivator and proto-oncogene which is overexpressed in breast
cancer, promotes breast cancer progression by epigenetic changes at ER
target genes and is an independent marker of poor prognosis and breast
cancer survival. The objective of this study is to develop an inhibitor
of PELP1-mediated ER coactivator functions. Since PELP1 lacks any known
enzymatic activities, we targeted PELP1 protein-protein interactions to
inhibit its oncogenic functions. We used a yeast two-hybrid system to
screen a library of random peptides (10-7) fused to a transcriptional
activation domain and identified 23 peptides with high affinity for
PELP1. Two of these PELP1-inhibiting peptides (PIP-1 and PIP-2)
significantly block PELP1 coactivator functions and we used a TAT-peptide
fusion of PIPs to deliver the peptides into cells. Cellular uptake of the
TAT- PIP was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy and biotin-avidin
peptide pull-down assays confirmed PELP1-PIP binding. Both PIP- 1 and -2
significantly inhibited PELP1-mediated proliferation in two ER-positive
breast cancer cells (MCF7 and ZR75). A GenBank search revealed homology
of PIPs with the methyltransferase G9a (Bat8/KMT1C/EHMT2) that is
commonly overexpressed in aggressive breast cancer, contributes to
epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressors and promotes cancer invasion
and metastasis. In vivo co-immunoprecipitation analysis and an in vitro
binding assay confirmed PELP1 interaction with G9a. Peptide competition
assays indicated that the TAT-fused peptides could interrupt PELP1-G9a
interaction. Both PIP-1 and -2 substantially inhibited PELP1-mediated
cell invasion/migration in Boyden chamber assays. Interestingly,
disrupting PELP1-G9a interaction with PIPs sensitized resistant cells to
hormonal therapy. Mechanistic studies revealed that PELP1-G9a
interactions play a critical role in epigenetic changes in therapy
resistant cells. In conclusion, our studies identified a novel inhibitor
of PELP1 that can be used for therapeutic targeting of ER-coregulator
driven cancer progression and therapy resistance. This work was supported
by the NIH grant CA095681 and CPRIT pre-doctoral fellowship.

