Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of nitroaspirin (NCX-4016) as a
powerful and clinically relevant inhibitor of human MGMT for increasing
the efficacy of alkylating agents


The DNA repair protein MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) is a
major determinant of resistance to many alkylating agents. Currently,
clinical trials with O6-benzylguanine (BG) to inhibit MGMT and induce its
degradation are ongoing; however, this is beset with severe alkylation
damage to bone marrow and the need for hematopoietic rescue using
BG-resistant MGMT gene therapy. Therefore, an urgent need exists for
non-toxic regimens that deplete MGMT and increase tumor antitumor
efficacy. Here, we have exploited the highly reactive nature of Cysteine
145 which accepts the alkyl groups for novel drug design. Cys145 has a
pKa of 4.8 and is susceptible for glutathionylation and nitrosylation,
both of which inactivate MGMT. This study characterized the effect of
nitro-aspirin or NCX-4016, which is a potent nitrosylator of reactive
cysteines and tyrosines. NCX-4016 is a well characterized chemopreventive
agent without the GI adverse effects of aspirin and is degraded by plasma
and tissue esterases to release NO in a sustained manner. In three
MGMT-proficient human cancer cell lines (HT29, T47D, and HCT116),
nitroaspirin (NA) at pharmacologically achievable concentrations (5-10 M)
caused 90% inhibition of MGMT activity within 1 h of exposure.
Interestingly, the MGMT protein disappeared very rapidly with similar
kinetics after NA treatment; approx. 80-90% of MGMT was degraded after 10
M NA treatment for 2 h. These data are highly comparable and/or superior
to those reported for BG. Further, purified MGMT or tumor cell extracts
exposed to NCX-4016 failed to bind the biotin-labeled BG, indicating
Cys145 as the nitrosylation site. Tyr114, a residue critical for MGMT
catalysis was another target for nitrosylation. The involvement of the
ub-proteasome pathway in the degradation of nitrosylated MGMT both in
vitro and in cells was also demonstrated. In cultured cells, MGMT
suppression by BG was more prolonged than nitroaspirin, however, the
24-36 h curtailment by NA was adequate for increased production of
cytotoxic lesions. Pre-exposure of tumor cells to NA followed by BCNU
resulted in (i) a significantly greater Induction and persistence of DNA
interstrand crosslinks, and (ii) at least a 2-fold increase in the G2/M
cell cycle blockade. Experiments in mice have shown that a single
injection (100 mg/kg) of NCX-4016 causes 50-60% inhibition of MGMT
activity in mice brain and liver. Because NO-aspirin, is non-toxic
(IC50>500 M for cell lines), can be administered at high levels, yields a
chemopreventive by-product, unlikely to elicit tumor resistance, is
lipophilic enough to cross the blood-brain barrier, and its pleiotropic
actions are actually beneficial for chemotherapy, we believe NA's ability
to potently inhibit MGMT holds great promise for efficient brain tumor
therapy (supported by RO3 CA125872 and Assoc. for Res of Childhood
Cancer).

