Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PREDICT (Personalised RNA Interference to Enhance the Delivery
of Individualised Cytotoxic and Targeted Therapeutics) Approach to
Biomarker Discovery in Renal Cell Carcinoma


Background: No predictive biomarkers have been identified for VEGFR- and
mTOR-inhibitors treatments, the 2 standards of care in mRCC. The PREDICT
project (Personalised RNA Interference to Enhance the Delivery of
Individualised Cytotoxic and Targeted Therapeutics) is a EU-funded
research program built on the Consortium of Academic Centers,
Universities, Research Institutions, SME & industrial members. Two
biomarker discovery clinical trials using Everolimus (E-PREDICT) and
Sunitinib (S-PREDICT) treatment in patients with mRCC have been
developped and are recruiting.The 3 cornerstones of the PREDICT approach
are: (i) to acquire paired pre-treatment biopsies and on-treatment
nephrectomy (NE) specimens for molecular analyses and integration with
clinical efficacy data; (ii) to identify genes regulating drug resistance
in ex vivo RCC cultures from trial patients by a novel personalized
functional genomics screening approach; (iii) to integrate functional
data with genome wide molecular analyses of pre- and on-treatment samples
in order to identify clinically relevant mechanisms of drug resistance
and the next generation of predictive biomarkers. Methods: International
multicentre single arm phase II trials of EV or SU administered peri-NE
in patients with untreated mRCC are ongoing. Fresh tissue is collected in
a quality-controlled setting by core biopsy of primary tumours before
treatment. Treatment (EV or SU) is administered for a 2 cycle period of
time (EV: 10 mg/d po for 6 wks; SU: 2 cycles of 50 mg/d po for 4 wks
followed by 2 wks off drug) followed by NE. On NE specimen, fresh tissue
is collected with similar standardized tissue collection and processing
protocols for both genomic analysis and ex-vivo expansion in order to
develop RCC cell culture from any NE as well as mice-xenografts. Ex vivo
cultures from NE specimens will be used for personalized functional
genomic RNA interference screening. Patient resumes treatment after wound
is healed until progression. Functional imaging (perfusion CT) as
clinical data are collected. The primary clinical endpoint is the safety
of peri-NE E/S. Secondary endpoints include efficacy and biomarker
measurements. Sample size: 60 pts in both biomarker discovery and
validation cohorts per trial will allow the identification and validation
of several potential predictive biomarkers per drug with an expected AUC
of >0.8 while controlling the false positive rate Background: No
predictive biomarkers have been identified for VEGFR- and mTOR-inhibitors
treatments, the 2 standards of care in mRCC. The PREDICT project
(Personalised RNA Interference to Enhance the Delivery of Individualised
Cytotoxic and Targeted Therapeutics) is a EU-funded research program
built on the Consortium of Academic Centers, Universities, Research
Institutions, SME & industrial members. Two biomarker discovery clinical
trials using Everolimus (E-PREDICT) and Sunitinib (S-PREDICT) treatment
in patients with mRCC have been developped and are recruiting.The 3
cornerstones of the PREDICT approach are: (i) to acquire paired
pre-treatment biopsies and on-treatment nephrectomy (NE) specimens for
molecular analyses and integration with clinical efficacy data; (ii) to
identify genes regulating drug resistance in ex vivo RCC cultures from
trial patients by a novel personalized functional genomics screening
approach; (iii) to integrate functional data with genome wide molecular
analyses of pre- and on-treatment samples in order to identify clinically
relevant mechanisms of drug resistance and the next generation of
predictive biomarkers. Methods: International multicentre single arm
phase II trials of EV or SU administered peri-NE in patients with
untreated mRCC are ongoing. Fresh tissue is collected in a
quality-controlled setting by core biopsy of primary tumours before
treatment. Treatment (EV or SU) is administered for a 2 cycle period of
time (EV: 10 mg/d po for 6 wks; SU: 2 cycles of 50 mg/d po for 4 wks
followed by 2 wks off drug) followed by NE. On NE specimen, fresh tissue
is collected with similar standardized tissue collection and processing
protocols for both genomic analysis and ex-vivo expansion in order to
develop RCC cell culture from any NE as well as mice-xenografts. Ex vivo
cultures from NE specimens will be used for personalized functional
genomic RNA interference screening. Patient resumes treatment after wound
is healed until progression. Functional imaging (perfusion CT) as
clinical data are collected. The primary clinical endpoint is the safety
of peri-NE E/S. Secondary endpoints include efficacy and biomarker
measurements. Sample size: 60 pts in both biomarker discovery and
validation cohorts per trial will allow the identification and validation
of several potential predictive biomarkers per drug with an expected AUC
of >0.8 while controlling the false positive rate < 5%. Results: To date
33 patients have been enrolled in the S- PREDICT Trial. Preliminary
analysis of 25 first paired pre- treatment biopsies and frozen
nephrectomy specimen provided sufficient and quality controlled material
for genomic analysis. Three RCC cultures have been tested for functional
genomic RNA interference screening. Planned genomic analyses and
functional genomic screens will be further discussed.

