Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotoxicity of multi-walled carbon nanotubes at occupationally
relevant doses


Carbon nanotubes represent a creative alternative for applications in
medicine as therapeutic vectors, imaging and controlled release of active
molecules. Although the low density and small size of carbon nanotubes
makes respiratory exposures to workers likely during the production or
use of commercial products, the potential genotoxicity of multi-walled
carbon nanotubes has not been investigated. We have previously shown
mitotic spindle aberrations in cultured primary and immortalized human
airway epithelial cells exposed to single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWCNT). In order to investigate whether genetic damage was unique to
SWCNT, we examined mitotic spindle aberrations following dosing of cells
to multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) at concentrations anticipated in
the workplace. Immortalized and primary respiratory epithelial cells were
exposed to 0.024, 0.24, 2.4, and 24g/cm2 carbon nanotubes. The minimal
dose of MWCNT considered for this research was based on the permissible
exposure limit for particles with an aerodynamic diameter of less than 5
microns (Occupation Safety and Health Administration). MWCNT induced a
dose response of disrupted centrosomes, mitotic spindles and aneuploid
chromosome number. The data further showed that monopolar mitotic
spindles comprised 95% of the disrupted mitoses. The monopolar phenotype
of the disrupted mitotic spindles is in sharp contrast to the multi-polar
spindle of SWCNT-induced disruption. Three-dimensional reconstructions
showed carbon nanotubes integrated with the microtubules, the DNA and
within the centrosome structure. The lower doses did not cause
cytotoxicity or apoptosis 24 hours after exposure; however, after 72
hours, significant cytotoxicity was observed in the MWCNT-exposed cells.
Disruption of the centrosome is common in many solid tumors including
lung cancer. The resulting aneuploidy is a key event in the progression
of cancer and is correlated with tumor stage. Our results demonstrate
significant disruption of the mitotic spindle by MWCNT at occupationally
relevant doses. These results suggest caution should be used in the
handling and processing of carbon nanotubes.

