Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolutionary therapy modeling for multidrug resistance: A novel
concept of false drug


The emergence of drug resistance is almost inevitably encountered during
systematic cancer therapies resulting in treatment failure and tumor
progression. The multidrug resistance (MDR), mediated by xenobiotic
metabolism, is among the most well-known and well-studied mechanisms for
drug resistance. Although MDR emergence is an evolutionary process,
cancer therapies rarely incorporate evolutionary dynamics into their
design. Here we present a study to develop a cancer treatment strategy
targeting the metabolic cost of MDR and its evolutionary consequence.
Through a new therapeutic strategy that reduces the fitness and
proliferation of resistant cells by forcing them to use excess energy, we
expect to stabilize the tumor volume by maintaining a constant population
of sensitive cells and suppressing emergence of resistance.
P-glycoprotein (PGP) is the best-known multidrug transporter responsible
for MDR and lowers the intracellular drug concentration by an active drug
export. A doxorubicin-resistant cell line MCF-7/dox showed significant
overexpression of PGP pump when compared to MCF-7/wt, the parental
drug-sensitive cell line. We focused on the metabolic energy cost due to
the overexpression of the pump protein and its activity which requires
about 2 ATP for each molecule of drug extruded. We hypothesized that the
cost requires diversion of some resources which are, therefore, not
available for proliferation thus reducing the evolutionary fitness of
resistant cells. As expected, MCF-7/dox showed higher glycolytic activity
and higher glucose demand for the growth and survival compared to the
parental cell line MCF-7/wt. Due to the increased glucose consumption,
MCF-7/dox appeared to be less competitive in a mixed culture with
MCF-7/wt when the glucose resource was limited. We were able to increase
the glycolytic activity further by applying other PGP substrates
including verapamil at a non-cytotoxic dose. From these results, we
propose a novel therapy using a false drug, which is not cytotoxic but
nevertheless exported by PGP. The expenditure of resources required to
extrude the false drug without any survival benefit is expected to
further reduce the fitness of the MDR phenotype. When the mixed
population was treated with verapamil at a non-lethal dosage, the
drug-resistant population was significantly decreased further than when
verapamil was not present. 2-deoxy glucose (2-DG), a glycolysis
inhibitor, showed synergistic effect with verapamil in further reducing
the MCF-7/dox population size.

