Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effects of everolimus, sorafenib, and axitinib in human
renal cells carcinoma xenografts resistant to first line treatment by
sunitinib


Background. Acquired resistance to sunitinib stands as a major clinical
challenge in renal cell carcinoma. This study aimed to evaluate the
antitumor effects of everolimus, sorafenib, and axitinib as second line
treatment in renal cancer xenografts acquiring resistance to sunitinib.
Materials and Methods: CAKI1 renal carcinoma cells (VHL+) were engrafted
in nude mice and treated continuously with tumor-static doses of oral
sunitinib (60 mg/kg) until progression (define as 100% increase tumor
volume on 3 subsequent measurements). Mice that progressed were
randomized to receive second line treatment with oral everolimus (2.5, 5,
10 and 20 mg/kg), sorafenib (60mg/kg), or axitinib (60mg/kg) for 3 weeks.
Tumor responses and progression-free survival were calculated using
Kaplan-Meier analysis. Tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), Western blot, and q-RT-PCR. Results. First line sunitinib induced
significant tumor growth delay compared with placebo (medians PFS: 50 and
17 days, respectively, pBackground. Acquired resistance to sunitinib
stands as a major clinical challenge in renal cell carcinoma. This study
aimed to evaluate the antitumor effects of everolimus, sorafenib, and
axitinib as second line treatment in renal cancer xenografts acquiring
resistance to sunitinib. Materials and Methods: CAKI1 renal carcinoma
cells (VHL+) were engrafted in nude mice and treated continuously with
tumor-static doses of oral sunitinib (60 mg/kg) until progression (define
as 100% increase tumor volume on 3 subsequent measurements). Mice that
progressed were randomized to receive second line treatment with oral
everolimus (2.5, 5, 10 and 20 mg/kg), sorafenib (60mg/kg), or axitinib
(60mg/kg) for 3 weeks. Tumor responses and progression-free survival were
calculated using Kaplan-Meier analysis. Tumors were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blot, and q-RT-PCR. Results. First
line sunitinib induced significant tumor growth delay compared with
placebo (medians PFS: 50 and 17 days, respectively, p<0.0001) without
toxicity. Tumors that progressed under sunitinib treatment showed higher
mRNA levels of HIF-1, VEGFA, CXCR4, and CA-IX as compared to tumors
displaying response to sunitinib. An increase in CXCR4, vimentin, and
HER3 protein expression was associated with sunitinib-resistance. No
change in mouse CD31 mRNA was observed contrasting with an increased
human CD31 mRNA expression in tumors developing resistance to sunitinib
compared to sensitive tumors, suggesting that human cancer stem cells may
dedifferentiate to gain angiogenic capacities at progression. Second line
treatment with everolimus, sorafenib, and axitinib were well tolerated as
defined by mouse weight, mortality, and behavior. Median PFS for 20 mg/kg
everolimus was significantly higher than that of control group (13 and 5
days, respectively, p10mg/kg everolimus display higher effects on tumor
growth than sorafenib and axitinib. Phospho-S6 expression was reduced in
tumors treated with everolimus and axitinib but not with sorafenib,
indicating that everolimus and axitinib inactivate the PI3k/AKT/mTOR
signaling. IHC analysis of everolimus- and sorafenib-treated tumors
showed no apoptosis, large hypoxic (by CA-IX staining) and necrotic areas
associated, and a decreased number of tumor vessels (CD31 staining)
compared to controls. Conversely, axitinib neither induce hypoxia nor
necrosis in this model. Conclusions. This study shows that, using an
appropriate tumor progression methodology, human tumor models can be used
to evaluate first and second line treatment with targeted drugs. This
setting also shows that xenograft models may allow testing molecular
markers of response and resistance prior to clinical trials.

