Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Geographic clustering of melanoma malignum with high thickness in
the United States


Melanoma malignum is the 6th most common cancer in the United States in
both genders with a continuously rising incidence. Therapeutic options
for melanoma depend on the stage at the diagnosis; only if discovered
early is this deadly disease curable. The proportion of thick melanomas
(>2mm) is reported to have remained stable in the US during the last 2
decades, which assumes these cases are homogenously distributed in the
country. However, there is evidence that tumor thickness varies (Breslow)
as a function of geography, possibly based on factors including county
level poverty and access to healthcare. Ultimately, how melanoma
incidence and tumor thickness relate to geographic location of the US,
and to the characteristics of the population and the environment within
any given location, has not been determined. Our goal was to test for
geographic clustering and risk factors for melanoma incidence and
thickness at diagnosis across US. We used a population-based cancer
registry for the US consisting of 17 registries of the National Cancer
Institute's Surveillance Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) program for
year 2008. Data consist of county level rates of cancer incidence across
7 states, representing 464 counties. The county-level covariates accessed
from the 2000 US census included % of families below poverty and median
income. First, global tests of spatial autocorrelation were conducted
using the Moran's I statistic. Second, clustering was examined using the
LISA statistic (local indicator of spatial autocorrelation). Third,
geographically weighted regression was used to identify factors
associated with the incidence and thickness of melanoma in US counties.
Incidence rates of melanoma varied widely across US counties in 2008,
ranging from 14-105/100,000. We found evidence of moderate positive
spatial autocorrelation (Moran's I=0.166, pMelanoma malignum is the 6th
most common cancer in the United States in both genders with a
continuously rising incidence. Therapeutic options for melanoma depend on
the stage at the diagnosis; only if discovered early is this deadly
disease curable. The proportion of thick melanomas (>2mm) is reported to
have remained stable in the US during the last 2 decades, which assumes
these cases are homogenously distributed in the country. However, there
is evidence that tumor thickness varies (Breslow) as a function of
geography, possibly based on factors including county level poverty and
access to healthcare. Ultimately, how melanoma incidence and tumor
thickness relate to geographic location of the US, and to the
characteristics of the population and the environment within any given
location, has not been determined. Our goal was to test for geographic
clustering and risk factors for melanoma incidence and thickness at
diagnosis across US. We used a population-based cancer registry for the
US consisting of 17 registries of the National Cancer Institute's
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Result (SEER) program for year 2008.
Data consist of county level rates of cancer incidence across 7 states,
representing 464 counties. The county-level covariates accessed from the
2000 US census included % of families below poverty and median income.
First, global tests of spatial autocorrelation were conducted using the
Moran's I statistic. Second, clustering was examined using the LISA
statistic (local indicator of spatial autocorrelation). Third,
geographically weighted regression was used to identify factors
associated with the incidence and thickness of melanoma in US counties.
Incidence rates of melanoma varied widely across US counties in 2008,
ranging from 14-105/100,000. We found evidence of moderate positive
spatial autocorrelation (Moran's I=0.166, p<0.05), with clustering of
counties with high incidence rates observed in localized parts of
northern Iowa, northern California, northern Washington, and southern
Utah; counties with low incidence rates were clustered in New Mexico and
Louisiana. Melanoma incidence was positively associated with county
rurality and income was negatively associated with poverty. We also found
that the median tumor thickness (Breslow, mm) at diagnosis varied widely
across counties ranging from 0.0-4.5 mm (mean=0.7 SD=0.36), but did not
exhibit global spatial autocorrelation. However, clusters of counties
with deep median tumor depth were observed in Iowa, but not in counties
in the US having the highest melanoma incidence. Counties with low median
tumor depth clustered in New Mexico. Factors negatively associated with
tumor thickness were income and poverty. Melanoma incidence and thickness
do not vary randomly across the landscape of the US, but occur in well
defined specific areas as a function of identifiable risk factors. This
gives guidance for improvement of early detection of melanoma.

