Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of race on outcome in women with uterine cancers


Background: Incidence rates for malignant tumors of the uterine corpus
have been reported to be lower among women of color than among whites,
whereas mortality rates have been reported to be higher among
African-American women and women of Latina origin. Reasons for the higher
level of mortality among women of color are currently unknown. Methods:
After Institutional Review Board approval, we accessed the prospective
clinical databases in the Division of Gynecologic Oncology at our
institution. We abstracted socio-demographic and survival data from all
women who were diagnosed with endometrial cancer from January
1990-January 2010. Pathology records were reviewed and the final
pathology confirmed. Results: Nine hundred and ninety patients were
identified. Racial distribution was 381 (38%) white, 310 (31%) black, 231
(23%) Hispanic, 21 (2%) other, and 72 (3%) unknown or unclassified. Five
hundred and ninety-six (60%) patients had Type I endometriod histological
subtype. At time of censor, 269 (27%) were confirmed deceased. The hazard
ratio for black verses white women was 1.91 (pBackground: Incidence rates
for malignant tumors of the uterine corpus have been reported to be lower
among women of color than among whites, whereas mortality rates have been
reported to be higher among African-American women and women of Latina
origin. Reasons for the higher level of mortality among women of color
are currently unknown. Methods: After Institutional Review Board
approval, we accessed the prospective clinical databases in the Division
of Gynecologic Oncology at our institution. We abstracted
socio-demographic and survival data from all women who were diagnosed
with endometrial cancer from January 1990-January 2010. Pathology records
were reviewed and the final pathology confirmed. Results: Nine hundred
and ninety patients were identified. Racial distribution was 381 (38%)
white, 310 (31%) black, 231 (23%) Hispanic, 21 (2%) other, and 72 (3%)
unknown or unclassified. Five hundred and ninety-six (60%) patients had
Type I endometriod histological subtype. At time of censor, 269 (27%)
were confirmed deceased. The hazard ratio for black verses white women
was 1.91 (p<0.001) when all histological subtypes were included. However,
when patients were divided into Type I and Type II histological subtypes
there was no significant difference in survival by race. Conclusion: Our
data show no difference in survival among women of Asian,
African-American/Caribbean, and Caucasian races with uterine cancer after
control for histological subtype.

