Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective small molecule inhibition of anti-apoptotic MCL-1


BCL-2 family proteins are key regulators of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in health and disease. Anti-apoptotic members such as BCL-2,
BCL-XL, and MCL-1 have been implicated in the initiation, progression,
and chemoresistance of human cancer. The anti-apoptotic BCL-2/BCL-XL
groove that binds and sequesters pro-apoptotic BH3 death helices has been
successfully targeted by small molecules and peptides. Such compounds
induce tumor cell apoptosis and are being advanced in clinical trials as
promising next-generation cancer therapeutics. Notably, selective
antagonists such as ABT-737 are highly effective at inducing apoptosis in
BCL-2/BCL-XL-dependent cancers, but are rendered inactive by
overexpression of MCL-1, a formidable chemoresistance protein that lies
outside the molecule's binding spectrum. By screening a library of
Stabilized Alpha-Helix of BCL-2 domains (SAHBs), we previously discovered
that the MCL-1 BH3 helix is itself a potent and exclusive MCL-1 inhibitor
(Stewart et al., Nat Chem Biol, 2010). Here, we deployed this natural
peptidic inhibitor of MCL-1 in a competitive binding screen to identify
an MCL-1 inhibitor molecule (MIM) that displays exquisite selectivity in
in vitro binding and functional assays. NMR analysis documented that MIM
engages the canonical BH3-binding pocket of MCL-1. Importantly, MIM
selectively triggers caspase 3/7 activation and apoptosis in a cancer
cell line that is dependent on induced overexpression of MCL-1, but
showed no activity in the isogenic cell line that is driven instead by
overexpressed BCL-XL. Conversely, ABT-737 manifested activity in the
BCL-XL-overexpressing cancer cells but had no effect on the corresponding
MCL-1-dependent cells. Thus, we report the application of MCL-1 SAHB to
identify a selective small molecule inhibitor of MCL-1 that exhibits
pro-apoptotic activity in the specific context of MCL-1 dependence.

