Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of orlistat hydrolysis by fatty acid synthase
thioesterase


Fatty acid synthase (FASN), a seven domain enzyme, is the sole protein
capable of de novo synthesis of free fatty acids, most commonly 16-carbon
palmitate. The fatty acid synthesis cycle begins with the condensation of
acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA, and continues with the elongation of the
fatty acid chain, which is tethered to an acyl carrier protein domain
(ACP), via a repeating cycle. At the end of elongation, the thioesterase
(TE) domain of FASN, a member of the serine hydrolase family with an
Asp-His-Ser catalytic triad, cleaves the bond between palmitate and ACP,
and releases free palmitate. FASN has been found to be over-expressed in
a wide variety of human cancers, and this over-expression is correlated
to a higher metastatic potential and poorer prognosis in cancer patients.
FASN over-expression is also associated with increased resistance toward
cancer chemotherapeutics. Orlistat, an FDA approved drug for obesity
treatment that prevents uptake of dietary fats by inhibiting pancreatic
lipases in the gastrointestinal tract, is a compound found to act as a
reversible inhibitor of FASN TE. A previous study using the co-crystal
structure of the TE domain with orlistat found that orlistat was
covalently bound to the active site Ser within the TE domain, indicating
that inhibition of FASN by orlistat halts the fatty acid synthesis cycle
by blocking the release of free palmitate from the ACP. A hydrolyzed form
of orlistat was also observed in the active site of TE, demonstrating
that orlistat is not a stable inhibitor of FASN. In this study, we
examined the mechanism of orlistat hydrolysis within the TE domain of
FASN using molecular dynamics simulations. We found that the hexanoyl
tail of orlistat is capable of shifting while covalently bound to the
active site Ser, and that this shift is accompanied by the
destabilization of a hydrogen bond that exists between a hydroxyl moiety
of orlistat and the active site His. Once this hydrogen bond is
destabilized, a catalytic water molecule can enter the active site of TE
with the proper orientation for catalysis of the covalent bond between
orlistat and Ser. These findings suggest that the hexanoyl tail of
orlistat plays an important role in its hydrolysis and may guide the
future design of new inhibitors that target the TE domain of FASN with
greater endurance for potential use in the treatment of cancer.

