Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplex assay in FFPE tissues to simultaneously quantify the
human EGF receptor (HER1-4) family proteins


The human EGF receptor family (HER's) consists of two clinically
validated drug targets (EGFR (HER1) and HER2), and two receptors (HER3
and HER4) which are the subject of intensive preclinical and early
clinical investigation. Although drugs inhibiting both EGFR and HER2 show
significant antitumor activity in the clinic, the acquisition of
resistance is a hallmark of these and other targeted therapies. In the
case of both targets, one of the emerging resistance mechanisms is the
co-expression of other members of the EGFR superfamily. It was recently
shown that HER2 co-expression mediates resistance in EGFR inhibitor
(cetuximab) treated head and neck cancer (Sci Transl Med 7(3)99).
Similarly, much attention has been paid to HER3 both as a bona fide drug
target as well as a resistance mechanism (Oncogene 27, 3944). Finally,
HER4, though less well studied may play a role in drug response (Breast
Cancer Research 11:R50). We have previously build HER1 and HER2 specific
SRM assays. HER3 is usually expressed at much lower levels than EGFR and
HER2 (often The human EGF receptor family (HER's) consists of two
clinically validated drug targets (EGFR (HER1) and HER2), and two
receptors (HER3 and HER4) which are the subject of intensive preclinical
and early clinical investigation. Although drugs inhibiting both EGFR and
HER2 show significant antitumor activity in the clinic, the acquisition
of resistance is a hallmark of these and other targeted therapies. In the
case of both targets, one of the emerging resistance mechanisms is the
co-expression of other members of the EGFR superfamily. It was recently
shown that HER2 co-expression mediates resistance in EGFR inhibitor
(cetuximab) treated head and neck cancer (Sci Transl Med 7(3)99).
Similarly, much attention has been paid to HER3 both as a bona fide drug
target as well as a resistance mechanism (Oncogene 27, 3944). Finally,
HER4, though less well studied may play a role in drug response (Breast
Cancer Research 11:R50). We have previously build HER1 and HER2 specific
SRM assays. HER3 is usually expressed at much lower levels than EGFR and
HER2 (often <10%). Yet, receptor crosstalk and heterodimerization can
allow even very low levels of HER3 to exert a large impact on drug
response. According to one report (Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.
19(4):982), IHC analysis of HER3 may be inadequate to properly quantitate
HER3 expression in FFPE tumor tissues. This antibody inadequacy may be a
result of high sequence homology/identity between HER3 and other HER
family members. Due to the critical need to accurately quantitate this
receptor, we have used a mass spectrometric approach to develop a
specific and quantitative SRM assay for HER3 from FFPE tumor tissue.
These preclinical studies are being extended by assessing the expression
levels of the complete HER family in two cohorts of clinical tumor tissue
which had been treated with HER family antagonists. First, we measured
HER3 expression in a set of neoadjuvant gefitinib treated NSCLC tumors.
In this cohort, 12/15 tumor showed low but measurable levels of HER3
expression, ranging from 50-100 amol/ug tumor tissue. In a second tissue
set, we measured HER3 expression in a cohort of advanced (Stage III-IV)
breast cancer tissues which had undergone post resection adjuvant
treatment with trastuzumab. These breast cancer samples demonstrated a
higher level of expression of HER3, ranging from 50 - 250amol/ug tumor
tissue, and 15/18 tumors were HER3 positive. In both studies, the
relationship between HER family expression and response to either
gefitinib or trastuzumab is currently under study. Analysis of HER4 in
these cohorts is ongoing. It is critically important to understand
mechanisms of resistance in patients undergoing targeted therapies, and
Liquid Tissue-SRM promises to be a platform which can deliver extremely
high sensitivity, absolute specificity as well as multiplexing
capabilities to assess the four HER family targets in unison.

