Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin II /angiotensin II type I receptor (AGTR1) promotes
cell growth in epithelial ovarian cancer


Background: Angiotensin and its receptor, AGTR (Anigiotensin receptor)
are known as main effectors molecules of renin-angiotensin system in
regulating the physiological processes of the cardiovascular system. Not
only do they function as an endocrine system, but they have recently
reported to regulate cell proliferation, angiogenesis, invasiveness, and
viabilities via inducing intercellular signaling pathways. The aim of
this study is to evaluate the role of angiotensin II and AGTR1 on cell
survival and proliferation in epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells.
Methods: Expressions of AGTR1 were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in
epithelial ovarian carcinoma tissues and analyzed the correlation between
AGTR1 expression and clinicopathological characteristics of patients. For
in vitro test, we checked the level of expression for angiotensin II and
AGTR1 in human ovarian cancer cell lines by Western blot. A recombinant
angiotensin II and its blocker losartan were treated into the cells. For
cell viabilities and proliferations were estimated by MTT assay. Results:
Through checking the expression of AGTR1 in human ovarian cancer cells,
we selected A2780 and HeyA8 cells for in vitro tests because these cells
have relatively high expression. Exogenous treatment of angiotensin II
resulted in increased cell growth of both cells. Losartan, specific
blocker of AGTR1, diminished the angiotensin II-induced increased cell
growth. Moreover, we identified that angiotensin II activated Akt and
STAT signaling through AGTR1 and pretreatment of losartan inhibited those
activations. Conclusion: In this study, we inquired into the role of
angiotensin II-AGTR1 interaction in ovarian cancer. They positively
regulate cell survivability and proliferation and activate intercellular
signaling involving Akt and STAT via suggesting their oncogenic
mechanisms. Moreover, treatment of losartan, showed antiproliferative
effect by inhibiting the activations of AGTR1 mediated signaling. These
results suggest that AGTR1 inhibitor like as losartan could be a novel
therapeutic strategy treating this cancer.

