Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunoediting by the innate immune system in the absence of
adaptive immunity


Cancer immunoediting is the process whereby the immune system protects
against cancer formation and sculpts the immunogenicity of developing
tumors cells. Although the full process is known to depend on innate and
adaptive immunity, it remains unclear whether innate immunity alone is
capable of immunoediting. By comparing the incidence and immunogenicity
of 3methylcholanthrene (MCA)-induced sarcomas in syngeneic wild-type,
RAG2-/-, and RAG2-/- x c-/- mice, we show that the innate immune system
can edit the immunogenicity of primary tumors. Specifically, RAG2-/-x
c-/- mice displayed the highest incidence of MCA sarcomas, followed by
RAG2-/- mice, and WT mice have the lowest incidence at four separate
doses of MCA. Moreover, when cell lines were generated from MCA sarcomas,
the cell lines derived from MCA sarcomas growing in RAG2-/-x c-/- mice
had the highest immunogenicity, followed by cell lines from RAG2-/- mice,
and cell lines from WT mice had the lowest immunogenicity. These results
show that the innate immune system can edit tumors in the absence of
adaptive immunity. To examine the cellular basis of editing by the innate
immune system, we analyzed the innate cells that infiltrate tumors formed
from transplanting highly immunogenic MCA sarcoma cell lines into RAG2-/-
or RAG2-/-x c-/- mice. We found that M1 macrophages were detected at high
levels in immunogenic tumors in RAG2-/- but not RAG2-/- x c-/- mice. The
accumulation of M1 macrophages required IFN and was associated with
effective tumor editing. In the absence of c and IFN, M2 macrophages were
abundant, and editing was impaired. Notably, M1 macrophages can be
elicited by administration of CD40 agonistic antibodies, thereby
restoring cancer editing activity in RAG2-/-x c-/- mice. Our results
suggest that crosstalk between natural killer cells and M1 macrophages,
through IFN, can be elicited in highly immunogenic tumors, leading to
cancer immunoediting. Our highly immunogenic cell lines will provide a
system to dissect the cellular and molecular basis of cancer
immunoediting by the innate immune system.

