Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of breast cancer by delaying promotion and progression


A full term pregnancy early in life reduces the risk of breast cancer in
women. A similar phenomenon is also observed in rats and mice. Short-term
treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol is also highly effective in
preventing mammary carcinogenesis. In the current study our objective was
to determine whether short-term treatment with pregnancy levels of
estradiol conferred protection against mammary carcinogenesis by blocking
initiation or promotion. Rats were injected with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea
at 7 weeks of age and treated with 20 g, 100 g, 200 g or 30 mg of
estradiol in silastic capsules for 3-weeks. The experiments were
terminated 9 months post carcinogen treatment. Mammary gland wholemounts
were prepared at termination and examined for the presence of latent
microscopic mammary cancers. Short-term treatment with pregnancy levels
of estradiol drastically reduced the incidence of overt mammary cancers.
100 g, 200 g and 30 mg doses of estradiol resulted in levels of estradiol
equivalent to pregnancy level and were effective in preventing overt
mammary cancer incidence compared to control or 20 g estradiol treatment
which did not result in pregnancy levels of estradiol in the circulation.
Although a significant reduction of overt cancers was observed in the
pregnancy levels of estradiol treated groups, there was no difference in
the incidence of microscopic mammary cancers between the estradiol
treated and the controls. Proliferation of microscopic mammary cancers
was examined using immunohistochemistry for cyclin D1 expression.
Proliferation in the microscopic mammary cancers of the protected groups
was significantly lower ( 2-3 fold) than the microscopic mammary cancers
in the unprotected groups. These findings clearly demonstrate that
short-term treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol confers
protection against mammary cancer development by blocking promotion and
progression of carcinogen initiated cells.

