Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel drug discovery approach targeting STAT3 for breast cancer
therapy using MLSD and drug repositioning


Constitutive activation of Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling is frequently detected in human cancer,
including breast cancer, and has emerged as a viable molecular target for
breast cancer treatment. Novel therapeutic approaches are needed for
breast cancer if significant improvements in survival are to occur. To
date, few STAT3 inhibitors are available for the therapy of breast
cancer. Conventional high throughput screening and virtual docking drug
discovery approaches identified many hits, but only a few of them may be
developed into drugs. To accelerate STAT3 drug development, we used a
novel drug discovery approach with multiple ligand simultaneous docking
(MLSD) which we have developed and drug repositioning to search against
FDA approved drug and experimental drug database in DrugBank. Using this
new method, we identified the FDA-approved drug celecoxib (a COX-2
inhibitor) with a novel function to target STAT3 [Predictive STAT3
binding dissociation constant (Kd)= 8.6 M]. In addition, a novel
celecoxib analog (8A) was developed exhibiting stronger STAT3 binding
(Predicted Kd= 0.12 M, 71-fold stronger than celecoxib). Although 8A has
stronger STAT3 binding, it has weaker COX-2 binding (521-fold weaker than
celecoxib), suggesting its selectivity on STAT3 versus COX-2. Minimal
COX-2 inhibition by 8A may reduce cardiovascular and gastrointestinal
risks associated with COX-2 inhibitors. The ability of 8A to inhibit
STAT3 was tested through a combination of Western Blot, MTT cell
viability assay, and Immunofluorescence Standing. 8A inhibited the
P-STAT3 stimulated by IL-6 but not the induction of STAT1, STAT2, STAT4,
STAT5, and STAT6 phosphorylation stimulated by IFN-, IFN-, and IL-4. 8A
also inhibited the induction of STAT3 nuclear localization by IL-6, which
could prevent STAT3 function as a transcription factor. 8A inhibited
STAT3 phosphorylation and resulted in the induction apoptosis on breast
cancer cells as evidenced by caspase-3 cleavage. Further, 8A has a lower
IC50 than celecoxib and was more potent than celecoxib to inhibit STAT3
phosphorylation and induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells, which
confirmed the stronger STAT3 binding energy than celecoxib. In summary,
our study is the first report using MLSD and drug repositioning to
develop drug-like STAT3 inhibitors. This novel method has a potential to
significantly speed up the STAT3 drug development for the therapy of
breast cancer and possibly other types of human cancer which express
constitutive STAT3 signaling.

