Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mixed lineage kinase activity results in G2/M arrest
and apoptosis in ER-positive breast cancer cells


A majority of breast tumors express estrogen receptor alpha (ER), and
many require ER activity to grow. Endocrine agents that target ER have
been successfully used to treat many breast cancer patients. However, de
novo and acquired resistance is an important clinical problem that
results in tumor progression and patient death. New targeted therapies
that can be used to treat or prevent the development of endocrine
resistant tumors are therefore needed. Resistance to endocrine therapies
can be due to activated signaling pathways that alter the ligand
dependence of ER or make cells independent of ER function. Agents that
target these signaling pathways might therefore be used to treat or
prevent endocrine resistance. However, activation of multiple signaling
pathways may contribute to endocrine resistance, and blockade of a single
receptor or pathway may only be effective for a subset of tumors. Mixed
Lineage Kinases (MLKs) are a family of Map Kinase Kinase Kinases (MAP3Ks)
that are capable of activating multiple MAPK pathways including the JNK,
p38 and ERK pathways. MLKs function downstream of several cell surface
receptors that have been implicated in endocrine resistance, and upstream
of several effectors that can impact ER function and cell proliferation.
We therefore investigated the effects of an MLK inhibitor (CEP 1347) on
human mammary epithelial and cancer cell lines including MCF-7
(ER-positive breast cancer, endocrine sensitive), MCF-7/LCC9 (ER-positive
breast cancer, endocrine resistant), MCF-10A (non-tumorigenic) and 184B5
(non-tumorigenic). Short term CEP 1347 treatment resulted in a G2/M
arrest and an increase in apoptosis in both tumor cell lines, but not in
the non-tumorigenic cells. Similarly, six days of treatment with CEP 1347
caused a significant decrease in viable cells in both breast cancer cell
lines, but not in non-tumorigenic cells. Six day CEP 1347 treatment of
MCF-7 and MCF-7/LCC9 cells also resulted in polyploidy and increased cell
size. Since MLKs can act upstream of multiple MAPKs, we investigated the
effects of CEP 1347 on JNK, p38 and ERK activity in the four cell lines.
Neither ERK nor p38 activity was affected in any of the cell lines. In
contrast, CEP 1347 treatment led to decreased JNK activity in MCF-7 and
MCF-7/LCC9 cells, but not in the non-tumorigenic cell lines. Based on
these results, we propose that MLK activity is required for JNK
activation in ER-positive breast cancer cells, but not in non-tumorigenic
mammary epithelial cells. Since JNK activity is required for G2/M
progression in these cells, inhibiting MLK activity therefore results in
a cell cycle arrest, the accumulation of polyploid cells, and ultimately
apoptosis. Since MLKs are not required for JNK activation in
non-tumorigenic cells, MLK inhibitors such as CEP 1347 may be selective
agents for the treatment of endocrine sensitive and endocrine resistant
ER-positive breast tumors.

