Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ceramide/tamoxifen nanoliposomal combination - A promising
strategy for treatment of chemoresistant breast cancer


Drug resistance in breast and other cancers results from multiple gene
interactions. Ceramide, a key intermediate in the sphingolipid pathway,
can act as a powerful tumor suppressor. The employ of ceramide-based
agents as opposed to the administration of ceramide generators such as
daunorubicin, could be a smart strategy for cancer therapy.
Polychemotherapy remains the best option for treatment of breast cancer
at the aggressive, metastatic stage. The aim of our study was to
investigate the cytotoxic and antiproliferative effects of ceramide
(short-chain C6-ceramide) administered in combination with tamoxifen,
used here as an inhibitor of ceramide glycosylation. We previously
demonstrated the cytotoxicity of this combination in MDA-MB-231 cells;
however, little regarding mechanism was established. The present study
employs nanoliposomal formulations of both agents, a strategy to enhance
efficacy. Four triple-negative chemoresistant breast cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, BT-20 and Hs578T were used. Cytotoxicity assays
revealed that C6-ceramide/tamoxifen synergistically reduced viability,
compared to single agents in all four cell lines. For example, in
MDA-MB-468 cells, nanoliposomal C6-ceramide (2.5 M), tamoxifen (5 M), and
the combination reduced cell viability to 70, 85, and 10% of control,
respectively (96 hr). A hallmark of cancer, implicated in tumor growth as
well as metastasis, is resistance to induction of apoptosis. Assessment
of cellular apoptosis showed that C6-ceramide/tamoxifen treatment
promoted DNA fragmentation in a dose-dependant manner, attaining a value
that was 36% over control at 24 hr. Introduction of the pan-caspase
inhibitor, z-VAD-fmk, completely reversed DNA fragmentation, showing that
apoptosis was mediated by caspase activation. The aggressive and
metastatic behavior of any tumor is dependent on the ability of the cells
to proliferate. Interestingly, the lower concentrations of our drug
combination (2.5 M) induced cell cycle arrest at G1, the first growth
phase. In summary, this approach has potential to circumvent limitations
of ceramide-based therapies, such as rapid ceramide clearance due to
metabolism, the inability to attain therapeutic levels when
ceramide-generating agents are employed, and inherent insolubility that
is encountered. These findings demonstrate the in vitro efficacy of
combination C6-ceramide/tamoxifen nanoliposomal formulations for
suppressing growth of breast cancer cells, and suggest that tamoxifen may
be an effective adjuvant for enhancing ceramide-driven cell death
cascades. Supported by NIGMS 77391 and ABC's, Los Angeles.

