Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative proteomic analysis of MCF7 and SKBR3 breast cancer
cell lines


Differentially expressed proteins among cancer cell lines fit each cell
line as a model for gaining knowledge of heterogeneity in cancer. The aim
of our study was to identify differentially expressed proteins between
MCF7 (ER+, low HER2 expression) and SKBR3 (ER-, high HER2 expression)
cell lines by a proteomic approach. Moreover, a number of proteins in
MCF7 cell line were randomly selected and identified. MCF7 and SKBR3 cell
lysates were subjected to two dimensional gel electrophoresis and spots
of interest were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.
Upregulated proteins (2 fold and p value Differentially expressed
proteins among cancer cell lines fit each cell line as a model for
gaining knowledge of heterogeneity in cancer. The aim of our study was to
identify differentially expressed proteins between MCF7 (ER+, low HER2
expression) and SKBR3 (ER-, high HER2 expression) cell lines by a
proteomic approach. Moreover, a number of proteins in MCF7 cell line were
randomly selected and identified. MCF7 and SKBR3 cell lysates were
subjected to two dimensional gel electrophoresis and spots of interest
were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. Upregulated proteins
(2 fold and p value <0.05) in MCF7 cells were cellular retinoic acid
binding-protein 2, Hsp27, nucleophosmin, electron transfer flavoprotein
subunit, and profilin, and in SKBR3 cells were Rho GDP dissociation
inhibitor- (RhoGDI-), voltage-dependent anion channel 2, aldehyde
dehydrogeanase-2 (ALDH2), LDH- A, LDH-B, pyrophosphates 1, GAPDH,
cathepsin D preprotein, and apolipoprotein A-I binding. Most of the
identified proteins have been a candidate marker for cancer
aggressiveness or drug resistance, but their differential expressions
between SKBr3 and MCF7 cells were not known. Apo-lipoprotein
binding-protein has not been described in cancer so far. Differential
expression of RhoGDI- was further validated by using western blotting
with specific antibody. Further studies are required to clarify the
importance of differential expressions of the identified proteins in
SKBr3 and MCF7 breast cancer cell line models.

