Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A c-Myc driven threshold model of tumor initiating in glioblastoma


Recent evidence suggests that glioblastoma is driven by a subset of Tumor
Initiating (TI) cells characterized by their capacity to form tumors in
xenograft models and self-renew in vitro. These TI cells share many
properties of neural stem/progenitor cells, including the expression of
certain cell surface markers. With serial passage, many cells lose their
capacity to TI. The transition between TI proficient and deficient states
remains poorly understood. There are two theoretic models for the
maintenance of TI states. In the elite model, TI activity is restricted
to a predetermined subpopulation of cells. The alternative stochastic
model suggests that any tumor cell has a finite chance of acquiring TI
capacity through random fluctuations in cell physiology. To distinguish
between these two models, we established culturing conditions capable of
sustaining a single cell line in both low and high TI states. For both
primary and long-term passaged glioblastoma lines, culturing under sphere
forming conditions lead to increased in vivo tumorigenicity relative to
serum based conditions. Further, cells cultured under sphere forming
conditions exhibited increased expression of neural stem cell markers,
including Nestin, Musashi, Olig2, and Sox2. Moreover, the ability of
individual subclones to form xenografts closely correlated with their
ability to grow under sphere forming conditions. In this context, the
elite model predicts that only a subset of subclones (derived from a
single line) cultured under serum conditions would possess high TI
capacity and grow under sphere forming conditions. Moreover, individual
cells derived from the same subclone would exhibit similar capacity for
growth under sphere forming conditions. Surprisingly, single cells
derived from a single glioblastoma subclone exhibited a wide range of
growth capacity under sphere forming conditions, suggesting the TI state
is in part driven by a stochastic process. On the other hand, only a
subset of subclones from a single glioblastoma line displayed capacity
for growth under sphere forming conditions, as predicted by the elite
model. Transcriptome profiling of the different subclones revealed a gene
signature associated with TI capacity. Analysis of this signature showed
enrichment for genes regulated by c-Myc. Indeed, clones with increased TI
capacity tend to harbor increased c-Myc expression. Additionally,
over-expression of c-myc increased the TI capacity of glioblastoma cells
in xenograft models and led to the formation of malignant brain tumor in
an Ink4a/ARF null transgenic murine model. Finally, analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas Project (TCGA) glioblastoma database revealed c-Myc
over-expression in glioblastoma cells, particularly in the pro-neural and
mesenchymal subtypes. Our results are most consistent with a threshold
model in which TI states in glioblastomas are driven by expression levels
of critical factors such as c-Myc.

