Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput, homogeneous in cyto assays to monitor histone H3
post-translational modifications


Histone proteins are an integral part of DNA packaging into chromatin, a
dynamic process partly regulated by post-translation modification of
histone N-terminal tails. Aberrant histone acetylation (ac) or
methylation (me) levels is associated with a number of diseases. For
example, histone deacetylases (HDACs and sirtuins) regulate the
expression of many genes involved in neurodegeneration and can be
aberrantly expressed in different tumors. In addition, deregulation of
the methyl marks H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 are found associated with the
development of several types of cancer. This work presents the
development of high-throughput AlphaLISA in cyto assays to monitor four
specific histone marks: H3K9ac, H3K4me2, H3K27ac and H3K27me3. These
assays were performed using an all-in-one well histone extraction
protocol requiring no acid extraction or centrifugation steps. The level
of each histone mark was first measured in cell titration experiments,
seeding cells from 500 to 10 000 in 384 well plates. The chemical
modulation of H3K4me2, H3K9ac and H3K27ac was monitored following
overnight treatment of HeLa, HEK293, and Jurkat cells with the
non-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors sodium butyrate and
trichostatin A. Signal increases were all corroborated by Western blot
analysis using the same antibodies as in the AlphaLISA detection assay.
In the absence of chemical modulation, measurement of different H3K27me3
mark levels was performed in two B cell lymphoma cell lines: OCI-LY-19
and SU-DHL-6. OCI-LY-19 cells express wild-type EZH2 methyltransferase
while SU-DHL-6 cells bear a heterozygous EZH2 mutation (Y641N) that
alters its substrate selectivity, resulting in increased H3K27me3 levels.
These novel cell-based assays showed suitability for high-throughput
screening (HTS) protocols as demonstrated by Z factors superior to 0.6
for all four marks. In summary, these homogeneous cell-based AlphaLISA
assays allow the simple and rapid monitoring of cellular histone H3 mark
levels.

