Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of Notch4-Nodal regulation of the aggressive melanoma
phenotype


Metastatic melanoma is a highly aggressive skin cancer with a poor
prognosis. The current lack of effective therapies for treating
metastatic melanoma exemplifies the desperate need for the identification
of new targets and the development of new therapies. Nodal is an
embryonic signaling molecule from the TGF superfamily that is not
typically expressed in adult tissues but is reactivated in a number of
aggressive cancers including melanoma, and breast and prostate
carcinomas. In a study recently published by our group, we determined a
connection between the Notch and Nodal pathways in aggressive melanoma.
We identified a specific correlation between the expression of Notch4 and
Nodal in aggressive melanoma cell lines and in advanced stage human
melanomas. By inhibiting Notch4 expression or function, we established a
link between Notch4 and Nodal signaling in promoting the aggressive
phenotype of metastatic melanoma cells in vitro. Notch4 regulation of
Nodal expression was identified as important in cellular plasticity,
since inhibition of Notch4 function impaired the ability of aggressive
cells to engage in vasculogenic mimicry (de novo formation of
vascular-like networks by non-endothelial tumor cells). Notably,
vascular-like network formation could be partially rescued by recombinant
human Nodal, suggesting both pathways are important for this phenomenon.
To extend our published observations, we utilized neutralizing antibodies
to Notch4 and to Nodal, and compared gene expression profiles. From this,
we identified a mechanism of feedback between signaling pathways that
controls the expression of components of both pathways, including Nodal,
Notch4, and the Notch ligand, Jagged2. Since Notch4 is enriched in the
subpopulation of cells that form vascular-like networks in melanoma, we
specifically analyzed the expression of angiogenesis signature genes
previously associated with vascular-like network formation, and
determined that inhibition of Notch4 or Nodal function downregulates a
large group of these genes including members of the VEGF, angiopoietin,
MMP, and cadherin families. We are currently investigating the hypothesis
that the Notch4-Nodal signaling axis may be a master regulator of the
vascular-like phenotype in aggressive melanoma cells. We suggest that
inhibition of Notch4 and/or Nodal function may offer a potential
molecular targeting strategy for metastatic melanoma therapy.

