Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated aromatase, estrogen receptor variants and human
hepatocellular carcinoma: a unifying hypothetical model


Although there is evidence that hints at a potential role of estrogen in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the use of antiestrogens has failed to
improve disease-free and overall survival of HCC patients. In the present
study we have investigated aromatase-driven estrogen formation in
nontumoral and malignant human liver tissues and cells, also in relation
to the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) , ER, and their splicing
variants, aiming to get insights into the potential role of estrogens and
the underlying mechanism(s) in human HCC. Chromatographic and
exon-specific RT-PCR analyses were respectively used to assess activity
and expression the aromatase enzyme and the expression of wild-type
(hER66, hER1) and variant (hER46, hER36; hER2/Cx, hER5) ER, both in vivo
and in vitro. Following incubation of tissue minces or liver cell lines,
with either testosterone or androstenedione used as androgen labeled
precursor, human HCC tissues and HepG2 hepatoma cells showed elevated
aromatase activity, with estrogen formation rates of 20% at 24h and >95%
at 72h. By contrast, no aromatase activity could be detected in
nontumoral hepatic tissues and HA22T liver cancer. Cirrhotic samples
exhibited variable enzyme activity, with average estrogen formation rates
of 4-8%, while Huh7 HCC cells gave rise to 34% estrogen formation.
Markedly lower aromatase mRNA levels were observed in HA22T cells and
nontumoral liver tissues, as compared to HepG2 cells and HCC samples.
Cirrhotic specimens displayed variable transcript levels, comparable in
turn to those observed in nontumoral or HCC tissues. Interestingly, no or
low expression of both wild type ER and ER could be detected in liver
cancer cells and malignant tissues. Conversely, equivalent amounts of the
hER46 variant were observed in both cells and tissues, while hER36
expression was highest in HepG2 cells and HCC samples, intermediate in
Huh7 cells and cirrhotic tissues, and very low in HA22T cells and
nontumoral liver. Only occasional expression of the two ER variants was
observed in liver cancer cells and tissues. It is noteworthy that the
pattern of hER36 expression was strictly related to that of the aromatase
enzyme, suggesting that this ER variant may be primarily implicated as a
mediator of estrogen action in the malignant liver. Based on present and
previous experimental evidence, we propose here a unifying hypothetical
model whereby locally elevated, aromatase-driven, estrogen formation,
combined with a shift in wild type/variant ER expression, may be
primarily implicated in development and/or progression of human HCC and
other neoplastic or chronic human diseases.

