Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy regulation of angiogenesis in human neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is a progressive solid tumor in infants and children that
originates from neural crest and it remains a clinical challenge to
treat. It is a highly malignant tumor, in part, because angiogenesis is a
key factor in tumor progression of neuroblastoma. We have previously
identified that gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)-receptor-mediated cell
signaling is critical to its tumorigenicity. In this study, we
hypothesized that increased autophagy via blockage of GRP receptor could
potentially inhibit angiogenesis in human neuroblastomas. METHODS.
Autophagic key molecular markers were detected with ATG5, Beclin-1 and
LC3 antibodies. Phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR and S6R were detected by
Western blotting. Angiogenesis were measured using tubule formation of
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) grown on top of Matrigel
Matrix Basement Membrane in vitro. They were also determined using a
mouse model of the cornea pocket assay in vivo. Autophagy was determined
by punctuate localization of GFP-LC3 fusion protein, and observed under a
confocal fluorescence microscope in vitro. RESULTS. Levels of
phospho-Akt, -mTOR and -S6R were increased in BE(2)-C cells treated with
GRP in both time- as well as dose-dependent manner. However, the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway was inactivated in short-hairpin (sh) silenced
targeted at GRP receptor in BE(2)-C cells when compared to control shLac
cells, indicating that angiogenesis may be reduced. We also observed
increased levels of ATG5, Beclin-1 and LC3 proteins, key autophagic
mediators, in shGRP receptor-BE(2)-C cells when compared to controls
(shLac cells). In particular, overexpression of ATG5 and Beclin-1 also
significantly decreased tube formation on HUVECs when treated with
exogenous GRP (100 nM). Consistent with the in vitro findings, treatment
with GRP receptor antagonist (RC3095) showed a dramatically decrease in
angiogenesis in a mouse model of the cornea pocket assay in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS. Our results show that enhanced autophagy was associated with
a downregulation of angiogenesis signaling pathways, and an increase in
characteristic punctuate localization of GFP-LC3 as a marker for
autophagy. A better understanding of how autophagic proteins can regulate
the angiogenic process may lead to novel therapeutic strategies in the
treatment of neuroblastomas or its vascular disorders.

