Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel epigenetic mechanisms of resveratrol regulation of PTEN/Akt
pathway in prostate cancer


Resveratrol (Res) (3,5,4-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene), a natural compound
found in grapes and berries, is one of the most promising diet-derived
chemopreventive agent with potential chemotherapeutic capabilities.
Chemopreventive and anticancer effects of Res may be exerted in part by
modulating various components of the epigenetic machinery. We recently
demonstrated that Res represses nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation
(NuRD) co-repressor complex by inhibiting metastasis associated protein
1/ histone deacetylase 1 (MTA1/HDAC1) subunit, which plays an essential
role in governing deacetylation of histone and non-histone proteins.
Since Res-induced upregulation of tumor suppressor PTEN (phosphatase and
tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) is concomitant with
MTA1-downregulation, we hypothesized that in the absence of Res MTA1
works in cooperation with PI3K/Akt survival pathways. We further
hypothesized that Res-induced restoration of PTEN expression and function
may occur by dual mechanism through MTA1/HDAC inhibition and regulation
of miRNA network. Our data indicate that shRNA-mediated MTA1 knockdown in
Du145 cells (wt PTEN) enhances acetylation of PTEN, and that HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin (TSA) further potentiates PTEN acetylation. We
also showed that Res treatment simultaneously decreases MTA1 and pAkt
levels in LNCaP cells, the effect which is enhanced in combination with
PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and BEZ235. To further understand Res-induced
MTA1-mediated epigenetic alterations, we analyzed MTA1-associated and
Res-induced microRNA (miRNA, miR) changes in LNCaP cells expressing and
silenced for MTA1 (shMTA1). Interestingly, Res downregulated miRs
(oncomiRs) included members of miR17-92 cluster (miRs-17, 20a, 20b) and
miRs 106a and 106b which target PTEN. These findings were further
confirmed by real time PCR analysis which showed that Res specifically
down-regulated these miRNAs in PCa cells (LNCaP and Du145) but not in
normal prostate cell line RWPE-1. Direct interaction of miR-17, miR-20a
and miR-106b with PTEN 3UTR were analyzed in the presence and absence of
Res using pmiRGLO luciferase reporter. In summary, we propose novel
epigenetic mechanisms of Res regulation of PTEN/ Akt signaling through
inhibition of MTA1/NuRD co-repressor complex and MTA1-associated miRNAs.

