Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycoproteomic analysis of lung cancer malignant pleural effusions
identify glycosylated proteins being produced by metastatic tumor cells


Malignant pleural effusions are produced in late stage metastatic lung
cancer. We have obtained malignant pleural effusions from lung cancer
patients. The specimens are separated into fluid and cells and the cells
are grown in culture in a non-adherent manner. The original pleural
effusion fluid and the conditioned media harvested from the tumor cells
growing in culture are analyzed by glycoproteomic methods to identify
glycosylated proteins being produced by the tumor cells. The cells are
grown in culture with defined media in a non-adherent manner for an
extended period of time to enrich for the tumor cell populations. These
cells are phenotypically characterized for lung, epithelial and tumor
markers by immunohistochemistry and/or flow cytometry. Conditioned media
is collected from the growing cells and along with the original pleural
effusion fluid and the tumor cells analyzed for glycosylated proteins
using lectin chromatography followed by the use of glycomic and proteomic
methods to analyze N- and O-linked glycans and proteins present in these
samples. Our early results indicate that cancer glycosylated proteins
CA125 (MUC16), MUC1 and fibronectin are present in the conditioned media
samples obtained from the different pleural effusion tumor cell cultures
that can also be measured in the original pleural effusion fluids. Not
all pleural effusion tumor cells produce the same cancer biomolecules.
Interestingly if the tumor cells produced CA125 (MUC16) in their culture
media, CA125 was also detected in the original pleural effusion fluid
confirming that the biomolecules in the fluid originated from the tumor
cells. Another patient sample produced mostly MUC1, but much CA125.
Fibronectin was also produced by these cells. Glycomic analysis of the
samples shows an enrichment of certain glycan groups (high mannose,
fucosylated and sialytic acid) in the conditioned media samples when
compared with the original pleural effusion fluid samples showing that
these glycan groups and the proteins to which they are attached originate
from the tumor cells present in the malignant pleural effusions. The use
of malignant pleural effusions from lung cancer patients provides us with
an excellent opportunity to study metastatic tumor cells and their local
environment without the need for scarce tissue specimens.

