Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a web-based patient registry and DNA repository for
pediatric cancer research in individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1


Individuals with hereditary cancer syndromes represent unique study
populations to elucidate the genetic, environmental, and clinical factors
that influence cancer development and outcome. In this regard, research
leveraging these populations has led to landmark discoveries that have
advanced our understanding of cancer pathogenesis and prognosis.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common hereditary
cancer syndromes, in which affected individuals are at risk for the
development of several benign and malignant cancers. Despite the high
frequency of tumorigenesis in this population, factors that predict tumor
development and outcomes are poorly defined. To facilitate progress in
this area, we have launched the NF1 Patient Registry Initiative (NPRI)
and the NF1 Genome Project. The NPRI is a web-based patient-driven
registry. Any individual with a NF1 diagnosis is eligible to participate.
Participants provide contact information and complete a 30-45 minute
questionnaire that captures demographic data, medical history, social
history, and inquires whether they are interested in participating in
future research studies and providing biological samples. Yearly
reminders are sent requesting that participants update their information
to allow for longitudinal study of outcomes in this population. From
5/17/2011-11/1/2011, 100 participants have provided contact information,
of which 80% have completed the questionnaire. To date, participants
include residents of 28 U.S. states and 11 countries spanning 6
continents. The mean age of the participants is 30 years (range 1-77
years), where fifty eight percent are female and 84% are white (race).
Approximately half of all participants reported a family history of NF1
(46%). Fourteen pediatric brain cancers (diagnosed Individuals with
hereditary cancer syndromes represent unique study populations to
elucidate the genetic, environmental, and clinical factors that influence
cancer development and outcome. In this regard, research leveraging these
populations has led to landmark discoveries that have advanced our
understanding of cancer pathogenesis and prognosis. Neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common hereditary cancer syndromes, in
which affected individuals are at risk for the development of several
benign and malignant cancers. Despite the high frequency of tumorigenesis
in this population, factors that predict tumor development and outcomes
are poorly defined. To facilitate progress in this area, we have launched
the NF1 Patient Registry Initiative (NPRI) and the NF1 Genome Project.
The NPRI is a web-based patient-driven registry. Any individual with a
NF1 diagnosis is eligible to participate. Participants provide contact
information and complete a 30-45 minute questionnaire that captures
demographic data, medical history, social history, and inquires whether
they are interested in participating in future research studies and
providing biological samples. Yearly reminders are sent requesting that
participants update their information to allow for longitudinal study of
outcomes in this population. From 5/17/2011-11/1/2011, 100 participants
have provided contact information, of which 80% have completed the
questionnaire. To date, participants include residents of 28 U.S. states
and 11 countries spanning 6 continents. The mean age of the participants
is 30 years (range 1-77 years), where fifty eight percent are female and
84% are white (race). Approximately half of all participants reported a
family history of NF1 (46%). Fourteen pediatric brain cancers (diagnosed
<20 years) were reported with a mean diagnosis age of 4 years (range 1-10
years), fifty percent of whom are female. Ninety percent of participants
indicated their willingness to be contacted in the future and to provide
biological samples for research. The NF1 Genome Project is an initiative
developed to collect genomic DNA samples from individuals with NF1 for
genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Based on encouraging preliminary
GWAS data, future sequencing-based investigations are planned to identify
genetic risk modifiers of pediatric tumor susceptibility. To date, a
total of 156 participants have provided DNA samples and clinical data.
Together, the NPRI and NF1 Genome Project provide unprecedented and
viable mechanisms for assembling patients with rare diseases from across
the world to discover genomic and non-genomic factors that influence
cancer development and progression in a model cancer predisposition
syndrome. The insights gained from these studies will not only benefit
individuals with NF1, but also serve as foundations for the study of
other rare tumor syndromes.

