Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of glioblastoma cells to temozolomide induced
antitumor effect by PLGA-aspirin microsphere through modulation of
-catenin transactivation


Malignant gliomas are the most prevalent and deadliest brain neoplasms.
Although temozolomide (TMZ) was currently used for treating glioblastoma
patients, the recurrence was commonly existed due to the acquired
therapeutic resistance. Thus the combination chemotherapy with TMZ is
considered a promising therapeutic strategy in overcoming therapeutic
resistance and improving treatment efficacy. In this study, we performed
PLGA microspheres of aspirin and TMZ by spray drying technique and
detected their cytotoxicity to glioblastoma cells. In vitro assay,
PLGA-aspirin (PLGA-A) microsphere treatment revealed a slight inhibition
of proliferation, invasion, as well as slightly induced apoptosis of A172
and U87 cells through inhibition of -catenin transactivation in
comparison with PLGA microsphere and Control group. In addition, the
limited antitumor effect was also demonstrated in vivo. However,
PLGA-aspirin-temozolomide (PLGA-A-T) microsphere treatment group
displayed enhancing antitumor efficacy compared with PLGA-temozolomide
(PLGA-T) microsphere group. IC50 values were dramatically decreased in
cells treated with PLGA-A-T microsphere, to a greater extent than those
treated with PLGA-A microsphere. Meanwhile, the PLGA-A-T microsphere
significantly enhanced apoptosis in both A172 cells and U87 cells, and
cell proliferation and invasiveness were obviously weakened. In response
to the inhibition of -catenin signaling, -catenin/TCF4 transcriptional
activity and STAT3 luciferase activity was strongly inhibited, as well as
a greater decrease of mRNA and protein expression levels of -catenin,
TCF4, pAKT and pSTAT3.Similar results were also observed in vivo,
intratumoral injection of PLGA-A-T microsphere significantly
downregulated expression of -catenin, TCF4, pAKT, pSTAT3 and PCNA, and
also delayed tumor growth in nude mice harboring subcutaneous U87
xenografts. These results indicated that the synergistic cytotoxic effect
of aspirin and temozolomide was achieved by aspirin- temozolomide -loaded
PLGA nanoparticles through inhibition of -catenin transactivation,
offering the potential for improved treatment of glioblastomas.

