Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of dietary energy balance modulation on the ability of
metformin to inhibit skin tumor promotion


The prevalence of obesity has drastically increased over the last decade
and is associated with increased risk for several cancers. In contrast,
calorie restriction (CR) universally inhibits cancer. Plausible
mechanisms for the energy balance-cancer link include differential
signaling through Akt/mTOR via the IGF-1R as well as other growth factor
receptors. Previous data from our lab, using topical administration of
rapamycin, support the hypothesis that pharmacological disruption of
mTORC1 signaling mimics some of the effects of CR on skin tumor
promotion. To further explore the role of mTORC1 signaling in tumor
promotion we have conducted studies using metformin. In the present
study, metformin was administered in the drinking water at doses of 250
mg/kg and 50 mg/kg body weight per day to female FVB/N mice, to assess
its ability to reverse the effects of overweight/obesity on skin tumor
promotion during two-stage skin carcinogenesis. Metformin treatment
during skin tumor promotion significantly inhibited tumor multiplicity in
a dose dependent manner in mice on an overweight control diet (AIN76A).
There was a 70% reduction in papillomas per mouse at the 250 mg/kg dose
and a 35% reduction at the 50 mg/kg dose. Short term mechanistic
experiments with these same doses revealed significant decreases in
TPA-induced epidermal hyperproliferation (as measured by epidermal
hyperplasia and labeling index) after oral administration of metformin.
Metformin also activated AMP Kinase in the epidermis as measured by
pAMPKT172 at both doses used as well as attenuated signaling through
mTORC1 at the highest dose as measured by downstream signaling proteins
p70S6KT389 and prS6S235/236. Treatment with the higher dose of metformin
also prevented TPA-induced mTORC1 mediated degradation of translational
repressor PDCD4. Current experiments are assessing the ability of
metformin to suppress skin tumor promotion in mice maintained on an
obesity inducing diet (60kcal% fat) and these studies will also be
presented. Overall, the current data support the hypothesis that
selectively targeting mTORC1, either directly (rapamycin) or indirectly
via AMPK activation, may be an effective strategy for reversing the
effects of overweight and obesity on tumor development during epithelial
carcinogenesis.

