Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoscopic diagnosis and treatment of esophageal tumor using a
novel DDS-type photoactivatable agent


Introduction: Photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) and therapy (PDT) have been
clinically used for the early phase cancer of hollow organs. We are
advancing the photomedicine to the next stage, in which treatment is
carried out immediately after the detection of lesions. For achieving the
simultaneous diagnosis and treatment, we established a novel DDS-type
photoactivatable agent, micelle-based photosensitizer loading dendrimer
porphyrin (DP/M). A micelle-based shell structure is expected to be
selectively accumulated in tumors. An intensely emitted fluorescence from
porphyrin can be used for lesion detection and a highly quantum yield of
porphyrin promises an effective PDT. Apart from the agent, we recently
developed a fluorometric system equipped with an ultrathin endoscope that
has a spatial resolution of 15,000 pixels even with a diameter of 0.8 mm.
The aim of this study was to verify practical effectiveness of the novel
photosensitizer combined with the endoscopic fluorometric system for
simultaneous diagnosis and treatment. In this study, we targeted
esophageal cancer because satisfactory results are not always obtained
with conventional therapies and an endoscopic approach is applicable.
Materials and Methods: A rat orthotopic esophageal tumor model was
established in female Fischer F344 rats by orally administered with NMBuA
(N-Nitroso Methylbutylamine) solved in drinking water. After intravenous
administration of DP/M, PDD was carried out using the endoscopic
fluorometric system (ex. 405 nm, em. > 630 nm). After the detection of
lesions, tumors were irradiated using a diffuser tip fiber connected to a
635nm LD laser. Results: About 6 weeks after the administration of NMBuA,
polypoid tumors were observed in the esophagus. Pathological analysis
revealed that proliferated polymorphonuclear cells were seen: a part of
which reached the muscular layer of mucosa. A selective accumulation of
DP/M in the tumors was confirmed with the endoscopic fluorometric system.
This modality enabled repeated observations of tumors without sacrifice.
The following PDT provided a promising result. Conclusions: DP/M combined
with the endoscopic fluorometric system brought the simultaneous
diagnosis and treatment for the orthotopic rat esophagus tumor models.
Acknowledgment: This research is granted by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) through the Funding Program for World-Leading
Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST Program), initiated by
the Council for Science and Technology Policy (CSTP).

