Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid diversification in prostate cancer progression


Two clinically significant indices of prostate cancer progression are the
dedifferentiation of the gland (as measured by histopathology and graded
by Gleason scoring, GS) and extension beyond the prostatic capsule
(extracapsular extension, ECE). In order to better understand the
underlying biology of prostate cancer progression, we undertook the
metabolomic characterization of prostatectomy tissues and correlated our
metabolite findings with these post-surgical endpoints. Briefly, frozen
tissues from 298 prostatectomy cases were characterized by frozen
sections and then disaggregated and the biochemical constituents were
extracted into cold methanol as previously reported. These extracts were
analyzed in three parallel workflows: gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry and ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography and tandem
mass spectrometry. The resulting data sets were compared against an
in-house chemical reference library of over 2500 authentic standards.
Three hundred and fifty-six metabolites were identified across all
biochemical classes (amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids, nucleotides,
cofactors and xenobiotics (primarily dietary and pharmaceutical
compounds)). The steady state abundance profiles of numerous long chain
fatty acids increased with Gleason pattern progression. The products of
-oxidation of long chain fatty acids (long chain -hydroxy fatty acids
(2-hydroxypalmitate and 2-hydroxystearate) and odd chain length fatty
acids (such as C19:0) increased in tissue samples in conjunction with the
amount of Gleason pattern 4 tissue that was present in the tumor.
Branched chain fatty acids such as isopalmitate and polyunsaturated C22
species (22:2n6 and 22:3n3) increased in abundance from Gleason 7 to 8.
In addition to these changes with Gleason pattern progression,
extracapsular extension was found to have biochemical correlates in fatty
acid metabolism. Specifically, the monounsaturated fatty acids (14:1n5,
16:1n7, 17:1n7, 18:1n9 and 19:1n9) were all found to increase in
abundance in prostate tissue samples where capsular integrity was
compromised compared to those tissues where the tumor was confined to the
gland. These data demonstrate that during the progression of human
prostate cancer, there is tremendous fatty acid diversification. Taken
together with other data demonstrating phospholipid turnover and membrane
remodeling in prostate cancer, these data suggest that prostate cancer
cells can dramatically alter membrane composition. The reliance of many
prostate cancers on these fatty acid diversification pathways can be
appreciated by the demonstration of chemotherapeutic activities of
inhibitors of both fatty acid synthase and stearoyl-coA dehydrogenase. In
addition to target validation, metabolomic profiling may also provide
insight into therapeutic selection for and monitoring of the prostate
cancer patient.

