Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in angiogenesis-related genes in prostate
cancer recurrence


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer death in American men. Among patients who have a
radical prostatectomy, 30% will have disease recurrence. Currently, the
level of prostate specific antigen (PSA), clinical stage (TNM) and tumor
grade (Gleason score) are used to estimate prognosis and inform treatment
modalities. Although these are extremely useful, additional biomarkers
are needed to better predict outcome. Angiogenesis has been associated
with Gleason score, tumor stage, progression, metastasis and survival in
prostate cancer. We hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in genes in the angiogenesis pathway may be associated with
prostate cancer recurrence. Methods: In a historical cohort of 1061
prostatectomy cases treated at the Moffitt Cancer Center from 1986 to
2003, we identified 311 recurrent cases and 750 non-recurrent cases. A
recurrent case was defined by either an elevated PSA level after surgical
treatment, clinical metastasis or disease specific death. All other
patients were categorized as non-recurrent. We compared genotype
frequencies of 2,981 SNPs in 547 angiogenesis genes between the two
groups. Genotyping was performed using the Illumina GoldenGate assay and
associations between recurrence-free survival and individual SNPs were
evaluated using competing Cox regression models to estimate hazard ratios
(HR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) under three inheritance models
(dominant, recessive and log-additive model). For each SNP, the minimum
P-value among all tested inheritance models was selected. We calculated
q-values to estimate false discovery rates. Results: The mean age at
diagnosis of the study subjects was 59.7 (SD=7.5) years. The recurrence
rate was 29.3% with a median recurrence-free survival of 200.8
(range=179.0-241.9) months. A total of 91 SNPs in 56 angiogenesis genes
had raw P-values less than 0.01 and q-values less than 3%. We found
associations for several families of genes that have been previously
associated with aggressiveness and/or survival of prostate cancer, such
as cadherins (CDH,11 SNPs), fibroblast growth factor and its receptor
(FGF/FGFR, 6 SNPs), insulin-like growth factor and its receptor
(IGF/IGFR, 3 SNPs), interleukins (IL, 5 SNPs), metalloproteinases (MMP, 3
SNPs) and thrombospondin (THBS, 4 SNPs). The most significant association
was observed for rs889730 in CDH13 (HR= 0.69, 95%CI=0.58-0.83,
P=0.000057, additive model). CDH13 contributes to promotion of tumor
neovascularization, but down regulation has been associated with a poor
outcome in prostate cancer. Conclusion: Data from this comprehensive
study of angiogenesis genes and prostate cancer suggests that variants in
angiogenesis-related genes may influence prostate cancer recurrence after
radical prostatectomy. Further studies are warranted to confirm these
preliminary findings.

