Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disparities in head and neck cancer: A case for chemoprevention
with vitamin D


Worldwide head and neck cancer (HNC) is the sixth most frequently
diagnosed cancer in men and is associated with significant morbidity,
mortality and economic loss. African Americans (AA) experience
significantly more HNC compared to Caucasian Americans (CA) and they have
markedly reduced 5-year survival rates, 40% compared to 61% among CA. AA
bear a disproportionate burden of HNC for reasons that are incompletely
understood, but likely due to the complex interplay of environmental,
genetic and health care access issues. An inverse association for vitamin
(vit) D status and HNC cancer has been reported and hypovitaminosis D in
AA is well documented; yet, vit D status has not been assessed in HNC
patients stratified by race. Thus, objective of this prospective pilot
study is to access vit D status in newly diagnosed AA and CA HNC patients
by measuring the circulating metabolite of vit D, vit-D 25-OH and by
assessing dietary levels utilizing the Block vit D/Calcium screener.
Circulating calcium, parathyroid, and 1,25-Dihydroxy vit D are also being
measured. In addition, to improve our understanding of mechanisms
associated with the potential cancer protective effects of vit D in the
context of HNC two HNC cell lines were treated with 2 M cholecalciferol
for 6 hours and protein harvested for proteome profiling. To date, 18 HNC
patients have been evaluated, 8 AA and 10 CA. Mean circulating vit D
25-OH levels were 27.3 (+ 9.9) and 20.0 (+ 5.9) ng/mL in CA and AA,
respectively supporting that vit D levels are suppressed to a greater
extent in AA compared to CA HNC patients, even in sunny Florida. Dietary
vit D estimates were non-significantly higher in AA HNC patients compared
to CA who had higher total vit D levels, supporting differences in
metabolism or potentially supplement use. None of the AA patients had vit
D 25-OH levels > 30 ng/mL, a level suggested for optimum regulation of
PTH, calcium absorption and bone density; 30% of CA patients expressed
levels above 30 ng/mL. Proteome profiling of CAL27 and SSC25 HNC cell
lines following vit D treatment revealed inverse modulation of proteins
linked to HNC. Proteins down-regulated by vit D treatment included
nucleophosmin (NPM), lactoylglutathione, heat shock protein beta-1
(HSPB1) Peroxiredoxin-1 (PRDX1) and Ras-related protein Rap-2b. Recent
reports have linked NPM with the regulation of the oncogene FOXM1, also a
potential biomarker for early detection. Disease-free survival rate is
improved in HNC patients with low NPM expression. Similarly, HSPB1 has
been shown to be over expressed in HNC and silencing of HSPB1 has been
shown to decrease metastatic behavior in HSNCC. PRDX1 displays
upregulation in oral premalignancy and is an indicator for local
recurrence. Histone H2A type was up-regulated by Vitamin D. Study results
support that newly diagnosed AA HNC patients have depressed vit D levels
compared to CA cases and that vit D treatment inversely targets select
proteins dysregulated in HNC.

