Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term tumor regression induced by a novel antibody drug
conjugate that targets 5T4, an oncofetal antigen expressed on
tumor-initiating cells


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) represent a promising therapeutic
modality for the clinical management of cancer. We have developed a novel
ADC that targets 5T4 (also known as TPBG), a tumor-associated antigen
that rapidly internalizes. In preclinical models of NSCLC, 5T4 was
identified as a marker of undifferentiated tumorigenic cells that express
properties of tumor-initiating cells (TICs) and was associated with a
highly proliferating (Ki67 positive) cell phenotype. Based on the
biological properties of 5T4, we designed the ADC by conjugating an
internalizing humanized anti-5T4 antibody (Ab), A1, to the tubulin
inhibitor monomethylauristatin F via a maleimidocaproyl (mc) linker
(A1mcMMAF) with a drug/antibody ratio of 4. The A1 Ab has a Kd of 0.9 nM
against the 5T4 antigen, binds to a broad range of 5T4 expressing cell
lines, and rapidly internalizes (66% internalized within 4h). As an ADC,
A1mcMMAF retains similar properties to the unconjugated Ab. In vitro,
A1mcMMAF exhibited potent and target-specific cytotoxic activity against
a panel of 5T4+ cell lines with an IC50 of 5 ng Ab/ml against high 5T4
expressing cells. In vivo, A1mcMMAF exhibited potent anti-tumor activity
in all five tumor models tested (with a broad range of 5T4 expression)
and caused long-term regressions monitored up to 100 days after the last
dose. Strikingly, animals were cured of disease in every model with doses
as low as 3 mg Ab/kg Q4d x 4. In a lung cancer patient-derived xenograft
in which 5T4 is not uniformly expressed, but instead is preferentially
expressed on the less differentiated sub-population of tumor cells,
A1mcMMAF treatment resulted in sustained tumor regression. This result
highlights the clinical potential of ADCs that target aggressive cell
subpopulations such as TICs. In exploratory safety studies, A1mcMMAF
exhibited no overt toxicities when administered at 10 mg Ab/kg/cycle x 2
to cynomolgus monkeys and had a half-life of 5 days. The encouraging
efficacy and safety data of the conjugate resulting in high therapeutic
index in preclinical models warrants further clinical testing of this ADC.

