Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the subclonal architecture of breast cancer


Cancer genomes contain a plethora of information about the complex
processes of mutation and selection that formed them. Genomic changes
conferring a selective advantage to developing cancer cells drive
successive waves of clonal expansion, shaping new cancer clones or
subclones. While the existence of genetic heterogeneity within cancers is
recognized, systematic insight into the subclonal architecture of cancer
is currently lacking. We developed multiple bioinformatic algorithms to
characterize the subclonal architecture of cancers from their
whole-genome sequences, and we apply these to 21 breast cancers. As a
first case-study, we aimed to characterize subclones and their
phylogenetic relationships in one ER+ breast cancer sequenced to 188-fold
sequencing depth. This tumor's genome is hypodiploid with relatively few
copy number changes and shows a mutator phenotype with 70,692 mutations
genome-wide. We developed an algorithm to detect large-scale subclonal
copy number changes in tumor genomes, using allele frequencies of
germline heterozygous SNP loci. Leveraging information of the 1000
Genomes Project to determine allele ratios across haplotype blocks, we
can detect rare subclonal copy number changes and we can accurately
quantify the fraction of cells in each subclone. In the deep-sequenced
tumor, a deletion of chromosome 13 in 69 % of tumor cells was detected,
as well as evidence for a tetraploid subclone (14 % of tumor cells) with
single-copy deletions on 9 different chromosomes and deletion of two
copies of chromosomes 2 (one from each parent) and chromosome 7 (both
from the same parent). These analyses did not require massive sequencing
depth, as this could all be detected as well when only 16 % of the
sequencing data was used. We modeled the patterns of clonal and subclonal
single nucleotide mutations using a hierarchical Bayesian Dirichlet
process. This model performs well on simulated data and simultaneously
identifies the number of subclones, the fraction of tumor cells and the
contributing proportion of somatic mutations. In the example above, 27000
mutations were clonal, 16000 mutations were found in 65 % of tumor cells,
and 11000 mutations were found in 18 % of tumor cells. Finally, using
novel methods to phase mutations relative to each other and to
heterozygous SNP loci, we are able to discern the phylogenetic
relationships between the above mentioned subclones. These analyses
indicate a complex picture of ongoing clonal expansions of multiple
competing subclones that are each shaped by distinct genomic changes.
Applying the methods above to 20 breast cancer genomes sequenced to 30-40
fold coverage depth, we gain insight into the subclonal landscape of
breast cancer. In 19 of these 20 genomes, we found conclusive evidence of
subclonal mutations and/or copy-number changes and many of them show a
complex subclonal landscape. This study paints a dynamic picture of
on-going evolution and competition between subclones in breast carcinoma.

