Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTHrP sensitizes breast cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis


Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is a multifunctional protein
that has been implicated in breast tumor biology. Breast cancers commonly
express PTHrP, and when such tumors are grown in bone in murine models,
PTHrP results in enhanced osteolysis. Whilst clinical studies have
determined that PTHrP expression by primary breast cancers was an
independent predictor of improved prognosis (Henderson et al., 2006).
Thus, the action of PTHrP upon breast cancers directly remains to be
elucidated. The aim of this study was to assess the interaction of PTHrP
with molecules associated with cell survival and cell death pathways,
such as Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL).
TRAIL is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of cytokines
that induces apoptosis in a wide range of transformed cells but not in
normal cells. To understand the role of PTHrP in relation to TRAIL in
breast cancer cells, PTHrP was overexpressed in two breast cancer cell
lines; MDA-MB-231 (TRAIL-sensitive) and MCF-7 (TRAIL-resistant), and
functional assays were performed. Over-expression of PTHrP in both MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cells enhanced cell cycle progression and cell growth rate
in comparison to parental and vector controls. However, treatment of
PTHrP overexpressing breast cancer cells with TRAIL resulted in an
enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the TRAIL sensitive cell line,
MDA-MB-231, and a sensitisation to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the
TRAIL-resistant cell line, MCF-7. Western blot showed decreased levels of
Caspase-10, Caspase-9, Caspase-6, Capase-7 precursor proteins and
increased PARP cleavage levels in PTHrP overexpressing cells treated with
TRAIL when compared to controls. There was no change observed in levels
of Caspase-8 percursor protein, suggesting that the apoptosis signal is
acting via the intrinsic pathway in PTHrP overexpressing cells. To
determine TRAIL sensitivity in MCF-7 cells overexpressing PTHrP, TRAIL
receptor mRNA and protein expression was assessed by qRT-PCR and FACS
analysis. TRAIL receptors; DR4, DR5, DcR1 and DcR2, mRNA expression was
not altered in PTHrP overexpressing cells. However, flow cytometric
analysis demonstrated an increase in cell surface expression of both
death receptors (DR4 and DR5) in cells overexpressing PTHrP. To determine
whether TRAIL-induced apoptosis in PTHrP overexpressing cells was
signaling either through DR4, DR5 or a combination of both death
receptors, antagonistic antibodies against DR4 or DR5 were used.
Pre-incubation of PTHrP overexpressing cells with DR5 antagonistic
antibody attenuated TRAIL-induced apoptosis. This demonstrated that TRAIL
preferentially signals through DR5 in the PTHrP overexpressing cells to
activate the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. In conclusion, these results
demonstrate a new function for PTHrP in breast cancer and may provide
utility when TRAIL is used as a treatment for breast cancer.

