Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Notch signaling to abrogate the increase in breast
cancer stem cells induced by hypoxia


There is increasing evidence from our lab and others supporting the
cancer stem cell hypothesis in breast cancer, which deems that tumors are
driven a small population of cells exhibiting stem cell properties. These
cancer stem/progenitor cells may also be responsible for mediating tumor
metastasis and resistance to cancer treatments. Recently, several new
cancer therapies targeting tumor angiogenesis have been developed and
validated in clinical trials. However, clinical practice has revealed
that these therapies ultimately result in drug resistance and do not
prolong patient survival by more than a few months. It has been reported
that these angiogenesis inhibitors promote tumor invasiveness and
metastasis in rodent breast cancer models. We have used in vitro and in
vivo assays to study the role of hypoxia in regulating mammary cancer
stem cells. We have shown that breast tumor stem cell population
increases in response to hypoxia in vitro and in tumors from
anti-angiogenic treated mice. We hypothesize that this leads to increased
tumor aggressiveness and may explain the resistance to these drugs seen
in patients. In vivo, both sunitinib and bevacizumab treatment increased
intratumoral hypoxia as well as the percentage of cells expressing ALDH
as assessed by the Aldefluor assay in SUM-159 and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer xenografts in NOD/SCID mice. In addition, tumor cells obtained
from sunitinib treated mice exhibit enhanced growth of secondary tumors
in NOD/SCID mice, further supporting an increase in the tumor stem cell
population. We also demonstrate that hypoxia (1-2% oxygen) enriches for
stem cells by at least 2 fold in several breast cancer cell lines grown
in vitro. Utilizing siRNA, we identified that HIF1a is required for the
increased cancer stem cell population following hypoxia treatment. We
next tested whether a gamma secretase inhibitor (GSI) can block hypoxia's
ability to increase the cancer stem cell population since HIF1a is
reported to activate the Notch signaling pathway, and this pathway is
known to regulate stem cell self renewal. Treatment of cells with the GSI
completely abrogated the increase in ALDH+ cells under hypoxic
conditions. We are now testing the ability of GSIs to block the increase
in CSCs seen in mice treated with anti-angiogenic drugs. This study may
reveal that therapies targeting tumor angiogenesis should be combined
with GSI treatments targeting the cancer stem cell population.

