Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of axitinib and its associated change of
serum biomarkers in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)


Background: We have previously demonstrated promising activity of
sunitinib, a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) against
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor, platelet-derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR), c-kit and RET, in preclinical models of
NPC (Invest New Drugs 2011:1123-31). However, the significant host
related toxicity encountered in a phase 2 clinical trial of NPC patients
has limited its clinical efficacy (Ann Oncol 2011:1280-7). Axitinib is a
highly selective TKI of VEGF receptor 1, 2 and 3. Selectively targeting a
single growth factor receptor pathway provides the potential to
rationally adjust dosages and combine drugs directed at specific parts of
the pathway to minimize toxicity and achieve the optimum therapeutic
benefit. Methods: In vitro cytotoxicity of axitinib was evaluated by MTT
assay in five NPC cell lines (C666-1, CNE-2, HK1-LMP1, HNE-1,
HONE-1-EBV). In vivo activity was tested in two representative NPC
xenograft models (CNE-2 and HK1-LMP1). We also studied treatment induced
changes in tumor histology, microvessel density (MVD) and murine serum
biomarkers. Results: All NPC cell lines tested except C666-1 were
sensitive to axitinib with IC50 of 0.8-7 M and maximum growth inhibition
of 45-87%. In vivo, axitinib demonstrated significant tumor growth
inhibition (fractional tumor volume reduction of 32-63% for axitinib
treated mice versus 0-10% for vehicle control), reduced MVD and induced
extensive tumor necrosis with no significant host toxicity in mice. There
were significant increases in serum murine-derived VEGF and SDF-1 and
decrease of sVEGFR-2 in axitinib treated tumor bearing mice as compared
to vehicle treated controls. Conclusion: Axitinib demonstrated potent in
vitro and in vivo activity in NPC preclinical models. Host derived serum
proteins may serve as potential biomarkers of drug activity. A phase 2
clinical trial of axitinib in NPC is on-going (NCT01249547) to validate
these findings in patients. Acknowledgement: supported by a direct grant
(2041496) from CUHK. Axitinib was provided by Pfizer Inc.

