Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preparation and evaluation of glycosylated paclitaxel loaded in
tastuzumab-immunoliposome


Targeted drug delivery is considered to enhance the therapeutic effects
of anti-cancer agents because high amount could be administered with
least side effects. However, water-insoluble hydrophobic chemical
compounds such as paclitaxel are not suitable for efficient drug
delivery. We conferred water-solubility of paclitaxel by coupling glucose
at 7-OH to produce 7-alpha-glucosyloxyacetylpaclitaxel (7-GLG-PT).
Although the 7-GLG-PT showed lower cytotoxicity than paclitaxel,
encapsulation of 7-GLG-PT into liposomes was more efficient than that of
paclitaxel. In our experiment, paclitaxel encapsulated liposomes was not
detectable. Trastuzumab was then conjugated on the surface of 7-GLG-PT
liposomes to prepare immunoliposome (GLG-PT-IL). The GLG-PT-IL exhibited
cytotoxicity on SK-BR-3 cells overexpressing HER2. The IC50 values of
paclitaxel, 7-GLG-PT, 7-GLG-PT liposome and GLG-PT-IL were 6, 126, 130
and 94 nM, respectively. From this evaluation, the concentration of each
formula to suppress the cell growth completely was estimated around 30 to
300 nM. At these concentrations, the time required for each formula to
suppress the growth at the half maximal level was evaluated. GLG-PT-IL
showed the shortest time of 5 hours, which was one third of the others
when compared with paclitaxel, 7-GLG-PT and 7-GLG-PT liposome. The
specific targeting potential of the immunoliposome on SK-BR-3 cells was
assessed. The accumulation on the cell surface was competitively
inhibited by the excess amount of free tastuzumab. The endocytosis of the
immunoliposomes was simultaneously confirmed by time-lapse imaging. Thus
GLG-PT-IL has been successfully demonstrated to target the
HER2-overexpressing cancer cells specifically suppressing their growth.
Trastumab itself is considered to induce the antibody dependent cellular
cytotoxicity, so that the endocytosis of HER2 may not be always
necessary. However, HER2-mediated endocytosis was induced by the
immunoliposomes while single trastuzumab did not show the endocytosis in
SK-BR-3 cells. In this context together with the results demonstrated in
this study, the 7-GLG-PT immunoliposome should be a promising candidate
of highly efficient drug delivery system of cancer treatment targeting
HER2.

