Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-1246 as a novel candidate for a blood-based biomarker in
ovarian cancer patients


Background: Ovarian Cancer is the leading cause of death among female
malignancies and despite advances in treatment, more than 50% of patients
will experience recurrence. For therapy-monitoring, it would be highly
desirable to establish a blood-based biomarker. In this regard, microRNA
(miRNA), a class of small regulatory RNA molecules, which provide a
profound stability in the circulation, are of particular interest. Here,
we analyzed circulating miRNA expression in sera of primary ovarian
cancer patients before surgery and after platinum-based chemotherapy and
correlated these findings with clinicopathological parameters of the
patients. Patients and Methods: Circulating total RNA, including
miRNA-fraction, was purified from sera of ovarian cancer patients and
healthy controls (400 l serum per patient, mirVana PARIS Kit, Ambion).
Screening for differentially expressed miRNA was performed with miRNA
microarray analysis (Agilent) of sera from ovarian cancer patients before
surgery (n= 0) and healthy donors (n=6). Array data were validated with
real-time PCR (miScript, Qiagen) in sera before surgery (n=53),
corresponding sera after chemotherapy (n=43) and healthy controls (n=35).
Relative quantification across these samples was allowed by spike-In
normalisation with synthetic c. elegans miRNA-54 (cel-miR-54). Therefore,
25 fmol cel-miR-54 were spiked into each serum sample after denaturation
and cel-miR-54 signal was quantified with real-time PCR. Normalized C(t)
value of a miRNA of interest was calculated as following: C(t)normalized
= C(t)candidate - C(t)spike-In. Results: Based on the array data,
miR-1246 was identified as up-modulated by approximately 2-fold in the
pre-operative serum samples and therefore selected for validation.
Relative quantification in the validation cohort confirmed miR-1246 to be
significantly up-regulated in sera before surgery in comparison to
healthy donors (p = 0.0001). In preoperative sera, expression of miR-1246
with a mean C(t) of 6.3 (range 2.33 - 9.21) was observed and in healthy
donors, a mean C(t) of 7.46 (range 4.01- 8.42) was measured. When these
results were statistically correlated with clinicopathological parameters
of the patients, we revealed significant correlations between miR-1246
expression before surgery and after chemotherapy and residual tumor load
(p = 0.022, p = 0.024, respectively). Moreover, miR-1246 expression
before surgery significantly correlated with FIGO stage (p = 0.04) and
nodal status (p = 0.006), whereas after chemotherapy miR-1246
significantly associated with tumor grading (p = 0.022). Conclusion: Our
data suggest circulating miR-1246 as a novel blood-based biomarker
candidate for ovarian cancer patients. The clinical follow-up of the
patients will further show, whether expression dynamics of miR-1246
before surgery and after chemotherapy could be clinically relevant for
therapy monitoring or prognosis.

