Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution melting analysis: a sensitive screening method for
the detection of MDM2 promotor SNP309


Background: Murine double minutes-2 (MDM2) protein plays a key role in
physiological processes like growth arrest, senescence and apoptosis.
MDM2 negatively regulates key proteins like p53 by inhibiting its
transcriptional activity and promoting its proteosomal degradation
through ubiquitinylation. In turn, the MDM2 expression is regulated in
part by a p53-responsive promotor. This negative feedback control
mechanism assures that both p53 and MDM2 are kept at very low levels in
proliferating cells. However, in about half of all human tumors, the
normal regulation of p53 might be disrupted through direct overexpression
of MDM2 caused by e.g. MDM2 gene amplification or a T to G substitution
(SNP309) in the promotor region of MDM2. High resolution melting analysis
(HRMA) provides a valid approach to efficiently detect DNA mutations. The
current study aimed at validating and implementing HRMA for screening of
colorectal cancer patients (CRC) to detect MDM2 promotor SNP309.
Pyrosequencing was used to confirm and characterize HRMA results.
Materials and Methods: First, HRMA sensitivity was established using a
cell line and a FFPE (formalin-fixed paraffin embedded) dilution model.
Then, the sensitivity of pyrosequencing to detect MDM2 promotor SNP309
was evaluated using the same dilution models. Next, HRMA was validated on
10 cell lines. Since the MDM2 SNP309 status for these cell lines was
unavailable, all HRMA results were confirmed and characterized by
pyrosequencing. Results: The cell line dilution model revealed a
detection limit of 6% while the detection limit in a background of FFPE
wild-type DNA was found to be 3%. The detection limit of pyrosequencing
to analyze SNP309 in a background of wild-type cell line DNA seems to be
between 20% and 15%. In a background of FFPE wild-type DNA, the detection
limit seems to be 3%. HRMA revealed abnormal melting patterns in 5/10
cell lines and pyrosequencing confirmed the presence of 2 homozygous
(G/G) and 3 heterozygous (G/T) genotypes. Preliminary results on FFPE
material from CRC patient samples showed abnormal melting patterns in
6/13 samples. These are currently being confirmed using pyrosequencing.
Discussion: HRMA was found to be a fast, efficient, sensitive and
reproducible screening method for MDM2 promotor SNP309 detection with a
detection limit between 3% and 6%, which is higher than that of
conventional sequencing methods. Preliminary results indicate that HRMA
can be used as a screening method for MDM2 SNP309 by which DNA from FFPE
tissues can be tested. Currently, a cohort of CRC patients is being
tested for the presence of SNP309 using HRMA and pyrosequencing.

