Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel nanoconstruct for tumor hypoxia
photothermal therapy


PURPOSE: Hypoxia is a common feature of solid tumors that occurs across a
wide variety of malignancies and significantly reduces tumor sensitivity
to radiation and chemotherapy. Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), an
extracellular protein that is overexpressed in hypoxic zones within many
human tumors, has emerged as a promising biomarker. To pursue focal
targeted therapy of tumor hypoxia, we prepared and characterized a novel
nanoconstruct composed of gold nanorods (GNR), which show superior
capability to assist tumor photothermal ablation, and anti-CAIX antibody
(CAIX-Ab), which binds specifically to CAIX. EXPERIMENTS: GNR with aspect
ratio (length 24 nm to width 8nm) of 3 were conjugated to CAIX-Ab through
bifunctional polyethylene glycol (PEG). The conjugates were characterized
by monitoring the absorption peak shift as well as size and zeta
potential changes for each step of the preparation. The stabilities of
the GNR, GNR-PEG and GNR/CAIX-Ab were challenged by 1X PBS. The binding
affinity and specificity of the GNR/CAIX-Ab were evaluated with ELISA
using CAIX protein and cell adhesion assay using HT29 human colorectal
cells (overexpresing CAIX) and NIH-3T3 cells (no expressing CAIX,
control). The photothermal cell ablation was performed on HT29 cells
treated with medium (control), GNR-PEG (control) and GNR/CAIX-Ab.
RESULTS: Obvious shifts of the absorption peaks of GNR at the NIR region
and particle size and surface charge changes suggested the success of the
conjugation. After challenging by 1XPBS, bare GNR formed aggregations and
lost the peak at 745 nm while GNR-PEG and GNR/CAIX-Ab remained stable as
their absorption peaks around 750 nm were preserved. This is an important
finding suggesting that our conjugated GNR will be stable for in vivo
work. From the sandwich ELISA study, we obtained a standard linear curve
of absorbance vs. CAIX-Ab concentration with R2 of 0.997 and linear curve
of absorbance vs. GNR/CAIX-Ab concentration with R2 of 0.999. And we
found that the negative control GNR-PEG had no binding to the CAIX
protein. We calculated the number of CAIX-Ab per GNR to be 1.47 0.2. In
cell adhesion assay, neither GNR-PEG nor GNR/CAIX-Ab had detectable
binding to 3T3 cells; but with HT29 cells, GNR-PEG still showed no
binding while GNR/CAIX-Ab bound specifically and avidly to the cells.
Photothermal ablation of HT29 cells revealed complete cell death after
treatment of GNR/CAIX-Ab while the cells remained alive when treated with
medium or GNR-PEG. CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that GNR/CAIX-Ab
is a stable and effective nanoconstruct appropriate for focal targeting
and photothermal ablation of tumor hypoxia. This new photothermal therapy
has the great potential as an alternative or complementary approach for
standard cancer treatment to eliminate residual or recurrent tumor cells,
especially within the hypoxic areas that are resistant to traditional
therapies.

