Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-Reg: An integrative parallel approach to uncover drivers of
cancer


Tumor samples harbor a vast number of genomic alterations of various
kinds, and it is difficult to distinguish driver alterations that
contribute to oncogenesis from passenger alterations. Most computational
methods identify driver genes by focusing on the most frequent copy
number alterations. Previous work in our lab has led to the development
of CONEXIC, a Bayesian algorithm that identifies candidate driver genes
in cancer and links them to gene expression signatures they govern by
integrating copy number and gene expression (Akavia et al, Cell, 2010).
This algorithm was applied to data from melanoma cell lines, where it
correctly identified known drivers, such as MITF and KLF6, and connected
them to their known targets. In addition, it predicted novel tumor
dependencies not previously implicated in melanoma, which were validated
experimentally. Drivers may act concurrently, where not only the
strongest one is important. For example, either PTEN deletion or AKT
activation can lead to a similar expression signature and phenotype.
Therefore, we developed a new algorithm, based on the same principles as
CONEXIC, with multiple improvements. The new algorithm - Multi-Reg - is
capable of detecting multiple candidate regulators that can all act in
parallel to regulate an expression signature, and is also capable of
integrating mutations in addition to copy number and gene expression
data. We applied Multi-Reg to glioblastoma data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). This data includes copy number, gene expression and
mutations for hundreds of primary tumor samples. Multi-Reg has identified
putative drivers that were missed by CONEXIC, such as the known genes
PDGFRA and NF1, in addition to EGFR & ERB2 (identified by CONEXIC).
Additionally, since Multi-Reg candidate drivers act in parallel, we can
group them by shared targets. For example, EGFR & ERRB2 induce the same
genes, which represent the Mesenchymal subtype of glibolastoma. These
same genes are repressed by PDGFRA & NF1. This matches the known behavior
of glioblastoma subtypes, where EGFR & PDGFRA characterize the
Mesenchymal and Proneural subtypes, respectively. Thus, our results
correctly identify known drivers of glioblastoma. Additionally, Multi-Reg
results identified RHPN2 as a novel oncogenic factor controlling a gene
expression signature related to adhesion. Validation has shown that while
RHPN2 has no effect on cell proliferation it induces invasiveness in
glioblastoma cell lines. This shows that Multi-Reg cannot only discover
drivers, but can link them to the oncogenic phenomena they controls, and
suggest the appropriate biological validation for it.

