Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ability of the transcription factor p63 to induce selected
gene expression modules associated with mesenchymal to epithelial
transition of prostate cells


Genome-wide gene expression analysis identified p63 as one of the most
consistently under-expressed transcription factors in prostate cancer
samples compared to matched benign prostate tissue. Two alternative p63
promoters generate two different N-terminal variants, TA or N which
contains and lacks the transactivating domain, respectively. Differential
splicing generates multiple additional isoforms. The activity and
interactions of the different isoforms remain unresolved.
Isoform-specific real-time quantitative PCR assays revealed that Np63 is
the predominant isoform in epithelial prostate tissues, but other
isoforms are detectable. Our group has established an experimental cell
culture model based upon primary, immortalized prostate epithelial cells
(EP156T cells), where p63 was shut down when EP156T cells underwent
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to become EPT1 cells.
Subsequently, several additional mesenchymal like cell subtypes with
additional malignant features, including anchorage independent growth in
soft agar and ability to grow at much higher density in monolayers, were
derived from EPT1 cells. All of these subtypes exhibited very low p63
expression. To examine the potential of p63 to induce mesenchymal to
epithelial transition (MET) in this EMT model, we have stably
re-expressed the Np63 and TAp63 isoforms in different mesenchymal like
cells of the model using retroviral/lentiviral vector transductions.
Genome-wide gene expression analyses and phenotypic cellular assays
revealed that the Np63 isoform induced re-expression of multiple genes
involved in cell adhesion. But this was not associated with complete MET
induction. Cells re-expressing Np63 obtained an intermediate morphology
with both epithelial and mesenchymal traits, and with actin filaments
organized in stress fibers. Np63 re-expression significantly compromised
migratory but not invasive ability of the cells. Based upon these
findings we want to investigate whether p63 may compromise epithelial to
mesenchymal plasticity in an animal model of tumorigenic cells and if
there is differential effect on primary tumor growth compared to
metastatic growth.

