Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of effects of Angelica
gigas ethanol extract on prostate neuroendocrine carcinomas of TRAMP mice


Angelica gigas Nakai (AGN) ethanol extract and its major component
decursin have been reported to exert anti-cancer activities. Recently,
our team reported that AGN was able to significantly suppress prostate
neuroendocrine (NE) carcinogenesis in the TRAMP mice (Proc AACR, 2011,
#5581). To gain insights into the in vivo mechanism(s) and potential
targets, we used a systems-biology approach with a combination of
proteomics and transcriptomics to analyze banked NE carcinoma tissues
from vehicle- and AGN-treated groups (from 8 to 24 weeks of age). Global
profiling of the proteome was performed by LC-MS/MS with iTRAQ labeling
whereas the transcriptome was profiled by Illumina Mouse WG-6 BeadChip
whole genome expression array. Angiogenesis Antibody Arrays (RayBiotech)
were used to analyze angiogenesis-related proteins as a focused approach.
Differentially expressed mRNA and proteins were subjected to
bioinformatics analysis with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Antibody
array analyses revealed that FGF2, a crucial stimulator of angiogenesis
and promoter of tumor growth, was substantially decreased by AGN
treatment. Other FGF family member such as FGF10, an oncogenic protein
expressed in stromal cells, was also decreased by AGN at the mRNA level
by more than 50%. In addition, mining of the microarray and proteomics
data indicated that the changes of genes upstream and downstream of FGF2
were functionally consistent with AGN inhibiting FGF2/FGFR1 signaling at
different levels of the transduction cascade. For example, FGFR1 mRNA
level was decreased by AGN; FGFBP3, a binding protein which can protect
FGFs from degradation, was decreased at the mRNA level; Dipeptidyl
peptidase IV, which can block FGF2 signaling pathway in prostate cancer
cells, was increased by AGN; Good stromal markers Myh11 and Myh4 which
could be suppressed in FGF2 signaling pathway through Ras and ERK were
substantially increased by AGN at both mRNA and protein levels. Some
changes in mRNA levels suggested an anti-invasion potential of AGN. For
example, the mRNA levels for urokinase plasminogen activator, Col1a1,
Col1a2, MMP2, MMP3 and MMP12 were all decreased by AGN; Tropomyosin 2,
reported to reduce the motility and invasion of cancer cells, was induced
by AGN. Moreover, AGN up-regulated E-cadherin and down-regulated vimentin
at both mRNA and protein levels, suggesting an anti-EMT action. IPA
identified Akt, PI3K, p38MAPK, and ERK1/2 as distinct inferred network
nodes after analyzing all AGN-responding genes. Furthermore, a number of
genes down-regulated during TRAMP carcinogenesis such as Msmb, Actc1,
Csrp1 and GSTM1 were increased by AGN treatment at protein and/or mRNA
levels. Given the anti-angiogenesis, anti-invasion and anti-EMT effects
of AGN observed, its anti-cancer activities may in part be mediated by
affecting the tumor micro-environment in addition to cancer cells.

