Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44s is required for a tumor-initiating stem-like mesenchymal
phenotype in hepatocellular carcinoma via ligand-independent c-Met
activation


c-Met, a high affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), plays
a critical role in cancer growth, invasion and metastasis. Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients with active HGF/c-Met signaling have a
significantly worse prognosis. CD44, the receptor for hyaluronic acid, is
utilized as a surface marker to identify mesenchymal tumor-initiating
stem-like cells (TISC) in several cancers. CD44v6 (spice variant 6) has
been shown to promote HGF activation of c-Met. In this work, we examine
the role of CD44s as a deregulator and activator of c-Met signaling in
HCC. In a transcriptome profile analysis of 149 human HCC cases, we
identified a significant positive correlation (R2=0.8993) between
up-regulated CD44 and c-Met expression. The human HCC cell lines MHCC97-H
and Huh7 were further utilized to investigate the direct relationship
between c-Met and CD44s. Metastatic MHCC97-H cells are 95% CD44+ and
demonstrate ligand-independent c-Met activation. CD44+/c-Met+ MHCC97-H
cells demonstrate a mesenchymal phenotype with low expression of
E-cadherin, high level of tumorsphere formation, increased expression of
fibronectin and Zeb2 compared to Huh7 cells, which have are
CD44neg/c-Metneg. In MHCC97-H cells, a direct interaction between CD44s
and c-Met was demonstrated by immunoprecipitation/immuno-blot analysis.
Transient and stable inhibition of c-Met in MHCC97-H cells results in
increased E-cadherin, decreased CD44s, and reduced tumor-initiating
characteristics and loss of tumorsphere formation. Likewise, inhibition
of CD44s demonstrates similar phenotype with increased E-cadherin,
decreased tumorsphere formation, and decreased c-Met activation and loss
of downstream Akt and Erk phosphorylation. CD44s knockdown recovered
c-Met to a regulated HGF-dependent state. Selective inhibition of either
PI3K (Ly294002) or MAPK (PD98059) pathways in MHCC97-H cells demonstrate
that PI3K/Akt activation signals drive CD44s expression in a feed forward
fashion. Conversely, the over-expression of CD44s in Huh7 cells
demonstrates a mesenchymal phenotype with fibroblastic-like cell
morphology, decreased E-cadherin, increased Zeb1, increased PI3K/Akt
signaling, and increased tumorsphere formation compared to control Huh7
cells. Selective inhibition of PI3K/Akt signaling in CD44+ Huh7 cells
resulted in reduced CD44s expression and decreased tumorsphere formation.
In conclusion, CD44s induces a mesenchymal phenotype and tumor initiating
characteristics in HCC through the deregulation of c-Met and activation
of a positive feedback loop through PI3K/Akt signaling.

