Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- activated EGFr as a bypass mechanism for the acquired
resistance of MET inhibitors in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with an active HGF/c-Met
signaling pathway have a significantly worse prognosis. Although
targeting strategies using MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are in
Phase I/II testing for HCC, monotherapy using TKIs in other cancers has
not demonstrated durable responses. In non-small cell lung cancer, bypass
mechanisms for resistance to EGFr TKIs include MET amplification and
activation. We utilized human HCC MET+ cell lines to explore a mechanism
of EGFr activation during MET inhibition, and we examined the effect of
combination MET and EGFr TKI therapy on suppressing this bypass mechanism
in HCC in vivo. Analysis of 149 HCC specimens using transcriptome
profiling and immuno-histochemical staining demonstrates a strong
negative correlation between EGFr and MET expression. HCC is
predominantly either MET positive [44%] or EGFr positive [45%], and
co-expression of MET and EGFr is extremely rare in the same tumor. We
have previously demonstrated that treatment of xenograft tumors of human
HCC MET+ MHCC97-H cells with a MET TKI resulted in stasis of tumor growth
in vivo (You Rountree. Hepatology. 2011). To understand the mechanism of
survival in the MHCC97-H cells after inhibition of MET, we developed an
MHCC97-H cell line with stable expression of MET shRNA. This MHCC97-H
METneg line demonstrated the slower growth kinetics and the inhibition of
both PI3K and MAPK signaling comparable to MET TKI treated xenografts.
Screening against 850 kinases and phosphatases identified EGFr activation
as a mechanism of survival in this MHCC97-H METneg line. Gene expression
analysis of this MHCC97-H METneg cell line demonstrated a 6 fold increase
in TGF-, a ligand of EGFr. MHCC97-H xenograft tumor analysis demonstrates
a 20 fold increase in TGF- expression after MET TKI therapy. In vivo
treatment of MHCC97-H tumors with combination MET and EGFr TKI therapy
resulted in complete regression of all small tumors (15 mm3 at start of
TKI) compared to partial regression when MET TKI was used as monotherapy.
Treatment of large tumors (200-300 mm3 at start of TKI) with combination
TKI therapy resulted in a significant reduction in tumor volume compared
to MET TKI monotherapy. EGFr TKI monotherapy had no effect on tumor
growth kinetics. Within MET positive HCC models, MET TKI therapy results
in a bypass mechanism through up-regulation of TGF- and activation of
EGFr. This bypass mechanism can be partially overcome with combination
EGFr and MET TKI therapy.

