Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ligand-gated Cl- channel GABA inhibits colon cancer invasion
following activation by pharmacological treatments


Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are ligand-gated ion channels
that are essential for neurotransmitter function and neuronal cell
homeostasis. Activation of these channels triggers the opening of a
chloride-sensitive pore, which causes a hyperpolarization via an influx
of chloride ions into the cell. The presence of these channels was
recently implicated in several cancers, and the neurotransmitter GABA has
been cited as a tumor suppressor. We propose that commercially available
pharmacological treatments that manipulate GABA receptor function could
be repurposed to target cancer. We have identified functional GABA
receptors in a spectrum of colon cancer cell lines and examined the
effects of the channels on invasion of the metastatic cell line SW620.
Electrophysiological techniques were used to confirm that these channels
have functional expression. Treatment with propofol, an agonist which
slows the channel closing time, and GABA led to a decrease in invasive
potential. Conversely, treatment with the antagonist gabazine, which
allosterically blocks GABA from binding in the channel, facilitated
invasion by preventing chloride influx. Curiously, treating the cells
with bicuculline, which blocks GABA's inhibitory action, led to a
decrease in invasion. In some situations bicuculline can also act as a
GABA agonist by causing spontaneous gating of homomeric 3 channels. The
expression of the 3 subunit was also confirmed through
immunocytochemistry. In addition to colon cancer cell lines, 3 expression
was detected at higher quantities in colon cancer patient samples
compared to matched controls. To further understand how GABA signaling is
implicated in cancer, we have looked at the association of GABA with the
EGF signaling pathway, which is commonly dysregulated in cancer. The EGF
pathway has also been linked with a loss of the glucagon receptor in
liver cancer, suggesting that a common pathway may exist between GABA and
glutamate that can be exploited for treatment. Altogether, our data
suggest that ligand-gated GABA channels inhibit the metastatic potential
of cancer cells and can be targeted to treat colon cancer.

