Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating the function of single VEGF isoforms using both
proteomic and molecular approaches


Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF), a potent regulator of tumour
angiogenesis, is differentially spliced to give rise to the predominant
pro-angiogenic isoforms, VEGF121/120, 165/164 and 189/188 in human and
mouse respectively. All VEGF isoforms bind to two tyrosine kinase
receptors, VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2, but elicit different signalling outcomes.
However, this is further complicated by more recent work describing the
existence of human anti-angiogenic VEGF isoforms (VEGFxxxb), which are
thought to counteract pro-angiogenic isoforms, inferring that it is the
balance between these two families of VEGF isoforms that determines
tumour angiogenic outcome. We have shown previously that mouse
fibrosarcoma cells expressing all VEGF isoforms (wt) or VEGF188 only,
give rise to tumours which establish more slowly, exhibit higher rates of
apoptosis, and exhibit more mature vasculature invested with pericytes,
compared to VEGF164 or VEGF120 expressing tumours. Importantly this
translated into resistance to the vascular disrupting agent (VDA)
combretastatin A-4 phosphate (CA4P) (Cancer Res 2008: 68:2301). To
address the hypothesis that differences in signalling pathways between
VEGF isoforms contributes to the tumour vascular characteristics
described above, we performed proteomic profiling of wt and VEGF
isoform-specific tumour cell lines and solid tumour lysates using
commercial angiogenesis and phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase arrays (R&D)
as well as iTRAQ technology to identify differentially expressed
proteins. In addition, using an RT-PCR based approach we determined
whether or not the potential existence of mouse anti-angiogenic isoforms
could be contributing to our data. Although able to infrequently detect
mouse VEGFxxxb isoforms, we show that these must be PCR artefacts since
they were detected in lysates derived from cell lines obtained from
transgenic mice whose genetic construction precludes VEGFxxxb splicing
from occurring. In contrast, protein profiling has revealed a number of
VEGF isoform-specific differentially expressed proteins. In particular,
we found that fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2), neuropilin 1 (NRP1) and
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) were up-regulated in
VEGF188-specific tumour cells, whilst Neuropilin 2 (NRP2) was
down-regulated in the same tumour extracts relative to VEGF164 and
VEGF120. Our data infer VEGF188-specific differentially expressed
candidate proteins in tumours, which may impact on the efficacy of VDA
treatment therapies. Further experiments aim to determine whether
manipulating the expression of these candidate proteins in
VEGF188-specific tumours reverses their resistance to CA4P, thus
identifying additional targets for anti-angiogenic therapy approaches.
This work, was funded by a Program Grant from Cancer Research UK

