Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional microscale cell-based systems for studying hematologic
cancers in complex microenvironments


Our ability to improve treatments for blood-related cancers such as
multiple myeloma (MM) is currently hindered by limitations in lab
procedures for studying cell signaling mechanisms in drug resistance.
Conventional assays for studying signal transduction (gel shift assays)
require large quantities of cell sample (> 100,000 cells per condition)
that often cannot be acquired safely and reliably from primary bone
marrow aspirations of different patients. Furthermore, in vitro assays
often do not adequately represent key aspects of the complex bone marrow
microenvironment, including spatial organization of stromal cell types.
The objective of this study was to develop a new functional assay using
microfluidics technology to examine signal transduction events,
specifically in improved in vitro microenvironments, for non-adherent
cells such as those associated with hematologic cancers, and for low cell
number applications (1000 cells per condition) including patient samples.
Successful development of this assay would provide an alternative to gel
shift assays and streamline experiments. We developed microscale cell
culture chambers that used a surface tension-based passive pumping method
for fluidic delivery, obviating the need for external pumps and tubing
commonly used in microfluidic systems, thus reducing dead volume and cell
loss. To validate the platform, non-adherent RPMI8226 cells (human MM
cell line) were cultured, treated with cytokines/drugs, fixed, and
immunostained to determine cytoplasmic versus nuclear localization of
NF-B subunit RelA as a measure of canonical NF-B activation. Fluorescent
images of RelA were analyzed using custom image analysis for calculating
ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic signals (intensity ratio, IR) at single
cell resolution. IR values of cells in a population were calculated to
determine overall nuclear translocation and NF-B activation. Results
showed fluorescence immunostaining coupled with custom image analysis was
able to detect dose-dependent TNF- activation of NF-B, and dose-dependent
inhibition of NF-B activity by bortezomib treatment. Ongoing work
involves applying the platform to study effects of various drug
treatments on NF-B signaling in primary patient MM cells in monoculture
and in coculture with bone marrow stromal cells. Our results demonstrate
the platform is a functional, enabling tool for studying single-cell NF-B
signal transduction with low numbers of non-adherent cells. The platform
is extensible to other hematologic cancers, applicable for other
transcription factors (e.g., STAT3), amenable to coculture studies, and
has potential to enable novel experiments with limited primary samples
that may have significant impact in translational research.

