Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic herpes simplex virus treatment of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cancer stem-like cell orthotopic tumor model


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) are highly aggressive
soft tissue sarcomas arising in peripheral nerves that often occur in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and have an extremely poor
prognosis. Therapy consists of surgery followed by radiation and/or
chemotherapy, which are generally of limited efficacy. Cancer stem cells
are a subpopulation of tumor cells with stem cell like properties that
are thought to be important in tumor progression, resistance to therapy,
and metastasis. We have isolated MPNST cancer stem-like cells (MSLCs)
from a human MPNST cell line by non-adherent sphere-culture in
neurosphere media with EGF and bFGF (without serum). Implantation of the
MSLCs in the sciatic nerve generates an orthotopic MPNST model in athymic
mice. As the tumors grow, mice develop neurologic deficits that are
quantified using a neurologic scoring system and externally measurable
masses. As a novel therapeutic strategy we are using oncolytic herpes
simplex virus (oHSV) vectors, which replicate in and kill tumor cells but
not normal tissue. Tumor selectivity is engendered by mutating viral
genes that make virus replication non-permissive in normal cells, while
retaining permissivity in cancer cells. For these studies, we used G47, a
multi-mutated oHSV with deletions in the 34.5 and ICP47 genes and an
inactivating LacZ insertion in the ICP6 gene. G47 is very efficacious in
many tumor models and is currently in clinical trial for glioblastoma.
G47 was able to infect and spread in MSLCs in vitro and MSLC-derived
tumors in vivo. Treatment of established MSLC-derived sciatic nerve
tumors with a single intratumoral injection of G47 significantly
prolonged survival of mice and reduced neurologic deficits. There was no
difference in survival between mice treated with 2 x 10^5 pfu versus 2 x
10^6 pfu, although the mice receiving the higher virus dose had
significantly higher neurologic score (less deficit). We describe a new
preclinical MPNST model generated by implantation of human MSLCs into the
sciatic nerve of immune-deficient mice. Treatment of established tumors
by oHSV G47 is highly efficacious. These preclinical studies suggest that
oHSV should be considered for the treatment of patients with MPNST.

