Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DMP1 activates osteolytic cycle in a tumor environment


Bone metastasis is one of the skeletal malignancies that could be caused
by breast cancer. Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is an acidic
noncollagenous protein localized specifically in the mineralized matrix
of bone and dentin. It is a multifunctional protein, involved in gene
regulation (within the cell) and HAP nucleation (in the ECM). DMP1 is
endocytosed by preosteoblasts, triggering the calcium dependent and
calcium independent signaling pathways resulting in a series of
downstream events leading to osteoblast differentiation. These signaling
events facilitate the activation of a calcium dependent stress-induced
p38 MAP kinase and a calcium independent integrin mediated ERK1/2 MAP
kinase pathway resulting in the expression of downstream target genes
such as Runx2 and osteocalcin. Results from this study have shown that
the osteoblast cells upon differentiation secrete receptor activator of
nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) that stimulates the differentiation
of precursor monocytes to osteoclasts. The study also focuses on
identifying the role of DMP1 in breast cancer cells that could enhance
osteoclast formation thereby accelerating bone resportion. Thus, the
study reveals a new mechanism by which DMP1 can activate the vicious
cycle leading to the aggressive growth and behavior of the cancer cells.
To address the mechanism by which DMP1 might contribute to the osteolytic
process, DMP1 was overexpressed in the metastatic cancer cell line MDA
MB231. Upregulation of markers like Runx2, MMP2, MMP9, RANKL, OPN, BSP,
VEGF and the activation of Smad2/3 and MAP kinase pathways (p38 and
ERK1/2 pathways) were observed in overexpressed cells. Results from this
study have shown that DMP1 secreted by the breast cancer cells into the
extracellular environment could stimulate the differentiation of
osteoblasts, leading to the secretion of factors that signal monocytes to
differentiate to osteoclast thus resulting in bone metastasis. Overall,
the results obtained from this study identify a new role for DMP1 in the
differentiation of breast cancer tumor cells that may be directly related
to their metastatic potential. Supported by NIH DE 115657 and the Brodie
Endowment Fund

