Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative splicing studies for the identification of novel
cancer markers and targets for antibody-based therapy


Alternative splicing plays a major role in gene regulation, both in
normal tissues as well as in disease. In cancer, abnormal alternative
splicing, resulting in the production of novel transcript variants, has
an impact on cellular processes related to tumor progression, including
inhibition of apoptosis, tumor invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis. The
identification of consistent molecular changes underlying the initiation
and the progression of cancers is critical to better understand the
mechanisms underlying tumorigenesis. Such molecular changes represent
promising candidates for diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Exonhit
has developed the Genome Wide SpliceArray, a new generation of microarray
that extends transcriptomic profiling to the monitoring of alternative
splicing, thereby increasing the discriminatory power of the analyses.
Through this novel discovery platform, libraries of alternative splicing
events that are deregulated in cancer have been generated in order to be
interrogated for the identification of novel biomarkers, allowing to
monitor disease status, progression/relapse, and specificity/selectivity
of drug response. Here we describe the identification of novel markers
and transmembrane targets, arising in different cancers due to
alternative splicing. Alternatively spliced transcripts were isolated
from breast, colon, and lung tumors and their corresponding adjacent
normal tissues (20 each). Different splicing patterns were evidenced in
tumoral versus normal tissues and from specificity analysis performed
across a pool of 20 normal organs. Events of interest, focused on
splicing events that generate potential novel amino acid sequences, were
selected based on combination of statistical analysis of probe sets
deregulations, protein knowledge and pathway analyses. The events were
used to identify novel cell surface epitopes for antibody development
with therapeutic or diagnostic usefulness and were subsequently validated
by QPCR analysis. With our microarray profiling performed here, focusing
on up-regulated genes with biomarker potential, we identified and
successfully validated genes that exhibit differential splicing in
different cancers compared to normal adjacent tissue. We concentrated our
analyses on genes involved in key processes of cancer progression such as
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and extracellular matrix
remodeling. Alternative RNA splicing offers a currently underexploited
source of biological information for cancer research. Platforms dedicated
to alternative splicing such as the SpliceArray can be integrated into
discovery processes to allow identification of biomarkers and novel
targets. Further, such platforms may also provide guidance in the
selection and follow-up of patients in clinical trials.

