Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational analysis of paclitaxel-induced tumor priming that
leads to enhanced deposition and efficacy nanoparticulate doxorubicin


Purpose: Paclitaxel (PAC) has been shown to cause tumor priming (TP),
which increases delivery of subsequently-administered drugs. A wave of
PAC-mediated apoptosis results in a transient reduction in tumor cell
density, expansion of the interstitial space, and vascular permeability
compromise that enhances tumor deposition of nanoparticulate formulations
such as liposomal doxorubicin (L-dox). Our aim was to develop an
integrated quantitative pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) analysis
approach to optimize combination chemotherapy of PAC with L-dox. Methods:
Data were extracted from the study of Lu et al. (J Pharmacol Exp Ther
322: 80, 2007) in which mice bearing human tumor xenografts were treated
with PAC (40 mg/kg), L-dox (20 mg/kg), TP dosing (PAC followed by L-dox
at 48h, the peak of the priming effect), or the reverse sequence (L-dox
then PAC). Data included plasma and tumor drug concentrations, kinetics
of PAC and L-dox induced apoptosis, and % change in tumor volume from
baseline. Drug profiles were described with a PK model for
carrier-mediated PAC, and a two-compartment model for L-dox, with
first-order release of free drug from the liposome. Intratumor
concentrations were described using a hybrid well-stirred model with
estimated partition coefficients (kp) for each drug. Tumor PK profiles
were used to drive apoptotic responses, which were modeled using
nonlinear time dependent signal transduction functions. The tumor growth
PD model consisted of two transit compartments, with a first order net
growth rate constant and the apoptotic signals from each agent driving
cytotoxic effects. PAC induced TP was modeled using a feedback loop, with
the apoptosis signal of PAC enhancing the deposition of L-dox (i.e.
increasing kp for dox). Model fittings were performed using MATLAB, and
simulations were conducted to explore priming sequences. Results: The
final model captured well the PK of PAC and L-dox in plasma and tumors,
and the time course of apoptosis induction, and tumor growth for each
treatment sequence. With single agent dosing, kp values for PAC and L-dox
were estimated at 0.044 and 0.085. L-dox kp increased 2-fold after the TP
treatment. Apoptosis signals exhibited a delayed onset that was well
captured, and the intratumor concentrations producing maximum effects
(Emax) and 50% Emax were 18 and 7.2 g/mL (PAC) and 17.6 and 14.3 g/mL
(L-dox). The duration of drug induced apoptosis was 27.4 h for PAC and
15.8 h for L-dox. Simulation with the PK/PD model suggested that earlier
administration of L-dox would increase efficacy markedly. Conclusions: A
model was successfully developed that captured the priming effect on PK
and efficacy. Simulation suggested that administration of L-dox 24 h
prior to the priming peak would enhance efficacy further. This model
could be adapted for evaluating other combination chemotherapies using
PAC as a TP agent.

