Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system
genes in prostate carcinoma is related to clinicopathological parameters


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of tumor mortality.
Members of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system play an
important role in tumorigenesis in many human malignancies. We sought to
characterize the mRNA expression of uPA members in primary PCa samples
and to correlate this expression to clinicopathological parameters.
Material and methods: We investigated the mRNA expression level of three
members of the uPA system (uPA, PAI-1 and uPAR) using 26 paired samples
of PCa and adjacent non-malignant tissue. Absolute quantification of gene
expression was performed by quantitative PCR and subsequent
standardization on the reference gene TBP. Gene expression measures were
further correlated to clinicopathological characteristics as TNM
classification, Gleason sum, and tumor grade. Results: Although we did
not detect significant differences in expression of uPA system genes
between tumor and matched nonmalingnant tissue in our patient cohort, we
identified a positive correlation of all three uPA family members
(pBackground: Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of tumor
mortality. Members of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system
play an important role in tumorigenesis in many human malignancies. We
sought to characterize the mRNA expression of uPA members in primary PCa
samples and to correlate this expression to clinicopathological
parameters. Material and methods: We investigated the mRNA expression
level of three members of the uPA system (uPA, PAI-1 and uPAR) using 26
paired samples of PCa and adjacent non-malignant tissue. Absolute
quantification of gene expression was performed by quantitative PCR and
subsequent standardization on the reference gene TBP. Gene expression
measures were further correlated to clinicopathological characteristics
as TNM classification, Gleason sum, and tumor grade. Results: Although we
did not detect significant differences in expression of uPA system genes
between tumor and matched nonmalingnant tissue in our patient cohort, we
identified a positive correlation of all three uPA family members
(p<0.01; bivariate correlation). When stratifying PAI-1 expression
according to the median mRNA level we discovered correlations to defined
tumor characteristics. Tumors with PAI-1 expression above median
displayed a higher Gleason sum (8 or 9) than tumors expressing
less-than-median PAI-1 (p=0.03, Fisher's exact test). Likewise, an
elevated PAI-1 expression was correlated with higher tumor grade (p=0.01;
Fisher exact test) and tumor stage (p=0.046; Fisher exact test).
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that mRNA expression of PAI-1 as a
member of the uPA family correlates with characteristic pathological
parameters of PCa.

