Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CYP33 in MLL target gene repression


This study further elucidates the role of CYP33 in gene transcription by
studying the effects of CYP33 overexpression and siRNA-mediated
down-regulation on the expression of MLL target genes such as c-MYC, p21,
p27, and HOXA9. CYP33 is a cis-trans prolyl isomerase (PPIase) which
mediates repression of HOX gene expression after binding to the 3rd PHD
finger of MLL through its own RRM domain. Upon binding to MLL, CYP33
increases recruitment of HDAC to the MLL repression domain which in turn
leads to deacetylation of histone H3. This ultimately causes repression
of MLL target genes (Xia et al. 2003). Chromosomal translocations
involving the MLL gene (Mixed Lineage Leukemia) can lead to the
production of fusion proteins with any of more than 60 different partner
proteins and is implicated in the initiation of leukemia. Expression of
MLL fusion proteins leads to increased expression of MLL target genes
such as HOXA7, HOXA9 and MEIS1 (Hess et al., 2010). MLL-fusion proteins
lack the 3rd PHD finger and therefore, lose their ability to bind CYP33;
in the presence of these fusion proteins CYP33 can no longer repress MLL
target genes. A mutation in CYP33's PPIase domain, leads to an
enzymatically inactive CYP33 which can still bind to MLL. Upon
overexpression of MLL and CYP33, HDAC is recruited to the MLL complex, as
demonstrated by co-immunopreciptiation. However, when the CYP33 PPIase
mutant is overexpressed, the lack of PPIase activity prevents the
recruitment of HDAC to MLL. As a consequence the chromatin retains the
acetylation mark on histone H3 and, although the CYP33 PPIase mutant
binds MLL, no repression of MLL target genes is observed. Conversely,
upon knockdown of wild-type CYP33, MLL target gene expression and H3K27Ac
are increased. This study aids in the understanding of how MLL and CYP33
modulate gene function and helps to identify some of the mechanisms
involved in hematopoietic development and leukemia.

