Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of epigenetic alterations associated with tumor
progression and cancer metastasis


Cancer metastasis could be defined as the point of no return in the
majority of cancers. The emergence of metastasis is still associated with
the worst prognosis and high morbidity. Given the importance of the
disease, researchers in this field are focusing on the discovery of new
molecular biomarkers able to predict tumor progression and the
development of metastasis. Thus, deciphering the molecular and cellular
alterations implied in the origin of the metastasis would permit us to
develop novel therapies that make a significant contribution to cancer
treatment. In this line, the extant variability and versatility of
microarray technology provides us a good chance to identify targets
involved in cancer progression, to distinguish between cancer types, to
identify the tumor type of origin, or to predict the outcome of the
disease. According to the successful results obtained applying these kind
of techniques, we proposed a genome-wide approach to elucidate the
methylation changes associated with cancer progression. Once the first
candidates were validated, we assessed the gene function and the
consequences that the epigenetic silencing has in the metastatic cascade.
The study was carried out in four different paired tumor cell types
(11A/11B, MDA-MB-468PT/468LN, 1590PT/1590LN, and SW480/SW620) derived
from primary tumor and the corresponding lymph node metastases. For that
purpose, we used the new Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450K array.
This powerful platform, mapping 485,577 CpGs, has been successfully
validated in our lab and has extensively demonstrated its huge
resolution. In order to spot those epigenetic alterations with functional
effect on gene activity, we combined these methylation data with the
expression data obtained from the Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 gene
expression array performed in the same cell lines. The promoter
methylation pattern of candidate genes in cell lines was validated by PCR
analysis of bisulfite-modified genomic DNA. In addition, quantitative
RT-PCR and Western Blot were used to make sure that the methylation
change was indeed associated with a deviation in the gene expression
level. DNA methylation status of candidate genes in primary and
metastatic tumors was determined by methylation-specific PCR. In our
preliminary results we detected several metastasis related genes
methylated. Some of them have already been described in colon, breast,
esophagus and head and neck cancer metastases but others were new
candidates, including both protein-coding genes and microRNAs. Among
these, we frequently found ontologies related to metastasis progression
such as cell adhesion, cell motility and migration, protein-to-protein
interaction with histone deacetylases complexes (HDAC, linked to gene
transcription repression), potential members of HDAC, sponge proteins
that recruit HDACs or histone acetyltransferases (HATs), and potential
suppressor tumor genes.

