Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel MMP-3 generated PTHrP peptides promote osteoblast
proliferation: Implications for prostate to bone metastases


Up to 90% of patients that succumb to prostate cancer will have evidence
of bone metastasis. Prostate to bone metastases generate mixed lesions
hallmarked by areas of extensive bone resorption and formation mediated
by osteoclasts and osteoblasts respectively. Tumor derived PTHrP has been
defined as a major molecule facilitating tumor-osteoblast interaction.
Mature PTHrP is comprised of 36 amino-acids and new data from our lab has
identified that MMP-3, one of several MMPs we have found highly expressed
in the prostate cancer-bone microenvironment, can process PTHrP to yield
novel distinct peptides. We posit that MMP-3 generated PTHrP peptides can
have distinct biological effects on osteoblasts. Our results to date
demonstrate that MMP-3 processes mature PTHrP to yield PTHrP1-16,
PTHrP17-26, and PTHrP27-36 amino acid peptides in vitro as determined by
N-terminal amino acid sequencing and MALDI-TOF analysis. Next, we
determined the biological activity of the MMP-3 generated PTHrP peptides
by treating osteoblast cell lines and examining differentiation and
proliferation. We found using alizarin red staining that the MMP-3
generated PTHrP peptides did not impact osteoblast differentiation.
However, analysis of cell proliferation, using an MTT assay, identified
that the PTHrP1-16 peptide stimulated osteoblast proliferation over a
24-hour period. Follow-up studies revealed that the MMP-3 generated
PTHrP1-16 fragment significantly enhanced phosphorylation of MAPK 42/44
and CREB, presumably via the PTHrP receptor, PTH1R. In conclusion, our
data identify for the first time that PTHrP is an MMP substrate and that
MMP-3 generated PTHrP peptide PTHrP1-16, can promote osteoblast
proliferation. These findings suggest that MMP-3 expression in the
prostate tumor microenvironment can potentially impact osteoblast
expansion and may play a role in the generation of osteoblastic lesions
that are commonly associated with prostate to bone metastases.

