Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule stabilization alters tumor secretome and fibroblast
activation


Microtubules (MTs) represent one of the most effective targets in cancer
chemotherapy. However, drugs that target MTs, like the taxanes, often
fail in the metastatic setting. Therefore it is of utmost importance to
fully understand the roles of MTs and MT-targeting agents in tumor
biology. An important process for tumor development and metastasis
involves the remodeling of the 3D microenvironment surrounding tumor
cells. In order to successfully proliferate and metastasize, tumor cells
need to dynamically respond to, manipulate, and remodel their surrounding
microenvironment. We hypothesized that MTs, as a dynamic cytoskeletal
component, regulates the cellular signaling process that controls
tumor-mediated remodeling of the microenvironment. To test this
hypothesis, we assessed the MT-dependence of metastatic MDA-MB-231 (231)
breast cancer cell activation of HMF3S human mammary fibroblasts. We
collected media conditioned by vehicle- or paclitaxel (PTX)-pretreated
231 cells and then applied this conditioned media to HMF3S fibroblasts.
Application of 231-derived conditioned media activated HMF3S fibroblasts
as evidenced by their enhanced directional 3D motility towards a serum
gradient. However, application of conditioned media from PTX-pretreated
231 cells to HMF3S fibroblasts inhibited their 3D directional motility.
Importantly, we demonstrated that this effect was due to PTX-induced MT
stabilization as conditioned media from PTX-treated 231 cells resistant
to PTX did not inhibit fibroblasts 3D motility. Together, these results
suggest that the composition of the tumor secretome changes upon MT
stabilization by PTX, which in turn affects the ability of tumor cells to
communicate with fibroblasts. In order to identify the factors
responsible for this MT-dependent cell-cell communication we performed a
differential proteomic analysis of the conditioned media from vehicle-
and PTX-pretreated 231 cells. Using splitless nanoflow chromatography
coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spec, we identified a total
of 2124 proteins within these tumor secretomes. Using a 2-fold change
threshold, we identified 78 under-represented and 31 over-represented
proteins in the secretome of PTX- versus vehicle-pretreated cells. We
focused our analysis on under-represented proteins based on the
hypothesis that MT stabilization would inhibit their secretion. From this
analysis we have identified proteins involved in cell motility, cell-cell
communication, or ECM remodeling. TGF, CTGF, cMet, fibronectin, and lysyl
oxidase 2 were key down-regulated proteins identified in the tumor
secretome upon PTX-induced MT stabilization. Currently we are
investigating the mechanisms by which stabilization of the MT
cytoskeleton results in the down-regulation of these factors. These
findings point to a novel role of interphase MTs in tumor biology and can
possibly enhance our understanding of taxane clinical efficacy.

