Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting EGFR/HER2 signaling pathway by a dual receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor BIBW2992 for radiosensitization in murine urothelial
carcinoma


Background: Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy (CCRT) has been
successful in phase II trials with selected patients for preserving
bladder after transurethral resection of bladder tumor. However, the
obstacles remain in the unsatisfactory effect of CCRT for unresectable
disease of bladder or upper urinary tract. The purpose of this study was
to determine whether the EGFR/HER2 targeting agent combined with
radiotherapy has the potential of radiosensitization in urothelial
carcinoma. Methods: BIBW2992, an irreversible EGFR/HER2 inhibitor, was
selected as the target agent to combine with radiotherapy. Murine bladder
tumor cell line, MBT-2, was used to evaluate the in vitro and in vivo
synergism of combining BIBW2992 with irradiation. Colony formation assay
was conducted to evaluate the synergistic effect of BIBW2992 and
radiation on colony number analyzed using CompuSyn software. The related
signaling protein expressions were investigated by Western blot assay.
Flow cytometry analyzed the cell cycle changes. Ectopic xenografts were
established by subcutaneous injection of MBT-2 cell (2 106) into the
right hind leg of C3H mouse. As the tumors became established (mean
starting tumor volume= 200 mm3), the mice were randomized into 4 groups
(n = 4) that received BIBW2992 and/or radiotherapy (10 mg/kg/day for 7
days and/or radiotherapy of 15 Gy on day 4). The tumor size was measured
weekly using calipers and the volumes were calculated. Positron emission
tomography (PET) was obtained on day 7 as the imaging modality to
evaluate the early treatment response. Results: BIBW2992 (0-1000 nM)
synergistically sensitized MBT-2 cells to radiation (0-10 Gy) in
clonogenic cell survivals. Based on the rapid increase of phosphorylation
of Her2 and EGFR shortly (2-6 hrs) after irradiation, pre-treatment of
BIBW2992 on irradiated MBT-2 cells inhibited Her2 and EGFR
phosphorylation dramatically. As compared to either treatment alone,
combined BIBW2992 and irradiation increased the cleavage form of PARP. It
was compatible with the flow cytometry finding of significantly increased
cells in subG1 phase, indicating the synergistic induction of cell
apoptosis. Besides, the combination of BIBW2992 and irradiation enhanced
p-H2AX (double-strand DNA damage) expression compared with either
treatment alone. The inhibitory effect on ectopic tumor metabolism was
early observed on PET after combined BIBW2992 and radiotherapy, as
compared to either modality alone or sham treatment. The tumor growth
delay between irradiation and combined treatment was 8.5 days.
Conclusions: BIBW2992 is an orally bioavailable dual EGFR/HER2 inhibitor
with therapeutic value as a radiosensitizer of murine bladder cancer. The
synergism likely associates with the enhanced effect on radiation induced
DNA damage, and leads to the increased cell apoptosis.

