Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sprouty loss leads to aberrant regulation of receptor tyrosine
kinase signaling pathways and accelerates mammary tumorigenesis


The SPROUTY (SPRY) proteins, key negative regulators of receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) signaling, control developmental processes such as organ
branching and maintain cellular homeostasis. The SPRY proteins inhibit
critical signaling pathways that are downstream of RTKs, including the
Ras-MAPK, PI3K-AKT, and the PLC-PKC pathway. These pathways are highly
deregulated in various cancers including HER2 overexpressing and PIK3CA
mutant breast cancers. Importantly, the SPRY genes are significantly
down-regulated in many cancers including 90% of human breast cancer
cases, suggesting that they may function as putative tumor suppressors.
To understand the role of Spry in normal mammary development, we examined
the mammary glands of our Spry1 mutant mice at various developmental
stages. In virgin Spry1-/- mice we observed a trend towards more
branching of developing breast ducts. Upon pregnancy there was striking
overgrowth of the mammary epithelium in Spry1+/ mice (Spry1-/- mice are
sterile), suggesting that Spry regulates mammary development. To
investigate the role of Spry in breast cancer we explored the consequence
of Spry loss in vitro and in vivo. We found that Spry deficient cells
possess accelerated cell growth, enhanced cell survival, and increased
tumorigenic potential. In addition these cells were hypersensitive to a
number of growth factors including EGF, showing enhanced and prolonged
activation of the MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways. To examine the role of Spry
loss in promoting mammary tumorigenesis in vivo, we crossed Spry1 mutant
mice with mice in which we can induce HER2/neu or PIK3CA expression. We
found that Spry1 loss cooperates with oncogenic activation of HER2/neu or
PIK3CA to increase cell proliferation and accelerate mammary hyperplasia.
Breast tissues from the Spry1-/- mice with oncogenic activation of
HER2/neu exhibited a trend towards increased levels of activated Mapk and
Akt compared to their Spry1+/+ counterparts. These Spry1-/- breast
tissues also accumulated significantly more DNA damage. Finally,
microarray gene expression analysis of these tissues identified that
genes differentially expressed in Spry1-/- breasts are involved in cell
cycle regulation and the DNA damage response. Collectively, this data
suggests that Spry functions as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer
opposing HER2/neu and PIK3CA by suppressing MAPK and AKT activation to
prevent DNA damage. Our work demonstrates that the misregulation of
critical signaling pathways, through loss of Spry, leads to increased
cell growth, enhanced cell survival, and accelerated tumorigenesis.

