Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolism and cancer: The CD38-NAMPT connection in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia


Tumor transformation is generally accompanied by an altered metabolic
state, with higher needs for NAD, an essential co-factor in the oxidative
phosphorylation chain, as well as a substrate for four classes of
enzymes, including the NADase CD38. In leukocytes, NAD is synthesized
mainly from nicotinamide through the activity of nicotinamide
phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT), which is the first and rate-limiting
enzyme in this biosynthesis pathway. In addition to its intracellular
localization (iNAMPT form), the enzyme can be present extracellularly
(eNAMPT), where it exerts cytokine-like actions that promote the
maturation of early stage B cells. For this reason it is also known as
pre-B cell colony enhancing factor (PBEF). Our hypothesis is that
PBEF/Nampt exerts pro-survival activity in human leukemic B cells through
the generation of a pro-inflammatory microenvironment. The model selected
is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a disease characterized by the
slowly progressive expansion of mature CD5+ B lymphocytes, intrinsically
resistant to apoptosis and dependent on a growth supportive environment
for progression. A further reason for selecting this model is that CD38
is an independent negative prognostic marker for CLL patients, suggesting
that modulation of the extracellular NAD/nicotinamide balance is critical
in determining a more aggressive phenotype. Analysis of the expression of
i and eNAMPT shows that CLL cells (n=60) express high and homogeneous
levels of iNAMPT comparable with those scored by normal B lymphocytes
from peripheral blood of health donors. In contrast, plasma eNAMPT levels
are significantly higher (fourfold increased, p=0.001) in CLL patients
(n=50) when compared to controls. These data suggest an involvement of
eNAMPT in this disease, also confirmed by in vitro experiments where CLL
cells, cultured in the presence of recombinant eNAMPT, showed activation
and proliferation. Furthermore, after 5 days of treatment with eNAMPT CLL
cells displayed morphological features of immunoblasts, as observed after
activation of CD38 using a combination of agonistic mAbs and IL-2. In
line with our hypothesis of a direct interplay between CD38 and eNAMPT,
i) CD38+ CLL cells were selectively responsive to eNAMPT actions and ii)
CD38 activation led to a potent and reproducible increase in eNAMPT.
Combined treatment of CLL cells with agonistic anti-CD38/IL-2 was
followed by i) a rapid increased of NAMPT mRNA and ii) a marked secretion
of eNAMPT, present in culture supernatants after 5 days of treatment. No
difference was observed in iNAMPT levels, constantly elevated. Considered
together, these data suggest the existence of a CD38/eNAMPT extracellular
loop, where CD38 consumes NAD and generates nicotinamide, triggering
eNAMPT expression and activation to reconstitute extracellular NAD
levels. This loop appears to be operative in CLL cells, generating
pro-survival and activation signals.

