Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a promoter methylation panel in plasma cell-free DNA
to screen for colorectal cancer in Hispanics


Introduction: Detection of quantitative and qualitative changes in
cell-free, tumor-derived nucleic acids in cancer patients are being
evaluated as potential screening, monitoring and diagnostic tools.
Genetic and epigenetic changes in cell-free plasma DNA (cfpDNA) have been
studied as non-invasive colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnostic markers, but a
gene panel with the diagnostic accuracy necessary for clinical use has
not been defined. The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP),
characterized by hypermethylation in promoter-associated regions, is one
of the molecular mechanisms resulting in CRC. We evaluated the detection
of promoter hypermethylation in a gene panel previously used to define
CIMP in CRC tumors, as plasma biomarkers. Methods: Methylation specific
PCR was used to analyze eight CIMP-specific gene promoters (CACNA1G,
IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1, hMLH1, p16, CRABP1) in cfpDNA. Forty
age-and-gender matched plasma samples (20 CRC and 20 controls) were
evaluated. Samples were classified as methylated, unmethylated or not
detected if not amplified by either primer set. Results: Methylation
patterns of eight genes in 40 subjects (20 CRC and 20 controls; mean age
67 12.2 years; 20 females) were examined. Five genes revealed a 100%
unmethylation pattern. p16 was found to be more likely methylated in
controls (11%) whereas NEUROG1 and CRABP1 were more likely to be
methylated in CRC cases (6% and 33%, respectively). 53.3% of CRC and 48%
controls had 1 methylated genes (OR = 1.24, 95% CI 0.34-4.46). The use of
1 methylated genes detected CRC with 40% sensitivity and 65% specificity.
Discussion: We report the first evaluation of the methylation pattern of
an eight-gene panel as CRC biomarkers in Hispanics. Our preliminary
findings showed that genes were mostly unmethylated in cases and
controls. NEUROG1 and CRAP1 were found to be most likely methylated in
CRC patients, but the diagnostic accuracy of this panel was poor as a CRC
screening biomarker.

