Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microparticle generation and activation after treatment with
paclitaxel and bavituximab combination therapy in metastatic breast cancer


Background: Breast cancer is the leading cause of life-threatening
malignancy affecting women and the second leading cause of female cancer
death in the United States. Weekly paclitaxel, alone or in combination
with other chemotherapies, has proven to be an effective and
well-tolerated therapy for patients with metastatic disease. Due to the
tumor's dependence on vascularization for progression, survival and
dissemination, targeting a tumor's vascular network is an important
additional cancer management strategy. Bavituximab, a monoclonal antibody
developed by Peregrine Pharmaceuticals against phosphatidylserine (PS),
is a vascular disrupting agent designed to selectively attack tumor blood
vessels already in existence. Under normal conditions, PS is localized to
the internal surface of the plasma membrane. However, PS is
preferentially localized on the outer surface of vascular endothelial
cells in tumors, possibly due to stress conditions in the tumor
microenvironment. Bavituximab is able to localize and bind specifically
to PS in tumor vessels in a 2-glycoprotein 1 dependent manner, mediating
the binding of host effector cells to the tumor vascular endothelium.
This leads to vessel damage, vascularity reduction, necrosis, and growth
retardation within the tumor. Microparticles are vesicles that are
released from cells after activation, stress, death, or malignant
transformation. Elevated levels of microparticles derived from platelets,
endothelial cells, and/or leukocytes have been associated with several
disease states, including cancer, however, the effect of anti-angiogenic
or vascular disrupting agents on microparticle production is unclear. We
investigated microparticle formation in our patients at baseline, in
response to Paclitaxel chemotherapy, and after addition of Bavituximab.
Patients and Methods: We initiated a phase I clinical trial in patients
with Her-2 negative metastatic breast cancer treated with paclitaxel (80
mg/m2)on a weekly schedule for 3 out of 4 weeks, and weekly bavituximab
(3 mg/kg) for 4 out of 4 weeks. Each cycle was defined as 4 weeks of
therapy. Microparticles were isolated from peripheral blood and examined
by flow cytometric phenotyping. Leukocyte, endothelial cell, and
activated platelet microparticles were quantified and longitudinal trends
analyzed. Five patients have been enrolled to date with additional
patients accruing. At presentation, the longitudinal trends in
microparticle formation from platelets, endothelial cells, and leukocytes
will be presented in response to weekly Paclitaxel versus combined
Paclitaxel and Bavituximab therapy.

