Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A humanized tumor mouse model to characterize the interaction of
human disseminated cancer cells with the human immune system


Most primary cancers can be surgically removed, but many patients will
die from metastatic disease months to years after initial therapy.
Adjuvant therapies are increasingly tailored to exploit characteristics
of the primary tumor however they usually improve the survival of less
than 10% of breast cancer patients. It has been recently shown that
dissemination is an early event and that disseminated cancer cells (DCC)
differ genetically from the primary tumor. Therefore a model is needed
which i) provides a human, autologous immune system and ii) allows the
expansion of DCC, which belong to the rarest cells in the human body (1-2
cells per 106 bone marrow cells in positive patients), in order to
investigate the interaction of these particular cell populations. Here we
show that a humanized tumor mouse model can be established using
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and DCC isolated from diagnostic
BM-aspirates of melanoma and mammary carcinoma patients. Bone marrow
samples are obtained prior to tumor resection. HSC are purified and
engrafted by intra-femoral injection into NOD-scidIL2Rg-/- (NSG) mice and
show long-term reconstitution (>24 weeks) of lymphoid and myeloid
lineages, also upon serial transplantation. DCC enriched from diagnostic
BM-aspirates or lymph node samples can be transplanted and are able to
establish tumors in NSG mice, even at low cell numbers (Most primary
cancers can be surgically removed, but many patients will die from
metastatic disease months to years after initial therapy. Adjuvant
therapies are increasingly tailored to exploit characteristics of the
primary tumor however they usually improve the survival of less than 10%
of breast cancer patients. It has been recently shown that dissemination
is an early event and that disseminated cancer cells (DCC) differ
genetically from the primary tumor. Therefore a model is needed which i)
provides a human, autologous immune system and ii) allows the expansion
of DCC, which belong to the rarest cells in the human body (1-2 cells per
106 bone marrow cells in positive patients), in order to investigate the
interaction of these particular cell populations. Here we show that a
humanized tumor mouse model can be established using hematopoietic stem
cells (HSC) and DCC isolated from diagnostic BM-aspirates of melanoma and
mammary carcinoma patients. Bone marrow samples are obtained prior to
tumor resection. HSC are purified and engrafted by intra-femoral
injection into NOD-scidIL2Rg-/- (NSG) mice and show long-term
reconstitution (>24 weeks) of lymphoid and myeloid lineages, also upon
serial transplantation. DCC enriched from diagnostic BM-aspirates or
lymph node samples can be transplanted and are able to establish tumors
in NSG mice, even at low cell numbers (<10 cells) in 50 to 70% of
DCC-containing samples. Since human melanoma and mammary carcinomas are,
in later stages, characterized by wide-spread metastasis, involving bone,
lung and liver, we currently focus on whether and how the humanized
immune system enables the systemic cancer spread of DCC derived tumors.

