Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UKLS - United Kingdom Lung Cancer Screening Trial


In the UK 33,500 individuals die from lung cancer each year. The
effectiveness of screening pre-symptomatic individuals urgently requires
evaluation. The aim of UK Lung cancer Screening trial (UKLS) is to
provide data required for an informed decision about the desirability of
introducing population screening for lung cancer in the UK. The aim of
the UKLS is to demonstrate a 25-30% mortality advantage and cost
effectiveness of the screening. The UKLS pilot has started to recruit in
2011. The pilot sites are based at the Liverpool Heath & Chest Hospital,
Liverpool and the Papworth Hospital, Cambridgeshire with a second reading
site at the Royal Brompton Hospital, London. It will randomise 4,000 high
risk patients identified by the Liverpool Lung Project (LLP) Risk
Prediction Model. If the pilot trial is successful and funding is
available, we plan to randomise a further 28,000 subjects from seven
centres in the UK. Individuals are invited to participate if they have at
least 5% risk of developing lung cancer over 5 years as predicted by the
LLP risk model. The Wald Single Screen Design has been chosen for the
UKLS pilot trial. Individuals meeting the inclusion/exclusion criteria
will be sent invitations to participate and selected on the basis of the
LLP risk questionnaire and selected to attend one of the pilot
recruitment sites. After consent has been obtained, the participant will
undertake spirometry and be asked to provide specimens (of blood, oral
and nasal brushings and sputum) and to complete baseline lifestyle,
psychosocial, and health economic questionnaire. Participants will be
randomised to the study arm and will have a single low dose computed
tomography scan (CT); those in the control arm will have usual care (no
CT). CT scans will be read both locally and centrally and volumetric
analysis will be performed on detected nodules. Both arms will be
followed up for lung cancer incidence and mortality. Mortality will be
documented after 10 years of follow-up. Modelling has resulted in the
development of the UKLS care pathway to manage identified nodules. The
aim of the main UKLS trial is to assess whether screening by low dose CT
will confer a mortality advantage of 30% and also be cost effective for
the UK population.

