Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of BCL6 targeted therapies for breast cancer
through gene expression networks


Breast cancer remains a deadly disease for countless women, thus new
treatment strategies must be developed. Since inappropriate activation of
transcription factors is a common pathogenic event in breast cancer,
targeting these proteins may be a tractable new strategy. In particular,
we have found that the BCL6 transcriptional modulator is expressed in 11
out of 12 breast cancer cell lines. In addition, BCL6 has been reported
to be expressed in the majority of high-grade ductal carcinomas.
Importantly, inhibiting BCL6 expression by RNA interference reduced cell
survival. We hypothesized that BCL6 target gene expression profiles could
be used to identify compounds with BCL6 inhibitory activity. To generate
a breast cancer specific BCL6 gene signature, we employed the combination
of gene expression microarrays and BCL6 binding sites identified by
ChIP-seq in breast cancer cells. These BCL6 target gene profiles were
then used to interrogate the Connectivity Map, a compilation of gene
expression signatures reflecting the effects of more than 1300 compounds.
This allowed us to identify compounds whose gene expression signature was
the inverse of that mediated by BCL6, and might thereby function as BCL6
inhibitors. We screened six of these compounds for BCL6 inhibitory
activity using a BCL6-specific reporter which identified disulfiram,
celastrol, and harmol as inhibitors of the transcriptional repressor
effects of BCL6. Importantly, treating breast cancer cells with these
compounds reduced the viability of these cells. Moreover, combining these
compounds with cytotoxic agents used in breast cancer therapy enhanced
cell killing. In addition, combining these agents with a peptidomimetic
of BCL6 also enhanced cell killing. Taken together, these studies show
that BCL6 is a key therapeutic target in breast cancer, and that gene
signature analysis can be used to identify novel inhibitors of this
protein that have activity in breast cancer cells.

