Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CSE1L, a 20q gain passenger that drives colorectal adenoma to
carcinoma progression


Background Driver genes are defined as genes that promote the tumorigenic
process upon acquirement of somatic alterations. Gain of chromosome 20q
is an important factor in the progression of colorectal adenomas to
carcinomas. Previously we identified TPX2 and AURKA as two genes that
drive 20q amplification in colorectal adenoma to carcinoma progression,
based on correlation of mRNA and protein expression levels with 20q DNA
copy number status while functionally influencing cancer processes. These
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the selection advantage
imposed by 20q gain in colorectal adenoma to carcinoma progression is
achieved by gain-of-function of multiple cancer-related genes at
chromosome 20q, rather than affecting a single driver gene. In addition
to TPX2 and AURKA, other 20q genes such as CSE1L may further contribute
to tumor progression. Aim We here investigated whether CSE1L is another
20q located gene that drives colorectal adenoma to carcinoma progression,
in a 20q gain-dependent manner. Methods Functional effects of CSE1L on
cell viability, anchorage-independent growth and invasion were
investigated upon gene knockdown using the SW480 colorectal cancer cell
line. CSE1L protein expression levels were examined by
immunohistochemical evaluation of tissue microarrays containing a series
of colorectal adenoma and carcinoma samples, which were characterized by
genome-wide (microarray-based) DNA and mRNA profiling. Results CSE1L
knockdown affected cell viability and anchorage-independent growth. CSE1L
mRNA expression levels correlated with chromosome 20q DNA copy number
status. However, CSE1L protein expression was not associated with 20q
gain, although its expression was increased in carcinomas compared to
adenomas. Conclusion CSE1L appears to be a driver of colorectal tumor
progression based on its functional effects combined with increased
protein expression levels in carcinomas compared to adenomas. However,
the lack of correlation between CSE1L protein expression levels and 20q
DNA copy number status in colorectal adenoma to carcinoma progression
implies that CSE1L is merely a passenger rather than a driver of
chromosome 20q amplification, suggesting that CSE1L protein levels are
subject to post-transcriptional regulation in a 20q gain-independent
manner.

