Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of ovarian hormones on the induction of mammary tumors
induced by the environmental pollutant 6-nitrochrysene


Exposure to ovarian hormones is the most widely recognized risk factors
for breast cancer. However, hormones alone do not fully address the
majority of the risk for this disease. Increasing data have linked
environmental factors such as radiation, chemical pollutants and diet to
the incidence of breast cancer. Humans are often exposed to a combination
of multiple risk factors. Thus, the potential of the interaction between
the environment and hormones is critical to assess the risk of breast
cancer. The goal of the present study is to examine the role of ovarian
hormones on the induction of mammary tumors by 6-nitrochrysene (6-NC), a
representative environmental pollutant. We have previously demonstrated
that 6-NC is one of the most potent mammary carcinogen in the rat. Thus,
6-NC (25 mol in 500 L trioctanoin) was administered orally to both female
intact and ovariectomized (ovax) Sprague-Dawley rats at age of 30 days
once a week for 8 weeks. Tumors in the intact animals was first detected
at week 4 (incidence 8%) and tumor incidence reached 50% at week 18 after
the last administration of 6-NC. On the contrary, in the group of ovax
rats tumors were first observed at week 8 (4% incidence) and the
incidence remained the same at week 22 after the last dose of 6-NC
administration. Further evidence to support this hormone dependence is
also observed in a separate group of ovax rats which received both 6-NC
at the same dose described above and estradiol (E2) pellet implantation
(twice, 5 mg/90 days); mammary tumor incidence was comparable to that
observed in intact animals treated with 6-NC. No tumors were found in
vehicle (trioctanoin) treated intact and ovax control groups. In this
study, we showed for the first time that ovarian hormones are essential
in the development of mammary tumors induced by this environmental
pollutant; the molecular mechanisms are being explored. Support: NCI RO1
35519.

