Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates the expression of
O6-methylguanine DNA-methyltransferase in cancer cells: a new strategy to
overcome resistance for DNA alkylators in cancer therapy


Background: A number of DNA-damaging agents attack the O6 position on
guanine and thereby form the most potent cytotoxic DNA adducts known. The
DNA-repair protein O6-alkylguanine (O6-AG) DNA alkyltransferase (AGT)
encoded by the gene O6-Methylguanine (O6-MG)-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT)
repair DNA adducts caused by alkylating agents. MGMT has important
implications in cancer treatment since its expression correlates
inversely with sensitivity to agents that form O6-alkylguanine adducts,
such as temozolamide. It is therefore of great interest to find agents
that induce MGMT deficiency, increase the sensitivity and possible
overcoming resistance to alkylating chemotherapeutic agents. Methods:
Cell lines from medulloblastomas, gliomas, colon cancer and
neuroblastomas were examined for Wnt/beta-catenin activity and MGMT
expression. We used Western blot, Real-Time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR),
siRNA knockdown and cDNA overexpression of beta-catenin, MGMT promotor
reporter plasmids and cells with inducible siRNAs targeting beta-catenin
to study beta-catenin mediated regulation of MGMT. The correlation
between Wnt activity and MGMT expression was also investigated in primary
medulloblastomas, gliomas and colon cancer using gene expression cohorts.
Cell cytotoxicity and clonogenicity of chemotherapeutic drugs in
combination with celecoxib were examined in cell lines using fluorometric
microculture cytotoxicity assay and clonogenic assay, respectively.
Compounds targeting Wnt signaling was investigated in combination with
temolzolamide in vitro and in vivo. Results: MGMT expression level was
shown be correlated to Wnt signaling activation both in primary tumors
and cell lines of different origins. Proinflammatory prostaglandin E2
activates the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and increase MGMT expression.
Transfection experiments and cells with inducible siRNAs revealed that
beta-catenin directly regulates MGMT expression via Tcf/LEF binding. Wnt
inhibiting drugs and compounds potentiates the cytotoxic effect of the
DNA alkylating drug, temozolomide in cells with elevated MGMT expression
in vitro and in vivo. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that MGMT is a
direct Wnt/beta-catenin target, and agents that inhibit Wnt signalling
reduces the transcription of MGMT through a prostaglandin
E2-Wnt/beta-catenin route and thus increases the sensitivity to
temozolomide. This provides a rational approach for improved efficacy of
chemotherapeutic drugs inducing DNA alkylation in cancer treatment. The
data also suggest that Wnt/beta-catenin is an important target for
therapeutic interventions.

