Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel signaling interactions of type XV collagen: Implications for
tumor suppression


Most clinical therapeutics used to date depend on specific targeting of
cellular components to treat cancers. However, the environment outside
the tumor cell is also critical since it may provide new targets to treat
malignant and resistant cancers, independent of the tumor. We aim to
advance the understanding of the early stages of cancer, prior to
metastasis by determining the role of a non-fibrillar collagen (Type XV)
and its interactions with the tumor stroma and extracellular environment.
Type XV collagen (COLXV) is found in basement membrane zones where it
assumes a pretzel-like structure but unlike the majority of fibrillar
collagens does not form tight lattice networks surrounding the cell. Loss
of COLXV during progression of aggressive cancers (including breast,
pancreas, and ovarian carcinomas and melanomas) precedes basement
membrane invasion and metastasis. Moreover, the loss of COLXV from the
distal side of basement membrane zones and the resulting deficit in its
interactions with other proteins may determine its specific function in
tumor progression and eventual metastasis. In this context we have
identified critical collagen-binding cell surface receptors on the tumor
cell, which interact with COLXV and appear to mediate its functions.
These receptors have also been reported to show altered signaling in
cancer. We previously showed that over-expression of COLXV in cervical
cancer cells alters the growth properties of these cells both in vitro
and in vivo, and showed that type XV collagen is a dose-dependent
suppressor of tumorigenicity in vivo. We now show that over-expression of
COLXV inhibits epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vitro and
has a dramatic effect on the associated signaling events. We are now
further investigating the mechanisms of tumor/stroma crosstalk that are
impacted by COLXV and subsequently by its depletion.

