Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 status determines the radio-sensitizing effect of an Akt
kinase inhibitor in malignant gliomas


Purpose: It has been reported that PI3K-Akt pathway, which plays a role
in cell survival and apoptosis, is deregulated in many cancer types. In
gliomas, amplification and constitutive activation of Akt, which can
result from amplifications in TKIs including EGFR, IGFR1, PDGFR, etc. and
mutations in PI3K, PTEN, etc. are thought to play a role in radiation
resistance. Some have tried to modulate the PI3K/Akt pathway by targeting
molecules upstream of Akt such as Ras and PI3K, while others have used
inhibitors targeting molecules downstream of Akt, such as mTOR. These
inhibitors have been shown to reduce cancer cell growth in vitro and in
vivo, but have had limited success in clinical settings as single agents.
In our study, we have investigated the use of a phosphatidylinositol
ether lipid analogue (PIA) that directly inhibits Akt activation as a
radiosensitizer for GBM. Materials and Methods: We utilized multiple
established (U87, LN18, LN229) and primary (VC3, MGH8, OSU61) cell lines
with varying molecular and genetic signatures to determine
radiosensitizing effects of PIA. We performed Annexin V, clonogenic
survival, and COMET assays on glioma cells treated with PIA, radiation
(RT), and a combination of PIA and RT. Western blot was performed using
these cell lines to examine the changes in expression of PI3K-Akt
pathway, apoptotic, and pro-survival proteins following treatment.
Furthermore, we sequenced tumor suppressor genes p53 and PTEN in all cell
lines used in this study. Gene silencing of p53 was done in U87 cells via
a lentiviral transfection of shRNA. Results and Conclusions: PIA
decreases the activation of Akt to a considerable extent (80%), induces
apoptosis, and reduces clonogenicity of all cell lines tested. A subset
of cell lines did show enhanced radiosensitization when PIA is combined
with RT. Further detailed investigation of differential radiosensitizing
effects led us to discover the link between p53 status, Akt kinase
inhibition, and radiosensitization. GBMs with intact p53 had no
radiosensitizing effect after Akt kinase inhibition, whereas
radiosensitization was observed if either p53 is null or mutated. This
observation was further validated using isogenic U87 p53 knockdown cells.
Surprisingly, MGMT status, a predictive marker of outcome in GBM, did not
determine radiosensitizing effects of PIA in the GBM cells tested.
Through this preclinical study, we have identified which subset of GBM
patients will derive benefit from Akt kinase inhibition and the
investigations conducted justify future clinical trials and lays ground
work for phase I study.

