Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcitriol and arsenic trioxide synergistically inhibited
proliferation of HL-60 cell line mainly through apoptosis pathway


Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) has shown substantial efficacy in the treatment
of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). However, since not
all patients could achieve complete remission after As2O3 treatment, it
is necessary to investigate a novel treatment method overcoming the
resistance of current treatment. However, the therapeutic role of
calcitriol against APL has not yet been fully elucidated. In our study,
we investigated the anti-leukemic effect of calcitriol in combination
with As2O3 on the human APL cell line HL-60. Inhibition of proliferation
rate of HL-60 cells was measured by the trypan blue exclusion test was
resulted in dose, time- dependent expressions. To evaluate the effects of
combination treatment of As2O3 and calcitriol on the cell proliferation,
we analyzed the combined effects of As2O3 and calcitriol using CalcuSyn
software (BioSoft, Ferguson, MO, USA), which is based on the multiple
drug-effect equation of Chou and Talalay (Chou TC, et al. Adv Enzyme
Regul 1984): a combination index (CI) of 1 is defined as synergistic,
additive, or antagonistic, respectively. In all combinations, the CI
values calculated were less than 1. To investigate the effects of these
treatments on the apoptosis pathway, we analyzed the expression of Bax,
Caspase-3, Bcl-2 with the Western blot and the RT-PCR. In the Western
blot analysis, lower Bcl-2 and higher Bax and Caspase-3 expressions were
observed in the As2O3 or calcitriol-treated groups compared to the
control group. The combination treatment decreased Bcl-2 expression and
increased Bax and Caspase-3 expressions more prominently than the single
treatment using either As2O3 or calcitriol. In the RT-PCR analysis, these
trends were validated again with the same results. These cells were then
labeled with fluorescein-conjugated Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide
(PI), and analyzed with flow cytometry to differentiate whether the main
cause of cell death was apoptosis or necrosis. To resultsze, calcitriol
in combination with As2O3 synergistically inhibited proliferation of the
human APL cell line HL-60. In addition, calcitriol combined with As2O3
more prominently activated the apoptosis pathway than single treatment
using either calcitriol or As2O3. The main cause of cell death was also
apoptosis. Our results suggest that these novel findings could be applied
to improve the therapeutic outcomes of patients with APL.

