Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Betulinic acid inhibits deubiquitinases to increase the
degradation of pro-survival proteins and enhance prostate cancer-specific
apoptosis


Inhibition of the ubiquitin proteasome (UPS) pathway is a valid
anti-cancer target but the alternative strategy to increase activity in
order to degrade pro-survival proteins is much less developed. Betulinic
acid (BA) is a naturally occurring small molecule with multiple
mechanisms for increasing apoptosis in cancer cells, making it an
attractive anti-prostate cancer agent. There is evidence that BA can
activate the UPS pathway to degrade multiple pro-survival proteins such
as androgen receptor (AR), but the mechanism is not clear. Our western
blot data in prostate cancer (PC) cells indicates that 10 M BA decreases
the levels of multiple pro-survival proteins including AR, cyclins, and
cyclin-dependent kinases. Inhibition of the UPS pathway with 1 M MG132
blocks the BA-mediated decrease of AR and AKT proteins and lowers cell
death, suggesting a dependence on the UPS pathway. In TRAMP transgenic
mice, BA treatment (10 mg/kg) inhibits tumor growth, increases apoptosis,
decreases angiogenesis and proliferation, and lowers AR and cyclin D1
protein levels (immunohistochemistry) without toxic side effects to
normal tissues. However, BA does not increase UPS activity
(Proteasome-Glo Chymotrypsin-like Cell-Based Assay; Promega) in LNCaP PC
cells suggesting an alternative mechanism for increasing protein
degradation. BA-mediated inhibition of deubiquitinase (DUB) activity, as
determined by DUB-Glo Protease Assay (Promega) and DUB labeling with
HA-ubiquitin vinyl sulfone, results in the accumulation of
poly-ubiquitinated (Ub) proteins that are recognized by the UPS pathway
and degraded. The cyclin D1 T286A mutant that cannot be degraded by the
UPS pathway is resistant to BA-mediated degradation. In non-cancer BJ
fibroblast, however, BA does not inhibit DUB activity nor increases total
poly-Ub proteins and this is associated with no effect on cell death. Our
data suggests that BA-mediated inhibition of DUBs and induction of
apoptotic cell death specifically in PC but not in non-cancer cells will
provide an effective non-toxic and clinically selective agent.

