Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALK mutant-driven cell lines develop crizotinib resistance by
secondary mutations and ALK-independent means


The clinical success of crizotinib against mutant ALK-expressing cancers
has generated great interest; however, the emergence of drug resistance
is limiting its durability in some patients. In NSCLC, crizotinib
resistance is linked to secondary mutations within EML4-ALK at amino
acids L1196M, C1156Y, L1152R. A mutation at amino acid F1174L reduced the
sensitivity to criozotinib in a patient with an inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor harboring a RANBP2-ALK translocation. The goal of
our studies was to evaluate mechanisms of crizotinib resistance in a
range of ALK-mutant expressing cell lines. Cells from ALCL (Karpas299),
NSCLC (NCI-H3122 and NCI-H2228) or neuroblastoma (SKNSH and KELLY)
developed resistance to crizotinib after being exposed to incremental
increases in the compound over several weeks. NPM-ALK expressing
Karpas299 cells independently acquired point mutations in ALK at amino
acids N1178H and I1171N. As the concentration of drug was increased,
cells that harbored the NPM-ALK N1178H mutation also expressed a mutation
at G1269A. Each mutation enhanced the temperature dependent
auto-phosphorylation activity of the kinase and diminished the inhibitory
effect of crizotinib on downstream ALK signaling. Mutations in Karpas299
cells were also accompanied by up regulation of a drug efflux
transporter, BCRP, whose heightened expression level was dependent on the
presence of the compound. In contrast no additional mutations were
discovered in ALK in crizotinib resistant NCI-H3122 and NCI-H2228
(EML4-ALK) or SKNSH and KELLY (ALK F1174L) cell lines. Instead both
NCI-H3122 and NCI-H2228 resistant cell lines displayed increased levels
of phospho-HER2 and HER3 and activation of AKT and ERK that may be due to
autocrine secretion of a growth factor. NSCLC resistant lines also
displayed an apparent change in phenotype with a
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. SKNSH and KELLY are inherently less
sensitive to crizotinib. We found that these cells may survive exposure
to high levels of the compound by altering RET expression. Our
observations represent potential mechanisms of resistance demonstrated in
a small number of cell lines. It will be important to align these results
with emerging data from drug-resistant patients to understand the
multiple mechanisms by which resistance might develop.

