Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number is inversely associated with overall
survival in non-small cell lung cancer


Mitochondria play an important role in generating energy for vital
cellular functions. Alterations in mitochondria function due to mutations
or copy number changes can potentially lead to tumorigenesis. Although
previous studies have investigated the effect of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) depletion on cancer risk, no studies have assessed constitutive
mtDNA copy number as a prognostic marker for overall survival in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Towards this, we measured mtDNA
content by a quantitative real-time PCR assay in peripheral blood
lymphocytes collected prior to treatment from 1,134 NSCLC cases seen at
MD Anderson Cancer Center. A significant inverse dose-response trend was
identified for mtDNA content and NSCLC risk (p-value: 0.0076). Those with
the highest tertile of mtDNA content had the greatest reduction in risk
of dying (HR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.82-0.97, p-value: 0.014) and a highly
significantly enhanced median survival time of 20.20 months compared to
only 14.11 months for those with the lowest mtDNA content (p-value:
6.7x10-5). It is known that exposure to tobacco smoke results in the
production of reactive oxygen species that can damage mtDNA. Therefore,
we also performed stratified analysis based on smoking status. The effect
in ever smokers (N=951) mirrored that of the overall population with a
significant reduction in risk of death with increasing mtDNA content
(p-trend: 0.008) and a dramatic nearly seven month survival advantage for
those patients with the highest mtDNA content compared to the lowest
(20.73 months compared to 13.98 months, respectively, p-value: 4.1x10-5).
Interestingly, mtDNA content was not significant with overall survival in
never smokers (N=183), suggesting that the effect in the overall
population was driven by the ever smokers and that mtDNA alterations do
not play a major role in the course of disease for this unique subgroup
of NSCLC patients. Together, these results demonstrate that mtDNA content
is a potential prognostic biomarker in NSCLC that can be measured
non-invasively prior to treatment to provide needed information regarding
course of disease to identify those at high risk for a poor outcome.

