Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of circulating tumor cells in a
mouse model of colorectal cancer


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are indicative of disease burden in
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) and high counts are believed to
adversely affect outcome. However there has been a lack of suitable mouse
models to study CTCs in mCRC. Here we report the development of an
orthotopic model of mCRC in athymic nude mice from which we have
successfully isolated and enumerated CTCs using the FDA-approved Veridex
Cellsearch technology (Table 1). So far we have injected 5 mice with a
million cells each of the human CRC cell line DLD-1 within the layers of
the cecal wall for tumor xenografts to grow. 200 microL of blood has been
collected every 2 weeks, till the endpoint of 16 weeks or a humane
endpoint, from the medial saphenous vein of the mouse for CTC detection.
In our protocol, human leucocyte filters are used as a RBC source. The
blood is centrifuged at 800 G for 10 minutes in a CellSave tube, the
serum removed and replaced by an equal volume of PBS. Mouse blood is
transferred to this tube after collection. Efforts are on to show CTCs
from mice injected with tumor cells labeled with a suitable cellular dye
like Cellvue. At the endpoint, after humanely euthanizing a mouse, the
cecum and organs are analyzed for possible secondary spread (liver,
lungs, mesenteric lymph nodes) following resection and preservation. H/E
staining is performed for evidence of primary or metastatic tumor tissue.
Positive tissue samples are further analysed using immunostaining for
stem cell markers and prognostic markers CD133, CD26, ALDH1, Mcl-1, EFGR,
Ki67. We are analyzing isolated CTCs for expression of these markers and
note the extent of concordance. The mouse model should help to understand
the role of CTCs in evaluating metastasis as well as to validate the use
of CTCs as tools for liquid biopsy of tumors. Table 1. CTC counts in the
mice at different time points from injection of cells. Mouse 4 is the
negative control mouse of the cohort which received injection of normal
saline instead of cancer cell suspension. * denotes clotted sample.


