Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenethyl isothiocyanate suppresses inhibitor of apoptosis family
protein expression in prostate cancer cells in culture and in vivo


Bioactive food components continue to gain traction for possible
chemoprevention of prostate cancer, which is a leading cause of
cancer-related death among American men. Phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC)
is one such compound that is under active investigation for
chemoprevention of prostate cancer as well as other types of
malignancies, including colon, lung, and breast cancers. PEITC occurs
naturally as a thioglucoside conjugate (gluconasturtiin) in a variety of
edible cruciferous vegetables (e.g., watercress), and is generated upon
cutting or chewing of cruciferous vegetables due to myrosinase-catalyzed
breakdown of the gluconasturtiin. Initial evidence supporting prostate
cancer protective effect of cruciferous vegetables emerged from
population-based case control studies. In vivo chemopreventive efficacy
of PEITC against prostate cancer has now been demonstrated in a
transgenic mouse model (Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate mice;
hereafter abbreviated as TRAMP mice). Post-initiation cancer
chemopreventive response to PEITC is associated with apoptosis induction
but the mechanism of cell death is not fully understood. The present
study was undertaken to determine the role of inhibitor of apoptosis
(IAP) family proteins in regulation of PEITC-induced apoptosis. The IAP
family proteins play critical roles in apoptosis regulation by inhibiting
caspases. Elevated expression of IAP proteins, including X-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) and Survivin has been reported in human
prostate cancers. Exposure of PC-3 and LNCaP human prostate cancer cells
to PEITC resulted in downregulation of XIAP and Survivin proteins and
suppression of Survivin mRNA expression. PEITC administration to
Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate mice caused modest but
significant downregulation of XIAP and Survivin proteins in the
dorsolateral prostate. Proapoptotic response to PEITC was significantly
attenuated by ectopic expression of XIAP and Survivin proteins. In
addition, Survivin overexpression conferred modest but significant
protection against PEITC-mediated inhibition of PC-3 cell migration. In
conclusion, these results indicate that cellular responses to PEITC,
including apoptosis induction and inhibition of cell migration, in
prostate cancer cells are mediated by downregulation of XIAP and/or
Survivin, which may serve as valid biomarkers to assess PEITC response in
future clinical investigations. This investigation was supported by the
USPHS grant RO1 CA101753-08.

