Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-111, a bispecific HER2 and HER3 antibody, inhibits
trastuzumab-resistant tumor cell growth


Amplification of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) occurs
in approximately 25% of breast cancers and is associated with increased
disease recurrence and poor prognosis. Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody
targeting HER2, has demonstrated clinical benefit in HER2 over-expressing
tumors. However, acquired resistance and disease progression is widely
observed in patients treated with trastuzumab. In this experiment our
objectives were to dissect the dynamic, molecular mechanisms involved in
acquired resistance to trastuzumab and to determine whether MM-111, a
novel bispecific antibody fusion protein that specifically targets the
HER2/HER3 heterodimer and blocks heregulin binding to HER3, has activity
in trastuzumab-resistant tumor cells. BT474 cells were cultured in the
presence of trastuzumab and cells were periodically tested for response
to trastuzumab and MM-111. Samples were also collected for protein and
RNA analyses. Resistance to trastuzumab gradually increased in BT474
cells after four months of exposure to trastuzumab, as measured by a cell
proliferation assay. Quantitative flow cytometry analysis showed EGFR,
HER2, and HER3 levels on the cell surface of resistant cells were similar
to the parental cells. Phospho-protein kinase antibody arrays revealed
that signaling pathways associated with the ERK cascade were activated
during the development of drug resistance. Western blotting further
confirmed that phosphorylation of EGFR, ERK, CREB, c-Jun, and AFT-1 was
increased in the resistant cells. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
also showed transcript levels of HER ligands, including HRG1, HRG1,
betacellulin, amphiregulin, epigen, TGF, and HB-EGF, dramatically
increased in tumor cells that acquired resistance to trastuzumab.
Compared to the BT474 parental cells, MM-111 showed a greater inhibition
in trastuzumab-resistant cells in a spheroid growth assay. Furthermore,
trastuzumab-resistant cells became more sensitive to gefitinib and
erlotinib, both EGFR inhibitors. The combination of gefitinib or
erlotinib with MM-111 showed greater inhibition than either drug alone.
In conclusion, our data suggest that one mechanism by which HER2
overexpressing breast cancer cells develop resistance to trastuzumab is
to up-regulate ligand-dependent EGFR and HER3 signaling pathways. The use
of MM-111 and EGFR inhibitors may provide an effective therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of trastuzumab-resistant cancer.

