Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for a role of a P2X7- EHBP1-Akt axis in prostate
carcinogenesis and in statin chemo-prevention


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer (over 30% of
all cancer in men) and the second leading cause of cancer death in men.
Statins, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, are potent cholesterol lowering
drugs. Recent epidemiology suggests that statins prevent aggressive PCa
development. In previous cell experiments we have shown that statins can
down-regulate nuclear Akt responses to insulin (J Biol Chem 2010; 285,
27900). We showed that atorvastatin decreases nuclear phosphorylated Akt
(pAkt) levels in pancreatic and lung cancer cell lines within minutes.
These effects were mediated by the P2X7 receptor, and its natural ligand,
extracellular ATP, induced the same effects as statins. Our published
work also implicates PTEN, PHLPP1 and 2 and other phosphatases, which
form protein complexes. Akt has oncogene activity in PCa and many other
cancer types, and we have now tested the possibility that the P2X7-Akt
pathway is of importance for the anticipated anticancer effects of
statins in the prostate. We performed SNP analysis of two cohorts of PCa
patients (Cgems and Gasp). We found significant associations for SNPs in
Akt1, Caveolin1, P2X7, NEDD4-1 and EHBP1 genes. NEDD4-1 negatively
regulates PTEN. EHBP1 is a previously shown risk factor for aggressive
PCa, and has been implicated in plasma membrane trafficking. A signaling
pathway analysis (Hum Hered 2011; 71, 11) also indicated significant
associations to PCa (p = 0.043). EHBP1 showed the strongest influence. In
additional cell studies we employed PCa cells and found that knock down
of EHBP1 or p110 (previously shown to have oncogenic activity in PCa;
Nature 2008; 454, 776) prevented depletion of nuclear Akt. In further
long term cell experiments (several weeks) we found that high
concentrations of statins resulted in a decreased expression of p110. We
also overexpressed a mutated NEDD4-1 and this treatment inhibited the
effect of statin on nuclear pAkt in PCa cells (DU145). Taken together
this study provides evidence for a role of a putative P2X7-EHBP1-Akt axis
in PCa development. As this pathway is negatively regulated by statins it
may have a role in the indicated chemo-preventive effect of statins.

