Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-terminal fragment of prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4)
generated by caspase-3 cleavage induces apoptosis in cancer cells


Prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4) is a ubiquitously expressed
pro-apoptotic tumor suppressor protein. Previously, we have shown that
Par-4 undergoes caspase-3 mediated cleavage in normal and cancer cells.
In the present study, we demonstrated that caspase-3 generated cleaved
fragment of Par-4 displays apoptotic activity. Hela cells were
transiently transfected with empty or Myc tagged C-terminal fragment of
Par-4. The results from immunofluorescence studies revealed that the
cleaved fragment of Par-4 is predominantly localized in the nuclear
compartment of the cells. Further, cells expressing C-terminal Par-4
fragment underwent significant apoptosis as compared to empty vector
transfected cells as measured by flow cytometry using annexin V/PI
staining. Next, we tested whether C-terminal fragment of Par-4 follows
similar mechanism of apoptosis induction as the full length Par-4 by the
inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC)/NF-B pathway. Western blot analysis
revealed that the overexpression of C-terminal Par-4 fragment reduced the
protein levels of Bcl-2 and FLIP as compared to empty vector transfected
cells. Overexpression of the C-terminal Par-4 fragment also reduced the
levels of phosphorylated IB, however, there was no change in the levels
of total IB. Interestingly, C-terminal fragment of Par-4 prevented the
nuclear mobilization of NF-B (p65) compared to empty vector transfected
cells. On the other hand, NF-B (p50) protein levels were found to be
decreased in cells expressing the C-terminal Par-4 fragment suggesting
that C-terminal fragment of Par-4 possesses pro-apoptotic activity and
regulates apoptotic induction by inhibiting the nuclear localization and
activity of NF-B in a manner similar to wild type full length Par-4. To
conclude, our data suggest that caspase-3 mediated cleavage of Par-4
results in nuclear localization of C-terminal Par-4 fragment which
possesses pro-apoptotic activity.

