Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A natural plant product to inhibit breast cancer metastasis


In the United States, breast cancer death is the second leading cause of
cancer deaths in women, primarily due to the occurrence of metastatic
disease. We have identified a potential novel therapeutic agent derived
from an edible root of the plant Colocasia esculenta, commonly known as
taro, which has significant antimetastatic activity in a preclinical
model of metastatic breast cancer and that should have minimal toxicity.
We have shown for the first time that a water-soluble extract of taro
(TE) potently inhibits lung colonizing ability (95-99%) as well as
spontaneous metastasis from mammary gland-implanted tumors (85%), in a
murine model of highly metastatic ER, PR and Her-2/neu negative breast
cancer. TE modestly inhibits the proliferation of some, but not all,
breast and prostate cancer cell lines and also causes morphologic changes
including cell rounding. TE inhibits prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels and
because PGE2 is a potent immune modulator, we examined the role of
immunity in the therapeutic response to TE. We first examined the effect
of TE on Natural Killer (NK) cell activities. TE modestly increases
NK-mediated tumor cell lysis in vitro. We determined the effect of NK
depletion on TE efficacy in vivo. The ability of TE to inhibit metastasis
was modestly compromised in NK-depleted mice indicating that NK cells
play a minor role in TE-mediated antimetastatic activity. To examine the
role of T and B lymphocytes, TE efficacy was examined in Balb/c SCID
mice. Antimetastatic activity of TE was completely lost in SCID mice
lacking mature T and B cells. Thus, T and /or B cell functions contribute
to the mechanism by which TE inhibits metastasis. In published studies we
have identified the active component of TE as one of three closely
related taro proteins, tarin, taro lectin and 12-kDa storage protein.
Current studies are determining how these candidate proteins affect
immune functions to inhibit breast cancer metastasis.

