Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of GSK3 in modulating TRAIL-induced apoptosis in prostate
cancer cells


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy and second
leading cause of cancer death in males. Surgical excision and hormonal
therapy are the first-line of treatments, which are not effective at
later-stages. Designing efficient non-invasive therapeutic strategies
that can target prostate cancer cells towards apoptosis is critically
important, thus making the apoptotic signaling pathways as attractive
targets for cancer therapy. The ability of cancer cells to evade
apoptosis is a hallmark of oncogenesis, and a major setback in current
therapy. TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) has gained much
importance recently due to its ability to preferentially induce cell
death in malignant and transformed cells but not in normal cells.
However, since many tumor cells develop resistance to TRAIL, recent
approaches are focused on developing combinatorial therapeutic regimens
that can enhance TRAIL sensitivity. There are multiple reasons behind
TRAIL resistance, and recent studies (including ours) indicate that,
Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3) might be a key player in mediating
this. GSK3, a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase regulates diverse
physiological processes, depending on its substrates, and its kinase
activity seems to be critical for various cancer cells. In our earlier
studies, combinatorial treatment with Troglitazone (TZD), a synthetic
ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor gamma and TRAIL
induced significant apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant cancer cells. More
in-depth analysis of the signaling pathways promoting TRAIL resistance
indicated that pretreatment of resistant prostate cancer cells with a
pharmacological inhibitor of GSK3 (AR-A014418) ameliorates TRAIL
resistance and synergizes with TZD to induce potent apoptosis. In
addition, small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of GSK3
expression promoted TRAIL-TZD-induced apoptosis, whereas ectopic
expression of GSK3 antagonized this. Further studies indicated a
TRAIL-TZD-induced decrease in total GSK3 expression and increase in
GSK3Ser9 phosphorylation (inactivation) in apoptotic cells. Pre-treatment
with caspase inhibitors protected the cells from apoptosis, but was
unable to reverse the effects of TRAIL-TZD on GSK3, suggesting these to
be caspase independent. Pretreatment with protein synthesis inhibitor
Cycloheximide abolished the inhibitory effects of TRAIL-TZD on total
GSK3, suggesting this to be a transcriptional event. In fact, luciferase
assays indicated a significant reduction of GSK3 promoter activity
following this combination treatment. The results from the present study
show that, targeting GSK3 might be an effective mechanism of increasing
TRAIL sensitivity, and understanding the detailed mechanism by which
TRAIL-TZD combination antagonizes GSK3 pathway might provide novel
insight to improve our understanding of TRAIL resistance.

