Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The FGF18/FGFR4 amplicon: Novel therapeutic biomarkers for ovarian
cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related
death among women and has the highest case-fatality rate among
gynecologic cancers. High throughput genomic technologies have been
instrumental in identifying new biomarkers and potential novel
therapeutic targets for ovarian cancer. However, comprehensive functional
validation studies on both the biological and clinical levels are needed
to better understand the mechanistic basis for these biomarkers and
realize their clinical significance and application. Fibroblast growth
factor 18 (FGF18) has been recently identified as an aberrantly expressed
gene within an expression signature predicting poor rate of survival in
patients with advanced stage serous ovarian cancers. In addition, genomic
amplification of both FGF18 and FGFR4 has been shown to predict for poor
overall survival among women with advanced stage high grade serous
ovarian cancers. siRNA mediated knock-down of FGFR4 abolishes FGF18
induced phosphorylation of FRS2 and ERK1/2 in ovarian cancer cells,
indicating the FGF18 signaling is at least partially conferred by FGFR4
in ovarian cancer cells. However, the exact role of FGF18/FGFR4 in the
clinicopathologic properties of ovarian cancer has not been determined.
Preliminary studies by ectopic FGF18 overexpression or recombinant FGF18
treatment demonstrate that FGF18 promotes the in vitro migration and
invasion of both ovarian cancer cells and endothelial cells. In SCID mice
xenograft models, FGF18 expression in ovarian cancer cells results in
increased tumor formation. Microarray analysis identified up-regulation
of a large number of proinflammatory cytokines by FGF18 which may mediate
the increases in angiogenesis and infiltration of macrophages seen in
FGF18 expressing xenografts. Pathway analysis further demonstrated
participation of NF-B signaling in FGF18 mediated cytokine production.
Conversely, knock-down of FGF18 in ovarian cancer cells reduces the in
vitro migration; inhibits the production of cytokines and impairs the in
vivo tumorigenicity in SCID mice xenograft model. Taken together,
FGF18/FGFR4 axis may play an important role in ovarian cancer
pathogenesis and may serve as a novel therapeutic target.

