Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatases as biomarkers of
hepatotoxicity in sprague-dawley rats exposed to silver nanoparticles


Nanoparticles are small scale substances (Nanoparticles are small scale
substances (<100 nm) used in biomedical applications, electronics, and
energy production. Increased exposure to nanoparticles being produced in
large scale industry facilities elicits concerns for the toxicity of
certain classes of nanoparticles. In particular, the oral toxicity of
silver nanoparticles is of concern to ensure public and consumer health.
Due to the intensive commercial application of silver nanoparticles
(Ag-NPs), health risk assessment of this nanoparticle is of great
importance. The previous in vitro studies demonstrated that Ag-NPs caused
toxicity in various cell-lines. However, toxicity of Ag NPs in vivo is
largely lacking. This study evaluated the effect of Ag-NPs on the
activities of specific liver enzymes such as aminotransferases (GOT/GPT),
and alkaline phosphatases (ALP) which may be useful as biomarkers of
hepatotoxicity. Four groups of five male rats each weighing approximately
80 + 2 g were orally administered once a day for five days with doses of
5, 25, 50 and 100 mg/kg BW of silver nanoparticles. A control group was
also made of 5 rats. At the end of the experiment, serum samples were
collected following standard protocols. The data obtained from the
hepatotoxicity study clearly show that highest two dose 50 and 100 mg/kg
of silver nanoparticles has statistically significantly increased the
activity of serum aminotransferases (GOT and GPT) and alkaline
phosphatases (ALP) when compared to control. The results demonstrate that
Ag-NPs have the potential to induce hepatotoxicity in Sprague-Dawley
rats. Our result does not imply that silver nanoparticles should be
banned from use but more in vivo studies with histopathological
characterization should be designed to confirm the results of this study.

