Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifunctional gold nanoparticles linked with aptamers and
fluorophores for breast cancer imaging and therapy


Breast cancer is a leading cause of mortality among women worldwide and
there is a need for improved methods for early detection, new therapies
that are more effective with fewer side effects, and personalized
treatment options. Nucleic acid aptamers are synthetic oligonucleotides
that bind to specific target proteins and have potential for both imaging
and therapy. They have a targeting mechanism similar to monoclonal
antibodies (i.e. shape-specific recognition), but may have substantial
advantages, including easier synthesis and storage, better tumor
penetration, and non-immunogenicity. Previously, we developed AS1411 (now
renamed ACT-GRO-777), a nucleolin-binding DNA aptamer that has
antiproliferative activity against cancer cells with little effect on
non-malignant cells. AS1411 was the first anticancer aptamer to be tested
in human clinical trials, which indicated promising activity with no
evidence of serious side effects. The molecular target for AS1411 is
nucleolin, a protein highly expressed on the surface of breast cancer
cells and breast tumor-associated endothelial cells, suggesting the
potential utility of AS1411 in this disease. Here we report on new
research in which we conjugated gold nanoparticles (GNPs) to AS1411 and
assessed their potential for breast cancer imaging and therapy. The
antiproliferative activity of AS1411 linked to 5 nm gold nanoparticles
(GNP) was determined by MTT and clonogenic assays. The GI50 value for
AS1411-GNPs against breast cancer cell lines was less than 100 nM
(aptamer concentration), which is at least 20-fold lower than
unconjugated AS1411. Moreover, AS1411-GNPs retained the
cancer-selectivity of AS1411 and had no effect on non-malignant breast
cells. Confocal microscopy revealed increased uptake in breast cancer
cells for GNP-AS1411 compared to GNP alone or GNP conjugated to a control
oligonucleotide. In addition, GNP-AS1411 potently induced breast cancer
cell vacuolization and death, similar to that seen at higher
concentrations of AS1411. Furthermore, in vivo studies in nude mice with
established MDA-MB-231 xenografts have shown that systemic administration
of AS1411-GNPs for 12 days could completely inhibit tumor growth in a
specific manner. We further examined if the GNP-AS1411 conjugated to
fluorophore Cy5 has a potential for in-vivo optical imaging to
specifically detect the tumor in established breast cancer xenograft
model. Preliminary data from biodistribution studies suggest that
GNP-AS1411 can very efficiently detect tumors using in vivo imaging
modalities. Altogether, our data suggest that this strategy could be used
to develop multifunctional tumor-targeting nanoparticles that can serve
as imaging agents to detect breast cancers or monitor clinical response,
as well as to specifically deliver therapeutic agents to the tumor.

