Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor activity of mTOR kinase inhibitor in combination
with anti-angiogenic agents in preclinical models of renal cell cancer


Background: Multiple agents that inhibit angiogenesis and tumor cell
growth via the VEGF and mTOR (TORC1) pathways have been approved for
locally advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in recent
years. Despite this progress, improving overall survival remains a
significant clinical challenge for the treatment of this cancer type. The
tumorigenesis of certain types of RCC is dominated by genes that play
critical role in hypoxia response, including stimulation of
neo-angiogenesis. Anti-angiogenic therapies target the tumor
microenvironment but provide little direct impact to the tumor cell,
allowing the potential for disease progression despite treatment.
Approval of allosteric partial TORC1 inhibitors in RCC stimulated
interest in pursuing TORC1/2 inhibitors, that block mTOR signaling more
potently and comprehensively, alone and in combination with
anti-angiogenic agents in preclinical models of RCC. Results: INK128 is
an orally bioavailable, potent and selective ATP site mTOR kinase
inhibitor (TORC1/2) that has entered clinical development. INK128
inhibited the phosphorylation of S6 and 4EBP1, downstream substrates of
TORC1, and AKT and NRDG1, downstream substrate of TORC2 in RCC cell
lines. TORC1/2 pathway inhibition correlated with potent and complete
blockade of cell proliferation. In vivo, daily treatment of INK128 as
single agent suppressed tumor growth in multiple mouse RCC xenograft
models. Pharmacodynamic analysis demonstrated that INK128 inhibits both
TORC1 and TORC2 pathways in vivo. INK128 did not alter the
tumor-associated microvasculature density despite significant decrease of
VEGF supply by lowering the capacity of protein translation of the tumor
cells. This prompted us to explore the potential of the combination of
INK128 with anti-angiogenic agents to maximize anti-tumor activity by
targeting both tumor microenvironment and tumor cells directly.
Co-treatment of INK128 with sorafenib resulted in much enhanced activity
in RCC tumor models but did not achieve sufficient tolerability. We next
employed an alternating dosing strategy of INK128 and sorafenib to
improve tolerability. An optimized dose/schedule sequence of both agents
caused sustained inhibition of tumor-associated angiogenesis, suppression
of mTOR pathway resulting into marked blockade of tumor growth with
significant induction of apoptosis and acceptable tolerability.
Conclusion: The sequential, yet potent blockade of both mTOR and VEGF
pathways obtained by combining INK128 with sorafenib acts synergistically
in inducing cell death and tumor regression in preclinical renal cancer
models. Adaptive combination of receptor tyrosine kinase-based
anti-angiogenic agents with mTOR kinase inhibitors currently in
development may offer a safe and effective therapeutic strategy for renal
cancer patients who fail to respond to standard of care therapy.

