Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-reporting dendritic nanoparticles (nanodendrons) for drug
delivery targeted to the tumor microenvironment and with reduced
neurotoxicity


Proteinases, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), contribute to
cancer progression and other pathologies. Selective MMP expression can be
used to distinguish benign from malignant tumors and identify aggressive
tumors associated with poor outcome. MMP9, a basement membrane-degrading
type-IV collagenase/gelatinase, is associated with tumor invasion and
metastasis. In this project, we describe a new class of dendritic
nanoparticles, nanodendrons (NDs), with MMP molecular recognition and
targeting capabilities. These NDs can be studied as individual dendrons
tuned for specific functions such as enhanced imaging or targeted drug
treatments. Additionally, the NDs can be coupled to facilitate
multifunctional purposes such as in NDs that can self-report drug
delivery to tumors. The prototypical system presented here describes NDs
that are activated by MMP9: 1) ND-PB, a near infrared imaging beacon; 2)
ND-PXL, a therapeutic that delivers paclitaxel (PXL) and 3) NDPB-NDPXL, a
bi-functional agent. In vivo studies in two orthotopic models of breast
cancer demonstrate efficacy of these NDs to image and treat breast
cancer. The proteinase-activated prodrug, NDPXL, delivers PXL to breast
cancer through release of the drug in the tumor microenvironment and
increases therapeutic efficacy while reducing systemic toxicity
(including peripheral neuropathy). The delivery of PXL using the
proteolytically activated ND-PXL is effective in inhibiting tumor growth
in two orthotopic models of breast cancer (PyVT-R221A and MDA-MB231).
Daily treatment of MDA-MB231 tumors with 12.5 mg/kg PXL as either ND-PXL
or Abraxane (Abx), showed similar reduction in tumor growth as compared
with vehicle-treated animals. Further investigation of the NDPXL in a
fully immunocompetent mouse model (PyVT-R221A) with treatments given on
alternate days at a dose of 12.5 mg/kg (ND-PXL or Abx) yielded similar
results: an average reduction in tumor growth of 58% and 53% in ND-PXL
and Abx cohorts, respectively. Peripheral nerve toxicity, a debilitating,
long term side effect of Abx therapy, was assessed in both tumor and
non-tumor mice through monitoring behavior indicative of peripheral nerve
damage before, during and after administration of each drug. Peripheral
neurotoxicity is markedly reduced in the ND-PXL-treated versus
Abraxane-treated mice as evident in a number of behavioral assessments.
The development of this novel class of NDs expands upon the current
capabilities of modern proteinase-based optical beacons and prodrugs and
is a step forward in treatment of both primary and metastatic cancer.
[Supported in part by Susan G. Komen for the Cure]

