Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD24 regulates tumor cell behaviour in a c-Src dependent fashion


CD24 is a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored membrane protein
that is frequently over-expressed in a variety of human carcinomas and is
correlated with poor prognosis. In cancer cell lines, changes of CD24
expression can alter several cellular properties like invasion,
proliferation and adhesion in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. However,
little is known about the mechanisms by which CD24 mediates these
effects. Here we have analyzed functional consequences of CD24 knock-down
or over-expression in human cancer cell lines of different tumor entities
(ovarian, lung, glioma). We show that presence or absence of CD24 was
crucial to regulate the amount and activity of c-Src in lipid rafts.
CD24-mediated effects on tyrosine-phosphorylated c-Src had impact on
regulation of target genes affecting tumor cell invasion, proliferation
and apoptosis. Invasive potential of tumor cells was controlled by the
expression of the tissue factor pathway inhibitor-2 (TFPI-2), a potent
inhibitor of extracellular matrix degradation that can block tumor cell
invasion and metastasis. Silencing of CD24 or c-Src enhanced TFPI-2
expression and diminished invasion of SKOV3ip and A549 cells into
matrigelTM. Conversely, over-expression of CD24 reduced TFPI-2 expression
and enhanced invasion. Furthermore, an inverse correlation between
expression of CD24 and TFPI-2 was observed by immunohistochemical
analysis of primary breast cancers (N = 1174). TFPI-2 expression was
highest in CD24 negative samples and lowered with increasing CD24
expression. Patients with a CD24 low/TFPI-2 high phenotype showed
significantly better survival compared to CD24 high/TFPI-2 low patients
(p=0.001). Additionally, STAT3 expression and phosphorylation were
reduced by CD24 silencing. Diminished STAT3 activity was confirmed by
specific reporter assays. Src depletion abrogated levels of p-STAT3
(Y705). In line with that, expression of classical STAT3 target genes
like MCL-1, Cyclin D1 and Survivin was reduced after CD24 knock-down.
Suppressed cell proliferation and enhanced apoptosis were observed in
CD24 knock-down cells, suggesting a pivotal role of regulated target
genes. An antibody to CD24 was effective in reducing tumor growth of
lung- and pancreatic cancer xenografts in mice. Antibody treatment
affected the level of Src-activity in the tumor and altered expression of
STAT3 target genes. Our results provide evidence that CD24 regulates
TFPI-2 and STAT3 activity via the c-Src non receptor tyrosin kinase.
Targeting of CD24 by antibodies could represent a novel strategy for anti
tumor therapy.

