Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regorafenib (BAY 73-4506): Anti-metastatic activity in a mouse
model of colorectal cancer


Regorafenib is an oral multi-kinase inhibitor which has recently been
reported to extend overall survival in a Phase III trial in patients with
metastatic colorectal tumors who have failed standard therapies (CORRECT
trial) when given with best supportive care (BSC) vs placebo plus BSC. It
is also examined in a Phase III trial for the treatment of patients with
metastatic and/or unresectable gastrointestinal stromal tumors who have
failed imatinib and sunitinib therapy (GRID trial). Regorafenib
deactivates tumors across three dimensions (angiogenesis, oncogenesis,
and stromatogenesis) by inhibition of angiogenic receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTK) (e.g., VEGFR1-3, TIE2), oncogenic (e.g., KIT, RET) and
stromal RTKs (e.g., PDGFR, FGFR). In preclinical studies it was
previously shown that regorafenib inhibits a broad spectrum of different
tumor types including colorectal cancer (CRC) models. Regorafenib was
efficacious as a single agent and in combination with irinotecan in CRC
models and demonstrated anti-metastatic activities in preclinical models
of breast cancer. VEGFR-3, a member of the VEGF receptor family, is
thought to play an important role in tumor lymphangiogenesis and
metastasis. Regorafenib potently inhibited (4-8 nM) VEGF-C stimulated
VEGFR-3 receptor autophosphorylation in human dermal lymphatic
endothelial cells (LECs) and inhibited VEGF-C stimulated LEC cell
migration in a scratch assay at concentrations below 100 nM. In vivo
regorafenib's antimetastatic potential was examined in a syngeneic CRC
liver metastasis model. In this model murine MC38 CRC cells were injected
into the mouse spleen with following ablation of the organ. Significant
survival of mice treated orally at a daily dose of 10 mg/kg regorafenib
was observed compared to vehicle-treated control mice. Liver weights,
which were used as read-out for the degree of metastases formation, was
reduced in mice treated with regorafenib for thirteen days vs vehicle
treated animals. This was accompanied by significantly reduced number of
metastases observed outside the liver. Finally, the direct effects of
regorafenib in CRC cell lines was evaluated in vitro in a panel of 25
different human CRC cell lines where it inhibited the proliferation of 19
cell lines with IC50 values between 1 and 10M and no correlation with
mutated KRAS or BRAF was observed. Effects of regorafenib on
intracellular MAPK signalling in CRC cell lines was analyzed by western
blotting. Regorafenib, which also inhibits Raf kinases, reduced pERK by
50% at concentrations of about 500-2000 nM in HT29, HCT116 and Colo-205
CRC cell lines. In summary, these results suggest that regorafenib may
exert its anti-tumor activity in colorectal cancer by inhibition of
multiple kinases across its three dimensions within the tumor
environment. Additional analyses in particular of clinical tumor samples
are necessary to more clearly understand regorafenib's molecular
mechanisms of action.

