Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells suppress tumor cell apoptosis
and are selectively recruited to early-stage tumors


Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSC) are recruited to primary
tumors and have been reported to display pro-tumorigenic as well as
anti-tumorigenic activities. However, the mechanisms behind their effect
on tumor development are still unclear. We have isolated murine bone
marrow aspirates and plated them on fibronectin/collagen I, which allows
expansion of an adherent stromal cell population in 3-6 weeks. These
cells express the CD44 hyaluronic acid receptor in the absence of
hematopoietic (CD34), myeloid (CD45), and endothelial (CD31/VEGFR2)
markers and display both spontaneous and inducible adipogenesis/
osteoblastogenesis in culture. 3D matrigel cultures of murine 4T1 mammary
carcinoma cells revealed enhanced generation of tumor spheroids in the
presence of BMMSC or their conditioned media. Conditioned media from
BMMSC also increased 4T1 cell expansion in 2D monolayer cultures, with
loss of this phenomenon after heat inactivation suggesting the presence
of protein-based signaling. Cell cycle analysis of 4T1 cells treated with
BMMSC conditioned media revealed no statistically significant change in
mitotic potential in either growth (serum present) or growth-arrest
(serum depleted) phase, as determined by PI staining and BrdU uptake.
However, analysis of apoptosis in 4T1 cells treated with BMMSC
conditioned media showed increased percentages of live cells by PI uptake
and AnnexinV staining, as well as a reduction in caspase-3 and caspase-9
activation by colorimetric assay, as the cells entered growth arrest
phase. Furthermore, treatment with BMMSC conditioned media preserved
viability in 4T1 cells exposed to paclitaxel under no-serum conditions.
Complementary studies of BMMSC tumor-directed migration indicate that
BMMSC show preferential in vitro recruitment by murine tumor cell lines
which generate reactive stroma (4T1, LL/2 lung carcinoma) vs. no stroma
(B16 melanoma). In vivo recruitment of BMMSC by early-stage/slow-growing
subcutaneous 4T1 tumors was also visualized by bioluminescent imaging,
red fluorescence, and magnetic resonance imaging of BMMSC labeled with
iron-nanoparticles. These results were confirmed by immunohistochemical
evaluation of iron deposits by Prussian blue stain and by
immunofluorescent detection of PKH26-labeled BMMSC. Overall, our data
identify BMMSC as an important mediator of tumor cell survival/treatment
resistance and reveal an enhanced tropism of BMMSC toward early 4T1
tumors.

