Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors in NSCLC stage and outcome: Integrated genome-wide study


Genome wide data has transformed disease diagnostic and prognostic model
development through the identification of molecular profiles. Enhanced
molecular insight can be achieved by multiple -omic profile integration.
Accordingly, we used a novel multistep integrative unsupervised approach,
the network phenotyping strategy (NPS), for discovery of disease
diagnostic/prognostic panels in resected NSCLC frozen tumor samples
(n=81; 29 Stage IA/52 Stage IB). Whole genome gene expression and DNA
methylation data was generated using Illumina BeadChips. In NPS step 1,
the most common (>18% of the cohort) hypo- and hyper-methylated genes
(lowest/highest -score; n=31) were identified. In step 2, a subset of
these genes was found to reside in networked multiple loci, co-protected
against genetic variation by extreme (high n=10 or low n=6) incorporation
energy costs, based on an exome entromic analysis. In step 3, maximal
spanning tree reduction of a network of all 120 possible expression level
relationships for these 16 genes, weighted by the correlation
coefficients quantifying co-regulation, was used to identify the most
informative sub-network, an 8-partite graph K8. For each partition, cases
were dichotomized into groups where gene 1 was expressed at least 1.5x
higher or lower relative to gene 2. In step 4, K8 cycle-decomposition
revealed only 8 distinct gene expression patterns (C1-C8) representing
nominally different molecular NSCLC subtypes. Characterization of
individual tumor expression patterns was computed as the patient's
difference vector (C) from C1-C8. Stage IA tumor gene expression patterns
(overexpression of all 16 genes) most closely matched C1 (true positive
rates 0.8 - 0.93 and false positive rates 0.2 - 0.07, ROC 0.9 in 10-fold
cross-validation). For stage IB, these 16 gene expression levels were
lower and heterogeneous. In step 5, we generated OS prediction models.
The Cs were used in an alternating decision tree algorithm. Two rule sets
were found, one for the high gene expression Stage IA tumors and the
second for Stage IB. In a 10-fold cross-validation, the log-rank test for
equality of survivor functions resulted in optimal OS separation at 1650
days (pGenome wide data has transformed disease diagnostic and prognostic
model development through the identification of molecular profiles.
Enhanced molecular insight can be achieved by multiple -omic profile
integration. Accordingly, we used a novel multistep integrative
unsupervised approach, the network phenotyping strategy (NPS), for
discovery of disease diagnostic/prognostic panels in resected NSCLC
frozen tumor samples (n=81; 29 Stage IA/52 Stage IB). Whole genome gene
expression and DNA methylation data was generated using Illumina
BeadChips. In NPS step 1, the most common (>18% of the cohort) hypo- and
hyper-methylated genes (lowest/highest -score; n=31) were identified. In
step 2, a subset of these genes was found to reside in networked multiple
loci, co-protected against genetic variation by extreme (high n=10 or low
n=6) incorporation energy costs, based on an exome entromic analysis. In
step 3, maximal spanning tree reduction of a network of all 120 possible
expression level relationships for these 16 genes, weighted by the
correlation coefficients quantifying co-regulation, was used to identify
the most informative sub-network, an 8-partite graph K8. For each
partition, cases were dichotomized into groups where gene 1 was expressed
at least 1.5x higher or lower relative to gene 2. In step 4, K8
cycle-decomposition revealed only 8 distinct gene expression patterns
(C1-C8) representing nominally different molecular NSCLC subtypes.
Characterization of individual tumor expression patterns was computed as
the patient's difference vector (C) from C1-C8. Stage IA tumor gene
expression patterns (overexpression of all 16 genes) most closely matched
C1 (true positive rates 0.8 - 0.93 and false positive rates 0.2 - 0.07,
ROC 0.9 in 10-fold cross-validation). For stage IB, these 16 gene
expression levels were lower and heterogeneous. In step 5, we generated
OS prediction models. The Cs were used in an alternating decision tree
algorithm. Two rule sets were found, one for the high gene expression
Stage IA tumors and the second for Stage IB. In a 10-fold
cross-validation, the log-rank test for equality of survivor functions
resulted in optimal OS separation at 1650 days (p<0.0005). These results
demonstrate that: 1) graph theory provides tools for handling complex
data relationships without loss of analytic power; and 2) networks of
genome loci co-protected against variant incorporation form a filter
identifying the function in experimental -omic data. Here, the 16 gene
panel we identified includes members of 3 common lung tumorigenesis
pathways and/or were co-regulated by miRNAs independently found to be
associated with prognosis in our cohort. The integrative NPS facilitated
the epigenetic identification of a biomarker gene set, stage
classification by overall expression levels and disease outcome
prediction by the expression patterns captured by C1-C8. Supported in
part by NIH 5P50 CA090440, P30 CA047904, UPMC Institutional Funds.

