Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor coactivator MED1 in mammary progenitor/stem cell
determination and tamoxifen resistance of breast cancer


Mediator has recently emerged as the central player to directly transduce
signals from transcription factors to the transcription machinery. MED1
(also named TRAP220, DRIP205 and MED220) subunit of the Mediator complex
has been shown to directly interact and mediate the transcription of
nuclear receptors, in a ligand-dependent fashion, through two classical
LxxLL motifs. We have recently generated MED1 LxxLL motifs mutant knockin
mice and interestingly, found these mutations do not affect the overall
survival and the development of most tissues. However, we did observe
severe defects in pubertal mammary gland development of MED1-mutant mice.
Consistent with this phenotype, expression of a number of known
ER-regulated genes was downregulated in MED1-mutant mammary epithelial
cells and these genes could no longer respond to estrogen stimulation.
Interestingly, along with the restricted expression of MED1 in luminal
but not basal mammary epithelial cells, we observed a very significant
increase in the luminal stem/progenitor cell population in the mammary
glands of MED1 mutant mice. We have further crossed this MED1 mutant
knockin mice with a MMTV-PyVT mouse model that produce mainly luminal
type of mammary tumors. Our date indicate that, although MED1 mutations
did not affect the time and number of tumors formed, it significantly
impacted the tumor progression and cancer stem cell formation in this
model. To further study the role of MED1 in human breast cancer, we
examined MED1 protein expression by using human breast cancer tissue
microarrays. Consistent with previously reports that MED1 coamplifies
with HER2, we found MED1 protein expression level is correlated most
strongly with HER2 status. Further study supports HER2 as a major
upstream regulator responsible for MED1 phosphorylation at sites known to
be critical for MED1 activation. Interestingly, we found an increased
recruitment of phosphorylated MED1 but not corepressors SMRT or NcoR to
endogenous ER target genes promoter by tamoxifen in HER2-overexpressing
cells. Importantly, knockdown of MED1 significantly sensitized the
otherwise resistant HER2 overexpressing cells to the tamoxifen treatment.
These results support MED1 as a key convergence point between ER and HER2
signaling pathways in mediating endocrine resistance. In summary, our
studies revealed new roles of MED1 in mediating ER functions in both
mammary stem/progenitor cell determination and tamoxifen resistance of
breast cancer, and support potential use of MED1 as a tissue-specific
therapeutic target for the treatment of human breast cancer.

