Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysfunctional of TGF- signaling via loss of 2SP activates SOX9 and
C-MYC via Notch signaling in Barrett's esophageal adenocarcinoma


Background: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) is often considered to arise
from a clonal stem like population of cells, potentially responsible for
its poor prognosis. TGF- and Notch signaling pathways play important
roles in regulating self-renewal of stem cells and gastrointestinal
carcinogenesis. We have demonstrated loss of TGF- signaling components
and activation of Notch signaling in Barrett's esophageal adenocarcinoma;
however, their contributions to EA and the mechanisms of their action
remain unclear. Methods: Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence were used
to evaluate protein expression and localization. Notch targets Hes-1,
SOX9 and C-MYC transcription were assayed using their luciferase
reporters and Q-PCR. Functional studies were performed in 2SP wild type
and mutant MEFs cells and in EA cell lines genetically engineered to
express high or low levels of 2SP. Results: Increased levels of Notch
signaling Hes1 and Jagged1 occurred in EA tissues and cell lines,
compared to normal tissues. Loss of 2SP in MEFs cells increased Hes1
expression by 40 fold. In addition, SOX9, a target gene of Notch
signaling and a documented stem cell marker was highly up-regulated in EA
tumor cells and tissues. Expression of SOX9 was increased in the absence
of 2SP in MEFs cells by 9 fold. Down-regulation of 2SP in SKTG-4, FLO-1
and BE3 EA cells by lentivirus shRNA led to increased SOX9 expression and
enhanced nuclear localization of both active intracellular Notch1 domain
(ICN1) and SOX9. Reintroducing 2SP into EA cells with knock down 2SP
decreased SOX9 promoter activity by 10 fold. Concomitantly, an increased
proportion of stem cells in 2SP knock down cells were identified using
stem cell marker OCT3/4, indicating expansion of putative cancer stem
cells in the absence of 2SP. Most interestingly, we observed a direct
interaction between Smad3 and ICN1 via Smad3 MH1 domain by GST-pull down
assays and that loss of 2SP increases the binding of Smad3 with ICN1 and
induces Notch targets SOX9 and C-MYC transcription. Conclusions: Our
findings suggests that loss of TGF- signaling adaptor 2SP may switch
Smad3 function from tumor suppression to tumor promotion by binding
intracellular Notch1 domain (ICN1) and activating Notch signaling.
Thereby, a potential therapeutic value for targeted therapy in EA is in
the setting of loss of 2SP/TGF- with active Notch signaling.

