Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDEF regulation and role as a survival factor in ER positive
breast cancer cells


PDEF (Prostate Derived Ets Factor) is a member of the Ets family. These
transcription factors regulate a number of biological processes,
including cell proliferation, differentiation, invasion and are thought
to play an important role in oncogenesis. PDEF is expressed exclusively
in tissues with a high epithelial content, especially hormone-regulated
epithelium, such as prostate, mammary gland, endometrium and ovary.
Furthermore, several studies showed PDEF to be one of the most highly
over expressed mRNA in human and mouse mammary tumors. PDEF is
interestingly significantly co-expressed with ER in ER positive breast
carcinomas, together with known ER cofactors such as FOXA1, XBP1 and
GATA3. PDEF was previously characterized as an Androgen Receptor
cooperating factor in prostate, however its potential function as an ER
cofactor is not explored yet. We investigated the mechanism of this
ER/PDEF co expression and the role of PDEF in breast cancer cells. Using
siRNA downregulations, mRNA quantification, and Chromatin IP, we
discovered that the mechanism of ER/PDEF co expression implies a critical
role for GATA3 as a negative regulator of PDEF expression. Moreover PDEF
and GATA3 expressions are inversely correlated in ER positive Breast
Cancer and cell lines. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses showed that these
two factors could be useful prognosis markers for patients. We performed
growth curves, cell cycle (FACs) and apoptosis (Annexin V) analyses of
MCF7 cells transfected with a PDEF targeting siRNAs. The growth curves
revealed an impaired proliferation rate of PDEF downregulated cells.
Quantification of apoptosis in various conditions (basal, stress induced)
demonstrated that PDEF is an essential survival factor for breast cancer
cells. The loss of PDEF expression indeed triggers an increased
proportion of apoptotic cells, especially in stress conditions such as
hormone depletion or tamoxifen / fulvestrant treatments. The findings
presented in this poster are evidences that designate PDEF as a potential
new cofactor of ER and as an interesting therapeutic target, since its
down regulation makes breast cancer cells more prone to undergo apoptosis
in stress conditions.

