Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of microRNA221 in breast cancer stem cell expansion and
induction of EMT


Breast cancer can be grouped by expression profiling into categories that
differ in biological and clinical characteristics. Molecular
characterization of these subtypes on the basis of stem cell markers has
shown that basal and claudin-low tumor bear stem cell like
characteristics with a higher population of CD44+/CD24- and CD49f+/EpCAM-
cells, which also display characteristics of epithelial mesenchymal tumor
transition (EMT). There are several genetic and epigenetic signaling
pathways that regulate the stem cell like characteristics of these
subtypes. We examined the role of microRNA221 (mir-221) in sub
populations of normal breast cells isolated from reduction mammoplasties
as well as in cancer cell lines from different molecular subtypes of
breast cancer. We found that mir-221 drives cells towards more basal
subtype and induces EMT in both normal mammary cells and breast cancer
cell lines. On the basis of CD49f and ESA staining in the cells isolated
from normal mammary tissue, we found high mir-221 expression in the
CD49f+/EpCAM- population. Furthermore, we showed that ALDH+ cells from
mammospheres expressed significantly higher mir-221 compared to ALDH-
cells. In order to determine the effect of mir-221 on the stem cell
population, we overexpressed mir-221 in cells from primary mammospheres
and showed that overexpression of mir-221 increases the CD49f+/EpCAM-
population with increased expression of mesenchymal biomarkers, an effect
also seen in a non-transformed breast cell line MCF10A. Overexpression of
mir-221 in luminal breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and T47D cell lines
increased the proportion of CD44+/CD24- cells. Furthermore,
overexpression of mir-221 significantly stimulated the tumor growth of
MCF7 xenographs in NOD/SCID mice. These studies suggest that mir-221
regulates breast CSCs by promoting EMT. This may play an important role
in tumor behavior and treatment resistance.

