Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Cdc42 in cancer cell perineural invasion


Perineural invasion (PNI) is the ability of cancer cells to invade in,
around, and along nerves. PNI is widely recognized as an adverse
pathologic feature of many malignancies. Glial-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) is secreted by nerve and glial cells, and is important in
neural development. We previously showed that GDNF activation of the
RET/GFR-alpha tyrosine kinase in cancer cells induces chemotaxis towards
nerves and PNI. Cdc42 is a member of the Rho family of G proteins and a
key regulator of cell polarity. We demonstrate here that GDNF-mediated
activation of RET/GFR-alpha leads to activation of Cdc42 as a mediator of
cancer cell chemotaxis and PNI. Exposure of MiaPaCa2 cells to GDNF or
dorsal root ganglia (DRG) activates Cdc42. SiRNA inhibition of Cdc42
impairs MiaPaCa2 chemotaxis towards GDNF or DRG in Boyden chamber assays.
SiRNA inhibition of RET decreases Cdc42 activity under GDNF stimulation
and MiaPaCa2 chemotaxis. To study dynamic interactions between nerves and
cancer cells in vitro, we used a DRG and cancer cell co-culture model of
PNI in matrigel. Analysis of individual cell trajectories reveals that
cell velocity remains unchanged, while directional migration is disrupted
with shRNA inhibition of Cdc42. The disruption of directional response
impairs the ability of shRNA Cdc42 MiaPaCa2 cells to migrate along
neurites, as visualized by time lapse microscopy and measured by area of
PNI. MRI imaging of live mice with sciatic nerves injected with shRNA
Cdc42 MiaPaCa2 cells reveals significantly diminished length and volume
of PNI as compared with injected shRNA control cancer cells when matched
for equivalent overall tumor volume. Murine sciatic nerves injected with
shRNA Cdc42 MiaPaCa2 cells exhibited preserved hindlimb and hind paw
neurologic function, and diminished perineural invasion by
histopathologic examination as compared with shRNA control MiaPaCa2. To
identify potential activators of Cdc42 in this model, we performed a
comprehensive siRNA screen of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs),
identifying specific GEFs which are necessary for MiaPaCa2 migration
towards DRG in Boyden chambers. We identified and validated six GEFs
(FLJ10521, DOCK9, ARHGEF7, RASGRF1, ARHGEF5, PLEKHG1) that impair
chemotaxis without affecting proliferation. These findings provide novel
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying cancer cell perineural
invasion. The RET-GEF-Cdc42 axis may be an attractive target for novel
therapies that may potentially interrupt perineural invasion.

