Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse models of cancer at The Jackson Laboratory Repository


As one of the largest collections of characterized mouse strains
available, The Jackson Laboratory Repository serves the scientific
community as a resource to archive and distribute mouse models. Among the
hundreds of new strains acquired or developed annually are a transgenic
model for prostate hyperplasia that progresses to adenoma/adenocarcinoma,
a transgenic model of large B cell lymphoma similar to tumors seen in
patients with SLE and Sjogren's syndrome; and a targeted mutation strain
of Lats1 (large tumor suppressor) that develops soft tissue sarcomas,
ovarian stromal cell tumors and increased sensitivity to carcinogens.
Conditional (floxed) strains that are useful in generating
tissue-specific mutants have been recently added to the Repository and
include mutations of Perp (TP53 apoptosis effector), Msh2 (mutS homolog
2, E. coli), and Irf8 (interferon regulatory factor 8). A transgenic
strain that expresses Cre recombinase specifically in the large intestine
has applications in colon cancer research. A combination mutant strain
(containing targeted mutations of Vhl, von Hippel-Lindau tumor
suppressor, and Pten, phosphatase and tensin homolog, and a transgene
with Cre recombinase expression driven by Cdh16, cadherin 16) is a model
for benign mixed adenosquamous genital tract tumors resembling clear cell
cystadenomas observed in patients with Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. The
TEL-AML1 (Etv6-RUNX1, t12;21) translocation/fusion protein associated
with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia is conditionally expressed by
a targeted mutation strain. For transplantation research, a number of
humanized mouse strains are available. These typically are immune
compromised lines and/or lines that provide continuous circulation of
human growth factors supporting a platform for a humanized
microenvironment. A number of new research tool strains have been added
to the Repository, including a fluorescent reporter for carcinoma
metastasis, the Cre reporter R26R-Confetti strain which allows individual
cell labeling with nuclear-localized membrane-targeted or cytoplasmic
fluorescent proteins, and transgenic strains expressing the KikGR
flurorescent protein which changes color from green to red upon
activation. The Repository maintains a searchable on-line resource
(www.jax.org) for each strain. Researchers can submit their strains by
using the on-line form available at The Jackson Laboratory website:
www.jax.org/donate-a-mouse. Supported by NIH, HHMI, The Ellison Medical
Foundation and several private charitable foundations.

