Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Successful treatment of advanced tumors with chemo-immunotherapy:
a combination of cyclophosphamide and inhibition of chemo-resistant
immune suppressor cells


It is well known that nave T cells transferred into lymphopenic hosts
develop into memory like T cells and acquire some effector functions. We
and others have been shown that transfer of nave T cells following
sublethal whole body irradiation augmented antitumor immunity and
inhibited tumor progression. Further analyses showed that antitumor
effector T cells were primed from transferred nave T cells. Although the
exact mechanism underlying this enhancement of antitumor immune responses
remains unclear, possible explanations have been proposed; depletion of
suppressor cells, improvement of tumor-antigen presentation, and
elimination of lymphocytes competing activation cytokines. Combination of
lymphodepletion by cytotoxic regimens, such as chemotherapy or
radiotherapy, and transfer of nave T cells seems to be a promising
strategy. Although whole body irradiation induces lymphopenia to
tumor-bearing animals and enhances antitumor immunity, it has not been
routinely used in clinical settings. To test whether cytotoxic agents
deplete lymphocytes and enhance antitumor immune responses, we infused
cyclophosphamide (CPA), fludarabine, cisplatin and etoposide at the
sublethal doses to mice. CPA treatment depleted 95% of lymphocytes in
mice, and enhanced antitumor effects of transferred nave T cells. Other
cytotoxic drugs failed to augment antitumor immunity in combination with
transfer of T cells. Previously, we have demonstrated that
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) and CD11b+Gr-1+ myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) inhibited priming of antitumor effector T cells.
Depletion of these suppressor cells increased the number of
tumor-specific T cells and augmented antitumor immune responses. To
examine the effect of sublethal doses of cyclophosphamide on immune
suppressor cells, we injected cyclophosphamide into mice and harvested
lymph-nodes and spleens for FACS analyses. Unexpectedly, we found a
significant increase in the frequency of Treg and MDSC after CPA
treatment. Magnetically isolated Treg and MDSC from cyclophosphamide
treated mice suppressed tumor-specific responses of effector T cells in
vitro. Depletion of Treg with anti-CD25 monoclonal antibodies following
CPA administration and transfer of nave T cells increased the number of
antitumor effector T cells. Further, the combination of Treg depletion,
CPA treatment and transfer of nave T cells succeeded to cure 20-day
established skin tumors in mice. We have also been testing whether
inhibition of MDSC after CPA treatment augments antitumor immunity. Our
results showed that CPA treatment efficiently depletes lymphocytes and
enhanced antitumor immune responses despite an increase of immune
suppressor cells. Further inhibition of suppressor cells after CPA
administration successfully treated advanced tumors.

