Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of the ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 in
PTEN-wild type cancer cells


Although the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is frequently hyperactivated in human
cancers due to the loss of function of the PTEN tumor suppressor, a
proportion of cancer cells still carries wild type PTEN and thus the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in these cells may remain unaltered. While it has
been widely accepted that these cancer cells are less susceptible to the
allosteric mTOR inhibitor rapamycin, it is unclear whether this is also
the case for an ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor. To address this question
we evaluated the effects of the mTOR kinase inhibitor AZD8055 in a panel
of wild type PTEN expressing cancer cells (6 cell lines of 4 tumor
types). The phosphorylated Akt (S473) level was undetectable in most of
these cells, suggesting the regular mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway and
low mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) activity. Cell proliferation was determined
by WST-1 (MTT) assay and clonogenic survival was tested by colony
formation assay. AZD8055 suppressed cell proliferation at the nanomolar
level in a dose dependent manner, with IC50 values in a range of 635 nM
for different cell types. In contrast, rapamycin exhibited limited
anti-proliferative effect, with less than 50% of inhibition observed even
with higher doses in most cell lines. Similarly, clonogenic capacity was
impaired by AZD8055 to a greater extent than was the case for rapamycin.
To detect the mTOR pathway alterations by drug treatment, two cell lines
with different expression levels of mTORC1 downstream pathways were
selected: murine mammary tumor 4T1 cells (low phosphorylated S6 and high
phosphorylated 4E-BP1) and human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells (normal
phosphorylated S6 and moderate phosphorylated 4E-BP1). While the
phospho-S6K (T389) and phospho-S6 (S235/236) pathway was potently
inhibited by both agents, AZD8055 displayed more striking inhibition of
the hierarchical 4E-BP1 phosphorylation (T37/46, T70 and S65) than
rapamycin in both cells. In addition, both rapamycin and AZD8055 slightly
increased Akt phosphorylation (T308 or S473), suggesting that the
activation of the feedback loop controlled by S6K was functional.
However, the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin did not sensitize cells to either
agent, implying such feedback-dependent activation is dispensable for
attenuating the drug response. Taken together, these findings indicate
that AZD8055 significantly inhibits growth and survival of cancer cells
that have wild type PTEN and normal PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, an
observation mainly associated with the comprehensive activation of
4E-BP1. These data provide in vitro evidence in support of broadening the
application of ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitors in cancer treatment.

