Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased prevalence of light chain monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance (MGUS) in first-degree relatives of individuals
with multiple myeloma or MGUS


Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a precursor
to multiple myeloma and related diseases. The majority of MGUS cases are
characterized by the expression of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH);
however, approximately one-fifth of MGUS cases do not present with IgH
expression. These individuals have light chain MGUS (LC-MGUS), a
precursor to light-chain MM (LC-MM). LC-MGUS is characterized by an
absence of IgH and an abnormal free light chain ratio (FLC-R), indicating
excessive expression of either or free light chains. LC-MGUS has a
prevalence of 0.8% in the general population over the age of 50, as
compared with a prevalence of 3.2% for heavy-chain MGUS (HC-MGUS)
(Dispenzieri, 2010). There is currently little understanding of the
association between family history of HC-MGUS or multiple myeloma (MM)
and LC-MGUS. We investigated whether the prevalence of LC-MGUS is
elevated in first-degree relatives of patients with either HC-MGUS or MM.
HC-MGUS probands expressed IgH and were recruited through a
population-based study of Olmsted County residents; MM probands consisted
of both HC-MM and LC-MM and were recruited through the Mayo Clinic
Hematology practice. Serum samples were collected from first-degree
relatives of probands older than 40 years of age and subjected to
electrophoresis, immunofixation, and free light chain assay. Prevalence
of LC-MGUS was calculated in all first-degree relatives combined, and in
relatives from both HC-MGUS and MM families separately. We compared the
prevalence in family members to that in a well-defined Olmsted County, MN
cohort (Dispenzieri, 2010) of patients aged 50 and over. A total 911
relatives of 232 MM and 97 MGUS patients were studied. LC-MGUS was
detected in 17/911 (1.9%) relatives, for an age- and sex-adjusted
prevalence of 1.7% (95% CI, 0.9% to 2.6%). Prevalence among relatives of
MM probands (age- and sex- adjusted rate 2.1%; 95% CI, 1.0% to 3.2%) was
higher than among relatives of MGUS probands (age- and sex- adjusted rate
0.6%; 95% CI, 0.0%-1.6%). There was an increased risk of LC-MGUS in
relatives compared to the reference population which was predominantly
due to the increased risk among relatives of MM probands (risk ratio=3.4,
95% CI 2.0, 5.51) as opposed to relatives of MGUS probands (risk
ratio=1.1, 95% CI, 0.3 to 4.5). Among MM probands, there was no
significant difference between the prevalence increase in relatives of
the 32 probands with LC-MM and that of the relatives of the 200 probands
with HC-MM (3.8 vs 3.3, ratio=1.2, 95% CI: 0.3-5.1, p=0.85). We conclude
that the prevalence of LC-MGUS is significantly higher among first degree
family members of all MM probands compared to the general population.

