Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recapitulation of human tumors in vitro: long-term culture of
heterogeneous tumor cell populations in 3-dimensions


Development of a biologically relevant in vitro tumor model is a complex
undertaking which requires culturing heterogeneous cell populations in a
realistic 3D arrangement such that interactions normally occurring
between different cell types (e.g., stromal cells and cancer cells) may
be promoted in vitro. This level of complexity requires establishing and
maintaining varied microenvironments in the culture that simulate the
various microenvironmental niches present within the original tumor.
Here, we demonstrate significant progress to this end by reporting
results of successful efforts to co-culture heterogeneous cell
populations derived from a metastatic pancreatic carcinoma tumor for 3
months using a novel, 3D perfusion culture system. The design of the
culture system incorporates low-sheer, tangential flow of nutrient medium
above and below an open synthetic 3D cell scaffold and exchange of
metabolic gasses via gas-permeable membranes which separate the core of
the culture chamber from gassing chambers located above and below the
nutrient flow compartments. This design allows for the establishment of
realistic gas and nutrient gradients across the culture scaffold that
mimic nutrient, waste and gas gradients present in vivo. Primary tumor
cultures were initiated in the 3D perfusion culture system and T-75
flasks (2D control cultures) after mechanical/enzymatic dissociation of a
mouse xenograft tumor originating from a human pancreatic carcinoma that
had metastasized to the liver. Each culture was seeded with an aliquot of
the total tumor dispersion and maintained in culture for up to 90 days.
The 3D perfusion cultures were maintained by performing partial medium
exchanges as needed based on glucose concentration levels measured in the
circulating medium while the 2D control cultures were maintained using
traditional subculturing techniques as necessary based on confluence of
the cell monolayers. A trend of increasing glucose consumption rate was
observed throughout the duration of the study in the 3D tumor cultures
suggesting continuous expansion of the cultured cell population without
the need for subculturing. The cell populations observed in the 3D
perfusion culture remained diverse throughout the 3 month culture period
and the cells were found to arrange in a manner resembling the cellular
organization of a corresponding tumor in vivo. 2D cultures established
using cells removed from the 3D perfusion culture after 3 months closely
resemble early passages of the 2D control cultures with respect to the
composition and arrangement of cells. In contrast, the diversity of cell
types present in the 2D control cultures decreased noticeably during the
course of the study. These data suggest that the novel 3D perfusion
culture system represents significant advancement over traditional
culture technologies towards recapitulating human tumors in vitro.

