Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the synergetic effect of a combination of
dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin and gemcitabine on liver metastasis of
pancreatic cancer


Activation of the nuclear transcription factor-kappaB (NF-B) has been
implicated in the progression and metastasis of pancreatic cancer. This
study was designed to evaluate the effects of a novel NF-B inhibitor,
dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ) in inhibition of liver metastasis
of pancreatic cancer in a clinical liver metastasis-mimicking mouse model
in which cancer cells were intra-portal injected under small laparotomy.
Moreover, the synergistic effect of combination therapy with DHMEQ and
gemcitabine (GEM) was investigated. Cytotoxicity of DHMEQ and GEM was
evaluated by cell growth inhibition assay. Both DHMEQ and GEM
monotherapies inhibited cell growth of the human pancreas cell line
AsPC-1. However, there was no synergistic effect in the combination
therapy. For the in vivo study, male BALB/c nude mice were xenografted
with intra-portal vein injection of AsPC-1. Mice were divided into four
groups: 1) control (without any treatment), 2) GEM-treated group, 3)
DHMEQ-treated group, and 4) combined treatment group (GEM+DHMEQ). Mice
were fed for four weeks, and the number of liver metastases, induction of
apoptosis in metastasis focuses and angiogenesis were investigated after
sacrifice. The number of liver metastasis was decreased significantly in
GEM group, DHMEQ group and GEM+DHMEQ group compared with control group.
Significant inductions of apoptosis were revealed in GEM group and DHMEQ
group compared with control group, in which apoptosis bodies in
metastasis sections were counted by using the TUNEL method. Moreover,
combination therapy of DHMEQ+GEM resulted in the strongest inductions of
apoptosis. Tumor vessels were identified by immunohistochemical staining
of tumor metastasis sections with an antibody against CD31. There was a
large reduction in the number of CD31-positive vessels in the tumor of
DHMEQ or/and GEM-treated mice as compared with control group. However,
there was an inconsistency in the results of cell growth inhibition assay
(in vitro) and mice metastasis model (in vivo). Thus we evaluated effect
of combination therapy in the invasive potential of tumor cells by using
chemoinvasion assay. The invasion ability was significantly inhibited in
the GEM group, DHMEQ group and GEM+DHMEQ group. Furthermore, real-time
PCR was performed to evaluate expression of mRNA of MMP-9. The expression
levels of MMP-9 were inhibited in respective groups in the same order. In
conclusion, the anti-tumor effects of combination therapy were
significant, as evidenced by angiogenesis inhibition, apoptosis induction
and invasiveness inhibition rather than cell growth inhibition.

