Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and molecular characterization of pancreatic
tumor-initiating cells


Pancreatic cancer has the worst prognosis of any major malignancy with
complex etiology involving both environmental and genetic factors.
Despite increasing knowledge in tumor biology, the treatment efficacy in
pancreatic cancers has not improved significantly over the past decade.
Thus, the identification of novel molecular pathways involved in
pancreatic oncogenesis and the development of new and potent therapeutic
options are highly desirable. The realization that tumors themselves
function as complex organs birthed the concept that cancer cells with
tumor-initiating properties of stem cells may be the key drivers of the
complex machinery behind oncogenesis. Tumor-initiating cells (TICs) have
been studied extensively in the hematopoietic system, however it is not
known which subpopulation has the highest tumor-initiating potential in
pancreatic cancer. We have identified that the CD133+/CD44+/ALDH1+ cell
population derived from 31 pancreatic adenocarcinomas and 6 pancreatic
cancer cell lines, has the highest tumorigenic potential, assessed by in
vivo dilution tumor propagation assays in highly immunodeficient
(NOD-SCID IL2R-/-) mice. In addition, this population has the highest
sphere-forming capacity and is highly resistant to gemcitabine treatment
in comparison to the other subpopulations. RNA-sequencing analysis in
CD133/CD44/ALDH1 and CD133+/CD44+/ALDH1+ subpopulations derived from
BxPC3 pancreatic cells revealed the transcriptomic alterations between
these cell types. Furthermore, gene network analysis revealed enrichment
of inflammatory and lipid metabolism networks in pancreatic TICs,
suggesting the potential role of inflammation and lipid metabolism in
pancreatic TIC function. In addition, a gene network-based FDA-approved
chemical library screen revealed that metformin perturbs the activated
networks in pancreatic TICs leading to the suppression of their growth.
Metformin suppressed pancreatic cancer growth, through suppression of
pancreatic TICs, in different pancreatic cancer mouse models. Overall, we
propose the identification of a novel pancreatic cancer subpopulation
which harbors tumor-initiating properties and is regulated by
inflammatory signals, contributing to our understanding of how
inflammation is linked to pancreatic oncogenesis in the molecular level.
Furthermore, by following a novel strategy, we have identified that
metformin suppresses pancreatic tumor growth and relapse through
inhibition of pancreatic TIC growth.

