Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of ERK and ROS in CLEFMA-induced apoptosis in lung
cancer cells


CLEFMA
(4-[3,5-bis(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid) is novel synthetic molecule with potent growth inhibitory activity
in human cancer cells. Our microarray gene expression analysis suggested
that it induces oxidative stress in lung adenocarcinoma H441 cells but
not in normal lung fibroblasts. That oxidative stress is a triggering
mechanism for both apoptotic and autophagic cell death has been supported
by several recent reports. Compared to normal cells, the cancer cells are
more vulnerable to oxidative stress-induced cell death because of their
high metabolic activity, increased likelihood of electron escape during
oxidative phosphorylation and overburdened antioxidant system. In this
study, we tested our hypothesis that CLEFMA-induced apoptotic cell death
was dependent on the accompanying increase in oxidative stress in
H441cells. Methods: Inhibition of cell growth by CLEFMA (10 M) was
estimated by MTT or hexosaminidase assay. ROS production, cell cycle and
apoptotic cell population were assessed by flow cytometry. The
phosphorylation levels of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2),
p38 and JNK1/2 were examined by Western blotting. N-acetylcysteine (NAC,
5 mM) and PD98059 (5 mM) were used as ROS scavenger and ERK1/2
inhibitors, respectively. The molecular markers of apoptosis were
analyzed by RT-PCR and immunobloting. Results: NCI-DTP program confirmed
anticancer activity of CLEFMA in 60 human cancer cell lines.
CLEFMA-treated H441 cells showed typical molecular signatures of
apoptosis- upregulated pro-apoptotic and downregulated anti-apoptotic
genes. There was time-dependent activation of caspases 3/7, PARP cleavage
and BAX; the expression of anti-apoptotic XIAP1 and BCL-xL was reduced,
whereas pro-apoptotic p53 was increased. Since BID was not activated, it
appears that CLEFMA works through intrinsic apoptosis pathway. CLEFMA
also induced sustained activation of ERK, p38 and JNK. The pharmacologic
inhibition of ERK, but not that of p38 and JNK, resulted in decreased
anti-proliferative activity of CLEFMA. ERK inhibition with PD98059
abrogated CLEFMA-induced apoptosis. The sustained ERK activation was
found to be associated with the inhibition of dual specificity
phosphatase, DUSP6, expression. Treatment with ROS scavenger NAC
abrogated CLEFMA-induced cell death, ERK activation and pro-apoptotic
biomarkers, and reinstated DUSP6 expression. Conclusion: From the results
of this study, we conclude that CLEFMA-induces apoptosis by enhancing
oxidative stress in the cancer cells, and that the accompanying prolonged
ERK activation is required for CLEFMA-induced H441 cell death.

