Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic gonadotropin levels and development of testicular
germ cell tumors


INTRODUCTION: Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are the most common
cancer among young men (20-45 years of age). The pathogenesis of TGCT
remains largely unknown; however, there is evidence that TGCT is related
to other male reproductive disorders namely infertility and genitourinary
malformations (cryptorchidism and hypospadias). It is generally assumed
that the development of TGCT is under endocrine control and it has been
hypothesized that gonadotropin dysregulation may be one potential cause
of TGCT, as the testes are primary target organs for the gonadotropins,
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinzing hormone (LH). FSH
stimulates spermatogenesis via binding to receptors in Sertoli cells,
while LH stimulates the Leydig cells to produce testosterone. Data
support the role of primary LH deficiency in cryptorchidism, and also
support the role of gonadotropin deficiency in infertility. It is
currently not known whether FSH and LH levels are associated with TGCT
risk. Thus, we assessed associations of pre-diagnostic serum FSH and LH
concentrations and risk of TGCT among participants in the U.S.
Servicemen's Testicular Tumor Environmental and Endocrine Determinants
(STEED) Study. METHODS: TGCT cases diagnosed between 2002 and 2005
(n=517) were matched on age, race and serum draw date to at least one
control (n=790). Associations between pre-diagnostic serum FSH and LH
levels and TGCT were estimated using conditional logistic regression with
further adjustment for prior cryptorchidism, family history of testicular
cancer, height, body mass index and serum testosterone. Associations
stratified on histology (seminoma, nonseminoma) were also examined.
RESULTS: Overall, TGCT was associated with increased levels of FSH and
decreased levels of LH. Men had an increased risk of TGCT if they were in
the highest quartile of FSH [Q4 vs. Q1: OR 2.17, 95% CI 1.35-3.48] and in
the lowest quartile of LH [Q1 vs. Q4: OR 1.99, 95% CI 1.25-3.16]. These
associations were independent of one another and independent of serum
testosterone concentration. In analyses stratified by histologic subtype
the increased risk of TGCT with high FSH [Q4 vs. Q1: OR 2.86, 95% CI
1.33-6.18] and low LH [Q1 vs. Q4: OR 2.55, 95% CI 1.18, 5.49] was
consistent for seminomas. Among nonseminomas, the ORs were indicative of
elevated TGCT risk with high FSH [Q4 vs. Q1: OR 1.81, 95% CI 0.96-3.43]
and low LH [Q1 vs. Q4: OR 1.80, 95% CI 0.97-3.36], albeit the results did
not attain statisitical significance. DISCUSSION: Our findings of
associations of TGCT with FSH and LH suggest that gonadotropin disruption
may be a critical event in development of TGCT. LH deficiency has
previously been associated with risk factors for TGCT, cryptorchidism and
infertility, while high levels of FSH may indicate a defect in Sertoli
cell production of inhibin B, a negative feedback regulator of FSH.

