Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of GRM1 in breast cancer


Despite epidemiologic studies suggesting a link between melanoma and
breast cancer, molecular mechanisms leading to these associations have
not been elucidated. Overexpression of metabotropic glutamate receptor 1
(GRM1) has been implicated in melanomagenesis. Its primary action occurs
through activation of the MAPK signaling pathway and other pathways
through intracellular calcium release. A recent study implicated GRM1 as
playing a role in angiogenesis in hormone receptor negative breast
cancer. However, the role of GRM1 in hormone receptor positive disease is
yet to be described. Given the associations between melanoma and breast
cancer, we evaluated three SNPs in GRM1 for genotype associations with
breast cancer clinicopathologic variables using DNA isolated from
peripheral blood of 1,096 breast cancer patients. Our study found that a
SNP in GRM1 resulting in a proline to serine substitution correlates with
age at diagnosis of breast cancer and reflects the receptor status of the
breast cancer, e.g. for progesterone receptor positive (PR+) disease,
proline carriers were diagnosed 8 years earlier than serine carriers.
Genotype-specific associations with risk of developing specific molecular
subtypes of breast cancer were observed, i.e. serine carriers were twice
as likely to develop estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and PR+ disease.
Furthermore, carrying the proline isoform also correlated with higher
risk of recurrence of breast cancer and shorter time to recurrence.
Immunohistochemical evaluation of breast microarrays showed that GRM1
expression is higher in breast cancers as compared to normal tissue and
is higher in ER+ as compared to ER- breast cancers. This parallels higher
expression observed in ER+ breast cancer cells lines in comparison to ER-
lines. In vitro studies with breast cancer cell lines were also performed
to evaluate the expression of GRM1 as a function of hormone exposure and
cell line receptor status. Treatment of ER+ cell lines with estradiol
resulted in increased GRM1, while tamoxifen decreased expression. Gene
expression data on ER+ breast cancers treated with tamoxifen were
reanalyzed for association between GRM1 expression and recurrence.
Analysis of breast cancers treated with tamoxifen from an independent
cohort demonstrated that high expressors of GRM1 have a worse distant
recurrence free survival. The results of these studies implicate GRM1 in
hormone receptor positive breast cancer biology. Additional knowledge
regarding the interaction between GRM1 and hormone signaling could have
significant implications in breast cancer risk, prevention, and treatment.

