Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radioresistence mechanism of prostate cancer stem cells


BACKGOUND. Radiotherapy induces tumor cell killing mainly by DNA damage
and is widely used as one of the main therapeutic modalities for prostate
cancer. However, a significant proportion of prostate cancer patients
experiences tumor recurrence after radiotherapy and eventually dies of
the disease. We previously observed that ionizing radiation (IR)
initially damaged prostate cancer stem cells (pCSCs) but levels of CSCs
were increased in the recurrent tumors of prostate cancer cell lines and
human prostate cancer tissues. METHODS. To define the radioresistance
mechanism of pCSCs, we examined expressions of DNA-repair proteins [Ku70,
Ku80 and Ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein kinase (ATR)],
cell cycle distribution, and levels of intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in prostaspheres, which is one of pCSC models, and compared
to those of total population of a prostate cancer cell line LNCaP.
Expressions of DNA-repair proteins were also examined in human prostate
cancer tissues harvested before and after radiotherapy. RESTULTS. In
non-irradiated cells, the expressions of Ku70 and Ku80 were higher in
prostaspheres compared to those of total population. ATR expression was
inconspicuous in both cells. After IR with 10 Gy, the expressions of Ku
70, Ku 80, and ATR proteins were increased in both cells with higher
levels in prostaspheres than those of total population. Although there
was a tendency that prostaspheres belonged to more in G1 phase and less
in S phase of cell cycle, it was not statistically significant. Apoptotic
cell population and expressions of total and cleaved forms of caspase 3
were not different between prostaspheres and total population.
Prostaspheres contained one group of cells that had low levels of ROS. In
recurrent human prostate cancer tissue after radiotherapy, expressions of
Ku70 and Ku80 were tended to increase. CONCLUSIONS. These results
demonstrate that pCSCs contain more DNA-repair proteins and less amount
of RCO compared to total population. They suggest that pCSCs have better
DNA-repair mechanism and less vulnerability to oxidative damage compared
to differentiated cells.

