Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase PPM1G regulates protein translation and cell
growth by dephosphorylating 4E-BP1


Protein translation initiation is a tightly controlled process responding
to nutrient availability and mitogen stimulation. Deregulation of
translation initiation leads to tumor development and progression.
Serving as one of the most important negative regulators of protein
translation, 4E binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) binds to translation
initiation factor 4E and inhibits cap-dependent translation in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Hyperphosphorylation of 4E-BP1, which
leads to inactivation of 4E-BP1, has been linked to human cancers with
increased malignancy. While it has been demonstrated previously that the
phosphosphorylation of 4E-BP1 is controlled by mTOR in the mTOR complex 1
(mTORC1), the mechanism underlying the dephosphorylation of 4E-BP1
remains elusive. Here, we report the identification of PPM1G as the
phosphatase of 4E-BP1 through an shRNA library screen of Ser/Thr protein
phosphatases. Co-immunoprecipitation experiment reveals that PPM1G binds
to 4E-BP1 in cells, and purified PPM1G dephosphorylates 4E-BP1 in vitro.
Knockdown of PPM1G in 293E and colon cancer HCT116 and SW480 cells
results in an increase in the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 at both Thr37/46
and Ser65 sites. This PPM1G-mediated dephosphorylation of 4E-BP1 is
specific as the phosphorylation of upstream regulators of 4E-BP1
including Akt and mTOR is not altered in PPM1G knockdown cells.
Furthermore, the time course of 4E-BP1 dephosphorylation induced by amino
acid starvation or mTOR inhibitor treatment is significantly slowed down
in PPM1G knockdown cells. Functionally, the amount of 4E-BP1 bound to the
cap-dependent translation initiation complex is decreased when expression
of PPM1G is depleted. As the result, the rate of cap-dependent
translation, cell size, and protein content are increased in PPM1G
knockdown cells. Taken together, our study has identified protein
phosphatase PPM1G as a novel regulator of protein translation by
negatively controlling the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1. Thus, PPM1G may
serve as a tumor suppressor by directly counteracting mTOR to inhibit
cell growth in cancer.

