Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive efficacy of sustained release curcumin
microparticles depends on tumorigenesis stage during initial treatment


Our lab has developed novel curcumin loaded PLGA microparticles for
effectively maintaining curcumin blood and tissue levels for at least 45
days. Efficacy of this system was tested in Balb-neuT mice, a transgenic
model of HER2 driven breast cancer. This model mimics human tumorigenesis
and follows a well predicted timeline: hyperplasia begins at 3 weeks of
age followed by carcinoma in situ at 8 weeks, palpable tumors appearing
at 17 weeks, and all mammary glands developing tumors by 33 weeks of age.
Our previous studies showed that starting curcumin microparticle
treatment at 4 weeks of age resulted in significant chemopreventive
efficacy. The goal of the current work was to examine the chemopreventive
efficacy of curcumin microparticle treatment as a function of
tumorigenesis stage at which the treatment was started. Mice were
injected subcutaneously with curcumin loaded or empty microparticles at
2, 4, 7 or 12 weeks of age and then once a month thereafter until all
mammary pads developed palpable tumors. Mice that started receiving
curcumin microparticle treatment at 2 weeks of age showed similar delays
in tumor multiplicity compared to mice initially treated at 4 weeks.
Times to first tumor (14 vs 15.5 weeks) and 100% tumor multiplicity (18.5
vs 21 weeks) were significantly delayed compared to blank microparticle
controls. Additionally, tumor growth was slower in curcumin treated
animals. At 8 weeks of age, mammary tissue showed significantly decreased
abnormal mammary tissue (3 vs 7%) and decreased CD-31 staining (16 vs 20
counts/field) compared to age-matched controls. Mammary vasculature was
also visually smaller and less developed. Based on these results,
decreased angiogenesis appears to be an important chemopreventive
mechanism for curcumin before the onset of hyperplasia. In mice receiving
curcumin microparticle treatment initially at 4 weeks of age showed a
difference in age to 100% tumor multiplicity (19 vs 21 weeks) compared to
mice that received control microparticles. At 12 weeks, histology studies
showed that curcumin treatment resulted in a significant (pOur lab has
developed novel curcumin loaded PLGA microparticles for effectively
maintaining curcumin blood and tissue levels for at least 45 days.
Efficacy of this system was tested in Balb-neuT mice, a transgenic model
of HER2 driven breast cancer. This model mimics human tumorigenesis and
follows a well predicted timeline: hyperplasia begins at 3 weeks of age
followed by carcinoma in situ at 8 weeks, palpable tumors appearing at 17
weeks, and all mammary glands developing tumors by 33 weeks of age. Our
previous studies showed that starting curcumin microparticle treatment at
4 weeks of age resulted in significant chemopreventive efficacy. The goal
of the current work was to examine the chemopreventive efficacy of
curcumin microparticle treatment as a function of tumorigenesis stage at
which the treatment was started. Mice were injected subcutaneously with
curcumin loaded or empty microparticles at 2, 4, 7 or 12 weeks of age and
then once a month thereafter until all mammary pads developed palpable
tumors. Mice that started receiving curcumin microparticle treatment at 2
weeks of age showed similar delays in tumor multiplicity compared to mice
initially treated at 4 weeks. Times to first tumor (14 vs 15.5 weeks) and
100% tumor multiplicity (18.5 vs 21 weeks) were significantly delayed
compared to blank microparticle controls. Additionally, tumor growth was
slower in curcumin treated animals. At 8 weeks of age, mammary tissue
showed significantly decreased abnormal mammary tissue (3 vs 7%) and
decreased CD-31 staining (16 vs 20 counts/field) compared to age-matched
controls. Mammary vasculature was also visually smaller and less
developed. Based on these results, decreased angiogenesis appears to be
an important chemopreventive mechanism for curcumin before the onset of
hyperplasia. In mice receiving curcumin microparticle treatment initially
at 4 weeks of age showed a difference in age to 100% tumor multiplicity
(19 vs 21 weeks) compared to mice that received control microparticles.
At 12 weeks, histology studies showed that curcumin treatment resulted in
a significant (p<0.05) decrease in Ki-67 expression and overall percent
area of abnormal mammary tissue (lobular hyperplasia, carcinoma in situ
and invasive carcinoma). Western blotting showed decreased HER2 protein
levels in curcumin-treated mice. Decreased cellular proliferation is a
key chemopreventive mechanism of action in this case. No difference in
tumor multiplicity was seen when the treatments were started at 7 or 12
weeks of age. In summary, sustained release curcumin microparticles show
promise as a chemopreventive against HER-2 positive breast cancer. These
results indicate that curcumin treatment should be started before the
appearance of carcinoma in situ. Future studies will further examine the
different mechanisms of action of curcumin in HER2 driven breast cancer.

