Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling novel functions of the oncogene Astrocyte elevated
gene-1 (AEG-1) contributing to hepatocarcinogenesis employing a
transgenic mouse model


In vitro tissue culture and nude mice xenograft models have firmly
established the role of Astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1) as a positive
regulator of tumorigenesis, including hepatocarcinogenesis. To better
appreciate the role of AEG-1 in hepatocarcinogenesis and to dissect the
underlying molecular mechanism, we have created a transgenic mouse with
hepatocyte-specific expression of AEG-1 (Alb/AEG1). Wild-type (WT) and
Alb/AEG-1 mice were challenged with a hepatocarcinogen,
N-nitrosodiethylamine (DEN), at 2 weeks of age. At 28 weeks of age,
Alb/AEG-1 mice, but not WT mice, developed multinodular HCC with
steatotic features and highly elevated serum liver enzymes. Affymetrix
microarray analyses identified modulation of expression of genes
associated with invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis and fatty acid
synthesis in DEN-treated Alb/AEG-1 mice versus their WT counterparts.
Hepatocytes isolated from Alb/AEG-1 mice demonstrated profound
chemoresistance and dramatically evaded reduction in cell viability upon
growth factor deprivation, which was associated with activation of
multiple pro-survival signaling pathways. Compared to the WT hepatocytes,
Alb/AEG-1 hepatocytes demonstrated marked resistance towards senescence,
which was associated with abrogation of activation of a DNA damage
response. Conditioned media (CM) from Alb/AEG-1 hepatocytes, but not form
WT hepatocytes, induced marked angiogenesis. Mass spectrometric analysis
of CM revealed noticeable increases in coagulation factors by AEG-1,
which are known to play a significant role in regulating tumor invasion,
angiogenesis and metastasis. siRNA-mediated knockdown of coagulation
factor XII resulted in profound inhibition of AEG-1-induced angiogenesis.
Our studies reveal novel aspects of AEG-1 functions, such as induction of
steatosis, inhibition of senescence, a known anti-cancer mechanism, and
activation of coagulation pathway to augment an aggressive
hepatocarcinogenic phenotype. The Alb/AEG-1 mouse will be a useful model
to decipher AEG-1 function in the context of hepatocarcinogenesis and to
evaluate the efficacy of novel therapeutic strategies directed towards
HCC.

