Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Psoriasin (S100A7) regulates epidermal growth factor signaling and
actin polymerization in estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells


S100A7 is a member of the S100 protein family which is characterized by
two calcium-binding sites of the helix-loop-helix (EF-hand type)
conformation. It is a part of the S100 gene cluster located on human
chromosome 1q21, which constitutes the epidermal differentiation complex.
This region is of particular interest as it encodes many genes that have
been linked to epidermal differentiation. S100A7 is also associated with
several epithelial malignancies including breast cancer. It is highly
expressed in ductal carcinoma in situ and a subset of invasive breast
cancers. S100A7 is mainly associated with the worst prognosis in invasive
estrogen receptor negative (ER) breast cancers, however, its exact role
in ER+ breast cancers is not known. Therefore, in the present study, we
investigated the tumorigenic potential of S100A7 overexpression in ER+
breast cancer cells. The tumorigenicity of stably overexpressing S100A7
and vector control ER+ cell lines was assessed using proliferation,
migration and wound healing assays. The results showed that S100A7
overexpression decreased epidermal growth factor (EGF)-mediated
proliferation in MCF7 and T47D cells. Further, in these cells,
EGF-induced migration and wound healing ability were inhibited in S100A7
overexpressing cells compared to the vector control. Characterization of
the EGF-mediated signaling pathways revealed reduced
phosphorylation/activation of various signaling molecules in S100A7
overexpressing cells. Morphological examination of the cells revealed
decreased lamellipodia formation in S100A7 overexpressing MCF7 cells
compared to vector control. This led us to hypothesize that S100A7 may be
regulating the actin polymerization and cytoskeletal dynamics in ER+
cells. Actin staining (Phalloidin) showed increased actin polymerization
on the lamellipodia and membrane in vector control MCF7 compared to
S100A7 overexpressing cells. Further elucidation of signalling revealed
that S100A7 overexpression decreased EGF-induced GTPase Rac activation.
Rac is an important regulator of actin dynamics. We also observed that
S100A7 overexpression reduced the activation of Lim-Kinase as well as
cofilin which are downstream targets of Rac activation. Taken together,
these results show that S100A7 overexpression may modulate cytoskeletal
dynamics by regulating Rac activation in ER+ cells. The reduced actin
polymerization may be responsible for the decreased lamellipodia
formation as well as the reduced migration and would healing ability of
ER+ cells. S100A7 has been shown to enhance EGF-induced signaling and
functional effects in ER cells. However, we observed that S100A7
decreases EGF-induced signaling and functional effects in ER+ cells. This
suggests that S100A7 may have a differential role in modulating
EGF-induced signaling in ER+ cells compared to ER cells.

