Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of YY1 in paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity in epithelial
ovarian cancer


The Yin Yang 1 (YY1) transcription factor is a member of Polycomb protein
family, with important roles in development, differentiation, replication
and cell proliferation. While YY1 expression is correlated with survival
in serous ovarian cancer, its role in chemotherapeutic agent-mediated
cytotoxicity is not known. Immunoblot analysis revealed that YY1 is
highly expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines, but not in immortalized
ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cell lines, suggesting a possible role
of YY1 in ovarian carcinogenesis. shRNA mediated stable downregulation of
YY1 resulted in inhibition of proliferation by CyQuant assay in SKOV3 and
SKOV3ip cells. While YY1 downregulation increased the sensitivity against
paclitaxel in both cell lines compared to nontargeted cells (NTC) as
determined by MTT and clonogenic assays, it had no effect on sensitivity
to cisplatin-mediated cytotoxicity. YY1 downregulated clones treated with
paclitaxel resulted in an increase in cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase and caspase-3/7 activity compared to NTC clones treated with
it in SKOV3 and SKOV3ip1 cells. To determine the mechanism of paclitaxel
sensitivity modulated by YY1, we performed cell cycle analysis and
determined the expression of microtubules at protein level. Cell cycle
analysis showed that downregulation of YY1 decreased the proportion of
G0/G1 phase with corresponding increase in cells accumulating both S and
G2/M phases in SKOV3 and SKOV3ip1 cells. Using nocodazole which
synchronizes cells into mitotic phase, we found that blocking mitotic
exit by YY1 knockdown slowed the cyclin B1 proteolysis, thus allowing
more time for death initiation by paclitaxel. Immunoblot analysis showed
that downregulation of YY1 increased the acetylation of alpha-tubulin and
attenuated betaIII-tubulin expression compared to NTC cells.
Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence assays revealed that YY1
interacts with HDAC6 which deacetylates alpha-tubulin and these proteins
co-localized in mitotic phase, suggesting that dysfunction of HDAC6 by
downregulation of YY1 could lead to microtubules stabilization, resulting
in the paclitaxel-induced apoptosis by blocking mitotic exit. Moreover,
nude mice bearing xenografts with stable downregulation of YY1 in
SKOV3ip1 were more sensitive to paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity compared
to xenografts of NTC cells. Additionally immunohistchemical staining
showed a decrease in betaIII-tubulin expression in tumor of YY1
downregulated clones compared to that of NTC clones. Collectively, these
results indicate that YY1 acts as a modulator of microtubules expression
and might be therapeutically targeted against epithelial ovarian cancer.

