Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target-molecular specific near infrared cancer photoimmunotherapy:
Detection, treatment, and monitoring of tumors with a theranostic
fluorescent probe


Targeted molecular therapies of cancer offer the possibility of effective
tumor control with a minimum of side effects. However, to date this
strategy has had modest results for most tumors. Antibody-based therapies
have been among the more successful molecular approaches. The concept of
using the antibody as a vector for additional therapy has been attempted
with toxins and radio-isotopes with mixed results. Herein we describe an
antibody conjugate with a photosensitive near infrared (NIR)
phthalocyanine dye, IR700, which can be used as an optical imaging agent
at low doses of light but becomes a photoimmunotherapeutic (PIT) at
higher doses of light. In this study, we tested the efficacy of PIT with
optimized regimen using an EGFR antbody-IR700 conjugate in a xenograft
tumor model. For in vitro PIT, EGFR (HER1) expressing A431 cells were
incubated with panitumumab-IR700 conjugates (Pan-IR700) which were then
irradiated with NIR light. For in vivo PIT, A431 xenograft tumor bearing
mice injected with 100 g of Pan-IR700 every week. Mice were then treated
with NIR light on day one (50 J cm2) and day 2 (100 J cm2) after
Pan-IR700 injection which was administered every week for up to 4 weeks.
NIR fluorescence images were obtained in each mouse and the effect of the
PIT was analyzed. Pan-IR700 demonstrated specific binding to target
receptors on the cell membrane. Target-specific cell death could be
induced only in Pan-IR700 binding cancer cells immediately after exposure
to NIR light. In vitro microscopy demonstrated that NIR exposure resulted
in cellular swelling, bleb formation, and rupture of vesicles indicating
necrotic cell death. No phototoxicity was observed in co-cultured HER1
negative Balb3T3 cells, even when MAb-IR700 was not removed from the
medium. HER1 target-specific accumulation of MAb-IR700 was observed in
mouse xenograft tumors by fluorescence imaging. Repeated administration
of Pan-IR700 followed by repeated irradiation with NIR light resulted in
effective tumor eradication and prolonged survival compared to control
mice with no significant side effects. IR700 fluorescence from the
conjugate allowed for image guidance of light delivery as well as
monitoring of PIT. In conclusion, Pan-IR700 PIT was effective, only when
the antibody conjugates were bound to the cell membrane, but showed no
phototoxicity when they were not bound or irradiated with NIR light.
Target selective PIT enables selective treatment of cancer with no
apparent side effects even with multiple administrations of Pan-IR700 and
NIR light irradiation. PIT using MAb-IR700 is a promising theranostics
for highly selective treatment of cancers.

