Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy-induced Akt survival signaling is regulated by CD44-
Ezrin/Radaxin Moesin (ERM) scaffolding, dependent on EGFR activity


Akt survival signaling has emerged as a predictor of poor prognosis in
tumors resistant to chemotherapy. Despite the firm correlation between
enhanced Akt survival signaling in resistant tumor tissue, there is a
poor understanding of the exact mechanisms which elicit this robust
pathway activation. In the present study we sought to uncover the full
pathway of Akt activation in response to chemotherapy in order to fully
elucidate mechanisms and proteins involved in chemotherapy resistance.
Using breast and ovarian cancer cells, immunoprecipitations revealed that
the CD44 glycoprotein initiates a unique scaffolding effect with the
Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin (ERM) proteins and Akt in response to the
anti-tubulin chemotherapies, docetaxel and vincrisine. Knockdown of CD44
using siRNA revealed that the activation of Akt(ser473) and ERM(tyr353)
by chemotherapy are abolished in a time and dose dependent manner. Flow
cytometry, caspase activation and cell viability assays confirmed that
loss of Akt signaling sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis and a similar sensitivity was observed in the absence of CD44
expression. Furthermore, immunoprecipitations revealed that inhibition of
EGFR using the small molecule inhibitor, Erlotinib, prevented
CD44/ERM/Akt scaffolding in response to chemotherapy. In summary, CD44
and ERM scaffolding is responsible for the activation of Akt survival
signaling induced by chemotherapy, in-vitro. Loss of CD44 sensitizes
cancer cells to apoptosis. This scaffolding effect is dependent on the
activity of EGFR, suggesting that a unique interaction exists between
this ErbB1 receptor tyrosine kinase and the CD44 glyco-protein. This is
the first evidence for cell surface events which precipitate survival
signaling in cancer cells as a consequence of chemotherapy. These
findings elucidate novel biomarker interactions for translation in the
clinical setting.

