Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the effects of aflibercept (VEGF Trap) and small
molecule kinase inhibitors on tumors and normal organs in mouse models


Introduction: The VEGF signaling pathway is important for tumor
angiogenesis, thus a number of approaches have been developed to
therapeutically inhibit the pathway. Clinical benefit has been shown by
both protein therapeutics that block VEGF itself, and by small molecules
that target the kinase activity of VEGF receptors. However, it is not
known whether these different classes of agents provide similar levels of
VEGF inhibition in tumors, nor whether they produce a similar degree of
perturbation to normal organs. In this study, we compared the effects of
aflibercept (VEGF Trap), a protein inhibitor of VEGF, to those of the
kinase inhibitors sorafenib and sunitinib on tumors and several normal
organs in mouse models. Methods: Transcriptional profiles were compared
from A431 human epidermoid carcinoma xenografts, as well as kidney,
liver, lung and heart, following three days of treatment of mice with
aflibercept (25 mg/kg, once), sunitinib (80 mg/kg, daily), or sorafenib
(160 mg/kg, daily). All three agents were used at pharmacologically
active doses that induce significant tumor growth inhibition. Kinase
inhibitors were used at maximum dose that did not cause general toxicity
such as body weight loss. RNA microarray was used to establish gene
signatures, and real-time PCR was used to validate gene-specific
expression levels. Results: Treatment of mice with sorafenib or sunitinib
induced large-scale transcriptional changes in normal organs, including a
significant overlap of the regulated genes and strong suppression of
hemoglobin genes Hba and Hbb. In contrast, aflibercept treatment induced
transcriptional changes in a much smaller number of genes in normal
organs and had no significant effect on hemoglobin transcript levels.
None of the agents changed expression of endothelial cell marker genes
such as Pecam1 and Robo4 in these normal organs, indicating that VEGF
inhibitors do not target stable vasculature. In tumor xenografts,
aflibercept regulated a significantly larger number of stromal genes
compared to either kinase inhibitor. Aflibercept, sorafenib or sunitinib
suppressed expression of Pecam1 in tumors (by 76%, 56% and 21%
respectively) and Robo4 (by 56%, 20% and 30% respectively), as well as
VEGF regulated genes Ang2 (by 59%, 44% and 41% respectively) and Dll4 (by
78%, 35% and 64% respectively), indicating reduced tumor vessel density
and inhibition of VEGF signaling. The three treatments affected a similar
number of genes expressed by the tumor cells, including upregulation of
hypoxia-induced genes. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that
aflibercept treatment of mice induces fewer changes in gene expression in
normal tissues than the kinase inhibitors sunitinib or sorafenib, while
at the same time produces similar or larger reduction of the tumor
vasculature and stroma genes in mouse xenograft models.

