Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMCgp100: A novel bi-specific biologic for the treatment of
malignant melanoma


In recent years significant advances in the treatment of metastatic
melanoma have emerged. Small molecule drugs provide potent short-term
responses for a significant proportion of the patient population; for a
minority of patients, immunotherapy has elicited long-term responses with
the promise of a cure. Despite these advances, long-term remission for
the majority of patients remains elusive and much effort is focussed on
combination therapies attempting to bring together the potency of small
molecule drugs with the durability of immunotherapy. IMCgp100 is a novel
bi-specific immunotherapy comprising a soluble, affinity- enhanced, T
cell receptor (TCR) specific for the melanoma-associated antigen gp100,
fused to an anti-CD3 specific antibody fragment (scfv). The engineered
TCR portion of the drug targets the gp100 peptide 280-288 antigen, which
is over- expressed and presented by HLA-A2 on the surface of melanoma
cells, thereby effectively coating these cells with CD3-specific antibody
fragments. The anti-CD3 scfv portion captures and redirects any T cells
in physical contact with the melanoma cell to kill it. In vitro, IMCgp100
potently redirects T cells from the blood of late stage cancer patients
to target melanoma cells exhibiting substantial HLA-down regulation, even
in the presence of high numbers of regulatory T cells. Target cell
killing is observed within hours, and is associated with the release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and dendritic cell cross-presentation of gp100
and other melanoma-specific antigens. Thus, IMCgp100 demonstrates the
potential to elicit potent short-term responses and trigger longer-term
anti melanoma durability in vivo (ref: paper to be published imminently
in Nature Medicine). IMCgp100 is currently under investigation as part of
a Phase 1 dose-finding study in patients with unresectable Stage
III/Stage IV malignant melanoma. Safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetic,
pharmacodynamic, and clinical activity are assessed after intravenous
infusion of IMCgp100, and the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) will be
established. We also have a Phase 0 trial open, in which IMCgp100 is
injected directly into tumours to assess pharmacodynamic activity in
human lesions. Both studies are actively enrolling and preliminary
clinical data will be presented.

