Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An oncogenic splice variant of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene is
associated with poor survival and is a potent driver of breast cancer
metastasis


Breast cancer is a leading causes of cancer death in women worldwide. It
is a heterogeneous and genetically complex disease has left a significant
proportion of patients with inadequate treatment options. Since
metastasis and drug resistance pose significant challengea in breast
cancer treatment, elucidating the mechanisms of these processes is
critical for understanding the key drivers of disease progression and for
the development of targeted therapies. Accumulating evidence from our
laboratory and other groups suggest that the tumor suppressor gene, KLF6,
and its oncogenic splice variant, KLF6-SV1, play a role in breast cancer
progression, dissemination, and chemoresistance. Here we demonstrate that
in multiple independent clinical cohorts of over 1200 breast cancer
patients with defined clinical outcome, high KLF6-SV1 mRNA levels in the
primary tumor associated with poor survival and disease recurrence.
Specifically, upregulated KLF6-SV1 expression in the primary tumors
correlated with poor survival independent of disease stage and grade.
Thus, we hypothesized that KLF6-SV1 is an early driver/molecular
determinant of invasive breast cancer. In order to investigate the
functional/biological relevance of KLF6-SV1 in breast cancer development
and progression, we performed a series of experiments using
retroviral-based overexpression in multiple non-tumorigenic, tumorigenic,
and metastatic breast cancer cell lines. We demonstrated that
overexpression of KLF6-SV1 increased mesenchymal marker gene expression,
cellular survival, invasion, as well as the migratory potential of
KLF6-SV1 transduced cells. Interestingly, KLF6-SV1 did not increase
growth rate of these mammary epithelial cell lines, similar to the
clinical data which showed an absence of a correlation between KLF6-SV1
expression and primary tumor size. In a 3D model KLF6-SV1 upregulation
disrupted mammary acinar morphogenesis promoting complex multiacinar
structures. To assay whether the KLF6-SV1-induced EMT phenotype conferred
increased metastatic potential in vivo, we injected tumorigenic cells
expressing high levels of KLF6-SV1 subcutaneously into immunodeficient
mice. Strikingly, KLF6-SV1 overexpression alone drove the entire
metastatic cascade resulting in dissemination to many organs including
the liver, kidney, heart, lung, and spleen. Furthermore, KLF6-SV1
overexpression in a metastatic breast cancer cell line increased
metastasis to the lungs and liver in an orthotopic model of the disease.
This is consistent with our clinical data in which high KLF6-SV1
expression was correlated with decreased overall survival and metastasis
free survival. Together these findings suggest a role for the KLF6-SV1
splice variant as a driver of breast cancer metastasis and validate its
potential utility as a novel biomarker and therapeutic target for breast
cancer.

