Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of bone-marrow derived cells in the intestinal tumor
microenvironment of apcmin/+ mouse on tumor response to inhibitors of
thymidylate synthase


The vast majority of chemotherapeutic agents have been developed to
specifically target actively dividing neoplastic cells. However, tumors
are not exclusively composed of a heterogeneous population of neoplastic
cells. They also include a heterogeneous collection of host derived
infiltrating non-neoplastic cells that together with the extracellular
matrix and secreted molecules compose the tumor stroma or
microenvironment. Multiple interactions between stromal and tumor cells
play a critical role in tumor growth and progression. Therefore, tumor
response to chemotherapy and recurrence post-therapy must also be
influenced by these interactions. For many decades, inhibitors of the
enzyme thymidylate synthase (TS), such as fluoropyrimidines, have been
used in the clinical management of various cancers; however, their
clinical efficacy continues to be limited by their toxicity to normal
cells and acquired resistance by tumor cells. Therapeutic efficacy is
often measured by its impact on tumor burden, however, the impact of TS
inhibitors on tumor stromal cells and their role on tumor response to
therapy is largely unknown. The goal of this project is to determine the
role of bone marrow derived tumor stromal cells (BMDCs) in mediating
tumor response to systemic therapy with TS inhibitors. We hypothesize
that, in addition to targeting tumor cells, TS inhibitors also directly
target stromal cells and that the sensitivity of stromal cells to the
therapy determines tumor response. Using the ApcMin/+ mouse as a model of
intestinal tumorigenesis, we identified and characterized BMDCs in the
intestinal tumor stroma. These included Macrophages, Fibroblasts, Pan T
cells, Helper T cells, Leukocytes, Mast cells, T-regulatory cells (T-reg)
and Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), among others. We generated
chimeric mice wherein the chemosensitivity of intestinal tumor cells to
TS inhibitors was distinct from that of the BMDCs by transplanting eGFP
positive bone marrow cells that were genetically modified to express a
drug resistant variant of TS. We examined the effect of 5-FU on MDSCs,
mast cells, and T-regs, that have previously been shown to promote
intestinal tumor development in ApcMin/+ mice. The results showed that
MDSCs were specifically sensitive to 5-FU due to its apoptotic effect on
these cells. Current studies are aimed at identifying the combination of
stromal cells that mediate tumor response to TS inhibitors in order to
identify cellular targets for combined therapy that would enhance
reduction of tumor burden or delay tumor recurrence.

