Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-gen deep sequencing improves FGFR3 mutation detection in the
urine of bladder cancer patients


FGFR3 mutations have been identified in 60-70% of low-stage, non-invasive
tumors. Our group and others have developed assays to detect FGFR3
mutations in the urine of bladder cancer patients. However, urine-based
assays have been limited by the technical ability to detect rare events
in a dilute medium where there is a high background of normal DNA. In
these assays, FGFR3 mutations are generally found in 30% of the urine
samples, which is FGFR3 mutations have been identified in 60-70% of
low-stage, non-invasive tumors. Our group and others have developed
assays to detect FGFR3 mutations in the urine of bladder cancer patients.
However, urine-based assays have been limited by the technical ability to
detect rare events in a dilute medium where there is a high background of
normal DNA. In these assays, FGFR3 mutations are generally found in 30%
of the urine samples, which is < 50% concordance with the expected
detection in tissue. We have now developed an ultra-deep amplicon
sequencing technique that increases FGFR3 mutation detection in urine to
67%, near the expected detection if every mutation found in tissue could
be detected in urine. Amplicons were designed against FGFR3 exons 7, 10,
and 15 using PCR primers containing the adapter sequences for
unidirectional sequencing. Taqman probes were used to determine if
sufficient DNA was present in each sample. Primary amplification was
performed from DNA isolated from 4 ml of urine. The resulting PCR
products were used as template for emulsion PCR and these were then
sequenced using the Roche 454 GS Junior. Samples were analyzed for total
DNA reads per sample and number of mutant sequencing reads to determine
percent mutation. Urine samples from 29 patients with stage Ta bladder
cancer were analyzed by both our previously described qPCR method and the
new ultra-deep sequencing approach. Of the 29 samples, 2 did not have
sufficient DNA for analysis by sequencing. Using ultra-deep amplicon
sequencing, 18 out of 27 (66.7%) were positive for FGFR3 mutations, while
only 3 out of 27 (11.1%) were positive for mutations by qPCR. The urine
samples from the 15 newly identified mutations using deep sequencing
contained FGFR3 mutations as low as 0.05%. Using matched tissue and urine
samples, we demonstrate that the sensitivity in urine approximates the
FGFR3 mutations observed in tissue. We have developed a highly sensitive
non-invasive urine based assay that can detect FGFR3 mutant DNA when
present at 90% concordance with tumor tissues. To our knowledge, this is
the first practical application of next generation sequencing technology
for diagnostic use.

