Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TLE4 is a key modulator of resistance to mTOR pathway specific
inhibition in glioblastoma


Rapamycin, a selective inhibitor of TOR (target of rapamycin), has been
used in clinical trials for the treatment of glioma (Cloughesy et al.,
2008). However, even though some patients respond temporarily to
rapamycin treatment, virtually all recur. The mechanisms underlying this
resistance to therapy are unknown. Here, we utilized patient-derived
glioblastoma (GBM) neurosphere cultures to examine these mechanisms. GBM
cell cultures exposed to chronic rapamycin yield a population of
rapamycin resistant cells with an increased malignant phenotype upon
removal from treatment, enhanced sphere formation in vitro and enhanced
tumorigenesis. We used an unbiased, proteomics-based approach to discover
phosphopeptides that were upregulated during rapamycin treatment in
vitro. Amongst the peptides that we uncovered was Tle4/Groucho, a global
co-repressor and known modulator of several key signaling pathways,
including the Wnt and Notch pathways. In an expression microarray, Tle4
was found to be significantly upregulated within chronic rapa treated GBM
cells. We show that TLE4 is a key modulator of resistance to mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway specific inhibition. While TLE4
knockdown has no clear effect on naive cells, this knockdown promotes
sensitivity under chronic rapamycin treatment as evidenced by reduced
neurosphere formation. TLE4 mediate rapamycin resistance through
activation of the quiescent population. Our results indicate that chronic
mTOR specific inhibition imparts TLE4 mediated resistance through both
ERK activation and inhibition of mTOR. The identification of this role
for TLE4 in rapamycin resistance provides a novel target for mTOR
pathway-associated chemotherapeutic agents. References: Cloughesy, T.F.,
Yoshimoto, K., Nghiemphu, P., Brown, K., Dang, J., Zhu, S., Hsueh, T.,
Chen, Y., Wang, W., Youngkin, D., et al. (2008). Antitumor activity of
rapamycin in a Phase I trial for patients with recurrent PTEN-deficient
glioblastoma. PLoS Med 5, e8.

