Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TTLL12: A promising therapeutic target for prostate cancer


Introduction: Microtubule-targeting drugs are used for the treatment of
cancer; however, they are relatively non-specific and toxic, and more
specific agents need to be developed. Microtubule functional diversity is
governed by posttranslational modifications, such as de-tyrosine of
-tubulin by tubulin carboxypeptidases (TCP) and re-tyrosination by TTL
(tubulin tyrosine ligase). Decreased levels of de-tyrosinated tubulin and
TTL are associated with increased tumour growth and poor prognosis. We
have studied a protein related to TTL, Tubulin Tyrosine Ligase-Like 12
(TLL12), which we have implicated in Prostate Cancer progression and
tubulin post-translational modification. Our findings open up the
possibility of more specific microtubule-directed therapy, by targeting
TTLL12. Links between cancer progression and TTLL12: We have shown that:
TTLL12 expression increases with prostate cancer progression and
metastasis. siRNA knockdown of endogenous TTLL12 inhibits growth of
Prostate Cancer cell lines. TTLL12 overexpression increases the number of
chromosomes in karyotypically normal HCT116 cells. The levels of TTLL12
and de-tyrosinated tubulin are higher in metastatic than normal cells.
TTLL12 is localised on de-tyrosinated tubulin filaments in cells. TTLL12
overexpression result in resistance to traditional tubulin-targeting
drugs. TTLL12 knockout mice are cancer prone. Conclusion & Perspectives
Our studies link TTLL12 to cancer progression in various ways: TTLL12
expression increases with Prostate Cancer progression, suggesting that
TTLL12 might be involved in the development of the disease. TTLL12
overexpression affects mitosis, which is a potential link to its effects
on DNA ploidy. Altered DNA ploidy is associated with cancer progression.
TTLL12 may affect cell division and mitosis through co-localisation with
structures that contain tubulin. TLL12 overexpression leads to increased
tubulin de-tyrosination. Decreased tubulin tyrosination levels favour
cell survival and growth, suggesting that TTLL12 may give a selective
advantage to cells during cancer development by this mechanism. TTLL12
renders cells less sensitive to tubulin-targeting drug. TTLL12 expression
could be investigated as a marker for tubulin-targeted drug sensitivity
and could be used to uncover mechanisms of drug response. TTL has been
linked to cancer previously, and now the additional link between TTLL12
and Prostate Cancer indicates that other TTLL-family members may also be
involved in cancer. Future studies of TTLL12 will be aimed at the
elucidation of its mechanisms of action, its further validation as a
therapeutic target and as a tumour marker, and its use to identify
therapeutic molecules in high throughput screens. Acknowledgements We
would like to thank for financial support the CNRS, INSERM, UdS, Procure,
Prima, Cancure, ProNest FP7 ITN, INCa, Ligue Rgionale contre le Cancer
(CCIR-GE nO 116BL.201O).

