Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel complex MUC1/CIN85 involved in invasion
and migration of breast cancer cells


MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein abnormally expressed in human
adenocarcinoma. The extracellular domain of MUC1 contains a variable
number of tandem repeats 20aa in length (VNTR region) which is fully
glycosylated in normal epithelia and underglycosylated in tumor cells. We
recently demonstrated that tumor form of MUC1 increases the accessibility
of the VNTR peptide backbone to other proteins thus affecting
protein-protein interactions and intracellular signaling. By using
MALDI-TOF, we identified CIN85 as one of the proteins that bind the
extracellular domain of MUC1. CIN85 is an adaptor protein involved in
multiple cellular processes including signal transduction,
vesicle-mediated transport, cytoskeleton remodelling, invasion and
migration of cancer cells. Structurally, CIN85 contains three SH3
domains, a proline-rich region and a C-terminal coiled-coil region. The
SH3 domain of CIN85 recognizes a specific sequence PXXAP that corresponds
to the PDTRP sequence in the 20 amino acid tandem repeat in the MUC1
VNTR. Co-immunoprecipitation assay and confocal immunofluorescence
confirmed that MUC1 and CIN85 co-localize in MUC1-transfected RMA (mouse
T cell lymphoma) and IG10 (mouse ovarian carcinoma) cells and in human
breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 that express endogenous
MUC1 and CIN85. Subcellular protein fractionation revealed that CIN85 and
MUC1 co-localize mainly at plasma membrane but also in the cytosol. To
better understand the function of CIN85/ MUC1 complex we analyzed their
expression by immunohistochemistry and confocal immunofluorescence in
human tissue microarray (TMA) composed of 31 breast cancer samples and 5
adjacent normal tissue. Hypoglycosylated MUC1 and CIN85 are
over-expressed and co-localize in early and advanced clinical stage of
breast cancer. Interestingly, CIN85 and MUC1 were localized to
invadopodia-like structures suggesting a potential role in cancer cell
invasion. siRNA-mediated silencing of CIN85 and/or MUC1 revealed that
MUC1 enhances CIN85-dependent cell invasion and migration of breast
cancer cells. In contrast, ectopic expression of MUC1 reduces the
motility induced by CIN85. In conclusion, our finding suggest that the
novel complex CIN85/MUC1 play a critical role in invadopodia formation
and have control on invasive and metastatic potential of breast cancer
cells.

