Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of bHLH transcription factor Id4 modulates androgen receptor
activity in prostate cancer progression


Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4), a crucial developmental gene also
expressed in the normal prostate, has been shown to act as a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer. Promoter hypermethylation of Id4 is
observed in several advanced stage cancers including prostate cancer. The
loss of Id4 expression correlates with androgen independent prostate
cancer progression. Our studies suggest that Id4 plays a crucial role in
mediating the transition from androgen dependent to androgen independent
prostate cancer by mediating the AR axis potential and reprogramming
several cellular mechanisms including migration, senescence and
proliferation. Stable transfection of a full length Id4 plasmid into the
androgen-independent prostate cancer cell line DU145 resulted in
re-expression of AR and downstream AR response gene PSA. Id4 transfected
cells also observed an androgen regulated rate of proliferation in
responsive to treatment with AR antagonist, Casodex. AR antagonism also
significantly reduced the rate of migration as observed by a scratch
wound assay. Under closer observation, AR antagonist treatment with
Casodex also inhibited translocation of AR to the nucleus of DU145 cells
as observed by immunofluorescence. Previous studies in our laboratory
have demonstrated that DU145+Id4 transfected cells undergo a significant
level of senescence ( 32%) compared to normal DU145 cells ( 4%).
Treatment of DU145+Id4 cells with the AR antagonist Casodex demonstrate
that the rate of senescence in DU145+Id4 transfected cells is closely
related to inhibition of AR activity. Our results suggest that Id4 may
play a crucial role in the loss of AR activity in advanced stage prostate
cancer progression. These results also suggest that the antagonism of AR
nuclear translocation post Id4 induction closely regulates the rate of
proliferation and the induction of a senescent phenotype. These results
provide a significant correlation between Id4 expression and AR activity
during prostate cancer progression. Loss of AR activity through Id4
promoter hypermethylation may play a crucial role in understanding
castration resistant prostate cancer. Therefore, induction of Id4 may
provide a novel therapeutic target for advanced stage prostate cancer
treatment.

