Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with auranofin induces oxidative and lethal endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress exerting single agent activity against mantle cell
lymphoma cells


Auranofin (AF) (Ridaura) is an oral, FDA-approved, lipophilic,
gold-containing compound used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
In the present studies, we determined for the first time the lethal
activity of AF (100 to 1000 nM) and its underlying mechanism(s) in
cultured and primary Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) cells. We demonstrate
that treatment with AF in JeKo-1 and Z138C cells induced 2 to 3.5 fold
increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels (assessed by flow
cytometry), decrease in thioredoxin reductase (TRR) activity (mean
reduction of 35-40%) without alteration in the expression of TRR. These
findings were associated with induction of nuclear factor erythroid
2-related factor 2 (NRF2) activity marked by substantial increase in heme
oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) expression. Microarray analysis revealed that AF
treatment significantly upregulated ER stress and oxidative stress
inducible genes including that of the ER-stress induced pro-apoptotic
transcription factor CHOP (CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous
protein), ATF3 (Activated Transcription Factor 3) and Glutamate-cysteine
ligase (GCL), modifier subunit (GCLM), the rate-limiting enzyme in the
glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis. Exposure to AF induced significantly more
apoptosis in primary MCL cells, as compared to CD19+ normal B cells,
CD34+ human cord blood and bone marrow progenitor cells (Auranofin (AF)
(Ridaura) is an oral, FDA-approved, lipophilic, gold-containing compound
used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. In the present studies,
we determined for the first time the lethal activity of AF (100 to 1000
nM) and its underlying mechanism(s) in cultured and primary Mantle Cell
Lymphoma (MCL) cells. We demonstrate that treatment with AF in JeKo-1 and
Z138C cells induced 2 to 3.5 fold increase in reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels (assessed by flow cytometry), decrease in thioredoxin
reductase (TRR) activity (mean reduction of 35-40%) without alteration in
the expression of TRR. These findings were associated with induction of
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) activity marked by
substantial increase in heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) expression. Microarray
analysis revealed that AF treatment significantly upregulated ER stress
and oxidative stress inducible genes including that of the ER-stress
induced pro-apoptotic transcription factor CHOP (CAAT/enhancer binding
protein homologous protein), ATF3 (Activated Transcription Factor 3) and
Glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), modifier subunit (GCLM), the
rate-limiting enzyme in the glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis. Exposure to
AF induced significantly more apoptosis in primary MCL cells, as compared
to CD19+ normal B cells, CD34+ human cord blood and bone marrow
progenitor cells (< 15% apoptosis) (p Auranofin (AF) (Ridaura) is an
oral, FDA-approved, lipophilic, gold-containing compound used for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. In the present studies, we determined
for the first time the lethal activity of AF (100 to 1000 nM) and its
underlying mechanism(s) in cultured and primary Mantle Cell Lymphoma
(MCL) cells. We demonstrate that treatment with AF in JeKo-1 and Z138C
cells induced 2 to 3.5 fold increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS)
levels (assessed by flow cytometry), decrease in thioredoxin reductase
(TRR) activity (mean reduction of 35-40%) without alteration in the
expression of TRR. These findings were associated with induction of
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) activity marked by
substantial increase in heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) expression. Microarray
analysis revealed that AF treatment significantly upregulated ER stress
and oxidative stress inducible genes including that of the ER-stress
induced pro-apoptotic transcription factor CHOP (CAAT/enhancer binding
protein homologous protein), ATF3 (Activated Transcription Factor 3) and
Glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), modifier subunit (GCLM), the
rate-limiting enzyme in the glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis. Exposure to
AF induced significantly more apoptosis in primary MCL cells, as compared
to CD19+ normal B cells, CD34+ human cord blood and bone marrow
progenitor cells (< 15% apoptosis) (p < 0.01). Based on the observations
that AF treatment induced oxidative and ER stress, we determined whether
exposure to AF increased the intracellular levels of misfolded and
polyubiquitylated proteins, which would disrupt the cytosolic complex
consisting of the heat shock protein (hsp) 90, heat shock factor (hsf) 1,
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and p97/VCP, resulting in hyperacetylation
and inhibition of the chaperone function of hsp90. Indeed, treatment with
AF disrupted the association between hsp90 and HDAC6, HSF1 and p97,
resulting in hyperacetylation of hsp90 and depletion of the levels of
hsp90 client proteins including HDAC6, AKT and Cyclin D1 in MCL cells.
Co-treatment of MCL cells with AF and the proteasome inhibitor
carfilzomib (CZ) resulted in synergistic apoptosis in cultured MCL cells
and significantly more apoptosis in primary MCL cells, than treatment
with each agent alone. Based on the induction of GCLM and anti-oxidant
response genes following AF treatment, we tested the anti-MCL activity of
the combination of AF and the GCL inhibitor Buthionine sulphoximine
(BSO), against MCL cells. Co-treatment with BSO and AF resulted in
significantly more apoptosis of MCL cells than treatment with each agent
alone. Collectively, our data creates a strong rationale for determining
the in vivo activity of AF in patients with MCL as a single agent and in
combination with other ER and oxidative stress-inducing agents,
especially GCL inhibitors.

