Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic inhibition of tumor growth and overcoming
chemo-resistance by simultaneously targeting key components in DNA
damage/repair, epigenetic, and putative cancer stem cell signaling
pathways using novel dual-functional DNA-alkylating/HDAC inhibitor and
tumor suppressor gene nanoparticles in lung cancer


In this study we explored a novel therapeutic strategy aimed to
simultaneously target multiple key components in DNA damage/repair,
epigenetic, and putative cancer stem cell (CSC) signaling pathways using
a novel dual-target DNA-alkylating nitrogen mustard/HDAC inhibitor
(DANM/HDACi) and tumor suppressor gene (TSG) nanoparticles to promote
antitumor synergy and overcome drug resistance in lung cancer. We
evaluated therapeutic effects of a new class DNAM/HDACi, NL10, as a
single agent or in combination with novel TSGs NPRL2, a regulator of the
DNA damage checkpoint pathway, and p53, a regulator of apoptosis and drug
resistance in the DNA damage/repair pathway in more than 50 human NSCLC
and SCLC cell lines. We detected a high anti-tumor potency by NL101
treatment across lung cancer cell lines, with IC50 doses ranging from
nanomolar to lower micromolar levels. A 20 to 100-fold higher level of
cytotoxicity was observed across these cell lines, particularly in SCLC
cell lines, treated by NL101 than in those treated by bendamustine, a
nitrogen mustard that is currently in Phase II/III clinical trials in
SCLC patients. We analyzed the NL101-induced DNA damage in NSCLC H1299
cells and found that NL101 induced a significantly higher degree of DNA
damage than that induced by either bendamustine or cisplatin at the same
IC20 dose level for each agent. We analyzed the DNA-damage-induced
apoptosis in NSCLC cells treated by NL101 alone or in combination with
DOTAP:Cholesterol (DC)-complexed NPRL2- or p53-expressing plasmid DNA
nanoparticles. We detected a significantly enhanced apoptosis in both
combination treatments with NL101+DC-NPRL2 and NL101+DC-p53. We also
found that combination treatment with NL101 and DC-NPRL2 nanoparticles
promoted a synergistic inhibitory effect on tumor cell-induced
clonogenecity in H1299 cells and on tumor cell growth in SCLC H69 and
GLC16 cells at effective dose levels of NL101 from IC10 to IC75.
Furthermore, we found that the sensitivity of lung cancer cells to NL101
treatment showed a significantly negative correlation with expression
levels of the HDAC family proteins HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC5 and the
putative lung cancer stem cell (CSC) marker ALDH1 protein. We found a
dose-dependent inhibition of multiple HDACs and CSC markers in both NSCLC
and SCLC cells. Our results suggest that a combination treatment using a
novel DANM/HDACi with pro-apoptotic TSGs targeting the DNA damage/repair,
epigenetic, and CSC signaling pathways will enhance chemotherapeutic
sensitivity, promote anti-cancer synergism, overcome drug resistance, and
block tumor progression and relapse by targeting putative CSCs.
(Supported by grants P50CA70907, RO1 CA-116322, and W81XWH0920139)

