Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abnormal VEGF-induced Ca2+ signaling in purified tumor endothelial
cells


Tumor growth requires angiogenesis, the development of new blood vessels
from existing blood vessels. Cancer cells release proangiogenic growth
factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to drive
angiogenesis. Current cancer therapy that incorporate targeting agents
that inhibit the production of new blood vessels have been only
marginally successful. We hypothesize that intracellular signaling
mechanisms downstream of proangiogenic factor receptors may differ in
tumor-derived endothelial cells compared to normal endothelial cells, and
may account for the limited effectiveness of antiangiogenic therapies in
vivo. VEGF activates VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) leading to elevated
cytosolic calcium (Ca2+). In endothelial cells (ECs), increased cytosolic
Ca2+ is required for VEGF-induced EC proliferation and migration, and is
dependent on activation of phospholipase C-gamma (PLCg). Treatment with a
PLCg blocker prevents the VEGFR2-induced increase in cytosolic Ca2+, but
does not alter baseline Ca2+ levels. Here, we compared VEGF-induced Ca2+
influx in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) versus breast
tumor ECs (TECs). TECs were purified from TG1-1 tumors grown in mammary
fat pads of TIE2-GFP mice. To measure changes in cytosolic Ca2+,
GFP-expressing TECs loaded with the Ca2+ indicator dye INDO-1 were imaged
using two-photon laser scanning microscopy (TPLSM). For imaging, the
cells were placed in a perfusion system that delivers reagents at a
constant flow rate with constant aspiration for continuous fluid
exchange. Changes in fluorescence intensity in response to VEGF were
measured in individual GFP+ cells over time. In HUVECs, the VEGF-induced
increase in intracellular Ca2+ is detected only after 18-hour serum
deprivation (serum starved). In contrast, both serum starved and
non-serum starved TECs respond to VEGF with increased intracellular Ca2+,
but the magnitude of the response in both TEC groups is significantly
lower than the serum-starved HUVECs. We hypothesized that changes in the
VEGF receptor expression attenuated the response in TECs. By flow
cytometry, VEGFR1 expression was elevated in TECs, while VEGFR2
expression was decreased compared to HUVEC. This change in receptor
expression may account for the attenuated VEGF response because VEGFR1
has lower signaling capacity compared to VEGFR2. Furthermore, in
nonstimulated, non-serum starved TECs the PLCg blocker U73122 altered
baseline Ca2+, suggesting that constitutively active PLCg contributes to
elevated baseline Ca2+ in TECs. These results demonstrate fundamental
differences in VEGF signaling between HUVECs and TECs that may account
for the limited success with antiangiogenic therapies that target VEGF or
VEGFR2. With the powerful depth and resolution advantages of multiphoton
microscopy, we will begin to determine if such abnormalities in
intracellular signaling of TECs observed in vitro are also observed in
vivo.

