Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stimulation of blood based biomarker release in primary tumor
models of the head and neck


Approximately 50,000 head and neck cancers (HNC) occur in the United
States per year and are responsible for 11,000 deaths. Identification of
early detection tumor biomarkers in bodily fluids has been the goal of
many studies in recent years, however none have gained wide clinical
acceptance. New approaches are needed to improve detection of biomarkers
with higher sensitivity and specificity for HNC. Epigenetic changes, such
as DNA methylation, are hallmarks of cancer and are potential biomarker
candidates. Promoter methylation of DCC, KIF1A and EDNRB were shown by
our group to be cancer specific in HNC. Proof of principal of techniques
enhancing detection sensitivity in an animal model may allow us, in the
future, to translate our results to human clinical trials. We aim to
study methods to enhance the sensitivity of blood based biomarker
detection in a head and neck tumorgraft model. The model proposed is
based on acquisition of human HNC tumor tissue and implantation into
immunodeficient mice. We exposed these mice to various stimulations that
consist of low dose treatments, which would not be expected to cause much
cell death or damage, nor considerable adverse effects. They comprise
Radiation (1Gy), Cisplatin (2.5g/g), Taxol (25g/g), Cetuximab (15g/g),
Erlotinib (10g/g). Every group consisted of 7 mice implanted with the
same tumor that was grown until the same size: one mouse for each
treatment and two control mice. Blood from a mouse without tumor was
first analyzed to confirm that our detection was restricted to human DNA
sequences. Thus far we have analyzed 5 tumors (5 groups). Following the
exposures, promoter methylation levels of DCC, KIF1A and EDNRB were
evaluated by quantitative methylation specific PCR (QMSP) in the tumor as
well as in the serum. Although, high levels of methylation were observed
in the tumors, we were not able to detect hypermethylation in the
bloodstream of non-stimulated animals. In one of our groups, the mouse
stimulated with Taxol showed sufficient biomarker release into the
bloodstream to provide signal amplification of all 3 genes analyzed,
under very stringent conditions of qPCR analysis. The corresponding tumor
showed high levels of promoter methylation of DCC, KIF1A and EDNRB,
however these were undetectable in the non-stimulated group, or those
mice stimulated with any condition other than Taxol. We did not observe
any changes in any of the other four groups analyzed; no epigenetic
alteration was detectable in any serum samples, although observed in the
tumor tissue. These preliminary data suggest that low dose of Taxol was
able to increase the concentration of biomarkers circulating in the
blood. Clinical applications of biomarker release include monitoring
patients that are at high risk for disease recurrence, and detecting the
presence of cancer cells before clinical symptoms appear. We will now
expand our study to explore other experimental variables that facilitate
biomarker release.

