Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylations of Serine-10 and Tyrosine-198 residues in the
cytoplasmic mislocalized p27 are critical to migration and invasion of
osteosarcoma cells


Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor in adolescents and
children. Metastasis is the major cause of death among osteosarcoma
patients even with the advent of chemotherapy. Therefore, it is an urgent
need to identify the key determinants of metastasis in osteosarcoma, so
that new and effective therapeutic approaches can be developed to combat
this deadly subtype of osteosarcoma. Recent studies have shown that the
tumor suppressor protein p27 promotes metastasis when it is mislocalized
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in some solid tumors. However, the
subcellular localization of the p27 protein in osteosarcoma and its role
in metastasis are not known. In this study, we found that 82% human
osteosarcoma cases harbored cytoplasmic staining of p27 using a tissue
microarray. An immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that the p27
protein was localized in the nuclei of three pairs of non-metastatic
osteosarcoma cell lines, but mislocalized in the cytoplasm of their
metastatic sublines. Overexpression of a stable fusion construct of
nuclear exporting sequence and p27 in a non-metastatic osteosarcoma cell
line significantly increased tumor cell migration and invasion in vitro,
suggesting that cytoplasmic p27 can promote metastatic potential in
osteosarcoma cells. Site-directed mutagenesis on key phosphorylation
sites of cytoplasmic p27 indicated that a mutation on Serine-10 or
Tyrosine-198 residue abolished the promoting effects of p27 on cell
motility and invasiveness, while a mutation on Tyrosine-157 had no
effect. This result suggests that phosphorylations of these two residues
are essential for tumor cell migration and invasion. Since mTOR signaling
has been implicated in metastatic osteosarcoma, we tested if rapamycin,
an mTOR inhibitor, can affect the subcellular localization of p27. We
found that exogenous addition of the drug reversed the protein
trafficking of p27 from the cytoplasm to the nuclei of metastatic
osteosarcoma cells, suggesting that p27 may be a yet undiscovered player
in the mTOR signaling of metastatic osteosarcoma. In summary, our results
indicate that a novel relationship between p27 mislocalization and the
metastatic potential of osteosarcoma cells. Therefore, further
characterizations of the role of cytoplasmic p27 and its phosphorylations
may lead to the development of a new therapeutic approach for metastatic
osteosarcoma.

