Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene signature of host irradiation from Trp53 null mammary tumors
detects radiation-preceded human cancers and has prognostic value for
sporadic human breast cancer


The microenvironment mediates many important aspects of tumorigenesis,
providing complementary mechanisms that work in concert with mutagenic
challenges to initiate and promote tumor development. To test the effect
of ionizing radiation, a carcinogen known to act via the
microenvironment, we employed a radiation-genetic chimera in which an
irradiated mouse was transplanted with unirradiated Trp53 null mammary
epithelium. Host irradiation not only decreased tumor latency, but
unexpectedly enriched for tumors that were negative for estrogen
receptor- (Cancer Cell 19:40-51, 2011). Using gene expression microarrays
we identified a profile containing 323 genes (323-IHC) that could
separate the tumors that arose in irradiated hosts from those that arose
in naive mice. To evaluate the relevance of an irradiated
microenvironment in human cancer, the 323-gene expression signature was
applied to expression profiles of sporadic or radiation-preceded human
cancers. Clustering using the 323-IHC was able to detect radiation
history in thyroid carcinomas from Chernobyl and radiotherapy associated
sarcomas even though there was no overlap with the differential gene
profiles published for either data set, demonstrating the relevance of
microenvironment reprogramming as one of the fundamental facets of
radiation carcinogenesis. We next utilized a gene expression data set
representing 1,608 human breast cancers compiled from 10 independent
studies. Clustering of these samples, using genes from our mouse-derived
radiation signature that were also present on the breast cancer gene
expression platform, segregated four subgroups that were enriched for
intrinsic subtypes, and two major groups with differential relapse-free
and overall survival. A 72-gene centroid derived from the 323-IHC
classified the breast cancers as either similar to tumors from
host-irradiation, or similar to tumors from non-irradiated hosts.
Classification of the human breast cancer expression profiles revealed an
association between host-irradiation and estrogen receptor negative,
basal-like breast cancers. Thus, the biology represented in the 323-IHC
signature is present in human cancers and associates with etiology and
clinical outcome.

