Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arousal of the stroma: Fibroblasts lead pancreatic cancer cell
invasion


Background: Cancer-associated fibroblasts, comprised of activated
fibroblasts or myofibroblasts, are found in the stroma surrounding solid
tumors; these myofibroblasts are thought to promote invasion and
metastasis of cancer cells. Mechanisms regulating the activation of the
fibroblasts and the initiation of the invasive tumorigenesis are of great
interest. Upregulation of the cytoskeletal protein, palladin, has been
detected in the stromal myofibroblasts surrounding many solid cancers and
in expression screens for genes involved in invasion. Using a pancreatic
cancer model, we investigated the functional consequence of
overexpression of exogenous palladin in normal fibroblasts in vitro and
the affect it could have on the early stages of tumor invasion. Findings:
Palladin expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts occurs very early in
tumorigenesis. In vivo, concordant expression of palladin and the
myofibroblast marker, alpha smooth muscle actin (-SMA), occurs early at
the dysplastic stages in peri-tumoral stroma and progressively increases
in pancreatic tumorigenesis. In vitro introduction of exogenous 90kD
palladin into normal human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) induces activation
of stromal fibroblasts into myofibroblasts as marked by induction of -SMA
and vimentin, and through the physical change of cell morphology.
Moreover, palladin expression in the fibroblasts enhances cellular
migration, invasion through the extracellular matrix, and creation of
tunnels through which cancer cells can follow. The fibroblast-led
invasion and creation of tunnels results from the development of
invadopodia-like cellular protrusions (feet) which express invadopodia
proteins and proteolytic enzymes. Palladin expression in fibroblasts is
triggered by the co-culture of normal fibroblasts with k-ras-expressing
epithelial cells. Abrogation of palladin with shRNA reverses the ability
of cancer cells to invade by blocking the transition of fibroblasts into
myofibroblasts and dampening of the myofibroblast-cancer cell
partnership. Conclusions: Fibroblasts are active partners in pancreatic
cancer cell invasion. Palladin expression can impart myofibroblast
properties, in turn promoting the invasive potential of these
peri-tumoral cells with invadopodia-driven degradation of extracellular
matrix. Palladin expression in fibroblasts can be triggered by k-ras
expression in adjacent epithelial cells. This data supports a model
whereby palladin-activated fibroblasts facilitate stromal-dependent
metastasis and outgrowth of tumorigenic epithelium.

