Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatment with Bevacizumab, Lenalidomide, Docetaxel
and Prednisone (ART-P) does not impact the immune response in patients
with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer


Purpose: Investigation of the effect of combination therapy for 5 cycles
with bevacizumab, lenalidomide, docetaxel and prednisone (ART-P) on the
immune response in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC). The aim was to ascertain if treatment containing
prednisone and docetaxel would impact immune responses, which could
compromise the efficacy of subsequent immunotherapy. Experimental Design:
We report here a study of immune responses in 12 patients enrolled in a
phase II trial of ART-P at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). We
compared peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and serum samples
collected at baseline and post 5 3-week cycles of ART-P treatment. PBMCs
were analyzed using flow cytometry to characterize phenotypes of T-cells,
regulatory T-cells, myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and natural
killer (NK) cells, and T-cell proliferation as well as NK-cell functional
activity were evaluated. Serum samples were analyzed for levels of
cytokines, chemokines and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) with
ELISA assays. Results: The baseline characteristics for the 12 patients
were: median age 65.7 years, Gleason score 8, and PSA 74 ng/ml. Greater
than 50% decreases in PSA were seen in 9/12 patients, with a median
decrease of 74%. Of the 12 patients 7 had a partial response, and 5 had
stable disease by RECIST criteria. After 5 cycles of ART-P treatment we
found no significant differences from baseline in T-cell proliferation
and NK-cell function, or the frequencies of T-cells, regulatory T-cells,
MDSC and NK-cells. There was also no change in the serum levels of
cytokines and chemokines except for IL-6, which decreased. As expected,
the serum levels of VEGF substantially decreased with therapy.
Conclusions: Treatment of mCRPC patients with ART-P for 5 cycles did not
alter the immune response in a way that would decrease the likelihood of
successful immunotherapy, pre or post treatment with ART-P.

