Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONO-WG-307, a novel, potent and selective inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (Btk), results in sustained inhibition of the ERK, AKT
and PKD signaling pathways


Purpose: Btk is a key regulator of B cell receptors (BCR) which play a
central role in signal transduction pathways regulating survival,
activation, proliferation, and differentiation of B-lineage lymphoid
cells. BCR signaling is implicated in the survival of malignant B cells
and recent studies indicate that targeting Btk may be effective in the
treatment of B-cell lymphoma. Response between cell survival and BCR
signaling is implicated in different types of B-cell lymphoma. Therefore,
we evaluated the inhibitory effect of ONO-WG-307 on Btk-dependent signal
transduction by large-scale and quantitative phosphoproteome analysis to
a depth of more than 10,000 phosphorylation sites. Methods: Two tumor
cell lines (sensitive and non-sensitive) were treated with ONO-WG-307.
After 72h, cell viability was determined by the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay. P-Btk was used as a marker for Btk activity
determined by Western blot and Flow Cytometry. Quantitative
phosphoproteomics were enabled by differential SILAC labeling of lymphoma
cells. After 1 hr incubation with ONO-WG-307, the total cellular proteins
were digested and phosphopeptides were enriched by a combination of
strong cation exchange and immobilized metal affinity chromatography.
Site-specific phosphorylations were identified and by LC-MS analysis on a
LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer followed by bioinformatic
processing. Results: Btk is potently and selectively inhibited by
ONO-WG-307 in an in vitro Btk kinase assay, with an IC50 in the
subnanomolar range whereas IC50 values for other tyrosine kinases (Lck,
Lyn and Fyn) were above 1 M. The concentration required for growth
inhibition for the sensitive cells was 3.59 nmol/L (IC50), whereas
considerably higher concentrations were required to suppress growth of
non-sensitive cells. Surprisingly, inhibition of cellular Btk and ERK
phosphorylation by ONO-WG-307 levels of P-Btk and P-ERK were similar in
both sensitive and non-sensitive cells. However, our quantitative
phosphoproteome studies revealed selective suppression of Akt-mediated
signaling and cellular protein kinase D activity in sensitive compared to
non-sensitive cells.Conclusion: These results suggest that the selective
ONO-WG-307 inhibition of responder cell growth might be due to a critical
role of Btk-mediated signaling through Akt and protein kinase D. These
data shed new light on the cellular mode-of-action of Btk inhibition and
support the potential clinical utility of ONO-WG-307 in B cell
malignancies.

