Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor activity and bioavailability of
chemopreventives by coated polymeric implants


Poor oral bioavailability limits the use of many chemopreventives in the
prevention and treatment of cancer. We previously reported a novel
concept in which polycaprolactone (PCL) implants embedded with test
agents provide sustained delivery for long duration (months to >1year),
reduce effective dose substantially and increase bioavailability. While
tested successfully for various agents, this formulation results in an
initial burst release and does not apply to heat-labile compounds.
Furthermore, it takes 2 or more years for the polymeric implant to
biodegrade. To overcome these limitations, we hypothesized that
formulation of low mol wt polymeric implants will provide more sustained
and higher release compared with higher mol. wt polymers; the low mol. wt
polymers are also expected to biodegrade in weeks to months. To test part
of this hypothesis, we used three different mol wt PCL polymers and two
co-polymers, poly(D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA). The method involves
i) preparation of blank PCL implants (1.4 mm dia), and ii) coating of
30-40 layers by dipping blank implants, with intermittent drying, in
10-20% of different mol wt PCL solutions in dichloromethane containing
10% curcumin in tetrahydrofuran. The curcumin implants when tested for in
vitro release showed that i) the burst release effect and the amount
released varied with mol wt of the polymer. Implants prepared with PCL of
3,600 mol wt (PCL-3.6K) did not show any burst release phenomenon.
Instead, these implants took nearly 7 days to render maximum daily
release and thereafter the rate of release declined gradually over a
period of two weeks. Implants prepared from higher mol wt polymers
(PCL-31K and PCL-112K) were accompanied with some initial burst release
and the rate of release declined gradually. Cumulative release measured
over two weeks was found to be inversely proportional to the mol wt of
PCL: PCL-3.6K (30%) > PCL-31K (24%) > PCL-112K (21%). On the other hand,
the co-polymers, PLGA (50:50) and PLGA (75:25) showed only 1% and 0.5%
total release, respectively. To determine if the implant delivery reduced
the effective dose in a tumor model, nude mice were inoculated with human
lung cancer (A549) cells and then treated with coated implants of
withaferin A, a potent triterpenoid isolated from the traditional
Ayurvedic herb Ashwagandha. Withaferin A given via the coated implants
significantly inhibited (>50%) human lung cancer (A549) xenograft, while
it was ineffective when the same dose was administered i.p. Together, our
data suggest that coated implants of low mol wt PCL can accommodate
heat-labile compounds, enhance bioavailability, furnish more sustained
and higher cumulative release, and elicits anti-tumor activity. Our
ultimate goal is to use low mol polymeric implants that will biodegrade
in few months and provide continuous release of the drug. (Supported from
CA-118114, KLCRP and Duggan Endowment).

