Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel MRI-based biomarker for early assessment of glioma recurrence


Gliomas continue to be the most common form of brain malignancy in adult
patients. Even with advancements in the clinical management of these
patients, assessment of tumor recurrence continues to be based on late or
serial changes in tumor volume as measured by CT or MRI [1; 2]. The
purpose of this study was to develop and evaluate a new voxel-based
method, referred as parametric response mapping (PRM), for early
detection of brain tumor progression using standard MR images (FLAIR and
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted). PRM results were evaluated relative to
standard MRI-based criteria of clinical progression assessment in
patients with Grade III/IV gliomas. Fourteen patients with grades III/IV
glioma underwent MRI before and during treatment (every 2 months). MRI
scans, acquired on a 1.5T or a 3T clinical scanner, consisted of
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging (FLAIR) and contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted (CE-T1w) images. All images were spatially registered to
CE-T1w pre-treatment scans and tumors were manually contoured on the
T1w-Gd images. Subsequent to PRM analysis, FLAIR images were normalized
to the signal using the white matter (rFLAIR). PRM, applied to the whole
brain volume on rFLAIR, was performed by first generating voxel-based
difference maps at each longitudinal follow-up scan using the baseline as
the subtrahend. Baseline was defined as either the pre-treatment or
subsequent rFLAIR image. Individual voxels were classified based on the
extent of change observed in the rFLAIR difference maps. Three
classifications were used: voxels with a significant increase in rFLAIR
values (PRMrFLAIR+), significant decrease (PRMrFLAIR-) or statistically
unchanged (PRMrFLAIR0). Disease recurrence was defined by PRM as the sum
of red voxels that exceed 20% of the tumor volume as delineated on
T1w-Gd. PRMrFLAIR detected tumor recurrence on average 183 weeks earlier
than the MacDonald criteria. It was also observed that PRMrFLAIR+ found
outside the tumor CE-T1w regions revealed the spatial location at which
the tumor would progress on subsequent scans based on current standard
progression criteria. These results show that the PRM approach provides
for the early detection and spatial depiction of brain tumor progression
prior to detection by currently available conventional MRI-based
criteria. While further validation of PRM for detection of tumor
recurrence is currently underway, the ability to detect tumor progression
significantly earlier than currently possible is anticipated to have a
major impact on patient care. [1] Macdonald, D. R., et al. (1990). J Clin
Oncol 8(7): 1277-1280. [2] Wen, P. Y., et al. (2010). J Clin Oncol
28(11): 1963-1972.

