Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stool proteomics reveals new candidate biomarkers for colorectal
cancer screening


Background Colorectal Cancer (CRC) screening can save many lives. Many
invitational large scale screening programs worldwide use stool tests
like the fecal immunochemical tests (FIT), which detects human
hemoglobin. Tumor-specific biomarkers have the potential to improve the
performance of these tests but so far, no protein-based fecal test has
proved better than the FIT. Although most biomarker discoveries are done
in tumor-tissues, the presence and/or chemical nature of biomarkers may
be different in samples that ultimately will be used for screening like
stool. Measuring biomarkers directly in stool samples may therefore yield
candidate CRC biomarkers that are stable in the fecal environment. Aim
The aim of the present study was to identify tumor-specific protein based
biomarkers for the early detection of CRC, by applying in-depth
proteomics to stool samples from CRC patients and healthy controls.
Material and method Stool samples were obtained from 10 subjects with
negative colonoscopy and from 12 CRC patients. Proteins were analyzed by
in-depth proteomics using gel electrophoresis and nano Liquid
Chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS).
Resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the human IPI database
(version 3.62). Proteins were analyzed by hierarchical cluster analysis
and visualized in a heat map. Non-paired statistical analysis of spectral
count data from human proteins was performed using a beta-binomial test.
Verification of candidate biomarkers was performed by Selected Reaction
Monitoring Mass Spectometry (SRM-MS). Results In total 830 human proteins
were identified of which 221 were present at different levels in stool
samples from CRC patients compared to control subjects. Of these, 134
proteins were significantly enriched in CRC. Unsupervised hierarchical
cluster analysis revealed two clusters. One cluster contained nine CRC
stool samples, the other cluster contained all ten control stool samples
together with three CRC stool samples. SRM-MS analysis of selected
candidate biomarkers on the same stool samples verified the results
obtained by LC-MS/MS. Conclusion Proteome profiling on stool revealed 134
proteins significantly enriched in CRC compared to control stool samples,
of which a sub set could be verified by SRM-MS. Validation in an
independent series of stool samples collection (n=200) by SRM-MS is in
process.

