Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered Salmonella effectively produce and preferentially
deliver bacterial cytotoxins to solid tumors


To effectively treat cancer, therapeutics must specifically target tumor
tissue and impart minimal toxicity to healthy tissues. Bacterial toxins,
such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa Exotoxin A (PEA) and Staphylococcus aureus
Alpha-Hemolysin (SAH), are highly cytotoxic and are promising moieties
for cancer treatment. Due to their high toxicity and non-specificity
towards all cells types, systemic effects limit their effectiveness as a
therapeutic. While efforts have been made to impart cancer-cell
specificity to these potent molecules, especially through immunotoxin
technology, systemic toxicities still prove to be a challenge.
Genetically engineered bacteria, such as Salmonella typhimurium, are
known to target cancer by preferential accumulation within tumors and
thus can be exploited as tumor-specific drug delivery vectors. By using
cellular engineering techniques, the genetic machinery of bacteria can be
used to produce exogenous bacterial toxins in situ. In addition to the
specificity of bacterial accumulation, inducible promoter systems such as
the arabinose-inducible system can be used to minimize systemic toxin
levels by controlling the timing of protein expression. By coupling these
strategies, we have been able to develop an effective bacterial therapy
for targeted tumor treatment. PEA and SAH expressed in Salmonella under
the PBAD promoter was secreted into the culture medium following
arabinose induction. Monolayer cultures of MCF7 human breast carcinoma
cells treated with secreted PEA and SAH for three days were depleted by
82% and 99%, respectively. Mechanism of delivery studies in a murine
tumor model showed co-localization of salmonella, toxins and cell death
within tumors following arabinose induction, while minimizing the
localization of toxins to the healthy organs. Survival studies indicate
that bacterial delivery of PEA and SAH can minimize systemic toxicities
while decreasing tumor growth and increasing survival. Overall, these
data indicate that by using bacteria to produce toxins in situ, we were
able to overcome the delivery challenges inherent with non-specific toxin
moieties and create a highly efficacious drug delivery system for use in
the treatment of solid tumors.

