Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired angiogenesis as a hallmark of prolonged tumor dormancy in
a mouse model of human glioblastoma


Small sized, microscopic, non-invasive, avascular and therefore
asymptomatic tumors can remain in their dormant stage for considerable
period of time depending on numerous processes. One crucial mechanism
underlying the transformation from a dormant phenotype to a fast-growing
phenotype is the ability of the tumor cells to induce angiogenesis, a
phenomenon termed as the angiogenic switch. Suspected dormant
tumor-generating clone, derived from aggressive tumor-forming U-87 MG
human glioblastoma cell line, was isolated using single-cell clone and
identified by gene expression signature of dormant tumors (Almog et al.,
Cancer Research 2009). In order to evaluate the phenotypic differences
between cell lines that generate dormant avascular tumors or fast-growing
angiogenic tumors, we established a pair of mCherry-labeled human
glioblastoma cell lines, U-87-D (Dormant) derived from the parental
U-87-F (Fast-growing). While the two cell lines share similar growth rate
in vitro, we found profound differences in tumor growth pattern when
injected into mice. U-87-F established palpable and vascularized tumors
only few days following inoculation, whereas U-87-D-generated tumors
remained at a small size for more than 100 days. We further characterized
both cell lines using migration, invasion and capillary-like tube
formation assays in vitro. Major differences in invasiveness via a
monolayer of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were found.
Furthermore, considerably increased number of tube-like structures formed
from HUVEC were observed in the presence of U-87-F conditioned media
(CM), compared with those formed in the presence of U-87-D CM. Similarly,
HUVEC migration towards U-87-F CM was significantly higher compared with
that towards U-87-D CM. Next, we utilized non-invasive intravital imaging
to evaluate tumor progression, and non-invasive endo-microscopy imaging,
as well as microbubbles contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging, to track
the blood flow within the tumor and blood vessels morphology at the tumor
microenvironment. We concluded that the dormant and fast-growing tumors
displayed distinct differences in their angiogenic potential leading to
highly diverse tumor progression profiles when injected into mice.

