Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlating circulating tumor cells with 18F-FDG positron emission
tomography (PET) uptake in patients with treatment nave non-small cell
lung cancer: A pilot study


BACKGROUND: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) represent disease derived
cells identified in the blood of cancer patients with prognostic
implications. 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) PET tumor uptake in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) may be associated with poor prognosis
despite therapy since the tracer accumulates in increasing amounts in
more aggressive cancers. We therefore set out to investigate whether CTCs
correlate with FDG uptake. METHODS: For this multi-center, prospective,
observational study patients were consented and underwent phlebotomy into
a cell preservative blood collection tube. Samples were shipped at
ambient temperature and processed within 36 hours. CTC detection was
defined by immunofluorescence (CK, DAPI, CD45) followed by automated
morphometric analysis that was validated manually. Patients who underwent
surgery or had medical treatment prior to imaging were excluded and only
those with biopsy proven NSCLC who had PET images acquired within 4 weeks
of CTC sample procurement were eligible. Semi-quantitative values
(maximum standardized uptake value [SUVmax]) were extracted from images
using a region of interest drawn over the tumor by the interpreting
physician. Correlations were calculated by either a Pearson or
Spearman-rank test depending on the distribution of the underlying
variable. RESULTS: Twenty-six patients with treatment nave NSCLC
underwent phlebotomy for CTCs and had FDG PET imaging done at four
medical centers during the pilot phase of this study. Five patients were
excluded for further analysis due to pending results or more than 4 weeks
from PET imaging to CTC draw. The average age for this cohort was 67 (
11) years, 13 of 21 patients were male (62%) and 71% were stage I or II
NSCLC. Mean tumor size was 3.0 cm (range 1.5-7.5 cm), median SUVmax was
7.4 (IQR 4.4-16.1) and two-thirds of patients had adenocarcinoma. At
least one CTC per ml was detected in 81% of patients (17/21), and the
median CTC count was 27 per ml (IQR 2.4-59.0) across all samples and
histologic types. CTCs appeared to correlate more with tumor size
(r=0.42) than with glucose metabolism as measured by SUVmax (r=0.22).
CONCLUSION: We have established a multi-center workflow to expeditiously
study tumor glucose metabolism using imaging and in-vitro diagnostics.
Preliminary data show good sensitivity for a combined immunofluorescent
and cytometric CTC detection approach in early-stage disease. CTC count
may not correlate well with tumor glucose metabolism in NSCLC but further
study is required.

