Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DrGaP: A powerful tool for identifying driver genes and pathways
in cancer sequencing studies


Recent next-generation sequencing experiments have brought success in
identifying cancer genes that were highly frequently mutated in tumors.
As genomic sequencing experiments continue to identify large numbers of
novel cancer mutations, one big challenge will be distinguishing driver
mutations from passenger mutations. Driver mutations are the ones that
have a role in oncogenesis or in the cancer phenotype, whereas passenger
mutations are co-traveler that accumulate through DNA replication but are
irrelevant to tumor development. From statistical point of view, driver
genes are defined as those for which the non-silent mutation rate is
significantly greater than a background (or passenger) mutation rate
estimated from silent mutations. Statistical methods are now actively
being developed to attempt to assess functional significance of a mutated
gene in cancer sequencing studies. However, embedding biological
knowledge on mutational process in tumors into statistical models is not
trivial. These biological considerations include length of protein coding
regions, gene structure, transcript isoforms, difference in mutation
types, variation in background mutation rates, redundancy of the genetic
code, multiple mutations in one gene, and functional consequence of
different tumor types. They have not yet been fully addressed by current
methods and tools for identifying driver genes. Driver mutations could be
either common or rare among tumors. Identification of rare driver
mutations may pose a potential challenge. In addition, mutation in one
member of a collection of functionally related genes may result in the
same net effect, and/or mutations in certain genes may be observed less
frequently if they play functional roles in later stages of tumor
development. At the pathway level, the frequency of rare driver mutations
is accumulated in that pathway which warrants sufficient detection power.
Thus, there is an increasing interest in the identification of driver
pathways in tumor formation and progression. To meet these challenges, we
developed a tool-DrGaP for identify driver genes and pathways in cancer
sequencing studies. We introduced the Poisson processes to model the
random nature of somatic mutation under no selection pressure. The new
model can handle the identification of both driver genes and pathways or
any gene sets in the same statistical framework. The new tool provides
several significant improvements and increased power over current
existing methods through simulations. To illustrate its utility, we
applied the DrGaP to analysis of a recent lung cancer sequencing study.
The DrGaP identified a few novel driver genes that were missed by
previous methods, demonstrating its high accuracy and sensitivity.

