Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Met protein expression is regulated by palmitoylation in
prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common noncutaneous neoplasia diagnosed
in men and represents roughly 10% of cancer-associated mortalities. The
lethal phenotype of PCa is primarily characterized by progression of
tumor cells to androgen-independence and metastasis. Organ-confined PCa
is often curable with surgery and/or radiation therapy, however, as the
disease becomes metastatic, the likelihood of survival becomes minimal.
Key influences in the progression to metastasis are growth factor
receptors including the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met. Numerous bodies
of evidence strongly link aberrant c-Met signaling with causation and/or
progression of prostate cancer. Overexpression of c-Met can lead to
activation in a ligand-independent manner and has been identified as a
common mechanism of resistance to RTK-targeted therapy. In addition,
multiple reports have identified the enzyme fatty acid synthase (FASN) as
being commonly overexpressed in prostate cancer, and that this aberrant
expression is an early event that becomes more pronounced with aggressive
androgen-independent and metastatic disease. FASN is the sole enzyme
responsible for de novo synthesis of the 16-carbon saturated fatty acid
palmitate. In cancer, de novo lipids are more selectively partitioned
into lipid rafts as phospholipids as well as utilized for
post-translational acyl-modifications of signaling proteins. Previous
findings have led us to identify a novel mechanism by which FASN activity
regulates c-Met expression. Our work has determined that inhibition or
shRNA knockdown of FASN results in a post-translational downregulation of
already synthesized c-Met protein. This downregulation is prevented by
the addition of exogenous palmitate. Here we provide evidence that
inhibition of palmitoylation, using the palmitate analog
2-bromopalmitate, lowers total c-Met levels. This protein loss occurs
post-transcriptionally and is associated with accumulation of c-Met in
Golgi compartments. Using inhibitors to a number of internalization
pathways, as well as surface biotinylation studies, our findings suggest
the inhibition of palmitoylation reduces the stability of newly
synthesized c-Met as opposed to inducing internalization and degradation.
Moreover, both an acyl-biotin exchange technique and a click-chemistry
based palmitate-labeling protocol have provided evidence suggesting c-Met
itself is palmitoylated. From these data, we hypothesize that c-Met
requires palmitoylation along a biosynthetic route to promote its
stability and trafficking to the cell surface. In the absence of
palmitoylation, c-Met accumulates within the Golgi and is disposed of
through a yet to be determined degradation pathway. Our findings
potentially reveal a novel mechanism for restricting the expression of
c-Met as a means of preventing prostate cancer invasion and metastasis.

