Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A real-time PCR based long noncoding RNA profiler for cancer
research


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are non-protein coding transcripts longer
than 200 nucleotides, which are abundantly expressed in human and mouse.
A recent study indicates that there are at least 16,000 ncRNAs among
which over 3,000 are lncRNAs. In particular, accumulating evidence
suggests that dysregulation of lncRNAs is associated with many types of
human diseases, highlighting their potential as biomarkers and
therapeutic targets. However, studies on lncRNA are still at a very early
stage and our understanding of lncRNA function is very limited. Thus,
investigation of the expression patterns of lncRNAs is a crucial step to
understanding of their roles in normal physiological process as well as
disease conditions such as cancer. To this end, we developed a qPCR based
disease-related human lncRNA profiler, which allows for the
quantification of differential expression of 83 individual lncRNAs among
various experimental RNA samples. All 83 lncRNAs chosen for the array are
based on publications and the majority of them are associated with
cancer. To determine the utility of this lncRNA profiler, we profiled
their expression in breast cancer specimens compared to matched normal
tissue and identified several lncRNAs are dysregulated, suggesting that
lncRNAs may function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. In addition to
those that have already been reported in the literature, we also
identified dysregulation of a few lncRNAs not yet in the literature.
Furthermore, gene expression profiling with this lncRNA profiler in a
series of breast cell lines such as MCF10A, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells
identified differential expression patterns unique to each cell line,
which may provide a basis for future analysis of these differentially
expressed lncRNAs. Finally, we identified several lncRNAs that are
induced by p53 in HCT-116 and MCF-7 cells. Experiments are underway to
further characterize these p53 inducible lncRNAs. Together, these results
suggest that this lncRNA profiler is a valuable research tool for cancer
research. The features of this profiler are easy, convenient, sensitive
and specific. Accordingly, it serves the first step toward the
understanding of the role of lncRNAs in cancer.

