Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH compounds: Nitric oxide- and hydrogen sulfide-releasing
hybrids, a new class of anti-inflammatory pharmaceuticals


Introduction: The clinical usefulness of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) combined with their potentially life-threatening toxicity
has prompted intensive efforts to identify safer alternatives, which will
at least maintain their pharmacological properties. The search for a
better NSAID has resulted in at least two modified hybrids, one that
releases nitric oxide (NO-NSAIDs), and another that releases hydrogen
sulfide (HS-NSAIDs). These agents although much safer and more potent
than their traditional counterparts, have IC50s for cell growth
inhibition that are in the micro-molar range. Therefore, we postulated
that a new hybrid that incorporated the active parts of each compound may
be more potent and effective than either one. Our hypothesis has proved
to be correct. We have synthesized a number of NSAID based NOSH (nitric
oxide-, hydrogen sulfide-releasing) compounds that release both H2S and
NO, and have IC50s for cell growth inhibition in the low nano-molar
range. Methods: Compounds: Aspirin based NOSH-1, NOSH-2, NOSH-3, and
NOSH-4 were synthesized and purified by us with 1H-NMR verification.
Human cancer cell lines: colon (HT-29, HCT 15, SW480), breast (MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, SKBR3), pancreas (BxPC-3, MIA PaCa-2), lung (A549), prostate
(LNCap), leukemia (Jurkat). Cell growth: MTT. Anti-inflammatory: paw
edema induced by intraplantar injection of 100 L of 1% carrageenan, paw
volumes measured up to the tibiotarsal joint immediately prior to
carrageenan injection and thereafter at 1hr intervals up to 6hrs. Drugs
were administered orally 1 hr before carrageenan; COX enzyme:
immunoblotting, PGE2: ELISA Results: All NOSH compounds were more
effective than aspirin in inhibiting the growth of colon, breast,
pancreas, prostate, lung, and leukemia cancer cell lines. The IC50s at
24h were in the range 48 nM to 6.5 M depending on the cell line and the
compound. The corresponding IC50 for aspirin was >5000 M in all cell
lines. Our lead compound NOSH-1, had a enhanced potency of >100,000-fold.
NOSH-1 dose-dependently decreased the carrageenan-induced edema 1h after
administration and maintained this anti-inflammatory effect throughout
the experiment (up to 6h). PGE2 levels within the inflamed rat paw were
also reduced by NOSH-1. Carrageenan induced both COX-1 and COX-2
expression which were dose-dependently inhibited by NOSH-1. Conclusions:
NOSH compounds are a new class of anti-inflammatory agents. NOSH-1, our
lead compound is very potent in inhibiting a number of different cancer
cell lines of different tissue origin suggesting a tissue independent
effect.

