Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumorigenic effects by targeted functional disruption of the
Sin3 PAH-2 domain


The Sin3 A/B adapter proteins function as structural scaffolds for
repressor/activator complexes that regulate transcription through the
specific association with histone modifying enzymes and a number of
transcription factors. Sin3 contains four paired amphipathic -helices
(PAH domains). We have reported earlier that targeted disruption of the
PAH2 domain with a SID (Sin3 Interaction Domain) peptide decoy in triple
negative (TN) breast cancer cells leads to cytoskeletal reorganization,
loss of anchorage independent growth and 3D invasive morphology and
decreased cell adhesion and invasion. There is epigenetic reprogramming
of silenced genes such as CDH1, ESR1 and RARA which are re-expressed and
together contribute to a SID decoy induced switch from basal to a more
differentiated luminal phenotype (Farias, et. al., PNAS, 2010,
107:11811-6). Computerized screening coupled with such assays as Duolink,
GST pull downs and mammalian two hybrid identified small molecule
inhibitors (SMI) that mimic the effects of the SID decoy peptide. SMI
inhibit cellular invasion at nanomolar range and in in vivo mouse myc TN
breast cancer prolong latency, decrease local invasion and metastasis.
Tumors recovered showed evidence of re-expression of E-cadherin and
estrogen receptor. Early effects of SID decoy in TN breast cancer cells
include inhibition of invasion that is associated with a significant
decrease in Src phosphorylation within 2-4hr of treatment. Recovery of
phosphorylation after SID decoy washout is coupled with recovered
invasion at 24hr. These effects occurred prior to measurable increase in
E-cadherin expression, suggesting a non-transcriptional effect. In
Drosophila larval breast cancer models with activated Src/Ras,
overexpression of SID inhibited (60%) tumor growth in the eye imaginal
disc, and was eradicated by the addition of a MEK inhibitor (AZD-6244),
indicating a strong synergy between SID and AZD-6244. In the adult fly
SID expression greatly inhibited RetMEN2B induced eye tumors (90%). These
data demonstrate that SID decoys have a potential to be effective agents
in the treatment of TN breast cancer by promoting basal phenotype
reversal, inhibiting invasion and metastasis, and could be synergistic
with specific inhibitors of signal transduction targets. Moreover, SID
decoys can overcome profound oncogenic stimulus such as Ras, Src and Ret
suggesting that they have a potential greater role than just in the
treatment of TN breast cancer.

