Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropilin-2 is upregulated during EMT in lung cancer


Neuropilins (NRP1 and NRP2) are high affinity receptors for the class-3
semaphorins, cell guidance molecules involved in tissue development,
immune responses, angiogenesis and cancer. Semaphorins affect cell
protrusion, spreading and adhesion, and can trigger migratory responses
often in a repulsive manner depending on the cellular context.
Interestingly, neuropilins are also receptors for galectin-1 and growth
factors including VEGF, PlGF, EGF and TGF. We previously cloned the
SEMA3F gene from chromosome 3p21.3, which undergoes homozygous deletion
and frequent loss of heterozygosity in lung cancer. We found that SEMA3F
levels were inversely correlated with tumor aggressiveness in human lung
cancer and confirmed its tumor suppressor activity in experimental
xenograft models. We subsequently discovered that SEMA3F is directly
downregulated by ZEB1, a transcription factor involved in the epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the present study, we asked whether
SEMA3F specific receptor, NRP2, was also regulated during the EMT
process. TGF, a physiologic EMT inducer, stimulated NRP2 expression in
two NSCLC cell lines. Forced expression of ZEB1, but not Snail, also
induced NRP2. Conversely, ZEB1 and Snail inhibition blocked NRP2
upregulation by TGF. Importantly, inhibiting NRP2 or ZEB1 expression
reduced TGF-induced migration in an equivalent manner. In lung cancer
tissue microarrays, NRP1 and NRP2 were preferentially expressed in the
tumor compartment, whereas the EMT-related transcription factors, ZEB1
and Snail, were predominantly expressed in the stroma. Of note, NRP2 was
also expressed in stromal cells and was significantly associated with
both ZEB1 and a higher (worse) tumor grade. Since NRP2 is the highest
affinity receptor for SEMA3F, our results suggest that loss of SEMA3F
coupled with increased NRP2 would facilitate the binding of growth
factors to NRP2 to further promote EMT and metastasis. Therefore,
targeting NRP2 could be an important therapeutic approach against EMT in
lung cancer.

