Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A randomized Phase III study comparing the efficacy of Bacillus
Calmette Gurin strain Tice versus Connaught for immunotherapy of
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer


Introduction: For almost forty years now, adjuvant immunotherapy with
intravesical Bacillus Calmette Gurin (BCG) is standard of care in the
treatment of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). The question
whether the choice of the different available BCG strains used for
treatment influences treatment outcome is still under debate. We report
on a randomized phase III study comparing the two most commonly used
strains in Europe and the USA. Patients and Methods: This study was
performed under approval of the Cantonal Ethical Committee of Bern,
Switzerland, to evaluate recurrence free survival in patients treated
with BCG as the primary end-point. Between 1998 and 2010 149 patients
(n=149) were recruited. Patients underwent transurethral resection of all
visible bladder tumors or random bladder biopsies in case of a solely
positive bladder wash cytology. TaG3 and T1G3 tumors underwent a second
resection to confirm non-muscle invasive disease. Two to 15 days after
surgery, patients were either randomized to receive six weekly
intravesical instillations with 2-8x108 CFU OncoTice (BCG Tice) or
6.6-19.2 x108 CFU ImmuCyst (BCG Connaught) dissolved in 50 ml of saline
according to manufacturers recommendations. Patients were followed in
3-monthly intervals for 3yrs, then in 6-monthly intervals by cystoscopy
and bladder wash cytology. Relapses were confirmed by histology after
transurethral surgery. Cox regression analysis and Log rank tests served
for statistical analysis. Results: Gender, age, tumor stage and grade
were well balanced between the two treatment arms (p=0.38). Median follow
up was 25 months (range: 0.3-136). Side effects did not differ between
the two treatment arms (p=0.42). Age and gender did not have an impact on
treatment response (p=0.71). Five year recurrence-free survival for all
patients was 61%. Patients treated with Connaught had significantly less
recurrences than patients treated with OncoTice (pIntroduction: For
almost forty years now, adjuvant immunotherapy with intravesical Bacillus
Calmette Gurin (BCG) is standard of care in the treatment of non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). The question whether the choice of the
different available BCG strains used for treatment influences treatment
outcome is still under debate. We report on a randomized phase III study
comparing the two most commonly used strains in Europe and the USA.
Patients and Methods: This study was performed under approval of the
Cantonal Ethical Committee of Bern, Switzerland, to evaluate recurrence
free survival in patients treated with BCG as the primary end-point.
Between 1998 and 2010 149 patients (n=149) were recruited. Patients
underwent transurethral resection of all visible bladder tumors or random
bladder biopsies in case of a solely positive bladder wash cytology. TaG3
and T1G3 tumors underwent a second resection to confirm non-muscle
invasive disease. Two to 15 days after surgery, patients were either
randomized to receive six weekly intravesical instillations with 2-8x108
CFU OncoTice (BCG Tice) or 6.6-19.2 x108 CFU ImmuCyst (BCG Connaught)
dissolved in 50 ml of saline according to manufacturers recommendations.
Patients were followed in 3-monthly intervals for 3yrs, then in 6-monthly
intervals by cystoscopy and bladder wash cytology. Relapses were
confirmed by histology after transurethral surgery. Cox regression
analysis and Log rank tests served for statistical analysis. Results:
Gender, age, tumor stage and grade were well balanced between the two
treatment arms (p=0.38). Median follow up was 25 months (range: 0.3-136).
Side effects did not differ between the two treatment arms (p=0.42). Age
and gender did not have an impact on treatment response (p=0.71). Five
year recurrence-free survival for all patients was 61%. Patients treated
with Connaught had significantly less recurrences than patients treated
with OncoTice (p<0.002). Five year recurrence-free survival was 75% and
46% for Connaught and Tice treated patients, respectively. Median
recurrence-free survival was 28 months (range: 0.6-136) for Connaught and
22 months (range: 0.3-122) for Tice treated patients. Progression-free
and overall survivals were not significantly different between the two
treatment arms. Conclusions: The choice of the BCG strain impacts on
treatment outcome and favors the use of BCG Connaught over Tice in the
treatment of NMIBC.

