Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A broad activity screen in support of a chemogenomic map for
kinase signaling research and drug discovery


Since protein kinases play a fundamental role in cell signaling,
especially as components of critical growth and differentiation pathways
linked to cancer, kinase inhibitors have been commercialized as both
therapeutics and research tools. This has been enabled to some degree by
the chemical tractability of protein kinase ATP binding pockets, the
automation of activity measurements, and the correlation of in vitro,
cellular, and in vivo activities. Despite the development of a number of
efficacious kinase inhibitors, the strategies for rational design of
these compounds have been limited by target promiscuity. In an effort to
better understand the nature of structure and activity across the kinome,
especially as it relates to off-target effects, we screened a
well-defined collection of kinase inhibitors using gold standard
radiometric assays for inhibitory activity toward 234 kinases, which
represent all branches of the kinome tree. We screened 158 small
molecules initially identified in the literature as potent and specific
inhibitors of kinases important from a therapeutic target as well as a
signal transduction biology perspective. We performed hierarchical
clustering of these benchmark kinase inhibitors based upon their kinome
activity profiles and illustrate how they relate to chemical structure
similarities; this provides new insights into inhibitor specificity and
potential applications for probing new targets. Additionally, we
developed a selectivity score for each kinase which we believe reflects
general binding site accessibility to small molecules. Knowledge of such
scoring indices can play an important role in therapeutic target
selection and drug discovery strategies. Using this broad set of data, we
provide a framework for assessing polypharmacology. Examples will be
shown to demonstrate that we not only identify likely off-target
inhibitor activities but also potential new uses for known small
molecules. Moreover we demonstrate how activity data can be used to help
explain the effects of small molecules observed in phenotypic screening.

