Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD43 normally expressed on the surface of leukocytes is expressed
in the cytoplasm and nucleus of breast cancer and is a novel therapeutic
target


One in eight of the female population of the United States will be
diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime. This statistic defines
breast cancer as the most common cancer affecting American women.
Advances in breast cancer treatment will be facilitated by the
identification and targeting of the causative molecular defects. We have
found that breast cancer is characterized by expression of CD43. This
sialoglycoprotein is normally only produced by leukocytes. Strikingly, an
N-terminal domain of CD43 that is extracellular in leukocytes is
expressed predominantly in the cytoplasm of breast cancers. The
C-terminal domain that is expressed in the nucleus of leukocytes only
upon activation exhibits constitutive nuclear localization in breast
cancer. Segregation of the N and C terminal domains of CD43 between
different subcelluar compartments suggests that in breast cancer it is
subjected to specific proteolytic cleavage events. The normal function of
CD43 is to regulate leukocyte adhesion, apoptosis and migration. We
reasoned that if these normal functions are extrapolated to breast
cancer, then CD43 could contribute to disease progression and, therefore,
represent a novel therapeutic target. We tested this hypothesis by using
small-interfering RNA to target CD43 expressed by the breast cancer cell
line MCF7. This targeting resulted in cancer cells exhibiting increased
susceptibility to apoptosis and increased vulnerability to lysis by
natural killer cells. In addition, targeting demonstrated that CD43
likely facilitates metastasis by inhibiting homotypic adhesion and
driving transendothelial migration. Using an othrotopic mouse model, we
demonstrate that CD43-targeting reduces the size of primary tumors by
76%. Taken together, our results indicate that expression of CD43 is a
robust breast cancer biomarker and its targeting has the potential to be
developed into a new breast cancer therapy.

