Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol, a promising small molecular weight natural agent,
activates AMP-activated protein kinase in breast cancer cells via
LKB1-dependent pathway and inhibits breast carcinogenesis


Introduction: Research over the past few years have established LKB1-AMPK
pathway as an important metabolic checkpoint interconnecting the
signaling pathways controlling metabolism and cancer cell growth. Thus,
it is of major interest to find effective therapeutic strategies to
manipulate LKB1-AMPK axis to inhibit cancer growth. The importance of
active constitutive agents in natural products has become increasingly
apparent owing to their potential cancer preventive as well as
therapeutic properties. Honokiol, a small-molecule polyphenol isolated
from magnolia species, is widely known for its therapeutic potential as
an anti-inflammatory, anti-thrombosis, anti-oxidant agent and more
recently for its protective function in carcinogenesis. In the present
study, we sought to examine the effectiveness of honokiol in modulating
LKB1-AMPK axis, preventing mammary tumorigenesis and inhibiting
metastasis. Methods: Clonogenicity, 3D-colony formation, matrigel
invasion, scratch-migration and spheroid-migration assays were used to
examine breast cancer cell growth and metastatic potential upon honokiol
treatment. Western blot and immunofluorescence analysis were used to
examine activation of LKB1-AMPK axis. Functional importance of AMPK and
LKB1 was examined by using AMPK-null and AMPK-WT immortalized mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and isogenic LKB1-knockdown cell line pairs.
Breast cancer xenografts, immunohistochemical and western blot analysis
of tumors were used. Results: Analysis of the underlying molecular
mechanisms revealed that honokiol treatment increases AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylation and activity as evident by
increased phosphorylation of downstream target of AMPK, acetyl-coenzyme A
carboxylase (ACC) and inhibition of phosphorylation of p70S6kinase (pS6K)
and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 1
(4EBP1). Using AMPK-null and AMPK-WT (MEFs); we found that AMPK is
required for honokiol-mediated modulation of pACC-pS6K. Intriguingly, we
discovered that honokiol treatment increased the expression and
cytoplasmic translocation of tumor suppressor gene LKB1 in breast cancer
cells. LKB1 knockdown inhibited honokiol-mediated activation of AMPK and
more importantly, inhibition of migration and invasion of breast cancer
cells. Furthermore, honokiol treatment resulted in inhibition of breast
tumorigenesis in vivo. Analysis of tumors showed significant increase in
the levels of cytoplasmic LKB1 and phospho-AMPK in honokiol-treated
tumors. Conclusions: Taken together, these data providing first in vitro
and in vivo evidence of the efficacy of honokiol in activating LKB1-AMPK
axis resulting in effective inhibition of mammary tumorigenesis and
metastasis provide impetus to determine its activity in clinical setting.

