Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR signaling in glioblastoma regulates the expression of a brain
specific isoform of alphaPIX/Arhgef6 to promote invasion


The gene Arhgef6 encodes the protein alphaPIX/Cool-2, a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor specific for the Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42.
AlphaPIX is a protein of 90 kDa predominantly expressed in haemopoietic
cells where it has been shown to have a role in cytoskeletal
reorganization. However, Arhgef6 is also expressed in the brain and
mutations in Arhgef6 have been linked to intellectual disability (ID) in
humans. AlphaPIX mRNA was reported to be upregulated in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM), the most lethal form of brain cancer. We examined
alphaPIX expression in several glioma cell lines and observed a smaller
isoform migrating at 72 kDa. To characterize this isoform we performed
5RACE from several glioma cell lines and show the smaller isoform is an
amino-terminal truncated form of alphaPIX lacking the calponin homology
(CH) domain. We demonstrate this isoform is expressed during post-natal
brain development and its expression coincides with activation of mTOR.
Examination of glioblastoma from both autopsy and biopsy clinical samples
shows alphaPIX expression correlates with EGFR/PI3K/Akt/mTOR activation.
EGF stimulation is shown to upregulate alphaPIX, and pharmacological
inhibition of Akt inhibits alphaPIX expression. To examine the function
of alphaPIX in glioblastoma we performed siRNA-mediated knockdown and
demonstrate increased cell adhesion upon alphaPIX loss. In addition,
knockdown of alphaPIX in glioma cells decreases invasive capacity and
decreases the formation of invadopodia. These data demonstrate a
previously uncharacterized isoform of alphaPIX is expressed during
post-natal brain development, and is highly upregulated in GBM with
activated EGFR signaling. A functional consequence of EGFR-mediated
alphaPIX expression in glioma is increased invasion as a result of
dysregulated cytoskeletal organization.

