Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK5 modulates the cell cycle, apoptosis and paclitaxel
sensitivity in human ovarian cancer cells with wild-type p53 function


Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) is a ubiquitously expressed
serine/threonine kinase that was initially identified in bovine brain
extracts and plays an important role in normal neuron development and
neurodegenerative diseases. This molecule has recently been shown to
possess many cellular functions in non-neuronal tissues as well. Using a
kinome siRNA screen, we identified CDK5 as a kinase that modulates
paclitaxel sensitivity in human ovarian cancer cells. The aim of this
report is to identify mechanisms by which CDK5 regulates paclitaxel
sensitivity in human ovarian cancer cells. Despite nucleotide sequence
homology with human CDK1, a role of CDK5 in regulating the cell cycle
remains unclear. Here we demonstrate dual roles of CDK5 in regulating the
cell cycle and apoptosis. We have found that knockdown of CDK5 with
multiple siRNAs markedly inhibits cell proliferation and increases
paclitaxel sensitivity in several p53 wild type ovarian cancer cell lines
using assays for cell viability and clonogenic growth. CDK5 knockdown
with or without paclitaxel treatment induces G1 arrest of the cell cycle
and apoptotic cell death linked to a significant induction of p53,
p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 proteins. Induction of G1 arrest following CDK5
knockdown depends on induction of p21Cip1 and p27Kip1, since silencing
p21Cip1 and/or p27Kip1 dramatically reduces CDK5 knockdown-induced G1
arrest. A CDK5 knockdown-induced increase of p53 expression contributes
both to CDK5 knockdown-induced G1 arrest and to apoptosis, as silencing
p53 markedly diminishes CDK5 knockdown-induced G1 arrest and apoptosis.
As expected, a CDK5 knockdown-induced increase in p21Cip1 expression
depends on p53-mediated transcriptional activation demonstrated by
QRT-PCR and reporter luciferase assays. CDK5 knockdown activates
caspase-3 and a pan-caspase inhibitor completely blocks CDK5
knockdown-induced apoptosis. Significant Inhibition of Bcl-2 expression
is found in CDK5 knockdown-induced apoptosis and additional inhibition of
Bcl-2 expression is found with combined CDK5 and paclitaxel treatment.
Taken together, these data suggest that CDK5 can modulate paclitaxel
sensitivity through regulating both the cell cycle and apoptosis. CDK5
inhibition can potentiate paclitaxel activity in human ovarian cancer
cells with wild-type p53 function, providing a novel approach for
enhancing the efficacies of paclitaxel-based regimens for low grade
ovarian cancer in the clinic.

