Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin has an anti-cancer effect by repressing TWIST/N-cadherin
signaling


Introduction and Objective Metformin, one of the most commonly used
medications for treatment of type 2 diabetes, has emerged as a potential
anticancer agent. The molecular mechanisms associated with the
anti-cancer effect of metformin are poorly understood. We demonstrate,
for the first time, that metformin inhibits prostate cancer proliferation
through suppression of TWIST/N-cadherin signaling pathway. Methods RTPCR,
Western blot, immunofluorescence assays and confocal microscopy were
applied to evaluate protein expression level. MTS assay and FACS analysis
were applied to determine cellular proliferation. N-cadherin expression
vectors were transfected into PC3 prostate cancer cells to establish
stable cells with over-expression of N-cadherin. Metformin-resistant
prostate cancer cells were established by exposure to higher
concentrations (10mM) of metformin over 4 weeks. Results Treatment with
metformin (5mM) inhibited proliferation in three different types of
cancer cells (PC3-prostate cancer cells; T24-bladder cancer cells and
786-O- kidney cancer cells). Metformin treatment suppressed expression of
N-cadherin in all cell types. Similar findings were observed by confocal
microscopy. Expression of E-cadherin was not affected by metformin.
Metformin-mediated repression of N-cadherin was dose and time- dependent
in prostate cancer cells. PC3 prostate cancer cells with stable
over-expression of N-cadherin became resistant to metformin-mediated
inhibition. Stable PC3 prostate cancer cells after selection for
metformin became resistant to metformin-mediated inhibition, and the
metformin-resistant cancer cells had slightly higher baseline level of
N-cadherin. In addition, in the metformin-resistant cells, N-cadherin
levels were unchanged after treatment with metformin. The expression of
AKT and AP-1, the downstream molecules of N-cadherin, closely correlated
with expression of N-cadherin after treatment with metformin. Moreover,
we also found that metformin inhibited expression of TWIST-1, a
transcriptional activator of N-cadherin. Similar findings were observed
by confocal microscopy. Conclusions We demonstrate that Metformin's
anti-cancer therapeutic effect may be mediated through repression of the
TWIST/N-cadherin signaling pathway.

