Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altering cell attachment to growth substrate up-regulates growth
differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) expression


Cell attachment to the extracellular environment is critical in
determining cell fate. When normal cells lose attachment, they undergo
anoikis. Cancer cells develop resistance to anoikis which results in
metastasis. While there are many known genes alterations that can alter
cell adhesion, less is known about how such a loss of cell adhesion may
influence gene expression. We believe that a change in cell adhesion
could trigger changes to gene expression, and the resulting changes play
an important role in prostate cancer metastasis. Using prostate cancer
cell lines, we examined gene expression changes in cancer cells brought
about by loss of attachment to their growth substrate through chemical
and physical means and how these changes play a role in prostate cancer.
Microarray analysis was performed on LNCaP cells treated with latrunculin
B, an actin cytoskeleton disrupting agent for 8 hours. Using quantitative
real time PCR and immunoblot analysis, a member of the tumor growth
factor beta superfamily, GDF15 was found to be consistently up-regulated
when the cells were treated with either latrunculin B or other drugs that
disrupt the actin cytoskeleton. These findings were observed not only in
LNCaP but in PC3 and DU145 as well. GDF15 expression was rapidly
increased in these three cell lines when cells were prevented from
attaching to tissue culture plastic and the levels of GDF15 expression
could be maintained as long as the cells were not allowed to re-attach.
This up-regulation was reversed when cells were allowed to re-attach to
growth substrate, or by regaining cell shape when the drugs were removed.
GDF15 has been shown to be associated with metastatic prostate cancer as
well as contributing to disease associated cachexia. In our study, we
demonstrated that loss of cell adhesion was sufficient to increase GDF15
expression in a rapid and sustainable manner. This finding is novel and
different from other reports that increased GDF15 led to altered cell
shape and adhesion. We believe that our findings may provide a picture of
the initial stages in metastasis when a cancer cell loses adhesion to the
extracellular environment. Furthermore, our results reinforce the
potential utility of GDF15 as a prognostic marker in prostate cancer, as
well as the intricate relationship between the cell and the physical
environment in cancer.

