Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3
(STAT3) in ovarian cancer: The hypoxic implications


Background: The hypoxic microenvironment plays a key role in
tumorigenesis and the development of therapeutic resistance in epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC). The goal of this study was to examine the
expression of STAT3 in hypoxic EOC, to understand its mechanism of
activation, and to explore the therapeutic efficacy of a novel compound
HO-3867. Methods: Expression of STAT family proteins in cell lines and
human tumor specimens was analyzed via western blot and IHC. MTT was used
to assess cell viability and apoptotic analysis was performed using flow
cytometry. Over-expression or suppression experiments were performed
using S1PR1 cDNA and shRNA. Tumor xenografts were made with cell lines
exposed to hypoxic preconditioning. Results: pSTAT3 Tyr705 is highly
expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines exposed to hypoxia as well as in
hypoxic regions of advanced human EOC tumor specimens. Accelerated
xenograft tumor growth was observed when implanted cells were
pre-conditioned in a hypoxic microenvironment. Similar to our in vitro
findings, the tumor xenografts of hypoxic ovarian cancer cells (HOCCs)
had high expression of pSTAT3 and its target proteins. We found an
increased expression of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1(S1PR1) in
HOCCs, a known positive feedback regulator of STAT3 transcription.
Suppression of S1PR1 expression with shRNA significantly reduced the
expression of pSTAT3 Tyr705 through the inhibition of the JAK kinases,
resulting in decreased cell survival. Conversely, overexpression of S1PR1
with cDNA increased pSTAT3 Tyr705 and promoted cell proliferation under
hypoxic conditions. Finally, treatment of HOCCs with the novel synthetic
compound HO-3867 resulted in decreased expression of pSTAT3 Tyr705, as
well as STAT3-regulated proteins VEGF, Bcl-xL, Bcl-2, and cyclin D1. The
rapid downregulation of pSTAT3 Tyr705 was associated with accelerated
ubiquitin-dependent degradation. An induction of apoptosis contributed to
inhibition of cell proliferation as HO-3867-exposed cells exhibited
elevated levels of cleaved caspases and PARP. Conclusions: The hypoxic
microenvironment results in STAT3 activation as evidenced in our in vitro
and in vivo models. S1PR1 is involved in STAT3 Tyr705 activation in
hypoxic ovarian cancer via the JAK signaling pathway. The specific
targeting of hypoxia-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 with
HO-3867 is a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment of
hypoxia-mediated chemotherapeutic resistant ovarian cancer.

