Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating mechanisms of regulation of homologous recombination
utilizing a PALB2 fusion protein that contains the BRCT repeats of BRCA1


The products of the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and PALB2,
directly interact through coiled-coil domains present in each protein.
How PALB2 is recruited to sites of DNA damage and how the BRCA1-PALB2
interaction regulates the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by
homologous recombination (HR) have remained unclear, however. Here, the
BRCT repeats of BRCA1, which are required for its localization, were
fused to a PALB2 mutant incapable of binding BRCA1. We introduced this
fusion protein into HCC1937 breast cancer cells that contain a truncated
BRCA1 or into cells in which full-length BRCA1 was depleted using a
siRNA. The fusion protein corrected the deficiency for PALB2 foci in both
systems, either with or without exposure to ionizing radiation.
Importantly, expression of the fusion protein also corrected a defect in
PALB2-dependent assembly of foci by the RAD51 recombinase. Further, we
also introduced the fusion protein into PALB2/FANCN-deficient cells from
a Fanconi anemia patient. The fusion protein restored both PALB2 and
RAD51 foci in these cells without binding to BRCA1. Strikingly, the
fusion protein also conferred resistance to mitomycin C (MMC) and
corrected a defect in DSB-initiated HR in PALB2-deficient cells. Our data
convincingly demonstrate that BRCA1 localizes PALB2 to sites of DNA
damage, and that this is necessary for recruitment of RAD51 and for HR.
Contrary to a published report, since the fusion protein is incapable of
binding to PALB2, our results suggest that PALB2 functions, such as HR,
are mediated by the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction rather than the PALB2-PALB2
dimer. Given that BRCA1 and PALB2 participate in a pathway of DNA repair
by HR, our results suggest that mutations which disrupt the BRCA1-PALB2
interaction may lead to the genetic instability that underlies the
development of cancer. Additionally, the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction may be a
potential therapeutic target for sensitization of cancer cells to DNA
damaging agents.

