Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pericyte coverage of differentiated vessels inside tumor
vasculature is an independent unfavorable prognostic factor for patients
with clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Background: The clinical significance of pericyte coverage (PC)
surrounding differentiated vessels in clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(CCRCC) is unclear. Objective: To evaluate the effect of PC on the
prognosis of patients with CCRCC. Methods: Samples from two cohorts of
CCRCC patients (Asian, 101 cases; U.S., 542 cases) were
immunohistochemically doubled-stained for a pericyte marker (-SMA) and a
differentiated vessel marker (CD34), followed by multispectral image
capturing and computerized image analyses to quantify the microvessel
density (MVD) and pericyte coverage of differentiated vessels. The
correlations of PC or MVD with clinicopathological characteristics were
analyzed. Univariate and multivariate survival analyses were performed.
Results: Uneven distributions of differentiated MVD and PC were found,
with higher MVD in the peripheral portion of the tumor and higher PC in
the inner portion. There was an inverse correlation between
differentiated MVD and PC. Higher PC correlated with more aggressive
clinicopathological characteristics of CCRCC in both cohorts, including
more advanced T-stage, higher pathological grades, and occurrence of
tumor necrosis. The MVD:PC ratio was an independent favorable prognostic
factor for overall survival in the Asian cohort and for recurrence-free
survival in the U.S. cohort. PC and MVD were also independent prognostic
factors, with higher PC or lower MVD predicting a poorer outcome. The
combination of PC and MVD could better distinguish the outcome of CCRCC
patients. PC combined with differentiated MVD, or MVD:PC ratio provided
additional independent prognostic information to the Leibovich risk
model, and using that information we generated improved risk models.
Conclusions: The distributions of MVD and PC were uneven in CCRCC. Higher
PC correlated with more aggressive clinicopathological characteristics.
PC was an independent unfavorable prognostic factor. Targeting pericytes
should be taken into consideration in anti-angiogenic therapy.

