Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH-aspirin: A novel nitric oxide- and hydrogen sulfide-releasing
hybrid for treatment of colon cancer


Introduction: In our search for a better non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) we have synthesized a series of nitric oxide-, and hydrogen
sulfide-releasing hybrid compounds that have IC50s for cell growth
inhibition in the low nano-molar range. We have termed these NOSH
compounds. Our lead agent, NOSH-aspirin is in the order of 100,000 to
250,000-fold more potent than aspirin in inhibiting colon cancer cell
growth over a 24-72h time period. NOSH-aspirin although highly potent,
has very limited cyto-toxicity, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release at 4
times its IC50 for cell growth inhibition was less than 10% at 24h. Here
we report our results on the effects of NOSH-aspirin treatment on
established tumors in a xenograft model of human colon cancer cells.
Methods: Compound: NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and purified by us with
1H-NMR verification. Cell line: HT-29 human adenocarcimoma; Xenografts:
Male athymic SKID mice were implanted s.c. in the right flank with HT-29
(2 x 106) cells suspended in 50% Matrigel, after 10 days the animals were
randomly divided into 4 groups (N = 7/group) and gavaged daily with
NOSH-aspirin (25 or 50 or 100 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle. Tumor volume
and animal weight were recorded every 3 days. After 3 weeks of treatment,
mice were sacrificed, tumors excised, weighed, and fixed in 10% buffered
formalin for immunohistochemical studies. Results: NOSH-aspirin had no
effect on the weight of the mice even at the highest concentration used.
There were no overt signs of toxicity. It dose-dependently reduced tumor
mass by 50 7%, 75 5%, 90 3 % at 25, 50, and 100 mg/kg, respectively.
Tumor volume was also dose-dependently reduced as a function of time.
NOSH-aspirin inhibited growth of HT-29 colon cancer cells xenografts as a
result of reduced proliferation (decreased PCNA expression), and
induction apoptosis (increased number of TUNEL positive cells). NF-B,
activated in control xenografts was significantly inhibited by
NOSH-aspirin. Conclusions: NOSH-aspirin has potent anti-cancer affects
and merits further evaluation.

