Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional genetic approach in patient-derived glioblastoma stem
cells reveals pre-mRNA splicing components to be cancer-lethal gene
targets


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and common form of
brain cancer in adults and is among the deadliest cancers with a median
survival period of 12-14 months. This poor prognosis despite aggressive
therapy underscores the need for novel therapeutic targets specifically
required by GBM cells. Many GBM are thought to arise from a neural stem
cell (NSC) origin and, consistent with this premise, tumor-initiating GBM
stem cells (GSCs) isolated from patients retain the NSC-like phenotype
and molecular profile of primary tumors. Importantly, unlike
serum-cultured cell lines, GSCs retain the developmental potential and
specific genetic mutations acquired as each patient's tumor progressed
from its cell of origin. We hypothesized that these genetic alterations
driving GBM growth might also give rise to unique molecular
vulnerabilities within the cancer cells. To identify such novel gene
targets required for GBM cell growth, but which are dispensable to normal
cells, we performed genome-scale RNAi screens in multiple patient-derived
GSC isolates and simultaneously counter-screened against primary
untransformed human NSCs. From these results, we identified and validated
the existence of GBM-lethal genes that, when inhibited, render patient
GSCs sensitive to cellular stresses arising within these transformed
cells. From these targets, we show that GSCs have an increased
requirement for the expression and function of multiple specific members
of the pre-mRNA splicing machinery. Notably, loss of specific key
splicing proteins resulted in cell cycle arrest and subsequent cell death
only in GSCs, identifying the spliceosome as a specific molecular
vulnerability in GBM. New treatment strategies for this disease are
urgently needed. The identification of spliceosomal proteins as essential
for the growth and maintenance of GSCs both adds to our understanding of
glioblastoma biology and suggests novel targets for therapeutic
intervention.

