Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron chelator contributes to anti-angiogenic therapy via selective
induction of VEGF-A


[Introduction] Iron is essential for cancer to survive. Cancer cell is
suppressed to proliferate under the iron depletion condition using iron
chelator. However, only iron depletion can't suppress tumor growth
completely. The reason is that cancer cell has abilities to escape the
severe environment. These abilities are known as angiogenesis, migration,
etc. Thus, to inhibit not only cancer cell proliferation but also these
abilities are important for anti-cancer therapy. Bevacizumab, an antibody
against vascular endothelial growth factor, is the first clinical
anti-angiogenic drug. It's used for many kinds of cancer patients and
revealed clinical benefit. According to spread widely in use, the
resistance of Bevacizumab has been recognized. Recently, patients in
resistance of Bevacizumab were reported to be high concentration of PIGF,
VEGF-C and VEGF-D. On the other hand, we have demonstrated a synergistic
therapeutic effect of iron depletion on anti-angiogenic therapy for human
cancer in this meeting. In vitro study, iron chelator was used to
simulate the iron depletion condition. Our result showed that iron
depletion has anti-proliferative effect and induction of VEGF-A.
Therefore, Bevacizumab revealed a synergistic therapeutic effect in iron
depletion condition. In this study, we hypothesized that iron chelation
therapy has anti-proliferative effect and induction of only VEGF-A(not
PIGF, VEGF-C and VEGF-D). [Matherials and Methods] A549, H1299 NSCLC cell
lines were used. Iron chelator deferasirox and deferoxamine were prepared
to simulate iron depletion condition. Cell viability was determined by
WST-1 assay. To determine induction of iron chelator, PIGF, VEGF-A, C, D
ELISA assays were performed. In vivo Bevacizumab administration study, we
used A549 subcutaneous tumor xenograft mice(n=5/group).
Deferasirox(50mg/kg) was administrated orally 5days in a week.
Bevaicuzmab(5 mg/kg) was administrated twice a week intravenously.
[Results] Iron chelator suppressed cancer cell proliferation and induced
only VEGF-A(not PIGF, VEGF-C and VEGF-D). VEGF-A was induced by iron
chelator in dose dependent manner. Deferasirox revealed synergistic
anti-tumor effect with Bevacizumab in vivo study. [Conclusion] Iron
chelator contributes to anti-angiogenic therapy via selectively inducing
VEGF-A. Iron chelator can be a new therapeutic strategy of Bevacizumab
combination therapy.

