Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced alterations of renal cell carcinoma cells and
their modulation by tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm in the adult
kidney and its incidence is increasing over the last 20 years.
Unfortunately, approximately 30 % of patients are diagnosed at a
metastatic stage, which is associated with a poor prognosis and a 5-year
survival rate of Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm
in the adult kidney and its incidence is increasing over the last 20
years. Unfortunately, approximately 30 % of patients are diagnosed at a
metastatic stage, which is associated with a poor prognosis and a 5-year
survival rate of < 10 %. The clear cell RCC, representing approximately
75 % of RCC lesions, is characterized by a frequent inactivation of the
Von-Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL) resulting in the upregulation of the
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), which consequently induces the
transcription of hypoxia-responsive genes, such as the vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGF) thereby inducing angiogenesis.
Thus, the inhibition of angiogenesis is a suitable tool for the therapy
of advanced clear cell RCC. During the last decade agents targeting tumor
angiogenesis include inhibitors of the VEGF receptor pathway and the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) have been successfully applied for
the treatment of this disease. Using proteome-based studies and microRNA
arrays hypoxia-regulated miRs and proteins in VHL- versus VHL+ RCC have
been identified in the absence or presence of the angiogenesis inhibitors
sunitinib and axitinib. (i) A differential miR and protein expression
profile exhibiting an inverse correlation was found upon hypoxia, which
further differed in VHL- versus wild-type VHL RCC cells. (ii) The
hypoxia-regulated miRs and proteins in these cell systems were altered by
the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) sunitinib and axitinib treatment.
(iii) Functional analysis of the hypoxia-regulated candidate biomarkers
and their modulation by both TKI are currently performed. (iv) The
differential expression pattern of miRs and proteins under hypoxia as
well as in the absence and presence of both TKIs were confirmed by RT-PCR
and Western blot analysis. These data were shown for the first time an
effect of sunitinib and axitinib on hypoxia-induced alterations in RCC,
which not only leads to a better understanding of the mechanisms of
action of both TKIs, but also to the define of novel strategies for the
targeted treatment of RCC.

