Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pegylated human recombinant hyaluronidase PH20 reduces solid tumor
hypoxia


Tumor hypoxia, the pathophysiological result of the structural and
functional disruption of the tumor microcirculation and the deterioration
of normal diffusion geometry, is strongly associated with tumor
proliferation and resistance to therapy, both chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Indeed, hypoxia-associated resistance to photon
radiotherapy is a severe clinical problem, as the radiation doses
required to achieve the same treatment effect in hypoxic tumors can be
three times the doses required in normoxic tumors. The extracellular
matrix (ECM) glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA) accumulates to high levels
in 30% of solid tumors. Since HA is highly hydrophilic, ECM HA
accumulation is believed to contribute to the elevated interstitial fluid
pressure (IFP) and subsequent tumor vessel constriction observed in solid
tumors. This vascular constriction contributes to the pathologic hypoxia
present in these tumors. PEGPH20, a pegylated human recombinant
hyaluronidase PH20, when delivered intravenously in preclinical models
has been shown to enzymatically remove tumor HA and decrease both tumor
IFP and water, leading to increased tumor vascular perfusion and enhanced
chemotherapeutic delivery (Thompson 2010). Here we aimed to extend these
observations and determine whether PEGPH20 would both increase tumor
blood flow and reduce tumor hypoxia following PEGPH20-mediated HA
removal. Nude mice were inoculated with human BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer
cells adjacent to the right tibial periosteum. When tumors reached 15-20
mm in diameter (n8/group), mice were staged into two treatment groups:
(1) vehicle control and (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy. Vehicle or PEGPH20 (4.5
mg/kg) was administered to animals intravenously twice weekly for one
week. The hypoxyprobe pimonidazole (60 mg/kg, ip) was administered to
animals two hours prior to sacrifice, and fluorescent carbocyanine (75 L,
iv) 5 minutes prior to sacrifice. At sacrifice, whole tumors were
removed, bisected, embedded in OCT medium, and processed for
immunohistochemistry (hypoxyprobe and CD31) or simply imaged
microscopically (carbocyanine). Hypoxia, blood vessel position, and tumor
perfusion were assessed using pimonidazole, CD31 and carbocyanine,
respectively. Compound images were created and the spatial relationship
between hypoxia and vasculature perfusion evaluated. Consistent with
prior studies, tumor HA was depleted in the PEGPH20-treated tumors.
Further, tumor vascular perfusion (carbocyanine) increased 86% (p=0.0007)
and tumor hypoxia decreased by 66% (p=0.03) in PEGPH20-treated animals,
relative to the vehicle controls. These findings suggest that
PEGPH20-mediated reduction in tumor HA increases tumor perfusion, while
concomitantly reducing tumor hypoxia.

