Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase 1 clinical trial of the base-excision repair inhibitor
Methoxyamine-HCl (TRC102; MX) in combination with Temozolomide (TMZ) in
patients with solid tumors


Background: MX is the first base excision repair (BER) inhibitor
evaluated in humans. MX blocks the BER pathway by covalently binding to
apurinic/pymidinic (AP) sites in DNA. In several preclinical studies,
improved therapeutic efficacy has been demonstrated with various
chemotherapeutic agents. Final results of the phase I clinical trial of
pemetrexed and oral MX have been published (GJ Weiss et al). Initial
results and correlative studies of the alkylating agent TMZ and MX were
previously presented (AACR Annual Meeting 2009, abstract#5433). As
initial PK analyses on patient samples revealed a distinct and prolonged
half life in humans, 10-fold greater than estimated in dogs, this report
reflects the protocol amendment from MX administration as a 5-day
intravenous continuous infusion to a 1-hour intravenous infusion.
Methods: This phase I dose-escalation trial investigates the safety,
pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) profile of MX given as an
one-hour intravenous infusion in combination with daily times 5 TMZ. PD
markers, including analysis of abasic sites measured on DNA extracted
from patients mononuclear cells (PBMCs) as well as DNA strand breaks
determined by comet assay at multiple time points over 5-days. Results:
23 patients have enrolled, at dose-levels (DL) 1 and 2 (TMZ 150
mg/m2/day, days 1-5 and MX 15 mg/m2 and 30 mg/m2 respectively) in two
cohorts. In cohort A (patients with no-CNS disease, n =13 at DL1 and n=4
at DL2) primary tumors include lung, breast, pancreatic, colon,
esophageal, ovarian, oropharyngeal, salivary gland, skin adnexal tumors.
In cohort B (patients with CNS tumors, n =3 at DL1 and n=3 at DL2)
primary tumors include brain, pancreatic, head and neck.The combination
of MX and TMZ has been well-tolerated. For the non-CNS involvement
cohort, one DLT was observed at DL1; grade 3 psychosis in a patient with
progressive disease on increasing doses of opioids. A grade 3 allergic
reaction classified as an idiosyncratic event resulted in further
expansion to 10 evaluable patients with no additional DLTs observed. To
date no DLTs have been observed at DL2 and in the CNS-involved cohort.
Three patients had stable disease (lung, ovarian, head and neck) with
extended dosing periods of 7, 10 and 11 months. The PK results will be
presented separately. In all patients evaluated, abasic sites were
blocked by MX resulting in an increase in DNA strand breaks. No
significant anemia (the DLT observed in the MX and pemetrexed trial) has
been observed at DL1 and 2 to date; possibly because of lower MX dose
administered.Conclusions: MX has a distinct PK profile in humans, which
has allowed us to move to a convenient one-hour infusion regimen. Ongoing
data in this phase I clinical trial demonstrate that the combination of
MX with TMZ is well tolerated and hits its target, interrupting base
excision repair in all patients. Trial remains open to accrual.

