Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic analyses of heterogeneous HER2 3+ invasive ductal
carcinomas of the breast


Aims: HER2 gene amplification is observed in 9% to 15% of breast
carcinomas. According to current guidelines, cases with >10% but 10% but
less than 100% of the cancer cells) i) to determine whether the
HER2-positive and HER2-negative components are clonal and ii) to define
the genomic differences between the HER2-positive and HER2-negative
components. Material and methods: Fourty-four cases were collected
consecutively among five French hospitals and for which initial reports
mentioned HER2 heterogeneity. Diagnosis of HER2 heterogeneity was
re-assessed by immunohistochemistry and chromogenic and/ or fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Each component was microdissected (laser capture
microdissection) from representative tissue sections stained with an
anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptest). After DNA extraction, the DNA samples
from the HER2-positive and HER2-negative components of each case were
subjected to microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),
using a platform with 50Kb resolution. Results: Out of 44 cases, the
HER2-positive and HER2-negative components from 13 cases yielded DNA of
sufficient quantity and quality and were subjected to aCGH analysis.
Tumors were preferentially ductal carcinomas of no special type (83%), of
histological grade 3, ER positive (83%), and lymph node positive (70%).
In 11 of the 13 pairs (85%), the only significant difference among the
genomic profiles was the presence of the region of amplification located
at the 17q12-q21 locus encompassing the HER2 gene in the HER2-positive
component. Unsupervised clustering of aCGH data demonstrated strikingly
similar patterns of copy number profiles in different components of each
tumour. In cases that were ER-positive, both the HER2-positive and
HER2-negative components harboured alterations associated with
ER-positive (luminal) carcinomas, such as gains of 1q+, losses of 16q,
and amplifications of 8p12 and 11q13. Conclusions: Albeit rare, our
results demonstrate that HER2 can be heterogeneously overexpressed and
amplified in breast cancers, and this phenomenon appears to be more
prevalent in ER-positive breast carcinomas. Based on the similarities of
their genomic profiles, the HER2-positive and HER2-negative components
from each case are clonal and are likely to have diverged relatively
early in the tumor evolution.

