Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The S-nitrosylation-mediated modification of p53 leads to altered
DNA binding and associates with inactivity of p53 in human melanoma cells


Melanoma represents one of the cancers most resistant to radiation,
DNA-damaging chemotherapy, and biotherapy. Notably, melanoma expresses
high levels of wild-type tumor suppressor p53, while mutational
inactivation of p53 is very rare. The mechanism for inactivating
wild-type p53 function in melanoma remains unknown. It is known that
melanoma secrets high levels of proinflammatory cytokines and produces
reactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen species (RNS). Chronic inflammation is
strongly associated with the progression of melanoma. Our previous
studies showed that constitutive expression of inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) has been found in human melanoma, and was highly
correlated with poor patient survival. Further studies showed that iNOS
inhibitor L-NIL could significantly inhibit melanoma growth and extended
the survival of tumor-bearing mice. Moreover, in melanoma A375 cells,
which express wild-type p53, the depletion of nitric oxide (NO) by
scavenger c-PTIO enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis in a p53-dependent
manner. Thus, we hypothesize that the aberrant high levels of NO in
melanoma cells inhibit p53 transcriptional activity through
posttranslational modification of important cysteines of p53 by
S-nitrosylating the thiol group. Our biotin switch assay data confirmed
that p53 was highly S-nitrosylated in A375 cells. Furthermore, the NOS
inhibitor, L-NAME, significantly reduced S-nitrosylated p53 levels in
A375 cells as compared with controls. ChIP assay studies showed that
manipulation of NO levels by NOS inhibitor or NO donor substantially
affected p53 binding to the promoters of downstream genes, such as p21,
Pig3, and Mdm2, in A375 cells. In the initial Mass spectrometry studies
on protein samples derived from biotin switch assays, we identified that
Cys277 of p53, which directly contacts DNA in the DNA-binding domain, was
highly S-nitrosylated in A375 cells. Molecular modeling to simulate
p53-DNA complex was performed based on p53 crystal structure. The
structural analysis showed that the S-nitrosylation of Cys277 reduced
three hydrogen bonds between p53 and the conserved DNA site of
p21Waf/Cip1 as compared with non-S-nitrosylated p53. However, a new
hydrogen bond was also observed between Lys120 of S-nitrosylated p53 with
DNA. It indicates that the S-nitrosylation of Cys277 can reduce the
affinity and specificity of p53 binding to p21Waf/Cip1 promoter resulting
in inhibiting transcription. Therefore, our studies represent a novel
mechanism for S-nitrosylation-mediated regulation of wild-type p53
activity in melanoma cells as well as other cancer cells with aberrant
high levels of RNS. Supported by MDACC SPORE in Melanoma P50CA093459.

