Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear Apc suppresses colitis-associated tumorigenesis in mice


Because mutation of tumor suppressor gene APC is the initiating step in
most colorectal cancers (CRC), understanding the full spectrum of APC
functions will illuminate better diagnostic, preventive and therapeutic
strategies for the disease. Although APC shuttles between the cytoplasm
and nucleus, testing proposed roles for nuclear APC in the context of a
whole organism was only recently made possible using a mouse model
compromised for nuclear Apc which we generated by introducing germline
mutations that inactivate the Apc nuclear localization signals (ApcmNLS).
Our previous analysis of ApcmNLS mice revealed a role for nuclear Apc in
regulation of Wnt signal transduction and intestinal cell proliferation
as well as in tumor suppression. In humans, chronic colitis significantly
increases CRC risk and APC mutations occur late in this cancer
progression. In the current study, we show increased expression of
inflammatory mediators cyclo-oxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and
macrophage-inflammatory-protein-2 (MIP-2) in colon epithelial cells from
ApcmNLS/mNLS mice, suggesting a role for nuclear Apc in suppressing
colitis-mediated colon cancer. To test this hypothesis, we initiated
colon tumors with a single injection of the mutagen, azoxymethane (AOM)
and promoted the tumors with repeated oral administration of dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS) to induce colonic inflammation. When treated with
AOM-DSS, ApcmNLS/mNLS mice developed more colonic tumors than treated
wildtype mice. Tumors from treated ApcmNLS/mNLS and wildtype mice had the
same spectrum of -catenin mutations, proliferation rates and
histopathological features, consistent with the ApcmNLS allele enhancing
colitis-associated tumor initiation rather than progression. ApcmNLS/mNLS
mice had increased weight loss and colonic lymphoid follicles implicating
nuclear Apc in suppression of AOM-DSS-induced colitis. These findings
reveal novel functions for nuclear Apc and also indicate a critical
protective role for Apc early in inflammation-induced colon tumorigenesis.

