Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3R1 gene alterations, insights on its role in lung cancer


Gene abnormalities are the cause of cancer and efforts are still needed
to identify all the genes that promote carcinogenesis, including those
altered at low frequencies. The occurrence of homozygous deletions (HD)
is one mechanism for tumor suppressor gene inactivation. We scrutinized
the SNP arrays at the Sanger Database to search for HD in lung cancer
cell lines. Several candidate tumor suppressors, including PIK3R1, were
found to be altered by HD. PIK3R1 codifies for p85, a regulatory subunit
of the PI3K, and mutations have been found in different tumor types. The
PI3K pathway is highly relevant in cancer since it contains well known
oncogens and tumor suppressors. Despite that, the functional significance
of PIK3R1 mutations is uncertain, because activating and inactivating
alterations have been described in tumors. Here, we aimed to clarify the
role of this gene in cancer. We amplified by PCR each individual exon of
the gene and confirmed the presence of a HD at the NCI-H2171 cell line.
Mutational analysis of PIK3R1 was then extended to a panel of 86 lung
cancer cell lines. We identified several changes including an
heterozygous nonsense mutation, c.211G>T (p.G71*), an heterozygous
missense mutation, c.211G>T (p.D13H) and several intronic changes outside
the canonical splice sites. Intriguingly, the levels of p85 protein in
the cell line carrying the p.G71* mutation were almost zero, indicating
the presence of a second hit. To search for the presence of intragenic
small deletions, undetectable by single exon amplification, we studied
the cDNA of PIK3R1. No additional alterations were detected in this cell
line nor in the other cells carrying PIK3R1 heterozygous missense
mutations. Next, we used cancer cell lines that have no p85 protein due
to HD to determine whether the lack of p85 impinges the AKT-mTOR pathway.
To this end, we tested the levels of pAKT-T308, pAKT-S473 and
pS6-S235/236, upon different cell culture conditions (i.e. +/IGF) in
cancer cells carrying alterations at distinct components of the PI3K
pathway. We found that cells with alterations at ERBB2 and PTEN had
constitutive high levels of pAKT and pS6, in all the conditions tested.
Surprisingly, some cells lacking p85 protein due to HD at PIK3R1, readily
regulated the activation/inactivation of the pathway, accordingly to the
cell culture conditions. This indicates that the inactivation of the p85
protein in cancer does not compromise the appropriate modulation of
AKT/mTOR signalling, possibly due to a compensation effect by other
regulatory subunits. In conclusion, PIK3R1 is mutated in lung cancer,
albeit at low frequencies. Furthermore, PIK3R1 alterations contribute to
oncogenesis by mechanisms that require further investigation.

