Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells in the peripheral blood and cerebrospinal
fluid of patients with central nervous system metastases


The enumeration of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood is a
validated method of monitoring disease status in patients with epithelial
malignancies involving the breast, colon, prostate, or lung. As cancer
therapies improve and aim to decrease metastatic burden, the central
nervous system (CNS) is emerging as an important sanctuary site for
metastasis. Current surveillance and clinical markers of metastatic
disease progression involving the CNS are lacking adequate sensitivity,
reproducibility, and specificity. One of these clinical markers is
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology, which lacks clarity, is insensitive,
requires high sample volumes and is subject to interpretation bias by the
pathologist. To overcome these limitations, we previously adapted the
Cellsearch system (Veridex) to isolate and enumerate tumor cells in the
CSF of breast or non-small cell lung cancer patients with CNS metastases.
We recently reported that the number of cells in the CSF directly
correlated with the subject's clinical condition and Karnofsky
performance status (KPS) in metastatic breast cancer. Furthermore,
imaging of the neuroaxis in these patients revealed disease presence,
however, was not indicative of disease burden. A sharp decline in the
number of CSF tumor cells (CSFTCs) was universally noted after the onset
and maintenance of such ventricular intrathecal chemotherapy. We have
continued to follow these patients and have expanded our patient
population to include non-small cell lung cancer. This includes a patient
that we have followed from a baseline CSFTC count of >10,000 to zero over
the course of intrathecal treatment, which as been accompanied by
drastically reduced disease by and complete resolution of clinical
symptoms. We have also begun to perform concomitant CTC enumeration from
peripheral blood in conjunction with CSFTC analysis. Interestingly, while
there appears to be no strong correlation between the two subpopulations,
tumor cells seemed to be compartmentalized to either the blood or the
CSF. Together, the current data indicates that CSFTCs may serve as viable
markers for diagnosis and prognostication in the setting of CNS
metastases. This novel method of isolating CSFTCs provides a
semi-automated platform that greatly increases sensitivity, accuracy and
reliability over the standard CSF cytology. Furthermore, this platform
enables studies to elucidate the significance and biology of this unique
subpopulation of tumor cells, including its relationship with CTCs.

