Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YM155, a small molecule survivin suppressant, sensitizes human
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma to rituximab-induced apoptosis


Survivin is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family of
proteins, and is highly expressed in various tumor types. Given its
preferential expression in tumor cells, and its ability to block
apoptosis and regulate cancer cell proliferation, survivin appears to be
an attractive target for cancer therapy. YM155 is a small molecule
survivin suppressant and shows in vitro antiproliferative activity
against the broad spectrum of human cancer cell lines, including B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL). The continuous infusion of YM155 induced
the tumor regression in B-NHL xenograft mice models. Furthermore, our
recent study indicated that the combination treatment of YM155 and
rituximab induced significant tumor growth inhibition and tumor
regression without weight loss. In the present study, we examined the in
vitro combination efficacy of YM155 and rituximab, and its underlying
signaling pathways involved in the combination effect of YM155 and
rituximab. The combination of YM155 at 1 nmol/L and rituximab at 2 ug/mL
induced higher sub G1 compared with each single treatment in WSU-DLCL-2
and SU-DHL-4. Rituximab at 2ug/mL decreased phospho-STAT3 level,
meanwhile, did not decreased phospho-p38 MAPK and phospho-AKT levels in
WSU-DLCL-2 and SU-DHL4. To further characterize the growth inhibitory
effect of inactivation of STAT3 pathway, we investigated the cell growth
inhibition by AG490, a JAK2 inhibitor and STA-21, a STAT3 dimerization
inhibitor in WSU-DLCL-2 and SU-DHL4. The treatment of AG-490 or STA-21
decreased cell viability in dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, the
combination of YM155 at 1 nmol/L and AG490 at 10mol/L or STA-21 at 6mol/L
induced higher apoptosis rate that was evident by the sub G1 fraction and
annexin-V induction compared with each single treatment. These results
suggested that the growth of human B-NHL is STAT3 dependent manner and
the inhibition of STAT3 pathway sensitizes human B-NHL to YM155 induced
apoptosis. The present study suggested that survivin suppression by YM155
and the convergence of disabling inhibition of STAT-dependent survival
pathway by ritximab would contribute the synergistic combination
efficacy. A phase 2 study with YM155 plus rituximab is ongoing in
relapsed patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

