Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell matrix interactions in a 3D alginate cell culture system


The use of 3-dimensional (3D) matrices for cell culture is gaining
popularity as a substitute for traditional 2D cell culture as it can
enable formation of multi-cellular structures and a more biologically
relevant cell-cell contact such as found in tissues, organs and tumors.
NovaMatrix-3D is an alginate-based cell culture system comprising an
alginate foam matrix and an alginate immobilizing solution. Cells are
entrapped throughout the alginate foam by first suspending them in a
solution of sodium alginate that is applied to the foam. As the foam
absorbs the suspension, in situ gelation occurs as calcium ions are
donated from the foam cross-linking the added alginate forming a hydrogel
in the pores of the foam comprising the cells. Cells do not have
receptors that recognize alginate molecules and this may stimulate
formation of spheroids. However, some cells require signaling molecules
and matrix interaction in order to proliferate. This was evaluated by
culturing cells in the presence of alginate to which the peptide sequence
RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) was covalently attached (RGD-alginate) thereby
facilitating a signaling cascade via integrin-RGD interaction. Various
cell lines were first cultured in 2D then prepared as a suspension in 0.5
- 1% alginate or RGD-alginate in cell culture medium. An aliquot of each
cell suspension was added to -sterilized NovaMatrix-3D foams. NHIK 3025
(human cervix carcinoma), OVCAR-3 (human ovarian adenocarcinoma), SKOV-3
(human ovarian carcinoma), NIH:3T3 (murine fibroblasts), C2C12 (murine
myoblasts), V79-379A (hamster lung fibroblast) and MDCK (Madin Darby
canine kidney) were used and single cells were immobilized in the
alginate foams. Cell localization within the foam was visualized using
confocal microscopy to identify fluorescently labeled (CellTrace CFSE)
cells. Cell proliferation was measured by counting cells after de-gelling
the foam using sodium citrate. Cell proliferation and spheroid formation
occurred during three weeks of culture in foams with or without
RGD-alginate for NHIK 3025, SKOV-3, 3T3 and V79-379A indicating that
these cell lines do not require the presence of RGD within the alginate
matrix for cell growth. However, during the same period, cell
proliferation was only seen in the foams containing RGD-alginate for
OVCAR-3, MDCK and C2C12. The proliferation rate was affected by the RGD
density. Cells that did not proliferate in pure alginate were still
metabolically viable as shown by live-dead staining. This cell culture
model enables 3D cell culture, formation of spheroids and isolation of
intact cellular structures. Cell-matrix interaction can be controlled by
type and concentration of signaling molecules covalently attached to the
alginate immobilization solution making NovaMatrix-3D a versatile cell
culture system. Portions of this work have been funded with the support
from METOXIA project no.222741 under the 7th Research Framework Programme
of the European Union.

