Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic potential of mitochondria regulate the cellular tumor
characteristics


Mitochondrial-nucleus cross-talks and mitochondrial retrograde regulation
of nuclear genes can play significant role in cellular properties.
Several studies reported that somatic mitochondrial DNA alterations are
often detected in cancer cells. Most of such alterations are
polymorphisms without functional significance. Here we use a
transmitochondrial cybrid (cybrids) approach to understand the
significance of mitochondrial property in regulating the oncogenic
properties of a cell irrespective of its mutational and nuclear status.
Cybrid models in two differently defined nuclear backgrounds were
studied. In the first model, mitochondria depleted rho zero (0) from an
aggressive osteosarcoma cell lines 143B TK was used as a common nuclear
background. 143B 0 cells were fused with mitochondria from non-cancerous
breast epithelial cell line MCF10A, low metastatic breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-468 and highly metastatic 143B TK cell lines. In the second
model, we used the common nuclear background of A1N4, a non-tumorigenic
immortalized breast epithelial cell. A1N4 0 cells were fused with MCF-10A
and metastatic breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231. Studies in parental
mitochondrial donor cells suggested that cancer cell lines have reduced
ATP synthesis, oxygen consumption and respiratory chain activities
compared to non-cancerous cells. Interestingly, in spite of the common
nuclear backgrounds, cybrids also showed properties similar to their
parental cells under both cancerous and non-cancerous nuclear
backgrounds. Functional studies in cybrids under non-cancerous nuclear
background observed that fusion with cancerous mitochondria resulted in
loss of growth contact inhibition, induction of colony formation
potential in soft agar and increased survival potential under serum
starvation. Similarly, functional studies in cybrids with cancerous
nuclear background suggested that non-cancerous mitochondria could
reverse different oncogenic characteristics of cancer cell including cell
proliferation, viability under hypoxic condition, anti-apoptotic
properties, resistance to anti-cancer drug, invasion, colony formation in
soft agar, and in vivo tumor growth in nude mice. Microarray analysis of
cybrids under cancerous nuclear background suggested that several
oncogenic pathways are inhibited due to non-cancerous mitochondria.
Interestingly, under non-cancerous nuclear background, induction of
important oncogenes was observed in cybrids containing cancerous
mitochondria. These results suggest that mitochondrial-nuclear cross talk
have significant contribution to cancer cell properties. Also it
highlights mitochondria as a promising target in cancer therapy.

