Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiles of head and neck cancer tumorgrafts


Purpose: We have developed a primary tumorgraft system of squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck with relevance for investigating
mechanisms of therapeutic resistance, understanding differential
responses to standard therapy in HPV-positive and HPV-negative cancers,
and testing novel therapeutics. To better understand the power,
limitations and relevance of our tumorgraft system, we have initiated
molecular characterization of these tumors. Methods: Patients with newly
diagnosed or recurrent HNSCC were consented for donation of tumor at the
time of surgery. Tumor tissue was obtained, washed in antibiotic rich
media, manually disaggregated, and subcutaneously implanted into mice
(NOD.Cg-Prkdc scid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) for initial tumorgraft establishment.
Subsequent mouse-to-mouse passages were performed and
formalin-fixed/paraffin embedded as well as flash frozen tissue was
harvested for subsequent molecular analyses. Expression of p16(Ink4a),
p53, pRB, and EGFR was assessed by immunohistochemistry(IHC). HPV status
and subtype was assessed using MY09/MY11 and GP5/GP6 degenerate nested
polymerase chain reaction and Sanger sequencing. Transcriptionally active
HPV infection was assessed by qRT-PCR for the HPV oncogenes E6 and E7.
Mutation status of p53 was assessed by PCR-based exon amplification and
Sanger sequencing. Results: To date, thirty primary tumorgrafts have been
established with robust growth in eighteen (60%). p16(INK4A) expression
was identified in approximately one-third. The majority of HPV-positive
tumorgrafts contained HPV-16 and were transcriptionally active by mRNA
expression profiling. HPV-positive tumors showed low p53 and RB
expression by IHC. As anticipated, mutations in p53 were seen more
frequently in HPV-negative tumors. Conclusions: These primary human
tumorgrafts represent a diverse range of head and neck cancers. Both
HPV-positive tumors and HPV-negative tumors have been successfully
propagated with a diverse range of molecular characteristics. These
primary tumorgrafts will provide a valuable platform for testing novel
therapeutics as well as radiation and chemotherapy response profiles.

