Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BH3 mimetic navitoclax (ABT-263) selectively induces apoptosis
in cholangiocarcinoma-associated fibroblasts thereby reducing tumor growth


Background and Aims: Cholangiocarcinomas (CCA) are highly desmoplastic
tumors containing abundant cancer associated myofibroblasts (CAF). An
inverse association between the abundance of CAF and survival has been
demonstrated in CCA, suggesting that CAF play a pivotal role in CCA
development and progression. The CAF phenotype represents an activated
cell state and as such may be uniquely susceptible to apoptosis. BH3
mimetics induce apoptosis in cells primed for cell death, representing a
therapeutic strategy for cancer. Herein we examine whether CAF display a
selective sensitivity to the BH3 mimetic ABT-263 and whether ABT-263
induced ablation of CAF reduces tumor growth and progression. Methods: We
employed human and rat CAF, myofibroblastic human LX2 cells, human and
rat control fibroblasts, the rat cholangiocarcinoma cell line BDEneu and
human CCA cell lines for these studies. In-vivo experiments were
conducted using a syngeneic, orthotopic rat CCA model. Results: We
observed a significant and dose dependent induction of apoptosis by
ABT-263 in human and rat primary CAF as well as activated LX2 cells as
compared to rat BDEneu and human CCA cell lines. Comparison of Bcl-2
protein expression in quiescent fibroblasts versus CAF demonstrated a
consistent upregulation of Bax in the CAF, likely explaining their
enhanced sensitivity to pro-death stimuli. Indeed, ABT-263 treatment of
CAF was associated with Bax activation as compared to human CCA cell
lines. Finally, administration of ABT-263 decreased tumor size and
metastasis in a human-like in-vivo rat model of CCA. Analysis of the rat
tumors revealed a decrease in Tenascin C positive tumor stroma and an
increase of TUNEL-positive apoptotic stromal cells. Conclusions: CCA
associated CAF appear to be primed for cell death, possibly due to
overexpression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein Bax. Consequently CAF
display increased sensitivity to the BH3 mimetic ABT-263, which
selectively depletes them from a rat in-vivo model of CCA, thereby
reducing tumor growth and metastasis. Thus targeting CCA tumor stroma by
inducing apoptosis in CAF may represent a new therapeutic approach in
human CCA.

