Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 chromatin dissociation induced by oncogene activation
promotes formation of senescence-associated heterochromatin foci and
senescence via chromatin remodeling factor BRG1


Background: Cellular senescence is a state of irreversible cell growth
arrest that is an important tumor suppression mechanism in vivo.
Activation of oncogenes such as Ras in primary mammalian cells typically
triggers senescence and formation of senescence-associated
heterochromatin foci (SAHF) that contributes to senescence-associated
cell cycle exit. We have previously showed that dissociation of BRCA1
from chromatin induced by oncogenic Ras plays a key role in promoting
cellular senescence by driving SAHF formation. However, the mechanism by
which BRCA1 chromatin dissociation promotes SAHF formation and senescence
remains to be determined. BRG1 is an ATP dependent SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling factor that interacts with BRCA1. Components of
SWI/SNF complex including BRG1 are often deregulated in human cancer.
Here we examined the role of BRG1 in regulating formation of SAHF trigged
by BRCA1 chromatin dissociation induced by oncogenic Ras. Results: We
discovered that the interaction between BRG1 and BRCA1 is disrupted
during oncogenic RAS induced senescence. Interestingly, BRG1 accumulates
in chromatin fraction while BRCA1 becomes dissociated from chromatin.
Notably, BRG1 knockdown suppresses formation of SAHF and senescence,
while has no effects on BRCA1 chromatin dissociation in Ras-infected
cells, suggesting that BRG1 functions downstream of BRCA1 chromatin
dissociation in promoting SAHF formation and senescence. Indeed, BRG1
knockdown is sufficient to inhibit SAHF formation and senescence induced
by BRCA1 knockdown. Conversely, BRG1 overexpression drives SAHF formation
and senescence. Notably, senescence induced by BRG1 overexpression is
independent of DNA damage response, further supporting the idea that BRG1
functions downstream of BRCA1 chromatin dissociation during Ras induced
senescence. Mechanistically, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that, in Ras-expressing or BRCA1 knockdown cells, there is an
increased association of BRG1 with the promoters of p16INK4a and p21CIP,
both of which are key regulators of SAHF formation and senescence.
Significance: These studies revealed the molecular underpinning by which
BRCA1 chromatin dissociation promotes SAHF formation and senescence. They
also imply that BRG1 inactivation contributes to cancer development by
suppressing cellular senescence. (R.Z. is an Ovarian Cancer Research Fund
(OCRF) Liz Tilberis Scholar. This work was supported in part by a NCI
FCCC-UPenn ovarian cancer SPORE (P50 CA083638) pilot project and SPORE
career development award, a DOD ovarian cancer academy award (OC093420),
and an OCRF program project.)

