Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole transcriptome analysis of primary and metastatic
osteosarcoma in the canine model


Canine osteosarcoma is an excellent model of the human disease.
Understanding the molecular events leading to metastatic disease is
foundational for developing effective treatments. The objective of this
study was to characterize single nucleotide variations (SNVs) acquired
during metastasis. Primary and metastatic tumor samples were obtained
from a dog with spontaneously occurring osteosarcoma, treated with
surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. Tumor total RNA was isolated and
processed using standard techniques. Created libraries were used for
paired-end sequencing (2 lanes of 2x80 per sample), in the Illumina
Platform. Alignments to canFam2 reference sequence were performed using
the TopHat splice aligner and quantified expression levels for all
canFam2 ENSEMBL gene models using CuffLinks with GC-correction and
upper-quartile normalization. After SNV discovery via custom pipeline,
quantification of their abundance was performed by Benjamini-Hochberg
corrected Fisher exact tests, on SNVs read counts. Thesequence data were
visualized using Integrated Genome Viewer, while Polyphen2 was used to
assess the potential impact of SNVs in protein function. Tumor samples
from a 6-year-old neutered male Golden Retriever, diagnosed with
spontaneously-occurringosteosarcoma, treated with surgery and adjuvant
cheemotherapy were used. Lung metastases were confirmed to be metastatic
osteosarcoma. Tumor RNA of adequate quantity and quality was isolated
from primary and metastatic lesions. Seventy-four and 89 million pair-end
reads were generated from the primary and the metastatic site,
respectively. There were 13,292 heterologous and 19,780 homologous SNVs
identified in the primary tumor, while 48,453 heterologous and 72,737
homologous SNVs identified in the metastatic tumor. At 20% false
discovery rate, we identified 190 SNVs with increased abundance in the
metastatic site compared to the primary site. The majority of these SNVs
(>95%) were nearly or fully homozygous in the metastatic sample and
either heterozygous or low abundance in the primary tumor sample. These
results suggest frequent and potentially convergent
loss-of-heterozygosity in the metastasis compared to the primary. More
specifically, a missense SNV with high probability of affecting protein
function was identified in p53, only in the metastatic sample. A
putativealternative splicing event was identified in BRCA1, skipping
exons 4, 5, and 6. A missense SNV was identified in BRCA2, with 1/9 reads
having a T>C change in the primary tumor, but 25/25 reads having the same
variant in the metastatic site (adjusted pCanine osteosarcoma is an
excellent model of the human disease. Understanding the molecular events
leading to metastatic disease is foundational for developing effective
treatments. The objective of this study was to characterize single
nucleotide variations (SNVs) acquired during metastasis. Primary and
metastatic tumor samples were obtained from a dog with spontaneously
occurring osteosarcoma, treated with surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy.
Tumor total RNA was isolated and processed using standard techniques.
Created libraries were used for paired-end sequencing (2 lanes of 2x80
per sample), in the Illumina Platform. Alignments to canFam2 reference
sequence were performed using the TopHat splice aligner and quantified
expression levels for all canFam2 ENSEMBL gene models using CuffLinks
with GC-correction and upper-quartile normalization. After SNV discovery
via custom pipeline, quantification of their abundance was performed by
Benjamini-Hochberg corrected Fisher exact tests, on SNVs read counts.
Thesequence data were visualized using Integrated Genome Viewer, while
Polyphen2 was used to assess the potential impact of SNVs in protein
function. Tumor samples from a 6-year-old neutered male Golden Retriever,
diagnosed with spontaneously-occurringosteosarcoma, treated with surgery
and adjuvant cheemotherapy were used. Lung metastases were confirmed to
be metastatic osteosarcoma. Tumor RNA of adequate quantity and quality
was isolated from primary and metastatic lesions. Seventy-four and 89
million pair-end reads were generated from the primary and the metastatic
site, respectively. There were 13,292 heterologous and 19,780 homologous
SNVs identified in the primary tumor, while 48,453 heterologous and
72,737 homologous SNVs identified in the metastatic tumor. At 20% false
discovery rate, we identified 190 SNVs with increased abundance in the
metastatic site compared to the primary site. The majority of these SNVs
(>95%) were nearly or fully homozygous in the metastatic sample and
either heterozygous or low abundance in the primary tumor sample. These
results suggest frequent and potentially convergent
loss-of-heterozygosity in the metastasis compared to the primary. More
specifically, a missense SNV with high probability of affecting protein
function was identified in p53, only in the metastatic sample. A
putativealternative splicing event was identified in BRCA1, skipping
exons 4, 5, and 6. A missense SNV was identified in BRCA2, with 1/9 reads
having a T>C change in the primary tumor, but 25/25 reads having the same
variant in the metastatic site (adjusted p<0.05). The metastatic
osteosarcoma lesion appears to have a higher number of SNVs than the
primary lesion, potentially reflecting the genetic changes of the
metastatic process, and altogether, indicate potentially programmed
genetic changes in metastatic sites compared to primary tumors.

