Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physiological -catenin signaling regulates pluripotency genes in
cancer microcell hybrids


Both -catenin signaling and Nanog were previously reported to be involved
in cell fusion-mediated somatic cell reprogramming. It remains unclear as
to how the -catenin signaling pathway is initiated and whether this
pathway may directly control the expression of core stem cell factors
such as Nanog and Oct4. Since -catenin signaling is a predominating force
for the regulation of cellular fate and basic levels of this signaling
are needed for somatic cell reprogramming, we speculate that transfer of
a single copy of chromosome 3, where -catenin maps and is controlled by
its natural regulators, into somatic cancer cells may appropriately
induce this pathway and switch on the expression of endogenous
pluripotency genes in recipient cells. We previously generated human
nasopharyngeal (HONE1) and esophageal (SLMT1) carcinoma hybrid cells with
an intact copy of transferred chromosome 3. At both transcriptional and
translational levels, we detected obvious expression of genes related to
the Wnt/-catenin pathway in HONE1/chromosome 3 hybrid cells. In these
hybrid cells, -catenin, c-Myc, Axin2, Tcf1, Sox2, Klf4, Oct4, and Nanog
were either strongly expressed or up-regulated. The loss of region that
contains B-catenin locus in transferred chromosome 3 abolishes the
expression of core stem cell genes. The control of these gene activities
by physiological -catenin signaling was further confirmed in
HONE1/chromosome 17 hybrids that contain the downstream components of
-catenin signaling Axin2 and Stat3, but was not detected in hybrids with
an irrelevant transferred chromosome and SLMT1 cells that had a
relatively high level of endogenous -catenin expression. We also found
that HONE1 hybrid cells have stem cell-like properties, including
spheroid formation, up-regulation of CD24+ and CD44+ populations and
expression of various embryonic markers. Additionally, chromosome 3
transfer induced epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) events in
HONE1 cells that caused different expression of adhesion molecules and
up-regulation of their regulators and other markers such as Twist, Snail,
Slug, ZEB1, Sip1, and E-cadherin. As expected, we detected that p53, Rb1,
and Smad2 involved pathways were activated in HONE1 hybrid cells,
suggesting that physiological -catenin signaling, via multiple signaling
pathways, regulates both pluripotency networks and EMT events.

