Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-assembled superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for
targeted cancer therapy


Surface engineered iron oxide nanoparticles offer greater potential for
targeted gene therapy as compared to many of the current treatment
modalities for cancer. The intrinsic superparamagnetism of iron oxide
nanoparticles along with a bio-inspired coating to circumvent the
physiological and cellular barriers suggests their usefulness as an
efficient non-invasive therapeutic option to invoke the desired response
at the tumor site. In the present study, a novel functionalized iron
oxide nanoparticle based polyplex system that explores the greater
potentials of self-assembly together with magnetic targeting is employed
for smart targeting and to improve therapeutic index. Poly (L-glutamic
acid) functionalized iron oxide nanoparticles (Feg) were synthesized and
complexed with plasmid DNA containing the gene of interest in the
presence of carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS). The preliminary
characterization of the nanoparticles was performed by X-ray diffraction
and FT-IR analysis. The formation and the internalization of Feg-CMCS-DNA
polyplex occurred irrespective of the type of DNA as illustrated by gel
retardation assay and Prussian blue staining, respectively. The Feg-CMCS
nanoparticles, when conjugated with secreted protein acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC)-overexpressing plasmid, showed excellent
cytocompatibility (evident from MTT assay, morphology and organization of
cytoskeleton) with comparable in vitro biofunctionality (illustrated by
western blot analysis) as that of a commonly used transfection agent. The
supramolecular assembly of the (Feg-CMCS-SPARC) polyplex system was
manifested by scanning and transmission electron micrographs. The
mechanism of internalization of the polyplex system and the role of
magnetic field in enhancing the internalization were observed by
transmission electron microscopy. Further, Feg-CMCS-SPARC polyplex
transfection resulted in significant inhibition of in vitro tumor
angiogenesis. This study highlights the superior efficacy of
Feg-CMCS-SPARC self-assembled polyplex system for use as a localized
therapeutic drug in vivo at the tumor site.

