Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular networks regulated by tumor suppressive microRNA-375 in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common malignancy worldwide. In spite of considerable advances in
multimodality therapy including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy,
the overall five-year survival rate for patients with HNSCC is around
40%. Understanding of the molecular oncogenic pathway underlying HNSCC
could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and disease prevention.
Our microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures of hypopharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), maxillary sinus SCC and esophageal SCC revealed
that the expression of microRNA-375 (miR-375) was significantly reduced
in cancer tissues. In this study, we investigated the functional
significance of miR-375 and explored novel molecular networks regulated
by miR-375 in HNSCC. METHODS: Cell proliferation assay was performed to
investigate the functional significance of miR-375 and its target genes
in HNSCC cell lines. Genome-wide gene expression analysis was performed
to identify the molecular networks of miR-375 by microarray technique.
The expression levels of miR-375 target genes were verified using
quantitative real-time RT-PCR in HNSCC clinical specimens. A luciferase
reporter assay was used to identify the actual binding site between
miR-375 and its candidate target genes. RESULTS: Restoration of miR-375
significantly inhibited cancer cell proliferation in HNSCC cells.
Genome-wide molecular targets search and TargetScan database indicated
that homocysteine-inducible, endoplasmic reticulum stress-inducible,
ubiquitin-like domain member 1 (HERPUD1), lactate dehydrogenase B (LDHB),
PC4 and SFRS1 interacting protein 1 (PSIP1), metadherin (MTDH) and
solute-carrier family 7, member 11 (SLC7A11) were the candidate genes of
miR-375 target. Among them, the expression levels of LDHB and MTDH were
significantly up-regulated in clinical HNSCC tumor specimens compared
with adjacent normal epithelium. Luciferase reporter assay showed that
LDHB and MTDH were directly regulated by miR-375. Silencing of these
genes studies demonstrated significant inhibition of cell proliferation
in HNSCC cells. CONCLUSIONS: miR-375 functions as a tumor suppressor in
HNSCC. LDHB and MTDH are directly regulated by miR-375. These genes may
function as oncogenes and contributed to cell proliferation in HNSCC.
Tumor suppressive miR-375 and its target oncogenes may provide new
insights into the molecular networks of HNSCC.

