Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLA2 activities in human epithelial ovarian cancer ascites


Ascites production is characteristic of late stage human epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) and it correlates with tumor spread clinically.
However, the role of this microenvironment in cancer cells and the
mechanisms by which ascites promotes tumor development are not well
understood. In recent years, phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes have been
identified as cancer therapeutic targets focusing mainly on secreted
PLA2s (sPLA2s). In this work, we optimized and validated the quantitative
analytic methods to measure PLA2 activities in human EOC ascites and
tissues. We found, for the first time, that both cytosolic PLA2 (cPLA2)
and calcium-independent PLA2 (iPLA2), but not sPLA2 and autotaxin (ATX),
activities (not their expression levels) in human EOC tissues and ascites
(the tumor microenvironment) were significantly elevated. In addition,
while cell-free (S1) and vesicle-free (S4) human EOC ascites had potent
promoting activities in proliferation, migration, and invasion of human
EOC cells, the PLA2 activities were involved and account for a
significant portion of these activities. Moreover, in vivo studies
demonstrated that methyl arachidonyl fluorophosphonate (MAFP, a dual
inhibitor of cPLA2 and iPLA2), was highly effective in inhibiting EOC
tumorigenesis/metastasis in xenograft models, supporting PLA2 activities
as new targets for EOC. LPA, an enzymatic product of ATX and PLA2
enzymes, mediates a significant part of the cellular effects of ascites
as evidenced by 1) LPA is produced in cell-free ascites; 2) LPA
production and their sensitivities to inhibitors correlate well with the
cellular effects in ascites; and 3) the cellular activities were
sensitive to LPAR inhibitor and siRNA against LPARs. While cPLA2 and
iPLA2 are cytosolic enzymes, our findings indicate that they are
associated with cell- and microvesicle-free ascites. In summary, our work
implies the potential marker and therapeutic values of PLA2 activity in
ovarian cancer.

