Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and proteomic characterization of tamoxifen sensitive and
resistant MCF7 cells


Among the most common and challenging aspect to the management of breast
cancer is the development of tumor resistance to virtually all therapies.
Our major research focus is to investigate genes and pathways that
contribute to this process. We have previously derived a series of
cultured breast cancer cell lines that were either highly sensitive or
naturally resistant to tamoxifen to study the factors that lead to drug
resistance. By comparing tamoxifen sensitive and resistant sub-clones we
identified 227 genes that responded to tamoxifen in sensitive but not in
resistant cells. From these, a signature of 67 genes demonstrated that
women whose tumors matched the resistance pattern had a significantly
greater likelihood of early relapse while on tamoxifen. Using automated
high-throughput cell-based assays; we identified 31 kinases that
repeatedly conferred resistance to tamoxifen when ectopically expressed.
To further expand our understanding of the development of tamoxifen
resistance to a genome level, we employed 6 of our tamoxifen-sensitive
and -resistant sister cell lines. We previously showed that all 6 of
these cell lines, which were all sub-cloned from the same parent without
any drug selection, were identical for a set of 24 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNPs), confirming that they all derived from the same
parent MCF7 line. We reasoned that they should be nearly identical
genetically, thus allowing us to find genetic differences that account
for the profound difference in drug response. For the genotyping, genomic
DNA from an early passage of three independent sensitive and three
resistant sub-clones were analyzed for copy number variation (CNV) and
SNP by Illumina BeadArray and HiSeq200 next-generation sequencing.
Preliminary analysis showed segregation between the genomic profiles of
sensitive and resistant sub-clones in general. Chromosomes that showed
more variation between sensitive and resistant sub-clones included
chromosome number 2, 7, 10, 15 and 20. Visual examination of the data
identified several regions of sub-clone specific chromosomal gain or loss
across all chromosomes, where overlap regions across both sub-clones and
regions that are either copy number gain in one cell but loss in the
other one. Furthermore, by comparative analysis with cDNA microarray
data, we also found that mRNA expression levels of several genes in these
chromosomal regions were indeed correlated with their chromosomal status.
In addition to a gene-level analysis, we are performing quantitative mass
spectrometry analysis (SILAC) to identify the differences in proteomes of
sensitive and resistant cells, which may account for molecular mechanisms
underlying drug resistance.

