Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HMTV in breast and endometrium carcinomas


Retroviral sequences homologous to the betaretrovirus mouse mammary tumor
virus (MMTV), the etiological agent of mammary tumor in mice, are present
in 40% of American women's breast cancers. A 660 bp sequence homologous
to MMTV env gene with no significant homology to any other viral or human
sequence reported in the Gen Bank is found in breast cancer, but not in
adjacent normal breast tissues, indicating its exogenous origin. A
complete provirus structure with 95% homology to MMTV has been isolated
from two human breast tumors and named human mammary tumor virus (HMTV).
Betaretroviral particles from primary cultures of metastatic breast
cancer cells (MSSM) have been isolated and characterized. HMTV virion RNA
is more than 90% homologous to MMTV RNA and to the HMTV proviral DNA.
HMTV is able to infect a variety of cells bringing about striking
molecular changes, as seen by co-culture experiments between MSSM cells
and normal human epithelial breast cells, B and T human lymphocytes and
human dendritic cells. Protein expression was only observed in 10-15% of
the infected cells by FACS analysis, suggesting the presence of innate
resistance in human cells after HMTV infection, as well as in breast
cancer cells. The human retroviral restriction factors APOBEC F and G and
the TRIM proteins are all highly expressed in HMTV infected cells as well
as in breast cancer cells as measured by quantitative RT-PCR. Disruption
of the cytoskeleton, evidence for epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and increase in invasiveness are additional molecular changes seen in
HMTV infected cells. Analysis of the sequencing data showed that HMTV
also contains hormone response elements (HRE) homologous to MMTV HRE.
This result encouraged us to investigate if HMTV were present in hormonal
responsive tissues other than breast. Endometrium is a classical example
of such tissue. Endometrial cancers and normal endometrium were analyzed
for HMTV env sequences. HMTV env sequences were present in 0% of 29
normal tissues and 23.2% of 56 tumors analyzed. Johal et al. recently
reported that MMTV-like sequence was found in 10% of the endometrial
cancers (J. Med. Virology; 82: 1044-50). We describe here the detection
of HMTV proteins by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) slides obtained from breast and endometrium carcinomas
but not in their respective normal tissues. These results are compared
with the results obtained by PCR. PCR is a very sensitive technique able
to detect a single DNA copy number but potential contaminations can
result in false positives. In addition, IHC is accessible to pathology
laboratories since no hybridization step with radioactive material is
necessary as in the HMTV PCR. In conclusion, we have developed a
contamination resistant method like IHC using monoclonal antibodies
against HMTV that correlates with the results we have obtained by western
blot and by PCR.

