Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, inducible, mammary gland-specific PELP1 murine breast
cancer model


Despite treatment advances, breast cancer remains the second most lethal
malignant disease for women worldwide. Although pharmacologic agents that
modulate estrogen receptor-alpha (ER) functions or reduce circulating
estrogens levels significantly reduced mortality in patients with
estrogen sensitive (ER positive) tumors, both de novo and acquired
resistance limits efficacy. A critical need for identifying more precise
diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets prompted
deeper investigation into ER-coregulatory protein function and
regulation. ER-coactivator PELP1, mediates both nuclear and extra-nuclear
estrogen signaling and crosstalk with growth factors. Deregulated PELP1
expression occurs in hormone-driven cancers, associates with
undifferentiated invasive breast adenocarcinomas and an independent
prognostic biomarker in assessing clinical outcome of luminal-like breast
cancer patients. Collectively, several studies suggest PELP1 is an ER
coregulator with tumorigenic potential. However, the in vivo significance
of PELP1 deregulation during initiation and progression of breast cancer
remains unknown. To determine the role of PELP1 over-expression in
mammary tumorigenesis, we generated an inducible transgenic murine model.
Transgene construct (pTetOPELP1) consists of a full-length human PELP1
cDNA linked to luciferase gene reporter through an internal ribosomal
entry site (IRES). pTetOPELP1 mice crossed with mammary gland-specific
rtTA mice (MMTVrtTA) to establish two independent MMTVrtTA-TetOPELP1
transgenic lines. Transgene induction in adult nulliparous bitransgenic
females was achieved with doxycycline administered in drinking water.
Concurrent expression and activity of the luciferase gene reporter was
detected specifically in the mammary gland by in vivo bioluminescence
imaging, luciferase assay and RT-PCR. Mammary epithelial-specific
expression of PELP1 was validated by immunohistochemistry and Western
blot analysis. PELP1-mediated morphological and histological changes were
analyzed by examining carmine-stained whole mounts and H&E-stained
paraffin embedded mammary glands sections. We observed an increase in
proliferation, extensive side branching and precocious differentiation in
PELP1 expressing mammary gland compared to controls. Aged
MMTVrtTA-TetOPELP1 bitransgenic mice (n=42) revealed hyperplasia and
preneoplastic changes as early as 12 weeks with ER-positive mammary gland
tumors developing by 8 months following PELP1 induction. Taken together,
we established PELP1 as an oncogenic in vivo. Our inducible
mammary-specific PELP1 transgenic model will serve as a valuable tool for
future in vivo investigation into molecular mechanisms of PELP1-mediated
tumorigenesis.

