Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of DAPK-1 in growth regulation of ER-negative breast
cancer


Background: Breast cancers can be subgrouped into ER-positive and
ER-negative breast cancers according to their estrogen receptor status.
Clinical data has shown that ER-negative breast cancers are aggressive
and have a poor prognosis; however, few effective targeted treatments are
available for these cancers. A human kinome study conducted in our lab
has identified 52 kinases highly expressed in ER-negative breast tumors.
One of these kinases, DAPK-1, was selected for further study.
Death-associated protein kinase-1 (DAPK-1) mediates cell death through
P53-dependent or -independent pathways. In this study, we investigated
the role of DAPK-1 in regulating growth and death in ER-negative breast
cancer. Methods: To perform expression and survival analysis of DAPK-1 in
breast tumors, we used data from VandeVijver, Desmedt and Ivshina
datasets. Inducible DAPK-1 knockdown cell lines were constructed through
pTRIPZ lentiviral system. Anchorage-independent growth was performed in
soft agar. Colonies were enumerated after 15-30 days. Xenograft
experiments were performed in nude mice by injecting 5106 cells per mice.
Results: Our gene expression analysis found that high DAPK-1 expression
correlated significantly with ER-negative breast cancers. Survival
analysis showed that high DAPK-1 expression is associated with worse
clinical outcome. Using an inducible DAPK-1 knockdown system, we found
that depletion of DAPK-1 suppressed anchorage-dependent and -independent
growth of ER-negative P53 mutant cells but not P53 wildtype cells. We
next investigated whether DAPK-1 suppression inhibits tumor growth in
mouse xenograft experiments. Results of in vivo experiments demonstrated
that DAPK-1 suppression inhibited the growth of ER-negative breast tumors
but not ER-positive breast tumors. Through a siRNA study in an expanded
panel of breast cancer cell lines, we found that the sensitivity of cell
lines to DAPK-1 knockdown is dependent on ER and P53 status. ER-negative
breast cancer cell lines with P53 mutations are very sensitive to DAPK-1
knockdown, while ER-positive, P53 wildtype breast cancer cell lines are
resistant to DAPK-1 knockdown. To determine if p53 dysfunction can
sensitize breast cancer cell lines to DAPK-1 suppression, we depleted P53
expression in MCF7 and found an increased sensitivity to DAPK-1
knockdown, indicating that MCF7 growth becomes partially addicted to
DAPK-1 after P53 dysfunction. Conclusion: DAPK-1 is an essential growth
regulator of ER-negative breast cancer cells, but not of ER-positive, P53
wildtype breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. These results suggest
that P53 dysfunction causes breast cancer cells to become addicted to
DAPK-1 signaling pathway for their growth. Our results show that DAPK-1
has a dual role in regulating breast cancer proliferation and apoptosis
depending on the status of P53. This study is supported by a PROMISE
grant (KG081694) from the Susan G. Komen for the Cure Foundation.

