Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a novel metastatic head and neck cancer model
with gain of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness properties


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer in the world, and includes oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC),
which is the fourth leading cause of male cancer death in Taiwan.
Metastasis is the end of neoplasm progression and the major cause of
mortality of HNSCC. Prevention or elimination of metastasis may improve
the morbidity and mortality caused from HNSCC. However, systemic cellular
model for investigation on the metastasis of oral cancer is unavailable
at present. To compromise the deviations between cell lines, we
established a series of cell lines derived from an established OSCC cell
line, SAS cells, which possess activity of low-tumorigenicity (SAS),
highly-tumorigenicity (SASVO3 (Chen et al., J Biomed Sci 16:100, 2009))
or metastasis (SASVO3M-1 and SASVO3M-5). Metastatic SASVO3M-1 and M-5
cells were generated by i.v. injection of SASVO3 cells into the tail vein
of nude mice, and the metastatic tumor in lung was collected, then, the
isolated tumor cells were grown for further studies. The invasiveness
activities of SASVO3M-1 and M-5 cells in lung tumor were confirmed by
both in vivo and in vitro pathological examination. Metastatic cells
possess increased activities of foci formation, filopodia formation, and
wound healing. In the mean time, the signature of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) properties, including upregulation of transcriptional
factor (Slug) and downregulation of E-cadherin, was observed. Further,
metastatic cells (SASVO3M-1/-5) enhanced tumor formation in lung and
shortened life span of tumor bearing mice. Next, the transcriptome of
above cells was determined and then subjected to pathway analysis
(Ingenuity Pathway Analysis). The group of genes specifically
up-regulated in metastatic cells was centered to ERK1/2, interleukin 1,
and focal adhesion kinase. The protein level of integrin, uPAR and
phosphorylated FAK was augmented in metastatic cells by immunoblot
analyses. Lines of evidence support that gain of EMT properties enhances
the stemness properties of cancer cells. We thus determined the stemness
properties of the above three cell lines. Sphere-formation activity and
the expression of stem cell marker, CD 133, were significantly induced in
metastatic SASVO3M-1 and M-5 cells indicating an increase in stemness of
these cells. Taken together, our data show enhanced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness properties associate with
the development of metastatic activity of SASVO3M-1 and M-5 cells.
Further, this metastatic cell line would be an instrumental tool for
further investigations on the development of diagnostic biomarkers or
therapeutic targets on HNSCC.

