Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative splicing of the metabolic regulator Estrogen-Related
Receptor alpha (ERR) in colon carcinogenesis


The nuclear receptor ERR acts principally in pair with its coactivator
PGC-1 as a regulator of metabolic processes particularly in tissues
subjected to high-energy demand. Besides its implication in energy
metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis, ERR was recently associated with
tumorigenesis. Increased expression of ERR was noted in different
cancerous tissues as breast, ovary and colon. Also, a new form of ERR
lacking the exon5 (ERR 5) was recently identified and suggested to be a
dominant negative of ERR and interestingly to be differently expressed in
normal and cancerous tissues. Since a protumorigenic role is emerging for
this metabolic regulator, we investigated the role of ERR and its spliced
form ERR 5 in colon carcinogenesis. METHODS: shRNA-mediated silencing of
ERR and overexpression of ERR 5 were performed by lentivirus infection in
DLD1 and HCT116 human colon cancer cells. The interaction between both
proteins was investigated as well as their respective roles in various
tumorigenic processes. RESULTS: Silencing of ERR by shRNA reduced
proliferation of DLD1 and HCT116 cells as measured by growth kinetics and
growth assays in soft agar and reduced tumor formation in NUDE mice.
Furthermore, FACS-scan analysis revealed that ERR silencing delays G1-S
phase transition in colon cancer cells. Differential expression of a
splice variant of ERR (ERR 5) in cancer vs normal tissues would support
the importance of ERR in colorectal carcinogenesis. This is the case at
least for colon tumors as cancerous samples display lower amount of ERR 5
and higher amount of ERR compared to adjacent normal tissues. Also, the
ERR 5 expression is surprisingly regulated by proteosomal degradation in
normal and colon cancer cell lines and this could explain the low
abundance of the ERR spliced form. Interaction between both variants has
been characterized by immunoprecipitation assays, confirming the
conserved dimerization potential of ERR 5 variant with ERR. Furthermore,
luciferase assays revealed that ERR 5 is transcriptionaly inactive and
its expression inhibits the transcriptional activity of ERR on its target
genes, suggesting that this variant acts as a dominant negative for ERR.
Interestingly, the reexpression of ERR 5 in colon cancer cells reduces
soft agar colony formation. CONCLUSION: Strong ERR expression is
associated with cancerous tissues and is required for the intense
proliferation of colon cancer cells. Interestingly, the poorly active
splice variant ERR 5 is lost in cancerous colon tissues and has
antiproliferative properties when reintroduced in colon cancer cells.
Since this splice variant could interact with ERR and inhibit its
activity, ERR 5 reduction of expression in cancerous tissue could allow
ERR to fully promote colon cancer cell proliferation.

