Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of epigenetic and transcriptional alterations
in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas


Objective: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common cancer worldwide with a 50% patient survival rate 5 years
post-diagnosis despite current therapeutic strategies. A direct
comprehensive genome wide integrated analysis of epigenetic and
transcriptional alteration in primary HNSCC has not been performed
before. Such data would greatly enrich our knowledge about HNSCC biology
and would be beneficial for the development of the individual targeted
therapy. Experimental Design: 44 primary HNSCC and 25 normal mucosal
samples were used in the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 array and for
the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 27 array. To analyze the data we
employed a novel screening approach based on Cancer Outlier Profile
Analysis (COPA). With use of this approach we determined 81 significant
differentially expressed and 37 significant differentially methylated
genes with both oncogenic and tumor suppressing properties. Results: Out
of total 118 candidate genes we picked 36 candidate tumor suppressing
genes with strong correlation between hypermethylation and decrease of
expression in tumor samples, such as BANK1, ADFP, MAPK4, ZNF71 and
others. 20 genes out of total 36 were validated by bisulfite sequencing
in a separate cohort of 32 primary HNSCC tumor and 16 normal mucosal
tissues. Out of the total 20 genes, 13 demonstrated at least 40%
difference in methylation, most notably for BANK1 81% of tumors were more
methylated as compared to normals. 7 of these newly discovered genes out
of the 36 belong to Zinc Finger Proteins (ZNF) group and they have never
been reported as tumor suppressors in HNSCC before. Bisulfite sequencing
and quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of ZNFs revealed that
they are strongly hypermethylated and underexpressed in HNSCC tumor
samples. Conclusions: Our new screening approach allowed identification
of 36 candidate tumor suppressor genes aberrantly methylated and
transcriptionally suppressed in HNSCC. Validation of gene expression and
methylation allowed the detection of ZNF genes whose downregulation may
play a significant role in HNSCC tumor development.

