Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of eukaryotic protein synthesis initiation
factor eIF4G by the daidzein metabolite equol may contribute to breast
cancer malignancy


The role of dietary soy in cancer has been the subject of intense
investigation and is thought to be cancer preventive. However, the
beneficial effects of soy on established breast cancer is controversial.
We recently demonstrated that dietary daidzein and combined soy
isoflavones (genistein, daidzein, and glycitein) promoted breast cancer
progression in a nude mouse model by increasing both primary mammary
tumor growth and metastasis. Dietary daidzein significantly upregulated
cancer promoting molecules including eukaryotic protein synthesis
initiation factors (eIF) eIF4G and eIF4E. Herein, using tumors from mice
treated orally with daidzein, we show that increased eIF expression is
associated with expression of mRNAs with long structured 5 untranslated
regions and internal ribosomal entry sites (IRES) that are sensitive to
eIF4E and eIF4G levels. We then tested the hypothesis that daidzein
upregulates protein synthesis initiation in breast cancer, but found that
daidzein treatment did not affect the levels of eIFs in the same
MDA-MB-435 cell line in vitro. Therefore, we tested the effect of equol
that is metabolized from daidzein by the gut bacteria in mice and humans.
Results show that equol specifically upregulated eIF4G, but not eIF4E, in
MDA-MB-435 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. Equol treatment also
increased gene and protein expression of c-MYC and protein expression of
other cell survival and proliferation promoting molecules with IRES
sites. The elevated eIF4G in response to equol was not associated with
eIF4E in a cap binding co-capture assay. Therefore, upregulation of eIF4G
by equol may regulate cap-independent protein synthesis initiation
resulting in cancer cell survival, proliferation, and thus, tumor
progression. This research was supported by grant numbers US Army/BCRP
W81XWH-11-1-0199 to CD, to NIH/NIGMS SC3GM084824 to SD

