Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of spontaneous metastasis incidence and
quantification in human tumor xenograft models using bioluminescence
imaging


Introduction: Spontaneous metastasis models are sought after in order to
assess the potential of therapies aimed at prevention or treatment of
primary tumor metastases. While some human tumor xenograft mouse models
show spontaneous metastasis, few show high tissue specific incidence.
Commonly the growth of the inherently more advanced primary tumor also
limits the ability to characterize far less advanced metastases.
Bioluminescence imaging provides a quantitative and convenient means for
assessing location, incidence and progression of metastases using
metastatic luciferase expressing tumor lines. However, substantially
greater light signal from the primary tumor inhibits the ability to find
and track much smaller metastasis signals. Several approaches to
optimizing metastasis incidence and quantification, and controlling
primary tumor growth were used and compared in a MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN
xenograft model. Methods: To assess both mouse strain dependence and
implant site dependence of primary tumor metastasis,
MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN cells (2x106) were implanted in either the mammary
fat pad, the sacral region or the quadriceps in several mouse strains,
including outbred nu/nu, SHO and nd/bg/xid. To control primary tumor
growth in order to facilitate metastasis quantification, both surgical
excision and radiation based growth inhibition of of the primary tumors
were used. In all cases, whole body bioluminescence imaging was used to
quantify metastasis incidence and growth. Shileding of the primary tumor
was used in order to characterize smaller metastases. Results and
Discussion: While the MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN mammary fat pad implant model
has been shown the metastasize spontaneously, tissue specific incidence
is generally Introduction: Spontaneous metastasis models are sought after
in order to assess the potential of therapies aimed at prevention or
treatment of primary tumor metastases. While some human tumor xenograft
mouse models show spontaneous metastasis, few show high tissue specific
incidence. Commonly the growth of the inherently more advanced primary
tumor also limits the ability to characterize far less advanced
metastases. Bioluminescence imaging provides a quantitative and
convenient means for assessing location, incidence and progression of
metastases using metastatic luciferase expressing tumor lines. However,
substantially greater light signal from the primary tumor inhibits the
ability to find and track much smaller metastasis signals. Several
approaches to optimizing metastasis incidence and quantification, and
controlling primary tumor growth were used and compared in a
MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN xenograft model. Methods: To assess both mouse
strain dependence and implant site dependence of primary tumor
metastasis, MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN cells (2x106) were implanted in either
the mammary fat pad, the sacral region or the quadriceps in several mouse
strains, including outbred nu/nu, SHO and nd/bg/xid. To control primary
tumor growth in order to facilitate metastasis quantification, both
surgical excision and radiation based growth inhibition of of the primary
tumors were used. In all cases, whole body bioluminescence imaging was
used to quantify metastasis incidence and growth. Shileding of the
primary tumor was used in order to characterize smaller metastases.
Results and Discussion: While the MDA-MB-231-luc-D3H2LN mammary fat pad
implant model has been shown the metastasize spontaneously, tissue
specific incidence is generally < 100% and the ability to quantify
metastases severely limited by the substantially greater light signal
overwhelming much smaller metastasis signals, even when primary tumor
shielding is used. In this study, both surgical excision and radiation
based primary tumor growth inhibition enhanced the ability to detect
metastases in a variety of tissues, including lymph nodes and lungs. The
mammary fat pad implant site and the SCID Beige strain provided the
highest spontaneous metastasis incidence. Future work will test radiation
timing and dose to further optimize metastasis quantification in this and
other spontaneous metastasis models.

