Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol modifies the activity and expression of antioxidant
enzymes in somatic cancer cells


Background & Objectives: Resveratrol has been reported as a potent
anti-cancer compound, but it's mode of action is not completely
understood. In this study, we investigated the effects of resveratrol
treatment on the activity and expression of antioxidant enzymes such as
catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase
(GPX) in three somatic cancer cell lines: PC-3 (prostate cancer), MCF-7
(breast cancer) and HepG2 (hepatocellular cancer). Methods: The cells
were treated with different concentration (0-200 M) of resveratrol for
24, 48 and 72 hours.Cell growth was studied by cell counting; cell
homogenate was taken for the measurement of enzyme activities; proteins
were isolated for western blotting to measure the genetic expression.
Results: Resveratrol showed dose-dependent growth inhibitory activity in
all cells. It was significantly effective against PC-3 and HepG2 even in
10 M, and 25 M concentration, but not in MCF-7 cells. However 50 M showed
significant growth inhibitory effect in MCF-7, and also in HEK293T (human
embryonic kidney cell line as control) cells. 25 M was identified as most
effective dosage against PC-3 and HepG2 cells, without affecting HEK293T
cells. Treatment of 25 M for 48 hours increased the activity of SOD
enzymes by 3-4 folds in PC-3; 2-3 folds in HepG2; 1.5-1.8 folds in MCF-7;
and 1.2-1.5 folds in HEK293T cells. Resveratrol treatment also
significantly increased the activity of CAT in HepG2, moderately in
MCF-7, but non-significantly in PC-3 and HEK293T cells. However, the
treatment of resveratrol showed no significant change in GPX activity in
any cell line. Western blotting also revealed the increased expression of
SOD2 in PC-3, and HepG2 cells at 25 M resveratrol treatment. CAT
expression was moderate, but no change in GPX1 expression was found in
the tested cancer cells. Conclusions: The results of this study could
confirm the dose dependent growth inhibitory potential of resveratrol;
however, the dose of resveratrol in treatment of the cancer cells should
be limited, as higher dose (50 M) has also been found dangerous for
normal cells (HEK293T). Resveratrol at low dose (25 M) potentially
increases the activity and expression of SOD enzyme in cancer cells while
inhibiting cell growth. Moderate increase of CAT activity and expression
is also observed, but no significant change in GPX activity and
expression in cell lines used in this study. These findings may
contribute to understanding the mechanisms of resveratrol action in
treatment of cancer. The work was supported by the National Basic
Research Program of China (No. 2011CB910700-704)

