Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copper efflux transporter-mediated resistance to cisplatin


The copper (Cu) efflux transporters ATP7A and ATP7B individually mediate
resistance to the Pt-containing chemotherapeutic agents and have been
identified as a primary pathway for the sequestration and/or export of
these drugs. While the structure and transport function of ATP7A and
ATP7B have been well studied, the mechanism by which they mediate
resistance to the Pt drugs remains unknown. The experimental system
consisted of the human fibroblast cell line Me32a, which does not express
either ATP7A or ATP7B, and sublines previously produced by transfection
that express either ATP7A (MeMNK) or ATP7B (MeWND). The MeMNK sub-line
was 2.2-fold resistant to cisplatin whereas the MeWND cells had a
1.8-fold increase in IC50. The MeMNK and MeWND cell lines also contained
a small population of cells that survived lethal dosages of DDP (10 -
20%). The MeMNK and MeWND cells were also 1.6- and 1.9-fold,
respectively, resistant to the specific vacuolar proton pump (V-ATPase)
inhibitor bafilomycin (Baf). Further investigation revealed that cells
expressing ATP7A or ATP7B also had increased expression of V-ATPase
subunits A, D and H at the mRNA level that corresponded to 8.6 - 14-fold
increases at the protein level indicating that ATP7A and ATP7B perturb
the proton transport system that accounts for progressive acidification
of vesicles in the secretory pathway. MeMNK and MeWND cells were found to
be 34- and 22-fold resistant to brefeldin A (BFA) which reversibly
disrupts transport of proteins in the vesicle secretory pathway and
specifically targets the ADP-ribosylation factor-1 (Arf1). This led us to
investigate the Arf family of proteins and we found that the levels of
Arf1, Arf3 and Arf4 were markedly reduced in cells expressing ATP7A and
ATP7B at the RNA level; the reduction in Arf1 appears to account for the
resistance to BFA and indicates the that function of Arf1 has been taken
over by some other protein. Furthermore, we found large perturbations in
the level of proteins that constitute the regulatory machinery of the
vesicle secretory pathway including guanine nucleotide exchange factors
(GEFs) and coat protein complexes in the MeMNK and MeWND cells. These
findings indicate that ATP7A and ATP7B both produce quite large
perturbations in the expression of proteins whose function is essential
to the formation and trafficking of vesicles in the secretory pathway. As
ATP7A and ATP7B have previously been shown to be capable of sequestering
cisplatin into the microvesicular fraction of the MeMNK and MeWND cells,
we conclude that these changes are linked to the ability of these Cu
transporters to mediate cisplatin resistance.

