Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRx-001 modulates intratumor blood flow in SCCVII and U87 tumors


The tumor-specific provascular effects of the anti-cancer agent RRx-001,
a novel nitrogen oxide donor and allosteric hemoglobin modifier in Phase
1 clinical trials were investigated using contrast enhanced ultrasound
(CEUS) and whole tissue section quantitative immunohistological staining.
Changes in tumor blood flow by CEUS in SCCVII tumor bearing mice
following RRx-001 (3, 6, 12 mg/kg) were dose and time dependent, reaching
maximum perfusion 6 h after treatment, returning to baseline within 72 h.
Microregional effects of RRx-001 (15 mg/kg) on tumor blood flow and
oxygenation by immunohistological staining were studied in mouse SCCVII
and human U87 tumors. SCCVII tumors exhibited regions of intermittent
perfusion exemplified by co-localization of vessels with the hypoxia
marker pimonidazole commonly occurring throughout the tissue. Only 21% of
vessels showed perfusion after a bolus dose of the perivascular stain
DiOC7. This increased to 28% 12 h post RRx-001. Paradoxically, an
increase in tissue oxygenation was not seen while modestly increased
pimonidazole binding was observed. However, preliminary radiobiological
assessment suggested tumors were radiosensitized when irradiated 10 min
after 12 mg/kg RRx-001. In the U87 tumor a decrease in vessel perfusion
at 90 min post RRx-001 administration was observed. Blood flow over large
areas of treated tumors was completely shut down. These areas stained
positive for CD31 and tissue did not appear necrotic. Analysis indicated
25% reduction in the fraction of perfused vessels and un-perfused tissue
by area at 90 min returning to near normal levels at 12 h. There was no
significant increase in the fraction of necrosis at 12 h suggesting that
the large un-perfused regions seen at 90 min had recovered rather than
become necrotic. No significant change in tumor hypoxia was seen at 90
min or 12 h. For both tumor types, RRx-001 appeared to cause the loss of
perfusion in large regions of the tumor however, at the 12 h time point,
both tumor types showed increase in vessel perfusion but no significant
decrease in hypoxia. These data suggest a redistribution of blood flow in
both tumor types while differences between the tumors were related to
tumor architecture and distribution of -SMA. RRx-001 shows promise for
short-term blood flow redistribution in tumors with a pericyte-rich
vasculature with contractile proteins such as -SMA. Expression of -SMA in
tumor vasculature could therefore be useful for predicting tumor response
to RRx-001.

