Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor S78454
in EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) related nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the
third leading cause of virus-related human malignancy. On average, NPCs
are more radiosensitive and chemosensitive than other head and neck
tumors. However, local relapse and distant organ metastases still raise
serious therapeutic problems. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have
recently emerged as a class of therapeutic agent for the treatment of
both hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. In the present study, we
investigated the antitumor effects of the novel Pan HDAC inhibitor S78454
in 3 NPC cell lines, namely C666-1 (EBV-positive NPC cell line), HONE1
and CNE1 (EBV-negative). The antiproliferative effects of S78454, used
either alone or in combination with cis-platinum or irradiation, were
evaluated using MTT assays and clonogenic assays. Combined treatment of
S78454 with cis-platinum resulted in a synergistic inhibitory effect on
cell proliferation, as well as on cell clonogenic growth. HDAC inhibition
also enhanced radiosensitivity of NPC cell lines. Western blot detection
of PARP cleavage revealed that the antiproliferative effects of S78454
were only partially related to apoptosis. Western blot analysis was also
used to explore molecular mechanisms involved in cellular response to
S78454. Quantitative assessment of tubulin acetylation confirmed that
S78454 effectively increased protein acetylation, even at low
concentrations. As previously reported in other tumors, RAD51 protein
levels were significantly decreased after 48H of treatment, suggesting
that HDAC inhibitors act, at least in part, by targeting homologous
recombination. However, HDAC inhibitor-induced cell death involves not
only epigenetic pathways, but numerous other mechanisms, through
acetylation of a variety of non-histone and non-chromatin-associated
proteins. For instance, the proteasome activity may play a role in the
response to HDAC inhibitors, and the amount of HR23B - a carrier protein
functionally related to the proteasome - has been identified as a
determinant of HDAC inhibitors sensitivity. We found that HR23B protein
levels were high in all 3 NPC cell lines. Nevertheless, there was a
decrease in HR23B protein levels after treatment with S78454. Altogether,
these results demonstrate that the novel HDAC inhibitor S78454, currently
in Phase I/II clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumors and
hematologic malignancies, has promising antitumour activity in NPC,
especially in association with cis-platinum and ionizing radiation, ie
the two most widely used antitumor agents in NPC. Experiments are in
progress to assess the anti-tumor activity of S78454 on other types of
NPC cells, including xenografted NPC tumor lines. The influence of the
HDAC inhibitor on the regulation of EBV latency is also under
investigation.

