Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Testing the carcinogenic potential of water disinfectant
byproducts in a human colon mucosal culture system


Epidemiological studies have linked the consumption of disinfected
surface waters to an increased risk of colorectal cancer. Approximately
600 disinfection byproducts (DBPs) have been identified for a number of
disinfectants currently in use. An in-depth mechanism-based structure
activity analysis undertaken identified 50 unregulated DBPs with the
highest risk carcinogenic potential. Because it would be financially
prohibitive to test all priority DBPs in chronic animal bioassays, we are
developing an in vitro model system to identify DBPs of carcinogenic
potential in normal human colonocytes. Specifically, a mixed culture of
human colon mucosal cells including stem cells with the capability for
differentiation (NCM460) were treated with brominated DBPs
bromochloroacetic acid (BCAA), dibromonitromethane (DBNM), and
tribromonitromethane (TBNM), as well as a positive colon carcinogenic
control, azoxymethane. To measure cancer-related pathways being
activated, global gene expression analysis of 10-day 106M treated NCM460
monolayers was performed on Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays
and statistically significant genes were identified using one-way ANOVA
with a false discovery rate (Benjamini-Hochberg test) of 0.05 followed by
a post-hoc test (Scheffe). Pathway analysis was performed using DAVID
bioinformatics resource (National Institutes of Health) which identified
multiple pertinent pathways activated with all or a majority of the
treatments including cell adherins, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and
xenobiotic metabolism. Of significance, AOM, DBNM and TBNM treatments
induced genes involved in the WNT/-catenin, a well studied signaling
pathway that modulates cell proliferation and differentiation and is a
hallmark pathway for cancer development. As validation,
immunocytochemical staining for -catenin indicated increased nuclear
translocation after treatment with all DBPs and AOM when compared to the
control. In addition, real-time RT-PCR analysis measured expression of
select genes known to be directly regulated by -catenin after 7 and
10-day 106M AOM and TBNM treatment. MYC, AXIN2 and PPARD expression
significantly increased (pEpidemiological studies have linked the
consumption of disinfected surface waters to an increased risk of
colorectal cancer. Approximately 600 disinfection byproducts (DBPs) have
been identified for a number of disinfectants currently in use. An
in-depth mechanism-based structure activity analysis undertaken
identified 50 unregulated DBPs with the highest risk carcinogenic
potential. Because it would be financially prohibitive to test all
priority DBPs in chronic animal bioassays, we are developing an in vitro
model system to identify DBPs of carcinogenic potential in normal human
colonocytes. Specifically, a mixed culture of human colon mucosal cells
including stem cells with the capability for differentiation (NCM460)
were treated with brominated DBPs bromochloroacetic acid (BCAA),
dibromonitromethane (DBNM), and tribromonitromethane (TBNM), as well as a
positive colon carcinogenic control, azoxymethane. To measure
cancer-related pathways being activated, global gene expression analysis
of 10-day 106M treated NCM460 monolayers was performed on Affymetrix
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays and statistically significant genes
were identified using one-way ANOVA with a false discovery rate
(Benjamini-Hochberg test) of 0.05 followed by a post-hoc test (Scheffe).
Pathway analysis was performed using DAVID bioinformatics resource
(National Institutes of Health) which identified multiple pertinent
pathways activated with all or a majority of the treatments including
cell adherins, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and xenobiotic metabolism.
Of significance, AOM, DBNM and TBNM treatments induced genes involved in
the WNT/-catenin, a well studied signaling pathway that modulates cell
proliferation and differentiation and is a hallmark pathway for cancer
development. As validation, immunocytochemical staining for -catenin
indicated increased nuclear translocation after treatment with all DBPs
and AOM when compared to the control. In addition, real-time RT-PCR
analysis measured expression of select genes known to be directly
regulated by -catenin after 7 and 10-day 106M AOM and TBNM treatment.
MYC, AXIN2 and PPARD expression significantly increased (p<0.05, t-test)
with 10, but not 7, day treatment with both chemicals, suggesting
WNT/-catenin signaling pathway activation at the later time point.
Importantly, preliminary studies indicate colony transformation of these
cells after DBP treatment as measured in soft agar assay. Our overall
results suggest the tested water DBPs may activate cellular mechanisms
that mediate colon cancer development and etiology. Additionally, we
demonstrate this in vitro methodology can detect carcinogenic potential
of chemicals and may serve as a useful tool to test other chemicals in a
more cost-effective and expedited manner than traditional animal
bioassays. [Abstract does not necessarily reflect the policies of the
U.S. EPA.]

