Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibit UV-induced tolerogenic T-cell
response through DNA repair-dependent functional activation of Langerhans
cells


It is well documented that ultraviolet (UV) radiation-induced DNA damage
in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) diminishes the antigen
presenting capacity of epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs) and this leads to
the suppression of immune system. Previously, we have shown that dietary
grape seed proanthocyanidins (GSPs) inhibit UVB-induced immunosuppression
in mice via activation of CD8+ T cells. However, it is not understood
whether (1) GSPs target LCs while exerting its immunomodulatory effects
on T cells in response to the application of cutaneous contact
sensitizer, 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB) onto the UV-exposed skin, and
whether (2) the ability of GSPs to activate dendritic cells/LCs
correlates with their DNA repair properties. To understand this
mechanism, we first determined DNA repair ability of GSPs in UV-exposed
dendritic cells for which CD11c+ cells were prepared from bone marrow of
xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A-knockout (XPA-KO) mice
which are deficient in DNA repair, and their wild-type (WT) counterparts.
CD11c+ cells were exposed to UVB radiation with or without pretreatment
with GSPs. Treatment of GSPs resulted in significant reduction in the
number of CPD-positive cells in CD11c+ cells from WT mice, but this DNA
repair effect of GSPs was not seen in the CD11c+ cells from XPA-KO mice.
We then analyzed effects of dietary GSPs (0.5%, w/w) on secretion of
cytokines by CD11c+ cells that were isolated from lymph nodes and spleens
of mice (WT and XPA-KO) that were exposed to UVB [150 mJ/cm2 (WT), 20
mJ/cm2 (XPA-KO)]. Our results showed that in comparison to CD11c+ cells
isolated from WT control mice (GSP-untreated), CD11c+ cells isolated from
mice that received GSPs in diet secreted a significantly higher level of
Th1 cytokines (IL-12, IFN), while the levels of Th2 cytokines (IL-4,
IL-10) were significantly lower, but this effect of GSPs was not observed
in CD11c+ cells isolated from XPA-KO mice. Finally, we used an adoptive
transfer approach, wherein draining lymph nodes were harvested from mice
that were exposed to UVB with and without GSPs supplementation in diet
and sensitized by DNFB onto the UVB-exposed skin. CD11c+ cells were
positively selected and transferred into nave mice that were subsequently
challenged by application of DNFB on the ear skin. Nave recipients that
received CD11c+ cells from WT, GSPs-treated, UVB-irradiated donors
exhibited full contact hypersensitivity (CHS) response, whereas no
significant CHS was observed in XPA-KO mice. These data suggest that
dietary GSPs inhibit UVB-induced immunosuppression in mice by improving
the ability of LCs to mount an immune response via activation of T cells
in a manner which correlates with its capacity to enhance repair of
UVB-induced DNA damage.

