Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NAD+ biosynthesis combined with radiation to enhance
cell death


Background and purpose: APO866 is a highly specific non-competitive
inhibitor of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), a key enzyme
in the regulation of NAD+ biosynthesis. Inhibition of NAMPT reduces
cellular NAD+ levels. Among NAD+ consuming enzymes are
Poly(adenosine-diphosphate[ADP]-ribose)polymerases (PARPs) and Sirtuins.
As a consequence, NAD+ is involved in numerous biochemical processes,
including regulation of DNA repair, replication, transcription and
apoptosis. APO866 is thought to preferentially target tumor cells because
of their high NAD+ turnover rates and increased dependence on NAD+ as
compared to normal cells. In the present study we investigated the
cytotoxic effect of APO866 alone and in combination with radiation on
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. Results: APO866, in nanomolar
concentrations, induces a time- and dose-dependent depletion of cellular
NAD+ levels in a panel of human tumor cell lines (U937, J16, LNCaP, PC3
and A431). In vitro, under APO866-mediated reduced NAD+ conditions, solid
tumor cell lines PC3 and LNCaP show besides a cytotoxic effect also a
decrease in clonogenic survival in combination with ionizing radiation
(Dose enhancement factor at 10% survival: 1.34 and 1.45 resp.), which was
not caused by radiation-induced enhancement of dsDNA breaks as determined
by -H2AX nuclear foci formation, nor by induction of apoptosis. In vivo
experiments with PC3 xenografts, treated with the APO866/radiation
combination, show the combination is more effective than APO866 or
radiation treatment alone. The time to reach 300% of the initial tumor
volume was in the control group 9.5 days, for APO866 treatment 28.6 days,
radiation treatment 51.4 days and for the combined APO866/radiation
treatment 76.6 days. Only the combination treatment caused complete
initial growth regression. No significant toxicity was observed after any
of these treatments. Tumors from animals treated with APO866 showed
significant reduced NAD+ levels. Conclusion: APO866 treatment depletes
NAD+ and enhances tumor cell kill in combination with radiation, in vitro
and in vivo. Targeting NAD+ biosynthesis together with radiation is a
promising strategy to enhance tumor response.

