Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCR5 and CCRL2 accommodating responses to CCL5 induces directional
cancer cells migration and organ specific metastasis


Environmental factors have profoundly influence on cancer cell
directional migration and metastasis. Previously, we have showed the
increasing of CCL5 in tumor associated stromal cells and in patient sera
with cancer progression. To verify the role of CCL5 in organ specific
cancer metastasis, cellular and molecular studies of cancer migratory
activities induced by CCL5 was conducted. Cell tracking assays indicated
CCL5 strongly involved in the directional migration. Furthermore,
quantitative PCR indicated significant increasing of CCRL2 in AIPC that
can be confirmed by western blot and flow cytometry analyses. Knockdown
of CCRL2 declined 75% of migration activities induced by CCL5, suggests
CCRL2 involve in CCL5 induce cancer metastasis. To verify the interaction
between CCRL2 and CCL5, biotinylated CCL5 binding assay demonstrated CCL5
independently binding to both CCR5 and CCRL2. Knockdown of CCRL2
decreased prostate cancer directional migration induced by CCL5. However,
shCCRL2 did not decrease CCR5 downstream signal activities, suggests
differential biological activities of CCR5 and CCRL2 induced by CCL5.
Reduction of CCRL2 expression decreased CCR5 polarization into the
leading edge of migration front after treating with CCL5, indicated CCRL2
assisting CCR5 polarization. Knockdown of CCRL2 significantly decreased
CDC42 GTP and GDP turn-over rate. Immunohistochemical studies of CCRL2
expression in prostate cancer patient samples revealed increasing of
CCRL2 expression in malignant prostate cancer locus, whereas no CCRL2 can
be detected in the benign region of same patient. T2 stage prostate
cancer showed lower of CCRL2 expression compared to T4 stage. In
addition, increased of CCRL2 expression can be detected at invasion
front. By contrast, bone metastasis tissue showed no CCRL2 expression.
This suggests CCRL2 transiently increasing during initial metastasis once
sensing environmental cues and decreased the expression after settled at
the distant organs. To determine the role of CCRL2 in initiation of
metastasis, cell sorting of CCRL2lo and CCRL2hi into two groups and
cultured for additional two weeks showed 90% of CCRL2hi converted back to
CCRL2lo with only 10% remain in high-expression group. Cell tracking
assay demonstrated strong directory migration activities exists in cancer
cells with CCRL2hi compared to CCRL2lo. These data suggests transient
increasing expression of CCRL2 play a central role in cancer directional
cell migration induced by CCL5. Our data indicating organ specific
metastasis might through the cooperation of multiple factors that
determine cancer initial migration and invasion, and metastasis
activities. (This work was supported by a grant NHRI EX-100-9902BI,
Taiwan to SY Sung).

