Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of hepatocellular carcinoma using rationally
combined molecular-targeted agents


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 5th most common cancer
and 3rd-leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide and is generally
recognized to be chemo- and radio-resistant. Aberrant RAS/RAF/MAPK and
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways have been reported in HCC, producing
dysregulation of cell survival, growth, and proliferation that likely
contributes to this resistant phenotype. Recently, several small-molecule
inhibitors targeting these pathways have emerged, including sorafenib (S;
a multi-kinase inhibitor with specific activity against the RAS/RAF/MAPK
pathway). S has shown a survival benefit in global phase III randomized
trials and has become standard 1st-line therapy for patients with
advanced and metastatic HCC. However, disease stabilization with S lasts
only a few months, possibly due to the development of resistance, and
consequently the survival advantage has been modest (Background:
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 5th most common cancer and
3rd-leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide and is generally
recognized to be chemo- and radio-resistant. Aberrant RAS/RAF/MAPK and
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways have been reported in HCC, producing
dysregulation of cell survival, growth, and proliferation that likely
contributes to this resistant phenotype. Recently, several small-molecule
inhibitors targeting these pathways have emerged, including sorafenib (S;
a multi-kinase inhibitor with specific activity against the RAS/RAF/MAPK
pathway). S has shown a survival benefit in global phase III randomized
trials and has become standard 1st-line therapy for patients with
advanced and metastatic HCC. However, disease stabilization with S lasts
only a few months, possibly due to the development of resistance, and
consequently the survival advantage has been modest (<3 mos). A natural
next step is to perform studies with the aim of enhancing the clinical
performance of S. We seek to assess for radiosensitization of HCC by
treating with S alone and in combination with 2 other molecular-targeted
agents (BEZ235 [B], a PI3K/mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor; and nelfinavir [N], a
dual PI3K/AKT inhibitor) with ionizing radiation (IR). Methods: We tested
the efficacy of combining IR with S, B, and N using clonogenic survival
assays. Drugs were administered both as single agents and in 2-drug
combinations to assess for radiosensitization. Human HCC cell lines HuH7,
HepG2, and Hep3B were treated with drug(s) for 24 hours prior to and
following IR to 0-8 Gy with a 137Cs source. Plating efficiency and
surviving fraction (SF) were calculated relative to those of
unirradiated, untreated cells. Results: SF at 0, 4, and 8 Gy for several
single- and dual-agent treatment cocktails was determined for the HuH7
cell line. While S (1 microM), N (10 microM), and B (50 nM) all
effectively reduced clonogenic proliferation at 0 Gy (SF=0.63, 0.41, and
0.52, respectively), only B achieved substantial radiosensitization
(enhancement ratio at 10% survival [ER] = 1.8, compared to an ER of 1.1
for both S and N; p0.05), suggesting that no synergistic or additive
effects are achieved through these 2-drug combinations compared to
treatment with B alone. Conclusions: B alone achieves a substantially
greater degree of radiosensitization than S or N alone, suggesting that
inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, and perhaps of mTORC1/2 in
particular, is important to effectively radiosensitize HCC. Synergistic
radiosensitization was not observed for any 2-drug combination. Further
confirmation of these results in additional HCC cell lines and
elucidation of possible molecular mechanisms are necessary future steps
that are currently underway.

