Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of EGFR to investigate its therapeutic potential for
treatment of non-small cell lung cancers


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane
protein consisting of an extracellular ligand-binding domain, and its
activation leads to a multitude of effects including cell proliferation,
cell differentiation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and antiapoptosis. EGFR
can be a partner of heterodimer of other EGFR family such as HER2 and
HER3. EGFR is often overexpressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Anti-EGFR agents including EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs)
have considered to be effective for NSCLC when drug sensitive EGFR
mutation is present. However, inherent and acquired resistances are major
problems of EGFR targeting therapies. In this study, we knock-downed EGFR
using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) in NSCLC cell lines to examine the
significance of targeting EGFR for NSCLC therapy. Materials and methods:
We treated 14 NSCLC cell lines including nine EGFR mutant and five EGFR
wild-type cell lines by geftinib or siRNAs for EGFR knock-down
(siR-EGFR). Three cell line, PC-9-GR-N1, RPC-9, and HCC827-Met, were
experimentally established as acquired resistant cells to gefitinib. The
anti-tumor effect was determined by MTS or colony formation assay. The
protein expression was evaluated using Western blotting. Results: All
cell lines showed the expression of EGFR protein and siR-EGFR treatment
down-regulated EGFR protein in all 14 cell lines. siR-EGFR suppressed
cell viability in 7 of 9 EGFR mutant cells ranged from 8.0% to 73%.
PC-9-GR-N1 and RPC-9 also showed inhibition. NCI-H1670 and HCC827-Met
harboured EGFR mutation but were not inhibited. Of note, PTEN was deleted
in NCI-H1670 and c-MET was amplified in HCC827-Met. Cell viability of all
EGFR wild-type cells was not inhibited except NCI-H411. Conclusion: Our
results indicated that EGFR can be the therapeutic target of NSCLC with
EGFR activation. By contrast, targeting EGFR is not appropriate strategy
for tumor of which EGFR is not activated even though EGFR is expressed.

