Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Andrographolide suppresses prostate cancer cell migration and
alters the expression of vimentin, ZO-1 and MMP-11


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second cause of
cancer-related deaths in males in the United States. The development of
novel chemopreventive strategies may be extremely helpful to prevent and
arrest the development of this neoplasm. Andrographolide, a labdane
diterpenoid that is the main bioactive component of the medicinal plant
Andrographis paniculata, has anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic
properties. In this study, we sought to examine the effect of
andrographolide on PC3 and LNCaP prostate cancer epithelial cells.
Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell growth at a
concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P Prostate cancer is the
most common cancer and the second cause of cancer-related deaths in males
in the United States. The development of novel chemopreventive strategies
may be extremely helpful to prevent and arrest the development of this
neoplasm. Andrographolide, a labdane diterpenoid that is the main
bioactive component of the medicinal plant Andrographis paniculata, has
anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic properties. In this study, we
sought to examine the effect of andrographolide on PC3 and LNCaP prostate
cancer epithelial cells. Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell
growth at a concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001), and
inhibited LNCaP cell growth at a concentration of 15 M after 24 h of
treatment (P Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second
cause of cancer-related deaths in males in the United States. The
development of novel chemopreventive strategies may be extremely helpful
to prevent and arrest the development of this neoplasm. Andrographolide,
a labdane diterpenoid that is the main bioactive component of the
medicinal plant Andrographis paniculata, has anti-inflammatory and
anticarcinogenic properties. In this study, we sought to examine the
effect of andrographolide on PC3 and LNCaP prostate cancer epithelial
cells. Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell growth at a
concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001), and inhibited
LNCaP cell growth at a concentration of 15 M after 24 h of treatment (P <
0.001). Wound healing assay and boyden chamber experiments were performed
in order to determine whether andrographolide had an effect on migration
and invasion. When PC3 and LNCaP cells were treated with andrographolide
the total number of migrating and invading cells was significantly
reduced (P Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second cause
of cancer-related deaths in males in the United States. The development
of novel chemopreventive strategies may be extremely helpful to prevent
and arrest the development of this neoplasm. Andrographolide, a labdane
diterpenoid that is the main bioactive component of the medicinal plant
Andrographis paniculata, has anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic
properties. In this study, we sought to examine the effect of
andrographolide on PC3 and LNCaP prostate cancer epithelial cells.
Andrographolide significantly inhibited PC3 cell growth at a
concentration of 10M after 24 h of treatment (P < 0.001), and inhibited
LNCaP cell growth at a concentration of 15 M after 24 h of treatment (P <
0.001). Wound healing assay and boyden chamber experiments were performed
in order to determine whether andrographolide had an effect on migration
and invasion. When PC3 and LNCaP cells were treated with andrographolide
the total number of migrating and invading cells was significantly
reduced (P < 0.001) when compared to control. To study possible
anti-migration and anti-invasion mechanisms of andrographolide on PC3 and
LNCap cells, we examined the expression of various adhesion molecules.
Andrograholide significantly decreased the expression of vimentin in PC3
and LNCap treated cells. However, PC3 and LNCaP cells treated with
andrographolide had increased expression levels of occludin and ZO-1. In
addition, immunofluorescence and western blot analysis showed that PC3
and LNCaP cells treated with andrographolide had decresased expression
levels of MMP-11. Our results suggest that the anti-migration and
anti-invasion effects of andrographolide in PC3 and LNCaP cells may be
associated with alterations in the expression of occluding, ZO-1 and
MMP-11.

