Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biotinylated derivatives of selective high affinity ligand (SHAL)
therapeutics as companion diagnostics for prescreening non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma patients


Selective High Affinity Ligands (SHALs) are a new class of small molecule
targeting agents that can be designed to bind selectively and with high
affinity to unique sites located on almost any protein. A series of
SHAL-based therapeutics have been developed to target the cell surface
antigen HLA-DR10 that is over-expressed on many B-cell derived
malignancies. SHALs are created by first identifying subsets of potential
ligands, or recognition elements, that bind to two or three neighboring
unique sites on the surface of the target protein. Bidentate or
tridentate SHALs are produced by linking two or three of these
recognition ligands together using carbodiimide chemistry and a miniPEG
and lysine scaffold. SHAL synthesis is rapid, uses relatively
inexpensive, commercially available components, and is very versatile.
Multiple forms of the SHAL can be created by combining different
recognition elements (ligands) or by attaching a variety of tags (biotin,
chelating groups, dyes, inhibitors) to the end of the linker. Using this
approach, SH7139 has been developed as a promising therapeutic for
treating non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Previous studies have shown SH7139 to be
effective in treating human B-cell lymphoma in a mouse xenograft model at
extremely low doses (3.3g/kg); 70% of the tumors disappeared within 30
days after treatment and did not reoccur during the remainder of the life
of the animal. Here we report that a biotinylated derivative of SH7139
can be used as companion diagnostic to prescreen needle aspirates or
biopsies from B-cell lymphomas and determine whether or not the tumor is
likely to respond to SH7139 therapy. The staining protocol involves
detecting the bound biotinylated SHAL using commercially available
alkaline phosphatase reagents, and it works equally well with both fixed
and unfixed biopsy sections. Biotinylated SH7139 has been used to
identify potentially responsive B-cell lymphomas in both canine and human
patients. The development of SHAL-based diagnostics in parallel with new
SHAL-based therapeutics will help advance individualized therapies and
minimize the systemic trauma and valuable time lost by patients given
treatments that prove to be ineffective. Our results also suggest this
diagnostic may also prove useful in determining whether malignancies
over-expressing HLA-DR10 have metastasized and individual lymphoma cells
have migrated out of the tumor into surrounding normal tissue. This
research was supported, in part, by NIH/NCI SBIR grant 1R43CA159843-01 to
Rod Balhorn.

