Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study identifies 10q24.32 variants
associated with arsenic metabolism and premalignant skin lesion risk in
Bangladesh


Arsenic is a class-I human carcinogen, and arsenic contamination of
drinking water is a serious public health issue in many countries,
increasing risk for a wide array of diseases, including cancers of the
bladder, kidney, lung, and skin. There is inter-individual variation in
arsenic metabolism efficiency and susceptibility to arsenic toxicity,
however the basis of this variation in not well understood. Here, we have
performed the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of
arsenic-related phenotypes to identify genetic determinants of arsenic
metabolism and gene-arsenic interactions influencing risk for
arsenic-induced premalignant skin lesions (a classical sign of arsenic
toxicity). Using data on urinary arsenic metabolite concentrations and
genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for 1,313
arsenic-exposed Bangladeshi individuals, we identified genome-wide
significant association signals (PArsenic is a class-I human carcinogen,
and arsenic contamination of drinking water is a serious public health
issue in many countries, increasing risk for a wide array of diseases,
including cancers of the bladder, kidney, lung, and skin. There is
inter-individual variation in arsenic metabolism efficiency and
susceptibility to arsenic toxicity, however the basis of this variation
in not well understood. Here, we have performed the first genome-wide
association study (GWAS) of arsenic-related phenotypes to identify
genetic determinants of arsenic metabolism and gene-arsenic interactions
influencing risk for arsenic-induced premalignant skin lesions (a
classical sign of arsenic toxicity). Using data on urinary arsenic
metabolite concentrations and genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) for 1,313 arsenic-exposed Bangladeshi individuals, we identified
genome-wide significant association signals (P<5x10^-8) for urinary
concentrations of both monomethylarsonic (MMA) and dimethylarsinic (DMA)
in a large linkage disequilibrium block containing the AS3MT gene
(arsenite methyltransferase; 10q24.32), with five genetic variants
showing strong evidence independent association. In a follow-up analysis
of 1,085 individuals with premalignant skin lesions and 1,794 controls
population-based, we show that one of these five variants (rs9527, which
is associated with DMA%) is associated with arsenical skin lesion risk
(P=0.0005). Using a subset of individuals with prospectively measured
arsenic metabolites (n=769), we show that rs9527 interacts with arsenic
exposure to influence skin lesion risk (P=0.01). The direction of the
observed association is consistent with the prevailing hypothesis that
DMA is the less toxic than MMA. To evaluate the functional role of the
five identified SNPs, we conducted expression quantitative trait locus
(eQTL) analyses of genome-wide expression data from 950 individual's
lymphocyte RNA. Our results suggest that several of our lead SNPs
represent cis-eQTLs for AS3MT (P=10^-12) or neighboring gene C10orf32
(P=10^-44). This is an intriguing finding in part because C10orf32 and
AS3MT are known to be involved in read-through transcription, producing a
transcript that is presumed to be non-functional. To our knowledge, this
is the largest genetic association study of arsenic metabolites to date,
the only GWAS of arsenic-related traits, and the first to implicate
10q24.32 variants in both arsenic metabolism and arsenical skin lesion
risk. Our results suggest that MMA% and DMA% have distinct genetic
determinants and support hypothesis that DMA is the less toxic of these
two methylated arsenic species. These results have potential
translational implications for the prevention and treatment of
arsenic-associated toxicities, including several types of cancer.

