Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An algorithm to detect somatic mutations in cancer specimens using
mass spectrometric genotyping


Although advances in technology and the biological understanding of
cancer pathogenesis have brought the goal of personalized cancer medicine
closer, important challenges remain in several areas. One such challenge
is the reliable and sensitive detection of somatic mutations in clinical
tumor specimens. Somatic mutation detection in clinical tumor specimens
is confounded by biological variables such as the percentage of tumor
cells in a specimen, stromal contamination, sequence quality
(particularly in DNA derived from formalin-fixed clinical samples), tumor
heterogeneity and ploidy considerations. These and other experimental
factors can lead to allele signal ratios very different from the 1:0, 1:1
or 0:1 ratio expected for a classically-defined SNP. Germline genotyping
using the Sequenom MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry platform has been used to
reliably detect single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a wide variety
of samples. The automated genotype calling algorithm included with the
Sequenom platform falters, however, when the ratio of allele peak signals
for a given assay in a specific sample do not approximate the native
algorithm's expectations of frequency, confounding accurate genotype
calling by the system. We report here a cancer-specific algorithm for
sensitive genotype calling of somatic mutations, based on an independent
clustering of raw allele peak data for each assay run, and the
identification and stratification of outliers from an empirical
background (wildtype) cluster of genotypes. Outliers from this cluster
are then evaluated using a number of criteria to determine the quality
and performance of the overall assay run, as well as the individual call;
these factors include the relative signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of each
allele peak, the ratio of variant allele peak height to peak area, the
percentage of signal lost in unextended probe (UEP) and relative distance
of a putative mutation call from the wildtype cluster In a scatter plot
of peak area values. Based on these criteria, a confidence value is
assigned to each candidate outlier, allowing for stratification and
prioritization of these candidates for validation. We applied the
algorithm to samples run against the our OncoMap genotyping panel,
comprised of 460 assays interrogating mutations in 33 cancer-associated
genes. Candidate mutations produced by this algorithm correlate strongly
with those called by users manually, and use of the algorithm increases
the sensitivity and reliability of the OncoMap platform to detect somatic
mutations in clinical tumor samples, particularly in FFPE-derived
material. The algorithm code and documentation will be made publicly
available in a form compatible with most Sequenom genotyping platform
installations.

