Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanofluidic technologies to define biological and response profile
in neoadjuvant patients with ovarian cancer


Objectives: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is used in the treatment of advanced
ovarian cancer. In this study, we determined the impact of chemotherapy
on gene and microRNA (miRNA), expression in ovarian cancer specimens
using nanofluidic technology. We performed the validation of this
technique by using RNA extraction from archival formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue. Molecular pathways involved in prediction of
the outcome in neoadjuvant patients were analyzed. Methods: Seventy-eight
patients with advanced ovarian cancer who were treated with primary
surgical debulking versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy (15/78) were
investigated. All patients were treated with Paclitaxel and Carboplatin.
A chip 48.48 served to analyze a panel of 96 potential predictors of the
outcome and response to chemotherapy. All the samples were normalized for
multiple housekeeping genes and as consistent reference the ovarian
cancer cell line A2780 was used. When needed for the analysis each factor
was then categorized as high and low expression using the mean value as
cutoff. Overall survival was analyzed using the methods of Kaplan and
Meier and comparisons between groups by log-rank and Wilcoxon test.
Results: We assessed the impact of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on the
selected genes and microRNAs. Among the cell growth and proliferation
genes MKI67, PLK1, PBK were reduced. Deactivation of the TUBB3 survival
pathway, which was reduced while its negative regulator GNAI1 was
increased. ERBB2 resulted downregulated in the neoadjuvant setting, while
HGF and PTEN were increased. MicroRNAs expression broadly increased, with
the only exception of miR-20a and miR-141. Patients exhibiting high
levels of COL11A1 and PLK1 were poor performers, while the opposite
occurred for GLI1. At the micro-RNA level the best predictors were
miR-193a-5p, miR-375 and miR-20a. The poor performers (miR-193a-5p,
miR-375) were featured by high levels of the micro-RNA while the opposite
was evident for miR-20a. Conclusions: Use of the nanofluidic technology
provides deeper insight into the specific roles of clinically relevant
major molecular networks. Chemotherapy induced modification of genes and
microRNA expression can be used as a model to develop future prognostic
biomarkers and therapeutic modalities. Moreover, our findings suggest
that neoadjuvant patients with ovarian cancer may benefit from biologic
agent targeting HGF treatment.

