Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical models for cellular pharmacodynamics of fractionated
radiation and radiochemotherapy


Cellular response to radiation is generally described by the
linear-quadratic equation, but the extension to complicated fractionated
schedules, and to combined exposure with chemotherapeutic drugs is not
well-established. Mathematical models for cellular response are needed
for predictive quantitative modeling of treatment. Here, such models are
formulated using the previously developed concepts of peak damage models
and additive damage, which in prior studies proved successful in
describing cellular pharmacodynamics of single-agent and combination
chemotherapy. The exponential form of the linear-quadratic equation is
replaced by Hill or cumulative lognormal functions of the peak value over
time of a quantity termed cellular damage. Damage is a saturating
function of radiation dose. Cell survival depends on whether the peak
value of cellular damage ever exceeds a threshold value during treatment.
This model is tested for a range of data sets for single-dose radiation,
and compares favorably with the linear-quadratic. In one data set (Park
et al 2008) the dose range was sufficiently wide to show the significant
overestimation of cell kill by the linear-quadratic model at high doses;
the Hill/lognormal formulation behaves more satisfactorily in this limit.
The model is then extended to the case of fractionated radiation through
the assumption that damage decays between treatments according to
first-order kinetics, and damage from different cycles is additive. The
model gives a satisfactory fit to literature data with multiple
fractionation schedules for the same drug and cell line. Finally, the
principle of additive damage is applied to model cellular response to
radiochemotherapy, with damage as a linear superposition of terms from
radiation and drug. Overall, the peak cellular damage model with additive
damage was found to fit in vitro dose-response data well, and provides a
tool for understanding and predicting response as schedule and dose are
varied in combination treatments. It is expected that these models will
have application in assessment of preclinical cellular pharmacodynamics
data, as well as computational simulations of treatment response.

