Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, suppresses
proliferation and induces apoptosis in endometrial cancer cells


INTRODUCTION: Obesity is associated with increased risk and worse
outcomes for women with endometrial cancer. Inflammation may play a
critical role in obesity-driven cancers; thus, the anti-inflammatory
effects of COX-2 inhibitors may be a novel treatment strategy that is
particularly beneficial in endometrial cancer patients. As a result, our
objective was to evaluate the effect of COX-2 inhibitors on proliferation
and apoptosis in endometrial cancer cell lines. METHODS: Two endometrial
cancer cell lines (ECC-1 and Ishikawa) were used in these studies. Cell
proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to the COX-2
inhibitor, celecoxib. Cell cycle progression was evaluated by flow
cytometry. Apoptosis was assessed by ELISA for caspase-3. hTERT mRNA
expression was assessed by real-time PCR. Western immunoblotting was
performed to determine the effect of celecoxib on COX-2 expression in the
endometrial cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Celecoxib significantly inhibited
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both endometrial cancer cell
lines (IC50 5-10 M for ECC-1, 10-20 M for Ishikawa; pINTRODUCTION:
Obesity is associated with increased risk and worse outcomes for women
with endometrial cancer. Inflammation may play a critical role in
obesity-driven cancers; thus, the anti-inflammatory effects of COX-2
inhibitors may be a novel treatment strategy that is particularly
beneficial in endometrial cancer patients. As a result, our objective was
to evaluate the effect of COX-2 inhibitors on proliferation and apoptosis
in endometrial cancer cell lines. METHODS: Two endometrial cancer cell
lines (ECC-1 and Ishikawa) were used in these studies. Cell proliferation
was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to the COX-2 inhibitor,
celecoxib. Cell cycle progression was evaluated by flow cytometry.
Apoptosis was assessed by ELISA for caspase-3. hTERT mRNA expression was
assessed by real-time PCR. Western immunoblotting was performed to
determine the effect of celecoxib on COX-2 expression in the endometrial
cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Celecoxib significantly inhibited
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both endometrial cancer cell
lines (IC50 5-10 M for ECC-1, 10-20 M for Ishikawa; p<0.005 for each).
Treatment with celecoxib resulted in G1 cell cycle arrest, induction of
apoptosis and inhibition of hTERT mRNA expression. Western immunoblot
analysis demonstrated that celecoxib treatment suppresses COX-2
expression in both endometrial cancer cell lines. CONCLUSION: Celecoxib
potently inhibits cell growth via G1 arrest, decreases telomerase
activity and increases apoptotic cell death in endometrial cancer cells.
This work suggests that celecoxib may be a novel chemotherapeutic agent
for endometrial cancer prevention and treatment, especially given the
interplay between obesity, inflammation and cancer risk.

