Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of commercially available phosphorylated ERK antibodies
for immunohistochemical biomarker analysis


Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of ERK phosphorylation is commonly
performed on pre- and post-treatment cancer biopsies as part of
pharmacodynamic biomarker assessments for targeted oncology therapeutics.
The current study was performed to assess the specificity and sensitivity
of four commercially-available pERK antibodies for IHC analysis, which
included three monoclonal antibodies (clones 20G11, MAPK-YT, D13.14.4E)
and one polyclonal antibody. To facilitate this analysis, the HEPG2 liver
cancer cell line was grown in the presence or absence of inhibitors of
the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway (U0126 or sorafenib). Cell lysates were prepared
for analysis via Western blotting and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
cell pellets were prepared for analysis via IHC. All antibodies produced
bands at 44 and 42 kDa, the expected molecular weights of ERK1/2, when
used for Western analysis of untreated cells and demonstrated a reduction
or ablation of these bands following treatment of cells with inhibitors
of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. When examined via IHC, the monoclonals
demonstrated nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in HEPG2 cells with
increased sensitivity relative to the polyclonal antibody. The
monoclonals also demonstrated greatly reduced staining in HEPG2 cells
treated with inhibitors of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. These antibodies were
further characterized for reactivity in human tumor specimens
representing breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, and
ovarian cancer. Melanoma tissues were stained with a red chromogen; all
others were stained with DAB. Differences in the frequency of expression,
percentage of expression, and protein localization were identified
between the three monoclonals. In summary, this work has identified
commercially-available antibodies that appear to be of suitable
specificity and sensitivity for use in IHC assays.

