Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TUSC3 (N33) affects protein N-glycosylation and proliferation of
prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer is the most prevalent cancer in males in developed
countries. Molecular aberrations in the pathogenesis of this disease are
numerous, though losses on the short arm of chromosome 8 are highly
prevalent. In our previous studies, hypermethylation and diminished TUSC3
expression turned out to be significantly associated with poor
progression free and overall survival in ovarian cancer. Additionally,
expression profiling of TUSC3 negative cancer cell lines revealed
deregulation of genes involved in cell structure and motility and
development processes, further supporting our hypothesis of TUSC3 as a
tumor suppressor. In silico prediction of TUSC3 shows a high homology of
TUSC3 to the Ost3p subunit of the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex
in yeast, hinting to its role in protein glycosylation. In this project,
we characterized TUSC3 (N33), a putative tumor suppressor gene on 8p, in
prostate cancer. To study the prognostic role of TUSC3 in prostate cancer
we used a comprehensive prostate cancer tissue microarray, comprised of
samples from 143 prostate cancer patients. Serum DNA methylation was
studied in an additional cohort of 67 prostate cancer patients.
Statistical analysis demonstrated low or missing TUSC3 protein expression
in 56.6% of prostate cancer patients based on immunohistochemical
staining. Methylation of the TUSC3 promoter was observed in 38.8% of
prostate cancer patients serum DNA, confirming our previous findings of
TUSC3 promoter hypermethylation as a possible epigenetic regulatory
mechanism. In our prostate cancer cohorts, however, neither expression
nor hypermethylation of TUSC3 had a significant effect on overall
survival, possibly due to the relatively short follow-up period. Next, we
studied the function of TUSC3 in N-glycosylation and in particular its
influence on carcinogenesis using a cell culture model. We downregulated
TUSC3 expression in prostate cancer cell lines DU145 and PC3 using shRNA
mediated knockdown and analyzed them for their proliferative and
carcinogenic properties in vitro. We could show that loss of TUSC3
expression confers growth advantage of prostate cancer cell lines, in
particular under conditions of serum starvation. We also observed
increased migratory properties of prostate cancer cell lines upon TUSC3
knockdown. Further, influence of TUSC3 downregulation on several putative
targets of N-linked glycosylation has been analyzed in vitro. In our
study, we characterized TUSC3 expression and/or methylation in prostate
cancer patients and obtained a first mechanistic insight into its
function in N-glycosylation and carcinogenesis.

