Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-scale analysis of everolimus and sorafenib combination in
pancreatic cancer xenografts


Objective: To investigate factors impacting efficacy of combined regimen
of the molecularly targeted agents everolimus and sorafenib in pancreatic
cancer (PaCA) xenografts. Rationale: Everolimus inhibits mTOR (mammalian
target of rapamycin) that drives cell proliferation, cell survival and
angiogenesis. Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor of cell growth and
angiogenic pathways driving tumor progression. By inhibiting compensatory
pathways, combinations of these drugs could improve efficacy in
pancreatic cancer. Methods: SCID mice were implanted sc with low-passage,
patient-derived pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Groups of 9 animals were
dosed by oral gavage for 5 weeks with individual drugs or combinations.
Low-dose groups received 0.5 mg/kg everolimus/10 mg/kg sorafenib, and
high-dose groups received 1 mg/kg everolimus/20 mg/kg sorafenib. These
doses were selected by preliminary scaling of expected human plasma drug
exposures in an ongoing Phase I trial, as well as prior data for the
drugs individually on cell-line based PaCA xenografts. Tumor volume
progression and body weight were the primary pharmacodynamic (PD)
endpoints. Pharmacokinetics (PK) was evaluated from plasma, tumor and
tissue concentrations of drug in nave animals or during the 24 h
following the last dose of week 5. Scalable, physiologically- based PK
(PBPK) models were developed for each drug, which enabled inter- species
comparison of plasma drug exposures. A mechanistic PD model based on
tumor growth and inhibition by the drugs was developed to relate PK to
the observed PD endpoints. Results: Neither drug alone or in combination
had significant effects on tumor progression at lower doses regimen. At
higher doses, each inhibited tumor growth by 70 %, and the combination
caused complete (100%) inhibition. The PBPK models well described
everolimus and sorafenib concentrations in plasma, tissues and tumor. The
model was extended to capture the PD and was able to describe the
observed tumor suppression data. Drug exposures expected in a Phase 1
trial of the drugs were calculated for equivalent scaled doses. The
lower, inefficacious doses resulted everolimus exposures 2-fold lower
than in mice and 2-fold higher for sorafenib. At the higher, efficacious
doses, everolimus was approx. 4-fold higher than expected in humans and
the sorafenib exposures were similar in mice and humans. Conclusions:
Combined inhibition of the mTOR and multiple kinase pathways can improve
the efficacy of molecularly targeted agents in SCID mouse models of PaCA.
Development of multiscale, linked PK and PD models provides a
quantitative approach to compare efficacy of drug combination strategies
in murine human tumor explants and provide insights that support clinical
trials of molecularly targeted agents in advanced malignancies.

