Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myricetin suppresses UVB-induced photoaging, skin cancer, and
angiogenesis by targeting multiple kinases


Chronic exposure to solar ultraviolet is a major cause of photoaging and
skin carcinogenesis. In the present study, we investigated the effect of
myricetin on UVB-induced photoaging, skin cancer, and angiogenesis in JB6
P+ cells and a mouse skin tumorigenesis model. Myricetin inhibited
wrinkle formation induced by UVB irradiation (0.18 J/cm2, 3 days/week for
15 weeks) in mouse skin. Myricetin treatment reduced UVB-induced
epidermal thickening of mouse skin and also suppressed UVB-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) protein expression and enzyme activity. In
vitro and in vivo pull-down and kinase assays revealed that myricetin
suppressed Raf activity by binding with Raf. Secondly, myricetin
suppressed UVB-induced COX-2 expression and mitogen-activated protein
kinases in JB6 P+ cells and mouse skin. Pull-down and kinase assay
results showed that myricetin directly inhibited UVB-induced Fyn kinase
activity by binding with Fyn in an ATP-competitive manner. Mouse skin
tumorigenesis data clearly showed that pretreatment with myricetin
significantly suppressed UVB-induced skin tumor incidence in a
dose-dependent manner. Topical treatment with myricetin suppressed
repetitive UVB-induced neovascularization in the SKH-1 hairless mouse
skin. The induction of vascular endothelial growth factor, matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and MMP-13 expression by chronic UVB
irradiation was substantially suppressed by myricetin treatment.
Immunohistochemical and Western blot analyses revealed that myricetin
attenuated UVB-induced hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha expression in
mouse skin. In vivo kinase and pull down assay data revealed that
myricetin suppressed UVB-induced phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase
activity by direct binding with PI3-kinase. Overall, together these
results suggest that the anti-photoaging, anti-skin carcinogenesis, and
anti-angiogenesis effects of myricetin are due to mainly targeting Raf,
Fyn, and PI3-K, respectively.

