Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-terminus-truncated hepatitis B virus X protein enhances cell
invasiveness in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth of major malignancies
worldwide and chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of its
well known risk factors. Random integration of the HBV DNA into host
genome is frequent in human HCCs and this leads to truncation of the HBV
DNA, particularly at the C-terminal end of the HBV X protein (HBx). In
this study, we investigated the frequency of this C-terminal truncation
of HBx in human HCCs and its functional significance in HCC cells. In the
51 HBV-positive patients with HCC, full-length HBx was detected in all of
the non-tumorous livers. Interestingly, natural COOH-truncated HBx was
found in 47% tumours. Upon clinicopathological analysis, presence of
natural COOH-truncated HBx significantly correlated with the presence of
venous invasion, a hallmark of metastasis (p Hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is the fifth of major malignancies worldwide and chronic hepatitis
B virus (HBV) infection is one of its well known risk factors. Random
integration of the HBV DNA into host genome is frequent in human HCCs and
this leads to truncation of the HBV DNA, particularly at the C-terminal
end of the HBV X protein (HBx). In this study, we investigated the
frequency of this C-terminal truncation of HBx in human HCCs and its
functional significance in HCC cells. In the 51 HBV-positive patients
with HCC, full-length HBx was detected in all of the non-tumorous livers.
Interestingly, natural COOH-truncated HBx was found in 47% tumours. Upon
clinicopathological analysis, presence of natural COOH-truncated HBx
significantly correlated with the presence of venous invasion, a hallmark
of metastasis (p < 0.01). Doxycycline- inducible stable expression of the
full-length HBx and C-terminal truncated forms of HBx in HepG2 cells was
employed for in vitro cell invasion assay and cell signalling analysis
involved in cell invasiveness. Inducible expression of COOH-truncated HBx
protein (with 24 amino acids truncated at C-terminal end) in HepG2 cells
enhanced cell invasiveness, and C-Jun transcriptional activity, and
increased MMP10 transcription production, as compared with the
full-length HBx. The activation of the MMP10 promoter by the
COOH-truncated HBx was abolished when the AP-1 binding sites were
mutated. Our data suggest that COOH-truncation of HBx may play a
significant role in enhancing cell invasiveness and metastasis in HCC,
possibly via activation of the MMP10 through C-Jun signaling pathway.
(This study was supported by a Hong Kong Government RFCID grant 05050022)

