Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel function of WW domain binding protein 2 (WBP2) in
regulating cytoskeletal function and cellular division through binding to
co-chaperone BAG3


BAG3, a BAG co-chaperone family member, co-localizes with actin
microfilaments and influences processes that involve actin function,
including adhesion and migration. Because actin function regulates cell
division, we hypothesized that the BAG3 WW-domain regulates cellular
division through its cytoskeletal association. We show that BAG3
co-localizes with leading lamellipodia exclusively during G2 and mitosis
phases. Co-immunoprecipitation of BAG3 and pulldown of GST-tagged BAG3
WW-domain confirmed that BAG3 WW-domain association with actin increased
during G2 and mitosis relative to asynchronous cells. Deletion of the
BAG3 WW-domain caused an abnormal cellular morphology, degenerate F-actin
organization, longer doubling time (pBAG3, a BAG co-chaperone family
member, co-localizes with actin microfilaments and influences processes
that involve actin function, including adhesion and migration. Because
actin function regulates cell division, we hypothesized that the BAG3
WW-domain regulates cellular division through its cytoskeletal
association. We show that BAG3 co-localizes with leading lamellipodia
exclusively during G2 and mitosis phases. Co-immunoprecipitation of BAG3
and pulldown of GST-tagged BAG3 WW-domain confirmed that BAG3 WW-domain
association with actin increased during G2 and mitosis relative to
asynchronous cells. Deletion of the BAG3 WW-domain caused an abnormal
cellular morphology, degenerate F-actin organization, longer doubling
time (p<0.05, n=4), and three-fold increase in polynucleated cells
relative to empty vector and full length-BAG3 (FL-BAG3; pBAG3, a BAG
co-chaperone family member, co-localizes with actin microfilaments and
influences processes that involve actin function, including adhesion and
migration. Because actin function regulates cell division, we
hypothesized that the BAG3 WW-domain regulates cellular division through
its cytoskeletal association. We show that BAG3 co-localizes with leading
lamellipodia exclusively during G2 and mitosis phases.
Co-immunoprecipitation of BAG3 and pulldown of GST-tagged BAG3 WW-domain
confirmed that BAG3 WW-domain association with actin increased during G2
and mitosis relative to asynchronous cells. Deletion of the BAG3
WW-domain caused an abnormal cellular morphology, degenerate F-actin
organization, longer doubling time (p<0.05, n=4), and three-fold increase
in polynucleated cells relative to empty vector and full length-BAG3
(FL-BAG3; p<0.001, n=3). We confirmed polyploidy development and absence
of cytokinesis in WW-BAG3 cells by live-cell imaging, and observed
mitotic delay relative to control and FL-BAG3 cells. To identify a
potential regulation mechanism for BAG3-actin binding, we identified WBP2
as a novel BAG3 WW domain interacting protein in a yeast two-hybrid
assay. BAG3 and WBP2 co-immunoprecipitated only in G1 and S phases,
indicating cell cycle-specific BAG3-WBP2 binding. WBP2 silencing caused
indiscriminate BAG3 co-immunoprecipitation with actin across all cell
cycle phases, suggesting that association with WBP2 prevents BAG3-actin
binding. We are the first to identify a function for WBP2, which our data
show regulates BAG3 WW-domain association with actin in a cell
cycle-specific manner. Because actin dysfunction has been proposed to
contribute to chromosomal instability and tumor formation, the WW-domain
of BAG3 is a potential target to reduce abnormal cell division.

