Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A focused proteomics technology QUEST-MS identified a novel plasma
prostate cancer biomarker polypeptide complementing PSA test


Prostate cancer accounted for more than 250,000 death worldwide in 2009,
which was the 9th highest cause of cancer related death in Japan (The
Population Survey Report 2010, the Ministry of Health, Labor and
Welfare). Although the widespread use of PSA test has contributed to the
early diagnosis of prostate cancer, expanding overdiagnosis cases and
unnecessary biopsies have emerged as a big issue. To identify novel
plasma biomarkers that could complement the specificity of PSA test and
improve diagnostic accuracy, especially in the early stage of prostate
cancer, we employed a focused proteomic technology QUEST-MS (Quick
Enrichment of Small Targets for Mass Spectrometry). The rapid 96-well
format preparation method QUEST was simply based on sequential reversed
phase chromatography purifications which allowed efficient enrichment of
less than 20 kDa proteins from 116 plasma samples in a half of day, prior
to LC/MS/MS analysis. In this biomarker screening experiment, plasma from
24 healthy controls, 19 benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH) patients, and
73 prostate cancer patients (Gleason score 5-10) were analyzed with
LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. The 116 LC/MS/MS raw data were
directly loaded onto the Expressionist proteome server platform (Genedata
AG) and subjected to data processing, label-free quantification analysis,
and the following biomarker discovery analysis. We extracted peptides
demonstrating prostate cancer-specific expression patterns by
Absent-Present Search algorithm on the Expressionist Analyst module,
which searched all-or-nothing peptides between two clinical groups
(healthy control + BPH vs. prostate cancer). Finally 108 peptides were
selected from over 100,000 peptides with the criteria; detection in at
most 1 case among 43 controls and at least 12 cases among 73 prostate
cancer patients. Simultaneously, protein identification analysis was
processed on the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific)
using the Sequest program, resulting in 1,126 non-redundant plasma
protein identifications with false discovery rate Prostate cancer
accounted for more than 250,000 death worldwide in 2009, which was the
9th highest cause of cancer related death in Japan (The Population Survey
Report 2010, the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare). Although the
widespread use of PSA test has contributed to the early diagnosis of
prostate cancer, expanding overdiagnosis cases and unnecessary biopsies
have emerged as a big issue. To identify novel plasma biomarkers that
could complement the specificity of PSA test and improve diagnostic
accuracy, especially in the early stage of prostate cancer, we employed a
focused proteomic technology QUEST-MS (Quick Enrichment of Small Targets
for Mass Spectrometry). The rapid 96-well format preparation method QUEST
was simply based on sequential reversed phase chromatography
purifications which allowed efficient enrichment of less than 20 kDa
proteins from 116 plasma samples in a half of day, prior to LC/MS/MS
analysis. In this biomarker screening experiment, plasma from 24 healthy
controls, 19 benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH) patients, and 73 prostate
cancer patients (Gleason score 5-10) were analyzed with
LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. The 116 LC/MS/MS raw data were
directly loaded onto the Expressionist proteome server platform (Genedata
AG) and subjected to data processing, label-free quantification analysis,
and the following biomarker discovery analysis. We extracted peptides
demonstrating prostate cancer-specific expression patterns by
Absent-Present Search algorithm on the Expressionist Analyst module,
which searched all-or-nothing peptides between two clinical groups
(healthy control + BPH vs. prostate cancer). Finally 108 peptides were
selected from over 100,000 peptides with the criteria; detection in at
most 1 case among 43 controls and at least 12 cases among 73 prostate
cancer patients. Simultaneously, protein identification analysis was
processed on the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific)
using the Sequest program, resulting in 1,126 non-redundant plasma
protein identifications with false discovery rate < 1%. The list included
the identification of PSA with 4 distinct high-confidence level peptides.
Here we would like to show a successful identification of a new prostate
cancer biomarker candidate polypeptide which displayed the Gleason
score-dependent escalation of its plasma level among 12 prostate cancer
samples, and only low level detection in 1 control sample. Although the
prostate-specific expression feature of this polypeptide was quite
similar with PSA, the pattern of positive cases was independent. Thus,
the integration of biomarker focusing technology QUEST-MS and the
high-end mass spectrometer analysis might be able to reach lots of
unidentified low abundant (around 100 pg/ml) serum/plasma biomarkers.

