Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of biodistribution and accumulation of a thermally
responsive polypeptide with and without a cell-penetrating peptide


Elastin-like Polypeptide (ELP) is a macromolecular carrier for various
therapeutic peptides and has the ability to penetrate tumor vasculature.
This penetration ability is mediated by a cell-penetrating peptide. The
polymer is soluble at normal physiological temperature but aggregates
above 40 C. Peptides without carriers have very short half-lives, so ELP
not only allows for longer circulation time, but its thermal properties
allow the peptide to accumulate inside the tumor when heated. Bac-ELP-p21
is an ELP conjugate that uses the CPP Bac to penetrate the nucleus and
the therapeutic peptide p21 to inhibit the cell cycle at G1/S. ELP-p21
lacks the CPP and therefore the cell penetrating capabilities. Both of
these constructs can be actively targeted to the tumor site using local
hyperthermia. In this study, tumor accumulation and biodistribution of
fluorescently labeled Bac-ELP-p21 and ELP-p21 were monitored in a mouse
xenograft model by whole animal imaging using the IVIS system. Luciferase
transfected S2013 pancreatic cells were used to establish the tumor,
allowing monitored tumor growth by quantifying luciferase signal over a
period of time. The animals were intravenously injected with Alexa750
labeled Bac-ELP-p21 or ELP-p21. Animals were imaged for fluorescent
signal at specific times after treatment to observe the level of protein
with respect to time. This allowed for the detection and quantification
of the protein level throughout the body and compared with uptake inside
the tumor. Heated tumors accumulated 3-fold more protein with both
Bac-ELP-p21 and ELP-p21. For biodistribution and plasma clearance
studies, blood draws were performed on separate groups at 5, 15, 30 min
and continuing every 30 min for 4h. At the end of the 4h, organs and
tumors were harvested for later dissection. This allowed for comparison
of the protein in the organs and monitored the amount of protein in the
plasma over time. At 5 minutes, 2 times the amount of ELP-p21 was
detectable in blood plasma compared to Bac-ELP-p21. At 2 hours, this
ratio increases to 2.5 fold. Protein was still detectable in the tumor at
48h after treatment, indicating that modification of macromolecular
carrier with cell penetrating peptide results in its faster plasma
clearance due to the rapid accumulation in tumor and/or tissues. In
conclusion, fusing a therapeutic peptide to a macromolecular carrier
results in its improved pharmacokinetics and accumulation of the peptide,
preferentially in the tumor tissue due to passive targeting, which is
improved due to externally induced hyperthermia while this active
targeting is increased due to the addition of a CPP. This approach will
allow us to use lower concentrations of drug systemically and therefore
reduce side effects in normal tissues.

