Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative effects of antagonists of Inhibitor of Apoptosis
Proteins (IAPs) in human cancer cells


The inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins are a family of proteins
containing one or more conserved, cysteine and histidine-rich baculoviral
IAP repeat (BIR) N-terminal domains and a C-terminal RING domain The BIR
domains of the IAPs form the zinc-figure-like structures that bind to
active caspases to block caspase activity. The RING domain acts as an
ubiquitin ligase to facilitate proteasomal degradation of caspases.
Upregulation of IAPs is found in many tumor cell lines as well as in most
primary tumor tissues. Increased expression of IAPs has been associated
with apoptosis resistance and low sensitivity to chemotherapy drugs in
several tumor types. Recent studies have shown that inhibition of levels
or functions of survivin and/XIAP with anti-sense, siRNA, and dominant
negative mutant survivin genes induces the apoptotic cell death
selectively in human tumor cells but not in normal cells. Like such, the
importance of IAPs in regulating the apoptotic response and as molecular
targets for production of therapeutic effects selectively in tumor cells
have attracted a great attention to identify peptide antagonists or small
molecule inhibitors for those proteins. In the effort to develop
efficient antagonists of IAPs into chemotherapy drug, we analyzed the
apoptotic effect of HM antagonists, novel small molecules inhibiting IAP
activities, on non-small-cell lung cancer cells and colon cells. We also
analyzed changes in cell signaling pathways after HM antagonists
treatment to determine the mechanisms of the apoptotic response in cancer
cells. Finally, the feasibility of using HM antagonists to sensitize
human cancer cells to chemotherapy drugs was examined by combining HM
antagonists with two commonly used agents, cisplatin and MK2206. In the
present study, we have demonstrated that this reagent efficiently
decreased IAPs expression in several NSCLC cells, especially on EGFR
activated cells, as well as colon cells. It showed cleaved caspase 3 and
PARP, and decreasing phosphor-Akt and phosphor-Erk, indicating that the
reagents exerted antiapoptotic activity through inhibition of Akt and
MAPK signaling pathways. Ongoing xenograft experiments using NSCLC cells
and colon cells would manifest the potential chemotherapeutic agents.

