Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased angiogenesis resulting from TIMP-1 inhibition of TSP-1
is mediated by PI3kinase and FAK interactions


Tissue Inhibitor of Matrix Metalloprotease -1 (TIMP-1), one of the four
natural inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases was initially identified
for its Erythroid Potentiating Activity. Since then, it has been shown to
independently induce cell proliferation and inhibit apoptosis in a number
of cell types. TIMP-1 has also been shown to promote, but also more often
to inhibit angiogenesis. Previously, we have shown that TIMP-1
overexpression in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line (H2009) resulted in
more aggressive and vascular tumors in nude mice and increased capillary
network formation and tumorigenicity in vitro. An angiogenesis
pathway-specific gene array had identified a 3-fold reduction in
thrombospondin 1 (TSP-1) levels in the TIMP-1 overexpressing clone HB-1.
TSP-1 siRNA clone exhibited a similar increase in in vitro angiogenesis
assays. In the present study, we have sought to identify the signaling
pathway involved whereby TIMP-1 inhibits TSP-1. To this end, we have used
specific inhibitors to inhibit TIMP1 initiated signaling pathways. MAP
kinase, PI3/Akt inhibitors were used, either singly or in combination
with Focal Adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitor. Our results indicate a
synergistic interaction between PI3/Akt pathway and FAK signaling, which
restores TSP-1 levels by approximately 3-fold relative to control.
Gelatin zymography of serum-free conditioned media (SFCM) revealed a
reduction in proMMP-9 level in the HB-1 clone versus H2009. Additionally
MMP9 specific ELISA reveals a two-fold reduction in MMP9 levels. This is
in tune with the role of TSP-1 as an inhibitor of MMP-9 activation such
that decreased TSP-1 level results in increased activation of MMP-9 with
a concomitant reduction in the extracellular level of proMMP-9. Thus our
findings define interaction of TIMP-1 via PI3kinase and FAK signaling.
resulting in TSP-1 decrease and subsequent downstream promotion of
angiogenesis with increased tumor kinetics.

