Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-surface marker discovery for colorectal cancer


In the United States and Europe, colorectal cancer (CRC) has the second
highest mortality rate of all cancers. Early diagnosis allows for
treatment and improved survival. Currently, colonoscopy is the standard
of care for detection of early-stage CRC, which is an invasive procedure
that requires a cathartic bowel preparation and general anesthesia.
Consequently, less invasive screening methods are highly desirable. The
objective of this study is to develop a targeted molecular imaging
technique termed molecular colonography, that can non-invasively detect
dysplastic and neoplastic colonic lesions with high sensitivity and
conspicuity by oral administration of ligand-targeted probes containing
image contrast agents followed by clearance and non-invasive colonography
with MRI, CT or Fluorescence imaging. The first step in the development
of molecular colonography is identification of cell-surface markers for
CRC. To accomplish this goal, gene expression profiling of DNA microarray
data from 432 adenocarcinomas, 39 adenomas and 16 inflammatory bowel
disease; and unaffected patient tissue samples (178 colon, 6 small
intestine, 4 stomach, 4 esophagus, 4 trachea, 3 oral mucosa and 3 tonsil)
was performed. Data were filtered using a previously compiled list of
3,800 cell surface genes from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database.
Of these, 1085 genes were broadly expressed in CRC and were ranked by
differential expression in adenomas and adenocarcinomas vs. normal
tissues. Six cell-surface markers were identified that are highly and
broadly expressed as mRNA in adenomas and adenocarcinomas relative to
unaffected tissues: TLR4, GPR56, GRM8, LY6G6D, CLDN1 and SLC01B3. TLR4
and/or GRM8 were shown to be expressed in 100% of the colon adenomas and
adenocarcinomas in this dataset. To confirm protein expression,
immunohistochemistry of normal (n=15) and CRC (16 adenoma and 60
adenocarcinoma) patient tissue samples and 26 CRC cell lines was
performed. All six markers were highly and broadly expressed in adenomas
and adenocarcinomas compared to normal colon. Further validations by mRNA
(qRT-PCR) and protein expression (Western blot and immunocytochemistry)
of these markers were also performed in nine colon tumor cell lines
(COLO-205, DIFI, HCT15, HCT116, HT-29, KM12C, Km12SM, SW480 and SW620).
Development of specific binding ligands for selected targets is underway.

