Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoids and TRAIL target early stage intestinal polyps in
ApcMin/+ mice


The purpose of this study is to determine the optimal timing of treatment
for a novel chemoprevention approach in a mouse model of Familial
Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). FAP is an autosomal dominantly inherited
disorder caused by mutations in the tumor suppressor Apc (adenomatous
polyposis coli) gene, which results in the formation of hundreds to
thousands of polyps, predominantly in the colon and rectum. Left
untreated, these polyps will form colorectal adenocarcinomas. Although
surgical removal of the colon eliminates the colon cancer risk, these
individuals are also at increased risk for other primary cancers,
including tumors of the small intestine and stomach. Systemic
chemopreventive interventions to specifically remove the pre-cancerous
cells in these individuals could greatly improve their outcomes and
quality of life. Recently, we have developed a new method based on the
ability of combined retinoid and TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor related
apoptosis inducing ligand) treatment to induce apoptosis and regression
of intestinal polyps in ApcMin/+ mice, a mouse model of FAP. Treatment of
these mice with retinoid causes an increase in TRAIL death receptors DR4
and DR5 as well as a concomitant decrease in the decoy receptors. APC
deficiency leads to a decreased level of the anti-apoptotic protein FLIP
(flice-like inhibitory protein). Thus, the combination of TRAIL and
retinoid specifically targets APC deficient cells for apoptosis.
Following up on these findings, we have tested the hypothesis that early
stage adenomas of the intestine will respond more readily to TRAIL and
retinoid treatment than those at a later stage. We used ApcMin/+ mice at
either two months of age or five-six months of age. Each group of mice
was given three treatments of retinyl acetate and TRAIL within one week.
Following the last treatment, the intestine was harvested from each mouse
and the polyps were counted. The number of polyps in each group of mice
was compared with the polyp number in age matched non-treated mice.
Results: When treated at two months of age, ApcMin/+ exhibit a nearly 50%
decrease in polyp number following only one week of therapy. Conversely,
ApcMin/+ treated at five-six months of age did not show any significant
difference in polyp number compared to non-treated mice. Conclusion:
Earlier stage adenomas respond more readily to the combined treatment of
retinoid and TRAIL. This is likely due to additional mutations acquired
by the later stage polyps. The cause of this resistance is a current area
of study.

