Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of growth inhibition of human brain tumor
stem cells and glioblastoma LN18 and U138MG cells by combination of
curcumin and paclitaxel


Glioblastoma is the deadliest human brain tumor that responds poorly to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents and continues to form tumor mass
because of existence of highly chemoresistant human brain tumor stem
cells (HBTSC). There is an urgent need for new therapeutic strategy that
can target HBTSC as well as other glioblastoma cells. We explored the
synergistic efficacy of a low dose of curcumin (CCM) and a low dose of
paclitaxel (PTX) to induce apoptosis and inhibit cell survival,
proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis in HBTSC and human glioblastoma
LN18 (p53 mutant and PTEN proficient) and U138MG (p53 mutant and PTEN
mutant) cells. Western blotting indicated the highest expression of the
cancer stem cell markers aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) and CD133 in
HBTSC when compared with LN18 and U138MG cells. Further, confocal laser
scanning immunofluorescence microscopy confirmed more expression of
ALDH1, presently considered as a novel cancer stem cell marker, in HBTSC
than that in LN18 and U138MG cells. Our MTT assay revealed that
combination of 20 M CCM and 10 nM PTX worked synergistically and more
effectively decreased the cell viability than the single drug treatments
in HBTSC, LN18, and U138MG cells. Our in situ Wright staining and light
microscopy showed that combination of CCM and PTX was highly effective in
inducing morphological features of apoptosis in these cells. We also
confirmed the induction of the highest amounts of apoptosis by this
combination therapy in the cells after Annexin V/PI staining. The
molecular mechanisms of induction of apoptosis required activation of
caspase-8, cleavage of Bid to tBid, increase in Bax:Bcl-2 ratio, and
mitochondrial release of cytochrome c, Smac, and apoptosis-inducing
factor (AIF). Further, increase in phosphorylation of Bcl-2 (p-Bcl-2)
following combination therapy could promote Bax homodimerization for
enhancing mitochondrial release of pro-apoptotic factors into the
cytosol. Increased expression of calpain and caspase-3 and their
proteolytic activities confirmed the completion of apoptotic process in
all cell lines. Our in vitro Matrigel invasion assay showed efficacy of
the combination therapy in inhibiting invasion of cells. Efficacy of this
combination therapy was also evident in reduced expression of cell
survival and proliferation factors (p-Akt, NF-B, survivin, and hTERT),
invasion factors (MMP-2 and MMP-9), and angiogenic factors (VEGF, b-FGF,
and CD31) most prominently in HBTSC and very clearly in glioblastoma LN18
and U138MG cells. Moreover, our in vitro angiogenic network formation
assay indicated that this combination therapy significantly reduced the
angiogenic capability of HBTSC, LN-18, and U138MG cells. Taken together,
our results clearly show that combination of CCM and PTX is a promising
therapy for controlling malignant growth of HBTSC and other glioblastoma
cells.

