Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an animal model for microdialysis sampling of pons
and cerebral cortex in rhesus macaques


Background: We developed a nonhuman primate model using rhesus macaques
(Macaca mulatta) to compare drug exposure in cortical brain, pontine
tissue, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) during systemic administration of
chemotherapeutic agents by microdialysis (MD), a continuous in vivo
extracellular sampling technique. Pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine
gliomas are aggressive brainstem tumors that respond minimally to
chemotherapy. We hypothesize that, because of its role in maintaining
basic life-sustaining functions, the protective features of the pons,
including the blood brain barrier and the blood-cerebrospinal fluid
barrier, may further limit antitumor agents from entering the pons
compared to cortical brain tissue. Methods: The coordinates and surgical
approach for probe placement were determined using 3T MRI (Philips
Healthcare, Best Netherlands) and OsiriX imaging software (v 3.9.4) in 4
adult male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). Custom MD cannulas and
probes (CMA, Solna, Sweden) were stereotactically implanted in the brain.
The pontine MD cannula (34 mm) was implanted superior to the pons, and
the MD probe (34 mm shaft plus 8 mm membrane) was then lowered through
the cannula, into the pons. The cortical MD cannula (10 mm) was implanted
in frontal cortex and a MD probe (10 mm shaft plus 8 mm membrane) was
lowered through the cannula. The MD probe inlet/outlet capillaries were
connected to a MD infusion pump (CMA 106, flow rate 0.3 L/min).
Retrodialysis was performed to assess in vivo recovery. A systemic
intravenous (IV) drug infusion of temozolomide was then administered over
1hr. Single continuous MD samples were collected from both the pons and
cortex over 4 hours with concurrent serial plasma and CSF samples (via a
subarachnoid or lumbar catheter). Post-surgical MRI verification of MD
probe placement was obtained in 2 of 4 animals. Verification of probe
placement was obtained via gross pathology and histology in all 4
animals. Results: MRI-determined coordinates and surgical approach for MD
probe placement and sample collection in the pons and cerebral cortex was
successful in 3 of 4 animals. Surgical monitoring for heart and
respiration rates, ETCO2 and SPO2 remained normal in all animals during
probe placement and sample collection. Conclusions: MRI-determined
coordinates and surgical methodologies resulted in accurate placement of
a MD probe in the pons and cerebral cortex of a rhesus macaque allowing
for MD sampling from these sites, in conjunction with CSF and plasma
sampling, following systemic drug administration. This new animal model
allows for the determination of differences in penetration of
chemotherapeutic agents in pons, cerebrum, and CSF following systemic
drug administration. Additionally, this model provides the foundation for
a subcutaneous, semi-permanent, closed system for CNS MD probe placement
and continuous sampling in rhesus macaques.

