Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of TRIM24 in breast cancer progression is
linked to loss of repressive histone marks at the promoter


We recently discovered that TRIM24 is an E3-ubiquitin ligase that targets
p53 for degradation in embryonic stem cells and breast cancer cell lines.
TRIM24 functions in human cells as a reader of dual histone marks and
binds chromatin and estrogen receptor (ER) to activate estrogen-dependent
genes associated with cellular proliferation and tumor development.
Intriguingly, we and others have shown that over-expression of TRIM24 is
associated with poor prognosis and worse survival in breast cancer
patients. Whether TRIM24 is causal in malignant transformation of breast
epithelial cells during breast tumor development and progression is not
known. Furthermore the mechanism that drives deregulated expression of
TRIM24 in breast cancer is not understood. To develop a timeline of
TRIM24 deregulation during malignant transformation, we used an isogenic
human mammary epithelial cell (HMEC) model system that allows for
assessment of molecular changes that occur at the earliest stages of
multistep human breast carcinogenesis. Our analysis of TRIM24 expression
in HMECs transitioning from finite lifespan, to immortality and to
malignantly transformed HMECs showed gradual up-regulation of TRIM24 at
both RNA and protein levels early in the transformation process.
Consistent with these findings, Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of
TRIM24 in clinical breast tumor samples from a breast cancer progression
array showed increased TRIM24 expression in hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma
in situ (DCIS) and invasive carcinoma, compared to normal breast tissues.
To understand the mechanism of TRIM24 deregulation in breast tumor
progression, we studied the TRIM24 promoter region for aberrant DNA
methylation changes by bisulfite genomic sequencing. There were no
aberrant DNA methylation changes in HMEC transitioning from finite
lifespan to malignant transformation suggesting that TRIM24 gene
expression is regulated by mechanisms other than DNA methylation.
Interestingly, Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies in finite
lifespan HMECs at the TRIM24 promoter showed an enrichment of repressive
histone marks H3K9me2 and H3K9me3 which gradually decreased in immortal
and malignantly transformed mammary epithelial cells. Further studies to
see if TRIM24 is involved in transformation of normal mammary epithelial
cells by stably overexpressing TRIM24 in HMECs are currently ongoing.
Also more studies are ongoing to define additional levels of regulation
of TRIM24, and which transcription factors are involved in its
deregulated expression in breast cancer. Our studies suggest a unique
role of TRIM24 in early steps of mammary carcinogenesis. Therefore, our
study may provide valuable insights into the rational development of
TRIM24-targeted therapeutic strategies against breast cancer.

