Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms for inhibition of rodent mammary carcinogenesis by
wheel running and/or dietary energy restriction


Our laboratory has reported the inhibitory effects of combined physical
activity (PA) and dietary energy restriction (DER) on mammary
carcinogenesis while the associated mechanisms are rarely investigated.
The objective of this experiment was to determine the cellular regulation
of mammary cancer by PA and/or DER. Female Sprague Dawley rats were
injected with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg) and 7 days thereafter
randomized to: 1) sedentary control, 2) PA at wheel running high
(WR-HIGH, 3.4 km per day); or the energy balance equivalents of PA: 3) PA
at wheel running low (WR-LOW, 1500 revolutions per day + DER), or 4) DER.
In order to investigate the effects of physical activity at a constant
intensity, rats were given free access to a motorized activity wheel (55
m/min) with reinforcement of running behavior using a food reward system.
The duration of this experiment was 8 weeks. Overall, PA and/or DER
reduced mammary cancer incidence, cancer multiplicity, and tumor burden
and prolonged cancer latency (pOur laboratory has reported the inhibitory
effects of combined physical activity (PA) and dietary energy restriction
(DER) on mammary carcinogenesis while the associated mechanisms are
rarely investigated. The objective of this experiment was to determine
the cellular regulation of mammary cancer by PA and/or DER. Female
Sprague Dawley rats were injected with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg)
and 7 days thereafter randomized to: 1) sedentary control, 2) PA at wheel
running high (WR-HIGH, 3.4 km per day); or the energy balance equivalents
of PA: 3) PA at wheel running low (WR-LOW, 1500 revolutions per day +
DER), or 4) DER. In order to investigate the effects of physical activity
at a constant intensity, rats were given free access to a motorized
activity wheel (55 m/min) with reinforcement of running behavior using a
food reward system. The duration of this experiment was 8 weeks. Overall,
PA and/or DER reduced mammary cancer incidence, cancer multiplicity, and
tumor burden and prolonged cancer latency (p<0.05) in comparison to the
sedentary control group. PA, DER, or their combination differentially
affected host systemic factors including bioavailable IGF-1 and
adipokines (leptin and adiponectin) and cell autonomous mechanisms
including modulation of FoxO and down regulation of Akt/mTOR signaling.
Mediation appears to be via inhibition of cell proliferation and
induction of apoptosis. Supported by PHS grant CA100693 from the National
Cancer Institute.

