Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HO-3867, a STAT3 inhibitor induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in
BRCA1-mutated ovarian cancer cells


Background: BRCA1 plays an important role in DNA damage and repair,
homologous recombination, cell-cycle regulation, and apoptosis.
BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer often presents at an advanced stage, however,
patients have shown improved responses with platinum-based chemotherapy
versus sporadic cases. In spite of this, most patients will develop a
recurrence and eventually succumb to the disease. Preclinical studies are
currently investigating natural compounds and their analogs for
tumor-directed targets in ovarian cancer cell models. The aim of this
study is to investigate whether the STAT3 inhibitor HO-3867, a novel
curcumin analog, has a therapeutic effect on BRCA1-mutated ovarian
cancer. Methods: Expression of STAT family proteins, cell cycle,
apoptotic and DNA repair proteins were evaluated via western blot on
BRCA- mutated and non-mutated ovarian cancer cell lines. Cell viability
and proliferation were analyzed with MTT and clonogenic assays. Cell
cycle analysis and apoptosis assays were performed using flow cytometry
and Annexin V staining. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) staining was
performed using immunofluoresence. Finally, STAT3 overexpression or
suppression experiments were performed using transfected wild-type STAT3
cDNA and STAT3 siRNA, respectively. Results: Our novel agent, HO-3867,
and a commercial STAT3 inhibitor, STATIC, significantly inhibited
BRCA-mutated cancer cells in vitro, in a dose-dependent manner. HO-3867
induced G2/M arrest with increased expression of p53 and p21 and with
decreased cdk5 and cyclin D1 expression. BRCA-mutated cells treated with
HO-3867 exhibited an increased induction of apoptosis with elevated
levels of cleaved caspase-3, caspase-7, and PARP. Tyrosine-phosphorylated
STAT3 (pTyr705) exhibited higher expression levels in BRCA-mutated cancer
cells compared with other STAT proteins. Furthermore, treatment of these
cells with HO-3867 resulted in decreased expression of pTyr705 and other
DNA repair proteins. In addition, HO-3867 treatment induced more ROS in
BRCA-mutated cells compared with wild-type cells, with no increased
induction in benign ovarian surface epithelial cells. Furthermore, we
confirmed that the over-expression of STAT3 cDNA provides resistance to
HO-3867 induction of apoptosis. Conclusion: Our results show that
HO-3867, a potential STAT3 inhibitor, may be effective in the treatment
of BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer, although continued studies are needed to
elucidate the exact mechanism of action.

