Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translocation-dependent activation of WNT signaling is essential
in synovial sarcoma cells


Synovial sarcoma is a rare malignant soft tissue tumor affecting mainly
adolescents and young adults. The hallmark of synovial sarcoma is the
presence of a reciprocal balanced t(X;18) translocation, leading to the
fusion of the SS18 gene to either the SSX1, SSX2 or rarely the SSX4 gene,
resulting in a chimeric transcriptional modifier. Therapeutic outcome of
synovial sarcomas is primarily determined by the efficiency of surgery as
a high tendency for local relapse is documented. Standardized chemo- and
radiotherapy are further therapeutic options, however, specific targeted
therapies are currently not available. Recently, several expression
profiling studies in mesenchymal malignancies revealed gene expression
signatures indicating WNT signaling activation in synovial sarcomas. This
study was performed to examine the functional relevance of WNT signaling
in synovial sarcomas and to evaluate if interference with the WNT
signaling pathway might represent an option in the development of novel
and highly selective drugs in the treatment of synovial sarcoma. To
assess the prevalence of WNT signaling activation in a set of 30 synovial
sarcoma tumor samples, nuclear staining of beta-catenin was analyzed
immunohistochemically. Nuclear beta-catenin signals were observed in a
significant subset of these tumors, indicating activation of the WNT
signaling pathway. In order to evaluate whether WNT activation is
molecularly dependent on the SS18/SSX fusion proteins,
tetracycline-inducible systems overexpressing the SS18/SSX fusion
proteins were established in T-Rex293 cells. In luciferase reporter
assays employing the TOP-/FOPflash system, expression of SS18/SSX
proteins effectively activated TCF/beta-catenin mediated transcriptional
activity, which was associated with nuclear recruitment of beta-catenin.
Five human synovial sarcoma cell lines were subsequently treated with
small molecular inhibitors of WNT signalling. In MTT assays, a
significant dose-dependent inhibition of cellular growth was observed,
which was accompanied by decreased expression of the WNT downstream
targets c-Myc and Cyclin D1. In flow cytometric analyses, the growth
effects exerted by the inhibitors were shown to be due to a reduction of
cellular proliferation combined with an increase of apoptosis. In
summary, our data emphasize the pivotal role of WNT signaling in synovial
sarcoma and indicate its functional dependence on the characteristic
SS18/SSX translocations. Furthermore, our study demonstrates that
targeting the WNT signaling pathway provides a specific, molecularly
founded therapeutic strategy in the treatment of synovial sarcoma.
Additional functional studies in vitro and in vivo are required to
further understand the role of WNT signaling and its therapeutic
applicability in synovial sarcomas.

