Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human extramedullary bone and bone marrow in mice: First in vivo
model of a genetically controlled hematopoietic environment - Role of
CTGF and HIF1-


The microenvironment contributes and may regulate cancer development,
progression and resistance to treatment. Our group reported first the
contribution of bone marrow (BM)-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs)
for tumor development and metastasis. Accumulating evidence has shown
that the BM microenvironment also plays a pivotal role in the
pathophysiology and propagation of leukemia. We here describe a novel,
genetically controlled bone and bone marrow model using human BM derived
MSCs and endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs) subcutaneously injected
into the flanks of NOD/SCID/IL-2rnull mice, where they developed into
bone-like tissues with high osteoblast activity after 10 weeks, with bone
structures and typical bone marrow cavities constituting a robust
hematopoietic environment. In vivo imaging with Osteosense confirmed the
presence of hydroxylapatite, and luciferase imaging of firefly-luciferase
labeled human leukemic cells demonstrated the engraftment of human
MOLM13/Luc/GFP leukemic cells. The extramedullary leukemic BM was
markedly hypoxic, as shown by Pimonidazole staining. Factors critical for
MSC to support normal and leukemic hematopoiesis are largely unknown and
cannot readily be studied since human MSC do not engraft reliably in
xenograft models. We therefore investigated the possibility of
genetically modifying MSC in this system and found a significant
reduction (50 6%, pThe microenvironment contributes and may regulate
cancer development, progression and resistance to treatment. Our group
reported first the contribution of bone marrow (BM)-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs) for tumor development and metastasis. Accumulating
evidence has shown that the BM microenvironment also plays a pivotal role
in the pathophysiology and propagation of leukemia. We here describe a
novel, genetically controlled bone and bone marrow model using human BM
derived MSCs and endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs) subcutaneously
injected into the flanks of NOD/SCID/IL-2rnull mice, where they developed
into bone-like tissues with high osteoblast activity after 10 weeks, with
bone structures and typical bone marrow cavities constituting a robust
hematopoietic environment. In vivo imaging with Osteosense confirmed the
presence of hydroxylapatite, and luciferase imaging of firefly-luciferase
labeled human leukemic cells demonstrated the engraftment of human
MOLM13/Luc/GFP leukemic cells. The extramedullary leukemic BM was
markedly hypoxic, as shown by Pimonidazole staining. Factors critical for
MSC to support normal and leukemic hematopoiesis are largely unknown and
cannot readily be studied since human MSC do not engraft reliably in
xenograft models. We therefore investigated the possibility of
genetically modifying MSC in this system and found a significant
reduction (50 6%, p<0.001) in leukemial engraftment in extramedullary BM
generated with HIF1 knockdown MSCs (1449 194 cells/mm2), compared to
vector controls (3037 496 cells/mm2). This finding indicates that HIF1
expression in stromal cells is critical for the engraftment of leukemic
cells. Surprisingly, shRNA knockdown of connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF) in MSC resulted in the 2-3 fold increased expression of embryonic
stem cell markers oct-4, nanog and sox2, increased adipogenic
differentiation (PPAR- and C/EB) and in formation of a more spongy bone.
Human leukemic Nalm-6 cells showed 3-fold higher migration to CTGF-KD as
compared to control BM, a surprising finding that could mechanistically
be related to the 3-fold increased expression of SDF-1 in CTGF-KD-MSC.
Conclusion: We have developed a genetically controlled human
extra-medullary bone marrow system that allows investigations of the role
of specific genes on the homing and expansion of normal and leukemic
cells/stem cells in vivo. HIF-1 and CTGF were shown to have distinct and
unexpected functions in this system. Results gain further relevance by
the recent demonstration of genetic abnormalities in human leukemic bone
marrow cells (Andreeff 2008, Blau 2011). The system has allows us to
established an in vivo bone and bone marrow model with a genetically
controlled human microenvironment.

