Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New synthetic analogs of migrastatin as potent cell migration
inhibitors to block overall metastasis in lung cancer and colorectal
carcinoma


Tumour metastasis is the leading cause of death within cancer patients.
Therefore the development of new small molecules targeting this process
is crucial in the therapeutic arsenal. Migrastatin is a biologically
active natural product isolated from Streptomyces that shows a high
potency inhibition of tumor cell migration. Upon completing the first
total synthesis of migrastatin, sets of structurally simplified synthetic
analogs were developed. In the light of extensive in vitro screening
leading to informative structureactivity relationship, a new generation
of analogs was launched which demonstrated higher levels of in vitro
inhibitory activity, stability and synthetic accessibility. We
investigated two promising ether-derivative analogs, the migrastatin core
ether (ME) and the carboxymethyl-ME (CME). Both compounds exhibited high
efficacy in blocking tumor cell migration in vitro with IC50 values in
the micromolar range, more than two orders of magnitude less than the
LD50 values. In the light of these results, in vivo efficacy of these
compounds in inhibiting tumor metastasis was assessed in human tumor
xenograft models established in NOD/SCID IL2R gamma null (NSG) mice.
First in a human Small-Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) primary xenograft model,
developed by subcutaneous injection of tumor cells, ME and CME compounds
were found to be highly potent in inhibiting overall metastasis even at
the lowest dosage used (degree of inhibition: 96% and 99%, for ME and CME
at 10mg/kg or 12mg/kg respectively). Next, in a human Colorectal
Carcinoma (CRC) xenograft model, developed by intrasplenic injection of
tumor cells, ME at the highest dosage (100mg/kg) was found to
significantly reduce the metastatic spread to the liver, the lungs and
the GI tract (degree of inhibition: 97%, 84% and 95% respectively). CME
and ME selectively inhibited tumor cell migration in vitro and in vivo
but neither compound inhibited tumor proliferation at the primary site of
tumor injection or at the metastatic site if tumor metastases occurred
prior inhibition by drug treatment. All together these very encouraging
findings suggest that these analogs have promise as potent
anti-metastatic agents in epithelial tumors.

