Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Invasion characteristics of tumor cells in a glioblastoma model of
genetically modified neural stem cells


Background: Although several types of cells in the brain are able to
migrate during development or even in adulthood, only cells of high grade
malignancies exhibit an invasive phenotype. The present study aims to
characterize the differences between infiltrating tumor cells and their
cells of origin using a model of genetically-induced
glioblastoma-initiating cells (GICs) in the syngeneic mouse adult brain.
Methods: Neural stem cells/ multipotent progenitor cells (NSCs/NPCs) were
isolated from the subventricular zone of adult C57BL/6 mice with a
homozygous deletion of the Ink4a/ARF locus and cultured as neurospheres.
GICs were established by overexpression of H-RasV12 in the NSCs/NPCs.
Tumor cells were isolated from the tumors formed by orthotopic
implantation of the GICs into 6-week-old wild type mice and propagated as
tumorspheres (TS). The motility of each type of cells and their response
to various chemoattractants was assessed using in vitro migration assays.
Their preference for anatomical structures and their ability to
infiltrate the surrounding normal brain was analyzed by tracking the
cells in cultured coronal brain slices established from
stereotactically-implanted mice. Results: In vitro, both tumor cells and
NSCs exhibited a similar degree of motility, but consistently varied in
their response to a panel of chemoattractants. Compared to NSCs, GICs and
TS responded only slightly to single growth factors or cytokines, but
showed significant responses to combinations of chemoattractants. The
most marked increase in migration was triggered by the supernatant of
cultured tumor cells. Supernatants obtained from GICs, TS or human glioma
cell lines induced migration to a similar degree. Timelapse microscopy
confirmed motility of both normal and tumor cells, with all three groups
being able to move both within the cortex and within the striatum, and
both along blood vessels and fiber tracts. However, NSCs/NPCs did not
leave the injection site as single cells, while GICs and TS entered and
infiltrated the normal brain as solitary cells. This pattern of migration
was greatly reduced by the administration of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) inhibitors, both in vitro and in vivo. Conclusion: Our
results show that tumor invasion is multifactorial, with both autocrine
secretion of several factors, as well as a mesenchymal phenotype being
key regulators. Moreover, the mesenchymal phenotype in itself is a
targetable attribute and should be assessed in patient samples in order
to adjust anti-invasive therapy when warranted.

