Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing chemotherapeutics which selectively disable the actin
cytoskeleton of tumor cells


The actin cytoskeleton is an important regulator of a variety of cellular
functions making it an ideal chemotherapeutic target. Despite this
promise no anti-actin compounds are used in current chemotherapy,
primarily due to the inability of existing anti-actin agents to
discriminate between the actin cytoskeleton of tumor cells and that of
the muscle sarcomere. We have previously shown that tropomyosin, an
integral component of the actin cytoskeleton, defines functionally
distinct actin filament populations. We have designed a new class of
compounds which target a specific cancer associated tropomyosin isoform,
Tm5NM1. Anti-tropomyosin (Tm) compounds were selected based on ability to
target the actin cytoskeleton and efficacy against a panel of
neuroblastoma and melanoma cell lines. The lead compound, TR100, was
shown to be effective against a panel of tumor cell lines (average EC50
3M). Preliminary studies demonstrate that TR100 induces cell death via
the intrinsic (mitochondrial) apoptotic pathway and the mechanism appears
to be independent of the pro apoptotic factors BAX and BAK. In 3D
melanoma spheroid models, which more accurately mimic the tumor
microenvironment, TR100 inhibited cell growth and motility. This
translated to a reduction in tumor cell growth in neuroblastoma and
melanoma xenograft models. Analysis of drug treated animals showed no
evidence of cardiac damage as measured by blood Troponin I levels and the
intraventricular septum thickness of isolated hearts. These results
demonstrate the possibility of targeting distinct actin filament
populations based on tropomyosin composition. Next generation anti-Tm
compounds with improved efficacy and specificity have now been developed.
Preliminary data demonstrate that these compounds exhibit increased
selectivity for transformed cells. Taken together, our findings suggest
that the anti-Tm compounds show a significant improvement in the
therapeutic window compared to existing anti-actin agents. This novel
approach and the development of the new class of anti-Tm compounds may be
the key for disabling a long sought after target, the actin cytoskeleton,
and may lead to a new class of chemotherapeutics active against a broad
range of cancer types.

