Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel DNA damage detection assay reveals a critical role of XPF
in the repair of endogenous damage


Introduction: DNA damage, notably that resulting from defective
nucleotide excision repair (NER), can lead to a number of diseases
including those associated with neurodegeneration and cancer. XPF, a gene
essential for effective NER, is typically associated with the repair of
chemically and UV induced bulky DNA lesions as well as crosslinks.
Recently, we developed a novel DNA damage detection assay (PADDA) capable
of detecting at the nucleotide level, on a high-throughput scale,
endogenous and induced DNA damage. We have previously validated this
assay using multiple in vitro and in vivo approaches. By applying this
assay to the study of wild-type (WT) and base excision repair (BER)
defective cells, we have also reported the first direct evidence for
preferential strand repair of endogenous DNA damage and documented the
major role of BER in this process. In this study, we used PADDA to
determine the role of XPF in the repair of endogenous DNA damage.
Methods: Endogenous DNA damage was detected in the CAN1 gene by PADDA in
wild-type and XPF defective S. cerevisiae cells in stationary phases of
growth. Levels and locations of lesions were compared between strains.
Locations of DNA damage were then compared to sites of previously
reported mutations in the CAN1 gene using statistical approaches based on
Chi-square goodness of fit and exact nonparametric tests. Results: PADDA
revealed higher levels of endogenous DNA damage in XPF defective yeast
cells compared to WT. Furthermore, a significantly higher rate of
polymerase by-passable DNA damage was observed in XPF defective yeast
cells compared to WT. There was a high association between the sites of
by-passable endogenous DNA damage found in XPF defective cells to sites
of previously reported mutations in the CAN1 gene. Conclusions: Our
results establish yet another novel role for XPF protein: a major
function in the repair of endogenous DNA damage. Furthermore, our results
suggest a key XPF role in the repair of highly mutagenic by-passable DNA
damage and therefore in the prevention of mutations caused by endogenous
DNA damage. Given this important role, XPF may become a biomarker of
cancer risk or even a suitable target for strategies aimed at preventing
cancer and other diseases associated with DNA damage. Additionally, the
ability of PADDA to map and quantify many different types of DNA damage
suggests it may become a very important clinical tool to assess cancer
risk and response to chemotherapy. Funding: This work was supported by
the National Institute of Health [R03 CA117316-01] (AR) and the OUHSC
Vice President for Research Fund (LQ). L.Q. holds a Presbyterian Health
Foundation Endowed Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.

