Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical characterization of Dacomitinib, an irreversible
pan-HER inhibitor, combined with radiation therapy in head and neck
cancer models


Introduction: Head and neck cancer is the 5th most common cancer
worldwide; the majority of cases (>90%) are squamous cell carcinomas
(SCCHNs). Despite advances in treatment, the 5-year overall survival rate
for SCCHN patients still remains at 40-50%, underscoring the need to
develop novel therapeutic strategies. EGFR is over-expressed in 90% of
SCCHN cases, and is associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis.
Dacomitinib (D), an irreversible pan-HER inhibitor, has demonstrated
clinical potential in patients with non-small cell lung cancer, leading
us to explore its therapeutic efficacy in SCCHN pre-clinical models, in
combination with radiation therapy (RT), a curative modality for HNC
management. Methods: The basal expression of EGFR family members was
assessed via qRT-PCR in three SCCHN models (FaDu (human hypopharyngeal),
UTSCC-8 & -42a (both laryngeal) squamous cancer, and NOE (normal oral
epithelial) cell lines. MTS-based cell viability and clonogenic assays
were performed with various concentrations of D, both alone and in
combination with irradiation (IR). Inhibition of EGFR signalling by D was
confirmed via immunoblotting. Cell cycle analysis was performed to assess
mode of cytotoxicity. In vivo therapeutic studies were performed using
FaDu xenografts in SCID mice; tumors were extracted post-treatment and
examined for TUNEL, CD31, Ki67, and pEGFR via IHC. Results: EGFR was
over-expressed in all three SCCHN, compared to the NOE cells. PF (50 nM)
reduced FaDu cell viability by 25%, with an additive interaction being
observed when D was combined with 2 Gy IR (36%). Similar trends were
observed in the other two cell lines and also in the clonogenic assays.
Immunoblotting confirmed a dose-dependent inhibition of EGFR signalling
in D-treated SCCHN cells, along with downstream reduction of p-Erk,
p-Akt, and p-mTOR expression. Cell cycle analyses showed 20% increase in
the G0/G1 cell population in D-treated FaDu cells, and 10% increase in
the sub-G cell population when D and IR were combined. Mice treated with
the combination of D + IR exhibited a maximum tumor growth delay of 21
days, as compared to the IR only group, determined by time to
tumor-plus-leg diameter of 14mm. Preliminary histological analysis of the
extracted tumor tissue show 40% reduction in Ki67 staining in the PF + IR
treated mice. The addition of D to IR appeared to be well-tolerated, with
no change in body weight, or extent of alopecia. Conclusion: Dacomitinib
effectively inhibited EGFR signalling in SCCHN models, leading to a
reduction in cell viability and clonogenic survival in vitro, along with
tumor growth delay in vivo. When D was combined with IR, there was an
additive interaction, both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, D combined with RT
may have a therapeutic benefit for patients with SCCHN.

