Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The IKK kinase is a potential therapeutic target in K-Ras-induced
lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the world. In lung
cancer, K-Ras oncogenic mutations are widespread, and compounds used to
target the biological activity of the Ras proteins failed in clinical
trials. Therefore, it is imperative to identify novel therapeutic targets
that reduce K-Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis. We have previously shown
that K-Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis is potentiated by the subunit p65
of the transcription factor NF-B; and that K-Ras-induced NF-B activation
in the lung requires IKK. Therefore, we hypothesized the following: (1)
the IKK kinase promotes K-Ras-induced oncogenesis; and (2)
pharmacological inhibition of IKK activity will be beneficial
therapeutically. We used genetic and/or pharmacological approaches to
inactivate IKK in primary lung epithelial cells transformed by K-Ras, as
well as K-Ras-positive lung cancer cell lines, and determined that IKK
inhibiton reduces oncogenic properties in vitro. In addition we used a
highly specific IKK inhibitor (CmpdA, Bayer) to treat a K-Ras-induced
lung cancer mouse model combined with loss of the tumor suppressor p53
(LSL-K-RasG12D/p53fl/fl). We chose this model for the following reasons:
(1) K-Ras activation coupled to p53 loss leads to aggressive lung
adenocarcinomas in mice that better resemble human lung tumors; (2) lung
cancer patients harboring K-Ras oncogenic mutations frequently display
p53 inactivation; and (3) it has been recently demonstrated that p53 loss
can enhance NF-B activation by K-Ras in lung tumors. To induce
concomitant K-Ras activation and p53 loss in murine lung epithelial
cells, we infected the lungs of LSL-K-RasG12D/p53fl/fl mice by intranasal
administration of a Cre-expressing adenovirus (AdCre). Two treatment
regimens were used to treat infected animals: CmpdA was either
administered daily for 2 weeks immediately following AdCre infection or
daily for 4 weeks starting 8 weeks post-infection. In either case, mice
treated with CmpdA presented smaller and lower grade tumors than mice
treated with placebo. These results show that IKK promotes lung cancer
growth and progression both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we have
shown that pharmacological administration of an IKK inhibitor slows lung
tumor growth and progression in vivo, supporting our hypothesis that IKK
inhibition therapy will have clinical benefits in lung cancer. This
research is supported by a FAMRI YCSA Award and a FAPESP Young
Investigator Award to DB and a NIH grant (CA73756) to AB.

