Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Jagged 2 knockdown inhibits invasion in colorectal cancer cell
lines


Background: The notch pathway is involved in control of cell
differentiation in various tissues including pancreas, muscle and bone
marrow. Jagged 2 (JAG2) is a ligand for the notch pathway and was found
to be overexpressed in malignant plasma cells from patients with multiple
myeloma, causing the secretion and release of IL-6, VEGF, and IGF-1 in
the microenvironment supporting myeloma cell growth. In breast cancers,
it was found to be overexpressed at the hypoxic invasive front and was
significantly correlated with metastasis free survival. Furthermore,
up-regulation of JAG2 expression in mouse lung adenocarcinoma cells
promoted its metastasis in mice. However, the expression pattern and
function of JAG2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) is not clear. Therefore in
this study, we examined the expression of JAG2 in CRC cell lines and
determined the effect(s) of JAG2 knockdown by RNA interference in CRC
cell lines. Materials and Methods: The expression of JAG2 protein was
examined in four CRC cell lines (SW480, SW620, HCT116, DLD-1) and also in
1 normal colon epithelial cell line (CCD18co) using the western blot. To
investigate the effects JAG2 knockdown in CRC cell lines, a pool of 4
siRNAs against JAG2 was transfected into the 4 CRC cell lines listed
above. The effects on cell growth was then determined by the CellTiter 96
AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay (the MTS assay) and the
Matrigel invasion assay was performed to assess its effects on invasive
capability. Results: Western blot results showed that JAG2 protein was
expressed in all 4 colorectal cancer cell lines including SW480, SW620,
HCT116 and DLD-1 but not in the CCD18co normal colon epithelial cell
line. The MTS assay showed that cell growth was not affected by JAG2
knockdown in the CRC cell lines. Interestingly, the invasive capability
of HCT116 and DLD-1cells was reduced after JAG2 knockdown. Conclusions:
Results from this study suggest that JAG2 may play a role in the
invasiveness of CRC cell lines but not in cell proliferation. JAG2 may be
a promising therapeutic target for inhibition of metastasis in colorectal
cancer.

