Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of PDCD4 in response to Resveratrol in
breast cancer cells


Background: Programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) is a key protein involved in
protein synthesis, and thus, it controls cell growth and proliferation.
Evidence indicates that PDCD4 is often downregulated in breast cancer and
is associated with disease progression and metastasis. Resveratrol (RSV),
a natural polyphenolic compound present in grapes and red wine, is a well
known anti-oxidant capable of modulating various signaling pathways,
leading to suppression of cell proliferation and increased apoptosis.
However, it remains unclear regarding the effect of RSV on PDCD4.
Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the effect of RSV on
PDCD4 in human breast cancer MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Methods: Cell
growth was measured by MTT assays, and cell invasion was determined by
matrigel chamber assays. Soft agar assays were used to determine
anchorage independent growth. Protein levels from treated cells were
analyzed by western blot. Real time RT-PCR was used to determine relative
expression of genes. Phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) was also determined by
immunohistochemistry in RSV-treated MDA-MB-231 cells. To determine
whether microRNAs are involved in the RSV-mediated induction of PDCD4, we
cloned PDCD4 3-UTR into the downstream of the luciferase gene as a
reporter. The effect of RSV on luciferase activity was tested in MCF-7
cells. PDCD4 was stably knocked down by RNAi in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cells. Results: We showed that ectopic expression of PDCD4 suppressed
anchorage independent tumor cell growth as well as invasion of MDA-MB-231
cells. By contrast, downregulation of PDCD4 by RNAi significantly
increased cell invasion. Of interest, cell invasion was suppressed by
RSV; at the same time, PDCD4 was induced significantly by RSV in
MDA-MB-231 cells, which was associated with suppression of pAkt.
Furthermore, we showed that both phosphorylated mTOR and S6K were
suppressed by RSV in a dose dependent manner. Since PDCD4 is a downstream
effector of Akt and mTOR, this may suggest that up-regulation by RSV is
through the Akt-mTOR pathway in MDA-MB-231. On the other hand, PDCD4 was
reduced by RSV in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) MCF-7 cells. To
determine the mechanism of RSV-mediated PDCD4 expression in these two
cell lines, we measured the levels of miR-21 which has been previously
shown to directly target PDCD4. Strikingly, expression of miR-21 was also
regulated differentially. For example, miR-21 was up-regulated in MCF-7
cells while it was slightly suppressed by RSV in MDA-MB-231 cells. In
particular, we found that RSV suppressed PDCD4 by transcriptional
regulation of miR-21 possibly through interacting with ER in MCF-7 cells.
Conclusion: Together, these results suggest that, as a tumor suppressor
gene, PDCD4 expression is dependent on cellular contents in response to
RSV, and thus, a better understanding of this RSV-mediated PDCD4
expression will provide new insight into the clinical implication of RSV
for breast cancer.

