Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates in oncology drug development: Examining
approaches to set the first-in-human dose


While many anti-neoplastic drugs have a proven ability to kill cancer
cells, some possess limited selectivity and high toxic effects on normal
cells, which can yield marginal therapeutic indices. Antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs) represent an alternative therapeutic option being
pursued by pharmaceutical companies. These therapeutic agents, also
called immuno-conjugates, combine the specificity of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) with the potency of cytotoxic molecules to deliver and
release the anti-cancer agent inside tumor cells. ADCs consist of a
cytotoxic agent, an antibody targeting an antigen expressed on tumor
cells, and a linker that covalently binds these components together. They
are designed to provide selective killing of target tumor cells while
minimizing the cytotoxic effects on normal tissues. Human mAbs are one of
the fastest-growing categories of therapeutics entering clinical studies.
As technology improves, the rational design and optimization of chemical
linkers have resulted in renewed interest in ADCs among pharmaceutical
companies. Phase I studies are a critical step in oncology drug
development, as they translate years of laboratory studies, non-clinical
data, into clinical use. A Sponsor-submitted investigational new drug
application (IND) contains non-clinical data to establish the maximum
recommended starting dose in humans. This panel of non-clinical data
includes those derived from laboratory animal studies and consists of
pharmacology information, toxicologic profile of the compound, and the
pharmacokinetics of the therapeutic agent, all of which are considered
when determining the first-in-human dose. This dose is expected to exert
some pharmacologic activity and have acceptable toxicities based on the
patient population and the benefit:risk consideration. While the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has established a guideline for
identifying the first-in-human dose for small molecules for oncology
indications (ICH S9), there is no specific FDA established approach
currently for ADCs. A growing number of INDs submitted to the FDA include
ADCs as the investigational drug. Our research consists of an examination
of 46 INDs containing ADCs, submitted to the FDA between 2003 and 2011.
Analysis of the data revealed that different approaches have been
proposed by Sponsors of the INDs for selection of the human dose based on
non-clinical data. During this research, these approaches are evaluated
with the goal of ultimately identifying the best approach. The objectives
of this research are to: 1) analyze approaches used to set the human
start dose based on animal pharmacology and toxicology data, 2) examine
the method and rationale for selecting the Phase I clinical start dose,
and 3) identify the optimal approach for first-in-human dose selection.

