Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Api6/AIM/SP/CD5L overexpression in alveolar type II epithelial
cells induces spontaneous lung adenocarcinoma


Chronic inflammation is an important contributor to the development of
lung cancers, one of the most common malignancies worldwide, but the
underlying molecular mechanisms of inflammation that specifically cue
cancer risk remains poorly understood. We have previously found that
blocking neutral lipid metabolism in lysosomal acid lipase knock-out mice
(lal-/-) leads to severe tissue inflammation and diseases in multiple
organs, including the lung. In an effort to identify downstream target
genes of LAL to promote lung inflammation, Affymetrix GeneChip microarray
analysis were performed and identified apoptosis inhibitor 6 (Api6, AIM,
Sp-alpha, CD5L) as one of top increased expression gene (70 folds in the
lal-/- lung). This aberrant up-regulation of Api6 occurs primarily in
alveolar type II (AT II) epithelial cells of lal-/- mice and this
up-regulation of Api6 can be reduced by treatment of ligands for
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) in lal-/-
mice. To determine the functional role of Api6 in AT II epithelial cells,
an epithelial-specific CCSP-rtTA/(TetO)7-CMV-Api6 bitransgenic mouse
model has been generated. Here we report that Api6 is a pro-inflammatory
and oncogenic molecule. Api6 overexpression inhibited apoptosis and
activated oncogenic signaling in AT II lung epithelial cells, inducing
emphysema and adenocarcinoma. Additionally, Api6 overexpression in AT II
cells increased the concentrations of pro-inflammatory
cytokines/chemokines in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and serum, which
promote expansion of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the lung
and blood but not in bone marrow or spleen. Lung MDSCs suppressed T cell
proliferation and activity in vitro and reduced levels of T cells in vivo
following doxycycline treatment to activate Api6. Together, our findings
establish that Api6 promotes lung tumorigenesis by blocking a mechanism
of epithelial apoptosis that would normally support immunosurveillance.
In humans, expression of the Api6 gene is up-regulated in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD, the major phenotype is emphysema)
and lung cancer.

