Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the actin-binding proteins actinin-1 and actinin-4:
Their role in cancer


Actinins are cytoskeleton proteins that crosslink actin filaments.
Evolution of the actinin family resulted in the formation of
calcium-insensitive muscle isoforms (actinin-2 and- 3) and
calcium-sensitive non-muscle isoforms (actinin-1 and -4) with regard to
their actin-binding function. Although the non-muscle actinin isoforms
show 87% amino acid identity, they are currently viewed as distinct
entities. Each isoform is reported to exert distinct effects on cell
migration, adhesion and proliferation depending on the cell type studied.
Actinin-4 is the predominant isoform reported to be associated with the
cancer phenotype. Actinin-4 protein levels are elevated in a number of
cancers including breast, ovarian, colorectal, bladder, pancreatic,
ovarian and glioblastomas. Actinin-4 enhances the motility and metastatic
potential of various carcinoma cell lines. This suggests that actinin-4
may have some unique characteristic that facilitates its role in cancer.
We aimed to compare the actin-binding affinities, actin-bundling
capacities and calcium sensitivities of the non-muscle actinins. We found
that the non-muscle actinins have similar actin-binding affinities and
calcium sensitivities with regard to their actin-binding and
actin-bundling functions. Actinin structure consists of two anti-parallel
monomers that form a homodimer. Heterodimer formation is reported to
occur between the muscle actinin isoforms however this has not been
systematically examined for the non-muscle isoforms. Through yeast
two-hybrid analysis and in vitro binding assays we have shown that
non-muscle actinin homodimers and heterodimers form with equal affinity.
Using native gel electrophoresis we have shown that non-muscle actinin
heterodimer formation occurs in a number of cancer cell lines studied.
Comparison of non-muscle actinin protein levels indicates that the
heterodimer represents the most abundant form of actinin present in the
majority of cell lines studied. siRNA- mediated knockdown of actinin-4
resulted in a decrease in heterodimer levels and an increase in actinin-1
homodimer levels. Taken together this data suggests that actinin-1 and
actinin-4 cannot be viewed as distinct entities from each other but
rather as proteins that can exist in both homodimeric and heterodimeric
forms. The ability to behave in this manner may have functional
implications. This may be of importance considering that these proteins
are central to such processes as cell migration and adhesion.

