Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor penetration and retention of different sized FGFR4 targeting
scaffolds


Poor drug concentration, distribution and retention pose significant
obstacles to effective therapy of solid tumors. Antibody based
immunotherapies must balance pharmacokinetics (PK), molecular weight and
potency in order to maximize tumor penetration and retention. Low
molecular weight constructs may have superior tumor diffusion properties,
but short in vivo half life, whereas whole IgG molecules have improved PK
properties and slow heterogeneous penetration. We hypothesise a molecule
with a mass of 100-150 kDa and a KD of 1- 10 nM will have the ideal
characteristics for maximum tumor penetration. A CovX-Body is the fusion
of two targeting moieties (typically a peptide; in this study an FGFR4
targeting peptide is used) with an IgG scaffold. Constructs with variable
molecular weights and affinities for FGFR4 have been generated by
enzymatic digestion of the CovX body. As measured by ELISA, surface
plasmon resonance (SPR), and flow cytometry (FACS), the bivalent
CovX-Body and F(ab)2 constructs had similar FGFR4 binding properties (KD
= 0.7 nM and 0.8 nM respectively), while the monovalent Fab construct
showed 10-fold decreased binding (KD =11 nM). Initial in vivo studies
measured total tumor levels of the full length CovX-Body in Colo205
Xenografts 72 hours post-injection with various doses. CovX-body levels
were measured using an anti-idiotype CovX-body ELISA. The FGFR4-targeting
CovX-Body reaches 8-fold higher total tumor levels compared to
non-targeting CovX-bodies following a 10 mg/kg dose. Tumor penetration
into the centre of the tumor was also measured, and showed 16-fold higher
levels of the targeted CovX-body in the centre of the tumor compared to
the non-targeting. Future work will involve measuring the biodistribution
and tumor penetration properties of the different constructs. Lower
molecular weight constructs should rapidly achieve high but transient
levels of drug within the tumor, while IgG should achieve longer term,
but lower intratumoral concentrations.

