Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-34a dysregulation promotes tumor growth and tumor
angiogenesis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Objectives: Head and Neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) results from
deregulation of multiple signaling pathways leading to tumor cells
acquiring proliferative, invasive, angiogenic and metastatic properties.
Interactions between neoplastic cells and the surrounding
microenvironment also play a major role in tumor progression. Recent
studies have demonstrated that microRNA's (miRs) play a critical role in
cancer development where they can act as oncogenes or as
onco-suppressors. A microRNA array analysis of a panel of ten HNSCC cell
lines reveled that miR-34a is significantly downregulated in all these
cell lines as compared to normal human oral keratinocyes (HOK). In
addition, miR-34a expression was also downregulated in highly angiogenic
endothelial cells (endothelial cells overexpressing Bcl-2; EC-Bcl-2) as
compared to normal human endothelial cells. However, little is known
about the role of miR-34a in HNSCC tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis.
In this study, we examined if dysregulation of miR-34a in HNSCC promotes
tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis. Methods and Results: miR-34a
expression in tumor samples, HNSCC cell lines and endothelial cells was
examined by real time PCR. Lipofectamine-2000 was used to transfect
miR-34a in HNSCC cell lines and human endothelial cells.
Cell-proliferation and migration was examined by Xcelligence system.
miR-34a effect on tumor growth and tumor angiogenesis was examined by in
vivo SCID mouse xenograft model. Our results demonstrate that miR-34a is
significantly downregulated in HNSCC tumors and cell lines. Ectopic
expression of miR-34a in HNSCC cell lines significantly inhibited tumor
cell proliferation, colony formation and migration. Tumor cells
expressing miR-34a also showed marked decrease in the levels of a key
transcription factor, E2F3. Rescue experiments using microRNA resistant
E2F3 isoforms suggest that miR-34a-mediated inhibition of cell
proliferation and colony formation is predominantly mediated by E2F3a
isoform. In addition, tumor samples from HNSCC patients showed inverse
relationship between miR-34a and survivin expression. Overexpression of
E2F3a completely rescued survivin expression in miR-34a expressing cells,
thereby suggesting that miR-34a may be regulating survivin expression via
E2F3a. Ectopic expression of miR-34a also significantly inhibited tumor
growth and tumor angiogenesis in a SCID mouse xenograft model.
Interestingly, miR-34a inhibited tumor angiogenesis by blocking VEGF
production by tumor cells as well as directly inhibiting endothelial cell
functions. Conclusions: Taken together, these findings suggest that
dysregulation of miR-34a expression is common in HNSCC and modulation of
miR34a activity might represent a novel therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of HNSCC.

