Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and validation of 20 novel breast cancer methylation
biomarkers: A new workflow for methylation biomarker development


Methylation is a process of regulation of gene expression. Methylation
pattern changes are implicated in the pathology of cancer and other
disorders but at the same time they can be used as biomarkers for
clinical disease management. There are four primary fields of use for
biomarkers in clinical disease management: diagnosis,
prognosis/prediction, prevention, pharmacoepigenomics. Methylation
biomarkers have already been shown to fulfill the requirements of each of
the above categories. Therefore, a lot of research in the field is
currently focused on discovery and validation of methylation biomarkers
for clinical use. The process of biomarker development can be subdivided
into five steps workflow: discovery of the biomarker, initial clinical
biomarker validation, retrospective biomarker validation, prospective
validation and the use of the marker in clinical practice. Following the
above workflow, we have combined the Roche/NimbleGen Methylation arrays
and Methylation Sensitive High Resolution Melting (MS-HRM) (ref: 1, 2),
into one platform for methylation biomarker development and validation.
Our approach allowed us, firstly to discover 20 novel loci undergoing
aberrant methylation during breast cancer development. Subsequently the
biomarkers were subjected to initial clinical validation. This procedure
aimed to evaluate to what extent the biomarkers can distinguish 274
breast tumor samples (disease) from 78 breast normal tissue samples
(healthy). Our results show that the specificity of almost all of the
novel biomarkers except for one was above 80%, with four of these showing
hypermethylation only in tumor tissue, which corresponds to 100%
specificity. The odds ratio (OR, interpreted as the probability with
which our new biomarker can distinguish a tumor sample from a
non-malignant sample) for our novel biomarkers was in the extraordinary
range from 4(2; 7) to 563(166; 1902), Overall our results clearly
illustrate the exceptional accuracy of the chosen approach for
methylation biomarker discovery and development. All the biomarkers that
successfully completed initial clinical validation are now undergoing
retrospective validation (see above) based on almost 1200 archival breast
cancer samples with detailed clinical follow up. This procedure will
allow investigating the clinical management field of use for each of the
novel biomarkers. References: 1. Wojdacz, T.K., Dobrovic, A. & Hansen,
L.L. Methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting. Nature Protocols 3
(2008). 2. Wojdacz, T.K. & Dobrovic, A. Methylation-sensitive high
resolution melting (MS-HRM): a new approach for sensitive and
high-throughput assessment of methylation. Nucleic Acids Res 35, e41
(2007).

