Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective study of seroreactivity to JC virus T-Antigen and risk
of colorectal cancers and adenomas


JC virus (JCV) has been hypothesized to play a role in the development of
colorectal cancer (CRC), although findings are inconsistent across
studies. Case series have reported the presence of JCV DNA in tumors, but
two serological studies observed no statistically significant association
between circulating antibodies to JCV capsid protein and risk of CRC. No
epidemiologic study has examined the association between antibodies to
the JCV oncoprotein, T-antigen, and cancer. To investigate the
association between circulating levels of JCV T-Ag antibodies and the
risk of CRC and adenomas, we conducted a case-control study nested within
a community-based cohort established in Washington County, MD, in 1989.
Cancer registries were used to identify incident cases of CRC occurring
within this cohort through 2006 (n=251), and 123 colonoscopy-detected
adenoma cases were initially self-reported through a follow-up
questionnaire and subsequently verified through pathology report review.
Controls were selected from cohort participants who did not develop CRC
or adenomas and matched to cases on age, sex, race, date of blood draw,
and for adenoma cases, date of endoscopy. Recombinant protein-based
enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) were used to measure JCV T-Ag
antibodies in baseline pre-diagnostic plasma samples. High versus low
seroreactivity was defined using the median value among the controls.
Conditional logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios (OR's)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Overall, high JCV T-Ag seroreactivity
was not associated with development of CRC (OR=1.24, 95% CI=0.84-1.84) or
adenoma (OR=1.18, 95% CI=0.67-2.09). Among females, high JCV T-Ag
seroreactivity was associated with an increased risk of CRC (OR=1.78, 95%
CI=1.00-3.17), whereas no association was observed among males (OR=0.89,
95% CI=0.51-1.54). High JCV T-Ag seroreactivity was associated with
non-statistically significant risks of rectal cancer (OR=1.55, 95%
CI=0.72-3.30) and CRC diagnosed at distant stage (OR=2.25, 95%
CI=0.69-7.31), but not with distal or proximal colon cancer or CRC
diagnosed at local/regional stages. High JCV T-Ag seroreactivity was not
associated with increased risk of adenomas overall or by gender. However,
a statistically significant association was observed between high JCV
T-Ag seroreactivity and adenomas of the proximal colon (OR=2.80, 95%
CI=1.01-7.77), but not the distal colon. No clear differences in risk
were observed when results were stratified by adenoma size or histology.
These results suggest that associations between JCV infection and
CRC/adenomas may differ by gender and anatomic site. Further studies
incorporating multiple serologic and DNA-based markers are needed to
better understand the relationship between JCV infection and CRC/adenomas.

