Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA binding protein RBM3 promotes metastasis through induction of
hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis


Introduction: Tumor metastasis, rather than primary tumors is the main
cause of cancer-related deaths. A critical aspect of tumor metastasis,
driven by vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF) is the development
of new vessels through hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. RNA binding
protein RBM3 is a novel protooncogene that transforms normal cells when
overexpressed. Here, we report that RBM3 mediates both hemangiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis. Results: Immunohistochemistry analysis of a human
tissue microarray demonstrated increased RBM3 expression in tumors when
compared to normal tissue, with even higher levels in metastatic tissues.
Furthermore, RBM3-transformed NIH3T3 cells were injected into flanks of
athymic nude mice metastasized to the liver and lungs.
Immunohistochemistry analysis of the primary NIH3T3-RBM3 xenograft
demonstrated increased number of microvessels that were lined by either
CD31 or LYVE1 positive cells suggesting the increase in hem- and
lymphangiogenesis. To demonstrate that RBM3 induces hemangiogenesis, tube
formation assay using human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVEC) cells was
performed. RBM3 overexpression increased, while RBM3 knockdown inhibited
tube formation. Furthermore, NIH3T3-RBM3 cells significantly induced de
novo capillary formation in the Chorio-Allantoic Membrane assay.
Similarly, RBM3 overexpression enhanced, while knockdown suppressed tube
formation by human lymphatic endothelial (HLEC) cells suggesting that it
also affects lymphangiogenesis. To confirm the RBM3 role in hem- and
lymphangiogenesis, HCT116 conditioned media was used in the tube
formation assays. Tube formation by both HUVEC and HLEC cells was
significantly increased in media from HCT116-RBM3 overexpressing cells.
Moreover, both HUVEC and HLEC cells showed significant migration through
collagen in transwell invasion assay. We further determined that this was
due to the increased expression of VEGF A, VEGF C and VEGF D because
siRNA mediated suppression of either one of these factors significantly
reduced RBM3-mediated enhanced HLEC tube formation and migration through
collagen. We next determined the mechanism of RBM3 mediated upregulation
of the three VEGFs. HCT116 cells overexpressing RBM3 showed increased
steady state levels of VEGF A, C and D mRNAs when compared to control. In
addition, actinomycin D-stability assays demonstrated that there was
increased stability of the three VEGF mRNAs in HCT116-RBM3 cells when
compared to HCT116 control cells. Conclusion: Taken together these data
suggests that RBM3 is a key regulator of hemangiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis, thereby inducing a highly metastatic phenotype through
upregulation of VEGF A, C and D at the posttranscriptional levels of mRNA
stability and translation.

