Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) inhibitor -
ONO-WG-307, a potential treatment for B-cell malignancies


Purpose: Signals from B cell receptors (BCR) play a central role in
signal transduction pathways regulating survival, activation,
proliferation, and differentiation of B-lineage lymphoid cells. BCR
signaling is implicated in the survival of malignant B cells and recent
studies indicate that targeting Btk, an essential component of the BCR
pathway, may be effective in the treatment of B-cell lymphoma. ONO-WG-307
is a highly potent and selective Btk inhibitor with an IC50 in the
sub-nmol/L range. We evaluated the inhibitory effect of ONO-WG-307 alone
and in combination with the chimeric type I anti-CD20 antibody rituximab,
using in vitro tumor growth assays and mouse xenograft models. Methods:
Two types of tumor cell lines (follicular lymphoma (FL) and activated
B-cell-like (ABC) sub-type of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL))
wereplated on to micro-titration plates (at doses up to 200 umol/L for
ONO-WG-307 and 100 ug/mL for rituximab) for in vitro cytotoxic assays.
The same cells were also implanted subcutaneously (SC) into female SCID
mice to explore ONO-WG-307 anti-tumor activity in vivo (orally at doses
up to 50 mg/kg, bid for ONO-WG-307 and intraperitoneally at doses up to
10 mg/kg, q7d). The IC50 of the in vitro cytotoxic activity was
determined using a MTS assay 72 and 96 hours after incubation. Anti-tumor
activity was defined as the ratio of the median tumor volume of treatment
groups versus control group. The determination of combination index (CI)
was calculated by the median-effect method. The CI was used to express
synergism (1). Results: In the MTS assay, ABC-DLBCL cells were much more
sensitive to ONO-WG-307 given as single agent compared with FL cell
lines, however, the activity of rituximab single agent had no impact on
ABC-DLBCL cell lines in contrast to its inhibitory activity against FL
cell lines. When ONO-WG-307 was combined with rituximab, a moderate
antagonism was observed in vitro on FL cell lines. In an ABC-DLBCL
xenograft model, treatment with single agent ONO-WG-307 resulted in a
dose-dependent inhibition of tumor growth and also showed moderate
anti-tumor activity in a FL xenograft model. Conclusion: ONO-WG-307 is a
highly potent and selective oral Btk inhibitor with evidence of efficacy
in both the ABC-DLBCL and the FL cell lines and in xenograft models.
These preliminary results suggest that ONO-WG-307 may be an effective
therapy in the treatment of B-cell malignancies. To determine whether
combination of ONO-WG-307 and rituximab is more efficacious, additional
in vivo combination work is underway.

