Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing III-tubulin by RNA interfering nanoparticles in
non-small cell lung cancer


Advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a dismal prognosis and
remains the most common cause of cancer death worldwide. One of the
primary reasons for its poor survival rate is its high level of
resistance to chemotherapy. Expression of the microtubule protein
III-tubulin is associated with an aggressive and drug resistant disease
in NSCLC. Recently, we demonstrated for the first time that targeting
III-tubulin using siRNA sensitizes NSCLC cells to chemotherapy and
reduces tumour growth in mice. However, therapeutic delivery of siRNA to
cancer cells in vivo remains problematic. Previously our group has
designed novel non-viral nanoparticles (iNOP-7) which can complex and
deliver siRNA in vivo. However, whether these nanoparticles can deliver
siRNA targeting III-tubulin to NSCLC cells is unknown. Therefore, the
aims of this study were to determine whether iNOP-7 could deliver siRNA
targeting III-tubulin to lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Methods:
Two NSCLC cell lines (H460 and Calu-6) were treated with increasing
amounts of iNOP-7 complexed to siRNA. Cell viability was assessed using a
colorimetric cell counting assay. Cellular uptake of iNOP-7-siRNA
complexes was determined by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. Gene
silencing efficiency of iNOP-7-III-tubulin siRNA complexes was measured
by real time PCR and Western blotting. To determine whether iNOP-7 could
deliver siRNA to lung tumors, 1x106 stably expressing luciferase H460
cells were orthotopically implanted into the lungs of Balb/c nude mice.
Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen IVIS System. Twelve
days post-tumor implantation mice were treated systemically with iNOP-7
complexed to fluorescently labelled siRNA or III-tubulin siRNA (1.5mg/kg
once a day for three days). Twenty four hours after the final injection
tumor tissue was collected and uptake and gene silencing efficiency was
evaluated using confocal microscopy and real-time PCR. Results: iNOP-7
did not affect cell viability and was able to effectively deliver high
levels of siRNA to both cell lines. Importantly, iNOP-7-III-tubulin siRNA
complexes potently silenced III-tubulin mRNA and protein levels by >85%
(n=3, p65% (n=2 animals per group) when compared to controls.
Conclusions: This is the first study to show that RNA interfering
nanoparticles can silence III-tubulin expression in NSCLC cells both in
vitro and in vivo. Future studies will address the therapeutic potential
of iNOP-7-III-tubulin siRNA complexes alone and in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents in an orthotopic lung cancer mouse model.

