Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the EGFR interactome reveals cellular dynamics
of receptor signalling and internalisation


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one part of the
promiscuous signaling network that regulates proliferation, growth and
differentiation of mammalian cells and its overexpression, aberrant or
enhanced activation are frequent events in human cancers. EGFR signaling
is realized by recruiting specific adaptor proteins to the activated
intracellular receptor tyrosine kinase domain. We hypothesize that the
pattern of recruited adaptor proteins is characteristic for respective
EGFR related cellular responses. Therefore, we developed a method to
decode the EGFR adaptor protein pattern in relation to its activation
state. A431 cells were stimulated with 100 ng/ml EGF for 30 minutes and
the EGFR-adaptor protein-complex was isolated by immunoprecipitation
after gentle lysis using the specific EGFR antibody cetuximab
biotinylated and bound to magnetic beads. Controls were precipitated from
lysates of unstimulated A431 cells. After pre fractionation by 1D SDS
PAGE and in gel digestion, protein complexes were characterized by
LC-ESI-tandem high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS
analyses reproducibly identified 68 proteins in three replicates of
precipitates from lysates of unstimulated A431 cells. 64 of these
proteins were assigned to gene ontology (GO) annotations and
significantly enriched domains included intracellular localisation and
protein transport proteins (29 proteins) and the EGFR signaling pathway
(5 proteins). The first domain contained structural proteins such as
actin and tubulin subunits as well as importins, exportins and
transportins. Proteins within the EGFR signaling category included growth
factor receptor bound protein 2 (Grb2) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). Biogrid analyses identified an
interacting EGFR network consisting of 14 known interacting proteins
including several subunits of the clathrin related adaptor protein
complex. Semi-quantification showed that the interactions of these
proteins with the EGFR were markedly pronounced upon EGF stimulation
suggesting increased receptor internalization. These data were confirmed
by Western Blotting and immunofluorescence microscopy. Furthermore,
several proteins were found which associations to the EGFR are as yet
unknown such as Hook homolog 2, MON2 homolog or FRG1 proteins.
Quantification of dynamic changes will further be carried out by stable
isotope labeling (SILAC) technology. As proof of principle, we were able
to identify proteins which are part of the EGFR signaling pathway as well
as proteins that relate to cellular localization and protein trafficking
and which abundances changed upon EGFR stimulation. Using this approach
will provide further insights into mechanisms of EGFR signal activation
from a systems biology point of view.

