Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the efficacy and analytical performance of isolation
procedures for circulating plasma microRNAs


Introduction: The efficiency and reproducibility of plasma miRNAs
extraction protocol consists a critical step concerning the
quantification of circulating miRNAs in plasma. Plasma is a specimen with
high concentrations of lipids and proteins, so specific handling is
required in order to achieve an enriched fraction of small RNAs at the
end of the procedure. In the present study, we conducted a comparative
investigation regarding RNA yielding among different commercially
available experimental approaches. Our evaluation approach relied on the
comparative extraction yielding of endogenous human miR-21 and exogenous
spiked-in C.elegans miR-39 from pooled plasma samples from healthy
individuals. Materials and Methods: In the present study we evaluated the
extraction potential of small RNAs using three different commercially
available kits for miRNAs extraction from plasma samples according to the
manufacturer's protocols: a) miRNeasy mini Kit (Qiagen), b) mirVana PARIS
kit (Ambion), c) microRNA purification Kit (Norgen Biotek) and d) Trizol
LS Reagent (Invitrogen). We firstly pooled plasma samples from healthy
individuals and used them for spiking experiments. In all cases, the
initial plasma volume was 200L and in each sample we spiked 25fmol of the
exogenous standard C.elegans cel-miR-39. The isolation of miRNAs from
plasma was conducted as per kit protocols and all extraction methods were
performed three independent times from the same initial pooled plasma
sample. A fixed volume of the eluted RNA sample was used as an input for
the reverse transcription reaction. After isolation, quantification of
cel-miR-39 was performed using real-time PCR. Recovery of cel-miR-39 in
each case was estimated in respect to the levels of an equivalent amount
of C.elegans copies added to total RNA after each extraction method
(representing 100% recovery). In parallel, in all these samples the
endogenous hsa-miR-21 was also quantified by real-time qPCR. The results
were compared between the different isolation protocols concerning this
with the greatest miRNAs yield for expression levels of endogenous
miRNAs. Results: We found that the phenol:chloroform extraction and
ethanol precipitation of RNA protocol (Trizol LS) recovers small RNAs
with some loss whereas silica-column based RNA extraction methods provide
a more effective and reliable mechanism for the isolation of small RNAs.
Although all column protocols have indications to be very effective, in
our hands the mirVana PARIS (Ambion) protocol appeared giving higher
yields of circulating miRNAs from plasma samples. This was the case after
quantifying for both the exogenous (cel-miR-39) and endogenous (miR-21)
less abundant levels of miRNAs. Conclusion: According to our results, the
mirVana PARIS kit (Ambion) was the most efficient among different
commercially available kits for the isolation of circulating plasma
miRNAs.

