Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of miR-122 in hepatocellular carcinoma


It has been reported that miRNAs potently influence cellular function
through the regulation of extensive gene expression networks and most
tumors are characterized by globally diminished miRNA expression.
However, the potential mechanism of microRNA expression change in
tumorigenesis remains to be further investigated. In this study, we focus
on the epigenetic regulation of miRNA expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma. We first performed miRNA microarray analysis in HepG2 cells,
which reveals significant changes in miRNA expression profiling with 23
upregulated miRNAs and 15 downregulated miRNAs induced by the treatment
with 5aza-2deoxycytidine (5-aza, DNA methylation inhibitor) and
4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA, histone deaceltylation inhibitor).
Interestingly, miR-122, the most abundant miRNA in the liver, is
upregulated by 5-aza and PBA, which is validated by qRT-PCR analysis in
both HepG2 and Huh7 cells. In addition, miR-122 expression is increased
by the overexpression of PPAR or the treatment of PPAR agonist (15-keto
PGE2 or 15d-PGJ2).We then demonstrate that peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR) and retinoid X receptor
alpha (RXR) bind to conserved DR-1 and DR-2 (peroxisome
proliferator-activated response element) in the miR-122 promoter region
and these bindings are significantly increased by 5-aza and PBA with the
biotinylated oligonicleotides precipitation assay. However, 5-aza and PBA
inhibit the binding of N-CoR (nuclear receptor corepressor) or SMRT
(silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor) to DR-1 or
DR-2. And we found that 5-aza and PBA inhibit PPAR/N-CoR/SMRT protein
complex formation in HepG2 cells with the immunoprecipitation assay.
Furthermore, we observe that SUV39H1(H3K9 methyl transferase) protein is
decreased by the co-treatment of 5aza and PBA; and the suppression of
endogenous SUV39H1 expression with SUV39H1siRNA increases miR-122
expression. Taken together, our results suggest that histone acethylation
and demethylation lead to the release of PPAR-gamma from
PPAR-gamma/N-CoR/SMRT protein complex to activate miR-122 transcription
and to the inhibition SUV39H1 protein expression for the elimination of
histone methylation to further facilitate miR-122 transcription. In
conclusion, Epigenetic silencing is one of the most important mechanisms
for diminished miR122 expression in hepatic carcinogenesis.

