Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of five novel biomarkers in human prostate tissues
and cell lines


Introduction and Objective: Our laboratory has identified several
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from primary prostate cancer (PCa) Stage
T2b tissue and five were identified as Prostate and breast cancer
overexpressed 1 (PBOV1), Calcium channel, voltage-dependent, l type,
alpha 1d subunit (CACNA1D), Tomoregulin-1 (TMEFF1), and Copine-1 & 4
(CPNE1 & CPNE 4). PBOV1 gene is overexpressed in prostate, breast and
bladder cancers and CACNA1D exists in several isoforms but little is
known about their role in cancer biology. TMEFF1 is predominantly
expressed in the brain and is also a cancer testes antigen. The Copines
are a novel family of ubiquitous Ca2+-dependent, phospholipid-binding
proteins and there is very little known about their role in cancer
etiopathogenesis. We have studied their expression in cancerous and
benign cancer adjacent areas of radical prostatectomy specimens as well
as their protein levels in PCa, BPH and normal prostate cell lines.
Methods: Nineteen sets of RNA samples, extracted from PCa tissues and
respective benign adjacent areas were received from Dr. DeMarzo. From
50ng of RNA, cDNA was generated and the real-time PCR for expression was
done using SsoFast EvaGreen supermix kit in an iCycler instrument (BioRad
Laboratories) utilizing the gene specific primers. For calculating
relative expression, a portion of -actin was also amplified using a
validated primer set (OriGene). Alongside cell lines of PCa (PC3, DU145 &
LNCaP); of Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and of normal prostate
(PrEC) were grown in cultures and total protein was extracted from each.
Using specific antibodies, the presence of these proteins were identified
by Western blotting. Results: When compared to the corresponding benign
adjacent areas, the expression increased significantly in cancer tissues
of: 12 samples for PBOV1, 14 samples for CACNA1D, 7 samples for TMEFF1, 9
samples for CPNE1 and 13 samples for CPNE4. Also, preliminary proteomic
data by Western blotting in cell line extracts also demonstrates
differential expression in PCa and control cell lines: PBOV1 was
expressed in PC3, DU145 & BPH; TMEFF1 in PC3 & DU145 (not tested in BPH &
PrEC); CACNA1D in PC3, DU145 & LNCaP; CPNE1 in BPH & PrEC and CPNE4 in
none of the cell lines. Conclusions: The increased expression of these
novel biomarkers in cancer areas vs. the benign cancer-adjacent may be
very useful in establishing significant ratios and cut-off values to
determine their potential clinical applications. Currently we continue
correlating these altered expressions with Gleason grades, stages and
other outcomes using a larger sample size. We also continue to study the
role of these biomarkers in the pathogenesis of more aggressive prostate
cancer phenotypes. Source of Funding: NIH U54CA143803 grant, Prostate
Cancer Foundation and the Patana Fund

