Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating novel targeted therapeutic agents in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia using a zebrafish xenotransplantation model


T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive hematologic
malignancy accounting for 25% of adult and 10-15% of pediatric ALL cases.
The disease is characterized by infiltration of the bone marrow and
peripheral blood with immature lymphoblasts bearing T-lineage markers.
Although current multi-agent chemotherapy regimens have dramatically
improved cancer outcomes, a significant proportion of T-ALL do not
respond to therapy or relapse post therapy. Novel molecular-based
treatment strategies are desperately needed to improve outcome and limit
toxicity. Mutations that activate the NOTCH and PTEN/PI3K pathways are
common in human T-ALL and may drive T-ALL cell proliferation. Gamma
secretase inhibiting compounds that block NOTCH signaling have been
effective against subtypes of T-ALL with NOTCH mutations but have had
limited success in clinical trials due to severe gastrointestinal
toxicity, and problems with drug resistance. Recently, inhibition of the
PI3K pathway (including the downstream kinase AKT) have shown efficacy in
vitro and in pre-clinical animal models. We have recently developed a
novel human cancer xenotransplantation (XT) animal model using the
zebrafish, which can be used for high throughput pre-clinical testing of
human tumour-drug interactions for both leukemia and solid tumours
(Corkery et al., 2011 Brit. J. Haemat.). Using the zebrafish XT model we
are studying a number of compounds that specifically target the PI3K/AKT
kinase pathway for ability to inhibit T-ALL cell proliferation in vivo.
Preliminary proof-of-principal studies have shown that we can
successfully engraft the PTEN-deficient T-ALL leukemia Jurkat cell line
in zebrafish embryos. In agreement with published data, we have shown
that treating Jurkat transplanted embryos with the mTOR inhibitor
rapamycin inhibits in vivo proliferation of the human leukemia cells line
by 60%, while, by contrast, the AKT inhibitor triciribine does not
significantly inhibit proliferation. We have also successfully
transplanted primary bone marrow from pediatric T-ALL patients which go
on to engraft in the zebrafish embryos. The ability to screen novel
compounds against a panel of primary patient samples could provide a more
accurate means of predicting the efficacy of said compounds across
heterogeneous patient populations. We are now employing the zebrafish XT
model to study the effects of novel PI3K/AKT kinase inhibition on the
proliferation of a panel of human T-ALL cell lines and primary patient
samples as a means of rapidly selecting new drug candidates to move
forward into the rodent model and Phase I clinical trials.

