Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP12 and myeloid cell populations influence establishment of
tumor metastases in the steatotic liver microenvironment


Introduction: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), encompassing
steatosis and progression to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are
liver disorders of increasing clinical significance. Studies in our lab
have shown that hepatic steatosis establishes a permissive
microenvironment for metastatic tumor seeding and tumor progression in
the liver. To understand the molecular factors influencing the initial
survival and growth of tumors in the steatotic liver microenvironment, we
adopted a candidate approach and performed microarray analysis to compare
RNA from normal vs steatotic liver samples in mice. MMP12 (macrophage
metalloelastase) was identified as an important proteinase associated
with the microenvironments of hepatic steatosis and steatohepatitis.
MMP12 can influence immune-mediated injury response by processing latent
TNF alpha and regulating neutrophil infiltration, cytokine release as
well as macrophage recruitment. We hypothesize that increased MMP12
levels in the steatotic liver contribute to a more permissive
microenvironment for primary tumor growth and establishment of metastases
by alteration of inflammatory cell populations. Results: Realtime qPCR
anlaysis verified a significant increase in MMP12 expression in murine
steatotic livers compared to normal control livers. In a splenic
injection model, hepatic metastases in steatotic MMP12 deficient livers
were significantly reduced as compared to hepatic metastases in steatotic
wildtype livers. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated an alteration in
the level of Gr-1 positive inflammatory cell populations in the steatotic
livers of both wildtype and MMP12 deficient livers when compared to
normal nonsteatotic livers. Although no significant changes were observed
in the percentage of F4/80 positive macrophage population, using
immunohistochemistry we did observe accumulation of F4/80 positive
macrophages into crown-like structures within steatotic MMP12 deficient
livers. To determine whether the inflammatory cells in the liver
microenvironment were contributing to survival of tumor cells, we
performed an in vitro co-culture assay of syngeneic MC38 tumor cells with
either CD90.2 cells (pan T cells) or CD11b cells (macrophages/monocytes).
Fewer numbers MC38 cells were present 3 days after co-culture with CD11b
cells from MMP12 deficient mice, which was corroborated with decreased
luciferase measurements from MC38-luc tagged cells. Conclusions: These
results suggest a role for MMP12 in mediating the inflammatory response
accompanying tumor establishment in the steatotic liver microenvironment.
The molecular mechanisms by which MMP12 influences a decrease in
metastatic tumor burden in the setting of fatty liver disease are
currently being investigated.

