Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of computer-aided detection (CAD) tool for liver
metastasis micro CT imaging using targeted contrast agent


Introduction: Preclinical in-vivo micro CT studies of liver metastasis
are difficult due to poor inherent soft tissue contrast and the need for
highly technical, manual analysis of the data. Research has implicated
that Kupffer cells in the liver encapsulate liver metastases providing an
opportunity to deliver macrophage-specific contrast agents for the
detection of small metastatic lesions. A new, long-acting preclinical CT
contrast agent that targets Kupffer cells has been developed that may
allow automated detection of liver lesions via CAD software. Method: A
pancreatic cancer liver metastasis model was created by surgically
implanting human pancreatic cancer cell line (L3.6pl) within the spleen.
Mice were injected with the contrast agent and scanned to obtain baseline
anatomy of the liver before implantation. The mice were scanned 1 day
after implantation and weekly after that for 5 weeks to monitor the liver
metastasis progression. The control group followed an identical protocol
but with a sham surgery. Liver tissues were harvested and fixed in
paraffin blocks after the last scan. Paraffin blocks were scanned using
high resolution micro CT before IHC staining. Human Mitochondrial and
F4/80 IHC were used to identify L3.6pl and Kupffer cells, respectively.
The CT images were compared to the IHC images from the same block to
verify that the locations of the contrast agent and the Kupffer cells
were related. Once the pattern of contrast agent and metastatic tumors
had been identified, CAD software was developed for automatic tumor
detection. Results: The contrast agent was evenly distributed throughout
the healthy liver tissue within 1 hour post injection. In healthy mice,
the homogenous distribution of contrast remained unchanged for at least 6
weeks. In liver metastasis models, the contrast began to concentrate in
various areas of the liver within 2 weeks post implantation. As tumors
developed and grew, the contrast became highly concentrated on the
borders of tumors creating a 3 dimensional outline of the lesion. IHC
staining and micro CT imaging of the fixed tissue verified that the
tumors are surrounded by Kupffer cells and that the distribution of
concentrated contrast agent matched them. Software was able to detect the
tumors based on these contrast outlines and compare them over successive
weekly scans. Conclusion: Our new imaging method enables automated
detection and evaluation of liver metastasis 1 mm or smaller from as
early as 2 weeks. In addition to allowing better visualization, it
provides new insight into macrophage motility within the liver. CAD
software can take advantage of this unique capability to automate data
analysis and allow for large scale longitudinal studies. This new imaging
method could be a useful tool to facilitate longitudinal imaging of liver
metastases in mice and has the potential for translation into clinical
practice.

