Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ephrin signaling in medulloblastoma


Eph receptor and ephrin ligand expression profiles have been associated
with poor outcome in several malignancies, but to date, there have been
no comprehensive studies characterizing Eph/ephrin expression and
signaling function in medulloblastoma (MB), the most common malignant
brain tumor of childhood. Determining if Eph receptors and ephrin ligands
have a functional role in MB tumorigenesis would be important to our
understanding of the molecular regulation of MB and for identifying more
effective and less toxic targeted therapies for MB. A few studies have
shown that the level of specific Eph receptor mRNA expression and Eph
tyrosine kinase activity appears to be increased in MB, particularly in
those subtypes with a propensity to metastasize. However, to our
knowledge, this is the first study to comprehensively characterize the
ephrin receptor and ligand expression profile (mRNA and protein) of MB
tumors and to demonstrate the functional effects of ephrin signaling in
medulloblastoma cells in vitro. We hypothesize that interactions between
specific Eph receptor and ligands results in bidirectional signaling that
is critical for MB cell proliferation and migration. We have generated
profiles characterizing Eph receptor and cognate ligand expression at the
mRNA and protein level in two medulloblastoma cell lines and in 29 (mRNA)
and 60 (protein) human medulloblastoma tissues. Based on our data, the
candidates of interest for functional characterization are Eph receptors
B1 and B2, expressed in over 98% of tumors, and the cognate ephrin
ligands b1 and b2. Of these targets, only ephrin b2 was detected in
developing fetal cerebellum, with positive expression by IHC restricted
to the purkinje cells, suggesting that these ephrin family members are
tumor-specific. To assess the functional role of these molecules in MB
cells, we knocked down ephrin b2 and ephrin b1 using siRNA. Cells with
altered Eph/ephrin expression were then compared to control transfectants
for the ability to signal downstream through Src and for changes in cell
function using bioassays of proliferation (MTT) and migration (scratch
assay). We demonstrate that ephrin b2 is diffusely expressed in 100% of
medulloblastoma tumors analyzed, signals through src oncogene, and
promotes MB cell proliferation. In contrast, ephrin b1 is heterogeneously
expressed in 20% of tumors analyzed, localizes to cells with high MIB
proliferative index within the tumor that are associated with an
aggressive phenotype of medulloblastoma, and promotes MB cell migration.
Together, these data indicate that ephrin b1 and b2 have distinct and
differential functional roles in the regulation of Eph signaling and
cellular behavior in MB cells. Further preclinical investigation of these
specific targets in MB in vivo is warranted to validate these Eph family
members as potential novel therapeutic targets in MB. The complete tumor
expression profiles and functional data of altered Eph/ephrin expression
in MB cells will be presented.

