Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent delivery of paclitaxel and 17-AAG via micellar
nanocarriers


Combination therapy of paclitaxel and
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) had previously been
tested in patients with advanced solid malignancies. Owing to the very
low aqueous solubility of both drugs, large volumes of organic solvents
were employed in the intravenous formulations, which contributed to
serious toxicities in cancer patients and consequently restricted the
optimal use of these drugs in the clinical setting. The aim of the
present study was to develop micellar nanocarriers for concomitant
delivery of paclitaxel and 17-AAG without the inclusion of any organic
solvent. At clinically relevant concentrations, paclitaxel and 17-AAG
were simultaneously loaded into polyethylene
glycol-distearoylphosphatidylethanolamine (PEG-DSPE) micelles by a dry
film method. The physicochemical and biological characteristics of the
dual drug-loaded micelles were evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The
simultaneous incorporation of paclitaxel and 17-AAG into PEG-DSPE
micelles was confirmed by 1H NMR analysis. The drug-loaded micelles had
an average diameter of 11 nm with a surface charge at 22 mV. In the
presence of 90% serum, the release half-lives of paclitaxel and 17-AAG
from PEG-DSPE micelles were 7.1 h and 4.8 h, respectively.
Paclitaxel/17-AAG-loaded micelles were as effective in blocking the
proliferation of human ovarian cancer SKOV-3 cells as the combined free
drugs. When administered intravenously to nude mice bearing SKOV-3 tumor
xenografts, paclitaxel/17-AAG-loaded PEG-DSPE micelles resulted in
significantly elevated drug concentrations in the blood circulation and
tumor tissues, compared to the free drug counterparts. These results
suggest that paclitaxel/17-AAG-loaded micelles preferentially accumulate
in the tumor tissue via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect. PEG-DSPE micellar nanocarriers may provide a novel and
advantageous delivery approach for paclitaxel/17-AAG combination therapy.

