Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imp2 controls oxidative phosphorylation in glioblastoma cancer
stem cells


Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (Imp2, IGF2BP2) is
expressed during embryonic development in the brain and associated with
several types of cancer. In preliminary studies we assessed Imp2
expression in normal brain and glial tumors. Immunohistochemistry
revealed that Imp2 is present in 75% cases of the most malignant glial
tumor, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), whereas it is absent in low grade
gliomas and in normal brain. GBM harbor a subpopulation of
undifferentiated, slowly proliferating cells that correspond to the
current definition of cancer stem cells (CSC). Analysis of these cells
selected based on the CSC-associated CD133 marker expression, revealed
that they express higher levels of Imp2 than their CD133-negative
counterparts. Primary cultures of gliospheres that allow for CSC
enrichment, also expressed high Imp2 levels. Imp2 depletion by shRNA
significantly decreased GBM CSC ability to form spheres in single cell
clonogenic assays and diminished their tumorigenic potential, suggesting
that Imp2 is important for CSC maintenance. To investigate the role of
Imp2 in CSC biology, Imp2 ribonucleoprotein complexes were purified and
both Imp2-bound mRNA and proteins were analyzed, by microarray and mass
spectrometry, respectively. Interestingly, both Imp2-bound RNA and
Imp2-associated proteins were implicated in mitochondrial metabolism, in
particular with oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos). Involvement of Imp2
in mitochondrial metabolism was therefore tested. Depletion of Imp2 in
GBM CSC impaired OxPhos, but did not affect other mitochondrial
processes. Moreover, Imp2 knock-down decreased cellular ATP levels,
suggesting that OxPhos is the main energy producing pathway in GBM CSC.
Accordingly, inhibition of respiratory complex I with rotenone mimicked
the Imp2 knock-down phenotype, as it diminished proliferation, sphere
formation, oxygen consumption and ATP levels. In contrast, inhibition of
anaerobic glycolysis, a pathway associated with cancer bioenergetics, did
not affect GBM CSC. The mechanism by which Imp2 controls OxPhos may
involve its protein interactors, among which we found three subunits of
respiratory complex I, responsible for initiation of complex assembly.
Imp2 depletion affects activity and assembly of respiratory complex I,
suggesting that the interaction between Imp2 and these subunits is
crucial for electron entry into the OxPhos chain. In addition, Imp2 may
control cellular respiration by providing mRNA delivery. Purification of
mitochondria-bound polyribosomes revealed that overexpression of Imp2
increases the amount of Imp2-bound mRNA in this fraction. These data
imply that Imp2 delivers nuclear-encoded mRNA onto ribosomes attached to
the mitochondrial surface, where co-translational insertion into
mitochondrial membranes can occur. Our results have uncovered a novel
function of the oncofetal protein Imp2 related to metabolic requirements
of GBM CSC.

