Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhalational temozolomidea new mode of treating malignant gliomas


Temozolomide (TMZ) is the standard of care chemotherapy for treatment of
malignant gliomas; it is currently delivered orally or intravenously.
Perillyl alcohol is a monoterpene which has been used to treat patients
with malignant gliomas via an intranasal delivery system. Recently, we
have constructed a new chemical entity (NCE) by conjugating temozolomide
to perillyl alcohol via a carbamate bond. This new compound has been
named TMZ-POH (NEO212). This new compound has been tested in-vitro in a
number of assays. Its mechanism of action does not appear to be MGMT
mediated, as addition of O6-benzylguanine has no effect on its
cytotoxicity in glioma cells regardless of their MGMT status. On the
other hand, TMZ-POH appears to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)
in malignant glioma cells, as demonstrated by an increase in
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and the apoptotic protein CHOP
expression. MTT assays demonstrate that TMZ-POH is effective in both
temozolomide sensitive and resistant U251, U87, LN229 malignant glioma
cell lines. IC50 for colony formation assays (CFA) was determined for
U251 temozolomide sensitive and resistant cells to be 18 uM and not
achieved (0-60 uM). TMZ-POH, on the other hand, had IC50 of 10 uM and 30
uM respectively for TMZ sensitive and resistant U251 glioma cells. MTT
assays using glioblastoma cancer stem cells (CSC) demonstrated that
TMZ-POH induced IC50 cytotoxicity at 200 uM, compared to no cytotoxicity
in the TMZ treated CSC. Moreover, TMZ-POH demonstrated no toxicity on
normal astrocytes. Treatment of glioma cells with TMZ alone, POH alone,
TMZ dissolved in POH, and TMZ-POH demonstrated that TMZ-POH was two
orders of magnitude more cytotoxic than TMZ dissolved in POH. These data
lead us to conclude that TMZ-POH is a NCE which may be evaluated for
potential intranasal drug delivery to treat patients with malignant
gliomas.

