Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The predictive and prognostic roles of DNA damage response genes
in epithelial ovarian cancer


Background: Despite platinum-based chemotherapy, 5-year survival of
advanced stage ovarian cancer patients is only 15-30%. Exposure to
platinum-based chemotherapeutics induces double strand DNA breaks (DSBs)
and subsequently leads to activation of the DNA damage response (DDR).
Therefore inhibition of components of the DDR may lead to better response
to therapy. Aim of this study was to investigate in a large series of
ovarian cancer patients the predictive and prognostic role of the
activation status of four DDR-proteins- ATM, a key controller in the DDR,
and three ATM substrates, including Chk2, 53BP1 and -H2AX, of which the
latter is a direct readout for DNA damage. Methods: Expression of
phospho-ATM, Chk2, phospho-Chk2, 53BP1, phospho-53BP1 and -H2AX was
immunohistochemically assessed in 309 patients with chemo-naive ovarian
cancer. Expression levels were related to clinicopathological
characteristics and survival. Response to platinum-based chemotherapy was
analyzed by defining two populations with either an optimal therapy
response or a very poor therapy response. Both groups consisted of
patients with advanced stage ovarian cancer, >2 cm residual disease after
primary surgery and were all treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.
The responder group had a well-defined PFS of more than 18 months while
the non-responder group had a PFS of less than 6 months. Results: In the
two well-defined groups with the largest contrast regarding response to
treatment, positive -H2AX expression (OR=0.193; p=0.036) and positive
Chk2 expression (OR=0.149; p=0.011) were related to a good response to
platinum-based chemotherapy. In advanced stage patients, phospho-53BP1
expression was independently related to a worse disease-specific survival
(HR=1.905; p= 0.044). Conclusion: High DDR protein expression in advanced
stage ovarian cancers suggests a high degree of genomic instability,
while the negative prognostic impact of phospho-53BP1 may be due to
enhanced repair capacity of chemotherapy-induced DSBs on the long term.

