Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intrinsic and extrinsic TME factors modulate breast cancer
progression


The tumor microenvironment (TME) of breast cancer is a heterogeneous
population of tumor cells, infiltrating endothelial cells,
immunomodulatory cells, and underlying stroma. This cellular cross-talk
is key to tumor progression; however the signaling pathways involved
remain unclear. Rapid expansion of breast cancer cells requires
sufficient supply of oxygenated blood supported by tumor induced
neovasculature. Our previous studies demonstrated that estrogen mediates
neovascularization via recruitment of bone marrow derived endothelial
progenitor cells (BM-EPCs). However, hypoxia, a major cellular
characteristic of cancer cell growth, mimics estrogen induced
vascularization as evidenced by HIF-1 translocation and secretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). These studies were carried out
in the TG1-1 murine mammary cancer cell line and used as a model.
Conditioned media from TG1-1 cells enhanced endothelial cell migration
and tube formation in vitro. Treatment of tumor cells with the
anti-estrogen Fulvestrant as well as the HIF-1 inhibitor YC-1 abrogated
the effects of estrogen. Further, use of the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin as
well as the protein inhibitor cyclohexamide, elucidated the necessity of
a functional AKT signaling pathway in this estrogen induced
neovasculogenesis. While the cell-cell interaction studies demonstrate a
considerable modulation of the tumor microenvironment, the co-culture
experiments using immunomodulatory cells and epithelial cells induced
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in TG1-1 cells. We
demonstrated that the murine macrophage cell line RAW264.7 secretes
factors that modulate tumor cell EMT via upregulation of TWIST and Slug
and an increase in tumor cell migration and invasion. To elucidate the
modulatory secreted factors, we performed western blot analysis of the
TGF- signaling pathway and observed differences in SMAD levels. However,
neutralizing antibody studies indicate that TGF- is not the sole
modulator of RAW264.7 induced EMT in Tg1-1 cells. Taken together,
cytokines as extrinisic factors and tumor hypoxic conditions generating
intrinsic factors, act in concert to alter breast cancer progression. Our
data demonstrate a need to target multiple TME interacting pathways as a
future breast cancer treatment strategy.

