Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping the oncogenic kinome using a kinase activity screening
array


The oncogenic activity of kinases harnesses myriad signalling cascades
driving tumorigenesis. Improper control of phosphorylation networks
represents one of the most relevant regulator and biomarker of cell
dys-functions leading to malignancies. Surprisingly however, measuring
the phosphorylation activity of kinases, and potentially monitoring the
functionality of the entire kinome at once to identify molecular
signatures causing cancers and guide therapeutic interventions, remains
largely unexplored. Specifically, a highly convenient tool for clinical
applications or research purposes would be the advent of a
microarray-like chip to map phosphorylation networks. We undertook to
develop such a kinase-sensing platform, and present here unique
strategies, technical advances and data -including the detection of
oncogenic Src and HER kinases activity in biological samples- supporting
such potential breakthrough. The devised kinase activity-sensing system
relies on peptide probes that act as beacons to evaluate enzymes
functionality, and emit distinctive optical signals before and after
(de-)phosphorylation. The following steps have been achieved. First, in
order to use baits relevant to human cancer etiology, we created a
protein and peptide repertoire cataloguing 6173 distinctive
kinase-substrate active nodes and compiling 2702 unique biological kinase
peptide targets that all represent latent nano-sensors usable to
comprehensively track kinase signaling networks. Second, we established
that our label-free detection approach (namely Raman scattering of probes
monitored via surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)) is a functional
system that reliably and robustly identifies the phosphorylation state of
peptide probes. Third, real-time kinetics and kinase inhibitor
experiments using biochemical samples and biological extracts from
mammalian cells demonstrated that our approach could directly assess the
functionality of kinases. Fourth, in an attempt to identify hyperactive
Src kinase in tumor cells, our assay discerned normal from oncogenic
Src-mutated cells. Finally, using breast cancer cell models of tumor
progression and tissue samples from patients, we were able to measure
EGFR kinases (hyper-)activity in vivo. Together, our strategy allows for
highly sensitive, specific, rapid, one-step, label-free, multiplex
capture and measurement of phosphorylation events. Our efforts will now
focus on expending this approach into a fully functional
kinomic-screening platform to explore oncogenic kinase networks in human
cancers. We will translate such device into the clinic, and map
phosphorylation signatures that cause breast malignancies to eventually
guide therapeutic interventions that best match breast cancer patients
disease characteristics and predicted responses to (chemo-)therapies.

