Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol inhibits prostate cancer metastasis by targeting
microRNA-21


Introduction: Most prostate cancer-related deaths are due to the
metastatic form of the disease. Despite multimodal therapy, no effective
treatment exists for metastatic prostate cancer. Resveratrol, a
phytoalexin, has been reported to possess anticancer properties against
various cancers. However, the exact mechanism underlying this beneficial
effect is not clearly known. MicroRNA (miR)-21, an oncomir, is found to
be up-regulated in prostate cancer and its levels are positively linked
to cancer cell invasion and metastasis. In this study, we propose that
resveratrol inhibition of miR-21 could account, in part, for its
reduction in invasiveness and metastasis of prostate cancer cells.
Methods: PC3-MM cells were treated with resveratrol and the levels of
miR-21 and its target proteins, programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) and
maspin, were assessed by TaqMan assay and Western blotting, respectively.
Cell viability was assessed by MTS assay, while invasion and migration
were assessed by Boyden chamber assay and wound healing assay,
respectively. Annexin-FITC and PI staining were performed to assess cell
apoptosis. Microarray analyses were performed to identify different miRs
which are regulated by resveratrol. Transient transfection of pre-miR-21
or PDCD4 siRNA was performed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
resveratrol's antitumor action. Severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)
mice were utilized to study the effect of oral administration of
resveratrol on tumor growth and lung metastasis using subcutaneous and
intravenous injections of PC3-MM cells. Results: Resveratrol
significantly reduced PC3-MM cell viability and inhibited its invasion
and migration in a dose-dependent manner. These anti-tumor effects of
resveratrol were due to inhibition of miR-21 and increased expression of
PDCD4, because transfection of PC3-MM cells with pre-miR-21 and PDCD4
siRNA reversed the anti-tumor effects of resveratrol. Resveratrol also
decreased both serum and insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1)-activated Akt1
(p-Akt), a known regulator of miR-21. Inhibition of PI3 kinase by
LY294002 mimicked resveratrol's response on cell viability and
invasiveness. Furthermore, studies in SCID mice demonstrated that oral
administration of resveratrol reduced PC3-MM tumor growth by inhibiting
miR-21 and p-Akt and also reduced the ability of these cells to
metastasize to the lung. Conclusion: We conclude that resveratrol
inhibits PC3-MM prostate cancer cell viability, invasion and migration by
suppressing miR-21 expression via a growth factor/Akt sensitive pathway.
We propose that oral administration of resveratrol inhibits prostate
cancer growth and metastasis by abrogating a growth factor/Akt signaling
pathway for induction of miR-21. These data support the use of
resveratrol as a miR-21 inhibitor for the treatment of metastatic
prostate cancer.

