Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uncovering tumor-specific components of the p53 pathway using
mouse models and RNAi


The gene that encodes for the p53 transcription factor is the most
frequently mutated gene in human cancer. It is estimated that about 50%
of all human cancers harbor a mutation in the TP53 gene, and that the
remaining 50% harbor mutations that inactivate other components of the
pathway. p53 is known to activate a variety of tumor suppressive
programs, such as cell cycle arrest, senescence and apoptosis, among
others. Using genetically engineered mouse models of cancer, we and
others have recently shown that a variety of established autochthonous
tumors require sustained inactivation of the p53 pathway. Interestingly,
the phenotypic outcome of p53 restoration in these tumors appears to be
tumor specific, with some tumor types undergoing a permanent cell cycle
arrest with features of cellular senescence and other tumors undergoing
apoptosis. Independent of the phenotypic outcome, these studies have
convincingly shown that established tumors are exquisitely sensitive to
p53 restoration. Since p53 is a transcription factor, one hypothesis that
may explain these tumor-specific outcomes suggests the possibility that
p53 transcriptionally activates a particular cohort of genes that is
specific to each tumor type, in addition to activating genes involved in
a core p53 pathway. Another possibility is that p53 transcriptionally
activates the same set of genes in all tumor types, but that their
functions are context-dependent. Moreover, it is also possible that there
are yet undiscovered genes in the p53 pathway that are not direct
transcriptional targets of p53. In order to uncover both tumor-specific
p53 effectors, as well as core p53 effectors, we have derived murine
p53-restorable cell lines from three different tumor types: lung
adenocarcinoma, sarcoma and lymphoma. These cell lines proliferate
indefinitely in vitro. However, upon restoration of the endogenous Trp53
gene, these cell lines efficiently undergo cell cycle arrest (lung
adenocarcinoma and sarcoma cell lines) or apoptosis (lymphoma cell
lines). Moreover, this response is p53-dependent, as knockdown of either
p53 or its main upstream activator p19Arf by RNAi allows the cells to
bypass the effects of p53 restoration. To gain insight into the genes
involved in these p53-dependent responses, we have carried out an
unbiased large-scale pooled RNAi p53 bypass screen in both lung
adenocarcinoma and sarcoma p53 restorable cell lines. We will describe
initial results obtained from screening a library composed of
approximately 40,000 shRNAs. Moreover, we are currently carrying out
additional p53 bypass screens, both in the in vitro and in vivo settings,
using different shRNA libraries, in order to obtain a more complete
picture of the p53 tumor suppressive pathway. We envision that the
results obtained from these screens will potentially uncover
tumor-specific components of the p53 pathway, as well as novel components
of the core p53 pathway.

