Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A microRNA activity map of human mesenchymal tumors: An
integrative transcriptomic study


Background MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are nucleic acid regulators of many human
mRNAs, and are associated with biological processes including cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. miRNA expression levels
have been used in cancer profiling studies, but some evidence suggests
that they do not fully capture miRNA regulatory activity. In this study
we have integrated multiple mRNA and miRNA expression datasets to use
gene expression as a surrogate for determining miRNA regulatory activity.
We discovered (and validated using a paraffin-based cohort) patterns
associated with cancer phenotypes and oncogenic pathways in mesenchymal
tumors - a very heterogeneous class of malignancies - and we investigated
possible causes for miRNA activity changes. Results Using a recently
developed computational method which determines miRNA activity from
changes in gene expression profiles, we identified differentially
activated miRNAs between 77 normal and 135 sarcoma specimens and we
validated many of these findings with microarray interrogation of an
independent, paraffin-based tumor cohort of 18 samples. Among these
differentially activated miRNAs are 17 with a histological
subtype-specific activity pattern in comparison to normal mesenchymal
tissue. We also found 81 miRNAs which exhibit a pattern common to all
histological subtypes, and we identified 12 miRNAs with unique activity
in osteosarcomas. In addition, we have shown that miRNA activity is
imperfectly correlated with miRNA expression levels. Using
next-generation miRNA sequencing we identified a specific sequence
alteration which may contribute to differential activity by changing
mRNA/miRNA complementarity. We then analyzed miRNA activity changes
related to the RAS-pathway and found 21 miRNAs that switch from silenced
to activated status in parallel with RAS activation. Importantly, nearly
half of these miRNAs were predicted to regulate integral parts of the
miRNA processing machinery, and our gene expression analysis revealed
significant reductions of these transcripts in RAS-active tumors. This
suggests an association between RAS signaling and miRNA processing in
which miRNAs may attenuate their own biogenesis. Conclusions Our study
represents the first gene expression-based investigation of miRNA
regulatory activity in human sarcomas, and our findings indicate that
miRNA activity patterns derived from integrated transcriptomic data are
reproducible and biologically informative in cancer. We identified an
association between RAS signaling and miRNA processing, and demonstrated
a sequence alteration as a plausible cause for differential miRNA
activity. Finally, our study highlights the value of systems level
integrative miRNA/mRNA assessment with high-throughput genomic data, and
the applicability of paraffin-tissue-derived RNA for validation of novel
findings.

