Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of small animal MRI and cone-beam CT for image-guided
radiotherapy of orthotopic tumors in mice


Introduction: Recent developments in image-guided radiation therapy
(IGRT) of small animals aim to adapt the radiation planning and delivery
protocols employed in the clinical setting to preclinical investigations.
Accurate and targeted delivery of radiation to the disease volume of
interest is necessary for evaluation of new treatment strategies and
their timely translation to the clinic. This abstract reports the
feasibility of employing a 1T small animal MR scanner and a cone-beam CT
(CBCT)-equipped small animal irradiator to effectively visualize and
delineate orthotopically implanted tumors on the treatment bed prior to
targeted radiotherapy. Methods: Male nude mice bearing orthotopically
implanted prostate tumor (DU145 and 22Rv1) and female SCID mice bearing
orthotopically implanted cervical tumor (ME-180) were positioned on a
transportable multimodality imaging and treatment bed (Minerve System,
Bioscan) and scanned using a 1T MR scanner (M2, Aspect Imaging) and a
small animal irradiator equipped with CBCT (X-rad 255Cx, Precision
X-ray). The MR images were acquired using a fast spin echo sequence
(TE/TR = 80/4800, NEX of 4 or 6, voxel size of 0.2 x 0.2 x 1.0 mm, 22 to
24 slices and imaging time of 6 to 8 minutes). The CBCT images were
acquired at 80 and 100 kVp (for reduced streaking at the bone/soft tissue
interface) and 0.5 mA (60 seconds acquisition) and reconstructed at 0.1 x
0.1 x 0.1 mm voxel size. Image analysis was conducted using Microview (GE
Healthcare) by manually contouring of the tumor in selected slices and
then linearly extrapolating across non-contoured slices. Results: The
overall soft tissue contrast in the lower abdominal cavity was poor in
the CBCT data set. There are cases where there is sufficient contrast
between the bladder and the tumor, and between the tumor and selected
segments of the intestinal tract. Nonetheless, it was challenging in most
cases to confidently delineate the tumor margins using the CBCT images
alone. Side-by-side consultation with the MR images during contouring
allowed for the tumors to be more confidently delineated on the CBCT
images (without co-registration with the MR data set) with a volumetric
accuracy of 92.4 12.3% (7 distinct tumors with volumes ranging from 181
to 1399 mm3) relative to the volumes contoured using the MR data set
alone. Conclusion: Precise and accurate delivery of radiation to
preclinical animal models must be supplemented by imaging techniques that
allow for visualization and delineation of the disease volume in the
treatment position. MR images acquired with the animal on a transportable
multimodality imaging and treatment bed facilitated the delineation of
volumetrically accurate treatment regions using a CBCT-equipped small
animal irradiator. Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank
Coackley C, Zafarana G and Bristow RG for providing the prostate mouse
models, and Chaudary N and McKee T for providing the cervical mouse model.

