Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TWEAK functions as chemotactic factor for glioma cells via Lyn
activation


The long-term survival of patients with glioblastoma multiforme is
compromised by the tumor's proclivity for local invasion into the
surrounding normal brain. These invasive cells escape surgery and display
resistance to chemotherapeutic- and radiation-induced apoptosis. We have
previously shown that tumor necrosis factor-like weak inducer of
apoptosis (TWEAK), a member of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily, can
stimulate glioma cell invasion and survival via binding to the fibroblast
growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14) receptor and subsequent activation of
the Rac1/NF-kappaB pathway. In addition, we have reported previously that
Fn14 is expressed at high levels in migrating glioma cells in vitro and
invading glioma cells in vivo. Here we demonstrate that TWEAK can act as
a chemotactic factor for glioma cells, a potential process to drive cell
invasion into the surrounding brain tissue. Specifically, we detected a
chemotactic migration of glioma cells to the concentration gradient of
TWEAK using the Modified Boyden chamber assay. Because TWEAK has been
shown to be expressed in normal astrocytes, microglia, and endothelial
cells, we neutralized TWEAK using a recombinant soluble murine Fn14-Fc
decoy receptor and examined the effect on glioma cell invasion in the ex
vivo rat brain slice model. Incubation of the brain slice with the
Fn14-Fc decoy receptor reduced glioma cell invasion as compared to
control IgG treated brain slice. Since Src family kinases (SFK) have been
implicated in chemotaxis, we next determined whether TWEAK:Fn14
engagement activated these cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases. Our data shows
that TWEAK stimulation of glioma cells results in a rapid phosphorylation
of Src as detected by Western blot analysis using a pan-Src
phosphorylation antibody. To determine which SFK member is phosphorylated
by TWEAK, we applied the multiplex Luminex assay and identified Lyn as a
candidate SFK. Immunoprecipitation of Lyn from TWEAK-treated cells
verified that Lyn is phosphorylated as determined by phosphotyrosine
immunoblot analysis. Immunodepletion of Lyn by siRNA oligonucleotides
suppressed the chemoattractive effect of TWEAK on glioma cells. We
hypothesize that TWEAK secretion by cells present in the glioma
microenvironment induce invasion of glioma cells into the brain
parenchyma. Understanding the function and signaling of the TWEAK-Fn14
ligand-receptor system may lead to development of novel therapies to
therapeutically target invasive glioma cells.

