Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of alterations in homologous recombination repair
genes with survival and chemotherapy sensitivity in patients with
high-grade serous ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy worldwide. The
poorest survival rate is found among the 60%-70% of patients diagnosed
with advanced stage, high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HgsOvCa), which is
also one of the major cancer types that have been systematically examined
by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. It has been shown that
mutations in BRCA2, a gene centrally involved in homologous recombination
repair (HRR), is connected to platinum-sensitivity and better survival.
The aim of this study was to obtain a comprehensive view of gene
alterations in other central HRR genes, namely in ATM, ATR, MRE11A,
RAD50, NBN, RAD52, RAD54L, RAD51, BARD1, XRCC2, XRCC3, BRCA1 and RPA1 in
correlation to survival and platinum-sensitivity in HgsOvCa tumors. Copy
number variation, mRNA expression and somatic mutation data along with
detailed clinical data for 323 HgsOvCa samples were obtained from TCGA
October 1, 2011. Each patient in the data set was treated with surgery
followed by platinum-based therapy. In TCGA clinical data the patients
were classified into four groups depending on the response to adjuvant
chemotherapy. Of all patients 232 patients had experienced a complete or
partial response (sensitive cases) and 36 had stable or progressive
disease (resistant cases) after adjuvant chemotherapy. All the core
interacting genes of HRR were screened in all samples and in different
chemotherapy groups to see the effect of alterations of individual genes
and in combination with other genes to the overall survival (OS),
progression free survival (PFS) and chemotherapy response. The
alterations that were screened included copy number amplifications and
deletions, high and low mRNA expression (above or below z-score 2) and
somatic mutations. The HRR genes were altered in 86% of all cases. The
three genes having the most alterations were RPA1 (24%), NBN (24%) and
ATR (23%). In two chemotherapy response groups, the main difference was
seen in ATR. In sensitive group, ATR was altered in 24% of which in 88%
the gene was either amplified or over expressed whereas in resistant
group ATR was altered only in 8% of cases. However, ATR alone was not
able to predict chemotherapy response or survival; analyses of the other
genes are ongoing. Here we identified what types of alterations are
present in central HRR genes in HgsOvCa. In addition we compared the
landscapes of altered HRR genes in two different chemotherapy response
groups. Future work, including methylation and functional studies, is
needed to further identify and confirm the clinically relevant key
alterations of HRR machinery that would eventually steer the finding of
potential targets for improved therapies.

