Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proline, glutamic acid, leucine rich protein 1 (PELP1) is
essential for optimal p53-mediated DNA damage response


DNA Damage Response (DDR) is a vital ameliorative action undertaken by
cells against various intrinsic and extrinsic genotoxic agents. p53 is an
important transcription factor that plays a critical role in mediating
cell cycle arrest or apoptosis upon DNA damage. PELP1 is a proto-oncogene
and scaffolding protein that functions as a coregulator for a number of
nuclear receptors such ER and transcription factors such as E2F1. In this
study, we discovered that PELP1 plays a vital role in p53-mediated DNA
damage response. Using p53 wild-type breast cancer cells and
PELP1-specific shRNAs, we show that cells lacking PELP1 are less
sensitive to various genotoxic agents including etoposide, cisplatin,
camptothecin or -irradiation. PELP1 interacts with p53 upon DNA damage
and ChIP analysis revealed that PELP1 is recruited to p53 target gene
promoters. Reporter gene assays demonstrated that PELP1 functions as a
coactivator of p53 and is required for optimal activation of p53 target
genes under genomic stress. Mechanistic studies revealed that resistance
to cell death in PELP1-depleted cells upon genotoxic stress was due to
significant decrease in expression of p53 target genes. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that PELP1 is phosphorylated at Serine 1033 upon DNA damage.
Using a novel phospho-specific PELP1 antibody that specifically
recognizes phosphorylated Serine 1033 on PELP1, we show that various
genomic insults can induce PELP1 phosphorylation in vivo. Using cell
lines that are either proficient or deficient in DDR kinases like ATM,
ATR or DNAPKc, we have also established that PELP1 is phosphorylated by
all three kinases depending on the type of DNA damage. Interestingly, we
also found that the phosphorylation of PELP1 at Ser-1033 is important for
optimal p53's transcriptional functions and that the phosphorylated form
of PELP1 is recruited to the site of DNA damage when analyzed by laser
micro-irradiation and confocal imaging, suggesting a potential role of
PELP1 in the DNA repair process. Overall, these studies established a
previously uncharacterized role of PELP1 in DNA damage response. Since
PELP1 is as proto-oncogene with deregulated expression in many cancers,
these findings will have implications in our understanding of cancer
progression and therapy.

