Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment effects of -tocotrienol with PPAR agonists and
antagonists on MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell growth in culture


-Tocotrienol (T3) is a member of the vitamin E family of compounds that
displays potent antiproliferative effects against breast cancer cells.
Recent studies have shown that combined treatment of subeffective doses
of -T3 with subeffective doses of statins, cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors,
or EGF receptor inhibitors caused a synergistic inhibition in the highly
malignant +SA mammary epithelial cell growth. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR), a member of the nuclear
receptor family is a ligand activated transcription factor that directly
regulates transcription of target genes. The present study investigated
the effects of T3 used in combination with PPAR agonists and antagonists
on breast cancer cell growth in culture. Treatment with 0.5-6M T3,
0.4-50M PPAR agonist (rosiglitazone or troglitazone) or 0.4-25 PPAR
antagonist (GW9662 or T0070907) alone resulted in a dose-responsive
inhibition of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell growth. However,
combined treatment with subeffective doses (2-3M) of T3 with subeffective
doses (3-5M) or PPAR agonists was found to increase MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cell growth, whereas combined treatment with similar subeffective doses
of T3 with subeffective doses (4-6M) of PPAR antagonists was found to
significantly inhibited growth of both breast cancer cell lines. Western
blot analysis showed that combined treatment with similar subeffective
doses of T3 and PPAR antagonists resulted in a relatively large decrease
in the levels of phosphorylated PPAR and its heterodimer partner,
retinoid X receptor (RXR), in a time-dependent manner. In addition,
combined treatment with these agents caused an overexpression of specific
PPAR transcriptional co-activators including, CREB-binding protein H-300
(CBP H-300), CBP C-20, and steroid receptor co-activator-1 (SRC-1). These
results indicate that the anti-proliferative effects induced by combined
treatment of T3 with PPAR antagonists are mediated through a
PPAR-dependent mechanism in these breast cancer cell lines. Additional
studies showed that the antiproliferative effects induced by combined
treatment with T3 and PPAR antagonists was also associated with a
reduction in phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/PI3-K-dependent kinase
(PDK)/Akt mitogenic signaling in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cell lines. In summary, these findings strongly suggest that the
antiproliferative effects of combined treatment of T3 and PPAR
antagonists in breast cancer cells are mediated by suppression in
PPAR-RXR phosphorylation and subsequent reduction in PI3K/PDK/Akt
mitogenic signaling. This study was supported by a grant from First Tech
International Ltd., and the Malaysian Palm Oil Council.

