Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orally delivery alginic acid-coated chitosan nanoparticles loaded
with legumain DNA vaccine protect against murine breast cancer


Legumain DNA vaccine has been proven to be a potential treatment approach
to protect against breast cancer. However, absence of safe and efficient
oral delivery system highly restricts its clinical application. Here, we
aim to develop a novel oral delivery system for legumain DNA vaccine with
better biocompatibility and efficiency. We constructed alginic
acid-coated chitosan NPs (A.C.NPs) and tested its anti-acid
characteristics in vitro. DNA agrose electrophoresis data showed that
compared to chitosan NPs (C.NPs), A.C.NPs significantly protected DNA
from degradation in the condition of pH=1.5. Furthermore, size
distribution anlysis showed that when pHLegumain DNA vaccine has been
proven to be a potential treatment approach to protect against breast
cancer. However, absence of safe and efficient oral delivery system
highly restricts its clinical application. Here, we aim to develop a
novel oral delivery system for legumain DNA vaccine with better
biocompatibility and efficiency. We constructed alginic acid-coated
chitosan NPs (A.C.NPs) and tested its anti-acid characteristics in vitro.
DNA agrose electrophoresis data showed that compared to chitosan NPs
(C.NPs), A.C.NPs significantly protected DNA from degradation in the
condition of pH=1.5. Furthermore, size distribution anlysis showed that
when pH<3.0, A.C.NPs aggregated to form the micrometer scale complex and
dispersed to nanoparticle sized about 314 nm with the increased pH value.
To visualize DNA expression, mice were treated by gavage with the A.C.NPs
carrying EGFP expression plasmid. Significant EGFP expression can be
detected in the intestinal peryer's patch of mice. Immunoflurescence
staining showed that overlapping existed in EGFP and F4/80 (CD11b)
positive cells. Full length legumain plasmids were loaded into different
delivery systems including chitosan NPs (CL), Salmonella typhi (SL),
A.C.NPs (ACL). PBS and A.C.NPs loaded with empty plasmid was also set as
control groups (n=5 each group). Oral vaccination was performed in murine
orthotropic 4T1 breast cancer model. Animals were scarified when the
average tumor size in the PBS group reached 500 mm3. Our data showed that
tumor volume was significantly smaller in ACL and SL groups compared to
other groups. Further, we isolated splenocytes from mice and co-cultured
with 4T1 cells pre-stimulated with hypoxia, which intrigued the
translocation of legumain from cytoplasm to membrane. FACS assay showed
that active cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD3+/CD8+/CD25+) in ACL group
increased 4.5 folds compared to PBS group and 2.3 folds compared to CL
group respectively. Our study suggests that chitosan NPs modified with
alginic acid could be a potential safe and efficient tool for oral
delivery plasmid DNA. Alginic acid-coated chitosan NPs loaded with
legumain DNA vaccine can effectively improve auto-immune response and
protect against breast cancer.

