Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB/Pi3K signaling contributes to EGFR ligand expression in
colorectal cancer cells


Background: Cellular expression of EGFR ligands is tightly regulated and
is thought to be maintained by an autocrine signaling component in
colorectal cancer cells. More importantly, the expression levels of
individual ligands have gained recent interest since their expression of
their mRNA was found to be linked to anti-EGFR therapy response. Since
the expression of these ligands can be regulated by EGFR signaling
elicited by EGF, we decided to investigate the contribution of MAPK as
well as the PI3K axis, to EREG expression, in K-Ras wild-type colon
cancer cells. Methods Colon cancer cells were used to interrogate EGFR
downstream signaling. Several inhibitors targeting the ErbBs and the MAPK
and PI3K/Akt pathways were used to dissect the pathways downstream of
EGFR maintaining ligand mRNA levels in the lim1215 colon cancer cell
line. Additionally, we used ER and AR reporter assays to selectively
evaluate involvement of the EGFR pathway in transcriptional regulation of
the pathway. Consequently, blockade and activation of EGFR pathway
members was assessed by Western Blot. Results We show that Ereg and Areg
mRNA levels are specifically maintained by erbb1 signaling. Treatment of
lim1215 cells with inhibitors blocking Erbb1 (cetuximab) or ErbB1/Erbb2
(lapatinib) did results in near complete inhibition of Ereg and Areg
expression in Kras/pi3K wild-type cells, while blockade of ErbB2 alone
(which is activated in these cells) with Trastuzumab did not decrease
Ereg nor Areg mRNA levels. Downstream of EGFR, we show that MEK signaling
is not required for maintenance of EREG and AREG levels in lim1215 cells.
Conversely, blockade of PI3K signaling by Akt inhibitors or PI3K
inhibitors abolished EREG mRNA levels in these cells. This was reflected
by the ability of overexpressed Akt to induce EREG and AREG reporter
activity in 293T cells. In contrast, this activation could be rescued by
the addition of Akt and PI3K inhibitors, but not MEK inhibitors in
cellular media. Conclusions In this work we show that PI3K signaling is
required for the transcription of EGFR ligands in colon cancer cells. In
this regard, this provides additional insights to the recent findings
that link PI3K/Akt signaling to Receptor Tyrosine Kinase expression and
activation in cancer cells. Therefore, a global understanding of the
signaling networks that control ligand availability and receptor
abundance will be crucial in combining ErbB pathway inhibitors in the
treatment of kras wild-type colon cancers.

