Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel sequencing of clinical FFPE cancer specimens
enables comprehensive genomic assessment of patient eligibility for
targeted therapy


Molecular diagnostics are growing in importance to clinical oncology as
an increasing number of therapies targeting specific molecular
alterations become available. This trend has led to a proliferation of
focused biomarker tests delivered using a variety of technologies, which
are generally restricted in their breadth of mutational status assessment
and constrained by scarce tissue material. We deployed massively parallel
sequencing (or NGS) technology to develop a pan-cancer, comprehensive
genomic profiling assay interrogating 189 relevant cancer genes, using
minimal DNA from fixed surgical or biopsy specimens. With this assay we
identify all classes of DNA alterations (base substitutions, insertions
and deletions, copy number alterations and rearrangements at specific
loci) in a single test with high sensitivity and specificity. To assess
the potential for comprehensive genomic profiling to inform clinical
decisions, we sequenced 58 archival FFPE tumor specimens, including 16
breast, 16 colon, 14 lung, and 12 renal cell cancers to an average of
depth of 850x and considered the resultant mutation profiles in the
context of current treatment guidelines and clinical trial information.
In total, 121 mutations and 30 copy number alterations were identified,
of which less than one third could be identified by traditional hotspot
analysis. The observed mutation frequencies were consistent with
published studies for these tissue types: 56% of breast cancers carried
TP53 mutations, 38% had PIK3CA mutations, and 13% harbored HER2
amplifications. In colon cancers, 75% and 63% carried APC and TP53
mutations, while 38%, 31%, and 25% harbored KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA
mutations respectively. Finally, 57% and 42% of NSCLCs carried mutations
in TP53 and KRAS, while 17% of RCCs had mutations in VHL. Nearly 70% of
the 58 cases carried one or more mutations that could plausibly confer
sensitivity or resistance to approved or experimental targeted therapies.
Of these potentially clinically actionable mutations, 57% occurred at
known sites of oncogene activation, 27% involved gene amplification or
deletion, 14% resulted in tumor suppressor loss, and one resulted in the
EML4-ALK fusion gene. Our results demonstrate technical feasibility of
comprehensive cancer gene characterization through massively parallel
sequencing in clinical FFPE specimens. The prevalence and diversity of
potentially actionable mutations we observed highlights the benefits of
adopting this approach. As massively-parallel sequencing is the only
practical means to detect all classes of somatic mutation in a small,
clinically relevant sample, we suggest that this type of testing will be
an essential ingredient in bringing targeted therapies to cancer patient
care.

