Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a nanovaccine for cancer therapy


Purpose: Despite significant advancements in dendritic cell (DC)-based
cancer immunotherapy, the approach remains challenging, especially with
regard to developing a simple yet robust method for activating the immune
system against cancer in the context of using tumor antigen-activated
DCs. To improve the feasibility of this immunotherapy approach, we sought
to develop a robust vaccine that utilizes nanotechnology to activate
endogenous DCs in the host. Method: Using a superparamagnetic iron oxide
(SPIO) nanoparticle as the carrier for this therapy, two immune system
activating molecules were conjugated to the nanoparticle. The
dextran-coated SPIO nanoparticles were reacted with an epoxyamine linker
to produce amine groups on the surface of the nanoparticle. Next, a
potent Natural Killer T (NKT) cell activating glycolipid, was conjugated
to the SPIO nanoparticle via a disulfide-containing crosslinker. For in
vivo studies, an MUC-1 derived antigenic peptide was conjugated as well
to the same nanoparticles. Here, adult MUC-1 transgenic C57BL/6 mice were
implanted with MUC-1 transfected C57G tumors. The protein and adjuvant
conjugated nanoparticle was delivered to mice via subcutaneous injection.
Tumor growth in the treated and untreated groups of mice was measured by
ultrasound over a 5-week period. Results: Using a mouse model, the
effectiveness of a nanovaccine was determined. The nanoparticle
conjugated with the NKT cell agonist induced robust IFN- and IL-4
response in wild-type mice while no response was elicited in NKT cell- or
DC-deficient mice probed with the same nanovaccine. In a different mouse
model group, treatment of tumor-bearing MUC-1 animals with the
nanovaccine resulted in markedly diminished tumor growth compared to the
untreated group. Conclusion: The results indicate that the nanoparticle
delivery vehicle can induce a robust immune response in mice. Beyond this
vehicular capability, the SPIO nanoparticles can be used as contrast
agents for magnetic resonance imaging. As a result, this multimodal and
multivalent nanovaccine, achieved through nanotechnology, has the
potential to provide microanatomical and functional imaging feedback of
the DC-targeted anti-cancer immunotherapy, thus leading to longitudinal
treatment and monitoring.

