Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel liposomal compositions of PharmaGap's lead peptide: Effect
on ovarian cancer cell proliferation and signaling pathways


Background: Liposomes, vesicular structures in the nano - micrometer
range, have been widely studied as drug delivery vehicles. Liposomes can
self-assemble in aqueous solutions and are normally comprised of lipids
organized in concentric bilayers that enclose an internal aqueous volume,
unique in their ability to accommodate a wide variety of therapeutic or
diagnostic compounds. Novel liposomal compositions of peptide GAP-107B8,
have recently been developed and their inhibitory effect on cell
proliferation in cancer cell lines has been studied. Protein kinase B,
Akt, has been implicated in certain cancer functions, including cell
motility and invasion, hormone independence, chemotherapy and radiation
resistance. Abnormalities in Akt are associated with certain breast,
pancreatic, colorectal, gastric and ovarian cancers. The present work
shows that an important mechanism of action for GAP-107B8 peptide
formulations is through modification of protein kinase pathways.
Objectives: 1) To optimize GAP-107B8 liposomal formulations, 2) To
evaluate the efficacy of GAP-107B8 liposomal formulations towards
inhibiting proliferation in ovarian cancer cell lines and 3) To gather
information on the inhibitory mechanism of action in ovarian cancer
cells. Methods: Optimization of the lipid components in the liposomes
including lipid identity and ratio in relation to extent of
peptide-liposome association was determined by IEC, liposome size and
charge. Cell proliferation was measured in A2780cp and OCC-1 ovarian
cancer cell lines with liposomal peptide formulations (24 and 72 hrs).
Immunoblotting experiments were executed on cancer cell line lysates
treated with peptide to explore inhibitory effects on signaling targets.
Results: Peptide association ranged from 80-100% for liposomal
formulations prepared with two lipid components in varying ratios
(formulation 2A and 2B) as opposed to a single lipid component
(formulation 1 - 30%). Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with liposomal
formulations 2A, 2B and 3 showed significant inhibition on cell
proliferation when compared to control groups. Densitometry results
showed a 50% reduction in pAkt levels (relative to Akt levels) when
ovarian cells were treated with peptide for 1 hour (similar inhibitory
effect found after peptide treatment for 4, 8, 14 and 30 hours).
Conclusions: A lipid based delivery system for GAP-107B8 peptide was
developed in which lipid ratio played an important role for an enhanced
peptide-associated liposomal formulation. Proliferation results indicate
that administration of peptides in liposome formulations generally
results in improved potency in a time dependent manner. All formulations
exhibited greater potency after 72 hrs in comparison to earlier time
points. GAP-107B8 was found to be a peptide-based inhibitor of protein
kinase B (Akt) with a strong potential for anti-cancer properties.

