Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel sentinel lymphnodes identification method using magnetic
nanoparticle by MRI


[Introduction] Detection of sentinel lymph nodes (SN) has been used to
predict regional lymph node (LN) metastasis in patients with various
types of carcinoma. The technique used to detect SN has focused on using
a vital blue dye, a radioactive tracer, or a combination of both. However
there are several problems in the current method for SN identification,
such as anaphylaxis shock, difficulties of detection, danger of radiation
exposure, the limitation of use of radioisotopes, and short shelf life.
The aim of this study was to develop new SN identification method using
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) by MRI. [Methods] 5-week-old, Male Donryu
rats were used for establishment of rat SN model and for optimization of
MNPs size and amount. 4-week-old, male nude rats (F344/NJcl-rnu/rnu) were
used for establishment of metastatic model. Three kinds of MNPs (4 nm
(M4), 8 nm (M8), 20 nm (M20)) were synthesized. SN detectability was
evaluated by T1-weighted gradient echo MR images after injection of
synthesized MNPs or Resovist in vivo. Signal change of LN induced by MNPs
were evaluated T1-weighted MRI slice by two independent researchers. In
addition, area (mm2) of susceptibility effect in LN was calculated using
ROI tools of MRVision software. All MRI was examined for the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves by three individuals whether area
of susceptibility was recognizable. ROC displaying sensitivity along with
the false-positive rate (1specificity) for detecting MNPs by MRI, and the
area under the curve with 95% confidence intervals was calculated. The
amount of iron in the brachial lymph node (Br) and the axillary lymph
node (Ax) was evaluated by inductively coupled plasma optical emission
spectrometry (ICP-OES), and evaluated pathologically. MRI was performed
weather Br and Ax were distinguishable. To evaluate toxicity of MNPs,
exploratory single toxicity study was performed. Over all condition and
weight status were observed. [Results] We established an original rat SN
model and it revealed that Br is SN and Ax is a higher echelon nodes
further downstream from SN. We also established metastatic rat model. M20
was sustained in Br selectively than M4, M8 and Resovist and appropriate
amount was 0.1mg. SN was distinguishable and detectable by MRI using M20
in normal and metastatic rat model. ROC curve analysis revealed that
threshold of magnetite amount for MRI detection is 2.3g/LN with 76.5%
sensitivity and 25% specificity, and the area under receiver operating
characteristic curve is 0.82 (95% CI, 0.64-1.0). Results of exploratory
single toxicity study indicated that the fatal dose was equal to Resovist
and it was tolerable less than medium-low dose (1250 mol/kg) injection.
[Conclusion] We developed the novel SN identification method by MRI with
our original 20nm MNPs.

