Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 status as a marker of recurrence and survival in choroid
plexus carcinomas


Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) is a rare intraventricular tumor more
frequently observed in children, accounting for 20% of brain tumors in
children under 2 yrs of age. This malignant neoplasm is categorized as a
grade III tumor by the WHO, while benign choroid plexus papilloma (CPP)
and atypical choroid plexus papilloma (aCPP) are categorized as grade I
and II, respectively. More than 50% of CPC's carry a mutation in TP53.
The role of p53 in the malignant progression of this tumor is not well
understood, yet this knowledge is crucial to optimize patient treatment,
increase survival and reduce long-term sequelae. The current treatment
approach for CPC includes surgical resection and combination chemo- and
radiation therapy. However, treatment response is highly variable; tumor
progression and relapse is observed in 60% of patients, and most
survivors experience significant long-term deficits. In this study, we
sought to determine whether TP53 status could be used as a reliable
marker to predict tumor aggressiveness and response to treatment in CPC
patients. Thirty CPC, 26 CPP and 8 aCPP tumor samples for which TP53
status was available were selected from the SickKids Cancer Genetics
tissue bank. Sequencing analysis revealed somatic TP53 in 60% of CPCs.
These mutations were significantly less frequent in CPPs (12%,
p=1.84x104). All aCPPs were wildtype (wt) for TP53. Relapse-free survival
was only 12% in TP53 mut CPC patients compared to 40% for TP53 wt
patients. Only 1 CPP patient relapsed 9 months after initial diagnosis.
Five-year overall survival for TP53 mut CPC patients was significantly
lower than that of TP53 wt patients (39% vs. 80%, respectively, p=0.04).
Overall survival for 18 CPP patients for which we had 5-year survival
data was 94%, and 100% for aCPP patients. Allele-specific copy number
(ASCN) and FISH analysis, revealed extensive chromosomal imbalances in
CPC tumors with TP53 mutations. TP53 wt CPCs had fewer chromosomal
imbalances or none at all, very similar to CPPs. Gene expression data was
used to examine the unsupervised clustering of our tumors. As expected,
CPCs and CPPs cluster independently according to raw gene expression
intensity, with TP53 wt CPCs segregating from the CPC mutant samples and
clustering more closely to CPPs. Using an integrative analysis, we were
able to identify unique behaviors and molecular characteristics that
distinguish TP53 wt from TP53 mut CPCs. The clinical outcomes observed,
supported by the genomic and transcriptomic data analyzed, suggest that
TP53 mut and wt CPCs indeed form two distinct subgroups. This molecular
genotyping approach may be valuable in stratifying patients to modulated
therapy protocols in order to diminish treatment-related toxicity, and
improve disease response and survival.

