Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression in Osteosarcoma: potential role of miR-1 and
miR-133b


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumor in
children and young adults. Conventional therapy for OS has reached a
plateau of 60-70%, a 5-year survival rate that has remained almost
unchanged in two decades, highlighting the need for new therapeutic
approaches by finding new targets. This study presents a comparative
analysis of miRNA expression profile in clinical OS samples and paired
normal tissues with microarray approach. The Unsupervised Hierarchical
Clustering, performed on log2(Hy3/Hy5) ratios, revealed 100 miRNAs with
the highest standard deviation across all samples. The Supervised
Hierarchical Clustering showed that 40 miRNAs were differentially
expressed with a p-value Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary
malignant bone tumor in children and young adults. Conventional therapy
for OS has reached a plateau of 60-70%, a 5-year survival rate that has
remained almost unchanged in two decades, highlighting the need for new
therapeutic approaches by finding new targets. This study presents a
comparative analysis of miRNA expression profile in clinical OS samples
and paired normal tissues with microarray approach. The Unsupervised
Hierarchical Clustering, performed on log2(Hy3/Hy5) ratios, revealed 100
miRNAs with the highest standard deviation across all samples. The
Supervised Hierarchical Clustering showed that 40 miRNAs were
differentially expressed with a p-value <3,95E-5, and 80% of these were
underexpressed in OS samples when compared with normal tissues. In
particular, the 5-fold underexpression of miR-1 and miR-133b
(pOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumor in
children and young adults. Conventional therapy for OS has reached a
plateau of 60-70%, a 5-year survival rate that has remained almost
unchanged in two decades, highlighting the need for new therapeutic
approaches by finding new targets. This study presents a comparative
analysis of miRNA expression profile in clinical OS samples and paired
normal tissues with microarray approach. The Unsupervised Hierarchical
Clustering, performed on log2(Hy3/Hy5) ratios, revealed 100 miRNAs with
the highest standard deviation across all samples. The Supervised
Hierarchical Clustering showed that 40 miRNAs were differentially
expressed with a p-value <3,95E-5, and 80% of these were underexpressed
in OS samples when compared with normal tissues. In particular, the
5-fold underexpression of miR-1 and miR-133b (p<3.95E-5) was confirmed by
Real Time PCR. When U2OS OS cells were transfected with miRNA precursor
molecules, we demonstrated that the ectopic expression of miR-1 and
miR-133b respectively decreased to 75% and 68% the cell proliferation as
compared with negative control, concomitantly with strong slowing down of
cell migration and invasion and reduced expression of Met protein that it
is considered a potential target of both miRNAs. It is well known that
miR-1 and miR-133b are expressed in skeletal muscle and are
transcriptionally regulated by myogenic differentiation factors. Our data
demonstrate a deregulation of miRNA profiling in OS clinical specimens
and highlight the function of miR-1 and miR-133 in the control of OS cell
growth and invasiveness. Further studies should be addressed to
investigate the role of these miRNAs and their targets as potential
prognostic and therapeutic markers.

