Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary and metastatic uveal melanoma cell lines express MelanA
that can be used as a target antigen for transfection of mature dendritic
cells


The most common intra-ocular malignancy is uveal melanoma (UM).
Metastatic disease occurs in approximately 50% of UM patients and
presents most frequently in the liver. Novel therapies that prevent the
development of metastases are needed and immunotherapy is a potential
option. Because of its origin in the immune-privileged eye, UM may be
particularly responsive to T cell-based immunotherapy. MelanA is
frequently over-expressed by human cutaneous melanomas. MelanA expression
has also been detected in UM primary and metastatic tumor-tissue sections
and could serve as a target antigen for immunotherapy of UM. Here we
report that primary and metastatic UM cell lines express MelanA and that
this protein can be used as a target antigen for transfection of mature
dendritic cells (mDC). MelanA expression was confirmed in primary and
metastatic UM cell lines using intracellular flow cytometry and
quantitative PCR (qPCR). In addition, sequencing of UM-derived MelanA
demonstrated that MelanA in primary and metastatic UM cells has an
identical sequence as compared to the published MelanA consensus
sequence. As an initial step towards activating UM-specific T cells by
UM-derived mRNA transfected DC we are generating MelanA mRNA transfected
mDC. To facilitate both MHC class I and class II presentation of MelanA
epitopes after mRNA electroporation into mDC, we included the endosomal
targeting sequence DCLamp linked to the MelanA protein. Monocytes were
isolated from leukapheresis products of healthy donors by density
centrifugation and plastic adherence. Monocytes were differentiated to
monocyte-derived DC by culturing with IL-4 and GM-CSF for 6 days to
obtain immature DC (iDC). iDCs were matured with a cytokine mixture
containing IL-4, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-6, TNF, and PGE2 for 48 hours. The
resulting mDC expressed cell surface maturation markers CD25, CD83, and
CD86 as confirmed by flow cytometry. mDC were transfected with either
MelanA-mRNA of MelanA-DCLamp-mRNA, using an established electroporation
protocol. To assess transfection efficiency and monitor MelanA expression
in transfected mDC, MelanA-mRNA and MelanA-DCLamp-mRNA expression was
demonstrated by qPCR and MelanA-protein expression was shown by
intracellular flow cytometry at different time points post-transfection
using variable mRNA concentrations. The detected amount of MelanA-mRNA
and protein was dependent on the amount of transfected mRNA and presented
transiently. Subsequently, total RNA was isolated from MelanA+ primary
and metastatic UM cell lines, then reversely transcribed into cDNA,
amplified by PCR and in vitro transcribed to mRNA. As confirmed by qPCR,
MelanA-mRNA was present in the pool of UM-derived mRNA and can be used
for transfection of mDC. Collectively, these data demonstrate that mDC
can be transfected with MelanA-mRNA and suggest MelanA could serve as a
target for immunotherapy of UM.

