Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing reveals both DNA sequence and copy number changes
in AML: Potential driver changes and mechanisms of drug resistance
revealed from serial samples from the same patients


Despite significant advances in characterizing the molecular genetics of
AML, the clonal evolution of leukemic cells and the dynamic impact of
genomic changes on the development of the disease and progression to drug
resistance are not well understood. Here, we applied next-generation
sequencing to quantify aberrant tumor subclones carrying specific mutant
alleles of key cancer genes and developed a method to extract
quantitative high-resolution copy number changes across the genome using
exome sequencing data from matching cancer and normal DNA. Serial bone
marrow (BM) samples collected from diagnosis to relapse to post-treatment
drug resistance in a patient-centric manner made it possible to trace the
clonal evolution of AML and to identify variants potentially involved in
drug resistance. Exome sequencing from AML blast cells and normal skin
biopsies was performed as part of the Finnish Hematology Registry and
Biobanking (FHRB) effort. Consecutive paired samples from different
patients revealed unique genetic patterns of clonal evolution and cancer
progression in each patient. In a pre-resistant sample of one AML M5
patient, we identified four closely spaced insertions in the Wilm's Tumor
(WT1) suppressor gene, none of which appear on the same sequence reads.
This suggests the presence of multiple distinct leukemic subclones even
before treatment resistance and underscores the strong selective
advantage conferred by WT1 mutations. After relapse, one of the subclones
was lost, and another one significantly increased suggesting that the
relapse arose from the expansion of a pre-existing resistant subclone. In
this patient, recurrent clones otherwise featured similar copy number
changes and the same fusion genes as the primary diagnostic sample. In
another AML patient developing recurrence an opposite pattern was
observed: The relapsed, drug-resistant cells displayed an enormous
increase of small microdeletions compared to the diagnostic,
pre-treatment sample, while almost all sequence-level alterations in
potential cancer genes were the same between the two samples. This
suggests that a distinct type of DNA repair deficiency may have
contributed to the drug resistant clone in this patient. Conclusions:
Exome sequencing from paired samples of AML cells before and after
relapse makes it possible to trace the clonal evolution of the disease
and study the impact of therapy both at the level of sequence alterations
of key cancer genes and simultaneously at the level of copy number
changes inferred from exome sequence data. This analysis has highlighted
multiple genomic patterns by which resistance may evolve in vivo during
cancer treatment. Refined bioinformatic analysis and interpretation of
exome-seq data provides a rich resource to identify genetic biomarkers of
drug response and minimal residual disease.

