Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screen for kinase inhibitors that sensitize pancreatic cancer
cells to gemcitabine: When collateral damage is a good thing


Kinase inhibitors are a growing class of therapeutically active agents
that are being used in the clinic. An interesting notion is that
inhibitors which show clinical efficacy likely do so by inhibiting not
only their intended target but also off-target kinases. Thus, pleiotropic
off-target effects of kinase inhibitors may be advantageous in preventing
tumor progression. Using a panel of 160 kinase inhibitors that had been
previously tested against a panel of 300 recombinant human kinases, we
sought to identify kinases that sensitize PANC1 cells to a sub-lethal
dose of gemcitabine. PANC1 cells were treated with gemcitabine (20nM) for
24h and then treated with increasing concentrations of kinase inhibitor
before cell viability was measured 24h later. From amongst the 160
compounds, we identified 8 compounds that enhanced killing of
gemcitabine-treated cells. Validation of gemcitabine sensitizers was
confirmed by clonogenic assays. To assess mechanisms for sensitization,
we determined the fates of cells using live cell video microscopy. We
found that 4/8 compounds abrogated the DNA damage checkpoint induced by
gemcitabine, and forced the cells to prematurely enter mitosis and die.
Indeed, of the kinases inhibited by these compounds, Chk1 was
over-represented above all others. We next queried the STRING database to
elucidate pertinent protein-protein interactions of those kinases
inhibited by the 8 hit compounds. We identified a signaling node
centering on Src and related kinases that were selectively inhibited by
Aminopurvalanol A (AMP-A) and Syk inhibitor. The importance of Src and
its related kinases was confirmed when MEFs lacking Src, Yes and Fyn were
found to be highly sensitive to gemcitabine compared to WT. From our in
vitro data, the Syk inhibitor inhibited Src family kinases as expected,
but also inhibited Chk1 (by >80%). In cells, the Syk inhibitor behaved
more like a Chk1 inhibitor as it caused gemcitabine treated cells to
aberrantly enter mitosis and then die. Thus, it is likely that the
off-target inhibition of Chk1 is responsible for the gemcitabine
sensitization. AMP-A inhibited not only cyclin dependent kinases but also
the Src family kinases. By movie analysis we observed that AMP-A caused
gemcitabine-treated cells to die in interphase. Which one of these family
of kinases is responsible for sensitization is currently being
investigated. But the results show AMP-A and the Syk inhibitor sensitize
cells to killing through distinct mechanisms. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that unintended targets of kinase inhibitors may in
fact play a greater role in achieving the desired biological effects of
the drug. Identifying the collateral targets in vivo may reveal
mechanisms of action of the kinase inhibitors that affects selection of
biomarkers for drug response.

