Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring of melanoma therapy with quantitative tissue cytometry
of a panel of apoptosis markers


Background: Monitoring of the apoptosis is a critical part of determining
whether certain therapeutic agents are effective. However, given the
complexity of the up- and down-regulation of AKT and ERK pathways, it can
be difficult to determine the state of each cell in a solid tumor section
using single-marker staining methods. Tissue cytometry (or in situ
cytometry) is a means of obtaining quantitative, per-cell, multi-marker
antigen expression data from a tissue section. While determining the
per-cell, multi-marker phenotype of samples containing whole cells has
become a common, if not ubiquitous, part of flow cytometry and
high-content screening, the same multi-marker analysis on samples such as
solid tumors, bone or other solid tissues, which are not easily broken
down into individual cells, are not easily performed. Immunohistochemical
(IHC) and immunofluorescence (IF) methods have been developed for
labeling such samples; however, in order to obtain quantitative
multi-marker results from IHC and IF samples there are several challenges
that must be overcome to give analogous tissue cytometry results.
Methods: To address this, a tissue cytometry platform was developed that
integrates: a) multiplexed immunofluorescence staining protocols; b) a
multispectral imaging system (Vectra or Nuance) that to isolate IHC or IF
marker signals from one another and, for IF, from tissue
autofluorescence; and c) a new pattern-recognition-based image analysis
package (inForm) for automatically performing morphologic segmentation
and extracting data from cells-of-interest; and d) easy-to-use, optimized
staining kits for panels of markers. For this study, a staining panel was
developed targeting phosphoepitopes of AKT, ERK, and S6, using antibodies
of three different isotypes, with secondaries conjugated to Alexa
fluorophores (A488, A555, and A647). DAPI was used as a counterstain.
Proof of principle of the suitability of the marker panel and imaging and
analysis methods was done in cell lines, monitoring the down regulation
of pS6 by a PI3 Kinase Inhibitor and the down regulation of pERK by a Raf
inhibitor. Clinical samples pre- and post-case for treatment of a
melanoma with a PIK3CA inhibitor were analyzed and both nuclear and
cytoplasmic signal levels for all three markers obtained. Results:
Results from cell lines matched expected down regulation. In the clinical
samples, downregulation of pERK in melanoma was observed following
treatment with the PLK3CA Kinase inhibitor. Conclusions: Tissue
segmentation accuracy was estimated at greater than 90%, based on visual
review by pathologists. Performance of the platform for automated
multiplexed tissue cytometry analyses supports its application to routine
clinical studies and works for both IHC and IF staining methodologies. In
this particular example, the monitoring of apoptosis in these clinical
samples was effective and easy to perform.

