Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDCP1 links RAS and Src signaling pathways as a common effector
for the promotion of tumor metastasis


The oncogenic RAS is one of the most intensively studied proteins which
are well recognized as a master regulator of cancer initiation and
progression, however rather limited information is available as for their
contribution to the cell properties associated with tumor metastasis such
as anoikis resistance, cell migration and invasion. We have revealed that
CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) protein, a substrate of Src
family kinase (SFK), in solid cancers is involved in the regulation of
anoikis resistance, cell migration and invasion. CDCP1 contributes
significantly to the metastatic potential of various cancers including
lung, stomach, and pancreatic cancers in a tyrosine phosphorylation
dependent manner. It was recently observed that human lung cancer cell
lines with K-RAS mutations show significantly higher expression of CDCP1
than those without, while the other common mutations such as EGFR, LKB1
and p53 did not show such relationship. The introduction of the
activating mutation of K-RAS clearly induced the expression of CDCP1 and
that this enhancement is also affected by the expression levels of Myc
protein. Treatment of PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK downstream of Ras, as
well as expression of dominant-negative Ras, reduced the expression of
CDCP1, and at the same time suppressed cell survival in suspension
culture, cell migration and invasion. However, these properties were
rescued only when both CDCP1 and Fyn, a member of SFKs were expressed. On
the contrary, metastatic potentials caused by expression of activated
K-Ras in lung cancer cells was blocked by knockdown of in CDCP1
expression induced by Ras. Using three dimensional organotypic culture
assay of human cervical keratinocytes (HCKs) which mimics in vivo tissue
invasion of cervical cancers, marked expression of CDCP1 was detected at
the site of cell invasion into the collagen raft. The treatment of CDCP1
siRNA or SFKs inhibitor PP2 repressed cell invasion into the collagen
raft induced by Ras and Myc. As a summary, it was revealed that
expression of CDCP1 is induced by oncogenic Ras, and upregulated CDCP1
triggers cancer invasion and metastasis when phosphorylated by SFKs.
Metastatic potential induced by Ras is dependent on the CDCP1 induction,
while CDCP1 is not responsive for proliferative change also induced by
Ras. These findings demonstrated the central role of CDCP1 as the
functional link between RAS and SFKs signaling during the progression of
human malignant tumors.

