Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The heterogeneous genomic landscape of posterior fossa ependymoma


Brain tumors are the most common cause of cancer-related death in
childhood. Ependymomas, are the third most common pediatric brain tumor.
The disease remains incurable for about 45% of patients even after gross
total resection and radiotherapy. Despite showing a very homogeneous
histological picture, ependymomas display distinct molecular behavior,
which supports the existence of several independent entities of the
disease. We examined two non-overlapping cohorts of 102 and 75
ependymomas by mRNA expression profiling, on two different array
platforms (Affymetrix, Agilent). When performing multiple statistical
clustering methods (unsupervised consensus NMF and consensus HCL), we
could consistently identify three major clusters, including two subgroups
of posterior fossa (PF) ependymoma, a variant common in children and
associated with heterogeneous clinical outcome. Subgroup-specific
chromosome aberrations of PF tumors were detected by aCGH, and biological
signaling pathways distinguishing PF subgroups were identified by gene
set enrichment analysis and visualized in Cytoscape. We validated the
most significantly classifying markers of each subgroup by
immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray containing an independent set
of 265 PF ependymomas. Our findings delineate two subgroups of PF
ependymoma (groups A and B) which are demographically, transcriptionally,
genetically, and clinically distinct. Group A patients are younger, have
laterally located tumors with a balanced genome, more frequently develop
secondary metastases and are much more likely to have an extremely poor
outcome as compared with group B patients. Based on a multi-variate Cox
proportional-hazards model, our identified markers have the strongest
independent prognostic value among demographic and molecular variables
with Hazard ratios of 8.45 (PFS) and 10.55 (OS). Prognostic significance
and predictive impact is being validated in the GPOH HIT2000 Ependymoma
study. The identification of two distinct subgroups of PF ependymoma, and
markers applicable for their clinical distinction, will allow for better
prognostication of individual cases, independent of age, level of
resection and WHO grade, and also for stratification in future ependymoma
clinical trials.

