Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number and lung cancer risk among Chinese
female non-smokers


Objectives It has been speculated that mitochondrial DNA copy number is
involved in carcinogenesis of several cancers. The purpose of this pilot
study was to explore the role of mitochondrial DNA copy number in the
development of lung cancer among Chinese female non-smoker. Methods A
subset of lung cancer cases (N=95) and healthy controls (N=96) were
randomly selected from an original lung cancer case-control study
conducted in Taiyuan City, China. mtDNA content was determined with
Quantitative Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR). Cases and
controls were blindly assayed consecutively. Each sample was done in
triplicate. Unconditional logistic regression model was used to calculate
the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals after adjusting for
age, education level and annual personal income. Spearman correlation
coefficient was applied to determine correlation between mtDNA copy
number and age or indoor air pollution index. Results Lung cancer cases
had a significantly lower median mtDNA copy number of 4.5 as opposed to
7.2 in the controls (pObjectives It has been speculated that
mitochondrial DNA copy number is involved in carcinogenesis of several
cancers. The purpose of this pilot study was to explore the role of
mitochondrial DNA copy number in the development of lung cancer among
Chinese female non-smoker. Methods A subset of lung cancer cases (N=95)
and healthy controls (N=96) were randomly selected from an original lung
cancer case-control study conducted in Taiyuan City, China. mtDNA content
was determined with Quantitative Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction
(qRT-PCR). Cases and controls were blindly assayed consecutively. Each
sample was done in triplicate. Unconditional logistic regression model
was used to calculate the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
after adjusting for age, education level and annual personal income.
Spearman correlation coefficient was applied to determine correlation
between mtDNA copy number and age or indoor air pollution index. Results
Lung cancer cases had a significantly lower median mtDNA copy number of
4.5 as opposed to 7.2 in the controls (p<0.0001). There was an inverse
relationship seen between mtDNA copy number and risk of lung cancer. Risk
of lung cancer decreased in a dose-response manner with mtDNA copy number
(Ptrend=0.0409) in the crude analysis. Those women in the highest
quartile of mtDNA have a seventy percent lower risk of lung cancer as
opposed to those women in the lowest quartile (aOR=0.3, 95%CI: 0.1-0.7).
A significant negative correlation was observed between mtDNA copy number
and indoor air pollution index which was developed based on individual's
exposure to passive smoking, solid fuel use for heating and cooking,
frequency of opening windows and exhaust hood use in the kitchen
(p=0.0026). There was not a significant correlation between mtDNA copy
number and age (p=0.6672), however a significant inverse relationship
seen between mtDNA copy number and risk of lung cancer in those women
over the age of 57.1. Conclusion Although the exploratory study showed
that mtDNA copy number was negatively associated with indoor air
pollution exposure and risk of lung cancer, the small sample size of the
study and random selection of the subset from original study has limited
the power and generalization of pilot study. Further large sample size
studies are needed to verify the findings.

