Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100B affects MAPK signaling in malignant melanoma via a direct
interaction with RSK


Establishing the mechanism by which S100B affects ERK and its downstream
signaling provided insight into how S100B affects the progression of
malignant melanoma and could aid in developing new pharmacological drugs.
S100B is a 21.5 kDa symmetric homodimer that is highly conserved and
expressed in a number of tissues and cell lines, including melanocytes.
Generally, low levels of S100B have trophic effects, while higher levels
can have dire consequences, as is the case in human malignant melanoma.
S100B is an effective and widely used prognostic marker for malignant
melanoma, with its increased level in serum being predictive of disease
stage, increased recurrence, and low overall survival. More recently,
S100B has been investigated as a potential contributor to cancer
progression, which may be related to how it impacts cell signaling,
including the MAPK pathway (BRAF-MEK-ERK). To further evaluate its
significance, S100B knock-down clones were created from the WM115
melanoma cell line, and a positive correlation was found between S100B
expression and cell viability, as measured by MTT assays. It was also
discovered that cells with suppressed S100B expression showed
significantly lower levels of ERK phosphorylation. Likewise,
over-expression of S100B in the human melanoma cell line, 501-MEL, showed
the reciprocal effect, with the introduction of high levels of S100B
leading to increased cell viability and ERK phosphorylation. However, the
phosphorylation status of ERK does not translate to all of its downstream
targets. For example, increased RSK phosphorylation was observed in the
S100B knock-down clones, and correspondingly, RSK phosphorylation was
decreased with over-expression of S100B. Additionally, over-expression of
a mutant S100B construct (E31A + E72A) that was incapable of binding
calcium yielded neither effect, indicating that the effect of S100B on
RSK phosphorylation was calcium-dependent. To determine if S100B
interacted directly with RSK, pull-down assays were performed next.
Consistent with the calcium-mutant data, RSK was detected in S100B
pull-downs in the presence of calcium, but not in the presence of the
calcium chelator EDTA. Changes in RSK localization was also observed,
where RSK was enriched in the nucleus of WM115 cells when S100B was
knocked down and diffuse in control cells. Together these data are
consistent with a mechanism in which elevated S100B binds directly to
RSK, preventing its phosphorylation by ERK and its subsequent
translocation to the nucleus. Thus, the calcium-binding protein S100B
affects MAPK signaling by increasing levels of phosphorylated ERK while
simultaneously decreasing phosphorylated RSK. Together, these two effects
of S100B on MAPK signaling could impact cancer progression.

