Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated NRAS mediates self-renewal capacity in AML


NRAS mutations are found in 11-14% of AML (Schubbert et al. Nat Rev
Cancer 2007, Bowen et al. Blood 2006), implicating NRAS signaling
pathways as potential targets for clinical intervention. However, the
specific effects of targeting these pathways on AML physiology are
currently unclear. We employ a manipulatable murine model of AML to
elucidate these phenomena for therapeutic applications. This model
harbors a tetracycline repressible, activated NRAS (NRASG12V) transgene
along with an Mll/AF9 transgene. Primary leukemia cells are then
transplanted into SCID mice and, upon development of clinically evident
leukemia, NRASG12V transgene expression is repressed with doxycycline.
NRASG12V repression leads to apoptosis and disease remission (Kim et al.
Blood 2009). To dissect the critical signaling networks directing
remission, immunophenotypic markers, along with the phosphorylation
status of critical signaling intermediates, were analyzed by flow
cytometry after NRASG12V repression. This analysis revealed that NRAS
withdrawal led to an enrichment of less differentiated Mac1/Gr1 negative
cells indicating that, in addition to well-described effects on
proliferation, NRAS affects leukemia differentiation status. Furthermore,
we only found modifications in known NRAS signaling effectors in the less
differentiated, Mac1 negative leukemia cells. Therefore, in addition to
affecting the differentiation status of the leukemia, oncogene withdrawal
leads to cell-type specific signaling alterations. We hypothesize that
these signaling alterations mediate remission-induction by altering the
self-renewal capacity of the leukemia at the gene expression level.
Parallel RNA sequencing and gene expression microarrays were performed to
address this hypothesis and revealed that the gene expression pattern of
NRASG12V-expressing cells is enriched with hematopoietic self-renewal
genes (Krivtsov et al. Nature 2006, Ivanova et al. Science 2002, Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis per Subramanian et al. PNAS 2005). Withdrawal of the
oncogene led to loss of this self-renewal gene expression program and an
enrichment of genes expressed in terminally differentiated, mature cells.
Furthermore, the NRASG12V-dependent gene expression program mimics the
Mll/AF9-determined, Myb-mediated self-renewal program seen in a similar
AML model (Zuber et al. Genes & Dev 2011). These data suggest that the
Mll/AF9-mediated self-renewal program requires the continued expression
of NRASG12Vand support a novel role for NRASG12V in maintaining the
self-renewal capacity AML.

