Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Setting the clock: Tumor TK1 is a prognostic marker for disease
recurrence


Cancer is a devastating disease which affects millions of people every
year. There is a need for reliable markers which indicate more aggressive
tumors. Thymidine kinase 1 (TK1) has been shown to have prognostic
potential in the serum of cancer patients, correlating with disease stage
and recurrence. Serum TK1 has been studied extensively, but relatively
few studies have investigated the prognostic potential of TK1 in tumor
tissue. We created a breast array of samples from 300 breast cancer
patients with various disease stages and treatment methods. We compared
several potential prognostic markers to clinically relevant markers,
including TK1, fatty acid synthase (FAS), annexin I, and Ki67. These
markers were also compared to tumor progesterone and estrogen receptor
status (PR and ER), HER2neu status, type of chemotherapy, and type of
hormone therapy. Whether or not the patients received radiation therapy
was also considered. Tumors were scored for TK1 staining on a scale from
0 to 2. A TK1 score of 0 indicated that 0-5% of tumor cells stained
positive for TK1. A score of 1 or 2 indicated 10%-20% TK1 staining and
20% or more TK1 staining respectively. The relationships between various
markers and therapies were analyzed using logistic regression and chi
square analysis. Interestingly, tumor TK1 staining did not correlate to
tumor stage, and was only moderately correlated to tumor grade. This is
different from the results of serum TK1 (sTK1) studies, which have shown
correlations between sTK1 and disease stage. Tumor TK1 levels did
correlate with Ki67 (p=6.333e-11), but there were no correlations between
TK1 and FAS (p=.7927), annexin I (p=.1169), or diagnosis (p=.4303).
Markers were also analyzed for their predictive value. Distant
metastasis, PR status, and the presence of positive nodes were strong
predictors of disease outcome and time to recurrence. If the disease had
not metastasized at the time of evaluation, patients were 82.85% more
likely to survive. No metastasis also predicted 1.4 years to disease
recurrence. Positive PR status also indicated that patients were 4.6
times more likely to die of their disease. Additionally, for every
positive node present, patients were 9.8% more likely to die of their
disease. The presence of positive nodes also predicted shorter time to
disease recurrence by 0.04 years per node. Higher TK1 scores were also
found to predict shorter times to recurrence. On the other hand, low TK1
scores were found to be predictive of longer time to recurrence. A score
of 2 indicated on average 1.8375 years to disease recurrence. Scores of 0
and 1 indicated 2.8 and 2.4 years on average to recurrence, respectively.
Further studies are needed to elucidate the differences between tumor TK1
and sTK1. Additional studies involving larger patient groups may be
needed to confirm the relationship between these predictors and
recurrence.

