Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hetmap: Evaluating tumor heterogeneity in
immunohistochemistry-stained breast cancer tissue


Immunohistochemisty assays examining the HER2 receptor in breast cancer
is the most widely adopted example of a companion diagnostic approach,
which seeks to dictate therapeutic strategy based on a molecular
description of a patient's disease. There are well-established guidelines
for selecting patients for anti HER2 adjuvant therapies in breast cancer
treatment, yet the current HER2 companion diagnostic approach is
qualitative, does not sufficiently account for intratumor heterogeneity,
and does not utilize any additional information about tumor cells that
score beyond a specific threshold level. A major contributing factor for
the failure of both treatment and diagnostic paradigm is thought to be
intratumor heterogeneity. This lack of information in the scoring
paradigm may contribute to inappropriate patient selection and explain
why the disease in many trastuzumab treated patients progresses or
becomes recurrent. Thus, a quantitative clinical measurement of
heterogeneity in immunohistochemistry staining would be useful in better
predicting patient therapeutic response. To answer this, we created a
heterogeneity scoring approach (HetMap) that allows the visualization of
an individual patient's IHC heterogeneity in the context of a cell
population. We combined HER2 semi-quantitative analysis with the use of
ecology diversity statistics to evaluate cell-level heterogeneity
(consistency of protein expression within neighboring cells in a tumor
nest) and tumor-level heterogeneity (differences of protein expression
across a tumor as represented by a tissue section). We evaluated the
approach on HER2 immunohistochemistry stained breast cancer samples,
using 200 specimens across two different CLIA laboratories, with three
pathologists at each laboratory each outlining regions of tumor for
scoring by automatic cell-based image analysis. HetMap was evaluated
using three different scoring schemes: HER2 scoring according to ASCO/CAP
guidelines, H-Score and a new continuous HER2 score (HER2cont).
Cell-level heterogeneity, reported either as an average or the maximum
area of heterogeneity across a slide, had low levels of dependency on the
pathologist choice of region. Tumor-level heterogeneity measurements had
more dependence on the pathologist choice of regions. Significantly,
discordant pathologist assessments of IHC scores in the +2, or equivocal
score, range occurred most in tumors with high heterogeneity, leading to
potentially major clinical impact. Thus, HetMap is a measure of
heterogeneity, by which pathologists, oncologists, and drug development
organizations can view cell-level and tumor-level heterogeneity for a
patient for a given marker in the context of an entire patient cohort.
Including such measures of heterogeneity in diagnostic approaches can
help establish better thresholds for patient selection, thereby improving
patient response.

