Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T-oligo mechanism of action and delivery with an alpha-helical
peptide


When telomeres are critically short, the telomere overhang is exposed
which induces cell senescence or apoptosis. T-oligo, an oligonucleotide
homologous to the telomere overhang, induces DNA damage responses similar
to those induced after exposure of the telomere overhang, and is an
effective, cancer-specific therapy both in vitro and in vivo. However,
T-oligo's mechanism of action is unclear, and as an oligonucleotide, its
inherent instability severely limits its clinical use. Hence, our studies
focus on its mechanism of action, stabilization and improved delivery. To
understand T-oligo's mechanism of action, we studied the role of the
telomere specific poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, tankyrase-1, in T-oligo
induced DNA damage responses. In normal cells, tankyrase-1 PARsylates
TRF1 which causes disruption of the shelterin complex and exposure of the
T-loop. This exposure activates telomerase resulting in elongation of
telomeres leading to possible cell immortality. This mechanism has made
tankyrase-1 inhibition a potential therapy for telomerase inhibitor
resistant cancers where tankyrase-1 is found to be upregulated. Since
several studies suggest that tankyrase-1 and T-oligo may have important
roles in p53 mediated DNA damage responses to critically shortened
telomeres, we measured total and phospho-p53 in MU melanoma cells after
treatment with tankyrase-1 inhibitors by immunoblot analysis. We found
that cells treated with T-oligo and tankyrase-1 inhibitors, 3AB and
XAV939, exhibited a 4 and 2 fold down regulation of phospho-p53, and 2.5
and 2 fold down regulation of total p53, respectively, compared to
T-oligo alone which increased phospho-p53 and total p53 by 4 and 2 fold,
respectively. Furthermore, XAV939, when given with T-oligo, completely
abrogated T-oligo induced inhibition of cell proliferation, indicating
that tankyrase-1 may play a role in T-oligo induced DNA damage responses.
To improve T-oligo's delivery, we combined T-oligo with a nano-sized
cationic -helical polypeptide (PVBLG150-8) which stabilizes the
negatively charged T-oligo. We complexed and delivered T-oligo with
PVBLG150-8 into H358 lung cancer and AN melanoma cells. We found that in
vitro delivery of the T-oligo and peptide (0.025-.25 mg/ml) complex
inhibited AN melanoma cell growth in a dose responsive manner from
4.5-8.3 fold compared to untreated controls, while T-oligo alone
inhibited growth by only 3 fold. Similarly, when H358 cells were given
T-oligo complexed with PVBLG150-8 (0.0125-.25 mg/ml), their growth was
inhibited in a dose dependent manner from 3.3-6.6 fold, compared to
T-oligo alone (2 fold). Our studies indicate that T-oligo has great
potential as an anti-cancer therapy, and due to its unique mechanism of
action, it could be used in patients with upregulated tankyrase-1
activity. Additionally, T-oligo delivery and efficacy can be greatly
improved when complexed with a cationic -helical polypeptide.

