Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decitabine and vorinostat cooperate to sensitize metastatic human
colon carcinoma cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis


The death receptor Fas and its physiological ligand, FasL, which is
expressed on the surface of cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs), regulate apoptosis
of cancerous cells. While normal colon epithelial cells express high
levels of Fas, Fas expression is diminished in colon carcinomas.
Metastatic colon cancers acquire an apopotosis-resistant phenotype often
due to the loss of Fas expression and function. Previous studies have
implicated Fas-mediated apoptosis as an important contributor of tumor
regression. Therefore, targeting Fas resistance is of critical importance
in treating colon cancer through Fas-based cancer therapy and
immunotherapy. In this study, we explore whether epigenetic
pharmacological agents can restore Fas expression and re-establish
sensitivity to Fas-mediated apoptosis in metastatic human colon carcinoma
cells. First we determined that the epigenetic drugs Decitabine, a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, and Vorinostat, a HDAC inhibitor, each are
capable of up-regulating Fas expression. When combined, these two
inhibitors cooperate to increase Fas expression to an even greater extent
than each agent alone. Pre-treatment with decitabine, vorinostat, or both
drugs followed by incubation with FasL, was able to overcome resistance
to FasL-induced apoptosis. Analysis of bisulfite-modified genomic DNA,
isolated from human metastatic colon carcinoma cells revealed that the
Fas promoter is sporadically methylated; therefore sensitization of Fas
receptor expression on the cell surface by decitabine was unlikely
through direct inhibition of Fas promoter meythlation. Although the Fas
promoter was not heavily methylated, the promoters for BNIP3 and Bik,
which are downstream of Fas signaling, were methylated. After treatment
with these pharmacological epigenetic inhibitors, alone or in
combination, protein levels of both BNIP3 and Bik were increased. Our
data suggest that combined modalities of chemotherapy and Fas-based
immunotherapy may be an effective approach for the suppression of colon
cancer metastasis.

