Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer tumor initiating cells are marked by the
presence of cell surface associated acetylated alpha tubulin


The function of tubulin acetylation in the context of cancer initiation
and progression remains unknown. In studying the frequency of primary
cilia in early pancreatic cancer, we discovered an increase in acetylated
alpha-tubulin labeling (AAT) labeling in murine PanIN, even in the
absence of primary cilia. We therefore hypothesized that human pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells may upregulate expression of AAT as
they progress from non-invasive to invasive and metastatic disease.
Performing confocal microscopy on a human PanIN (n=23) and metastatic
PDAC (n=10) tissue arrays, we have determined that in 15% of PanIN
lesions, 13-30% of the cells have detectable levels of AAT, with a
primarily cytoplasmic/cell membrane pattern of labeling. In contrast,
over 80% of metastatic PDAC cells are AAT-positive. Surprisingly,
high-resolution 3D confocal imaging of both fixed and unfixed human PDAC
cell lines demonstrated immunoreactive AAT to be present on the cell
surface of unfixed cells, as previously reported in human leukemia cells
(Quillen, JCB 1985). To evaluate the functional significance of this
finding, we developed a FACS-based strategy to isolate viable PDAC cells
based on levels of cell surface AAT. Applying this strategy to four
different human pancreatic cancer cell lines and three early passage
human xenografts, we have determined that 5-10% of human pancreatic
cancer cells have detectable levels of cell-surface AAT. PDAC cells
positive for cell surface AAT are markedly enriched in cells also
positive for either CD133 or CD24/CD44, representing putative pancreatic
cancer stem cell populations. We have functionally analyzed the
tumor-initiating capacity of cell surface AAT+ cells using in vitro tumor
sphere experiments. In this assay, cell surface AAT+ cells show a
statistically significant 100-fold increase in tumor sphere-forming
capacity relative to cell surface AAT-negative cells. Tumor
sphere-forming capacity was significantly reduced by neutralizing
anti-AAT antibodies, as well as by an siRNA targeting -tubulin K40
acetyltransferase (TAT). We further evaluated the functional significance
of cell surface AAT by analyzing the in vivo tumor initiating capacities
of cell surface AAT-positive and AAT-negative cells from a human PDAC
xenograft. Cell surface AAT-positive cells exhibited significantly
increased tumor initiating frequency relative to the AAT-negative
population (**pThe function of tubulin acetylation in the context of
cancer initiation and progression remains unknown. In studying the
frequency of primary cilia in early pancreatic cancer, we discovered an
increase in acetylated alpha-tubulin labeling (AAT) labeling in murine
PanIN, even in the absence of primary cilia. We therefore hypothesized
that human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells may upregulate
expression of AAT as they progress from non-invasive to invasive and
metastatic disease. Performing confocal microscopy on a human PanIN
(n=23) and metastatic PDAC (n=10) tissue arrays, we have determined that
in 15% of PanIN lesions, 13-30% of the cells have detectable levels of
AAT, with a primarily cytoplasmic/cell membrane pattern of labeling. In
contrast, over 80% of metastatic PDAC cells are AAT-positive.
Surprisingly, high-resolution 3D confocal imaging of both fixed and
unfixed human PDAC cell lines demonstrated immunoreactive AAT to be
present on the cell surface of unfixed cells, as previously reported in
human leukemia cells (Quillen, JCB 1985). To evaluate the functional
significance of this finding, we developed a FACS-based strategy to
isolate viable PDAC cells based on levels of cell surface AAT. Applying
this strategy to four different human pancreatic cancer cell lines and
three early passage human xenografts, we have determined that 5-10% of
human pancreatic cancer cells have detectable levels of cell-surface AAT.
PDAC cells positive for cell surface AAT are markedly enriched in cells
also positive for either CD133 or CD24/CD44, representing putative
pancreatic cancer stem cell populations. We have functionally analyzed
the tumor-initiating capacity of cell surface AAT+ cells using in vitro
tumor sphere experiments. In this assay, cell surface AAT+ cells show a
statistically significant 100-fold increase in tumor sphere-forming
capacity relative to cell surface AAT-negative cells. Tumor
sphere-forming capacity was significantly reduced by neutralizing
anti-AAT antibodies, as well as by an siRNA targeting -tubulin K40
acetyltransferase (TAT). We further evaluated the functional significance
of cell surface AAT by analyzing the in vivo tumor initiating capacities
of cell surface AAT-positive and AAT-negative cells from a human PDAC
xenograft. Cell surface AAT-positive cells exhibited significantly
increased tumor initiating frequency relative to the AAT-negative
population (**p<0.0000539). AAT-positive cells had a tumor-initiating
frequency similar to an Aldefluor-bright population, suggesting that the
presence of cell surface acetylated alpha tubulin may mark a pancreatic
cancer tumor initiating population. These data provide important new
information regarding cellular heterogeneity in human pancreatic cancer,
and suggest that novel strategies targeting cell surface tubulin may have
therapeutic utility.

