Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Afatinib, an EGFR/Her-2 dual inhibitor, effectively
radiosensitizes bladder cancer cells


Over-expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) had been
correlated with poor prognosis in bladder cancer, but clinical trials
using EGFR inhibitors alone in the treatment of bladder cancer did not
show definite improvement. On the other hand, radiotherapy is the key
element of bladder-preserving protocol for patients with muscle-invasive
bladder cancer, and several preclinical data reported the advantage of
combing radiation and tyrosine kinase inhibitor against EGFR. It is known
that aberrantly activated signal transduction pathways can influence
radiosensitivity of cancer cells. Herein, we attempt to demonstrate
whether radiation can activate signal transduction pathways in bladder
cancer cells, and whether the combined inhibition of such pathways can
further enhance radiosensitivity. We used a RTK signaling antibody array
to investigate the relative levels of phosphorylated signaling proteins.
We detected that not only EGFR but also HER-2 and Akt (Ser473) were
activated in T24 human bladder cancer cells after irradiation, and the
phenomenon was more prominent in 10Gy dose than in 2.5Gy dose. The
increased phosphorylation of EGFR and Her-2 was confirmed by Western
blot. Then we performed colony formation assay of T24 and NTUB1 human
bladder cancer cell lines for 7 days after treatment combining
irradiation and erlotinib (an EGFR inhibitor), lapatinib (a reversible
EGFR/Her-2 dual inhibitor) or afatinib (an irreversible EGFR/Her-2 dual
inhibitor) in different doses. The combination index (CI) analysis
revealed synergy between radiation (2.5Gy and 10 Gy) and afatinib in
various doses. For T24 cells with afatinib 100nM, the CI was 0.97 in
2.5Gy and 0.66 in 10Gy. For NTUB1 cells with afatinib 100nM, the CI was
0.92 in 2.5Gy and 0.80 in 10Gy. In contrast, erlotinib or lapatinib
showed only minor influence to enhance radiation effect in human bladder
cancer cells. Using flow cytometry, the relative distribution of cells
among various cell cycle phases were determined in cell lines treated
with either DMSO, radiation 2.5Gy, afatinib 200nM, or the combination of
radiation and afatinib. When compared with radiation alone, treatment
combining radiation and afatinib resulted in accumulation of cells in
sub-G1 phase but decrease in G2-M phase. Western blot showed the
expression of cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) was increased
in the combination group when compared with radiation or afatinib alone.
The results implicated that the adding of afatinib might enhance
radiation effect by increasing apoptosis in bladder cancer cells. Our
data clearly show that both EGFR and Her-2 signaling can be activated
after radiation in human bladder cancer cells. Afatinib, an EGFR/Her-2
dual inhibitor, effectively radiosensitizes the bladder cancer cells by
enhancing apoptosis. The result provides a basis for future in vivo and
human studies.

