Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer genome sequencing analysis, storage, discovery and delivery


Genome instability and structural rearrangement is a distinctive hallmark
of the cancer genome. With next-gen sequencing technologies, our ability
to measure structural rearrangements that occur throughout tumorigenesis
and progression has improved significantly, while creating an urgent need
for rearrangement discovery, analysis, and visualization methods to aid
in our understanding of these events. We have developed a sequencing
analysis pipeline that streamlines the discovery of an individual tumor's
mutations, small indels, copy number alterations, allele-specific
amplifications and deletions, and genomic rearrangements. Rearrangements
are refined to base-pair precision using unmapped, putative split reads
found in the vicinity of the breakpoint. Results are presented in an
interactive, web-based genome browser that provides analysis and
visualization of both high-level, processed results as well as the raw
data from which they were derived. From the web-based interface, results
from multiple samples can be aggregated into user-defined sample cohorts
to help identify features that are shared among a significant number of
the samples. Using this sequencing analysis pipeline, we discovered
high-confident, small- and large-scale somatic events in 17 whole genome
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumor samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) project, using their matched normal sequences to filter out
germline variants. Among many interesting structural aberrations
identified in these samples, we find four samples exhibiting EGFR
amplifications and the presence of the EGFRvIII mutant, characterized by
the in-frame deletion of exons 2-7 to produce a constitutively active
form of the receptor. Comparing the read support of the
EGFRvIII-associated breakpoints to the number of normally-mapped reads in
the neighborhood suggest that, in all cases, the EGFRvIII mutant emerges
after the amplification of wild-type EGFR, existing as a small fraction
of total number of EGFR copies. In other samples, evidence of high copy
number amplicons containing both MDM2 and EGFR are discovered at
detectable levels in the blood sequencing data, raising the possibility
that patient-specific PCR-based assays could be developed to quantitate
the presence of somatic rearrangements as a proxy to monitor the
progression of brain tumors.

