Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploitation of androgen receptor splice variant signaling by
guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav3 in castration resistant prostate
cancer


The treatment for advanced or metastatic prostate cancer is androgen
deprivation therapy. Patients inevitably relapse and the cancer is now
termed androgen-independent or castration resistant (CRPC). CRPC remains
dependent on androgen receptor (AR) signaling. One of the proteins
implicated in the reactivation of AR transcriptional activity in CRPC is
Vav3, a Rho GTPase guanine nucleotide exchange factor. Vav3 is
up-regulated in human prostate cancer tumors compared to benign tissue
and in preclinical models of prostate cancer progression to CRPC. Vav3
enhances AR activity at both physiological and as well as at subnanomolar
androgen concentrations, similar to prostatic microenvironment levels
demonstrated in CRPC. Vav3 confers castration resistant growth to a
classically androgen dependent cell line in a mouse xenograft model.
Thus, elevated levels of Vav3 seem to be pivotal in promoting continued
AR signaling in CRPC. We examined the contributions of Vav3 to AR
activity and cell proliferation in the CRPC cell lines CWR-22Rv1 and
CWR-R1. Knockdown of Vav3 attenuated cell growth and reduced AR activity
as compared to the shGFP control. However knockdown of full length AR had
little effect, perhaps due to impaired ligand-mediated transcriptional
activity of the mutated AR expressed in these cell lines. Because
CWR-22Rv1 also express AR splice variants that lack the ligand binding
domain and are proposed to underlie CRPC growth, we examined the
possibility that Vav3 enhances AR splice variant signaling. The AR splice
variant, ARV7 (also known as AR3), exhibits constitutive ligand
independent activity and is linked to poor prognosis and survival.
Depletion of ARV7 in 22Rv1 and CWR-R1 cell lines resulted in slowed
growth and lowered AR activity. Soft agar assays revealed that knockdown
of either Vav3 or ARV7 resulted in greatly decreased anchorage
independent growth. Vav3 potently enhanced the activity of ARV7 in
reporter gene assays. Further, knockdown of Vav3 resulted in lowered
levels of nuclear AR splice variants in CWR-22Rv1. Co-immunoprecipitation
revealed that ARV7 and Vav3 directly interact. These results suggest that
Vav3 may enhance ARV7 activity through increased nuclear localization and
that the interaction of Vav3 and ARV7 may be required for robust growth
of CRPC cells. These novel data demonstrating interaction between a
versatile AR coactivator and an AR splice variant provide insights into
the possible mechanisms by which Vav3 exploits and enhances AR splice
variant signaling in the progression of prostate cancer malignancy and
castration resistance.

