Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms for cross-talk between Notch1 and AKT signaling in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) has a variable
prognosis, with many patients exhibiting high-risk features at diagnosis,
including older age and high presenting white blood cell counts.
Activating mutations involving the Notch1 heterodimerizeration and PEST
domains occur in more than 50% of T-ALL cases. Increased Notch1 activity
promotes survival and proliferation of leukemic cells, in part by
transcriptionally repressing PTEN (via HES1). This provides compelling
rationale for the use of gamma secretase inhibitors (GSIs) to block
Notch1 activation and to restore PTEN levels, which antagonize AKT
signaling. Further, PTEN mutations are implicated in GSI resistance. PTEN
activity is also modulated by an assortment of posttranslational
modifications and Notch1 may regulate PTEN at the posttranslational
level. To investigate the impact of Notch1 on AKT signaling, independent
of its transcriptional regulation of PTEN, we used PTEN-null Jurkat cells
with constitutively active Notch1 and conditional ectopic PTEN expression
under control of a tetracycline (tet)-inducible promoter. Induction of
PTEN was accompanied by increased phosphorylation of AKTT308, increased
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) protein and transcripts,
and increased Notch1. Increased AKTT308 phosphorylation was blocked with
an IGF1R inhibitor (GSK1904259A) and was abolished in Jurkat cells
expressing a tet-inducible G129R PTEN phosphatase-inactive mutant. This
suggests that PTEN can activate AKT signaling by modulating IGF1R levels.
In Jurkat cells, inhibition of Notch1, either through GSI treatment or
shRNA knockdown (KD), resulted in increased phosphorylation of AKTT308.
Although this result could involve Notch1-dependent decreased cMyc,
reflecting indirect effects of cMyc on mTOR1 and negative feedback on
AKT, this was not impacted by treatment with a cMyc inhibitor (10058-F4)
or by ectopic overexpression of cMyc, suggesting that other effectors and
mechanisms are involved. Microarray analysis was performed on wild-type
and KD Jurkat cells. Using a 1.5-fold cutoff, 1208 differentially
regulated genes were identified. These include PH domain leucine-rich
repeat protein phosphatase-1 (PHLPP1) and prokineticin-2 (PROK2), both of
which could significantly impact AKT phosphorylation in response to
Notch1. By real-time RT-PCR, PHLPP1 was significantly decreased (4-fold),
and PROK2 was significantly increased (6-fold) in Notch1 KD cells
compared to wild-type cells. Studies are underway to characterize the
potential roles of PHLPP1 and PROK2 in mediating the inhibitory effects
of Notch1 on AKT activation in T-ALL. Better understanding of the
cross-talk between Notch1 and AKT in T-ALL may identify rational
therapeutic strategies for combining GSIs with inhibitors of AKT, mTOR,
or IGF1R, and/or for designing therapies based on capacities for
constitutive Notch1 signaling.

