Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Employing the Berg Interrogative Biology systems platform to
elucidate cellular signaling changes that contribute to the
pathophysiology of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related death worldwide, ranked as the third most fatal cancer
after lung and stomach carcinomas. The diverse etiology, high
morbidity/mortality, lack of diagnostic markers for early diagnosis and
the highly variable clinical course of HCC have hindered advances in
diagnosis and treatment. After years of studying the HCC, the
understanding of molecular mechanism operational in HCC remains
incomplete. The genomic, transcriptomic and comparative proteomic
profiles have yielded some important insights for HCC research. However,
many studies focused on single aspect of the cellular changes associated
with HCC, hindering the full understanding of biological systems in their
true complexity and dynamics. We describe a novel approach combining the
power of cell biology, integrated proteomics platforms and an informatics
platform that generates causal protein networks. In order to delineate
the role of post-translation modification and enzymes that partake in
such mechanisms, we incorporated activity based proteomics employing
kinase enrichment probes and phosphoproteome mapping of total proteins in
HCC cellular models. Multikinase inhibitor Sorafenib, the first line
chemotherapeuitc agent for the advanced HCC patients, was used to probe
the global kinase activity and protein phosphorylation changes associated
with this treatment. Comparative proteomics, phosphoproteome and kinase
activity data was integrated into the AI based REFS informatics platform.
Causal networks of protein interaction specifically from a functional
stand point namely kinase activity and potential targets that kinases can
phosphorylate were generated. In addition, using cellular functional read
out, proteins/ kinases that modulate phosphorylation of targets and
mechanistically drive pathophysiological cellular behavior were
determined. The approach outlined here enables global characterization of
cellular responses, insights into mechanisms of chemo sensitivity and
potential targets/biomarkers for clinical management of HCC.

