Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic role of ecdysoneless with oncogenic Ras in
transformation of human mammary epithelial cells


Precisely regulated cell proliferation is essential for embryonic
development as well as homeostasis in adult organs and tissues, whereas
uncontrolled cell proliferation is a hallmark of cancer. Thus,
elucidating how the cell cycle machinery is controlled is an important
area of research in cancer cell biology. A large body of evidence has
established a basic paradigm of the control of cell cycle progression
involving the Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein family in conjunction with the
E2F family of transcription factors. During G0/G1, interaction of
hypo-phosphorylated Rb proteins with E2Fs prevents the transcription of
E2F target genes. Cyclin-CDK complexes generated during cell cycle
progression hyper-phosphorylate Rb, leading to release of Rb from E2Fs;
this allows E2F target gene transcription and cell cycle progression. We
previously identified the mammalian ortholog of Drosophila ecdysoneless
(Ecd) protein as a novel and essential regulator of Rb-E2F-dependent cell
cycle progression. Loss of Ecd retards the separation of Rb from E2F,
arrests cells at G1/S boundary and prevents cell cycle progression.
Consistent with role of Ecd in cell cycle, our recent studies show Ecd is
overexpressed in breast cancer cell lines as well as in ductal carcinoma
in situ and infiltrating ductal carcinomas of the breast. To understand
the mechanism of Ecd overexpression and its correlation with oncogenesis,
we overexpressed either Ecd alone, 61L-HRas alone or both genes together
in hTERT-immortalized hMECs. These transfectants were then examined for
their oncogenic properties. We observed while vector infected cells do
not exhibit anchorage independence, all three transfectants showed
anchorage independent proliferation, particularly Ecd+Ras showed a
dramatic increase in anchorage independence in comparison with either Ecd
or H-Ras. Similarly, other oncogenic traits such as proliferation on
matrigel, invasion and migration were dramatically increased when both
genes were expressed in comparison with individual genes. Considering the
known oncogenic role of Ras in human cancer and the known role of Ecd in
cell cycle, these data are highly significant and present a novel
synergistic pathway for mammary cell transformation. We are currently
defining the molecular mechanism of this synergistic oncogenic effect. In
addition, we are generating Ecd overexpressed transgenic mice to examine
the role of Ecd in oncogenesis in in vivo models.

