Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA signatures associate with pathogenesis and progression of
osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma is the most common sarcoma in the skeleton, but remains
elusive with regard to molecular etiology. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have
demonstrated far-reaching effects on the cellular biology of development
as well as oncogenesis. Here we identify an miRNA signature reflecting
the pathogenesis of conventional (osteoblastic/fibroblastic) osteosarcoma
from surgically procured samples from human patients. The signature
includes high expression of miR-181a, miR-181b, and miR-181c as well as
reduced expression of miR-29b, miR-16, and miR-142-5p. Osteosarcomas of
varied histology subtype co-localized on unsupervised hierarchical
clustering, suggesting that the signature profile relates to oncogenesis
itself, rather than simply a differentiation phenotype. We also
demonstrated that miR-181b and miR-29b exhibit restricted expression to
distinct cell populations in the tumor tissue. Further, higher expression
of miR-27a and miR-181c* in pre-treatment biopsy samples characterized
patients who developed clinical metastatic disease. In addition, higher
expression of miR-451 and miR-15b in pre-treatment samples correlated
with subsequent positive response to chemotherapy. In vitro functional
validation of miR-16 and miR-27a confirmed opposing roles in human
osteoblast and osteosarcoma cell lines. Furthermore, predicted target
genes for miR-16 and miR-27a were confirmed as down-regulated by
real-time PCR. Affymetrix array profiling of cDNAs from osteosarcoma
specimens and controls were interrogated according to predicted targets
of miR-16, miR142-5p, miR-29b, miR-181a/b, and miR-27a. This analysis
revealed positive and negative correlations highlighting pathways of
known importance to osteosarcoma, as well as novel genes. Thus, our
findings establish miRNA signatures associated with pathogenesis,
metastasis, and responsiveness to treatment in osteosarcoma.

