Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing genetically flexible mouse models of sarcoma - a novel
functional genomics platform


Introduction: Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant neoplasms
that arise from connective tissues and have a disease-specific mortality
of 30-50%. Existing mouse models of sarcomagenesis utilize knockout and
transgenic mice but it is unclear if fixed germline mutations
recapitulate sporadic human cancer. In addition, creating germline mutant
mice requires substantial time and resources. We hypothesized that
delivery of oncogenes into mouse skeletal muscle using a retroviral
(RCAS) system would result in sarcomagenesis and could mitigate the
limitations of conventional mouse models. Methods: p16/p19 null mice
expressing the retroviral receptor, TVA, under nestin (N-tva) or -actin
(BKE) promoters were used. DF1 chicken fibroblasts, infected with
avian-leukosis virus vectors (RCAS) carrying combinations of oncogenes
(KrasG12D, c-Myc, IGF2) or GFP alone, were delivered by injection into
the hindlegs of neonatal mice and tumor development was monitored.
Results: GFP-positive cells were observed following in vitro infection of
cultured mouse skeletal muscle with RCAS-GFP and GFP+ myoblasts were
identified from mice injected with RCAS-GFP in vivo, suggesting
successful cell infection and targeted gene delivery. Sarcomas formed in
30% of p16/p19/xN-tva mice at the injection site with a median latency of
23.5 weeks (8-42 weeks). Several subtypes of sarcoma developed in this
strain based on morphologic assessment and immunohistochemistry (S100,
desmin, and smooth muscle actin). Of these, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor (MPNST) that overexpressed EGFR consistent with human MPNST,
was the predominant subtype (55%). Although a similar tumor incidence
occurred in the p16/p19/xBKE strain (32%), the median latency was much
shorter, 10.4 weeks (7-25 weeks) and the tumor spectrum shifted to
predominantly fibrosarcoma (36%) or rhabdomyosarcoma (36%). No tumors
were observed in mice injected with empty RCAS vector or without
inactivation of the p16/p19 locus. Gene-anchored PCR revealed retroviral
vector DNA integration in 89% of N-tva and 97% of BKE tumors. KrasG12D
was the most frequent oncogene isolated. Conclusions: We have generated
novel models of sarcomagenesis using the RCAS-TVA system to deliver known
sarcoma oncogenes into mouse hind legs with a tumor incidence of 30%.
With optimization, we will be able to use this genetically flexible
system to functionally validate novel candidate sarcoma genes.

