Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-inducible miR-210 is involved in hypoxia-induced cell
migration and invasion in human hepatocellular carcinoma


MicroRNA dysregulation is implicated in many human malignancies, yet
little is known regarding the regulatory mechanisms of these small
noncoding RNAs. Hypoxia is a prevalent tumor microenvironment in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and plays a key role in modulating tumor
aggressiveness. In the present study, we investigated the effects of
hypoxia on microRNA expression in human HCC. First, we examined the miRNA
expression profiles with TaqMan human microRNA Low-Density Array on HCC
cell lines put under normoxic and hypoxic conditions to identify
expression changes of microRNA. From the 664 microRNAs examined, miR-210
was overexpressed in SMMC-7721, Huh-7 and MHCC-97L HCC cell lines under
0.1% O2 hypoxic condition. The hypoxic induction of miR-210 was further
validated in another two HCC cell lines (Hep3B and PLC/PRF/5) by
individual real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and the same expression
pattern was observed, suggesting that miR-210 is consistently induced in
HCC cells under hypoxic conditions. The abundance of mature human miR-210
was also examined by qPCR in a human HCC cohort consisting of 48 pairs of
primary HCC tissues and their corresponding non-tumorous livers. We found
that miR-210 expression was significantly higher in the HCC tissues as
compared with the corresponding non-tumorous livers (P=0.0003).
Furthermore, we used the hypoxia marker carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX)
coupled with microdissection technique to isolate tissue samples in the
peri-necrotic areas, which are considered pathologically hypoxic, in
clinical formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) HCC samples. We
extracted the microRNA from the tissues and compared the miR-210
expression with those from histologically preserved HCC areas away from
necrotic areas. In line with the in vitro observations, with qPCR,
miR-210 was remarkably overexpressed in hypoxic HCC regions. Furthermore,
miR-210 overexpression significantly and inversely correlated with the
overall survival and disease-free survival rates (P= 0.029 and 0.043,
respectively) of HCC patients, indicating that overexpression of miR-210
in HCC was associated with a poorer prognosis. The biological function of
the miR-210 induction in HCC was also investigated. Notably, with
transwell and cell invasion assays, we demonstrated that the cell
migratory and invasive abilities of SMMC-7721 were dramatically enhanced
during hypoxia, and this enhancement was abolished upon miR-210
suppression using locked nucleic acid (LNA) inhibitor. Taken together,
our present data indicate that miR-210 is a hypoxia-inducible microRNA in
HCC, which may enhance HCC aggressiveness under hypoxic conditions.

