Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a new ex-vivo orthotopic model-Human breast cancer
cells in mouse mammary gland organ culture


Mouse mammary organ culture (MMOC) has been classically employed for
evaluating the efficacy of chemopreventive agents against development of
carcinogen-induced preneoplastic lesions. Efficacy of chemopreventive
agents observed in MMOC correlates well with that observed in in-vivo
carcinogenesis models. In the present study, we developed a new ex-vivo
Human in Mouse organ culture model which mimics in-vivo orthotopic breast
cancer model. Since we introduced human breast cancer cells in mouse
mammary gland, this model is termed as human Breast cancer (BCA) in Mouse
Mammary Organ Culture (BCa-in-MMOC)). Three to four week old female
BALB/c mice were sensitized with estradiol (1g) + progesterone (1mg) for
9 days. On the 10th day animals were sacrificed and 2.5x104 T47Dparental
or T47D aromatase overexpressing cells were injected into the fourth pair
of thoracic mammary glands. The glands were excised then cultured at 37C
under 95% O2 / 5% CO2 in hMEM medium containing 10% charcoal stripped
FBS/supplemented with Testosterone (1nM) and progesterone (1uM) and
growth promoting hormones (5 g insulin, 5 g prolactin per ml medium). At
the end of the experiment, the glands were fixed in formalin. The
paraffin embedded sections (longitudinal) of entire glands were processed
for histopathological examination (H and E stain) and immnohistochemical
staining of various proteins. Mammary glands were evaluated for the
presence of T47D cells, their growth pattern and their molecular
responsiveness to estradiol. T47D cells (both types) injected into
mammary glands were easily identified against mouse cells by intense
human specific Ck-18 immunofluorescence staining. Histopathological
observation of mammary gland sections showed that growth pattern of
injected cancer cells was identical to that observed of breast cancer
cells injected in vivo in athymic mice. Interestingly, clusters of cancer
cells in the mammary gland stroma appear similar to those observed in
breast tumors in women. Cancer cells injected into glands survived and
continued to grow (as evident from Ki-67 immunostaining) after 15 days in
culture. Cancer cells maintained their original characteristics (ER+,
PR+, EGFR+, and aromatase). T47D cells with enhanced aromatase expression
growing in the MMOC could metabolize testosterone to estrogen, which
resulted in enhanced cell proliferation and induction of estrogen target
genes such as ER and PR-B. Mouse mammary glands with T47D aromatase
overexpressing cells also showed changes typical to estrogenic milieu. In
summary this model provides a novel, inexpensive ex-vivo model, which
could be used to study effects of therapeutic agents on the cancer cells
growing in orthotopic micromilieu.

