Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMGN529, a CD37-directed antibody-drug conjugate for the treatment
of B-cell malignancies, has a favorable in vitro safety profile


The B-cell surface antigen CD37 is an attractive target for antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) mediated therapies, as it is widely expressed on
malignant B cells in NHL and CLL. In normal human tissues, high CD37
expression is mainly restricted to B cells, with substantially lower
expression seen in T cells, NK cells, monocytes and granulocytes. The
CD37-targeting K7153A antibody was selected from a panel of antibodies
for its potent pro-apoptotic, CDC and ADCC activity against B-cell
lymphoma cell lines in vitro. The K7153A antibody was conjugated to the
maytansinoid DM1 via the SMCC linker to yield the IMGN529 conjugate,
which retained the intrinsic functions of the antibody and demonstrated
enhanced in vitro and in vivo activity through targeted delivery of its
payload. To complement preclinical in vivo toxicity studies with IMGN529
in animal models, we conducted extensive in vitro safety studies, with
the aim of identifying any potential negative effects on normal human
blood cells. Depletion of B cells, T cells and monocytes from peripheral
blood cells by K7153A, IMGN529, the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab or the
anti-CD52 antibody alemtuzumab was determined by flow cytometry.
Proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in response
to K7153A or IMGN529 was evaluated by CFDA staining. Cytokine release of
TNF-, IFN-, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and IL-10 by normal human PBMCs was measured
by ELISpot and cytometric bead array following exposure to compounds in
both soluble and immobilized form. K7153A and IMGN529 specifically
depleted B cells in a dose-dependent manner, but had no effect on T cells
or monocytes, consistent with the much lower CD37 expression levels in
these cells. K7153A and IMGN529 were more potent than rituximab and more
specific than alemtuzumab, which depleted T cells and monocytes in
addition to B cells. Incubation with IMGN529 did not increase the
percentage of proliferating cells, while the anti-CD3 control antibody
was able to strongly stimulate T cell proliferation. Treatment with
K7153A or IMGN529 did not specifically induce cytokine release as
compared to non-binding antibody controls, while treatment with the
anti-CD3 control antibody resulted in significant cytokine release for
all donors. Rituximab treatment caused release of low levels of IFN- and
TNF in some donors. In contrast, treatment with alemtuzumab resulted in
release of IFN-, TNF- and IL-6 for most donors consistent with its
potential for cytokine release in patients. In conclusion, the
CD37-directed IMGN529 maytansinoid conjugate demonstrated potent in vitro
and in vivo efficacy combined with a favorable in vitro safety profile
with respect to cytokine release. Our analysis confirmed that the primary
target cells of IMGN529 are B cells. Together, these data support the
clinical development of this ADC for the treatment of B-cell malignancies.

