Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A robust transgenic mouse model to study male breast cancer


Male breast cancer accounts for about 1% of all breast cancers and even
though it is a rare disease, the incidence rate has increased steadily
during the past 20 years. Study of the male form of the disease has been
hampered by a lack of relevant animal models as it is commonly believed
that male mammary glands do not contain ducts. Female FVB C3(1)-SV40Tag
transgenic mice spontaneously develop hyperplastic mammary lesions that
progress to invasive mammary tumors, whereas most of the transgenic males
develop prostatic hyperplasia that progresses to adenocarcinoma. However,
upon closer examination, we discovered that approximately 55% of
transgenic males develop mammary tumors by 40 weeks of age, often prior
to developing prostate tumors. The course of male mammary development is
similar to that observed in the females but with a later onset.
Hyperplastic ducts form as early as 15 weeks of age and progress into
DCIS-resembling tumors before developing into invasive tumors that invade
locally into adipose tissue and muscle and occasionally form metastases
to lung and other organs. We then examined male mammary development in
the FVB background strain (wild type) and showed that all males develop
mammary ducts that continue to grow and branch throughout adulthood. The
morphology of these ducts was similar to that of females with a central
lumen surrounded by concentric layers of luminal epithelium,
myoepithelium, a basement membrane and surrounding stroma. A study of CD1
male mice confirmed that male mammary development was not specific to the
FVB strain but that CD1 males showed similar mammary ductal development.
Male mammary development in FVB wild type animals and tumor progression
in the transgenic males was characterized in terms of cell proliferation,
apoptosis and expression of various markers of differentiation including
hormone receptor status. In summary, our results demonstrate that FVB
C3(1)-SV40Tag transgenic males represent a highly robust and reproducible
model for the study male breast cancer. Our long-term goal is to leverage
the information we uncovered through this effort to design novel
therapies for breast cancer treatment in men.

