Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of ZDHHC14 as a novel tumor suppressor gene
commonly downregulated in human cancers


Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) play critical roles in preventing
tumorigenesis and they are frequently inactivated in tumours. Recently
developed high-density microarrays can detect subchromosomal deletions,
recurrence of which usually indicates the location of TSGs within the
deleted region. We analyzed testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT) clinical
samples using SNP arrays and found a frequent small deletion on the
region 6q25.3 containing only one known gene, ZDHHC14. While its cellular
function is unknown, ZDHHC14 belongs to the recently discovered DHHC
family, which are predicted to be involved in protein palmitoylation, a
reversible lipid modification that regulates membrane tethering for key
proteins in cell signaling, cancer, neuronal transmission, and membrane
trafficking. Consistently, we found a dramatic under-expression of
ZDHHC14 mRNA and protein in TGCTs, and this associated with
chemoresistance. Oncomine database mining showed that ZDHHC14 is also
under-expressed in lymphoma, liposarcoma, brain, kidney, lung and
colorectal cancers. Thus, it appears that ZDHHC14 downregulation may be
involved in other cancers. We studied ZDHHC14 expression in prostate
cancer (PCa), detecting a decrease at mRNA and protein level. We also
detected that ZDHHC14 mRNA was downregulated in a pilot study on breast
cancer samples. As genomic loss of the ZDHHC14 region was only detected
in a small number of PCa samples, we checked whether promoter
hypermethylation was the cause for ZDHHC14 downregulation. However, no
changes in methylation status were found. We then sequenced the whole
genomic region surrounding ZDHHC14 by next generation sequencing in TGCTs
and PCa and found several mutations in the promoter, the coding region,
as well as in intronic regions. Finally, we tested the function of
ZDHHC14 in cell-based studies. We generated a 293 T-REx tetracycline
inducible ZDHHC14 overexpressing stable cell line, which showed that
ZDHHC14 overexpression decreased cell viability. The induction of
apoptosis by ZDHHC14 overexpression was detected both by FACS and caspase
7 and PARP cleavage analyses. This was confirmed by transient ZDHHC14
overexpression in the PCa cell line 22RV1. In vivo we xenografted mice
using both tetracycline inducible ZDHHC14 overexpressing 293 T-REx cells
and control cells transfected with the empty vector. ZDHHC14 expression
was induced by tetracycline at the beginning of inoculation and we
detected that ZDHHC14 overexpression blocked tumour initiation
completely. In conclusion, these results implicate ZDHHC14 as a tumour
suppressor gene commonly inactivated in human cancers, indicating that it
might exert its tumor suppressor role through the induction of programmed
cell death. This is the first study showing the involvement of ZDHHC14 in
a specific pathway, the classic caspase-dependent apoptosis.

