Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel tumor suppressor DIAPH3 governs transition to an
amoeboid phenotype


Introduction: We previously reported that loss of DIAPH3, proximal to RB1
on chromosome 13q and encoding the cytoskeletal regulator
Diaphanous-related Formin-3 (DRF3), is associated with metastatic
prostate cancer. Here we examine further the impact of genomic DIAPH3
loss on motility and metastasis, in multiple cancers. Methods: We
employed publically available genomic data sets (including the Genomic
Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer platform), Oncomine
expression profiles, Affymetrix Human Genome-wide SNP arrays, and tissue
microarrays to determine DIAPH3 copy number and DRF3 expression in
carcinomas and with disease progression. In cultured cancer cells,
biochemical and cell biological approaches in two- and three-dimensional
growth conditions were used to assess mechanisms underlying phenotypic
changes associated with DRF3 deficiency. The in vivo impact of DIAPH3
loss was investigated with a murine experimental metastasis model.
Results: Analysis of somatic copy number alterations along chromosome 13q
revealed a region of significant focal deletion, in which the DIAPH3
locus was central, common to hepatocellular, breast, and prostate
carcinomas. Employing prostate cancer as a disease-relevant model, we
detected reduced DIAPH3 copy number in multiple, independent patient
cohorts. DIAPH3 deletions accumulated during disease progression, were
strongly associated with metastatic disease, and were prevalent in
disseminated tumor cells from patient bone marrow aspirates. Tissue
microarrays confirmed reduced expression of DRF3 in metastases relative
to normal tissue and primary tumor. In vitro, stable silencing of DRF3 in
prostate cancer and HRAS-transformed human mammary epithelial cells
dramatically altered cell morphology, evoking an amoeboid morphological
phenotype. Accordingly, biochemical hallmarks of amoeboid behavior, as
well as enhanced migration, invasion, and chemotaxis, were associated
with DRF3 loss. Consistent with its role as a regulator of cytoskeletal
dynamics, DRF3 depletion destabilized microtubules, thereby perturbing
endocytic receptor trafficking. EGFR was observed to accumulate in
endosomes and was hyperactive, coinciding with persistent signaling
through the MEK-ERK pathway. Inhibition of MEK reversed the amoeboid
phenotype stimulated by DRF3 loss. Enforced expression of DRF3
accelerated down-regulation of EGFR and suppressed amoeboid morphology.
Phosphorylation was observed to modulate DRF3 function. In a murine
metastasis model, the formation of pulmonary lesions was markedly
potentiated by DRF3 silencing, supporting a role for the protein in
mitigation of tumor cell dissemination. Conclusions: Genomic deletions at
the DIAPH3 locus are prevalent in multiple carcinomas and are strongly
associated with metastasis. DRF3 is a metastasis suppressor that prevents
transition to an amoeboid tumor cell phenotype.

