Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of CXCL5/ENA-78 regulating the interaction of
cholangiocarcinoma and cancer-associated fibroblasts


Background and Aims: Tumor-stromal interaction has been recognized to be
essential for understanding tumor development. Cholangiocarcinoma shows
very poor prognosis and have fibrous tumor stroma. Hepatic stellate cells
are well-known to have a major role in hepatic fibrogenesis. Therefore,
we have focused on the interaction of cholangiocarcinoma and hepatic
stellate cells and reported their positive interaction (Ann Surg Oncol
2009, 2011). The aim of this study is to identify the key protein which
is important for the interaction of cholangiocarcinoma cells and hepatic
stellate cells and examine its functional role in tumor progression.
Methods: Using co-culture model and proteomic analysis, we analyzed the
secreted factors which were considered to be important for their
interaction. The functional role of CXCL5 was examined in vitro and
clinical significance was validated using human intrahepatic carcinoma
samples by immunohistochemistry. Results: Using SELDI-TOF-MS and
qTOF-MS/MS analysis, we identified CXCL5 which was remarkably increased
when they were co-cultured. CXCL5 which was mainly produced by
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (HuCCT1 and RBE) promoted the invasion, and
migration of them in the autocrine fashion. These effects were
significantly decreased by inhibition of CXCR2 which was a receptor of
CXCL5. IL1 was found to up-regulate in hepatic stellate cells when they
were co-cultured by cytokine array analysis, we also found that IL1
accelerated the production of CXCL5 in cholangiocarcinoma cells. In human
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, immunohistochemical study showed that
there was a significant correlation between stromal myofibroblasts and
CXCL5 produced by cholangiocarcinoma cells. Since CXCL5 is identified as
epithelial neutrophil activating factor-78 (ENA-78), we researched the
presence of CD66b positive immune cells which have been recently reported
to be tumor-associated neutrophils. CD66b positive immune cells are more
abundant in CXCL5 high expression group. In addition, high CXCL5
expression group showed worse survival than low expression group.
Conclusion: We conclude that CXCL5 is important for the interaction of
cholangiocarcinoma and stromal myofibroblasts and that the strategies to
inhibit tumor-stromal cell interactions may be beneficial in
cholangiocarcinoma.

