Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase 3 trial of weekly farletuzumab combined with carboplatin
and taxane in subjects with platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer in first
relapse


Background: Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death among women with
gynecologic malignancies in North America. Despite advances in treatment,
only 15%-30% of patients survive long term, underscoring the need for
more effective regimens. Folate receptor (FR) is highly expressed on all
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells but largely absent from normal
tissue. This study examines the efficacy and safety of farletuzumab, a
monoclonal antibody that binds FR, when combined with standard
chemotherapy, in platinum-sensitive subjects with ovarian cancer after
first relapse. Methods: This phase 3, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial is ongoing at 375 sites globally. Eligible
subjects are 18 years of age, with a histologically confirmed diagnosis
of non-mucinous EOC, including primary peritoneal and fallopian tube
malignancies. Subjects must have undergone debulking surgery and achieved
an objective response lasting 6-24 months following first-line platinum
and taxane chemotherapy, followed by relapse confirmed by computed
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. Approximately 1080 subjects
will be randomized to receive weekly intravenous farletuzumab (1.25 mg/kg
or 2.5 mg/kg) or placebo, plus standard carboplatin (area under the curve
[AUC] 5-6) and taxane (paclitaxel at 175 mg/m2 or docetaxel at 75 mg/m2)
every 3 weeks for 6 cycles. Maintenance treatment follows, with weekly
single-agent farletuzumab or placebo administered until disease
progression. The primary end point is progression-free survival (PFS)
based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST). Secondary
outcomes are overall survival, CA-125-defined PFS (based on Rustin
criteria) and serologic response, best objective response and time to
response, duration of first vs current remission (by RECIST),
subject-reported quality of life, and resource utilization
(hospitalizations, unscheduled office visits, and admissions to hospice
or nursing home). Molecular markers are being sought that may be
predictive of response to farletuzumab. Pharmacokinetic analysis is
performed to assess interactions between agents. Safety will be evaluated
by review of physical assessments, laboratory data, and adverse events;
review is overseen by an independent data monitoring committee. As of
November 7, 2011, 957 (of 1080 planned) subjects have enrolled in the
study. The last subject will likely be enrolled by March 2012.

