Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of OSI-296, a dual inhibitor of
cMET and RON kinases


cMET and RON are receptor tyrosine kinases of the MET proto-oncogene
family that are activated by their respective ligands HGF and MSP.
Signaling through the cMET/HGF system can be deregulated in cancer by
HGF-dependent autocrine activation, gene amplification, and/or the
presence of activating mutations, among others, while for RON,
constitutively active variants generated by alternative splicing or
methylation-dependent promoter usage [short-form RON (sfRON)] have been
identified. Approaches to abrogate aberrant cMET and RON signaling that
have led to agents in clinical trials include inhibiting their kinase
function with small molecules. We report here the discovery and
characterization of OSI-296, a dual inhibitor of cMET and RON. The
compound exhibited selectivity in a panel of 96 kinases with potent
activity against cMET, including common Y1230 mutants, and RON. OSI-296
blocked cMET autophosphorylation in MKN45 cells, resulting in
dose-dependent inhibition of downstream ERK, AKT, and STAT3
phosphorylation. It also showed potent cellular activity in ELISA-format
sfRON and caRON cell mechanistic assays that we developed, resulting in
dose-dependent inhibition of downstream ERK and AKT phosphorylation.
OSI-296 showed a PK profile in rodents suitable for oral dosing with >70%
bioavailability. In multiple xenografts models (cMET: MKN45, SNU-5,
U87MG; RON: caRON), significant tumor growth inhibition was observed upon
oral dosing with regression at higher doses. OSI-296 was very well
tolerated with little body weight loss and no adverse effects even at the
highest tested dose of 300 mg/kg p.o. qdx14. Solid PK/PD/TGI correlations
have been established wherein >90% inhibition of cMET or RON
phosphorylation sustained over 24 h by OSI-296 translated to 100% TGI. In
summary, OSI-296 was shown to be a well tolerated, dual inhibitor of cMET
and RON with in vivo activity in mouse xenografts models for both targets
upon oral dosing.

