Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between NFB and STAT3 in human multiple myeloma cells
(U266)


Purpose: To evaluate a potential interaction between NFB and STAT3
pathways and its consequences on treatment outcome (cell survival) in a
human myeloma cell line (U266). Methods: A computational network model of
signal transduction in U266 cells was used to simulate the interplay
between NFB and STAT3, suggesting that inhibition of just one of the
pathways does not result in inhibition of NFB and downstream processes,
as NFB expression is partially regulated by STAT3. To test this
hypothesis, U266 cells were exposed continuously to either an IKK
inhibitor (IKKi; 10 M), a JAK inhibitor (JAKi; 10 M), or bortezomib
(Bort) (a proteasome inhibitor; 20 nM). The time-course of intracellular
proteins were measured over 48 h (immunobloting), including: phospho-p65
(p-p65), p-stat3, p-IB, and BclXL. Cell proliferation was measured using
WST-1 reagent assay kit at 72 h. PARP cleavage was measured as an
indicator of apoptosis over a 24 h period. U266 cells were also exposed
transiently (1 and 2 h) to Bort treatment, and the time-course of p-p65,
BclXL, and PARP was measured. Results: Expression of p-p65 was unchanged
following continuous exposure to IKKi and JAKi. However, p-p65 expression
initially increased (1.7-fold) followed by a decrease below baseline
following Bort exposure. BclXL expression remained unchanged after IKKi
exposure, and it decreased (80 %) either rapidly or gradually after JAKi
or Bort exposure. p-stat3 expression rapidly decreased after Bort (80 %)
and was transiently increased after IKKi treatment (2 fold). For
short-term Bort exposure, p-p65 expression transiently increased (2.5
fold) and then returned to baseline. BclXL expression decreased (50 %)
and achieved a new steady-state baseline. Bort exposure for 2 h resulted
in significant PARP cleavage (10 fold increase) in agreement with model
simulations. Conclusions: Both NFB and STAT3 pathways need to be
inhibited to fully inhibit NFB activity. Similarly, when NFB and STAT3
are constitutively active, both transcription factors need to be
inhibited to inhibit cell proliferation. Further research is needed to
better understand mechanisms of p-stat3 inhibition and p-p65 transient
stimulation and long-term inhibition following Bort exposure to U266
myeloma cells.

