Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy to surgical cavity
after resection for brain metastasis


Recurrence at resection cavity after resection for brain metastasis is
high; whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) decreases this risk but may cause
neurocognitive complication. Post-operative radiosurgery to resection
cavity is a new technique to decrease recurrence and spare patients from
WBRT, but single high-dose fraction may potentially increase
radiation-induced necrosis. Hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy
(SRT) delivers higher radiobiological dose which may potentially provide
higher local tumor control, and fractionation may lower risk of
radiation-induced injury. To investigate the efficacy of post-operative
hypofractionated SRT after resection of brain metastasis, we
retrospectively analyzed 52 consecutive patients with brain metastasis
from solid tumors who underwent surgical resection followed by SRT to the
resection cavity for at least one metastasis from April 2008 to March
2011. A total of 25 to 30 Gy in 5 daily fractions over 1-week period was
prescribed to the resection cavity with a margin of 2 mm expansion
(median dose 28.5 Gy) between 2 to 4 weeks post-operatively. Synchronous
oligometastasis, if present, was treated with radiosurgery. No patients
received upfront WBRT. All patients were followed up for at least 6
months. Follow-up was assessed using clinical evaluation and MR imaging
every 2 to 3 months. The radiographic end point was local tumor control
at resection cavity. Preliminary analyses showed the actuarial local
control rate of 86% at 12 months at the resection site. For those with
synchronous brain metastasis, the rates of local control at resection
cavity and oligometastases were not statistically significantly different
(p=0.4). Approximately 30% of the patients developed distant brain
recurrence during follow-up, and 70% of these patients received salvage
radiosurgery while the rest received WBRT. None of the patient developed
radiation-induced injury at the resection site. Multivariate analysis
showed that number of metastasis was associated with higher rate of
distant brain recurrence. Hypofractionated SRT appears to be safe and
effective in preventing recurrence at resection cavity following surgical
resection of brain metastasis and may spare many patients from WBRT and
its adverse effects.

