Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CUL4A ubiquitin ligase, a putative target gene at the 13q34
amplicon and its role in breast cancer pathogenesis & progression


Breast cancer is a complex and heterogeneous disease and one of the most
frequent causes of cancer deaths in developed countries. DNA copy number
alterations occur frequently in breast tumours. Regions of DNA
amplification are of major interest since often contain oncogenes whose
increased expression confers tumour cells a selective advantage and
contributes to the carcinogenesis process. In our laboratory prior
analysis of familiar and sporadic breast tumours by using array-CGH
identified an amplification event at the 13q34 region with an overall
frequency of 4.5% that increased to 8.1% in BRCA1-associated tumours.
Comprehensive characterization of the amplicon allowed us to define CUL4A
as one of the most likely putative oncogenes. CUL4A is an E3 Ubiquitin
Ligase which is amplified and/or overexpressed in primary breast tumours
and involved in functions such as chromatin regulation, cell cycle
regulation or DNA repair through ubiquitylation of NER pathway members.
Its deregulation could have implications for oncogenic transformation and
treatment response to DNA-damaging agents. One of such compounds is
Trabectedin a marine-derived drug that presents antitumor activity in
sarcomas and ovarian cancer. To elucidate the possible implication of
CUL4A in the initial steps of the tumorigenic process we conducted the
stable up-regulation of CUL4A in human mammary epithelial cells (184B5),
and in NIH3T3 mouse-derived cell line by lentiviral infection. We also
stably silenced CUL4A in the human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-157
and HCC1937 that present amplification and/or overexpression of CUL4A.
With these modified cell lines we performed functional assays in
different in vitro systems such as viability experiments, colony
formation both in plastic and in soft agar and 3-D cultures in Matrigel.
In order to measure sensitivity to Trabectedin we used silenced CUL4A
breast cancer cell lines to perform clonogenic assays. Our preliminary
results in CUL4A overexpression in 184B5 model system showed increase in
proliferation and colony formation ability. On the other hand, CUL4A
silencing in breast cancer cell lines resulted in diminished
proliferation and decreased colony-forming abilities in both anchorage
dependent and independent conditions. Concerning DNA-repair implication,
it seems that high levels of CUL4A could be a good predictor of
Trabectedin response. Our results indicate that CUL4A would play a role
in promoting oncogenesis and/or in modulating breast cancer progression.
Further evaluation of CUL4A amplification/overexpression impact on the
maintenance of genome integrity will help elucidate its full potential
for therapeutic intervention in breast and other cancers.

