Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated polyamine levels generate an immunosuppressive oncogenic
microenvironment


Increased suprabasal epidermal activity of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC),
a key regulatory enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis, stimulates cellular
proliferation and vascularization in the underlying dermis, and promotes
skin tumorigenesis after treatment with a single, subthreshold dose of a
carcinogen in ODCER transgenic mice. Interestingly, skin tumor formation
is also induced in ODCER transgenic mice by wounding and does not require
prior carcinogen treatment. This wound-induced tumor formation is
dependent on the polyamine-induction of sustained recruitment of
inflammatory cells to the dermal wound site. Moreover, when weakly
transformed (Ras activation) primary keratinocytes (Ker/Ras) were
injected subcutaneously in syngeneic ODCER transgenic mice, tumor growth
occurred while it did not in normal littermates. These data suggest the
generation of an oncogenic stromal microenvironment in mice with elevated
epidermal polyamine levels. Polyamine-Based Therapy (PaBT: combination of
the well-characterized ODC inhibitor, difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), and
an inhibitor of cellular polyamine transport, AMXT 1501) significantly
inhibited tumor growth in wildtype FVB mice that were orthotopically
injected with either syngeneic Ker/Ras cells or neu02 mammary tumor
cells. Flow cytometry analyses of tumor inflammatory infiltrates revealed
that PaBT significantly increased the percentage of CD3+ cell population
(includes T cells and NK cells) and decreased the percentage of both
F4/80+ (macrophage) and Gr-1+ (neutrophil and monocyte) subpopulations of
CD45+ cells compared to tumors in control, non-treated mice. When PaBT
treatment was stopped and tumors were resected, we re-challenged two
weeks later with a second injection of neu02 tumor cells. Mice that had
been previously treated with PaBT were protected from secondary tumor
growth (demonstrating no or very little tumor growth) compared to mice
that never received PaBT. In order to examine whether elevated polyamine
biosynthesis suppresses a T-cell mediated adaptive immune response, we
examined the effect of ODC overexpression in keratinocytes on a classic
contact hypersensitivity (CHS) response test using ODCER transgenic mice.
These mice showed reduced ear swelling in comparison to normal
littermates together with reduced neutrophil infiltration and decreased
migration of FITC-loaded dendritic cells to draining lymph nodes
following hapten elicitation of CHS. Collectively, these data suggest
that the immunosuppression mediated by increased epidermal ODC activity
may contribute to an environment conducive to tumor growth, and,
conversely, that depletion of tumor polyamines will block tumorigenesis
in part by normalizing the stromal microenvironment and restoring tumor
immune surveillance. (Supported by NIH grant CA070739 and funding from
Aminex Therapeutics Inc)

