Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subtyping of glioblastoma based on isoform level network
modeling


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary central nervous
system tumor, accounting for nearly 80% of the 22,000 malignant brain
tumors diagnosed annually in the United States. Patients who receive a
diagnosis of glioblastoma have a dismal prognosis and median survival of
12-14 months following the standard therapy. Therefore, there is a need
for improved molecular classification of GBM to identify highly sensitive
and specific biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Recent genome wide
transcriptome studies, by us and others, have discovered that one gene
gives rise to multiple protein isoforms, which could be involved in
multiple functional pathways. Based on this model, we hypothesize that
the isoform-level expression profiling will lead to significantly
improved classification of molecular sub-types and identification of more
specific isoform based regulatory modules that are disrupted in each GBM
molecular sub-type. Using the GBM data sets from TCGA data portal, we
identified 2903 genes, which differ significantly in expression between
the normal brain and GBM. In contrast, similar analysis using
transcript-level expression showed that the expression of 7639
transcripts (correspond to 4401 genes) was significantly altered in GBMs,
suggesting that measuring isoform/mRNA variant expression is more
sensitive to identify molecular changes in GBM. Furthermore, we
identified 51 genes (e.g. RTN3, DCLK2, PKM2, ACTN1), mostly associated
with cellular assembly and organization, whose transcript variants show
opposite expression pattern, an information lost in a gene centric
approach. Although GBMs have been grouped into four subtypes (Proneural,
Neural, Classical, Mesenchymal) based on gene expression and mutation
profiling, these sub-types do not show any survival differences. Since we
observed higher expression differences at isoform-level, we investigated
whether isoform-level expression estimates can improve the grouping in
terms of disease prognosis. We observed that isoform level clustering
always generated a better survival grouping and effectively grouped the
173 core samples into 4 sub-groups with significant (p=0.024) survival
differences between the groups. Interestingly, we identified a subgroup,
consisting of selected proneural samples, which exhibits higher survival
and is characterized by isoform specific overexpression of
oligodendroglial markers including Olig1, Olig2, Sox 4, Sox6, Sox8, and
Sox10. Gene level expression fails to identify Olig1, Sox6 and Sox10 as
significantly misregulated in this subgroup. Similarly, we identify an
isoform specific network in another subgroup that could confer resistance
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, erlotinib. Our analyses suggests that
the quest for genomics based personalized medicine requires molecular
classification and systematic understanding of the gene regulatory
networks at the isoform level.

