Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLL3 act as a tumor suppressor gene in pancreatic cancer


Myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia 3 (MLL3) is a histone 3-lysine
4 methyltransferase, found frequently mutated in a variety of solid
tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma where it is the fourth
most common somatically mutated gene (excluding homozygous deletions).
Despite various somatic mutations, the functional role of MLL3 has not
been studied in pancreatic cancer. Upon careful compilation of all the
known MLL3 somatic mutations in various solid tumors, no hotspots were
identified. However, regardless of the mutation status, we found
significantly diminished MLL3 expression in a panel of patient-derived
pancreatic tumor cell lines, tumor xenografts and archived patient
tumors. Examination of the MLL3 promoter region revealed a CpG island.
Methylation of the promoter region was confirmed by methylation-specific
PCR in majority of the tumor cell lines and xenografts. Treatment with
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor relieved the promoter methylation causing
increase in MLL3 transcript expression. Further, knockdown of MLL3 by
siRNA in cell lines increased anchorage-independent growth, and enhanced
the migration/invasion phenotype of cancer cells. Agilent microarray
analysis of two pancreatic cancer cell lines subsequent to knockdown of
residual MLL3 function by siRNA, revealed a battery of potential gene
targets and pathways regulated by MLL3. The most common Gene Ontology
(GO) categories for differentially expressed genes include those involved
in cell cycle, cell migration, and DNA repair, underscoring the
phenotypes observed with MLL3 siRNA. We indeed observed an increase in
MLL3 expression upon DNA damage which was independent of p53 status.
Using transgenic mouse model of pancreatic cancer, we are investigating
whether loss of MLL3 function in exocrine pancreas cooperates with mutant
Kras to accelerate the progression of pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN) to invasive neoplasia.

