Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WAVE3 modulates the invasion-metastasis cascade by regulating
invadopodia structures, MMP activity and ECM degradation


Invadopodia are dynamic membrane structures enriched in actin that form
on the ventral side of invasive cancer cells and are required for the
degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), therefore, allowing the
invasion of the tumor-surrounding tissue and subsequent colonization and
metastasis. Invadopodia are the site of assembly of a multitude of
proteins, including the actin regulators cortactin and members of
WASP/WAVE proteins family. In our previously published studies we have
identified WAVE3 as a key player in modulating the invasion-metastasis
cascade in breast cancer (BC), where WAVE3 expression levels are
significantly increased in metastatic BC cell lines and tumors. We have
also shown that the metastasis-promoting activity of WAVE3 is achieved in
part by affecting the activity of several matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), including MMP1, MMP3 and MMP9. These MMPs, which are integral
constituents of invadopodia, are required for the degradation of the ECM.
More importantly, we have shown that phosphorylation of WAVE3 by Abl
tyrosine kinase at specific tyrosine residues is required for the
WAVE3-mediated modulation of BC metastasis. Here we present evidence that
WAVE3 phosphorylation regulates the metastatic phenotype of BC by
affecting the formation of invadopodia, MMPs activity and ECM
degradation. First we show that loss of WAVE3 in the metastatic
MDA-MB-231 BC cells results in a significant reduction in the number of
invadopodia. Loss of WAVE3 expression also results in a significant
decrease in MMP expression and activity in the zymography assay, loss of
the ability of MDA-MB-231 cells to degrade gelatin in the ECM degradation
assay, and consequently, a dramatic decrease in the invasive potential of
these cells. Mechanistically, our data have now established a new link
between WAVE3 and invadopodia, where WAVE3 phosphorylation downstream of
Abl is critical for the formation of invadopodia structures as well as
for MMP activity and for the degradation of the ECM. Loss of WAVE3
phosphorylation either by site directed mutagenesis or by pharmacological
inhibition of Abl kinase activity leads to a significant decrease in
invadopodia formation, MMP2 and MMP9 activity as well as ECM degradation,
as a direct result of the inability of phospho-mutant WAVE3 to localize
to invadopodia. In an independent study, we have found that WAVE3 is
involved in a different molecular pathway, where WAVE3 phosphorylation is
also required for the nuclear translocation of NFkB and the activation of
MMP9, downstream of TNF. The WAVE3-mediated NFkB nuclear translocation to
activate MMP9 is facilitated through a WAVE3-Importin interaction, either
directly or within a protein complex. Together, our data indentify two
independent pathways whereby WAVE3 modulates the cancer
invasion-metastasis cascade through its regulation of invadopodia
structures and the NFkB-mediated activation of MMPs.

