Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 inhibits non-homologous end joining,
enhances radio- and chemosensitivity and increases dependence on
homologous recombination in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines


Background DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), the most cytotoxic lesions
induced by ionizing radiation (IR) and anticancer drugs such as
topoisomerase II poisons (e.g., doxorubicin), are repaired by
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR).
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), which initiates NHEJ, is
up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (GEO profiles), possibly
contributing to anticancer therapy resistance. To assess DNA-PK as a
potential therapeutic target for chemo- and radio-sensitisation in HCC we
determined the effect of the DNA-PK inhibitor, NU7441, on DSB repair and
cytotoxicity in HCC cells. Methods DNA-PK protein levels and activation
by IR (Western blot), DSB levels (y-H2AX foci), HR (RAD51 foci), cell
growth (DAPI fluorescence) and cytotoxicity (colony formation) following
exposure to IR or doxorubicin was determined in a panel of 6 hepatoma
cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, Huh7, SNU-182, SNU475 and PLC/PRF/5). Results
DNA-PK protein concentration and activity did not vary significantly
across the panel (24% and 37%, respectively) but there were cell-specific
sensitivities to IR and doxorubicin (e.g. HepG2 2-fold more resistant
than Hep3B). NU7441 significantly sensitised all cells to both
doxorubicin (average PF50 4.33.0) and IR (average PF50 3.91.1) in growth
inhibition assays and significantly reduced survival (4.8 to 3.3-fold) in
colony forming assays. Following exposure to IR, NU7441 significantly
delayed yH2AX focus clearance in all cell lines (e.g. only 13% cleared at
4 hr compared to 50% in control), but increased RAD51 focus formation
(3-fold). Conclusion While chemo- and radio-sensitivity in HCC cells was
not dependent on DNA-PK expression or activity, NU7441 causes greater
than 2-fold chemo- and radiosensitisation in all cells. This was
accompanied by a substantial reduction in the rapid phase of DNA repair
(NHEJ-dependent) and a shift to a greater reliance on the slower HR
repair. DNA-PK inhibitors may have potential as chemo- and
radio-sensitisors in hepatoma patients.

