Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt/-catenin pathway is involved in KRAS-induced intestinal
epithelial cell transformation


Aberrant regulation of the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway is one of the
major causes of colorectal cancer (CRC). The APC protein is an integral
part of the destruction complex that controls cytoplasmic -catenin levels
by promoting ubiquitin-mediated degradation of -catenin. Loss-of-function
mutations in APC are commonly found in CRC, leading to constitutively
high levels of -catenin which then associates with TCF4, inducing
expression of target genes that are important in cell growth. The
KRAS/BRAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathway is also a major transforming growth
regulatory signaling pathway. Indeed, gain-of-function mutations of KRAS
and BRAF are detected in up to 60% of CRCs. Although both the
Wnt/-catenin and the ERK pathways are major pathways for tumorigenesis of
intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), no significant interactions between
these pathways have been identified. Methods. Retrovirus encoding the
HA-tagged wild-type MEK1 (wtMEK) or activated MEK1 (MEK1S218D/S222D,
caMEK) or oncogenic form of KRASG12V were used to infect and transform
normal IECs in culture. The transcriptional activity of -catenin/TCF4
complex was analyzed by using the luciferase reporter systems TOPFLASH
and c-myc promoter (mutated or not for TCF4 binding elements). Expression
levels of Wnt/-catenin targets axin2, lef-1 and c-myc were evaluated by
qPCR and protein localisation by immunofluorescence. A dominant-negative
form of TCF4 (TCF4-DN) was used to verify the contribution of
-catenin/TCF4 complex in transformation induced by oncogenic activation
of KRAS or MEK1. -catenin transcriptional activity was analyzed in human
CRC cells exhibiting APC mutation, treated or not with the MEK inhibitor
U0126. Results. 1- Phase-contrast microscopy revealed that KRASG12V and
caMEK-expressing IECs underwent a morphological change from an epithelial
morphology to an elongated morphology. Cells clearly loose cell-to-cell
contacts when compared to control cells. E-cadherin and -catenin proteins
disappeared from cell-cell junctions. 2- -catenin/TCF4 transcriptional
activity as well as mRNA levels of c-myc, axin2 and lef1 were markedly
increased in IECs transformed by oncogenic MEK1 or KRAS. 3- Expression of
the dominant-negative form of TCF4 severely attenuated IEC transformation
induced by oncogenic MEK1 or KRAS. 4- Treatment of human CRC cell lines
with U0126 significantly reduced axin2, lef-1 and c-myc mRNA levels,
indicating that expression of these -catenin target genes is likely
dependent on MEK/ERK activity. Accordingly, -catenin/TCF4 transcriptional
activity was inhibited following MEK inhibition by U0126 or ERK
dephosphorylation by DUSP4 expression. Conclusion. Our data indicate that
the oncogenic activation of the KRAS/ERK signalling pathway in IECs
up-regulates -catenin/TCF4 transcriptional activity which contributes to
the tumorigenic potential of this signaling.

