Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Applying mechanistic pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models (PKPD)
to describe the growth and inhibition of xenograft tumors in rats and
mice by targeted anticancer agents


Introduction: M. Simeoni et al., Cancer Res 64, 1094-1101 (2004)
published a mathematical model, which is now widely used in pre-clinical
experimentation to describe the growth and inhibition by anti-cancer
agents of mouse and rat xenograft models. It models drug-concentration
induced cell damage, and uses a series of transit-compartments to
introduce delay into the system and empirically describe populations of
cells undergoing subsequent stages of cell damage and death. The model
involves a number of simplifying assumptions: All healthy cells are
equally susceptible to drug treatment at all times; drug action is
linearly related to drug concentration; drug action causes cell damage
and death with a single rate of progress through a series of empirical
transit compartments; DNA damage repair mechanisms are assumed not to
exist. B. Ribba et al. Eur. J. Cancer, 47, 479-490 (2011) recently
demonstrated the utility of a mechanistic model that characterizes the
tumor xenograft in terms of non-hypoxic, hypoxic, and necrotic cells and
the drug action on these sub-populations of cells. In this poster we will
illustrate several modeling approaches that have been utilized when the
simplifying assumptions in the Simeoni model are invalid. We will also
extend the model presented by Ribba et al., to incorporate the spatial
features of a tumor in an attempt to better describe the tumor
micro-environment. Methods: We have adapted the Simeoni and Ribba models
to be more mechanistic by incorporating features that describe: (1) the
utility of biomarkers proximal to the target in cell signaling pathways
as a driver for growth inhibition; (2) multiple mechanisms of drug action
on sub-populations of cells that drive tumor growth. Pharmacokinetic,
biomarker and tumor growth data for example compounds have been used to
demonstrate the utility of these mechanistic models. Results:
Incorporating non-linearity between drug exposure, biomarker response,
and tumor growth inhibition allows observed differences between dosing
schedules to be explained. Replacing drug exposure with a biomarker as
the driver for tumor growth inhibition provides a more meaningful
surrogate for pharmacological action, particularly in the situation where
biomarker response to drug is significantly delayed compared to the
pharmacokinetics. Modeling multiple mechanisms of action on
sub-populations of cells can allow an accurate representation of the drug
effect on the disease biology. Conclusions: We demonstrate that adding
mechanistic features to a descriptive model of drug-induced tumor growth
inhibition makes it more representative of the disease biology and drug
action. This offers the opportunity for modeling targeted drug action,
which was not possible with the original model.

