Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: No evidence for increased risk of cancers other than testicular
cancer among first-degree relatives of testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT)
patients from multiple-case TGCT families


Familial aggregation of testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) has been
reported, but it is unclear whether other cancers co-aggregate in
multiple-case TGCT families. METHODS: We performed an
observed-to-expected (O/E) analysis in a cohort of TGCT families with
documented family cancer history assembled in Norway and the U.S. All
bloodline first-degree relatives of TGCT cases were eligible. Relatives
with missing vital status, gender, or dates of birth and/or death were
excluded. We used population-based, age-adjusted cancer incidence rates
from Norway and the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
Program of the National Cancer Institute, respectively, to calculate
expected numbers of cancer cases. Only non-TGCT cancers were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 130 TGCT families with 84 reported cancers and 31,556
person-years at risk were included in the analysis. Overall, there was no
excess cancer risk, all non-TGCT sites combined, observed among
first-degree relatives of TGCT cases (O/E = 0.89; 95%CI 0.71 - 1.10),
either collectively or stratified by center. Although numbers were small,
site-specific increased risks were observed for soft tissue cancers (n=4;
O/E=7.14; 95%CI 1.95 - 18.29) and leukemia (n=9; O/E=6.48; 95%CI 2.96 -
12.29), and site-specific decreased risk was observed for breast cancer
(n=6; O/E=0.44; 95%CI 0.16 - 0.95). These risks were statistically
significant overall and in Norway, but not in the U.S. CONCLUSION: In
this, the largest study of site-specific cancer risk within multiple-case
TGCT families yet performed, we found no excess risk of non-TGCT cancers
overall among first-degree relatives of TGCT cases. There was limited
evidence supporting altered site-specific risks for soft tissue cancer,
leukemia and breast cancer; however, cancer numbers were small, and the
results were not consistent between centers, suggesting that differences
in cancer reporting among families, case validation methods, or other
factors, rather than an etiologic association, explain these findings.
Familial testicular cancer appears to be a site-specific syndrome.

