Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel WT1-derived peptide induces cellular senescence and
inhibits tumor growth in a human melanoma cell line and xenograft model


Malignant melanoma is the most aggressive and deadly type of skin cancer.
The Wilms tumor protein 1 (WT1) is a transcription factor that has been
associated with melanoma oncogenesis and proliferation, hence could be a
target of tumor control procedures. A lysine-arginine rich peptide (WT1
pTj) based on WT1 C-terminal zinc finger domain was synthesized and
tested for anti-proliferative effects on human and murine melanoma cell
lines (A2058 and B16F10-Nex2, respectively), including inhibition of cell
growth and colony formation, cell cycle arrest and induction of cell
senescence. Internalization of WT1 pTj into A2058 cells was established
by confocal microscopy, using biotinylated peptide and staining by
streptoavidin-FITC. An effect on p53 activity was measured by a
luciferase reporter assay. Competitive ELISA assay was performed to
verify whether the peptide interferes with p53-WT1 interaction. In vivo,
athymic nude mice and C57Bl/6 were inoculated with A2058 and B16F10-Nex2
cells, respectively, and treated for 5 consecutive days with C-amidated
WT1 pTj. Here, we show that WT1 pTj decreased, in a dose and time
dependent manner, the number of melanoma viable cells. The
anti-proliferative activity of WT1 pTj was linked to an irreversible G1
cell cycle arrest and induction of senescence as suggested by positive
staining for beta-galactosidase. Treatment with WT1 pTj reduced the total
number of soft-agar colonies by A2058 melanoma cells. The peptide entered
the cell within 15 minutes and was diffusely distributed throughout the
cell, including the nucleus. Moreover, WT1 pTj enhanced p53 activity and
competed with WT1 protein for binding to p53. In vivo, WT1 pTj reduced
the number of lung nodules in the B16F10-Nex2 syngeneic model of
metastatic melanoma and prolonged survival of mice in the A2058
subcutaneous xenograft model. In conclusion, WT1 pTj peptide entered
cancer cells and promoted antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo. The
data support the hypothesis that WT1 pTj may prevent important
interactions between WT1 protein and its partners via a zinc finger
motif, inhibiting melanoma development. Therefore, WT1 pTj is a promising
agent against WT1-expressing malignancies (e.g. MCF-7 but not SK-BR-3
breast cancer or normal human fibroblasts; and also HL60 acute myeloid
leukemia). WT1 pTj may act also as a trojan carrier peptide for potential
drug delivery. Supported by FAPESP grant 2010/51423-0 and the Brazilian
National Research Council (CNPq)

