Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting EVI1-overexpressing AML with darinaparsin


Activation of EVI1, due to chromosomal translocation, inversion or
transcriptional upregulation, occurs in 8-10% of AML and results in both
activation and repression of specific gene sets. Importantly, the tumor
suppressor PTEN is repressed by EVI1. Arsenic trioxide targets EVI1 for
degradation, suggesting that arsenicals may be effective in treating
EVI1-positive malignancies. Indeed, MDS patients with EVI1 deregulation
had greater benefit from the combination of arsenic trioxide (inorganic
arsenic) and thalidomide than patients without EVI1 deregulation. Here,
we describe the use of a novel organic arsenical, darinaparsin, to treat
a patient with EVI1-overexpressing AML. A 36 year old woman was diagnosed
with AML inv(3)(q21q26.2) where two copies of inv(3) were detected. Her
initial treatment included two induction regimens followed by an
allogeneic stem cell transplant. She had a complete remission lasting 5
years after which time her AML relapsed. After three high dose regimens
and another investigational combination therapy failed to induce
remission (>80% blasts in the bone marrow), we treated the patient's
peripheral blasts ex vivo and found that darinaparsin induced
significantly more cell death than arsenic trioxide. Thus, the patient
started darinaparsin (300 mg/m2 IV over 60 minutes for 5 days every 21
days). Within 10 hours of receiving her first dose, her fever and night
sweats had resolved. Her performance status and appetite improved, and
she was discharged home 2 days after her last dose. Unlike previous drug
regimens, darinaparsin allowed the patient to enjoy a good quality of
life for more than 30 days with an ECOG performance status of 1.
Unfortunately, while darinaparsin stabilized her peripheral white blood
cell counts, the patient died of extramedullary manifestations and
complications of her AML, 12 days after receiving a second cycle of
darinaparsin. Darinaparsin decreased her peripheral white blood cell
counts during the five days of treatment, which was followed by an
additional decrease in the white blood cell count when serum arsenic
levels were low to undetectable. We observed visible nuclear and
cytoplasmic blebbing consistent with apoptosis. Despite the anti-tumor
activity, neither EVI1 protein levels nor the transcriptional repression
activity as measured by PTEN mRNA expression were altered within the
first 72 hours of darinaparsin treatment. cDNA microarray expression
profiling showed a dramatic change in gene expression of her tumor
between the first and second cycle, including a significant increase in
the pro-survival NF-B pathway. NF-B family member (i.e. NFKB1, 2, IA, IB,
IE, RELA, TANK, TRAF1 and TRAF2) mRNA expression increased 2-8 fold
following the first cycle of darinaparsin. Based on our clinical
observations and correlative studies, future studies will investigate a
link between EVI1 overexpression, NF-B signaling and darinaparsin
sensitivity.

