Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-based selection of RNA-aptamers to specifically target
glioblastoma cancer stem cells


Stem cells are a group of cells, which have two important fundamental
properties: self-renewal and multipotency. Stem cells have been
identified also in many human cancers on the basis of being both
morphologically and functionally distinct from other cells within the
heterogeneous tumor mass. According to cancer stem cell hypothesis, the
cancer stem cells (CSC) would remain unaffected by conventional
therapies, and capable of repopulating the tumor and giving rise to
cancer recurrence. The possibility to identify highly selective
biomarkers on CSC would greatly improve cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Recently, nucleic acid-based aptamers have proven useful as reagents for
identifying cell surface proteins and for cell typing. Further, their
high specificity and low toxicity render them a valid alternative to
antibodies for in vivo cell recognition. We have developed the SELEX
technology on intact glioblastoma cancer stem cells to generate aptamers
as biologically active high affinity ligands for CSC-specific cell
surface proteins. The approach has been applied by utilizing glioblastoma
differentiated tumor cells as a negative selection, and cancer stem cells
obtained from two different patients, as positive selection. Upon 16
cycles of SELEX, we generated a set of 2-fluoro-pyrimidines containing
RNA aptamers that, based on sequence analysis, have been grouped into 5
main families. Best aptamers have been then selected by binding
experiments for their ability to distinguish glioblastoma CSC from
differentiated tumor cells. We thus determined the binding affinity of
each molecule to the cell surface specific targets. Functional
experiments will be as well presented to further insight the biological
role of the most promising aptamer molecules in the acquisition and
maintenance of stem cells properties of glioma cancer cells. Results
demonstrate the possibility to generate RNA-based aptamers as potential
innovative tools for the selective targeting of cancer stem cells. A
proteomic approach will define the specific membrane targets of the
selected aptamers

