Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial dynamics regulates migration and invasion of breast
cancer cells


Mitochondrial structure is dynamically regulated by fusion and fission
events that are essential for maintaining physiological functions of
cells. Although dysfunction of mitochondria has been implicated in
tumorigenesis, little is known about the roles of mitochondrial dynamics
in metastasis, the major cause of cancer death. In the present study, we
found that mitochondria were more fragmented in metastatic breast cancer
cells that express higher levels of mitochondrial fission protein
dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) and less mitochondrial fusion protein 1
(Mfn1). Silence of Drp1 or overexpression of Mfn1 resulted in
mitochondria elongation and significantly suppressed metastatic abilities
of breast cancer cells. In contrast, silence of Mfn proteins led to
mitochondrial fragmentation and enhanced metastatic abilities of breast
cancer cells. Interestingly, these manipulations of mitochondrial
dynamics had no significant effects on overall mitochondrial
bioenergetics but altered the subcellular distribution of mitochondria in
breast cancer cells. Silence of Drp1 or overexpression of Mfn1 inhibited
lamellipodia formation, a key step for cancer metastasis, and suppressed
chemoattractant-induced recruitment of mitochondria to lamellipodial
regions. Conversely, silence of Mfn proteins caused accumulation of more
mitochondria in lamollipodia regions with higher mitochondrial membrane
potential, an indication of higher ATP synthesis. Treatment with the ATP
uncoupling agent m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) or mitochondrial ATP
synthesis inhibitor oligomycin A caused disappearance of lamellipodia and
decreased breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Together, our
findings show a new mechanism for regulation of cancer cell migration and
invasion by mitochondrial dynamics. Thus targeting mitochondrial dynamics
may provide a novel strategy for suppressing breast cancer metastasis.
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (CA125661),
State of Nebraska Research Fund (Grant LB595), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31100973) and the National Basic Research
Program (2010CB833701, 2012CB934003).

