Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Malate dehydrogenase 2 confers resistance to docetaxel
chemotherapy in prostate cancer through JNK pathway


Resistance to chemotherapy represents a significant obstacle in cancer
therapeutics. Novel mechanistic understandings in cancer cell
chemotherapeutic sensitivity and resistance can optimize treatment and
improve patient outcome. Molecular alterations in the metabolic pathways
are associated with cancer development; however, the role of these
alterations in chemotherapy efficacy is largely unknown. In this study,
we identified a novel role for mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase 2
(MDH2) in mediating prostate cancer resistance to docetaxel-chemotherapy.
We performed gene expression microarray analyses on frozen needle
biopsies from prostate cancer patients before they underwent neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. We observed that genes in the metabolic pathways are
significantly altered in the cancer epithelium versus the matched- tumor
adjacent benign epithelium. In addition, some of the metabolic gene
expression alterations are associated with the long-term treatment
outcome. Patients with MDH2 overexpression in cancer cells had a
significantly lower relapse-free survival (RFS) based on the Kaplan-Meier
analysis. To investigate the underlying mechanism responsible for this
clinical observation, we found that MDH2 expression was elevated in
prostate cancer cell lines compared to benign prostate epithelial cells.
Then we established stable MDH2 knock-down prostate cancer lines and
evaluated cell proliferation and cell viability within the context of
chemotherapy. We found that MDH2 knockdown significantly enhanced the
docetaxel sensitivity in prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, C42B and PC3.
Metabolic and redox measurement showed that MDH2 knockdown significantly
reduced cellular ATP levels and increased the ADP/ATP and NAD+/NADH
level. In addition, MDH2 knockdown significantly increased reactive
oxygen specifies (ROS) while maintaining the oxygen consumption rate.
These metabolic alterations were associated with the sustained activation
of JNK signaling cascade after docetaxel treatment and the inactivation
of apoptosis inhibitor BCL2. Taken together, these data suggest a novel
function for MDH2 in prostate cancer development and chemotherapy, in
which the cancer associated metabolic and redox alteration confers
resistance to chemotherapy by regulating pathways of signal transduction
and cell death.

