Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shear stress induces Rac1/Rab5 circular ruffling/endosomes at the
apical surface of metastatic esophageal tumor cells enhancing spreading
and motility responses


A coordinated mode of motility is required for dissemination and invasion
of esophageal metastases through the vasculature. This motility is
largely driven by the activation of GTPases Rac1 and Rab5 which regulate
2 and 3-dimensional motility respectively; however, little is known about
the localization and activation of these GTPases under hydrodynamic flow.
In this study, the effect of Rac1 activation on tumor motility was
investigated in a controlled microfluidic chip that simulates venous flow
conditions. A metastatic esophageal cell line derived from the ascites of
a male patient with squamous cell cancer of the esophagus (OC-1), was
transiently transfected with cDNA encoding active (L61), dominant
negative (N17) and wild type (WT) Rac1 fused to GFP to enable visual
localization of Rac1 in real time under static and fluid flow conditions.
Transfected OC-1 cells were allowed to adhere to fibronectin (Fn) for 30
minutes under static conditions or allowed to adhere to Fn for 5 minutes
followed by exposure to a continuous venous shear rate of 200 s-1 for 25
minutes. Cell motility and Rac1 localization was monitored over a
30-minute period followed by cell fixation and co-staining with a
polyclonal antibody directed against Rab5 to visualize endosomal
trafficking within the cells. The results of our study show that the
over-expression of constitutively active Rac1 enhances circular ruffling,
pseudopodia formation and motility in OC-1 cells under static conditions
when compared to N17 and WT Rac1. Moreover, this activation response in
L61-transfected cells is significantly increased in the presence of
venous shear rates, (pA coordinated mode of motility is required for
dissemination and invasion of esophageal metastases through the
vasculature. This motility is largely driven by the activation of GTPases
Rac1 and Rab5 which regulate 2 and 3-dimensional motility respectively;
however, little is known about the localization and activation of these
GTPases under hydrodynamic flow. In this study, the effect of Rac1
activation on tumor motility was investigated in a controlled
microfluidic chip that simulates venous flow conditions. A metastatic
esophageal cell line derived from the ascites of a male patient with
squamous cell cancer of the esophagus (OC-1), was transiently transfected
with cDNA encoding active (L61), dominant negative (N17) and wild type
(WT) Rac1 fused to GFP to enable visual localization of Rac1 in real time
under static and fluid flow conditions. Transfected OC-1 cells were
allowed to adhere to fibronectin (Fn) for 30 minutes under static
conditions or allowed to adhere to Fn for 5 minutes followed by exposure
to a continuous venous shear rate of 200 s-1 for 25 minutes. Cell
motility and Rac1 localization was monitored over a 30-minute period
followed by cell fixation and co-staining with a polyclonal antibody
directed against Rab5 to visualize endosomal trafficking within the
cells. The results of our study show that the over-expression of
constitutively active Rac1 enhances circular ruffling, pseudopodia
formation and motility in OC-1 cells under static conditions when
compared to N17 and WT Rac1. Moreover, this activation response in
L61-transfected cells is significantly increased in the presence of
venous shear rates, (p<0.0013) and completely inhibited in cells
expressing the N17 active mutant which display rounded quiescent
morphology states. Co-localization studies confirmed that both Rac1 and
Rab5 GTPases are recruited to distinct populations of endosomes
containing actin at the apical membrane of OC-1 cells under shear,
measuring between 0.6 and 1.5 m. These results suggest that Rab5/Rac1
circular ruffling/endosomal recruitment at the apical surface is an
important adaptive response to enhance motility under fluid flow
conditions. Moreover, this study may offer insight into mechano-receptor
signaling and how metastatic cells adapt and disseminate in circulation.

