Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic heterogeneity and instability of tumor-initiating cells
in high-grade serous cancer


Serous ovarian cancer (SOC) is the leading cause of morbidity/mortality
from gynecologic malignancy. Current therapies significantly increase
survival, yet 70-90% of SOC patients recur within five years and die of
their disease. The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis holds that only some
tumor cells have the potential to initiate and maintain tumors. Moreover,
CSC might be resistant to many therapeutic agents that are effective
against bulk tumor cells, which could contribute to treatment failure. We
have established a large collection of primary human SOC samples and
developed a robust, quantitative assay for SOC tumor-initiating cells
(TIC). Using this assay, we found that TIC from primary SOC can be
identified based on their expression of the surface marker CD133.
However, we also observed heterogeneity and instability of the TIC
phenotype with disease progression. We examined whether instability in
the TIC phenotype may be due to the acquisition of additional genetic
alterations in the CD133- compared to the CD133+ fraction. Preliminary
analysis suggests that most genetic alterations are common in both
fractions; however, in 3/6 cases, additional genetic alterations were
observed in the CD133- fraction, suggesting the emergence of CD133- TIC
might be, at least in part, genetically driven. The mechanism of genetic
instability is currently under investigation. In addition, we have used
expression microarrays to examine differences between CD133+ and CD133-
populations. We find that >1000 probes are differentially expressed in
these two groups. We have identified several pathways with altered
expression in TIC-enriched fractions. The biological role of these
pathways in HG-SOC is under investigation. Our ability to identify and
characterize TIC in this disease may facilitate development of new and
more effective therapeutic strategies for ovarian cancer, thereby
benefitting patients with this devastating disease.

