Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of GREB1 mRNA and protein limits ER+ breast tumor cell
proliferation


Discovering the mechanism by which estrogen regulates breast cancer
growth will aid in the identification of patients who will benefit from
endocrine therapy. Estrogen (E2) binding to the estrogen receptor (ER)
stimulates the proliferation of normal mammary cells and some breast
cancers. Preventing ER expression or receptor-ligand interaction in
hormone-responsive breast cancers inhibits cell division and promotes
tumor cell death. However, the mechanism of E2-regulated breast cancer
cell growth remains unclear. Although E2-regulated genes have been
identified, those critically involved in growth regulation remain
elusive. Identification of critical E2-regulated genes involved in
mammary cell proliferation would elucidate the key pathway(s) supporting
hormone-mediated tumor growth as well as provide insight into mechanisms
of resistance to endocrine therapies and potential prognostic and
therapeutic targets for ER+ breast cancer treatment. Gene regulated in
breast cancer 1 (GREB1) is an estrogen-regulated gene that has been
implicated in hormone-stimulated cell proliferation and is a candidate
clinical marker for response to endocrine therapy. GREB1 mRNA and protein
expression correlate with ER expression in breast tumors and the addition
of estrogen to ER+ breast cancer cell lines leads to an increase in GREB1
expression and cell proliferation. The function of GREB1 and its role in
ER+ breast tumors remains undefined. Experiments were designed to
elucidate the role of GREB1 in ER+ breast cancer cell lines. ER+ breast
cancer cell lines were transfected with GREB1-specific siRNA and control
species. These tumor cell populations were evaluated for GREB1 mRNA and
protein expression, cell growth and proliferation as well as invasion and
migration in vitro. Sequence-specific siRNA effectively inhibited GREB1
mRNA and protein expression for more than 96 hours in MCF7 and T47D ER+
breast tumor cell lines. Utilizing the real-time Xcelligence system to
monitor cell growth in culture suggested tumor cells treated with siRNA
targeting GREB1 had significantly retarded cell proliferation. These
observations suggest that GREB1 is a critical E2-regulated gene involved
in breast tumor cell proliferation and is an exploitable target for novel
breast cancer therapies.

