Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quorum-sensing salmonella selectively trigger protein expression
within tumor models


Engineered salmonella possess unique capabilities that make them ideal
drug delivery vectors for tumors. Current cancer chemotherapeutic regimes
have limited efficacy due to therapeutic resistance, which decreases the
success rate for treatment of late-stage cancer and metastases. This
therapeutic resistance can be explained by a number of factors including
1) intra-tumoral transport limitations, 2) reduced susceptibility of
quiescent cancer cells, and 3) protein pumps that expel therapeutics from
cells. Bacteria are capable of overcoming these therapeutic limitations
because they preferentially accumulate in tumors, actively penetrate
tumor tissue, and can be engineered to produce anti-cancer drugs in situ.
Due to systemic toxicity, however, bacteria that constitutively express
an anti-cancer drug would not be an ideal alternative to standard
chemotherapy. Therefore, we have engineered salmonella to secrete
anti-cancer drugs after tumoral colonization has occurred through the use
of the lux quorum sensing system. Quorum sensing is the ability for
bacteria to change their gene expression based on changes in population
density. Because salmonella preferentially accumulate in tumors, a quorum
sensing genetic circuit, coupled with an anti-cancer agent, creates a
robust expression switch that only turns on in bacterial tumor colonies.
This unique bacterial drug delivery vector will allow for targeted
delivery of a powerful anti-cancer drug to therapeutically resistant
tumors and metastases while minimizing the risk of systemic toxicity.
Salmonella transformed with the quorum-sensing system induce expression
upon reaching a threshold bacterial density of 108 cfu/mL (OD = 0.5).
Furthermore, in a tumor-on-a-chip device, quorum-sensing bacteria induce
expression once colonies have formed within the tissue. These colonies
have formed deep within the therapeutically resistant regions of tumors
where most standard chemotherapeutic drugs cannot reach due to diffusion
limitations. Finally, 4T1 murine tumor models injected with the
quorum-sensing system show co-localization of GFP and salmonella within
tumor tissue while healthy tissue shows low-counts of salmonella without
any GFP expression. The culmination of this data demonstrates that
salmonella integrated with a quorum-sensing expression vector can sense
colonization within tumors and induce expression of a reporter protein
once a critical density has been reached. Bacteria transformed with a
quorum-sensing system will also form colonies deeper into the
therapeutically resistant regions of tumors allowing for treatment of
tumor tissue previously unreachable by standard chemotherapeutic
regiments. Overall, this system creates a robust on/off switch that will
allow for targeted bacterial drug delivery to tumors and metastases while
minimizing the risk of potentially harmful drugs reaching healthy tissue.

