Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of aldo-keto reductases and estrogen signalling in
acquired anthracycline resistance


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in North
American women. The disease can be difficult to treat by adjuvant or
neoadjuvant chemotherapy because of intrinsic or acquired resistance to
chemotherapy agents. To better understand the mechanisms for acquired
resistance to the anthracycline class of chemotherapy agents in breast
cancer, a series of MCF-7 breast tumour cell lines have been developed
that exhibit progressive resistance to epirubicin (MCF-7EPI cells) or to
doxorubicin (MCF-7DOX2 cells). Following mRNA microarray analysis,
several genes were identified whose expression was associated with the
acquisition of anthracycline resistance. Among these were several
Aldo-keto Reductases (AKRs) responsible for estrogen synthesis from
estrone and anthracycline detoxification to 13-hydroxymetabolites. AKR
1C3 showed more than a 10-fold increase in expression in
anthracycline-resistant breast tumour cells. We hypothesized that the
over-expression of AKR 1C3 would lead to both increased drug
detoxification and an increase in estrogen synthesis. This would result
in increased tumour cell survival and growth in the presence of
anthracyclines. Recently, we observed that estrogen levels were, in fact,
increased as cells became anthracycline-resistant. In contrast, the
expression of estrogen receptor (ESR1) was reduced by 2- to 5-fold at the
gene level and 2- to 20- fold at the protein level, with a concomitant
reduction in the estrogen-dependent expression of Bcl-2 and Cyclin D1.
Diminished Bcl-2 and cyclin D1 expression would be expected to reduce the
growth rate of the cells, a hypothesis we have confirmed in cell culture
experiments. Taken together, our findings suggest that selection for
anthracycline resistance in breast tumour cells results in alterations in
AKR expression, resulting in enhanced detoxification of doxorubicin, the
promotion of estrogen biosynthesis, and the reduced estrogen-dependent
expression of Bcl-2 and cyclin D1. The reduced expression of Bcl-2 and
cyclin D1 blunts the growth rate of anthracycline-resistant cells, which
would further increase the ability of these cells to survive in the
presence of anthracyclines.

