Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of MAP1LC3 in 15d-PGJ2 induced non-apoptotic and
non-autophagic cell death in therapy-resistant triple negative breast
tumors


Introduction: In spite of significant progress in breast cancer research,
hormonal therapy resistant triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) still
pose a greater therapeutic challenge due to lack of a suitable
therapeutic target and their resistance to apoptosis induced by
chemotherapy. Therefore, alternative approaches are required to induce
cell death in these apoptosis-resistant breast cancers. We previously
showed that certain sulfhydryl reactive compounds, containing
,-unsaturated ketones, such as 15d-PGJ2 induced non-apoptotic and
non-autophagic cell death in apoptosis resistant and rapidly growing
cancer cells through induction of microtubule-associated protein 1 light
chain 3 (MAP1LC3) and sequestosome1 (p62) proteins. Purpose: In the
present study, our objective is to address the role of MAP1LC3 in
15d-PGJ2 induced non-apoptotic and non-autophagic cell death of breast
cancer cells. Methods: Stable knockdown of endogenous MAP1LC3 expression
was achieved by shRNA expression vectors. Cell culture, cell
proliferation, soft-agar colony forming assays and immunoblotting were
performed using standard methods. Nude mice tumor models were used for in
vivo studies. Results: First, we showed the efficacy of 15d-PGJ2 in
reducing the breast tumor burden using xenograft mice models of
MDA-MB-231 cells by i.p. into tumor bearing mice. We observed significant
reduction of tumor growth with high levels of p27, PTEN and less pAkt
compared to vehicle treated mice. Most importantly, tumors treated with
15d-PGJ2 showed extensive cytoplasmic vacuoles with remarkable increase
in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers such as Bip, CHOP along with
MAP1LC3 and p62 proteins as well as higher molecular weight ubiquitinated
proteins. Notably, in normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC)
15d-PGJ2 failed to induce cell death as well as MAP1LC3 protein.
Likewise, MAP1LC3 knockdown (LC3KD) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
also prevented 15d-PGJ2 induced cell death with decreased accumulation of
ER stress markers such as Bip and CHOP, p62 and ubiquitinated proteins.
In addition, MAP1LC3 deficiency also resulted in changes in MDA-MB-231
cell morphology from an elongated mesenchymal shape to epithelial
cobblestone appearance with distinct slower growth rate. Moreover, LC3KD
cells failed to form colonies in soft agar, showed reduced migration and
invasion in transit well chamber assays, and expressed high levels of
p21, p27 and PTEN with decreased pAkt levels. Finally, MAP1LC3-deficient
cells showed marked reduction in tumor growth compared to parental
MDA-MB-231 cells in xenograft model using nude mice. Conclusions: Hence
our results suggest that the induction of MAP1LC3 in response to
treatment with sulfhydryl reactive , -unsaturated carbonyl compounds is
an essential feature in inducing a novel form of cell death in therapy
resistant breast cancers.

