Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel use of E2f and Cdk inhibitors to prevent RB-null tumours
in genetically engineered models of retinoblastoma


Over the past few decades, extensive mouse and human genetics have
implicated deregulated E2f and Cdk activity in cell exit escape and
tumorigenesis. In flies, activating E2f or Cdk causes temporary abnormal
division, but both must be induced for long-term aberrant proliferation -
a hallmark in benign tumor-prone lesions. Almost invariably, defects in
the Rb-E2f or Cip/Kip Cdk inhibitor (CKI)-Cdk2/1 cell cycle regulatory
pathways occur together in human cancer. Despite this, little is known in
regards to whether dual activation is an obligate feature for tumor
susceptibility at initiation in vivo. In human retinoblastoma, homozygous
RB1 inactivation is sufficient to initiate the disease. However, mouse
retinoblastoma requires inactivation of both Rb1 and one of its family
members (p107 or p130). Like pRb, p107 and p130 are best known as E2f
inhibitors. Unexpectedly, the additional loss of p107 does not elevate
E2f targets follow Rb loss. Instead, Rb/p107-deficient cells induce the
E3 ubiquitin ligase Skp2 and activate Cdk2 in vivo. Strikingly, Cdk2
activity tightly correlates with susceptibility to retinoblastoma in our
mouse models. Compiling this data, tumorigenesis may have two distinct
steps: (1) Rb loss initiates abnormal division, and (2) the additional
loss of p107 or, as we have found, p27kip1, both of which lead to Cdk2
activation is required to engender cancer susceptibility. Together, E2f
and Cdk dual axes activity is essential for retinoblastoma initiation. To
test this notion pharmaceutically, we treated retinoblastoma-prone mice
with a Cdk or E2f small molecule inhibitor during the birth period of
suspected cancer cell-of-origin. Strikingly, one-week exposure to an
inhibitor of either axes curtailed retinoblastoma in Rb/p107- null and
Rb/p27-null retinas. These therapeutic successes were achieved without
disrupting normal proliferation. Thus, E2f inhibitors, untested in vivo,
or Cdk inhibitors, largely unproven as therapeutics, may be ideal
chemopreventative agents.

