Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers of phenethyl isothiocyanate-mediated mammary cancer
prevention in MMTV-neu mouse model


Biomarker(s) predictive of efficacy is necessary for clinical development
of promising cancer chemopreventive agents because cancer incidence is
too rigorous of an end point for malignancies with long latency such as
breast cancer. The present study was undertaken to identify biomarker(s)
associated with phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC)-mediated mammary cancer
prevention in MMTV-neu transgenic mouse model. The PEITC is a promising
cancer chemopreventive constituent of cruciferous vegetables (e.g.,
watercress). Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis-mass spectrometry of
tumor specimens from control and PEITC-fed mice (n= 3) revealed
alterations in expression of several proteins, including hexokinase-1,
isoform CRA_f (1.36-fold increase by PEITC administration), L-lactate
dehydrogenase A chain isoform 1 (1.57-fold increase by PEITC
administration), pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2 (1.33-fold decrease by
PEITC administration), and mitochondrial ATP synthase, H+ transporting F1
complex beta subunit (1.38-fold decrease by PEITC administration).
Interestingly, the PEITC-induced apoptotic cell death in cultured cancer
cells is associated with inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation leading
to production of reactive oxygen species. Down-regulation of
mitochondrial ATP synthase protein in tumors of PEITC-fed mice was
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Expression of mitochondrial ATP
synthase was reduced by about 66% in the tumors from PEITC-fed mice in
comparison with control (P= 0.05 by two-sided Student's t-test, n= 6-7).
In addition, plasma level of transthyretin was significantly higher in
the PEITC treatment group compared with control (P= 0.04 by two-sided
Student's t-test, n= 5). In conclusion, the present study not only
underscores the power of proteomics in cancer chemoprevention research
but also suggests that mitochondrial ATP synthase, and possibly
hexokinase-1, pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2, and/or L-lactate
dehydrogenase A chain isoform 1, may be useful biomarkers to assess the
biological activity of PEITC in future clinical trials. This study was
supported in part by the US PHS grants CA101753 and CA129347, awarded by
the National Cancer Institute.

