Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disregulation of phosphorelated Amplified In Breast Cancer3 (AIB3)
contributes to poor prognosis and mediates trastuzumab efficacy in breast
cancer patients


Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is the first line HER2 (ErbB2)/neu-directed
therapy for the treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
Although the efficacy of trastuzumab depends on the HER2/neu status of
the tumour, the single-agent response rate ranges from 12 to 30% and ew
patients respond to trastuzumab monotherapy largely due to various
resistance mechanisms. Amplifeid In Breast Cancer3 (AIB3) is a
transcriptional coactivator. AIB3 plays an important role in embryonic
development, adipocyte differentiation, metabolism. AIB3 was initially
found to be amplified in subgroup of breast cancer patients. Our previous
data using knockout mouse mode combined cell culture indicate that AIB3
plays important role in breast tumorigenesis. Here we report that AIB3
can be phosphorylated by MAPK at S884 site and phosphorylation at S884 of
AIB3 dramatically reduced ligand-dependent AIB3 interactions with
estrogen receptors when compared with the wild-type unphosphorylated
form, although there was a significant increase of interactions with the
unliganded receptor. Misexpression of phosphorylated AIB3 was observed in
human breast cancer tissues and disregulation of phosphorylated AIB3 was
associated with patients poor prognosis. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous
disease and intrinsic subtypes play an extremely important role in
improve on current standards for breast cancer prognosis and prediction
of chemotherapy. Noticeably, phosphorylated AIB3 was highly expressed in
Her2-enriched subtype of human breast cancer patients, as well as in the
mammary tumor of MMTV-Her2 transgenic mice. Mechanism studies reveal that
phosphorylated AIB3 alters trastuzumab efficacy in cultured breast cancer
cells. The association between pAIB3 and important clinical outcomes
confers pAIB3 a significant prognostic marker in breast cancer.
Phosphorylated AIB3 as a modulator in ErbB2-MAPK regulating loop
represents a potentially novel mechanism for trastuzumab (herceptin)
efficacy. The implied interaction between pAIB3 and Her2 suggests the
potential of dual targeting of Her2 and pAIB3 as a promising therapeutic
approach for personalized breast cancer therapy.

