Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA binding site polymorphisms influence ovarian cancer risk
in the collaborative oncological gene-environment study


Mi(cro)RNAs are short non-coding RNA molecules that play a key role in
carcinogenesis by regulating tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Published
data has implicated miRNAs in ovarian cancer (OC) development and
progression, and we hypothesize that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in sites of miRNA: messenger RNA (mRNA) binding may influence OC
risk by altering expression levels of targeted mRNAs. To evaluate
associations between SNPs in miRNA binding sites and OC risk, we used
bioinformatics tools and public databases to identify miRNA binding SNPs
relevant to ovarian cancer. We then evaluated the frequency of
approximately 1,100 SNPs in 20,000 epithelial OC cases and 20,000
controls represented in the international Collaborative Oncological
Gene-environment Study. Unconditional logistic regression was used to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between
genotypes and case status, with adjustment for the first five principal
components representing European ancestry. Log-additive genetic models
were applied to each SNP, modeling the number of copies of the minor
allele. Subgroup analysis was conducted for serous adenocarcinomas, the
most predominant histologic subtype of epithelial OC. Preliminary
analysis of 11,215 invasive epithelial OCs and 15,910 controls included
four SNPs with PMi(cro)RNAs are short non-coding RNA molecules that play
a key role in carcinogenesis by regulating tumor suppressors and
oncogenes. Published data has implicated miRNAs in ovarian cancer (OC)
development and progression, and we hypothesize that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in sites of miRNA: messenger RNA (mRNA) binding may
influence OC risk by altering expression levels of targeted mRNAs. To
evaluate associations between SNPs in miRNA binding sites and OC risk, we
used bioinformatics tools and public databases to identify miRNA binding
SNPs relevant to ovarian cancer. We then evaluated the frequency of
approximately 1,100 SNPs in 20,000 epithelial OC cases and 20,000
controls represented in the international Collaborative Oncological
Gene-environment Study. Unconditional logistic regression was used to
estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between
genotypes and case status, with adjustment for the first five principal
components representing European ancestry. Log-additive genetic models
were applied to each SNP, modeling the number of copies of the minor
allele. Subgroup analysis was conducted for serous adenocarcinomas, the
most predominant histologic subtype of epithelial OC. Preliminary
analysis of 11,215 invasive epithelial OCs and 15,910 controls included
four SNPs with P<106 and 1 SNP with PMi(cro)RNAs are short non-coding RNA
molecules that play a key role in carcinogenesis by regulating tumor
suppressors and oncogenes. Published data has implicated miRNAs in
ovarian cancer (OC) development and progression, and we hypothesize that
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in sites of miRNA: messenger RNA
(mRNA) binding may influence OC risk by altering expression levels of
targeted mRNAs. To evaluate associations between SNPs in miRNA binding
sites and OC risk, we used bioinformatics tools and public databases to
identify miRNA binding SNPs relevant to ovarian cancer. We then evaluated
the frequency of approximately 1,100 SNPs in 20,000 epithelial OC cases
and 20,000 controls represented in the international Collaborative
Oncological Gene-environment Study. Unconditional logistic regression was
used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
between genotypes and case status, with adjustment for the first five
principal components representing European ancestry. Log-additive genetic
models were applied to each SNP, modeling the number of copies of the
minor allele. Subgroup analysis was conducted for serous adenocarcinomas,
the most predominant histologic subtype of epithelial OC. Preliminary
analysis of 11,215 invasive epithelial OCs and 15,910 controls included
four SNPs with P<106 and 1 SNP with P<105. Analysis of 6,215 invasive
serous adenocarcinomas revealed two SNPs with PMi(cro)RNAs are short
non-coding RNA molecules that play a key role in carcinogenesis by
regulating tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Published data has implicated
miRNAs in ovarian cancer (OC) development and progression, and we
hypothesize that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in sites of
miRNA: messenger RNA (mRNA) binding may influence OC risk by altering
expression levels of targeted mRNAs. To evaluate associations between
SNPs in miRNA binding sites and OC risk, we used bioinformatics tools and
public databases to identify miRNA binding SNPs relevant to ovarian
cancer. We then evaluated the frequency of approximately 1,100 SNPs in
20,000 epithelial OC cases and 20,000 controls represented in the
international Collaborative Oncological Gene-environment Study.
Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) between genotypes and case status, with
adjustment for the first five principal components representing European
ancestry. Log-additive genetic models were applied to each SNP, modeling
the number of copies of the minor allele. Subgroup analysis was conducted
for serous adenocarcinomas, the most predominant histologic subtype of
epithelial OC. Preliminary analysis of 11,215 invasive epithelial OCs and
15,910 controls included four SNPs with P<106 and 1 SNP with P<105.
Analysis of 6,215 invasive serous adenocarcinomas revealed two SNPs with
P<107 and three SNPs with PT SNP predicted to reside in a highly
conserved miRNA binding site of BTBD3 (BTB POZ domain containing 3), a
transcription factor suggested to be involved in cell proliferation,
cancer progression, and response to platinum-based chemotherapy.
rs6104808 was associated with a decreased risk of OC overall (OR (95%
CI): 0.42 (0.28-0.62), P=1.26 x 105)), and the association was stronger
among cases with serous adenocarcinoma (OR (95% CI): 0.30 (0.17-0.50),
P=9.89 x 106)). This represents the largest, most comprehensive
epidemiologic study to date to evaluate associations between miRNA
binding site SNPs and OC susceptibility. Although based on a preliminary
analysis, these data suggest a significant role and putative biological
mechanism for common germline variants in miRNA binding sites leading to
cancer development.

