Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two-dimensional gel analysis of protein expression profile in
patients with invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix for
identification of differentially expressed proteins in relation to
response to radiation therapy


Background: Cancer of uterine cervix is the second most common cancer and
an important cause of cancer related mortality among women worldwide.
These patients are treated by chemoradiation, response to which is a
major factor affecting their outcome. Objective: To identify
differentially expressed proteins in the tissue biopsies of patients with
invasive cervical cancer by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis [2-DE]
and correlate it with their clinical outcome. Methods: After an informed
consent, 10 patients of invasive squamous cervical cancer, stage IIB,
between 40-50 years treated with chemoradiation as per standard protocol
were recruited. Based on the 24 month-outcome, there were two groups
(N=5): i) Evidence of disease (ED) and ii) No evidence of disease (NED).
Pooled protein from the tissue biopsies were subjected to 2-DE using pH
3-10 IPG strips of 7cm length, silver stained and expression profile
compared using Image Master 7.0 software (GE Healthsciences). The
differentially expressed protein spots were identified and isoelectric
point (pI) & Molecular Weight (MW) was determined from the plot of
relative electrophoretic mobility (Rf) values of the marker against their
respective molecular weight and the plot of pI marker against their
respective distance from the anode respectively. The TagIdent software
was used for their identification. Results: Out of a total of 327 spots
identified, 89 spots showed differential expression, of which 40 were
highly significant (ANOVA p Background: Cancer of uterine cervix is the
second most common cancer and an important cause of cancer related
mortality among women worldwide. These patients are treated by
chemoradiation, response to which is a major factor affecting their
outcome. Objective: To identify differentially expressed proteins in the
tissue biopsies of patients with invasive cervical cancer by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis [2-DE] and correlate it with their
clinical outcome. Methods: After an informed consent, 10 patients of
invasive squamous cervical cancer, stage IIB, between 40-50 years treated
with chemoradiation as per standard protocol were recruited. Based on the
24 month-outcome, there were two groups (N=5): i) Evidence of disease
(ED) and ii) No evidence of disease (NED). Pooled protein from the tissue
biopsies were subjected to 2-DE using pH 3-10 IPG strips of 7cm length,
silver stained and expression profile compared using Image Master 7.0
software (GE Healthsciences). The differentially expressed protein spots
were identified and isoelectric point (pI) & Molecular Weight (MW) was
determined from the plot of relative electrophoretic mobility (Rf) values
of the marker against their respective molecular weight and the plot of
pI marker against their respective distance from the anode respectively.
The TagIdent software was used for their identification. Results: Out of
a total of 327 spots identified, 89 spots showed differential expression,
of which 40 were highly significant (ANOVA p <0.03) between ED vs NED
groups. Conclusion: 2-DE has provided preliminaryinformation regarding
differentially expressed proteins which may help identify biomarkers for
prediction of outcome in patients with invasive cervical cancer which
needs further confirmation. Differentially expressed proteins in NED vs
ED groups in invasive cervical cancer


