Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi-mediated diminution of myoferlin increases adhesion of breast
cancer cells


Introduction: Ferlins are a family of proteins that play a variety of
roles associated with plasma membrane dynamics in eukaryotes, including
plasma membrane repair, regulation of membrane expression of receptors,
and endocytosis. Dysferlin was recently reported to regulate platelet
endothelial cellular adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) in endothelial cells
(1). We have shown that ablation of myoferlin (MYOF) in breast tumor
cells attenuates invasion in vitro (in review, J Cell Sci). Moreover,
loss of MYOF was found to be associated with reduced phosphorylation of a
number of receptor tyrosine kinases (in press, PNAS), and others have
reported on the role of MYOF in tyrosine kinase receptors expression at
the plasma membrane (2). These results prompted us to hypothesize that
MYOF may be involved in cell-matrix adhesion. Methods & Results: We used
lentiviral-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) gene silencing to generate
stable MYOF-deficient MDA-MB-231 cells and confirmed MYOF reduction with
immunoblotting and qRT-PCR. RNAi control cells were generated in tandem
with a non-human gene targeting construct. Relative adhesion and
spreading of the wild-type, control, and MYOF-deficient epithelial cells
were evaluated using a real-time electrical impedance measurement system
(xCELLigence, Roche Applied Science). Results show a significant increase
in the adhesion and spreading of the MYOF-deficient cells in comparision
to wild-type and control cells. A trypsin assay developed using the same
electrical impedance system demonstrated greater adhesion strength in the
MYOF-deficient cells. This was measured by the duration of time necessary
to reduce the pre-trypsin-treatment impedance by one-half. These results
were further validated using a conventional parallel plate device, in
which MYOF-deficient cells were found to be more adherent than controls
when subjected to a range of shear stresses (1-10 dynes/cm2). PCR array
screening of extracellular matrix related genes (SABiosciences) in
MYOF-deficient and RNAi control MDA-MB-231 cells indicated that
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1/CD54) and vitronectin mRNA
levels are increased following MYOF-diminution, and may potentially
contribute to the mechanism behind the altered adhesion in MYOF-deficient
cells. Conclusion: Myoferlin is important for the regulation of breast
cancer epithelial cell adhesion. Since dysregulation of adhesion is often
associated with cancer invasion and metastasis, myoferlin may play a role
in these processes in breast carcinoma. (1) Sharma A, Yu C, Leung C,
Trane A, Lau M, Utokaparch S, et al. A new role for the muscle repair
protein dysferlin in endothelial cell adhesion and angiogenesis.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2010 Nov;30 (11):2196-204. (2) Yu C, Sharma
A, Trane A, Utokaparch S, Leung C, Bernatchez P. Myoferlin gene silencing
decreases Tie-2 expression in vitro and angiogenesis in vivo. Vascul
Pharmacol 2011 May 6.

