Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Production of recombinant lunasin peptides with enhanced
anticancer activity using transient expression in tobacco


Epidemiological observations suggest a correlation between high levels of
soybean product consumption and lowered incidence and mortality due to
prostate, breast and colon cancer. Lunasin, a 43-44 amino acid peptide
derived from soybean, has been implicated as a significant source of this
anticancer activity. Lunasin contains nine consecutive aspartic acid
residues at the C-terminus that bind to hypoacetlyated core histones, a
minimal internal RGD cell adhesion motif and a helical region exhibiting
structural homology to conserved sequences of chromatin binding proteins.
Initial studies demonstrated that lunasin can prevent the transformation
of mammalian cells by chemical carcinogens or viral oncogenes, and
inhibits chemically-induced tumors in a mouse skin cancer model. These
results suggest that lunasin may be useful as a cancer chemoprevention
agent. More recent studies have demonstrated that lunasin can inhibit the
proliferation of several established human cancer cell lines in vitro and
in vivo, suggesting that lunasin may also be useful as a cancer
therapeutic. Lunasin's anticancer effects are currently limited to
specific cancer cell types and require 10-100 M concentrations of
peptide. We have now established a transient expression system based on
the Tobacco Mosaic Virus vector, Geneware, for large-scale production of
modified forms of recombinant lunasin in tobacco. Our initial studies
revealed that we could not detect any significant protein accumulation
using constructs expressing lunasin peptides alone. We modified our
strategy by expressing lunasin peptides as C-terminal fusions to green
fluorescent protein (GFP) that includes a linker sequence containing a
thrombin cleavage site. We have demonstrated that this system can produce
GFP-lunasin at levels >100 mg/kg fresh weight tissue and demonstrated
that the lunasin peptide can be recovered by proteolytic cleavage with
thrombin. We have used this system to produce a modified form of lunasin
that contains an N-terminal RGD domain sequence that preferentially binds
to the v6 integrin that is highly expressed in a number of
epithelial-derived carcinomas. In vitro studies using cancer cell lines
expressing the v6 integrin demonstrate that the RGD-lunasin peptide is
>10-fold more active in inhibiting cancer cell proliferation than the
natural form of lunasin. Moreover, RGD-lunasin inhibits the proliferation
of some cancer cell lines that are insensitive to 100 M lunasin. These
results demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing plant-based expression
to produce more efficacious forms of lunasin that are targeted
specifically to cancer cells and indicate that RGD lunasin may be useful
as a cancer therapeutic.

