Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An EGFR-STAT3 pathway promotes NF1 peripheral nerve tumorigenesis
and transformation


Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a very common inherited disease,
affecting 1:3500 individuals worldwide. Nearly all (95%) of NF1 patients
develop benign neurofibromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors(MPNSTs). Currently, their prevention is not possible, partially
because the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis and the molecules that
mark benign neurofibroma formation are poorly understood. This study is
to test the relevance of EGFR expression to neurofibroma formation, and
to identify possible additional pathways and genes that might contribute
to neurofibroma formation. We bred the Nf1 flox/flox;DhhCre mice, 100% of
which form neurofibromas (Wu et al., 2008), to CNP-hEGFR mice and to Wa2
mice, an EGFR hypomorphic allele. To test the role of EGFR in
tumorigenesis, we also used sleeping beauty (SB) insertional mutagenesis
to obtain quadruple transgenic mice (Rosa26-lsl-SB11;T2/Onc;
Nf1flox/flox;DhhCre). To define neurofibroma initiation and progression
genes, we used Pyrosequencing to identify common insertion sites (CISs)
that had more SB insertions that are most likely to harbor
disease-related genes. We used ingenuity pathway analysis to predict
pathways and genes that might contribute to neurofibroma formation. We
used a neurofibroma sphere culture system, a method used for detecting
self-renewing stem/progenitor cells, to determine inhibitory effects of a
STAT3 inhibitor (FLLL32). We immunostained human and mouse sections with
anti-pSTAT3 (tyr705) to determine STAT3 activation status. We found that
mouse neurofibroma number and size increased in Nf1flox/flox;DhhCre mice
with hEGFR expressed in nerve Schwann cells. Diminished EGFR signaling in
Nf1 flox/flox;DhhCre, Wa2/+ mice decreased neurofibroma number, not size.
We used insertional mutagenesis to identify other modifiers of
neurofibroma tumorigenesis. Analysis of CISs identified hubs involving
GSK3B, TNF, and STAT3. STAT3 was the most significant changed pathway.
Inhibition of STAT3 by shRNA or a specific STAT3 inhibitor FLLL32 blocked
human neurofibroma-sphere formation. Immunohistochemistry identified
STAT3(p705) in human and mouse neurofibromas and MPNSTs. FLLL32 inhibited
cell proliferation and stimulated cell death as well as reduced
neurofibroma growth in vivo in the Nf1flox/flox;DhhCre mouse
neurofibromas. STAT3 knockdown by shRNA prevented MPNST formation in
vivo. Finally, reducing EGFR activity strongly reduced pSTAT3 in vivo.
Thus, an EGFR-STAT3 pathway regulates neurofibroma number and
neurofibroma growth, and promotes transformation. STAT3 inhibitors may be
useful in NF1 therapeutics. (*This work was supported by the National
Institutes of Health (R01 NS28840 to N.R. and P50 NS057531 to N.R. and
D.L.) and an Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center pelotonia
idea award to J.W.)

