Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical role of autophagy proteins Beclin 1 and LC3B in
deguelin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic tumor cells in vitro and in
vivo: A new paradigm


Deguelin is known to inhibit cell growth by inducing apoptosis in various
cancer models primarily by inhibiting AKT, but its role in autophagy is
largely unknown. In the present study, we evaluated the role of autophagy
in deguelin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer. Our results reveal
that PanC-1, AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 cells that were treated with deguelin show
significant increase in autophagosome vacuoles (AV) formation and
increase in the expression of Beclin1, ATG5 and LC3B. In general,
induction of autophagy is considered to be a protective mechanism;
however, few recent studies have indicated the pro-apoptotic role of
autophagy as well. To address this question, cells were pretreated with
specific inhibitors of autophagy such as chloroquine and 3-methyladenine
prior to deguelin treatment and apoptosis was evaluated. Surprisingly,
inhibition of autophagy by all the above-mentioned inhibitors
significantly blocked deguelin-induced apoptosis, indicating that
apoptosis induction by deguelin was dependent on autophagy. To establish
that deguelin-mediated autophagy was involved in apoptosis, Beclin1, ATG5
and LC3B were silenced and treated with deguelin. Consistent with our
inhibitor data, silencing of Beclin1 and LC3B made the cells resistant to
deguelin-induced apoptosis, however silencing of ATG5 provided modest
protection, indicating that Beclin1 and LC3B play a critical role in
deguelin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Previous studies
have shown that Beclin1 is cleaved by caspases into N-terminal and
C-terminal fragments. C-terminal translocates to mitochondria and cause
cytochrome C release to trigger apoptosis. In agreement, our results show
that the C-terminal fragment of Beclin1 was increased, whereas cytochrome
C levels were decreased in mitochondrial fraction, indicating that
Beclin1 acts as a proapoptotic protein in our model. Similarly, LC3B has
been shown to induce apoptosis by releasing Fas from caveolin1 to form
DISC and trigger extrinsic apoptosis. To test this possibility, DISC
formation was evaluated in deguelin treated control and LC3B-silenced
PanC-1 cells. Interestingly, DISC formation was significantly reduced in
LC3B silenced PanC-1 cells, as compared to LC3B expressing cells. To
further validate our observations in vivo, PanC-1-luc cells were
orthotopically implanted into the pancreas of nu/nu mice and treated with
5mg/kg deguelin (i.p., daily). After 42 days of treatment, deguelin
treated mice showed substantially reduced tumor growth as compared to
control mice. In addition, tumors of deguelin treated mice exhibited
increased levels of Beclin1 and LC3B. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that deguelin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic tumor cells was
mediated through autophagy. [Supported in part by R01 grants CA129038 and
CA106953 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer Institute].

