Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of high resolution Doppler imaging for non-invasive,
quantitative evaluation of hypoxia-driven neovascularization following
surgical ligation of the femoral artery


A tumor's growth is inextricably linked with its vascularization. Rapidly
growing tumors outstrip their blood supply, creating hypoxia. To
compensate, tumor cells release angioproliferative factors that stimulate
endothelial cell proliferation. Proliferating endothelial cells
contribute to the formation of new blood vessels that promote tumor
perfusion and stimulate further tumor growth. The close link between
tumor growth and neovascularization makes it difficult to study either
process in the absence of the other. To address this we have adapted a
mouse model used in the study of peripheral arterial disease. Ischemia
was induced by surgical ligation and excision a 3-5mm portion of the
femoral artery, vein, and all nearby arterial branches in the right
hindlimb of 10-12 week old athymic nude mice. Limb perfusion was measured
prior to surgery and 1, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post-surgery. A 7mm
portion of hindlimb perfusion was quantified using Power Doppler mode on
the VisualSonics Vevo 770 High Resolution micro Ultrasound system.
Morphological changes were observed by histology and immunohistochemistry
using antibodies against CD31 and F4/80. Based on quantified Doppler
ultrasound data, limb perfusion was reduced as much as 80% within 24 hrs
of ligation. Blood flow was restored over the course of the next 7 days.
However, re-perfused limbs showed a diffuse pattern of blood flow in
comparison to control limbs. Loss of perfusion was accompanied by muscle
atrophy and the accumulation of intra-fasicular fat deposits. IHC
revealed a marked increase of F4/80 and CD31 staining in ligated limbs.
Similar changes were not observed in contralateral limbs that were not
operated on or in sham-ligated hind limbs. Our data is consistent with
the interpretation that femoral artery ligation causes acute loss of
perfusion that is compensated for by macrophage recruitment and
disseminated neovascularization. This model provides a novel opportunity
to study neovascularization in the absence of tumor growth that will
complement ongoing studies using tumor-based models of angiogenesis.

