Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction and cross-resistance of cisplatin and pemetrexed in
malignant pleural mesothelioma cell lines


Background: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is one of the most
lethal cancers with a rapidly increasing incidence worldwide. Although
cisplatin and pemetrexed are recognized as key drugs, and their
combination chemotherapy is a standard therapy for MPM, their
drug-to-drug interactions, cross-resistance, and resistance mechanisms
are not well understood. Methods: The interaction between cisplatin and
pemetrexed was evaluated by colonogenic assays followed by isobologram
analysis in 4 human MPM cell lines. The cell lines were exposed to the
agents using a stepwise dose-escalation method to establish
drug-resistant sublines. Thymidylate synthase (TS) mRNA expression was
evaluated by RT-PCR, and gene expression profiles were assessed by cDNA
microarray analysis and gene ontology analysis using Ingenuity Pathway
Analisis (IPA) in the drug-resistant sublines. Results: Cisplatin and
pemetrexed had synergistic effects in 3 cell lines and an additive effect
in the fourth cell line. The former 3 cell lines showed similar
sensitivity to pemetrexed in the parental cells and their
cisplatin-resistant sublines, whereas the fourth cell line exhibited
cross-resistance. In contrast, cisplatin had diverse effects on
pemetrexed-resistant sublines. High TS expression did not correlate with
natural pemetrexed resistance and its elevatedexpression correlated with
acquired pemetrexed resistance in 2 sublines. Microarray analysis
disclosed that the genes which related to cellular development, small
molecule biochemistry, cellular movement, cell death, and cellular growth
and proliferation affected drug-resistant mechanisms deeply, and that
this tendency was common to cisplatin-resistant sublines and
pemetrexed-resistant sublines. Conclusion: Cisplatin and pemetrexed
showed synergistic activity and no cross-resistance in 3 of the 4 MPM
cell lines, suggesting the clinical relevance of their combination
chemotherapy. TS expression did not necessarily correlate with pemetrexed
resistance. Multiple mechanisms of molecular and cellular functions may
underlie acquired resistance to cisplatin and pemetrexed in MPM.

