Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet induced obesity, inflammation and prostate cancer progression
in Hi-Myc mice


Obesity occurs when energy intake exceeds expenditure and is associated
with increased risk and/or mortality rates for various types of cancers.
In contrast, calorie restriction (CR) has been shown to act as a potent
inhibitor of tumorigenesis in many tissues. We have recently reported
that diet induced obesity (DIO) enhanced prostate cancer progression in
the ventral prostate of the Hi-Myc mice (Blando et al, CAPR, 2011).
Significant increases in inflammatory gene expression were observed as
well as accumulation of inflammatory cells. In the current study, we have
further investigated changes in inflammatory genes as well as cellular
changes associated with DIO effects on prostate cancer progression in
this mouse model. Initial studies were conducted to look at some of the
cell populations that reside in the ventral prostate (VP) of Hi-Myc mice
on the 30% CR, overweight control (AIN76A) and DIO diets (60% Kcal fat).
Staining for perilipin (a lipid associated protein that marks adipocytes)
revealed that adipocytes were restricted to the periphery of the VP of
Hi-Myc mice on the 30% CR diet. In contrast, adipocytes could be seen
infiltrating the VP of Hi-Myc mice on the overweight control diet.
Notably, in mice on the DIO diet, many of the glands in the VP were
completely surrounded by adipocytes. Additionally, we performed double
staining for either perilipin and CD3 (T-lymphocytes) or perilipin and
RM0029-11H3 (macrophages). Few if any inflammatory cells were seen in VP
of Hi-Myc mice on the 30% CR diet. In contrast, adipocytes and
inflammatory cells (both T-cells and macrophages) were seen in close
proximity to adipocytes that had infiltrated into the VP in both the
overweight control and DIO diet groups. This was particularly evident in
Hi-Myc mice on the DIO diet. In addition, we have also stained sections
of VP from Hi-Myc mice on the different diets for both the IL-23 receptor
(IL-23R) and Cox-2. IL-23R expression was dramatically upregulated in the
epithelial cells of the VP from Hi-Myc mice on the DIO compared to the
other diet groups. These data suggest that IL-23 may play a role not only
in driving further inflammatory cell activation (e.g., TH17+/ CD4+
T-cells) but also have direct effects on prostate epithelial cells that
facilitate prostate cancer progression. Cox-2 expression was also
dramatically upregulated in VP of Hi-Myc on the DIO diet. This finding is
consistent with the high level of NFkB activation seen in prostate
tissues for the same mice and diet group. Thus, Cox-2 and subsequent
generation of arachidonic metabolites may also play a role in the effects
of DIO on prostate cancer progression in Hi-Myc mice. Collectively,
changes in the levels of IL-23R and COX-2 and the elevated presence of
inflammatory cells together with changes in the adipose tissue, suggest
that the tumor associated microenvironment may play a key role in DIO
effects on prostate cancer progression in Hi-Myc mice.

