Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astaxanthin as an adjunct therapy for breast cancer


While existing treatment regimens for breast cancer have increased
patient survival, regional recurrence and metastasis remain a significant
clinical problem. Many current therapies exhibit dose-limiting
toxicities, so the development of adjuvant therapeutic strategies which
can improve the efficacies and/or reduce the side effects of existing
treatments is a clinical priority. Astaxanthin (AST) is a potent
antioxidant carotenoid with an established safety profile that is
approved as a dietary supplement. AST has been reported to act as a
chemopreventive agent limiting the initiation and establishment of
tumors. We are investigating the hypothesis that AST sensitizes breast
cancer cells to standard chemotherapy drugs and ionizing radiation (IR)
used to treat breast cancer. We found that treatment with either an
AST-rich algal extract supplement (L-10) or a synthetic 3S, 3's AST
isomer (sAST) alone did not significantly alter proliferation of
immortalized MCF10A mammary epithelial cells or seven out of eight breast
cancer cell lines, while L-10 decreased clonogenic growth of four out of
five breast cancer cell lines tested so far. We next evaluated whether
AST altered response to IR. We found that while AST neither sensitizes
nor protects MCF10A cells, no radiosensitization was observed in the four
breast cancer cell lines tested thus far. In the BT549 cell line, AST
showed slight antagonism of IR response; however, the combination of IR
and AST still results in fewer overall colonies than either treatment
modality alone. We next investigated whether AST can synergize with
chemotherapy drugs in vitro. While AST pretreatment does not increase the
toxicity of Doxorubicin (Dox) or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) on MCF10A cells,
MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cancer cells pretreated with L-10 demonstrate an
augmented response to Dox, 5-FU, and methotrexate. Mechanistically, we
have determined that cell lines demonstrating AST-mediated sensitization
exhibit a decrease in constitutive phosphorylation of Akt, whereas Akt
phosphorylation was not affected in unresponsive cell lines. However,
overexpression of myristoylated Akt did not reverse the observed
sensitization, suggesting involvement of different signaling pathways in
sensitization by AST. Responding cancer cell lines also show decreases in
NFB and/or STAT3 phosphorylation following AST treatment. We are
currently evaluating whether decreased activation of these pathways plays
a role in AST-mediated chemosensitization. Identification of the
molecular determinants of AST sensitivity may allow for the
identification of patient populations whose treatment regimens may
benefit from AST supplementation (Supported by DoD W81XWH-09-1-0067).

