Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plakophilin 3 (Pkp3) increases oral squamous carcinoma cell-cell
adhesion while inhibiting cell motility and proliferation


Desmosomal junctions are major contributors to the stability of
mechanically stressed tissues including oral epithelium. Plakophilins are
a subfamily of Armadillo proteins with a critical role in desmosomal
assembly. They have emerged as candidates for a number of regulatory
roles both dependent and independent of their function as cell-cell
adhesion molecules. These include potential regulation of transcription
and translation, as well as control of various signaling cascades.
However, there is little known about the biological consequences of their
actions. We show here that plakophilin 3 (Pkp3) plays a prominent
regulatory role in oral squamous carcinoma cells (OSCC). OSCCs present a
great clinical challenge with poor prognosis and no improvement in
survival rates for the last 20 years. Using 141 patient tissue samples we
demonstrated, by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence, an inverse
correlation between Pkp3 and tumor aggressiveness. In addition, >40% of
tumor samples completely lost Pkp3 expression. In order to test its role
in OSCC cell-cell adhesion, we ablated Pkp3 in the oral cancer cell line
SCC9. Pkp3 loss disrupted desmosomal assembly by preventing proper cell
border localization of the obligate desmosomal component desmoplakin
(DP). Not surprisingly, Pkp3 dependent disruption of desmosomal assembly
severely diminished cell-cell adhesion, while at the same time increasing
cell motility in a wound healing assay. Interestingly, the activators of
cAMP dependent signaling partially rescued the Pkp3 deficient phenotype,
demonstrating a role for cAMP in Pkp3 dependent maintenance of oral
keratinocyte cell-cell adhesion strength, an important impediment to OSCC
growth, motility and invasion. Moving beyond cell-cell adhesion, our
preliminary data indicated that Pkp3 down-regulation increases cell cycle
progression and proliferation in OSCC cells. The levels of cell cycle
inhibitors p21 and p27 were decreased in the absence of Pkp3 whereas the
proliferation marker PCNA was increased. Correspondingly, over-expression
of Pkp3 in the aggressive OSCC cell line SCC 22B led to an increase in
p21 and p27. Both of these results point to Pkp3 acting as a regulator of
cell cycle progression, thus we further tested the ability of Pkp3 to
regulate cell cycle using flow cytometry. Decreased Pkp3 expression led
to an increase in S and G2/M phases of the cell cycle and a concomitant
decrease in G0/G1 phase in SCC9 cells indicating an increase in cell
cycle progression. Furthermore, a marker of G2 progression, Cyclin B1 is
increased in Pkp3 depleted SCC9 cells, indicating that the cells are not
experiencing G2/M arrest. In summary, these results support the
hypothesis that Pkp3 attenuates OSCC tumor progression towards more
aggressive phenotype through both adhesion and cell cycle regulation.

