Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming cancer therapeutic resistance by targeting dysregulated
glucose metabolism


Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of the
heat shock responses in eukaryotes. Upon exposure to a variety of
stresses, HSF1 activates its target genes, subsequently activating the
heat shock responses. Although not well understood, the functions of HSF1
are far beyond the classical induction of heat shock responses. Recent
reports have shown that HSF1 plays an important role in cancer
development. We investigated the role and mechanism of HSF1 in regulating
oncogene-mediated dysregulated cellular metabolism and cell growth in
cancer cells. We found that oncogene ErbB2-overexpressing cancer cells
possessed significantly higher level of glycolysis when compared to
ErbB2-low expressing cells, and the downregulation of ErbB2 markedly
decreased glycolysis. Overexpression of ErbB2 increased the expression of
HSF1 and two critical glycolysis-regulating molecules, lactate
dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) and Hexokinase (HK). ErbB2 activated HSF1,
indicated by the increased HSF1 trimer formation and DNA binding
activity, and promoted the rate of HSF1 protein translation. HSF1 bound
to the promoter of LDH-A and transcriptionally activated LDH-A.
Meanwhile, the downregulation of HSF1 reduced the expression of LDH-A and
subsequently decreased cancer cell glycolysis and growth. These results
demonstrate that in cancer cells, ErbB2 promotes glycolysis and cell
growth through HSF1-mediated upregulation of LDH-A. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin) and Paclitaxel (Taxol) are important drugs in treatment of
breast cancers when used alone or in combination with other
chemotherapeutics. However, acquired resistance develops in most treated
patients, necessitating alternate treatment strategies. Increased aerobic
glycolysis is a hallmark of cancer and inhibition of glycolysis may offer
a promising strategy to preferentially kill cancer cells. We investigated
the antitumor effects of trastuzumab and Taxol in combination with
glycolysis inhibitors in breast cancer. We found that trastuzumab
inhibits glycolysis via downregulation of HSF1 and LDH-A in
ErbB2-positive cancer cells, resulting in tumor growth inhibition.
Moreover, increased glycolysis via HSF1 and LDH-A contributes to
trastuzumab and Taxol resistance. Strikingly, we found that combining
trastuzumab or Taxol with glycolysis inhibition synergistically inhibited
both drug-sensitive and -resistant breast cancers in vitro and in vivo,
due to more efficient inhibition of glycolysis. These results show how
glycolysis inhibition can dramatically enhance the therapeutic efficacy
of trastuzumab in ErbB2-positive breast cancers, potentially useful as a
strategy to overcome trastuzumab resistance. This work was supported by
NIH Grant RO1CA149646, The Vincent F. Kilborn, Jr. Cancer Research
Foundation, and Radiumhospitalets Legater Project 334003.

