Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of tivozanib


Background: Tivozanib, a potent, selective, long-half-life tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1, 2,
and 3, has demonstrated antitumor activity in a Phase II study in
patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and is currently being studied
in clinical trials in patients with RCC and other solid tumors. The goal
of this study was to investigate the effect of food on the
pharmacokinetics (PK) of a single 1.5 mg dose of tivozanib in healthy
subjects. Methods: This was a single-center, open-label, randomized,
two-period, crossover Phase I trial. Subjects were admitted to the
clinical research unit (CRU) 1 day before dosing, fasted 10 hours, and
were randomized to fed (standard high-fat breakfast)/fasted or fasted/fed
sequence. In each phase of the sequence, subjects received a single oral
dose of tivozanib 1.5 mg with a 6-week washout period between doses.
Subjects remained at the CRU for at least 48 hours post dose for blood
sample collection and safety monitoring, and were assessed on an
outpatient basis for up to 504 hours post dose. PK data were analyzed by
non-compartmental methods. The effect of food on PK was assessed using
standard criteria for bioequivalence based on the exposure parameters
AUC0- and Cmax. If the 90% confidence intervals for the fed/fasted AUC0-
and Cmax fell within the range of 80% to 125%, it was concluded that food
had no effect on exposure. Results: Thirty healthy volunteers were
enrolled (19M/11F; mean age 39 years [range 22-53 years]). There was no
significant difference in AUC0- of serum tivozanib between the fed and
fasted states (107.4%; Table 1). Food caused a significant decrease in
serum tivozanib levels vs fasted state (Cmax: 77.5%). Conclusions: These
results indicate that dosing tivozanib with food decreases maximal
concentrations by 23%, but does not affect overall exposure. As tivozanib
is dosed chronically in oncology patients and accumulates 6 to 7 times
single-dose levels when at steady-state, these results are not likely to
affect dosing.


