Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, in vitro tankyrase 1 trans-ribosylation assay


The poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, tankyrase 1, is an encouraging
pharmacological target for cancer therapy. First discovered by its
association with the TRF1, tankyrase 1 plays an important role in the
maintenance of telomere length, sister telomere association, and mitotic
spindle organization. More recently, interactions between tankyrase 1 and
axin were shown to stabilize -catenin and modulate Wnt signaling,
enabling selective targeting of the Wnt pathway with tankyrase
inhibitors. In addition, tankyrase 1 has also demonstrated potential as a
target for synthetic lethality for BRCA-deficient cancers. Given the
effect on these cancer-associated pathways, there is a growing interest
for identifying tankyrase-specific inhibitors. Historical methods to
evaluate tankyrase activity are not amenable for high throughput
screening. Limited availability of the full length enzyme required
radioactivity to attain the needed sensitivity. Truncation of tankyrase 1
improved solubility and increased availability, but the physiological
response may not be equivalent to the full length enzyme. Many of these
assays have also used modified substrates where molecules such as
fluorescein or biotin are linked to NAD without characterizing the
effects on enzyme activity. Most historical assays have also relied on
measuring autoribosylation of tankyrase 1; whereas, transribosylation may
be more relevant for assessing the activity of tankyrase 1 on other
molecules. To address these issues, we have developed a novel, in vitro,
high throughput assay for evaluating the transribosylation activity of
tankyrase 1. This is accomplished using an ELISA format which
semi-quantitatively detects poly (ADP-ribose) (PAR) deposited onto
immobilized histone proteins by tankyrase 1. An anti-PAR monoclonal
antibody, goat anti-mouse IgG-HRP conjugate, and HRP substrate generate a
colorimetric or chemiluminescent signal, and the conversion of substrate
correlates with tankyrase 1 activity. This assay ensures physiological
significance by utilizing the full length enzyme and unmodified substrate
in a transribosylation format, providing sensitivity down to pmols of
enzyme. This assay is utilized to demonstrate the specificity of the
tankyrase 1 inhibitor, XAV939, for tankyrase 1 compared to PARP1 and to
reveal differential effects of activated DNA for full-length tankyrase 1
compared to the truncated enzyme.

