Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of BRONJ-like oral mucosal lesions in mice


Bisphosphonates (BPs) are potent anti-resorptive agents that are widely
used to treat bone-associated diseases including metastatic bone cancer.
Many reports have indicated that long-term use of BPs can develop
BP-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ) that occurs largely at the
site of tooth extraction; however, the pathophysiology of BRONJ is still
poorly understood. Clinically, BRONJ is defined as exposed necrotic bone
with unhealed and open oral mucosa, implying that the lack of wound
closure may be caused either directly by BPs or indirectly via biological
signals (i.e., cytokines) from the BP-affected surrounding structures. We
hypothesize that oral mucosal tissues lose their capacity to close the
wound properly at the affected sites and that the genes involved in wound
healing processes are differentially expressed between BRONJ lesions and
the normal counterparts. To test our hypothesis, we utilized the
established BRONJ mice model. Zometa was administered via tail vein 1
week prior to tooth extraction. After extracting the upper first molar,
the extracted socket was allowed to heal, and the overlaying oral mucosal
tissues were harvested after 2 weeks from control and BRONJ groups (n=3).
The fresh tissue samples were subjected to RNA isolation, cDNA
sysnthesis, and cDNA hybridization onto microarray chip (Affymetrix MG
430 2.0). The data analysis by functions using IPA software revealed that
the genes involved in skeletal and muscular disorders, dermatological
diseases, cellular movement, cellular assembly and organization, and
inflammatory disease were significantly associated with BRONJ. In
particular, we found that growth factors (i.e., Igf2, Fgf7, Pdf2bp2),
collagens (i.e., Col1a1, Col1a2, Col2a1, Col2a2, Col5a1, Col5a2, Col11a1,
and Col11a2), and non-collagenous proteins (i.e., DMP-1, ITBP, and SPP1)
were significantly down-regulated in BRONJ groups. Taken together, our
study suggests that the diminution of growth factors as well as
collagenous and non-collagenous structural proteins may be associated
with the development of BRONJ. This study was supported by NIDCR/NIH
(R03DE021114 and K08DE017121).

