Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of primary cultured cells in personalized chemotherapy for
angiosarcoma of the oral cavity


Current treatments for major malignant tumors are based on evidences
accumulated over the world and clinical trials with molecular target
drugs that are expected to improve their prognosis are ongoing. In
contrast, rare malignant tumors have no standard therapies and few
evidences for effective drugs. Moreover, epidemiology, etiology,
pathogenesis and molecular mechanisms are unknown because published data
are based on a few case series and experimental materials can be used in
vitro do not exist. Thus we have to manage a treatment case by case when
facing a rare tumor. One of the useful methods to evaluate drug efficacy
is the collagen gel droplet embedded culture drug sensitivity test
(CD-DST), but a resected tumor tissue as an examination materials is
limited. Primary cultured cells are thought to be an alternative material
for various analyses. Angiosarcoma is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma of
endothelial cell origin showing a poor prognosis. A 72-year-old man who
has large masses on upper and lower gingiva came to our department and a
palliative excision was performed. He also had multiple nodules in both
lungs and cervical lymph nodes. Histopathological diagnosis was
angiosarcoma because the immunohistochemical stainings showed that
vimentin, CD31 and vW factor were positive. We attempted to culture the
excised tumor specimen in vitro and obtained primary cultured cells with
stable proliferation, and confirmed their in vivo tumorigenicity in
athymic nude mice. First, both primary tumor tissues and cultured cells
were assessed their sensitivity against 8 anti-tumor drugs by CD-DST. We
evaluated their growth inhibitory effects as the ratio of total volume of
colonies in the treated group to that in the untreated group (T/C%). The
most effective drug, gemcitabine, had 20.9 T/C% in tumor tissues and 35.4
T/C% in cultured cells, and the second, docetaxel, had 32.2 T/C% and 40.2
T/C%, respectively. The other drugs showed the similar sensitivity
between both types of samples. Next, we determined the gene expression
profiles of both samples and a normal gingival tissue by microarray
analysis. The data showed that 2,498 genes in primary tumor tissues and
2,893 genes in primary cultured cells had more than 5-fold change
compared to control. Of these, 1,627 genes were common, and then we found
the overexpression of 170 cancer-related genes including Aurora kinase A
(AURKA) among these genes. Finally, we investigated the effect of a
selective AURKA inhibitor MLN8237 on the growth of primary cultured
angiosarcoma cells in vitro, and then observed the growth inhibitory
effect of MLN8237 against these cells. These results suggest that primary
cultured tumor cells may be useful for predicting the efficacies of
various anti-tumor drugs and developing novel therapeutic strategies.

