Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase-2 mediates significant changes in the extracellular
matrix in triple negative breast cancer


Triple (ER/PR/HER2) negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for
approximately 20% of all breast cancer diagnoses and is characterized by
metastasis that is refractory to treatment. We and others have
demonstrated that cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) products are important
mediators of increased invasion and metastasis in the MDA-MB-231 human
xenograft model of TNBC. Increasing evidence suggest that high density of
collagen I fibers in the extracellular matrix (ECM) is predictive of
increased metastasis and cancer cells have been observed to migrate along
these fibers during the metastatic journey. We previously observed that
downregulation of COX-2 significantly reduced the expression of
degradative enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinase 1 and altered the
expression of ECM components such as hyaluronan and lumican that play a
role in intra-fibrillar collagen spacing. Tumor growth of MDA-MB-231 and
Clone 13 (a MDA-MB-231-derived COX-2 shRNA-expressing clone secreting
less than 10% of PGE2 compared to parental) xenografts, studied following
Matrigel-supported orthotopic implantation in SCID mice, showed a 3-week
delay in tumor growth. Here, we have used non-Matrigel tumors derived
from Clone 13 cells were used to investigate the relationship between
COX-2 expression, interstitial fluid transport using MRI and collagen
fiber density and volume using second harmonic generation (SHG)
microscopy. MRI was performed once tumor volumes were approximately
400-500 mm3. Interstitial fluid transport parameters were measured from
quantitative T1 maps obtained before and following intravenous
administration of the contrast agent albumin-GdDTPA. Interstitial fluid
transport parameters calculated included number of draining and pooling
voxels, draining and pooling rates, and volumes. SHG microscopy of tissue
slices was performed using a 25x lens on a Zeiss 710 LSM NLO confocal
microscope. Collagen I fiber distribution was characterized using an
in-house 3D analysis software developed to quantify fiber distance
distributions and fiber volumes. Significant differences in the ECM
structure and function were evident between high COX-2 expressing
MDA-MB-231 tumors compared to Clone 13 tumors with low COX-2 expression.
Tumors arising from Clone 13 cells demonstrated an increase in vascular
volume, a decrease of draining voxels, an increase of pooling voxels, and
a decrease of collagen fiber density. Collectively, these data provide
direct evidence for COX-2-mediated changes in the ECM. Here, for the
first time, we have shown that dowregulating COX-2 in TNBC cells
profoundly impacts collagen I fiber density and volume and alters
macromolecular transport. Understanding the role of COX-2 in TNBC and its
impact on the ECM and macromolecular transport may provide new insights
into preventing relapse and metastasis.

