Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and characterization of a novel monoclonal antibody
recognizing both the blood and tissue form of human PCBP-1


Background: Poly(rC)-binding protein-1 (PCBP-1) is a nucleic-acid-binding
protein that localizes in nucleus and/or cytoplasm of cells. Shuttling
between nucleus and cytoplasm has been related to its function in
regulation of RNA transcription, translation and also implicated its
involvement in cancer metastasis, progression and chemoresistance. In the
present study, we investigated the levels and expression of PCBP-1 in
breast carcinoma and its potential use as a biomarker in breast carcinoma
differential diagnosis. Methods/Results: We generated a novel monoclonal
antibody (mAb), AB-PCBP-1 using hybridoma technology and native protein
in cell culture medium as immunogen. This mAb is of IgG1 (kappa) type. It
specifically recognized both native and denatured human PCBP-1 protein
and displayed high affinity as assessed by ELISA, immunohistochemistry
assay, western blot and flow cytometry applications. Using this mAb in
competitive ELISA, we showed for the first time that soluble PCBP-1 level
is significantly increased in the plasma of metastatic breast cancer
patients plasma. PCBP-1 is also expressed in metastatic breast carcinoma
tissue by immunohistochemistry. Seventy percent of normal breast ducts
and lobules expressed strong nuclear staining whereas cytoplasmic
staining was less specific and found in most cancer tissues. We examined
90 cases of breast carcinoma tissues classified as either ductal and
lobular carcinoma. To evaluate the immunoreactivity of PCBP-1, the
staining intensity and intracellular distribution were compared and
scored as 0, 1+, 2+ and 3+ based on intensity. Seventy nine % (60 out of
76) of ductal carcinomas showed strong cytoplasmic staining (2+ and 3+)
and 45% also exhibited strong nuclear localization for PCBP-1. Lobular
carcinomas (n=14), on the other hand, showed an exclusively nuclear
staining pattern.Conclusion: AB-PCBP-1 mAb showed high performance in
blood and tissue assays. PCBP-1 levels were significantly increased in
blood and demonstrated a distinct pattern of expression related to
histological tumor types, suggesting that PCBP-1 may be involved in a
regulatory mechanism that differs in various subtypes of breast
carcinoma. The results suggest the potential clinical use of PCBP-1 as a
therapeutic target and/or a biomarker in blood and tissue for the
diagnosis and prognosis of breast carcinoma.

