Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic biomarker discovery and validation for diagnosis and
therapeutic intervention for hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common and lethal
malignancies worldwide, accounting for approximately half a million
annual deaths globally. HCC is completely asymptomatic in the early
stages of the disease; therefore, early detection of HCC in afflicted
patients is vital to receive therapeutic benefits from curative surgery.
The standard diagnosis of HCC relies upon detection of the serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level in at-risk subjects followed by hepatic
ultrasonography to identify suspicious nodules. Accurate levels of AFP
are often difficult to detect, and the imaging method to identify nodules
is both operator-sensitive and subject to a high false-negative rate.
While it is known that hepatocellular carcinoma is a multi-step process
that requires altered expression of multiple genes, recent evidence has
indicated that epigenetic abnormalities also play an important role in
hepatocarcinogenesis. The discovery of reliable and accurate epigenetic
biomarkers may open up new avenues for the development of novel
diagnostic tools and provide new target for therapeutic interventions.
Combining Next Generation Sequencing methods with well-established
bisulfite conversation chemistry, a unique genome-wide epigenetic profile
for HCC was done in liver tumor and normal tissues. Hypermethylated and
hypomethylated gene regions from the genome-wide epigenetic profile were
then validated for percent methylation in liver tumor and normal tissues
using a streamlined system of methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme
(MSRE) digestion combined with real-time PCR. Serum circulated genomic
DNA from liver cancer patients were also examined to look for potential
epigenetic markers for clinical diagnostic applications. More than one
hundred gene loci were identified at differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) by comparing several different stage liver tumors with their
correspondent normal tissue by the genome wide epigenetic profile.
Calculated CT values from combined MSRE digestion and real-time PCR
quantitation indicated that percent methylation of the CpG island in the
gene ADAM8 was highest in stage IV liver tumor tissue, while percent
methylation of the CpG island in CSMD3 was lowest in stage IV tissue
compared to normal adjacent tissue. Percent methylation of the CpG island
in ZNF783 was high in all stages of HCC tumor liver tissue compared to
normal adjacent tissue. Epigenomic profiling and screening with MSRE
digestion and real-time PCR identified and validated differences in the
CpG island methylation status of three gene loci in different stages of
HCC liver tissue and normal tissue. Extensive validation of these gene
specific loci in larger numbers of HCC samples is necessary before they
can be considered possible epigenetic biomarkers for novel diagnostic
tools and therapeutic interventions for HCC.

