Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming transport barriers in liver metastasis with multi-stage
nanovectors (MSV)


Liver metastasis occur in 30-70% of patients dying of various
malignancies. In the case of metastatic breast cancer, 50% of the
patients develop liver metastasis with median survival rate of only a few
months and very rare 5-year survival. We hypothesized that the
inefficiency in treatment of liver metastasis of breast tumors can be
related to biophysical barriers in the tumor microenvironment preventing
delivery of therapeutics to tumor loci. Our research focused on physical
factors involved in the progression of liver metastasis and design of
systems for targeted delivery of therapeutics. Multi-stage vectors (MSV)
were previously reported to overcome sequential biophysical barriers and
to efficiently carry therapeutic payload to the tumor microenvironment.
The first stage porous silicon particles target tumor-associated
endothelium or macrophages releasing second stage therapeutic
nanoparticles in the close proximity to the tumor. The objectives of this
work were to investigate: (1) in vivo barriers associated with drug
delivery in breast tumor liver metastasis; (2) in vitro/in vivo
interaction of MSV with macrophages; and (3) to perform initial
therapeutic efficiency study with MSV loaded with Abraxane (albumin bound
paclitaxel). Liver metastases were produced by intra-splenic injected of
4T1 breast cancer cells to balb/C mice. A small incision in the abdomen
of the animals was made to expose the liver and the kinetics of
distribution of tracers/MSV was recorded. Intravital microscopy was used
to observe the distribution of tracers (MW 4 and 30KDa dextrans) and MSV
particles. Macrophages and RBC were pre-labeled 4-48 hours prior to the
experiment. For therapy experiment, 10-14 days following tumor
inoculation mice were randomly divided in three groups: untreated,
MSV-Abraxane treated and Abraxane treated. The mice were sacrificed on
day 7 following the treatment and the number of metastasis and liver
weight were recorded. From the intravital microscopy studies, it appears
that liver metastasis of 4T1 tumors have insufficient functional
vascularization, which can be the reason for inability to efficiently
treat metastatic loci. Dextran 4KDs with nominal diameter of 2-3nm
(similar to unbound chemotherapeutics) penetrate into the tumor but
washed out within minutes, while dextran 30KdA (d=12nm) retain longer,
but penetrate less due to the limited vascular permeability. MSV were
efficiently Internalized by murine and human macrophages in vitro and by
liver macrophages in vivo in the metastatic liver. MSV encapsulated
Abraxane enabled an almost complete elimination of the metastatic loci,
while Abraxane was not efficient. The initial therapy data suggest that
MSV targeted macrophages in breast cancer liver metastasis enabling high
concentrations of chemotherapeutic agents to accumulate in the tumor
loci. This can be an efficient strategy for overcoming physical barriers
in breast cancer liver metastasis.

