Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat-shock and autophagy in cancer: Novel role for DGK iota


Autophagy is a cellular process by which damaged proteins, protein
aggregates, and organelles are sequestered by lysosome-like compartments
and degraded. Autophagy contributes to quality control, cell death, and
senescence. Defects in autophagy cause the accumulation of cellular
damage, inhibit cell death processes, and promote an inflammatory state
that facilitates tumor development. In contrast, the heat shock response,
which is mediated primarily by the transcription factor, HSF1 is
frequently enhanced in cancer. Despite this inverse relationship between
autophagy and heat-shock in cancer, the direct influence of heat-shock
and HSF1-mediated gene expression on autophagy has not been investigated.
Our study suggests that heat-shock mediated gene expression suppresses
autophagy in a human colorectal cancer cell line. Our data show that
diacylglycerol kinase iota (DGK iota) expression is regulated by HSF1.
DGK iota phosphorylates diacylglycerol, generating phosphatidic acid
(PA), which is a potent suppressor of autophagy through its activation of
the serine/threonine kinase mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin). The aim
of our study was to evaluate the influence of HSF-1-mediated gene
expression on autophagy, and to examine the specific contribution of DGK
iota in this effect. We utilized RKO colorectal cancer cells for this
investigation and assayed autophagy using complimentary techniques,
including: conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II, which was monitored by Western
blot; and the formation of autophagic vesicles (autophagosomes), which
were visualized by high-content screening confocal microscopy of cells
harboring an LC3-GFP expression construct. The influence of basal and
heat-shock (42C)-simulated HSF1 activity on autophagy was analyzed using
siRNA. Silencing of HSF1 led to a profound increase in autophagic
markers, suggesting a role for HSF1-driven gene expression in the
suppression of autophagy. In HSF1-deficient cells we also observed
increased phosphorylation of p70S6K, which is a surrogate marker for mTOR
activation. We confirmed that DGK iota mRNA and protein expression is
mediated by HSF1. Using biochemical inhibitors of DGK activity, we
observed a significant increase in autophagy, supporting our hypothesis
that DGK iota participates in suppressing autophagy. Additional siRNA
experiments of DGK iota are being performed to confirm this effect, along
with measurements of cellular PA levels. Taken together, these results
indicate an important role for HSF1 in the suppression of autophagy, and
provides mechanistic insight into a potential, tumor-promoting role for
DGK iota.

