Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genomics approach to determining the role of DICER1 in
tumorigenesis: Interferon responses in the cancer cell


DICER1 is required for generation of mature microRNAs (miRNAs) and other
short noncoding RNAs. Reduced DICER1 levels are associated with adverse
outcomes in a variety of cancers and multiple lines of evidence suggest
DICER1 is a tumor suppressor. The effects of reduced DICER1 on mRNA
transcript abundance in tumor cells remain largely unknown. To determine
how reduced DICER1 levels contribute to tumor phenotypes we used shRNA to
stably knock down DICER1 in endometrial cancer cell lines for extended
periods (up to 25 passages). Reduced DICER1 levels had no effect on cell
proliferation but were associated with enhanced cell migration and
increased growth in soft agar. MiRNA profiling for the KLE cancer cell
line DICER1 knockdowns (two different DICER1 shRNA constructs) revealed
that miRNA levels were decreased overall. Not surprisingly, many mRNA
transcripts were upregulated in the DICER1 knockdowns. A striking number
of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) showed upregulation. Upregulation
of six ISG transcripts was validated by qRT-PCR in three independent
knockdowns of DICER1 in KLE cells. IFN, a key upstream regulator of the
interferon response, was significantly increased in DICER1 knockdowns
(KLE and additional endometrial cancer cell lines). IFN protein secreted
in media of DICER1 knockdown cells activated an interferon response in
HT29 colon carcinoma cells. The majority of ISGs with increased
transcript levels lacked miRNA target sequences and as such it seemed
unlikely that the increase in expression levels was secondary to reduced
miRNA levels. We tested the hypothesis that defects in miRNA processing
could trigger an interferon response. We showed that DICER1 knockdowns in
which miRNA processing is reduced have increased levels of pre-microRNAs
in the cytoplasm. Pre-microRNAs are double-stranded molecules and long
enough (60-100 nt) to activate the dsRNA sensors in the cytoplasm, such
as Mda5/IFIH1, that typically sense viral dsRNA (> 30 nt) and stimulate
the interferon response. Knockdown of DROSHA, necessary for processing of
pri-miRNAs to pre-miRNAs, did not result in accumulation of pre-miRNAs
and did not cause an interferon response. Our findings suggest elevated
pre-microRNA levels trigger the interferon response to double stranded
RNA (incompletely processed miRNA and other species). Rescue experiments
(restoring DICER1 function) are currently underway to shed additional
light on how reduced double-stranded RNA processing might elicit an
interferon response. Work is ongoing to determine the relationship
between the observed interferon response and the migration and soft agar
phenotypes.

