Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The apoptotic response of the triple negative breast cancer cell
line HCC1806 to chemotherapeutics


Triple negative breast cancer is characterized by the loss or low
expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 proteins
which have been targeted and established as somewhat effective therapy
regiments in other breast cancer subtypes including luminal breast
cancer. Since triple negative tumors are missing these established drug
targets, there has been little advancement in the establishment of drug
therapies to specifically target this breast cancer subtype. Triple
negative breast cancer is described as aggressive due to its invasiveness
and metastatic properties. One potential mediator of triple negative
breast cancer aggressive behavior may be due to the fact that this breast
cancer subtype may have as high as an 80% p53 tumor suppressor gene
mutation rate. While the p53 gene may be mutated at high rates, it may be
possible to design drugs to target some of the downstream genes that p53
transactivates, including the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and
the pro-apoptotic gene PUMA, in order to inhibit the further growth of
the triple negative breast cancer cells. We previously reported that
classic chemotherapeutics including actinomycin-D, staurosporine, and
doxorubicin, were effective in eliciting apoptosis in breast cancer cell
lines. We initially stressed breast cancer cell lines with all three
chemotherapeutics listed above. We showed that all of the cell lines
underwent significant apoptosis by 24hrs. Interestingly, the normal
breast cancer cell line AG11132 had a delayed apoptosis response to
doxorubicin treatment as compared to the breast cancer cell lines
HCC1806, HCC70 and HCC1500. Therefore, we treated the breast cancer cell
lines with a titration of various doxorubicin concentrations. Here we
show that even at lower doxorubicin concentrations, a significant amount
of apoptosis was measured at 24hrs in all of the cell lines including the
triple negative breast cancer cell line HCC1806. We measured apoptosis by
the physical characteristics as observed under light microscopy and by
using the cell viability assay. We are currently monitoring the p53 tumor
suppressor pathway network in all of these cells to determine the
network's integrity and whether there is a direct or indirect involvement
of p53 on the apoptosis responses. We are also further analyzing the
chemotherapeutic agents to determine their effectiveness in killing
breast cancer cells with limited cytotoxic effects to normal breast cells
at various time-points.

