Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor promotes colonic
inflammation and inflammation-associated tumorigenesis


Although epidemiologic and experimental evidence strongly indicates
chronic inflammation as a risk factor for cancer, it remains unclear how
chronic inflammation contributes carcinogenesis. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) is one member of PPAR family that
belongs to the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily and is also
ligand-dependent transcription factor. Although PPAR has been shown to be
involved in chronic inflammation and the progression of hereditary and
sporadic CRC, its role in inflammation-induced carcinogenesis is not
defined. The aim of our present study was to determine whether PPAR
contributes to the pathogenesis of colonic inflammation and
inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. Here we present genetic evidence
demonstrating that deletion of PPAR diminishes colonic inflammation
accompanied with reducing infiltration of immune cells and the expression
of pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines in a mouse model of colitis.
These PPAR-dependent chemokines are responsible for recruitment of
leukocytes from the circulation to local inflammatory sites and the tumor
microenvironment. Our results further reveal that activation of PPAR
induces COX-2 expression in colonic epithelial cells. Importantly,
COX-2-derived PGE2 stimulates macrophages to produce pro-inflammatory
chemokines and cytokines. More intriguingly, loss of PPAR attenuated
colonic chronic inflammation and colitis-associated adenoma growth via
PGE2 signaling in two mouse models of colitis-associated tumorigenesis.
Collectively, our results demonstrate that PPAR promotes colonic chronic
inflammation and colitis-associated tumor growth via a PGE2 signaling
which mediates the crosstalk between tumor epithelial cells and
macrophages. Our data further supports the notion that the existence of
crosstalk between PPAR and COX-2 signaling in CRC progression. These
findings indicate that PPAR plays a pivotal role in connecting colonic
inflammation to cancer progression and may represent a potential
therapeutic target for prevention or treatment of colorectal cancer.

