Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy: Galectin-3C and bortezomib potent anticancer
activity and inhibition of angiogenesis, chemotaxis, and NF-kB activation
in human multiple myeloma


Introduction Galectin-3 is a human lectin involved in cellular processes
including differentiation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, neoplastic
transformation, and metastasis. We evaluated galectin-3C, an N-terminally
truncated form of galectin-3 that is thought to act as a dominant
negative inhibitor, as a potential treatment for multiple myeloma (MM).
Methods We analyzed 9 human MM cell lines tested in vitro for cell
proliferation/viability; chemotaxis. The human MM cell lines used in this
study were RPMI-8226, U266 (American Type Culture Collection, VA, USA),
ARP-1, ARK-B, (gifts from J. Epstein, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA). The 8226/Dox and 8226/LR-5 cell lines
were kindly provided by Dr. William S. Dalton of the H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute in Tampa, Florida. All MM cells were
cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) in 5% CO2 at 37 C. The 8226/Dox cells were cultured with 40 nM
doxorubicin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The 8226/LR-5 cells were
cultured in media containing 5 M mephalan (Sigma-Aldrich). 8226/Dox and
8226/LR-5 cells were maintained in drug-free medium for 1 week prior to
drug sensitivity assays. Human umbilical cord vascular endothelial cells
(HUVEC, American Type Culture Collection, VA, USA) were maintained in
EGM-2 medium (Lonza, Houston, TX, USA) and were used within 10 passages.
Furthermore we used U266 MM model in the NOD/SCID mice to evaluate the
efficacy of galectin-3C in single or in combination with BOR. Results
Galectin-3C exhibited modest anti-proliferative effects on MM cells in
vitro. Delivery of galectin-3C intravenously via an osmotic pump in a
subcutaneous U266 cell NOD/SCID mouse model of MM significantly inhibited
tumor growth. Bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor approved by the F.D.A.
for MM treatment, also inhibited the growth of the U266 tumors. Treatment
with both agents was more effective than either alone, such that the
average tumor volume of the combination group was just 14.0% of controls
at day 35. We show that mechanisms by which galectin-3C facilitates the
anticancer activity of BOR include inhibition of angiogenesis,
chemotaxis, and NF-kB activation. Conclusion In conclusion, our study
shows that in a mouse model of human MM, treatment with galectin-3C alone
is efficacious, and that it enhances the anti-tumor activity of
bortezomib. These findings provide the proof-of-principle to test
galectin-3C clinically for human MM.

