Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and quantification of tumor-derived microparticles in a
murine orthotopic tumor progression model


Approximately 85% of newly identified pancreatic cancer patients are
estimated to die within one year of diagnosis. This poor prognosis is
attributable in part to inadequate early detection methods, with the
presence of pancreatic cancer often becoming evident only upon
metastasis. Development of non-invasive early detection technologies that
permit earlier initiation of treatment might increase the likelihood of
patient survival. Our research centered on the task of developing a
method for the detection of tumor-derived microparticles (MPs) using a
murine orthotopic pancreatic tumor model. MPs are 100nm to 1.5m membrane
blebs released from cells via budding upon cell activation or during
apoptosis which then circulate in the bloodstream. Cell-derived MPs
retain characteristics, including cell surface antigens, of their parent
cells. These antigens serve as cellular fingerprints of MP origin. In
this way, the presence of cell-specific (e.g. tumor-specific) MPs signals
the presence of a tumor, and therefore, serves as a biomarker of disease.
The Mia-Paca-2 human pancreatic cell line expresses the cell surface
tumor marker MUC-1 and this model has been widely used as a murine
xenograft model to evaluate experimental therapeutics. In a novel
orthotopic model of tumor growth, 5x106 Mia-Paca-2 cells were injected
directly into the pancreas of athymic nude mice, while control mice were
sham-injected. Treated and control mice groups of mice were sacrificed
every two weeks for 8 weeks, at which points, each pancreas was weighed,
tumor weight calculated, and blood drawn. Blood-derived MUC-1 expressing
MPs were enriched from a subset of Mia-Paca-2-injected mice representing
treatment and compared by flow cytometry with MPs enriched from control
mice. Our findings suggested a correlation between tumor size and the
concentration of detected MPs in early time-points following injection of
tumor cells. This relationship changed with advanced tumor progression,
where a significant drop in detectable MPs was observed. These
preliminary findings support the contention that measurement of
circulating tumor-derived MPs may be used for the early detection of
pancreatic cancer. While sensitivity remains to be confirmed and further
characterization is needed, this potentially translational method is
non-invasive and compatible with multiple, longitudinal measurements.
Further work will be needed to elucidate the relationship between MPs
generation and tumor growth, and the relationship between MPs and
metastatic tumor progression.

