Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Basal VEGF protein expression in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue
and mammary tumors of PyMT mice


Obesity is associated with the overall risk of certain cancers, including
breast cancer. The prevailing view is that metabolic alterations
associated with obesity result in the production of excess vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) thereby establishing a local and
systemic environment that favors the development and progression of
breast cancer. We need to understand how VEGF from adipose is integrated
with mammary tumor growth and vascular activity to modulate tumor
progression. The MMTV-PyMT mouse is a clinically-relevant model for
studying breast cancer progression as mammary tumors grow spontaneously
over time; however, little is known about the distribution of VEGF
between various organs. We sought to compare the basal VEGF protein
expression in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue and mammary tumors from
MMTV-PyMT mice and compared these levels against background nontransgenic
FVB/N mice. Normal expression of VEGF protein was 69.4 2.1 pg/mL in
skeletal muscle and 59.0 7.3 pg/mL in adipose tissue of wild-type (FVB
background) control mice. The average expression level of VEGF protein in
mammary tumors of MMTV-PyMT mice was 61.8 31.3 pg/mL. Adipose tissue of
MMTV-PyMT exhibited 324% greater (191.2 37.6 pg/mL, pObesity is
associated with the overall risk of certain cancers, including breast
cancer. The prevailing view is that metabolic alterations associated with
obesity result in the production of excess vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) thereby establishing a local and systemic environment that
favors the development and progression of breast cancer. We need to
understand how VEGF from adipose is integrated with mammary tumor growth
and vascular activity to modulate tumor progression. The MMTV-PyMT mouse
is a clinically-relevant model for studying breast cancer progression as
mammary tumors grow spontaneously over time; however, little is known
about the distribution of VEGF between various organs. We sought to
compare the basal VEGF protein expression in skeletal muscle, adipose
tissue and mammary tumors from MMTV-PyMT mice and compared these levels
against background nontransgenic FVB/N mice. Normal expression of VEGF
protein was 69.4 2.1 pg/mL in skeletal muscle and 59.0 7.3 pg/mL in
adipose tissue of wild-type (FVB background) control mice. The average
expression level of VEGF protein in mammary tumors of MMTV-PyMT mice was
61.8 31.3 pg/mL. Adipose tissue of MMTV-PyMT exhibited 324% greater
(191.2 37.6 pg/mL, p<0.01) VEGF protein expression compared to adipose
tissue of control FVB mice, and 309% greater (pObesity is associated with
the overall risk of certain cancers, including breast cancer. The
prevailing view is that metabolic alterations associated with obesity
result in the production of excess vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) thereby establishing a local and systemic environment that favors
the development and progression of breast cancer. We need to understand
how VEGF from adipose is integrated with mammary tumor growth and
vascular activity to modulate tumor progression. The MMTV-PyMT mouse is a
clinically-relevant model for studying breast cancer progression as
mammary tumors grow spontaneously over time; however, little is known
about the distribution of VEGF between various organs. We sought to
compare the basal VEGF protein expression in skeletal muscle, adipose
tissue and mammary tumors from MMTV-PyMT mice and compared these levels
against background nontransgenic FVB/N mice. Normal expression of VEGF
protein was 69.4 2.1 pg/mL in skeletal muscle and 59.0 7.3 pg/mL in
adipose tissue of wild-type (FVB background) control mice. The average
expression level of VEGF protein in mammary tumors of MMTV-PyMT mice was
61.8 31.3 pg/mL. Adipose tissue of MMTV-PyMT exhibited 324% greater
(191.2 37.6 pg/mL, p<0.01) VEGF protein expression compared to adipose
tissue of control FVB mice, and 309% greater (p<0.05) VEGF protein
compared to tumor VEGF expression. These data imply that stromal
expression of VEGF may be a critical determinant regulating the
angiogenic phenotype in breast cancer, and further suggests that
cross-talk between the stromal environment and tumor is likely to be
essential in promoting tumor growth and progression. NIH 5T32-HL090610,
AHA 10BGIA3630002, ACS 116837IRG0906101

