Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipocyte oxidative stress promotes epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) related gene expression and estrogen receptor (ER)
negative phenotype in breast cancer cells


Epidemiological studies have linked obesity with basal-like breast cancer
risk in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women, suggesting that
obesity may affect tumor phenotype by skewing the microenvironment toward
support of more aggressive tumor cell phenotypes (typically ER/PR,
HER-2). In order to study the interactions between adipocytes and breast
tumor cells, we developed an adipocyte-breast cancer cell co-culture
system. The adipocytes SGBS (Simpson-Golabi-Behmel Syndrome) and human ER
positive breast cancer MCF7 cells were co-cultured for 24 hours.
Following co-culture, the cells from the inserts (MCF7 cells) and wells
(SGBS cells) were collected separately and total RNA was then isolated.
The mRNA levels of the NADPH oxidase subunit NOX4 and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF1) were determined by RT-PCR and normalized to 18S RNA
levels. When SGBS cells were co-cultured with MCF7 cells, SGBS NOX4 and
HIF1 mRNA levels increased more than 10 fold and 3 fold, respectively,
while there were no changes in NOX4 and HIF1 expression detected in
co-cultured MCF7 cells. We also compared several epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process-related gene expression levels. Expression in
MCF7 cells of the EMT-inducing transcription factors FOXC2 and Twist1
were increased more than 8 fold and 5 fold respectively, after co-culture
with SGBS. E-cadherin mRNA level was decreased 2 fold, while N-cadherin
mRNA level was increased more than 6 fold in co-cultured MCF7. We also
found that mRNA levels of ER- were significantly (pEpidemiological
studies have linked obesity with basal-like breast cancer risk in both
premenopausal and postmenopausal women, suggesting that obesity may
affect tumor phenotype by skewing the microenvironment toward support of
more aggressive tumor cell phenotypes (typically ER/PR, HER-2). In order
to study the interactions between adipocytes and breast tumor cells, we
developed an adipocyte-breast cancer cell co-culture system. The
adipocytes SGBS (Simpson-Golabi-Behmel Syndrome) and human ER positive
breast cancer MCF7 cells were co-cultured for 24 hours. Following
co-culture, the cells from the inserts (MCF7 cells) and wells (SGBS
cells) were collected separately and total RNA was then isolated. The
mRNA levels of the NADPH oxidase subunit NOX4 and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF1) were determined by RT-PCR and normalized to 18S RNA
levels. When SGBS cells were co-cultured with MCF7 cells, SGBS NOX4 and
HIF1 mRNA levels increased more than 10 fold and 3 fold, respectively,
while there were no changes in NOX4 and HIF1 expression detected in
co-cultured MCF7 cells. We also compared several epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process-related gene expression levels. Expression in
MCF7 cells of the EMT-inducing transcription factors FOXC2 and Twist1
were increased more than 8 fold and 5 fold respectively, after co-culture
with SGBS. E-cadherin mRNA level was decreased 2 fold, while N-cadherin
mRNA level was increased more than 6 fold in co-cultured MCF7. We also
found that mRNA levels of ER- were significantly (p<0.05) repressed in
MCF7 cells co-cultured with SGBS cells. To explore the mechanism of the
effect of adipocyte co-culture on ER expression in breast cancer cells,
SGBS cells were transfected with 30nM of siHIF1 for 48 hours before
co-culture with MCF7 cells. ER gene expression level did not change in
MCF7 cells co-cultured with SGBS cells that had been transfected with
siHIF1. In summary, we have shown that adipocytes and breast tumor cells
interact with each other: MCF7 cells increased hypoxia and oxidative
stress in SGBS cells, while SGBS increased the expression of EMT-inducing
factor genes in MCF7 cells, as well as repressing ER expression. This
repression was controlled, at least in part, by HIF1. These results
suggest that hypoxia and oxidative stress from adipocytes can modify ER
gene expression and promote EMT processes in breast cancer cells,
supporting an important role of obesity in aggressive breast cancer
development.

