Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -arrestin-1 acts as a nuclear transcriptional regulator of
endothelin A receptor signalling to promote ovarian cancer progression


In epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), endothelin (ET)-1/endothelin A
receptor (ETAR) autocrine loop activates epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and malignant progression through the activation of
-catenin-driven transcriptional programs. Although it has been
demonstrated that -arrestin-1 (-arr1) is involved in ETAR signalling
acting as cytoplasmic scaffold protein, the specific contribution to
ETAR-regulated EOC progression in the nuclear compartment remains
undefined. In this study, we demonstrated that in response to ETAR
activation by ET-1, endogenous as well as exogenous -arr1 translocated to
the nucleus in different EOC cell lines. To study a putative role of
-arr1 in controlling gene expression, we investigated the relationship of
-arr1 with -catenin. We found that ET-1-driven -arr1 nuclear
translocation is associated with a nuclear translocation of with -catenin
and their physical interaction, as shown by microscopy and biochemical
analysis. This nuclear complex, that include TCF4 transcription factor,
is localized in ET-1-dependent manner on the promoter regions of specific
-catenin target genes, such as ET-1, matrix-metalloproteinase-2, and
Cyclin D1, thus promoting their transcription. Gain/loss of function
approaches as well as nuclear mutant -arr1 expression demonstrated that
this complex is critical for the recruitment and binding of p300
acetyltransferase on these promoters, resulting in enhanced H3 and H4
histone acetylation, enhanced promoter activity and gene expression,
specifically required for ETAR-induced cell migration, invasion, and EMT.
In a murine orthotopic model of metastatic human EOC, silencing of -arr1
or expression of nuclear mutant -arr1, as well as ETAR blockade, by the
specific antagonist zibotentan, inhibits metastasis and intravasation.
Finely, in human EOC tissues, -arr1/-catenin nuclear complexes are
selectively enriched at specific gene promoters compared to non-tumoral
ovarian tissues. Therefore, our study provides insights into how a
nuclear -arr1-mediated epigenetic mechanism controls -catenin activity in
response to ETAR activation, deciphering a novel function for -arr1 as
signal transducer for the nuclear compartmentalization of ETAR signalling
in promoting tumor metastasis. Supported by AIRC, AstraZeneca

