Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of oxidative stress in the growth inhibitory and
proapoptotic effects of brown button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) in
human prostate cancer cells


An increasing body of clinical and in vivo/in vitro studies suggests that
some chemical components in specialty mushrooms like maitake (Grifola
frondosa) may exert cancer preventive effects. Edible mushrooms, which
have a similar content of polysaccharides, proteoglycans, steroids, etc.,
have been less well-studied for their anticancer and cancer preventive
activity. For example, only one publication has reported the inhibition
of human breast cancer cell growth by brown button mushrooms (Agaricus
bisporus). The objectives of our research were to evaluate the
anti-prostate cancer activity and mechanism(s) of action of brown button
mushroom extracts. A hot water extract was prepared from freeze-dried
brown button mushroom powder and fractioned with hexane and ethyl
acetate. The IC50 of ethyl acetate fraction from brown button mushrooms
(BBEA) was 0.1mg/ml. The inhibitory potency against LNCaP human prostate
cancer cells correlated with the total phenol content, suggesting that
these may be the active anticancer components. To further investigate the
mechanisms of BBEA's anticancer effects, we examined the production of
H2O2 by the extract using FOX assay and examined oxidative stress,
proapoptotic, and cell cycle arrest markers by western blot. BBEA
(0.1mg/ml) produced 50M H2O2 under cell culture conditions after 6h. The
expression of the oxidative stress marker, H2A.X, in LNCaP cells was
enhanced by BBEA after 12 and 24h, suggesting that pro-oxidative effects
may be a possible anticancer mechanism. BBEA also increased caspase-3 and
PARP cleavage and reduced the expression of Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E2,
suggesting induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest by BBEA. In
summary, this is the first report of the anticancer effects of phenolic
compounds in brown button mushrooms and these results demonstrate that
further study of BBEA is warranted. Microarray studies are currently
under way to better characterize the anticancer activity of BBEA against
human prostate cancer cells.

