Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSTP1 expression is regulated by MycN and is a marker of poor
outcome in childhood neuroblastoma


In childhood neuroblastoma, amplification of the transcription factor
MycN is associated with poor outcome and a multidrug resistant phenotype.
We have previously shown that MycN regulates the expression of several
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter genes, and that these genes
represent powerful prognostic markers in neuroblastoma (1,2,3). Although
these transporters are able to efflux a wide range of cytotoxic drugs,
they do not confer resistance to several important cytotoxic agents used
to treat neuroblastoma, including cisplatin and cyclophosphamide, hence
we explored the prognostic significance and transcriptional regulation of
the phase II detoxifying enzyme, glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1).
Using quantitative real-time PCR, GSTP1 gene expression was assessed in a
retrospective cohort of 51 patients, and subsequently in a cohort of 207
prospectively accrued primary neuroblastomas. These data, and GSTP1
expression data from an independent microarray study of 251 neuroblastoma
samples, were correlated with established prognostic indicators and
disease outcome. High levels of GSTP1 were associated with decreased
event-free and overall survival in all three cohorts. Multivariate
analyses, including age at diagnosis, tumor stage and MYCN amplification
status, were conducted on the two larger cohorts and demonstrated
independent prognostic significance of GSTP1 expression levels. We also
explored the regulation of GSTP1 by MycN using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and luciferase reporter assays in
neuroblastoma cell lines and found that GSTP1 is a direct transcriptional
target of MycN. We conclude that N-Myc regulates multiple components of
drug metabolism and efflux pathways, including GSTP1 and transporters of
the ABC superfamily. The regulation of these key multidrug resistance
mechanisms may have particular significance for malignancies with
amplification of Myc family genes. 1) J Biol Chem, 285:19532-19543, 2010
2) J Natl Cancer Institute, 103:1236-51, 2011 4) Nat Rev Cancer,
10:147-156, 2010

