Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression and potential role of MUC7 in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


Human mucin 7 (MUC7) is the smallest of the mucin core proteins at 39 kD
and its fully glycosylated form ranges from 125-250 kD. This secreted,
non-gel forming mucin is normally expressed by the mucousal and serosal
salivary glands and sub-mucosal glands in the lower respiratory tract.
Recently MUC7 has been observed to be expressed in such diseases as
allergic-asthma, COPD, cystic fibrosis and bladder cancer. The tandem
repeat domain consists of 5-6 repeats of a 23 amino acid sequence, which
contains 3 SEA domains which may serve as sites of auto-cleavage. Our
immunohistochemical studies of pancreatic adenocarcionoma revealed that
MUC7 was expressed in over 50% of primary tumors, liver metastases, and
lymph node metastases. MUC7 was found to be primarily expressed by the
immune cells in the lymph node metastases rather than tumor cells. In
contrast, MUC7 was not expressed by infiltrating immune cells in primary
tumors and liver metastases, but it was present in the tumors themselves.
Further characterization of the immune cells expressing MUC7 in the lymph
nodes (by means of immunofluorescence and flow cytometry) revealed that
the majority were macrophages and myeloid-derived suppressor cells
together with a small population of dendritic cells. MUC7 has been
posited to play a role in inflammation. This function is likely due to a
unique histatin-like domain allowing it to bind numerous microbes to
promote their clearance.MUC7 has been shown to be upregulated by IL-1,
IL-4, IL-13, TNF-, LPS, and EGF in inflammed airways, and its minimal
proximal promoter contains binding sites for NF-B, AP1 and STAT
transcription factors; all of which are involved in promoting
inflammation. We found that MUC7 expression was up-regulated in the
pancreatic cancer cell line Hs766T and the breast cancer cell line BT474
upon incubation with Th1 cytokines IFN-, IL-1 and TNF- and the Th2
cytokines IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13. MUC7 over-expression was achieved in a
time-dependent manner when incubated with the Th1 cytokines; however
immediate and sustained expression was observed when cells were treated
with the Th2 cytokines. Global gene expression by microarray was
evaluated on samples of primary and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma
that expressed or did not express MUC7 to identify candidate genes
affected by MUC7 expression. The microarray data revealed that a number
of genes involved in tissue remodeling and inflammation were
differentially regulated by MUC7 expressing tumors. Together, the data
from the analyses presented here led us to propose that MUC7 has a role
in establishing a pro-tumorigenic microenvironment through enhancing the
Th2 inflammatory response and aiding in tissue remodeling.

