Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant activation of Spleen Tyrosine Kinase in ovarian cancer
identified through a global phosphorylation profiling of protein tyrosine
kinases


Aberrations in protein kinase activity and the consequent deregulation of
downstream signaling pathways are considered a hallmark of oncogenesis.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the phosphorylation state,
the ultimate readout of dysregulated activity, of protein tyrosine
kinases in ovarian tumors. An innovative Luminex multiplex platform was
employed to systematically determine phosphorylation status of protein
tyrosine kinases in a total of 69 protein lysates derived from normal
human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) cells, ovarian tumors, and cancer
cell lines. Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) was performed to
identify the signature of phosphorylated kinases with statistical
significance. Profiling results were confirmed by using phosphor-specific
kinase antibodies in immunoblot analysis of the profiled lysates and
immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded archived ovarian
and fallopian tissues, as well as immunofluorescence of ovarian cancer
cells growing as monolayer or 3D Matrigel cell cultures. A signature of
twenty-two phosphorylated protein tyrosine kinases was identified by SAM
analysis of the profiling data. Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (SYK), a novel
tyrosine kinase included in the signature, was found significantly
phosphorylated in lysates from ovarian cancer tissues compared to normal
tissues by both Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry on 94
clinical ovarian tissues (P=0.024). SYK phosphorylation was also
identified in tubal intraepithelial carcinomas, the hypothesized
precursors of high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas. However, SYK
activation was not observed in ovarian cancer cell lines growing as
attached monolayer cells, but was present when they grew as mouse
xenografts or in 3D Matrigel in vitro cultures. We are the first to
report that SYK, an extensively investigated tyrosine kinase in
hematopoietic cells, is aberrantly phosphorylated and activated in
ovarian cancer. SYK phosphorylation in ovarian cancer might be induced by
extracellular stimuli that are exclusively present in the tumor
microenvironment. These findings provide additional options in targeted
therapy for ovarian cancer.

