Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of factors governing sensitivity of NSCLC cell
lines to inhibition of Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase (PARP)


Recently, Poly (ADP Ribose) Polymerase-1 (PARP-1) has been shown to be an
important target in subsets of breast and ovarian cancers. PARP
inhibitors are emerging as important new anticancer agents, especially in
cancers defective in homologous recombination (HR) repair, such as those
lacking BRCA1 or BRCA2. To date, the potential role of PARP inhibition in
NSCLC has not been extensively studied. BRCA1 or BRCA2 promoter
hypermethylation and ATM mutation have been described in primary NSCLCs,
alterations that may sensitize cells to PARP inhibition. We have examined
a panel of 26 genotypically-defined NSCLC cell lines for sensitivity to
the PARP-1 inhibitor AG014699 using colony formation assays. We have
identified 5cell lines that are exquisitely sensitive (IC50 50nM), 9 cell
lines that are moderately sensitive (IC50 60-500nM) and 12 cell lines
that are resistant (IC50 > 5 M). To determine whether sensitive cell
lines have defective HR compared to resistant cell lines, we examined the
formation of Rad51 foci following exposure to PARP inhibition, as well as
to gamma-irradiation and cisplatin. Both sensitive and resistant cell
lines demonstrated efficient formation of Rad51 foci as well as
gamma-H2AX foci in response to DNA damaging treatments, suggesting
correct initiation of HR. In resistant cell lines, the repair process
following PARP inhibition is completed within 24 hours, with resolution
of Rad51 and gamma H2AX foci. No alterations in cell cycle distribution
were detected in these cell lines, suggesting that the efficiency of
repair allows proliferation to continue largely unabated. However, in
sensitive cell lines, these foci persist greater than 30 hours following
DNA damaging treatments. These results suggest that although sensitive
lines are able to initiate HR repair, they are unable to complete the
process, so that Rad51 foci are not resolved. The persistence of DNA
damage in these cell lines is confirmed by persistent gamma H2AX focus
formation as well as S/G2 arrest, the latter representing intact
checkpoint control. We are currently investigating whether PARP
inhibitor-sensitive cell lines have a deficiency in one of the helicases
or resolvases required for resolution of the complex Holliday junctions
formed during HR repair. Our results may define a novel subset of NSCLCs
with a late-step defect in HR that can be approached with PARP inhibition
as a novel treatment strategy.

