Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain tumor stem-like cells as a tool for testing small molecules
for anti-tumor therapy


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary malignant tumor
of the adult central nervous system. The highly lethal nature of this
tumor partly derives from the acquisition of an invasive phenotype, which
allows the tumor cells to infiltrate the surrounding brain tissues. In
fact the tumor cells, leading to the recurrence of the primary neoplasm
highly contribute to the lack of success in eradicating this disease.
Recent evidences suggested that a rare population of stem-like cells (or
tumor initiating cells) present in brain tumors may be responsible for
development of highly invasive and chemoresistant recurrent tumors. It
was suggested that not all the cells from a given brain tumor show the
same ability to proliferate and sustain the growth. Only a relatively
small fraction of those cells, termed Brain Tumor Stem-like Cells
(BTSCs), possess the ability to proliferate, self-renew extensively and
adapt to very different micro-environments. Further investigations have
demonstrated that BTSCs also more closely mirror the phenotype and
genotype of the primary tumors, in fact when used in animal models they
are able to generate a tumor that recapitulates the features of the human
GBMs. The absence of stem cell specific markers has posed challenges to
the identification and isolation of BTSCs from the bulk tumor cells in a
definitive manner. Furthermore, recent findings suggest that the Hedgehog
(HH) pathway is involved in BTSCs population maintaining in GBM. We
report that in a commercially available human recurrent GBM line
(DBTRG-05MG) and in different patients derived GBM cells; the key
components required for an active HH pathway, such as PTCH1, SMO and SHH,
are present and differently expressed according to culture conditions.
Cells cultured in serum containing media, have a switched-off HH pathway,
while cells kept in serum free containing media supplemented with EGF and
bFGF to promote the formation of floating growing neurospheres, show a
functional HH signaling pathway. These GBM cells respond to the same
mitogens that activate normal adult neural stem cells showing multipotent
differentiation properties and expressing markers of the normal stem
cells lineage, such as Nestin, SOX2, Bmi1 and Musashi1. Proliferation
assays performed using GBM patient-derived neurospheres clearly showed
higher sensitivity to the different SMO antagonists tested when compared
to the adherent counterpart cultured in serum containing media. The
effect of small molecules SMO antagonists in self-renewal assays,
confirmed the implication of the HH pathway in the growth of these
stem-like cells. Taken together, these data demonstrate the presence of
an operational HH pathway in human GBM derived neurospheres, and the
ability of those cells to be applied in a drug discovery setting as a
reliable SMO antagonists phenotypic testing tool.

