Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suicide gene therapy is effective for treating chemo-resistant
small cell lung cancer cells


Background: Resistance arises in patients with small cell lung cancer
(SCLC) following treatment with chemotherapeutic agents. Suicide gene
(SG) therapy is a novel treatment strategy for cancer in which the
introduced therapeutic gene encodes an enzyme capable of transforming a
non-toxic prodrug into a cell poison. By coupling the SCLC specific
promoter Insulinoma-associated 1 (INSM1) to the SG, it is possible to
target SG expression and resulting cytotoxicity exclusive to SCLC cells.
The aim of this project was to investigate the influence of
chemo-resistance on transcriptional targeted SG therapy. Results: As an
in vitro model of chemo-resistance we used a number of SCLC cell lines
resistant to different chemotherapeutic agents used in first-line
treatment of SCLC patients. Protein expression analysis showed the cells
lines to vary in expression of a several proteins correlated to
development of resistance. Despite of this the INSM1 promoter activity
was found to be equally or increased in chemo-resistant compared to
chemo-sensitive cells as measured by luciferase reporter assays and
determination of INSM1 mRNA levels by RT-PCR. Additionally, in tumor
xenografts stably expressing EGFP from the INSM1 promoter it was apparent
that the INSM1 promoter activity is very strong and stable in vivo.
Cytotoxic effects of two different SG systems driven by the INSM1
promoter were tested in the chemo-resistant cell lines by MTT assays. One
consisted of the fusion SG of yeast-cytosine-deaminase (YCD) and
yeast-uracil-phosphoribosyl-transferase (YUPRT) and the prodrug
5-fluorocytosin (5-FC). The other system consisted of the Nitroreductase
(NTR) gene and SN27686 prodrug. While equal sensitivity was found in
chemo-sensitive and -resistant cells towards YCD-YUPRT/5-FC therapy, the
NTR/SN276868 system showed reduced cytotoxicity in cells resistant to
alkylating agents. Importantly, equal cytotoxicity could be obtained in
these chemo-resistant cells upon NTR/SN27686 therapy by exposing cells to
higher prodrug doses, still not inducing off-target toxicity in
NTR-negative cells. Finally, the combination of YCD-YUPRT/5-FC SG therapy
with standard chemotherapy and with NTR/SN27686 SG therapy, respectively,
were tested and evaluated by MTT assay. In contrast to chemo-sensitive
cells, where the combination therapy had no additive effect,
significantly additive cytotoxicity was achieved in chemo-resistant SCLC
cells exposed to combination therapy compared to single agent therapy.
Conclusion: The results demonstrate that targeted SG therapy is equally
effective in chemo-resistant and -sensitive SCLC cells and that
additional effect can be achieved in chemo-resistant SCLC cells when SG
therapy is given in combination with chemotherapy or another SG therapy
system. INSM1-driven SG therapy therefore seems potent to be effective in
the treatment of SCLC patients with chemo-resistant tumors.

