Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The low-penetrance breast cancer risk allele MCS5A functions in
T-cells through downregulation of the E3-ubiquitin ligase Fbxo10, to
alter mammary epithelial cell differentiation


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 50 low-penetrance,
high-population frequency breast cancer susceptibility variants, of which
the vast majority are non-protein coding. Mechanisms through which such
variants modulate breast cancer risk are largely unknown. The non-coding
mammary carcinoma susceptibility locus 5a (MCS5A/Mcs5a) is associated
with breast cancer risk in both women and rats (Samuelson et al., 2007
PNAS). We use a comparative genetics approach to functionally
characterize this locus. Using mammary gland and bone marrow
transplantation assays in congenic rat models, we showed that the Mcs5a
resistance allele acts through a non-mammary cell-autonomous immune
mechanism. We found that Mcs5a is associated with altered T-cell
homeostasis and functions, most notably a 38% and 89% higher abundance of
gammadelta T-cells in the spleen and mammary gland, respectively (Smits
et al., 2011 Breast Cancer Res). On the molecular genetic level, the
non-protein coding Mcs5a resistance allele was found to strongly
associate with 2-fold and 4-fold lower Fbxo10 transcript levels in thymic
and splenic T-cells, respectively, but not in other immune cell types or
mammary gland (Smits et al., 2011 Nucleic Acids Res). Fbxo10 is an
E3-ubiquitin ligase gene, transcriptionally initiating from within Mcs5a.
Using flow cytometric analysis of the rat mammary epithelium with
antibodies against CD24, CD29, CD31, CD45, cytokeratin (CK) 14, CK19, as
well as staining with phalloidin, we identified the luminal and
basal/myoepithelial cell populations (Sharma et al., 2011 PLoS ONE).
Quantitative analysis of these populations revealed that in a window of
cancer susceptibility to carcinogen exposure (50-90 days of age), mammary
glands from Mcs5a resistant congenic rats have a 47% lower frequency of
basal/myoepithelial (CD24medCD29high) cells. Loss of CD29
(Integrin-beta1) expression in the mouse mammary epithelium has been
implicated in mammary cancer resistance. To investigate the function of
Fbxo10, we generated an Fbxo10 knockout mouse model, which recapitulated
both the gammadelta T-cell and the mammary epithelial cell
differentiation phenotypes. We hypothesize that Mcs5a controls Fbxo10
expression levels in the thymus, resulting in higher abundance of
gammadelta T-cells, especially in the mammary epithelium, which
contributes to resistance to carcinoma development through increased
immune surveillance and/or altered mammary epithelial cell
differentiation. Fbxo10 and its downstream ubiquitination proteins
represent novel breast cancer prevention targets within the immune
system. This study exemplifies the necessity of mammalian genetic models
for deciphering mechanisms through which low-penetrance variants affect
cancer susceptibility.

