Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNAs regulate the transition between EMT and MET breast
cancer stem cell states


Recent studies have suggested similarities between cancer stem cells and
the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) state. In contrast, other
studies suggest that these states are mutually exclusive. Our studies
suggest that these divergent views may be explained by the existence of
multiple stem cell states, which are regulated by microRNAs. Utilizing
primary breast tissue and established cell lines, we demonstrate that
both normal and malignant breast stem cells exist in distinct,
inter-convertible states. The EMT-like state is characterized by
expression of vimentin and N-cadherin, slug, snail and twist
transcription factors. EMT-like CSCs have a mesenchymal morphology, are
largely quiescent, invasive and characterized by expression of the CSC
markers CD44+CD24 and are EpCAMCD49f+. In contrast, the MET (mesenchymal
epithelial transition) state of CSCs is characterized by an epithelial
morphology and expression of E-cadherin and EpCAM. MET-like CSCs undergo
self-renewal and express the CSC marker Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and
are EpCAM+CD49F+. A subpopulation of cells expressing both CD44+CD24 and
ALDH may represent cells in transition between these states. This
transition is regulated by signals in the microenvironment which in turn
modulate microRNA networks. Expression induction of mir100 in MCF10A
cells and several cancer cell lines resulted in a decrease of
ALDH-positive CSC population with a concomitant increase in the CD24CD44+
population accompanied by induction of EMT. We demonstrated mir100
effects are mediated by targeting BMPR2, SMARCA5 and SMARCD1, all of
which may contribute to induction of EMT. Moreover, we show that mir100
overexpression induces cellular quiescence as shown by Ki67 and Brdu
staining. Induction of mir100 expression immediately upon orthotopic
implantation or after the tumors are established significantly reduced
the subsequent tumor growth in NOD/SCID mice. In contrast of
overexpression of mir100 stimulates cell invasion in vitro matrigel
assay. The existence of multiple cancer stem cell states has important
implications for understanding stem cell plasticity as well as tumor
growth and metastasis. In addition, the existence of these states has
implications for the development of CSC-targeting therapeutics.

