Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel laser ablation electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(LAESI-MS) platform for biomarker discovery in cancer cells


Introductory Sentence: LAESI is a novel technique for the direct and
rapid interrogation of cancer cells by mass spectrometry (MS) that can be
used to identify potential biomarkers in live cell populations.
Experimental: Presented in this work, the human leukemic cell line, REH,
was cultured under 3 different conditions to represent clinically
relevant scenarios. These included media alone or co-culture with human
bone marrow or osteoblast cells to represent conditions in which leukemic
disease originates and environments in which the therapeutic response of
tumors is known to differ. In previous work, REH cells co-cultured with
stromal cells have shown increased resistance to chemotherapeutic
treatments prompting our interest in evaluating differences in tumor
cells exposed to bone marrow microenvironment conditions compared to
those deprived of these survival cues. Subsequently, these unique
signatures may identify therapeutic targets of interest. To identify
potential therapeutic targets, the cells were pelleted using
centrifugation, washed twice, and pipetted upon slides for direct
LAESI-MS analysis. The LAESI-MS analysis was performed using a Protea
DP-1000 LAESI system interfaced to a Waters Synapt G2 mass spectrometer.
The mid-IR laser in the DP-1000 had a maximum output energy of 1 mJ, a
200 m spot size, and an operational frequency of 10 Hz. The MS was
continually calibrated using a lockmass of m/z 445.1206 resulting in mass
differences typically less than 5 ppm. After LAESI-MS analysis, the data
was analyzed using MarkerLynx software and subjected to a principle
component analysis (PCA) and orthogonal projections to latent structures
discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) for identification of potential
biomarkers from each treatment. Five replicates of each cell population
were analyzed for statistical significance and potential biomarkers were
searched against online databases based on accurate mass and confirmed
using MS/MS where possible. Summary of Data: The LAESI-MS analysis of the
REH cell pellets produced several notable differences in the cell
populations that could aid in the identification of biomarkers
responsible for the increased resistance to chemotherapeutic treatments.
The LAESI-MS analysis was very rapid, requiring less than five minutes of
analysis time per cell population to get an average fingerprint mass
spectrum in addition to MS/MS spectra to aid in metabolite verification.
Conclusions: LAESI-MS is a rapid analysis technique that can be used for
cancer research as applied here to cell populations. A LAESI-MS analysis
requires minimal sample pretreatment with simple washing and pelleting of
the cells being the only requirement for the analysis. This method allows
the direct analysis of live cells, which can ultimately lead to the
determination of biomarkers of disease through the comparison of
different cell populations.

