Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A siRNA high-throughput screening identified Wee1 as determinant
of Chk1 inhibitor sensitivity


Targeting Chk1 protein kinase is a valid anti cancer strategy to enhance
the cytotoxic effects of radio and chemotherapy. Recent evidence
disclosed a role of Chk1 in unperturbed cell proliferation and survival,
implying that Chk1 inhibitors could also be effective as single agents in
tumors with a specific genetic background. The effect of Chk1 inhibition
on a wide panel of cancer cell lines has been herein conducted by using a
specific and selective Chk1 inhibitor PF-00477736. The results showed
that 2 cancer cell lines out of 16 analyzed (the ovarian cancer cell line
OVCA-432 and the breast cancer cell line SK-BR3) were very sensitive to
PF-00477736 treatment. To identify genes in synthetic lethality with
Chk1, which may justify the sensitivity to Chk1 inhibitor of some cancer
cell lines, a high-throughput screening using a siRNA library directed
against 719 human protein kinases, in combination with either scramble or
Chk1 siRNA, was undertaken. The ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-5,
resistant to Chk1 inhibition, was used to perform the screening. After 2
independent screenings and the validation procedure using specific
esiRNAs, and the three siRNAs of each target (used in the screening as a
pool), the Wee1 tyrosine kinase was identified as the most significant
gene in synthetic lethality with Chk1. Treatment with both PF-00477736
and a Wee1 inhibitor (MK-1775) confirmed the remarkable synergistic
effect in various human cancer cell lines (breast, ovarian, colon,
prostate). Same results have been obtained with AZD-7762 Chk1 inhibitor.
Isogenic cellular systems differing only for the status of p53 (the colon
carcinoma cancer cell lines HCT-116 p53 +/+ and p53 -/- and the ovarian
cancer cell lines A2780 and A2780/E6) showed a comparable and strong
synergistic effect of the combined treatment. Interestingly, in the
normal fetal human lung cell line MRC-5 the effect of the combined
treatment was additive. Time lapse experiments and an evaluation of the
ability of cells to form colonies, suggested that cells treated with the
two inhibitors almost completely lost the ability to proliferate and
failed to perform a proper cell division. A detailed molecular analysis
showed that the combined treatment causes cells to undergo premature
mitosis before the end of DNA replication and with damaged DNA, leading
to a massive cell death by apoptosis. Taken together these preclinical
data address a new promising combined targeted anticancer strategy that
deserves clinical investigation.

