Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of hematogenous metastasis by mouse and murine/human
chimeric anti-Aggrus/podoplanin antibodies


Tumor cell-induced platelet aggregation has been known to facilitate
hematogenous metastasis by increasing the arrest of tumor cell emboli in
the microvasculature. We have previously established metastatic variants
of cancer cells and identified Aggrus (also known as podoplanin, T1alpha,
gp36) as a platelet aggregation-inducing factor expressed on the surface
of highly metastatic variants. Aggrus, a type-I transmembrane
sialomucin-like glycoprotein, induced platelet activation via interaction
with one of its counter receptor CLEC-2 (C-type lectin-like receptor 2)
expressed on platelet surface. Thus, Aggrus-induced platelet aggregation
did not require any plasma components. Moreover, Aggrus has been shown to
be up-regulated in many different types of cancers and to be associated
with poor outcome. Thus, Aggrus must be a useful cancer specific antigen
in addition to a useful therapeutic target for developing hematogenous
metastasis inhibitors. In this study, we established an anti-human Aggrus
monoclonal antibody, designated as P2-0, and investigated its potential
as a hematogenous metastasis inhibitor. We observed that P2-0 antibody
could inhibit Aggrus-CLEC-2 interaction detected by in vitro competition
assay and could suppress Aggrus-induced platelet aggregation in a
concentration-dependent manner. Moreover, P2-0 antibody decreased the
number of Aggrus-mediated pulmonary metastatic foci in in vivo
experimental mouse model. We then cloned complementarity-determining
region of P2-0 antibody and generated murine/human chimeric P2-0
antibody. We revealed that chimeric P2-0 antibody retained
Aggrus-neutralizing activity and inhibited the experimental pulmonary
metastasis of cancer cells that endogenously expressed Aggrus on their
surface. These data indicate that P2-0 antibody and its chimeric antibody
are useful as inhibitors of Aggrus-mediated hematogenous metastasis and
expected to be applied for the clinical examination of Aggrus-targeted
cancer therapy. This study was supported in part by a grant from the
Program for the Promotion of Fundamental Studies in Health Sciences of
the National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Japan.

