Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: cAMP/PKA signaling enhances activity of Deleted in Liver Cancer 1
(DLC1) tumor suppressor in suppressing liver cancer tumorigenesis


Deleted in Liver Cancer 1 (DLC1) which encodes a RhoGTPase-activating
protein (RhoGAP) is a tumor suppressor frequently inactivated in a wide
spectrum of human cancers. The RhoGAP activity has been shown to play a
predominant role in the biological activities of DLC1. It has been shown
that cells with silenced DLC1 exhibit increased active RhoA level. This
finding provides evidence about the activation of RhoA as the consequence
of deregulated DLC1 and points to the importance of RhoGAP activity in
the biological activity of DLC1. In this regard, it is important to
comprehend how RhoGAP activity of DLC1 is related. Here, we show that
DLC1 was robustly phosphorylated by cyclic AMP (cAMP)/Protein kinase A
(PKA) signaling in cells. Phosphorylation of DLC1 was enhanced by
forskolin, a known activator of PKA while suppressed when H-89, an
inhibitor of PKA was added. Direct phosphorylation of DLC1 by PKA was
further confirmed by the in vitro kinase assay. Using specific
phospho-DLC1 antibodies, PKA was shown to phosphorylate DLC1 at S431 and
S549. Functional assays demonstrate that phosphorylation at S549 plays a
critical role in provoking the inhibitory activity of DLC1 in suppressing
growth and motility of Ras-transduced p53 null mouse hepatoblasts. When
compared with the stable clone of wild-type DLC1, stable clone of DLC1
phosphomimetic mutant, S549D, displayed a largely reduced growth of
subcutaneous and orthotopic liver implanted tumors and an enhanced
apoptosis. The migration and invasion rates of S549D cells were also
significantly inhibited. Furthermore, S549D expression abolished stress
fiber formation but failed to alter filopodia protrusions. These
functional effects exerted by S549D were ascribed to the enhanced RhoGAP
activity against RhoA. To further investigate the mechanism through which
the RhoGAP activity is enhanced, we found that DLC1 dimerized upon S549
phosphorylation. Our findings have revealed for the first time about the
regulation of RhoGAP activity of DLC1 via dimerization. Our study
suggests a molecular link between PKA and DLC1/Rho pathways and
underscores the importance of S549 phosphorylation in the regulation of
RhoGAP activity of DLC1. (This study was funded by the Small Project
Funding Program, The University of Hong Kong 200907176125)

