Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combination of raloxifene and gefitinib potentiates the
cytotoxicity and induces apoptosis in estrogen receptor negative breast
cancer cell lines


In recent years, numerous studies have shown that the selective estrogen
receptor modulators (SERMs) tamoxifen and raloxifene reduce the risk of
invasive breast carcinoma. However, while SERMs do prevent the
development of many estrogen-receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers, few
studies suggest a potential effect of these drugs in the prevention of
the development of ER-negative breast cancers. Although, the therapeutic
efficacy of raloxifene in cancer therapy is thought to arise primarily
from its ability to compete with estrogens; raloxifene has been shown to
have effects through estrogen receptor (ER)-independent mechanisms.
Recently, a study perform in our laboratory demonstrated that raloxifene
decreased the level of EGFR expression in xenograft tumors. Based on
these results, we hypothesized that a combination of raloxifene and a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, gefitinib may improve cytotoxicity towards
ER-negative breast cancers. In the present study, we show that raloxifene
(5M) in combination with gefitinib (10M) further decrease cell viability
of two human ER-negative breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-468 and
MDA-MB-231, compare to a single treatment from either of these two drugs.
The combination potentiates apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 by 6 fold and in
MDA-MB-468 by 3 fold after 36 h. Expression and phosphorylation pattern
of proteins involved in cell proliferation such as NFB, -catenin,
epidermal growth factor (EGFR) were also markedly affected by the
combination treatment. Furthermore, evidence of apoptosis activation was
also observed by an increase of the cleaved form of caspase-3. Additional
studies demonstrated that the combination decreased cell migration and
tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells. Moreover, the combined treatment
decreased the ability of neovascularization as assessed by tube formation
of endothelial cells. All together, these results suggested the potential
of the combination of gefitinib and raloxifene for the prevention of
tumor growth and appearance of metastatic events. In conclusion, these
results provide us with the basis for future studies on the mechanism
involved in raloxifene-gefitinib inhibition of ER-negative tumor growth.

