Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XPC protein attenuation and deficiency in tobacco smoke-induced
DNA hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes


DNA hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes is a hallmark for many
types of cancer, including lung cancer. The mechanism that leads to
hypermethylation of these tumor suppressor genes in tumor cells is not
fully understood. Importantly lung cancer is strongly associated with
environmental factors, especially cigarette smoking. DNA damage generated
by environmental carcinogens and their metabolites is believed to play an
important role in lung cancer development. XPC is a DNA damage
recognition protein required for nucleotide excision repair (NER) and
many other DNA damage responses (e.g. checkpoint regulation and
apoptosis). Attenuated levels of XPC protein have been detected in a
majority of lung cancer patients. We studied the role of XPC protein
attenuation and deficiency in cigarette smoke-caused DNA
hypermethylation. Using primary human normal fibroblast (NF) and
XPC-deficient human fibroblasts (XPC), our DNA methylation studies
revealed that the XPC deficiency caused greatly elevated levels of DNA
hypermethylation in Brca1, Mlh1, and Xpc genes after exposure to tobacco
smoke condensate (TSC). Our chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) results
indicated that the XPC deficiency led to a more increased binding of DNA
methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) at the promoters of these genes following
the TSC treatment; however, this binding was partially diminished when
the XPC cells were treated with caffeine prior to the TSC treatment. The
results of our IP studies further revealed that the ATR protein
interacted with DNMT3A. In addition, our western blots revealed that the
level of ATR protein phosphorylation at serine 428 was greatly increased
in XPC cells after the TSC treatment. These results suggest that the XPC
protein attenuation and deficiency may cause lung cancer as a result of
tobacco smoking through activation of the ATR protein, which enhances the
binding of DNMT3A at selected target sequences, resulting in
hypermethylation of important tumor suppressor genes.

