Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early features of EMT in Abcb4/-cholangiocytes: A novel cellular
model for testing antimetastatic drugs


Discovering novel drugs for epithelial tumors remains a challenge since
cellular events underlying the onset of carcinoma progression are largely
unknown. We previously reported the therapeutic effects of oral
5-methylthioadenosine in the Abcb4/ mouse (Latasa et al, PLoS ONE 2010:
e15690), a clinically relevant model of chronic liver disease leading to
carcinoma development. Aiming to gain insight into malignant cellular
traits, we then generated primary cultures of intrahepatic bile duct
cells from this Abcb4/ mouse model. We found that Abcb4/-cholangiocytes
exhibit a fibroblastoid-like appearance which is accompanied by
diminished expression of epithelial hallmarks (CK19), and a concomitant
up-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as Snail1. The
trans-epithelial-electrical-resistance analyses indicated that whereas
confluent monolayers of normal cholangiocytes retained the epithelial
polarity, Abcb4/-cholangiocytes fail to repolarize. Abcb4/-cholangiocytes
proliferated at reduced growth rates (pDiscovering novel drugs for
epithelial tumors remains a challenge since cellular events underlying
the onset of carcinoma progression are largely unknown. We previously
reported the therapeutic effects of oral 5-methylthioadenosine in the
Abcb4/ mouse (Latasa et al, PLoS ONE 2010: e15690), a clinically relevant
model of chronic liver disease leading to carcinoma development. Aiming
to gain insight into malignant cellular traits, we then generated primary
cultures of intrahepatic bile duct cells from this Abcb4/ mouse model. We
found that Abcb4/-cholangiocytes exhibit a fibroblastoid-like appearance
which is accompanied by diminished expression of epithelial hallmarks
(CK19), and a concomitant up-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as
Snail1. The trans-epithelial-electrical-resistance analyses indicated
that whereas confluent monolayers of normal cholangiocytes retained the
epithelial polarity, Abcb4/-cholangiocytes fail to repolarize.
Abcb4/-cholangiocytes proliferated at reduced growth rates (p<0.05),
formed a higher number of colonies in soft agar (pDiscovering novel drugs
for epithelial tumors remains a challenge since cellular events
underlying the onset of carcinoma progression are largely unknown. We
previously reported the therapeutic effects of oral 5-methylthioadenosine
in the Abcb4/ mouse (Latasa et al, PLoS ONE 2010: e15690), a clinically
relevant model of chronic liver disease leading to carcinoma development.
Aiming to gain insight into malignant cellular traits, we then generated
primary cultures of intrahepatic bile duct cells from this Abcb4/ mouse
model. We found that Abcb4/-cholangiocytes exhibit a fibroblastoid-like
appearance which is accompanied by diminished expression of epithelial
hallmarks (CK19), and a concomitant up-regulation of mesenchymal markers
such as Snail1. The trans-epithelial-electrical-resistance analyses
indicated that whereas confluent monolayers of normal cholangiocytes
retained the epithelial polarity, Abcb4/-cholangiocytes fail to
repolarize. Abcb4/-cholangiocytes proliferated at reduced growth rates
(p<0.05), formed a higher number of colonies in soft agar (p<0.01) and
were less sensitive to antiproliferative effect of TGF1 (pDiscovering
novel drugs for epithelial tumors remains a challenge since cellular
events underlying the onset of carcinoma progression are largely unknown.
We previously reported the therapeutic effects of oral
5-methylthioadenosine in the Abcb4/ mouse (Latasa et al, PLoS ONE 2010:
e15690), a clinically relevant model of chronic liver disease leading to
carcinoma development. Aiming to gain insight into malignant cellular
traits, we then generated primary cultures of intrahepatic bile duct
cells from this Abcb4/ mouse model. We found that Abcb4/-cholangiocytes
exhibit a fibroblastoid-like appearance which is accompanied by
diminished expression of epithelial hallmarks (CK19), and a concomitant
up-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as Snail1. The
trans-epithelial-electrical-resistance analyses indicated that whereas
confluent monolayers of normal cholangiocytes retained the epithelial
polarity, Abcb4/-cholangiocytes fail to repolarize. Abcb4/-cholangiocytes
proliferated at reduced growth rates (p<0.05), formed a higher number of
colonies in soft agar (p<0.01) and were less sensitive to
antiproliferative effect of TGF1 (p<0.05). Consistent with EMT
characteristics, Abcb4/-cholangiocytes induced TGF isoforms and were more
sensitive to TGF1-signaling. Collectively, this data suggests that Abcb4/
cholangiocytes acquire EMT features that may be largely regulated in vivo
by TGF1. This original bile ductular cell line of Abcb4/-cholangiocytes
will be useful for testing compounds that may interfere with metastatic
malignancy of EMT.

