Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoconstructs for the efficient delivery of siRNA molecules
against Aquaporin-1 for anti-angiogenic therapies


Aquaporins (AQPs) are water-specific, membrane-channel proteins expressed
in diverse tissues. In particular, AQP1 has been reported to be
specifically and strongly expressed in most tumor microvascular
endothelial cells. Angiogenesis and tumor progression have been
dramatically impaired, in AQP1-null mice [Saadoun et al. Nature
434:2005]. These findings support the notion that AQP1 could be
considered as a specific target for the treatment of various neoplasias.
The AQP1 proteins can be specifically blocked by using small interference
RNA molecules (siRNAs). However, despite the considerable potential of
RNA interference for the treatment of cancer, the proper systemic
delivery of exogenous siRNA molecules is still a challenge. The most
significant obstacle is ensuring specific and effective delivery of
siRNAs to the cytoplasm of the target cell, limiting toxic effects and
serum degradation by RNAses. The use of nanoparticles, as intravascular
delivery vehicles, has potential in supporting the efficient, effective
and safe systemic delivery of siRNAs. Herein, multiple nanotechnological
platforms (nanoconstructs) are used to deliver siRNAs against AQP1. The
performance of the different nanoconstructs is assessed in vitro using
HeLa cells, transfected to express AQP1 molecules. Three nanoconstructs
are studied: fullerenes (C60), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
nanospheres and hydrogel-template nanoparticles. Positively charged
fullerenes are sub-nanometer spheres (diameter 0.71 nm) that complex with
the negatively charged siRNA molecules forming a stable compound under
physiological conditions (pH = 7.4). Differently, the PLGA nanospheres
and hydrogel-template nanoparticles are loaded with siRNA molecules
during their synthesis process. The silencing performance of the three
different nanoconstructs is assessed in vitro at multiple time points,
over a period of 6 days post incubation. The loading efficiency, the
release rate, the cell-entry mechanisms and potential cytotoxic response
are analyzed. The performance of the nanoconstructs is compared with
traditional delivery systems based on the use of transfection agents
(oligofectamine). AQP1 is here used as a model system, and the optimized
nanoconstructs could be utilized also for other siRNA therapeutics.

