Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the DNA repair protein UNG predicts lung cancer
sensitivity to pemetrexed


Uracil misincorporation is a direct consequence of TS inhibition by the
multi-target antifolate, pemetrexed. The DNA base excision repair (BER)
enzyme Uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) is the major glycosylase responsible
for the removal of misincorporated genomic uracil. We have previously
illustrated that human colon cancer cells (DLD1) with engineered stable
somatic knockout of UNG expression are hypersensitive to pemetrexed owing
to the cytotoxicity of genomic uracil accumulation. Here, we examined the
relationship between the expression of UNG and the pemetrexed sensitivity
in a small panel of lung cancer cell lines (n10). The levels of UNG were
measured by western blot (for protein) and RT-PCR (for mRNA). Results
revealed that UNG mRNA expression is well correlated with protein
expression in all cell lines. Moreover, there was a wide range of
distribution of UNG levels in the lung cancer cell lines evaluated. UNG
cutting assay and AP site measurements confirm that these differences in
UNG expression result in varied potential for BER activation and
subsequent AP site formation. To determine the role of this variation in
UNG expression in pemetrexed cytotoxicity, colony survival studies were
performed. In general, cell lines with higher UNG expression were more
resistant to pemetrexed. H460 cells having 7-fold lower expression of UNG
mRNA than H1975 cells are >5 fold more sensitive to pemetrexed than H1975
cells (H460 IC50 = 200nM; H1975 IC50 = >1000nM). Analysis of tissue
microarray data in Oncomine confirms variations in UNG expression in
primary human lung cancer samples. Moreover, small cell lung cancer and
squamous cell lung cancer, both notoriously resistant to pemetrexed, have
significantly increased median UNG expression compared to all other lung
cancer subtypes (1.5-fold greater UNG expression pUracil misincorporation
is a direct consequence of TS inhibition by the multi-target antifolate,
pemetrexed. The DNA base excision repair (BER) enzyme Uracil DNA
glycosylase (UNG) is the major glycosylase responsible for the removal of
misincorporated genomic uracil. We have previously illustrated that human
colon cancer cells (DLD1) with engineered stable somatic knockout of UNG
expression are hypersensitive to pemetrexed owing to the cytotoxicity of
genomic uracil accumulation. Here, we examined the relationship between
the expression of UNG and the pemetrexed sensitivity in a small panel of
lung cancer cell lines (n10). The levels of UNG were measured by western
blot (for protein) and RT-PCR (for mRNA). Results revealed that UNG mRNA
expression is well correlated with protein expression in all cell lines.
Moreover, there was a wide range of distribution of UNG levels in the
lung cancer cell lines evaluated. UNG cutting assay and AP site
measurements confirm that these differences in UNG expression result in
varied potential for BER activation and subsequent AP site formation. To
determine the role of this variation in UNG expression in pemetrexed
cytotoxicity, colony survival studies were performed. In general, cell
lines with higher UNG expression were more resistant to pemetrexed. H460
cells having 7-fold lower expression of UNG mRNA than H1975 cells are >5
fold more sensitive to pemetrexed than H1975 cells (H460 IC50 = 200nM;
H1975 IC50 = >1000nM). Analysis of tissue microarray data in Oncomine
confirms variations in UNG expression in primary human lung cancer
samples. Moreover, small cell lung cancer and squamous cell lung cancer,
both notoriously resistant to pemetrexed, have significantly increased
median UNG expression compared to all other lung cancer subtypes
(1.5-fold greater UNG expression p<0.005). These data motivate future
evaluation of UNG as a clinical predictor of pemetrexed response using
lung cancer biopsy specimens. Together, our results clearly indicate that
the BER protein, UNG is differentially expressed in lung cancer cells.
The inherent variation in UNG expression may have particular impact on
our ability to predict the therapeutic efficacy of pemetrexed in lung
cancer.

