Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of therapy resistant pediatric brain tumor cells
that have extraordinary survival and tumorigenic capabilities: The
ultimate seed cells that drives the growth of autopsied tumor cells in
mouse brains


Brain tumors are a leading cause of cancer related death in children.
Little is known about the biology of recurrent or refractory pediatric
CNS tumors, particularly those that are inoperable, such as hypothalamic
or brainstem tumors. Since autopsy may be the only opportunity to obtain
tumor tissue for inoperable or recurrent tumors, we have obtained
postmortem tissue for the purpose of developing orthotopic xenografts. We
hypothesized that a small fraction of tumor cells would survive the
postmortem period of extreme hypoxia and starvation, maintain their
tumorigenic capacity, leading to tumor formation in an appropriate in
vivo microenvironment; and that these tumor cells may represent the
ultimate seed cells that drive tumor recurrence and treatment failure. To
identify this subpopulation of TREST cells, i.e. therapy resistant with
extraordinary survival and tumorigenic capabilities, we collected 11
postmortem tumor samples, including 3 recurrent medulloblastomas (MBs),1
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and 7 diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma
(DIPG), 5-72 hrs (mean 32 hrs) after the time of death. We examined tumor
cell viability and their capacity of growth in vitro (neurospheres in
serum-free medium and proliferation in FBS-based DMEM), analyzed the
content of putative cancer stem cells, and determined their tumor forming
capability in vivo in mouse brains. Our results showed that a small
fraction (5-10%) of viable tumor cells exists in all the autopsied
tumors, although most of them failed to proliferate in vitro. More
importantly, we found that injection of unfractionated tumor cells into
mouse brains resulted in the formation of xenograft tumors in 2 of 3 MBs
(66.6%), 1/1 GBM and 5 of 7 DIPGs (71%). One of the medulloblastomas and
the GBM model have been serially passaged in mouse brains 6 times, and
two of the DIPGs in mouse brainstems 3 times. These tumors replicated the
histopathological phenotypes of the corresponding patient tumors
demonstrating diffuse invasion. Using a series of putative cancer stem
cell markers (CD133, CD15, CD24/CD44, CD57 and CD117), we showed that
CD133+ and CD15+ cells were enriched in the xenograft tumors. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that a small fraction of tumor cells,
some of which expressed putative CSC markers, can survive a lengthy
period of postmortem hypoxia/anoxia and starvation and maintain
tumorigenic capabilities in mouse brains. Detailed analysis of these
TREST cells, particularly with our unique panel of orthotopic xenograft
mouse models, should provide novel insights about their biology and
future development of new therapies specifically targeting the
recurrent/late stage brain tumors.

