Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Guided intracellular drug delivery and release with plasmonic
nanobubbles in drug-resistant cancer cells


Chemotherapies are often impeded by drug resistance of cancer cells, high
non-specific toxicity and low selectivity and efficacy of drug delivery.
We developed a platform for the selective, fast, guided intracellular
delivery of drugs into cancer cells with new cell-specific agents,
plasmonic nanobubbles (PNBs). PNBs are not particles but transient
events, vapor nanobubbles, induced by a short laser pulse around gold
nanoparticles. Therapeutic effects of PNBs have a localized mechanical,
non-thermal, nature and can be dynamically tuned in cancer cells to
support non-invasive imaging, disruption of endosomes and drug carriers,
injection of drug and mechanical cell ablation with single cell
selectivity in a heterogeneous tissue. Simultaneous treatment of a bulk
tissue activates those functions only in cancer cells while leaving
adjacent normal cells intact. Optical and acoustical properties of PNBs
provide a real time guidance of therapeutic effect. PNB mechanisms were
evaluated for intracellular delivery of free and encapsulated doxorubicin
into drug-resistant oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OCSCC) cells
mixed in a co-culture with normal cells. Gold nanoshells were conjugated
with Panitumumab antibody to target EGFR that is overexpressed by OCSCC.
Receptor-endocytotic targeting resulted in cancer cell-specific clusters
of nanoshells. These clusters selectively generated PNBs only in cancer
cells while normal cells did not produce PNBs under simultaneous
treatment with a single, short near-infrared laser pulse of low,
biologically safe, energy. PNBs selectively delivered free extracellular
drug only to cancer cells by creating transient nano-holes in cellular
membranes and inbound nanojets that brought the extracellular drug into
the cytoplasm. Thus PNBs worked as nano-injector of extracellular drug.
Compared to a standard treatment with doxorubicin alone, PNB injection
improved therapeutic efficacy by 12-fold and at the same time reduced
drug dose by 10-fold and non-specific toxicity by 3-fold. Plasmonic
nanobubble-enhanced endosomal escape (PNBEE) provided intracellular
delivery of the liposome-encapsulated drug, Doxil, that was administered
separately with gold nanoshells through a self-assembly of mixed
nanoshell-Doxil nanoclusters by cancer cells. Small PNBs generated in
these nanoclusters disrupted both liposomes and endosomes and ejected the
released doxorubicin into cytoplasm. Cancer cell-specific generation of
PNBs in a mixed co-culture of OCSCC and normal cells increased the
therapeutic efficacy of Doxil by 31-fold and at the same time reduced
drug dose by 20-fold, treatment time by 3-fold and non-specific toxicity
by 10-fold. The described mechanisms of nano-injection and PNBEE are
universal, can be applied to various cancers and provide a guided
intracellular drug delivery in heterogeneous tissues through the
application of plasmonic nanobubbles.

