Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using the Mendelian randomization approach to clarify the role of
well-done meat and heterocyclic amine exposure in the etiology of
colorectal polyps


Background: High red meat intake and meat-derived mutagen heterocyclic
amines (HCAs) exposure have been linked to the risk of colorectal polyps
and cancer. HCAs are activated and detoxified by a group of carcinogen
metabolizing enzymes. Internal exposure dose to these carcinogens is
determined by both external exposure and genetic polymorphisms in genes
encoding these enzymes, providing a unique opportunity to conduct a
Mendelian randomization analysis to reduce bias associated with
observational epidemiological studies. Methods: In a colonoscopy-based
case-control study, we recruited 5,386 participants, including 2,057
patients with colorectal polyps, and 3,329 polyp-free controls. Twenty
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were analyzed to construct a HCA
metabolizing score. Data on dietary intake of meat by cooking methods and
doneness level were obtained through telephone interviews to derive
dietary HCA exposure level. Interactions between HCA metabolizing score
and dietary exposure variables were evaluated using multivariate
unconditional logistic regression models to derive odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results: HCA metabolizing score was
unrelated to polyp risk among those with a low intake of total meat or
red meat and low dietary HCA exposure. These dietary variables also
tended to not be associated with polyp risk among those with a low HCA
metabolizing score. Risks of polyps associated with meat intake and HCA
exposure, however, were elevated among those with a high risk HCA
metabolizing score. The interactions between dietary meat exposures and
HCA metabolizing score were statistically significant for most of the
analyses (P 0.05). Participants with the highest meat intake and HCA
exposure level and a high risk HCA metabolizing score had a 30% to 40%
elevated risk of developing any polyps and 60% to 80% elevated risk of
developing advanced or multiple adenomas. Conclusions: Dietary meat
intake and dietary exposure to HCAs is associated with an elevated risk
of colorectal polyps, and this association is modified by genetic
polymorphisms in HCA metabolizing enzymes. This study provides strong
evidence supporting a causal role of HCA exposure in the etiology of
colorectal tumors.

