Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFATc1 is a novel invasion promoter in colorectal cancer


Colorectal carcinoma is the third leading cause of cancer-related death
in the United States. In order to understand the mechanism/signaling
pathways responsible for invasion, migration and metastasis in colorectal
cancer, our lab successfully modeled human cancer invasion/metastasis
using mouse colon cancer cells. We have developed an integrative and
comparative computational approach to reveal transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms underlying colon cancer progression. Applying this approach to
fourteen human colorectal cancer (CRC) microarray data sets and to one
microarray dataset from an immunocompetent mouse model of metastasis, we
identified known and novel transcriptional regulators in CRC. Among these
transcriptional regulators, the Nuclear Factor of Activated T cells
(NFAT) family of transcription factors play a central role in inducible
gene transcription in various signaling pathways including regulation of
cell differentiation, development, adaption, immune system response,
inflammation, adipocyte metabolism, and lipolysis, and carcinogenesis. We
found that an NFAT-driven transcriptional program significantly
correlates with disease-free survival in multiple CRC Stage II patients.
Using quantitative real time RT-PCR, we validated high NFATc1 expression
in a subgroup of stage II colorectal cancer patients and differential
expression of predicted NFATc1 targets in the same patients. The
tumor-associated NFATc1 co-regulated gene signature was associated with
worse clinical survival outcomes in stage II colorectal cancer patients.
In comparison with parental MC38 mouse colon cancer cells, NFATc1
expression is increased in MC38met cells selected for invasive and
metastatic ability, RNAi-based inhibition of NFATc1 expression in the
MC38met cells resulted in decreased invasiveness in a transendothelial
invasion model. Our studies suggest a role for NFATc1 as a tumor
promoting transcription factor that contributes to invasion in colon
cancer.

