Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary glycemic load, glycemic index and risk of primary liver
cancer: Results from the Shanghai women's and men's health studies


Introduction Dietary glycemic index (GI) and glycemic load (GL) have been
observed to have a positive relationship with obesity and diabetes which
are risk factors for liver cancer. However, studies assessing the
association between GI, GL and liver cancer have yielded inconsistent
results. We evaluated the association of GI and GL with liver cancer
using data from two prospective cohort studies, the Shanghai Women's
Health Study (SWHS) and the Shanghai Men's Health Study (SMHS). Methods
The study population consisted of 72,906 women from SWHS and 60,203 men
from the SMHS who had not been previously diagnosed with cancer, did not
have extreme total energy intake as assessed by a food frequency
questionnaire (FFQ) and had complete data on all covariates of interest.
Subject recruitment for the SWHS began in 1996 and for the SMHS began in
2002. Outcome follow-up data through December 31, 2009 from both cohorts
were used in the current analysis. At baseline, a validated FFQ was
administered and daily dietary GI and GL were calculated for each cohort
member. These values were energy adjusted using the residuals method and
categorized into quintiles. Confounders were assessed using data from the
baseline questionnaire. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals were
calculated for the association between GI/GL and liver cancer incidence
with adjustment for potential confounders. Results After a median
follow-up of 11.2 and 5.3 years for the SWHS and SMHS, respectively, 346
incident liver cancer (ICD-9: 155) were identified. Women in the upper
quintiles of GL intake were more likely to be older, have less education,
have lower annual family incomes, be smokers, be post-menopausal, and
were less likely to exercise, consume alcohol or have a history of
diabetes or hepatitis. Men in the upper quintiles of GL intake were more
likely to have less education, have lower annual per capita family
incomes, and were less likely to exercise, to consume alcohol or have a
history of diabetes. After adjustment for all confounders, no
statistically significant trends were observed for men or women for the
quintile of intake of GI or GL with the incidence of liver cancer (SWHS:
GL p trend = 0.67, GI p trend = 0.11; SMHS: GL p trend = 0.64, GI p trend
= 0.29). Similarly, no statistically significant trends were observed
when the models were stratified by chronic hepatitis status (yes or no).
Conclusions There is little evidence that GI or GL affect the incidence
of liver cancer in this population. Further research about other
modifiable risk factors for liver cancer is warranted.

