Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer subtype-specific regulation of gene transcription
and therapeutic response by functional crosstalk between LSD1 and HDACs


The dysregulation of histone deacetylases (HDACs), which frequently leads
to the silencing of gene expression, is linked to breast cancer
progression. Studies in recent years have focused on reversing these
changes in gene expression through inhibition of histone deacetylases
(HDACs), and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have emerged as a potential new
treatment option for cancer. However the current HDACi are less effective
as monotherapy against solid tumors, highlighting the need to develop
rational combinations of chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of
solid tumors. Our recent work has shown that combined inhibition of LSD1
and HDACs in breast cancer cell lines leads to re-expression of a unique
subset of abnormally silenced genes and enhanced apoptosis in triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells, suggesting that crosstalk between
lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) and HDACs is a novel and important
epigenetic mechanism for aberrant gene silencing. These data also suggest
that inhibition of LSD1 in combination with HDACi might enhance the
therapeutic efficacy of HDAC inhibitors, and thus improve breast cancer
treatment. Our further investigation showed that TNBC cells are overall
more sensitive to combined treatment with LSD1 and HDAC inhibitors than
other subtypes of breast tumors, or normal breast cells. LSD1-knockdown
(KD) by shRNA sensitized TNBC MDA-MB-231 cells to HDACi-induced growth
inhibition and apoptosis, and resulted in a striking synergistic mRNA
induction of important growth control and apoptosis-related genes such as
ER, E-Cadherin, NR4A1, PCDH1, RGS16, BIK, CDKN1C, CRABP2, ING1, SQSTM1,
TP53TG1, etc. In contrast, LSD1-KD exerted only minor effect on
SAHA-induced gene re-expression in hormone receptor-positive or HER2
positive counterparts. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that
re-expression of silenced genes was accompanied by concurrent increase of
active chromatin marks H3K4me2 and AcetylH3K9 at gene promoters.
ShRNA-mediated silencing of LSD1 significantly suppressed the mRNA
expression of most of the class I (1-3, 8), II (6, 7, 10) and IV (11)
HDAC isozymes in TNBC cells, but exerted marginal effect on transcription
activities of HDAC isozymes in other subtypes of breast cancer cells.
Moreover, siRNA-mediated silencing of the specific HDAC isozymes led to
increase of H3K4me2 level in MDA-MB-231 cells. Taken together, our
studies suggest that orchestrated interplay between LSD1 and HDACs is an
important epigenetic signature contributing to aberrant gene silencing,
and combination therapy targeting the crosstalk between histone
demethylation and deacetylation may represent a novel therapeutic
approach for aggressive TNBC.

