Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complete regression of solid B16F1 melanoma tumors obtained by
intratumoral injection of LTX-315 (Oncopore)


Background: Malignant melanoma is imposing an increasing threat to the
world's population and new therapies are needed.Standard treatment
involves surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy and often leads to
relapse after ended therapy. LTX-315 (Oncopore) is a chemically modified
cationic cytolytic peptide which is equally active against drug-sensitive
and drug-resistant cancer cells. Earlier animal studies have demonstrated
that treatment of syngeneic murine A20 B-cell lymphomas and CT26WT colon
carcinomas with intratumoral (i.t.) injection with LTX-315 resulted in
complete tumor regression and long-term protective effect against
re-inoculated tumor cells. The present study was undertaken to
investigate whether LTX-315 induced an antitumor response in vivo in a
highly aggressive murine melanoma tumor model. Methods: Pre-cultured
B16F1 melanoma cells (5 x 104) were subcutaneously inoculated into the
abdomen of syngeneic C57BL/6N mice and established tumors treated i.t.
with LTX-315. Animals were taken for analysis to elaborate the mechanism
of action of LTX-315 and for potential immune modulatory effects
following treatment. Blood plasma was analyzed for changes in cytokine
content and tumor tissue was analyzed for infiltrating immune cells using
immunohistochemistry and flow-cytometry. Results: Intratumoral treatment
with LTX-315 resulted in a complete regression of tumor in the treated
animals. Tumors treated with LTX-315 showed an increased infiltration of
immune cells into the tumor compared to control tumors receiving vehicle.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that LTX-315 treatment can induce
complete regression in solid B16F1 melanoma tumors, thus leading to local
tumor control. Intratumoral treatment with LTX-315 can lead to
immune-modulatory effects such as an increase in the number of
infiltrating immune cells, causing a shift in the balance between immune
effector and immune suppressive cells in the tumor environment.

