Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The high mobility group A1 oncogene enhances cellular
reprogramming to a pluripotent stem-like cell


The molecular mechanisms that enable cancer cells to metastasize are
poorly understood, although emerging evidence indicates that
transcriptional networks required for stem cell properties during
embryogenesis are co-opted by cancer cells during metastatic progression.
To elucidate the molecular underpinnings of stemness in cancer and normal
development, we investigated transcriptional networks and epigenetic
alterations during the induction of pluripotent stem cells. Our focus is
the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene, which encodes proteins that bind
to AT-rich regions of DNA and orchestrate the assembly of transcription
factor complexes to alter chromatin structure and modulate gene
expression. Our group first discovered that HMGA1 functions as a potent
oncogene in cultured cells and causes aggressive tumors in transgenic
mice. Recent studies also identified HMGA1 as a key transcription factor
enriched in human embryonic stem (hESCs) cells, induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), refractory leukemia, and high-grade/poorly differentiated
cancers arising from diverse tissues. Together, these findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that HMGA1 drives an undifferentiated,
stem cell-like state during malignant transformation and normal
development. To further investigate the role of HMGA1 in the stem cell
state, we assessed its function in the derivation of iPSCs using multiple
approaches. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that HMGA1
significantly enhances the reprogramming of somatic cells (bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, fetal lung cells, or mononuclear
blood cells) into iPSCs together with OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and cMYC (OSKM)
using a retroviral or episomal, non-integrating approach. When hESCs are
induced to differentiate, HMGA1 expression falls and parallels that of
other pluripotency factors, such as OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2. We also found
that forced expression of HMGA1 blocks differentiation of hESCs. To
determine how HMGA1 induces a stem cell state, we assessed gene
expression and epigenetic changes. During the reprogramming process,
HMGA1 induces the expression of pluripotency and cancer genes, including
SOX2, LIN28, and cMYC, while in hESCs, knock-down of HMGA1 results in
repression of these genes. In addition, NANOG and OCT4 are repressed in
hESCs following knock-down of HMGA1. By chromatin immunoprecipitation,
HMGA1 binds to the promoters of SOX2, LIN28, and cMYC in vivo in hESCs.
Moreover, HMGA1 is associated with decreased promoter methylation of
select stem cell genes early in reprogramming. These findings uncover a
key role for HMGA1 as a regulator of the stem cell state through
transcriptional networks and epigenetic remodeling that induce
pluripotency and an undifferentiated state. Further studies are needed to
determine if HMGA1 pathways could be targeted in poorly differentiated,
stem-like cancers or exploited in regenerative medicine.

