Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 17-estradiol-induced expression of EF1 confers tamoxifen
resistance in breast cancer


Background: Resistance to tamoxifen therapy is one of the major barriers
to the successful treatment of breast cancer, and ER- expression is
currently the main biomarker of response to tamoxifen treatment.
Elucidating the regulation of ER- expression may provide new therapeutic
targets for overcoming tamoxifen resistance. Materials and Methods:
Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblotting, and immunofluorescence were used to
determine 17-estradiol-induced expression of EF1 and ER- at the mRNA and
protein levels in the presence or absence of ICI 182,780, PI-103, PKI, or
BAY 11-7082. Luciferase assay was used to determine EF1-driven
transcriptional activities of the wild-type and mutant human ER-
promoters. Quantitative CHIP assay was used to detect the direct
association of EF1 with the wild-type human ER- proximal promoter.
Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the expression of EF1 and ER-
protein in breast cancer specimens. Results: We found that 17-estradiol
up-regulated EF1 expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner in MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Down-regulation of the ER- significantly abolished
this effect, showing that 17-estradiol-induced expression of EF1 is
ER-dependent. Blockade of the PI3K or NF-B pathway resulted in an
interference on the up-regulation of EF1 by 17-estradiol. Interestingly,
ectopic expression of EF1 exhibited a repression on ER- expression in
MCF-7 cells. Luciferase and CHIP assays further confirmed that EF1
transcriptionally inhibited the promoter activity of human ER- by binding
to its E2-box (CACCTG). Importantly, up-regulation of EF1 expression
rendered MCF-7 cells less sensitive to tamoxifen treatment, whereas
adding ER- comprised the effect of EF1 on the cell sensitivity to
tamoxifen. Through the study of breast cancer specimens, we found a
strong inverse correlation between EF1 and ER- protein expression,
further supporting the contribution of estrogen/EF1/ER cascade to
tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. Conclusions: Our data indicates a
key role of EF1 in developing tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer, by
altering ER- expression. Given that re-expressing ER- in ER--negative
breast cancer can restore tamoxifen sensitivity, restoring ER- expression
by inhibiting EF1 provides a potential new strategy for overcoming
endocrine resistance.

