Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of MUC16/CA125-specific therapeutics through dual
fluorescence high throughput screening


BACKGROUND: The MUC16 gene encodes the CA125 ovarian cancer antigen. This
glycoprotein is expressed in the majority of Epithelial Ovarian Cancers
(EOC) but has limited expression elsewhere in the adult human. Expression
of the carboxy-portion of MUC16 results in increased invasion, soft agar
growth and in vivo growth. OBJECTIVES:. We seek to identify MUC16
specific small molecules as chemotherapy candidate drugs for development
in ovarian cancer. METHODS: Our previously reported study of dual
fluorescence isogenic high content screening for MUC16/CA125 selective
agents (Mol.Can.Ther, 2011) was extended to a library of 74,942 compounds
from NCI, to identify small molecules which have a differential effects
against MUC16 positive cells compared to isogenic MUC16 negative ovarian
cancer cell lines Carboxy-terminus portions of the human MUC16 gene were
introduced into A2780 EOC cell lines labeled with mCherry and compared to
GFP labeled isogenic controls in a 384 well co-culture assay for cellular
viability by computerized fluorescence intensities and compared for the
relative toxicity against MUC16+/MUC16- isogenic cell lines. Compounds
with differential activity were selected, resupplied and examined by Vi
Cell counting and Alamar Blue cytotoxic assays for confirmation in
SK-OV-3 cell line pairs. RESULTS: A2780 isogenic pair was initially used
and thirty compounds which selectively targeted MUC16 positive cells were
identified. These 30 compounds were tested for growth inhibition with a
secondary SKOV3 isogenic screen for confirmation. Two compounds were
among the screen identified in the secondary SKOV3 isogenic pair testing.
These compounds were studied using Alamar Blue Assay with a panel of
ovarian cell lines including CAOV3; OV433; OV432; SKOV8 (WT and MUC16
knockdown and an isogenic T80 MUC16+/ pair (in vitro transformed normal
ovarian surface epithelial cell line) and IGROV1-R10. We are in the
process of examining the Structural Activity Relationship around these 2
compounds and will present their response. CONCLUSIONS: These MUC16 +/
dual fluorescence screens can be used as an example of single gene
target, high throughput screening strategies to identify potentially
specific therapeutics for key oncogenic targets.

