Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA editing enzyme ADAR1 drives leukemia stem cell differentiation
and self-renewal in chronic myeloid leukemia


Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the first cancer that was shown to
originate from a genetic abnormality - the Philadelphia chromosome
translocation, and production of its constitutively active protein
tyrosine kinase product, BCR-ABL. The disease progresses slowly from
chronic phase to accelerated phase, and later transforms to blast crisis
(BC) stage. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subset of tumor cells that
have acquired certain treatment-resistant stem cell properties. High
levels of RNA editing are associated with a primitive transcriptional
program typical of human embryonic stem cells, and RNA editing plays an
important role in both embryonic hematopoietic cell fate determination
and in maintenance of normal hematopoiesis. Human RNA editing occurs
primarily in secondary structures created by Alu retroelements and is
carried out by enzymes such as the adenosine deaminase acting on RNA
(ADAR) family. Among these, ADAR1 was also recently shown to be required
for normal hematopoiesis by suppressing interferon-induced apoptosis. Our
research focuses on dissecting the role of ADAR-mediated RNA editing in
normal human hematopoietic progenitor cell development compared with
malignant editing programs that may be activated in leukemia stem cells
(LSC) during the progression of human CML. Our data demonstrates that BC
LSC harbor increased levels of the interferon-responsive ADAR1 p150
isoform compared with chronic phase (CP) progenitors and normal cord
blood progenitors. Expression of this isoform also exhibits a positive
correlation with BCR-ABL expression levels - an effect which is specific
to BC progenitors, suggesting that ADAR1 expression correlates with
disease progression from CP to BC. In vitro hematopoietic progenitor
assays with normal cord blood progenitors and CP samples transduced with
lentiviral vectors overexpressing human ADAR1 reveals a significant shift
in cell differentiation fate towards granulocyte-macrophage progenitor
(GMP) colonies, which has been shown to be the initiating LSC population
in CML Correspondingly, a progression towards erythroid lineage was
observed in BC CML LSC transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing
shRNA targeting ADAR1. Further qRT-PCR analyses revealed that the
mechanism through which ADAR1 drives LSC and HSC differentiation towards
myelopoiesis involves regulation of PU.1, which in turn inhibits GATA1
expression. Moreover, in vivo studies in a robust humanized CML mouse
model showed a significant decrease in LSC serial transplantation
potential of lentiviral shADAR1-transduced BC progenitors transplanted
into neonatal RAG2-/-c-/- mice. Together, these data support a crucial
role for ADAR1 in cell fate determination and self-renewal potential of
hematopoietic stem cells in both normal human progenitors and in
malignant LSC that drive disease progression and therapeutic resistance.

