Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amphiregulin interacts with Wnt signaling to regulate cancer cell
growth and survival


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) initiates signaling via several
ligands that include but are not limited to EGF, amphiregulin (Areg) and
epiregulin. These ligands are believed to differentially affect various
physiological and cellular processes such as cell survival, proliferation
and differentiation. This study is designed to delineate how amphiregulin
alters the biology of both breast and ovarian cancer cells that
overexpress amphiregulin and activate EGFR in an autocrine manner. AREG
knock down drastically reduces the rate of proliferation of both a breast
cancer cell line, SUM149 and an ovarian cancer cell line, OV1 that
overexpress amphiregulin. Stable, clonal populations of SUM149 cells with
AREG knockdown grow poorly in serum free media, but can be rescued by
addition of exogenous AREG or other EGFR ligands to the culture medium.
Clones with the most effective AREG knock down are completely unable to
survive or proliferate in serum free media. Our Micro array analyses show
that inhibiting amphiregulin in SUM149 cells dysregulates the expression
of several important genes, including up-regulating DKK1, an antagonist
of Wnt signaling. DKK1 up regulation upon AREG knockdown was confirmed by
ELISA, with one of the clones, C2 showing a 16 fold increase in DKK1
secretion following AREG knock-down. Flow cytometetric analysis of
SUM-149 cells and AREG knock-down derivatives demonstrated that 48% of
control cells expressing a non-silencing shRNA construct were CD44+/CD24-
but only a small population (7%) expressed CD24 alone. AREG knockdown
induced significant reduction in the fraction of CD44 positive cells,
down to 4% while, simultaneously increasing the non-stem cell fraction,
CD44-/CD24+ to 60% of the total population. Since CD44hi/CD24lo is a
characteristic of undifferentiated cells that have the potential to
initiate tumor formation, we are currently examining the in vivo growth
potential of SUM-149 cells and AREG knock-down derivatives. To determine
the tumorigenicity of SUM149 cells three different cell innocula of
unsorted parental SUM149 cells and SUM149 cells expressing a
non-silencing shRNA construct (SUM149-NS) were transplanted into the
mammary fat pad of NOD-SCID mice. As expected, the tumorigenic activity
of the cells is proportional to the cell titer. In the parental SUM149
cells, the injection of 5x105 cells resulted in measurable tumors
beginning at day 28 while SUM149-NS displays tumors at day 24, while
transplantation of 2.5x105 cells per fat pad yielded tumor formation in
31 and 28 days respectively. Experiments to measure the in vivo growth
potential of AREG knock-down SUM-149 cells is in progress. Thus,
amphiregulin has a unique biological function to enhance cell survival
and differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Future studies will focus on
the role of AREG mediated WNT signaling in the malignant potential of
SUM-149 cells.

