Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptotic effects of curcumin and bleomycin alone or in
combination on malignant testicular germ cells


Aims: Testicular cancer is the most common cancer among young men of
reproductive age. Bleomycin is a frequently used drug for the treatment
of several malignancies and is part of the chemotherapy protocols in
testicular cancer, but side effects are common. Bleomycin increases
oxidative stress which has been shown to induce apoptosis in cancer
cells. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane), an active component of the spice
turmeric, has been demonstrated to induce apoptosis in several types of
malignancies. However, no study has been carried out so far to elucidate
its possible anticancer activity and interaction with Bleomycin in
testicular cancer cells. Methods: In this study, we investigated the
effects of Curcumin and Bleomycin alone or in combination on
apoptosis-signalling-pathways. We determined the cytotoxic effect of
Bleomycin and Curcumin on NTera-2 (NT2) cells using 3-(4,5)
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and
measured apoptosis signalling pathway markers such as Caspase-3,
Caspase-8, Caspase-9 activities and Bcl-2, Bax and Cyt-c levels in NT2
cells incubated with Bleomycin in the presence or absence of Curcumin.
Results: Median lethal dose (LD50) of Bleomycin on NT2 cell viability as
400 g/ml after an incubation of 24 h and LD50 of Curcumin as 20 M.
Treatment with Bleomycin (400 g/ml) and Curcumin (20 M) alone for 24 h
caused 3.2-fold and 3-fold increase in caspase-3 activity, 3.4-fold and
2-fold increase in caspase-8 activity, 2.9-fold and 2.8 fold increase in
caspase-9 activities respectively. These treatments alone also caused
2-fold increase in Bax and 2-fold increase in cytoplasmic Cyt-c levels
while leading 2-fold decrease in Bcl-2 levels. Combination of Curcumin
with Bleomycin induced Caspase-3,-8,-9 activities more than their
separate effects in NT2 cells. Specifically combination of Curcumin (20
M) with Bleomycin (400 g/ml) induced 4.2-fold increase in Caspase-3,
4.3-fold increase in caspase-8 activity, 4-fold increase in caspase-9
activity, 3-fold increase in cytoplasmic Cyt-c levels and 3-fold decrease
in Bcl-2 levels.Conclusion: Bleomycin has proven to be an essential
component of the cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimens, used in the
treatment of testicular cancer. However, the use of Bleomycin is limited
because of Bleomycin-induced pneumonitis, a complication occurring in
approximately 10% of patients treated with Bleomycin and fatal in
approximately 10% of the cases. Our observations suggest that the effects
of Bleomycin on apoptosis-signalling-pathways were improved by Curcumin.
Co-administration of Bleomycin with Curcumin could be a new strategy to
use less dosage of Bleomycin and prevent patients from Bleomycin-induced
side effects.

