Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between cell surface expression level of EGF-R and
cetuximab-mediated ADCC activity in human colorectal cancer cells


Background: Cetuximab is a monoclonal antibody approved in the patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer expressing epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGF-R). It is considered that the proposed mechanism of action
includes antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) by
triggering FcR on natural killer cells. However, it is unclear whether
ADCC correlates with EGF-R expression and/or the mutational status of
downstream effectors such as K-RAS, B-RAF, PI3K, and so on in colorectal
cancer. Aim: The aim of this study is to investigate whether ADCC
activities correlate with cell surface expression levels of EGF-R, and/or
mutational status of K-RAS, B-RAF, and PI3K in human colorectal cancer
cell lines. Methods: Five human colorectal cancer cell lines (HT29, HCT8,
HCT116, DLD-1, SW480) and A431 (positive control) with different K-RAS,
B-RAF, and PI3K mutational status were evaluated for: (i) cell surface
expression level of EGF-R, (ii) cetuximab mediated ADCC activity. Cell
surface expression of EGF-R was quantified using a flow cytometric
analysis. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (hPBMC) were prepared
from healthy donors and were isolated from heparinised peripheral blood
on a Ficoll gradient. Cell lines were used to establish the assay
condition as follows: (i) Cell line was incubated with cetuximab at
various concentrations from 0 to 100 g/ml as comparable experiments, (ii)
hPBMC were added as effector cells at different effector:target (E:T)
ratio, (iii) The cells were used as targets in a standard lactate
dehydrogenase release assay to measure ADCC activity (Cytotox 96: Promega
Corporation, WI, USA) as per the manufacturer's instruction. The
correlation between the cell surface expression levels of EGF-R and ADCC
activities were calculated using univariate regression analysis. Results:
Cell surface expression levels of EGF-R in the HCT8, DLD-1, SW480, and
A431 cell lines were high, whereas those of HT29 and HCT116 were low. The
highest ADCC activity was detected in each cell line with the cetuximab
concentration of 100 g/ml at an E:T ratio of 20:1. A strong correlation
was observed between the cell surface expression level of EGF-R and ADCC
activity (correlation coefficient: 0.930 (P Background: Cetuximab is a
monoclonal antibody approved in the patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer expressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R). It is
considered that the proposed mechanism of action includes
antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) by triggering FcR on
natural killer cells. However, it is unclear whether ADCC correlates with
EGF-R expression and/or the mutational status of downstream effectors
such as K-RAS, B-RAF, PI3K, and so on in colorectal cancer. Aim: The aim
of this study is to investigate whether ADCC activities correlate with
cell surface expression levels of EGF-R, and/or mutational status of
K-RAS, B-RAF, and PI3K in human colorectal cancer cell lines. Methods:
Five human colorectal cancer cell lines (HT29, HCT8, HCT116, DLD-1,
SW480) and A431 (positive control) with different K-RAS, B-RAF, and PI3K
mutational status were evaluated for: (i) cell surface expression level
of EGF-R, (ii) cetuximab mediated ADCC activity. Cell surface expression
of EGF-R was quantified using a flow cytometric analysis. Human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (hPBMC) were prepared from healthy
donors and were isolated from heparinised peripheral blood on a Ficoll
gradient. Cell lines were used to establish the assay condition as
follows: (i) Cell line was incubated with cetuximab at various
concentrations from 0 to 100 g/ml as comparable experiments, (ii) hPBMC
were added as effector cells at different effector:target (E:T) ratio,
(iii) The cells were used as targets in a standard lactate dehydrogenase
release assay to measure ADCC activity (Cytotox 96: Promega Corporation,
WI, USA) as per the manufacturer's instruction. The correlation between
the cell surface expression levels of EGF-R and ADCC activities were
calculated using univariate regression analysis. Results: Cell surface
expression levels of EGF-R in the HCT8, DLD-1, SW480, and A431 cell lines
were high, whereas those of HT29 and HCT116 were low. The highest ADCC
activity was detected in each cell line with the cetuximab concentration
of 100 g/ml at an E:T ratio of 20:1. A strong correlation was observed
between the cell surface expression level of EGF-R and ADCC activity
(correlation coefficient: 0.930 (P < 0.001)). There was no significant
correlation between mutational status of K-RAS, B-RAF, and PI3K and ADCC
activity in colorectal cancer cell lines. Conclusions: It was suggested
that cetuximab mediated ADCC activity was correlated with cell surface
expression level of EGF-R, but not with mutational status of K-RAS,
B-RAF, and PI3K in human colorectal cancer cell lines.

