Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer protein markers in African Americans


The purpose of this study is to characterize protein markers in African
American breast tumors that correspond to different tumor subtypes,
recurrence, and survival. Tissue microarrays (TMA) have been used because
they have the advantage of analyzing numerous samples on a single slide
and can be used in clinical pathology laboratories. Protein markers that
have been used are estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2), cyclin A2, cytokeratin
5, vimentin, Bcl2, and Ki67. TMA have been prepared and stained for
proteins that will distinguish 5 tumor subtypes: luminal A (ER+ and/or
PR+ Her2-); luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+ Her2- Cyclin A2+ and/or Ki67+);
luminal B Her2+ (ER+ and/or PR+ Her2+); Her2+ (ER- PR- Her2+), and triple
negative (ER- PR- Her2-). These subtypes are known to be associated with
different relapse-free survival and overall survival. Luminal B tumors
have the same ER+PR+HER2- profile as luminal A tumors; however, luminal B
tumors have a poor prognosis, whereas luminal A tumors have the best
prognosis of all 5 subtypes. Luminal B tumors can be distinguished from
luminal A tumors by staining for cell cycle proteins Cyclin A2 or Ki67,
which promote cell proliferation. Cyclin A2 was more frequently expressed
than Ki67 in tumors with poor prognosis such as luminal B (ER+PR+HER-)
and ER-PR-HER2- (triple negative) tumors. Therefore, Cyclin A2+ may
better serve to identify luminal B and triple negative tumors with a poor
prognosis and thus aid physicians in treatment decisions. The RASSF1A
protein has been reported to inhibit the transcription of Cyclin A2.
Methylation of the RASSF1A promoter is expected to decrease RASSF1A
transcription and thereby increase Cyclin A2 transcription and protein
levels. Significantly increased levels of RASSF1A methylation have been
observed in this laboratory with AA ER-PR-HER- breast cancer patients
compared to mammoplasty samples. Thus, increased Cyclin A2 protein
staining correlated with increased RASSF1A methylation. This is one
molecular explanation for elevated cyclin A2 protein levels in triple
negative tumors. Discovery of molecular markers and subtypes that are
most prevalent in African Americans could lead to a better treatment,
targets for therapy, and understanding of the factors contributing to
higher mortality in this group compared to other groups.

