Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The C/EBPbeta isoform, liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP)
induces cell death in breast cancer cell lines


C/EBPbeta is a member of a family of basic-leucine zipper transcription
factors. It has been shown to be a key regulator of growth and
differentiation in the mammary gland. There are three different protein
isoforms of C/EBPbeta. C/EBPbeta-1 and -2 are transactivators, and differ
by just 23 N-terminal amino acids present in beta-1 only. C/EBPbeta-3
(LIP) lacks the transactivation domain and represses transcription. Here,
we report that LIP expression stimulates autophagy and induces cell death
in breast cancer cell lines. Overexpression of LIP is incompatible with
cell growth and when cell cycle analysis was performed in the
LIP-MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, a DNA profile of cells undergoing
apoptosis was not observed. Instead, LIP expressing cells appeared to
have large autophagic vesicles when examined via electron microscopy.
Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved cellular process responsible for
self-cannabalization through a lysosomal degradation pathway. Autophagy
was further assessed in LIP expressing and control breast cancer cells by
monitoring the development of acidic vesicular organelles and conversion
of LC3 from the cytoplasmic form to the autophagosome form. LIP
expression leads to an increase in acidic vesicles. In addition,
activation of LC3 was detected in LIP expressing cells by immunoblot
analysis and immunofluorescence studies. Interestingly, we find that LIP
expression not only leads to massive and rapid cell death in the
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cell line, but cell cycle profiling reveals a
dramatic increase in DNA content in LIP expressing cells. We present data
that the induction of autophagy appears to accompany or possibly follow
the engulfment of neighboring cells by the LIP expressing cells.
Recently, there have been reports of different cell death processes that
occur due to cell internalization. LIP overexpression may be one
important factor that is driving cell engulfment resulting in cell death.

