Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAK-733, an investigational, selective MEK1/2 inhibitor, in
combination with alisertib (MLN8237), an investigational, selective
Aurora A kinase inhibitor is tolerated and results in additive to
synergistic antitumor activity: Results from In Vivo Studies


MEK and Aurora A kinase inhibitors (AAK) have profound impacts on cell
cycle progression. Inhibition of MEK leads to defects in cell-cycle
progression followed by cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. These
cell-cycle progression defects may in part be due to the role of MEK in
the DNA replication or damage checkpoint responses through positive
regulation of DNA repair mechanisms. AAK inhibition leads to chromosome
congression and segregation defects leading to DNA damage followed by
apoptosis or senesence. The overlapping biological effects of inhibition
of AAK and MEK kinases in cell cycle progression and chromosomal
integrity raise the possibility that inhibiting both targets would
provide added benefit over the inhibition of either target alone. The in
vivo antitumor activity of TAK-733, an investigational potent, selective,
non-ATP-competitive allosteric inhibitor of MEK, in combination with
alisertib, an investigational potent, selective, reversible,
ATP-competitive inhibitor of Aurora A kinase, was examined in
experimental human solid tumor xenograft models including NSCLC (NCI H23
[KRAS and LKB1 mutations]), CRC (SW620 [KRAS, APC, p53 mutations]), and
pancreatic cancer (Panc 1 and Capan 1 [KRAS mutations] and BxPC-3 [No
MAPK mutations]) models in immunocompromised mice. The previously
established maximally efficacious doses for the single agents dosed once
daily (QD) orally (PO) (10 mg/kg TAK-733 and 30-mg/kg alisertib) were
examined. A lower dose of 20 mg/kg alisertib was also examined in the
event the maximally efficacious dose of each agent was not tolerated in
combination. The once daily (QD) concurrent oral administration of
TAK-733 and alisertib resulted in additive to synergistic antitumor
activity and in prolonged inhibition of tumor regrowth after terminating
treatment compared to single agent treatment in all xenograft models
examined. Concurrent administration of TAK-733 and alisertib daily for 21
days was well tolerated. Treatment with TAK-733 alone and in combination
with alisertib clearly inhibited phosphorylated ERK and produced a slight
increase in phosphorylated histone H3. The results from the nonclinical
models examined demonstrate considerable improvement in nonclinical
antitumor activity over either single agent alone and provide a
biological rationale for clinical evaluation of a TAK-733/alisertib
combination in patients with advanced malignancies.

