Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Verification of a novel approach to identify disease mechanisms in
breast cancer patient subsets and application of this approach to
indicating and characterizing tamoxifen resistance


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided into
distinct clinical and molecular subtypes. Key biomarkers such as the
expression of HER2 or ER serve as a basis for subdividing the disease
into distinct clinical entities and to distinguish patients who will most
likely respond to specific targeted therapies, such as Herceptin and
tamoxifen, respectively. Further understanding the molecular mechanistic
differences among and within the breast cancer subtypes can facilitate
the identification of treatment regimens that can be even more tailored
to an individual's disease. If such a strategy is implemented, efficacy
rates for cancer treatments can be improved, and more importantly,
patients will be spared from any collateral effects of those treatments
that will not combat their specific disease. We have taken a systems
biology approach to segregate breast cancer patients into subgroups by
semi-quantitatively evaluating the literature-derived molecular gene
expression footprints of over 2100 mechanisms in our Knowledgebase. This
approach effectively enables the stratification of breast cancer patients
by their individual levels of signaling amplitude for these mechanisms.
Using publicly available breast cancer data sets from GEO, we validated
the stratification capability of these inferred mechanism activities
against immunohistochemical staining for ER and HER2, and
sequencing-based identification of TP53 mutation. In addition, applying
this semi-quantitative evaluation of mechanism molecular footprints based
on gene expression data from ER+ breast cancer patients before tamoxifen
treatment (GSE17705), we developed a tamoxifen-sensitivity classifier a
priori of knowledge of clinical outcome. This classifier enabled
prediction of 16 of the 19 patients from an independent test set
(GSE6532) who had gone on to develop distant metastases. Beyond
identifying specific breast cancer sub-groups, which has been well
established by clustering sets of genes, the systems biology-based
approach presented here enables us to identify the specific mechanisms
defining the separation of patient groups, and offers a means of either
selecting the right patient population for a drug candidate or indicating
additional/alternative disease pathways that could be targeted for
clinical efficacy. This strategy is universal and can be applied to a
variety of other cancers and diseases.

