Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplex in vivo RNAi screening instructs combination therapies
to increase the therapeutic efficacy of the multikinase inhibitor
sorafenib


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the third leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, represents a highly chemoresistant tumor and only recently the
multikinase inhibitor sorafenib was approved as the first active systemic
treatment against HCC. This illustrates that targeted therapies can be
effective against HCC and therefore heralds a new era in HCC treatment.
However, sorafenib monotherapy increases survival of HCC patients by less
than 3 month, thus emphasizing the strong need to understand the
molecular mechanisms of sorafenib sensitivity and resistance in order to
inform new combination therapies with higher therapeutic efficacy.
Activation of the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway was reported to play a major
role in liver tumor development and progression. Taking advantage of
genetically defined mosaic liver cancer mouse models, we found that
sorafenib treatment of NrasG12V driven murine liver carcinomas results in
moderate but distinct treatment responses resembling the response rates
of sorafenib treated human HCCs. To identify genes mediating resistance
or sensitivity towards sorafenib, we conducted an in vivo RNAi screen.
Pools of shRNAs targeting genes found amplified in human hepatocellular
carcinomas were applied and mice harboring NrasG12V expressing liver
carcinomas with stable expression of shRNA library pools were either
treated with sorafenib or carrier control. After 5 weeks of treatment,
shRNA distribution was quantified in tumors from both cohorts using deep
sequencing, whereas enriched shRNAs pinpoint potential resistance genes
and depleted shRNAs pinpoint targets that may be exploited as sorafenib
sensitizers. Functional validation experiments were performed with
multiple independent single shRNAs against each sensitizing target and
confirmed a significant survival benefit over sorafenib treated tumors
that express non-targeting control shRNAs. Importantly, our top-scoring
candidate represents a kinase and, taking advantage of readily available
pharmacological inhibitors, we show that combination therapy with
sorafenib is well tolerated by the mice and results in a significant
survival advantage. We also expanded our new combination treatment to
murine HCCs of additional genetic backgrounds, overexpressing c-myc or
AKT. As therapeutic efficacy was also shown in these models, it is likely
that our new combination therapy will be active against a broad range of
human HCCs. Furthermore, we found that the newly identified combination
therapy significantly decreased proliferation and induced cell death in a
panel of well established human hepatoma cell lines. In summary, our
study establishes a new sorafenib based combination therapy for the
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma and highlights the potential of in
vivo RNAi screens to identify genes that modulate the treatment response
of targeted therapies.

