Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of protein substrates of PSA: effect of PSA
stimulating peptides


Increased proteolytic activity is associated with cancer, where proteases
play a major role in tumor spread and formation of metastases. However,
proteases may also inhibit tumor growth. The prostate produces several
proteases, the most abundant one being prostate-specific antigen (PSA or
kallikrein-related peptidase-3, KLK3). The role of PSA in the prostate,
and in particular in prostate cancer, is not well known. However, several
functions have been proposed, most of which are based on the protein
substrates, which PSA cleaves in vitro. These include both tumor growth
promoting and inhibiting activities, e.g., antiangiogenic activity of
PSA. We have previously used phage display technology to develop
peptides, the synthetic analogs of which stimulate the activity of PSA.
These peptides are useful for studying the significance of PSA-activity
and potentially for prostate cancer treatment. We analyzed the cleavage
of different protein substrates of PSA and found that physiological
substrates, semenogelin-1 and 2, are cleaved much more efficiently than
other substrates, such as IGFBP-3, fibronectin and galectin-3. The
peptides increased the proteolytic activity of PSA towards these protein
substrates, but the extent of stimulation and the relative efficiency of
peptides were different than with small peptide substrates. We conclude
that the peptides can be used to stimulate the activity of PSA towards
natural protein substrates. Thus, they may be potential lead molecules
for drug development. As most of the studied protein substrates are
cleaved with very low efficiency, their relevance as PSA substrates is
questionable, especially as prostate produces several other highly active
proteases, including several kallikreins and trypsin. As compared to
other substrates, semenogelins are very efficiently cleaved by PSA,
highlighting the substrate specificity of PSA.

