Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of new highly selective and potent PARP-1
inhibitors


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is a key nuclear enzyme that is
activated by DNA-strand breaks; activation of PARP-1 protects DNA breaks
and chromatin structure and recruits DNA repair and checkpoint proteins
to the sites of damage, by modification with poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR)
polymers. PARP-2, another nuclear member of the PARP family with largely
unknown functions, shares homology with PARP-1 and is also activated by
DNA breaks. Embryonic knock out of either PARP-1 or PARP-2 is well
tolerated; however, double knockout is embryonic lethal suggesting that
inhibiting both PARPs could enhance toxicity. PARP inhibitors in clinical
development generally inhibit more than one PARP isoforms. These
compounds are synthetic lethal with defects in homologous recombination
(HR), and are currently being tested in combination as well as in
monotherapy for hereditable cancers deficient in the BRCA1 or BRCA2
genes. Here we describe the in vitro and in vivo properties of a novel
class of potent and selective PARP-1 small molecule inhibitors. Starting
from a series of derivatives that were found to be active against PARP-1
and PARP-2, an expansion and optimization program was undertaken. This
led to the identification of inhibitors with single digit nM affinity for
PARP-1 and negligible crossreactivity against PARP-2. Members of this
sub-series display single agent cytotoxicity with IC50s below 1 M in cell
lines harboring BRCA mutations, or in cells stably transfected with
BRCA-1 short harpin RNA, and more than 100 times selectivity against BRCA
wild-type tumor cell lines. Furthermore, these compounds are highly
active in other repair deficient backgrounds such as ATM and Mre11
mutated acute leukemias and lymphomas and they compared favorably with
reference PARP inhibitors which are in clinical development. Expected
mechanism of action was confirmed by observed modulation of PAR
induction, in vitro and in vivo. These compounds show high oral
bioavailability, good ADME properties and high tolerability. Selection of
the candidate most suitable for further development is underway.

