Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
microheterogeneity: a case study considering N-linked glycoforms


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer related
deaths in the United States. A critical component of CRC care is
post-surgical monitoring for cancer recurrence. Carcinogenicembryonic
antigen (CEA) is a tumor marker for the clinical management of CRC which
has the specific utility of monitoring post-operative disease recurrence.
After surgery to remove cancerous tissue, the level of CEA in blood can
be periodically monitored using an immunoassay. If the levels begin to
rise above 6.0 ng/mL there is a high correlation with recurrence of the
cancer. CEA, like many tumor markers is a glycoprotein and there is a
significant body of work showing protein glycosylation is greatly
affected by diseases such as cancer. We are investigating the CEA protein
microheterogeneity in effort to improve its performance as a CRC
biomarker. This poster presentation outlines our methods for glycoprotein
characterization and includes qualitative and quantitative CEA glycoform
data. CEA immuno-purified from cancerous liver was purchased from AbCam
and processed without further purification. The purified protein was
processed by SDS-PAGE on a 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPage gel (Invitrogen) in the
MOPS buffer system. A second instance of the purified protein was
deglycosylated with PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) and processed using the
same SDS-PAGE conditions. The windows corresponding to the modified and
unmodified proteins were excised and processed by in-gel digestion using
a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) and Promega sequencing grade trypsin. The
digested sample was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity
HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Velos Pro. Peptides
were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75m analytical column
at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin
(Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode,
with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and MS/MS
performed in the dual linear ion traps. The fifteen most abundant ions
were selected for MS/MS. Data were processed using bioinformatics tools
and manually to identify and validate N-glycosylation sites and
associated N-linked glycans. Glycoform quantitation was performed using
High Resolution Accurate Mass (HRAM) and when necessary glycosites were
confirmed using MS3 analysis. This presentation summarizes a workflow for
the identification and quantification of protein glycoforms and shows the
combination of immuno-purification, a targeted multiple enzyme approach
and high resolution accurate mass data enables the accurate
identification of N-glycosites and their glycoforms. The data from these
experiments highlight the complexity of CEA glycoforms, for example a
single N-linked glycosite on the peptide LQLSNGNR has over 30 associated
glycoforms of varying abundance.

