Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the genes that chemosensitize hepatocellular
carcinoma cells to interferon- and 5-fluorouracil therapy


The increasing numbers of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
which is characterized by an extremely poor prognosis, are causing
serious problems worldwide. To improve their prognosis, the development
of a more effective therapy is required. Combination therapy with
interferon- (IFN-) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) was reported to provide
benefits to patients with advanced HCC, although its efficacy is still
unsatisfactory. In this study, taking advantage of functional screening,
three chemosensitizing genes for this therapy against HCC cells were
identified. Identification of chemosensitizing genes was performed using
ribozyme-based functional screening. We constructed a plasmid DNA library
expressing random ribozyme genes with 6.0 106 target recognition
sequences. We performed a positive-selection strategy based on the
ability of 5-FU to eliminate cells expressing a ribozyme that targets
chemosensitivity-unrelated genes. The ribozyme library was transfected
into HepG2 cells, which were subsequently treated with the IC50 dose of
5-FU. This cycle was repeated 10 times to fully concentrate the ribozymes
targeting those genes involved in the sensitivity of 5-FU. Consequently,
100 target ribozyme recognition sequences that were recovered before
screening and after 10 cycles of screening were subjected to a BLAST
search to retrieve genes with homologous sequences. This analysis
indicated 3 genes (PRKAG2, TGFBR2, and EXT1) as candidate genes. The
chemosensitizing effects of these genes on IFN-/5-FU as well as 5-FU
treatment were confirmed by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. In
addition, the mechanisms of effects of these genes on enhancing effects
on combination therapy with IFN-/5-FU were also evaluated. Furthermore,
to evaluate the relationship between their expression levels in tumor
tissues and the clinical outcome of IFN-/5-FU combination therapy in
advanced HCC patients, mRNA expression was measured using real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. As a result, PRKAG2,
TGFBR2, and EXT1 were identified as novel chemosensitizing genes for the
combination therapy against HCC. TGFBR2 and EXT1 induced transforming
growth factor- signal activation and endoplasmic reticulum stress,
respectively. Moreover, PRKAG2 and TGFBR2 were suggested to be promising
predictive markers for the clinical outcome of this therapy. In
conclusion, the identified genes are promising candidates as targets to
enhance the therapeutic effect of IFN-/5-FU combination therapy in
advanced HCC and could be used as predictive markers for response to this
therapy.

