Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prenatal and postnatal management of infants at 100%-risk for
developing retinoblastoma


Purpose: Prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis of infants at 100%-risk of
developing retinoblastoma (RB) is possible when the familial RB1 mutation
is known in the parent. Since retinal tumors may develop in the third
trimester, we assessed the success of a protocol of early delivery of
such infants for early institution of therapy with the aim of optimizing
outcome. Methods: Since 1999, we treated ten 100%-risk infants with early
delivery in a Special Pregnancy Unit, at 32-37 weeks gestation and when
deemed to be safe by their obstetrician. From birth, weekly dilated
indirect fundoscopy, and/or contact imaging, and/or optical coherent
tomography (OCT) examinations were performed with no sedation, with
3-weekly examinations under anesthesia (EUAs) only started once the first
tumor was identified, or by the age of 3 months. The tumors were ablated
by focal laser therapy and/or cryotherapy. In selected cases, subtenons
topotecan (local chemotherapy that causes little side-effects
systemically), was used to reduce the sizes of tumors that were too
large, or near the optic nerve, or affecting the macula, for focal
therapy ablation. When possible, low-dose or single-agent systemic
chemotherapy was avoided to avoid induction of the multidrug resistance
(MDR) P-glycoprotein in the tumors. If indicated, short-course but
high-dose cyclosporin (CSA) MDR-circumventing high-dose
carboplatin-etoposide-vincristine (CEV) chemotherapy was given as soon as
the infant's immature renal function normalized. Secondary
malignancy-inducing radiation and/or eye enucleation was only used for
tumors progressing under this regimen. Results: At median followup of 5.7
years (range 0.7-11.7 years), both eyes were saved in 9 children, seven
with 20/20-20/50 vision in at least one eye (two were too young for
vision-testing), and only one child required radiation and then
enucleation of one eye, but retained 20/30 vision in the remaining
radiated eye. Five children were only treated with focal laser therapy
and/or cryotherapy, two with added subtenons topotecan, four with 1 to
4-cycle CSA-modulated CEV, and one with 2-cycle
non-CSA-modulated/dose-adjusted CEV because of immature renal function.
Conclusions: This protocol warrants multicenter trial to confirm the
favorable efficacy with low toxicity and excellent vision preservation.

