Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoallelic expression in codon 72 of TP53 in heterozygote
individuals


Background & Aim: Correlations between DNA variation and human phenotypic
differences, such as susceptibility to certain diseases, are not well
understood. Polymorphisms can contribute to the observed variation in
complex human traits, but their relative contributions remain to be
determined. Expression differences between alleles of the same gene have
been observed, contributing to phenotypic variation between individuals.
Studies showed that variations exist in the relative allelic expression
levels in certain genes of heterozygote individuals. Polymorphism at
codon 72 of TP53 results in either Arginine or Proline, whose functional
significance in carcinogenesis is controversial. Studies showed that the
Pro72 is less efficient than Arg72 allele in suppressing cell
transformation and inducing apoptosis. We have investigated if the
expression of these p53 polymorphs is selectively regulated, using mRNA
and DNA from colorectal cancer (CRC). Methods: 89 non-related patients
treated at ACCamargo Hospital/Brazil were evaluated. DNA/RNA were
isolated from frozen tumor tissue using phenol/chloroform protocol and
evaluated by sequencing. Associations were analyzed by Pearson Chi-Square
or Fisher Exact tests and Multiple Logistic Regression. Results: We found
24 (27%) heterozygotes tumors and 10 (41.7%) of these showed monoallelic
expression: 70% (7/10) of them preferentially expressed the Pro allele.
Thus, the allele frequencies showed a discrete decrease, from 0.26 for
Pro allele of expression analysis to 0.25 for Pro allele of tumor genomic
analysis. Previous results revealed that the p53 codon 72 expression was
significantly associated with gender (P= .037), recurrence (P= .005),
dirty tumor necrosis (P= .025), border pattern of tumor growth (P= .05),
post chemoradiotherapy use (P= .002), p53 immunohistochemistry expression
(P= .041) and TP53 mutation (P= .004), suggesting that the presence of at
least one Arg72 allele is associated with better prognosis. According to
multiple logistic regression the variable independently associated with
the presence of the Arginine allele is the absence of tumor necrosis
factor (OD= 8.64/P= .047). This is the first report describing the
monoallelic expression of the p53 codon 72 in CRC and revealed that
heterozygotes preferentially express the Pro allele, suggesting that the
Pro allele is selectively activated during CRC development. Conclusions:
The expression of the different p53 polymorphs is selectively regulated
in Pro72Arg heterozygotes individuals. The silent Arg allele seems to
have a negative relation with cancer susceptibility, since it is better
in inducing apoptosis. The differences in the expression of heterozygotes
resulted in an increase in the total numbers of Pro expressers in this
cancer population. Thus, the expression status of the p53 polymorphs,
rather than the genotypic status, might be a useful indicator for cancer
susceptibility.

