Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human FLCN delays cell cycle progression through late S and
G2/M-phases: Effect of phosphorylation and tumor-associated mutations


The Birt-Hogg-Dube (BHD) autosomal dominantly inherited syndrome has
clinical features that include the development of skin fibrofolliculomas,
lung cysts, and renal neoplasia. Renal tumors occur in approximately one
third of individuals with BHD. The gene responsible for BHD syndrome is
Folliculin (FLCN), which encodes a 68kD phosphoprotein (FLCN). One allele
of the FLCN gene is mutated in the germline of >90% of BHD patients and
somatic mutations or loss of the wild type FLCN allele are observed in
the renal tumors of patients with BHD, suggesting that FLCN acts as a
tumor suppressor protein. The human renal cell carcinoma cell line
UOK257, derived from a patient with a germline mutation in the FLCN gene,
harbors a truncated version of the FLCN protein. Reconstitution of the
wild type FLCN protein into the FLCN-deficient UOK257 cells decreased
their proliferation rate. Here we tested whether this difference in cell
proliferation rate may be partly attributed to the effect of FLCN on cell
cycle progression. We synchronized FLCN-deficient UOK257 cells and their
isogenic, wild type or mutant FLCN counterparts, by double thymidine
block and followed cell cycle progression after release. UOK257 cells
expressing wild type FLCN exhibited a slower progression through the late
S and G2/M-phases of the cell cycle compared to the vector only controls
(FLCN-deficient). The reintroduction of tumor-associated FLCN mutants
failed to delay cell cycle progression in UOK257 cells, indicating that
the effect of wild type FLCN on cell cycle progression may contribute to
its tumor suppressor function. FLCN phosphorylation on serines S62 and
S73 fluctuates throughout the cell cycle and peaks in cells arrested at
the G2/M boundary following treatment with nocodazole. In keeping with
this observation, the reintroduction of a FLCN S62/73 phosphomimetic
mutant into the UOK257 cell line resulted in faster progression through
the cell cycle compared to those expressing the wild type FLCN protein.
These findings suggest that orderly changes in FLCN phosphorylation
during the cell cycle are linked to and may be required for its effect on
cell cycle progression and possibly its activity as a tumor suppressor
protein. We expect that these studies will provide insight into the role
of FLCN in kidney tumorigenesis and will identify putative new targets
for therapeutic intervention.

