Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting angiogenesis: Anti-docking site peptides to Met receptor
and nanotechnology


The Met tyrosine kinase receptor is involved in different cell responses
during development and pathological conditions. In cancer, Met can
promote growth, invasion, angiogenesis and tumor metastasis following the
interaction with its ligand, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). We
decided to develop angiogenesis inhibitors that target the HGF pathway,
impairing tumour neo-vascularization and metastatic spreading. We
investigated the anti-angiogenic proprieties of a synthetic peptide
mimicking the intracellular Met-tail, which was delivered into cells by
fusion with the internalization sequences from Antennapedia or HIV-Tat.
We are also trying to do peptide delivery by using carbon nanotubes. In
order to evaluate the effect of Met-derived inhibitors on angiogenesis,
we treated HUVEC with peptides and we evaluated their ability to
interfere with HGF-induced proliferation, migration and morphogenesis of
endothelial cells in vitro and angiogenesis. Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), the
most frequent neoplasia in patients with AIDS, which originates from
endothelial origin and is highly vascularized, shows features compatible
with the biological properties of HGF. We used KS as tumour model to test
the effect of peptides on tumour growth in vivo. We found that the
peptides inhibited ligand-dependent endothelial cell proliferation,
migration and morphogenesis in vitro and interfered with HGF-dependent
downstream signalling. In vivo, the peptides inhibited HGF-induced
angiogenesis and Kaposi's sarcoma tumour growth. We also demonstrated
that diacylglycerol kinases (DGK) contribute to the malignant phenotype
of KS. The data obtained show that the peptides impair angiogenesis
triggered by HGF, suggesting the use of anti-docking site compounds as
therapeutic agents to interfere with the angiogenesis process. The
development of angiogenesis inhibitors and the identification of new
intracellular transducers effective in the high vascularised KS cells,
open the possibility of a combination therapy that concomitantly
interferes with tumour neo-vascularization and the malignant properties
of KS.

