Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DAB2IP, a novel tumor suppressor protein modulates prostate cancer
cell death in response to the combined treatment of ionizing radiation
and a DNA-PKcs inhibitor NU7441


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignancy (25%)
and the second leading cause of cancer-related death (10%) in U.S. men.
Radiation treatment, which is noninvasive and well tolerated, is one of
the front line therapeutic interventions in the management of localized
PCa. However, significant proportions of high-risk patients fail therapy
and develop metastatic disease. DAB2IP, which is a novel member of the
Ras GTPase-activating protein family and a regulator of PI3K/Akt
activity, is often downregulated and associated with aggressive prostate
cancer (PCa). The purpose of this study is to investigate the
radio-sensitizing property of a novel DNA-PKcs inhibitor, NU7441, in
DAB2IP- deficient human PCa cells. Methods: We have developed DAB2IP
deficient and proficient PCa cell lines (C4-2, PC3) for this study. We
performed clonogenic surviving fraction analysis, DNA double strand break
repair kinetics, cell cycle analysis, TUNEL assays, immunofluorescence,
immunoblot, apoptosis and autophagy assays to investigate the mechanism
of radiosensitization of NU7441 in these PCa cells. Results: Clonogenic
surviving fraction analysis indicates a strong radiosensitizing ability
of NU7441 in PCa cells deficient in DAB2IP. This is primarily due to
robust G2-M block and persistent DNA double strand break in response to
the combined treatment of radiation and NU7441. We clearly demonstrate
that the presence of DAB2IP modulates prostate cancer cell death when
treated with radiation and NU7441. Apoptotic cell death was prominent in
PCa cells proficient in DAB2IP whereas, robust autophagic cell death was
noticed in DAB2IP deficient PCa cells. Conclusion: Our study clearly
shows that NU7441, a novel DNA-PKcs inhibitor, is a potent
radiosensitizer in aggressive PCa cells. Furthermore, our study indicates
that DAB2IP may act as an important factor in PCa cell death after
combined treatment Nu7441 and radiation.

