Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lovastatin decreases ovarian cancer cell proliferation and
invasion: A case for statin therapy for ovarian cancer patients?


Introduction: Statins are a drug class that inhibit HMG-CoA reductase,
the enzyme responsible for converting 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl Co-A
into mevalonic acid; the earliest step in cholesterol biosynthesis.
Accumulating epidemiologic evidence suggests that cancer patients taking
statins for elevated cholesterol respond better to therapy and have
longer survival times. In vitro studies have also shown that cancer cells
are sensitive to physiologically relevant dosages of statins. Studies
have also shown that invasion, proliferation and cell growth are
inhibited by statin treatment in several cancer cell lines. Here, we
report the effect of lovastatin, a hydrophobic statin, in the inhibition
of ovarian cancer cell growth and proliferation, and invasion. Methods:
Ovarian cancer cells (ID8, HeyA8, SKOV3ip1, and OVCAR5) were grown to
confluency and treated with varying dosages of lovastatin (10, 20, and 40
M). Morphology was examined using a light microscope. Proliferation was
measured using an MTT assay at 24, 48, and 72 hours after treatment in
both complete DMEM and serum-free DMEM media. Invasion was measured as
the average number of cells that invaded collagen (I)-coated wells using
serum free media and lovastatin (20 M). Histological assessment of
HMG-CoA reductase expression was examined in paraffin-embedded human and
mouse ovarian tissue. Results: Lovastatin produced a dose-dependent
decrease in cell proliferation in HeyA8 and ID8 cancer cell lines.
Lovastatin likewise decreased cell proliferation in OVCAR5 and SKOV3ip1
cell lines after 72 hours. Lovastatin inhibited OVCAR5, HeyA8, and
SKOV3ip1 cell invasion with exposure to 20 M concentrations for 24 hours
before and during an overnight invasion assay. When HeyA8 cells were
exposed to lovastatin during overnight incubation, invasion was also
reduced. Histologic assessment of HMG-CoA reductase in human ovarian
tumors confirmed expression to the ovarian stroma and to the omentum.
Discussion: Our preliminary studies demonstrate the growth inhibitory
effects of lovastatin on ovarian cancer cell proliferation and invasion
when using dosages that are physiologically relevant. The faster growing
types of ovarian cancer cell lines (HeyA8 and ID8) are the most sensitive
to lovastatin therapy, while the slower growing ovarian cancer cell lines
(OVCAR5 and SKOV3ip1) demonstrate minor effects of lovastatin on cell
growth for up to 72 hours. Histologic findings suggests that HMG-CoA is
found both in the ovarian stroma and in the omentum of ovarian tumors,
indicating that this could be an important target for metastases, as
omental metastases are problematic in the management of patients with
ovarian tumors. Our next goal is to further determine the molecular
mechanisms by which statins inhibit ovarian cancer invasion.

