Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hes1 regulates hypoxia induced chemoresistance of myeloma cells


Bone marrow (BM) microenvironment plays a critical role in response of
tumor cells to chemotherapeutic drugs. Hypoxia has been shown to
contribute to pathogenesis not only solid but also hematological tumors.
While normal BM environment is hypoxic, tumor growth is associated with
increased hypoxia in BM niche. We have previously demonstrated that
activation of Notch signaling could be one of the mechanisms responsible
for survival of multiple myeloma (MM) cells from chemotherapeutic drugs.
Here we investigated whether hypoxia could modulate Notch signaling and
induce chemoresistance of MM cells. Three MM cell lines were treated with
doxorubicin or melphalan in hypoxic (1% O2) or normoxic conditions. Using
Annexin V binding assay we demonstrated that hypoxia induced
chemoresistance in only one (H929) cell line studied. This effect was
associated with significant up-regulation of expression of Notch target
gene Hes1 and its protein level while Hes1 level was unchanged in other
two MM cell lines. Inhibition of Hes1 with siRNA canceled the protective
effect of hypoxia on MM cells. To further confirm the involvement of
Notch pathway in regulation of drug sensitivity, Hes-1 was overexpressed
in MM cells in normoxic condition using vector pIRES-AcGFP-Hes-1. MM
cells with increased Hes1 level became less sensitive to
chemotherapeutics as compared to cells transfected with control vector.
Hes-1 is considered to be a Notch target gene. However, hypoxia did not
affect Notch receptors expression level in MM cells. The effect of
hypoxia on Hes1 was Notch-independent as was evident from Notch/CBF1
reporter assay. In addition, inhibition of Notch receptor cleavage with
gamma-secretase inhibitor GSI-XII (Calbiochem) did not affect hypoxia
induced MM cell chemoresistance. Up-regulation of Hes-1 was induced by
HIF-1a as treatment of MM cells with hypoxia mimetic deferoxamine
resulted in up-regulation of Hes1 and inhibition of HIF-1a with siRNA
abrogated hypoxia-induced protection of MM cells. Thus, our study, for
the first time, demonstrates that hypoxia could induce chemoresistance of
MM cells through Notch-independent up-regulation of Hes-1. These results
could be important not only for understanding the cancer biology but for
designing therapeutic intervention in MM.

