Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allosteric regulation of Abl and Bcr-Abl kinases by enhanced
SH3:linker interaction


Bcr-Abl is the oncogenic protein-tyrosine kinase responsible for the
pathogenesis of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Clinical management
of CML has been revolutionized by imatinib, a selective ATP-competitive
inhibitor of Bcr-Abl kinase activity. Despite the clinical success of
imatinib in the chronic stage of CML, it is less effective in advanced
disease due to the emergence of drug resistance often caused by point
mutations in the Bcr-Abl kinase domain. Recently, we demonstrated that
introduction of the gatekeeper resistance mutation T315I into a
recombinant c-Abl core protein enhanced basal kinase activity. Imatinib
selectivity is achieved in part by binding and stabilizing the unique
inactive conformation of the Abl kinase domain. This conformation is
stabilized allosterically by intramolecular binding of the SH3 domain to
the SH2-kinase linker, which in turn docks against the back of the kinase
domain. The goal of this project, therefore, was to determine whether
kinase activation induced by T315I, as well as a mutation in a recently
described allosteric inhibitor binding site in the kinase domain C-lobe
(A356N mutant), could be overcome by enhancing the SH3:linker
interaction. For these experiments, we engineered nine High Affinity
Linker (HAL) variants of Abl in which SH3:linker interaction was
tightened through sequential addition of proline residues to the linker.
Enhanced SH3:linker interaction was confirmed by analysis of SH3 dynamics
using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Using cell based
assays, we identified Abl-HAL core proteins that remain locked in an
inactive conformation. To determine the impact of the HAL sequences on
activating mutations in the kinase domain, the strongest HAL sequence was
combined with the T315I and A356N mutations. Remarkably, the HAL
substitution completely reversed Abl core activation by the A356N
mutation, and partially reversed the effect of T315I. We next introduced
the HAL sequence into p210 Bcr-Abl coding region (wild-type and T315I),
and expressed these forms of Bcr-Abl along with matched controls in the
human myeloid cell line, TF-1. The Bcr-Abl HAL mutants transformed TF-1
cells to a cytokine-independent phenotype as effectively as wild-type
Bcr-Abl but were much more sensitive to induction of apoptosis by the
allosteric inhibitor, GNF-2. Furthermore, TF-1 cells transformed with
Bcr-Abl-HAL bearing a wild-type kinase domain also showed greater
sensitivity to imatinib and the related inhibitor nilotinib, suggesting
that enhanced SH3:linker interaction structures the kinase domain in a
favorable conformation for drug action. Our results provide new evidence
that SH3:linker interaction not only has a strong allosteric effect on
the regulation of the c-Abl kinase core, but also on Bcr-Abl sensitivity
to both ATP-competitive and allosteric inhibitors as well.

