Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of hedgehog signaling in prostate cancer by extracts of
Sutherlandia


Prostate cancer possesses long latency periods and is responsive to
dietary mediators, making it a target for phytochemoprevention. Many
botanical compounds that have been proposed to prevent cancer may
potentially work via inhibition of the hedgehog signaling pathway. Here
we investigated the potential of Sutherlandia frutescens (also called
Lessertia and cancer bush in South Africa) to inhibit hedgehog signaling.
We hypothesize that the anti-cancer effects of Sutherlandia are due to
its inhibition of hedgehog signaling pathway activity. Methods: We
evaluated Sutherlandia's effects of growth inhibition in vitro both in
the human prostate cancer cell line PC3 and mouse prostate cancer cell
line TRAMP-C2 by exposing the cells for 72hrs to plant extracts before
protein concentrations were measured to evaluate inhibition of growth. To
determine hedgehog pathway inhibitory activity, we treated two different
cell lines (an NIH3T3 cell line and a TRAMPC2 cell line) stably
transfected with a firefly luciferase reporter having Gli response
elements in the firefly luciferase promoter. After 48hr exposure to
treatment with multiple doses of Sutherlandia, a firefly substrate was
added to the cell lysate and the luciferase signal was measured using a
Biotek Synergy plate reader. Finally, Sutherlandia was incorporated into
a diet and fed to TRAMP (Transgenic Adenocarcinoma Mouse Prostate) mice
to examine whether the plant can delay or even inhibit prostate cancer
incidence in the TRAMPmouse model. Results: Sutherlandia extracts
inhibited growth of both PC3 and TRAMPC2 cells. In addition, hedgehog
signaling was inhibited by Sutherlandia in both NIH3T3 and TRAMPC2
reporter cells. Interestingly, in vivo the lowest concentration of
Sutherlandia diet had the greatest effect on inhibition of poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma in the TRAMP mice. Conclusions:
Sutherlandia's inhibition of prostate cancer growth may be via inhibition
of hedgehog signaling. Future work to identify in Sutherlandia the active
compound having this effect, and the ideal concentration for use in vivo
may lead to a means whereby dietary intervention for prostate cancer
prevention and/or treatment is possible.

