Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of cell-cell contacts in the survival of extracellular
matrix detached mammary epithelial cells


Normal epithelial cells require attachment to the extracellular matrix
(ECM) in order to proliferate and survive. Binding to the ECM facilitates
the activation of pathways responsible for ATP production and cell
survival. When detached from the ECM, normal cells will upregulate
apoptotic pathways and will be systematically removed. This
detachment-induced apoptosis is known as anoikis. ECM detachment in
normal epithelial cells disrupts cellular signaling derived from
integrin-mediated basal attachment as well as cadherin assisted signaling
from lateral cell contacts. Cadherins, primarily E-cadherin, have been
shown to be classic tumor suppressor genes and can prevent the
proliferation of cells that fail to assume normal epithelial morphology
and cell-cell contacts. The loss of E-cadherin endows an increased
invasion capacity to breast tumors and regulation of E-cadherin levels
are directly mediated by factors (i.e. Slug) that promote
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis. Cadherin
molecules have previously been reported to interact with other receptor
tyrosine kinases, such as EGFR (epithelial growth factor receptor), in
order to suppress the ability of the receptor to bind ligand, dimerize
and elicit downstream signaling. HER2 is an orphan member of the EGFR
family of tyrosine kinases and is a potent oncogene found in 30% of all
breast cancer tissue. Previous studies in our laboratory have found a
direct correlation between upregulation of survival pathways in ECM
detached cells and expression of HER2. In this study, we find that the
overexpression of HER2 in non-malignant mammary epithelial cells
(MCF-10A) results in substantial aggregation of detached cells, the
inhibition of caspase activation and a rescue of ATP production. These
data suggest that HER2 plays a role in protecting detached cells from
anoikis and this activity may be linked to cell-cell adhesion in
suspension. We have found that disruption of cell-cell contacts in
HER2-expressing MCF-10A cells utilizing methylcellulose can induce
caspase activity and diminish global ATP levels. Preliminary studies also
reveal a previously uncharacterized interaction between HER2 and
E-cadherin that takes place when E-cadherin dimers are disrupted. Thus,
the disruption of E-cadherin dimers in cellular aggregates may facilitate
the binding of E-cadherin to HER2 in a fashion that compromises
downstream survival signaling. These data together suggest a potential
role for E-cadherin as a modulator of HER2 activity and further suggest
that the loss of E-cadherin via mechanisms like EMT may function as a
means to promote ECM-detached tumor cell survival.

