Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-874 as a tumor suppressor in maxillary sinus squamous
cell carcinoma based on microRNA expression signature


(BACKGROUND) Maxillary sinus squamous cell carcinoma (MSSCC) comprises
2-3% of all cancers of head and neck tumor and the annual incidence rate
is 0.5-1.0 per 100,000 populations. After introduction of multimodality
treatment comprising radiation therapy along with concomitant
intra-arterial chemotherapy, rates of local control was improved. However
the prognosis of advanced MSSCC is still worse. The 5-years survival rate
of T4 tumors is 50% around. Local recurrence is the most common cause of
treatment failure and death. Greater understanding of the molecular
oncogenic network in MSSCC could help improve diagnosis, therapy, and
prevention of the disease. No studies have been carried out for the
purpose of identifying specific microRNA (miRNA) alterations in MSSCC. In
this study, we focused on the functional siginificance of the most
downregulated miRNA in MSSCC on the basis of miRNA expression signature.
(METHODS) We used PCR-based methods to investigate the downregulated
miRNAs in clinical specimens of MSSCC. Genome-wide gene expression
analysis was performed to identify the molecular networks of microRNA-874
(miR-874) by microarray technique. Cell proliferation and invasion assays
were performed to investigate the functional significance of miR-874 and
its target genes in MSSCC cell lines. (RESULTS) Our miRNA signature
identified that 23 miRNAs were significantly reduced in cancer cells. We
focused on miR-874 as the most downregulated novel miRNA in our analysis.
Ectopic miR-874 overexpression showed potential tumour suppressive
functions such as inhibition of cancer cell proliferation and invasion. A
molecular target search of miR-874 revealed that protein phosphatase 1,
catalytic subunit, alpha isozyme (PPP1CA), proteasomal ATPase-associated
factor 1 (PAAF1) and trans-golgi network protein 2 (TGOLN2) were
regulated by miR-874. Overexpression of these genes was observed in MSSCC
clinical specimens and each gene expression was inversely correlated with
miR-874 expression. Moreover, silencing of the PPP1CA gene significantly
inhibited cancer cell proliferation and invasion. (CONCLUSION) The
downregulation of miR-874 was a frequent event in MSSCC, which suggests
that miR-874 functions as a tumour suppressive miRNA, directly regulating
PPP1CA that has a potential role of an oncogene. The identification of
novel miR-874-regulated cancer network could provide new insights into
potential molecular mechanisms of MSSCC oncogenesis.

