Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent in vivo activity of the aurora kinase inhibitor ABT-348 in
human acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome xenograft models


The Aurora kinases are a family of serine/threonine kinases that mediate
essential functions in cell division. Aurora A depletion results in
accumulation of cells in the G2/M phase and apoptosis. Inhibition of
Aurora B/C results in abnormal cell division, polyploidy, resulting in
apoptosis, therefore, Aurora kinases present an attractive target for
chemotherapy. Cells treated with aurora inhibitors enter mitosis with
normal kinetics but fail to undergo cytokinesis due to mitotic spindle
checkpoint disruption. ABT-348 is a novel adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)-competitive inhibitor of Aurora A, Aurora B, and Aurora C (Enzyme
IC50 A=116, B=5, C= 1 nM) and a potent inhibitor of all members of the
VEGF and PDGF family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Despite
significant advances in the epidemiological, genetic and biological
understanding of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), the basic therapeutic approach has not substantially
changed for the last 10-15 years, so most patients still die of this
disease. Here we demonstrate profound in vivo efficacy (with regressions)
of ABT-348 in both AML (MV-4-11, FLT3 mutant expressing the internal
tandem duplication with constitutive kinase activation) and MDS (SKM-1)
xenograft models. MV-4-11 tumor-bearing SCID mice were treated at 6.25,
12.5 and 25 mg/kg/day, p.o., q7d x 3 (%TGI ratios on day 30 were 80, 86
and 94%, respectively). SKM-1 tumor-bearing SCID mice were treated at
6.25, 12.5 and 25 mg/kg/day, p.o., q7d x 3 (% tumor growth inhibition or
TGI ratios on day 30 were 38, 59 and 80%, respectively). In addition,
ABT-348 provided additive effects when combined with cytarabine,
decitabine or doxorubicin compared to cytotoxic monotherapies. The
treatments were well tolerated with no animal health concerns observed
indicating the feasibility of ABT-348 combination strategies in the
clinic. Currently ABT-348 is being evaluated (monotherapy and in
combination with cytotoxic therapies) in the HL-60 acute promyelocytic
leukemia xenograft model in vivo. Dose/scheduling studies for combination
therapies in the SKM-1 and HL-60 xenografts are ongoing.
Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic biomarker analyses in these xenograft
models were evaluated using phospho-H3 (an Aurora B substrate,
proliferation) and cleaved caspase-3 (apoptosis) by IHC at various
timepoints post single dose (1/2 hr to 5 days). A general decrease in
proliferation and increase in apoptosis consistent with the mechanism of
action was observed which coincided with the potent in vivo efficacy in
xenograft models. Overall, ABT-348 is a potent, oral Aurora kinase
inhibitor, demonstrating robust in antitumor activity in AML and MDS
xenograft models with a good safety profile that warrants investigation
in the clinic. ABT-348 is currently undergoing Phase I clinical trials in
advanced hematologic malignancies.

