Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression characterization of different cancer stem cell
isolation methods in head and neck cancer


Background: Head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) is a heterogeneous
cancer that continues to pose major clinical problems. There is growing
evidence that cancer stem cells (CSCs) may be an important factor in
disease progression and resistance to current treatments. Establishing
that stem cells are present in HNSCC and characterizing their global gene
expression patterns provides the rationale for this study. Methods: A
series of 5 HNSCC cell lines that have been maintained at low passage
number such that they maintain phenotypic and morphological
characteristics similar to the primary tumor were used in this study.
Three different strategies were used to isolate stem cells by flow
cytometry sorting: 1) Hoechst 33342 side population, 2) Aldefluor, and 3)
CD44 bright cells. Global gene expression for each isolated CSC-enriched
population and its associated CSC-depleted population was analyzed using
Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0ST arrays. Gene set enrichment analysis was
performed using Ariadne Pathway Studio. Results: The different methods of
identifying CSCs produced widely different populations. In side
population cells, there were 77 differentially expressed genes
(pBackground: Head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) is a
heterogeneous cancer that continues to pose major clinical problems.
There is growing evidence that cancer stem cells (CSCs) may be an
important factor in disease progression and resistance to current
treatments. Establishing that stem cells are present in HNSCC and
characterizing their global gene expression patterns provides the
rationale for this study. Methods: A series of 5 HNSCC cell lines that
have been maintained at low passage number such that they maintain
phenotypic and morphological characteristics similar to the primary tumor
were used in this study. Three different strategies were used to isolate
stem cells by flow cytometry sorting: 1) Hoechst 33342 side population,
2) Aldefluor, and 3) CD44 bright cells. Global gene expression for each
isolated CSC-enriched population and its associated CSC-depleted
population was analyzed using Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0ST arrays. Gene
set enrichment analysis was performed using Ariadne Pathway Studio.
Results: The different methods of identifying CSCs produced widely
different populations. In side population cells, there were 77
differentially expressed genes (p<0.05 and 1.5-fold cutoff) while only 59
and 17 genes were differentially expressed in the CD44 bright and
Aldefluor bright populations, respectively. Not a single gene was
commonly altered between any two of the isolation methods. Gene set
enrichment analysis, however, was able to identify categories that
differed between the CSC-enriched and CSC-depleted populations.
Biological processes of cell cycle, cell division, mitosis, translational
elongation, and spindle assembly were highly regulated. Microtubule
binding/microtubule plus-end binding and structural constituent of
ribosome were commonly altered molecular functions. Conclusions: This
study suggests that current methods for isolating putative stem cells in
HNSCC result in diverse populations with differing expression of specific
genes. However, when examined for global expression patterns, several
important categories of genes are commonly altered between the
CSC-enriched and CSC-depleted populations. Some of the known
characteristics of stem cells such as asymmetric division and unlimited
growth potential are suggested by the highly regulated categories of cell
division and spindle assembly. From these studies we hope to gain greater
insight into the importance of stem cells in HNSCC as well as improve the
capability of identifying these potentially important new targets for
treatment.

