Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of cell death mediated by poly(ADP-ribose),
Apoptosis-Inducing Factor (AIF) and caspases in breast cancer cells by
RNA interference


Apoptosis-Inducing Factor (AIF) was previously characterized as a
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) dependent, caspase independent cell death effector
in a wide spectrum of diseases or conditions that involve cell death. The
objective of this study was to determine the role of PAR and AIF in
cancer cell death after chemotherapy. We have previously demonstrated the
presence of AIF mediated caspase-independent cell death in MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells following treatment with the DNA alkylating agent
N-methyl-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG). To gain further insight into the role
of AIF in cell death induced by chemotherapy, we utilized RNA
interference (RNAi) to knockdown expression of AIF and PAR glycohydrolase
(PARG) in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. UV-C irradiated
AIF-silenced cells displayed increased cell viability. Moreover FACS
analysis showed that AIF knockdown successfully protected cells against
apoptosis induced by MNNG and the chemotherapeutic agents epirubicin and
cyclophosphamide. Interestingly, the knockdown of PARG led to decreased
apoptotic cell death after treatment with MNNG. However, inhibition of
caspases using Q-VD-OPh in PARG RNAi treated cells led to an increase in
apoptotic cell death, which suggests that caspase dependent cell death
after chemotherapy is mediated in part by PARG. However, the knockdown of
AIF in these cells led to significant protection, which indicates that
cell death in the absence of caspase activity in PARG knockdown cells is
mediated by AIF. Taken together, the results provide a paradigm where AIF
can substitute as caspase executioner in the absence of PARG and caspases
in breast cancer cells. Thus, the activation of AIF mediated cell death
is a promising strategy to improve the treatment of breast cancer by
providing an alternative pathway for tumor eradiation.

