Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation enhances the efficacy of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL inhibition in
small cell lung cancer: A new concept of using radiation for targeted
therapy through contextual oncogene addiction


Purpose: Radiotherapy has a critical role in the treatment of small cell
lung cancer (SCLC). Effectiveness of radiation in SCLC remains limited as
resistance results from defects in apoptosis. Experimental Design: We
investigated whether using a new Bcl-2/Bcl-XL inhibitor, S44563, can
enhance radiosensitivity of SCLC cells in vitro and in vivo. We also
explored the mechanisms of the potential interaction. Results: In vitro
studies confirmed that S44563 induce apoptosis in SCLC cells by inducing
hallmarks of apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3, sub-G1 fraction induction and
induction of the mitochondrial caspase activation pathway). S44563
markedly enhanced sensitivity of H146 and H69 cells to radiation in
clonogenic assay. In vitro experiments demonstrated a greater induction
of apoptosis (sub-G1 fraction and cleaved caspase-3) with the combination
as well as in vivo caspase-3 immunostaining. This positive interaction
between S44563 and radiation was greater when S44563 was given during and
after the completion of the radiation, which was explained by the
radiation-induced over expression of anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2 and
Bcl-XL). in vitro studies based on gene expression and immunoblotting
indicated that radiation activates NF-B pathways which results in
anti-apoptotic expression. In addition, S44563 combined with
cisplatin-based chemo-radiation showed a dramatic tumor growth delay and
increased overall survival in mouse xenograft models.Conclusion: This
study underlines the critical role of sequence administration of targeted
therapies with conventional therapies such as radiation and chemotherapy.
SCLC cells which survive to IR highly rely on the induction of anti
apoptotic proteins for their survival therefore yielding to the concept
of contextual oncogene addiction to the Bcl-2/Bcl-XL pathway. These
results suggest that radioresistance results in part from resistance to
apoptosis in SCLC mediated by up regulation of Bcl-2/Bcl-XL. The
inhibition of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL leads to the induction of
radiation-induced apoptosis and enhances radiation therapy both in vitro
and in SCLC xenograft models. Our data suggest that targeting radiation
induced survival pathways may constitute an efficient strategy to
potentiate IR.

