Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A metabolomic analysis revealed the involvement of deoxycytidine
kinase and CTP synthase in the sensitivity of human pancreatic cancer
cells to gemcitabine


Gemcitabine (GEM), a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue, is used in patients
with pancreatic cancer as the standard chemotherapeutic agent. However,
pancreatic cancer cells often show resistance to GEM in vivo and vitro.
In this study, we explored the factors involved in the sensitivity of GEM
in human pancreatic cancer cells, Miapaca-2 and AsPC-1, by a metabolomic
analysis using capillary electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(CE-TOFMS). The sensitivity of Miapaca-2 (IC50: 66 nM) to GEM was higher
than that of AxPC-1 (IC50: 16 nM), whereas there were little differences
in the growth rates of these cells. This result indicates that the
difference in the sensitivities between Miapaca-2 and AsPC-1 is not
dependent on their growth rates. At 12 hr after adding GEM, intracellular
level of GEM in Miapaca-2 was higher than that in AsPC-1, whereas levels
of GEM monophosphate, diphosphate and triphosphate in Miapaca-2 were
lower than that in AsPC-1. In addition, expression level of deoxycytidine
kinase (dCK), which catalyzes the reaction from GEM to GEM monophosphate,
in Miapaca-2 was lower than that in AsPC-1. Expression levels of human
equilibrium transporter (hENT1), which is known to major transporter of
GEM, were similar in both cells. These results suggest that dCK is
rate-limiting enzyme in GEM phosphorylation and one of the factors
involved in the sensitivity. In pyrimidine metabolism, GEM was observed
to inhibit CTP synthase, which converts UTP to CTP, resulting increase in
UTP level, decrease in CTP level and depletion of dCTP in both cells at
12 hr after adding GEM. The degree of increase in UTP and decrease in CTP
was lower in Miapaca-2 than that of AsPC-1. Indeed, the ratio of UTP to
CTP in Miapaca-2 was about 2.5, whereas that of AsPC-1 was about 11. In
addition, the expression level of CTP synthase in Miapaca-2 was higher
than that in AsPC-1. Ribonucleotide reductase, which catalyzes the
conversion of CDP to dCDP, is known to be inhibited by GEM diphosphate
and be involved in the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to GEM. GEM
decreased CDP in AsPC-1. This may be caused by inhibiting CTP synthase.
Expression level of ribonucleotide reductase in Miapaca-2 was higher than
that in AxPC-1. Therefore, ribonucleotide reductase also may be involved
in the sensitivity to GEM. Furthermore, we previously found that GEM
mainly inhibited CTP synthase in pyrimidine metabolism, resulting in
depletion of dCTP. Our current study suggests that dCK, CTP synthase and
ribonucleotide reductase are involved in the sensitivity of pancreatic
cancer cells to GEM.

