Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of genomic variants identified through whole
exome sequencing for susceptibility to lymphocytic leukemia


The underlying genetic basis of many childhood cancers remains largely
unknown, which places a significant focus on the discovery and
understanding of cancer susceptibility genes. Our research is focused on
the identification of novel high risk childhood cancer susceptibility
genes through next generation sequencing methods and functional assays.
One kindred contained four individuals diagnosed during childhood with
lymphocytic leukemia or lymphoma transmitted in an autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance. Whole exome sequencing was performed on the
constitutional DNA of three of the patients diagnosed with childhood
cancer and one non-transmitting parent as an internal control. This
analysis resulted in over 1000 unique single nucleotide variant (SNV)
sites shared among the three affected family members. Of these SNVs,
greater than 95% were found in control databases and excluded. Also, any
variant found in the non-transmitting parent was eliminated. Systematic
bioinformatics analysis resulted in a short list of seven missense SNVs
predicted to be functionally important. Within this list is the missense
mutation of a conserved residue (L254P) of Human Cytosolic 5 Nucleotidase
(NT5C1A). NT5C1A has a role in nucleoside metabolism as this protein
primarily catalyzes the production of adenosine through the
dephosphorylation of AMP. Adenosine metabolism is essential for
lymphocyte maturation and viability, making NT5C1A an attractive leukemia
susceptibility candidate to pursue further through functional genomic
assays. Prior studies have shown that overexpression of wild type NT5C1A
in HEK293 cells improves cell survival after treatment with purine and
pyrimidine analogs also used in leukemia treatment. We created multiple
HEK293 cell lines that stably overexpress either the NT5C1A wild type or
L254P mutant protein. These cells were tested for quantitative changes in
NT5C1A mediated cytotoxicity to the nucleoside analogs, Cladribine and
Gemcitabine. We have replicated the prior findings in cells
overexpressing wild type NT5C1A and demonstrated that resistance is
dependent on the amount of exogenous NT5C1A protein expressed.
Importantly, overexpression of the L254P protein is deficient in
mediating resistance to these analogs, which is consistent with this
novel variant interfering with NT5C1A activity. This finding has led us
to hypothesize that the L254P mutation leads to a reduction in protein
function, most likely through reduced substrate binding, which may
increase AMP levels in early lymphocytes and predispose to tumorigenesis.
Future directions include experiments to determine the L254P protein's
substrate binding affinity and activity and the introduction of the
mutation into murine leukemia models as well as analysis of L254P as a
pharmacogenetic variant.

