Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant NFKBIA expression in lung adenocarcinomas arising from
never smokers


[Background] Lung cancer in never-smoker (NS) is known as a seventh cause
of cancer-related death. Activating mutation of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) gene is frequently observed in non-small-cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) with never smoking history and it is significantly
associated with the sensitivity of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(EGFR-TKI). Recently, NFKBIA gene, a tumor suppressor gene, has been
reported to be silenced by deletion in glioblastomas, and in NSCLCs, its
expression level is associated with clinical outcome of EGFR-TKI therapy.
In this study, we examined NFKBIA expression and the genetic alterations
of EGFR, K-ras, EML4-ALK to investigate the inter-relationship between
these genetic alterations and clinicopathological factors among lung
adenocarcinomas in NS. [Material and Method] We obtained ninety seven
lung adenocarcinomas samples in NS which were resected at our
institution. Four NSCLC cell lines (NCI-H1299, NCI-H1650, HCC827,
NCI-H1819) were also investigated. We examined NFKBIA expression using
immunohistochemistory (IHC) in tumor samples and real time reverse
transcriptional PCR (RT-PCR) in cell lines, respectively. Mutational
statuses of EGFR and K-ras genes were determined using mutant-enriched
PCR assay and direct sequencing, respectively. EML4-ALK fusion was
screened by ALK IHC and confirmed using RT-PCR assay. The methylation
status of NFKBIA gene is investigated by methylation specific PCR assay
and bisulfite sequencing. [Result] NFKBIA expression was silenced in 36
out of 97 samples (37.1%). EGFR mutation, K-ras mutation, and EML4-ALK
fusion were detected in 61.8%, 2.1%, and 1.0% of 97 samples,
respectively. Of note, the silencing of NFKBIA expression was
significantly frequent in EGFR wild-type patients than in EGFR mutant
patients (p=0.0024), while there was no correlation between NFKBIA
expression level and K-ras mutation or EML4-ALK fusion. Although NFKBIA
expression was silenced in NCI-H1299 and NCI-H1650, NFKBIA expression was
not restored after 5-Aza treatment in these cell lines. In addition,
NFKBIA methylation was found in these two cell lines. [Conclusion] Our
findings suggest that the degradation of NFKBIA expression is a frequent
event in lung adenocarcinomas of NS and may mediate an important
non-tobacco carcinogenic pathway especially among lung adenocarcinoma
with wild-type EGFR.

