Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of beta blockers, ACE inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor
blockers and risk of breast cancer recurrence: A Danish nationwide cohort
study


Background: Some studies indicate an anti-cancer effect of certain
antihypertensive medications. Beta blockers (BB) inhibit binding of
catecholamines to their receptors. Angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) interrupt the
renin-angiotensin system. Both adrenergic and angiotensin activity have
been implicated in malignant progression. We conducted a Danish
nationwide prospective cohort study to estimate associations between use
of these medications and the recurrence rate among breast cancer
survivors. Methods: We enrolled Danish women diagnosed with stage I-III
invasive breast cancer between 1996-2003 who were reported to the Danish
Breast Cancer Cooperative Group (DBCG). Data on patient and tumor
characteristics, primary and adjuvant therapy, and recurrence follow-up
were ascertained from the DBCG registry. We linked this cohort to the
National Registry of Medicinal Products, from which we ascertained pre-
and post-diagnosis prescriptions for BB, ACEi, ARBs, and potentially
confounding co-medications. Exposure status was updated yearly, with
exposure in a given interval defined as having filled at least one
prescription for the drug of interest during that interval. Exposures to
BB, ACEi, and ARBs were classified as 1) use of any drug in the class,
and 2) by purity of the prescription (that is, whether or not tablets
were combinations with diuretics or calcium channel blockers). We also
evaluated exposure to specific BB with high prevalence. In analyses based
on purity and on specific drugs, subjects who switched between exposure
types over follow-up were excluded. Recurrence associations were
estimated with Cox regression models, in which drug exposures were coded
as time-varying covariates lagged by 1 year. Associations were adjusted
for prognostic factors, comorbidity, and potentially confounding
co-medications. Results: We enrolled 18,733 breast cancer survivors who
experienced 3,414 recurrences over 111,010 person-years. There were 3,660
BB users, 3,075 ACEi users, and 1,989 ARB users; median durations of use
of these drugs were 4.7, 4.0, and 5.0 years, respectively. Use of any BB
was positively associated with recurrence (adjusted HR=1.3, 95% CI: 1.1,
1.5) and the association persisted for non-combination BB prescriptions
(adjusted HR=1.3, 95%CI: 1.1, 1.6). When we examined specific BB,
associations for exclusive use of propranolol, atenolol, bisoprolol, and
carvedilol were near-null and measured with good precision. Exclusive use
of metoprolol and sotalol were positively associated with recurrence (for
metoprolol, adjusted HR=1.5, 95% CI: 1.2, 1.8; for sotalol, adjusted
HR=2.0, 95% CI: 0.99, 4.0). No category of exposure to ACEi or ARB was
associated with recurrence. Conclusions: Our findings do not support the
hypothesis that BB, ACEi, or ARBs reduce breast cancer recurrence risk.

