Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The natural enzyme sequestration in signaling cascades provides
inherent opportunities for off-target effects induced by kinase inhibitors


Off-target effects from targeted therapies are often attributed to
cross-talk, which usually refers to inter-pathway molecular interactions
that occur because of explicit regulatory feedback connections between
two pathways. Recent experimental and theoretical studies have
demonstrated, however, that covalently modified cascades naturally
exhibit bidirectional signal propagation via a phenomenon termed
retroactivity. This phenomenon arises due to enzyme sequestration where
each cycle is coupled, not only to the next cycle, but also to the
previous cycle. While retroactivity occurs naturally in covalently
modified cascades, signaling pathways likely evolved to propagate
information in a downstream manner. An important consequence of
retroactivity, however, is that a downstream perturbation can induce an
upstream response without the presence of regulatory feedback
connections. We hypothesize that kinase inhibitors can produce off-target
effects as a consequence of retroactivity alone via the following
mechanism: a signal travels upstream from the site of a downstream
perturbation through retroactivity and, upon reaching a shared upstream
component, is delivered to an independent parallel pathway. To test the
hypothesis we used a computational model to simulate the targeted
inhibition of a specific kinase in a series signaling networks using
physiologically and therapeutically relevant ranges for all parameters.
Surprisingly, our results suggest that an off-target effect due to
retroactive signaling is more likely when the first cycle in a
non-inhibited cascade is off and not consuming large amounts of a shared
up-stream activator. Our results also suggest that the kinetics governing
covalently modified cycles in a cascade are more important for
propagating an upstream off-target effect than the binding affinity of
the drug to the targeted protein, which is a commonly optimized property
in drug development. Finally, our results suggest that a single mutation
has the capacity to produce a large spontaneous off-target effect without
any direct regulatory connections between the targeted protein and the
effected protein. Together, our results suggest that retroactivity may
play an important role in the dysregulated signaling networks of cancer
cells as well as the cellular response to targeted therapies. These
findings have important implications for somatic evolution in cancer and
the onset of therapeutic resistance, which has been widely reported for
many targeted cancer therapeutics, including kinase inhibitors.

