Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased resistance of breast cancer cells to doxorubicin by
clinically relevant doses of temsirolimus


The phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway is often activated in breast
cancer due to frequent mutations in PIK3CA, loss of expression of PTEN or
over-expression of receptor tyrosine kinases. This results in
constitutive activation of this pathway and in turn resistance to
anticancer treatments. One strategy to reverse this chemoresistance was
to inhibit PI3K pathway by targeting key regulatory proteins such as
PI3K, Akt or mTOR. Many inhibitors have been developed but clinical
results obtained have been disappointing so far, probably due to the
absence of information on the functional activities of the targeted
kinases. We wanted to test how quantitative changes in enzymatic
activities of PIK3 pathway would predict a decrease in chemoresistance to
conventional therapeutic agents when combined with mTOR inhibitors. A
prerequisite was to determine if the genomic mutations of PI3K pathway
mentioned above were followed by quantitative changes in the
corresponding enzymatic activities targeted by the specific inhibitors.
We determined the enzymatic activities of the PI3K pathway in breast
cancer cell lines with either mutation in PIK3CA (MCF-7 and T-47D cells),
deletion of PTEN (MDA-MB-468 cells) or no alteration in the pathway
(MDA-MB-231). Enzymatic activities were evaluated by quantifying the
percentage of phosphorylated proteins. As expected, a genomic alteration
of a PI3K pathway component resulted in activation of downstream kinases
of the pathway (PDK1, mTORC2, Akt and mTORC1) but their level of
activation varied depending on the cell line tested. Next, we treated
those cell lines with clinically relevant, non-toxic doses (0.1nM or 1nM)
of temsirolimus (mTORC1 inhibitor) and carried out a dose-response (from
0.1nM up to 10M) of doxorubicin (anthracyclin). Temsirolimus induced the
phosphorylation of Akt on both Ser473 and Thr308 in MCF-7 cells. This Akt
activation remained much lower in MCF-7 than constitutive activation
measured in MDA-MB-468 cells. As expected, doxorubicin, used at IC25 (66
nM) also induced the activation of Akt in MCF-7 cells. Addition of
temsirolimus did not further increase doxorubicine toxicity. On the
opposite, a marked increased resistance of cells to doxorubicin was
measured in MCF-7 and in MDA-MB-468 cells treated with temsirolimus. Such
induction of chemoresistance was not detected in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Similar results were obtained with PI-103, a dual inhibitor of PI3K and
mTORC1. Although PI3K pathway inhibitors have been used in clinical
settings to restore the effects of conventional anti-cancer drugs, we
found that some inhibitors of this pathway increased chemoresistance in
breast cancer cells, depending on the altered enzymatic activities in
PI3K pathway. Thus, in addition to identifying genomic alterations,
kinases activities of the PI3K pathway should be quantified in breast
cancer biopsies prior to contemplating the use of targeted drugs.

