Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular effects of doxycycline treatment on pterygium as
revealed by massive transcriptome sequencing


Pterygium is a common benign tumor growth of the ocular surface
attributed to chronic ultraviolet light exposure, representing a
tremendous burden, both human and financial, in many countries. At the
cellular level, pterygium is characterized by proliferation of limbal
cells, inflammatory infiltrates, fibrosis, angiogenesis, and
extracellular matrix breakdown. Pterygia also display tumor-like
features, such as propensity to invade normal tissue and high recurrence
rates following resection. Currently, the only approved treatment for
pterygium is surgery which, in some cases, results in high recurrence
rates. In a recent article, our group has shown that doxycycline, a
common oral antibiotic, was able to dramatically reduce pterygium-like
lesions in a mouse model and we are nowadays conducting a clinical trial
to test this ability in humans. In the present study we investigated the
molecular effects of doxycycline on short-term primary cultures of
pterygium cells, using ultrasequencing techniques, to better understand
all the pathways affected by the antibiotic in pterygium. Use of
pterygium specimens was approved by our Institutional Review Board
(CEICLAR). For each patient, cells were subjected to 4 treatments: 0
(control), 50, 200, and 500 g/mL doxycycline for 24 h. Total RNA was
isolated and a library was prepared for ultrasequencing following
Illumina's protocols. Gene products whose expression was significantly
changed upon application of doxycycline were chosen for further
confirmation by quantitative real time PCR using Taqman probes. Some
secreted proteins were quantified in the supernatant of the cultures by
commercially available ELISA kits Our results showed that the exposure of
pterygium cells to doxycycline induced dose-dependent changes in
mitochondrial-related genes as well as ER stress-related genes, VEGF
signalling, and integrin related genes in pterygium. Twenty two of the
differentially-induced genes identified by ultrasequencing were selected
for confirmation by qRT-PCR. All of them showed a similar dose dependence
on doxycycline treatment. Correlation analysis between ultrasequencing
data and qRT-PCR showed a coefficient of correlation (r2) of 0.7. In
addition, several cytokines were analysed by ELISA confirming the
validity of the technique. The doxycycline-activated pathways identified
by ultrasequencing techniques provide a plausible mechanism by which
doxycycline exerts its anti-proliferative effects on pterygia and
unveiled new therapeutic targets for the treatment of the disease. In
addition, the high correlation between ultrasequencing and qRT-PCR data
supports the use of Massive Transcriptome Sequencing as a useful and
powerful tool to study the mechanism underlining complex diseases.
Supported by a Grant from Spain's Ministry of Health, Social Policy, and
Equality, No. DIN-021.

