Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PI3K kinase by a selective small molecule inhibitor
suppresses B-cell proliferation and leukemic cell growth


Background: Phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) belongs to a class of
intracellular lipid kinases that phosphorylate the 3 position hydroxyl
group of the inositol ring of phosphotidylinositol. The PI3K pathway is
frequently activated in human cancers and thus represents an attractive
target for small molecule inhibitors. Pan-PI3K inhibitors currently in
development have been associated with adverse side-effects such as
insulin resistance, thus necessitating the need to develop isoform
specific inhibitors of PI3K. Herein, we describe the biological and
pharmacokinetic properties of RP5264, a small molecule PI3K inhibitors
with scope to be further developed as a clinical candidate for
hematological malignancies mediated by B-cells. Methods: Activity of
RP5264 on individual PI3K isoforms was determined by a Homogenous Time
Resolved Fluorescence assay (Millipore, Billerica, MA) with
modifications. Cell based selectivity assays against , , or isoforms was
assessed by testing the effect of the compound on PDGF, LPA, or c5a
induced Akt phosphorylation in NIH-3T3 or RAW cells. Similarly,
inhibition of cellular PI3K activity was determined in an IgM induced
human B-cell proliferation as well as LPS-induced CD19 assays. Ability to
arrest cell growth and induce apoptosis was also tested. Viability assays
was conducted to determine the growth inhibitory effect of the compounds
in leukemic cells. Pharmacokinetic behaviour of compounds in plasma after
single dose oral administration was determined in female Balb/c mice.
Results: RP5264 inhibited PI3K activity in enzyme and cell based assays
with IC50 and EC50 values of 22.2 & 24.3 nM respectively. The compound
displayed a high degree of selectivity over the alpha (>1000 fold), beta
(>30-50 fold), and gamma (>15-50 fold) isoforms. Additionally, the
compound caused a half-maximal inhibition of human whole blood CD19 cell
proliferation between 100-300 nM. Treatment of PBMC with RP5264 resulted
initially in a G2/M arrest followed by subsequent increase in the number
of Sub G0 cells. Viability assays demonstrated that the compound caused a
significant inhibition in growth as well as Akt phosphorylation of
immortalized and primary leukemic cells. Further, the compound exhibited
good oral absorption with favourable pharmacokinetic properties in
rodents. Conclusions: Results demonstrate the PI3K delta selective nature
of RP5264 along with an ability to suppress proliferation and Akt
phosphorylation in cancer cells. In vitro selectivity and potency data
indicate the therapeutics potential of the compounds in hematological
cancers without the deleterious effects commonly associated with the Pan
PI3K inhibitors. RP5264 is poised to enter clinical development in 2012.

