Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determinants of Sorafenib sensitivity in renal and non
small cell lung - Patient derived tumors engrafted in nude mice


Introduction: Sorafenib (Nexavar()) is a potent multikinase inhibitor
suppressing angiogenesis and promoting cell autophagy. Sorafenib has been
shown to be active in a broad range of cancers models and is approved in
the clinic for treatment of renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular
carcinoma. Sorafenib was shown to inhibit non small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC), however a recent phase III study failed to demonstrate efficacy
when given together with carboplatin and paclitaxel. Therefore, the
identification of molecular determinants of Sorafenib sensitivity is of
particular importance for better selecting NSCLC patients for treatment
with this therapy. In the present study we used a large collection of
NSCLC and renal cancer patient derived tumor models xenografted in nude
mice (PDX) to compare Sorafenib anti-tumor activity in both cancer types
and to identify molecular determinants of tumor sensitivity. Material and
Methods: Sorafenib was tested in vivo in a panel of 33 different PDX
including 8 renal and 25 NSCLC. The drug was given orally at 200
mg/kg/day for 12 days and tumor sensitivity was evaluated by tumor volume
inhibition of the test group relative to the vehicle control group (T/C
in %). Molecular characterization was done using targeted mutation
analysis by Sequenom MassARRAY Oncocarta 3.0, Affymetrix SNP V6.0 array
for gene copy number variation and HGU133 plus 2 arrays for transcriptome
analysis. Results: The mean % T/C values were 42% in renal and 38% in
NSCL PDX. Using a T/C value of 30% as cut-off for sensitivity, tumor
response to Sorafenib were observed in 5/8 renal (62%) and in 8/25(32%)
NSCL PDX. In NSCLC the response to Sorafenib was 2/5 (40%) in epidermoid,
2/7 (28%) in large cell and 3/13 (23%) in adeno subtypes. The
transcriptome analysis revealed differentially expressed transcripts
between tumors responding to Sorafenib and those being resistant (student
t-test adjusted pIntroduction: Sorafenib (Nexavar()) is a potent
multikinase inhibitor suppressing angiogenesis and promoting cell
autophagy. Sorafenib has been shown to be active in a broad range of
cancers models and is approved in the clinic for treatment of renal cell
carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. Sorafenib was shown to inhibit
non small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), however a recent phase III study
failed to demonstrate efficacy when given together with carboplatin and
paclitaxel. Therefore, the identification of molecular determinants of
Sorafenib sensitivity is of particular importance for better selecting
NSCLC patients for treatment with this therapy. In the present study we
used a large collection of NSCLC and renal cancer patient derived tumor
models xenografted in nude mice (PDX) to compare Sorafenib anti-tumor
activity in both cancer types and to identify molecular determinants of
tumor sensitivity. Material and Methods: Sorafenib was tested in vivo in
a panel of 33 different PDX including 8 renal and 25 NSCLC. The drug was
given orally at 200 mg/kg/day for 12 days and tumor sensitivity was
evaluated by tumor volume inhibition of the test group relative to the
vehicle control group (T/C in %). Molecular characterization was done
using targeted mutation analysis by Sequenom MassARRAY Oncocarta 3.0,
Affymetrix SNP V6.0 array for gene copy number variation and HGU133 plus
2 arrays for transcriptome analysis. Results: The mean % T/C values were
42% in renal and 38% in NSCL PDX. Using a T/C value of 30% as cut-off for
sensitivity, tumor response to Sorafenib were observed in 5/8 renal (62%)
and in 8/25(32%) NSCL PDX. In NSCLC the response to Sorafenib was 2/5
(40%) in epidermoid, 2/7 (28%) in large cell and 3/13 (23%) in adeno
subtypes. The transcriptome analysis revealed differentially expressed
transcripts between tumors responding to Sorafenib and those being
resistant (student t-test adjusted p<0.05). Gene ontology and pathway
analyzes will be presented. In addition, for some of these transcripts,
differential expression was associated with gene copy number variations
in PDX. None of the specific gene mutations detected by Oncocarta panel.
3 were associated with Sorafenib sensitivity. Conclusion: Sorafenib is a
potent tumor inhibitor not only in renal but also in the different NSCL
cancer model subtypes. Molecular analysis evidenced differentially
expressed transcripts but no gene mutation associated with response to
treatment. The relevance of these markers for predicting Sorafenib
sensitivity should be confirmed in an independent data set.

