Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Image-guided miRNA therapy for metastatic breast cancer


Metastases, and not the primary tumor from which they originate, are the
main reason for mortality from breast carcinoma. New therapeutic
approaches for metastatic breast cancer are urgently needed. The specific
involvement of miRNAs in the development of metastases has been recently
described and identified microRNA-10b (miR-10b) in initiation of breast
cancer invasion and metastasis (Ma et al, Nature, 2007). Here, we
describe a nanodrug for image-guided therapy of lymph node metastatic
breast cancer. It consists of RGD-targeted ultrasmall magnetic
nanoparticles that mediate their therapeutic effect by delivering locked
nucleic acid to knockdown microRNA-10b (MN-anti-miR10b). Nanodrug bearing
scrambled locked nucleic acid (MN-scr-miR) was also synthesized. The size
and composition of the nanoparticles promote their extended persistence
in the circulation (blood half-life >12 hrs) and transcytosis into the
tumoral and lymph node interstitium. The nanodrug is detectable by
magnetic resonance and optical imaging and is designed so that it targets
both primary tumor cells and lymph node metastases. We show that
treatment of invasive human breast tumor cells in vitro expressing
luciferase (MDA-MB-231-luc) with the nanodrug results in an 88%
downregulation of miRNA-10b with the application of just 1.5 nmoles/ml of
LNA and abolishes the invasion and migration of the tumor cells. In vivo,
we showed that the nanodrug could be delivered to primary tumors as well
as to lymph nodes and lymph node and lung metastasis. Therapeutic
treatment of animal bearing orthotopic MDA-MB-231-luc tumors was
performed with tail vein injections (10mg/kg of iron) delivered once a
week for four weeks. Two therapeutic scenarios were used: 1) preventing
tumor cell dissemination from the primary tumor beginning prior to the
formation of detectable lymph node metastases and 2) beginning the
treatment after the formation of lymph node metastasis but prior to
metastasis to the lungs. In scenario (1) we observed that by the end of
the treatment course, bioluminsecence signal from the tumors in the
experimental animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b was at pre-metastatic
levels, indicating a prevention of tumor cell metastasis from the primary
tumor to lymph nodes. In contrast, there was visible dissemination of
tumor cells to the lymph nodes of control animals treated with the
MN-scr-miR. This therapeutic effect was highly reproducible. In scenario
(2) there was a 20-fold increase in lymph node metastatic burden in
controls treated with MN-scr-miR. By contrast, in the experimental
animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b, there was a dramatic reduction of
metastatic progression (p Metastases, and not the primary tumor from
which they originate, are the main reason for mortality from breast
carcinoma. New therapeutic approaches for metastatic breast cancer are
urgently needed. The specific involvement of miRNAs in the development of
metastases has been recently described and identified microRNA-10b
(miR-10b) in initiation of breast cancer invasion and metastasis (Ma et
al, Nature, 2007). Here, we describe a nanodrug for image-guided therapy
of lymph node metastatic breast cancer. It consists of RGD-targeted
ultrasmall magnetic nanoparticles that mediate their therapeutic effect
by delivering locked nucleic acid to knockdown microRNA-10b
(MN-anti-miR10b). Nanodrug bearing scrambled locked nucleic acid
(MN-scr-miR) was also synthesized. The size and composition of the
nanoparticles promote their extended persistence in the circulation
(blood half-life >12 hrs) and transcytosis into the tumoral and lymph
node interstitium. The nanodrug is detectable by magnetic resonance and
optical imaging and is designed so that it targets both primary tumor
cells and lymph node metastases. We show that treatment of invasive human
breast tumor cells in vitro expressing luciferase (MDA-MB-231-luc) with
the nanodrug results in an 88% downregulation of miRNA-10b with the
application of just 1.5 nmoles/ml of LNA and abolishes the invasion and
migration of the tumor cells. In vivo, we showed that the nanodrug could
be delivered to primary tumors as well as to lymph nodes and lymph node
and lung metastasis. Therapeutic treatment of animal bearing orthotopic
MDA-MB-231-luc tumors was performed with tail vein injections (10mg/kg of
iron) delivered once a week for four weeks. Two therapeutic scenarios
were used: 1) preventing tumor cell dissemination from the primary tumor
beginning prior to the formation of detectable lymph node metastases and
2) beginning the treatment after the formation of lymph node metastasis
but prior to metastasis to the lungs. In scenario (1) we observed that by
the end of the treatment course, bioluminsecence signal from the tumors
in the experimental animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b was at
pre-metastatic levels, indicating a prevention of tumor cell metastasis
from the primary tumor to lymph nodes. In contrast, there was visible
dissemination of tumor cells to the lymph nodes of control animals
treated with the MN-scr-miR. This therapeutic effect was highly
reproducible. In scenario (2) there was a 20-fold increase in lymph node
metastatic burden in controls treated with MN-scr-miR. By contrast, in
the experimental animals treated with MN-anti-miR10b, there was a
dramatic reduction of metastatic progression (p < 0.001, n = 6) and a
prevention of tumor cell dissemination to the lungs.

