Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The positive role of TP in the induction of COX-2, TxA2 and cell
growth by NNK in human lung cancer cells


Many studies have shown that 4-Methylnitrosamino-1-3-pyridyl-1-butanone
(NNK), the most potent carcinogen present in tobacco smoke, can induce
lung tumor growth. We previously demonstrated that the activation of
extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK) and cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB) is responsible for the pro-survival and
proliferative effects of thromboxane A2 (TxA2) and its receptor (TP) in
the human lung cancer cells stimulated with NNK (reported in oncogene
journal). In current study, we further determined the role of
cyclooxygenase(COX)-2/TxA2/TP pathway in lung cancer cell growth mediated
by NNK. TP exists as two isoforms, and , in human beings. Western
blotting showed that TP, but not TP, was widely expressed in a series of
human lung cells. NCI-H23 and CRL-2066, which express both TP and TP,
were selected as models in this study. COX-2 inhibitor NS398 could
significantly reduce NNK-stimulated TxA2 synthesis. Moreover, NS398 and
BM567, an agent combining TxA2 synthase inhibition and TP antagonism, had
the similar effects to reverse NNK-induced activation of ERK and CREB and
the increase in cell growth. Furthermore, the administration of TxA2
mimetic U46619 could almost reconstituted NNK-induced ERK and CREB
activation in the presence of COX-2-siRNA. Collectively, these findings
suggest that in lung cancer cells stimulated with NNK, TxA2 is mainly
derived from COX-2 and acts as a key mediator for tumor-promoting effects
of COX-2. Interestingly, TP antagonist SQ29548 could inhibit NNK-induced
COX-2 protein expression and TxA2 production, indicating that TP is able
to modulate NNK-induced COX-2 expression and activity, thereby
constituting an auto-amplification mechanism of TxA2 synthesis in lung
cancer cells stimulated with NNK. We further examined which TP isoform
contributes to the NNK effects. We observed that the protein expression
of TP, but not TP, was time-dependently increased by NNK. Moreover, the
activation of ERK and CREB and the production of COX-2 and TxA2 by NNK
were potentiated in cells transfected with pcDNA3-TP as compared with
cells transfected with control vector or pcDNA3-TP, and such effects
could be reversed by SQ29548. However, in cells transfected with
pcDNA3-TP, the COX-2, TxA2, phospho-ERK and phospho-CREB levels were
similar to that seen in the cells transfected with control vector, and
neither NNK nor SQ29548 had any additional effects when compared to the
control cells. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that TP rather
than TP is, at least in part, responsible for the induction of COX-2,
TxA2 and cell growth by NNK in lung cancer cells. Our study implies that
targeting TxA2 and its receptor TP may represent a promising strategy for
prevention of smoking-associated lung cancer.

