Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia potentiates Runx2-mediated increased Bcl-2 expression in
prostate cancer resulting in apoptosis resistance


Hypoxia is known to act as a selective pressure in the tumor
microenvironment, often resulting in sub-populations of cells that have a
propensity for more aggressive behaviour. More recently, Runx2 (an
osteogenic transcription factor) has been associated with tumor growth,
invasion and metastasis. Previous results in our laboratory have
indicated that hypoxia selects for more invasive, apoptosis-resistant
prostate cancer cells. Microarray analysis revealed that both Runx2 and
Bcl-2 (an anti-apoptotic protein) were up-regulated in the
hypoxia-selected cells (Butterworth et al, 2008). Bcl-2 is known to be
up-regulated in various malignancies, and is associated with more
aggressive disease and resistance to chemotherapy. Subsequent analysis of
the Bcl-2 promoter revealed two binding sites for Runx2. In the current
study we confirmed regulation of Bcl-2 by Runx2 though ChIP binding and
reporter assays in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Runx2 over-expressing
LNCaP cells showed increased cell viability which was inhibited by Runx2
siRNA knockdown. A variety of assays demonstrated that Runx2
over-expressing cells were more resistant to apoptosis than controls. We
further addressed the effect of hypoxia on Runx2 expression and the
potential role Runx2 might play in the regulation of Bcl-2 expression and
thus apoptosis in prostate cancer. When LNCaP cells were exposed to
hypoxia, both Runx2 and Bcl-2 mRNA and protein levels were significantly
increased over oxic controls. In a separate in vivo study, treatment of
LNCaP tumors grown on the backs of immuno-compromised mice with the
anti-androgen bicalutamide resulted in a profound decrease in tumor
oxygenation during the first 14 days. Over the following 14 days, oxygen
levels gradually increased. Further investigation of the excised tumors
showed an increase in Runx2 mRNA levels from day 7, which was further
confirmed by western and immunohistochemical analyses. In summary, this
study shows that hypoxia promotes over-expression of Runx2 in prostate
cancer cells. The cells exhibit a survival advantage through
up-regulation of Bcl-2 leading to apoptosis resistance. These results,
taken together with the in vivo data, suggest that Runx2 expression
(either through microenvironmental pressures or ectopic expression)
promotes progression to a more apoptosis-resistant and thus malignant
phenotype, highlighting Runx2 as a potential therapeutic target in
prostate cancer.

