Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of Akt and MEK with the Akt inhibitor GDC-0068
and MEK inhibitor GDC-0973 demonstrates synergistic anti-tumor effects


Background: Akt, a serine/threonine protein kinase, and MEK, a dual
specificity kinase, are key signaling nodes in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and the
Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway, respectively. Both Akt and MEK play key roles in
regulating numerous cellular processes such as cell proliferation,
growth, survival, protein synthesis and oncogenic transformation. Many
cancer types have alterations in both of these pathways and inhibiting
only one of these pathways can result in up-regulation of the other
pathway. We previously reported on a potent highly selective
ATP-competitive pan-Akt inhibitor, GDC-0068 as well as a potent selective
inhibitor of MEK, GDC-0973 that are currently in Phase 1 clinical trials.
We hypothesized that dual inhibition of both MEK and Akt pathways with
the combination of these two agents would induce synergistic antitumor
activity. Methods: In these studies, we evaluated the efficacy of
GDC-0068 and GDC-0973 both individually and in combination on a panel of
cancer cell lines. Cells were treated with either GDC-0068 or GDC-0973 or
in combination at increasing concentrations and assayed after 4 days for
viability. For in vivo studies, tumor cells were subcutaneously implanted
in the flank of female NCR.nude mice. Once tumors reached sufficient
size, mice were dosed orally for 21 days with GDC-0068, GDC-0973 or the
combination of both compounds. Results: In vitro, the combination of
GDC-0068 and GDC-0973 results in enhanced inhibition of cell viability
compared to either single agent alone. Synergistic effects are observed
in multiple cell lines; especially in cell lines that have activation of
the Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway or both pathways (e.g. via the combination of
PTEN loss or PI3K mutations and Ras or BRaf mutations). Combined
knockdown of downstream targets of both Akt and MEK is observed at
concentrations where a synergistic effect is observed, with enhanced
knockdown of several converged targets. Increased cell death is also
observed. These results were recapitulated in vivo in xenograft models,
where the combination of GDC-0068 and GDC-0973 resulted in increased
tumor growth inhibition or regression compared to either single agent
alone. All combinations tested were well tolerated as assessed by animal
body weights and mortalities. Conclusions: Our studies demonstrate
significant combination benefit between GDC-0068 and GDC-0973 on cell
viability in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. These data support the
clinical development of the combination of these two compounds.

