Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the FOXO1/KLF6 transcriptional network to modulate
response to anti-EGFR based therapy


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation is both a key
molecular driver of disease progression and the target of a broad class
of molecular agents designed to treat advanced cancer. Nevertheless,
resistance develops through several mechanisms including constitutive
activation of AKT signaling. Additional molecular characterization of the
downstream mediators of EGFR signaling may lead to the development of new
classes of targeted molecular therapies to treat resistant disease. Here
we identify a transcriptional network involving the KLF6 and FOXO1 tumor
suppressor genes that negatively regulate activated EGFR signaling and
that can be reactivated using the combination of two FDA approved agents
in both cell culture and in vivo models of the disease. In both murine
models and patient derived lung adenocarcinoma samples, EGFR activation
is associated with FOXO1 mislocalization and decreased KLF6 expression.
Furthermore, in a Kras driven mouse model, KLF6 expression is not
significantly changed whereas AKT activation seen in the Pten/Mmac1+/
heterozygous mouse model results in FOXO1 mislocalization and decreased
KLF6 expression. Consistent with these findings, inhibition of AKT
signaling promotes increase in nuclear FOXO1 resulting in transactivation
of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene in lung adenocarcinoma cell lines.
Correspondingly, the EGFRL858R mouse model demonstrates spontaneous tumor
regression when treated with the anti-EGFR based therapy, erlotinib, an
FDA-approved small-molecule inhibitor of EGFR signaling. We analyzed
L858R mouse tumors samples treated with erlotinib and found increased
KLF6 expression following EGFR inhibition. Conversely, targeted reduction
of KLF6 resulted in decreased erlotinib response in both cell culture and
in vivo models of disease suggesting a direct link between KLF6
upregulation and the induction of apoptosis by anti-EGFR based therapy.
Therefore, we hypothesized that acquired resistance to anti-EGFR based
therapies could be overcome by restoring downstream function of the
FOXO1/KLF6 transcriptional network. Here we demonstrate that an
FDA-approved drug, trifluoperazine hydrochloride (TFP), which has been
shown to inhibit FOXO1 nuclear export, restores sensitivity to AKT-driven
erlotinib-resistance through modulation of the KLF6/FOXO1 signaling
cascade in both cell culture and xenograft models. Furthermore, silencing
of FOXO1 blunts apoptosis mediated through combination erlotinib and TFP
treatment suggesting that this transcriptional network is important for
negatively regulating AKT signaling. Combined, these studies define a
novel transcriptional network regulating oncogenic EGFR signaling and
identify a class of FDA-approved drugs with the potential for rapid
clinical translation to restore chemosensitivity to anti-EGFR-based
therapy for the treatment of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma.

