Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second primary tumors after breast cancer: Results from the
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study


During the last decades, improvements in medical and surgical treatments
have substantially increased the chances of surviving from a cancer.
Cancer survivors now amount to more than 3.5% of population in the US,
and about 3% in Western Europe. Cancer survivors face the problem of
subsequent cancers possibly related to the late effects of treatments or
to a common aetiology for the first and subsequent cancers. Cancer
patients have a 20% higher risk of new primary cancer compared with the
general population. Approximately one third of cancer survivors aged >60
years were diagnosed more than once with another cancer. Women with
breast cancer as first primary cancer were the first largest group of
multiple cancer prevalence reported in the United States in 2002, while
the second and third groups were men and women with a diagnosis of
primary colorectal cancer and men with prostate cancer, respectively.
Multiple cancers arise in the same individual due to several causes: host
factors, such as hormonal and/or genetic factors, lifestyle and
environment, and treatments due to the first cancer (for example,
radiotherapy) The aim of this study is to assess the incidence of second
primary tumors in a cohort of women with a first breast cancer and to
investigate the role of shared risk factors. The study was performed in
the cohort of women with a primary breast cancer from the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study. To
correctly assess the incidence of second primary tumors, we applied a
Markov model studying the transition intensities from first to second
tumor with the Aalen-Johansen (AJ) estimators, as usually done in
competing risk models. In the cohort of 11045 women, we observed 492
second primary tumors (not metachronous) after a median follow-up of 4.92
years. About 30% (140) of them were second primary breast cancers, 65
were colorectal cancers and 39 were endometrial cancers. In this cohort,
there was a slight, not statistically significant increase of cancer
incidence in women with breast cancer, compared to the general
population; this was for all tumors together, except non-melanoma skin
cancers. Analysis by subgroups identified a significant increase for
second breast cancers and for endometrial cancers. Our findings suggest
that second primaries may be an important problem for cancer survivors.
We will now investigate the role played by lifestyle factors, genetics
and possibly therapies in second primary occurrence.

