Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing glucosylceramide synthase using MBO-asGCS eliminates
tumor metastasis


Disseminated metastasis is often observed in cancer patients fail in
chemotherapy. Tumor metastasis is known to rely on the interaction of
cancer cells and the extracellular matrix components but the molecular
mechanism by which drug resistance promotes tumor metastasis is still not
clear. Glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) that is a limiting enzyme for
ceramide glycosylation and regulates glycosphingolipid (GSL) synthesis
can cause drug resistance. Hence we report that GCS is a determinant of
metastatic properties of drug-resistant cancer cells, and silencing GCS
eliminates tumor metastasis. Our recent study found that the metastatic
potency of drug-resistant cancer cells depended on the overexpression of
GCS. Compared with drug-sensitive MCF-7 cells, the wound healing,
matrigel attachment and MMP-9 activity significantly was 1.5 fold faster,
3 fold more and 2 folds higher respectively in the drug resistant
MCF-7/Dox that also had 39-fold higher GCS protein level and 2-fold
higher GCS enzyme activity. Introduction of GCS gene enhanced the
metastatic potency of MCF-7 cells, because its matrigel attachment and
invasion potential significantly increased by 2-fold and 1.5-fold after
transfection. In contrast, silencing GCS by using mixed-backbone
oligonucleotide against GCS (MBO-asGCS, 100 nM) substantially diminished
the metastatic potency of MCF-7/Dox cells, as the wound healing, matrigel
attachment and invasion reduced by 2-fold, 1.5-fold and 3-fold
respectively. MBO-asGCS treatments eliminated lung metastasis of
MCF-7/Dox tumors. Further mechanistic studies disclosed that silencing
GCS by MBO-asGCS decreased its expression and enzyme activity and also
decreased the levels of globo-series glycosphingolipids (GSLs) in
GSL-enriched microdomain located on the plasma membrane. Sequentially,
silencing GCS decreased the expression levels of uPA, MMP-9, VEGF and
FGF-2 that actively mediated the migration and invasion of cancer cells.
This study thus indicates that GCS is determinant for the metastatic
potency of drug-resistant cancer cells and silencing GCS by using
MBO-asGCS is an effective approach to target the metastasis of tumor with
drug resistance.

