Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of prognosis by the combination of mutation and
methylation in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the most common types of cancer in both
men and women and is associated with high mortality, particularly at
advanced stages. Markers for defining individual risk signatures in CRC
patients are of great clinical value, as they may allow for targeted
therapies to improve outcomes in CRC patients. Epigenetic alteration such
as promoter hypermethylation of gene, as well as genetic abnormality such
as gene mutation, occurs frequently during the pathogenesis of human
cancers. Recent studies exhibit the increasing observations that both
epigenetic and genetic changes combine to determine the phenotype of
cancer. Thus, in the present study, we examined KRAS and PIK3CA mutations
and the methylation status of BNIP3, SFRP1, and Dkk1, and analyzed the
correlation between these molecular alterations and the
clinicopathological features of CRC. We aimed to clarify whether a
combination of genetic and epigenetic alterations can be used to classify
CRC patients in relation to their clinicopathological features and
outcomes. Tissue samples from 122 CRC patients who underwent surgical
resection were examined. The methylation status of SFRP1 and Dkk1 and the
sequences of exon 1 of KRAS gene and exons 9 and 20 of the PIK3CA gene
were determined by methylation specific PCR and direct sequencing,
respectively, using genomic DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded blocks.
Correlation between these factors and clinicopathologic findings/patients
survival were examined. As a result, there was a significant correlation
between KRAS mutation and BNIP3 (p=0.0004) or Dkk1 (p=0.0009) methylation
but not SFRP1 (p=0.114). Although SFRP1 and Dkk1 methylation showed no
associations with disease specific survival (DSS) and other
clinicopathological findings in CRC patients, BNIP3 was associated with
poor DSS (p=0.0149). In CRC without both KRAS and PIK3CA mutation,
patients with two or three methylated genes had poorer overall survival
compared to those with no or one methylated genes (p=0.0017). To
contrary, in the cases of at least one or more mutations, patients with
two or three methylated genes tended to have better survival than
patients with no methylation. Classifying CRC based on BNIP3, SFRP1, and
Dkk1 methylation status and KRAS and PIK3CA mutation may be a clinically
powerful predictor of patient outcome.

