Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HAF promotes the switch from HIF-1 to HIF-2 signaling during
chronic hypoxia and promotes stem cell characteristics


Most solid tumors and their metastases experience periods of hypoxia,
which promotes tumor progression and resistance to therapy. Hypoxia is
also an important micro-environmental factor supporting the maintenance
of pluripotent cancer stem/progenitor cells (CSCs) within the stem cell
niche. The clinical relevance of CSCs is underscored by their resistance
to cytotoxic therapies, invasive potential and role in tumor recurrence.
Critical mediators of the hypoxia response are the hypoxia-inducible
factors HIF-1 and HIF-2. Although they have some overlapping functions,
the HIFs are generally non-redundant whereby HIF-1 regulates the acute
metabolic changes required for hypoxic survival, whereas HIF-2 promotes
the adaptation to chronic hypoxia, including the maintenance of CSCs.
However, the mechanism determining selectivity for HIF-1 versus HIF-2
activation is unclear. Here we describe a new mechanism for the switch
between HIF-1 and HIF-2 dependent transcription during chronic hypoxia by
the hypoxia associated factor (HAF). HAF is overexpressed in a number of
tumor types and is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates HIF-1
independently of oxygen and pVHL, thus targeting HIF-1 for proteasomal
degradation. HAF also binds to HIF-2 but at a different site than it
binds to HIF-1, increasing HIF-2 transactivation without causing its
degradation. Hence HAF switches cellular dependence from HIF-1 towards
HIF-2, resulting in the activation of HIF-2 specific target genes (MMP9,
OCT3/4)and the simultaneous inhibition of HIF-1 specific target genes
(CA-IX, DDIT4). HAF itself is hypoxia regulated - decreasing during acute
hypoxia, but increasing with hypoxic duration. Hence HAF is a key
determinant of HIF-2 versus HIF-1 activation in response to hypoxia.
Using cell-free recombinant proteins and in vitro binding assays, we show
that HAF binding to HIF-2 requires a novel eukaryotic post-translational
modification of HIF-2 within a unique region of HIF-2 that is absent from
HIF-1. HAF binding to HIF-2 is increased in cells exposed to prolonged
hypoxia and promotes the transcription of HIF-2 target genes important in
CSC maintenance such as OCT3/4 and SOX2. HAF levels are elevated in
CD133+ U87 glioblastoma stem/progenitor cells and HAF knockdown decreases
neurosphere formation suggesting a key role for HAF in the maintenance of
the stem cell phenotype. The HAF-induced switch to HIF-2 dependent
transcription promotes invasion and enriches the proportion of
stem/progenitor CD133+ U87 cells. This increases the rate of tumor take
and increases tumor morbidity in vivo. Funded by NIH CA095060, CA17094,
CA098920

