Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LC-MS/MS detection of the dansyl-modified biologically active CDK
inhibitor VMY-1-103 using an in vivo model system


The development of new small molecule kinase inhibitors as cancer
therapeutic drugs has placed increased emphasis on determining the
mechanism of action of the new compounds preclinically, such as in
genetically engineered mice or using human tissue xenografts. The ability
to accurately measure the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of new
compounds is often hampered by the lack of suitable platforms to measure
serum and tissue distribution with high sensitivity and specificity. We
have recently developed a novel dansylated cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitor called VMY-1-103 (VMY) that has purvalanol B as its base
compound. We established that VMY was significantly more effective in
blocking cell cycle progression and inducing apoptosis than purvalanol B.
Since dansylation is frequently used to enhance mass spectrometry-based
quantitative analyses, we hypothesized that this modality could similarly
be used to evaluate the tissue distribution of VMY in mouse models. In
the current study, we developed a rapid liquid phase-extraction of VMY
and purvalanol B from mouse tissue and validated a sensitive liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry based assay to quantify tissue
delivery of these compounds in vivo. Comparisons of the standard curves
for VMY versus Purvalanol B revealed a greater than 7.7-fold increase in
sensitivity for VMY. Using both the ND-2 SmoA1, a genetically engineered
mouse model of medulloblastoma, and normal mice, we quantified tissue
delivery by mass spectrometry as well as Area Under the Curve (AUC)
analysis by integrating the peak intensity normalized by an internal
standard. Our analyses revealed that VMY delivered intraperitoneally at
20mg/kg was found at its highest concentration in serum 4 hours after
injection. We further established that VMY was distributed in multiple
tissues, including pancreas and prostate at varying levels and,
importantly, we establish that VMY was able to traverse an intact
blood-brain barrier as it was detected in the brain and cerebellum of
normal mice. Purvalanol B delivered in the same manner as VMY was found
at significantly lower levels in all tissues examined and unlike VMY, we
failed to detect purvalanol B in brain or and cerebellar tissue. The
significance of this study illustrates that a biologically active
compound can be modified by dansylation and exhibit both increased
sensitivity to mass spectrometry and enhanced bioavailability and tissue
delivery, including the brain, in vivo. We also define a simple mass
spectrometry-based tissue and serum assay.

