Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collagen-mediated chromatin remodeling promotes chemoresistance in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the US, is associated with a pronounced
collagen-rich stromal reaction that has been shown to contribute to
chemo-resistance. We have previously shown that PDAC cells grown in the
collagen microenvironment are resistant to gemcitabine-induced
proliferation- and checkpoint-arrest (Dangi-Garimella et al, Cancer
Research 2011). The effects were mediated by ERK1/2-dependent expression
of high mobility group A2 (HMGA2), a well-known chromatin remodeling
protein. We have now found that relative to cells grown on tissue culture
plastic, PDAC cells grown in 3D collagen display increased acetylation of
lysines K9 and K27 on histone H3 along with a reduction in the levels of
the heterochromatin binding protein HP1-, suggesting that cells in
collagen have a more open chromatin state. Decreasing HMGA2 expression or
inhibiting ERK1/2 activity attenuates the effect of collagen on K9 and
K27 acetylation. 3D collagen also promotes expression of the histone
acetyl transferase (HAT) enzymes PCAF and GCN5 through increased HMGA2
expression and ERK1/2 activation. Additionally, human PDAC tumors display
higher histone acetylation near fibrotic regions that also have increased
HMGA2 expression. Finally, cells in 3D matrix demonstrate increased H2AX
and a reduced tailing with the comet assay following gemcitabine
treatment, suggesting that there is increased DNA repair associated with
the more open chromatin state when cells are in the 3D collagen
microenvironment. Downregulation of HATs along with inhibition of ERK1/2
phosphorylation attenuates gemcitabine-induced H2AX detected in 3D
collagen. Overall, our results increase our understanding of how growth
in 3D collagen contributes to chemo-resistance and identify potential
therapeutic targets against this deadly cancer.

