Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creation of a novel biochemical and biophysical assay suite to
enable the identification of inhibitors targeting inactive kinases


We have recently reported the implementation of a structural
biology-based drug design platform for the identification of protein
kinase inhibitors which utilize hydrophobic clusters to stabilize the
inactive state of a kinase. These clusters are not formed in active
kinases and result in the conversion of the ATP binding cleft into a
non-polar environment which is sterically and electrostatically
incompatible with ATP binding. We have industrialized this approach,
designated the ArQule Kinase Inhibitor Platform (AKIPTM), and synthesized
a library of more than 15,000 small molecules through the application of
an in silico guided process. This has allowed us to rapidly generate
leads to a variety of kinases, including receptor tyrosine kinases,
non-receptor tyrosine kinases, and serine-threonine kinases. By virtue of
their unique binding modes, many of these inhibitors would not be
identified in standard assays using highly activated kinases. We have
therefore deliberately re-engineered standard biochemical kinase assays
using unphosphorylated inactive kinases to aid in the optimization of
these inhibitors. In addition to these biochemical assays, we have also
implemented a variety of well-established technologies not commonly used
early in the hit generation process, including a thermal shift assay
(TSA), affinity mass spectrometry, endogenous tryptophan fluorescence
detection, an ATP-exclusion assay using a non-hydrolyzable ATP analogue,
classical kinetic analysis to assess ATP-dependence and
mechanism-of-inhibition, X-ray crystallography, and finally,
cross-competition experiments with known inhibitors. Using the cumulative
knowledge gained from these technologies throughout the hit generation,
hit-to-lead, and lead optimization stages has enabled us to make informed
decisions and resulted in identification of many potent ATP-independent
inhibitors. The AKIP technology to date has produced at least one
clinical candidate, ARQ 092, which potently inhibits AKT with a high
degree of selectivity amongst the human kinome. Further examples of the
application of these various technologies will be provided for a diverse
range of kinases, including c-Met, FGFR, Ack, and TNIK.

