Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy using saracatinib adjunctive to castration
inhibits progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer in a murine
model


Introduction: Prostate cancer treatment with androgen deprivation is
typically efficacious for two years prior to the development of
castration resistant disease (CRPC). The Src family kinases (SFK) are
upregulated with androgen deprivation and have been implicated in the
progression to CRPC. Saracatinib is a specific SFK inhibitor that
inhibits castration resistant growth and metastases in an animal model
using LNCaP cells overexpressing the neuropeptide gastrin-releasing
peptide. We test the hypothesis that saracatinib given immediately after
androgen deprivation inhibits castration resistant tumor recurrence using
a CWR22 xenograft model. Materials and Methods: CWR22 prostate cancer
xenografts were injected subcutaneously into nude mice primed with
testosterone pellets (21-day release). Twenty-six mice were castrated
after adequate tumor development (day 0). Mice in the treatment arm were
administered saracatinib from day 7 to day 150. Mice were sacrificed at
days 0, 3, 30 and 150. Tumors and sera were collected for analysis
including tumor weight, serum testosterone, serum PSA and gene-profile
studies. The data was analyzed using the t-test and analysis of variance.
Results: CRPC recurrence was significantly inhibited with the
administration of saracatinib. The mean weight of tumor recurrence was
0.18 grams with saracatinib compared to 3.20 grams in the control group
(p=0.015). Saracatinib was associated with a reduction in serum PSA (1.6
versus 14.7 ng/dl) and testosterone (21.1 versus 24.1 pg/ml) compared to
controls, though statistical significance was not reached (p=0.08 and
p=0.63, respectively). Gene expression of signaling kinases and their
downstream olecules including Src, Etk, FAK, JAK, Stat3, c-myc, -catenin,
NF-B, Akt, and mTOR is being compared between time points. Conclusions:
Saracatinib significantly inhibits castration resistant tumor recurrence
when started with androgen deprivation. Additional investigation into the
genetic and molecular changes induced by saracatinib with gene microarray
and polymerase chain reaction is ongoing. Saracatinib may have a role in
combination with androgen deprivation to delay the onset of castration
resistant disease.

