Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparisons between an IRDye 800CW-labeled PSMA-targeted small
molecule and antibody for preclinical small animal imaging


Prostate cancer continues to be the second leading cause of cancer death
in men in 2011. Deciphering the progression and mechanisms contributing
to the metastatic spread of this disease is critical to our overall
understanding of how to approach treatment and/or therapy.
Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a possible therapeutic
target for the disease and is the focus of several cancer therapies
currently in clinical trials. Near infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging
for cancer diagnosis and treatment is gaining attention for preclinical
as well as clinical applications. IRDye 800CW is a NIR fluorophore
exhibiting superior target-to-background ratios when conjugated to
targeting moieties such as antibodies, peptides, and small molecules.
Here we assess two different PSMA-targeted compounds conjugated to IRDye
800CW: the small molecule YC-27 and a PSMA-specific antibody. In vitro
binding kinetics for both compounds exhibit expected dose dependent
increases with increasing concentrations. Both compounds were
successfully blocked with their unlabeled counterpart; however, neither
blocked the other suggesting different PSMA epitopes. Although direct
comparisons are inappropriate due to differences in molecular structures
and labeling density, assessment of their respective pharmacokinetics is
possible. Microscopy of prostate tumor cells incubated with each probe
revealed a slower internalization of the small molecule when compared to
the internalization of the antibody. Specificity of the labeled compounds
in vivo was determined in male athymic nu/nu mice implanted with 22Rv1
(PSMA positive) or PC3M-LN4 (PSMA negative) prostate cancer cells (106).
Mice received either IRDye 800CW YC27 (1 nmole) or IRDye 800CW PSMA (50
g) followed by non-invasive fluorescent optical imaging of 800nm signals
on the Pearl Impulse Small Animal Imager. At the study endpoint, organs
and tumors were excised and imaged to assess residual probe localization.
In vivo clearance patterns for these labeled molecules differed with the
YC27 clearing via the kidneys and the antibody clearing through the
liver. These subtle differences between the two imaging agents provide
valuable options to investigators with specific requirements in their
animal research.

