Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits colon cancer stem cell growth and mechanism
mediated through Notch signaling pathway


Background: Despite therapeutic advances, colon cancer remains the second
leading cause of death in the United States. Cancer stem cells are
implicated in resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. Honokiol is a
biphenolic compound that has been used in the traditional Chinese
Medicine for treating various ailments. The current study is designed to
determine whether honokiol affected colon cancer stem cells and to
identify a mechanism. Methods: Colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines HCT116
and SW480 and normal colon epithelial cells were used in the study. Cell
growth was measured by hexoseaminidase and clonogenicity assays.
Apoptosis was determined by measuring caspase 3/7 activities. Colosphere
formation assay and FACS sorting were used for stem cells. For in vivo
effects, HCT116 xenografts were developed in the flanks of nude mice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for CD31, stem cell markers and Notch
signaling proteins. Results: Honokiol treatment resulted in a significant
dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation and colony formation of the
two cell lines, but not the normal cells. Treatment also induced CRC
cells to undergo apoptosis and a G0/G1 arrest. Furthermore, honokiol
reduced the number and size of colospheres, a method used to reflect stem
cells in a population. Colon stem cell marker proteins DCLK1, LGR5, CD44
and SOX-9 were also decreased. Further proof was obtained by flow
cytometry studies, demonstrating that honokiol reduced the number of
DCLK1+ cells. In addition, there were reduced levels of activated
Notch-1, its ligand Jagged-1 and the downstream target gene Hes-1.
Furthermore, expression of the -secretase complex proteins, Presenilin,
Nicastrin, Pen2 and APH-1, required for Notch activation were suppressed.
On the other hand, ectopic expression of the Notch Intracellular domain
partially rescued the cells from honokiol-mediated growth suppression. To
determine the effect of honokiol on tumor growth in vivo, nude mice
harboring HCT116 tumor xenografts in their flanks were administered the
compound intraperitoneally every day for 21 days. Honokiol treatment
significantly inhibited tumor xenograft growth, with notably lower tumor
volume and weight. Microvessel density, based on CD31 staining was also
significantly lower in the tumors following honokiol treatment when
compared to controls. Western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses
demonstrated significant inhibition in the expression of stem marker and
Notch signaling proteins in the honokiol-treated xenograft tissues.
Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that honokiol is a potent
inhibitor of colon cancer that targets stem cells by inhibiting the
-secretase complex proteins.

