Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabozantinib (XL184) inhibits prostate tumor growth and bone
lesion development


Over 80% of advanced prostate cancers (PCa) metastasize to bone resulting
in primarily osteoblastic bone lesions. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a
multi-kinase inhibitor that targets MET and vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2). Administration of CABO to men with PCa bone
metastases has been shown to induce a marked resolution of lesions on
bone scan as well as regression of measurable disease. Modulation of
prostate specific antigen (PSA) appeared to be independent of changes in
other parameters such as target lesions and bone scan. The current study
was designed to determine mechanisms underlying CABO activity in PCa.
Expression of MET and VEGFR2 or modulation of their activity were
verified in PCa cell lines such as PC-3 or the pre-osteoblast cell line
MC3T3-E1. To evaluate if CABO impacts PCa neoplastic phenotypes, PCa cell
lines LNCaP, C4-2B and PC-3 were treated. CABO inhibited cell viability,
migration and invasive ability and promoted apoptosis in LNCaP, C4-2B and
PC-3 cells. To determine if CABO could directly modulate PSA expression,
LNCaP (androgen dependent) and C4-2B (androgen independent) cells were
incubated in the presence or absence of CABO. CABO increased both PSA and
androgen receptor (AR) mRNA and protein expression in the LNCaP cells but
did not modulate PSA expression in C4-2B cells. MC3T3-E1 and ST2 cells
were treated with CABO to evaluate impact on osteoblastogenesis. CABO
decreased cell viability and modulated osteocalcin levels in MC3T3-E1 and
ST2 cells. ACE-1 canine osteoblastic PCa cells were injected into the
tibia and treatment with CABO was started after tumors had developed to
determine the impact on PCa growth in vivo. CABO decreased both ACE-1
tumor burden and tumor-induced osteoblastic activity in bone. In
contrast, when PC-3 cells (osteolytic) were injected subcutaneously or
into the tibiae of mice, which were treated with CABO or vehicle once
tumors were established, CABO slowed the growth of PC-3 tumors in the
soft tissue but not in bone. These findings indicate that CABO inhibits
prostate tumor growth and tumor-induced bone lesion development through
direct targeting of both PCa cells and osteoblasts. These studies provide
a strong rationale to further elucidate the effect of CABO on
osteoblastogenesis and PSA modulation.

