Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti- GP88 (progranulin) antibody to GP88 (progranulin) inhibits
breast tumor growth and restores sensitivity to tamoxifen


GP88 (Progranulin, PCDGF, acrogranin) is an 88 kDa glycoprotein that is
the largest member of the granulin/epithelin family of growth modulators
characterized by 7.5 repeats of a highly conserved 12-cysteine
granulin/epithelin motif. Our laboratory demonstrated the role of GP88 as
an autocrine growth and survival factor in breast cancer: 1) GP88
expression increases with tumorigenesis; 2) inhibition of GP88 expression
by antisense transfection in MDA-MB-468 cells inhibited tumor formation
in nude mice by 90%; 3) in ER+ breast cancer cells, GP88 stimulates
proliferation and its overexpression confers estrogen independence; 4)
GP88 is a strong survival factor that confers resistance to anti-estrogen
and aromatase inhibitors in ER+ breast cancer; 5) GP88 is expressed in
80% invasive ductal carcinoma and 60% of ductal carcinoma whereas it is
negative in benign lesions and normal mammary epithelial cells; 6)
pathological studies with 530 cases of ER+ invasive ductal carcinoma
showed that GP88 tumor expression is a prognostic indicator of recurrence
in early stage breast cancer patients; 7) GP88 is secreted and can be
detected in the serum of breast cancer patients at an increased level
when compared to healthy subjects. Based on these results GP88 represents
an ideal therapeutic and diagnostic target in breast cancer. We developed
a neutralizing anti-GP88 antibody AG1. AG1 inhibits GP88 biological
effect in a dose-dependent fashion. In the present study, we investigated
the effect of AG1 on the tumor development of tamoxifen sensitive (MCF-7)
and resistant (TamR) estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells lines
injected in nude mice. We show that AG1 alone (5mg/kg) inhibited tumor
growth of MCF-7 cells injected into nude mice in a similar efficacy as
tamoxifen. Interestingly, AG1 in combination with tamoxifen inhibited by
more than 50% tumor formation of TamR cells, whereas tamoxifen only had
no effect. These data suggest that inhibiting GP88 provide a novel and
alternate pathway for restoration of tamoxifen sensitivity in ER+ breast
cancer. This works is supported by grant 2R44CA124179 from the National
Cancer Institute.

