Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Odontogenic ameloblast-associated protein (ODAM) alters the growth
and migration of human melanoma cells


Initial studies of the Odontogenic Ameloblast-Associated Protein (ODAM)
revealed that it is highly expressed in mature ameloblasts and is present
in the rodent enamel organ and junctional epithelium. Further analysis
showed that ODAM is expressed in several epithelial malignancies
including gastric, colon, breast, lung and melanoma. A correlation was
observed between ODAM expression/localization and breast cancer
stage/clinical patient outcome, indicating that ODAM may serve as a novel
prognostic biomarker in this type of cancer. When transfected with rODAM
and injected into mice intravenously, the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line showed marked inhibition of neoplastic and metastatic properties.
This suggests that ODAM has a potentially significant regulatory role in
tumorigenesis and metastasis of breast cancer with important clinical
implications. To investigate the role of ODAM in melanoma, archived
slides prepared from primary melanoma tissue specimens were obtained and
stained with anti-ODAM antibodies and results were compared with
retrospective clinical data. In patients that were found to have positive
sentinel lymph nodes, ODAM localized to the nucleus in 76% of the cases.
This suggests that nuclear-localization of ODAM in the primary tumor is a
negative prognostic factor, which could assist in determining management
of this devastating cancer. Melanoma is frequently diagnosed at late
stages, often metastatic to regional lymph nodes or distant sites. The
inhibition of neoplastic and metastatic properties shown in
ODAM-expressing breast malignancies encouraged further investigation into
the effect of ODAM expression in the tumorigenesis of melanoma. The human
metastatic melanoma cell line C8161 does not express ODAM and was stably
transfected with rODAM. In two consecutive growth assays, the
ODAM-expressing C8161-clones showed significant growth inhibition
compared to parent C8161 cells. In wound-healing assays of cell
migration, exogenous rODAM was added at increasingly higher
concentrations to wells of C8161 cells at 100% confluency immediately
before scratch-wounding the monolayer. After twenty-four hours, C8161
parent cells had near-complete coverage of the scratch defect. In the
wells with added exogenous rODAM, cells showed a decreased ability to
migrate and cover the scratch, with more inhibition of migration as the
concentration of rODAM increased from 3 to 12 g/mL. These findings
demonstrate that ODAM alters the behavior of the C8161 human melanoma
cell line with respect to growth and cell migration. Further studies to
assess tumorigenesis in vivo are under way, concerning the potential
effect that ODAM may have on invasion, gene expression and metastatic
characteristics of this cell line.

