Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of Xanthohumol in carcinoid cancer growth
in vitro and in vivo


Background: Besides surgery, there is no potential curative treatment for
carcinoid tumors. Because these cancers are metastatic in nature and
produce excessive amounts of various bioactive hormones, patients
diagnosed with this malignancy will have poor quality of life due to
carcinoid syndrome. Therefore, new anticarcinogenic agents are required
to improve the effectiveness of treatment. Xanthohumol (XN)
(Tetrahydroxy-3-prenylchalcone) is a prenylated chalconoid found in hops
and beer that has been found to have potential anticancer and bioactive
properties. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the
effectiveness of xanthohumol (XN) on carcinoid cancer growth in vitro and
in vivo. Methods: To examine the anticancer activity of XN, we treated
human gastrointestinal carcinoid BON and bronchopulmonary carcinoid H727
cells with up to 15 mol/L of XN or carrier (DMSO), and analyzed the
effect on cell growth by colony formation assay. The mechanism of growth
inhibition was examined by flow cytometry and western analysis for the
levels of pro-apoptotic and cell cycle regulatory proteins. To examine
the anticancer activity of XN in vivo, subcutaneous BON carcinoid tumors
developed in murine xenografts were subjected to intraperitoneal
injections of XN (3 mg/kg bwt) or an appropriate volume of DMSO carrier
every other day. Results: Treatment with xanthohumol significantly
reduced the ability of carcinoid cells to form colonies in a
dose-dependent manner. Flow cytometry and western analysis confirmed the
observed decrease in cell viability, and showed the decrease was mediated
through apoptosis. The carcinoid tumors in the mouse xenograft experiment
showed a significant reduction in growth. Conclusions: XN treatment
reduced cell viability, colony forming ability and increased cell death
through apoptosis. In addition, administration of XN suppressed cancer
cell growth in an in vivo xenograft mouse model. Our findings demonstrate
for the first time the anti-proliferative effects of xanthohumol in
carcinoid cell lines in vivo. Xanthohumol is already being used as a
dietary supplement to encourage overall health and has shown few side
effects. This fact combined with the potential anticarcinogenic activity
found here warrants clinical investigation on patients with carcinoid
disease.

