Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A randomized, open-label, phase 1 study to evaluate the effect of
food on tivantinib (ARQ 197) pharmacokinetics


Background: Tivantinib (ARQ 197) is a selective inhibitor of c-MET that
is administered orally. Therefore, the bioavailability of tivantinib may
be affected by changes in gastric pH or emptying and gastrointestinal
motility that occur in the presence of food. This study evaluated the
effect of food on tivantinib pharmacokinetics (PK) to provide guidance
regarding intake of meals in conjunction with tivantinib dosing in future
clinical studies, and estimated the intra-subject variability of
tivantinib when administered in fasting and fed conditions. Methods:
Young healthy adults 18-45 years of age were eligible for the study.
Subjects were randomized to 1 of 2 sequences. In sequence 1, subjects
received a single dose of tivantinib (360 mg) in fasting conditions in
Period 1 and in fed conditions in Periods 2 and 3. In sequence 2,
subjects received a single dose of tivantinib (360 mg) in fed conditions
in Period 1 and in fasting conditions in Periods 2 and 3. Each period was
separated by 4 days, during which serial blood samples were collected for
tivantinib analysis. PK parameters, including area under the curve (AUC),
maximum concentration (Cmax), time to peak concentration (tmax), and
terminal half-life (t1/2), were calculated and compared. Results: A total
of 20 subjects (19 male and 1 female) were randomized. Under fed
conditions, total exposure of tivantinib was significantly higher
(approximately 2.7-times for AUC and 3.6-times for Cmax) compared with
fasting conditions (ratios of geometric least-square means and 90%
confidence intervals were outside the 80%-125% bioequivalence interval).
Time to maximum concentration (tmax) was prolonged when tivantinib was
administered in fed conditions versus fasting conditions (4.0 vs 2.5
hours). Although t1/2 was longer in fasting versus fed conditions (19.0
vs 4.0 hours), nonparametric statistical analysis demonstrated that this
difference was not statistically significant. Intra-subject variability
was roughly 2-fold lower in fed conditions compared with fasting
conditions. Five adverse events were reported in 2 subjects (10%), all of
which were considered unrelated to study treatment. One subject withdrew
consent and discontinued from the study for reasons unrelated to
treatment. Conclusions: Administration of tivantinib in fed conditions
results in relatively higher exposure with lower variability compared
with fasting conditions. This may be explained by increased tivantinib
solubility and more consistent absorption in the fed state. Based on this
observation, tivantinib is currently recommended to be administered with
meals in ongoing clinical studies, including the ongoing phase 3 study
(MARQUEE) in patients with nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer.

