Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olive polyphenol, hydroxytyrosol, exerts anti-tumor effects in
prostate cancer cells by targeting Akt, STAT3 and AR signaling


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed non-cutaneous
malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer related death in men in
the United States. Considering the central role of androgen-receptor (AR)
signaling in PCa, surgical or medical castration [referred as
androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT)] is the first line of treatment for
the advanced disease. Most patients treated with ADT initially exhibit a
dramatic regression of the androgen-dependent (AD) PCa cells; however,
the tumors eventually progress to an androgen-independent (AI) stage. The
resulting hormone-refractory tumors are highly aggressive and resistant
to conventional therapies. Thus, there is an urgent need for the
development of novel preventive and/or curative approaches against this
advanced stage of the disease. Consumption of olive oil, which is a major
component of the Mediterranean diet, has been associated with lower
incidence of prostate and other malignancies. Olive oil is rich in
phenolic compounds that are believed to exert beneficial effects against
many pathological processes. Hydroxytyrosol (HT), an important
polyphenolic constituent of virgin olive oil, has been shown to exhibit
several health promoting effects such as anti-microbial, anti-atherogenic
and anti-inflammatory activities. Some recent studies also suggest
anti-tumor properties of HT as a consequence of its ability to induce
apoptosis and inhibit the cell proliferation. In the present study, we
have performed functional and biochemical assays to investigate the
growth suppressive activity of HT against PCa using androgen-dependent
(LNCaP) and androgen-independent (C4-2) human PCa cell lines along with
normal/benign (RWPE1 and RWPE2) prostate epithelial cell lines. We
observed dose- and time- dependent growth inhibitory effects of HT on
both the PCa cell lines, whereas no significant effect was observed on
the treated normal/benign human prostate epithelial cells. Growth
inhibition in LNCaP and C4-2 cells accompanied apoptotic induction as
determined by Annexin-V staining, PARP cleavage and enhanced Bax/Bcl-2
ratio. Moreover, our data demonstrated a significant decrease in the
ability of HT-treated PCa cells to migrate and invade through the
extra-cellular matrix. Immunoblot analyses revealed decreased
phosphorylation of Akt and STAT3, two signaling proteins of pathological
significance in PCa, in HT-treated PCa cells indicating their reduced
activation. Importantly, we also observed a downregulated expression of
AR and its downstream target gene, KLK3/PSA, in PCa cells treated with
HT. These preliminary findings suggest that HT could serve as a novel
nutraceutical for prevention and therapy of PCa.

