Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) suppresses melanoma tumor
growth by inhibiting AKT/XIAP pathway


The incidence of melanoma is constantly on the rise indicating that
current available therapies are not very effective. Moreover, melanoma is
highly metastatic and resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs. Our previous
studies have demonstrated that caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE)
suppress the growth of melanoma cells and induce ROS generation. However,
the exact mechanism of the growth suppressive effects of CAPE was not
clear. Here we determined the potential mechanism of CAPE against
melanoma in vitro and in vivo. In a concentration and time-dependent
study, CAPE treatment suppressed the activating phosphorylation of PI3K
at Tyr-458, PDK1 at Ser-241, mTOR at Ser-2448 and AKT at Ser-473 in B16F0
and SK-MEL-28 melanoma cells. Furthermore, the expression of XIAP,
survivin and BCl2 were down-regulated by CAPE treatment in both the cell
lines. Significant apoptosis was observed in both the cell lines by CAPE
treatment as indicated by cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP. AKT kinase
activity was inhibited by CAPE in a concentration-dependent manner. Since
Akt regulates XIAP, their interaction was examined by immunoprecipitation
studies. Our results show that CAPE treatment decreased the interaction
of AKT with XIAP. To establish the involvement of Akt in the
apoptosis-inducing effects of CAPE, cells were transfected with Akt. Our
results reveal that AKT over-expression attenuated the decrease in XIAP
and significantly blocked CAPE-mediated apoptosis. Similarly,
over-expression of XIAP further decreased CAPE-induced apoptosis. To
confirm the involvement of ROS in the inhibition of AKT/XIAP pathway,
cells were treated with antioxidant NAC prior to CAPE treatment. Our
results indicate that NAC blocked CAPE mediated AKT/XIAP inhibition and
protected the cells from apoptosis. In addition, oral administration of
10mg/kg/day CAPE substantially suppressed the growth of B16F0 tumor
xenografts in C57BL/6 mice. Tumors from CAPE treated mice showed reduced
phosphorylation of PI3K, AKT, mTOR and protein level of XIAP and enhanced
the cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP. Taken together, our results suggest
that CAPE suppresses AKT/XIAP pathway leading to apoptosis in melanoma
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. [Supported in part by R01 grant
CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer Institute].

