Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT-1 activation enhances phospholipid scramblase 1-mediated
apoptosis in aromatase inhibitor resistant breast cancer cells


The signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT-1) protein
is essential for signaling by interferons (IFNs), which, in addition to
their role in innate immunity, serve as potent inhibitors of growth and
promoters of apoptosis. Likewise, the phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR-1)
protein is also induced by interferon and is responsible for the
translocation of phospholipids between the lipid bilayer of a cell
membrane which occurs during apoptosis. While there is increasing
evidence to suggest that STAT-1 and PLSCR-1 play a direct role in
apoptosis, the molecular mechanism by which these proteins regulate
apoptotic cell death remains unclear. Previously, our laboratory has
reported the development of an estrogen receptor alpha (ER)-positive
breast cancer cell line, MCF-7:5C, which is resistant to long term
estrogen deprivation (i.e resistant to aromatase inhibitors) but
undergoes apoptosis in the presence of physiologic concentrations of
17-estradiol (E2). Global gene expression profile of MCF-7:5C cells has
previously revealed that estradiol-induced apoptosis is associated with
significant upregulation of several proinflammatory genes including;
IFNs, STAT1, and PLSCR-1. In the present study, we investigated the role
of STAT-1 and PLSCR-1 in estradiol-induced apoptosis in MCF-7:5C breast
cancer cells. We found that PLSCR-1 and STAT-1 proteins were
constitutively overexpressed by 20- and 10-fold, respectively, in
MCF-7:5C cells compared to hormone-responsive MCF-7 and T47D breast
cancer cells and siRNA suppression of PLSCR-1 or STAT-1 expression in
MCF-7:5C cells completely blocked their ability to undergo apoptosis in
the presence of estradiol and/or interferon-alpha (IFN) but not other
apoptosis-inducing agents such as taxol and etoposide. Immunofluoresence
analysis of MCF-7:5C cells indicated that PLSCR-1 and STAT-1 were
overexpressed and localized primarily in the cytoplasm of these cells;
however, in the presence of IFN and E2, a significant portion of PLSCR-1
and STAT-1 translocated to the nucleus and was associated with apoptosis.
We also found that increased STAT-1 and PLSCR1 activation inhibited the
expression of prosurvival (BCL2, BCL-xL) and induced the expression of
proapoptotic members (BAK, mitochondrial BAX) of the BCL2 family and was
associated with increased mitochondrial membrane permeability and
activation of CASP7, CASP8, and CASP9, as well as suppression of pAKT and
NF-B. Overall, our data demonstrate that STAT-1 and PLSCR-1 play a
critical role in sensitizing aromatase inhibitor resistant breast cancer
cells to estradiol-induced apoptosis and that IFN combined with E2 might
be an effective treatment option for patients with endocrine resistant
disease. This work was supported by the NIH Career Development Grant
K01CA120051 01A2 and the Hollenbach Foundation Grant (JSLW).

