Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Merlin is a negative regulator of human melanoma


Merlin is a cytoskeletal linker protein encoded by the neurofibromatosis
type 2 (NF2) gene. Like the other Band 4.1 protein family members, it
serves to connect cell surface proteins to the actin cytoskeleton.
Defects in the protein caused by mutations of the NF2 gene give rise to
NF2 disease, which is generally characterized by the formation of
bilateral vestibular schwannomas and, to a lesser extent, meningiomas and
ependymomas. In addition to these tumor types, merlin has been shown to
be mutated and/or merlin protein expression lost in other cancers
including mesothelioma, thyroid cancers, and melanomas, albeit to a
lesser extent. In the current study, we set out to elucidate the role of
merlin in the progression of human melanoma. We first show that merlin
knockdown enhances melanoma cell migration and invasion in vitro.
Furthermore, we show that decreased merlin expression leads to increased
subcutaneous melanoma growth in immuno-compromised mice. Tumors derived
from merlin knockdown cells display border regions that are generally
less well defined, with cases in which tumor cells are visible in the
surrounding dermis and adipose tissue, which is consistent with the more
invasive phenotype observed in vitro upon merlin knockdown. To compliment
these knockdown experiments we overexpressed merlin in a metastatic
melanoma cell line. Upon increased merlin expression, the melanoma cells
exhibit decreased in vitro migration, invasion, and proliferation. These
cells also display a diminished ability to form anchorage independent
colonies in soft agar. Additionally, increased merlin expression inhibits
in vivo subcutaneous growth of the melanoma cells in our xenograft
experiments. Lastly, we surveyed several signaling pathways to identify a
mechanism that exerts the negative regulatory effect of merlin on
melanoma growth. We found that merlin protein levels in human melanoma
cells are correlated with the extent of induced activation of the known
tumor suppressors in the Hippo signaling pathway, MST1/2 Ser/Thr kinases,
which have been shown to function downstream of merlin in other cell
types. Taken together, these results provide evidence for the first time
that merlin is a negative regulator of human melanoma progression and
that it may exert its inhibitory effects through the activation of the
MST1/2 kinases.

