Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of an acid-sensitive albumin-binding prodrug
of doxorubicin (INNO-206) and an albumin-binding prodrug of methotrexate
(AW054) that is cleaved by cathepsin B and plasmin induces complete
remissions against pancreatic cancer in vivo (MiaPaca-2)


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer death across
the globe. Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis. For locally advanced
and for metastatic disease, which collectively represent over 80 % of
individuals, median survival is approximately 10 and 6 months,
respectively. Gemcitabine and 5-fluorouracil that have been approved for
this indication have a poor response rate with a benefit in overall
survival for a small population of treated patients of up to 2 months on
average. Thus there is an unmet medical need for treating this tumor
indication more effectively. INNO-206, the (6-maleimidocaproyl)hydrazone
of doxorubicin (DOXO-EMCH) is an albumin-binding prodrug of doxorubicin
with acid-sensitive properties that has shown objective responses in a
phase I study, and phase II studies are scheduled in sarcoma for
2011/2012 (see www.cytrx.com). For treating essentially chemoresistant
pancreatic cancer, we preclinically investigated a combination of two
albumin-binding prodrugs, i.e. the albumin-binding prodrug INNO-206 and
an albumin-binding prodrug of methotrexate, AW054, that is cleaved by two
proteases that are over-expressed in solid tumors, cathepsin B and
plasmin. In the pancreatic carcinoma xenograft model MiaPaca-2 both
INNO-206 and AW054 were administered simultaneously (i.v.) in a three
weekly schedule at half the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of the
respective prodrug, i.e. 3 x 12 mg/kg for INNO-206 (doxorubicin
equivalents) and 3 x 10 mg/kg (methotrexate equivalents). Compared to
doxorubicin (dosed at the MTD of 3 x 6 mg/kg) or methotrexate (dosed at
the MTD of 3 x 125 mg/kg) or the combination of the two free drugs (3 x 3
mg/kg for doxorubicin and 3 x 62.5 mg/kg for doxorubicin) which only
showed moderate antitumor effects over control animals treated with
saline, the combination of the two albumin-binding prodrugs produced
complete remissions and an acceptable body weight loss of 13 %.
Immunohistochemical staining with CD31 that makes up a large portion of
endothelial cell intercellular junctions was moderate to good in control
tumors indicating a sufficient vascularity for the albumin-bound forms of
the prodrugs to accumulate in the tumor via the EPR effect. This
encouraging in vivo result is an impetus for investigating further
combinations of albumin-binding prodrugs with other anticancer agents.

