Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular heat shock protein 90 (eHsp90) initiates EMT events
and enhances cell motility in prostate cancer


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in men,
responsible for the second highest lethality. Although early cancer
detection and treatment is often curative, subsequent metastatic spread
of tumor cells renders the disease incurable. Activation of the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) genetic program is considered
a key event contributing to metastatic potential and subsequent
lethality. Although targeting EMT may be a promising approach for
improving treatment outcome, the main, potentially druggable, targets
driving this pathway in PCa remain poorly defined. Multiple reports
indicate that extracellular Hsp90 (eHsp90) promotes cell motility,
invasion, and metastasis in a number of cancer cell types. Intriguingly,
eHsp90 has been preferentially detected in the serum or plasma from
aggressive cancers. Its presence in the serum of metastatic PCa patients
implicates a potential causative role in PCa. Therefore, our objective
was to investigate whether eHsp90 may influence EMT events, thereby
influencing the metastatic potential of PCa. We now report that paired
sets of differentially aggressive PCa tumor cell lines exhibited higher
expression of eHsp90. Functionally, exposure of PCa cells to eHsp90
elicted a significant increase in cell motility. Inversely, blockade of
eHsp90 attenuated the activation of several pro-motility effectors,
concomitant with the significant suppression of cell migration. These
events were associated with a profound alteration of cellular morphology
towards a mesenchymal phenotype. Changes in cell phenotype were coupled
with a loss and redistribution of the EMT suppressive gatekeeper protein
E-cadherin. eHsp90 was also found to impact on the localization of other
junctional proteins known to maintain a cuboidal epithelial phenotype.
Finally, eHsp90 was found to transcriptionally upregulate several of the
established transcriptional factors known to initiate EMT events.
Confirmation of the EMT inducing ability of eHsp90 was determined by
focused quantitative real time EMT PCR arrays. Our results therefore
highlight a novel role for eHsp90 as a central regulator of EMT events in
PCa. Our findings further support the premise that therapeutic targeting
of eHsp90 may have the potential to suppress EMT activation and diminish
the dissemination and metastatic propensity of PCa tumor cells.

