Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary acetate supplementation as a means of inducing glioma stem
cell growth arrest


Glioma, the most common primary brain tumor of the adult central nervous
system, is associated with a poor prognosis due, in part, to the presence
of chemoradiotherapy-resistant glioma stem-like cells responsible for
inevitable post-surgical recurrence. N-acetyl-L-aspartate (NAA), one of
the most concentrated metabolic sources of acetate in the brain, and
aspartoacylase (ASPA), the enzyme responsible for NAA degradation, are
significantly reduced in glioma tumors. NAA-derived acetate is converted
to acetyl coenzyme A via acetyl-CoA synthetase (AceCS) for use in
lipogenesis, protein/histone acetylation, and the TCA cycle. We propose
that glyceryltriacetate (GTA), a FDA approved food additive with
generally regarded as safe status, may be an effective means of reducing
glioma growth via restoration of acetate levels. The effect of GTA on the
growth of both established (Hs683, HOG) and stem-like (grade II OG33,
grade III OG35) oligodendroglioma cell lines was assessed. In vitro, GTA
induced growth arrest in all cells examined (i.e., increased proportion
of cells in G0/G1 and reduced S phase cells by flow cytometry of
propidium iodide labeled cells 24 hours after treatment and unbiased
trypan blue exclusion based cytometry up to 5 days post-treatment).
Growth arrest was not associated with apoptosis (lack of cleaved poly
ADP-ribose polymerase immunolabeling), but differentiation (increased
CNPase expression). ASPA expression was greater in stem-like cells when
grown in stem cell media than differentiation media and was decreased in
GTA-treated OG35 cells. Interestingly, GTA did not decrease ASPA
expression in OG33 cells, but induced a novel 26 kDa ASPA isoform. ASPA
and AceCS1 were co-localized within the nucleus. Nuclear, but not
cytosolic, ASPA expression was decreased upon GTA addition in stem cell
media, but not differentiation media. Finally, the effect of GTA on
orthotopically grafted luciferase expressing OG33 and OG35 cells was
assessed. Bioluminescence and tumor volume were reduced in GTA treated
mice. These data suggest that the nuclear ASPA/AceCS1 co-localization
provides acetate for histone acetylation to maintain cells in a
progenitor/stem-like state and that decreased ASPA promotes
gliomagenesis. Inasmuch as infants with Canavan Disease, a leukodystrophy
due to ASPA mutation, treated with high dose GTA showed no significant
side effects, GTA may prove an effective therapy to prevent recurrence by
inducing growth arrest/differentiation of glioma stem-like cells.

