Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitotic kinase inhibitors synergize with PI3K and Akt inhibitors
in a novel model of anaplastic thyroid carcinomas


Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most aggressive form of thyroid
cancer, and often derives from pre-existing well-differentiated tumors.
Despite a relatively low prevalence, it accounts for a disproportionate
number of thyroid cancer-related deaths, due to its resistance to any
therapeutic approach. We have generated a mouse model in which the
simultaneous selective activation of the PI3K pathway and inactivation of
p53 in the thyroid epithelial cells leads to the development of ATCs.
These tumors display all the features of their human counterpart,
including pleomorphism, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, aneuploidy,
local invasion and distant metastases. Expression profiling of the murine
ATCs reveals a significant overlap with genes found deregulated in human
ATC, including genes involved in mitosis control, such as Aurora kinase A
(AURKA), its co-activator TPX2, and Polo like kinase-1 (PLK1). These
proteins are crucial driving forces for normal mitotic spindle formation,
centrosome maturation and separation, and their overexpression has been
demonstrated in a wide range of tumors. MLN8237 (AURKA inhibitor), TAK960
and GSK461364 (PLK1 inhibitors) are a promising new generation of
anti-mitotic agents. We show that these molecules inhibit cell
proliferation and induce cell death in mouse ATC-derived cell lines and
in the human ATC cell lines CAL62 and C643. A dose-dependent decrease in
the degree of chromosome alignment and spindle bipolarity during mitosis
is observed after the treatments, together with a change in mitotic index
indicated by the decrease of the mitotic marker pHisH3. FACS analysis
reveals a G2/M phase arrest followed by apoptosis. Furthermore, small
molecule inhibitors of PI3K or AKT potently synergize with these
anti-mitotic compounds. Taken together these data suggest that AURKA and
PLK1 inhibitors are promising therapeutic agents against undifferentiated
thyroid carcinoma cells, and that concurrent inhibition of key driver
pathways is a viable option to increase efficacy in this otherwise
invariably lethal cancer.

