Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KSHV-initiated Notch activation leads to membrane-type-1 matrix
metalloproteinase-dependent lymphatic endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition


Kaposi sarcoma (KS), an angioproliferative disease associated with Kaposi
sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) infection, harbors a diversity of cell types
ranging from endothelial to mesenchymal cells of unclear origin. Using a
novel three-dimensional (3D) cell model, we have demonstrated that KSHV
induces transcriptional reprogramming of primary lymphatic endothelial
cells (LEC) to mesenchymal cells via endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EndMT). As EndMT induction has been described in response to
activation of the TGF-beta or Notch pathways, inhibitor studies were used
to decipher their roles in our 3D system. Inhibition of the Notch pathway
dramatically attenuated the EndMT in KSHV infected LECs (K-LECs) in 3D
whereas inhibition or activation of the TGF- pathway did not have any
effect. Two viral gene products, vFLIP and vGPCR, were found to trigger
Notch signaling and lead to the KSHV-induced EndMT. As Notch activation
has been shown to inhibit angiogenic and lymphangiogenic sprouting, we
assessed the effect of VEGFA or -C stimulation on the 3D K-LECs.
Interestingly, VEGFA/C stimulation induced a dramatic outgrowth of
(lymph)angiogenic sprouts and inhibited the KSHV-induced EndMT in the 3D
K-LECs. This suggests that the KSHV-induced Notch signaling and
mesenchymal reprogramming can override the lymphangiogenic properties of
LECs in the absence of VEGF-A/C stimulation. These results further
corroborate the central role of Notch signaling as a critical determinant
for the lymphangiogenic vs. mesenchymal fate of LECs. The 3D K-LEC
transcriptome showed significant up-regulation of invasion related genes
over the uninfected control. Intriguingly, comparison of the GEM profiles
of the 3D K-LECs and KS biopsies, genes with similar co-regulation were
found and included those involved both in EMT/EndMT and invasive
processes. Using a panel of specific inhibitors we found a membrane
associated matrix metalloproteinase MT1-MMP to be the major MMP involved
in this process. Our data further identifies Notch as a previously
unrecognized upstream regulator of MT1-MMP, and demonstrates that MT1-MMP
as such is sufficient to induce EndMT in 3D cultured LECs. Mesenchymal
markers and MT1-MMP were found co-distributed in the same cells with LANA
in primary KS tumors suggesting that virus-induced EndMT may contribute
to development of KS by giving rise to invasive cells, and providing the
virus a permissive microenvironment for efficient spread of the viral
genomes.

