Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of a DNA damage response network in
glioblastoma associated with long-term patient survival


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain cancer
in humans with a median survival of less than 14 months. However, a small
minority of GBM patients have a median survival of over three years. In
an effort to identify genetic and epigenetic events that might explain
this relative long-term survival, an integrative genomic approach was
utilized. We show that in contrast to most GBM patients, relative
long-term survivors have tumors that lack a biological network that
responds to DNA damage. This network is comprised of pro-inflammatory
genes and genes normally regulated through interferon signaling. By
overlaying the network with phenotype information, key genes and
gene-gene interactions that strongly associate with patient survival were
identified to facilitate the discovery of important genes and genetic
dependencies in the network. One such gene is Interferon-Stimulated Gene
15 (ISG15), which is part of the interferon subnetwork and encodes for an
ubiquitin-like protein. Targeted disruption of ISG15 in various GBM cell
lines unmasked a DNA damage response as characterized by delayed S-phase
entry and G2/M accumulation, increased H2AX, and senescence. Various
genes that displayed a predicted interaction with ISG15 were tested for
evidence for a biological interaction. Functional validation confirmed
that these predicted interactions with ISG15 were mirrored by genetic and
regulatory interactions that resulted in rescue of the effects of ISG15
knockdown. We also investigated genes that control the pro-inflammatory
subnetwork. Targeted disruption of one such gene, MYD88, resulted in
decreased invasion and increased sensitivity to DNA damage. In summary,
we have identified a biological network that responds to and regulates
DNA damage. The absence of network genes results in susceptibility to DNA
damage, senescence, and decreased invasion. GBM patients with tumors
lacking the network are rare long-term survivors of an otherwise
uniformly and rapidly fatal tumor.

