Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: API 31510 induced shift in mitochondrial metabolism in cancer
cells is characterized by increased mitochondrial efficiency and
induction of apoptosis


API 31510 is an ubidecarenone-based small molecule currently in late
stage clinical development for skin cancers and early stage for solid
tumors. Mechanism of action studies demonstrate that there is induced
metabolic shift that occurs via modulation of the pentose phosphate
shunt. The current study focused on delineating further insight into the
relationship of mitochondrial metabolism and API 31510 induced apoptosis
on different cancer cell lines. Use of Berg Interrogative Biology
Platform of high thorough-put omic data demonstrated presence of
coordinated alterations on gene expression and substrate metabolism in
the cells in response to treatment with API 31510. Detection of apoptotic
responses in different cancer cell lines revealed a significant elevation
of different markers such as Bcl2, BcL-xL, BIRC3, and GADD45. Hence, the
treatment induced significant increases in the intrinsic apoptosis
networks in pancreatic (PaCa-2), breast (SKBr3), and liver (Hep3B) cancer
cell lines. Furthermore, treatment with API 31510 is associated with
increase in the ATP/oxygen consumption rate (OCR) ratios, suggesting
increased mitochondrial efficiency in API 31510 treated cancer cells.
Conversely, in normal fibroblasts, aortic smooth muscle, cardiomyocytes,
and liver cells, the cells exhibited a more homeostatic phenotype and
were not adversely affected by administration of API 31510. This
observation suggests that the oncogenic phenotype secondary to
mitochondrial dysfunction alters the metabolic machinery in a manner that
confers an evasion of intrinsic apoptotic potential in cancer. Increased
ATP/OCR is accompanied by altered intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production in cancer cell lines. Taken together, the data suggest
that the data demonstrate that treatment with API 31510 is associated
with induction of significantly increased cell death triggered by
increased mitochondrial efficiency, altered ROS and apoptosis activation
in cancer cells.

