Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: QPCR and sequence analysis of DNA template from a microfluidic CTC
isolation platform


Sequence analysis and quantitative allele specific PCR (QPCR) methods
permit genetic profiling of cancer for targeted therapeutic selection;
such personalized treatments have been associated with improved outcomes
in cancer. Circulating tumor cells (CTC) offer a minimally-invasive
opportunity for serial patient sampling, and potentially a means of
tracking the molecular evolution that underlies the behavior and response
phenotype of the disease including potential therapeutic response
markers. Acquiring these types of patient profiles requires a platform
and workflow providing reliable detection and recovery of small numbers
of mutation-bearing CTC from a blood sample. Availability of such an
enabling platform is a necessary prerequisite to the clinical correlation
studies needed to demonstrate the utility of mutation-bearing CTC to
patient care. We have successfully purified CTCs and converted them into
DNA template of sufficient purity and quality to support multiple
non-overlapping advanced molecular characterizations. Beginning with
whole human blood spiked with defined numbers of cultured cancer cells as
surrogates for CTCs, cells were successfully fluid-phase labeled using an
anti-EpCAM antibody ferrofluid. Using a proprietary microfluidic sheath
flow technology, EpCAM positive, cytokeratin staining cells were selected
from 2 to 4 ml of labeled blood. This method produced sufficient DNA
template for multiple analyses per patient sample. QPCR analysis of these
templates demonstrated reproducible detection of fewer than 1% target
cells in a background of non-target cells, allowing detection of the KRAS
G12S mutation from as few as 5 recaptured cancer cells. The same DNA
templates were then used for hybrid capture and next-generation
sequencing of a panel of more than 200 cancer-related genes. This
sequencing platform was able to detect multiple somatic mutations in
genomic DNA templates produced from samples containing as few as 10
cancer cells per milliliter of blood. Together these data provide initial
proof-of-concept for a system capable of detecting and characterizing
mutations across any specified set of genes within purified CTC
populations.

