Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue specific expression of the PI 3-kinase mutation
Pik3caH1047R induces hyperplasia and tumorigenesis in a mouse model


Mutations in the p110 subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
(encoded by the gene PIK3CA) are frequent in human cancers. To better
understand the role of mutant PIK3CA in the initiation or progression of
tumorigenesis in vivo, we generated a conditional (Cre
recombinase-inducible) knock-in mouse model of the common activating
mutation, Pik3caH1047R, expressed from the endogenous locus. We have then
targeted the mutation to specific tissues by crossing our mouse to mice
expressing Cre under the control of tissue-specific promoters. The mouse
mammary gland was targeted using a transgenic mouse expressing Cre under
the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter (MMTV-Cre). To
target the gastrointestinal tract, we used the A33CrePR2 mouse,
expressing Ru486-inducible version of Cre under the control of the gpa33
promoter. Tumors were formed in both these models but only following a
long latency (>15 months) suggesting that a second-hit may be necessary
for tumor development. Similarly, activation of this mutation in the
mouse ovary, by injection of an adenovirus expressing Cre into the
ovarian bursa, revealed that Pik3caH1047R alone is a weak activator of
AKT capable of inducing premalignant hyperplasia in ovarian surface
epithelium. Interestingly, we found that combining Pik3caH1047R mutation
with deletion of Pten in the mouse ovary resulted in robust epithelial
AKT signaling and progression to ovarian serous adenocarcinomas and
granulosa cell tumors within 6 months. Therapeutic inhibition of
PI3K/mTOR in these mice delayed tumor growth and prolonged survival. This
novel mouse is proving to be a fascinating model with which to explore
the biological consequences and clinical significance of Pik3caH1047R
mutation in diverse tissue types and a valuable tool for the preclinical
evaluation of PI3K pathway inhibitors.

