Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Onartuzumab (MetMAb) restores sensitivity to erlotinib in EGFR
mutant NSCLC cells expressing HGF


Background: Onartuzumab (MetMAb) is a humanized monovalent monoclonal
antibody that blocks binding of HGF to Met. The combination of
onartuzumab + erlotinib is currently being evaluated in a Phase III
clinical trial for 2nd/3rd line NSCLC (1). EGFR-activating mutations,
including deletions of exon 19 and L858R point mutations, are associated
with better response to erlotinib. However, EGFR mutant NSCLC tumors with
high HGF expression are less responsive to EGFR small molecule inhibitors
(2) (3). Since onartuzumab blocks HGF-induced Met activation, the
addition of onartuzumab to erlotinib may be more beneficial than
erlotinib alone in such patients. To test this hypothesis preclinically,
we engineered the human NSCLC cell line PC9 (exon 19 deletion of EGFR and
Met positive) to express hHGF endogenously, and evaluated combination
effects of onartuzumab + erlotinib in vitro and in vivo. Methods: PC-9
cells were transfected with hHGF expression plasmids, and a stable clone
was selected. For in vitro analyses, parental PC-9 cells and PC-9/hHGF
cells were treated with various concentrations of erlotinib combined with
30g/mL of onartuzumab, and cytotoxicity was examined. Additionally, the
phosphorylation status of Met, EGFR, ERK and AKT was examined by western
blot analysis of whole cell lysates. For in vivo analyses, PC-9/hHGF
cells were inoculated subcutaneously into nude mice. After tumors reached
approximately 200 mm3 in volume, onartuzumab (30 mg/kg, IP, Q3W) was
administered alone or in combination with erlotinib (50 mg/kg, PO, daily)
and tumor volume was measured over time. Results: One stable clone with
high expression of hHGF was selected by hHGF ELISA and western blotting.
This PC-9/hHGF clone was less sensitive to erlotinib compared to the
parental PC-9 in vitro. Adding onartuzumab to erlotinib suppressed
proliferation of these PC9/hHGF cells. pERK and pAKT levels were
significantly reduced when PC-9/hHGF cells were treated with onartuzumab
+ erlotinib. In PC-9/hHGF xenograft tumors, onartuzumab or erlotinib
alone had modest effects on tumor growth. However, combining onartuzumab
and erlotinib dramatically suppressed tumor growth. Conclusions:
Overexpression of hHGF decreases response of PC9 cells to erlotinib.
Onartuzumab + erlotinib was more efficacious than erlotinib alone on
PC9/hHGF cells in vitro and in vivo. These data support the hypothesis
that addition of onartuzumab to erlotinib may enhance efficacy of
erlotinib in EGFR mutant NSCLC tumors. References: (1) NCT01456325 at
www.clinicaltrials.gov (2) S. Yano et al. Cancer Res 68 (2008) (3) A. B.
Turke et al. Cancer Cell 17 (2010)

