Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of trancriptional repression by EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma


Objective: Ewing's sarcoma is a highly aggressive bone-associated
malignancy affecting children and young adults with most cases harboring
a somatic translocation that encodes the EWS/FLI oncoprotein. EWS/FLI is
an aberrant transcription factor. Most studies indicate that EWS/FLI
functions as a transcriptional activator. However, recent genome-wide
transcriptional studies have raised the possibility that EWS/FLI may also
repress target genes, although the mechanistic basis for this repression
is unknown. We sought to test the hypothesis that EWS/FLI functions as a
direct transcriptional repressor at some genetic loci, and that
transcriptional repression is required for the oncogenic function of
EWS/FLI. Furthermore, we sought to define relevant domains and
corepressors that are involved in this activity. Methods: RNAi based
microarray combined with genome-wide ChIP-Chip analyses were used to
identify direct repressed target genes of EWS/FLI. Soft agar and
xenograft tumor formation assays were performed to assess oncogenic
transformation. Deletion mutants of EWS/FLI were constructed and used to
map the repression domain. Co-immunoprecipitations were performed to
validate the interaction of EWS/FLI with transcriptional co-repressors.
Luciferase reporter assays and gel shift assays were utilized to
characterize the binding site for EWS/FLI at repressed gene promoters.
Results: We identified a subset of EWS/FLI-repressed target genes that
are directly bound by the protein. Using these target genes, we
identified domains in EWS/FLI necessary and sufficient for repression.
Interestingly, these repression domains are also necessary for oncogenic
transformation. We identified two HDACs that are involved in this
repression, and identified a likely candidate transcriptional repression
complex that binds EWS/FLI and contributes to its repressive function.
Finally, we found that transcriptional repression is absolutely required
for the oncogenic function of EWS/FLI, as two downregulated targets
function as suppressors of Ewing's sarcoma oncogenesis. Conclusion:
Transcriptional deregulation by EWS/FLI is a key oncogenic event in
Ewing's sarcoma pathogenesis. Our data demonstrated that, in addition to
transcriptional activation, EWS/FLI mediated transcriptional repression
is also critical in Ewing's sarcoma oncogenesis. This is the first time
that a detailed molecular mechanism of EWS/FLI mediated direct repression
is reported, and has important implications for therapeutic targeting of
EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma.

