Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regression of rectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis
patients by freeze-dried black raspberries is associated with the
demethylation and reactivation of tumor suppressor genes


We previously reported in a Phase I clinical trial that black raspberry
(BRB) powder is well tolerated by humans when administered in a slurry of
water at 45g/day for 7 days. We then undertook a study to determine if
BRB might regress rectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
patients. Fourteen FAP patients who had undergone a colectomy were
treated with BRB daily for a period of nine months. Seven patients
received BRB powder (20g/3x/day) orally in water plus two suppositories
(each composed of 700 mg BRB) that patients inserted into the rectum one
hour before bedtime. The other seven patients were randomized to receive
an oral placebo plus the two rectal suppositories. Rectal polyp counts
were taken at time zero and after nine months of BRB treatment. The
number of rectal polyps was reduced by a median of 43% at nine months
overall including a median reduction of 59% in patients treated by both
routes and 36% in patients treated with the suppositories only. Polyps
and aberrant crypt foci, both were histopathologically identified as
tubular adenomas, and adjacent normal tissues were collected both before
and after berry treatment. Promoter methylation of CDKN2A, also known as
p16, in collected specimens was measured using MassARRAY. Global
methylation LINE-1 was determined by Pyrosequencing. MBDCap-seq
genome-wide methylation analysis was used to discover other genes
demethylated by berries. Further, the specimens were evaluated for p16,
Ki-67, TUNEL, DNMT1 and DNMT3B expression by semi-quantitative
immunohistochemistry. Our results showed that treatment with BRB powder,
both orally and in the form of a BRB suppository, significantly reduced
cell proliferation in the tubular adenomas. The suppository alone was
sufficient to decrease promoter methylation of p16 leading to an increase
in p16 protein expression in adjacent normal rectum and in tubular
adenomas. This was associated with decreased protein expression of DNMT1
and DNMT3B. Based on MBDCap-seq data, BRBs significantly demethylated
promoter CpGs of 44 genes in tubular adenomas. These genes are involved
in the regulation of important cellular functions; e.g., cell
proliferation, Wnt signaling and Notch pathway, etc. Lastly, berry
treatment did not induce changes in global methylation LINE-1. In
conclusion, our data provide evidence that one of the mechanisms for
BRB-induced rectal polyp regression in FAP patients is through the
demethylation and reactivation of tumor suppressor genes.(Supported by
NCI grants CA148818 and CA103180, and USDA grant 38903-03560).

