Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination strategies for management of ovarian cancer using
doxorubicin and withaferin A


Ovarian cancer is the 5th cause of cancer death in women with a mortality
rate of 70%. Main treatment options include cytoreductive surgery with
platinum-based therapy. However, 70% of patients relapse due to the
carcinomas becoming platinum-resistant. As an alternative method,
doxorubicin (Dox) is used for the treatment of several cancers, including
ovarian. However, due to severe side effects, Dox is used as a
second-line treatment strategy despite better patient response rates. To
overcome this problem, we developed a novel treatment strategy that
combines Dox with Withaferin A (WFA). WFA has been used as an
anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial compound in traditional Indian
medicine. More recently, it has gained attention as an anti-cancer
compound to prevent tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis. We
propose that combination of Dox with WFA will enhance the therapeutic
effect of Dox so a lower dose of Dox can be used and many side-effects
avoided. We used epithelial ovarian cancer cell line A2780 as our in
vitro model. Based on our results, combination of Dox with WFA increased
cell death over Dox or WFA alone measured by MTT assays. In particular,
combination of Dox 200nM with WFA 2M resulted in 90-95% cell death after
48 hr of treatment. Early apoptosis marker Annexin V-FITC was used to
confirm these results as well as TUNEL assay for DNA damage. In addition,
we have studied the signaling mechanism responsible for cell death
through the inactivation of pro-survival Akt pathway. We demonstrated
that down regulation of mTOR/p70S6K leads to autophagy and confirmed this
with transmission electron microscopy, autophagy marker LC3B, and cleaved
caspase 3. We have also validated this combination therapy in vivo using
a xenograft model of ovarian cancer and showed reduction in tumor growth
and weight as well as reduced Ki67 and CD31 staining. Mice tolerated
receiving low dose of Dox (1 mg/kg) and combination Dox (1mg/kg) + WFA (2
mg/kg), whereas mice receiving high dose of Dox (9 mg/kg) did not
tolerate treatment and died within 6 six days of treatment. Three
dimensional tumor growth studies showed that treatment of tumors with Dox
and WFA suppressed tumors growth by 80% within 3 days of treatment
compared to untreated tumors. This work was supported by a grant from NCI
CA124630 (SSK).Three dimensional tumor growth studies were performed in
association with Vivo Biosciences Inc., Birmingham, AL.

