Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of bisphosphonate prodrugs of doxorubicin for
targeting bone metastases that are cleaved pH dependently or by cathepsin
B


Bone metastases occur in up to 80 % of patients with advanced breast or
prostate cancer and significantly affect the quality of life. Most
frequently, bone metastases cause bone fractures, severe pain and
hypercalcaemia. Current options for treating of bone metastases are
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and the
administration of bisphosphonates. These treatments are primarily
palliative and can improve the quality of life in some cases, however
without increasing the survival time of the patients. Bisphosphonates are
presently the most active inhibitors of bone degradation, and they can
reduce bone pain, bone destruction and tumor growth. Their therapeutic
effects are due to the high affinity between bisphosphonates and the
apatite structure of bone and bone metastases. In order to improve the
outcome of treating bone metastases, new therapeutic approaches are
urgently required. As bone-seeking agents, bisphosphonates show an uptake
in the bone of 20-60% of the applied dose, and in general the uptake in
bone metastases is 10-20-fold higher than in healthy bone tissue. In
addition, bone metastases are characterized by an acidic pH and the
over-expression of several proteases including cathepsins, matrix
metalloproteases, plasmin and uPA. Surprisingly, no prodrug approaches
have been reported to date that exploit the bone targeting effect of
low-molecular weight bisphosphonates with a concomitant release of a
bound drug in bone metastases. To this purpose, we developed
water-soluble bisphosphonate prodrugs of doxorubicin for targeting bone
metastases by conjugating a thiol-bearing aliphatic bisphosphonate with
the 6-maleimidocaproyl hydrazone derivative of doxorubicin (1) that is
cleaved pH dependently, or by attaching a maleimide derivative of the
dipeptide Val-Ala-PABC (PABC = p-benzyloxycarbonyl) to the aliphatic
bisphosphonate (2). Incubation studies with cathepsin B and 2 at 37 C
showed a cleavage of doxorubicin after two hours with a half time of 45
min and 1 released doxorubicin quantitatively at pH 5.0 after 2 h. The
plasma stabilities (human and mouse) of both prodrugs were in the range
of 3-6 h at 37 C. Binding studies of 1 and 2 with a major component of
bone, i.e. hydroxyapatite, demonstrated binding of 80-90 % of both
prodrugs after 4 h at 37 C. Finally, in an orientating toxicity study in
nude mice the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of 1 was three-fold higher
compared to conventional doxorubicin whereas 2 showed essentially the
same MTD as doxorubicin.

