Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mild and moderate early-life stressors differentially affect
stress reactivity and mammary tumorigenesis in BALB/c mice: A new look at
the stress and breast cancer relationship


Many studies have produced inconsistent support for the hypothesized role
of stressful life events in breast cancer risk. One major factor
contributing to the inconsistent data could be that differences in
premorbid physiological (e.g., endocrine levels) and psychological (e.g.,
emotional reactivity to challenges) characteristics were not taken into
account and therefore, nor was the enduring impact of these differences
on many aspects of endocrine activity and mammary gland development. It
is difficult to gain information on human childhood variables that affect
breast development and even more still on the influence of those
variables into adulthood. Thus, evidence for factors influencing breast
development and increased cancer risk during this time is limited. To
this end, we use an established rodent model in which mild and moderate
chronic neonatal stressors of brief and long maternal separation (BMS and
LMS, respectively) over the first 3 weeks of life cause enduring
functional changes to limbic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity. With this
model, we show that BMS and LMS experiences differentially alter emotion-
and stress-related behaviors of adult female BALB/c offspring.
Circulating, corticosterone (CORT) and estrogen (E2) levels were also
differentially altered by the BMS and LMS experiences as were transcript
or protein levels of estrogen receptor (ER) and ER in normal mammary
glands. Interestingly, increased mammary tumorigenesis in LMS mice
following adulthood carcinogen (7,12-dimethylbenz[]anthracene; DMBA)
administration was related to lower circulating plasma CORT and E2
levels, higher ER protein (but not transcript), and lower ER transcript
(but not protein) levels in mammary glands. We suggest that early-life
physical and psychosocial environments influence breast cancer risk by
shaping the behavioral phenotype and altering circulating hormone levels
which in turn alter the cellular and molecular architecture of the breast
predisposing some to increased risk of carcinogenesis. A better
understanding of the biobehavioral pathways that govern the complex
interplay among environment, phenotype, and normal and malignant breast
development will facilitate the creation of effective behavioral and
cellular strategies for cancer prevention.

