Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of romidepsin (FK228) and its analogs as HDAC/PI3K
dual inhibitors


Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling is involved
in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Therefore, inhibitors targeting
PI3K are considered to be candidate drugs for cancer therapy. Indeed,
some PI3K inhibitors have entered clinical trials, but efforts are still
underway to develop new PI3K inhibitors. To discover novel PI3K
inhibitors, we took advantage of a drug screening system by using the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with deleterious mutations in ATP-binding
cassette transporter genes. This is because wild-type yeast employs drug
efflux pumps for reducing intracellular drug concentrations. The
screening system is based on growth inhibition induced by overexpression
of membrane localized p110 in yeast, in which no endogenous p110 homolog
is expressed. However, compounds with the ability to inhibit PI3K can
rescue cells from p110 induced growth inhibition. Using this system, we
screened the deposited chemical library of the Screening Committee of
Anticancer Drugs (SCADS). As a result, the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor romidepsin (FK228) and its novel analogs were isolated. In
vitro PI3K activity assays confirmed that these compounds directly
inhibit PI3K activity at M-range concentrations. FK-A5 analog was the
most potent inhibitor. Western blotting revealed that these compounds
inhibit phosphorylation of v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog
(AKT) and downstream signaling components. Molecular modeling of the
PI3K-FK228 complex indicated that FK228 binds to the ATP binding pocket
of p110. At M range concentrations, FK228 and FK-A5 exhibit potent
cytotoxicity even in HDAC inhibitor-resistant cells. Fluorescence
activated cell sorting (FACS) and western blotting indicated apoptosis as
the cause of cell death. Furthermore, it was suggested that HDAC/PI3K
dual inhibitory activity of FK228 and FK-A5 at M range concentrations
contributed to the induction of potent apoptosis because of the following
reasons. 1) FK228 or FK-A5 within M range inhibited AKT phophorylation
and acetylated histones simultaneously. 2) The apoptosis induction by
FK228 or FK-A5 at M range concentrations was mimicked by combination of
HDAC inhibitor and PI3K inhibitor. In conclusion, we demonstrated that
FK228 and its analogs directly inhibited PI3K activity and induce potent
apoptosis exhibiting HDAC/PI3K dual inhibition at M range concentrations.
In future, optimizing potency of FK228 and its analogs against PI3K may
contribute to the development of novel HDAC/PI3K dual inhibitors for
cancer treatment.

