Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear trafficking of Tie2 is associated with radioresistance of
gliomas


Resistance and relapse are still primary causes that result in poor
effectiveness of chemo- and radiotherapy in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBMs), the most frequent subtype of primary brain tumors in adults.
Patients suffering from this disease exhibit a median survival that
ranges from 9 to 15 month, and the disease invariably recur after therapy
due to the presence of cells exhibiting a multidrug-resistance phenotype.
Aberrant DNA repair pathways can enable tumor cells to survive DNA damage
that is induced after chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Therefore,
development of new therapeutic strategies requires the identification of
key molecular pathways regulating the resistant phenotype of these
tumors. Previous work from our laboratory showed that Tie2, a previously
considered specific vascular tyrosine kinase receptor, was expressed in
glioma tumors and in brain tumor stem cells. The degree of expression of
Tie2 was related to the malignancy of these tumors, and played an
essential role in the multidrug resistance phenotype of gliomas. Our
current research is focused on deciphering the mechanisms underlying this
critical function. We found that density of Tie2 receptors in the
membrane decreased upon exposure to both ligand (angiopoietin 1, Ang1)
and ionizing irradiation (IR). Immunoflurorescence studies using confocal
microscope and subcellular fractionation followed by Western blot showed
that Tie2 traffics from the cellular membrane to the nucleus upon both
stimuli. Western blot analysis using antibodies against N- and
C-terminus, and against phosphorylated-Tie2, indicated that the nuclear
Tie2 is a full-length protein, and importantly that is phosphorylated at
Tyr992. Of biological importance, to find the role of Tie2 in the
nucleus, we irradiated the glioma cells, U251.Tie2, and found that
ionizing radiation also helps Tie2 to move to the nucleus and importantly
it binds with H2AX one of the key DNA repair protein complex. By using
confocal microscopy we found that Tie2 makes foci with H2AX after DNA
damage. We also found that after genotoxic stress like ionizing radiation
or DNA-damaging drugs, Tie2-expressing cells were more resistant to DNA
damaging effect, as assessed by cell viability assay and comet assay.
Collectively, the nuclear Tie2 plays important role in the DNA repair
which will result in the design of Tie2-targeting combinational therapies
for patients with glioblastomas.

