Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteoprotegerin production by breast cancer cells: Regulation by
NF-kappaB and role in metastasis


Human breast cancer cells and tissues express the protein osteoprotegerin
(OPG). While many studies have investigated the role of OPG in cancer as
a mediator of bone remodeling, few studies consider its impact outside
the bone microenvironment. Further investigation is therefore required
into endogenous OPG expression by breast cancer cells and its effects on
tumor progression. OPG can be regulated by the transcription factor
NF-kappaB in several cell types. We investigated whether OPG expression
in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells was regulated by
NF-kappaB. Cells were treated for 24 hours with 10ng/ml TNF-alpha or 10M
thymoquinone (TQ), to stimulate or inhibit NF-kappaB activity
respectively. OPG expression was measured by real time RT-PCR (mRNA) and
ELISA (protein). OPG levels were increased after treatment with TNF-alpha
while treatment with TQ decreased expression. We used the chick embryo
metastasis model to determine the effect of OPG on metastasis. Human
breast cancer cells were inoculated onto the chick chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) where they form a tumor that metastasizes to the chick
tissue. Metastasis is quantified by real time PCR for Human Alu repeat
DNA sequences in the chick tissue. We transfected MDA-MB-231 cells with
OPG-specific siRNA which reduced OPG mRNA expression up to 72 hours
post-transfection. OPG knockdown or control (non-targeting siRNA) treated
cells were inoculated onto the CAM at embryonic day 9; chick tissue was
harvested at day 16 and analyzed for breast cancer cell metastasis. We
found a significant reduction in metastasis of the OPG knockdown cells
compared to the control. We performed genome-wide mRNA microarray data
analysis to determine whether OPG expression correlates with breast
cancer progression in human tumor samples. OPG expression in 1809 breast
cancer tissues was not correlated with prognosis. However, analyses by
breast cancer subtypes showed that high OPG mRNA expression correlated
with poorer prognosis in basal (p=0.0028, n=383) and also HER2 positive
tumor subtypes (p=0.021, n=408). In summary, our data suggest that OPG
expression in breast cancer cells is regulated by NF-kappaB, a
transcription factor associated with pro-tumor effects. Our in vivo
studies suggest that OPG promotes metastasis. We are currently
determining the mechanism whereby OPG exerts its effects. Since OPG
levels correlate with poorer prognosis in basal and HER2 positive tumors,
treatment strategies targeting OPG in the primary tumor may represent a
potential therapeutic strategy for these disease subytpes.

