Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nano-scale phospho-proteomic analysis to define diagnostic
signatures and biomarkers of therapeutic activity in cancer


The ability to quantify changes in protein activity in a clinical setting
is important for the development of therapeutics that target cancer
signaling pathways. We have developed the use of a highly sensitive
microfluidic nano-immunoassay (NIA, Nanopro1000) to quantify
unphosphorylated, single- and multi- phosphorylated isoforms of proteins
in clinical specimens including blood, bone marrow, and fine needle
aspirates (FNAs). Using as little as 2 nanoliters of cellular lysate, we
can measure over 40 proteomic parameters, and assess changes in proteins
that mediate signal transduction, cell cycle progression and apoptosis.
Using NIA to resolve different phosphorylated isoforms of individual
proteins and directly measure percent phosphorylation has led to new
hypotheses and approaches to biomarker development. To develop novel
diagnostic biomarkers, we have analyzed MAP Kinase phospho-protein
profiles for over 200 specimens collected from patients with
hematopoietic and solid tumors. We found that quantifying even subtle
differences in protein signaling between tumor calls and adjacent
non-tumor tissue can distinguish various malignancies. We will also
present preclinical and clinical data using NIA to develop biomarkers of
therapeutic activity biologic activity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) in myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia. One unanticipated
finding has been that TKIs might preferentially inhibit or activate
specific phospho-isoforms of proteins. Our NIA studies also suggest that
dynamic changes in protein signaling may better predict therapeutic
outcome than profiles from a single, pre-treatment time point. One
example is that the decrease in single phospho-ERK2 (p-ERK2) is
associated with response to TKIs in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Notably, measurements of the phospho-isoform at a single time point were
not sufficient to distinguish the two groups, which may reflect that
individual tumors may have different initial set-points for the pathway.
In contrast, comparison of proteomic signatures serially sampled from
patients before and during treatment can provide valuable information
regarding degree of target kinase inhibition and also compensatory
signaling that can not be gleaned from analysis of a single time point.
Our studies using nanoscale proteomic analysis to profile tumor
signatures and characterize biologic response to therapies have led to
new potential strategies for developing biomarkers, moving us closer to
individualized cancer therapy.

