Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomics highlights which G-protein coupled receptors are
candidates for ADC development


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are a recent and exciting development for
targeted therapy of cancer. Their efficacy is governed by ADC-intrinsic
characteristics such as avidity, drug load and linker chemistry, and
mechanisms of activation and action, which can be controlled or clarified
in the early stages of ADC development. In contrast, the properties that
define a promising ADC target are still somewhat unclear. OGAP is a
unique proteomic database that integrates information at the tissue,
disease and protein isoform level across diseases, indications, and
normal tissues to clarify protein expression levels and profiles.
Specifically, it currently holds information on 2,000,000 human protein
peptide sequences, 16,000 human proteins sequenced, 7,000 cancer membrane
proteins, 50 tissues/organs, and 60 diseases. Building on OGAP and a
proprietary sample preparation and processing workflow that relies on
state-of-the-art high-throughput mass spectrometry and data processing to
provide quantitative information on over 4,000 membrane-enriched proteins
from 15,000 unique peptide sequences per analysis, we have established a
novel predictive tool to establish each protein's potential to serve as a
target for ADC development. The tool considers proteomic and
target-specific information on antigenicity, structure, function,
expression level, regulation, and tissue distribution in order to
highlight the most suitable candidates for ADC development. We will
demonstrate the utility of this process for the protein family of
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), which according to a recent
bioinformatics prediction encompasses 899 distinct members in the human
genome. These cell surface receptors are the target of more than one
third of conventional drugs, yet their potential for ADCs is largely
unexplored. Here we show that proteomics in the context of the OGAP
database can highlight which of this large family of receptors have the
potential to become true ADC targets.

