Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The essential role of eEF-2 kinase in determining fate of glioma
cells under ER stress


Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), an organelle that plays an essential role in
protein folding and post-translational modification, can be stressed a
variety of stimuli and pathological conditions. To recover normal ER
function, an evolutionarily conserved response, termed unfolded protein
response, is triggered. When ER homeostasis fails to be re-established,
persistent ER stress can induce apoptosis. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that ER stress can also induce autophagy, another mechanism
for removing unfolded proteins that cannot be eliminated via the
ubiquitin/proteasome system, thereby reducing ER stress. However, the
precise mechanisms by which the ER stress-induced autophagy is regulated
and the functional association between apoptosis and autophagy in tumor
cells under ER stress remains unclear. We report here that eukaryotic
elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) is a critical mediator of the ER
stress-induced autophagy. We found in the human glioma cells (T98G and
LN229) that eEF-2K and autophagy were simultaneously activated following
treatment with the ER stress inducers, thapsigargin and tunicamycin;
silencing of eEF-2K expression blunted the autophagic response to ER
stress. To explore the pathway linking eEF-2K activation and ER stress,
we tested the role of REDD1, a stress-induced protein involved in
repression of the mTOR signaling. We demonstrated that under ER stress,
silencing of REDD1 blocked the phosphorylation of eEF-2, the only known
substrate of eEF-2K, indicating that REDD1 is required for transducing
the signal for eEF-2K activation. As phosphorylation of eEF-2K at
different sites can either activate or inhibit the activity of the
enzyme, we next determined the roles of phosphorylation of the kinase in
regulating autophagy. We showed that phosphorylation of eEF-2K at Ser398
was essential for the induction of autophagy, while phosphorylation at
Ser 366 and Ser78 exerted an inhibitory effect on the kinase activity and
autophagy. We further observed that suppression of the ER
stress-activated autophagy via silencing of eEF-2K expression aggravated
ER stress and promoted apoptotic cell death. Moreover, inhibiting eEF-2K
by either RNAi or NH125, a small molecule inhibitor of the enzyme,
rendered the glioma cells 23-fold more sensitive to curcumin and velcade,
two cytotoxic agents that trigger anti-tumor activities by inducing ER
stress. Our study indicates that REDD1-eEF-2K pathway is essential for
inducing autophagy and for determining fate of tumor cells under ER
stress, and suggests that inhibiting the eEF-2K-mediated autophagy can
enhance ER stress and lead to greater apoptotic response, thereby
potentiating the efficacy of anticancer agents. These results underscore
the potential of eEF-2K as a novel target for cancer therapy.

