Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC: Mining the world's knowledge on somatic cancer mutations


COSMIC, the Catalog Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer
(www.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic) is a single resource combining much of the
available data on somatic mutations in human cancer. This information is
obtained from a number of online sources, including the TCGA and ICGC
webportals, the IARC p53 database and the Cancer Genome Project, Sanger
Institute, UK; this is then combined with information carefully curated
from the scientific literature. Over 20,000 genes have been screened in
the search for cancer causing mutations, and details have been curated
for all of these, resulting in the annotation of 213,615 mutations across
665,763 tumor samples (COSMIC v56, Nov 2011). The Cancer Gene Census
lists all known cancer genes and these are prioritized for curation,
generating extensive mutation spectra across 107 point-mutated genes and
111 fusion gene pairs. Increasing whole genome/exome data are also
available; currently 559 samples detail 2753 genome rearrangements, 21892
coding and 57396 non-coding point mutations. Most importantly, this
information is all rigorously maintained and regularly updated. With new
releases every two months, COSMIC is very responsive to the scientific
literature, detailing all the latest findings. The data in COSMIC can be
examined in a number of different ways. The website has been designed to
allow easy graphical browsing of the data, with many mining options to
filter desired information. A COSMIC genome browser can be used to
visualize COSMIC mutations in a genomic context, and a Biomart is
available to download datasets federated with external databases. In
addition, the complete data is available for free download for offline
analysis. The combination of data from multiple sources in COSMIC allows
its use as a discovery tool as well as a reference datasource;
substantial mining can be performed between mutant genotypes and clinical
phenotypes, searching for novel recurrence patterns between tissues,
genes and individual variants. Overall, the top mutated gene reported in
human cancer is JAK2, with a published mutation rate of 38% (n=76853),
however a phenotype correlation suggests a mutation rate of up to 86% in
Polycythaemia Vera, 58% in Myelofibrosis and 55% in Essential
Thrombocythaemia. Similarly, KRAS with an overall mutation rate of 23%
(n=96055) increases to 69% in Pancreatic ductal carcinomas, and a single
report suggests a 70% mutation frequency for MED12 in Uterine Leiomyomas
(n=225). In addition to these well characterized cancer genes, new
whole-genome screens are beginning to identify many more. For instance
the TCGA Ovarian exome screen suggested roles for genes such as CSMD3,
HMCN1 and USH2A, and combining multiple whole genome screens suggests
roles for further new genes such as BAI3 (13% mutated in lung). As yet,
novel recurrent mutations are challenging to identify across studies, but
rapidly increasing amounts of whole genome data will make COSMIC a key
resource in this search for new therapeutic targets.

