Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB4 is a novel driver of metastasis and anoikis resistance in
Ewing's sarcoma


Most Ewing family tumor (EFT) related deaths occur as a consequence of
metastatic disease. Using high-throughput Affymetrix arrays, and matched
primary and metastatic tumor-derived cell line pairs, we have identified
ERBB4, a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family, as
a novel driver of metastasis and anoikis resistance in EFTs. Gene
expression profiling, mRNA analysis, and immunoblotting revealed a 2 to
4-fold increase in ERBB4 expression in metastatic compared to primary EFT
cell lines. SNP profiling failed to show copy number aberrations to
explain the increased ErbB4 expression in metastatic cell lines. However,
epigenetic mechanisms were found to potentially regulate ERBB4 expression
in the paired CHLA-9 primary and in the metastatic/chemoresistant CHLA-10
cell line derived from the same patient. Treatment with
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine enhanced ErbB4 in CHLA-9 cells, but reduced its
expression in CHLA-10, suggesting a potential role for DNA methylation in
controlling ERBB4 expression in EFTs. Enhanced protein expression and
ErbB4 tyrosine kinase activation were clearly identified in metastatic
versus primary cells grown under anchorage independent conditions (as
multicellular spheroids), which mimic micrometastases. We next evaluated
the clinical relevance of these data using biopsies from EFT patients. We
found a direct correlation between ErbB4 expression and reduced
disease-free survival (pMost Ewing family tumor (EFT) related deaths
occur as a consequence of metastatic disease. Using high-throughput
Affymetrix arrays, and matched primary and metastatic tumor-derived cell
line pairs, we have identified ERBB4, a member of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) family, as a novel driver of metastasis and
anoikis resistance in EFTs. Gene expression profiling, mRNA analysis, and
immunoblotting revealed a 2 to 4-fold increase in ERBB4 expression in
metastatic compared to primary EFT cell lines. SNP profiling failed to
show copy number aberrations to explain the increased ErbB4 expression in
metastatic cell lines. However, epigenetic mechanisms were found to
potentially regulate ERBB4 expression in the paired CHLA-9 primary and in
the metastatic/chemoresistant CHLA-10 cell line derived from the same
patient. Treatment with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine enhanced ErbB4 in CHLA-9
cells, but reduced its expression in CHLA-10, suggesting a potential role
for DNA methylation in controlling ERBB4 expression in EFTs. Enhanced
protein expression and ErbB4 tyrosine kinase activation were clearly
identified in metastatic versus primary cells grown under anchorage
independent conditions (as multicellular spheroids), which mimic
micrometastases. We next evaluated the clinical relevance of these data
using biopsies from EFT patients. We found a direct correlation between
ErbB4 expression and reduced disease-free survival (p<0.05), and
identified statistically higher ErbB4 expression (pMost Ewing family
tumor (EFT) related deaths occur as a consequence of metastatic disease.
Using high-throughput Affymetrix arrays, and matched primary and
metastatic tumor-derived cell line pairs, we have identified ERBB4, a
member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family, as a novel
driver of metastasis and anoikis resistance in EFTs. Gene expression
profiling, mRNA analysis, and immunoblotting revealed a 2 to 4-fold
increase in ERBB4 expression in metastatic compared to primary EFT cell
lines. SNP profiling failed to show copy number aberrations to explain
the increased ErbB4 expression in metastatic cell lines. However,
epigenetic mechanisms were found to potentially regulate ERBB4 expression
in the paired CHLA-9 primary and in the metastatic/chemoresistant CHLA-10
cell line derived from the same patient. Treatment with
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine enhanced ErbB4 in CHLA-9 cells, but reduced its
expression in CHLA-10, suggesting a potential role for DNA methylation in
controlling ERBB4 expression in EFTs. Enhanced protein expression and
ErbB4 tyrosine kinase activation were clearly identified in metastatic
versus primary cells grown under anchorage independent conditions (as
multicellular spheroids), which mimic micrometastases. We next evaluated
the clinical relevance of these data using biopsies from EFT patients. We
found a direct correlation between ErbB4 expression and reduced
disease-free survival (p<0.05), and identified statistically higher ErbB4
expression (p<0.05) in metastatic vs. primary biopsies (80% vs. 56%,
respectively). ErbB4 gene knockdown or treatment with the FDA-approved
pan-ErbB inhibitor Lapatinib reduced proliferation, blocked cell
migration and tumor invasion, and sensitized metastatic/chemoresistant
cell lines to EFT standard of care chemotherapeutic drugs. Taken
together, our findings identify ErbB4 as a novel driver of metastasis in
EFTs.

