Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail transcription factor contributes to prostate cancer tumor
progression via reactive oxygen species and Rac1 activation


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) represses cell adhesion
associated genes, making cells more migratory. Snail is the master gene
that regulates the EMT process by down regulating tight junction
proteins, such as E-cadherin, and up-regulating mesenchymal genes, such
as vimentin. Cell migration can also be regulated by the Rho family of
GTPases such as Rac1, which can induce reactive oxygen species (ROS),
specifically superoxide, via the NADPH oxidase (Nox) pathways. ROS,
specifically hydrogen peroxide has been shown to mediate EMT induced by
MMP-3. The objective of this study is to determine whether Snail
Transcription factor contributes to tumor progression via ROS and Rac1
and to study the effect(s) of antioxidants on Snail signaling. We
utilized androgen-dependent LNCaP and androgen-independent 22Rv1 and
ARCaP cell lines overexpressing Snail to examine Rac1 activity in vitro.
ROS (superoxide and hydrogen peroxide) levels were examined in vitro and
in vivo. Western blot analysis of EMT markers, cell migration on collagen
and Real Time PCR Array to assay oxidative stress enzymes was also
performed. We found that LNCaP, 22Rv1 and ARCaP cells overexpressing
Snail displayed increased Rac1 activity while LNCaP and ARCaP cells with
Snail overexpression expressed higher levels of superoxide and hydrogen
peroxide in vitro. Furthermore, ARCaP cells overexpressing Snail injected
into nude mice showed higher tumorigenicity as compared to ARCaP Neo
control cells and excised tumors displayed increased levels of superoxide
and hydrogen peroxide ex vivo. Real Time PCR Array revealed significant
increase in key enzymes involved in oxidative stress such as aldehyde
oxidase I and peroxidasin. Treatment with the hydrogen peroxide
scavenger, N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), could partially revert Snail-mediated
EMT in ARCaP cells as evidenced by re-expression of E-cadherin after 3
days. The muscadine grape skin extract (MSKE) antioxidant decreased ROS
levels and Rac1 activity and reverted Snail-mediated EMT as seen by
decreased vimentin, re-induction of E-cadherin, and decreased cell
migration. This is the first report of Snail regulation of ROS by
regulating oxidative stress enzymes, leading to EMT and tumor
progression. We are also showing novel data that Snail can regulate cell
motility via Rac1 activation. Therefore, targeting Snail-mediated EMT
with antioxidants offers a promising therapy to reduce prostate cancer
progression in future. Research supported by NIH Grants: 1P20MD002285 and
G12RR03062.

