Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 increases drug resistance by protecting FBXO21 mediated
ubiquitination of P-glycoprotein


Drug resistance and metastases are major causes of treatment failure in
cancer. These two important but not clearly related aspects in the
biology of cancer have been extensively studied, but not until recently
has there been evidence that these phenotypes are functionally linked.
Two proteins, P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and CD44 are well known determinants
of multidrug resistance and metastases, respectively. P-gp, the product
of the ABCBC1 gene is a transmembrane ATP-dependent transporter that
confers drug resistance to cancer cells. CD44 is a membrane protein
implicated in metastases and has been identified as a stem cell marker
for various types of cancer. Previously, we reported about a physical and
functional interaction between P-gp and CD44. We found that the two
proteins co-immunoprecipitate and co-localize within the cell membrane.
When we introduced CD44 into CD44 (-) breast cancer cell lines, we found
that P-gp expression was also induced both at the mRNA and protein level
and the cells became drug resistant. In the present work we created a
yeast-2-hybrid system that corroborates the physical interaction between
the two proteins. We generated point mutants of the CD44 intracytoplasmic
domain at two different serine residues known to be phosphorylation sites
and show that when Ser 291 of CD44 is mutated, P-gp function is
completely inhibited and the cells revert to drug sensitive in face of
P-gp expression. We therefore hypothesized that CD44 could be stabilizing
P-gp. We first determined that P-gp is ubiquitinated and degraded by the
proteasomal pathway. We then screened a siRNA E3 ligase library and found
several candidates for P-gp E-3 ligases. We tested FBXO21, which is in
the FBOX family of ligases and does not have a known function yet. We
demonstrated that FBXO21 ligase binds, ubiquitinates, and degrades P-gp.
Furthermore, we show that CD44 inhibits FBXO21 directed ubiquitination of
P-gp. Our findings are key to the understanding of P-gp induced drug
resistance and reveal a new control mechanism of P-gp expression. Our
work uncovers CD44 phosphorylation at Ser 291 as an excellent and very
specific new drug target that would distinctively affect drug resistant
cancer cells that are CD44 positive, such as cancer stem cells.

