Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1B, a member of the human SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling
complex, is a novel tumor suppressor gene in pancreatic cancer


Lack of early diagnosis and efficient therapeutic options are the two
major obstacles hindering improvement in pancreatic cancer (PaCa)
survival rate. Traditionally, researchers have focused their attention on
identification and characterization of oncogenes, given the comparative
ease of therapeutic targeting. Recent studies have however suggested that
up to 90% of cancer driver genes are tumor suppressors. In our previous
work, we identified a recurrent deletion located at 6q25.3 in pancreatic
cancer cell lines and xenografts that included only one gene viz. ARID1B,
a component of the human SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. We
utilized a two-pronged strategy for this study; ectopic expression in
MiaPaCa2 PaCa cell line harboring an ARID1B homozygous deletion and
analysis of promoter hypermethylation induced transcriptional silencing
in cell lines and tumor tissues. The ARID1B cDNA was cloned into the
pcDNA3.1 expression system in order to generate permanent transfectants
in MiaPaCa2; vector transfectants were generated as a control. Two
independent gene and vector clones were evaluated for several
tumor-related characteristics. There was no significant difference in
growth rates between the gene and vector clones as determined through MTT
assay, crystal violet staining assay and FACS-based cell cycle analysis
nor was a perceptible difference discernable in percentage apoptotic
cells based on Caspase 3 and Propidium Iodide/Hoechst staining assays.
However, the ARID1B clones generated significantly reduced number of
colonies in liquid colony formation as well as soft agar assays
indicating reduced ability to grow in the presence of contact inhibition
and in the absence of anchorage, respectively. In addition, the ARID1B
clones exhibited reduced motility in wound healing assays when compared
to vector clones. We independently analyzed ten PaCa cell lines that
exhibited a single copy loss and reduced expression of ARID1B.
Azacytidine and Trichostatin A treatment resulted in a significant
increase in ARID1B transcript levels indicating the possibility of
methylation-induced transcriptional silencing. Bisulphite sequencing
revealed extensive hypermethylation in the ARID1B promoter in cell lines
exhibiting elevated transcript levels upon Azacytidine/TSA treatment but
not in cell lines that exhibited no change in transcript levels.
Immunohistochemistry and quantitative reverse transcription PCR-based
analysis of pancreatic tumor samples revealed reduced ARID1B expression
in tumour as compared to normal samples. Methylation analysis of the
ARID1B promoter using DNA isolated from pancreatic cancer tissue is
currently underway. Our results therefore suggest a tumor suppressor role
for ARID1B in pancreatic cancer.

