Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiphoton tomographic imaging is an effective optical biopsy
tool for detecting gastrointestinal inflammation and neoplasia


Background: Improved early detection methods are needed to reduce the
risk of gastrointestinal (GI) cancers for both average and high risk
individuals. Standard colonoscopes and low magnification adjuncts (e.g.,
narrow band imaging) are unable to provide cellular resolution. Thus, any
suspicious lesions must be biopsied. Individuals with longstanding
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are at increased risk for colorectal
cancer (CRC), requiring frequent colonoscopic evaluations including
multiple random biopsies to exclude dysplasia. Technologies that
facilitate directed biopsies should decrease both procedure-related
morbidity and costs. Here, we explore the use of multiphoton microscopy
(MPM) as a novel optical biopsy tool with several potential advantages:
(1) no need for exogenous contrast; (2) greater depth of imaging; and (3)
access to multiple signals from different tissue sources using a single
illumination. Study design and results: Phase 1: Generating an MPM atlas
of normal mouse GI tract. Tissues along the mouse GI tract from esophagus
to anus were imaged using a single excitation wavelength; three distinct
signals were collected, color-coded and overlaid to obtain
cellular-resolution 3D images: (1) Second Harmonic Generation - a higher
order scattering signal from collagen; (2) Short wavelength
autofluorescence - from cytoplasm of epithelial and certain immune cells,
and elastin; (3) Long wavelength autofluorescence - from macrophages,
presumably originating from lipofuscin. After MPM imaging, each specimen
was fixed, H&E stained, and images from both MPM and H&E-stained slides
were archived and annotated by a pathologist. MPM provided sufficient
histological details to identify all relevant tissue substructures. Phase
2: Imaging disease progression in mouse models of dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS) induced colitis and azoxymethane (AOM) induced CRC. We identified
both acute and resolving stages of colitis in the DSS model, which
correlated with pathological findings. In the AOM model, we followed the
progression from aberrant crypts to aberrant crypt foci to micro-adenoma
to adenoma. Three independent pathologists identified all lesion types
from the MPM images with 100% concordance. Phase 3: Translating mouse
model findings to human disease. Patients with both IBD and celiac sprue
are at increased risk of inflammation-related GI malignancy. Hence, both
IBD and celiac sprue were evaluated. Additionally, adenomatous polyps and
CRC were imaged. Normal tissue was imaged in each case as control, and
all MPM images were compared with H&E slides prepared from the same
specimens. MPM images demonstrated striking similarity to those generated
by H&E staining. Conclusion: MPM is a promising optical biopsy technique
that identifies relevant tissue substructures without exogenous contrast,
and might have distinct advantages over competing technologies.

