Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking T cell leukemogenesis in mice with green fluorescence
protein-labeled LSTRA leukemic cells


LSTRA leukemia was originally induced in a BALB/c mouse by the Moloney
murine leukemia virus. The established LSTRA leukemic T cell line is
transplantable in BALB/c mice and serves as an important animal model for
leukemogenesis. Numerous studies using LSTRA cells have been reported in
the field of cancer therapy, including immunotherapy and chemotherapy.
Subsequent identification of a lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine
kinase gene Lck in LSTRA cells further highlights the LSTRA leukemia as a
key model in studying hematologic malignancy induced by oncogenic Lck
protein tyrosine kinase. While intraperitoneal inoculation of LSTRA cells
reproducibly induces leukemic death in syngeneic BALB/c mice, very little
is known on the details of its malignant progression. It also is not
clear if LSTRA leukemia in mice resembles any specific T cell leukemia in
humans. To better understand the process of LSTRA leukemia, we engineered
LSTRA cells to stably express green fluorescence protein (GFP) by
retroviral transduction. GFP-labeled LSTRA cells are easily
distinguishable by flow cytometry, immunofluorescence microscopy, and
immunoblotting. Biochemical characterization confirms that, like the
parental LSTRA leukemia, GFP-tagged LSTRA cells express high levels of
active Lck kinase. Consistent with our previous report (J Immunol
159:5206), GFP-tagged LSTRA cells also exhibit constitutive activation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and STAT5.
BALB/c mice receiving 10 million GFP-labeled LSTRA cells
intraperitoneally show signs of leukemia, such as acute weight loss,
abdominal swelling, hunched posture, and squinting eyes, within 1 week.
All mice die within 10 days. Even intraperitoneal inoculation of 50
GFP-labeled LSTRA cells results in 40% lethality within a month. By
tracking GFP, we were able to identify multi-organ metastasis of LSTRA
leukemia, including bone marrow, spleen, and liver. Immunohistochemistry
analysis of tissue sections further revealed a unique concentration of
LSTRA cells in the red pulp of spleen. It is important to note that mild
to moderate lymphocytic infiltration of the spleen red pulp has been
reported in patients with T cell large granular lymphocyte (LGL)
leukemia. It suggests that LSTRA leukemia may represent a murine model of
distinct human T cell maliganacy, such as LGL leukemia. All together, we
have shown here that the GFP-labeled LSTRA cell line is a powerful tool
to monitor leukemic progression in immune-competent mice. It has
important implications in utilizing LSTRA leukemia for future studies in
cancer therapy. Experiments are also in progress to define the molecular
mechanisms underlying LSTRA infiltration in the spleen red pulp.

