Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple-negative breast cancers establish a systemic environment
that drives malignant progression of otherwise indolent disseminated
tumors via EGF and IGF


Breast cancer recurrence rates are variable, suggesting that tumor cells
disseminate from primary sites at an early stage but remain indolent for
extended periods of time before progressing to symptomatic disease.
Little is known about mechanisms that cause otherwise dormant tumors to
become overt cancers, making it difficult to predict which breast cancer
patients are likely to relapse and therefore likely to benefit from
preemptive therapy. To address these challenges, we use a human breast
tumor xenograft model in which aggressively growing breast cancers
(instigators) promote the growth of otherwise indolent breast cancers
(responders) that have disseminated to distant sites. These
pro-tumorigenic systemic effects are established by instigating tumors,
in large part, through their mobilization of bone marrow cells (BMCs)
that are subsequently recruited to the responding breast tumors, where
they create a tumor-supportive microenvironment. We report here that the
mechanisms of establishing tumor-supportive systemic environments depend
upon the molecular-histopathological subtype of the instigating breast
cancer. Instigating cell lines and primary tumor surgical specimens,
derived from patients with either triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) or
luminal breast cancer (LBC), established different subtype-specific
systemic environments that impinged in different ways upon the malignant
features of responding tumor cells and their microenvironment. In
particular, the TNBC-induced responding tumor microenvironment was
characterized by elevated levels of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1). EGF and IGF acted on responding
tumor cells in a paracrine manner to induce expression of factors that
play a role in tumor-initiation, embryonic stem cell maintenance, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Pharmacological administration of EGFR
and IGF1R inhibitors prevented responding tumors from acquiring the
TNBC-induced malignant features, thus maintaining them in an indolent
state. Our results demonstrate that microenvironmental composition, as
well as tumor cell phenotypic plasticity and molecular properties, are
strongly influenced by the host systemic macroenvironment. Our work
suggests that the crosstalk between disseminated tumor cells and their
microenvironment can be exploited therapeutically to improve outcomes for
patients with TNBC.

