Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent VCP/p97/CDC48 inhibitors with distinct
biochemical mechanisms including a reversible, allosteric inhibitor that
activates the unfolded protein response, induce autophagy and cancer cell
death


Valosin Containing Protein (VCP), also called p97 in mammals and cdc48 in
yeast, is an ubiquitously expressed and essential AAA ATPase important in
specific cellular processes including Endoplasmic Reticulum Associated
Degradation (ERAD), Golgi reformation, membrane fusion and autophagy. VCP
is a hexameric complex formed by six identical protomers, each composed
of three domains: an N-terminal domain responsible for the interaction
with co-factors and adaptor proteins, and two AAA ATPase domains, D1 and
D2. VCP acts as a protein-directed molecular machine that converts energy
derived from ATP hydrolysis into mechanical force to cause disassembly of
multiprotein complexes or extraction of molecules from the membrane to be
delivered to the proteasome for degradation. VCP also affects autophagy
and aggresome formation processes. Overall, VCP plays a key role in
cellular homeostasis. The clinical success of proteasome inhibitors, and
recent advances in the preclinical development of molecules that
interfere with protein folding and degradation has highlighted that
cancer cells can be extremely sensitive to perturbation of protein
homeostasis. The availability of small molecules that specifically
inhibit VCP function would help to clarify whether VCP is a valid target
for cancer therapy. We found that VCP silencing by siRNA induces cancer
cell death in a variety of tumor cell lines, and examined the main
cellular pathways modulated upon VCP ablation, thus identifying
biomarkers suitable for characterizing the cellular activity of VCP
inhibitors. We then performed a High Throughput Screening campaign using
recombinant VCP and identified multiple compound classes that inhibit VCP
function with distinct biochemical mechanisms. Initial hits included a
compound that covalently modifies VCP, representatives of two classes of
ATP-sensitive inhibitors, and an inhibitor class characterized by a novel
allosteric mechanism of action. Chemical expansion of initial hits
resulted in improvement of biochemical potency, yielding highly active
derivatives for each class, suggesting that VCP is a druggable target.
Notably, the binding site of the allosteric class of inhibitors was
identified by photo-affinity labeling in combination with available
structural data. We will present data on a potent (30 nM) and specific
compound emerging from this class that displays anti-proliferative
activity related to the modulation of direct VCP biomarkers, activation
of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) and perturbation of autophagy,
which ultimately result in cancer cell death.

