Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome RNAi screen identifies proteasome inhibition as a
strategy for NSCLC radiosensitization


Background: Each year, approximately 60,000 patients in the US are
diagnosed with locally advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC).
The majority is treated with a combination of radiation therapy (RT),
chemotherapy +/ surgery. Despite best available therapy, over a third of
patients fail locoregionally. The addition of concurrent chemotherapy to
RT adds only about a 5% absolute survival benefit. Novel radiosensitizers
may improve the therapeutic index of RT. Materials and Methods: We
performed whole genome pooled RNAi screens using the Hannon-Elledge
library of 74,705 distinct shRNAs directed against over 18,000 genes, in
two NSCLC cell lines A549 and NCI-H460. After stable transduction, we
passaged the lines for 12 population doublings, and extracted DNA both
before and after passaging to compare the representation of each shRNA at
each time point. We defined top hits as those genes for which multiple
shRNAs decreased in representation by at least 50% during passaging,
signifying silencings that were detrimental to proliferation. Results:
The top hit of our screen was PSMA1, a subunit of the 20S proteasome; out
of six shRNAs, between four and six scored in the two lines in screens
performed in triplicate. Bortezomib, an inhibitor of the 20S proteasome,
has shown activity against NSCLC in preclinical studies and Phase I/II
clinical trials. We observed that bortezomib results in synergistic
cytotoxicity in cells treated with fractionated ionizing radiation (IR)
in vitro. 10 nM bortezomib resulted in 46% clonogenic survival of
unirradiated A549 cells, but only 29% survival of cells treated with 1 Gy
x 3 daily fractions compared to cells treated with IR alone. Similar
results were observed with MG-132 and with NCI-H460. In soft agar
anchorage-independent growth assays, bortezomib resulted in less than 1%
colony formation following 1 Gy x 3 daily fractions compared to cells
treated with IR alone. In vivo experiments are underway with subcutaneous
xenografts in nude mice treated with concurrent CT-guided conformal RT. A
retrospective analysis of 443 patients with profiled lung adenocarcinomas
showed worse overall survival among patients with tumors showing high
proteasome gene expression (median OS 4.2 vs. 6.2 y, 5-year OS 47.5 vs.
61.0%, log rank p = 0.04). Conclusions: Proteasome inhibition emerged as
the top drug target of an RNAi screen designed to identify targets with
sustained activity over multiple cell generations. Its synergistic impact
on NSCLC viability when coupled with fractionated RT should be further
explored in preclinical studies and early clinical trials.

