Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunostimulatory effects of HSP90 inhibition: Insights from
combinational immunotherapies targeting EphA2


Introduction: Limited MHC Class I antigen presentation by tumor cells has
consistently been identified as a significant barrier to cancer
immunotherapy. Combinational regimens that coordinately enhance
tumor-associated antigen (TAA) presentation on tumor MHC Class I
molecules and stimulate TAA-specific T cell immunity are expected to
yield synergistic clinical benefit. We have previously shown in vitro
that the HSP90 inhibitor
17-Dimethylaminoethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-DMAG), which is
currently being evaluated as an anti-cancer agent in phase I/II clinical
trials, is capable of enhancing MHC Class I presentation of EphA2, a TAA
that is over expressed in several cancers (Melanoma, lung cancer,
sarcomas). To further characterize the therapeutic potential of this
approach, we are currently assessing the safety and effectiveness of a
rationally-designed combinational therapy incorporating 17-DMAG and
EphA2-targeted immunotherapy in murine tumor models. Results: The
anti-tumor efficacy of 17-DMAG was evaluated in an MCA205 sarcoma model
applied to syngenic mice.17-DMAG facilitated a dose-dependent reduction
in EphA2 expression in vivo, which correlated with increased presentation
of EphA2 peptides on tumor MHC class I molecules. Increased EphA2
presentation on tumor MHC class I molecules was determined by documenting
the increased recognition of treated tumor cells by EphA2-specific T
cells.17-DMAG treatment, when combined with 2 different immunotherapy
approaches targeting EphA2 (adoptive transfer of EphA2-specific T cells
and DC-based vaccine), led to superior anti-tumor impact and in some
cases, even complete tumor regression, compared to single-modality
approaches. In addition, combination treatment groups had increased
infiltration of tumors by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and decreased Tregs and
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) compared to groups receiving
single mode of treatment or untreated progressors. Infiltrating CD8 T
cells in the tumor in the combination therapy cohort were specific for
EphA2, as assessed by in vitro stimulation. Skewing of the immune
response towards a type 1 phenotype was caused by upregulated
inflammatory chemokines and their receptors in the TME. 17-DMAG also
facilitated vascular remodeling of the tumor with decreased endothelial
cell and pericyte coverage coinciding with increased VCAM-1 expression,
which may contribute to the enhanced recruitment of antigen-specific T
cells. Conclusions: Our studies suggest that conditionally decreased
EphA2 protein levels in tumors treated with 17-DMAG is accompanied by
increased recognition by therapeutic anti-EphA2 T cells in vivo.
Combinational immunotherapies integrating 17-DMAG have superior
anti-tumor efficacy compared to single modality approaches and are
orchestrated by the vascular and immunologically-preferred alterations in
the tumor promoted by 17-DMAG.

