Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of microRNA-200a and 141 by proto-oncogene
PELP1: Role in breast cancer progression and metastasis


Endocrine therapy is a key component of adjuvant therapy for estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. However, initial or acquired
resistance frequently occurs and tumor recurs as advanced metastatic
disease. Accumulating evidence suggests that ER-coregulators play an
essential role in cancer progression. Metastatic tumors exhibit increased
expression of coregulators and their deregulation occurs in both ER+ve
and ER-ve tumors. Proline glutamic acid rich protein (PELP1) is an ER
coregulator, its expression is upregulated during breast cancer
progression to metastasis and PELP1 is an independent prognostic
predictor of shorter breast cancer specific survival. The objective of
this study is to examine the mechanism and significance of PELP1
regulation of microRNAs and its effect on breast cancer metastasis. We
have used both ER+ve (ZR75, MCF7) and ER-ve (MDAMB231) models that either
stably overexpress PELP1 or PELP1shRNA. Boyden chamber, wound healing,
and invasion assays demonstrated that PELP1 down regulation significantly
affect migration of both ER+ve and ER-ve cells. Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT) real time qPCR Array (Super array) studies identified
PELP1 modulate expression of eight genes involved in the EMT (including
Snail, Twist, ZEB1, ZEB2, Vimentin and MMPs). In xenograft assays,
overexpression of PELP1 in non-metastatic ZR75, MCF7 cells increased
their propensity for metastasis in vivo, while PELP1 knockdown in
metastatic MDAMB231 model cells decreased in vivo metastasis. Mechanistic
studies using whole genome microRNA array analysis using PELP1 model
cells revealed that miR200a and miR141 were significantly upregulated in
cells expressing PELP1-shRNA compared to control shRNA expressing cells.
Accordingly, over expression of PELP1 in low metastatic model cells
decreased expression of miR200a and miR141. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis revealed recruitment of PELP1 to the proximal promoter
region of miR-200a and miR141. Mechanistic studies showed PELP1 down
regulate expression of metastasis suppressive microRNAs (miR200a and
miR141) by promoting repressive chromatin modifications via its
association with HDAC2. Accordingly, HDAC inhibitors reversed PELP1
driven repressive effects. Further, ectopic expression of miR200a and
miR141 mimetics decreased PELP1 mediated metastatic functions.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate for the first time a previously
unknown role for PELP1 in the epigenetic control of miR-200a and miR141.
These results reveal that PELP1 play a role in breast cancer metastasis
by promoting cell motility / EMT by modulating miRNA expression.
Understanding how proto-oncogene PELP1 plays a role in metastasis will be
useful in maximizing treatment opportunities for metastatic breast
cancer. This study is funded by T32CA148724 NIH Postdoctoral Fellowship
Grant.

