Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A kinetic live-cell imaging approach to measuring cytotoxicity in
vitro


Cytotoxicity assays play a critical role in the identification of
potential anti-cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Commonly used in vitro
cytotoxicity assays evaluate a range of end point parameters such as the
release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and glutathione (GSH) following
membrane rupture, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), cell
proliferation, and disruption of mitochondrial trans-membrane potential.
Critical factors contributing to the predictive nature of these assays
include compound concentration, and more importantly, the time allowed
for the compound to elicit an effect. Although these multiplexed assays
are able to simultaneously measure multiple indicators of in vitro
cytotoxicity, they typically assess a single time point and are unable to
assess the biological activity over time. We present data showing that we
are able to kinetically measure cell wall integrity, while simultaneously
monitoring cell death associated morphological changes using a
commercially available cell impermeable DNA dye, YOYO-1, coupled with the
IncuCyte FLR live-cell imaging system. This no-wash, mix-and-read assay
provides a statistically robust method to study the kinetic induction of
cytotoxicity in vitro. Specifically we use HT 1080 fibrosarcoma cells,
MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma cells, and HeLa cervical adenocarcinoma
cells in conjunction with the cytotoxic agents staurosporine and
camptothecin, and the cytostatic agent, cycloheximide. These data
illustrate the ability to kinetically detect, quantify, and analyze
cytotoxicity data in a 96-well plate format using images collected in
real time. We show that the quantitative data obtained in this study is
amenable to moderate throughput screening protocols with Z values >0.6
achieved in both intra- and inter-assay reproducibility studies. We also
provide evidence that that the high definition phase contrast images
provide qualitative verification of quantitative results allowing for the
discrimination between cytotoxic and cytostatic compounds. This strategy
combines automated data acquisition and analysis to provide an
informative and efficient approach to detecting pharmacological or
genetic manipulations that alter cell viability.

