Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of miR-145 expression by Foxo3a, C/EBP- and p53 in
cancer cells


Background: MicroRNAs are master gene regulators that control gene
expression through the posttranscriptional repression mechanism.
Accumulating evidence indicates that microRNAs are often dysregulated in
human cancers, and they may function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors.
Our laboratory and other groups have previously shown that miR-145 is a
tumor suppressor that is downregulated in a variety of tumors. However,
it is not fully understood about the underlying mechanism of miR-145
regulation. In this study, we characterized miR-145 regulation involving
transcription factors FoxO3a, C/EBP- and p53 in cancer cells. Methods: We
previously constructed the miR-145 promoter luciferase reporter in
pGL3-basic, which was used in this study to determine the effect of
FoxO3a, C/EBP- or p53 on miR-145 promoter activity. p53 expression vector
was constructed in pEGFP; C/EBP- and FoxO3a were cloned into pCDH
lentiviral vector carrying copGFP. Western blot and fluorescence
microscope were used to determine expression of exogenous genes.
Endogenous miR-145 levels were determined by TaqMan real time PCR after
reverse transcription as well as by in situ hybridization. The expression
vectors or luciferase reporter were introduced into cells by either
transfection or infection. Results: We showed that miR-145 functions a
downstream effector of Akt, and impacts tumor growth and invasion. For
example, suppression of Akt by serum starvation or PI3K inhibitor LY29
significantly activates p53, which in turn binds to the miR-145 promoter
and induces miR-145 expression. Furthermore, we showed that in addition
to p53, FoxO3a also functions a positive regulator of miR-145. Of
considerable interest, FoxO3a induces miR-145 expression in the mutant
p53 background; however, in the wild type p53 background, p53 suppresses
the ability of FoxO3a to induce miR-145. On the other hand, C/EBP- serves
as a negative regulator of miR-145 in both wild type p53 and mutant p53
backgrounds, which is likely in part through regulation of Akt activity.
Experiments are underway to further dissect the regulation of miR-145.
Conclusion: Together, these results suggest a sophisticated regulatory
system controlling miR-145 expression in cancer cells. Thus, a better
understanding of this regulatory network will aid in the identification
of novel cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets, and improve cancer
diagnosis and treatment.

