Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of genome-wide methylation and expression
profiles for metastatic colorectal cancer


In colorectal cancer (CRC) care, treatment decisions depend on efforts to
estimate the metastatic potential of tumors. The liver is one of the most
common metastatic sites of CRC and prognosis of CRC patients often
reflects metastases to distant sites. However, the molecular mechanisms
for further development of CRC with metastasis to the liver, lung, brain,
bone and lymph nodes are unknown. The aim of this study was to stratify
patients based on DNA methylation status and identify not one biomarker
gene, but functional motif for metastatic potential of CRC. Using
Illumina HumanMethylation 27 harboring approximately 27,000 CpG loci, we
performed genome-wide methylation analysis for 74 CRC samples including
36 patients with liver metastasis and 38 without any distant metastasis.
As a control, their corresponding colorectal mucosa was used. Consistent
with our previous data, using non-negative matrix factorization and
consensus clustering analysis, samples were clustered into three groups;
high-, intermediate-, and low-methylation epigenotypes. Next, tumor
samples were classified based on gene expression profile in each
methylation cluster. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was applied for
expression data, which could identify that Rhodopsin kinase was activated
in CRC samples with liver metastasis. Then genes included in this kinase
were analyzed by Network Hidden Key molecule miner (NetHike) algorithm.
NetHike, which we recently developed as network analysis, demonstrated
that CXCR4 was one of key molecule for liver metastasis of CRC. In
NetHike algorithm, several information such as methylation status and
gene expression was inputted which would be integrated on known signaling
pathways. In CXCR4 and its neighbors as a functional motif of CRC
metastasis, CXCL12 was methylated without gene expression aberration. On
the other hand, CXCR4, CCR5, and ARRB2 were not methylated, of which
expression was increased, suggesting that integration and mapping of some
gene information effectively identify activated gene pathways in some
clusters, and may be missed only by conventional analyses. Taken
together, network-based analysis could find the potential functional
motif and integration of various gene expression aberrations and
methylation status also could stratify CRC patients with liver metastasis
and without metastasis. We plan to make an exhaustive exploration to
discover the some novel functional topologies that have both expression
and methylation aberrations and might be related to the mechanism of CRC
metastasis.

