Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Difference in the synergistic effect of cytotoxicity in pediatric
brain stem gliomas and adult glioblastomas to combination treatment with
temozolomide and molecular target-specific agents


Brain stem glioma (BSG) in children is comparable to adult glioblastoma
(GBM) with regard to poor survival and resistance to chemo-radiation
therapy. Temozolomide (TMZ) is an alkylating agent and rapidly penetrates
the central nervous system (CNS), making it a standard chemotherapeutic
agent for adults with malignant glioma. Despite some improvement of
survival, radiation with TMZ monotherapy rarely provides long-term
control. This study aimed to determine combination effect of conventional
anticancer agent, TMZ and molecular target-specific agents such as
Sunitinib, Tandutinib, Cediranib and Rapamycin in BSG and GBM. The drug
combination effects were tested by cell proliferation inhibition in
glioma cells from six children with BSG and five established GBM cell
lines. The half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of each agent was
estimated 48hr after treatment of agents by cell proliferation assay. The
values of IC50 in brain stem gliomas were higher as much as 1.5 to 4
times than those of GBM cell lines in all of agents, suggesting that
brain stem gliomas are more resistant to not only TMZ, but also to
various molecular target specific agents. O6-methylguanine
methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation status was determined by
methylation-specific PCR after bisulfite treatment. As a result, MGMT
promoter methylation was detected in all of GBM cell lines, whereas
incomplete methylated or unmethylated MGMT was shown in six brain stem
gliomas from pediatric patients. For combination therapy, IC10 of each
agent plus IC10 of TMZ was treated in each cell for 48hr to assess
cytotoxicity. TMZ+Cediranib, +Rapamycin, +Sunitinib showed some tumor
proliferation inhibition in 60%, 40%, 20% of 5 GBM cell line
respectively. In BSGs, however TMZ-Sunitinib and TMZ-Cediranib presented
considerable tumor growth inhibition in 2 (33%), 1 (16%) among 6 BSGs
although most BSGs were unmethylated in MGMT promoter. BSGs in children
showed different chemotherapeutic effect and MGMT promoter methylation
status compared to GBM in adult. The combination therapy of TMZ and
molecular target-specific agents showed more synergistic effects in
cytotoxicity for BSG and GBM than TMZ only. Also children with BSG can be
more effectively treated with TMZ with multiple molecular targeted agents
such as Sunitinib than adult GBM. These results can be translated
clinically to develop new chemotherapeutic trials for children with BSG.

