Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFB activation in mesenchymal stromal cells induced by
leukemia-stroma interaction plays a central role in stroma-mediated
chemo-resistance of leukemic cells


Within the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment, BM mesenchymal stromal
cells (BM-MSC) produce cytokines and chemokines and initiate cellular
adhesion-mediated signals that tightly regulate normal and malignant
hematopoietic cell development. This rich environment serves as a
sanctuary for malignant hematopoietic cells, offering protection from
chemotherapeutic agents and promoting residual disease with greater
potential for developing acquired drug resistance. In this study we
utilized gene expression profiling (GEP) as a genome-wide exploratory
approach to characterize changes caused by the interaction between
leukemic cells and BM-MSC, and how these changes can contribute to the
observed microenvironment-mediated chemoresistance. Co-culture of REH, a
pre-B-ALL cell line, with normal-donor BM-MSCs for 48 hours upregulated a
variety of genes encoding cytokines and chemokines in BM-MSCs such as
CXCR6, CCL5, CCL2, IL32, IL34, IL8, IL6, CXCL12, and the VLA4 ligand
VCAM-1. These microarray-based GEP findings were confirmed by qRT-PCR.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) implicated activation of NFB in
BM-MSCs as a potential cause of these changes. Similar upregulation of
NFB target genes was found in MSC co-cultured with the AML cell line
OCI-AML3, suggesting that NFB activation is a common consequence of
leukemia-stroma interation. Given known paracrine functions of
NFB-regulated target genes such as IL-8, we hypothesized that stromal NFB
activation contributes to stroma-mediated chemo-resistance of leukemic
cells. Stable transduction of BM-MSC to overexpress a super-repressor
form of IB (IB-SR), to block canonical-pathway NFB activation in the
stromal compartment, significantly reduced the stroma-mediated
chemo-resistance to Vincristine (VCR) of REH cells. NFB inhibition using
a specific IKK inhibitor (MLN120B), affecting both BM-MSC and tumor
cells, highly increased the apoptotic effects in leukemia-stroma
co-cultures of VCR in REH cells and NALM6, another pre-B-ALL cell line.
Similar results were obtained with CDDO-Me, another NFB inhibitor.
Altogether these results indicate that the interaction of leukemic cells
with BM stromal cells activates NFB in the stromal compartment, with
subsequent transcriptional upregulation of a number of cytokines and
chemokines ultimately favoring the survival of leukemic cells. We propose
that targeting NFB may ameliorate stroma-mediated chemo-resistance and
help in eliminating bone-marrow resident leukemic cells.

