Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR2 inhibition decreases invasion and metastasis of a
KRAS/p53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell line in vitro and in vivo


Background: The tumor microenvironment of human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is composed of a variety of cell types, which are
functionally and phenotypically heterogeneous and provide multiple
complex regulatory signals. CXCR2 in NSCLC has been mainly studied in
stromal cells and is known to increase tumor inflammation and
angiogenesis. We have previously reported that alveolar epithelial cells
transformed by oncogenic KRAS have high expression of CXCR2 (IL8R)
ligands, which recruit inflammatory and endothelial cells and promote the
progression of premalignant alveolar lesions to lung adenocarcinoma
(ADC). In addition, we have shown that murine cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAF) abundantly secrete CXCR2 ligands and that these ligands
promote lung adenocarcinoma inflammation, angiogenesis, and growth. The
purpose of our study was to investigate the role of CXCR2 expression in
lung ADC tumoral cells in vitro and in vivo in promoting tumoral cell
invasion and metastasis. Material and Methods: We created stable shRNA
knockdown clones derived from a murine KrasLA1/+p53R172HG/+ cell line
(344SQ) which develops aggressive and metastatic lung ADC once injected
in syngeneic mice. Invasion was assessed in vitro by co-cultures of two
CXCR2-shRNA clones (clone-1 and clone-3) and CAF in 24-well Transwell
invasion plates, compared to scrambled control (ctrl). In order to block
tumoral cell proliferation, we added mitomycin C to the serum-free media
of the tumoral cells. To assess the in vivo tumoral invasion and
metastatic potential of the shRNA clones, 2x104 cells of the two
different shRNA clones and of the ctrl were injected into the left lung
of syngeneic mice (N=10 mice each group). Mice were euthanized at first
signs of poor physical conditions due to tumor burden. Wilcoxon rank sum
test was used for statistical calculations. Results: The two CXCR2-shRNA
clones showed a significantly lower invasion potential in vitro when
compared to ctrl (clone-1 vs. ctrl p=0.002; clone-3 vs. ctrl p=0.04).
Mice were euthanized after 21 days from injection because 2 out of 10
showed poor physical conditions in the control group. At necropsy, mice
bearing CXCR2-shRNA lung ADCs had significantly smaller primary tumors
(clone-1 vs. ctrl p=0.03; clone-3 vs. ctrl p=0.008), decreased number of
lung tumor nodules in the same lung of primary injection (clone-1 vs.
ctrl p=0.02), decreased number of mediastinal lymph node metastases
(clone-1 vs. ctrl p=0.004; clone-3 vs. ctrl p=0.003) and decreased number
of distant metastases (clone-1 vs. ctrl p=0.004; clone-3 vs. ctrl
p=0.02), when compared to ctrl. Conclusion: CXCR2 inhibition decreases
invasion and metastases in vitro and in vivo in a murine model of
KRAS/p53-mutant lung ADC and may be an important target in KRAS-mutated
human lung ADC. (Supported by A.S.C.O Conquer Cancer Foundation Young
Investigator Award to E. Massarelli).

