Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG and ETV1 regulate a common transcriptional network in prostate
cells but in an opposite fashion


Chromosomal rearrangements involving ERG or ETV1 have been reported in
>50% prostate cancer cases. It is presently unknown how ERG and ETV1
function leads to prostate tumorigenesis, and whether the factors play
similar roles in this process. To address this, we focused on
identification of their direct chromosomal targets relevant for prostate
cancer initiation and progression. We also generated Tmprss2-ERG and
Tmprss2-ETV1 knockin mouse models to interrogate the in vivo roles of
these two most prevalent gene fusions. To investigate the transcriptional
program regulated by ERG and ETV1, we performed siRNA silencing
experiments in prostate cancer cells and overexpression studies in normal
prostate immortalized cells. With the aid of a biotin-tagging approach,
we also identified chromatin sites occupied by ERG and ETV1 in prostate
cells. Cross-referencing ETV1 and ERG gene promoter binding to global
expression profiling data permitted characterization of ERG and ETV1
-regulated programs in prostate cells. These combined transcriptional
studies revealed that a common transcriptional network regulated by ERG
and ETV1 but in an opposite fashion. Indeed, ETV1 enhanced the androgen
receptor (AR) pathway, favoring tumor growth, while ERG showed a negative
effect over the same pathway. Consistent with this, in the mouse models,
ERG and ETV1 also exhibited differential regulation of common pathways:
exogenous expression of ERG from the endogenous Tmprss2 promoter was much
lower than that of ETV1, possibly due to a negative regulation of AR
target genes (including Tmprss2) by ERG; however, transgenic
overexpression of a mutated version of AR was able to break this negative
regulation and significantly upregulated Tmprss2-ERG expression in vivo.
In contrast, Tmprss2-ETV1 expression alone was able to upregulate
expression of AR targets in vivo. Moreover, although ectopic expression
of either ERG or ETV1 from the endogenous Tmprss2 locus alone in mouse
prostate was insufficient to initiate prostate tumorigenesis in vivo,
Tmprss2-ETV1 cooperated with Pten loss to enhance the prostate cancer
phenotype, whereas Tmprss2-ERG failed to significantly affect the
prostate phenotype induced by Pten-loss. Finally, analysis of patient
data supported a differential outcome based on the presence of ERG or
ETV1 fusions. In summary, we conclude that ERG and ETV1 play different
roles in prostate tumorigenesis, and accordingly prostate cancers with
ERG or ETV1 fusions should be considered different molecular subtypes.
These findings have important implications for the development of
targeted therapy for ERG- and ETV1-associated prostate cancers.

