Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling guided human PDX tumor model selection for
preclinical drug evaluation


Recent advances in targeted anticancer drug discovery and development has
brought about many new promising IND entities to the frontline of
preclinical and clinical research. One of the major challenges is to
identify and select appropriate patient population for further validation
of the new drug efficacy in preclinical and clinical settings. Thus,
patient stratification is a critical step in developing personalized
cancer therapeutic drugs. This requires comprehensive understanding of
genetic background and biomarker profiles of the patients. To meet this
highly desired need, we have built up a robust preclinical oncology
pharmacology platform, establishoing over 250 human primary tumor
xenograft models (HuPrimeTM), including more than 20 common cancer types.
All HuPrimeTM models are annotated with clinical information, diagnosis
pathology, genome-wide transcription profiling, genome-wide SNP-copy
number variation (CNV), hot-spot mutations of key oncogenes, key
biomarker IHC information, and responses to standard-of-care (SOC) agent
treatment. All the HuPrimeTM model information, along with cancer cell
line genomic information, were collected into a proprietary interactive
database, HuBaseTM, which offers intuitive navigation control and
searchable function, enabling cancer researchers to analyze hundreds of
cancer cell lines and HuPrimeTM tumor models for their need of drug
development programs. With easily accessible genomic information,
HuPrimeTM models or cell lines which express specific target genes of
interest can be identified by transcription profiling and gene copy
number variation (CNV) status. Biomarkers that are potentially predictive
to drug response can then be validated in HuPrimeTM tumor models based on
genomic annotation prior to pharmacological studies. Models with
appropriate genomic signatures and biomarker information can be selected
for more efficient drug efficacy tests with higher success rate. Using
the genomic-biomarker guided approaches, we have validated
standard-of-care drug responses in HuPrimeTM tumor models that showed
significantly elevated expression of molecules involved in drug target
related signaling pathways, conducted PD biomarker identification and
discovery studies, including biomarkers in various cellular response upon
drug treatment.In this presentation, examples of HuPrimeTM tumor models,
application of HuBase data and predictive biomarker IHC analysis in model
selection for several targeted therapy agents, including Trastuzumab
(Herceptin), Sorafenib, Cetuximab, and Tarceva, will be discussed. We
believed that this genomics-biomarker guided approach can greatly improve
the effectiveness of preclinical evaluation of targeted drug development.

