Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic, safety and efficacy of high dose simvastatin in
refractory and relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients


Statins are established as safe and effective anti-hypercholesterolemia
drugs. Preclinical evidence shows that statins exhibit antitumor activity
against different tumors by reducing prenylation of small GTPase
molecules, which play a critical role in intracellular cancer cell
signaling. However, these effects have only been noted at higher
concentrations, which cannot be achieved with the typical dosing. In a
Phase I trial, simvastatin was well tolerated by patients with relapsed
or refractory myeloma or lymphomas at amaximum tolerated dose (MTD) of
7.5mg/kg twice daily. However, the pharmacokinetic (PK) was not defined
and it is unknown if simvastatin plasma concentrations can reach the
levels necessary for the antitumor activity observed in vitro. Here we
evaluated the PK, safety and efficacy of high dose simvastatin in the
context of a pilot trial enrolling patients with recurrent and refractory
CLL. Methods: Patients received simvastatin orally at 7.5mg/kg twice a
day for 7 days during a 21 day cycle for 6 cycles. During study
treatment, patients underwent weekly or bi-weekly evaluations that
included physical examination, complete blood counts and comprehensive
chemistry profiles. Toxicities were graded according to the National
Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (version 3.0). The NCI CLL
revised guidelines for diagnosis and treatment were utilized to determine
the level of clinical response. Blood samples were collected during cycle
1 at predose, 15 min and 1,2,3,6,8, and 12 hr and at predose on day-7.
Simvastatin lactone and acid concentrations were measured in plasma and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) using a validated HPLC-MS/MS
assay. Biochemical assays assessing the apoptotic effects of simvastatin
were also performed in CLL cell samples (the predose and day-7) obtained
from the treated patients. Results: Patients were accrued in this pilot
trial. High dose simvastatin was well tolerated and there were no signs
of serious adverse effects. Simvastatin exposure was dose proportional
(AUC and Cmax) as compared to the doses used to treat hyperlipidemia.
Exposure was lower than that required for in vitro cytotoxicity against
immortalized cells. Simvastatin exposure in both plasma and PBMCs was
variable with an AUC12hr (%CV) of 800.6 hr*ng/ml (88.6%) and 11.03
hr*ng/mg (119.4%), respectively. Following 7 days exposure to high dose
simvastatin, CLL cells had increased the expression of cleaved PARP, an
apoptotic marker. Conclusion: Preliminary results show that high dose
simvastatin is well tolerated with no signs of serious side effects.
Although plasma concentrations were lower than that required for in-vitro
cytotoxicity, the simvastatin concentrations achieved in the clinic
induced apoptosis in patient CLL cells. Further studies in CLL patients
are warranted to demonstrate its efficacy alone or in combination therapy.

