Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic role of Perp in breast cancer


Perp, a tetraspan plasma membrane protein, is activated by p53 during
apoptosis and is also regulated by p63 where it functions as an essential
component of the desmosome and contributes to epithelial integrity. A
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in Perp was identified by its effect
on apoptotic efficiency in irradiated lymphoblastoid cell lines.
Therefore, this SNP may have functional significance in clinical outcomes
of cancer. In this study, this SNP in PERP was evaluated as a prognostic
marker and in its relationship to other known prognostic factors.
Genotyping was performed on DNA isolated from peripheral blood of 1020
patients with breast cancer and genotypes were linked with annotated
clinical information. Analysis of recurrence free survival was performed
on a subset limited to 790 Caucasians. Among Caucasian cases, homozygous
SNP genotypes were nearly equally distributed (AA: 25% and GG: 26%).
Using a COX proportional hazards survival analysis, the AA genotype was
found to be an independent predictor of worse recurrence-free survival
(RFS, hazard ratio [HR]: 1.95, 95% CI: 1.38-2.76, p=0.0001). RFS was
similar between AG and GG carriers and was more favorable as compared to
AA carriers. For patients receiving breast-conserving surgery followed by
radiation, patients diagnosed at or above 51 years of age or patients
with stage III disease, the deleterious effect of AA genotype on RFS was
more significant. In addition, the AA genotype associated with decreased
RFS in subgroups of Caucasian cases regardless of stratification by
hormone receptor status, HER2 status, and whether they received
chemotherapy or hormonal therapy. Adjusting for effects due to stage and
chemotherapy, this association remained significant in estrogen receptor
positive and progesterone receptor negative cases. We also analyzed the
NCI-60 cell line panel for an association between this polymorphism and
response to 132 standard chemotherapeutic drugs. A significant
association was observed with respect to genotype and response to
anti-mitotic agents. Collectively, cell lines with the AA genotype were
more sensitive to anti-mitotic agents than the GG genotype. Clinical data
suggest that the AA genotype of Perp has a functional phenotype leading
to increased risk of recurrence. Further studies are needed to determine
the mechanism behind this association, but ultimately this SNP may be
useful as a prognostic marker in breast cancer and could be used as a
tool to optimize treatment strategies.

