Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-Beta regulates tumor ECM remodeling and progression to
metastasis


To understand how loss of TGF- signaling in cancer cells promotes tumor
progression, we are evaluating modifications to the extracellular matrix
in TGF- type II receptor KO mammary tumors. Previous work from our lab
supports a stromal expansion and increased TGF- availability in PyMT
tumors lacking TGF- signaling in the epithelium. This expansion is
characterized by increased activated fibroblasts, collagen deposition,
and MDSC infiltration. We hypothesize that the increased TGF-
availability and fibroblast activation in TGF- receptor II knock out
tumors will also lead to increased ECM remodeling. Crosslinking of
collagen fibers increases the overall stiffness of affected tissue
providing the mechanical force necessary for tumor cell migration and
invasion. Lysyl oxidase is a potent extracellular enzyme that crosslinks
collagen and elastin fibers. The study of human breast cancer cell lines
shows that HIF-1a upregulates lysyl oxidase in highly invasive cells and
treatment with a lysyl oxidase inhibitor significantly decreases cellular
invasion. Past work also supports TGF-B driving lysyl oxidase expression
in the stroma of many tissue types. The interaction between the TGF-
secreted by infiltrating myeloid cells and stromal fibroblasts has yet to
be elucidated and the combination of these effects on ECM remodeling and
tumor metastasis will be the focus of this study. In this study we
utilize transgenic mice which express PyMT under a mammary epithelial
specific promoter, MMTV, and have the type II TGF- receptor conditionally
deleted from mammary epithelial cells. Prior to tumor palpation, we see
an increase in collagen deposition as well as tissue tensile strength
indicating a higher degree of collagen crosslinking. In PyMT tumors
originating from the RII KO mammary glands, we see an increased
deposition of collagen as well as an increased expression of lysyl
oxidase. In our model, both in vitro and in vivo evidence supports
stromal expression of lysyl oxidase by fibroblasts. Increased levels of
stromal lysyl oxidase are correlated with increased levels of available
TGF- in the RII KO tumors which is primarily derived from infiltrating
myeloid cells. Upon inhibition of lysyl oxidase activity during
development of PyMT tumors in vivo, we observe a dramatic decrease in the
ability of the cells to metastasize primarily through a loss of the
ability to intravasate into the circulation. These results suggest that
loss of the TGF- type II receptor in mammary carcinoma cells promotes
invasion through increases in lysyl oxidase activity and tissue
stiffness. Future studies will focus on cellular response to variability
in tissue stiffness and how the changes relate to in vivo tumors and
their ability to enter the blood stream.

