Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface modifications and drug-loading affect immunogenicity of
targeted nanoparticles


Introduction: Targeted nanoparticles offer great promise for developing
new cancer imaging and targeted therapy approaches. For future clinical
translation, one of the major concerns is that repeated administrations
of the targeted nanoparticles may induce a strong immune response to the
targeting ligands. The production of a high titer of neutralizing
antibodies will block the receptor-binding site and reduce efficiency of
targeted delivery of the nanoparticles. Methods: We have examined the
titers of targeting ligand-specific antibodies in the blood and the
antibody producing B lymphocytes in the spleen of Balb/c mice, bearing
mouse 4T1 mammary tumors, following injections of magnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (IONPs) conjugated with targeting ligands derived from mice
or humans. Results: We found that conjugation of targeting ligands onto
IONPs increases immunogenicity of the ligand and results in a higher
antibody titer compared to free targeting ligand injected mice.
Furthermore, targeting ligands from different species, such as a human
single chain antibody to epidermal growth factor receptor (scFvEGFR),
induce a much higher level of the antibody in the mice compared to the
mice that received a recombinant receptor binding domain of the mouse
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), which targets uPA receptor.
Surface coating of polyethylene glycol (PEG) reduces nonspecific uptake
of the nanoparticles by macrophages in the liver and spleen. However, we
found higher antibody titers in the mice that received PEG-coated
targeting IONPs compared to the mice received targeting IONPs without
PEG. We further elucidated the mechanism of the enhanced antibody
response and found that although PEG-coated IONPs avoided uptake by mouse
macrophages, they efficiently enter into mouse dendritic cells. High
levels of the PEG-coated IONPs and longer circulation time in the blood
allow uptake of more IONPs in the antigen-presenting dendritic cells,
thereby stimulating antibody production. However, for targeted therapy
using nanoparticles carrying chemotherapy drugs, the antibody response
may not be significant since we found that the antibody response was
significantly inhibited in mice that received the targeted nanoparticles
carrying a chemotherapy drug, doxorubicin. Results of ELISPOT assay of
the spleen cells from the mice that received systemic delivery of the
targeted nanoparticles with or without doxorubicin revealed that the
nanoparticles carrying the drug were able to selectively eliminate
ligand-specific, antibody-producing B lymphocytes in the spleen, with no
overall decrease in the total number of antibody producing cells. Results
of our study provide important information for the development of
targeted nanoparticle drug carriers for effective treatment of human
cancer. Our study further supports the feasibility of translation of
targeted theranostic nanoparticles for clinic applications.

