Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-6 producing tumor associated macrophages (TAMs)
increase MYC expression and promote tumor growth in a novel murine
neuroblastoma model


The concept of tumor-promoting inflammation is a recognized enabling
characteristic of cancers. Recent studies have demonstrated the
prognostic significance of tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in several
cancers. Our group has also demonstrated the significance of TAMs and
interleukin-6 receptor in predicting poor outcome in children diagnosed
with metastatic MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma (NBL-NA). Previous in
vitro work has shown that co-culture of a human neuroblastoma MYCN
non-amplified cell line with monocytes enhanced proliferation, an effect
mediated in part by interleukin-6 (IL6). To address the mechanism by
which inflammation contributes to tumorigenesis in neuroblastoma, we have
established a novel, 100% penetrant, murine model of metastatic NBL-NA.
The tumors of these transgenic mice (NBL-Tag) are detected by MRI only
after 12 weeks of age, which coincide with IL6 levels becoming detectable
and increasing in blood. DNA profiling of tumors reveal no amplification
of the MYCN locus, while RNA profiling and FACS analyses of tumors show
high expression of IL6, and infiltration by IL6-producing TAMs. Thus, a
pro-inflammatory microenvironment mimicking that observed in human
metastatic NBL-NA characterizes the growth of NBL-Tag murine tumors.
Immune-related gene expression analysis of NBL-Tag adrenal glands in mice
at pre-tumor development age (4, 8 and 12 weeks old) show age-dependent
increase in expression of CCL2 (aka monocyte chemotactic protein 1) and
fibronectin (FN1) compared to wildtype adrenal glands demonstrating early
monocyte chemotaxis and establishment of a pro-inflammatory niche. In
vitro co-culture of spleen or peritoneal macrophages from wildtype mice
increases proliferation of a NBL-Tag cell line (NBT2) by 30 - 50% over
its basal rate, as measured by Brdu incorporation. This effect coincides
with two-fold increase in IL6 protein level in the co-cultured media.
However, these proliferative changes do not require cell-cell contact and
are only partially reversed by blocking IL6, suggesting other soluble
factors also contribute to the observed effects. Co-cultured NBT2 cells
also increase their expression of MYC by two-fold, providing insight into
the tumor proliferative mechanism facilitated by TAMs. In summary, this
study demonstrates the recruitment and growth-promoting effects of IL6
producing TAMs in early pathogenesis of neuroblastoma in a novel MYCN
non-amplified murine model. The NBL-Tag mice provide a robust transgenic
model to study neuroblastoma pathogenesis and provide a platform to
assess therapies targeting tumor cells and tumor-associated inflammatory
cells.

