Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent splicing pathway mutations and aberrant RNA splicing in
myelodysplasia


MDS are a group of myeloid neoplasms characterized by deregulated blood
cell production and a high propensity to AML. Although a number of gene
alterations have been implicated in the pathogenesis of MDS, they do not
fully explain the pathogenesis of MDS. So, in order to clarify a
comprehensive registry of gene mutations in MDS, we performed whole-exome
sequencing of 29 cases with MDS and related myeloid neoplasm. A total of
268 somatic mutations or 9.2 mutations per sample were identified. Among
these 9 genes were mutated in more than 2 cases, which not only included
a spectrum of known gene targets in MDS, but also affected previously
unknown genes that are commonly involved in RNA splicing pathway,
including U2AF35, SRSF2 and ZRSR2. Together with additional three (SF3A1,
SF3B1 and PRPF40B) found in single cases, 16 (55.2%) of the 29 discovery
cases carried a mutation affecting the component of the splicing
machinery. To confirm the observation, we examined 9 spliceosome genes
for mutations in a large set of myeloid neoplasms. In total, 219
mutations were identified in 209 out of the 582 samples of myeloid
neoplasms. RNA splicing pathway mutations were highly specific to
myelodysplasia, including 19 of 23 (83%) cases with RARS, 43 of 50 (86%)
RCMD-RS, 68 of 155 (44%) other MDS, 48 of 88 (55%) CMML, and 16 of 62
(26%) secondary AML with MDS features with a string preference of SF3B1
mutations to RARS and RCMD-RS and of SRSF2 to CMML, while they were rare
in cases with de novo AML and MPN. Significantly, these mutations
occurred in an almost completely mutually exclusive manner among mutated
cases, suggesting the importance of deregulated RNA splicing in the
pathogenesis of MDS. RNA splicing plays critical roles in
differentiation, development, and disease and is a major source for
protein diversity in higher eukaryotes. Splicing pathway mutations in
myelodysplasia commonly affected those components of the splicing complex
that are engaged in the 3 splice site recognition, strongly indicating
production of unspliced or aberrantly spliced RNA species are
incriminated for the pathogenesis of MDS. So, to clarify the effect of
these splicing mutations on RNA splicing, we expressed the wild-type and
the mutant U2AF35 or SRSF2 in HeLa cells and performed whole
transcriptome analysis in these cells. The results of exon array showed
that the wild-type U2AF35 promoted RNA splicing correctly, whereas the
mutant U2AF35 inhibited this processes and rendered intronic sequences to
remain unspliced. RNA sequencing additionally showed that the number of
reads that encompassed the exon/intron junctions was significantly
increased in mutant U2AF35-transduced cells. This result means that
mutant U2AF35 actually induced impaired 3-splice site recognition during
pre-mRNA processing. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that abnormal
RNA splicing caused by mutations of multiple genes on RNA splicing
pathway is a common feature of myelodysplasia.

