Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-tumor heterogeneity and Darwinian selection revealed by
multi-region exome sequencing of renal cell carcinomas


Background: Genetic intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) may foster tumor
adaptation by providing selectable phenotypes for Darwinian evolution.
Extensive genetic heterogeneity may also hinder personalized medicine
strategies that rely on the portrayal of the mutational landscape from
single tumor biopsies. Methods: To examine ITH, we have subjected
multiple biopsies from primary renal cell carcinomas and associated
metastatic sites to exome capture sequencing (n=2), SNP-array based
chromosomal aberration and ploidy profiling analysis (n=4). Phylogenetic
relationships of tumor regions were reconstructed by clonal ordering of
non-synonymous somatic mutations. The phenotypic consequences of genetic
ITH were characterised by immunohistochemistry, mutation functional
analysis and mRNA expression profiling. Results: Phylogenetic
reconstruction revealed branched evolutionary tumor growth with 63-69% of
somatic mutations identified from single biopsies not detectable across
all sequenced tumor regions. Independent tumor suppressor gene loss of
function mutations with distinct regional distributions were detected
within individual tumors: SETD2 harbored 5 different mutations in 2
tumors and PTEN and KDM5C two different mutations in one tumor, each.
Thus, despite genetic divergence during tumor progression, phenotypic
convergent evolution occurred, indicating a high degree of early
mutational diversity. ITH was observed for a mutation in the kinase
domain of mTOR, correlating with S6 and 4EBP phosphorylation specifically
in cancer regions carrying the mutation and constitutive activation of
mTOR kinase activity in vitro. Expression of a renal cancer-specific
prognostic signature differed between tumor regions. Chromosomal
aberration analysis revealed extensive ITH with 26/30 tumor biopsies from
four tumors harboring divergent allelic imbalance profiles. Ploidy
profiling revealed heterogeneity in two out of four tumors and identified
an aneuploid tumor cell population in a metastasis that probably evolved
from a tetraploid intermediate detectable in the primary tumor.
Conclusions: Genetic ITH was present in all tumors and occurs through
spatially separated heterogeneous somatic mutations and chromosomal and
ploidy aberrations leading to both, phenotypic intra-tumor diversity
(mTOR activating mutation) and convergent loss of function(SETD2, PTEN
and KDM5C). ITH can lead to underestimation of the tumor genomic
landscape portrayed from single biopsies and may present significant
challenges to personalized medicine and biomarker development. ITH,
associated with heterogeneous protein function, may foster tumor
adaptation and therapeutic failure through Darwinian selection. Targeting
mutations commonly located on the trunks, rather than the branches of
phylogenetic trees, may improve therapeutic outcomes.

