Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optically-guided surgical approach using fluorescence
visualization can significantly improve locoregional recurrence and
overall survival for early stage oral cancer


Recurrence following excision of high-grade dysplasia (HGD, severe
dysplasia and carcinoma in situ) or squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) implies
that the presence of subclinical changes at the margins is not apparent
at surgery, resulting in incomplete excision. Fluorescence visualization
(FV) has shown its value in identifying clinically not apparent high-risk
oral lesions. The objective of this study is to assess the effectiveness
of FV-guided surgery in reducing the loco-regional recurrence and
improving overall survival. Method: From September 1st 2004 to August 31,
2009, 264 consecutive patients diagnosed with T1/T2 SCC or HGD were
registered at the BC Cancer Agency and treated with surgical excision
with intent to cure. Among these, 246 patients (93%; SCC, 132; HGD, 114)
had a follow-up period of at least 6 months. Among these patients, 149
had the surgery done under FV guidance (FV group) while the other 97 were
treated with conventional surgery procedure (control group). The outcome
measurements include pathology-proven local recurrence to severe
dysplasia or higher requiring another surgical procedure, regional
failure, and death at follow-up. Time to outcome curve was estimated by
the Kaplan-Meier method. Results: There is no significant difference
between FV and control groups in age, smoking habit, lesion anatomical
site, diagnosis, tumor size, and previous cancer history. There were more
females in the FV group (51% vs. 33%, P = 0.006). With an average of 40
months follow-up, the FV group shows significantly lower local recurrence
(7% vs. 38%), regional failure (6% vs. 23%), and death (5% vs. 20%), and
significant longer time to recurrence (P Recurrence following excision of
high-grade dysplasia (HGD, severe dysplasia and carcinoma in situ) or
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) implies that the presence of subclinical
changes at the margins is not apparent at surgery, resulting in
incomplete excision. Fluorescence visualization (FV) has shown its value
in identifying clinically not apparent high-risk oral lesions. The
objective of this study is to assess the effectiveness of FV-guided
surgery in reducing the loco-regional recurrence and improving overall
survival. Method: From September 1st 2004 to August 31, 2009, 264
consecutive patients diagnosed with T1/T2 SCC or HGD were registered at
the BC Cancer Agency and treated with surgical excision with intent to
cure. Among these, 246 patients (93%; SCC, 132; HGD, 114) had a follow-up
period of at least 6 months. Among these patients, 149 had the surgery
done under FV guidance (FV group) while the other 97 were treated with
conventional surgery procedure (control group). The outcome measurements
include pathology-proven local recurrence to severe dysplasia or higher
requiring another surgical procedure, regional failure, and death at
follow-up. Time to outcome curve was estimated by the Kaplan-Meier
method. Results: There is no significant difference between FV and
control groups in age, smoking habit, lesion anatomical site, diagnosis,
tumor size, and previous cancer history. There were more females in the
FV group (51% vs. 33%, P = 0.006). With an average of 40 months
follow-up, the FV group shows significantly lower local recurrence (7%
vs. 38%), regional failure (6% vs. 23%), and death (5% vs. 20%), and
significant longer time to recurrence (P < 0.0001), regional failure (P =
0.0007), and death of disease (P = 0.004). Conclusion: Although they are
retrospectively collected from a single centre, the data have strongly
demonstrated that the use of FV for surgical margin decision can
significantly improve outcomes of the early stage oral cancer. An
on-going 5-year multi-centre phase III randomized surgical trial (the
COOLS trial), funded by Terry Fox Research Institute, has started to
recruit patients and the data will be used to validate the results of
this study. (Supported by R01 DE17013 from the National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research, CCSRI-20336 from Canadian Cancer
Society Research Institute, and TFRI-2009-24 from Terry Fox Research
Institute. CFP is currently supported by a Scholar Award from the Michael
Smith Foundation for Health Research).

