Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of paclitaxel and carboplatin therapy by CCL2 blockade
in ovarian cancers


Ovarian cancer is strongly associated with a pro-inflammatory leukocyte
infiltrate, and very high levels of chemokines are found in ascites,
including CCL2. CNTO 888, a neutralizing anti-CCL2 antibody, could
inhibit the pro-tumor inflammatory infiltrate and tumor growth, thus
providing clinical benefit to ovarian cancer patients. It was reported
that CCL2 stimulated tumor cells to produce pro-angiogenic factors
instead of directly stimulating bone marrow endothelial cells (Zhang J et
al. 2009). The anti-CCL2 antibody CNTO 888 also had no effect as a
monotherapy on capillary tube formation; however, CCL2 increased VEGF-A
mRNA expression levels in PC-3 cells after 4-6 h of treatment. The
induction of VEGF-A mRNA expression in PC-3 cells was blocked by
pretreatment with a neutralizing antibody, indicating this induction was
mediated by CCL2. CCL2 has been shown to be overexpressed in tumor cell
lines resistant to taxanes. CCL2 may be induced by chemotherapy and
mediate chemoresistance to taxanes. Moreover, this upregulation of CCL2
by taxane-based chemotherapy has been shown to occur via the JNK pathway.
Study design: Our overall hypothesis is that CCL2 neutralization can
inhibit tumor growth of taxane resistant metastatic ovarian cancer, and
that stroma plays an important role in promoting tumor growth. This
project is focused on three pairs of taxane resistant variants developed
in the lab: ES-2/TP, MES-OV/TP and OVCAR-3/TP. These three cell models
exhibit alterations in tubulin expression and dynamics along with other
non-MDR1/P-glycoprotein mechanisms of resistance to taxanes. Using
quantitative PCR, we observed elevated CCL2 expression (7x, 45x and 9x,
respectively) in these cell models relative to parental controls, and
confirmed these findings at the protein level by ELISA. CCR2 expression
has been determined as well, by qPCR and by FACS analysis. In order to
assess tumor growth by bioluminescent imaging, our taxane variants were
transduced with the pHR2-gfp/luc lentiviral vector and were sorted in
order to obtain homogenous gfp/luc positive population. These cells have
been implanted intraperitoneally (i.p.) and subcutaneously (s.c.) in
athymic nude, adult female mice. A pilot study was done to determine the
growth of our three cell lines pairs injected subcutaneously or
intraperitoneally into mice. Mice were then treated with antibodies to
neutralize both the human tumor-derived CCL2 (CNTO 888) and the mouse
orthologue of human CCL2, MCP-1 (C1142), with and without chemotherapy
(paclitaxel or carboplatin). Bioluminescence images have been acquired in
order to evaluate tumor growth during treatment. We observed a
significant additive effect on efficacy of paclitaxel and carboplatin
when the CCL2 blockade is added, compared to the chemotherapy alone
(percent tumor burden at week 7 compared with week 3: paclitaxel 82%,
paclitaxel + CNTO888/C1142 19%, carboplatin 74%, carboplatin +
CNTO888/C1142 13%).

