Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of claudin-1 induces Notch and Wnt signaling to
regulate colon carcinogenesis


Under physiological conditions, colonic homeostasis is a carefully
balanced interplay between stem cells, their progeny, differentiation and
cell fate determination. Dysregulation of this harmony signifies
susceptibility to neoplastic growth. Colonic epithelium undergoes
continuous proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis along the crypt
(crypt bottom to top). Notch signaling is a key regulator of the
absorptive/secretory lineage determination. Dysregulation of notch
signaling disrupts the normal colonic differentiation and depletes the
goblet cell population while immature colonocyte population increases.
Importantly, emerging literature suggests that Notch- signaling helps
regulate colon cancer growth and progression in association with Wnt
signaling. We have previously demonstrated that claudin-1 expression is
highly increased in colon cancer and is causally associated with the
tumorigenic and metastatic abilities of colon cancer cells. We also
reported an inverse relationship between claudin-1 expression and
differentiation in colon cancer cells. Here, we show a significant
decrease in the goblet cell population (as determined by PAS and Alcian
Blue) and Muc-2 expression accompanied with an increase in Carbonic
Anhydrase I (CAI) expression, a commonly used marker for colonocytes in
Villin-claudin-1 transgenic (Cl-1TG) mice that overexpress claudin-1 in
the intestinal epithelium. Further analysis to detect Ki-67 expression
suggested increase in colonic proliferation in Cl-1TG mice vs. WT mice.
Taken together, these data suggest a role for claudin-1 in the regulation
of colonic epithelial differentiation. To further determine the role of
claudin-1 overexpression in cancer progression, we crossed Cl-1TG mice
with APCmin mice, most widely used mouse model of colon cancer. Notably,
APCmin mice develop few colonic tumors (mean=0.8) and have a life span of
22.5-23 weeks. Importantly, we noted a 4fold increase in the colonic
tumor burden in (mean=3.8 tumors) and decrease in life span in
APCmin/Cl-1 mice vs. APCmin mice. Also, tumors in APCmin/Cl-1 mice were
larger, exhibited high grade of dysplasia and increased nuclear -catenin
(activated Wnt signaling) compared to tumors from APCmin mice. Our
further studies using SW480claudin-1 cells {SW480 cells stably
overexpressing claudin-1} and SW620siRNA cells {SW620 cells with stable
inhibition of claudin-1 expression} demonstrated activation of Notch and
Wnt signaling in SW480 cells (APCmutant) overexpressing claudin-1 while
inhibited on inhibition of claudin-1. Taken together, our data supported
a novel role of claudin-1 in the regulation of Notch and Wnt-signaling
and thus colon carcinogenesis.

