Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted polymer-based nanoparticles containing camptothecin:
Development and function


Camptothecin (CPT) is a naturally occurring broad range anti-cancer
alkaloid that acts by inhibiting DNA enzyme topoisomerase I and HIF-1
activities. However, its systemic delivery has been problematic due to
its low solubility and toxicity. To this end, we have designed a CPT
delivery system that increases the solubility of CPT by more than three
orders of magnitude and is capable of directing CPT specifically to
cancerous cells. This delivery system is composed of CPT conjugated to a
copolymer of mucic acid and poly(ethylene glycol) (MAP). When this
conjugate is placed in water it self-assembles into MAP-CPT
nanoparticles. The polyol containing backbone of MAP is able to form
reversible covalent bonds with boronic acids (BA). Targeting can
therefore be achieved through using BA as the linker between the
targeting agent and MAP-CPT nanoparticles. MAP-CPT nanoparticles with
varying MAP lengths of 20kDa, 65kDa and 100kDa and BA linkers with
different binding constants to MAP-CPT nanoparticles are synthesized and
characterized. Particle sizes of 40nm in diameter are observed by dynamic
light scattering and visualized by particle tracking methods (Nanosight)
and cryo-transmission electron microscopy. This particle size takes
advantage of the accumulation of nanoscaled entities in tumor tissue via
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. In addition, the
slightly negative particle surface charge of 1mV reduces clearance by the
reticuloendothelial system (RES) and minimizes undesirable interaction
with blood components. A prolonged pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of
MAP-CPT system is observed in Balb/C mice with greater than 10% of
injected dose remaining in circulation 24 hours post injection for
MAP-CPT nanoparticles containing 65kDa or 100kDa MAP. Maximum tolerable
dose (MTD) for MAP-CPT nanoparticles containing MAP at 20kDa, 65kDa and
100kDa are found to be 20, 10 and 8mg of CPT/kg respectively in nude
mice. Initial anti-tumor data using MAP-CPT nanoparticles in A/J mice
bearing Neuro2A (mice neuroblastoma) tumors show tumor regression after
two weekly doses of MAP-CPT nanoparticles. We are currently investigating
a targeted version of the MAP-CPT nanoparticles through anti-tumor
studies comparing targeted (using Herceptin antibodies) versus
non-targeted efficacy in nude mice bearing BT-474 (HER2 over-expressing
human breast carcinoma) tumors. MAP-CPT, a delivery system for the small
hydrophobic drug CPT, is developed and has favorable particle size and
surface charge properties, prolonged PK profile and targeting potential.
Efforts to define the relationships between targeted and non-targeted
versions of the MAP-CPT nanoparticles are in progress.

