Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tobacco smoke modulates estrogen metabolism in the mouse lung


Tobacco smoke is the major risk factor for lung cancer; the leading cause
of cancer death in both men and women in the US and worldwide. Recent
studies suggest that the female hormone estrogen promotes lung cancer
development. However, the relationship between tobacco smoke exposure and
estrogen is not well studied. Previous data from our lab showed that
whole-body exposure to tobacco smoke induced the expression of the phase
I detoxification enzyme cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) within the lungs of
female A/J mice. CYP1B1 activates polyaromatic hydrocarbons in tobacco
smoke and also converts estrogen to catechol metabolites, in particular
4-hydroxy estrogens (4-OHEs), which are known to be carcinogenic. The
goal of this study was to characterize the profile of estrogen
metabolites within the lung using a novel high-performance liquid
chromatography/electrospray ionization/tandem mass spectrometry
(HPLC/ESI/MS/MS) protocol. Three estrogens (E1, E2 and E3) and five
estrogen metabolites (2-OHE1, 4-OHE1, 4-OHE2, 2-OMeE1 and 2-OMeE2) were
detected in perfused murine lungs, with 4-OHE1 identified as the most
abundant estrogen metabolite. The levels of both 4-OHE1 and 4-OHE2 were
2-fold higher within the lungs of female mice as compared to those of
males. This elevation was maintained when total 4-OHE levels were
normalized to total estrogen (sum of estrogen and its metabolites,
p=0.009). In contrast, no gender difference was observed in 2-OHE1
levels. This estrogen metabolite profile is consistent with the results
from gene expression analyses, which revealed that the ratio of CYP1B1 to
CYP1A1 transcripts (CYP1A1 produces 2-OHE) was elevated (2-fold) in
females as compared to males (p=0.05). To assess the impact of tobacco
smoke on the profile of estrogen metabolites within the lung, female mice
were exposed to tobacco smoke for 8 weeks and estrogen metabolite levels
were measured by HPLC/ESI/MS/MS. As expected, the levels of 4-OHEs were
significantly higher within the lungs of mice exposed to tobacco smoke
(4-fold for 4-OHE1 and 2-fold for 2-OHE2) as compared to controls exposed
to filtered air (p=0.00003 and 0.0007, respectively). Interestingly, the
level of total 2-OMeE, a putative protective estrogen metabolite, was
decreased to 70% of controls in mice exposed to tobacco smoke (p=0.005)
while 2-OHE levels were comparable in control and smoke-exposed animals.
These results suggest that tobacco smoke accelerates the production of
carcinogenic 4-OHEs within the lung; metabolites that could potentially
contribute to lung tumor development. Furthermore, CYP1B1 may represent a
molecular target for therapeutic intervention in lung tumor formation.
Future studies will focus on comparing the profile of estrogen
metabolites in human lung tissue from never smokers and current smokers.
This work was supported by funds from the Estate of Jane Villon and the
Kitty Jackson Fund.

