Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of a highly invasive subpopulation
from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells


The acquisition of an invasive phenotype is a pre-requisite for
metastasis. We set out to develop cellular systems that can mirror
transient and stbale molecular alterations that confer an invasive
phenotype to breast cancer cells. We observed that it is possible to
isolate invasive subpopulations from moderately invasive cancer cell
lines. Enrichment of invasive sub-populations of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells in three successive preparative invasion assays in Matrigel covered
Boyden chambers yielded a highly invasive cell line. Prolonged
cultivation of these cells did not abolish the invasive phenotype
although not all phenotypic changes acquired during selection are
maintained by long term cultures. Genetic analyses of these cells by
cytogenetics and array based comparative genome hybridization revealed
many genetic alterations including increased ploidy. The flow cytometric
DNA Index (DI) changes from 1.28 to 2.28. Cells with DI 2.28 constitute
1.4% of the parental cell line. Whole genome SNP analysis shows that the
two populations are genetically related excluding any cell contamination.
The invasive cells proliferate and undergo apoptosis similar to the
parental cells. Commitment to apoptosis is increased since invasive cells
respond more strongly to curcumin or peroxide induced apoptosis. Invasive
cells show relative resistance to the cytotoxic, alkylating agent
Doxorubicin and increased sensitivity to the anti-mitotic drugs
Vincristine and Taxol. Increased resistance to the topoisomerase II
inhibitor Mitoxantrone is observed only transiently in invasive cells and
lost in long term cultures. Similarly, the chemokines CXCL1 and -2 are
transiently upregulated. Response to the anti-diabetic drug Metformin
showed a reduced sensibility for invasive cells in terms of growth
inhibition (IC50). Gene expression profiling shows complex alterations in
gene expression. Many of the genes that are differentially expressed in
highly versus moderately invasive cells are differentially expressed in
human breast cancer cases with and without distant metastasis and
correlate with disease free survival. The invasive phenotype is not
related to stem cell features nor to epithelial mesenchymal transition.
These cells constitute a novel model for tumor progression.
Tumorigenicity and metastatic potential in vivo are currently being
tested.

