Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic profiling for early detection of colorectal neoplasia


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the world. Colonoscopy is widely used for early
detection and removal of colorectal neoplasia to prevent CRC. However, it
is both invasive and costly underscoring the need for new strategies to
identify subjects for whom colonoscopy is most appropriate. Metabolomics
is a high throughput method of detecting small molecules which provides a
platform for identifying novel biomarkers of colorectal neoplasia. In
this study, we investigated whether metabolic changes could be identified
in the feces and plasma in a model of experimental CRC. Methods: Five
week old male A/J mice were administered six weekly intraperitoneal
injections of either azoxymethane (AOM) (10mg/kg) (n=40) or 0.9% saline
(n=35). Following injections, feces, plasma and tumor tissue or normal
colonic mucosa were collected and stored at 80oC for metabolomic
analysis. Five mice from the AOM injected group were sacrificed at each
of three time points (three, five and seven weeks after the last
injection) to assess tumor burden. UPLC/MS/MS and GC/MS were used to
quantify metabolite levels in feces, plasma and tissue. Results:
Histological analysis of tumor burden in the colon showed a progressive
increase as a function of time after AOM administration. Metabolomic
analysis revealed a large number of significantly changed metabolite
levels in both the feces and plasma during colon carcinogenesis. These
included amino acids and peptides in feces as well as bile acids in the
plasma. A select number of these metabolites were found to progressively
change as a function of time in both feces and plasma in relation to
increased tumor burden. Significantly, certain metabolites changed in the
same direction in feces and tumor tissue, plasma and tumor tissue as well
as across all three matrices, suggesting that these may be tumor-derived.
For example, samples from AOM injected mice showed increased levels of
sarcosine and 2-hydroxyglutarate, metabolites previously implicated in
prostate cancer and gliomas/AML, respectively. Conclusions: This study
demonstrates the potential utility of metabolomic analyses for the early
detection of colorectal neoplasia. Additionally, the finding of increased
levels of two onco-metabolites (sarcosine, 2-hydroxyglutarate) in
colorectal neoplasia suggests their potential involvement in colon
carcinogenesis. Future studies in humans will be required to determine
the significance of these findings.

