Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of STAT3 signaling promotes K-Ras induced lung
tumorigenesis


Lung cancer related and unrelated to smoking is still leading cause of
cancer deaths worldwide with an overall survival rate of 15%. Several
genetic alterations have been associated with lung cancer: loss of tumor
suppressor genes such as p53, INK4a, LKB1 and mutations/amplifications in
several oncogenes like K-Ras, EGFR, or c-Myc. Most frequent
smoking-related mutations impair GTP hydrolysis in K-Ras, an oncogene
downstream of the EGFR pathway, causing persistent cell growth and
proliferation in 20-30% of lung adenocarcinomas. Another important
downstream effector of EGFR signaling is the signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)-3. STAT-3 regulates important pathways
in tumorigenesis, through upregulation of genes encoding apoptosis
inhibitors (Bcl-XL, Bcl-2, Mcl-1, survivin). In patient samples and NSCLC
cell lines nuclear, phosphorylated STAT3 is enhanced and correlates with
subsequent suppression of apoptosis of NSCLC tumors. However, the role of
STAT-3 in lung cancer in vivo has not yet been established. In order to
investigate the role of STAT-3 in lung tumors, we have established a
genetic mouse model that allows inducing K-RasG12D-dependent lung tumors
and simultaneously genetically ablating STAT-3. Survival analysis of this
model showed a significant advantage of K-RasG12D male mice harbouring
STAT-3 compared to K-RasG12D mice lacking one or both alleles of Stat-3,
indicating a hapoloinsufficient tumor suppressor role in oncogenic
K-RasG12D tumor formation. Furthermore, animals with deleted STAT-3 and
activated K-RasG12D have a significant increase in tumor burden and
develop more adenomas and adenocarcinomas than age-matched animals,
harbouring only oncogenic K-RasG12D. This data suggest that disruption of
STAT-3 signaling promotes tumorigenesis in K-Ras induced tumors. We are
currently investigating the molecular and cellular mechanisms responsible
for this observation.

