Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Id1-induced IGF2 in autocrine/endocrine promotion of
esophageal cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis


Esophageal cancer is the 7th leading cause of cancer death in Hong Kong.
The disease is highly lethal (with a 5-year survival rate of 14%) because
many cases go undetected until the disease is at an advanced stage.
Understanding of the underlying mechanisms and the signaling pathways
involved in esophageal tumorigenesis is the key to identify new molecular
targets for intervention. Id1 (inhibitor of differentiation or DNA
binding), a member of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins, is
overexpressed in many types of human cancer. Our previous reports
provided the first evidence that Id1 activates the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells, and that there is a positive correlation
between Id1 and phosphorylated (p)-AKT expressions in clinical esophageal
cancer specimens. We also demonstrated in experimental animal models that
Id1 promotes tumor growth and metastasis through activation of PI3K/AKT.
Increasing evidence suggests that growth factors secreted from cancer
cells can play an important role in cancer progression by modulating the
tumor microenvironment and the host systemic environment via autocrine,
paracrine, and endocrine mechanisms. In this study, we found that Id1
induced the expression and secretion of IGF2 (insulin-like growth factor
2) in ESCC cells, and that this induction mediated the activation of
PI3K/AKT in an autocrine manner. Knockdown of IGF2 in cancer cells or
addition of IGF2 neutralizing antibody abrogated the effects of Id1 on
proliferation, survival, and invasion of esophageal cancer cells. The
mechanisms by which Id1 upregulates IGF2 were studied, and the results
indicated that Id1 could protect IGF2 from ubiquitin-proteasomal
degradation in ESCC cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of human
esophageal cancer tissue microarray showed elevated IGF2 expression in
ESCC, which correlated with increased Id1 and p-AKT expressions.
Furthermore, our in vivo experiments showed that IGF2 secreted by
Id1-overexpressing ESCC xenograft could instigate the growth of distant
ESCC tumors, as well as promote metastasis of circulating ESCC cells.
Targeting IGF2 with the use of neutralizing antibody had significant
antitumor effects on esophageal cancer xenografts in mice. Our findings
therefore support that the Id1-IGF2-PI3K/AKT signaling cascade plays an
important role in esophageal cancer, and that Id1-overexpressing primary
tumors may affect the host systemic environment and contribute to cancer
progression. In conclusion, we have uncovered a novel mechanism in the
role of Id1 in tumorigenesis which may have significant implications for
the development of targeted therapy for esophageal cancer. [This study is
supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong SAR, China
(General Research Fund Project no. HKU 762610M)]

