Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-E2F-1 PEGylated liposomal encapsulated peptide regresses
human small cell lung cancer & lymphoma xenografts


The E2F family of transcription factors is critical to large number of
key cellular processes, including replication, DNA repair, and
differentiation. E2F-1 is unique among the E2F family of transcription
factors in that it can act as a tumor suppressor or as an oncogene,
depending on the cellular context. Given the critical functions of E2F
target genes in replication, and differentiation, it is perhaps not
surprising that dysregulation of E2Fs has been associated with the cancer
phenotype. E2F-1,2 and-3, activating E2Fs, function as heterodimers with
DP proteins and are regulated by the retinoblastoma protein. E2F-1 and 3
are over expressed in many human tumors and overexpression (suggesting
oncogene addiction) is associated with a poor prognosis. We have used
phage display to obtain peptides that bind tightly to the E2F consensus
promoter recognition sequence. When one of these peptides was coupled to
a modified penetration sequence to enhance uptake, the penetratin-
peptide (PEP) potently inhibited some but not all malignant cell lines.
Modeling studies and ChIP studies showed that part of the pentratin
sequence was involved in the binding of the PEP to the E2 F1 promoter.
The PEP down-regulated E2F-2 and 4, as well as E2F-1, and-down stream
targets of E2F-1. The small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) cell line and the
Ramos cell line (Burkitt lymphoma) were sensitive to low micromolar
concentrations of the PEP, and apoptosis was seen within 6 h. These cell
lines have mutant p53, and over express E2F-1 and cMyc and BCL2, and are
oncogene addicted. Normal cells (human bone marrow CD34+ hematopoeitic
stem cells, human marrow mesenchymal cells and MEFs), were insensitive to
high concentrations of the PEP. When encapsulated in PEGylated liposomes,
the PEP caused marked regression of advanced SCLC xenografts in mice
without appreciable toxicity. These results prompt us to explore further
preclinical development of the PEP for tumor therapy.

