Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association studies identify several new loci for
human pigmentation traits


Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been widely conducted and
numerous new loci have been associated with various outcomes. Multiple
GWASs have been completed in the Nurses Health Study and the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study, and we have accrued more than 15,000
individuals with genome-wide genotype data. More recently, with the data
released from the 1000 Genomes Project, we have imputed about 10 million
SNPs based on the genotyped SNPs and haplotypes from the 1000 Genomes
Project. Based on the knowledge that light human pigmentation is a host
risk factor for skin cancer development, we conducted the GWASs on
pigmentary traits in multiple GWAS datasets in the two cohorts using the
newly imputed data. We systematically evaluated the traits of natural
hair color (ordinal coding from blonde, light brown, dark brown to black,
excluding red hair color), eye colors (blue, green and brown eye colors
as co-dominant outcomes), tanning ability (ordinal coding from
practically no tan, moderate tan to deep tan) and the number of sunburns
(continuous variable). We adjusted for the four largest principal
components of genetic variation in the regression model for each
component dataset, and performed a meta-analysis to combine the results
of all these datasets. No systematic deviation from the expected
distribution was detected for any of these pigmentation GWASs. Using a
multistage study design, we identified a new region on chromosome 13q22
associated with natural hair color that reached the GWAS significance
level. The most significant SNP in this region reached a p-value of 2.4
1014 (p = 5.4109 in the discovery stage and p = 1.2106 in the replication
stage). We also newly identified and replicated the association of a SNP
on 1q32.3 with brown eye color (p = 7.0108 in the combined set), a SNP on
5p15 with green eye color (p = 9.1107 in the combined set), and a SNP on
11q25 with the number of sunburns (p = 5.6106 in the combined set). Of
note, the SNP associated with the number of sunburns was also associated
with the expression of a local gene based on the transcript expression
profiling data of 87 HapMap CEU cell lines (NCBI GEO database, accession
GSE7792). These novel pigmentation SNPs identified by our GWASs are
strong candidates to evaluate skin cancer risk.

