Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid metabolism is a possible target for treatment of cyclin
D1 over-expressing mantle cell lymphoma


Cyclin D1 over-expression has been linked to the development and
progression of several types of cancer including mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL), an aggressive type of B-cell lymphoma characterized by a
t(11;14)(q13;q32) chromosomal translocation. Recent studies have shown
that cyclin D1 is a multifunctional protein not only regulating the cell
cycle but also affecting other cellular processes including DNA repair,
apoptosis, as well as glucose, fatty acid, and lipid metabolism. In this
study, we investigated the effects of the fatty acid synthase and lipase
inhibitor Orlistat on cyclin D1 over-expressing MCL cell lines. In
contrast to non-malignant peripheral blood lymphocytes and normal
fibroblasts all MCL cell lines examined were sensitive to Orlistat. This
enhanced sensitivity was dependent on cyclin D1 overexpression since
siRNA mediated cyclin D1 knockdown almost completely rescued MCL cells
from Orlistat induced apoptosis. Cell death upon Orlistat treatment was
accompanied by loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and dependent on
caspase activation since pre-incubation of the cells with the pan-caspase
inhibitor zVAD-fmk completely blocked induction of apoptosis. We
therefore investigated potential Orlistat-mediated changes in the
expression levels of the pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins
and found NOXA to be strongly induced whereas the expression of other
Bcl-2 proteins did not change significantly. RNAi mediated knockdown of
NOXA inhibited induction of cell death demonstrating the predominant role
of this protein for the proapoptotic effect of Orlistat in MCL cells.
Interestingly, silencing of cyclin D1 reduced the expression of NOXA upon
Orlistat treatment further indicating a connection between cyclin D1,
fatty acid metabolism, and the induction of NOXA. Since inhibition of
fatty acid metabolism by Orlistat was found to disturb the balance
between pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins in MCL cells we analyzed
possible combinatory effects with Bcl-2 family modulators. Co-treatment
of the cells with Orlistat and the BH3 mimetic ABT737 led to a rapid
induction of cell death and an almost complete loss of cell viability in
cyclin D1 over-expressing cells. A similar synergistic effect could be
observed by combining Orlistat and 2-deoxy-D-glucose, a glycolysis
inhibitor known to reduce MCL1 protein. These combinatory effects were
selective for MCL cells as the same treatments had only minor or no
effects on cell viability of primary PBMCs and fibroblasts from healthy
donors. In summary, our results for the first time indicate that fatty
acid metabolism may be an attractive target for therapy of cyclin D1
over-expressing MCL cells. Furthermore, these observations may contribute
to the development of rational strategies combining fatty acid metabolism
inhibitors with Bcl-2 family modulators for treatment of MCL.

