Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) associated with poor prognosis in
gastric signet ring cell carcinoma


Background: PKM2 (M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase) was identified as a
driver of aerobic glycolysis, leading to cell growth and tumor
development. PKM2 is usually known to overexpress in cancer, however,
there are still remaining questions about the function and the potential
as anti-cancer treatment target. We investigated the expression status of
PKM2 in gastric cancer tissues and evaluated the possibility of biomarker
and anticancer target. Methods: Paraffin-embedded tissue microarray
blocks of gastric adenocarcinoma tissue specimens were obtained from 363
gastric cancer patients. All patients underwent curative gastric
resection from 1999 to 2007 and distributed from stage I to IV and their
clinical characteristics were collected. IHC (Immunohistochemical) assay
was performed to evaluate PKM2 expression levels. The correlation of PKM2
expression level with gastric cancer prognosis / stage / histology was
evaluated. Results: In our previous microarray study using 60 gastric
cancer tissues, we identified PKM2 mRNA overexpressed in cancer tissue
than non-cancer tissue (PBackground: PKM2 (M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase)
was identified as a driver of aerobic glycolysis, leading to cell growth
and tumor development. PKM2 is usually known to overexpress in cancer,
however, there are still remaining questions about the function and the
potential as anti-cancer treatment target. We investigated the expression
status of PKM2 in gastric cancer tissues and evaluated the possibility of
biomarker and anticancer target. Methods: Paraffin-embedded tissue
microarray blocks of gastric adenocarcinoma tissue specimens were
obtained from 363 gastric cancer patients. All patients underwent
curative gastric resection from 1999 to 2007 and distributed from stage I
to IV and their clinical characteristics were collected. IHC
(Immunohistochemical) assay was performed to evaluate PKM2 expression
levels. The correlation of PKM2 expression level with gastric cancer
prognosis / stage / histology was evaluated. Results: In our previous
microarray study using 60 gastric cancer tissues, we identified PKM2 mRNA
overexpressed in cancer tissue than non-cancer tissue (P<0.01). In IHC
assays, PKM2 expression level was classified to score 0 (negative,
n=185), 1 (weak positive, n=136), and 2 (strong positive, n=42). 49% of
gastric cancer tissues presented PKM2 expression (weak or strong
positive). PKM2 expression had no relation with prognosis (p=0.913,
recurrence free survival) and TNM stage (p=0.825). Intestinal and diffuse
type cancer manifested different PKM2 expression pattern and signet ring
cell carcinoma manifested 26.6% PKM2 expression. Within same Lauren
classification, there was no significant difference of prognosis
according to PKM2 expression except signet ring cell carcinoma. In signet
ring cell cancer (n=78), PKM2 expression was related to poor overall
survival (p=0.029) Conclusion: PKM2 protein expression was not correlated
with gastric cancer prognosis. Only in signet ring cell gastric cancer,
overexpressed PKM2 was associated with poor overall survival. The role of
PKM2 should be further verified in signet ring cell gastric cancer model
to find clinical significance in this subtype of gastric cancer.

