Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time in vivo imaging for sensitive detection of primary and
metastatic disease in a human breast-to-lung orthotopic model


Orthotopic mouse models of human disease are absolutely essential for
validating therapeutic targets and assessing efficacy of emerging
therapies. Early detection of in vivo tumor growth is a critical
benchmark in humanized mouse models, for it reveals tumor take at a time
of reasonable tumor burden. To develop an optimal mouse model of human
metastatic breast cancer, we utilized TMD231 breast cancer cells (derived
from MDA-MB-231) that have a high propensity to metastasize to the lung.
TMD231 tumor take and improved kinetics of tumor growth and metastatic
foci formation appeared more consistently and at a faster rate in
NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) versus NOD/SCID mice. For in vivo
detection of small tumor burden at study initiation and metastatic
lesions over time, TMD231 breast cancer cells were transduced with
lentiviral vectors that express either mCherry or E2-Crimson fluorescent
proteins (FPs). Flow cytometric analysis indicated transduction
efficiencies for the lentiviral vectors expressing mCherry and E2-Crimson
in the TMD231 cells was >99% and >80%, respectively. TMD231 cells
expressing either the mCherry or E2-Crimson FPs were implanted into NSG
mice and were imaged weekly using the Optix MX3 (ART Technologies,
Montreal, Canada) to assess to what degree fluorescently tagged cells
could be longitudinally and non-invasively visualized at primary and
secondary sites within the NSG mice. While photon emission from TMD231
tumors expressing mCherry could be detected, levels were low and did not
correlate with tumor growth overtime. In contrast, high levels of photon
emission were detected using TMD231-E2-Crimson cells. Non-palpable tumors
expressing the E2-Crimson FP could be detected in NSG mice as early as 7
days post-implant into the mammary fat pad. Additionally, metastatic foci
in the lung were detected via optical imaging as early as 2-3 weeks
post-implant. Following imaging analysis, TMD231-E2-Crimson tumor size
correlated to increased fluorescent intensity, tumor depth, and
fluorescent concentration longitudinally. In vitro imaging analysis of
TMD231-E2-Crimson cells confirmed the in vivo imaging results showing a
linear relationship between cell number and fluorescent intensity. The
discrepancy in the in vivo detection of mCherry versus E2-Crimson
proteins is most likely due to the greater brightness of E2-Crimson, as
well as the closer alignment of the excitation/emission spectra of
E2-Crimson with the laser/filter set of the Optix MX3 imaging system. To
confirm optical imaging results, H&E staining indicated the presence of
numerous foci in the lungs post-mortem. The optimized orthotopic model
described here is being used to investigate mechanisms of metastasis as
well as novel therapeutic strategies in metastatic breast cancer.

