Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct taxonomic, metagenomic and metabolomic profiles from a
comprehensive gut flora analysis in healthy and colon adenoma African
Americans


Background: Gut flora has long been suspected to play a role in
colorectal cancer (CRC) pathogenesis. Elegant experiments have
substantiated such claims with the use of single pathogenic bacteria in
germ free colon cancer mouse models. Here we run a comprehensive
taxonomic, metagenomic and metabolomics analysis of stool samples from
healthy and colon adenoma African American (AA) patients to define
further this role. Patients & Methods: DNA extracts from stool samples of
6 healthy and 6 colon adenoma patients were used for the taxonomic and
metagenomic analysis. The sequencing was done using a 454 pyrosequencer
and the generated data was processed using informatics pipeline for
phylogenetic bacterial affiliation and for bacterial functions
assignment. For the metabolomics analysis, 10 fecal water extracts from
healthy individuals and 10 from colon adenoma patients were analysed for
their metabolites contents using NMR spectrometry. Results: The analysis
of 16S-rDNA sequences revealed the existence of 22 groups of bacteria. A
phylogenetic clustering revealed colon adenoma cases clustering together.
Most predominant groups in both sets of samples were Clostridia and
Bacteroides. No Lactobacilli or Bifidobacteria (good bacteria) were
detected. The synergistetes_Dynergistia group -involved in
gastrointestinal infections and Firmicutes phylum: Firmicutes group -
involved in energy resorption and obesity were 20 and 10 folds more
prevalent in adenoma patients, respectively. Bacteria TM7 group that
contain active agents in IBD was 5 folds more represented in the control
compared to the adenoma group. The metagenomic experiment have led to the
generation of about 100,000 reads per sample, 80% of which were
successfully annotated. Among the annotated functions, many were
differentially present in the colon adenoma compared to healthy
individuals. The metabolomics analysis led to a strong clustering of the
adenoma samples metabolomes further consolidating the role of bacteria
and their metabolites in colon cancer pathology. Conclusion: Our
taxonomic, metagenomic and metabolomics analysis have led the presence of
clear differential profiles in colon adenoma patients vs. healthy
persons. Lack of detection of good bacteria (Lactobacilli and
Bifidobacteria) in this study defines already a first level of
intervention in this high risk CRC population. A comprehensive analysis
of all the results is underway to bridge the Taxo, Meta and metabolomics
data.

