Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global microRNA expression array analysis and potential
application in discovery of promising drugs for hematologic cancer


Hematologic cancers, the third most common cause of cancer deaths, will
kill 50,000 Americans this year. Early diagnosis and innovative treatment
has been proposed to result in cure. Bendamustine (BM) is a synthetic
drug which is highly effective in broad range of hematologic cancers. The
efficacy of the drug is attributed to the ability of the drug to induce
apoptosis as well as to inhibit cell cycle. It was highly effective in
patients whose disease is refractory to other established drugs. Gambogic
acid (GA) is the major active component of gambose, the resin secreted
from Garcinia hanburryi which also has strong ability to induce apoptosis
as well as inhibit cell cycle. microRNAs (miRNAs) are master regulators
of the gene expression. Neither BM nor GA had been previously reported
for their effect on miRNA expression profiles in hematologic or other
cancers. We have set up an innovative global miRNA expression analysis
array. Using this miRNA expression array, we analysed global expression
in leukemia cells in culture treated with or without treatment of MB or
GA. Our data showed comparable inhibition of cell cycle and induction of
apoptosis by both GA and BM at a dose of GA several folds lower than that
of BM. Our data, based on miRNA expression analysis using genome-wide
miRNA expression array showed five common miRNAs, found differentially
expressed (more than 3 times up or down regulated compared to untreated
group with pHematologic cancers, the third most common cause of cancer
deaths, will kill 50,000 Americans this year. Early diagnosis and
innovative treatment has been proposed to result in cure. Bendamustine
(BM) is a synthetic drug which is highly effective in broad range of
hematologic cancers. The efficacy of the drug is attributed to the
ability of the drug to induce apoptosis as well as to inhibit cell cycle.
It was highly effective in patients whose disease is refractory to other
established drugs. Gambogic acid (GA) is the major active component of
gambose, the resin secreted from Garcinia hanburryi which also has strong
ability to induce apoptosis as well as inhibit cell cycle. microRNAs
(miRNAs) are master regulators of the gene expression. Neither BM nor GA
had been previously reported for their effect on miRNA expression
profiles in hematologic or other cancers. We have set up an innovative
global miRNA expression analysis array. Using this miRNA expression
array, we analysed global expression in leukemia cells in culture treated
with or without treatment of MB or GA. Our data showed comparable
inhibition of cell cycle and induction of apoptosis by both GA and BM at
a dose of GA several folds lower than that of BM. Our data, based on
miRNA expression analysis using genome-wide miRNA expression array showed
five common miRNAs, found differentially expressed (more than 3 times up
or down regulated compared to untreated group with p<0.05) in both GA and
BM treated groups. The data is particularly interesting, since these
miRNAs have been reported to target and thus modulate expression of
proteins of apoptotic pathway and senescence pathway. Out data suggest
that drugs that induce apoptosis as well as inhibit cell cycle may have
great therapeutic potential in hematologic cancers. Based on our data it
appears that the drugs with anticancer properties may affect a common set
or sets of miRNAs. To our knowledge, this constitutes the first report
describing effect of both BM and GA on miRNA expression profile, not in
just hematologic cancer but any cancer. Our study provides strong
evidence to suggest that specific miRNA expression signature/s of
hematologic cancer cells in culture following drug treatment should be
further explored to screen promising drugs with higher anticancer
properties.

