Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer in the setting of inflammatory bowel disease:
role of hemoglobin


Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is a serious complication of inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) and accounts for approximately 15% of all
IBD-associated deaths. The likelihood of IBD-related carcinoma is greater
than that of sporadic CRC. Over one half are diagnosed at stage III or
IV. During the last few years we have worked on mining colon mucosal and
submucosal layers for discovery of biomarkers that differentiate
ulcerative colitis (UC) from Crohn's colitis (CC). Using LC-MS/MS, we
examined signals found to be significantly different between CC and UC
samples. We found a signal at m/z 5045 which was more intense in UC
samples. The MALDI spectrum did not identify an intact protein entity but
did identify hemoglobin chains. Macrophages are highly versatile
phagocytes active in multiple roles in the immune system and key players
in the inflammatory response. The microenvironment of most inflammation
is filled with a large population of macrophages. In IBD, studies have
found that macrophages can count for more than 50% of the exudative mass.
Their presence within the inflammatory microenvironment, in some cases,
has been proven to increase transformation, angiogenesis, and
immunosuppression. In hemorrhagic situations (as in UC) macrophages
engulf erythrocytes and as a result release free heme iron (heFe).
Earlier studies observed that heFe has cellular proliferation effects on
colon cancer cells. Recently, the potential carcinogenic effects of heFe
were documented when it was shown that heFe increases the number of
aberrant crypt foci in colon mucosa. In the colon, iron is expected to
increase the production of reactive oxygen (O2) species (ROS) from
peroxides via the Fenton reaction, which may be the cause of cellular
toxicity and even pro-mutagenic lesions. Intracellular reactions with
active O2 can result in the initiation and progression of carcinogenesis
by induction of gene mutations, chromosomal damage and cytotoxic effects.
We hypothesize that elevated expression of mucosal free heFe would be
associated with an increased risk of UC-associated CRC. To validate this
will require investigating whether hemoglobin could be classified as a
proliferative or transforming agent for colon cancer cells by causing
reactive oxygen species release. For this purpose, we plan to study the
cellular viability of differentiated colon cell line (cancer: CCL 224,
CCL 227 and normal: NCM 356 and NCM 460) after administration of
hemoglobin at different concentrations. ROS production will be
investigated in each step. Additionally, we intend to examine the
potential cytotoxicity of hemoglobin. Supported: MMC-VICC Cancer
Partnership Grant # 3U54CA091408-09S 1 (SEA & HLM); MeTRC grant #
5U54RR026140-03 (SEA), and Vanderbilt SPORE in GI Cancer Grant #
P50CA095103

