Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a poor prognostic cancer,
develops through the progression of premalignant lesions called
pancreatic intraductal neoplasms (PanINs). Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia
(ADM) is postulated to contribute to PanIN development, and the canonical
Wnt/-catenin pathway has been implicated in this process. To ascertain
the impact of postnatal activation of the Wnt/-catenin pathway in
PanIN-PDAC progression, we combined the elasatse-tva-based RCAS-TVA
pancreatic cancer model with the established LSL-KrasG12D, Ptf1a-cre
model. Delivery of RCAS viruses encoding -cateninS37A, but not RCAS-GFP,
stimulated a shift to higher-grade PanIN lesions in young adult mice.
Moreover, mice injected with RCAS--cateninS37A had reduced survival
relative to RCAS-GFP controls (log-rank test; p Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a poor prognostic cancer, develops through the
progression of premalignant lesions called pancreatic intraductal
neoplasms (PanINs). Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) is postulated to
contribute to PanIN development, and the canonical Wnt/-catenin pathway
has been implicated in this process. To ascertain the impact of postnatal
activation of the Wnt/-catenin pathway in PanIN-PDAC progression, we
combined the elasatse-tva-based RCAS-TVA pancreatic cancer model with the
established LSL-KrasG12D, Ptf1a-cre model. Delivery of RCAS viruses
encoding -cateninS37A, but not RCAS-GFP, stimulated a shift to
higher-grade PanIN lesions in young adult mice. Moreover, mice injected
with RCAS--cateninS37A had reduced survival relative to RCAS-GFP controls
(log-rank test; p <0.05). In addition, overexpression of active -catenin
or its DNA-binding partner TCF4 in PDAC cell lines enhanced cell
proliferation, soft-agar colony formation, as well as migration and
invasion activity. In contrast, these phenotypes were significantly
blocked by the introduction of Icat, an inhibitor of the -catenin/TCF4
interaction. Together, these data suggest that activation of the
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway is closely related to pancreatic
tumorigenesis and progression of this malignancy.

