Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LHT-7 as multi-targeting and anti-angiogenic agent to growth
factor receptors


Angiogenesis is a highly regulated process that is critical for tumor
growth and metastasis. Angiogenesis depends on the balance between
different molecules released by the host and tumor cells such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast growth factor basic (bFGF),
platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PDGF), insulin-like
growth factors (IGF-1 and IGF-2) and scatter factor, which are potential
targets for development of angiogenesis inhibitor and depend on heparin
sulfate for their biological functions. Heparan sulfate is located in
cell surface and in the extracellular matrix and plays crucial regulatory
roles in some growth factors. For this reason, heparin has been
highlighted as a therapeutic agent as well as anticoagulant. In a
previous study, we reported new angiogenesis inhibitor, low molecular
weight heparin derivative (heparin-taurocholic acid conjugate; LHT-7) and
it showed delay of in vivo tumor growth in MDA-MB231 human breast cancer
and inhibited phosphorylation of VEGFR2 through the interaction with VEGF
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In present study, we
revealed LHT-7 as multi-targeting agent to several growth factors and on
their actions. LHT7 inhibited phosphorylation of VEGFR2 and binding of
LHT7 was increased in VEGFR2 over-expressing HEK293 by FACS analysis. In
HUVECs, binding of LHT-7 was shown in a dose-dependent manner by FACS
analysis and co-localized with VEGFR2 by immunofluorescence. LHT-7 also
inhibited vessel formation enhanced by PDGF-bb in matrigel plug assay and
phosphorylation of PDGFR- in human vascular smooth muscle cell (HuVSMC).
Binding of LHT-7 was increased in a dose-dependent manner by FACS
analysis and decreased in PDGFR--siRNA HuVSMC by immunofluorescence.
Finally, LHT-7 inhibited phosphorylation of FGFR-1 in HUVECs and binding
of LHT-7 was decreased in FGFR-1-siRNA MDA-MB-361. Overall, LHT-7 has
inhibitory effect on phosphorylation of growth factors and binding of
LHT-7 was increased in a dose-dependent manner but decreased in a growth
factor down-regulated cell. Therefore we suggest that LHT7 would target
to VEGFR2, PDGFR- and FGFR-1 and inhibit their angiogenic roles.

