Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of prostate cancer associated kinases by Tillandsia
recurvata: A Jamaican medicinal plant


Prostate cancer is the second most common cause of death from cancer in
men of all ages. The three conventional treatment options include
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. In many cases, these treatments are
used in combination. Chemotherapy is however the most widely used tool in
prostate cancer treatment especially where the cancer has metastasized or
spread to other organs of the body. Increased resistance to current
chemotherapies by prostate cancer calls for an urgent need to discover
and develop new therapeutics that can slow the growth of cancer cells
while having lesser side effects on the patients. The development of
target therapies for the treatment of human cancers is revolutionizing
the concept of cancer treatment today. This type of therapeutic approach
is directed to the inhibition of molecular targets that play a pivotal
role in tumor progression such as the kinases. It is only in recent years
that kinases have emerged as major targets for therapeutics, particularly
for cancer related therapies. Relatively few kinase inhibitors have been
identified to date and efforts are being made to discover new small
molecules kinase inhibitors. The Island of Jamaica is known for its rich
biodiversity and abundance of medicinal plants used in folk medicines. In
an effort to discover new anticancer drugs from natural products several
Jamaican medicinal plants were screened for anticancer activity. The
Jamaican Ball Moss (Tillandsia recurvata L.) was one such plant that
exhibited potent activity against the PC-3 prostate cancer cell line in
vitro (IC50 = 2.4g/ml) and was selected for further studies. The crude
extract of Ball Moss was screened for interaction with 451 kinases. The
crude Ball Moss extract showed potent kinase inhibitory activity against
5 kinases (kd = 8-14 g/ml), of which 4 are implicated in prostate cancer
growth and proliferation. The four kinases are; CSNK2A2, DRAK1, GAK and
MEK5. The above results validate the folk use of this medicinal plant as
well as make it a good candidate for development into a prostate cancer
treatment or for the discovery of the bioactive molecules in the plant.
Studies are currently underway to confirm the ability of Ball Moss to
halt the growth of prostate tumors in mice as well as measure the
inhibitory effects of the crude extract on the 4 related kinases in vivo.
The isolation and characterization of the kinase inhibitors in ball moss
is also in progress.

