Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation analysis of melanoma tumor samples from ECOG 2603
clinical trial


The BRAF kinase, a member of the MAP kinase pathway, has emerged as an
attractive molecule to target in melanoma. In an initial attempt to
target BRAF in melanoma, a randomized, phase III trial (ECOG 2603) of
carboplatin, paclitaxel, and sorafenib versus carboplatin, paclitaxel,
and placebo was performed. Patients enrolled on the trial had either
unresectable, locally advanced Stage III or Stage IV melanoma. We
analyzed patients tumor samples for 74 mutations in 13 genes using a
custom iPlex (Sequenom). We have preliminarily analyzed 157 tumor samples
from patients enrolled in this clinical trial. Analysis of the initial
data set demonstrates that 62 samples (42%, 62/148, 95% CI 34%,50%)
carried BRAF mutations - 60 samples with V600 and two samples having a
BRAF V601 mutation. Thirty eight samples (26%, 38/148, 95% CI 19%,33%)
were positive for NRAS mutations, with 33 with Q61, two G12 and three G13
mutations. With the exception of one tumor sample, the BRAF and NRAS
mutations were negatively correlated with each other, consistent with
prior observations. We also observed a number of rare mutations in our
samples including one in AKT1, one in AKT3, four in CDK4, five in
beta-catenin, two in GNAQ and three in KIT. The results of this study
demonstrated no difference between the two treatment arms in OS and PFS
and no association with treatment outcome and BRAF and NRAS mutations.
Consequently, the treatment arms were collapsed, and we examined the
relationship of BRAF and NRAS mutations with OS and PFS. Interestingly,
our data demonstrated that the BRAF and NRAS mutations did not correlate
with OS or PFS. This sample population is unique in that it provides a
large data set of melanoma tumor samples, all of whom were entered on a
clinical trial, unselected for pre-existing mutations. Using the Sequenom
assay platform, we have identified a number of mutations in a subset of
genes known to be involved in melanoma in patient tumor samples. In the
future, these tumor samples will be informative as we continue to examine
and identify additional genetic alterations in melanoma, providing
information regarding the natural history and distribution of certain
mutations. Future studies will use array comparative genomic
hybridization to further investigate additional somatic mutations
occurring in melanoma tumors and correlate these with clinical outcome,
as well as provide insight into the pathogenesis of melanoma. These
results may lead to further opportunities for clinical trials.

