Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated approach to study large-scale expression analysis,
copy number alterations and epigenetic profiles in cancer


Recently, some studies have integrated the results of copy number
alterations and analysis of transcripts aiming to identify mutations in
genes that may be drivers on the tumor process. Similarly, several
studies in cancer have been described using an integrated analysis
between transcripts expression and methylation data. In this study it was
developed a method that integrates genomic and transcriptomic alterations
by detecting key mutations that drive cancer progression. The
score-guided algorithm search for genes that are both recurrently
aberrant in copy number and methylation data and associated with variance
of expression patterns in tumor samples. This proposed method uses
concepts derived from gene network inference and addresses a recurring
problem in this approach. Usually, the main limitation of network
inference methods is related to a small number of samples with large
dimensionalities and the noisy nature of the expression measurements. To
address these limitations, alternatives are necessary to obtain better
accuracy on the inference problem. One of them, presented in this study,
is the integration of different data in order to reduce errors during the
gene prediction by feature selection methods based on conditional entropy
for identification of gene network architectures. To search the key genes
predictors, the score-guided algorithm is based in three databases aiming
to select the best combination with the highest score, weighted by the
gene expression matrix. This method may allow greater accuracy decreasing
the error during the network prediction and selecting only relevant hub
genes in the analysis. To test this score-based algorithm, it was used a
35 penile carcinomas as study model evaluated by large-scale transcript
analysis, CGH-array and large-scale methylation data. Penile cancer is a
rare neoplasm usually associated with low socioeconomic status, poor
personal hygiene and HPV infection (particularly 16 and 18 subtypes in
40-50% of cases). The analysis correctly identifies known recurrent
regions with copy number and methylation changes related to immune
response and inflammation pathways. In addition, the hub genes in these
regions were also connected to their associated aberrant neighbors. Since
the penile carcinoma development is often attributed to inflammatory and
irritative effects of smegma - a bioproduct of bacterial action in penile
epithelial cells described as associated with this tumor - the present
findings may contribute to a better understanding of the tumor
development process by identification of key factors in the regulation of
gene expression and genome stability. Thus the findings presented in this
study demonstrate the ability of the integrative data algorithm to
identify drivers as biomarkers in penile carcinomas.

