Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pooled shRNA screens conducted in vitro and in vivo identify genes
that are essential for the growth and/or survival of human tumor cells


Identification of novel drug targets is a major challenge in cancer
research. While numerous studies have identified genes that are mutated
and/or amplified in cancers, the functional significance of most of these
genetic alterations remains unknown. To directly identify genes that are
required for the growth of human tumor cells, and that could potentially
be targets for therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, we employed a custom
shRNA library containing 13,000 shRNAs targeting 3,210 genes (4 shRNAs
per gene) that encode cell surface or secreted proteins. Cultured tumor
cells were infected with the virally-packaged shRNA library such that
each shRNA (and an associated molecular barcode) was integrated into 200
cells. Cells that expressed shRNAs that target essential genes were
progressively depleted from the population upon in vitro passage or
following implantation into mice, resulting in decreased representation
of those shRNAs/barcodes versus reference samples. In vitro screens were
conducted in 3 colorectal cancer cell lines (HCT116, DLD1 and Colo320DM)
and in NCI-H1975 lung cancer cells. About 1-3% of the genes in the
library were identified as essential for tumor cell growth and/or
survival in vitro. Importantly, these genes included positive controls
such as PCNA that were included in the library to validate the screening
procedure, as well as components of pathways that are known to control
cell growth such as IGF-1R, Wnt9a, sonic hedgehog and RON. In vivo
screens were performed with HCT116 and NCI-H1975 cells by implanting
cells into mice immediately following shRNA integration. Representation
of shRNAs versus the reference sample was assessed in small tumors (100
mm3) and in large tumors (1000 mm3). While we observed very few hits in
small tumors, the number of hits in large tumors was greater than that
observed in vitro (e.g., 3-fold higher for HCT116), suggesting that tumor
growth in vivo is dependent on a larger set of genes than is cell growth
in vitro. Interestingly, the genes that were uniquely essential in tumors
versus in vitro included several that are involved in cell/cell adhesion
(e.g., cadherin 24, claudin 3) and cell signaling (epidermal growth
factor receptor). In summary, our shRNA screens focusing on secreted and
cell surface targets have identified genes that may be essential for
tumor growth, including many genes that have not previously been
implicated in this process. Upon further validation, these genes could
potentially serve as novel targets for therapeutic antibodies in cancer.

