Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering of EGFR-targeted nanoparticles for triple negative
breast cancer therapy


The human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is expressed at high
levels in at least 20% of breast cancers overall, but in 60-70% of
patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which makes EGFR a
potential treatment target. Herein we developed a novel therapy for TNBC
that utilizes anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody (mAb)-conjugated nanodiamonds
(NDs) to specifically deliver paclitaxel (PTX) to breast cancer cells
over-expressing EGFR. NDs, 2-8 nm diameter carbon nanoparticles, have
recently emerged as promising drug carriers. In this study, we have
synthesized a versatile ND construct that incorporates anti-EGFR mAb,
fluorescent imaging agent and paclitaxel for multimodal imaging,
targeting and treatment of TNBC. Sulfo-LC-SPDP was attached on to an
aminated ND surface (ND-NH2), yielding sulfhydryl-reactive NDs (ND-SPDP).
Thiolated paclitaxel-oligonucleotide (PTX-DNA) conjugates and thiolated
mAbs were then simultaneously attached to ND-SPDPs, forming
PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs. For the PTX-DNA conjugate, a fluorescein-labeled
dT-nucleotide was inserted within the thiolated 20-mer poly-dT strand for
cellular imaging and PTX loading quantification. The resultant
nanoparticles could form highly stable suspensions in aqueous solutions.
Dithiothreitol treatment detaches PTX-DNA and thiolated mAbs from the ND
surface. About 2.2 0.4 nmol of PTX and 53.5 2.1 g of mAb were loaded on
per mg of PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs, while 3.1 0.7 nmol of PTX for per mg of
PTX-DNA@NDs. The targeting capacity of PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs was tested through
flow cytometry analysis and confocal microscopy within 2 breast cancer
cells of contrasting EGFR expression. Internalization of PTX-DNA@NDs and
PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs was nearly equivalent within basal EGFR expressing MCF7
cells. However, when EGFR-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells were treated
with PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs, there was a nearly 150% enhancement in the
fluorescence signal as compared to that of PTX-DNA@NDs. Internalization
of anti-EGFR-conjugated NDs within MDA-MB-231 cells was competitively
inhibited by the addition of EGF. MTT assays were performed comparing
free PTX with untargeted and targeted versions of PTX-DNA@NDs at
equivalent PTX dosages in both cells. Enhanced cytotoxicity was observed
in escalating-dose studies after 48 h treatment of PTX-DNA@NDs and
PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs across all concentrations. Within MDA-MB-231 cells,
anti-EGFR linked conjugates had an IC50 value of 43.8 nM, a nearly
two-fold increase in efficacy compared to untargeted conjugates (83.3
nM). The data suggests that targeting through the mAb moiety increases
specificity and internalization, which subsequently enhances therapeutic
activity. Intravenous injection of NDs (up to 1.2 mg) didn't induce any
toxicity and systemic immune response in mice, attesting to NDs as a
biocompatible nanocarrier platform. In vivo efficacy of PTX-DNA/mAb@NDs
will be further investigated in tumor-bearing mice.

