Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel immunocytokine generates a CD8+ T cell-mediated anti-tumor
response in vivo


Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a potent TH1 cytokine produced by dendritic
cells and macrophages to activate NK cells and T cells. Data from
preclinical studies in mice indicate that this cytokine may be useful for
the treatment of cancer. However, cases of severe toxicity in human
trials have impeded its successful clinical development. Targeting
delivery of IL-12 to a tumor while reducing systemic IL-12 exposure could
make this a safer, more effective cancer therapeutic agent. One strategy
is to conjugate IL-12 to a tumor-binding antibody, as antibody conjugates
have previously been used to deliver radioisotopes, other cytokines, and
small molecule therapeutics to tumors in vivo. NHS-IL12 is a novel
immunocytokine consisting of two molecules of the IL-12 heterodimer
covalently fused to a fully humanized antibody (NHS76). This antibody
targets necrotic portions of tumors because of its high affinity for
single- and double-stranded DNA, which are often exposed as tumors
outgrow their blood supply. NHS-IL12 may therefore be useful against a
wide range of solid tumors, and mouse models can be used to study its
mechanisms of action. Initial imaging studies clearly showed superior in
vivo localization of IL-12 to mouse tumors following subcutaneous
NHS-IL12 injection as compared to administration of recombinant IL-12
(rIL-12) or IL-12 fused to a control antibody (BC1). In the MC38/CEA+
colorectal carcinoma model in CEA.Tg mice, treatment with NHS-IL12
significantly delayed subcutaneous tumor growth more effectively than
treatment with rIL-12. NHS-IL12 did not inhibit MC38/CEA+ tumor cell
growth in vitro, suggesting that NHS-IL12 acts indirectly on tumors in
vivo most probably via an immune-mediated mechanism. Subsequent findings
revealed that tumor-bearing mice treated with NHS-IL12 developed a strong
CD8+ T cell response directed against the endogenous p15E tumor antigen.
In one study, a subset of mice bearing MC38/CEA+ tumors had complete
tumor regression following NHS-IL12 treatment. Each of these mice still
had a strong p15E-specific CTL response more than two months after tumor
rejection, indicating that p15E may be the major tumor rejection antigen
for this in vivo tumor model. Subsequent in vivo depletion studies are
planned to investigate which immune cell subsets contribute to the
anti-tumor efficacy of this agent. Taken together, these data show that
targeted delivery of IL-12 to tumors can overcome the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment and prime a robust CD8+ T cell response. These
findings suggest that NHS-IL12 may be a promising cancer therapeutic as a
single agent and/or as a potent vaccine adjuvant.

