Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In search of the ideal cancer screening test


Background: The success of a cancer screening program partly depends on
the compliance level of the screened population for the proposed
screening procedure. Since 2005, EDIFICE surveys on cancer screening
behaviours are carried out in France in the general population for
breast, colon and prostate cancers. In the third edition of the EDIFICE
surveys, subjects were questioned on what could be improved on screening
tests. Methods: This third nationwide observational study, EDIFICE 3, was
conducted through phone interviews among a representative sample of 1603
subjects aged between 40 and 75 years, using the quota method, from July
8th to July 28th, 2011. The question concerning subjects expectations for
a screening test was: If scientific progress were made, what kind of
cancer screening test would you wish to be proposed? Results: For breast
cancer screening, among 669 women never treated for cancer, the main
expectations were: a more reliable imaging or radiological test for 43%
of the subjects, a blood test for 32% and no preference for 17% of the
subjects. For colon cancer screening, among 1469 subjects never treated
for cancer, the main expectations were: a blood test for 35% of the
subjects, no preference for 22% and a more reliable imaging or
radiological test for 21% of the subjects. Results show a low level of
satisfaction for the fecal occult blood test with 9% of the subjects
looking for a more reliable fecal test. For prostate cancer screening,
among 711 men never treated for cancer, the main expectations were: a
blood test for 43% of the subjects, a more reliable imaging or
radiological test for 21% and no preference for 21 % of the subjects.
Conclusions: For breast cancer and prostate cancer, screening procedures
are well accepted by the population. The vast majority prefers a blood
test for cancer screening, even if they seem to accept radiological
tests. In contrast, the population seems reluctant with fecal occult
blood tests. This suggests the need to think over colon cancer screening
tests to improve their results.

