Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-resistance and sensitivity of sunitinib resistant tumor cells


Background: Resistance to sunitinib, a multi-targeted anti-angiogenic
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) approved for clinical use in advanced
renal cell cancer, gastrointestinal stromal tumors and pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, represents a major clinical problem. Previously we
have shown that tumor cells acquire resistance in vitro by continuous
incubation with sunitinib and found that acidic lysosomal sequestration
of sunitinib mediates its resistance. In this study, we investigated
whether sunitinib resistant tumor cells are cross-resistant to other
clinically relevant inhibitors and whether agents interfering with
lysosomal function can modulate resistance. Methods: Continuous exposure
to sunitinib for more than 12 months resulted in drug resistance in 786-O
(RCC) and HT-29 (colorectal cancer) cell lines. Using these cells,
cross-resistance to other clinically available TKIs such as sorafenib,
pazopanib and erlotinib, and to the mTOR inhibitor everolimus, was
determined in proliferation assays (MTT). In addition, modulation of
sunitinib resistance by the lysosomal inhibitors (LIs) chloroquine and
bafilomycin A1 was studied using proliferation assays. The effect of LIs
on phosphorylation of key signaling proteins was determined by western
blotting. Results: Compared to parental cell lines, proliferation assays
revealed that sunitinib resistant cell lines were cross-resistant to
pazopanib and erlotinib, while no significant decrease in sensitivity to
sorafenib or everolimus was observed. Both chloroquine and bafilomycin A1
were able to modulate sunitinib resistance. Western blot analysis
revealed that phosphorylation of key signaling proteins including Akt and
p44/42-MAPK was inhibited in sunitinib resistant cells upon co-incubation
with chloroquine, while sunitinib alone did not inhibit phosphorylation
of these kinases. Conclusion: We found that sunitinib resistant tumor
cells are cross-resistant to pazopanib and erlotinib, but remain
sensitive to sorafenib and everolimus. Furthermore, combination with the
lysosomal inhibitor chloroquine resulted in inhibition of key signaling
proteins in sunitinib resistant cells. Taken together, we envision that
these findings are relevant for clinical treatment strategies in patients
with renal cell cancer resistant to sunitinib.

