Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting formin autoinhibition to construct cell infrastructure


Rho small GTP-binding proteins locally manage Diaphanous-related formins
as they construct the cytoskeletal infrastructure that supports essential
changes in cell morphology. Rho binding unlatches formin intramolecular
autoinhibition. The autoinhibition is mediated by the Dia-inhibitory and
-autoregulatory domains (DID & DAD) which flank the formin homology-2
(FH2) domain. The free FH2 domain guides the assembly of the linear actin
and microtubule structures required for adhesion, migration, division,
and polarity establishment. Microtubule stabilization is already known to
be an effective anti-cancer strategy. Combined with the knowledge that
formins can act as haploinsufficient tumor suppressor genes, a screen was
conducted for agents that could impair autoinhibition in order to
activate formins for therapeutic benefit. We have focused on two of the
primary hits for development. VARI01 and VARI02 are nearly identical
thioamide inhibitors of DID-DAD binding (IC50 values 140 nM). Exposure of
cultured tumor cells to either compound triggered the expected changes in
cell structure and signaling that were consistent with formin activation.
These included microtubule stabilization, F-actin assembly, the
activation of the transcription factor SRF, cell-cycle arrest, and
eventual apoptosis. SRF senses changes in actin dynamics to activate the
expression of genes that reinforce cell structure and monitor genome
integrity. VARI01 and VARI02 both exhibit anti-tumor activity in
xenograft studies. Ongoing studies are aimed at identifying
VARI01/VARI02-sensitive tumor types and to define other potential
therapeutic applications. Significance: Microtubule stabilization by
taxol has proven to be an effective anti-cancer strategy, but it has
significant deleterious side effects. Small-molecule formin activation
serve as a novel class of anti-cancer agents that may provide tools for
unlocking the biological roles of formins in signalling and disease.

