Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating susceptibility to sporadic osteosarcoma by
genome-wide copy number analysis


Constitutional copy-number variants (CNVs) frequently overlap genomic
regions that contain genes associated with cancer. In addition, copy
number alterations (CNAs) in tumors often coincide with sites of CNVs and
may arise through progression of CNVs. Osteosarcoma (OS), the most common
human bone malignancy, can arise in familial or sporadic forms. While
germline mutations of tumor suppressor genes have been implicated in a
minority of OS cases, little is known about genetic changes that
contribute to the etiology of sporadic OS. Using high-resolution SNP/CNV
arrays, we observed a higher global germline CNV frequency in patients
with sporadic OS compared to healthy controls. Given the early age of
onset and the extensive constitutional CNVs, we hypothesize that these
genomic alterations are linked to susceptibility to OS. Here we
investigate whether specific constitutional CNVs are related to
susceptibility to sporadic OS and whether OS tumor CNAs arise via
progression of constitutional CNVs in these patients. Blood derived DNA
samples from patients with sporadic OS with wild-type germline p53
sequence and gene dosage were selected for analysis on Affymetrix GW6.0
arrays with paired pre-therapy tumor biopsies. Initial results from a
discovery set of samples (n=43 pairs) reveal a copy number loss at 1q43,
in a region that overlaps several genes that have a role in bone
formation, microtubules and cytoskeletal organization. This loss was
present in 43% of the blood-derived DNA samples and 44% of the
tumor-derived samples, whereas this variant was noted in only 1.2% of
controls. Furthermore, the germline 1q43 deletion correlates with poor
survival of the OS patients (p=0.04, Long Rank). Analysis of an
independent validation set (n=32 pairs) is currently underway to confirm
the initial finding and further characterize specific constitutional CNVs
among sporadic OS patients. The findings of this study will open new
avenues for the discovery of novel loci implicated in susceptibility to
OS with potential for improved diagnostic and prognostic options as well
as further insight into disease pathogenesis.

