Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP BEZ-235 suppresses translation of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 and increases cell death under hypoxia


Our goal was to investigate the effects of the Novartis compound
NVP-BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, on hypoxia-inducible factor-1
alpha (HIF-1) expression. NVP-BEZ235 was much more potent than either the
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin or the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 in blocking the
hypoxic induction of HIF-1 in vitro, due to decreased protein
translation. 7-methyl GTP chromatography showed that NVP-BEZ235 led to a
robust recruitment of 4E-BP1 to eIF4E and a near absence of binding of
eIF4G, consistent with inhibition of protein translation. NVP-BEZ235 also
decreased expression of several proteins regulated by eIF4E including
cyclin B1 and D1, survivin, and vascular endothelial growth factor.
NVP-BEZ235 specifically decreased eIF4G but not eIF4E expression. As
HIF-1 has been associated with adaptation under hypoxia, we examined the
effect of NVP-BEZ235 on cell survival in low pO2 conditions. The drug
increased killing of cells under hypoxia as measured by both short-term
(MTT) and long-term (clonogenic) assays. To understand the mechanism
behind this observation, we performed immunoblotting for factors
associated with cell survival. In normoxia, Akt S473 phosphorylation
decreased within an hour of NVP-BEZ235 treatment, but then increased by
24 hours. In contrast, under hypoxia, NVP-BEZ235 caused a prolonged
suppression of Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, we found a greater
increase in PARP cleavage in hypoxic cells treated 1-16 hours after drug
treatment than in normoxic cells, consistent with increased apoptosis.
This was confirmed using an ELISA assay that measures cytoplasmic
oligonucleosomes. We also found that NVP-BEZ235 increases autophagy as
measured by (i) LC3-I to LC3-II conversion on immunoblotting, (ii)
degradation of p62 and (iii) GFP-LC3 subcellular localization detected by
immunofluorescence. Treatment of cells with the drug under hypoxia
further increased autophagy, although it is unclear at this point whether
this actually contributes to cell death or is a pro-survival mechanism.
In conclusion, we have found that NVP-BEZ235 blocks HIF-1 induction and
increases cell killing under hypoxia, which may have important
implications for the use of this drug in cancer therapy.

