Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of NF-B (p65) and Stat3 interplay in the regulation of
radiation-induced, ICAM-1-mediated migration and invasion in glioma


Aberrant activation of both NF-B and Stat3 is associated with enhanced
tumor metastasis in various cancers. In human glioma xenograft cells 4910
and 5310, irradiation (IR; 8 Gy) elevated Stat3 and p65 phosphorylation
and persistent nuclear translocation in correlation with massive
increases in cellular and soluble ICAM-1 levels. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments confirmed enhanced nuclear phospho-p65/phospho-Stat3 and
acetyl-p65/phospho-Stat3 interactions along with enhanced invasiveness
and migration in IR-treated cells. Promoter analysis indicated presence
of adjacent NF-B- and Stat3-consensus binding elements in the proximal
promoter and the proximal intron-1 of the ICAM-1 promoter, whereas
overlapping NF-B/Stat3 binding motifs were identified in the distal
intron-1 region. ChIP binding and promoter/luciferase reporter assays
showed that IR induced prominent binding of both Stat3 and NF-B to the
proximal intron-1 region followed by the distal intron-1 and the proximal
promoter regions on the ICAM-1 gene. Individual treatments with Stat3.si
or JSH-23 blocked the occupancy of both Stat3 and p65 onto the ICAM-1
promoter and prevented subsequent ICAM-1-mediated migration and invasion.
In addition, constitutive activation of Stat3 and NF-B by Stat3C or TNF-
significantly elevated IR-induced migration and invasion. In vivo
orthotropic experiments in nude mice showed that the Stat3.si treatment
reduced tumor growth and IR-induced phopsho-Stat3/phospho-p65 and ICAM-1
expression when compared to pSV-treated controls. These results suggest
that both p65 and Stat3 bind to the intronic region of ICAM-1 promoter to
induce its optimal transcription in IR-treated cells and abrogation of
IR-induced p65/Stat3 binding inhibits ICAM-1-mediated enhancement of
malignancy in post-irradiated tumor cells. As such, the results of this
study clearly have potential future therapeutic significance in glioma
treatment.

