Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary grape polyphenol resveratrol regulates Rac activity to
increase mammary tumor growth and metastasis


Resveratrol is a natural compound from grapes and peanuts that is
structurally similar to estrogen and can act as an estrogenic or
antiestrogenic compound, depending on the concentration. In vitro, high
concentrations of resveratrol can have proapoptotic, antigrowth,
anti-inflammmatory, antiangiogenic, and anti-invasive properties in
cancer cells. However, we reported that resveratrol at low,
physiologically relevant, concentrations acts similar to estrogen and
promotes breast cancer cell migration via actin cytoskeletal changes
regulated by Rac; a small GTPase that plays a pivotal role in cancer cell
migration/invasion, and thus, metastasis. Herein, we investigated the
effects of dietary resveratrol on mammary tumor growth and metastasis in
immunocompromised mouse models of cancer metastasis. Interestingly, our
findings suggest promotion of mammary tumor growth and metastasis to
lung, liver, and kidney by resveratrol in tumors derived from the low
metastatic estrogen receptor (ER)(), ER(+) MDA-MB-231 and the highly
metastatic ER(-) MDA-MB-435 cancer cell lines. To determine the role of
Rac in resveratrol-mediated mammary tumor progression, the activity of
Rac was measured in tumors from resveratrol-treated mice. Our results
show a significant increase in tumoral Rac activity, consistent with the
concentration of resveratrol that induced the highest metastatic
efficiency. Taken together, our findings demonstrate a cancer-promoting
role for dietary concentrations of resveratrol in metastatic cancer via
Rac activation. Therefore, this study illuminates the importance of
further delineating resveratrol's concentration dependent molecular
mechanisms, particularly in breast cancer, before it can be tested in the
clinic or used as a dietary supplement for cancer patients. This study
was supported by DoD/BCRP W81XWH-08-1-0258 to LCP, DoD/BCRP
W81XWH-07-1-0330 to SD, the UCC Pilot Project Program, and the UCC
Postdoctoral Program sponsored by the PR Science, Technology and Research
Trust. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of the Universidad Central
del Caribe or the PR Science, Technology and Research Trust.

