Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of miR-34a as measured by quantitative in situ hybridization
on a tissue microarray is associated with poor outcome in breast cancer


Introduction: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as key regulators in the
pathogenesis of cancers as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors. It has
been shown that the loss of miR-34a leads to tumor progression and
metastasis using cell lines and a limited number of patient samples by
RT-PCR. Lack of a robust, reproducible and quantitative method has
limited large scale analysis and assessment of miR-34a as tumor
suppressor marker in cancer. Herein, we have developed and validated a
method for the quantitative analysis of miRNA expression by in situ
hybridization (qISH) allowing for the direct assessment of tumor
epithelial expression of miR34a in breast cancer. Method: Expression
level of miR-34a was measured in a retrospective breast cancer (n=461)
cohort with 20 year follow-up using quantitative immunofluorescence
(AQUA) technology for ISH in a tissue microarray (TMA) format. The assay
was performed in two-fold redundancy with a 40 case index TMA for
reproducibility and standardization. Averaged AQUA scores for miR34a were
correlated with clinical and pathological characteristics and 10 year
disease-free survival in this cohort. Results: Since miR-34a is a tumor
suppressor, we determined the threshold at which no specific
hybridization was seen (AQUA score =16.89). Reproducibility between two
different builds (cores) of the TMA was R*2 = 0.59. Using overall
survival as an endpoint in Kaplan Meier analysis with the threshold of
expression as the cutpoint, the group with loss of miR-34a had
significantly worse survival (log rank p = 0.0264). Cox univariate
analysis for miR-34a showed hazard ratio of 1.53 (95% CI: 1.05-2.22,
p=0.0276). Cox multivariate analysis including age, nuclear grade, nodal
status, ER, PR and Her2 showed miR34a is not an independent marker
(p=0.0908). An independent breast cancer cohort will be used to validate
this result. Conclusions: The microRNA miR-34a has been proposed to be a
tumor suppressor using mechanistic and functional data. This result,
showing loss of miR-34a is associated with worse outcome in a large
breast cancer cohort provides clinical evidence of the tumor suppressor
function of miR-34a.

