Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical analysis of claudins expression in penile
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Claudins are tight junction proteins that are critical for
the sealing of cellular sheets and controlling paracellular ion flux.
Members of the claudin family have been demonstrated to play an important
role in carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Penile squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) is a major health problem in Brazil, corresponding to
2,1% of all brazilian men tumors and 5-year survival rate drops
dramatically in patients with lymph node metastasis. Objective: The aim
of this study was to determine the protein expression pattern of claudins
in penile SCC and correlate it with the clinicopathological features of
penile cancer. Method: Tissue microarray (TMA) comprising 101 cases of
penile SCC were immunohistochemically stained for claudin-1, -3, -4, -5
and -7, with which TMA core showing more than 10% of positive membranous
staining cells. Results: Claudin-1, -3, -5 and -7 were downregulated in
55%, 68%, 62% and 88% of penile SCC samples, respectively. Claudin-4 was
overexpressed in 58% of the tumor samples. Strong correlation was found
between downregulation of claudin-1 and -3 (pBackground: Claudins are
tight junction proteins that are critical for the sealing of cellular
sheets and controlling paracellular ion flux. Members of the claudin
family have been demonstrated to play an important role in carcinogenesis
and tumor progression. Penile squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a major
health problem in Brazil, corresponding to 2,1% of all brazilian men
tumors and 5-year survival rate drops dramatically in patients with lymph
node metastasis. Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the
protein expression pattern of claudins in penile SCC and correlate it
with the clinicopathological features of penile cancer. Method: Tissue
microarray (TMA) comprising 101 cases of penile SCC were
immunohistochemically stained for claudin-1, -3, -4, -5 and -7, with
which TMA core showing more than 10% of positive membranous staining
cells. Results: Claudin-1, -3, -5 and -7 were downregulated in 55%, 68%,
62% and 88% of penile SCC samples, respectively. Claudin-4 was
overexpressed in 58% of the tumor samples. Strong correlation was found
between downregulation of claudin-1 and -3 (p< 0.001). Absence of
claudin-1, -3 and -5 was associated with urethral infiltration (p=0.03
and p=0.02 and p=0.019, respectively). Loss of claudin -1 and -3 was also
associated with perineural invasion (p=0.05 and p=0.02, respectively).
Conclusion: Our data provides the first evidence that claudins expression
was decreased in areas of invasion and infiltration and could be related
to evolution and prognosis of these tumours.

