Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytogenetic and somatic characterization of myeloma tumors from a
multi-ethnic cohort


Previous epidemiological studies have suggested that African Americans
(AA) are twice as likely to be diagnosed with and to die from Multiple
Myeloma (MM) as compared to European Americans (EA). In recent years,
however, mortality rates have become more comparable between these
groups. Although socioeconomic factors could play a major role to this
potential disparity, biological factors may also be responsible for
influencing these differences in either incidence and/or mortality. Here
we examined a multi-ethnic cohort of MM tumors to assess potential
differences in the frequency of molecular events in tumors derived from
either African American (AA) or European American (EA) patients. First,
we compared the frequency of 14q32 translocation breakpoints at the IgH
locus among a series of data from 115 AA MM patients from three studies
and EA MM from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG).
Furthermore, we analyzed matching genome-wide copy number and
transcriptional data among 47 AA MM tumors and 196 EA MM tumors to
determine differences in the frequency of molecular events in tumors from
these populations. Univariate analyses were conducted using the Fisher's
Exact Test and p-values were calculated to measure statistical
significance. We observed statistically significant differences in the
frequency of IgH translocations and somatic copy number alterations.
Although we did not detect differences for specific translocation
subtypes, we saw a statistically significant difference in the overall
frequency of IgH translocations between the two groups, which occurred
more frequently in EA patients (p = 0.032). When assessing genomic copy
number events previously shown to be associated with poor outcome in MM,
chromosome 13 monosomy was more frequent in hyperdiploid MM from AA
patients and significant after correcting for multiple testing using the
Bonferoni correction method (p = 0.001). Moreover, when using the
Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction method, chromosome 13
monosomy remained significantly different among hyperdiploid AA patients
(p = 0.0121). Chromosome 1q amplification was also significant among
hyperdiploid tumors from EA patients when using this correction method (p
= 0.036). No differences in the frequency of hyperdiploid status or gene
expression-based subtypes were detected when comparing tumors from AA and
EA patients. Our study represents the first comprehensive assessment of
the frequency and distribution of molecular alterations in MM tumors from
both AA and EA patients and could help shed light on possible biological
features associated with population differences in incidence and outcome
in MM.

