Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum miRNAs as an early marker for breast cancer


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding, single-stranded RNAs between
18-22 nucleotides that regulate gene expression by affecting mRNA
translation and degradation. It has been proposed that miRNAs could be
master regulators of gene expression by regulating entire gene networks.
Expression of miRNAs is altered in tumor compared to normal tissue and
there is growing evidence that miRNA profiles in serum may differ in
cancer cases as compared to healthy controls. However, these studies use
samples collected after diagnosis so treatment and/or disease effects
cannot be excluded. We are using serum samples from the Sister Study, a
prospective cohort study of 50,000 women who had never had breast cancer
at the time of enrollment, but were at increased risk because they had a
sister previously diagnosed with breast cancer. We are exploring whether
serum miRNA profiles can be used as prediagnostic markers of breast
cancer. In an initial pilot analysis comparing 5 women diagnosed with
breast cancer 1-2 months after their blood draw to 5 controls, there were
25 miRNAs significantly different at the 0.05 level (paired T test). Of
those 25 miRNAs, 7 have been previously associated with breast tumor
tissue in published studies showing differential expression in tumor
tissue or in breast cancer cell lines. We have now completed a larger
follow up study examining 205 women diagnosed with breast cancer within
18 months of their blood draw compared to 205 controls frequency matched
to cases by age, 2 month interval of blood draw and race. We are using
Affymetrix miRNA microarrays to profile miRNA expression in serum
samples, and have optimized this platform for use with less than .5mLs of
serum. After normalization and background correction, we found 439 miRNAs
(of 1105 human miRNAs on the chip) expressed above background in at least
50 samples. When the average expression of controls was compared to cases
using logistic regression, we found 16 miRNAs significantly different at
the .05 level. For cases, the mean time between blood draw and cancer
diagnosis was 10 months. We hypothesize that, if miRNA is a prediagnostic
marker, cases with a longer time between blood draw and diagnosis would
have a more control-like miRNA profile. To examine this, we are
conducting a more detailed analysis among cases with a short time between
blood draw and diagnosis. The next steps of our analysis will be to
examine how far in advance of cancer diagnosis can we detect case-control
differences in miRNA expression profiles.

