Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 Circos: A visualization tool for BRCA1 missense variants


Germline mutations in BRCA1 have been associated with a significantly
increased risk of developing breast and ovarian cancers. A large number
of variants have been identified in BRCA1 and are reported as pathogenic,
non-pathogenic, or as variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Test
results reporting pathogenic or non-pathogenic variants can be used by
physicians and genetic counselors to help patients in making important
clinical decisions. Around 10-15% of the reported BRCA1 and BRCA2
variants are clearly pathogenic and 5% of these reported variants are
VUS. Results reporting a VUS can cause anxiety and make it difficult to
advise the patient on further clinical intervention to reduce their risk
of developing the disease. Many of these VUSs are non-synonymous single
amino acid changes leading to missense changes. A number of previous
studies have focused on assessing the functional impact of these changes
on the BRCA1 protein. BRCA1 is a gene product with pleiotropic functions
and therefore, different functional assays are used in these studies to
analyze the variant's impact on function. However, information on the
functional impact of VUS is currently not consolidated and collecting
available information on missense variants depends on multiple database
searches and literature review. Moreover, methods to incorporate
functional data into multifactorial models have recently been developed
highlighting the need for a common resource to facilitate analysis.
Realizing the need for a resource that facilitates the global
visualization and analysis of these variants we have developed a
visualization tool for multidimensional data using Circos
(http://circos.ca) to aggregate the data from all published studies that
have assessed these missense variants. Circos plots have been used in the
literature to represent genomic data and we have used the same concept to
illustrate variants in BRCA1. We have included 700 variants for which we
have 30 different functional experiments from various studies assessing
over 150 missense variants. Results are color coded to uniformly depict
various degrees of functional impact on the BRCA1 protein function so
that information for any variant can be obtained in a snapshot without
having to perform extensive literature searches. Therefore, we believe
clinical geneticists and genetic counselors can use this research tool as
a quick reference to analyze all the missense variants that have been
identified along with associated information to characterize them when
faced with the challenge of advising a patient with these types of VUSs.

