Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical potential of the miR-200 - ZEB EMT pathway in cancer


The majority of all cancer deaths are caused by metastases rather than
the primary tumour. The process by which cells can develop migratory
properties is suggested to occur through an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The microRNA (miR) 200 family have been associated with
EMT and acts negatively on ZEB1 which is a repressor of CDH1 (E-cadherin)
thereby supports the epithelial maintenance. Our aim was to investigate
the expression of the EMT markers ZEB1, CDH1, miR-200c and miR141 in
metastatic colorectal cancer and primary breast tumours and to explore
their prognostic significance as well as their correlations to
clinicopathological factors. Matched tissue from primary tumour and liver
metastasis of 10 colorectal cancer patients and another 15 tissues from
CR liver metastasis were used in this study. Moreover, primary tumours
from 90 stage II breast tumours from postmenopausal patients, randomized
to radiotherapy vs chemotherapy as well as tamoxifen or no endocrine
treatment, were included. microRNA and gene expression was studied by
quantitative real-time PCR. Correlations between the mir-200 family and
CDH1 and inverse correlations to ZEB were found in 15 CR liver metastases
as well as in the breast cancer material. In the breast cancer material
the gene expression of CDH1 was confirmed by positive correlation to CNV
of the CDH1 gene. In the liver metastases low CDH1 was associated with
recurrence. A reduction in the mir-200 family was seen in matched normal
CR mucosas, primary CRC tumours and liver metastasis and lower expression
was found in metastatic CRC primary tumours compared to non-metastatic.
In the breast cancer material, wild-type p53 was associated with high
expression of the miR cluster which is in agreement with recently
presented data of p53 as a suggested regulator of the EMT pathway, via
the miR-200 family. In addition, low miR-141/200 expression was
associated with activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, especially in
combination with a wild-type p53. miR-141 correlated with positive
oestrogen receptor (ER) status, whereas miR200c negatively correlated
with HER2 status, suggesting that these miRs may play different roles in
different subtypes of breast cancer. A low expression of the miR cluster
was associated with a worse outcome in terms of a decreased distant
recurrence-free survival. In addition, the levels of miR141/200c were
associated with the response to radiation and chemotherapy. Among
patients carrying tumours with low miR-141/200c expression, chemotherapy
significantly reduced the risk of distant metastases, whereas a high
expression of miR141/200c predicted good benefit from radiation, using
local or distant recurrence-free survival as an endpoint. These findings
support the role of miR141/200c in metastatic progression, and indicate
that these markers of EMT could be useful prognostic and treatment
predictive factors in cancer.

