Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiocidin induces differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a malignant proliferative disorder where
blast stage cells fail to terminally differentiate and accumulate in the
blood and bone marrow. AML represents a very significant health risk in
the general population with rising incidence in aging adults. From
2004-2008 the median age at diagnosis was 67.8 years and it is estimated
12,950 adults will be diagnosed with 9,050 deaths from AML leukemia in
2011 (http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/amyl.html, accessed November
2011). Standard AML therapy requires intensive combination chemotherapy
with a low rate of durable remissions often requiring stem cell
transplantation and associated with significant treatment-related
toxicity, especially in elderly patients. Due to this toxicity, the
majority of elderly patients are not eligible for therapy. Therefore, new
therapeutic options for the treatment of AML are urgently needed. In this
study, we present evidence that the human protein angiocidin, discovered
in our laboratory, has the potential to be used as a novel, non-toxic
therapy for AML. We found that angiocidin can induce both AML cell lines
and primary patient cells to increase expression of surface markers
characteristic of a more normal differentiated phenotype. We evaluated
expression of CD14, a major receptor for the innate immune system in
macrophages, CD54 or ICAM-1, the major adhesion receptor used by
macrophages for endothelial transmigration, and CD15, a neutrophil
phagocytosis receptor. Expression of these receptors was measured by flow
cytometry after cells were cultured for 24 hours in media alone or media
containing 10 g/ml angiocidin. Angiocidin up-regulated these receptors by
more than 10 fold in 50% of the AML cells tested. The AML cells included
the cell line THP-1 and 11 primary AML patient cells. Angiocidin
up-regulated CD14 and CD54 in THP-1 cells and in 3 out of 5 M5 phenotype
AML patient cells tested and 1 M4 AML phenotype out of 6 M4 samples
tested. Angiocidin also up-regulated CD15 in 1 M4 AML patient phenotype
out of 6 M4 patient cells tested. These results suggest that angiocidin
can differentiate AML cells and therefore has the potential to be
developed as differentiation therapy for AML.

