Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined grape polyphenols regulate mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) signaling via a dual mechanism of Akt inhibition and AMPK
activation


Breast Cancer (BC) is the major prevalent cancer in women in the United
States and Puerto Rico with metastatic breast cancer (MBC), often
resulting in death. Recent studies have shown that the Akt/mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is a critical signaling cascade that
drives MBC. We recently reported that a combined diet of grape
polyphenols (resveratrol, quercetin and catechin: RQC) at equimolar
concentration is effective at inhibition of mammary tumor growth and
metastasis to lung and bones in nude mice. The objective of this study is
to investigate a role for RQC in prevention of MBC via inhibition of the
Akt/AMPK/mTOR pathway. We found that RQC at 5 M each inhibits Akt and
p70S6 kinase (downstream effector of mTOR) activities in a metastatic
variant of the MDA-MB-435 cell line and MDA-MB-231 human BC cells. RQC at
5 M demonstrated a 2-fold activation of adenosine monophophate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), an endogenous inhibitor of mTOR that acts opposite
to Akt. To determine the contribution of individual resveratrol,
quercetin, and catechin to the effect of combined RQC on mTOR signaling,
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with RQC at 1, 3 and 9 M individually and
in combination. Results show that at 1 M, individual or combined RQC did
not increase AMPK activity, while at 3 M, only Quercetin increased AMPK
activity. Individual compounds at 1 M did not affect Akt activity, while
combined RQC decreased Akt activity by 20%. At 3 M, Akt activity is
downregulated by all compounds individually and in combination with
combined RQC exerting a higher inhibitory effect on Akt activity than
individual compounds. In general, the combination of RQC was more
efficient at inhibition of the Akt/mTOR pathway than individual
compounds. Thus, RQC has the potential to be used alone or in combination
with other cancer therapeutics to impede progressive BC. This study was
sponsored by the Department of Defense/Breast Cancer Research Program
award W81XWH-07-1-0330 to SD and the U54 grant No. CA-096297 to UPR
Comprehensive Cancer Center.

