Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor initiating cells are sensitive to paclitaxel encapsulated in
polymeric nanoparticles


Tumor initiating cells (TICs) represent a small fraction of tumor cells,
and are considered to be key drivers of tumor growth, drug resistance and
recurrence. TICs are highly resistant to conventional chemotherapy,
possibly due to overexpression of drug efflux transporters and other
protective mechanisms. Because drug resistance and tumor relapse are
significant problems, approaches to eliminate TICs are urgently needed.
Recent studies show that tumor populations that are depleted of TICs
demonstrate a return of the TIC sub-population 1 suggesting the
possibility of de-differentiation of non-TICs to TICs. We hypothesized
that sustained delivery of a cytotoxic agent to the tumor population
could potentially reduce TIC fraction and consequently increase the
therapeutic effectiveness of chemotherapy. To test this hypothesis, we
encapsulated paclitaxel, a microtubule stabilizing agent, in PLGA
nanoparticles formulated using an FDA-approved polymer, poly
(lactide-co-glycolide). Our previous studies have shown nanoparticles can
sustain the intracellular delivery of encapsulated drugs like paclitaxel
2. The effectiveness of nanoparticle-encapsulated paclitaxel in reducing
TIC fraction was investigated by standard cancer stem cell assays-
mammosphere formation and anchorage-independent growth on soft agar in
MCF-7, an ER+ luminal breast cancer cell line. Results obtained in these
studies show that drug encapsulated PLGA formulations effectively
decreased mammosphere formation and soft-agar colony formation when
compared to free drug treatment. In mammosphere assays, paclitaxel
solution treatment did not significantly affect the mammosphere formation
relative to untreated controls, whereas paclitaxel loaded PLGA
nanoparticles treatment decreased the number of mammospheres to 50 33% of
untreated controls. In soft-agar colony formation assay, paclitaxel
solution treatment increased the number of colonies to 122 10% of
untreated controls. In contrast to this, paclitaxel loaded PLGA
nanoparticles treatment decreased the number of colonies to 66 8% of
untreated controls. Future studies will investigate the effectiveness of
these formulations on TICs in mouse models of breast cancer. References 1
Gupta, P. B. et al., Cell 146 (4), 633; Chaffer, C. L. et al., Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 108 (19), 7950. 2 Patil, Y. B. et al., Biomaterials 31
(2), 358.

