Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted genome sequencing of 184 cancer-related genes for
molecular targeted therapy in gastric cancer


Cancer is a result of complex genetic alterations including mutations,
copy number alterations, and gene fusions. Recent advance in sequencing
technology enables comprehensive genome-wide study of the complex genetic
alterations. Better understanding of the genetic alteration of cancer
will ultimately lead to better treatment options and improved survival of
the patients. We have established a set of cancer-related genes comprised
of 184 genes for targeted sequencing using next generation sequencing
technology. Targeted genome sequencing of the coding regions in the gene
set was performed using the Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx. We analyzed the
gene set in 13 gastric cancer cell lines. Average coverage depth was
140X. A total of 237 somatic sequence variations were found in 111 genes.
The frequently mutated genes were ATM in 7, MSH6 in 6, TP53 in 5, and
KRAS in 4 gastic cancer cells. Using the coverage data, we could also
analyze copy number variations. Copy number gain (>2.0 fold) was found in
5 genes, whereas copy number loss (Cancer is a result of complex genetic
alterations including mutations, copy number alterations, and gene
fusions. Recent advance in sequencing technology enables comprehensive
genome-wide study of the complex genetic alterations. Better
understanding of the genetic alteration of cancer will ultimately lead to
better treatment options and improved survival of the patients. We have
established a set of cancer-related genes comprised of 184 genes for
targeted sequencing using next generation sequencing technology. Targeted
genome sequencing of the coding regions in the gene set was performed
using the Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx. We analyzed the gene set in 13
gastric cancer cell lines. Average coverage depth was 140X. A total of
237 somatic sequence variations were found in 111 genes. The frequently
mutated genes were ATM in 7, MSH6 in 6, TP53 in 5, and KRAS in 4 gastic
cancer cells. Using the coverage data, we could also analyze copy number
variations. Copy number gain (>2.0 fold) was found in 5 genes, whereas
copy number loss (<2.0 fold) was found in 17 genes in gastric cancer cell
lines. Moreover, the association between the genetic alterations and in
vitro sensitivity to various targeted agents is being analyzed. The
analyses are aimed at identifying sensitive/resistant mechanisms of the
targeted agents and identification of novel therapeutic target.
Validation and detailed analysis is currently underway. Targeted genome
sequencing of cancer-related genes using NGS can be an accurate and
efficient method for studying mutations and copy number variations with a
single analysis. Moreover, investigational therapies with their molecular
characteristics will reveal biomarkers that can be used to guide clinical
trials.

