Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triapine sensitizes ovarian cancer cells to platinum drugs and
PARP inhibitors


Triapine (3-aminopyridine-2-carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone) is a
ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) inhibitor that is 1000-times more potent
than clinically-used hydroxyurea. Consisting primarily of R2 and R1
subunits during the S phase of the cell cycle, RNR catalyzes the
rate-limiting step in the production of deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs)
required for DNA synthesis. Triapine chelates iron to form the
triapine-Fe complex that quenches the tyrosyl radical at the R2 subunit
and leads to enzymatic inactivation. In recent phase I and II trials,
treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer with triapine in
combination with cisplatin and radiation was well tolerated and produced
high durable complete clinical responses in patients. This promising
combination therapy may be attributable to the inhibitory effects of
triapine on the repair of cisplatin- and radiation-induced DNA damage.
However, the exact DNA repair mechanisms modulated by triapine remain
poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that treatment of
ovarian cancer cells with triapine prompts rapid and prolonged depletion
of dATP/dNTP pools, which in turn leads to formation of DNA double strand
breaks (DSBs) and inhibition of DNA synthesis in S and G2/M phases of the
cell cycle. Furthermore, we show that treatment with triapine results in
enhanced sensitization of BRCA-proficient (wild-type) ovarian cancer
cells to platinum drugs (cisplatin and carboplatin) and the PARP
inhibitor olaparib. Both platinum drugs and PARP inhibitors indirectly
cause DSBs which require BRCA1- and BRCA2-dependent homologous
recombination (HR) to repair. Collectively, these results suggest that
triapine acts to abrogate replicative DNA synthesis and post-replication
repair, thereby deterring HR repair of DSBs caused by platinum drugs and
other DNA damaging modalities. While 70% of ovarian cancer patients
initially respond to platinum-based chemotherapy, the majority of these
patients will develop recurrent cancer resistant to the platinum drugs.
Emergence of platinum-resistant cancer populations may be associated with
increasing proficiency of cancer cells to employ HR to repair DNA damage.
Given that, our findings provide the rationale for the use of triapine to
enhance the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy and PARP inhibitors,
and potentially eradicate platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.

