Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 is expressed in the nucleus of metastatic prostate cancer
cells


Most prostate cancer-related deaths are due to the advancement of the
tumor to a metastatic disease. The C-X-C Chemokine Receptor 4 (CXCR4) is
a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) involved in the metastasis of various
cancers, including the prostate. CXCR4 is generally regarded as a plasma
membrane receptor; the canon concept of GPCR signaling holds that
receptors located at the plasma membrane respond to secreted agonist
stimulation. GPCRs, however, have also been observed at other
intracellular organelles, including the nuclear membrane. Several cancer
models have positively observed expression of a nuclear form of CXCR4 in
advanced stage tissues and tumors with a poor prognosis. The significance
of these receptors having a dualistic localization pattern is that
nuclear receptors can escape from chemotherapy, since most therapeutics
are hydrophobic small molecules targeted towards membrane bound
receptors, which cannot pass through non-polar regions of the plasma
membrane. An initial search of the CXCR4 sequence through the PredictNLS
software program revealed a putative, nontraditional nuclear localization
sequence, RPRK. We probed prostate cancer tissues for CXCR4 and observed
a higher nuclear expression in high grade prostate tumors, compared to
low grade, and no detectable CXCR4 in normal human prostate tissue by
immunohistochemistry. Subcellular fractionations of prostate cancer cell
lines (PC3, DU145 and 22RV1) and normal prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1)
demonstrated positive expression of CXCR4 in both nuclear and cytoplasmic
fractions, which were confirmed by immunocytochemistry analysis,
independent of exogenous SDF1 stimulation. Based on our results, we
suggest that CXCR4 is alternately expressed in the nucleus of advanced
prostate cancer, which may enhance prostate cancer metastasis. To
determine the origin of nuclear CXCR4, the a kinetic localization study
confirmed that CXCR4 translocates to the nucleus from the plasma membrane
at 37C, which was inhibited when the same reaction was performed at 4C.
In conclusion, expression and localization of a nuclear CXCR4 may
contribute to the advancement of prostate cancer to a metastatic disease,
and aid tumors in escaping from therapy. Our studies will contribute to
the development of therapeutics towards CXCR4, as current options are
targeted towards membrane receptors, which may be ineffective if CXCR4
located and functional inside of the cell.

