Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast transcriptome sequencing reveals different gene
expression profiles among distinct subtypes of breast cancer and normal
mammary tissue


Cancer associated fibroblasts, CAFs, is believed to actively participate
in the growth and invasion of tumor cells by providing a unique tumor
microenvironment, rendering increasingly clear that the development of
cancer cannot be dissociated from its local microenvironment. However,
neither the origin of CAFs nor the criteria to distinguish CAFs from
normal fibroblasts has been well established. Moreover, the complex
nature of the heterogeneity that exists both within and between breast
cancers, particularly as related to gene expression profiling, needs more
recognition. It must be appreciated that CAFs from different subtypes of
breast cancers have distinct gene expression profiles as well as do CAFs
in comparison to normal breast fibroblasts (NAFs). The identification of
these differentially expressed genes (DEG) may shed light on the
molecular interactions of fibroblasts with carcinoma cells and to further
understand their signaling pathways that are actively involved. The
advent of next generation sequence technologies and the realization that
breast cancer is heterogeneous has shifted the focus to the
identification of molecular markers of prognostic relevance. In the
present study, we isolated total RNA from fibroblasts of frozen tissue
samples of human invasive ductal breast carcinoma luminal A and triple
negative subtypes and also from normal surrounding tissue from
fibroadenoma lesions using laser capture microdissection. Preparing 3
fragments cDNA libraries from fibroblast samples and sequencing on the
Genome Sequencer FLX Titanium 454 Plataform, we obtained a
transcriptional snapshot of CAFs and NAF. Sequencing and filtering
(removal of adapter, polyA tail etc) of these sequences resulted in a
total of 376,528 high quality reads with an average length of 159.43 bp.
A total of 14,950 transcripts were sequenced and corresponded to 10,586
genes, representing 53.72% of the human genome repertoire. The analysis
of DEG between the distinct samples was investigated by test on
proportions (p value 0.05 and 2.0 fold change difference in expression
level). The comparison of expression in NAFs versus triple negative CAF
yielded 192 DEG while NAF versus luminal A CAF revealed 88 DEG and triple
negative CAF versus luminal A CAF presented 41 DEG. Gene ontology (GO)
assignments and KEGG pathways classifications were performed to gain an
overview of the biological processes in which these DEG are involved. The
results suggest that highly specific genes are expressed in each breast
cancer fibroblast subtype. Taken all together, genes will be selected for
validation by RT-qPCR and tissue microarray using independent samples.
Further understanding of detailed functional mechanisms of the
differentially expressed genes, may thus yield additional candidates for
prognostic and therapeutic intervention. Supported by FAPESP:05/60333-7,
09/10088-7.

