Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Cancer Genome Project high throughput analysis pipeline


The Cancer Genome Project (CGP) was set up in 2000 to use systematic
mutation screening methods to increase our understanding of human cancer.
With the advent of next generation sequencing, and the large volumes of
data that it generates, a new suite of software was required to rapidly
and accurately screen these data for somatic changes. We have built an
analysis pipeline to track and analyse large numbers of tumour samples,
using in-house and externally available tools. The analysis pipeline is
built around a 2,000 node compute farm and Lustre filesystem which
outputs into our archive and data storage system, FileTrk. FileTrk holds
the raw data files (BAM, CEL etc), the results of the analysis and any
versioning information about the software used to generate these results.
Sample lanes are aligned back to the genome using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
(BWA) and lane-to-lane comparisons are made to ensure data integrity.
Lanes from each sample are merged into a single sample BAM file and once
30 - 40x coverage is reached and the lanes have been quality assessed the
sample is locked and ready for analysis. Mutation callers detect point
mutations (Caveman, in-house software), small insertions/deletions
(Pindel), breakpoints (BRASS, in-house software) and copy number changes
(ASCAT & PICNIC, in-house software). The resulting mutations are
post-processed to remove false positives, annotated to the RNA and
protein level using standard nomenclature (Vagrent, in-house software)
and uploaded to a database. Interfaces have been developed to enable the
selection of random sets of mutations for validation, the outcome of the
validations is recorded so specificity can be calculated for each sample
in the system. IT systems are being developed to automatically export
lists of somatic changes to COSMIC, the ICGC data portal and raw data to
the European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA).

