Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct anti-angiogenic activity of a small molecular STAT3
inhibitor LLL12


Increased vascularization (angiogenesis) is a required adaptation for
sustained tumor growth. It is a complex multistage process regulated by a
number of signal transduction pathways, although the primary mediator of
blood vessel formation is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Recent data indicate the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
3 (STAT3) is required for VEGF production and angiogenesis in various
types of cancers, possibly through regulating hypoxia inducible factor 1
(HIF-1). Other STAT3 inhibitors have been shown to reduce tumor
microvessel density in tumors (Lin L et al., Cancer Res.
2010;70:2445-54), but a direct anti-angiogenic activity has not been
described. In this study, we investigated the direct action of LLL12 in
human umbilical chord vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs). LLL12 (100nM)
significantly inhibited VEGF-stimulated STAT3 phosphorylation in HUVEC
cells, reduced their proliferation/migration and also inhibited
VEGF-induced tube formation. Morphologic analysis of LLL12 treated HUVECS
demonstrated significant changes in actin/tubulin distribution and
bundling. To test the anti-angiogenic effects of LLL12 in vivo,
VEGF-infused Matrigel plugs were implanted into scid mice, and
microvessel invasion (CD34 positive cells) determined after 7 days in
vehicle treated or LLL12-treated mice. VEGF stimulated microvessel
development (10-fold) over control plugs (PBS infused). The decreased in
microvessel density in LLL12 treated mice was dose dependent, being
reduced by 90% at a daily dose of 5 mg/kg. To test the antitumor activity
of LLL12, mice bearing established OS-1 osteosarcoma xenografts with no
treatment, vehicle alone or LLL12 (5 mg/kg daily) for 6 weeks. Following
a period of tumor progression, LLL12 completely suppressed further
growth. Pharmacodynamic studies at the end of treatment showed robust
phosphor-STAT3 in control tumors whereas phosphor-STAT3 was not detected
in treated OS-1 tumors. Treated tumors demonstrated decreased
proliferation (Ki67 staining) but no significant increase in apoptosis
(TUNEL staining), relative to controls. To examine the effect of LLL12 on
angiogenic factors a Proteome Profiler antibody array was used to detect
the relative levels of expression of 55 angiogenesis related proteins in
control and treated OS-1 tumors. Several critical regulators of
angiogenesis including VEGF, MMP-9, Angiopoieion1/2, Tissue Factor and
FGF-1 expression were significantly reduced in LLL12 treated tumors
compared to control OS-1 xenografts. These findings provide the first
evidence that LLL12 effectively inhibits tumor angiogenesis both in vitro
and in vivo. These data indicate that the inhibition of STAT3 signaling
is a potential therapeutic approach for tumor angiogenesis, and tumor
control. Supported in part through a Pelotonia grant from OSU.

