Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amino terminus of SEPT9_i1 impacts cellular localization:
Implications for mammary tumorigenesis


Septins were first discovered in Saccharomyces cerevisiae as proteins
essential for faithful cell division. They are highly conserved and found
in all eukaryotes with the exception of plants. One septin, SEPT9, was
cloned from a region of allelic imbalance in breast and ovarian cancers
on chromosome 17q25. Further analysis showed that SEPT9 encoded multiple
protein isoforms. Retroviral expression of one isoform, SEPT9_i1,
promoted oncogenic phenotypes including, increased cell proliferation,
invasion, motility, and genomic instability in mammary epithelial cells.
In addition, abnormal nuclear localization of SEPT9_i1 was observed.
SEPT9_i1 is highly expressed in many cancers including, breast, ovarian,
prostate, and head and neck. SEPT9_i1 differs from other SEPT9 isoforms
by 25 unique amino acids at the N terminus. SEPT9_i3, which lacks these
25 amino acids, does not exhibit the same pro-oncogenic phenotypes
associated with SEPT9_i1. The goal of this study is to determine the
functional relevance of these amino acids with respect to cellular
localization as well as phenotypes related to mammary tumorigenesis and
metastasis. First, bioinformatic analysis revealed a bipartite nuclear
localization signal within the 25 unique amino acids but no other
recognized functional domains. To determine the effects of these 25 amino
acids on nuclear localization, FLAG-tagged deletion (N)-SEPT9_i1,
full-length (FL) -SEPT9_i1, and empty vector control constructs were
transiently transfected into two immortalized human mammary epithelial
cell lines, HME and MCF-10a. Immunofluorescence analyses of FL-SEPT9_i1
and N-SEPT9_i1 localization revealed a dramatic decrease in the amount of
SEPT9_i1 localized to the nucleus in the N-SEPT9_i1 versus FL- SEPT9_i1
lines. Stably expressing FL-SEPT9_i1 and N-SEPT9_i1 HS578t cell lines
were also generated using nucleofection for examination of the effects of
N-SEPT9_i1 on cellular phenotypes including cell proliferation, cell
motility and invasion. We present data indicating that the deletion of
the N terminal 25 amino acids decreases cell motility and invasion as
compared to SEPT9_i1 in HS578t cells. In addition, we show increased cell
proliferation in cells expressing N-SEPT9_i1 as compared to both EV and
SEPT9_i1. To date our results implicate an oncogenic role for high
SEPT9_i1 in mammary tumorigenesis where the unique 25 amino acids of
SEPT9_i1 may impact tumorigenesis. Further investigation could provide
valuable insight into developing targeted chemotherapeutic agents.

