Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of bone marrow adipocyte-induced HO-1 expression in
prostate tumor survival in bone


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among
men in the United States. Obesity, adipocyte-derived signals, and adipose
tissue inflammation are major contributors to development of aggressive
PCa, with higher recurrence and higher mortality rates. Bone is a primary
site of metastasis of PCa and obese and overweight men have a three-fold
higher risk of progression to metastatic disease compared to
normal-weight men receiving the same treatment. Experimental and clinical
evidence indicate that bone marrow adipocyte numbers increase with age
and obesity and their increased presence affects homeostasis in the bone
microenvironment. It is not, however, currently known how
adipocyte-derived factors influence tumor growth and survival in bone.
Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is a stress-responsive protein induced by hypoxia
and inflammation, and it has been shown to play a role in prostate
carcinogenesis and cell survival. Its role in tumor cell aggressiveness
and survival in response to adipocyte-derived signals has not been
previously explored. Here, we investigated the effects of bone marrow
adipocyte-derived factors on HO-1/IL-1 pathway in PCa cells. Our study
was driven by hypothesis that adipocytes increase invasiveness and
survival of PCa cells via upregulation of HO-1. We utilized Taqman RT PCR
analyses and western blotting approaches to demonstrate that levels of
HO-1 and its inducer IL-1 increase in PC3, DU145 and C42B prostate cancer
cell lines in response to treatment with adipocyte conditioned media
(Adipo CM). Immunofluorescence analyses and subcellular fractionation
methods were used to demonstrate a translocation of HO-1 from the
cytoplasm to nucleus upon exposure to Adipo CM. Invasiveness of PCa cells
in response to adipocyte-derived factors in the absence and presence of
IL-1 neutralizing antibody and HO-1 inhibitor Zinc protoporphyrin IX was
assessed using Boyden chamber assays. Studies are currently underway to
determine the significance of HO-1/IL-1 upregulation in tumor cells
survival and response to chemotherapy. Collectively, the results of our
studies demonstrate that adipocyte-induced upregulation of HO-1/IL-1
pathways may be playing a significant role in promoting prostate tumor
aggressiveness and survival.

