Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of the mevalonate pathway and oncogenic signaling may
underlie the tumor-suppressing effects of KLK5 in breast cancer


Kallikrein-related peptidase 5 (KLK5) has been implicated in different
types of cancer based on its aberrant expression in tumor cell lines and
tissue specimens and in vitro data, however, functional association is
missing. Here, we confirmed that KLK5 is very frequently down-regulated
or inactivated in breast cancers of different subtypes. Reconstitution of
KLK5 expression by stable transfection in KLK5-negative MDA-MB-231 cells
remarkably reversed their malignant phenotype both in vitro (wound
scratch and soft agar assay) and in vivo (orthotopic xenograft growth in
SCID mice). We found that in KLK5 transfectants Snail1 and the
mesenchymal marker vimentin were highly downregulated, pointing to a
potential involvement of KLK5 in mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transdifferentiation, however, re-expression of E-cadherin could not be
demonstrated. Importantly, it appears that KLK5 may severely affect the
overall output of the proteolytic web as it minimized the proteolytic
activities of MMP9 and MMP3. Unexpectedly, transcriptomic profiling
revealed that reconstitution of KLK5 expression suppresses the mevalonate
pathway of cholesterol biosynthesis by highly up-regulating INSIG1
(insulin induced gene 1), a major negative regulator of HMGCR
(3-hydroxy-3-methylgluratyl-CoA reductase), while KLK5 may also affect
cholesterol uptake, as the LDLR (LDL receptor) and PCSK9 (proprotein
convertase subtilisin-like/kexin type 9), the main regulator of LDLR,
were both found significantly upregulated in KLK5 transfectants. A
functional role of KLK5 in the regulation of the mevalonate pathway and
protein-prenylation circuitries was demonstrated by reduced cellular
cholesterol and prenylation levels, end products of this pathway. Reduced
prenylation was shown by the remarkable reduction in the levels of
activated RhoA, which must be subjected to isoprenylation (mainly
geranyl-geranylation) for activation. To our knowledge, this is the first
demonstration of a protease involved in the crosstalk between metabolic
pathways and oncogenic signaling. Moreover, among the genes found up or
down-regulated upon KLK5 re-expression (i.e. the KLK5 signature) were
several genes known to be involved in atherosclerosis and other
lipid-related metabolic disorders. Overall, KLK5 may represent a nodal
interconnection of proteolytic and signaling pathways in cancer but may
also participate in pathways associated with metabolic diseases, in
support of the emerging concept of common genetic networks governing both
cancer and lipid-associated disorders.

