Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Randomized trial of autologous dendritic cell vs tumor cell
vaccines in patients with metastatic melanoma


Autologous proliferating tumor cells may represent tumor stem cells
and/or early progenitor cells that are capable of establishing new sites
of metastatic cancer, and may provide excellent antigenic targets for
patient-specific vaccines. In successive trials in metastatic melanoma,
74 patients treated with irradiated proliferating autologous tumor cell
vaccines (TC) had a median survival of 20.5 months (29% 5-yr survival),
and 54 patients treated with autologous dendritic cell vaccines (DC), in
which dendritic cells were loaded with antigen from autologous
proliferating tumor cells, had a 50% 5-yr survival (Cancer Biother
Radiopharm 2007, 2009). A randomized trial was initiated to determine
whether there was a difference in the two approaches. Key eligibility
criteria included a diagnosis of metastatic melanoma, successful
establishment of a short-term cell line from resected metastatic tumor
with expansion to 200 million proliferating tumor cells by the Hoag Cell
Biology Laboratory, and the ability of patients to travel to Newport
Beach, CA. There were no eligibility restrictions for types or numbers of
prior therapies. Patients were stratified by whether they had measurable
disease and by whether their most advanced stage had been regional or
distant metastases, then randomized to receive either TC or DC injected
s.c. with 500 micrograms of GM-CSF, weekly for 3 weeks and then monthly
for five months. This was designed as a randomized phase III trial with
90% power to detect a 50% difference in survival by intent-to-treat
analysis. In April 2011 Hoag Hospital advised that the Cell Biology
Laboratory was to be closed for strategic and economic reasons, forcing
discontinuation of the trial. 42 of a planned 200 patients were
randomized, and all 42 received the assigned treatment. Because of the
premature closure, an unplanned interim analysis was performed. There
were no differences between the two arms in patient characteristics for
17 different variables including age, gender, measurable disease,
location of metastases, LDH, and prior therapies. One patient in the DC
arm experienced complete regression of multiple measurable soft-tissue
metastases. With 21 patients deceased, survival is superior in the DC arm
(HR=0.27 95% CI 0.098-0.729) with median survival not reached vs 15.9
months and 2-year survival rates 72% vs 30% (p=.007 Mantle-Cox log rank
test, and p=.011 Breslow generalized Wilcoxon). This study establishes
the importance of denditic cells in active specific immunotherapy,
confirms an earlier study showing a high rate of long-term survival in
patients with metastatic melanoma treated with such therapy, and shows
that a patient-specific DC product is superior to a patient-specific TC
product in death reduction. (NCT00436930) Supported by the Hoag Hospital
Foundation.

