Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an organotypic raft culture system to study the
role of latent membrane protein 1 during Epstein-Barr virus replication


Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is a gamma herpesvirus that is prevalent
worldwide and is an important cause of acute and chronic disease. Primary
EBV infection which occurs after early childhood often results in acute
infectious mononucleosis. Persistent latent EBV infection is a causative
agent of anaplastic nasopharyngeal carcinoma, AIDS related lymphoma,
posttransplant lymphoma, and Hodgkin's disease. Expression of Latent
Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1) is common to most EBV related malignancies.
LMP1 induced NF-B activity is required for efficient transformation and
survival of primary human B lymphocytes into lymphoblastoid cell lines.
Increasing evidence suggest that LMP1 has an important role in the lytic
cycle. Studies indicate that LMP1 and other latent genes are induced as
part of the EBV lytic cascade in Burkitt's lymphomas. Our recent research
indicates that LMP1-deleted virus replicates as efficiently as wildtype
virus in HEK293 cells which suggests that the role of LMP1 during lytic
replication is linked to changes in the cellular environment. LMP1
expression is associated with survival signals and alters expression of
several differentiation markers, therefore a role for LMP1 during lytic
replication in differentiating epithelial cells should be pursued. We
have developed an organotypic raft culture system that will permit
investigation of EBV replication in differentiating epithelial cells. Our
lab is utilizing molecular, biochemical, and genetic approaches to
elucidate the role of LMP1 during EBV replication in differentiating
epithelial cells. We are investigating the function of LMP1 in viral
replication, cell proliferation and differentiation, and viral-cellular
signaling pathways. Based on these studies we will develop a model for
the role of LMP1 during EBV replication in differentiating epithelial
cells and its resulting pathogenesis.

