Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant in vivo activity of an APE1/Ref-1 redox inhibitor,
E3330, alone and in combination with Bevacizumab in a glioblastoma mouse
model analyzed by a whole slide digital imaging system and quantitative
immunohistochemistry


Human apurinic endonuclease/redox factor 1 (APE1/Ref-1) mediates the
repair of baseless sites in DNA caused by alkylation and oxidative DNA
damage as well as regulates the function of various transcription factors
(TF) under redox signaling control (p53, NFkB, HIF-1, AP-1, and others).
High levels of APE1 expression have been reported in numerous cancers
(glioblastoma, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate, and others) such that APE1
is an emerging target for a variety of novel anticancer drugs. E3330
targets the redox signaling function of APE1 and its activity was studied
in vivo using a glioblastoma xenograft mouse model. This preclinical
xenograft model evaluated the use of dual anti-angiogenic agents,
Bevacizumab (Bev) and E3330, in glioblastoma implanted Nude mice. Four
mice groups were used to determine drug effects: E3330, Bev, a
combination of E3330 and Bev, and an untreated vehicle control group.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to predict the effectiveness of
treatment for glioblastoma based on caspase-3, Ki67, and CD31 biomarker
expression. IHC slides were quantified using both a traditional pathology
hand count and an image system analysis. The positive pixel data closely
mirrored the hand count for all three biomarkers. At the combined dosage,
hand count data demonstrated that CD31 levels decreased significantly
from the vehicle control group. Ki67 decreased slightly, and caspase-3
was not increased in any of the drug treatment groups. While each drug
independently had anti-angiogenic effects, the combined drug group, E3330
and Bev, had anti-angiogenic effects that were greatly enhanced. These
results support previous studies demonstrating the anti-angiogenic
activity of E3330 and its enhancement of Bevacizumab.

