Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the Shh pathway by KAAD-Cyclopamine promoted apoptosis
in estrogen treated breast cancer cells


The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway functions as an organizer in
embryonic development. Recent studies have shown constitutive activation
of the hedgehog pathway is important in the development of various
carcinomas including breast cancer. However, it remains unclear whether
this pathway is activated in human breast cancer. Herein, we investigated
the role of Shh signaling pathway in tumorigenesis of estrogen treated
breast cancer cells and the molecular mechanisms underlying these
effects. We showed that breast cancer cell lines express all the
components of Shh signaling, albeit to different extents. Moreover, in
breast cancer cells, estrogen supplementation triggered Shh
up-regulation. This estrogen treated Shh expression activated the Hh
pathway in a ligand-dependent manner, and increased cell proliferation.
Cell proliferation was done MTT assay with various concentrations of
KAAD-Cyclopamine for 24, 48, or 72 h. As a result, KAAD-Cyclopamine had
anti-proliferative effect on estrogen treated breast cancer cells. Also,
to determine whether the cytotoxicity induced by KAAD-Cyclopamine was due
to apoptosis in estrogen-induced breast cancer cells, we measured cell
cycle and the fraction of early apoptosis [Annexin V(+)/PI(-)]. Cell
cycle analysis by FACS indicated that Cyclopamine treated cell lines
showed an increase in the proportion of cells in sub-G1 phase, compared
to untreated cells. Exposure of gastric cancer cells to Cyclopamine also
resulted in the increase in the percentage of annexin V- positive and
PI-negative cells. These observations demonstrate that KAAD-Cyclopamine
can inhibit estrogen-induced breast cancer cell cycle progression and
promote cell apoptosis. Furthermore, Western blotting analysis was used
to investigate the effect of KAAD-Cyclopamine (a Shh signaling inhibitor)
on estroen treated breast cancer cells. As a result, expression of
cleaved PARP, caspase-3, and -9, Bax was increased. In addition,
phosphorylation of Akt and of glycogensynthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) was also
reduced by treatment with KAAD-Cyclopamine. These results, taken
together, suggest that Blockade of the Shh pathway by KAAD-Cyclopamine
promoted apoptosis in estrogen treated breast cancer cells.

