Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling to characterize
platelet response following inotuzumab ozogamicin treatment in patients
with follicular or diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma


Background: Inotuzumab ozogamicin (CMC-544) is an immunoconjugate
chemotherapy agent composed of a CD22-directed IgG4 antibody linked to
calicheamicin, a potent cytotoxic anti-tumor antibiotic. Thrombocytopenia
was the most frequent adverse event observed in phase 1/2 studies. This
integrated population pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) analysis
was undertaken to a) elucidate the relationship between exposure of
inotuzumab or total calicheamicin (tCali) and the decrease in platelet
count; b) identify the covariates that influence the PK of inotuzumab and
platelet response; and c) optimize the dosing schedule. Methods: Serum
concentrations of inotuzumab, tCali (sum of conjugated and unconjugated
forms), and platelet count were available from 5 phase 1/2 studies with
follicular or diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) who
received inotuzumab alone or in combination with rituximab. Most patients
received 1.8 mg/m2 of inotuzumab infused over 1 hour every 3 to 4 weeks
(dose range, 0.4-2.4 mg/m2). The sequential PK/PD analysis was performed
by nonlinear regression using NONMEM, version 7, level 1.2 (Icon
Development Solutions, Hanover, MD). Covariates (factors for demography,
hematology measures, renal and hepatic function, and baseline tumor size)
were evaluated using graphical analysis, a general additive model (GAM),
and a stepwise covariate model by forward addition and backward
elimination process (SCM). Results and Conclusion: A 2-compartment model
with linear elimination adequately described the PK of inotuzumab and
tCali. The time course of platelet response was modeled using a
semi-mechanistic transit compartment model model with drug effect as a
sigmoidal Emax function. Significant covariate effects identified for PK
estimates of inotuzumab included baseline body surface area (BSA) on
clearance (CL) and central volume (V1), and baseline creatinine clearance
on inter-compartment clearance (Q). For tCali, significant covariate
effects included baseline BSA on CL and V1, treatment occasion (cycle) on
CL and V1, and gender on peripheral volume (V2). The CL of tCali
decreased from 0.73 L/h in Cycle 1 to 0.3 L/h in Cycles 2 and 3,
suggesting a nonlinear disposition process. For the platelet model, the
EC50 estimates for effect of inotuzumab and tCali on production of
platelets were 219 and 50.2 ng/mL, respectively. Baseline platelet count
was identified as a significant covariate. Integrated modeling of drug
concentration and platelet count provides a means to quantify the
magnitude of platelet suppression and to identify dosing schedules that
mitigate the incidence of thrombocytopenia.

