Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylseleninic acid potentiates multiple types of cancer cells to
ABT-737-induced apoptosis involving Mcl-1, AKT-Bad, and mitochondrial
cascade


ABT-737, a novel small-molecule inhibitor of select Bcl-2 family survival
proteins, holds excellent promise to complement current cytotoxic
therapies for cancer, especially B-cell malignancies. However many types
of solid cancer cells are resistant to ABT-737. One practical approach to
improving its therapeutic efficacy is to combine with agents that can
overcome such resistance to restore the sensitivity. In the present
study, we sought to test the hypothesis that the cancer chemopreventive
selenium compound methylseleninic acid (MSeA), known to suppress the
expression of some Bcl-2 family members and AKT survival signaling, could
synergistically sensitize cancer cells to ABT-737-induced apoptosis. Our
results show that serum achievable levels of MSeA increased apoptosis
induction by ABT-737 in several aggressive malignant cell lines:
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells, HT-29 human colon cancer cells and
DU145 human prostate cancer cells, as evidenced by greater than additive
enhancement of annexin V/FITC positive (apoptotic) cells and activation
of multiple caspases and PARP cleavage. Mechanistic investigation
demonstrated that MSeA significantly decreased the basal expression of
Mcl-1 and ABT-737-induced Mcl-1 expression. Knocking down of Mcl-1 with
RNAi increased ABT-737-induced apoptosis. More importantly, we identified
activation of AKT phosphorylation and AKT-mediated inactivation of Bad by
ser-136 and ser-112 phosphorylation as a novel mechanism involved in
ABT-737 resistance which could be overcome by MSeA. In addition, we found
that expression of Bax was required for the efficient execution of
synergistic sensitization. These mitochondria-related apoptosis findings,
to our knowledge for the first time, provide a strong mechanistic
rationale for developing MSeA as a novel sensitizing agent of ABT-737 for
cancer chemotherapy.

