Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
(IGF1R) expression in pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Insulin like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) reported to
be overexpressed in some types of human carcinomas, including lung
cancer, and breast cancer. However no report of the significance of IGF1R
expression was available in pancreatic cancer. Most patients with
pancreatic cancer die within 2 years at diagnosis even after curative
resection. The objective of this study was to evaluate the significance
of IGF1R expression in human pancreatic cancer. Material and Methods: A
total 122 patients with pancreatic cancer was studied. Paraffin embedded
species of pancreatic cancers were stained with antibodies against IGF1R.
IGF1R expression was evaluated by intensity of staining.
Semi-quantitative scores of zero (no staining), 1+ (weak staining), 2+
(moderate staining), or 3+ (strong staining) were assigned to each sample
based on the intensity of staining. Scores of 2+ or 3+ were defined as
IGF1R-positive staining. The association between IGF1R expression and
clinicopathologic variables was examined. Results: IGF1R expression was
positive in 50 (40.1%) of 122 cases. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated
the prognosis of IGF1R-positive patients was significantly (p=0.0076)
poorer than that of IGF1R-negative, and median survival time of patients
with IGF1R-positive was 37.3 months, while that of patients with
IGF1R-negative samples was 60.8 months. There were no associations
between IGF1R overexpression and clinicopathological factors, including
tumor location, tumor size, tumor differentiation, and T/N categories
according to the International Union against Cancer. Multivariate
analysis showed IGF1R expression and lymph node metastasis were
independent predictors of worse prognosis in pancreatic cancer.
Conclusion: The expression of IGF1R might be a novel predictive
prognostic marker for patients with pancreatic cancers.

