Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol enhances the anti-proliferative response of zinc by
increasing zinc-transporter protein ZIP1 in prostate cancer cells: A
novel combinatorial approach for prostate cancer management


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is one of the most prevalent cancers in males
across the globe. In the United States alone, 240,890 new PCa cases and
33,720 related deaths are predicted for the year 2011. Studies suggest
that the essential trace element zinc is extremely important in prostate
cell functions and survival. Prostate tissue can accumulate zinc at up to
ten-fold higher concentration than other organs. However, the cancerous
prostatic cells lose the ability to accumulate zinc and lower levels of
prostatic zinc have been associated with PCa development and progression.
Based on several studies, it has been suggested that lower expression of
zinc transporter protein ZIP1 is associated with this neoplastic
transformation and restoration of adequate zinc levels in
premalignant/malignant prostate cells can abort prostate malignancy. In
addition, zinc has been shown to function as an anti-proliferative agent
against PCa. However, because of low ZIP1 in cancerous cells, active
transport of zinc into the cells is compromised. Thus, zinc
supplementation is not effective since very high concentrations of zinc
are needed to achieve enough zinc inside cancerous cells. Therefore new
means to enhance the bioaccumulation of sufficient zinc in the prostate
tissue could be useful towards PCa management. In this study, we tested
the hypothesis that grape antioxidant resveratrol will enhance zinc
bioaccumulation via increasing ZIP1 in prostate, to impart a superior
anti-proliferative response against PCa cells. Our data demonstrated that
ZIP1 protein was markedly downregulated in human PCa tissue as compared
to normal prostate tissue. Employing androgen-responsive 22R1 and LNCaP
as well as androgen-unresponsive DU145 cell lines, we observed that a
combination of resveratrol and zinc resulted in a remarkable increase in
ZIP1 mRNA and protein expression in PCa cells. Further, a combination of
resveratrol and zinc was found to impart a superior anti-proliferative
response (inhibition of cell growth/viability and induction of apoptosis)
in PCa cells, compared to either of the agent alone. Furthermore, we also
found that resveratrol-zinc combination resulted in an increase in the
levels of metallothioneins (MT1A, MT1X, MT2A and MT3), which play
critical role in regulation of intracellular zinc levels. Taken together,
our data indicate that resveratrol enhances the cellular transport of
zinc via enhancing ZIP1 transporter protein and a combination of
resveratrol and zinc may be a useful approach for PCa management.
However, further in vivo studies are needed in appropriate animal
model(s) with relevance to human disease to determine the clinical
benefits of resveratrol and zinc combination against PCa.

