Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PR/AMPK-IGF/PI3K network plays a major role on
progestin-resistance in endometrial cancer therapy


Progestin-resistance is a main obstacle to the success of conservative
therapy in type I young endometrial cancer patients. We have established
a progestin-resistant endometrial cancer cell line by long-term induction
with gradual increasing of progestin concentration. Our previous study
confirmed that progestin activated PI3K/Akt pathway through a non-genomic
pathway independent of Progesterone receptor (PR). Blocking PI3K pathway
up-regulated PR expression and restored the anti-proliferative effect of
medoxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) in progestin-resistant cells. We propose
that PI3K/Akt activation may not be the only mechanism of
progestin-resistance. To further explore other molecular events leading
to progestin-resistance and to search for any possible approaches to
reverse this resistance in endometrial cancer, we have characterized
functional proteomics by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in
progestin-sensitive and -resistant endometrial cancer cells, and the RPPA
results were confirmed by Western blots. Our results demonstrated
up-regulation of Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R), and
down-regulation of IGF binding protein 2 (IGFBP2) and Ataxia
Telangiectasia (ATM) [an upstream molecule of adenosine
monophosphate-activated kinase (AMPK) pathway] in progestin-resistant
cells, suggesting that IGF/AMPK metabolic pathways are involved in
progestin-resistance of endometrial cancer therapy. We further identified
the differential effects of insulin stimulation on metabolic changes in
progestin-sensitive and -resistant cell lines. We found that acute
stimulation with high concentration of insulin not only activated
PI3K/Akt, but also reduced the expression of PR, EGFR and IGF-1R, and
further mediated proliferation of primary endometrial cancer cells.
Continually stimulation with insulin reduced MPA-mediated
anti-proliferation effect in progestin-sensitive cells, but no effect in
progestin-resistant cells, indicating the existing of altered
insulin-responsiveness in progestin-resistant cells. Furthermore,
Metformin, an insulin-independent AMPK activator and is commonly used as
an insulin sensitizer, could restore progestin sensitivity in
progestin-resistant endometrial cancer cells. The restoration was
demonstrated directly related to the inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway,
activation of AMPK and upregulation of PR transcription. In summary, our
study revealed that PR/AMPK-IGF/PI3K network plays an important role on
progestin-resistance in endometrial cancer therapy. The combinatory
treatment of progestin with PI3K inhibitor, or with AMPK
activator-metformin might be an effective conservative approach for
endometrial cancer patients who developed progestin-resistance in their
therapy.

