Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy and biomarker modulation by AZD1208, a novel, potent and
selective pan-Pim kinase inhibitor, in models of acute myeloid leukemia


The Pim serine/threonine kinase family is composed of three highly
homologous members; Pim-1, Pim-2 and Pim-3, identified by the ability of
the prototype member Pim-1 to drive lymphomagenesis in mice. Upregulation
of Pim-1 and Pim-2 is observed in leukemias and lymphomas, including AML,
NHL and CLL, highlighting the potential of these kinases as therapeutic
targets in these indications. Overexpression of Pim-1 or Pim-3 has also
been observed in prostate, pancreatic, gastric, bladder and
hepatocellular cancers. Pim kinases are downstream effectors of many
cytokine and growth factor signaling pathways and are direct
transcriptional targets of STAT transcription factors activated by these
pathways. Pims can phosphorylate multiple substrates to mediate cell
proliferation and survival. Here we describe the activity of AZD1208, an
orally available, potent and highly selective Pim inhibitor that
effectively inhibits all three isoforms. AZD1208 inhibits the growth of
several AML cell lines and sensitivity correlates with the level of Pim-1
expression, STAT5 activation and presence of protein tyrosine kinase
mutation. AZD1208 causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in MOLM-16 cells
in culture. This is accompanied by a dose-dependent reduction in
phosphorylation of BAD, 4EBP1 and p70S6K. AZD1208 suppresses the growth
of MOLM-16 and KG-1a xenograft tumors in vivo in a dose proportional
manner. In addition, AZD1208 leads to potent inhibition of colony growth
of primary AML cells from bone marrow aspirates and downregulates
phosphorylation of Pim targets. These results underscore the therapeutic
potential of Pim kinase inhibition by AZD1208 for the treatment of AML.
They also further support investigation of this inhibitor in other
hematological and solid tumor malignancies where PIM signaling may play a
role in tumorigenesis and survival.

