Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute bacterial infection increases lung cancer metastasis via
toll-like receptors 2 and 4


INTRODUCTION: Surgery is required for curative treatment of lung cancer
but is associated with a high rate of bacterial infections such as
pneumonia. There is emerging clinical evidence to suggest that infectious
complications may decrease survival after cancer surgery, but the
mechanism is unclear. Interactions between bacteria and host cells are
mediated by specialized pathogen recognition receptors, of which the
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are best characterized. We and others have
shown that cancer cells express TLRs, but their function is largely
unknown. The aim of this study is to investigate the mechanisms of
bacterial infection-facilitated lung cancer metastasis with a particular
focus on the role of TLRs. METHODS: Two lung cancer cell lines (murine
H-59 and human A549) were incubated a) directly with heat-inactivated
bacteria (S.pneumonia or E.coli) or purified bacterial antigens
(lipopolysaccharide or lipoteichoic acid), or b) indirectly with an in
vitro pneumonia model using conditioned media from pulmonary bronchial
epithelial cells incubated with heat-inactivated bacteria or bacterial
antigens. Migratory and metastatic ability of thus treated cells were
determined in vitro (adhesion, migration) and in vivo (hepatic intravital
microscopy and intra-splenic liver metastasis). A clinically relevant in
vivo model of severe infection, cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) or sham
control, was employed in some animals. To assess the role of TLRs, we
used transgenic TLR4 knockout mice, and small molecule inhibiting
molecules or antibodies of TLRs. RESULTS: Direct and indirect (in vitro
pneumonia) infection of H-59 and A549 increased adhesion to extracellular
matrix components approximately 2-8 fold and 2-4 fold over negative
control, respectively. In vitro pneumonia increased in vitro migration of
H-59 approximately 2-5 fold. Direct and indirect incubation of H-59 with
S.pneumonia and E.coli increased the in vivo adhesion to liver sinusoids
2-4 fold. CLP (in vivo infection model) enhanced the in vivo adhesion of
H-59 3-fold and increased number of liver metastases at 2 weeks
post-injection approximately 12 fold. These effects were attenuated in
TLR4 -/- mice and with TLR2 and TLR4 inhibition. CONCLUSION: Activation
of TLR2 or TLR4 on lung cancer cells, either directly by S.pneumonia and
E.coli, indirectly though activated bronchial epithelial cells, or via an
in vivo infection, increases cancer cell adhesion, migration and
metastasis. TLRs thus represent a potential therapeutic target in
bacterial infection facilitated cancer metastasis.

