Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 is a potent inhibitor of
ATM- and DNA-PKcs-mediated DNA damage responses


Inhibitors of PI3K/Akt signaling are being actively developed for tumor
therapy due to the frequent mutational activation of the PI3K-Akt-mTORC1
pathway in many cancers, including glioblastomas (GBMs). NVP-BEZ235 is a
novel and potent inhibitor of PI3K/Akt signaling that is currently in
phase I/II clinical trials. BEZ235 is reported to specifically inhibit
PI3Ks and mTOR with little effect on other kinases. However, we find that
BEZ235 also potently inhibits the two major kinases responding to DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs), ATM and DNA-PKcs, both in vitro and in vivo.
Consequently, BEZ235 blocks both non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and
homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair pathways, resulting in
significant attenuation of DSB repair. Additionally, phosphorylation of
ATM targets and implementation of the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint are also
attenuated by this drug. The consequence is profound radiosensitization
at very low concentrations (100 nM) of BEZ235. This radiosensitizing
effect is significantly more potent than that seen with much higher
concentrations (10 m) of inhibitors of DNA-PKcs or ATM that are currently
being optimized for clinical testing. Since radiotherapy is the standard
of care for GBM, we investigated the potential utility of BEZ235 as a
radiosensitizing agent in a panel of GBM lines. We find that BEZ235
treatment confers an extreme degree of radiosensitization and
significantly attenuates DSB repair irrespective of Akt activation status
in these lines. Finally, we show that BEZ235 also significantly impairs
DSB repair in a mouse tumor model thereby validating the efficacy of this
drug in vivo. Our results, showing that BEZ235 is a potent and novel
inhibitor of ATM and DNA-PKcs, have important implications for the
informed and rational design of clinical trials involving this drug and
also reveal the potential clinical utility of BEZ235 as an effective
radiosensitizer.

