Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxic heavy metal content in lung tissue samples from non-small
cell lung cancer patients


Background: Cigarettes, food, water, and air pollution can contain toxic
heavy metals, such as cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), mercury (Hg), and lead
(Pb). A cigarette contains approximately 1-2 ug of Cd, 40-120 ng of As,
2.95-10.2 ng of Hg, and 1-2 mg/kg of Pb because the tobacco plant
concentrates metals from soil and water. The accumulation of toxic heavy
metals inhaled from smoking may be associated with lung cancer. We
surveyed tissue from current/former smokers with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) for heavy metal content. Methods: Tissue collected from
treatment-nave stage I and II NSCLC patient samples that underwent
surgical resection was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma mass
spectroscopy (ICP-MS) for concentration of Cd, As, Hg, and Pb. 16 cases
were matched for stage, histology, gender, age, and race. Concentrations
were measured from two 20 micron thick slides each from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues: primary lung cancer, benign adjacent
lung, and where applicable to malignant lymph node, benign adjacent lymph
node, benign lymph node, and distant non-malignant lung tissue. Negative
controls were paraffin without tissue from FFPE blocks. Paired samples
t-tests were used to make intra-case comparisons. The nonparametric
Mann-Whitney U and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test were used to examine
inter-case differences. Results: The median patient age was 64.7 (range
36.4-75.4). There were 15 primary lung cancer cases with sufficient
tissue for analysis: 8 were men, 7 were stage I, 7 had adenocarcinoma, 8
had squamous cell carcinoma, 8 were former smokers, 7 were current
smokers, 9 were Caucasian, and 6 were African-American. A total of 75
tissue samples were analyzed with an average sample weight of 2.9 mg.
With the lower limit of detection at 0.001 ug/g, the median
concentrations in ug/g for Cd, As, Hg, and Pb in primary lung tumor were
0.058 (range undetectable [Not]-0.316), 0.019 (range Not-0.078), 0 (range
Not-0.015), and 0 (range Not-0.026); respectively. In distant
non-malignant lung samples, the median concentrations in ug/g for Cd, As,
Hg, and Pb were 0.204 (range Not-2.500), 0.025 (range Not-0.070), 0
(range Not-0.012), and Not; respectively. There were no significant
inter-case differences for the heavy metal concentrations in primary lung
tumor and stage, histology, gender, and race. However, distant
non-malignant lung samples had significantly higher Cd levels compared to
primary lung tumor (p=0.013). Conclusion: Using ICP-MS, concentrations of
Cd, As, Hg, and Pb could be measured in low quantities of FFPE tissue.
Significantly higher Cd content was observed in distant non-malignant
lung tissue compared to primary lung tumor. There appears to be higher
levels of Cd and As than Hg and Pb in the lung tissues of current/former
smokers with NSCLC. Analysis of lung tissues from clinically-matched
non-cancer patients is warranted.

