Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHA-739358, a pan-Aurora kinase inhibitor, induces apoptosis and
inhibits invasion in melanoma cell lines


Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is the most lethal form of skin cancer and is
highly invasive and markedly resistant to conventional therapy. The
incidence of malignant melanoma has been increasing worldwide for the
past three decades, however, the standard care for patients with
metastatic melanoma has not changed significantly, therefore, new
strategies for treatment of metastatic melanoma are urgently needed.
Significant insights have recently been gained into the molecular events
underpinning the development of melanoma. Aurora kinases play an
essential role as key mitotic regulators, controlling chromosome
alignment, segregation, centrosomal maturation, mitotic spindle
formation, and cytokinesis during mitosis, and are frequently
overexpressed in various human cancers including that of CM making them
ideal targets for anti-cancer therapy. Several small molecule inhibitors
of the aurora kinases have been developed and tested in vivo and in
vitro, and some of them have shown promising clinical efficacy in a
number of early phaseI/II clinical trials. Among those, one of the most
advanced clinical compounds currently is PHA-739358 (PHA). The goal of
this study is to investigate the anti-proliferative and anti-invasive
features of PHA in three melanoma cell lines including WM3211, Lu1205,
and SK-Mel28. The results showed a time- and dose- dependent growth
inhibition in all the cell lines tested with low M IC50s upon PHA
treatment, and significant induction of caspase activity was observed as
well. FACScan cell cycle analysis showed significant induction of G2/M
population of cells in all three cell lines and increased polyploidy
proportion of cells in WM3211 cell line. For the first time, we showed
that PHA inhibits melanoma cell invasion in a dose- and time- dependent
manor using a Matrigel Invasion Assay. More interestingly, addition of
PHA enhanced Temozolomide (TMZ)-induced caspase activation in melanoma
cell lines indicating a potential combination therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of melanoma. Thus, targeting aurora kianses with PHA is a
promising therapeutic strategy administered alone or in combination with
TMZ for patients with advanced stages of CM.

