Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gremlin 1 labels a mesenchymal progenitor cell in the
gastrointestinal tract, bone marrow and cancer microenvironment


The gastrointestinal tract is supported by myofibroblasts (MF) that
regulate epithelial homeostasis. In cancer the physiological stroma is
replaced by activated cells including bone marrow (BM)-derived
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) that drive carcinogenesis. MFs and a
significant proportion of CAFs express SMA. The origin of these cells and
their relation to the stem cell niche in cancer, however, is unclear. We
examined gene expression to determine markers of the MSC niche, from
which MFs and CAFs develop, and then generated three transgenic mouse
models to trace and examine the kinetics of the physiological and cancer
stroma. MSC cultures from whole BM of SMA-RFP transgenic reporter mice
consist of a heterogeneous population of SMA-RFP (+) and (-) cells
(FACS). The SMA-RFP (-) population contained the true MSC (CFU-F and
differentiation). The BMP-antagonist, Grem1, was specifically upregulated
in the combined RFP+/ population but not RFP+ cells suggesting that Grem1
may mark the MSC within its niche. Additionally, we confirmed the
expansion of BM-derived Grem1 cells in the gastric peritumoral stroma
supporting our hypothesis that the mesenchymal niche is recruited to the
cancer microenvironment. In order to confirm that Grem1 labels MSCs, we
developed a Grem1-BAC-CreER transgenic mouse to lineage trace this cell.
24 hours after tamoxifen induction single recombined cells were evident
throughout the gastrointestinal stroma adjacent to the epithelial stem
cell zone. By 3 months post-induction the recombined cells had expanded
giving rise to SMA+ MFs. Importantly, Grem1(+) cells were identified
within BM-derived MSC cultures, where they also gave rise to SMA(+) MFs
and adipocytes, and are currently being differentiated into osteocytes
and chondrocytes. Furthermore, in a syngeneic tumor model, subcutaneous
injection of MC38 cells into Grem1-BAC-CreER mice, yielded infiltrating
CAFs derived from Grem1 cells, suggesting that Grem1 marks the cellular
origin of both physiological and pathological mesenchyme.
Gastrointestinal carcinogenesis models (AOM/DSS, MNU/H. felis),
metastasis models (splenic injection MC38) and longer term lineage
tracing are proceeding. We also developed SMA-BAC-CreER and
Vimentin-BAC-CreER transgenic mice to characterize the cellular kinetics
of the stroma and further refine markers co-expressed by MSCs. These
studies have confirmed the turnover of intestinal MFs. In summary, Grem1
expressing stromal cells co-localize with the epithelial stem cell niche
within the gastrointestinal tract and specifically label a mesenchymal
cell that gives rise to SMA+ MFs. Furthermore, syngeneic tumor models
suggest that Grem1 cells also give rise to peritumoral mesenchyme. Grem1
expression identifies a likely progenitor to gastrointestinal MFs/CAFs in
health and cancer. Grem1 is a promising marker of the MSC in health in
cancer.

