Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine secreted IL-6 and IL-8 play critical and non-redundant
roles in basal-like breast cancer cell transformation and growth in vitro
and in vivo


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be subdivided into
distinct types based upon the molecular classification of oncogenic
driver mutations. While most breast cancers are driven by
estrogen-mediated signaling (ER+) or HER2 expression (HER2+), the
cellular signals that mediate transformation and growth of ER-HER2- (or
basal-type) breast cancers are incompletely understood. To identify novel
targets for the treatment of this aggressive and treatment-refractory
disease, we investigated inflammatory signaling in these cancers, as
inflammatory pathways have proven critical for oncogenic transformation
of multiple cancers. In our primary analysis, we analyzed ER- and ER+
primary patient tumors (N=106, Baylor College of Medicine Tumor Bank) to
determine inflammatory genes (in the KEGG Cytokine-Cytokine Receptor set,
N=226) that are differentially expressed (FDRBreast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease that can be subdivided into distinct types based
upon the molecular classification of oncogenic driver mutations. While
most breast cancers are driven by estrogen-mediated signaling (ER+) or
HER2 expression (HER2+), the cellular signals that mediate transformation
and growth of ER-HER2- (or basal-type) breast cancers are incompletely
understood. To identify novel targets for the treatment of this
aggressive and treatment-refractory disease, we investigated inflammatory
signaling in these cancers, as inflammatory pathways have proven critical
for oncogenic transformation of multiple cancers. In our primary
analysis, we analyzed ER- and ER+ primary patient tumors (N=106, Baylor
College of Medicine Tumor Bank) to determine inflammatory genes (in the
KEGG Cytokine-Cytokine Receptor set, N=226) that are differentially
expressed (FDR<.05) in ER-negative breast cancers. Combining this
analysis with analyses of the Richardson (GSE5460, N=129), Bild (GSE3143,
N=158), Wang (GSE2034, N=287), Brrensen-Dale (GSE19783, N=115), and Chin
Datasets (E-TABM-158, N=119), we identified a consensus set of 58
differentially regulated inflammatory genes in ER- breast cancers. To
determine which genes are required for the autocrine maintenance of
transformation, we performed further microarray analysis of breast cancer
cell line datasets, which revealed 24 of these genes to be highly
expressed in basal-like breast cancer cells in vitro. Using a lentiviral
shRNA panel targeting these conserved genes, we systematically
investigated their role in regulating cell growth and transformation of
basal-like breast cancer. We found that suppression of 8 different
inflammatory genes inhibited anchorage-independent growth in the majority
of basal-like breast cancer cells, including IL-6 and IL-8. As these
genes were coordinately expressed at high levels by tumor cells and
associated with poor survival, they became the focus of our subsequent
investigations. These studies revealed that while IL-6 expression
regulated cell growth in vitro, IL-8 had stronger effects on cell
migration and invasion in vitro. Notably, tandem inhibition of IL-6 and
IL-8 drastically inhibited anchorage-independent growth, elicited low
level apoptosis, and sensitized cells to chemotherapeutic agents. In
vivo, IL-6 inhibition limited tumor growth but had no effect on tumor
formation, while IL-8 inhibition prevented tumor formation in some
animals. Strikingly, dual inhibition of IL-6 and IL-8 strongly inhibited
tumor engraftment and growth in vivo. These findings suggest that
specific inflammatory pathways regulate the growth and maintenance of
basal-like breast cancer transformation and suggest that combined
inhibition of IL-6 and IL-8 inflammatory pathways represents a promising
strategy to treat or prevent basal-like breast cancers.

