Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL2 and interleukin-6 regulate EMT-mediated chemo-resistance in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most common cancers and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death in western countries. In China, the
incidence has increased, unexpectedly and sharply, for the past 20 years.
Chemo-resistance, in various types of tumor including PCa, is one of the
critical problems in cancer therapy. In PCa, for example, the resistance
to taxanes (DTX) accounts for tumor relapse and progression resulting in
skeletal metastasis and high mortality. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) has been suggested as a key process that dominates chemo-resistance
through unknown mechanisms. In the current study, we reported that CCL2
and interleukin-6 (IL-6) serve as key molecules in EMT-mediated
chemo-resistance in PCa cells using previously established
paclitaxel-resistant cells, DU145-TxR and PC-3-TxR. Parental DU145 and
PC-3 cells were used as controls. We observed that DU145-TxR and PC-3-TxR
cells produced significantly higher amount of CCL2 and IL-6 compared to
their parental cells, determined by cytokine array. In addition,
DU145-TxR and PC-3-TxR cells demonstrated EMT phenotypes including hall
maker changes in E-cadherin and Vimentin expression and transcriptional
factor (Snail, ZEB1, and Slug) alterations. These changes were reversed
partially by adding neutralizing antibodies against either CCL2 or
interleukin-6. Interestingly, synergistic effects were observed by adding
both reagents. Finally DU145-TxR, PC-3-TxR, or their parental cells were
implanted into SCID mice and the mice were given DTX (10mg/kg, biweekly)
and tumor growth was monitored for 4 weeks. Both DU145-TxR and PC-3-TxR
tumors grew faster than the parental tumors. Tumor tissues were collected
and total RNAs were isolated. Levels of CCL2 expression in these tumors
were significantly higher in DU145-TxR and PC-3-TxR tumors. IHC analysis
confirmed corresponding staining of EMT markers such as E-cadherin and
Vimentin expression. Together we concluded that CCL2 and IL-6 regulates
EMT-mediated chemo-resistance in prostate cancer. These results are of
high impact of human prostate cancer chemotherapy. Supported by U.S.
Department of Defense PC061231 (J. Zhang), National Natural Sciences
Foundation Key Project (81130046, J. Zhang) and National Natural Science
Foundation Project (81171993, Y. Lu).

