Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperthermia and radiotherapy in combination with curcumin prevent
tumor cell migration and progression of breast cancer


We have demonstrated that hyperthermia (HT)-induced nitric oxide
regulates NF-kB, and that potentiates radiotherapy (RT)-induced breast
cancer cell death. As a follow-up, in this study we investigated the
efficacy of pharmacologically-safe bioactive curcumin (CUR) in
combination with HT and therapeutic doses of radiation in regulating
breast cancer progression. Human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7) cells were
either mock-irradiated, exposed to 2Gy (IR), exposed to HT (43oC for 1 h)
and /or treated with CUR in the presence or absence of radiation
exposure. The treated/irradiated cells were examined for (i)
transcriptional modulations of ninety three molecules that are directly
involved in tumor invasion and metastasis; (ii) cellular localization of
cMYC, p65, p53, MMP2 and MMP9; (iii) cellular migration; (iv) metabolic
activity and (v) cell death. Compared to mock-IR control, QPCR profiling
demonstrated a significant modulation of tumor invasion and metastasis
molecules in IR exposed cells. Conversely, combinations like HT with IR,
CUR with IR or CUR with HT robustly inhibited IR-induced and in parallel
conferred IR suppressed tumor invasion and metastasis molecules in this
setting. More importantly, CUR combined with both HT and IR significantly
inhibited (through blocking seventy four genes) tumor invasion and
metastasis molecules. Scratch wound assay demonstrated complete
inhibition of tumor cell migration in CUR-HT-IR exposed cells as opposed
to every stand alone and combinations investigated. Likewise, cytotoxic
assay, MTT showed a significant cell killing with CUR-HT-IR exposure
compared to all other groups. Furthermore, we observed significant and
robust apoptotic characteristics in CUR-HT-IR exposed cells. These data
together with our earlier report clearly demonstrate that CUR in
combination with HT and IR may significantly inhibit breast cancer
progression through combinatorial regulation of tumor invasion and
metastasis molecules. The findings further imply that CUR may
significantly enhance the IR dose reduction factor at least for the
treatment of breast cancer.

