Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lupeol, a novel inhibitor of Wnt/-catenin signaling: Implications
in colon cancer therapy


Introduction: Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway which regulates a variety of
cellular processes has been reported to play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of human colon cancer and found in almost 90% of the colon
cancer patients. Recent studies from our laboratory and others showed
that Lupeol a natural triterpene acts as a potent and selective inhibitor
of Wnt signaling in prostate and melanoma tumor cells (Saleem et al,
Carcinogenesis, 30: 801-17, 2009). Keeping in view these reports, we
hypothesized that Lupeol will inhibit the tumorigenic growth of colon
cancer cells (exhibiting aberrant Wnt/ signaling) under in vitro and in
vivo conditions. Objectives: We investigated the effect of Lupeol on
growth of human normal colon and carcinoma cells (exhibiting varied Wnt
profile) and determined if Lupeol could enhances the efficacy of
Sulindac, (Wnt signaling inhibitor and chemotherapeutic agent) that is
used in clinics to treat human colon cancer. Methods: To test our
hypothesis we employed in vitro and in vivo strategies. Firstly, normal
human colon epithelial cells (FHC) and colon carcinoma cell lines
(SW-480, HCT-116, HT-29) treated with either Lupeol (10-50 M), or
Sulindac (100-200 M), or combination (Lupeol + Sulindac) were tested for
growth, proliferation, clonogenicity and surrogate biomarkers of Wnt
signaling by employing 3[H]thymidine uptake, MTT, Soft-agar colony, FACS,
immunoblot and luciferase-reporter assays. Secondly, we investigated
whether Lupeol is bio-available to mice after oral and intraperitoneal
(i.p.) administration by using mass spectrometry. Next, we treated
athymic mice bearing colon tumors-derived from HT-29 cells (highly
chemoresistant among all colon cells) with either Lupeol (40 mg/kg) or
Sulindac (20 mg/kg) or combination and measured tumor growth. In vivo
proliferation and biochemical analysis of harvested tumors for surrogate
biomarkers of apoptosis, proliferation and Wnt signaling were measured by
employing BrdU uptake, immunoblot and immunhistochemical analysis.
Results: Lupeol treatment was observed to (i) inhibit the proliferation
of colon cancer cells (exhibiting activated Wnt) while sparing normal
cells, (ii) induce G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis, (iii) decrease cytoslic as
well as nuclear -catenin levels (iv) increase degradation of cytosolic
-catenin, (iv) decrease TCF-transcriptional activity and (v) decrease the
expression of Wnt target genes. Lupeol was observed to bioavailable in
mice after oral and i.p. administration. Lupeol significantly inhibited
the tumorigenicity of colon tumor cells in a xenograft mouse model. Most
importantly, Lupeol treatment significantly sensitized highly
chemoresistant colon cancer cells to Sulindac therapy, in vitro and in
vivo. Conclusion: Lupeol alone or as an adjuvant to current therapies
could be developed as an agent to treat subtype of human colon cancer
exhibiting constitutive activation of Wnt signaling.

