Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XenTech patient-derived xenograft (PDX) panels: a clinically
relevant platform for drug efficacy, target validation and predictive
biomarker discovery studies


Despite considerable efforts in understanding the biology and genetics of
cancer, most currently available treatments fail to achieve tumor
eradication in the majority of patients. Key to more effective therapies
is adequate disease classification and subsequent patient stratification.
In addition, it is important to understand the mechanisms of
drug-response or resistance and identify novel targets amenable to
therapeutic intervention. It is increasingly recognized that at the
preclinical stage, testing therapeutic strategies and validating target
relevance in more predictive models closely mimicking clinical disease
such as patient derived xenografts (PDXs), may translate into improved
clinical efficacy and lower rate of drug attrition. XenTech collection of
over 120 runing PDX models is one of the largest in the world. PDX models
were established by grafting post-surgery human tumor fragments in the
interscapular region of immunodeficient mice. These deeply characterized
PDX models can be used for in vivo preclinical assays. Such preclinical
platform is a reliable surrogate of patient cohorts and can address
several aims: 1. Evaluate tumor response to treatment. PDXs can be
subjected to parallel evaluation of tumor response to various treatment
protocols. Drug-response profile is linked to tumor histotype and
molecular features in order to identify predictive markers of drug
response to assist treatment choice. 2. Assess treatment-driven tumor
eradication. The ability of a treatment to induce complete tumor response
is assessed by monitoring tumor regression over a long period. Most
tumors, despite complete macroscopic regression, are still present as
latent microscopic nodular islands that may give rise to tumor
recurrence. Molecular characterization of tumor foci responsible for
tumor relapse may be performed to identify genes/pathways involved in
residual tumor cell survival, which may provide new diagnostic and/or
therapeutic targets for designing novel adjuvant treatment strategies. 3.
Development of bioluminescent metastatic models to study the mechanisms
of tumor invasion and to test anti-metastatic therapy. 4. Non-invasive
molecular imaging technology to monitor tumor metabolism, vascularization
and apoptosis. 5. Constitution of preclinical panels of rare malignancies
to obtain phase II-like tumor cohorts. Development of new therapies for
rare tumors is rendered difficult by the unavailability of patient
cohorts wide enough to set up robust clinical trials. To assist the
clinical need, these panels would allow the evaluation of new and more
efficient therapies. We describe here in detail our PDX collection and
illustrate how it represents a powerful tool to identify preferential
therapeutic options for patients by exploring and improving anti-cancer
therapeutic strategies.

