Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel therapeutic approach for triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are defined as tumors that lack
expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (EGFR2). TNBCs account for
15-20% of all breast tumors. These breast tumors are usually aggressive
and have a specific molecular profile. Unfortunately, treatment options
for TNBCs are limited, leading to a poor prognosis and high mortality
rates. Thus, novel therapeutic approaches are needed to treat TNBCs. To
date, several molecular targets have been identified (e.g., PARP, EGFR,
mTOR, Akt, and BRAC-1). Moreover, many pre-clinical and clinical trials
are underway to determine the efficacy of specific inhibitors against
these molecular targets, used either alone or in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents. So far, these trials have failed to produce
significant promising results. Hence, our goal is to identify novel
therapeutic agents that specifically target breast tumor cells,
especially TNBCs, without causing toxicity to normal cells. Our studies
identified nimbolide as a novel therapeutic agent. Nimbolide is a major
bioactive compound derived from the Azadirachta indica (Neem) leaves,
which is well-known medicinal plant having a wide spectrum of biological
activities. In our studies, nimbolide targeted TNBC cells without causing
toxicity to normal primary breast epithelial cells. We also explored the
molecular mechanism underlying the anti-cancer effect of nimbolide on
TNBC cells and found that nimbolide, simultaneously inhibited
phosphorylation of Akt mediates pro-survival signaling. In addition,
downstream signaling by mTOR and NF-kappa-B was down regulated by
nimbolide which resulted in the induction of pJNK and pc-Jun mediated
pro-apoptotic signaling and apoptosis in TNBC cells. These changes in the
pro and anti-apoptotic molecular circuits also inhibited migration and
invasion properties of TNBC cells. Altogether, our results strongly
suggest that nimbolide could be a potent compound for the prevention
and/or treatment of TNBC. Our ongoing in vivo studies may reveal the in
vivo efficacy of nimbolide and toxicity to other organs or cells if any.

