Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of cancer stem cell model from
mouse iPS cells


The cancer stem cells in capable of continuous proliferation and
self-renewal are proposed to play significant roles in oncogenesis, tumor
growth, metastasis and cancer recurrence. Cancer stem cells are
considered derived from normal stem cells affected by the tumor
microenvironment although the mechanism of development is not clear yet.
In 2007, Yamanaka's group succeeded in generating Nanog mouse induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, in which green fluorescent protein has been
inserted into the 5 untranslated region of the Nanog gene. Usually, iPS
cells are considered to be induced into progenitor cells, which
differentiate into various normal phenotypes depending on the normal
niche. We hypothesized that cancer stem cells could be derived from Nanog
mouse iPS cells in the conditioned culture medium of cancer cell lines,
which is a mimic of carcinoma microenvironment. As a result, the cells
exhibited a high tumorigenicity in vivo with a capacity of self-renewal
and the expression of markers associated with stem cell properties and an
undifferentiated state. The cells efficiently formed spheroids expressing
green fluorescent protein in suspension culture, vasculogenic tubes in
MatriGel in vitro and exhibited extensive angiogenesis in vivo, which was
confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging and by histochemical analysis.
Thus we concluded that a model of cancer stem cells was originally
developed using mouse iPS cells and proposed the conditioned culture
medium might perform as niche for producing cancer stem cells. It is
worthwhile noticing that the mouse iPS cells co-cultured with
cancer-derived cells did not form malignant tumors in vivo. This implies
that cell-to-cell contact may have inhibitory effect on the conversion of
mouse iPS cells into cancer stem cells. Furthermore, demonstration of the
genetic alterations and the secreted factors in the tumor
microenvironment which convert mouse iPS cells to cancer stem cells, and
identification of potentially bona fide markers of cancer stem cells will
help the development of novel anti-cancer therapies.

