Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic ETS transcription factors bind ETS/AP-1 sequences and
activate a RAS/MAPK gene expression program in the absence of MAPK
activation


Deciphering the mechanism of transcription factor function in both normal
and disease states requires understanding how these proteins are targeted
to specific genomic binding sites, influence transcription, and how these
functions are modified by signaling pathways. However, overlapping
functions among the thousands of transcription factors encoded by the
human genome have made it difficult to assign specific mechanisms.
Approximately 50% of prostate cancers have chromosomal rearrangements
resulting in the over-expression any one of four ETS-family transcription
factors. It is not known why these four ETS family members are associated
with prostate cancers, while the other 24 human ETS genes are not. We
found that the four oncogenic ETS family members have a specific role in
prostate cell migration that does not extend to other family members.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with next-generation
sequencing (ChIP-seq), this specific biological function was matched to a
specific set of genomic targets highlighted by the presence of both ETS
and AP-1 binding sequences. ETS/AP-1 binding sequences are prototypical
RAS-responsive elements where a MAPK can phosphorylate ETS proteins
increasing transcriptional activation. We found that oncogenic ETS
proteins could activate a RAS/MAPK transcriptional program when the MAPK
pathway was inactive. These findings indicate that a specific function of
ETS proteins over-expressed in prostate cancer is the activation of a
RAS/MAPK gene expression program in the absence of activating mutations
in the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. We propose that this ETS/AP-1
regulated, RAS-responsive, transcriptional network will also play a
critical role in other cancers that do not over-express an ETS protein,
but have activating mutations in the RAS/MAPK pathway.

