Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: L-Tag-driven systemic immune regulatory profile as a potential
signature for polyomavirus BK involvement in prostate cancer


Background: Polyomavirus BK (BKV) large tumor antigen (L-Tag) contributes
to oncogenesis by regulating crucial pathways of human cell cycle when
non-permissive cells are infected. Therefore, L-Tag has been identified
as an important target of immune surveillance in L-Tag expressing tumors.
The role of L-Tag as a target of tumor immune surveillance in prostate
cancer (PCa) patients has not been investigated so far. In this study we
thus analyzed the immunological profile exerted by L-Tag peptide-specific
induction in newly diagnosed PCa patients by means of BKV L-Tag serology
and local molecular testing, and compared it to age-matched benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) patients. Methods: We enrolled 60 newly
diagnosed PCa patients and 50 age-matched BPH. Detection of BKV L-Tag DNA
was carried out in random punches from tumor areas of surgically excised
specimens. BKV L-Tag seroprevalence was determined by enzyme immunoassay
(EIA). Systemic immune-regulatory activity was tested upon BKV L-Tag
peptide-pool induction and analyzed using cytokine gene expressions
(qrt-PCR), antigen-specific regulatory T cell (Treg) characterization
(flow cytometry) and immune-regulatory protein release (multiplex
fluorescent bead immunoassay). Data were correlated to 5-year follow-up
clinical information. Five-year follow-up after surgery was completed on
48/60 PCa patients. Biochemical recurrence (BR) with early censoring was
defined as the first PSA 0.2ng/ml. Results: In peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from PCa patients with evidence of biochemical
recurrence (BR) and BKV L-Tag positive lesions, BKV L-Tag peptide-pool,
but not the Epstein Barr/Influenza virus/Cytomegalovirus (CEF)
peptide-pool, induced a particular gene profile, which was characterized
by high expression of IL-10 and TGF-1 and a low expression of IFN- and
TNF- genes. This signature was confirmed by protein secretion data and
correlated with levels of anti-BKV L-Tag IgG activity. Furthermore, in
these PCa patients the L-Tag peptide pool significantly boosted IL-10
secreting CD4+CD25+(high)/FoxP3+(high)/CD103+ T cells exerting
suppressive functions on autologous effectors (CD4+, CD25 and CD8+ T cell
fractions) by reducing cell proliferation and IFN- production.
Conclusion: Significant associations between immune regulatory activity
exerted by BKV L-Tag induction, BKV L-Tag DNA positive tumor lesions and
IgG activity against L-Tag were observed in PCa patients. In detail, BR+
PCa patients shared features such as functional BKV L-Tag specific immune
regulatory profile with marked BKV L-Tag positive lesion and strong
L-Tag-specific IgG activity, thereby hinting at a potential BKV
involvement in prostate cancer progression. Our findings are thus
consistent with a systemic BKV L-Tag-related tolerogenic environment
governing prostate cancer.

