Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of PAX2 activity by estradiol in breast cancer cells


Most breast cancer deaths arise from tumour cells ability to produce
distant metastases. Among breast tumour subtypes, luminal A tumours,
which express the highest levels of estrogen receptor alpha, are
associated with the poorest metastatic phenotype and with longest
relapse-free survival. Usually active during embryogenesis, PAX2, a
homeobox transcription factor, is of a particular interest in this
context. It is preferentially activated in luminal A tumours in vivo and
it was shown to downregulate the expression of ERBB2 (erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2, HER-2/neu), a well-documented
proinvasive and pro-metastastic gene, in these cells in response to
estradiol in vitro. However, the ability of estradiol to regulate PAX2
activity and ERBB2 expression in non-luminal breast cancer cells, and the
intracellular mechanisms involved in estradiol-induced PAX2 activity in
breast cancer cells, have not been investigated. Objective: The objective
of our work was to compare the impact of estradiol exposure on PAX2
activation in luminal and non-luminal breast cancer cells, and to
determine the molecular mechanisms mediating estradiol-induced activation
in breast cancer cells. Hypothesis: Estradiol would induce PAX2 activity
in breast cancer cells of the luminal subtype only, in an estradiol
receptor alpha-dependent manner. Results: Basal PAX2 activity was higher
in cell lines from luminal compared to non-luminal subtype. Activation of
PAX2 by estradiol, as assessed by measuring PAX2 phosphorylation on
serine 393 residue and ERBB2 expression, was selectively achieved in
breast cancer cell lines of the luminal subtype. This process was blocked
by estrogen receptor alpha antagonist ICI 182780. Conclusion: PAX2
activation by estradiol is selectively achieved in breast cancer cells of
the luminal subtype, via ER. We are currently investigating intracellular
signaling pathways downstream of estrogen receptor alpha which could
mediate estradiol-induced activation of PAX2 in luminal breast cancer
cells.

