Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone type II (GnRH-II) agonist regulates
the invasiveness of endometrial cancer cells through GnRH-I receptor and
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs)-dependent activation of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2


Introduction: More than 25% of patients diagnosed with endometrial
carcinoma have an invasive primary cancer accompanied by metastases. The
GnRH has an important role in reproduction. In mammals, GnRH-II is more
widely identified than GnRH-I in peripheral tissues. GnRH-II may regulate
tumor progression of endometrial cancer. MAPKs have been considered
important components of GnRH-induced signaling pathways. MMPs are largely
implicated in promoting angiogenesis and tumor metastasis. In the present
study, we examined the action of GnRH-II agonist-promoted motility of
endometrial cancer cells and the mechanisms of the action in endometrial
cancer. Materials and methods: Endometrial cancer cell line Ishikawa and
ECC-1 were derived from an endometrial adenocarcinoma. D-Arg6,
AzaGly10-GnRH II was a synthetic decapeptide. Cell motility was estimated
by invasion and migration assay. The activities of MMP-2 was assessed by
gelatin zymography. Immunoblot analysis was done to study the expression
of GnRH-I receptor and the effects of GnRH-II agonist in the activation
of ERK1/2, JNK and MMP-2. ERK1/2 inhibitor (U0126), and JNK inhibitor
(SP600125) were pretreated for 30 min to evaluate the effects of MAPKs.
MMP-2 inhibitor (OA-Hy) was pretreated for 30 min to evaluate the effects
of MMP-2 in cell motility. Human GnRH-I receptor siRNA was used to knock
down the expression of GnRH-I receptor. Results: The GnRH-I receptor was
expressed in endometrial cancer cells. The GnRH-II agonist promoted cell
motility in a dose-dependent manner. GnRH-II agonist activated the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK signaling and the phosphorylation was
abolished by 1M U0126 and 1M SP600125. GnRH-II agonist-promoted cell
motility was suppressed in cells pretreated with U0126 and SP600125.
Moreover, U0126 and SP600125 abolished GnRH-II agonist-induced activation
of MMP-2. Inhibition of MMP-2 with 10M OA-Hy suppressed cell motility in
response to GnRH-II agonist. GnRH-II agonist-mediated cell motility was
suppressed by knockdown of endogenous GnRH-I receptor with siRNA.
Conclusion: Our results confirmed that GnRH-I receptor may be a common
receptor that mediates the effects of both GnRH-I and GnRH-II in
endometrial cancer cells. Our study shows that the GnRH-II agonist
promoted the cell motility of endometrial cancer cells through the GnRH-I
receptor, and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK-dependent activation
of MMP-2. Our findings represent a new concept regarding the mechanisms
of GnRH-II-promoted cell motility in endometrial cancer cells, suggesting
the possibility of GnRH-II as a potential therapeutic intervention for
the treatment of human endometrial cancer.

