Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 is a potential molecular target for chemoradiosensitization
of colorectal cancer cells


Introductory sentence: Resistance to preoperative chemoradiotherapy
represents a major clinical problem in the treatment of patients with
locally advanced rectal cancer. Therefore, the identification of novel
molecular targets that are differently expressed in responsive and
resistant tumors is exceedingly important. Furthermore, modulating target
gene expression may sensitize a priori resistant tumors to multimodal
therapy. Experimental procedures: Previously, we established an in vitro
model for chemoradiotherapy in 12 colorectal cancer cell lines, and
correlated differences in treatment sensitivity with pretherapeutic gene
expression profiles. Within our signature we identified the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), which was
significantly correlated with treatment resistance. To test the
functional relevance of the observed over-expression of STAT3, we first
determined STAT3 mRNA and protein expression levels in all 12 cell lines.
Subsequently, we established doxycycline-inducible stable shRNA single
cell populations and a non-silencing shRNA (shNEG) in SW480. The induced
single cell clones and shNEG were treated with 3M 5-FU and exposed to 1,
2, 4, 6, and 8 Gy of X-rays. In addition, STAT3 was inhibited using two
different siRNAs and a small-molecular inhibitor (STATTIC). Successful
RNAi-mediated silencing of STAT3 and inhibitor treatment was detected by
Western blot. Data: STAT3 was significantly overexpressed in resistant
cells at mRNA and protein level. In stable STAT3 knockdown single cell
clones and transiently siRNA transfected SW480 and SW837 cells,
successful silencing of the STAT3 protein was detected after 72 hours,
and STATTIC-induced inhibition of STAT3-phosphorylation after 1 hour. The
silencing/inhibition resulted in a significantly increased
chemoradiosensitivity with dose-reduction factors of 1.8 to 2.
Conclusions: STAT3 is highly overexpressed in resistant colorectal cancer
cells, and silencing of STAT3 leads to a significantly increased
chemoradiosensitivity. This highlights the potential relevance of STAT3
as a novel molecular target in rectal cancer to sensitize a priori
resistant colorectal tumor cells to chemoradiotherapy.

