Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent inhibition of c-Met and VEGF signaling suppresses tumor
invasion in orthotopic Panc-1 pancreatic carcinomas in mice


Multiple factors can contribute to evasive resistance that develops
during treatment with angiogenesis inhibitors that target the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway. Evidence from studies of
neuroendocrine tumors in RIP-Tag2 transgenic mice indicates that
hypoxia-induced activation of pro-invasive pathways involving the
receptor for hepatocyte growth factor, c-Met, can participate. The
present study sought to determine whether this mechanism also applies to
other types of tumors. Our approach was to ask whether growth and
invasiveness of Panc-1 pancreatic adenocarcinomas implanted
orthotopically in nude mice were reduced by inhibition of c-Met during
concurrent treatment with an angiogenesis inhibitor for 3 weeks. Panc-1
tumors in mice treated with the angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib, a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor that blocks VEGFR and related receptors, had a
75% reduction in vascularity and grew more slowly than controls but had
twice as much of intratumoral hypoxia, assessed by pimonidazole staining.
Unlike the faint c-Met immunoreactivity in most tumor cells of
vehicle-treated Panc-1 tumors, c-Met staining was stronger in tumor cells
after treatment with sunitinib. Tumors in mice treated with the selective
c-Met inhibitor PF-04217903 alone had little change in tumor vascularity
or intratumoral hypoxia and grew faster than those treated with
sunitinib. However, tumors treated with sunitinib plus PF-04217903
together grew more slowly than after sunitinib alone but had similar
amounts of vascular pruning and hypoxia. Tumor invasiveness, reflected by
amylase-positive acinar cells of the exocrine pancreas located within
tumors, was exaggerated after sunitinib treatment but, importantly, was
significantly less in tumors treated with sunitinib plus PF-04217903.
These findings indicate that sunitinib used alone reduced the growth of
Panc-1 tumors but increased intratumoral hypoxia, c-Met expression, and
local invasion into the surrounding normal pancreas. By comparison,
sunitinib administered concurrently with the c-Met inhibitor PF-04217903
resulted in further slowing of tumor growth and less tumor invasiveness.

