Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liposomal bortezomib improves chemosensitivity and inhibits cell
proliferation in part through BCR/ABL downregulation in CML


The t(9;22) Philadelphia chromosome translocation fuses the BCR gene to
the c-ABL proto-oncogene resulting in a chimeric BCR/ABL protein.
Although BCR/ABL inhibitor imatinib has shown unprecedented efficacy for
treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), resistance to this agent due
to BCR/ABL mutations or increased protein expression poses a significant
clinical problem, thereby arguing for novel therapeutic approaches.
BCR/ABL gene amplification frequently occurs in blast crisis and BCR/ABL
expression is required for its mutation. BCR promoter contains Sp1
binding sites and proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BORT) disrupts Sp1
transactivation, therefore, we hypothesized that BORT could abolish
BCR/ABL expression leading to disrupted kinase activity. However, the
fast clearance and the inability to reach target cells in vivo have
limited its application. As such, we designed a liposomal BORT (L-BORT)
and transferrin receptor (TfR)-targeted L-BORT (Tf-L-BORT) for the
objective of enhancing BORT delivery efficiency. We observed that there
were 3.6-fold and 10.4-fold increases in cellular uptake of L-BORT and
Tf-L-BORT, respectively, compared to that of the free drug. We evidenced
a 2.7-fold augmented chemosensitivity to doxorubicin (DOX) in cells
exposed to subtoxic concentration of BORT, with a decrease in IC50 from 8
M to 300 nM. Tf-L-BORT further reduced IC50 of DOX to 90 nM. These data
indicated the enhanced chemosensitizing efficacy of the L-BORT
formulations. When single tumor cells from K562 tumor bearing mice were
treated by subtoxic L-BORT combined with DOX, a synergy of toxicity was
evidenced by 70-fold increased chemosensitivity (pThe t(9;22)
Philadelphia chromosome translocation fuses the BCR gene to the c-ABL
proto-oncogene resulting in a chimeric BCR/ABL protein. Although BCR/ABL
inhibitor imatinib has shown unprecedented efficacy for treatment of
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), resistance to this agent due to BCR/ABL
mutations or increased protein expression poses a significant clinical
problem, thereby arguing for novel therapeutic approaches. BCR/ABL gene
amplification frequently occurs in blast crisis and BCR/ABL expression is
required for its mutation. BCR promoter contains Sp1 binding sites and
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BORT) disrupts Sp1 transactivation,
therefore, we hypothesized that BORT could abolish BCR/ABL expression
leading to disrupted kinase activity. However, the fast clearance and the
inability to reach target cells in vivo have limited its application. As
such, we designed a liposomal BORT (L-BORT) and transferrin receptor
(TfR)-targeted L-BORT (Tf-L-BORT) for the objective of enhancing BORT
delivery efficiency. We observed that there were 3.6-fold and 10.4-fold
increases in cellular uptake of L-BORT and Tf-L-BORT, respectively,
compared to that of the free drug. We evidenced a 2.7-fold augmented
chemosensitivity to doxorubicin (DOX) in cells exposed to subtoxic
concentration of BORT, with a decrease in IC50 from 8 M to 300 nM.
Tf-L-BORT further reduced IC50 of DOX to 90 nM. These data indicated the
enhanced chemosensitizing efficacy of the L-BORT formulations. When
single tumor cells from K562 tumor bearing mice were treated by subtoxic
L-BORT combined with DOX, a synergy of toxicity was evidenced by 70-fold
increased chemosensitivity (p<0.05). Tf-L-BORT was more effective in
chemosensitizing tumor single cells than L-BORT, with decreased IC50 of
DOX to 94 nM. Pharmacokinetic study in mice after i.v. bolus injection
showed that L-BORT had slower tissue distribution (T1/2, 7.3 min vs. 2.9
min), increased elimination phase half-life (T1/2, 82.9 h vs. 68.3 h),
decreased clearance (CL, 4.2 mL/h vs. 27.7 mL/h), and increased area
under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC, 4714.1 hng/mL vs. 721.4
hng/mL) compared to the free drug. This indicated a significant and
potentially beneficial change in BORT pharmacokinetics in vivo.
Mechanistically, when K562 cells were exposed to L-BORT (0, 10, 30 and
60nM) or DOX (0, 100, 200 and 500nM) for 48h, BCR/ABL protein was
significantly decreased in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the
combination of L-BORT with DOX synergistically abrogated BCR/ABL and Sp1
protein expression. Altogether, these results highlight the therapeutic
relevance of disrupting BCR/ABL protein expression and strongly support
the utilization of L-BORT alone or in combination with DOX to treat CML
patients harboring overexpressed BCR/ABL.

