Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silence of miR-203 by promoter methylation in endometrial cancer


MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a class of small non-coding RNAs, play important
roles in cancer development by perturbing the expression of target genes.
DNA methylation, a well-studied epigenetic event, also influences gene
expression and aberrant methylation is frequently observed in cancer. We
previously reported a new paradigm in which hypermethylation-mediated
silencing of a miRNA de-repressed its oncogenic target in cancer cells.
SOX4, an oncogene, was found to be overexpressed in endometrial cancer,
partly because of hypermethylation of miR-129-2. Herein, thirteen
additional miRNAs targeting on the 3-end of untranslated regions of SOX4,
and encompassing CpG islands, were identified using computational
analysis. Hypermethylation of eight of the thirteen miRNAs was detected
in at least two of seven endometrial cancer cell lines. miR-203 was
selected for further analysis because this locus was predominantly
hypermethylated in endometrial cancer cell lines, but not in normal
endometrium. miR-203 expression can be reactivated by pharmacologic
induction of DNA demethylation and histone acetylation, indicating that
the loss of miR-203 expression is associated with promoter
hypermethylation in endometrial cancer. Restoration of miR-203 by cell
transfection decreased SOX4 expression and reduced proliferation of
endometrial cancer cells. To confirm these in vitro findings in primary
endometrial tumors, specimens from two cohorts were analyzed for miR-203
methylation by quantitative pyrosequencing or MassARRAY. In one cohort,
miR-203 was significantly hypermethylated in endometrial tumors (n=31),
but not in adjacent or un-related normal (n=18) specimens. Methylation of
this locus is related to lymphatic and vascular invasion. In the other
cohort, increased methylation was observed in primary tumors (n=114), but
not in normal controls (n=22). Hypermethylation of miR-203 was positively
associated with MLH1 methylation and MSI status. In conclusion, we
present an emerging phenomenon that epigenetic silencing of multiple
miRNAs could lead to overexpression of a single oncogene in endometrial
cancer. This work is supported, in part, by NIH grants U54 CA113001 (THH)
and P50 CA134254 (PJG, THH).

