Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of ionizing radiation on transcription of human
endogenous retrovirus-K (HERV-K) in breast cancer cell lines


Ionizing Radiation (IR) has been reported to increase the transcriptional
activity of many viruses, including retroviruses. We hypothesized that IR
could reactivate subsets of Human Endogenous Retroviruses (HERVs), which
are retroviruses integrated into the human genome, remnants of ancient
retroviral infections, and that HERV-derived peptides, the final product
of HERVs transcription, will increase the diversity of the antigen
repertoire presented by irradiated cancer cells, thereby inducing
anti-tumor immune responses. IR has been shown to increase the
immunogenicity of cancer cells by modulating various cellular processes,
including antigen presentation by MHC. HERVs are known to be transcribed
in numerous diseases including cancer, HIV infection, and autoimmune
disorders. HERV-K is the most recently integrated and thus intact HERV
family, with approximately 350 loci in the human genome, 98 to 99%
identical. Previous experiments in our laboratory have shown IR-dependent
increases in HERV-K transcription, plus increased HERV-K-derived peptides
in irradiated prostate carcinoma cell lines upon proteomic LC-MS/MS
analysis of peptides eluted from MHC-I complexes. HERV-K activation has
been reported in breast cancer. To test the influence of IR on HERV-K
transcription, three breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231 and
MCF7) were analyzed by RT-PCR and qRT-PCR at specific time-points, from 1
to 72 hours, after different doses of -irradiation (0, 2.5, 5, 10 and 20
Gy). HERV-K transcription was detected in all cell lines studied. After
IR, each cell line showed distinct dose-response curves of HERV-K
transcription during the time-frame of observation. Overall, the peak of
HERV-K transcription in irradiated samples, when compared to
non-irradiated samples, was increased by an average of 2- to 5-fold.
Multiple, active, individual HERV-K loci were detected. Cloning and
sequencing are ongoing to identify specific active loci for each cell
line. These findings show that HERV-K is actively transcribed in breast
carcinoma cell lines. The IR-dependent increase in HERV-K transcription
may enhance antigen repertoire diversity, contribute to the
immunomodulatory properties of IR, and offers attractive targets for the
development of novel IR-enhanced immunotherapies for cancer.

