Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling protein-coding RNA and thousands of large non-coding
RNAs from nanogram amounts of total RNA using a single microarray design


Large intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) are emerging as key
regulators of diverse cellular processes, yet determining the function of
individual lincRNAs remains challenging. Recently, more than 8,000 human
lincRNAs were annotated and cataloged from more than 4 billion RNA-Seq
reads across 24 tissues and cell types by scientists at the Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard. Data from this project indicates that
lincRNA expression is highly tissue-specific as compared to protein
coding gene expression. As researchers continue to investigate the
function of lincRNAs, there is a need for tools that can rapidly and
accurately measure the expression of the recently annotated lincRNAs
along with mRNA expression. We have previously developed and recently
updated the content of the human SurePrint G3 microarrays so that they
are comprised of all known protein-coding mRNAs and lincRNAs, to enable
systematic profiling and simultaneous detection of coding and non-coding
gene expression from a single sample. To demonstrate the utility of the
new microarray design we used low nanogram amounts RNA from matched tumor
and adjacent normal tissues to produce cyanine-labeled cRNA. The labeled
cRNA was applied to the microarrays to detect differences in coding and
non-coding gene expression profiles. Using the GeneSpring GX software we
are able to identify differentially expressed lincRNAs and protein-coding
RNAs in the tumor and normal samples in less than two days. Comparisons
of probe signals from technical replicate samples demonstrated high
reproducibility with wide dynamic ranges and high sensitivity. Data from
the microarrays correlates well with whole transcriptome sequencing of
the same matched tumor/normal samples. Using this approach we show that
lincRNA expression coincides with key genes known to regulate biological
processes involved in cancer progression and this work demonstrates how
profiling mRNA and lincRNA from matched tumor and adjacent normal samples
can enable researchers to further define the role of lincRNAs in gene
regulation.

