Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative determination of compound delivery to orthotopic and
subcutaneous tumors by non-invasive imaging


Cancer is fundamentally a disease of aberrant tissue growth and
determining accurate progression in malignancies is of significant
importance for the understanding of the heterogeneous growth patterns,
and irregular nature of malignant tumors. Here we used two different
imaging modalities to detect tumor progression, and highlight the
inherent challenges with accurate determination of growth
characteristics. The main focus in this study was to examine the
differences in compound deposition and uptake into orthotopically and
subcutaneously implanted tumors. Several perfusion studies with
Indocyanine green (ICG) were performed and compound kinetics and
distribution within the tumors were determined by MSOT and FMT-XCT.
Multi-Spectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT) is a powerful novel imaging
modality that decomposes the spectral responses of endogenous and
exogenous chromophores in vivo, with high resolution and at depths
ranging from several millimeters to centimeters. Therefore, it can
simultaneously detect and separate the signal of endogenous chromophores
such as (oxy)hemoglobin and extrinsically administered photo-absorbing
agents such as ICG and nanoparticles. FMT-XCT is an imaging system that
integrates X-ray computed tomography (XCT) and fluorescence molecular
tomography (FMT), enabling quantitative, volumetric detection of
fluorescent agents with co-registration of anatomical features. For the
subcutaneous model, HT29 human colon adenocarcinoma cells (106) were
injected subcutaneously in the hind limb of CD1 nude mice (Charles River
Laboratories, Germany). For the syngeneic, orthotopic model, Balb/c mice
(Charles River Laboratories, Germany) were injected with 4T1 mouse
mammary tumor cells (0.5x106) into the mammary fat pad. With MSOT imaging
after ICG injection (50g) we were able to show that the vascular
perfusion of subcutaneous tumors was limited to the outer edges of the
tumor, caused by necrosis within these tumors. The orthotopically
implanted tumors were much better perfused and compound delivery
throughout the entire tumor was achieved. A major advantage of MSOT
imaging compared to FMT-XCT is that contrast agents and oxygenated vs.
deoxygenated hemoglobin can be visualized non-invasively at the tumor
site simultaneously with high spatial resolution, in real time, and
throughout the entire period of tumor growth. Using FMT-XCT we were able
to assess further information about the three-dimensional distribution of
ICG within the entire animal. These findings show that the heterogeneity
of tumors can be visualized non-invasively using MSOT and FMT-XCT. MSOT
has the added advantage that endogenous chromophores such as hemoglobin
can be resolved simultaneously. These imaging strategies are of critical
importance to monitor tumor progression in order to evaluate appropriate
treatment regimens and/ or stratify tumors based on oxygenation status.

