Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Butyrate effect on expression of quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) and
cytochrome P450 CYP1A1 enzymes


Butyrate is a small chain fatic acid formed by bacterial fermentation of
plant foods in guts. It has been shown to induce Quinone Oxidoreductase
(NQO1) enzyme in tumor cell lines, which may contribute to the
detoxification of dietary carcinogens with out any effect to the
expression of carcinogen activation enzymes, such as cytochrome P450
CPY1A1 and epoxide hydrolase. The risk from chemical carcinogens and
environmental toxins is dependent on the metabolic balance between
bioactivation and detoxification enzymes. Cancer chemoprevention
therefore may be achieved through alterations in the expression of these
enzymes. There is substantial evidence that chemoprevention comprises
multiple intervention methods to impede, arrest, or reverse
carcinogenesis at various stages. Transcriptional regulation of
activation and detoxification enzymes competing for the carcinogen
substrate is strongly affected by intracellular oxidation reduction
potential change. Treatment of cells with butyrate causes a change in
intracellular redox potential which results in transcriptional regulation
of activation and detoxification enzymes. Indicators of redox potential
may include the concentration ratio of glutathione (GSH): glutathione
disulfide (GSSG), cysteine (CYH): cystine (CYSS) and other redox couples.
Treatment of human liver HepG2 cells with sodium butyrate (5mM, 48-72Hr)
results in an oxidation of both GSH: GSSG and CYH: CYSS to approximately
the same extent up on calculation based on Nernst equation of
concentrations determined by HPLC analysis. The present study shows that
both the steady-state redox potential of the cysteine/cystine couple (Eh
= -155 mV) and GSH/GSSG couple (Eh = -255 mV) in cells are sufficiently
oxidized (>40 mV) up on treatment of cells with butyrate. The GSH
oxidation, in response to 5mM butyrate at 48 -72 Hr for HepG2 cells were
associated with an approximately 3-4-fold increase in mRNA for NQO1 as
measured by quantitative PCR and 40-85 fold increase as a luciferase
measure for relative change in a of transcriptional activation of NQO1 as
comparing to the control respectively. However, CYP1A1 expression was not
significantly different from controls. Changes in redox potential may
directly release transcriptional proteins from within the cytoplasm for
traslocation to the nucleus or alter their affinity for transcription
response elements. These possibilities are under investigation using
nuclear extracts of HepG2 and HT29 cells treated to alter intracellular
redox potential. Surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (SELDI)
allows rapid identification and quantitation of changes in transcription
proteins in response to intracellular redox potential change.

