Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INK128, a TORC1/2 kinase inhibitor, enhances the efficacy of
cytotoxic therapies in endometrial tumor models


Background: The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which comprises two
protein complexes, TORC1 and TORC2, regulates tumor cell growth,
metabolism and motility. In endometrial cancer, the mTOR pathway is
aberrantly activated by constitutive mitogen stimuli, such as FGFR2 and
multiple genetic mutations such as PIK3CA, PIK3R1/2, PTEN and LKB1. The
activation of multiple signaling pathways, cross-feedback and redundancy
of these pathways led us to explore the combination of mTOR kinase
inhibitor with chemotherapeutic agents for achieving maximal efficacy in
preclinical mouse models of endometrial cancer. Results: INK128 is a
potent and selective TORC1/2 inhibitor with excellent drug-like
properties currently advancing in clinical development. INK128 inhibits
endometrial tumor cell proliferation in vitro and displays tumor growth
inhibition in endometrial tumor models. In most instances, the anti-tumor
activity of INK128 is cytostatic compared to the cytotoxic effect of
taxol and carboplatin. In endometrial tumor cells of diverse genetic
backgrounds, combining INK128 with taxol resulted in a synergistic
inhibition of tumor cell proliferation, sustained suppression of
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway activity, skewed cell cycle and an increase in
apoptosis. INK128 decreased the expression of anti-apoptotic protein
MCL-1 and therefore mechanistically enhanced taxol-triggered apoptosis.
In endometrial mouse tumor models with PTEN and FGFR2 mutations, the
combination induced marked tumor regression and significantly delayed
tumor re-growth upon discontinuation of the treatment compared to taxol
treatment alone. The combination therapy was well-tolerated and the
enhanced anti-tumor efficacy correlated with mechanism-based inhibition
of several TORC1 and TORC2 pharmacodynamic markers and induction of
apoptosis in vivo. Additionally, combining INK128 with taxol or
carbotaxol resulted in tumor regression in taxol-resistant endometrial
tumor models. The opportunity of optimizing dose and schedule combination
regimens as well as biomarkers predicting sensitivity/resistance to
INK128/taxol combination will be discussed. Conclusion: The combination
of mTOR kinase inhibitors with chemotherapeutic agents is a compelling
strategy to improve therapeutic outcome and to overcome chemo-resistance
for tumor types with aberrant activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway such as
endometrial cancer.

