Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functionally altered plasmacytoid DC in breast tumor environment
play a central role in Treg and Tr1-like expansion through ICOS engagement


Tumor immunosubversion occurs through various mechanisms including the
selective recruitment of CD4+ regulatory T cell (Treg) and the alteration
of dendritic cell (DC) physiology. We reported that the presence of high
number of both Treg and/or plasmacytoid DC (pDC) correlates with poor
prognosis in breast (1-2) and ovarian carcinoma (3). We previously
demonstrated that CCR4+ Treg are recruited from the periphery to the
breast tumor through CCL22 production by breast tumor cells under
exposure to IFNg, IL-1b and TNFa, consecutively to Macrophages and
Natural killer cell detection of transformed cells (4). We report here
that Tumor-associated Treg (Ta-Treg) are highly activated
(GITRhighHLA-DRhighCD39high) and show a selective expression of high
levels of ICOS, proliferate in situ (Ki-67+) but unlike blood Treg, did
not proliferate ex vivo under CD3/CD28 co-stimulation in presence of
IL-2. On the other hand, Ta-pDC expressed a partially activated phenotype
but lacked their principal function, i.e., their type-I interferon
production (key mediator of antiviral and tumoral immune responses), is
strongly impaired. We show that Ta-Treg and Ta-pDC colocalize within
lymphoid structures in vivo and demonstrate the unique capacity of Ta-pDC
to favour proliferation of Ta-Treg and CD4+ T cells secreting IL-10. Of
importance, this Treg amplification is strongly reduced by addition of
exogenous IFNa. Furthermore, targeting ICOS with a neutralizing antibody
suppresses Ta-Treg proliferation as well as IL-10 secretion in pDC/CD4+ T
cell co-culture, demonstrating a role of ICOS-ICOS-L interaction in
Ta-Treg proliferation mediated by Ta-pDC. In contrast, blocking ICOS does
not impact T cell responses induced by mDC that, contrary to pDC, do not
support Treg enrichment or high IL-10 secretion. Altogether these
observations suggest that ICOS represents a therapeutic target in breast
cancer that may allow to restore anti-tumor immunity. Grant supports:
BCRF, Ligue nationale contre le cancer, ARC, Comit dpartementaux de la
Ligue contre le cancer, INCa. 1. Treilleux I, Blay JY, Bendriss-Vermare
N, et al. Dendritic cell infiltration and prognosis of early stage breast
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:7466-74. 2. Gobert M.., Caux C., Blay
JY. and Mntrier-Caux C. Treg recruited through CCL22/CCR4 are selectively
activated in lymphoid infiltrates surrounding primary breast tumors and
lead to an adverse clinical outcome. Cancer Research 2009; 69:2000-9. 3.
Labidi-Galy SI, Ray-Coquard I, Mntrier-Caux C, Caux C, Blay JY and
Bendriss-Vermare N. Systemic and local dysfunctions of pDC in ovarian
carcinoma could contribute to immune tolerance. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:5423-34 4. Faget J., Blay J.Y., Caux C. and Mntrier-Caux C. Early
detection of tumor cells by innate immune cells leads to Treg recruitment
through CCL22 production by tumor cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6143-52

