Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of two-dimensional verses three-dimensional breast
cancer models in drug discovery


Two-dimensional (2D) monolayer cancer cell culture is generally used in
most drug discovery screening programmes to identify novel anti-cancer
compounds. However, three-dimensional (3D) cell culture more closely
represents the in vivo tumor environment thus providing a more accurate
measure of compound activity. Development of an automated, reproducible
and miniaturised 3D culture model for drug discovery in breast cancer
would be highly advantageous. Thus we have developed and optimised a
miniaturised in vitro 3D culture model in which breast cancer cells
interact with reconstituted basement membrane from MatrigelTM. To
determine the effectiveness of our 3D breast cancer model for use in
future drug discovery, chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used in breast
cancer therapy were tested and differences in drug activity were compared
to 2D cell culture models. Once validated, this 3D culture model will be
used to evaluate and further characterise novel compounds. The results
presented describe the development and reproducibility of our 3D culture
model and its 2D culture model counterpart. This includes the linear
relationship between fluorescence intensity and cell number for
measurement of metabolic activity as an indicator of cell viability when
using the indicator dye Resazurin; determination of an adequate signal
window and the reproducible average mean sizes of spheroids present under
assay conditions. We report that there is significantly more drug
resistance in our 3D cell culture model compared to our 2D culture model.
This is particularly evident in the presence of taxanes and
anthracyclines. Results from this study also show that the degree of drug
resistance in 3D is breast cancer cell line dependent for each of the
chemotherapeutic drugs studied and not necessarily correlated to the
profile observed in 2D. Image based analysis demonstrated a distinct
correlation of 3D cell culture morphology to drug dose, where
disassociation of spheroids indicates drug effectiveness and intact
spheroids indicates ineffectiveness of drug activity. Further research is
underway to determine the mechanism for the drug resistance in 3D
culture, which may be important in providing information on resistance
mechanisms and potential drug targets. Miniaturisation of 3D culture for
breast cancer cell lines allows a higher throughput of novel compound
testing in a more cost effective, biologically relevant model. Our work
highlights the importance of using 3D cell culture in the early stages of
drug discovery in evaluating compound activity.

