Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro selection of metastatic breast cancer cells based on
their adaptability


The success of cancer depends on ongoing generation of genetic and
epigenetic heterogeneity in cancer cells, and the selection of cells that
are most adaptable at surviving numerous obstacles in the body. Current
approaches of personalized therapy, mostly designed to inhibit cell
proliferative function of a single protein, may not succeed unless we
target adaptability of cancer cells as well. We reported recently that it
is possible to isolate highly metastatic rare cancer cells (The success
of cancer depends on ongoing generation of genetic and epigenetic
heterogeneity in cancer cells, and the selection of cells that are most
adaptable at surviving numerous obstacles in the body. Current approaches
of personalized therapy, mostly designed to inhibit cell proliferative
function of a single protein, may not succeed unless we target
adaptability of cancer cells as well. We reported recently that it is
possible to isolate highly metastatic rare cancer cells (< 0.01% in
SUM149 inflammatory breast cancer cell line) based on their adaptability
to survive without glutamine in culture medium. These studies also
provided evidence of a high COX-2 expression in such Gln-independent
cells and in subpopulations that survived lack of serum and attachment.
To determine the usefulness of our new function-based selections, we
compared different COX-2 overexpressing subpopulations with the parental
SUM149 cell line for their adaptability to survive lack of Gln- 1) COX-2
overexpressing cells that survive lack of serum and attachment
(designated SWS), and 2) a pre-existing COX-2 overexpressing clone (clone
5) isolated by picking individual colonies. We found that the SWS
variants yielded significantly more colonies (2-3 fold) than the parental
cell line upon Gln withdrawal. In contrast, clone 5 failed to yield any
Gln-ind colony. Further investigation into the adaptability of Gln-ind
cells revealed that they are better able to survive exposure to hypoxia
than the parental cell line. We obtained similar results with hypoxia
caused by cell culture in 0.5% oxygen or with hypoxia caused by exposure
to cobalt chloride. These results support a model in which rare cells
that drive metastasis are proposed to be adaptable in multiple ways. Our
studies suggest that the function-based selection of adaptable cancer
cells is able to select unique cancer cells from a heterogeneous
population that may not be selectable on the basis of specific
biomarkers. We conclude that it is feasible to isolate rare metastatic
breast cancer cells with a function-based robust selection of adaptable
metabolic state. In vitro assays utilizing such adaptable and metastatic
cancer cells will likely aid anti-cancer drug discovery efforts.

