Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying genetic variants contributing to cellular
susceptibility to tamoxifen using a genome-wide cell-based model


Tamoxifen is one of the most commonly used agents in the treatment and
prevention of estrogen receptor positive breast cancers. Beyond the
presence of hormone receptors, there are no validated predictors of
tamoxifen efficacy and toxicity. Therefore, we utilized a genome-wide
cell-based model to comprehensively evaluate genetic variants for their
contribution to cellular susceptibility to tamoxifen. Our model
incorporates multi-dimensional datasets including genome-wide genotype,
gene expression, and cellular growth inhibition following treatment in
lymphoblastoid cell lines from the International HapMap project. Growth
inhibition was measured using AlamarBlue Assay in 60 unrelated CEU
(individuals of northern and western European decedent) and 60 unrelated
YRI (individuals from Ibadan, Nigeria) samples. All cell lines were
treated with increasing concentrations of endoxifen, an active metabolite
of tamoxifen, for 72 hours. Log2 transformed percent survival at each
concentration and IC50 were used as cellular susceptibility to drug
phenotypes. A step-wise genome-wide association studies were performed
among SNPs, mRNA expression, and endoxifen sensitivity phenotypes. We
identified 10 and 74 SNPs associated with endoxifen sensitivity through
the expression of 13 and 92 genes in the separate CEU and YRI population.
Interestingly 3 genes (STS, TES and SMARCA2) identified through this
method are known to play a role in hormone biosynthesis pathway.
Furthermore, a large portion of identified genes was found to play a role
in tamoxifen sensitivity in the NCI60 cancer cell lines including CHPT1,
a known tumor progression marker. This approach has made possible the
identification of genetic variants/genes that have not been previously
associated with tamoxifen response. Further validation of these
cell-based model findings may significantly improve our ability to
predict tamoxifen treatment efficacy and toxicity in breast cancer
patients.

