Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Let-7a inhibits neuroblastoma cell proliferation by directly
targeting the MYCN oncogene


Neuroblastoma is a heterogeneous pediatric cancer consisting of
clinically favorable and unfavorable tumor subtypes, with tumors having
MYCN amplification or loss of chromosome 11q being associated with
particularly poor patient survival. We have previously profiled a set of
145 primary neuroblastoma tumors for the expression 450 miRNA loci and
have identified miRNAs that have been dysregulated by MYCN or by large
scale genomic imbalances (Bray et al Plos One 2009), as well as miRNAs
that are significantly correlated with clinically aggressive disease
(Chen et al., Cancer Res, 2007). Here, we have carried out a refined
analysis of the let-7 family of miRNAs, which map to 9 different human
chromosomes. These miRNAs display a remarkable degree of coordinated
expression in the tumors, in spite of their differing genomic sites.
Although the expression of let-7 family members was not predictive of
either overall (OS) or event free (EFS) survival in the entire tumor data
set, let-7d and let-7f family members were independently predictive (p=
0.039, HR= 3.71 and p=0.024, HR=3.37 respectively) of poor clinical
outcome when down-regulated in a stratified data set consisting of only
11q- tumors. We demonstrate how let-7a, let-7b, let-7c, let-7d, let-f,
let-7g and let-7i miRNAs represent a signature for predicting patient
survival for the 11q- tumor subtype (pNeuroblastoma is a heterogeneous
pediatric cancer consisting of clinically favorable and unfavorable tumor
subtypes, with tumors having MYCN amplification or loss of chromosome 11q
being associated with particularly poor patient survival. We have
previously profiled a set of 145 primary neuroblastoma tumors for the
expression 450 miRNA loci and have identified miRNAs that have been
dysregulated by MYCN or by large scale genomic imbalances (Bray et al
Plos One 2009), as well as miRNAs that are significantly correlated with
clinically aggressive disease (Chen et al., Cancer Res, 2007). Here, we
have carried out a refined analysis of the let-7 family of miRNAs, which
map to 9 different human chromosomes. These miRNAs display a remarkable
degree of coordinated expression in the tumors, in spite of their
differing genomic sites. Although the expression of let-7 family members
was not predictive of either overall (OS) or event free (EFS) survival in
the entire tumor data set, let-7d and let-7f family members were
independently predictive (p= 0.039, HR= 3.71 and p=0.024, HR=3.37
respectively) of poor clinical outcome when down-regulated in a
stratified data set consisting of only 11q- tumors. We demonstrate how
let-7a, let-7b, let-7c, let-7d, let-f, let-7g and let-7i miRNAs represent
a signature for predicting patient survival for the 11q- tumor subtype
(p<0.05). The coordinated expression of let-7 family members across
tumors is likely a consequence of LIN28B, which is known to inhibit the
processing of primary and/or pre-let-7 sequences into mature miRNAs.
Thus, a primary function of LIN28B would be to down-regulate the tumor
suppressive let-7 miRNAs. Consistent with this hypothesis is the fact
that LIN28B is up-regulated in tumors from patients with poor survival,
as determined using 38 tumors from the R2 data analysis tool. As a
partial mechanism for up-regulation of LIN28B, we further demonstrate
that miR-125b, which maps to the chromosome 11q deletion region, is
significantly down-regulated in 11q- tumors (pNeuroblastoma is a
heterogeneous pediatric cancer consisting of clinically favorable and
unfavorable tumor subtypes, with tumors having MYCN amplification or loss
of chromosome 11q being associated with particularly poor patient
survival. We have previously profiled a set of 145 primary neuroblastoma
tumors for the expression 450 miRNA loci and have identified miRNAs that
have been dysregulated by MYCN or by large scale genomic imbalances (Bray
et al Plos One 2009), as well as miRNAs that are significantly correlated
with clinically aggressive disease (Chen et al., Cancer Res, 2007). Here,
we have carried out a refined analysis of the let-7 family of miRNAs,
which map to 9 different human chromosomes. These miRNAs display a
remarkable degree of coordinated expression in the tumors, in spite of
their differing genomic sites. Although the expression of let-7 family
members was not predictive of either overall (OS) or event free (EFS)
survival in the entire tumor data set, let-7d and let-7f family members
were independently predictive (p= 0.039, HR= 3.71 and p=0.024, HR=3.37
respectively) of poor clinical outcome when down-regulated in a
stratified data set consisting of only 11q- tumors. We demonstrate how
let-7a, let-7b, let-7c, let-7d, let-f, let-7g and let-7i miRNAs represent
a signature for predicting patient survival for the 11q- tumor subtype
(p<0.05). The coordinated expression of let-7 family members across
tumors is likely a consequence of LIN28B, which is known to inhibit the
processing of primary and/or pre-let-7 sequences into mature miRNAs.
Thus, a primary function of LIN28B would be to down-regulate the tumor
suppressive let-7 miRNAs. Consistent with this hypothesis is the fact
that LIN28B is up-regulated in tumors from patients with poor survival,
as determined using 38 tumors from the R2 data analysis tool. As a
partial mechanism for up-regulation of LIN28B, we further demonstrate
that miR-125b, which maps to the chromosome 11q deletion region, is
significantly down-regulated in 11q- tumors (p< 0.05), and that this
miRNA directly targets LIN28B. Thus, down-regulation of miR-125b through
genomic deletion of one allele leads to up-regulation of LIN28B, which in
turn reduces levels of let-7 members. At a functional level, we
demonstrate that let-7a significantly diminishes neuroblastoma cell
viability when ectopically over-expressed in Kelly cells, through direct
targeting and inhibition of the MYCN oncogenic transcription factor. We
conclude that let-7 family members act as tumor suppressors in MYCN
amplified and 11q- neuroblastoma tumor subtypes, although each of the
tumor subtypes appear to differ in their endogenous levels of these
miRNAs.

