Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of whole body hyperthermia system: changes of core body
temperature and their effects on immune system


We have recently introduced a whole-body hyperthermia (WBH) system
(Heckel ht3000) which is a specific device for WBH consisting of four
water-filtered infrared-A (wIRA) irradiators and synthetic leather tent
for heat-retention. We are now studying how this system should be used in
combination with cancer immune-cell therapy such as DC-based vaccination
and adoptive T cell therapy. The aim of this study is to examine the
effects of increase in core body temperature on the number and function
of peripheral blood leukocytes. Heat treatment was applied to healthy
volunteers with this system; rectal temperature which was used as a
representative of core body temperature, and axillary temperature were
monitored simultaneously. During the irradiation phase, the volunteers
were exposed to wIRA until their rectal temperature reached at 38.5C, and
they were then wrapped in synthetic leather tent for 60 min (heat
retention phase) in order to maintain rectal temperature within fever
range (38.5-40.5C). Peripheral blood was taken from the each volunteer 3
times; before irradiation, at the time when rectal temperature reached at
38.5C, and when elevated rectal temperature returned to 38.5C after the
completion of heat retention. Blood samples were analyzed by using flow
cytometry to examine the number of leukocytes, lymphocytes subsets and NK
cells-killing activities. During the irradiation phase, rectal
temperature of every volunteer was gradually elevated, and it reached at
38.5C after 60-90 min irradiation. Moderate but continuous elevation of
rectal temperatures was observed even after irradiation, and they were
kept at 39.0-39.5C during the heat retention phase. After the volunteers
got out of the heat retention tent, rectal temperatures were gradually
decreased, and 30-60 min later, it returned to below 38.5C. Regarding the
number of peripheral leukocytes, NK cells showed the most striking
change. In fact, they showed rapid increase in number at the time when
rectal temperature reached at 38.5C, on the other hand, the number of NK
cells sharply decreased to approximately 50-60% of the one in
pre-irradiation phase when the elevated rectal temperature retuned to
38.5C. We also examined how NK cells changed their functions and
phenotypes in some volunteers, and found that killing activity
significantly enhanced after heat-treatment in fever range. Regarding the
number of other types of cells, monocytes and granulocytes showed gradual
increase during and after heat-treatment. By contrast, the number of the
T cells, particularly the number of CD62L positive T cells, was
moderately decreased after heat-treatment, which is presumably due to
their homing to secondary lymphoid tissues. In conclusion, WBH has
various impacts on human immune system so that the combination of
immune-cell therapy and WBH could be a more powerful therapy of enhancing
immune system.

