Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term results of organ sparing surgical treatments of
precancerous cervical lesions in Mongolia


Background: Cervical cancer is the most common cancer in female
reproductive system. Since introduction of diagnostic modalities like
Pap-tests, the detection pre-cancerous cervical lesions CIN1, CIN2 and
CIN3 have increased dramatically. Early detection of pre-cancerous
lesions enables performance of organ sparing treatments like LEEP,
conization and cryotherapy. Aim: Since there are no studies in the field
of organ sparing treatment of cervical cancer, we decided analyze the
results of such treatments and calculate the: 1. Five year survival of
patients underwent organ sparing surgical procedures 2. Fertility and
reproductive function of these patients Method: LEEP (n-63), knife
conization (n-22) and trachelectomy (total removal of cervix) (n-15) was
performed in women of reproductive age (25-35 years old) at National
Cancer Center. The treatment results were followed for 5 years and
statistical analysis of survival and reproductive function were analyzed.
Results: 87.7% of patients with CINI lesions had LEEP, 12.3 % had knife
conization and 0% had trachelectomy. 44.4% of patients with CINI lesions
had LEEP, 55.6 % had knife conization and 0% had trachelectomies
respectively. For CINIII 6.2% of patients had LEEP, 0% had knife
conization and 93% had trachelectomy. We performed organ sparing
treatment in 100 patients, out of which 10% had cancer recurrence in LEEP
treatment, 9.1% in knife conization and 0% in trachelectomy.
Complications of hemorrhage were observed in 14% of patients, cervical
tube obstruction in 3% and deterioration of chronic inflammations in 13%
respectively. After the organ sparing treatment, menstrual cycle was
normal in 75% of the all patients, 65% reached pregnancy. 9.2% of
patients who reached pregnancy had stillbirth, 12.3% had abortion, and
78.5% had normal delivery. 80.4% of patients with pregnancy had natural
labors, while19.6% of patients had caesarean sections respectively.
Conclusion: in Mongolia, LEEP, knife conization and trachelectomy methods
are used since 2000. But the treatment results were not reported so far.
10% of patients treated by LEEP and 9.1% of patients treated by knife
conization had tumor recurrence. Thus our treatment efficiency is above
90%. Up to 20% of patients had complications ranging from bleeding to
cervical tube obstruction. We conclude that organ sparing cancer
treatment allows better QOL (quality of life) for the patients and
provides opportunity to have children.

