Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of autocrine epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling in breast cancer metastasis


The majority of breast cancer deaths are due to the development of
metastatic disease. The metastatic cascade consists of a series of steps
and includes primary tumor growth and angiogenesis, invasion,
intravasation, cell survival in circulation, extravasation and sustained
growth at secondary organ sites to form micrometastases. Previous studies
have shown that overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR; ErbB1; Her1) increases tumor cell motility, intravasation and
motility. In addition, it has been demonstrated that the metastatic
potential of cancer cells depends not only on their intrinsic
characteristics but also on their cooperative interaction with the tumor
microenvironment. For instance, imposed gradients of EGF or
colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) can stimulate invasion via an
EGF/CSF-1 paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages. Because
breast malignancies exhibiting increased expression of the epidermal
growth factor (EGF) family of receptors and their cognate ligands are
associated with more biologically aggressive disease and poorer patient
prognosis, we decided to study how expression of certain members of the
EGF family of ligands in the context of ErbB1 overexpression can affect
the processes of invasion, intravasation and metastasis using in vitro
and in vivo systems. Based on initial Oncomine cancer gene expression
analysis, heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) overexpression was correlated with more rapid recurrence of
disease in breast cancer and thus, we decided to focus our study this
ligand. Briefly, MTLn3 rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells and human MDA-MB
231 breast adenocarcimona cells were transduced to overexpress HB-EGF.
HB-EGF expression did not significantly affect in vitro or in vivo growth
rate. In vitro microchemotaxis and invasion assays to study chemotaxis
and invasion, respectively, in the presence and absence of EGF,
demonstrated that random motility and spontaneous invasion were both
enhanced in the presence of HB-EGF expression. Interestingly, EGF-induced
chemotaxis and EGF-induced in vivo invasion were both suppressed. In vivo
studies show that tumor cells expressing HB-EGF not only display
increased metastasis to the lungs and extravasation from circulation, but
also significantly enhanced macrophage recruitment and exerted an
angiogenic effect. These findings suggest that a better understanding of
the role of HB-EGF in breast cancer will aid in directing and modifying
therapeutic approaches aimed at inactivating the ErbB ligand/EGFR system
as well as developing approaches based on the EGF family of ligands as a
target for the clinical treatment of breast cancer, ultimately leading to
improved patient survival.

