Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of DNA copy number changes in colorectal cancer
metastasis are highly similar to their corresponding primaries with
additional focal alterations that differ between individual patients


Objective: Metastasis is a complex process that remains an obstacle in
the management of colorectal cancer (CRC). Over the years many models
have been developed to explain the metastatic process in detail, however,
the molecular basis is still poorly understood. To gain better insight
into the biology of metastases we investigated genomic aberrations in
matched triplets of normal, CRC primaries and metastases of various
distant sites. Methods: In total, 63 primary colorectal tumours, 63
matched normal specimens, and 69 matched metastases (liver, lung,
ovarian, omentum and distant lymph nodes) were analysed by high
resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). Our
findings were validated in a publicly available dataset consisting of 21
matched primary tumours and liver metastases.1 Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) was used to confirm our findings and to evaluate
intra-tumour heterogeneity of the observed copy number differences.
Results: The overall pattern of copy number aberrations was highly
similar between primary tumours and their metastases. However, higher
deflections were observed in the metastases compared to the primary
tumours, which was confirmed in the validation set. Across all patients,
17 regions showed significantly lower DNA copy number ratio and 2 regions
showed significantly higher DNA copy number ratio in the metastases
compared to the primary tumour. None of these significant DNA copy number
changes occurred in a substantial percentage of our patients. In the
training set we did not detect a higher frequency of chromosome 11p15.5
gain in liver metastasis compared to the primary tumour, as previously
reported in the validation set. In two different patients, two specific
regions showed amplifications in the three metastases (one patient with
two metastatic sites) which were absent in the primary tumours. One of
these regions harboured the MYC oncogene. FISH analysis confirmed the
extensive MYC amplification in the three metastases, but also showed
tumour cell populations with smaller MYC amplifications within the
primary tumour, which were not detected by array CGH. Conclusions: Highly
similar patterns of DNA copy number profiles between metastatic and
primary CRC were observed using array CGH. Focal differences that were
observed in individual patients are probably explained by heterogeneity
within the primary tumour in contrast to the metastatic sub clone. True
additional copy number aberrations are rare and rather specific for
individual patients, which is consistent with the hypothesis that the
metastatic potential is already present in the primary tumour.
Referentie: 1. Stange DE, Engel F, Longerich T et al. Expression of an
ASCL2 related stem cell signature and IGF2 in colorectal cancer liver
metastases with 11p15.5 gain. Gut 2011;59:1236-44.

