Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptation to histone deacetylase inhibitors attenuates cancer
cell growth


Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as SAHA (suberoylanilude
hydroxamic acid) inhibit the growth of multiple cancer cell lines in
vitro, and human tumor xenografts in vivo. SAHA has recently been
approved for the treatment of human T cell lymphomas and is in clinical
trials for a number of other different malignancies. HDAC inhibitors lead
to increased acetylation of multiple cellular proteins, including
histones, and lead to major changes in cellular gene expression, however
the precise mechanisms of their therapeutic effects are not known. HDAC
inhibitors have been reported to have multiple effects on different
cancer cell lines, ranging from induction of differentiation to induction
of apoptosis, DNA damage, senescence, and autophagy. We hypothesized that
chronic treatment of malignant cells with HDAC inhibitors, through
changes in the program of cancer cell gene expression, would induce
differentiation and senescence, and attenuate the malignant phenotype. We
have treated a subclone of the SW480 colon cancer cells (S3 cells) with
step-wise increasing amounts of SAHA. Chronic treatment with SAHA
resulted in adaptation of S3 cells to SAHA, associated with marked
decrease in cell growth and tumorigenicity in nude mice. In addition to
slow growth, SAHA-adapted SW480 cells (designated SH80), exhibit features
of differentiation including gland formation and increased intestinal
alkaline phosphatase production (IAP), and increased cell size,
associated with multiple nuclei and polyploidy. Interestingly, decreased
growth rate and increased expression of alkaline phosphatase were seen
even following drug withdrawal, suggesting that drug-adaptation resulted
in a relatively stable phenotype. Frequent expression of
senescence-associated -galactosidase was observed in SH80 cells,
particularly in giant cells and cell clusters, suggesting on-going
senescence. Increased expression of p21 RNA and protein, previously
suggested to contribute to the growth inhibition effect of HDAC
inhibitors, was observed in the SH80 cells. SH80 cells also exhibited
changes in the expression of several microRNAs previously implicated in
oncogenesis, suggesting that altered expression of these miRs might
contribute to the attenuated malignant phenotype in SH80 cells. These
data suggest adaptation of colon cancer cells to HDAC inhibitor therapy
may attenuate key aspects of the malignant phenotype, and offer a new
therapeutic approach to the long-term control of cancer.

