Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Severe toxicities in patients undergoing gemcitabine, ARA-C,
capecitabine, or azacytidine treatments: Is deregulated cytidine
deaminase the bad guy


Background: Nucleoside analogs are anticancer drugs widely used both in
adults and in children. Genetic polymorphisms leading to impaired ability
to detoxify drugs in the liver are a major issue in clinical oncology.
Cytidine deaminase (CDA) is a ubiquituous enzyme responsible for the
metabolism of several pyrimidine derivatives. CDA is involved in the
activation pattern of capecitabine, but conversely is responsible for the
liver catabolism of most other nucleosidic analogs. So far, downregulated
CDA is considered as an issue with gemcitabine, but little is known about
the impact of deregulated CDA on the clinical outcome with other
pyrimidine analogs. Methods: A retrospective study was perfomed as a
proof-of-concept for the implication of CDA in severe toxicities with
several pyrimidine analogs. Phenotypic and genotypic investigations were
performed in a subset of patients presenting with severe toxicities soon
after being treated for the first time with a pyrimidine derivative. CDA
status was evaluated on a phenotypic basis using a surrogate enzymatic
test. Additionally, polymorphisms associated with loss of CDA activity
(i.e. 79A>C, 435 T>C, 208 G>A mutations) or conversely with increased
expression (i.e. rs532545 deletion) were screened. Toxicities were
monitored following the standard CTC 4.0 grading. Results & Discussion:
We followed five patients (4 adults, 1 child), all presenting with
extremely severe toxicities soon after being treated with a nucleoside
analog (i.e. capecitabine, gemcitabine, azacytidine and ara-C,
respectively). Two patients treated with capecitabine underwent severe
toxicities, including a lethal one. Both patients were phenotyped as CDA
ultra-metabolizer (UM: CDA > 6 U/mg). The rs532545 deletion in the CDA
promoter region was found in the patient with lethal outcome. This
suggests that CDA UM status triggers toxicities through an increased
activation of capecitabine towards its toxics metabolites. Conversely,
poor metabolizer (PM) profile (i.e. CDA C and rs532545 polymorphisms,
which have opposite impacts on CDA levels eventually. In this case,
phenotypic determination proved to be critical to picture the CDA status,
and confirmed her PM phenotype. Our observations suggest that CDA
deficiency makes patients administered with gemcitabine, azacytidine and
ara-C at risk of early severe toxicities alike. Conclusions: Deregulated
CDA (i.e. PM or UM patients) proved to be associated with a serial of
severe/lethal toxicities in patients treated with nucleoside analogs
frequently administered in clinical oncology. Overall, this POC study
warrants the identification of CDA status in patients prior to starting
pyrimidine-based treatments.

