Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysis of cancer cells by highly purified T regulatory cells
engaged via an EpCAM/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody


BiTE antibodies are single-chain bispecific antibody constructs with dual
specificity for CD3 on T cells and a surface antigen on target cells. By
bridging cytotoxic T cells and cancer cells, BiTE antibodies are capable
to temporarily mount a polyclonal T cell response that is not restricted
by T cell receptor specificity, presence of MHC class I, generation and
presentation of peptide antigen, or the need for T cell co-stimulation.
Examples are the CD19/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody blinatumomab, which
has shown high response rates and durable remissions in leukemia and
lymphoma patients, and EpCAM/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody solitomab
(MT110), which is in a dose-escalating phase 1 study in patients with
solid tumors. CD8+ and CD4+ effector memory T cells were found to be the
most potent effector cells for BiTE antibodies. Here, we have assessed
whether highly purified T regulatory cells (T regs) can also serve as
effector cells for BiTE antibody MT110, despite multiple reports
suggesting that T regs rather suppress the anti-tumor activity of
cytotoxic T cells. T regs were purified from human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) using anti-CD25 magnetic beads and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for expression of CD4 and
CD45RA markers, followed by expansion in the presence of IL-2 (Hoffmann
P. et al., Methods Mol. Biol. 677:15-30, 2011). Purified nave
CD4+/CD25high/CD45RA+/FOXP3+ T regs had a purity of 96-99.6%, and
contained no detectable CD8+ T cells. In co-culture experiments, a small
fraction of purified T regs up-regulated the expression of granzyme B and
perforin when stimulated with MT110 in the presence of EpCAM+ target
cells. As shown by chromium release assay and phase contrast microscopy,
T regs caused a MT110 dose-dependent, redirected lysis of target cells.
No target cell lysis was observed with a BiTE antibody solely binding to
CD3 on T cells, and by T regs alone. We then tested the activity of T
regs against spheroids formed in vitro from colorectal cancer stem cells.
Only in the presence of MT110, T regs could significantly reduce the size
and integrity of spheroids. In that respect, T regs had a similar
activity as PBMC. Our study suggests that T regs, which often are
associated with immune escape of tumors, can be effectively engaged for
redirected cancer cell lysis by a BiTE antibody.

