Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific epidermal growth factor receptor autophosphorylation
sites promote epithelial cell chemotaxis and restitution


BACKGROUND: Cell migration is required for the physiological processes of
wound repair, resolution of inflammation, and organogenesis, but is also
involved in the pathology of tumor invasion. Thus, investigation of the
regulatory mechanisms of cell migration is important for both
understanding basic intestinal biology and identifying potential
therapeutic targets for disorders such as inflammatory bowel diseases and
colon cancer. HYPOTHESIS: Upon ligand binding, epidermal growth factor
(EGF) receptor (R) autophosphorylates on c-terminal tyrosines, generating
docking sites for signaling partners that stimulate proliferation,
restitution, and chemotaxis. Specificity for individual EGFR tyrosines in
cellular responses has been hypothesized but not well documented. Here we
tested the requirement for particular tyrosines, and associated
downstream pathways, in mouse colon epithelial cell chemotactic
migration. We compared these requirements to those for the phenotypically
distinct restitution (wound healing) migration. METHODS: Wild-type,
Y992/1173F, Y1045F, Y1068F, and Y1086F EGFR constructs were expressed in
EGFR-/- cells; EGF-induced chemotaxis or restitution were determined by
Boyden chamber or modified scratch wound assay, respectively.
Pharmacological inhibitors of p38, phospholipase C (PLC), Src, MEK,
JNK/SAPK, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase), and protein kinase
C (PKC) were used to block EGF-stimulated signaling. Pathway activation
was determined by immunoblot analysis. RESULTS: Unlike wild-type EGFR,
Y992/1173F and Y1086F EGFR did not stimulate colon epithelial cell
chemotaxis towards EGF; Y1045F and Y1068F EGFR partially stimulated
chemotaxis. Only wt EGFR promoted colonocyte restitution. Inhibition of
p38, PLC, and Src blocked chemotaxis; JNK, PI 3-kinase, and PKC
inhibitors blocked restitution but not chemotaxis. All four EGFR mutants
stimulated downstream signaling in response to EGF, but Y992/1173F EGFR
was partially defective in PLC activation while both Y1068F and Y1086F
EGFR failed to activate Src. CONCLUSIONS: Specific EGFR tyrosines play
key roles in determining cellular responses to ligand. Chemotaxis and
restitution, which have different migration phenotypes and physiological
consequences, have overlapping but not identical EGFR signaling
requirements.

