Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting TMEPAI in breast cancer therapy and prevention


We earlier identified that TMEPAI (Transmembrane prostate androgen
induced) as a novel TGF- inducible gene that converts tumor suppressive
TGF- into a tumor promoter in breast cancer. The objective of the present
study was to assess the role of TMEPAI in the regulation of TGF- mediated
canonical and non-canonical signaling pathways and evaluate the effect of
novel drugs, which block TMEPAI expression, in controlling breast tumor
progression. Knockdown of endogenous TMEPAI expression was achieved by
Lentiviral shRNA expression vectors. DNA transfections, luciferase
assays, cell culture, cell proliferation, immunoblotting,
immunohistochemistry and in vivo tumor studies using nude mice were done
using standard methods. Here, we show that TMEPAI knock-down in
MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cells increased TGF- mediated
Smad signaling with prolonged activation of Smad2 and Smad3 proteins
measured by their phosphorylation and Smad-driven luciferase reporter
activity. In contrast, exogenous expression of TMEPAI in normal human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) or TMEPAI-deficient MDA-MB-231cells
reduced Smad signaling. While proliferation of HMEC is inhibited by TGF-,
MDA-MB-231 cells showed a biphasic growth response to TGF-, which is
blocked by TMEPAI-deficiency. This led us to test the role of TMEPAI in
regulating the canonical and non-canonical pathways of TGF- signaling.
Our studies identified that TMEPAI subverts tumor suppressive TGF-
mediated Smad signaling into tumor promotive non-Smad signaling through
stimulation of all three groups of mammalian mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathways and Akt pathway. TMEPAI-deficiency prevented the
activation of these MAPKs in breast cancer cells. Importantly,
TMEPAI-deficiency increased PTEN and reduced pAkt levels in MDA-MB-231
cells. Furthermore, evaluation of TMEPAI as a prognostic biomarker by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed high TMEPAI expression in several
aggressive human breast tumor samples but not in the matched normal human
breast specimens. In addition, drug screening identified a terpenoid
derivative (TD) that blocked the expression of TMEPAI and inhibited the
proliferation, migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells. Notably, TD
did not block the growth of normal human mammary epithelial cells. In
addition, TD enhanced TGF--mediated Smad signaling but inhibited growth
promoting activation of MAPKs and Akt in MDA-MB-231 cells. Importantly,
administration of TD (at 2mg/Kg body weight by i.p.) markedly reduced the
mass of tumors in mice harboring MDA-MB-231-derived xenograft tumors. Our
findings suggest that TMEPAI is a novel biomarker and a therapeutic
target for TGF- dependent aggressive breast cancers. In addition to
reducing the tumor mass, drugs that block TMEPAI expression may also
prevent nascent tumor formation by their ability to stimulate growth
suppressive TGF- signaling and inhibit growth promoting signaling.

