Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin enhances cisplatin cytotoxicity of lung cancer through
Stat3 pathway


The antitumorigenic effects of metformin were mostly interpreted as
attributing to the activation of LKB1-AMPK pathway and the studies
investigating the AMPK-independent mechanism of metformin remained
limited. In lung cancer, cisplatin-based chemotherapy remained the first
line regimen for advanced lung cancer patients especially those without
EGFR mutation. Previous study demonstrated the linkage between IL6-Stat3
autocrine and chemoresistance. In this study, we first showed that lung
cancer line S3C (PC14PE6/AS2 cells with expressing plasmids containing
constitutively-active Stat3) was more resistant to cisplatin than
PC14PE6/AS2 cell. Treating lung cancer cells with Stat3 inhibitor
(JSI-124) or metformin combined with cisplatin, the proliferation of
cancer cells were inhibited additionally. And metformin inhibited Stat3
phosphorylation in PC14PE6/AS2 and A549 cells. To investigate the
upstream mechanism associated Stat3 phosphorylation, we examined the
secretion of IL-6 which was inhibited by metformin. And VEGF secretion,
representing Stat3 downstream pathway, was inhibited by metformin in
vitro and in vivo. Conversely, the secretion of VEGF was not inhibited in
S3C cells after metformin treatment. However, using another AMPK
activator-AICAR, the enhancement of cisplatin cytotoxicity is not
obvious. In contrast to metformin, AICAR induced AMPK phosphorylation but
Stat3 phosphorylation was not inhibited. To verify the LKB-AMPK
independent effect of metformin on Stat3 phosphorylation, PC14PE6/AS2
cells were transfected with siRNA targeting LKB1 or AMPK. We demonstrated
the inhibition of Stat3 phosphorylation of metformin even under the
knockdown of LKB1-AMPK pathway. We also found that MTOR downstream signal
including P70S6K and 4EBP1 were inhibited by metformin. Though previous
study demonstrated MTOR pathway modulated Stat3 pathway, we found P70S6K
and 4EBP1 phosphorylation were inhibited after treatment with metformin
at 8hr and Stat3 phosphorylation change was detected after 24hr. Using
MTOR inhibitor (rapamycin), the Stat3 tyrosine phosphorylation was not
inhibited. Finally, we used subcutaneous tumor xenografts to evaluate the
effect of combination of metformin with cisplatin in vivo. Body weight,
blood sugar, and tumor volume were recorded in four groups including
control, metformin, cisplatin, and metformin combined with cisplatin.
Body weights and blood sugar were not different between combination
treatment group and control group. In combination group, tumor stopped
growing at 18th day and the tumor sizes were obvious less than the other
three groups. Immunohistochemical staining of ki67 verified the lower
proliferation in combination group. Our study demonstrated that
metformin, independent of LKB1-AMPK pathway, inhibits Stat3
phosphorylation which contributes the enhancement of cisplatin
cytotoxicity in lung cancer.

