Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Asymmetry-defective oligodendrocyte progenitors are glioma
precursors


Mammalian oligodendrocyte progenitors expressing the chondroitine sulfate
proteoglycan NG2 are the largest dividing population in the postnatal,
mammalian brain. NG2+ oligodendrocyte progenitors self-renew and generate
mature oligodendrocytes. The mechanism by which oligodendrocyte
progenitors fulfill their dual function has been unclear. NG2+
oligodendrocyte progenitors are also a cellular origin of
oligodendrogliomas, a chemo-sensitive but frequently progressive and
lethal type of brain tumor. It is however poorly understood how the
normal progenitors turn into tumor cells. We proposed to test whether
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells undergo asymmetric cell divisions to
generate daughter cells of distinct fate, by asymmetrically segregating
cell fate determinants. We further speculated that alterations in
asymmetric cell division might predispose cells for or even cause
transformation by disrupting the normal balance of self-renewal and
differentiation. By analyzing murine oligodendrocyte progenitors in the
pair assay, which was developed to visualize asymmetric cell divisions,
we discovered that the proteoglycan NG2 segregates asymmetrically,
suggestive of asymmetric cell division. By determining the fate of the
NG2+ and NG2- daughters, we found that the NG2+ progeny undergoes
EGF-dependent self-renewal. In contrast, the NG2- progeny differentiates.
By analyzing self-renewal of NG2 deficient oligodendrocyte progenitors
from genetically engineered NG2 knock-out mice, we determined that NG2 is
required for asymmetric segregation of NG2 and EGF-dependent
self-renewal. In a transgenic mouse model for oligodendrogliomas,
increased symmetric oligodendrocyte progenitor divisions coincide with
abnormal self-renewal rather then differentiation at premalignant stages
and leads to neoplastic transformation. Lastly, our analyses of human
brain and brain tumor tissue-derived cells showed that asymmetric cell
divisions are prevalent in non-neoplastic NG2+ cells and reduced in NG2+
cells from low-grade oligodendrogliomas. Mining of existing brain tumor
databases for expression level changes revealed that candidate regulators
of asymmetric cell division are frequently mis-expressed in low grade
brain oligodendrogliomas. Taken together, we unraveled loss of asymmetric
division in premalignant, aberrantly self-renewing
differentiation-defective murine oligodendrocyte progenitors and human
NG2+ oligodendroglioma cells, thereby explaining initial steps by which
oligodendrocyte progenitors transform into oligodendroglioma cells. Our
data suggest that asymmetric cell divisions maintain homeostasis in the
postnatal oligodendrocyte lineage. In contrast, loss or disruption of
asymmetric cell division might be causal to the neoplastic transformation
of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and provide novel points of
disruption to which specific glioma therapies can be targeted.

