Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of changes in 4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase (ABAT)
and beta-alanine metabolism with breast cancer and the more aggressive
estrogen receptor negative subtype


Metabolic changes are the final answer of the cell to environmental or
genetic changes. While gene expression in breast cancer has extensively
been studied, studies on the breast cancer metabolome and its correlation
to transcriptional changes are rare. Therefore, a combined metabolomics
and transcriptomics study was carried out by the METAcancer consortium.
In this project, 275 breast cancer tissues collected as fresh-frozen
samples in the METAcancer tumor bank were analyzed using gas
chromatography combined with time of flight mass spectrometry
(GC-TOF-MS). Out of these, 156 tumor samples were transcriptionally
profiled using whole genome DASL. Before, we identified 10 increased and
9 decreased metabolites in the more aggressive estrogen receptor negative
(ER-) compared to the estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer
(poster #5573, AACR Annual Meeting 2010). Among these changes, the
increase of beta-alanine (fold change = 2.4, p = 1.7E-20) was the
strongest and most significant alteration. Comparing breast cancer and
normal tissues, beta-alanine turned out to be strongly increased in the
cancer tissues (fold change = 2.6, p = 1.1E-34). Using the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) we identified 135 enzymes that
catalyze reactions of the 19 regulated metabolites. These enzymes were
subjected to correlation analysis with their substrates and products. As
most significant result, a negative relationship between 4-aminobutyrate
aminotransferase (ABAT) expression and beta-alanine concentration was
detected (Pearson correlation = 0.62, p = 1.1E-17). ABAT was
significantly down-regulated in the more aggressive ER- subtype (fold
change = 1.9, p = 1.6E-08). The differential expression of ABAT was
confirmed in three publicly available breast cancer microarray data sets.
The effect of ABAT inhibition was investigated in estrogen receptor
positive MCF-7 and triple-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. In
both cell lines, treatment with vigabatrin, a small molecule that binds
irreversibly to ABAT and inhibits the enzymatic activity, increased
proliferation. In summary, we detected an accumulation of beta-alanine in
breast cancer and an increase of beta-alanine and a down-regulation of
ABAT in the more aggressive ER- subtype. The regulation of beta-alanine
metabolism that underlies these changes is currently investigated in cell
culture models.

