Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitor differentially regulates stemness
gene expression in neuroblastoma drug resistant cells


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have been developed as anti-tumor
agents and they may play a role in reversing drug resistance by
combination treatment with other chemotherapeutic drugs. However, it has
also been reported that HDACi can upregulate the cancer stem surface
marker expression and promote stem cell self-renewal, which may cause
inherit resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. We investigated the effect
of HDACi treatment on the stemness gene expression in drug resistant
cells. Using SK-N-Be2C, high aggressive I type human of neuroblastoma
cells, and SKN-SH, low aggressive mixed N and S type of human
neuroblastoma cells, our laboratory generated doxorubicin drug resistant
cell lines with and without intermittent histone deacetylase inhibitor
Vorinostat treatment over one year. For each cell line, four groups were
generated: wild type (WT), doxorubicin resistant (DoxR), vorinostat
treated WT (WT-v), and vorinostat - treated doxorubicin resistant
(DoxR-v). The cells sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs, the ability of
forming tumorspheres and in vitro invasion were examined. Cell surface
markers and side populations were analyzed by flow cytometry. The
differential expressed stemness genes were identified by whole genome
analysis and confirmed by real-time PCR. Vorinostat increased the
sensitivity of SK-N-Be2C resistant cells to chemotherapy, made the cells
lose the ability to form tumorspheres, and reduced in vitro invasion
ability and the percentage of side population. In contrary, vorinostat
decreased the sensitivity of SK-N-SH resistant cells to drugs, enhanced
the cell's ability to form tumorshperes and had little effect on the
cells invasion and side population. The putative neuroblastoma marker,
CD133, was not enriched in either long term or short term
vorinostat/doxorubicin treatment. Nine stemness linked genes (ABCB1,
ABCC4, LMO2, SOX2, ERCC5, S100A10, IGFBP3, TCF3 and VIM) were upregulated
in doxorubicin resistant SK-N-Be2C cells, compared to vorinostat -
treated resistant cells. Vorinostat did not have significant effect on
stemness gene expression in SK-N-SH cells, except for ABCB1 and ABCC4
genes, which were deregulated in vorinostat - treated resistant cells. In
conclusion, Histone deacetylase inhibitor differentially regulates
stemness gene expression in neuroblastoma drug resistant cells. It has
better effect on reversing drug resistance in high aggressive
neuroblastoma and this may be associated with downregulated stemness gene
expression. This work may be valuable for clinicians to design treatment
protocols specific for different neuroblastoma patients.

