Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cost effectiveness of implementing a screening and treatment
program for hepatitis C virus infection in Egypt


Egypt has one of the highest prevalence rates of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection in the World. We estimated the cost-effectiveness of
implementing a screening and treatment program for HCV infection among
Egyptians. We developed a Markov decision analysis model of the natural
history of HCV infection and treatment to evaluate cost-effectiveness of
screening and treatment for asymptomatic average-risk Egyptian adults. We
used HCV age-specific disease progression rates and prevalence for
Egyptians. Lifetime costs of screening, treatment, disease progression,
and health utilities have been used with 3% annual discounting. We used a
societal perspective, local cost estimates, quality-adjusted life years
(QALYs) gained, and calculated the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
of a hypothetical program of screening and treating Egyptians for HCV
versus no screening. We conducted sensitivity analysis to test
uncertainty in the model assumptions. Under base case assumptions,
implementing the program for a 40-year-old, asymptomatic Egyptian adult
would cost $1,856 for 19.192 QALYs, while non-screening would cost $1,807
for 19.164 QALYs for the 40 year time horizon. The incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) is $1,750/QALY (equivalent to about
10,392 LE, Egyptian pound/QALY). If applied to the population of 10-60
years old individuals, this program would lead to long-term costs of 2.15
billion dollars, but save one million life-years. Results were the most
sensitive to change in disutility by being identified as HCV-positive
after screening as well as the probability of receiving treatment after
HCV positive diagnosis and probability of successful treatment. Comparing
this model to international standards for cost-effectiveness,
implementing a screening and treatment program for HCV in Egypt is very
cost-effective. Therefore, we recommend implementing this program to
reduce the burden of liver disease in Egypt.

