Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compensatory function of the homologous proteins MIF and D-DT in
regulation of AMPK-dependent metabolic-stress pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma


Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is over-expressed in most
solid malignancies and is important for many pro-tumorigenic pathways.
Several studies reveal that genetic deletion or inhibition of MIF results
in anti-cancer phenotypes, but these phenotypes are not nearly as
profound as one would anticipate given its reported activities. We
recently discovered that MIF's only related family member, D-dopachrome
tautomerase (D-DT), functionally compensates for MIF-dependent promotion
of angiogenic potential in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). This
finding not only provides an explanation for why MIF individual targeting
has not provided more efficacious anti-cancer activities, but also
suggests that therapeutic targeting of MIF and D-DT simultaneously may
provide a highly effective and novel new class of anti-lung cancer
pharmacologic agents. Here we present further evidence of the important
cooperative function of these two homologous proteins in NSCLC cells. We
reveal a strong collaborative effect of MIF and D-DT on the negative
regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activation. AMPK is
phosphorylated by the tumor suppressor, LKB1, in response to metabolic
stress, resulting in AMPK-dependent p53 activation and mTOR inhibition.
We show that while siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous MIF or D-DT
individually has modest effects on AMPK activation in NSCLC cells,
combined knockdown of both MIF and D-DT results in a significant
activation of AMPK-dependent regulation of p53 and mTOR pathways.
Importantly, this re-activation of AMPK by MIF and D-DT occurs in LKB1
mutant NSCLC cell lines. In addition, overexpression of MIF or D-DT alone
by adenoviral delivery causes a substantial reduction in p53 expression,
with a dramatic increase in mTOR pathway activation. Our findings suggest
that MIF and D-DT promote a unique and well conserved adaptation pathway
that is usurped by the malignant cells in order to counter metabolic
stress-induced, AMPK-dependent, tumor suppression. Because the LKB1 tumor
suppressor locus is mutated in over 30% of NSCLC lesions rendering these
tumors insensitive to AMPK-dependent growth suppression, the
identification of unique AMPK agonists would be expected to have a
tremendous impact on NSCLC disease management for clinicians. Taken
together, simultaneous therapeutic targeting of both MIF and D-DT
represents an innovative and clinically efficacious approach to
re-activating metabolic stress-induced tumor suppression in NSCLC
malignant lesions.

