Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liposomal nanoparticle siRNA delivery systems for in vivo
silencing of the androgen receptor in human prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed non-skin cancer in men and
one of the leading causes of cancer-death. While frequently curable by
surgical or radiation ablation, recurrent or metastatic disease is
usually managed with androgen withdrawal therapies (medical castration),
which block the growth promoting effects of androgens on the androgen
receptor (AR). Unfortunately, the cancers eventually progress to the
lethal castration-resistant state. Previously, we reported that knocking
down the AR by RNA interference using small hairpin RNA (shRNA) inhibits
this progression and, in about 50% of tumours, causes complete
regression. In this study, we investigated the ability of small
interfering RNA (siRNA) encapsulated in lipid nanoparticle (LNP) to
silence AR in human prostate cancer cell lines and xenograft tumours
following intravenous injections. In vitro screening studies with
prostate cancer cell lines using a panel of cationic lipids demonstrated
that siRNA formulated in LNPs containing the ionizable cationic lipid
2,2-dilinoleyl-4-(2-dimethylaminoethyl)-[1,3]-dioxolane (DLin-KC2-DMA)
exhibited the most potent AR silencing effects. This is attributed to an
optimized ability of DLin-KC2-DMA-containing LNP to enter into cells and
to release the siRNA into the cell cytoplasm following endocytotic
uptake. DLin-KC2-DMA LNPs were also effective in silencing the AR in a
wild-type AR expressing cell line, LAPC-4, and a variant AR expressing
cell line, CWR22Rv1. Importantly, we found that LNP AR-siRNA systems
containing DLin-KC2-DMA could silence AR gene expression in distal LNCaP
xenograft tumors and decrease serum PSA levels following intravenous
injection. The 5RACE experiments further confirmed that siRNA-induced
specific cleavage of AR mRNA was the primary mechanism of action. In
conclusion, these results indicate that in vivo delivery of siRNA to
knockdown AR using our LNP formulations causes a decrease in serum PSA
and provides proof in principle that this approach may offer a
therapeutic strategy for treating advanced prostate cancer. (Funded by
Canadian Institutes for Health Research and a PCF-STAR Project from
Prostate Cancer Canada with the support of Safeway Canada)

