Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of ECM proteins in advanced carcinoma of
uterine cervix


Background Carcinoma of uterine cervix accounts for most common
malignancy in Indian women. Migration is one of the important processes
fundamental to cell invasion and dissemination. Role of extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins is also very important in this crucial process and
cannot be ignored. ECM proteins are involved in cell migration, tissue
remodeling, angiogenesis and cell adhesion. Fibulin-1 is cysteine-rich,
calcium-binding extracellular matrix and plasma protein that has been
implicated as playing a role in tumour progression by modulating cell
morphology, growth, adhesion, and motility. Increased plasminogen
activator (PA) secretion has been observed in malignant cells and tissue
and PA is thought to be involved in the processes of tumorigenesis,
cancer invasion and metastasis. Laminins are important for proliferation,
differentiation, growth, migration & angiogenesis. Besides the structural
function of nidogens, it has long been suggested that nidogens play a
role in cell attachment and tumor angiogenesis. Objectives This study was
aimed to investigate the expression and significance of ECM proteins
(Fibulin-1, uPA, Laminin and Nidogen) in advanced carcinoma of uterine
cervix. Material & Methods 40 patients of cancer cervix stage IIIb were
included in this study. Circulatory levels of Fibulin-1, Laminin and
Nidogen were measured using high sensitivity ELISA kits. uPA activity was
measured by activity assay kit. The levels of biochemical markers were
compared with 20 healthy females, taken as control. mRNA levels of these
molecules were further assessed by Real Time RT-PCR. Data was analyzed
statistically. Results Statistical significant (p Background Carcinoma of
uterine cervix accounts for most common malignancy in Indian women.
Migration is one of the important processes fundamental to cell invasion
and dissemination. Role of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins is also
very important in this crucial process and cannot be ignored. ECM
proteins are involved in cell migration, tissue remodeling, angiogenesis
and cell adhesion. Fibulin-1 is cysteine-rich, calcium-binding
extracellular matrix and plasma protein that has been implicated as
playing a role in tumour progression by modulating cell morphology,
growth, adhesion, and motility. Increased plasminogen activator (PA)
secretion has been observed in malignant cells and tissue and PA is
thought to be involved in the processes of tumorigenesis, cancer invasion
and metastasis. Laminins are important for proliferation,
differentiation, growth, migration & angiogenesis. Besides the structural
function of nidogens, it has long been suggested that nidogens play a
role in cell attachment and tumor angiogenesis. Objectives This study was
aimed to investigate the expression and significance of ECM proteins
(Fibulin-1, uPA, Laminin and Nidogen) in advanced carcinoma of uterine
cervix. Material & Methods 40 patients of cancer cervix stage IIIb were
included in this study. Circulatory levels of Fibulin-1, Laminin and
Nidogen were measured using high sensitivity ELISA kits. uPA activity was
measured by activity assay kit. The levels of biochemical markers were
compared with 20 healthy females, taken as control. mRNA levels of these
molecules were further assessed by Real Time RT-PCR. Data was analyzed
statistically. Results Statistical significant (p < 0.001) increase was
observed in Fibulin-1, uPA and Laminin levels and found to be
significantly correlated with each other whereas Nidogen evels were
insignificantly increased as compared to controls. Increased mRNA
expression for all these molecules has also been observed in the isolated
PBMC by qRT-PCR except nidogen (statistically insignificant increase).
Conclusion The elevated serum/plasma levels and increased quantitative
expression of these ECM proteins suggests their involvement in the
pathogenesis of the disease. This study suggests that rise in ECM
proteins might contribute to the complicated and unregulated process of
metastasis in cancer of cervix. The association of extracellular matrix
proteins and the prognosis of the disease may lead to have a better
approach in treating the cervical cancer patients with a combination
therapy.

