Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthracenyl isoxazole amides (AIMs) as novel agents for brain
tumors


In the United States, the average survival rate for malignant brain
tumors is approximately one year. Despite recent advancements in
treatment, there remains a need for the development of new therapeutic
agents to target and treat malignant brain tumors to increase survival
and quality of life. Due to its pivotal role in cancer cell
proliferation, telomerase has become an attractive target in the
development of new anticancer agents. The enzymatic activity of
telomerase is responsible for telomere maintenance and adds the
guanine-rich DNA sequence repeats to the 3 end of DNA strands in the
telomere regions. Human telomeric DNA has the potential to adopt
G-quartet conformations, which in turn can stack in various arrangements
to form G quadruplexes (G4). To this end, molecules that bind telomeric
G4 DNA and inhibit telomerase have substantial anticancer potential. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxicity of a novel
series of anthracenyl isoxazole amides (AIMs), capable of selectively
binding to G4 telomeric DNA, and determine the ability of the AIMs to
penetrate cell membranes and enter the nuclei of cancer cells. These AIMs
have demonstrated significant activity against brain tumor cell lines in
the DTP NCI-60 cell line panel, and COMPARE analysis indicated that these
molecules exerted their cytotoxicity via a unique mechanism. Two AIMs,
referred to here as AIM-dimer and AIM-double tail (AIM-dt), showed single
digit micromolar IC50 values (4.75 +/ 0.27 and 3.13 +/ 0.45,
respectively) by MTT assay when tested in the human glioblastoma cell
line SNB-19. As a followup to the cytotoxicity studies, apoptosis was
evaluated by flow cytometry (Annexin V). The results indicated that both
AIMs induced apoptosis in SNB-19 cells at higher levels than untreated
cells after a four-hour treatment. Since the AIMs are known to
autofluoresce, confocal microscopy was performed to determine if they
were able to penetrate cell membranes of the SNB-19 cells. Contrary to
bioavailability calculations made with Symyx Draw v3.1, which suggested
that only the AIM-dt had acceptable properties for cell penetration, both
compounds were found to enter the cells. Perhaps more intriguing,
however, are the results from the laser scanning cytometry (iCys)
studies. SNB-19 cells were co-treated with either AIM-dimer or AIM-dt and
the nuclear stain propidium iodide. Images taken of each AIM clearly
indicated co-localization of the AIM at the nucleus, suggesting that
these AIMs are able to penetrate cell membranes and reach the nuclei and
therefore have potential to bind DNA. Further studies will be focused on
elucidating the mechanism of action of the AIMs as well as confirming
their interactions at the level of G4 telomeric DNA. Supported by NIH
Grant P20RR017670 (HDB).

