Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT3b increases transformation efficiency and accelerates
carcinogen induced transformation of human bronchial epithelial cells


Malignant tumors and cell lines are characterized by increased expression
of DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b. While evidence suggests that DNMT1, DNMT3a
and DNMT3b co-operate in methylation and gene silencing during
carcinogenesis, very little is known regarding gene targets for DNMT3a
and DNMT3b and their impact on the development of adenocarcinoma. We
developed an in vitro model using human telomerase/cyclin dependent
kinase 4-immortalized human bronchial epithelial cell lines (HBECs) to
identify key molecular changes that drive transformation and clonal
outgrowth of preneoplastic lung epithelial cells during exposure to
tobacco carcinogens. Carcinogen exposure (0.5mM MNU and 0.05M BPDE) for
12 weeks induced transformation of HBEC2 cells and transformation
efficiency was associated with DNA repair capacity. A significant
increase in DNMT1 protein was observed during carcinogen exposure while
moderate increases in DNMT3a and DNMT3b were observed in transformed
cells. Increased DNMT3a and DNMT3b levels have been reported in several
cancers. We observed 5-20 fold increased expression of DNMT3a and DNMT3b
in tumor derived lung cancer cell lines. Therefore we tested the
hypothesis that over expressing DNMT3a and DNMT3b would accelerate
transformation by targeting specific genes for methylation and promote
full malignancy in carcinogen-treated HBECs. Over expression of DNMT3a or
DNMT3b did not affect DNA repair capacity and was not sufficient to drive
spontaneous transformation as evidenced by inability to form colonies on
soft agar. Transformation efficiency was increased 2-2.5 fold in the two
HBEC2 cell lines over expressing DNMT3b after 12 weeks of carcinogen
treatment relative to treated parental HBEC2. In addition, after 8 weeks,
colony formation was evident in the DNMT3b over expressing, but not in
parental HBECs indicating that increased expression of this de novo DNMT
accelerates transformation. Over expressing DNMT3a had no effect on
carcinogen-induced transformation. Current studies are evaluating global
re-programming of the epigenome in transformed clones using the Illumina
450k promoter array and the effect of over expression of DNMT3b on stem
cell markers. This study was supported by R01 ES008801 to S.A.B. and 1F32
CA157082 to I.T.

