Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potentiating MUC1 expression in human bronchial epithelial cells
by cigarette smoke carcinogens through induction of TNF- secretion from
macrophages


Although an important role of inflammation in the development of lung
cancer has been recognized, how inflammation promotes lung epithelial
cell transformation and lung cancer development has not been well
elucidated. Cigarette smoke (CS), the major cause of lung cancers,
potently elicits chronic pulmonary inflammation. Our recent studies have
found that CS significantly induces Muc1 (MUC1 for human and Muc1 for
nonhuman species) expression in mouse bronchial epithelial cells and
macrophages, and MUC1 facilitates Benzo(a)pyrene diolepoxide
(BPDE)-induced human lung epithelial cell transformation. In this study,
we investigated the role of inflammatory cells in regulating CS
carcinogen-induced MUC1 expression in bronchial epithelial cells. BPDE
and N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU), an active CS carcinogen and a mimic,
strongly induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-) secretion from human
macrophages. The TNF- induction was effectively blocked when ERK, JNK,
and NF-B were blocked, suggesting these pathways are involved in the
induction of TNF- from macrophages by BPDE and MNU. Interestingly,
knockdown of MUC1 in macrophages suppressed BPDE- or MNU-induced TNF-
secretion, suggesting MUC1 plays a role in modulating carcinogen-induced
and macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses. Conditioned media from
BPDE- or MNU-treated macrophages potently induced MUC1 expression in
human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs), which was inhibited by a TNF-
neutralizing antibody, suggesting that TNF- derived from macrophages
contributes to CS carcinogen-induced MUC1 expression in HBECs. Thus, our
results establish a dual role of MUC1 in CS-induced and
inflammation-associated lung cancer development: to facilitate TNF-
secretion from macrophages and to potentiate transformation of HBECs.
Note: This work is supported by NIH/NIEHS grant 1R01ES017328.

