Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent curcumin analogues inhibit pancreatic cancer cell growth
and angiogenesis


Background: Curcumin, a component of turmeric, has demonstrated
anti-cancer properties mediated through inhibition of NF-B in preclinical
models. In clinical trials, curcumin failed to demonstrate activity
against pancreatic cancer. The pharmacologic properties, low absorption,
and low potency of curcumin may account for this discrepancy between
preclinical and clinical results. Using the curcumin molecular model, our
group synthesized over 100 analogs. Of these analogs, EF31 and UBS109
demonstrated higher potency in squamous cell cancer xenograft models as
well as inhibition of NF-B signaling pathways. Based on this preclinical
data, we hypothesized that these analogs EF-31 and UBS-109 would be more
effective in inhibiting growth of pancreatic cell lines than curcumin.
Methods: MiaPaCa-2 and PANC-1 cell lines were used in the experiments.
Cells were cultured and then treated with nothing (control), curcumin,
UBS-109, EF-31, 5FU, or combination. Cell proliferation was evaluated
using XTT assay. Western blot was used to evaluate effects on HSP90,
HIF-1, and VEGF levels. Angiogenic effects were measured by tube
formation and chicken egg chorioallantoic membrane (Egg CAM) assays.
Results: UBS-109 and EF-31 demonstrated significantly improved inhibition
of cell proliferation as compared to curcumin. UBS-109 and EF-31
potentiated the growth inhibitory effects of 5FU. UBS-109 and EF-31
resulted in significant inhibition of expression of protein and mRNA for
HSP90 and HIF-1 as compared to curcumin. In turn, UBS-109 and EF-31
significantly inhibited VEGF protein and mRNA expression resulting in
inhibition of HUVEC tube formation in vitro and also inhibited
angiogenesis in vivo using the Egg CAM assay. Conclusion: UBS-109 and
EF-31 are more potent analogs of curcumin. Preliminary data demonstrate
potentiation of chemotherapy effects as well as antiangiogenic effects.
Evaluating UBS-109 and EF-31 in patients with pancreatic cancer is a
rational approach to target HSP90 and HIF-1 in this disease.

