Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo drug sensitivity testing of CTCs isolated using the FMSA
device


BACKGROUND: Cells disseminated from primary epithelial tumors into
peripheral blood, called circulating tumor cells (CTCs), can be monitored
to assess metastases and to provide a surrogate marker of treatment
response; indeed, the enumeration of fixed CTCs with the Johnson and
Johnson Veridex CellSearch System is FDA-approved for assessment of
patient prognosis in metastatic breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer.
The opportunity to isolate viable CTCs using the Flexible Micro Spring
Array (FMSA) device a novel microfluidic device that enriches CTCs by two
physical parameters: size and flexibility offers the possibility of
testing cancer treatments in real time and rapidly providing information
back to clinicians regarding the best course of treatment. OBJECTIVES: In
this study, we evaluated the possibility of isolating viable CTCs from
human blood using the FMSA device, growing these cells in a mouse
xenograft model, and determining successful treatments for metastatic
disease. METHODS: GFP-labeled HCT-116 cells were spiked into samples of
blood from healthy donors to mimic the blood of patients with metastatic
disease. This spiked blood was filtered using the FMSA device, and the
recovered cells were implanted into the flanks of immunodeficient mice
for study. A series of in vivo experiments were carried out to
investigate the effect of chemotherapy on the resulting tumors. These
tumors were molecularly characterized, compared to tumors derived from
non-filtered cells, and analyzed for potential differences resulting from
FMSA enrichment. Studies are ongoing to further investigate the use of
this model and approach to culture CTCs from patients. RESULTS &
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer cells isolated from blood using the FMSA can
proliferate when implanted subcutaneously into the flanks of
immunodeficient mice developing into tumors within two weeks. Although
they grow at rates that depend on the number of cancer cells found in
each mL of blood, these tumors provide a means for testing the effects of
chemotherapy on CTCs in vivo. Using this model, treatments targeted
towards CTCs could be assessed and provide real-time information to
clinicians regarding treatment interventions for patients with metastatic
cancer and detectable CTCs. It may also be possible to use this model as
the primary mode for CTC culture as the in vivo environment may provide
soluble factors, cell-to-cell interactions, and physical parameters that
are not easily mimicked by in vitro culture. The approach has potential
to help with efforts to develop personalized therapy options for patients
with advanced cancer.

