Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cooperative allosteric inhibitors of thymidylate synthase as
novel antineoplastic agents


Thymidylate synthase (TS) inhibitors are a class of antineoplastic agents
widely used for the treatment of gastrointestinal, breast, ovarian and
other cancers. TS catalyzes reductive methylation of dUMP to dTMP and
serves as the sole de novo source of thymidylate inside the cell. While
TS is essential for DNA biosynthesis and normal cell proliferation, TS
overexpression has been associated with resistant tumor phenotype and
poor prognosis. Although TS inhibitor 5-flourouracil (5-FU) continues to
be one of the most frequently used chemo-therapeutic agents, 5-FU and its
metabolites can cause significant liver, cardiac and bone marrow toxicity
and are associated with development of drug resistance. In this study, we
developed a new strategy that targets TS subunit cooperativity by
freezing isoform interconversions and structural dynamics of the enzyme.
In TS catalytic mechanism, conserted motion of amino acid residues
181-197 brings the catalytic Cys195 in and out of the active site. These
small scale motions that translate across the dimer interface upon
substrate binding and product release are integral to TS enzymatic
function and can be taken advantage of in structure-based design of its
inhibitors. For this purpose, we selected TS crystal structure with high
asymmetry between the subunits (PDBID:1HVY) and used it as a template for
molecular docking. The structure was prepared by removing heteroatoms and
liganded molecules, followed by energy minimization in UCSF Chimera
(1.5.2) and testing resulting geometries in Coot (0.6.2). We identified 5
potential docking sites and selected the site at the dimer interface
specific to inactive conformation of TS. National Cancer Institute (NCI)
small molecule library of 139,735 compounds was extracted from ZINC and
pruned for redundant structures and molecules with molecular weight less
than 200 Da. Resulting compound library was docked (DOCK6.4) into the
selected site in 1000 orientations with flexible bond parameters enabled.
The top 1000 hits were re-scored using AMBER and visualized in PyMOL to
check for consistency and geometric fit. 837 out of 1000 molecules were
further selected and re-ranked based on predicted physicochemical
characteristics (cLogP, pKa, solubility, etc.). The twenty-seven highest
ranked compounds were requested from the NCI and tested for their effects
on viability in HeLa, K562 and A549 human cancer cell lines. Five out of
27 compounds reduced viability by more than 50% at a concentration of
10uM; one of the compounds was effective below 1uM. In conclusion, by
using this new approach that targets TS subunit cooperativity, we
identified small molecules with potential anti-cancer activity.

