Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of reactive oxygen species in
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)-induced cell growth inhibition and
apoptosis in oral cancer cells


(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the most abundant polyphenol in
green tea (Camellia sinensis L.). Recently, it has been reported to have
cancer chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive effects. However, the
mechanisms are incompletely understood. We found that EGCG induced both
extracellular and intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in SCC-25
and SCC-9 human oral squamous carcinoma cells. Extracellular ROS was
produced rapidly in the DMEM/F12 (1:1) cell culture medium, but was also
quenched very rapidly (t1/2 = 1.7 h). By contrast, the level of
intracellular ROS increased more slowly and was increasing even after
EGCG could no longer be detected in either the cytosol or the cell
culture medium. We observed that EGCG treatment decreased the
mitochondrial membrane potential suggesting that EGCG induced dysfunction
of electron transport chain in the mitochondria of treated cells. This
may explain the continuous ROS production in the cells even after EGCG
levels have dropped to below the limit of detection. EGCG treatment for
72 hr reduced cell viability significantly (IC50=127 M in SCC-25 cells
and IC50=83 M in SCC-9 cells). Effects on cell viability were modulated
by inclusion of N-acetylcysteine, a thiol-antioxidant, indicating a role
for EGCG-induced ROS in the reduction of cell viability. EGCG treatment
also arrested cell cycle progression in the G2/M phase of cell cycle, and
induced apoptosis (increased TUNEL positivity and annexin V staining).
Based on the present studies, it appears that EGCG-induced oxidative
stress and mitochondrial dysfunction play a role in its anti-oral cancer
effects in cell culture. Ongoing studies in our laboratory are focused on
the mechanism by which EGCG induces mitochondrial dysfunction, and the
relevance of this mechanism to oral cancer prevention in vivo.

