Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The EVI1 human protein regulates its own transcription. Role of
the different isoforms


The EVI1 transcription factor has an essential role in development and
leukemogenesis. High expression of EVI1 is a negative prognostic
indicator of survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients,
irrespective of the presence of 3q26 rearrangements; however, the only
known mechanisms that lead to EVI1 overexpression are 3q aberrations, and
MLL oncoproteins, which activate the transcription of EVI1 in
hematopoietic stem cells. Our aim was to study mechanisms of EVI1
expression at transcriptional level, and to determine the role of the
different isoforms of this protein in leukemogenesis. Bioinformatic
analysis of the promoter of the EVI1 gene identified 8 EVI1-potential
binding sites. ChIP assay confirmed that EVI1 directly binds to two of
these sites, suggesting that EVI1 could act as a regulator of its own
expression. Luciferase assays showed that the EVI1-full length (145KDa)
protein binds to the EVI1 promoter as a transcriptional activator. The
EVI1 human locus codes for at least 4 different proteins: EVI1-145KDa;
MDS1EVI1, with an additional PR domain; delta324, that lacks the zinc
fingers 6 and 7; and RP-9 that lacks 9 amino-acids from the repressor
domain. The best studied is the EVI1-145KDa protein; however, the
functional significance of the other isoforms is unclear. This prompted
us to determine whether the other isoforms had the same ability than
EVI1-145KDa. We observed that the RP-9, delta324 and MDS1EVI1 isoforms
repressed the transcription of EVI1 by binding to a more distal promoter
region. To confirm these results we transfected HEK293T with different
expression vectors. EVI1-145KDa overexpression increased the EVI1-1A, -1B
and -1D transcripts. However, RP-9 decreased M/E, EVI1-1A, -1B and -1D,
and delta324 decreased EVI1-1D. These results support the data obtained
with the luciferase experiments; however, we found no differences at
protein level. In addition, we analyzed at mRNA and protein level 16 cell
lines and 18 samples of patients with AML. We found a positive
correlation between the expression of EVI1-145KDa and MDS1EVI1 at mRNA
and protein level. However, some of the patients with the same protein
levels expressed different delta324 transcript levels, suggesting either
a regulation of the protein expression at post-transcriptional level or
protein stability. Cycloheximide experiments demonstrated that the
delta324 isoform is more stable than the MDS1EVI1 and EVI1-145KDa
proteins. Preliminary results show that knockdown of EVI1 caused a
decrease in proliferation with an increase in apoptosis. Further
experiments are in progress to determine the role of each isoform. In
conclusion, our results suggest that the EVI1 isoforms oppositely
regulate the expression of the EVI1 human gene by specific binding to the
promoter motifs. This study opens new directions to further understand
the mechanisms of EVI1 overexpressing leukemias.

