Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stem cell marker nestin inhibits growth and invasion of
malignant melanoma


BACKGROUND: Nestin, a class VI intermediate filament protein, was first
described as a neural stem cell/progenitor cell marker. Nestin was
detected in various neoplasms, and its expression level has relevance to
the poor prognosis in some tumors, including malignant melanomas.
Recently, nestin was reported as one of the cancer stem cell markers in
melanomas. Furthermore, nestin is expressed in circulating tumor cells of
melanoma patients, and its expression was found to be correlated with the
prognosis. These reports indicate that nestin plays important roles in
melanomas, and has the possibility of becoming a therapeutic target in
melanomas. In the present study, we used a silencing strategy of nestin
to clarify the effectiveness of nestin-targeting therapy in malignant
melanomas. METHODS: We constructed a plasmid vector of short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) tageting nestin and scramble vector as a negative control. Human
malignant melanoma cells, A375 cells, were stably transfected with these
vectors. Using nestin-shRNA-transfected cells, scramble
vector-transfected cells, and wild-type cells, we analyzed cell growth,
sphere formation, and invasion in vitro. Activation of the AKT/MAPK
pathway was analyzed using a phosphorylated protein array. To determine
the effect of nestin-knockdown in vivo, we performed tail vein injection
of transfected and wild-type A375 cells into nude mice, and analyzed the
metastatic tumor formation in 5 weeks. RESULTS: Nestin shRNA transfection
suppressed cell growth, invasion, and sphere formation of A375 cells in
vitro. In the protein array, the suppression of nestin decreased the
phosphorylation of AKT and p53. The incidence of liver metastasis in nude
mice was 100% in wild-type cell-injected mice, 75% in scramble
vector-transfected cell-injected mice, and 16.7% in
nestin-shRNA-transfected cell-injected mice. CONCLUSION: These findings
suggest that nestin regulates cell growth, stemness, invasion, and
metastasis of melanomas, in part, by alterling the phosphorylation of the
MAPK/AKT pathway. Nestin may be a candidate therapeutic target in
malignant melanomas.

