Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and validation of novel RNA cancer biomarkers by single
molecule RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (smRNA FISH)


RNA biomarkers are discovered and validated through advanced
transcriptome analysis at a fast pace. These markers that allow the
interrogation of the active genes hold promise for more precise staging,
prognosis, and treatment of cancer. Long RNA markers comprise pre-mRNAs
found in the cell nucleus, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) that may be
found in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm, as well as mature and mostly
cytoplasmic mRNAs. Importantly, comparative studies in mouse have
demonstrated that transcript levels are more strongly correlated with
clinical traits than the corresponding protein levels. Because lncRNA and
mRNA biomarkers have the potential to contribute to the development of
targeted cancer therapies, there is an obvious need for a robust and
dependable methodology to reliably detect and validate these RNA targets.
RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA FISH) provides a powerful
means to detect specific RNAs in single cells, while still maintaining
tissue morphology. Significant advances in RNA FISH technology, such as
the hybridization of multiple, fluorescently labeled 20-mer
oligonucleotides to the RNA target, allow for the detection of single
RNAs and yields information on the RNA's distinct spatial distribution
within tissues and even within cells. In this study, we investigate
emerging RNA biomarkers in prostate cancer cell lines and tissue
utilizing RNA FISH. We also examine established breast cancer biomarkers
such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2 / ERBB2), estrogen
receptor (ER / ESR1), and progesterone receptor (PR / PGR) in breast
cancer tumors and cell lines. The results and tools presented here will
contribute to advancing the current capabilities of the detection and
treatment of specific cancers, as well as in the continued discovery and
development of cancer drug candidates.

