Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting epidermal growth factor receptor positive breast cancer
using nanoparticles loaded with the anti-cancer drug aminoflavone


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related death in
American women. Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs), which lack
expression of common therapeutic targets ER and HER2, are particularly
aggressive and correlated with decreased survival. While TNBCs make up
15-20% of all breast cancer cases, they account for a disproportionately
large amount of breast cancer morbidity. Recently, our group has
developed a novel therapeutic approach utilizing nanoparticle technology
to increase targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic agents, specifically
aminoflavone (AF, NSC 686288) to a model TNBC cell line that shows
exquisite sensitivity to AF. We have found that AF, a synthetic flavonoid
compound, exerts growth inhibitory effects in two TNBC cell lines,
MDA-MB-468 and Cal51, with IC50 values in the low nanomolar range.
However, in vivo studies examining the efficacy of AF indicate
dose-limiting pulmonary toxicity, creating a need for drug delivery
systems that circumvent toxicity through specific targeting mechanisms.
This method exploits the overexpression of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) commonly associated with TNBC by utilizing a unimolecular
micelle nanoparticle conjugated with an EGFR-specific peptide (GE11)
formed by dendritic poly(amido amine) (PAMAM) polylactide (PLA)-
polyethylene glycol (PEG) amphiphilic block copolymers. The unimolecular
micelle nanoparticle was also conjugated with Cy5.5 dye to allow for
visualization and detection of the particles at the cellular level.
Uniform size distribution and spherical morphology of the particles was
confirmed using dynamic light scattering and transmission electron
microscopy. Using the EGFR-overexpressing and AF-sensitive human
MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell line, we were able to show that nanoparticles
containing the EGFR-specific peptide GE11 exhibited increased cellular
uptake, as shown using confocal microscopy for imaging and subsequent
fluorescence intensity analysis. Furthermore, flow cytometric analysis
confirmed that MDA-MB-468 cells treated with GE11-containing
nanoparticles exhibit increased fluorescence intensity as compared to
cells treated with non-targeting particles, which were not conjugated to
GE11. This data suggests that the use of GE11-conjugated unimolecular
micelles is an effective means of specifically targeted drug delivery in
an EGFR-overexpressing TNBC cell line. The preparation and development of
these nanoparticles has established a basis for further studies involving
cellular toxicity and in vivo anti-tumor action of AF loaded,
EGFR-targeted nanoparticles.

