Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mediated by cancer cell and stroma cell TGF- signaling, the
periostin / -Ig-H3 expression ratio is altered during breast cancer
progression


Involved in the maintenance of normal breast tissue, the extracellular
matrix (ECM) also supports the progression of several human cancers. In
particular, both periostin and TGF--induced (-Ig-H3) whose expression is
regulated by transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling, are
differentially expressed in many human cancers. While a link between
increased periostin expression and poor breast cancer outcomes has been
shown, our recent data suggest that overall periostin expression is
variable and is poorly correlated with human breast cancer progression.
Therefore, in this study we investigated the ratio between periostin and
-Ig-H3 expression and the relationship between TGF- signaling and
expression of these ECM proteins by cancer cells and stromal cells during
human breast cancer progression. Expressions of periostin and -Ig-H3 were
determined in biopsy specimens collected from 61 breast cancer patients
by immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinico-pathologic features.
Additionally, periostin, -Ig-H3, and TGF- expression in multiple stroma
and tumor cells were evaluated in vitro using western-blots and ELISAs.
Increases in the periostin / -Ig-H3 ratio correlated with increased the
AJCC stage and progesterone positive status of the breast cancer
specimens tested (pInvolved in the maintenance of normal breast tissue,
the extracellular matrix (ECM) also supports the progression of several
human cancers. In particular, both periostin and TGF--induced (-Ig-H3)
whose expression is regulated by transforming growth factor- (TGF-)
signaling, are differentially expressed in many human cancers. While a
link between increased periostin expression and poor breast cancer
outcomes has been shown, our recent data suggest that overall periostin
expression is variable and is poorly correlated with human breast cancer
progression. Therefore, in this study we investigated the ratio between
periostin and -Ig-H3 expression and the relationship between TGF-
signaling and expression of these ECM proteins by cancer cells and
stromal cells during human breast cancer progression. Expressions of
periostin and -Ig-H3 were determined in biopsy specimens collected from
61 breast cancer patients by immunohistochemistry and correlated with
clinico-pathologic features. Additionally, periostin, -Ig-H3, and TGF-
expression in multiple stroma and tumor cells were evaluated in vitro
using western-blots and ELISAs. Increases in the periostin / -Ig-H3 ratio
correlated with increased the AJCC stage and progesterone positive status
of the breast cancer specimens tested (p<0.05). In vitro, murine L929
fibroblasts and 4T1 mammary cancer cells secreted higher periostin
concentrations compared to J774 and RAW macrophages (pInvolved in the
maintenance of normal breast tissue, the extracellular matrix (ECM) also
supports the progression of several human cancers. In particular, both
periostin and TGF--induced (-Ig-H3) whose expression is regulated by
transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling, are differentially
expressed in many human cancers. While a link between increased periostin
expression and poor breast cancer outcomes has been shown, our recent
data suggest that overall periostin expression is variable and is poorly
correlated with human breast cancer progression. Therefore, in this study
we investigated the ratio between periostin and -Ig-H3 expression and the
relationship between TGF- signaling and expression of these ECM proteins
by cancer cells and stromal cells during human breast cancer progression.
Expressions of periostin and -Ig-H3 were determined in biopsy specimens
collected from 61 breast cancer patients by immunohistochemistry and
correlated with clinico-pathologic features. Additionally, periostin,
-Ig-H3, and TGF- expression in multiple stroma and tumor cells were
evaluated in vitro using western-blots and ELISAs. Increases in the
periostin / -Ig-H3 ratio correlated with increased the AJCC stage and
progesterone positive status of the breast cancer specimens tested
(p<0.05). In vitro, murine L929 fibroblasts and 4T1 mammary cancer cells
secreted higher periostin concentrations compared to J774 and RAW
macrophages (p<0.05). Furthermore, the periostin / -Ig-H3 protein
expression ratio of 4T1 cells was higher than those of J774 and RAW
cells. Following treatment with TGF- that activated the SMAD pathway,
L929 and 4T1 cells expressed higher periostin concentrations (pInvolved
in the maintenance of normal breast tissue, the extracellular matrix
(ECM) also supports the progression of several human cancers. In
particular, both periostin and TGF--induced (-Ig-H3) whose expression is
regulated by transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling, are
differentially expressed in many human cancers. While a link between
increased periostin expression and poor breast cancer outcomes has been
shown, our recent data suggest that overall periostin expression is
variable and is poorly correlated with human breast cancer progression.
Therefore, in this study we investigated the ratio between periostin and
-Ig-H3 expression and the relationship between TGF- signaling and
expression of these ECM proteins by cancer cells and stromal cells during
human breast cancer progression. Expressions of periostin and -Ig-H3 were
determined in biopsy specimens collected from 61 breast cancer patients
by immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinico-pathologic features.
Additionally, periostin, -Ig-H3, and TGF- expression in multiple stroma
and tumor cells were evaluated in vitro using western-blots and ELISAs.
Increases in the periostin / -Ig-H3 ratio correlated with increased the
AJCC stage and progesterone positive status of the breast cancer
specimens tested (p<0.05). In vitro, murine L929 fibroblasts and 4T1
mammary cancer cells secreted higher periostin concentrations compared to
J774 and RAW macrophages (p<0.05). Furthermore, the periostin / -Ig-H3
protein expression ratio of 4T1 cells was higher than those of J774 and
RAW cells. Following treatment with TGF- that activated the SMAD pathway,
L929 and 4T1 cells expressed higher periostin concentrations (p<0.05). In
contrast, the high -Ig-H3 secretion by L929 fibroblasts and J774
macrophages remained unchanged following TGF treatment (n.s.). These
observations support a role for TGF- and periostin signaling loops
between stroma and cancer cells in the microenvironment and may indicate
a role of the periostin / -Ig-H3 ratio as a predictor of breast cancer
aggressiveness.[This works was supported by grants from the Department of
Defense Era of Hope research program (BC044778) and the National Science
Foundation EFRI program (CBE0736007)]

