Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Legumain in colorectal cancer: Unorthodox localization and
trafficking


The cysteine proteinase legumain is unique in cleaving substrates
N-terminally of asparagine, and recent observations also revealed
carboxypeptidase activity. This specificity combined with its
up-regulation in a number of solid tumors prompts to take advantage of
legumain for cancer therapy and as a prognostic biomarker. Traditionally
legumain was thought to reside within the endo-lysosomes, but the
proteinase has also been reported expressed elsewhere in the cell, and we
recently described nuclear localization of proteolytically active
legumain in colorectal cancer cells. Presently, trafficking of legumain
in the cell remains enigmatic, particularly when not routed to the
endo-lysosomes.Our recent analysis of legumain expression in tissue from
primary colorectal cancer (n=277) revealed that the subcellular
localization pattern in tumor cells was diversified between the cases.
Some had mostly dispersed and others more granulated cytoplasmic
expression, while nuclear localization could be observed in about one
third of the patients. We have thus established the association of
legumain expression with clinicopathological parameters and outcome, and
found that high levels of total or nuclear legumain in colon cancer cells
were significantly negative for overall survival. Although an overall
lower expression, nuclear localized legumain was also observed in normal
tissue while in cytoplasm it was found polarized primarily to the apical
side of the epithelial layer. We have previously observed legumain in the
extracellular media of cancer cells and are in the process of analyzing
wether it can also be found in exosomes. The unexpected observations in
cellular localization are presumably due to altered trafficking. We have
therefore analyzed legumain transport in colorectal cancer cells treated
with tunicamycin to block N-glycosylation of de novo synthesized
legumain, which had a striking effect on the trafficking and activation
of the proteinase. Regarding functionality, we hypothesize that nuclear
legumain may be acting as a transcription factor and have made fusion
constructs of legumain and HaloTag to identify potential genomic targets.
The fusion protein has so far been verified to be highly expressed in the
nuclei and will be used for chromatin capture.While the unique features
of legumain make it an attractive target to exploit for therapy and
diagnosis of cancer, our results reveal that location and function of
legumain in normal and cancerous tissue is not completely elucidated.
Such factors may be of outmost importance in attempts to utilize the
protease activity for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes and may also
represent novel cancer treatment opportunities.

