Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing reveals the landscape of gene mutations and
evolution in low-grade glioma


Low grade gliomas (LGGs) account for approximately half of all gliomas.
Although LGGs typically show slower tumor progression and generally
better clinical outcomes than high-grade gliomas, their clinical course
is invariably indolent and most patients ultimately succumb to death. In
contrast to high-grade tumors, our knowledge about the genetic lesions
and clonal evolution in LGG is still incomplete. So, to obtain a complete
registry of gene mutations involved in LGG pathogenesis and their role in
clonal evolution, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) of paired
tumor/normal DNA from 54 cases with LGG. Clonal evolution in LGG was
investigated using paired primary/relapsed tumor specimens from 9 cases
as well as multiple tumor specimens (median 5) from 4cases.Major
mutational targets detected in WES included not only previously known
mutational genes, including IDH1/2, TP53, ATRX, CIC, FUBP1 and NOTCH1, as
well as multiple components of the PI3K pathway and the SWI/SNF complex.
Multi-sampling analysis revealed regional and special heterogeneity of
LGG. According to the observed variant allele frequencies (VAFs),
mutations of IDH1/2 and 1p19q co-deletion were thought to exist in the
major clone, representing truncal mutations in most cases., In contrast,
mutations in TP53, ATRX, CIC and FUBP1 were more often identified in one
or more phylogenic branches in different subclones and involved in
parallel evolution, where different mutations of the same genes were
found at different time points in different locations.We further
performed deep-sequencing of common mutational targets identified by WES
and SNP array analysis among a large cohort of 327 LGG cases. As
previously reported, mutations in IDH1/2 were found in 78.6%. 1p19q
co-deletion (43.1%), and TP53 mutations (34.6%) with or without ATRX
mutations were mutually exclusive with common IDH mutations. VAFs of
coexisting IDH1/2 and 1p19q co-deletion were approximately the same,
whereas mutations in other genes tended to show lower VAFs than those of
IDH1/2.Combined, our findings revealed two major, mutually exclusive
patterns in clonal evolution in LGG; in some cases IDH1/2 mutations and
1p19q co-deletions were trunchal events, followed by CIC, FUBP1, and
other mutations in subsequent phylogenic branches. In other cases,
predated by the founder IDH1/2 mutations, mutations in TP53 and ATRX
seemed to predominate tumor populations after.

