Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A unique cross-talk between HER2 and sonic hedgehog signaling
promotes anoikis resistance in breast cancer cells


Metastatic cancer cells possess a unique capacity to survive without
appropriate signaling from the extracellular matrix (ECM). The epithelial
cells surrounded by proper ECM within tissues are designed to grow and
differentiate whereas epithelial cells lacking suitable EMC are destined
to anoikis, a form of apoptosis. The metastatic cancer cells resist
anoikis to survive under the absence of ECM. Current study identifies a
novel interplay between HER2 and sonic hedgehog signaling in promoting
anoikis resistance. MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited an up-regulation of HER2
expression in cells cultured under anchorage- independent conditions as
compared to adherent cells. Similar phenomenon was also observed in 4T-1
cells. The survival of MDA-MB-231 cells with stable HER2 overexpression
(HH) was significantly enhanced when cultured under anchorage-independent
conditions. However, the enhanced survival of MDA-MB-231 (HH) was reduced
when HER2 was silenced using shRNA. These observations indicate the
obligatory role of HER2 in anoikis resistance. Furthermore cells grown
under anchorage-independent conditions induced the expression of sonic
hedgehog (SHH). Increase in SHH was accompanied with enhanced expressions
of PTCH2 and GLI2, the receptor and subsequent transcription factors of
the sonic hedgehog signaling. Our results further showed that the
induction of SHH was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231 (HH) cells
relative to parent cells when cultured under anchorage-independent
conditions, suggesting a correlation between HER2 and SHH signaling.
Treatment of MDA-MB-231 and 4T-1 cells with cyclopamine (SHH signaling
inhibitor) reduced the survival of cells under anchorage-independent
conditions. Interestingly, cyclopamine treatment also inhibited the
induction of HER2 during anchorage-independent culture conditions. Taken
together, our study suggests a SHH-mediated induction of HER2 to promote
anoikis resistance in breast cancer cells. Further mechanistic and in
vivo studies are under progress. [Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038
(to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer Institute].

