Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic changes associated with resistance to sunitinib in
human clear cell renal cell carcinoma models


Background: Sunitinib is first-line therapy for patients with advanced
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Despite the clinical efficacy of
sunitinib, in the majority of patients the disease eventually develops
resistance and progresses. Epigenetic modifications of histone protein in
chromatins have been shown to play a role in the regulation of gene
transcription patterns in cells primarily by the catalytic activity of
histone methyltransferase. EZH2 has been shown to contribute to tumor
angiogenesis by inactivating anti-angiogenic factors via methylation at
their promoter region. In this study, we examined epigenetic changes that
may be associated with response and the resistant phenotype. Methods:
Human ccRCC xenograft models RP-01 (isolated from a skin metastasis in a
patient with sporadic ccRCC) and RP-02 (isolated from a skin metastasis
in a patient with hereditary ccRCC) were implanted (1mm pieces)
subcutaneously into SCID mice and were randomly assigned into two groups
(sunitinib and vehicle). Mice were treated 5 days/week with sunitinib at
40mg/kg. Tumor volumes and body weights were assessed weekly by caliper
measurements and weigh scale, respectively. Tumor tissues and blood were
collected prior treatments and when tumors became resistant to treatment.
Tissues collected were used for immunohistochemistry studies and RNA
analysis. Results: Our results showed that RP-01 and RP-02 tumors,
although initially responsive to treatment at 40 mg/kg, eventually became
resistant to treatment. Immunohistochemistry analysis of RP-01 tumor
samples indicated tumors to be hypo-vasculature when responding to
sunitinib, but then became hyper-vascularized at point of resistance by
CD31 staining. Analysis also revealed an associated increase in the
expression of the methyltransferase EZH2 when tumors became resistant to
sunitinib. However, there was no change in the expression levels of its
EZH2 associated histone make H3K27me3. In addition, we noticed an
increase in the levels of H3k9me2 and H3k4me2 in tumors resistant to
sunitinib as compared to controls. Conclusion: Overall, our results
suggest the potential role of epigenetic changes that that may be
associated with sunitinib-induced resistance in ccRCC

