Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of Vernonia amygdalina-induced apoptosis of human
breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7) cells


Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cause of death of women between 40 and
55 years of age and is the second overall cause of death of women.
Fortunately, the mortality rate from BC has decreased in recent years due
to an increased emphasis on early detection and more effective
treatments. Despite early detection and conventional methods of
treatment, about 7% of women diagnosed with BC still die every year.
Therefore, novel therapeutic agents are needed to improve the clinical
outcome of this disease. The development of new drugs from natural
products is considered important. Previous studies from our laboratory
show that a novel natural product, extracts of Vernonia amygdalina (VA)
leaf exerts DNA-damaging anticancer activities against BC. Therefore, the
central goal of this research was to determine the therapeutic mechanisms
of VA leaf extracts in breast cancer cells. To achieve this goal, cell
viability, live and death cells were determined by the means of the MTT
assay, trypan blue test, and propidium iodine assay, respectively. Cell
apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry analysis of phosphatidylserine
externalization (Annexin V assay) and caspase 3 activity, and by DNA
laddering assay. Data obtained from the MTT assay indicated that VA
significantly reduced the viability of MCF-7 cells a dose-dependent
response. On one hand, the Trypan blue dye exclusion test demonstrated
the integrity of the membrane of untreated cells in culture. On the other
hand, the trypan blue dye exclusion test demonstrated a loss of viability
in VA-treated cells due to membrane damage. The result of the propidium
iodine demonstrated a significant (pBreast cancer (BC) is the leading
cause of death of women between 40 and 55 years of age and is the second
overall cause of death of women. Fortunately, the mortality rate from BC
has decreased in recent years due to an increased emphasis on early
detection and more effective treatments. Despite early detection and
conventional methods of treatment, about 7% of women diagnosed with BC
still die every year. Therefore, novel therapeutic agents are needed to
improve the clinical outcome of this disease. The development of new
drugs from natural products is considered important. Previous studies
from our laboratory show that a novel natural product, extracts of
Vernonia amygdalina (VA) leaf exerts DNA-damaging anticancer activities
against BC. Therefore, the central goal of this research was to determine
the therapeutic mechanisms of VA leaf extracts in breast cancer cells. To
achieve this goal, cell viability, live and death cells were determined
by the means of the MTT assay, trypan blue test, and propidium iodine
assay, respectively. Cell apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry
analysis of phosphatidylserine externalization (Annexin V assay) and
caspase 3 activity, and by DNA laddering assay. Data obtained from the
MTT assay indicated that VA significantly reduced the viability of MCF-7
cells a dose-dependent response. On one hand, the Trypan blue dye
exclusion test demonstrated the integrity of the membrane of untreated
cells in culture. On the other hand, the trypan blue dye exclusion test
demonstrated a loss of viability in VA-treated cells due to membrane
damage. The result of the propidium iodine demonstrated a significant
(p<0.05) increase of necrotic cell death in VA-treated cells, indicative
of membrane rupture by VA. Flow cytometry data showed a strong
dose-response relationship between VA exposure and Annexin-V positive
MCF-7 cells. These results were confirmed by data of DNA laddering assay
showing a clear evidence of nucleosomal DNA fragmentation in VA-treated
cells. A statistically significant was recorded with regard to caspase 3
activity in MCF-7 cells. Taken together, our research demonstrated that
VA represents an apoptosis-inducing agent and its apoptotic mechanisms
involve phosphatidylserine externalization, activation of p53 tumor
suppressor gene and caspase-3, and nucleosomal DNA fragmentation.

