Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of proliferation sensitizes chronic lymphocytic leukemia
cells to apoptosis mediated by the ATR inhibitor AZD6738


ATR (Ataxia Telangiectasia and RAD3-related) is a PI3K-related kinase
involved in repair of DNA damage incurred through the genotoxic stress of
cellular replication. During cell division, ATR is recruited and
activated at sites of single strand DNA breaks, such as those that occur
at stalled replication forks, and helps initiate DNA repair. Tumor cells
may develop an enhanced dependency on ATR to maintain genomic stability
and survival, making ATR an attractive target for anticancer
therapy.AZD6738 is a first-in-class small molecule that inhibits ATR at
sub micromolar (uM) concentrations. We examined the leukemic cells from
patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) for expression of ATR
and sensitivity to this specific ATR inhibitor. For this, we examined
both resting CLL cells and CLL cells induced to undergo replication, as
assessed by flow cytometry of CLL cells stained with Carboxyfluorescein
succinimidyl ester (CFSE). We found that conditions that induced of
leukemic cell proliferation (eg: CD40 ligation in the context of
interleukin(IL)4 and IL10) also induced expression of ATR. Examination of
both resting and proliferating leukemic cells for sensitivity to AZD6738
revealed that those leukemic cells that expressed ATR were highly
sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of this ATR inhibitor in a time and
dose dependent fashion. As such, concentrations of AZD6738 as low as 1 uM
were cytotoxic for proliferating CLL cells. In contrast, the IC50 of
resting CLL cells was approximately 30 uM, indicating that resting CLL
cells are relatively insensitive to the activity of this drug. AZD6738
may therefore be particularly effective in eliminating the leukemic cells
that are being stimulated in the leukemia microenvironment found in
lymphoid tissues, which provides survival/growth signals that ordinarily
mitigate the activity of standard cytotoxic drugs.ATR inhibition also may
be particularly effective in tumors lacking ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia
Mutated). Such cells are even more dependent on the activity of ATR to
repair DNA damage that occurs during replication or genotoxic stress,
such as that incurred by cancer chemotherapy. To this end, we are
examining differential sensitivity to ATR inhibition of leukemic cells
that lack functional ATM, which is often times associated with deletions
of the long arm of chromosome 11 (Del 11q22). An ongoing phase 1 clinical
trial testing the safety of AZD6738 in patients with relapsed or
refractory CLL with Del11q also will examine the activity of this
compound for the treatment of patients with CLL.

