Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenesis is independently influenced by interstitial flow and
concentration gradients of tumor secreted morphogens


Angiogenesis facilitates growth and entry of tumors into the systemic
circulation leading to metastasis. Morphogens, such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), secreted by the tumors are believed to
guide nearby vasculature towards the tumor. The distribution of
morphogens in tissues is affected by interstitial fluid flow, which also
exerts forces in the tissue microenvironment. Numerous cells in the tumor
microenvironment can sense and respond to force, yet our understanding of
the independent effect of interstitial flow in tumor angiogenesis is
limited. This is due, in part, to inadequate experimental models that
cannot decouple spatial morphogen concentrations and interstitial flow.
Notably, control of these parameters is not possible in animal models,
and 2D cell systems lack the complexity of in vivo tissue. We addressed
these limitations by designing a microfluidic platform of
polydimethlsiloxane (PDMS) polymer consisting of three parallel
microporous tissue compartments (Angiogenesis facilitates growth and
entry of tumors into the systemic circulation leading to metastasis.
Morphogens, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), secreted
by the tumors are believed to guide nearby vasculature towards the tumor.
The distribution of morphogens in tissues is affected by interstitial
fluid flow, which also exerts forces in the tissue microenvironment.
Numerous cells in the tumor microenvironment can sense and respond to
force, yet our understanding of the independent effect of interstitial
flow in tumor angiogenesis is limited. This is due, in part, to
inadequate experimental models that cannot decouple spatial morphogen
concentrations and interstitial flow. Notably, control of these
parameters is not possible in animal models, and 2D cell systems lack the
complexity of in vivo tissue. We addressed these limitations by designing
a microfluidic platform of polydimethlsiloxane (PDMS) polymer consisting
of three parallel microporous tissue compartments (< 0.1 mm3 total
volume) that are media-fed with microfluidic lines. Endothelial colony
forming cell-derived endothelial cells (ECFC-EC) and stromal fibroblasts
in extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., fibrin and collagen) seeded in
the central compartment formed interconnected microvascular networks with
hollow lumens in 7-14 days. A mathematical model of mass and momentum
transport in the microfluidic device was used to determine experimental
conditions that either minimize the concentration gradients or the
interstitial flow across the tissue chamber. The conditions were
validated experimentally using various molecular size fluorescent
dextrans. In the absence of a concentration gradient, microvessels
demonstrated a striking bias for angiogenesis against the direction of
the interstitial flow. Furthermore, the extent of migration against the
flow increased with increasing interstitial flow. In separate experiments
with minimal/no interstitial flow, angiogenisis is biased towards a
positive concentration gradient of the morphogens such as VEGF. In
conclusion, we have developed a novel microfluidic platform that can
decouple the effects of concentration gradients and interstitial flow.
Using this platform we show that angiogenesis is independently influenced
by interstitial flow and concentration gradients of tumor secreted
morphogens.

