Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: siRNA-mediated HuR silencing sensitizes triple-negative breast
cancer cells to radiation therapy


HuR is a ubiquitously expressed member of the Elav/Hu family of
RNA-binding proteins which can associate with mRNAs containing AU-rich
elements in their 3-untranslated regions. It is predominantly a nuclear
protein that translocates to the cytoplasm in response to stress signals
and stabilizes mRNAs encoding proteins implicated in cell proliferation,
angiogenesis, apoptosis, and stress response. Studies examining HuR
expression in human cancers indicated that elevated cytoplasmic HuR
expression is associated with a high histologic grade, large tumor size,
and poor survival of patients with cancer, leading to the hypothesis that
cytoplasmic HuR abundance could be a prognostic marker in cancer
patients. It has been reported that altering the subcellular distribution
of HuR leads to a decrease in mRNA stability and increases tamoxifen
responsiveness in breast cancer cells. As the role of HuR in radiation
resistance has not been previously evaluated, we designed this study to
determine the role of HuR in mediating radiation response of human breast
cancer cells. Subcellular fractionation studies in a panel of breast
cancer cells [triple negative (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and Hs578t),
luminal (MCF-7), and normal mammary epithelial (MCF-10a)] demonstrated
elevated cytoplasmic levels of HuR in the more aggressive triple negative
breast cancer cells (TNBC) compared to the normal mammary and the luminal
cells. TNBCs also had high expression of HuR mRNA and total protein as
observed by quantitative (Q) RT-PCR and western blot analysis. To test if
high expression of HuR contributed to the radiation resistance of TNBCs,
HuR was silenced and cells were exposed to various doses of radiation.
Clonogenic assays indicated that silencing HuR enhanced tumor cell
radiosensitivity in MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and Hs578t cells, with the
survival fraction at 2Gy declining from 59%, 49%, 65% in control
(scrambled siRNA-transfected cells) to 40%, 33%, 46% in HuR-silenced
cells, respectively. MCF-7 and MCF-10a cells were not radiosensitized
upon HuR silencing. Since HuR plays a central role in cancer it is
possible that multiple pathways and mechanisms are affected by HuR
knockdown and could contribute to the observed radiosensitivity.
Molecular studies suggested that HuR silencing in combination with
radiation modulated the expression of several genes involved in cell
survival, cell cycle and DNA repair in MDA-MB-231 cells. The involvement
of the DNA repair pathway following treatment with siHuR was assessed
using -H2AX foci as a marker. Our results show that a higher number of
radiation-induced -H2AX foci are present in HuR-silenced MDA-MB-231 cells
compared with control cells, suggesting a suppression of the
double-strand DNA repair pathway. The persistence of -H2AX foci was not
seen in the MCF-7 cells. We propose that HuR knockdown enhances the
radioresponse of TNBC cells by inhibiting the repair of radiation-induced
double-strand DNA breaks.

