Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder mutations in population
isolates from Colombia


Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy in women. Germline
mutations in breast cancer risk genes, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, account
for a large portion of hereditary breast cancer families. The
contribution of mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes has been
poorly investigated in minority populations, such as in Hispanics from
South America. While mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 display a heterogeneous
mutation spectrum, specific mutations often occur in population isolates.
Using the KASP genotyping technology, we screened 476 unselected
Colombian breast cancer patients for three common BRCA1 and one BRCA2
founder mutations in the Hispanic population. The BRCA2
c.2806_2809delAAAC founder mutation was identified in 3 of the 476 BC
cases (0.6%). Strikingly, 24 out of 476 cases (5.0%) harbored the BRCA1
founder mutation c.3331_3334delCAAG, which has also been reported in
Southern European populations, including Spain and Portugal. The clinical
data and family history of these patients have highlighted a distinct
geographic region from where these cases originate. This finding
potentially represents one of the most remarkable founder effects
reported in human populations. To date the arrival of the BRCA1
c.3331_3334delCAAG mutation to Colombia, we are completing haplotype
analysis of the patients and their families, along with BC cases from
Spain and Portugal that harbor the same mutation. Interestingly,
haplotype analyses of our BC cases have revealed a haplotype larger than
3.5 cM. In the future, we aim to perform haplotype analysis of family
members of the mutation carriers and BC cases from Portugal and Spain to
further study the haplotype around this BRCA1 mutation, which will allow
us to date the origin of the mutation. By understanding the prevalence of
mutations in known breast cancer risk genes in minority populations,
cancer disparities can be better addressed and breast cancer screening
can be improved. Furthermore, the ability to identify such strong founder
effects highlights an advantage of using this Colombian population
isolate in facilitating the identification of novel BC risk genes.

