Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipokines modulate human mammary stem cell self-renewal through
mTOR


Rationale: Excess visceral adiposity is associated with an increased
incidence of a variety of human ailments, including cancer. We tested the
hypothesis that adipose-derived factors drive normal mammary stem cell
self-renewal.Methods: Visceral adipose tissue explants from obese F344
rats and cultured mouse 3T3-L1 adipocytes were grown with serum-free
media for 48 hours. Primary human mammary epithelial cells, MCF10A,
SUM149 and MCF7 cells were exposed to rhleptin (500 ng/ml), or adipocyte
conditioned media and expanded in a non-adherent sphere forming assay for
10 days. Spheres were counted and size was quantified in Image J.
Adipokine concentrations were assayed with the Proteome Profiler
Adipokine Array. Other cultures were pre-treated with mTOR inhibitors
rapamycin (100 nM) or everolimus (100 nM) for 2 hours prior to exposure
to rhleptin or adipocyte conditioned media for 2 hours. S6 protein
phosphorylation was quantified from Western blots.Results: Data shown in
Table 1 suggest that conditioned media from adipose tissue and from
3T3-L1 adipocytes increase human mammary stem cell self-renewal by 103%
and 189%, respectively, whereas rhleptin increases stem cell self-renewal
by 37%. Blockade of leptin activity with neutralizing antibodies or
chimeric soluble receptors reduced the adipocyte conditioned media's
stimulation of mammary epithelial cell self-renewal by 10-15%. Media
conditioned by the mouse 3T3-L1 adipocytes or primary rat visceral
adipose explants increased pS6 protein by 170% in MCF10A cells. mTOR
inhibitors reduced rhleptin and adipocyte conditioned media stimulation
of self-renewal in MCF10A and normal human mammary stem cells by
78-85%.Conclusion: Adipocyte secreted factors and rhleptin promote
increased mammary epithelial cell self-renewal through a process
involving the activation of mTOR. Leptin contributes to a small fraction
of the activity in adipocyte conditioned media, and is sufficient but not
required for mammary stem cell self-renewal.


