Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of an HPLC-UV method for Sirolimus
(sir) quantification in human blood and application to cancer patients in
routine clinical practice


Background and objective: After oral administration, SIR (mTOR inhibitor)
is rapid absorbed with a bioavailability around 14%. SIR is distributed
mostly into red blood cells, 92% is bound to proteins and its apparent
steady state volume of distribution is higher than 650 L. The apparent
clearance has been determined to be 13 L/h. SIR undergoes extensive
hepatic and intestinal metabolism via CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, as well as
excretion by P-glycoprotein. The purpose of this study was to develop a
simple and sensitive HPLC method with UV-Visible detection for SIR blood
quantification to allow therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) in cancer
patients. A pilot phase I study in advanced cancer patients was initiated
to evaluate the effect of grapefruit juice in SIR
pharmacokinetics.Methods: After a liquid-liquid extraction with
1-chlorobutane, SIR and paclitaxel (internal standard, IS) are separated
in Ultrabase C18 column using a mobile phase consisting of a mixture of
methanol and water in a proportion 77:23 pumped at a constant flow rate
of 1 mL/min. The column was maintained at 50C and the eluent was
monitored at a wavelength of 277 nm. Validation experiments were carried
out after the guidelines for Bioanalytical Method Validation published by
the FDA and the EMA. SIR was administered once weekly as an oral solution
in three dose leves (10, 20 or 30 mg). Natural grapefruit juice (250 cc)
was administered half an hour before SIR administration, once a
week.Results: The calibration curve was linear in the range of 10-700
ng/mL. The limit of quantification was determined to be 10 ng/mL. SIR and
IS retention times were 12.2 and 3.4 min, respectively. Inter- and
intra-day coefficients of variation were less than 8%. The mean
extraction recovery from plasma was higher than 67%. In the first six
patients evaluated, SIR blood concentrations were well quantified and
showed that the analytical method was capable of measuring the blood
concentrations of SIR in advanced cancer patients undergoing SIR therapy.
In all patients, SIR concentrations were significantly increased by
grapefruit juice at all dose levels because its clearance was reduce
around 50% confirming previous results published by Cohen E et al. (Clin
Cancer Res, 2012).Conclusion: The simple, rapid and sensitive HPLC-UV
method developed and validated for the measurement of SIR in human blood
using paclitaxel as IS can be applied easily in routine clinical practice
for the TDM of SIR. Co-administration of grapefruit juice and SIR must be
evaluated in the context of Phase II and III clinical trials in order to
explore alternative and safer treatments.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

