Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stathmin is involved in the maternal embryonic leucine zipper
kinase pathway and impacts in the outcome of glioblastoma


INTRODUCTION: Maternal Embryonic Leucine Zipper Kinase (MELK) is a
serine/threonine kinase involved in several cell processes, including the
cell cycle, differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. MELK has also
shown multiple features consistent with the potential utility as an
anticancer target, including in astrocytomas. However, the detailed
downstream signaling pathway of MELK in cancer cells is still not fully
understood and the putative role of MELK in astrocytomas remains unclear.
The discovery of proteins involved in the MELK pathway might be important
to develop additional small molecular compound to improve effectiveness.
PURPOSE: This study aim to analyze proteins and/or genes involved in the
MELK pathway in the tumorigenesis of gliomas. MATERIAL AND METHODS:
Analysis of the expression profile of a panel of protein relevant to the
process of tumorigenesis that MELK is involved was performed by Proteomic
analysis by two dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry for
human glioma cell line U87MG transfected with siRNA for the MELK compared
to U87MG transfected with non-target control (NTC) cells. Analysis and
validation of gene expression was performed by Quantitative real time PCR
(qRT-PCR) using SYBR Green method in a series of 153 astrocytomas of
different malignant grade (23 AGI, 26 AGII, 18 AGIII and 86 AGIV or
glioblastoma - GBM) and 22 non neoplastic (NN) brain samples. RESULTS: We
identified Stathmin/oncoprotein 18 (STMN1) involved in the cell cycle, as
one of twelve proteins differentially expressed, with lower expression
when MELK was silenced. A significant higher expression of STMN1 in
malignant diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas when compared to
non-invasive pilocytic astrocytoma was found (pINTRODUCTION: Maternal
Embryonic Leucine Zipper Kinase (MELK) is a serine/threonine kinase
involved in several cell processes, including the cell cycle,
differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. MELK has also shown
multiple features consistent with the potential utility as an anticancer
target, including in astrocytomas. However, the detailed downstream
signaling pathway of MELK in cancer cells is still not fully understood
and the putative role of MELK in astrocytomas remains unclear. The
discovery of proteins involved in the MELK pathway might be important to
develop additional small molecular compound to improve effectiveness.
PURPOSE: This study aim to analyze proteins and/or genes involved in the
MELK pathway in the tumorigenesis of gliomas. MATERIAL AND METHODS:
Analysis of the expression profile of a panel of protein relevant to the
process of tumorigenesis that MELK is involved was performed by Proteomic
analysis by two dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry for
human glioma cell line U87MG transfected with siRNA for the MELK compared
to U87MG transfected with non-target control (NTC) cells. Analysis and
validation of gene expression was performed by Quantitative real time PCR
(qRT-PCR) using SYBR Green method in a series of 153 astrocytomas of
different malignant grade (23 AGI, 26 AGII, 18 AGIII and 86 AGIV or
glioblastoma - GBM) and 22 non neoplastic (NN) brain samples. RESULTS: We
identified Stathmin/oncoprotein 18 (STMN1) involved in the cell cycle, as
one of twelve proteins differentially expressed, with lower expression
when MELK was silenced. A significant higher expression of STMN1 in
malignant diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas when compared to
non-invasive pilocytic astrocytoma was found (p<0.0001). Strong
correlation for MELK and STMN1 associated expression was observed
(r=0.741, pINTRODUCTION: Maternal Embryonic Leucine Zipper Kinase (MELK)
is a serine/threonine kinase involved in several cell processes,
including the cell cycle, differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis.
MELK has also shown multiple features consistent with the potential
utility as an anticancer target, including in astrocytomas. However, the
detailed downstream signaling pathway of MELK in cancer cells is still
not fully understood and the putative role of MELK in astrocytomas
remains unclear. The discovery of proteins involved in the MELK pathway
might be important to develop additional small molecular compound to
improve effectiveness. PURPOSE: This study aim to analyze proteins and/or
genes involved in the MELK pathway in the tumorigenesis of gliomas.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Analysis of the expression profile of a panel of
protein relevant to the process of tumorigenesis that MELK is involved
was performed by Proteomic analysis by two dimensional electrophoresis
and mass spectrometry for human glioma cell line U87MG transfected with
siRNA for the MELK compared to U87MG transfected with non-target control
(NTC) cells. Analysis and validation of gene expression was performed by
Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using SYBR Green method in a series
of 153 astrocytomas of different malignant grade (23 AGI, 26 AGII, 18
AGIII and 86 AGIV or glioblastoma - GBM) and 22 non neoplastic (NN) brain
samples. RESULTS: We identified Stathmin/oncoprotein 18 (STMN1) involved
in the cell cycle, as one of twelve proteins differentially expressed,
with lower expression when MELK was silenced. A significant higher
expression of STMN1 in malignant diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas when
compared to non-invasive pilocytic astrocytoma was found (p<0.0001).
Strong correlation for MELK and STMN1 associated expression was observed
(r=0.741, p<0.0001) in GBM. STMN1 hyperexpression alone impacted at GBM
outcome with an overall survival of 5.4 months in contrast to 13.4 months
when both genes were hypoexpressed (log rank=0.002). CONCLUSIONS: Thus,
our results showed that STMN1 is downstream in the MELK pathway and might
play an important role in astrocytoma tumorigenesis.

