Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of miR-888 as the first miRNA cancer-testis antigen


Cancer-testis (CT) antigens are a large family of genes that are
exclusively expressed in human testes and are typically located on the X
chromosome and part of multicopy gene families. Importantly, CT antigens
are overexpressed in a variety of tumors. To date, all known CT antigens
are protein-coding genes. Here we identify miR-888 as the first miRNA
with features characteristic of a CT antigen. In a panel of 21 normal
human tissues, miR-888 expression was high in testes, but minimal or
absent in all other tissues. Analysis of cancer cell lines demonstrated
expression of miR-888 in endometrial cancer cells, but not in
choriocarcinoma, breast, ovarian or prostate cancer cells. In endometrial
patient tumor specimens, miR-888 was 8-fold overexpressed relative to
benign endometrium (p Cancer-testis (CT) antigens are a large family of
genes that are exclusively expressed in human testes and are typically
located on the X chromosome and part of multicopy gene families.
Importantly, CT antigens are overexpressed in a variety of tumors. To
date, all known CT antigens are protein-coding genes. Here we identify
miR-888 as the first miRNA with features characteristic of a CT antigen.
In a panel of 21 normal human tissues, miR-888 expression was high in
testes, but minimal or absent in all other tissues. Analysis of cancer
cell lines demonstrated expression of miR-888 in endometrial cancer
cells, but not in choriocarcinoma, breast, ovarian or prostate cancer
cells. In endometrial patient tumor specimens, miR-888 was 8-fold
overexpressed relative to benign endometrium (p < 0.01). In addition,
expression of miR-888 was highest in endometrial carcinosarcomas (fold
change = 22, p Cancer-testis (CT) antigens are a large family of genes
that are exclusively expressed in human testes and are typically located
on the X chromosome and part of multicopy gene families. Importantly, CT
antigens are overexpressed in a variety of tumors. To date, all known CT
antigens are protein-coding genes. Here we identify miR-888 as the first
miRNA with features characteristic of a CT antigen. In a panel of 21
normal human tissues, miR-888 expression was high in testes, but minimal
or absent in all other tissues. Analysis of cancer cell lines
demonstrated expression of miR-888 in endometrial cancer cells, but not
in choriocarcinoma, breast, ovarian or prostate cancer cells. In
endometrial patient tumor specimens, miR-888 was 8-fold overexpressed
relative to benign endometrium (p < 0.01). In addition, expression of
miR-888 was highest in endometrial carcinosarcomas (fold change = 22, p <
0.01), a rare and aggressive type of endometrial tumor. Analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas database revealed that miR-888 expression is
significantly associated with high stage and grade endometrial tumors,
which has also been observed for many other CT antigens. Furthermore, the
miR-888 gene is part of a multicopy gene family on the X chromosome and
evolved recently in primates through gene duplication. Therefore, we
classify miR-888 as the first miRNA CT antigen and hypothesize that other
miRNAs located on the X chromosome may also function as CT antigens.
These findings have the potential to advance understanding of
cancer-testis genes, their evolution and what role they play in testis
and cancer biology.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

