Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of tumor microenvironment on tumor growth, metastasis and
response to combination therapy via microenvironment-responsive dual
drug-loaded nanoparticles and radiation


Several studies including our own have made it increasingly clear that
genetic alterations of tumor cells alone are not the sole driving force
behind tumor development but that tumor initiation, growth, progression
and response to combinatorial treatments are rather intimately controlled
by the microenvironment. Improved knowledge of cancer biology and
investigation of the complex functional interrelation between the
cellular and noncellular compartments of the tumor microenvironment have
provided an ideal platform for the evolution of novel cancer
nanotherapies. In the present study we have developed an in-vitro method
to co-culture color coded triple negative breast carcinoma cells and cell
types that exist in the tumor/tumor microenvironment in a hanging drop of
medium to the size of an avascular microtissue (800 m). Changes in the
fluorescence intensity of different cell types and spheroid/microtissue
sizing is being utilized as a method for high throughput therapeutic
evaluation of the combination therapy using nanoparticles. When implanted
orthotopically and in the dorsal skin fold window chambers in nude mice
they facilitate the imaging of neovascularization and understanding
response to therapy. We have also observed that radiation (3Gy) can
significantly enhances expression of Galectin-1 in tumor vasculature
associated endothelial cells which can serve as a specific ligand for the
33 amino acid antiangiogenic, anginex peptide. Thus Galectin-1 is a
promising candidate for actively targeting irradiated tumors with anginex
conjugated nanoparticles. The objective of this study is to establish a
novel strategy for radiation therapy-amplified delivery of dual drugs for
targeting the microenvironment-responsive endothelial component of the
tumor vasculature. Use of radiation-guided anginex bound nanoparticles
for delivery and controlled release of dual drugs (Arsenic-cisplatin) are
expected to simulate metronomic therapy and preferentially target the
tumor endothelial cells at the irradiated tumor site via tumor stroma
enriched Galectin-1 protein. Our molecular studies indicate differential
vulnerability for arsenic and cisplatin in cell types constituting the
tumor/tumor microenvironment. This is the first study to understand a
novel combinatorial nanotherapeutic system in an in-vitro/ in-vivo breast
tumor model which incorporates characteristics of the tumor
microenvironment and is thus expected to better predict treatment
response in patients.Supported by NCI grant CA173609 and (CNPP)
U01CA151461

