Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of romidepsin and bendamustin is synergistically
cytotoxic and reverses the malignant phenotype in preclinical models of
T-cell lymphoma


Background: Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) represent approximately
10-15% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) in the Western world, and their
incidence is increasing. Cases of PTCL tend to have an aggressive
clinical course, with poor patient responses to conventional chemotherapy
and poor long-term survival. So far, treatment approaches have mirrored
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) and CHOP-like chemotherapy are
commonly used despite suboptimal results. Histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACs) have been approved for the treatment of relapsed or refractory
PTCLs given their single-agent activity in these diseases. To continue to
improve responses in patients with PTCL, it is important to assess the
utility of romidepsin as frontline therapy and as a component of
combination therapies.Aim: Interactions between romidepsin (R) and
bendamustine (B), a potent cytotoxic alkylating drug active against a
panel of other lymphoproliferative disorders, was investigated in in
preclinical models of T-cell Lymphoma.Experimental Design: Assays for
cytotoxicity on 5 different T-cell lymphoma and leukemia cell lines
(Jurkat, HD-MAR2, Karpas, Sup-T1, HH), mathematical analysis for
synergism (Chou-Talalay equation), flow cytometry, and the Itk-Syk
transgenic mouse model (K. Pechloff, 2010) were used to explore the in
vitro and in vivo activities of R and B alone and in combination in
T-cell lymphoid malignancies.Results: In vitro, romidepsin and
bendamustine exhibited concentration- and time-dependent cytotoxicity
against all the 5 different T-cell lymphoma and leukemia cell lines.
Romidepsin showed synergism when combined with bendamustine in all cell
lines studied. Romidepsin also induced potent apoptosis and caspase
activation when combined with bendamustine across the panel. The impact
of schedule on the activity of the combination was determined by
assessing cell viability after treatment with B and R as follows: (1)
simultaneous exposure; (2) B pretreatment followed by exposure to R; and
(3) R pretreatment followed by exposure to B. In a new mouse model of
PTCL in which a status of permanent T cell activation mediated by the
Itk-Syk transcript induces highly malignant PTCLs with 100% penetrance
that resemble the human disease, the combination of romidepsin and
bendamustine enhanced efficacy compared with either drug
alone.Conclusions: Collectively, these data strongly support the
potential therapeutic role of romidepsin in combination with bendamustine
for PTCLs and might constitute the basis for future phase I-II clinical
trials.

