Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotopic IL-15 as a novel therapeutic for prostate cancer


Introduction & Objectives:Prostate cancer progression can arise by
tolerance to, and evasion of tumor cells from immune effector cells such
as CD8 T cells and NK cells due to the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment. Immunotherapeutic drugs can eliminate tumors by
breaking this tolerance, and such drugs that can be localized to the
prostate will have greater efficacy and less systemic toxicity than drugs
administered systemically. It has also been shown that a localized
stimulation of the immune system can boost immunity all over the body to
clear distant metastases. However, in the highly immunosuppressive
prostate cancer microenvironment, most activated effector immune cells
are rendered anergic or even regulatory. We have previously shown that
IL-15, unlike other therapeutic cytokines such as IL-2 and IL-12, can
stimulate expansion and activity of CD8 and NK cells when they are
exposed to prostate cancer cells. Therefore, we decided to create a
localizable form of this cytokine to study its activity on NK and CD8 T
cells in the presence and absence of prostate cancer cells.Material &
Methods:The cytokine IL-15 was produced in a modified form to enable its
conjugation to a cytotopic tail molecule. The tail consists of three
regions - a thiol reactive region which interacts with free cysteines on
the protein of interest, a cationic region, which binds to the negatively
charged cell membrane surface, and a hydrophobic region that enters the
cell membrane. The cytotopic IL-15 can therefore adhere to cell membranes
and can thus localize to any lesion where it is potentially injected.The
tailed IL-15 was then compared to non-tailed IL-15 and other cytokines in
assays to measure T cell proliferation, and NK and CD8 T cell expansion
in the presence and absence of prostate cancer cells.Results:Compared to
non-tailed forms of IL-15, the tailed IL-15 induced greater proliferation
of a murine T cell line, CTLL-2 and PBMCs . Proliferation levels were up
to 20 times greater with the tailed IL-15. In initial experiments,
activity of the tailed IL-15 was also greater or equivalent to non tailed
IL-15 in its ability to expand NK cells in the presence of a prostate
cancer cell line (TRAMP-C1).Conclusion:We have identified a cytokine,
IL-15, that can break tolerance to immunity in the prostate cancer
microenvironment. A tailed form of this molecule, has equivalent or
greater activity in expanding immune effector cells in the presence or
absence of prostate cancer cells and its potential for regioselective
action makes it therefore a promising new agent for immunotherapy of
prostate cancer.

