Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: siRNA silencing of survivin enhances activity of mitomycin C in
human bladder RT4 xenografts


For intravesical therapy of nonmuscle-invading bladder cancer, maximizing
the mitomycin (MMC) exposure by pharmacokinetic interventions yielded 43%
5-year recurrence-free survival (Au et al., JNCI, 2001). Further
improvement requires enhancing chemosensitivity, such as silencing of
survivin, an inhibitor of apoptosis and indicator of bladder cancer
aggressiveness and recurrence. Survivin is induced by chemotherapy, and
its in vitro knockdown by si/shRNA enhances sensitivity to chemotherapy
including MMC. As the utility of siRNA has been impeded by lack of
activity in vivo, we developed a siRNA carrier that enhances its
intracellular bioavailability and in vivo transfection. This carrier uses
a fusogenic lipid to destabilize the endosomal membrane plus paclitaxel
to perturb the endosomal siRNA transport (PPCat). The present study
investigated if survivin siRNA-loaded PPCat (PPCat-siSurvivin) produces
in vivo survivin knockdown and enhances MMC activity in human bladder RT4
tumors. Table shows the results. In vitro studies showed that MMC at 50%
cytotoxic concentration induced survivin expression, which was reversed
by PPCat-siSurvivin. A separate experiment evaluated if a modified
PPCat-siSurvivin (i.e., PCat, without paclitaxel) enhanced the MMC
activity; the results showed (a) lower clonogenicity for the combination
compared to either agents (pFor intravesical therapy of
nonmuscle-invading bladder cancer, maximizing the mitomycin (MMC)
exposure by pharmacokinetic interventions yielded 43% 5-year
recurrence-free survival (Au et al., JNCI, 2001). Further improvement
requires enhancing chemosensitivity, such as silencing of survivin, an
inhibitor of apoptosis and indicator of bladder cancer aggressiveness and
recurrence. Survivin is induced by chemotherapy, and its in vitro
knockdown by si/shRNA enhances sensitivity to chemotherapy including MMC.
As the utility of siRNA has been impeded by lack of activity in vivo, we
developed a siRNA carrier that enhances its intracellular bioavailability
and in vivo transfection. This carrier uses a fusogenic lipid to
destabilize the endosomal membrane plus paclitaxel to perturb the
endosomal siRNA transport (PPCat). The present study investigated if
survivin siRNA-loaded PPCat (PPCat-siSurvivin) produces in vivo survivin
knockdown and enhances MMC activity in human bladder RT4 tumors. Table
shows the results. In vitro studies showed that MMC at 50% cytotoxic
concentration induced survivin expression, which was reversed by
PPCat-siSurvivin. A separate experiment evaluated if a modified
PPCat-siSurvivin (i.e., PCat, without paclitaxel) enhanced the MMC
activity; the results showed (a) lower clonogenicity for the combination
compared to either agents (p<0.05, n=3 experiments), and (b) PCat
comprising non-target siRNA had no effects. Taken together, these data
indicate the enhanced activity was due to survivin knockdown and not the
paclitaxel contained in PPCat. In mice bearing subcutaneous RT4 tumors,
single agent MMC delayed tumor growth, with the residual tumors showing
higher survivin expression. PPCat-siSurvivin significantly enhanced the
MMC activity, which appeared to correlate with reduced survivin level. As
single agent PPCat-siSurvivin was inactive in vivo, the enhanced activity
for the combination indicates synergy. Supported in part by R43TR000356
and RO1CA158300, DHHS.


