Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of progesterone receptor (PR) isotype-specific
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on the diagnosis of triple negative breast
cancer (BC)


Background: Given the poor therapeutic outcomes for triple negative BC,
diagnostic accuracy is vital. In routine IHC, PR is measured using
bispecific antibodies (Ab) that recognize epitopes common to PRA and PRB.
PR A and B expression is imbalanced in BC. Relative expression of the PR
isotypes appears to be prognostic in tumors evaluated with a bispecific
Ab (Hopp 2004). Tumors can express PRA or PRB on different cells in the
same tumor (Mote 2008), which differ from those expressing ER (Zukiwski
2013). A true triple negative phenotype might escape detection with the
use of one single Ab to detect both PR A and B epitopes, depending on its
sensitivity/specificity. This study evaluated the use of two
isotype-specific PR Abs to fully characterize PR status.Methods: 312
archived BC specimens with clinical data came from Oscar Lambret Cancer
Center, Lille. HER2 status was previously determined. IHC was performed
using anti-ER, anti-PRA and PRB Abs. ER and PR tumor positivity was
defined as 1% stained tumor cells.Results: 276 cases had complete data.
Table 1 shows ER, PRA and PRB status. 38/276 cases (14%) were ER and HER2
negative: 22 were PR A or B negative, 9 were PR A and B positive, 2 were
positive only for PRA and 5 only for PRB. Discussion: Bispecific PR Abs
rarely report PRA and PRB similarly (Mote 2001). PR Phosphorylation and
activation may vary across tumors. Potentially only one PR isotype may
drive BC tumor growth. Triple-negative BC status determination could be
PR Ab-dependent. These cases are currently being tested with a standard
bispecific PR Ab to understand which would be considered triple-negative
with routine IHC.Conclusion: Further evaluation of IHC with specific PRA
and PRB Abs is warranted to determine if certain patients, currently
classified as having triple-negative BC, could respond to antiprogestins,
which have shown activity in BC.


