Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ImmTACs: Bi-specific TCR-anti-CD3 fusions for potent re-directed
killing of cancer cells


Immunotherapeutic strategies that are able to drive activation of T
cells, and in particular CD8+ cells, possess significant potential to
eradicate tumors. Although it is well-established that CD8+ T cells can
mediate potent destruction of tumor tissue, the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment and thymic selection serve to limit the availability and
effectiveness of tumor-specific T cells. These factors typically prevent
an effective immune response in cancer patients. Despite some successful
attempts to counter immune-suppression using bi-specific,
immune-activating antibodies, the paucity of tumor-specific antibody
targets limits this approach. ImmTACs (immune mobilising monoclonal TCRs
against cancer) are a new class of soluble bi-specific molecules
comprising, pico-molar affinity T cell receptors (TCRs) fused to an
anti-CD3 specific scFv. Unlike antibodies, TCRs target peptide epitopes,
derived from intracellular antigens, and presented on the cell surface by
Class I MHC, thus providing access to a large pool of tumor-associated
antigens. The high affinity recognition mediated by the engineered TCR
portion of ImmTACs overcomes the problems posed by thymic selection, as
well as HLA down-regulation on tumor cells, while the anti-CD3 moiety
re-directs T cells to mediate a potent anti-tumor response.The most
advanced ImmTAC reagent to-date, IMCgp100, targets the HLA-A2 presented
gp100280-288 epitope. This reagent represents a first-in-class treatment
for malignant melanoma, and is currently in Phase I clinical testing,
with maximum tolerated dose having been established. Here we examine the
processes which underpin the mechanism of action of IMCgp100, as well as
the broader ImmTAC platform. These studies demonstrate that IMCgp100 is
able to redirect T cells from healthy donors and from melanoma patients
to destroy cancer cells with low cell-surface epitope densities (25 to 70
epitopes per cell), and to secrete a range of inflammatory cytokines.
Effector and central memory cells in the CD8+ and CD4+ repertoire rapidly
respond to ImmTAC engagement on melanoma cells, while the nave cells
provide a slower but nonetheless potent response. ImmTACs can induce an
anti-tumor T cell response despite the presence of immunosuppressive
regulatory T cells and expression of inhibitory molecules such as PD-L1.
In addition, ImmTAC activated cytotoxic T cells are capable of serially
killing a number of target cells. Finally, we have been able to
demonstrate that IMCgp100 can trigger DC X presentation of melanoma
associated antigens providing a potential mechanism for inducing a
long-term self-sustained anti-cancer response. Taken together these data
demonstrate the potential of the ImmTAC platform for targeted cancer
therapy.

