Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of miR-145 by long noncoding RNA RoR in colon cancer


Background: The human genome makes a large number of non-coding RNAs
including long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs. Compared to
well-characterized microRNAs, much less is known about lncRNAs. However,
emerging evidence has implicated lncRNAs as master gene regulators; and
they are often aberrantly expressed in a variety of human diseases
including cancer. In particular, several studies suggest that lncRNAs can
modulate the concentration and biological functions of microRNAs through
a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) mechanism. We have previously
demonstrated that lncRNA-RoR is a strong negative regulator of p53 in
response to DNA damage and miR-145 is a direct transcription target for
p53. Therefore, it is important to further characterize this p53
regulatory network involving lncRNA-RoR and miR-145, and to determine
their role in tumorigenesis.Methods: To determine cell growth, we
performed MTT assays. Protein levels from treated cells were analyzed by
western blot. Real-time RT-PCR was used to determine relative expression
of genes. Interaction between lncRNA-RoR and the key component (AGO2) of
the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) was confirmed by RNA
co-immunoprecipitation and RNA precipitation. Dual fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) was used to determine the relative levels of
lncRNA-RoR and miR-145, and their co-localizations in colon cancer
specimens. The effect of lncRNA-RoR on tumor growth was determined by a
xenograft mouse model.Results: LncRNA-RoR suppressed miR-145 and
upregulated c-Myc, one of major miR-145 target genes. In contrast,
RoR-siRNA increased miR-145 expression and inhibited c-Myc. Of interest,
miR-145 can also repress lncRNA-RoR expression. This reciprocal
repression between lncRNA-RoR and miR-145 appeared to work through the
CeRNA mechanism. Mechanistically, we showed that lncRNA-RoR directly
interacted with AGO2, a key component of RISC complex, by RNA
precipitation assays. This interaction was further confirmed by RNA
immunoprecipitation with AGO2 antibody. In consistent with these finding,
lncRNA-RoR stimulated proliferation in different cancer cells. Moreover,
ectopic expression of lncRNA-RoR in HCT-116 cells significantly promoted
tumor growth in a xenograft mouse model. Finally, experiments with dual
FISH revealed an inverse correlation between lncRNA-RoR and miR-145 in
colon cancer specimens. LncRNA-RoR was upregulated in colon cancer
whereas miR-145 was downregulated in the same specimens.Conclusion: Taken
together, these results suggest that lncRNA-RoR plays an oncogene role in
colon cancer in part through suppression of the tumor suppressor miR-145.
Thus, a better understanding of the p53-RoR-miR-145 regulatory system
will provide new insight of colon cancer therapy.

