Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcriptomic and methylomic changes caused by subtoxic doses
of 5-azacytidine and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine


Two demethylating agents, 5-azacytydine (Vidaza) and
5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (Decitabine), are used in the clinic to treat
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and some forms of leukemia. There are also
several ongoing clinical trials using these demethylating agents to treat
solid tumors. DNA incorporation of these drugs leads to the depletion of
DNMTs (DNA methyltransferases) in the cell and passive DNA demethylation.
The major difference between Decitabine and Vidaza is their respective
level of incorporation into nucleic acid. Decitabine is only incorporated
into DNA, while 70-90% of Vidaza incorporates into RNA and only 10-30%
into DNA. Due to their mechanisms of action, the effects of these drugs
on DNA are S-phase dependent. It has been previously demonstrated that
various transcriptional changes are initiated by demethylation of DNA,
but the majority of studies have focused on transcriptional activation of
tumor suppressor genes. The objective of this study is to use genomics
approaches to examine the effects of low doses of Vidaza and Decitabine
on bladder cancer cells and normal immortalized urothelium. We
hypothesize that Vidaza and Decitabine will have distinct biological
effects on the methylome and transcriptome in these cells, including
alternative splicing. We have generated DNA and RNA samples from normal
(SV-HUC) and cancer bladder (T24 and SCaBer) cell lines treated with low
concentrations (100nM, 200nM, and 1M) of Vidaza and Decitabine. The cells
were treated with the different concentration of drugs on day 2 and 4,
and then harvested on day 5. Before utilizing these samples for genomic
screening, we monitored the methylation status of three CpGs in the
promoter region of LINE-1, a surrogate marker of pharmacologically
induced DNA demethylation. Furthermore, we examined the mRNA expression
of NY-ESO-1 cancer testis gene previously shown to be one of the
reactivated genes by demethylating agents through a loss of promoter
hypermethylation. T24 cells immediately showed a significant decrease of
methylation of LINE-1 when treated with 100nM Decitibine, but there was
barely any change in methylation status in the other cells lines at this
low dose. Meanwhile, treatment with Vidaza did not change the methylation
status of LINE-1 and mRNA expression of NY-ESO-1. However, these
experiments were merely designed to monitor the general pharmacological
effects of Vidaza and Decitabine. We are currently examining the effects
of these drugs focusing on genomic regions (exonic and intronic) outside
of gene promoters by utilizing deep-coverage paired-end RNA sequencing
and 450K Illumina methylation array. The integration of these large-scale
data will enable us to better understand pharmacologically induced
demethylation in cancer and utilization of these agents in treatment of
solid tumors including bladder cancer.

