Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of circulating glioblastoma cells
identifies a mesenchymal-like tumor cell subpopulation


Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and aggressive form of glioma, is
often heterogeneous, diffusely invasive and hypervascularized. Despite
being aggressive, extracranial metastases are rare, suggesting
constraints on hematologic dissemination or distant survival of primary
GBM cells. We recently developed a novel microfluidic device, termed the
CTC-iChip, for efficient, antigen agnostic capture of rare circulating
tumor cells (CTCs). Using the CTC-iChip, we set out to determine whether
GBM cells can be detected in the blood of mice using two orthotopic
xenograft models representing diffuse (GBM8) and focal (GBM24) GBM. CTCs
were identified in 5/11 and 2/5 mice bearing GBM8 and GBM24 xenografts,
respectively. CTC numbers did not correlate with tumor size or latency.
We then expanded our analysis to patients and identified CTCs in 12/38
GBM patients with a median 5.3 cells per ml (range: 0 to 48.2 cells per
ml). To understand the molecular characteristics of GBM CTCs, we analyzed
the expression of 49 GBM-specific and stem cell transcripts in single GBM
CTCs from both mouse xenografts models as well as GBM patients. The
expression of mesenchymal gene transcripts including VIM, TGFBR2, TGFB,
and SERPINE1 was elevated in CTCs compared with cultured cells and
matched primary tumor cells. Moreover, CTCs exhibited lower proliferative
indices and decreased neural lineage transcripts. To determine the
pathophysiologic significance of this expression profile and the
prospective origin of GBM CTCs, RNA-ISH was performed on xenografts and
patient tumor samples. In the highly migratory GBM8 xenograft model,
broad tumor cell expression of CTC/mesenchymal transcripts was observed.
However, in the GBM24 focal tumor growth model, CTC/mesenchymal gene
transcripts were predominantly expressed in regions of tumor invasion,
migration along fiber tracts, and around regions of necrosis. Similarly,
RNA-ISH analysis of 6 GBM patient tumors revealed prominent expression of
CTC/mesenchymal genes in peri-necrotic and migratory pseudopalisading
cells. Finally, RNA-ISH analysis of a rare case of metastatic GBM
revealed a significant enrichment of GBM/mesenchymal gene expressing
tumor cells within lung and lymph node metastases. Taken together, these
data provide the first evidence for the hematologic circulation of GBM
cells and reveal the involvement of mesenchymal features in the
pathophysiology of malignant brain tumors.

