Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the transcription factor TFEB and the
autophagic/lysosomal network by GSK3 in pancreatic cancer cells


We recently demonstrated that prolonged inhibition of GSK3 activity
induces JNK-dependent cell death in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Surprisingly, we observed that, concomitant to apoptosis, GSK3 inhibition
also induces autophagy. Preventing this autophagic response sensitizes
pancreatic cancer cells to the GSK3 inhibition-induced apoptosis
suggesting a protective role for autophagy against cell death caused by
prolonged inhibition of GSK3. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying the
control of autophagy by GSK3 remain unknown. The aim of this study was to
determine the molecular mechanism involved in the regulation of autophagy
by GSK3 in pancreatic cancer cells. Methods: Experiments were performed
in pancreatic cancer cells (PANC1, MIA PaCa2 and BxPC3), and HEK293T
cells. GSK3 activity was inhibited using shRNA directed against GSK3beta
and/or GSK3alpha or by using the GSK3 specific inhibitors CHIR99021 and
SB216763. The JNK inhibitor SP600125 and the mTOR specific inhibitor
Torin1 were also used. Results: 1) Inhibition of the JNK-cJun pathway
prevented the apoptotic response but not the autophagic response upon
GSK3 inhibition excluding a contribution of the JNK-cJUN pathway in the
autophagy induced by GSK3 inhibition. We therefore analyzed the activity
of the mTOR pathway since this pathway is well known to modulate
autophagy. 2) Inhibition of GSK3 activity reduced the activity of S6K1, a
direct substrate of the mTOR complex suggesting an inhibition of the mTOR
pathway upon GSK3 inhibition. The mTOR pathway was recently shown to
regulate autophagy through its impact on the transcription factor TFEB, a
master regulator of an autophagic/lysosomal gene network. 3)
Interestingly, treatment of cells with GSK3 inhibitors or a mTOR
inhibitor both led to the nuclear translocation of TFEB, 4) and
correlated with the expression of a lower molecular weight TFEB protein.
5) Pre-treatment of cells with the serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitor
calyculin A prevented the molecular weight shift of TFEB induced upon
GSK3 inhibition suggesting that GSK3 impacts on TFEB phosphorylation. 6)
Furthermore, either GSK3 or mTOR inhibition correlated with increased
activity of a TFEB-luciferase reporter gene, 7) and with an increased
staining of lysosomes (lysotracker). 8) Interestingly, shRNA-mediated
reduction of TFEB expression sensitized pancreatic cancer cells to the
apoptosis induced upon GSK3 inhibition. Conclusion: Our results
demonstrate that GSK3 inhibition promotes the dephosphorylation of TFEB
that correlates with increased transcriptional activity of this master
regulator of autophagy and lysosomal biogenesis. Furthermore, our results
support a protective role against cell death assumed by TFEB upon GSK3
inhibition.

