Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MET in preclinical models to support the clinical
development of Volitinib in NSCLC


MET is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor that is deregulated (gene
amplification, mutation and over-expression) across multiple cancer
types. Signaling through MET is normally activated through interactions
with its specific ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Aberrant
MET/HGF activation can stimulate tumor growth, promote angiogenesis,
induce metastasis and may contribute to resistance mechanisms in several
tumor types. Several non-selective MET inhibitors have entered clinical
development; results have been mixed based on potency, selectivity,
and/or patient selection. Volitinib is a potent (IC50 4 nM) and selective
(>650 fold selectivity over 265 kinases), small molecule inhibitor of
MET. Recent evaluation of Volitinib across a panel of cancer cell lines
demonstrated selectivity for MET-driven disease, with MET amplified cell
lines being most sensitive (IC50s of 1nM) and also suggesting limited off
target activity. Volitinib resistant cell lines with MET amplification
were identified and used to better understand the relationship of
concurrent mutations with response. In addition to cancer cell line
selectivity, we are analyzing preclinical models of NSCLC (non small cell
lung cancer) that are representative of key patient segments, namely MET
amplification and over expression. In newly diagnosed NSCLC
adenocarcinomas, focal MET amplification events represent 3% of the
population while over expression of MET (without gene amplification) is
observed in the majority of patients. In preclinical models, focal Met
amplification in EBC-1 and NCI-H1993 caused significant tumor growth
inhibition, confirming sensitivity to Volitinib. Given the prevalence of
over expression in NSCLC, however, we sought to build a platform of
evidence for the therapeutic use of Volitinib in preclinical models
lacking amplification of the MET gene. Using a patient-derived xenograft
model (PDX) of EGFR WT, KRAS WT and metastatic NSCLC disease
(HLXF-036LN), we demonstrate that Volitinib induces tumor regression as
monotherapy and has added therapeutic benefit when used in combination
with taxotere. In addition, we show robust efficacy effects for
additional preclinical models, LG0567, LG0645 and Calu-3, for either
Volitinib alone or in combination with taxotere. In parallel
pharmacodynamic studies, we demonstrate that Volitinib inhibits p-MET and
downstream signaling in each model. Together, using an integrated
platform of molecular characterization and MET FISH and IHC scores,
corresponding antitumor responses to Volitinib are being evaluated for
several patient segments. We are using these studies to inform the design
of patient selection criteria for upcoming clinical trials in NSCLC.

