Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune dysfunction cascades caused by ALCAM+ mesenchymal stem
cells toward tumor progression


Purposes:We have been investigating the interplay between cancer cells
and host immunity, and previously demonstrated that Snail expression in
tumor cells accelerates metastasis not only by enhancing tumor motility
but also by inducing immune dysfunction through increase of a variety of
immunoregulatory cells using murine tumor models implanted with
snail-transduced B16-F10 melanoma (F10-snail+). We additionally found
that Snail+ tumor cells frequently metastasize into bone marrow (BM) of
the mice, and pluripotent CD45-ALCAM+ mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
consequently increased in the mice. In this study, we attempted to
characterize the Snail+ tumor-induced CD45-ALCAM+ MSCs
(sMSCs).Results:The sMSCs were prepared by stimulating BMCs with
F10-snail+ tumor supernatant for 5-7 days, or by sorting CD45-ALCAM+
cells from BM or spleen of the F10-snail+ tumor cells 2-3 weeks after
implantation. When the mixture of the sMSCs and F10-mock tumor cells was
subcutaneously injected in C57BL/6 mice, tumor growth was aggressively
promoted, and spontaneous tumor dissemination in BM indicating de novo
bone metastasis was observed, accompanied by increase of sMSCs in BM. In
the tumor milieu and spleen of these mice, functionally impaired CD8(low)
T cells and immunosuppressive Treg-inducible CD11b+Gr1+ MDSCs
predominantly increased. Indeed, CD8(low) T cells were generated in the
culture with splenic T cells and sMSCs, and MDSCs were expanded in the
culture with BM cells and sMSCs. We identified key molecules responsible
for the sMSC-induced events: ALCAM, ANGPT2 and FSTL1, which significantly
increased only in the sMSC but not F10-mock-derived MSCs and normal MSCs.
FSTL1 inhibited bone metastasis and consequent increase of sMSCs,
CD8(low) T cells and MDSCs. Blocking ALCAM with mAb inhibited both sMSC
expansion and CD8(low) T-cell induction. Blocking ANGPT2 inhibited
expansion of MDSCs and Tregs rather than angiogenesis. Blocking FSTL1,
which is a key trigger to initiate these cascades, in combination with
elimination of other sMSC-associated factors significantly induced
anti-tumor immune responses, resulting in complete inhibition of tumor
growth and metastasis.Conclusions:These results suggest that sMSCs play a
central role in the cancer EMT-induced immune dysfunction leading to
tumor progression. Snail is reported to regulate acquisition of stem-like
properties in tumor cells. However, how cancer stem cells would modulate
the BM microenvironment and alter anti-tumor immune responses also
remains unclear. Targeting sMSCs and its associated molecules may be a
promising strategy for abrogating even cancer stem cells through
reprogramming and activating anti-tumor immune responses appropriately.

