Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum proteomics uncover possible biomarkers associated with
progression of metastatic breast cancer


Despite the recognized advances in the treatment of breast cancer, it
still accounts for 15% of all cancer-related deaths. Ninety percent of
breast cancer deaths are due to unpredicted metastasis. There is neither
successful treatment for metastatic patients nor a specific test to
predict or detect secondary lesions. Patients with primary tumor will be
either overtreated with cytotoxic side effects or undertreated and risk
recurrence. This necessitates the need for personalized treatment, which
is hard to offer for such heterogeneous disease. Obstacles in treating
breast cancer metastasis are mainly due to the gaps exist in the
understanding of the molecular mechanism of metastasis. The linear model
of metastasis is supported by several observations that reflect an early
crosstalk between the primary and secondary tumor, which in turn makes
the secondary microenvironment fertile for the growth of disseminated
cells. This communication occurs through circulation and utilizes
molecules which have not been identified to date. Identifying such
molecules may help in detecting initial stages of tumor colonization and
predict the target organ of metastasis. Furthermore, these molecules may
help to provide a personalized therapy that aims to tailor treatment
according to the biology of the individual tumor. Advances in proteomics
allows for more reproducible and sensitive biomarker discovery. Proteomic
biomarkers are often more translatable to the clinic compared to
biomarkers identified using other -omics approaches. Further, protein
biomarkers can be found in biological fluids making them a non invasive
way to treat or investigate cancer patients. In this study we are
screening serum samples of stage I and stage III breast cancer patients
using cLC-MS/MS, with a focus on characterizing the differential
expression of small peptide biomarkers. We typically analyze 2500
individual small peptide biomarkers in a single serum sample. Comparisons
between different sample types (from stage I and III breast cancer
patients in this case) allows for the detection of unique short peptide
biomarkers present in one sample type. In our preliminary analysis of 6
patients of each type, we find roughly 64 short peptide biomarkers to be
upregulated in patients with metastatic breast cancer. We also see the
downregulation of an addition 92 short peptides in these same patients.
The serum expression pattern and identity of peptides in metastatic
patients may provide clues about the biology underlying tumor cell
dissemination and colonization to specific sites.

