Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of S-nitrosylated heat shock protein 90 in renal cell
cancer


Purpose: Nitric oxide (NO) is a versatile signaling molecule. Its roles
in a variety of physiological functions in mammals are beginning to be
understood. It has been demonstrated that NO up-regulates the expression
of the Fas receptor on human tumor cells via specific inactivation of
transcription repressor YY1 DNA binding activity to the silencer region
of the Fas promoter (Hermes G., et al. 2001). We also showed that
inactivation of YY1 via protein S-nitrosylated by NO in prostatic cancer
could be identified (Hongo F., et al. 2005). This post-translational
modification, known as S-nitrosylation, has emerged as a highly conserved
and spatiotemporally specific signaling mechanism. The objective of our
study was to examine the effect of NO donor treatment on renal cell
cancer.Methods: We examined the effect of the NO donor DETA-NONOate
(100-500uM) on the following renal cell cancer cell lines; CAKI-1, NC65,
and ACHN. Anti-S-nitroso-Cysteine antibody in the rabbit (SIGMA-ALDRICH)
was applied as a primary antibody for immunohistochemistry. The
biotin-switch technique was applied to detect specific S-nitrosylated
proteins. Whole cell lysates were extracted from ACHN cells employed with
DETA-NONOate. Using an S-nitrosylated detection kit (Cayman Chemical
Company), S-NO was replaced by Biotin. Cell lysates were incubated at 4
oC with 30 L of Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (Invitrogen) for 3 hrs.
After five washes with wash buffer (S-Nitrosylation Wash buffer), the
protein complex was eluted from anti-biotin dynabeads by incubation with
1x volume of elution buffer (0.1M glycine (pH2.0)) twice for 15 min. Each
sample was added to an SDS-polyacrylamide gel for mass
spectrometry.Results: Significant up-regulation of S-nitrosylated
proteins employed with DETA-NONOate was observed by immunohistochemistry.
Specific S-nitrosylated proteins in ACHN cells were detected by the
biotin-switch technique and included HSP90 (heat shock protein 90), GRP78
(HSP70 family), HSP70, and pyruvate kinase M2. In ACNH cells, Significant
up regulation of S-nitrosylated HSP90 by western blot.Conclusions: Our
data showed that NO treatment significantly increased S-nitrosylation of
several proteins. S-nitrosylation should be considered as one of the
mechanisms by which NO acts on cancer cells.

