Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMP-1: A potential biomarker of neuroendocrine differentiation in
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC)


BACKGROUND: Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) is a 28.5
kDa secreted glycoprotein that inhibits matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
activity. Recent studies have demonstrated that TIMP-1 promotes tumor
growth in an MMP-independent manner. We have previously shown that
elevated plasma TIMP-1 predicts worse survival in mCRPC patients;
however, the mechanism underpinning this association is unknown. Normal
and malignant neuroendocrine (NE) cells, from various organs, express
TIMP-1 as measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We hypothesized that
elevated blood levels of TIMP-1 in mCRPC patients results from androgen
deprivation therapy-induced NE differentiation.METHODS: In this study, we
used qPCR, ELISA and IHC to correlate the expression of TIMP-1 and NE
markers such as chromogranin A (CGA) in 7 prostate cancer cell lines, 37
patient serum samples and prostate cancer (adenocarcinoma and NE cancer)
tissue microarrays.RESULTS: We first examined TIMP-1 and NE marker (NSE
and PTHLH) mRNA expression in 7 prostate cancer cell lines. Our results
show that PC-3, PC-3M, DU145 cells express high levels of TIMP-1 as well
as NE markers. On the other hand, LNCAP, VCAP and LAPC-4 cells had barely
detectable levels of TIMP-1 and much lower expression of NE markers. We
then measured serum TIMP-1 and CGA levels from CRPC patient samples by
ELISA. Patients with castration resistant disease had significantly
higher serum TIMP-1 levels (mean value of 373.5 ng/ml) than patients with
hormone sensitive disease (mean value of 304.8 ng/ml) (p=0.01),
suggesting that castration resistance in prostate cancer patients is
associated with increased TIMP-1 production. Interestingly, when we
divided patients using a cutoff of 100 ng/ml (based on cutoffs reported
in published literature), serum TIMP-1 was significantly higher in the
high CGA group (p=0.018), indicating an association between TIMP-1
production and existing NE markers. We also compared PSA values between
low and high CGA groups and found that the high CGA group was associated
with lower PSA levels (p=0.029). Next, we explored TIMP-1 expression in
NE tumor tissues. We performed TIMP-1 and CGA IHC staining in archival
liver neuroendocrine and thyroid cancers and found that TIMP-1 expression
was associated with CGA expression. In prostate cancer specimens, normal
prostate epithelial cells expressed high levels of TIMP-1, but the
expression was lost in adenocarcinomas. In contrast, prostatic
neuroendocrine cancers expressed high levels of TIMP-1 as well as the NE
marker CGA.CONCLUSIONS: These observations support the further evaluation
of TIMP-1 as a tissue and serum biomarker for NE differentiation in
CRPC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

