Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIM16 inhibits cell growth through direct interaction and
modulation of TDP43 protein stability in cancer cells


The tripartite motif (TRIM) family of proteins are involved in a diverse
range of cellular processes ranging from innate immunity, oncogenesis as
well as tumor suppression. A majority of these reported functions occur
through protein-protein interactions. Previously, we have found a strong
correlation between loss of TRIM16 expression and disease progression in
three human cancers: neuroblastoma, squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma.
Moreover, our studies have shown that TRIM16 acts as a tumor suppressor
in these cancers through effects on cell cycle and migration. In order to
better understand the mechanism of TRIM16 in cancer cell growth
inhibition, we have identified a novel binding partner of TRIM16 and
investigated the functional outcome of the protein-protein interaction.
Using the yeast two-hybrid screening tool, we identified transactive
response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43) as a novel TRIM16 binding
protein. TDP43 has been described as a RNA/DNA binding protein with a
putative role in HIV transcription and reports also suggest that this
protein plays a role in a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases.
Through co-immunoprecipitation studies, we have demonstrated that TDP43
directly binds to TRIM16 in human BE(2)-C neuroblastoma and MCF7 breast
cancer cells. Enforced over-expression of TRIM16 increased the protein
half-life of TDP43. We have also shown that TDP43 expression was required
for TRIM16 induced inhibition of neuroblastoma and breast cancer cell
growth. Moreover, we have shown that two cell cycle regulatory proteins,
E2F1 and pRb, were regulated by TRIM16 and TDP43. Taken together, our
studies suggest that the novel mechanism by which TRIM16 inhibits cancer
cell growth is through the direct interaction and up-regulation of TDP43
protein expression and with consequent effects on E2F1 and phos-Rb.

