Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of therapeutic targets via
microRNA profiling in HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most frequent type of liver cancer
and it accounts for about 600,000 cancer deaths worldwide. Chronic
infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is known to be responsible for
most of HCC cases. HBV infections are especially common in Africa and
some of Asian countries, including South Korea where 75% of HCC patients
are infected with HBV. With traditional therapeutic strategies, such as
surgical dissection or chemoembolization, 5-year survival rate of HCC
patients is about 18%, demanding better understanding of molecular and
cellular biology of the disease.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding
single-stranded RNA molecules about 21-25 nucleotides long. miRNAs are
involved in many cellular processes, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and cell differentiation. Recently, it has been reported that
deregulation of miRNAs contributes to the development of different types
of human cancers but their role in HCC pathogenesis remains to be fully
understood.In the present study, we performed a microarray-based
genome-wide analysis of miRNA expression in 9 tissue samples from HCC
patients and 7 noncancerous liver tissues to identify differentially
expressed miRNAs. The expression of 183 and 84 miRNAs was found
significantly up- and down-regulated in HCC samples compared with normal
liver tissues, respectively (p Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most
frequent type of liver cancer and it accounts for about 600,000 cancer
deaths worldwide. Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is known
to be responsible for most of HCC cases. HBV infections are especially
common in Africa and some of Asian countries, including South Korea where
75% of HCC patients are infected with HBV. With traditional therapeutic
strategies, such as surgical dissection or chemoembolization, 5-year
survival rate of HCC patients is about 18%, demanding better
understanding of molecular and cellular biology of the disease.MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small noncoding single-stranded RNA molecules about 21-25
nucleotides long. miRNAs are involved in many cellular processes,
including cell proliferation, apoptosis, and cell differentiation.
Recently, it has been reported that deregulation of miRNAs contributes to
the development of different types of human cancers but their role in HCC
pathogenesis remains to be fully understood.In the present study, we
performed a microarray-based genome-wide analysis of miRNA expression in
9 tissue samples from HCC patients and 7 noncancerous liver tissues to
identify differentially expressed miRNAs. The expression of 183 and 84
miRNAs was found significantly up- and down-regulated in HCC samples
compared with normal liver tissues, respectively (p < 0.05). Among
prominent miRNAs are miR-1792 polycistronic oncomir, miR-200 family,
miR-34, and miR-125b that are shown to be associated with HCC
pathogenesis, demonstrating the validity of this miRNA profiling and
warranting the identification and characterization of other miRNAs and
their potential target genes.Taken together, our study demonstrates miRNA
profiling in HCC that may be used as a diagnostic purposes.

