Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug-tolerant gastric cancer cell subpopulation enriched by
5-fluorouracil acquires malignant phenotype


Background: Post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy for gastric cancer is a
treatment for suppressing the growth of invisible cancer cells, but
substantial numbers of patients experience recurrence despite of this
therapy. We attempted to clarify the mechanism of cancer relapse after
chemotherapy using 5-FU tolerant human gastric cancer cell line,
MKN45.Methods: Through a stepwise dose escalation of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) for one year, a 5-FU-tolerant cell subpopulation, MKN45T, was
established from a human gastric cancer cell line, MKN45. Nucleotide
variation was screened with a panel of 46 cancer-associated genes, and
western blot analyses were performed to examine whether known proteins
were involved in the acquisition of the drug-tolerant phenotype. For
molecular profiling, cancer cell subpopulations emerging as colonies in
the presence of anticancer drugs including 5-FU, cisplatin, and
docetaxel, reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPAs) were produced with the
drug-tolerant 480 colonies. Subcutaneous or orthotopic xenografts of
MKN45 and MKN45T to immunodeficient mice were performed to examine
tumorigenicity.Results: Western blot analysis revealed that most of
protein expression levels were not visibly different between MKN45 and
MKN45T, except that p53 showed slight reduction in MKN45T. Analysis of 46
cancer-associated genes revealed that all gene variations were identical
in both MKN45 and MKN45T, suggesting that gene mutations had a limited
effect on the acquisition of the drug-tolerant phenotype. RPPA analysis
revealed that colonies from MKN45T exhibited a protein level increase in
a 5-FU concentration-dependent manner in Atg5, Atg7, and PI3K, suggesting
a functional association between drug-tolerance and autophagy/glucose
metabolism. An orthotopic xenograft to the stomach demonstrated tumors in
the stomach (9 out of 9, 100%), and lymph node and liver metastases only
in MKN45T at a high frequency (6 out of 9, 67%). No difference in
tumorigenicity was observed when MKN45 and MKN45T were transplanted
subcutaneously. The orthotopic xenograft of MKN45T followed by
administration of 5-FU (30mg/kg/day) for five post-xenograft days
suppressed metastasis in 4 out of 5 mice (80%) at 42 post-xenograft days,
indicating that chemotherapy is particularly effective if it is performed
before initiating tumor formation.Conclusion: Chemotherapy does not only
reduce tumor size, but may also be selecting for tumors that are
resistant to the chemotherapy. Our clinical experiences are
well-explained by this observation, as relapse after chemotherapy is
often chemotherapy resistant.

