Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myc and Miz1 in medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor,
which arises in the cerebellum. Human MBs are classified into four
subgroups: Wingless (WNT), Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Group 3 (G3) and Group 4
(G4). In 2012, we developed a mouse model of the most aggressive and
least curable G3 MB, by overexpressing MYC but not MYCN, in Trp53-null
cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (GNPs), which were implanted into
the cortices of recipient CD-1 nu/nu mice. Remarkably, enforced
expression of MYCN in Trp53-null GNPs induced a SHH MB. This was
unexpected since MYC and MYCN bind to the same E-box DNA binding
sequences. We hypothesized that the difference between MYC- and
MYCN-induced MBs might be due to their interaction with different
partners in GNPs. Human G3 MBs are distinguished by MYC overexpression.
The MYC proto-oncogene encodes a bHLH/leucine-zipper transcription factor
that forms heterodimers with MAX to drive transcription. However, MYC can
repress transcription when the MYC/MAX heterodimer is recruited to core
promoter sequences by MIZ1, a member of the POZ-domain/zinc-finger
transcription factor. MIZ1, ubiquitously expressed during embryonic
development, can either be a transcription activator or repressor
depending on its binding partners.To investigate whether the MYC/MIZ1
complex contributed to G3 MBs, we used a mutant of MYC which no longer
binds to MIZ1 in which a Valine is substituted for an Aspartic acid amino
acid at position 394 (MYCV394D). We enforced the expression of MYC or
MYCV394D in GNPs purified from seven-day-old Trp53-null mouse pups using
retroviral transduction, and implanted transduced GNPs into the cerebral
cortices of recipient mice. MYCV394D-induced tumors developed later than
MYC-induced G3 MBs. Histopathological analysis revealed that MYC-induced
tumors exhibited a large cell/anaplastic (LCA) phenotype and were
classified as G3 MBs; however, MYCV394D-induced tumors were described as
unclassified primitive neuroectodermal tumors. In vitro, MYCV394D-induced
tumors formed tumorspheres that were highly apoptotic and less
proliferative compared to MYC tumorspheres. Global gene expression of
MYCV394D tumors was distinct from murine G3 and SHH subgroup MBs.
Particularly, genes needed for neuronal differentiation and which are
strongly repressed by MYC in G3 MBs, were no longer repressed by the
MYCV394D mutant, indicating that the MYC/MIZ1 complex was responsible for
their repression.To analyze whether the MYC/MIZ1 complex was present on
chromatin in G3 MBs, we performed ChIP-Seq for MYC and MIZ1. In contrast
to Trp53-null GNPs, where MIZ1 only binds 140 promoters, 11.549 promoters
were occupied by MIZ1 in G3 MBs, 9.353 of which were co-occupied by MYC
(81%). Because as many of the joined binding sites neither contained a
canonical E-box sequence nor a bona fide MIZ1 binding motif, we speculate
that cooperative binding of oncogenic MYC with MIZ1 is necessary for
binding.Our data suggest that the MYC-MIZ1 interaction is critical for
the development of G3 MBs.

