Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic microparticle-based tumor lysate vaccination reduces
spontaneous lung metastases in a murine breast cancer model


Although existing interventions are highly efficacious for the treatment
of localized breast cancers, disseminated tumors remain incurable.
Therapeutic induction of systemic anti-tumor immunity is a promising
approach for treating metastatic disease. We have developed a novel
heterologous prime/boost vaccination protocol that significantly reduces
metastatic tumor burdens in a pre-clinical murine model of breast
cancer.In our studies, mice were orthotopically challenged with
Luciferase-expressing 4T1 adenocarinoma cells. Six days later, mice
received a priming therapy that consisted of parental 4T1 tumor lysates
encapsulated in poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid microparticles administered
contralateral to the established tumor. On day eleven, mice received a
boost therapy that consisted of 4T1 lysates and a cocktail of Toll-like
receptor agonists. At the conclusion of the assay (day twenty-five),
tumor burdens from excised lungs were quantified using bioluminescent
imaging. Therapy-receiving mice showed a significant reduction in lung
tumors (Student's T-test: p = 0.002, n = 37 control mice vs. 25 treated
mice) with an average 46.66% decrease relative to no therapy control
mice. Independent quantification of lung metastases was also performed
using a standard 6-thioguanine assay. There was a strong correlation (R^2
= 0.8803) between bioluminescent intensity and 6-thioguanine colony
number, demonstrating that the decrease in bioluminescence signal due to
therapy is not merely explained by the in vivo loss of Luciferase
expression by 4T1 cells.We are currently characterizing the
vaccination-induced differences in the localized immune environment of
metastatic lung tumors. Effector T cell activation/exhaustion kinetics
and the influx of immunosuppressive cell populations (myeloid-derived
suppressor cells and regulatory T cells) are now being explored. These
studies will help elucidate the immunological mechanism(s) responsible
for the diminished metastatic tumor outgrowth observed with our therapy.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that therapeutic vaccination of tumor
lysates is efficacious in controlling spontaneous lung metastases in an
aggressive model of murine breast cancer.

