Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Context-specific dependence of ovarian cancer on IKK and CHEK1


Background: The IB kinase, IKK, was previously identified as an oncogene
in breast cancer and was associated with poor clinical outcome in ovarian
cancer. Recently, we demonstrated that IKK is a key regulator of invasion
and metastasis in ovarian cancer. A highly specific inhibitor of IKK is
not readily available for use as a tool compound to study pathway
interactions in the preclinical setting. Therefore, we utilized dual
shRNA technique to create IKK-matched cell line pairs and performed
sensitization screens to identify the key molecular targets influenced by
the loss of IKK expression.Results: We screened a previously established
shRNA library targeting the human kinome, and identified 65 genes that
further inhibited the survival of ovarian cancer cells in combination
with IKK depletion. In order to evaluate potential clinical significance
associated with their overexpression, we examined the expression levels
of these 65 genes in TCGA ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma dataset.
Strikingly, CHEK1 was overexpressed in 100% of TCGA ovarian cancers with
a cut-off of 1.5 fold change compared to normal ovarian surface
epithelium. Interestingly, CHEK1 loss also sensitized IKK depleted A2780,
a wild-type p53 containing ovarian cancer cell line.Next, we investigated
whether chemical inhibitors could recapitulate the effects of shRNAs,
although they are less specific than RNAi and are unable to interrogate
kinase-independent functions of cellular proteins. Consistent with the
initial screening methodology, inhibition of IKK and CHEK1 activities by
BX795 and PF00477736, respectively, in 6 ovarian cancer cell lines was
critical to the cooperative decrease in cell viability. Thus, the
co-inhibition of IKK and CHEK1 activities, regardless of p53 status, was
more effective in killing ovarian cancer cells than single treatment. The
inhibition of IKK activity alone induced dramatic G2/M arrest in all 6
cell lines without inducing a DNA damage response, while CHEK1 inhibition
resulted in significant DNA damage response with abnormal S phase profile
in cell cycle analysis and an increase in gamma-H2A.X level. This
combined inhibition dramatically decreased CHEK1 level and further
increased apoptosis compared to CHEK1 inhibitor alone.Conclusion: Our
dual shRNA technique efficiently identified CHEK1 as an IKK synthetic
lethal gene in ovarian cancer. CHEK1 inhibitor as a single agent has not
been successful in clinic, and this may be due to increased pro-survival
signaling mediated by IKK, which may contribute to resistance and
subsequent relapse. Identification of IKK dependent signaling will lead
to development of context-specific therapeutics in the poor prognostic
group of patients with a high level of IKK expression.

