Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-143 is a putative predictive biomarker for 5-FU-based
chemotherapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer


Background: Approximately half of the colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
develop metastatic disease, either at diagnosis or during follow-up.
5-FU-based chemotherapy forms the backbone of treatment in these
patients. However, the response to this therapy varies between
individuals. Therefore, an important challenge in CRC research is to
identify biomarkers that are predictive of this response.MicroRNAs are
short RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate the gene expression of
many genes. MicroRNA levels are frequently altered in cancer, and can
affect expression of genes that modulate tumorigenesis.Objective: In this
study, we explore the potential of microRNAs, and the microRNA producing
protein Dicer, as biomarkers that can predict chemo-sensitivity in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.Methods: We analyzed the
levels of a selected panel of 22 miRNAs and the Dicer protein in primary
CRC tumors from patients enrolled in the CAIRO study (a phase III study
of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group). MiRNA levels were determined with
Taqman microRNA assays and Dicer level with immunohistochemistry.
Correlation between the expression status of microRNAs or Dicer in
primary tumors and the progression free survival (PFS) were investigated.
In addition, we evaluated correlations between Dicer and miRNA
levels.Results: Variable Dicer intensities were observed among the
analyzed samples, but there was no significant association between Dicer
levels and PFS. In addition, no clear correlation between Dicer and miRNA
levels could be identified. We especially detected higher expression of
miR-31 and miR-21 in tumors compared to matched normal tissue, whereas
miR-137 and miR-215 were lower expressed. Interestingly, miR-143
expression was reduced in a subset of the primary CRC tumors, and this
differential expression showed a relationship with PFS. The group with
reduced miR-143 expression showed higher PFS. The median PFS for patients
with reduced, neutral and increased miR-143 expression was 261, 167 and
142 days, respectively (p-value log-rank test=0.018).Conclusion: The
expression level of miR-143 may have clinical utility as a biomarker for
response to 5-FU-based chemotherapy. These findings warrant further
studies to investigate the relationship between miR-143 expression and
5-FU.

