Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin-b and Osteopontin-c splicing isofoms activate prostate
cancer cells prosurvival features


Alternative splicing of the osteopontin (OPN) gene generates three
protein splicing isoforms (OPN-SI), designated as OPNa, OPNb and OPNc. We
previously demonstrated that both OPNb e OPNc are able to activate
typical features of prostate cancer (PCa) progression. These data
suggested that some of these tumorigenic roles are mediated by the
activation of pro-survival pathways in PCa cells. The aim of this study
was to delineate molecular and signaling pathways by which these two
isoforms are able to mediate PCa cell survival and growth. PC3 cells
overexpressing the three OPN-SI were treated with 1x10-6g/mL of docetaxel
(DXT), which was used as an in vitro model to induce cell death. Cell
survival was analyzed by phase-contrast microscopy, crystal violet
staining and MTT assays, in the presence or not of PI3K/Akt specific
inhibitor (LY294002). Cell death has been investigated by immunoblot and
flow citometry. Quantitative real time PCR assays (qRT-PCR) and
immunofluorescence evaluated the involvement of epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) on PC3 cell survival in response to DXT treatment. PC3
cells overexpressing OPNb or OPNc treated with DXT have a higher cell
density and phosphorylated AKT (Ser473) expression level compared to
control cells. An additional increase in Akt (Ser473) phosphorylation was
also observed after DXT treatment. PC3 cells overexpressing OPNb or OPNc
isoforms also promoted additional resistance to cell death induced by DXT
treatment, as compared to cells overexpressing OPNa. Combined treatment
with LY294002 and DXT significantly inhibited PC3 cell survival mediated
by the overexpression of OPNb and OPNc isoforms. Cells overexpressing the
3 OPN-SI similarly express Bcl-2, activated caspase 3 and 7 and also
similar annexin V staining index. However, PC3 overexpressing OPNb or
OPNc treated with DXT differentially express Mcl-1 and Bim.
Immunofluorescence and qRT-PCR assays demonstrated that PC3 cells
overexpressing these two splice variants significantly down-regulate the
epithelial and upregulate the mesenchymal EMT markers, indicating that
activation of this pathway is one of the mechanisms modulating PC3 cell
survival in response to DXT treatment. As a whole, our data indicate
important roles for PI3K/Akt and EMT signaling, besides BL2-family
members differential expression on modulating PC3 pro-survival features
in response to OPNb e OPNc overexpression.

