Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts promote breast cancer cell
invasion via IGF-1 and RhoA


In triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and other breast cancer subtypes,
the presence of a fibrotic focus - composed of carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) and collagen fibers correlates with high-grade
malignancies and reduced survival. CAFs secrete specific soluble
pro-survival factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules that
modulate the adhesion of cancer cells, leading to the remodeling of a
permissive and supportive environment for tumor progression and
dissemination. Hence, the main goal of our study was to determine how
CAFs affect breast cancer cell invasion. To study in vitro invasion, we
established a 3D co-culture model by seeding human TNBC spheroids
(MDA-MB-231 and HCC-1937), alone or in presence of human mammary CAFs, in
a collagen I gel. Our findings show that CAFs increase active RhoA-GTP
expression in MDA-MB-231 cells and significantly promote their invasion,
by inducing cellular scattering and a switch from an elongated to an
amboid mode of migration. In presence of CAFs, the ROCK inhibitor Y27632,
as well as the genetic silencing of RhoA, inhibited the rounding of
MDA-MB-231 cells and significantly reduced their invasion. We then
determined the expression of pro-invasive cytokines in CAFs and we found
that IGF-1 expression was increased in CAFs co-cultured with MDA-MB-231
cells. To date, the IGF-1R pathway has been shown to stimulate
proliferation and cell survival in TNBC cells in vitro, and several
studies have suggested that the presence of stromal IGF-1 could modulate
TNBC cell plasticity and drive tumors to metastasize to bone. To assess
the role of IGF-1 in CAF-promoted invasion of TNBC cells, we first
assayed the effect of recombinant IGF-1 on RhoA activation and the
invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells. IGF-1 increased RhoA-GTP expression and
promoted invasion in a RhoA-dependent manner. Furthermore, the addition
of an IGF-1 blocking antibody to the co-culture of MDA-MB-231 cells and
CAFs reduced the expression of RhoA-GTP, and the scattering and invasion
of MDA-MB-231. Together, our results suggest that CAFs increase the
invasion of MDA-MB-231 by promoting cell scattering and amboid migration,
which is dependent on the IGF-1/RhoA/ROCK pathway. Interestingly, we also
found that CAFs as well as recombinant IGF-1, promote multicellular
invasion of HCC-1937, in a ROCK-dependent manner, indicating that CAFs,
via the IGF-1/RhoA/ROCK pathway, can support different modes of
invasion.In conclusion, our results highlight the different roles of CAFs
in invasion of TNBC cells. In breast cancer patients, the expression of
RhoA and its downstream effector ROCK1 has been associated with cancer
outgrowth and dissemination. Our findings may lead to the use of ROCK
inhibitors (such as Fasudil), potentially in combination with IGF-1R
targeting therapy, in the treatment of invasive breast cancer.

