Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restricted ketogenic diet reduces growth and distant organ
metastasis in the murine VM-M3 metastatic tumor model


Metastasis involves the spread of tumor cells throughout the body and is
one of the leading causes of cancer death. Most current drug therapies
for metastatic cancer are toxic and only marginally effective in
providing long-term management. Respiratory insufficiency with
compensatory aerobic fermentation (Warburg effect) is the hallmark
biochemical phenotype of nearly all neoplastic cells within tumors. Most
tumor cells are incapable of utilizing ketone bodies for energy due to
their respiratory insufficiency. Calorie restriction, which lowers blood
glucose and elevates ketone bodies, is known to reduce tumor growth. We
previously showed that ketogenic diets with high fat/protein +
carbohydrate ratios of 3-4:1 are better able to lower blood glucose and
elevate ketone levels than is calorie restriction alone. We evaluated the
influence of a new ketogenic diet formula from Solace Nutrition (KetoGen)
on the growth and metastatic spread of the VM-M3 tumor. VM-M3 is a highly
metastatic macrophage-like tumor that arose spontaneously in the brain of
the syngeneic inbred VM/Dk mouse strain. The VM-M3 cells spread rapidly
(within days) to lungs, liver, spleen, kidney, and brain with 100%
fidelity following subcutaneous implantation. Tumor bearing VM mice were
fed either a standard lab chow diet in unrestricted amounts (SD-UR), a
standard lab chow restricted to obtain an 18% reduction in body weight
(SD-R), or the KetoGen diet restricted (KG-R) to match the body weights
of the SD-R control group. Tumor size was significantly smaller and organ
metastasis was significantly less in the KG-R group than in the SD-UR or
SD-R groups. Although blood glucose was reduced similarly in both the
SD-R and KG-R groups, blood ketones were 3-fold higher in the KG-R group
than in the SD-R group. These results show that VM-M3 tumor growth and
systemic metastasis was managed better with the restricted KetoGen KD
than with calorie restriction of a high carbohydrate standard diet. As
all human and mouse tumors cells suffer from respiratory insufficiency,
our findings suggest that the KetoGen diet should be an effective
non-toxic therapy against systemic metastatic cancer.

