Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescence-guided surgery of pancreatic cancer using activatable
cell penetrating peptides (ACPPs) in orthotopic mouse models


Surgical resection with complete removal of tumor remains one of the most
effective modalities in the treatment of cancer. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the efficacy of using activatable cell penetrating
peptides (ACPPs) conjugated to Cy5 fluorophores to accurately label
primary pancreatic tumor for fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS) in
orthotopic mouse models. Orthotopic mouse models of human pancreatic
cancer using surgical implantation of tumor fragments of the
MiaPaca-2-GFP pancreatic cancer cell line were established. Two weeks
after tumor implantation, the tumors were resected with bright light
surgery (BLS) or FGS. FGS was performed with a florescence-dissecting
microscope (MVX10, Olympus) 2 hours after periorbital injection of ACPPs.
Completeness of resection was assessed from postoperative images obtained
with the Maestro CRI Small Imaging System. Postoperatively, we performed
whole body imaging of the mice to assess for recurrence. At eight weeks,
mice were sacrificed to evaluate pancreatic tumor burden, as well as
local and distant recurrence. Cy-5-conjugated ACPPs, cleavable by MMP-2
and MMP-9 permitted clear visualization of tumor margins for
fluorescence-guided resection. With FGS, no residual tumor was detected
in the postoperative surgical site in all 16 mice. One mouse out of 16
undergoing BLS had evidence of residual tumor postoperatively. At 8
weeks, mice in the BLS group demonstrated larger primary tumors compared
to mice in the FGS group (1.72 g SE 0.58 vs 0.25 g SE 0.14, p=0.026).
Mean disease-free survival (DFS) was significantly lengthened from 5.33
weeks in the BLS group to 7.38 weeks in the FGS group (p=0.02).
Furthermore, recurrence rates were lower in the FGS group (38% vs 73%,
p=0.049). This translated into a lower local and distant recurrence rate
for FGS (31% vs 67% and 25% vs 60%, respectively). ACPPs can provide an
alternative method to accurately and effectively label cancer cells for
improved resection of tumors that do not express specific tumor antigens
and result in better outcomes post-resection.

