Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of early toxicology assessment on the selection of
azd9291


Discovery toxicology is the concept of evaluating the safety of molecules
early in the drug development process when there is chemical scope to
refine candidate drug quality. The aim is to identify and mitigate safety
liabilities to maximize the chance of clinical success. This poster
describes the impact of discovery toxicology on the selection of AZD9291,
an irreversible inhibitor of both EGFR-TKI sensitising and resistance
mutations. Although, maintaining a margin of selectivity to wild type
EGFR was a key medicinal chemistry goal, early in vitro selectivity
evaluation of the lead series compounds revealed significant off-target
inhibition against the insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors
(IR/IGFR). Further exploration of this liability in a rat in vivo study
revealed that our early lead compound (Cmpd 1) was associated with severe
hyperglycemia, rapid body weight loss and evidence of reduced gastric
emptying. The reduction in bodyweight and the inhibition of gastric
emptying was dose limiting and we hypothesized this was caused by the
hyperglycaemia. A broader selection of compounds based on the same
scaffold was tested both in vitro and in vivo in the hope of identifying
one or more compounds without this liability. Compounds were tested in a
modified single dose rat study, exploring insulin and glucose homeostasis
and effects on gastric emptying. Compounds within the shortlist caused
increases in insulin of up to 80-fold, 3-fold increases in glucose and up
to a 60% reduction in gastric emptying. There was a clear link between in
vitro IR/IGF inhibition, hyperinsulinemia and inhibition of gastric
emptying. One of the shortlisted candidates (now selected as AZD9291),
had up to a 30 fold improvement in in vitro IGFR cellular potency
compared to previous candidates and had no effect on insulin/glucose
homeostasis in vivo. AZD9291 has demonstrated tumor shrinkage in patients
at doses that have been very well tolerated and to date, no effect on
glucose homeostasis has been reported.


