Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct quantitative PCR of LINE repeats to quantify CFC-DNA in
serum


Background: Cell free circulating (cfc)-HMW DNA is a proposed diagnostic
and prognostic biomarker for malignant tumors. Apoptotic DNA (less than
200 bp) is present in the circulation of normal healthy individuals
whereas DNA released from dead cancer cells produces HMW DNA (greater
than 400 bp). We developed LINE assay for direct serum/plasma
quantitation of cfc-DNA concentration and integrity. LINE (Long
Interspersed Elements) is highly conserved repetitive element in human
genome with 500,000 copies/g.e. These large numbers of copies allow cfc
DNA quantitation from small sample volume.Methods: Sera of 15-30 CRC and
Lung cancer patients (early and late stage) from retrospective studies, 5
CRC patients (late stage) from prospective studies along with healthy
normals were characterized for cfc-DNA quantity and integrity by LINE
Assay. All the samples were prescreened for hemolysis by Potassium assay.
Quantitative real-time PCR of LINE repeats was performed with 2 sets of
primers (less than 200 bp and greater than 400 bp) amplifying different
lengths of DNA. We used 10ul serum directly as a template for qPCR
without DNA purification. DNA integrity was determined as a ratio of
concentration of longer over shorter LINE fragments.Results: LINE Assay
has a detection limit of 0.08 pg of DNA. Both CRC and lung cancer
patients from Retrospective studies have significantly high HMW DNA
concentration and DNA integrity as compared to healthy normals
(statistically significant at p-value less than 0.05). ROC curves of HMW
DNA for detecting early and late stage CRC and Lung have areas under the
curves of greater than 0.80. High concentration of HMW DNA along with
high DNA integrity also follows the trend of treatment of CRC patients
from prospective studies.Conclusions: LINE Assay is a robust, highly
sensitive, and high-throughput method to measure different sizes of
cfc-DNA. Our experiments demonstrate that this sizing capability helps to
calculate DNA integrity which is a strong indicator for treatment
monitoring in prospective studies and cancer staging in solid tumors. The
high sensitivity of the LINE assay helps in direct DNA quantitation in
serum.

