Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycodelin abolishes PMA-induced migration of MCF-7 breast cancer
cells


Glycodelin is a lipocalin protein mainly expressed in well-differentiated
epithelial cells in reproductive tissues. Previously, glycodelin has been
shown to induce cell differentiation in endometrial and breast cancer
cells. We have used glycodelin-transfected MCF-7 breast cancer cells to
study the glycodelin-induced differentiation. Glycodelin expression
changed the cellular morphology towards normal, less malignant direction.
In addition, glycodelin-producing cells formed significantly smaller
tumors in xenograft mice. We have found that the effects of glycodelin
are at least partly mediated by repressed PKC activity, rendering the
cells resistant to activation of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), a
known activator of PKC. Here we continued these previous studies by
addressing the effect of glycodelin on the invasion and migration of
MCF-7 breast cancer cells, and studying the affected signaling route in
more detail.Activation of signaling proteins was detected with an
antibody array of 43 phospho kinases. Cell migration was studied using
wound healing test. The cells were grown on chamber slides until they
formed a monolayer and then a scratch was made using a pipet tip. After
addition of PMA or DMSO control, the migration of the cells was monitored
under microscope. In some of the control cells, PKC was down-regulated
with RNAi prior the migration assay. For invasion through Matrigel
basement membrane preparation, a Boyden chamber assay was used. The cells
were grown with and without PMA and the amount of invasive cells was
quantified.Phospho-kinase array did not reveal any widespread changes in
the amount of phosphorylated signaling molecules between the
glycodelin-producing and control cells irrespective of the PMA treatment.
However, in addition to PKC some changes were found in the levels of
phosphoproteins such as p38 and p27. In wound healing test PMA caused a
two-fold increase in the migration of the control cells, but had no
effect on the glycodelin-producing cells. When the expression of PKC was
blocked in the control cells using siRNA, the addition of PMA did not
increase the migration of the cells. PMA also increased the invasiveness
of the cells, but that was detected in both cells clones regardless of
glycodelin expression. Without PMA treatment both glycodelin-expressing
and control cells behaved similarly in wound healing and invasion
tests.In conclusion, glycodelin abolished PMA-induced migration in MCF-7
breast cancer cells, while it did not have any effect on the invasion of
the cells. Our results suggest that the effect of glycodelin in migration
is mediated by reduced activation of PKC.

