Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between initiating cells with different metabolism in a
murine model of malignant glioma


BackgroundThe metabolic preference of malignant glioma for glycolysis as
an energy source is a potential therapeutic target. As a result of the
cellular heterogeneity of these tumors, however, the relation between
glycolytic preference, tumor formation, and tumor cell clonogenicity has
remained unknown. To address this issue, we analyzed the metabolic
profiles of isogenic glioma-initiating cells (GICs) in a mouse
model.MethodsGICs were established by overexpression of H-RasV12 in
Ink4a/Arf-null neural stem cells. Subpopulations of these cells were
obtained by single-cell cloning, and clones differing in extracellular
acidification potential were assessed for metabolic characteristics by
quantification of intra- and extracellular metabolites. Tumorigenicity
was assessed by implantation of 100 cells of each subpopulation into the
forebrain of wild-type mice. Tumors were examined for pathological
features of glioma and expression of glycolytic enzymes.ResultsMalignant
transformation of neural stem cells resulted in a shift in metabolism
characterized by a significant increase in glucose uptake and lactic acid
production. Clonal populations of GICs also manifested pronounced
differences in their metabolic profiles. Certain GICs consumed more
glucose and produced more lactate, while others had higher oxygen
consumption. These differences were reflected in the levels of
intracellular metabolites and they were paralleled by a differential
expression of glycolytic enzymes such as hexokinase 2 and pyruvate kinase
M2. GIC clones with different metabolic profiles had the same level of
tumorigenic ability and the tumors formed by all types of GICs displayed
the histopathological features of glioblastoma. However, the differential
expression of the glycolytic enzymes was also evident in the tumors
formed by each of the clones. Implantation of a mix of GICs with
different metabolic profiles showed that clones with higher glycolytic
ability were the major component of the tumor mass and that they provided
a scaffold for the less glycolytic clones, supporting their
expansion.ConclusionsThe metabolic characteristics of glioma cells appear
early during malignant transformation and persist until the late stages
of tumor formation. Even isogenic clones may be heterogeneous in terms of
metabolic features, however, and this heterogeneity may play a role in
tumor cell proliferation and survival. Our results suggest that a more
detailed understanding of the metabolic profile of malignant gliomas is
imperative for their effective therapeutic targeting.

