Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulfasalazine (SSZ) works cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) via
inhibiting xCT signal pathway: Phase 1 study in patients with gastric
cancer (EPOC 1205)


Back ground: CD44 is an adhesion molecule expressed in cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs). Our group recently reported that CD44 splice variant
(CD44v) is expressed in CSCs and interacts with xCT, a glutamate-cystine
transporter, keeping high levels of the intracellular reduced glutathione
(GSH). Thus, CSCs with a high expression of CD44v have an enhanced
capacity for GSH synthesis and defense against reactive oxygen species
(ROS), resulting in resistance to various therapeutic stresses (Cancer
Cell 2011; Cancer Res 2013). Sulfasalazine (SSZ) as an xCT inhibitor
suppressed CD44v-dependent tumor growth and increased sensitivity to
cytotoxic drugs in vivo study.Methods: A phase 1 dose escalation study in
patients with advanced gastric cancer who had received one or more
standard chemotherapies was conducted to determine the optimal dose,
change in CD44v expression and intra-tumor level of GSH pre- and post SSZ
exposure and pharmacokinetics. SSZ was given fourth-daily oral
administration with 2 weeks as one cycle, which were continued until
progression of disease, unacceptable toxicity, or other discontinuation
criteria were met. A 3+3 escalation was used to evaluate a MTD. Tumor
tissues were obtained pre- and post SSZ administration to evaluate
expression of CD44v and intra-tumor level of GSH by immunohistochemistry
and boron doped diamond microelectrode (Sci Rep 2012),
respectively.Results: Eleven patients were dosed from 8 g to 12 g/day;
median age: 71 years (61-78); median number of prior chemotherapies: 3
(1-4). There was two DLT of grade 3 anorexia and nausea among patients
who were treated with 12 g/day. One additional patients required frequent
dose interruption with grade 2 anorexia and nausea. Therefore 12g/day was
judged as MTD. No DLT was observed among patients with 8g/day. Among the
5 patients with high CD44v expression, 4 patients achieved reduced
expression of CD44v after the administration of SSZ for 2 weeks. GSH was
also apparently decreased in 2 of 5 patients. Further exploratory
biomarker analyses are still ongoing. The individual variability of SSZ
exposure was explainable in terms of the genotypes of ABCG2 and NAT2
which influence SSZ pharmacokinetics.Conclusions: Optimal dose of SSZ was
considered as 8g/day. Down regulation of CD44v expression and decreased
level of GSH is confirmed as a pharmacodynamic marker of drug-on-target
effect and mode of action of SSZ for CSCs, which warrants further
investigation for combination with chemotherapy or other targeting
agents. Clinical trial information: UMIN000010254

