Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin regulates cell differentiation and protumorigenic responses
in pancreatic stellate cells


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by marked
desmoplasia orchestrated by pancreatic stellate cells (PaSCs).
Epidemiological studies indicate that obesity and chronic pancreatitis
(from alcoholism) increase the risk of PDAC. We recently showed that a
diet high in fats and calories increases blood leptin levels and
accelerates the development of desmoplasia and early pancreatic neoplasia
in the conditional KrasG12D mouse model of pancreatic carcinogenesis. We
hypothesize that environmental risk factors such as obesity and alcohol
abuse facilitate PDAC progression by regulating PaSC tumorigenic
responses. Here we measured leptin and ethanol effects on cell
differentiation into the myofibroblast phenotype, cell proliferation and
fibrogenic responses in primary mouse PaSC and mouse and human PaSC
lines. Inhibitors of mTOR signaling were used to delineate the role of
mTOR on leptin-mediated PaSC responses. We found that leptin receptors
are expressed in cultured-activated primary mouse PaSCs and in
immortalized mouse and human PaSCs. In quiescent PaSCs isolated from the
mouse pancreas, leptin alone or in combination with ethanol markedly
accelerated PaSC activation and promoted extracellular matrix (ECM)
protein production (collagen and fibronectin) via ERK and Akt/mTORC1
signaling pathways, suggesting that these pathways interact to modulate
the activated PaSC phenotype. In activated PaSCs, leptin induced
activation of JAK/STAT and mTORC1 signaling pathways, and the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin blocked leptin-induced mTORC1 activation and markedly
reduced fibronectin production and cell proliferation. Other factors
known to regulate cell proliferation and inflammation in obesity and
alcohol abuse, such as IGF-1, TNF, and LPS also transiently activated
Akt/mTORC1 signaling in PaSCs. Further, we found that pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) cells isolated from the KrasG12D mice
interact with PaSCs to promote their proliferation and ECM production.
Our data support a key role for leptin-induced Akt/mTOR signaling in
regulating PaSC pro-tumorigenic responses and indicate that leptin and
other inflammatory factors provide the mechanistic underpinnings of
environmental risk factor promotion in PDAC.

