Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHLPP controls cell polarity by negatively regulating the activity
of atypical PKC in colon cancer cells


The proper establishment of epithelial polarity allows cells to sense and
to respond signals that arise from the microenvironment in a
spatiotemporally controlled manner. Increasing evidence has suggested
that disruption of polarity promotes the malignant progression of cancer
cells. However, the molecular mechanism underlying polarity regulation in
the initiation and progression of colon cancer remains largely unknown.
PHLPP belongs to a novel family of Ser/Thr protein phosphatases that
consists of PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 isoforms. Previously, we have identified
conventional PKC isoforms as substrates of PHLPP. Here, we demonstrated
that PHLPP controls phosphorylation levels of atypical PKC (aPKC)
isoforms, including PKC and PKC, as well. Overexpression of either PHLPP
isoform resulted in a decrease in aPKC phosphorylation at both the
activation loop (Thr403/410) and the turn motif (Thr555/560) sites in
colon cancer cells; conversely, knockdown of PHLPP increased aPKC
phosphorylation. In addition, in vitro dephosphorylation experiments
revealed that both aPKC isoforms are direct substrates of PHLPP. Since
aPKC has been widely implicated in the regulation of cell polarity in
intestinal epithelial cells, we determined the function of PHLPP in
establishing cell polarity using a 3-D Matrigel culture model. Whereas
control Caco2 cells form well polarized cysts in 2 weeks, PHLPP depletion
alters the acinar structure by inducing the formation of multiple lumens.
Interestingly, knockdown of PKC, but not PKC, results in similar
disruption of the polarized lumen structure in Caco2 cells, suggesting
that PHLPP may regulate cell polarity through dephosphorylating PKC.
Taken together, our results identify both aPKC isoforms as novel
substrates of PHLPP and downregulation of PHLPP may promote tumorigenesis
in colon cancer by disrupting cell polarity.

