Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase in colorectal carcinogenesis


SHP-2 (Src homology-2 domain-containing phosphatase 2) is a tyrosine
phosphatase ubiquitously expressed. Previous work done in SHP-2-/-
fibroblasts demonstrated its implication in proliferation and migration
as well as in the regulation of many signaling pathways including the
Ras-Raf/MEK/ERK, the PI3K/AKT and the Jak/STAT pathways(1). Importantly,
gain-of-function mutations were discovered in some colorectal cancers
(CRCs)(2). However, the role of SHP-2 in intestinal tumorigenesis has
never been investigated.Methods: SHP-2 expression and catalytic activity
were analyzed by Western blot, qPCR and immunohistochemistry in human CRC
cells and in human tumours from different stages. SHP-2 expression was
also analyzed in polyps (adenomas) from mice bearing a mutation in Apc
gene (APCMin/+ mice). To elucidate the role of SHP-2, RNA interference
was used to specifically downregulate its expression in intestinal
epithelial cells transformed or not by the oncogenic form of KRASG12V
(IEC/KRas). Proliferation (cell counting), invasion (through Matrigel in
Boyden chamber), anchorage-independent growth (soft agar) and tumor
formation in nude mice (xenograft assays) were analyzed.Results: 1- SHP-2
mRNA and protein levels were significantly increased in human CRC cells
and tumors, especially in adenomas, in comparison to healthy adjacent
tissues. 2- Interestingly, polyps from APCMin/+ mice also exhibited
marked increase in SHP-2 protein expression in comparison to normal
adjacent intestinal epithelium. 3- SHP-2 silencing in IEC/KRAS cells
markedly reduced their proliferation rate, their growth in soft agar,
their capacity to migrate and invade Matrigel and finally, their capacity
to form tumor in vivo, in nude mice. 4- Of note, phosphorylated and
activated levels of MEK and ERK kinases were significantly decreased
following SHP-2 silencing in IECs particularly in those expressing the
mutated form of KRAS.Conclusion: Our data suggest that SHP-2 promotes
malignancy of intestinal epithelial cells by sustaining the oncogenic
activation of MEK/ERK signalling during intestinal tumorigenesis.(1)Shi
ZQ, Lu W, Feng GS., J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb
27;273(9):4904-8.(2)Bentires-Alj M. et al., Cancer Res. 2004 Dec
15;64(24):8816-20.

