Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NANOG represses mitochondrial energy production and promotes fatty
acid synthesis to promote self-renewal in tumor-initiating cells


Stem cell markers such as Nanog have been implicated in various cancer,
but whether they are functionally contributing to cancer pathogenesis has
remained unclear. We previously reported that Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
signaling regulated NANOG expression in liver cancers (Chen et al., J.
Clin. Inv., 2013). Here, we determined novel targets of NANOG in
CD133+CD49f+ tumor-initiating cells (TICs) from patient and mouse models
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using genome-wide NANOG-binding site
analysis (ChIP-seq). Silencing NANOG inhibits tumor development in HCC
mouse models and genesis of TICs as alcohol/obesity-associated increase
of serum bacterial products activates TLR4 signaling. To determine novel
targets of NANOG in TICs isolated from several HCC models, ChIP-seq in
TICs was performed. NANOG binds genes of oxidative phosphorylation and
-oxidation in mitochondria. Silencing NANOG promotes oxidative
phosphorylation and -oxidation, indicating that NANOG is a suppressor of
mitochondria-mediated energy production. We identified the TLR4-NANOG
oncogenic pathway in the genesis of TICs and liver tumor in HCC mouse
models, including alcohol/high-fat-diet-fed hepatitis C virus (HCV)
transgenic mice, DEN/phenobarbtal-treated and Spnb2+/- mice. We
identified the stimulation of TLR4 transactivates Nanog through E2F1
phosphorylation at serine residues 332/336 and generates TICs, leading to
development of liver tumors. Metabolomic analysis demonstrates metabolic
reprogramming in TICs through NANOG. Reduction of NANOG expression
resulted in an improved cellular energy balance, including reduction of
the glycolysis pathway, increased fatty acid consumption and greater
uptake of amino acids. The improved energy status is linked to a shift
away from glycolysis and a greater reliance on fatty acid -oxidation and
amino acid anaplerosis. Taken together, these results suggest that
NANOG-mediated metabolic reprogramming through suppression of
mitochondria function in both experimental and clinical HCC downstream of
TLR4/NANOG generates TICs and drives liver tumorigenesis.

