Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive effects of wild-type Hras on oncogenic
Kras-driven pancreatic tumorigenesis


The RAS proteins are a group of small GTPases that can become
constitutively activated by point mutations that are found in a quarter
or more of all cancer patients, particularly in pancreatic cancer, in
which over 90% of patients have an activating KRAS mutation. There are
three well-characterized RAS protein family members: HRAS, NRAS, and
KRAS, the latter of which is alternatively spliced at the C-terminus into
two proteins, KRAS4A and KRAS4B. The RAS proteins are all nearly
identical at their N-termini and core effector binding domains. However,
they have divergent C-terminal membrane-binding regions that impart both
different subcellular localization and subtle changes in signaling. While
oncogenic RAS is well established to promote cancer, recent work has
suggested that wild-type RAS proteins also participate in tumorigenesis.
In this regard, we previously found that wild-type HRAS is activated
downstream of oncogenic KRAS, which promoted tumor growth of human
pancreatic cancer cell lines. To examine the role of wild-type Hras
during de novo pancreatic tumor development, we tested whether knockout
of the wild-type Hras gene altered tumorigenesis in oncogenic Kras-driven
mice models of pancreatic cancer. Specifically, Hras homozygous null mice
(Hras-/-) were crossed into a Pdx-Cre;LSL-KRasG12D/+ background in the
absence or presence of an additional mutant p53 allele (Trp53R172H/+) to
induce early and late pancreatic cancer, respectively. Surprisingly, loss
of Hras led to an increase in early pancreatic lesions and reduced
survival in the model of late disease. Since HRAS is activated downstream
of oncogenic KRAS, and high oncogenic signaling can induce a senescent
growth arrest, we tested and found that suppressing senescence by
mutating both alleles of Trp53 ameliorated the survival difference
between wild-type and null Hras mice. We thus hypothesize that wild-type
Hras amplifies oncogenic Kras signaling, leading to the growth arrest of
senescence and thereby inhibit early tumorigenesis. However, once
senescence is suppressed later in tumorigenesis, wild-type RAS proteins
instead promote more malignant phenotypes.

