Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) isolated from patients with
metastatic breast cancer utilizing a sensitive microfluidic graphene
oxide (GO) nanosheet device express markers of cancer stem cells


Breast cancers are driven by a subset of cells that display stem cell
properties. These cancer stem cells (CSCs) mediate metastasis and
contribute to treatment resistance. Many current CTC isolation
technologies are limited in their sensitivity and are particularly
inefficient at capturing cells which display an epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenotype which has been associated with CSCs. We have
developed a sensitive microfluidic device using functionalized graphene
oxide (GO) nanosheets to identify and isolate CTCs from patients with
metastatic breast cancer. Unlike other CTC capture devices with
microposts, the effective functionalized surface created by GO allows the
device to be two-dimensional. The GO nanosheets were adsorbed onto the
patterned gold surface and then chemically functionalized. Blood samples
were collected into EDTA and AdnaGen tubes from patients with metastatic
breast cancer and analyzed within 24 hours of blood sampling. Isolated
CTCs were studied for expression of genes using a multiplex TaqMan-based
qRT-PCR method. CTC preparations were checked for white blood cells
(WBCs) contamination by examining CD45 expression and verifying that
there was no or extremely low levels of CD45 expression in all of the
processed samples. The majority of isolated CTCs showed mRNA expression
of EMT markers including TGF and Vimentin at different levels among
tested samples. In addition, markers of breast CSCs including CD44+/CD24-
and ALDH1+ were observed in CTCs isolated from patients across the
molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Interestingly, HER2+ CTCs were
isolated from patients with HER2/neu- primary tumors. This is consistent
with recent work from our group that demonstrated selective expression of
HER2 in the CSC-like populations of luminal breast cancers occur
independent of HER2 gene amplification. These studies demonstrate the
feasibility of utilizing GO nanosheet microfluidic devices to isolate and
molecularly characterize CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients.
Such liquid biopsies may be of particular value for following CSC
populations for patients on therapeutic clinical trials.

