Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib and lenalidomide resistant myeloma cells overexpress
the hepatocyte growth factor/MET signaling axis and respond to MET kinase
inhibitors


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell neoplasm that responds well to
therapeutic agents such as bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, and
lenalidomide, an immunomodulatory drug. However, myeloma patients acquire
resistance to these agents and disease relapses. Previously, it has been
established that levels of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) are high in
serum of myeloma patients. In concert, our studies in myeloma indicated
that HGF gene expression is also high in CD138+ myeloma plasma cells.
High HGF levels in serum and in myeloma cells are correlated with poor
prognosis and advanced disease. HGF is the ligand for the MET receptor
tyrosine kinase that controls proliferation, survival and migration. Our
earlier studies demonstrated that MET acts as a survival factor in
myeloma cells. We hypothesized that MET/HGF axis may serve as a resistant
mechanism in myeloma. To test this, we examined the HGF/MET signaling
pathway in bortezomib and lenalidomide resistant myeloma cell lines.
These lines were developed by continuous exposure of cells to increasing
concentrations of the respective drug. We used three paired cell lines;
KAS-6/1 wild type (WT) and bortezomib resistant (KAS-6/V10R) as well as
lenalidomide resistant (KAS-6/R10R); WT MM1.S and its lenalidomide
resistant counterpart (MM1.R10R), and WT ANBL-6 and its bortezomib
resistant (ANBL-6/V10R) pair. Compared to WT cells (KAS-6/1, MM.1S),
resistant cell lines overexpress MET at both the protein and mRNA levels.
MET is four-fold higher in KAS-6/V10R and KAS-6/R10R compared to KAS-6/1
at both the protein and mRNA level while it is three-fold higher in
MM.1/R10R compared to MM.1S at the protein level. On the other hand,
compared to WT ANBL-6 cells, the bortezomib resistant cell line
ANBL-6/V10R does not overexpress MET but secretes higher (2.6x) levels of
HGF into the medium. The overexpression of MET in the resistant cell
lines is associated with increased signaling of the HGF/MET pathway at
both basal conditions and upon HGF-stimulated activation of the HGF/MET
pathway as we observed higher levels of phospho-AKT(S473),
phospho-GSK3(S9) and phospho-ERK1/2 in lenalidomide resistant cell lines
compared to WT controls. To test utility of MET kinase inhibitors in
bortezomib and lenalidomide resistant cell lines, we used crizotinib,
SU11274, ARQ 197 and SGX523, all small-molecule MET kinase inhibitors.
Our studies demonstrate that targeted MET kinase inhibition induced
apoptosis with concomitant inhibition of growth in these resistant
myeloma cell lines. Depending on the potency of the compound, we observed
1 - 90% apoptosis and 15 - 70 % growth inhibition with these inhibitors
at 3 M level. Taken together, out study implies that bortezomib and
lenalidomide resistant myeloma may have active HGF/MET axis and MET
inhibitors may have therapeutic efficacy for these patients.

