Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput cellular genetics approach to identifying genes
associated with sorafenib response and toxicity


Background: Sorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor, approved for
hepatocellular, renal and thyroid carcinomas, which decreases tumor
angiogenesis and proliferation. The antitumor efficacy and toxicity
profiles of sorafenib vary among patients. No predictive biomarkers of
sorafenib activity exist to help guide clinicians. Novel pathways and
targets of sorafenib activity remain to be identified. We aimed to
identify novel genes associated with sorafenib activity by using an in
vitro methodology based upon mouse genomics.Methods: We profiled primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from 32 inbred strains for sorafenib
cytotoxicity utilizing high content imaging and simultaneous evaluation
of cell health parameters. The 32 strains have been genomically
characterized previously (PMID: 21623374). MEF cells were treated with
varying concentrations (0-300 M) of sorafenib, incubated for 24 h or 72
h, and then fixed and stained. Nuclear staining was used to assess
sorafenib cytotoxicity and establish our cell viability phenotype. Dose
response curves were generated from data, and EC50 values for each strain
were identified using a Brain-Cousens model. Genome-wide association
mapping, using the SNPster algorithm, was performed on cell viability
EC50 values to identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with
sorafenib cytotoxicity. Approximately 277,000 single nucleotide
polymorphisms were tested, and genomic loci with p-values Background:
Sorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor, approved for hepatocellular,
renal and thyroid carcinomas, which decreases tumor angiogenesis and
proliferation. The antitumor efficacy and toxicity profiles of sorafenib
vary among patients. No predictive biomarkers of sorafenib activity exist
to help guide clinicians. Novel pathways and targets of sorafenib
activity remain to be identified. We aimed to identify novel genes
associated with sorafenib activity by using an in vitro methodology based
upon mouse genomics.Methods: We profiled primary mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) from 32 inbred strains for sorafenib cytotoxicity
utilizing high content imaging and simultaneous evaluation of cell health
parameters. The 32 strains have been genomically characterized previously
(PMID: 21623374). MEF cells were treated with varying concentrations
(0-300 M) of sorafenib, incubated for 24 h or 72 h, and then fixed and
stained. Nuclear staining was used to assess sorafenib cytotoxicity and
establish our cell viability phenotype. Dose response curves were
generated from data, and EC50 values for each strain were identified
using a Brain-Cousens model. Genome-wide association mapping, using the
SNPster algorithm, was performed on cell viability EC50 values to
identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with sorafenib
cytotoxicity. Approximately 277,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms were
tested, and genomic loci with p-values < 3.5x10-5 were selected for
additional analyses.Results: Interstrain EC50 variability among the 32
MEF strains was observed after 24 h (21-121 M) and 72 h (17-32 M)
sorafenib incubations. We identified three total peaks associated with
cell viability: two on chromosome 13 (23 Mb apart; p = 3.4x10-5 and =
1.6x10-5, respectively), and one on chromosome 4 (p = 2.2x10-5). From
these three peaks, we have identified candidate genes that may underlie
variability in sorafenib cytotoxicity. A total of 16 genes expressed in
MEF cells at mRNA level are present in these QTLs. Of particular
interest, we identified one locus that contains Nfyc, a gene that encodes
the C subunit of the NF-Y transcription factor. This transcription factor
complex is conserved between humans and mice. In humans, NF-Y regulates
MYC signaling and DNA-dependent transcription of PDGFR- (a primary target
of sorafenib) (PMID: 12167641).Conclusions: Our innovative
high-throughput cellular genetics approach has identified three regions
with genetic loci potentially associated with sorafenib cytotoxicity.
This approach is capable of identifying robust interstrain cellular
differences in sorafenib activity. Functional validation of Nyfc and
other promising candidates should be conducted.

