Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analyzing the effects of radiotherapy on the metastatic phenotype:
a role for combined therapeutic approaches incorporating Src and PI3K
targeting


Background: Radiotherapy is used in the treatment of over 50% of cancer
patients. Although seen as a positive intervention, there are reports of
radiation enhancing the metastatic characteristics of cells. We have
previously observed that radiotherapy activates a number of pathways
associated with tumour metastases and aggressive phenotype including Src
and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). Here we wished to relate pathway
activation to cellular phenotype and to investigate the impact of
pharmacological inhibition on radiation response and metastases.Methods:
The effects of radiotherapy alone, and combined with Src (AZD0530) and/or
PI3K (GDC-0941) inhibition, on cell adhesion, migration and clonogenic
survival were assessed in vitro using well-characterised assays. Initial
in vivo studies, using FTC133 xenografts, evaluated the effects of
radiation treatment on the Src and PI3K pathways and inhibition thereof
using pAKT (Ser473) and pFAK (Tyr861) as biomarkers. The effect of single
versus combined pathway inhibition with radiation therapy (5x2Gy
fractions) on primary tumour growth and lung metastasis (via ex vivo
clonogenic assay) was then evaluated.Results: In vitro, radiation
combined with Src and/or PI3K inhibition resulted in a reduction in cell
adhesion, cell spreading and cell migration compared to radiation alone,
with the combined effects greater than either inhibitor alone. Radiation
both in vivo and in vitro enhanced activity of the PI3K/AKT and the
Src/FAK axis. In vivo, radiation combined with Src or PI3K inhibition
showed little effect on tumour growth but did reduce metastatic lung
colonisation, compared to radiation alone, with Src inhibition proving
more efficacious. When radiation was combined with inhibition of both
pathways a significant reduction in both primary tumour growth and
metastatic lung colonisation was observed.Conclusion: Radiation enhances
multiple pathways, two predominant ones being PI3K and Src, and by using
rationale drug combinations we saw improved local control and reduced
metastatic spread. From these data we can suggest that the PI3K and Src
pathways are involved in the radiation enhancement in metastatic
phenotype and this provides potential for application of these therapies
in the clinic.

