Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 enhances neuropilin-1 signaling in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has the worst prognosis of all
cancers and is the 4th leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the
United States. Mucin1 (MUC1) is a transmembrane glycoprotein
over-expressed in more than 60% of PDA and its expression correlates with
high metastases and poor prognosis. In PDA, there is a correlation
between blood vessel density, tumor levels of VEGF, and disease
progression. We have recently discovered a novel association between MUC1
and neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) expression. Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) is a
co-receptor for VEGF165 and blockade of NRP-1-VEGF165 interaction has
been shown to inhibit angiogenesis and tumor growth in several other
cancer types. Thus, we hypothesize that MUC1 induces a pro-angiogenic
tumor microenvironment by increasing levels of VEGF and NRP-1, thus
enhancing disease progression and metastases. We have generated
Muc1-expressing KC and Muc1-null KCKO mouse PDA cell lines for this
study. Compared to KCKO, KC cells secrete more VEGF and express higher
levels of NRP-1 as well as VEGF receptors (1/2/3). Although the cell
culture supernatants from KC do not alter the NRP-1 level on the
endothelial line 2H11 cells, they significantly promote the 2H11 cell
tube formation. Consistent with the in vitro results, tumor lysates from
KC-bearing mice have higher levels of NRP-1 and VEGFR2 and its
phosphorylations at Tyr residues 951, 996, and 1175. In human PDA cell
lines, inhibition of MUC1 expression by specific siRNA reduced NRP-1
level while overexpression of full-length MUC1 increases NRP-1
expression. This suggests a direct regulation of NRP-1 by MUC1.
Furthermore, the over-expression of MUC1 in BxPC3 human PDA cell line
induces strong angiogenesis and promotes tumor metastasis in a zebrafish
tumor xenograft model. Finally, we report that inhibition of NRP-1 by its
specific blocking peptide suppresses BxPC3.MUC1 tumor growth in vivo.
Taking together, MUC1 in PDA cells can enhance their own NRP-1 levels and
promote the VEGF-VEGFR-NRP-1 signaling, which may favor the creation of a
pro-angiogenic microenvironment for tumor growth and metastases. Our
findings highlight the potential for MUC1 targeted blockade of VEGF-NRP-1
interaction in PDA by conjugating the NRP-1 inhibitory agents to a MUC1
targeting antibody.

