Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Head and neck cancer and HPV infection: A potential role for
peritumoral neurogenesis in HPV-associated malignancy


Background: Head and neck cancers account for 5% of all cancer related
deaths and present with complex molecular pathology and clinical features
owing to their functional anatomical location. The molecular etiology of
head and neck squamous cancer (HNSC) has gained extensive attention
recently revealing key mutations, viral infection, and an emerging
landscape of varying disease sub-types. While perineural invasion has
long been associated with poor outcome in HNSC, the association of
neurogenesis-related genes with cancer progression has only recently come
into focus in HNSC. Using prospectively acquired patient samples and TCGA
HNSC mutational analyses we further characterized the sequelae of
molecular changes in neurogenesis-related genes and propose that these
genes play a significant role in HNSC development.Methods: All clinical
specimens were collected under approval by Institutional Review Board.
Prospectively collected samples were analyzed for HPV DNA by linear
arrays (InnoLipa) and q-PCR for E7-RNA. Gene expression arrays were
conducted to determine differences in HPV activity and neuronal
associated gene ontologies (Agilent). Gene expression profiles were
compared in oral HPV+ and HPV- cultured oral keratinocytes as well as the
TCGA Kandoth & Tang datasets. Gene targets were validated by
Immunohistochemistry and qPCR.Results: Initial unsupervised hierarchical
clustering analysis of our HNSC cohort revealed a separation of HPV+
HPV+E7-(HPV-inactive: HPVin), and HPV- tumors with changes in the
expression of key neurogenesis-related genes. For example, POU4F1, NGFR,
and GRIN2C were significantly up-regulated (PBackground: Head and neck
cancers account for 5% of all cancer related deaths and present with
complex molecular pathology and clinical features owing to their
functional anatomical location. The molecular etiology of head and neck
squamous cancer (HNSC) has gained extensive attention recently revealing
key mutations, viral infection, and an emerging landscape of varying
disease sub-types. While perineural invasion has long been associated
with poor outcome in HNSC, the association of neurogenesis-related genes
with cancer progression has only recently come into focus in HNSC. Using
prospectively acquired patient samples and TCGA HNSC mutational analyses
we further characterized the sequelae of molecular changes in
neurogenesis-related genes and propose that these genes play a
significant role in HNSC development.Methods: All clinical specimens were
collected under approval by Institutional Review Board. Prospectively
collected samples were analyzed for HPV DNA by linear arrays (InnoLipa)
and q-PCR for E7-RNA. Gene expression arrays were conducted to determine
differences in HPV activity and neuronal associated gene ontologies
(Agilent). Gene expression profiles were compared in oral HPV+ and HPV-
cultured oral keratinocytes as well as the TCGA Kandoth & Tang datasets.
Gene targets were validated by Immunohistochemistry and qPCR.Results:
Initial unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of our HNSC cohort
revealed a separation of HPV+ HPV+E7-(HPV-inactive: HPVin), and HPV-
tumors with changes in the expression of key neurogenesis-related genes.
For example, POU4F1, NGFR, and GRIN2C were significantly up-regulated
(P<0.05) in HPV+ vs HPVin cancers. Additional analysis of TCGA data
revealed divergence of the mutational spectra in HNSC with and without
perineural invasion.Conclusion: Our preliminary findings indicate the
emerging importance of neurogenesis-related genes and perineural
involvement in HNSC and support a divergence of HPV+, HPVin, and HPV-
HNSC sub-types.

