Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) and IGF-I system crosstalk in
bladder cancer progression


Bladder cancer is a major public health problem and affects more than
72,570 Americans with more than 15,000 estimated deaths in 2013. The
majority of deaths is due to metastatic spread. Understanding the
molecular mechanisms regulating bladder tumor cell invasion and
progression toward metastases is essential for developing better
therapies to treat bladder cancer patients. The insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) system and its two major receptors, the IGF-IR and IR,
play a central role in a variety of physiological processes including
growth, motility and glucose homeostasis. The IGF-IR is also critical for
tumorigenesis through its ability to promote cell growth and protect
cancer cells from apoptosis. We have recently shown that the IGF-IR and
the Proline-rich tyrosine-kinase 2 (Pyk2) are critical for bladder cancer
cell motility and invasion. However, IGF-IR depletion in metastatic
bladder cancer cells only partially inhibits anchorage-independent
growth. Significantly, metastatic bladder cancer cells have decreased
IGF-IR levels but overexpress the IR-A isoform, suggesting that the
latter may play a more prevalent role than the IGF-IR in promoting
metastasis. It has been recently demonstrated that another receptor
tyrosine kinase, the discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is a substrate
for the IR-A. DDR1, the receptor for fibrillar collagens, plays a broad
role in adhesion and motility in many cellular models.Here we show that
DDR1 was expressed in invasive and metastatic but not in papillary
non-invasive bladder cancer cells. DDR1 was phosphorylated upon
stimulation with IGF-I, IGF-II and insulin and co-precipitated with the
IGF-IR and the IR-A in invasive and metastatic bladder cancer cells
respectively. Significantly, DDR1 depletion severely inhibited
IGF-I-induced motility of invasive 5637 cells indicating an essential
role of DDR1 in modulating IGF-IR action. Additionally, DDR1 interacted
with Pyk2 and non-muscle myosin IIA in ligand-dependent fashion
suggesting that DDR1 may modulate IGF-IR and IR-A-dependent bladder
cancer cell motility by linking the IGF-IR and IR-A to the regulation of
F-actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Furthermore, DDR1 is upregulated in
bladder cancer tissues compared to normal tissue controls.The
characterization of the cross-talk between the IGF-I system and DDR1 will
greatly contribute to the identification of novel targets for therapeutic
intervention in bladder tumors. In addition, the IGF-IR, IR-A, DDR1 and
downstream effectors Pyk2 and myosin IIA may serve as novel biomarkers
with diagnostic and prognostic significance in bladder cancer.

