Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H2O2 upregulates xCT in human breast cancer cells via NRF-2


Cancer cells adapt to high levels of oxidative stress in order to survive
and proliferate, making the transcription factors involved in antioxidant
defense regulation targets of interest. The transcription factor NF E2
Related Factor 2 (NRF-2) regulates cellular defense genes including those
encoding intracellular redox-balancing proteins such as enzymes involved
in glutathione metabolism. Glutathione in particular is an important
intracellular antioxidant molecule. NRF-2 binds to the Antioxidant
Response Element (ARE) in the promoter of its target genes. Under basal
conditions, KEAP1 acts as an inhibitor that targets NRF-2 for
ubiquitination. During oxidative stress, NRF-2 dissociates from KEAP1 and
enters the nucleus to bind to the ARE sequence.It is hypothesized that
the elevated Reactive Oxygen Species may be depleting the glutathione
levels within the cancer cell. System xc- is a cysteine/glutamate
antiporter that exports glutamate while importing cysteine to synthesize
glutathione. In response to oxidative stress the cells increase system
xc- activity in order to provide cysteine for glutathione synthesis.
There is evidence that expression of xCT the specific subunit of System X
is regulated by NRF-2. However this has not yet been demonstrated in
human cancer cells, which is the focus of this project.Basal expression
of NRF-2, Keap1 and xCT was characterized in two breast cancer cell lines
(MDA MB 231 and MCF-7) compared to normal human breast epithelial 184B5
cells. Compared to 184B5 cells, Keap-1, NRF-2 and xCT were upregulated in
MDA MB 231 cells, but down regulated in MCF-7 cells. MCF-7 cells were
treated with H202 resulting in NRF-2 protein accumulation in the nucleus
and decreased levels in the cytosol. Under the same treatment conditions,
Keap-1 protein decreased in the nucleus and increased in the cytosol.
With H202 treatment, xCT mRNA levels increased in MCF-7 cells.We have
cloned approximately 2.6 kilobase (-2329 to +278 bp) of the human xCT
promoter region from genomic DNA isolated from MDA MB 231 breast cancer
cells. We found that the xCT promoter was responsive to treatment with
H2O2, which increased transcriptional activity. This is consistent with
results described for the mouse promoter, which is known to contain an
antioxidant response element that can be bound by NRF-2 during oxidative
stress. Co transfection of MDA MB 231 with the xCT promoter and an NRF-2
expression vector also increased promoter activity. This data suggests
that under oxidative stress, NRF-2 is localized to the nucleus and
transcriptionally upregulates xCT. This is the first study in which the
regulation of xCT has been linked to oxidative stress via NRF-2 in human
breast cancer cells.This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes
for Health Research.

