Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying therapy responsive and resistant LKB1 mutant non-small
cell lung tumor populations


The LKB1/STK11 tumor suppressor is mutationally inactivated in 30% of
sporadic non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), and to date there are no
agents targeting loss of LKB1 in lung cancer. LKB1 is the major upstream
kinase activating the energy sensing kinase AMPK under conditions of low
intracellular ATP. In cells defective for LKB1, metabolic stress is not
appropriately sensed and energy homeostasis is not efficiently restored,
providing an Achilles heel to target in tumors with this genetic lesion.
Importantly, LKB1-deficient (LKB1-/-) NSCLC cells are unable to restore
energy homeostasis in response to biguanide-induced energy stress and
preferentially undergo apoptosis. As targeted therapy for LKB1 mutant
tumors are needed, we explored the use of the metabolic stress agent
phenformin as an anti- cancer drug to target the LKB1-/- NSCLC.
Phenformin is a biguanide that has historically used to treat metabolic
disease and we demonstrated that it potently induced apoptosis in LKB1-/-
lung tumors and significantly prolonged survival in genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of lung cancer in mice bearing tumors
with mutated Kras and Lkb1 genes but not mice with compound mutations in
Kras and p53. Our pre-clinical studies suggest phenformin may be used as
a cancer metabolism-based prevention agent or therapeutic to selectively
target LKB1-/- pulmonary epithelial cells and tumors. However, phenformin
as a single agent therapy was not curative, highlighting the need to find
additional therapies to prevent or target LKB1-/- lung tumors in
combination with phenformin. We have previously shown LKB1 loss leads to
mTORC1 hyperactivation therefore we explored the combinatorial use of
phenformin with the mTOR kinase inhibitor MLN128. We tested phenformin
and MLN128 together on our human and mouse models of lung cancer and
demonstrated the two drugs cooperated together to enhance apoptosis and
reduce proliferation. KrasG12D driven, Lkb1-/- mice develop both
adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinomas (SQCC). We performed
18FDG-PET and CT guided pre-clinical studies assessing phenformin +
MLN128 as a combinatorial therapy in vivo using our Lkb1-/- GEMMs of
NSCLC. We discovered that lung ADC were highly responsive to the
combination therapy while the SQCC lung tumor populations appear highly
resistant. These findings carry important clincal relevance as currently
there are limited options for patients with LKB1-mutant tumors. Here we
define the hypersensitivity of LKB1-/- lung ADC tumors to metabolic
stress and mTOR inhibition while in parallel identifying a therapy
resistant SQCC lung tumor population. These results suggest phenformin in
combination with mTOR kinase inhibitors may find clinical utility to
treat LKB1 mutant lung ADC.

