Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel radiation mitigators and cancer chemoprevention drugs


The possibility of a radiation disaster from a nuclear detonation or
accident has existed for over 50 years and spawned much of the basic
research in radiobiology in the 1950-60s. The recent Fukushima accident
was yet another reminder that there remains a dire need to develop novel
therapies against radiation-induced toxicities. Here we report on the
development of two novel radiation countermeasure therapies: Yel001 and
Yel002. These small, biologically active, drug-like molecules were
uncovered in the DEL high throughput assay reducing radiation-induced
cyto- and geno-toxicity in yeast. Radiation-modulating activity was
further confirmed in yeast plate-based DEL Assay: addition of either
Yel001 or Yel002 to irradiated cultures reduced cell death and genomic
instability. Further, Yel compounds increases survival to 75% in vivo
following an LD100/30 dose of ionizing radiation (IR) with the first
therapeutic injection administered 24 hours post exposure followed by
injections at 48,72,96, and 120 hours. Additionally, treatment with
Yel001 and Yel002 compounds reduces radiation-induced leukemia from 90%
to to 50% and 40% respectively. Of note, treatment with either Yel001 or
Yel002 reduced spontaneous leukemia rate from 10% to 0%. Furthermore,
Yel002 significantly prolonged the life of Atm deficient mice. Treatment
with Yel002 following IR accelerates the recovery of the hematopoietic
cells and protects stem cells after sub-lethal exposures. In addition,
treatment with Yel002 reduces I131, EMS, MMS, UV, cigarette smoke extract
as well as nitrogen mustard induced toxicity as well as genotoxicity
showing a broad application spectrum. Proteomics shows that Yel002
induces DNA repair mediated by Atm signaling, homologous recombination,
nonhomologous end joining, base excision repair, DNA damage binding
proteins and chromosome segregation functions. Toxicity has not been
observed in neither in vitro or in vivo administrations, even in a two
generation teratogenicity assay. Overall, Yel compounds have much
potential as stockpile therapies for radiation-induced lethality and
cancer as well as spontaneous cancer: they are highly effective when
administered up to 24hours post exposure, they reduce radiation-induced
sequelae such as leukemia, and appear to have an acceptable toxicity
profile.

