Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of caloric and carbohydrate restriction on
prostate cancer in a mouse model


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common non-cutaneous malignancy in men
in the United States. Animal studies have shown that dietary
interventions, specifically dietary restriction, demonstrate an ability
to inhibit prostate tumor growth and progression. Classically, dietary
restriction has come in the form of global caloric restriction (CR). CR,
without malnutrition, has been consistently shown to be effective in
reducing age-related conditions as well as decreasing the spontaneous
incidence and progression of multiple cancers. In contrast to the
generalized reduction of calories seen in CR, an alternative manner of
dietary restriction would be to restrict specific macronutrients. In
prior studies, we have tested the theory that specifically restricting
carbohydrates could slow tumor growth by providing mice a diet deplete of
carbohydrates (i.e. a no-carbohydrate Ketogenic diet or NCKD). As such,
we previously found that in a prostate cancer xenograft study, mice fed a
NCKD, in the presence or absence of weight loss, had improved mouse
survival as well as slowed tumor growth with respect to a diet complete
of carbohydrates (i.e. Western diet). Moreover, NCKD, like CR, appeared
to inhibit tumor growth via depression of the insulin/IGF-1 axis. These
series of studies suggest that CR and NCKD may act via overlapping
molecular mechanisms that inhibit tumor growth, however, no study to date
has directly compared the effects of carbohydrate versus caloric
restriction. Therefore we sought to investigate the role of global CR and
NCKD without CR on tumor growth side by side. In addition, we sought to
determine whether calorie restriction of NCKD would provide an additional
inhibitory effect (i.e. CR + NCDK). This study consisted of four arms: 1)
Western Diet (WD); 2) NCKD (pair fed with WD); 3) western diet 25%
calorie restricted (WD-CR) and 4) NCKD 25% CR (NCKD-CR). By day 52 after
randomization, when median tumor volumes for WD mice were 1000 mm3, NCKD,
Western CR and NCKD CR arms had 32.2%, 41.6%, and 62.1% smaller tumor
volumes, respectively, relative to WD mice (all pProstate cancer (PC) is
the most common non-cutaneous malignancy in men in the United States.
Animal studies have shown that dietary interventions, specifically
dietary restriction, demonstrate an ability to inhibit prostate tumor
growth and progression. Classically, dietary restriction has come in the
form of global caloric restriction (CR). CR, without malnutrition, has
been consistently shown to be effective in reducing age-related
conditions as well as decreasing the spontaneous incidence and
progression of multiple cancers. In contrast to the generalized reduction
of calories seen in CR, an alternative manner of dietary restriction
would be to restrict specific macronutrients. In prior studies, we have
tested the theory that specifically restricting carbohydrates could slow
tumor growth by providing mice a diet deplete of carbohydrates (i.e. a
no-carbohydrate Ketogenic diet or NCKD). As such, we previously found
that in a prostate cancer xenograft study, mice fed a NCKD, in the
presence or absence of weight loss, had improved mouse survival as well
as slowed tumor growth with respect to a diet complete of carbohydrates
(i.e. Western diet). Moreover, NCKD, like CR, appeared to inhibit tumor
growth via depression of the insulin/IGF-1 axis. These series of studies
suggest that CR and NCKD may act via overlapping molecular mechanisms
that inhibit tumor growth, however, no study to date has directly
compared the effects of carbohydrate versus caloric restriction.
Therefore we sought to investigate the role of global CR and NCKD without
CR on tumor growth side by side. In addition, we sought to determine
whether calorie restriction of NCKD would provide an additional
inhibitory effect (i.e. CR + NCDK). This study consisted of four arms: 1)
Western Diet (WD); 2) NCKD (pair fed with WD); 3) western diet 25%
calorie restricted (WD-CR) and 4) NCKD 25% CR (NCKD-CR). By day 52 after
randomization, when median tumor volumes for WD mice were 1000 mm3, NCKD,
Western CR and NCKD CR arms had 32.2%, 41.6%, and 62.1% smaller tumor
volumes, respectively, relative to WD mice (all p<0.01). At sacrifice,
both calorically restricted groups had significantly lower serum glucose
levels than the non-calorically restricted arms. Moreover, IGF-1:IGFBP-3
levels of all active experimental arms (NCKD, WD-CR, and NCKD-CR) were
significantly lower than WD mice. Among the two CR arms, IGF-1: IGFBP-3
ratios were lower in the NCKD-CR mice. These data suggest that CR and
NCKD have similar efficacy in reducing tumor growth and both act, at
least in part, via reductions in IGF-1. Also, the combination of CR plus
NCKD had an additive effect. Global gene expression analysis of xenograft
tumors revealed genes altered in a similar fashion across the three diets
in comparison to WD, but also genes uniquely altered in individual diets.
Further analysis of these genes will allow us to better understand the
molecular mechanisms through which these dietary regimens inhibit tumor
growth.

