Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct levels of circulating tumor cell counts for the papillary
thyroid cancer patients with distant metastases and in disease-free status


Distant metastasis of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is a multistep and
complex process that frequently complicates the disease with poor
prognosis. The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the
peripheral blood has been reported in several cancer types to be highly
related to the development of distant metastasis. Nevertheless, the CTCs
status during the progression of PTC is rarely investigated. This study
aimed to define and compare the CTCs counts among the healthy control
individuals (Group I, n = 14), the PTC patients in disease-free status
(Group II, n = 9), and the patients with distant metastasis (Group III, n
= 8). The patients in group III had metastases to the lung and
mediastinum (n = 4), bones (n = 3), and lung and kidney (n = 1),
respectively. CTCs were enriched from the peripheral blood by the
negative selection method PowerMag that has been validated in our
previous study. CTCs enumeration was performed by immunofluorescence
staining using the anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and
anti-thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) antibodies. The EpCAM+
and TSHR+ CTCs counts were 2.97 2.03 and 9.97 9.22 cells/mL for group I,
10.43 9.03 and 19.17 9.77 cells/mL for group II, and 100.06 73.34 and
141.60 82.08 cells/mL for group III individuals, respectively (p Distant
metastasis of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is a multistep and complex
process that frequently complicates the disease with poor prognosis. The
presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the peripheral blood has
been reported in several cancer types to be highly related to the
development of distant metastasis. Nevertheless, the CTCs status during
the progression of PTC is rarely investigated. This study aimed to define
and compare the CTCs counts among the healthy control individuals (Group
I, n = 14), the PTC patients in disease-free status (Group II, n = 9),
and the patients with distant metastasis (Group III, n = 8). The patients
in group III had metastases to the lung and mediastinum (n = 4), bones (n
= 3), and lung and kidney (n = 1), respectively. CTCs were enriched from
the peripheral blood by the negative selection method PowerMag that has
been validated in our previous study. CTCs enumeration was performed by
immunofluorescence staining using the anti-epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM) and anti-thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR)
antibodies. The EpCAM+ and TSHR+ CTCs counts were 2.97 2.03 and 9.97 9.22
cells/mL for group I, 10.43 9.03 and 19.17 9.77 cells/mL for group II,
and 100.06 73.34 and 141.60 82.08 cells/mL for group III individuals,
respectively (p < 0.01). These data indicate that (1) some of the
TSHR+-CTCs are not EpCAM+ and this type of cell population can be
overlooked if CTCs were enriched by the method based on positive
selection of EpCAM+ cells; (2) the PTC patients in disease-free status
has higher CTCs counts than the healthy control individuals and, hence,
continuous CTCs enumeration is recommended for the patient in the stage
of disease-free; (3) the PTC patients with distant metastases have higher
CTCs counts when compares to the healthy control subjects and the
patients with disease-free status. In conclusion, CTCs enumeration is
thereby warranted in the course of diagnosis and treatment of thyroid
cancer.

