Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of tumor specific antibody response following systemic
delivery of receptor targeted nanoparticles into Balb/c mice bearing
mouse mammary tumors


Targeted nanoparticles (NP) offer a great opportunity for developing new
cancer imaging agents and targeted drug delivery carriers. Although
increasing evidence supports the potential of the targeted NP for early
cancer detection and drug delivery, the impact of systemic delivery of
targeted NP on the immune response in the tumor has yet to be addressed.
The possible immune enhancement effect of NP has attracted great
attention to apply various NP for vaccine development since NP can be
nonspecifically taken up by macrophages. In this study, we developed
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) receptor-targeted dual imaging
modality magnetic iron oxide NP (IONP) using single chain antibody to
EGFR (ScFvEGFR) without or with chemotherapy drug doxorubicin (Dox) for
targeted tumor imaging and therapy of triple negative breast cancer. The
NP were injected into normal Balb/c mice or mice bearing 4T1 mammary
tumors once per week for three weeks, then serum and tumors were
collected. Systemic delivery of the receptor-targeted NP led to
accumulation of NP in the tumors and inhibited tumor growth. Using ELISA
on tumor cell lysates and intact tumor cells, we found that mouse serum
from targeted IONP had the highest level of mammary tumor specific
antibody titers compared to mice that received Dox only, non-targeted NP
and no treatment control. However, the antibody titer was decreased in
the mice that received ScFvEGFR-IONP-Dox. To understand the antibody
activation mechanism by targeted delivery of ScFvEGFR-IONP but not
ScFvEGFR-IONP-Dox, we examined changes in the amount, phenotype, and
localization of antigen presenting macrophages using a pan-macrophage
(CD68) and M2 macrophage (CD163) and also dendritic cells (CD83) markers
in frozen tumor tissue sections. Results of double labeling
immunofluorescence against CD68 and CD163 showed the majority macrophage
subtype at the tumor edge was M2 for the tumors treated with
ScFvEGFR-IONP with and without Dox. However, in the central tumor area M1
macrophages was the main phenotype in ScFvEGFR -IONP-Dox treated tumors
while ScFvEGFR -IONP still expressed majority M2. Also, a higher level of
CD83+ cells infiltrated into the central tumor area of ScFvEGFR-IONP
compared to ScFvEGFR-IONP-Dox. Results of our study suggest that targeted
delivery of ScFvEGFR-IONP into tumor is able to activate intratumoral
macrophages and dendritic cells to antigen presentation and stimulate
tumor specific antibody responses while ScFvEGFR-IONP-Dox had decreased
amounts of CD163 and CD83. Therefore, targeted delivery of NP into tumors
and infiltration of antigen-presenting macrophages into the center of
tumors are important for the activation of tumor specific antibody
responses. This study could have clinical implications in development of
NP imaging and therapy agents for cancer detection and treatment.

