Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IG-001 potential as intraperitoneal therapy for ovarian cancer


Introduction: nab-paclitaxela Cremophor-free, albumin-bound, nanoparticle
form of paclitaxelthough a breakthrough in paclitaxel formulation, has
inherent problems associated with any biologics. IG-001
(Cynviloq/Genexol-PM), a polymeric albumin-free micellar formulation
utilizes biodegradable di-block copolymers composed of methoxy poly
(ethylene glycol)-poly (lactide) to form nanoparticles with paclitaxel
and is being developed as the next generation nanoparticle paclitaxel.
Its target indications are solid tumors such as Breast, NSCLC, Ovarian,
Bladder and Pancreatic cancers, taking advantage of its ability to
rapidly deliver paclitaxel to the targeted tissue via albumin-mediated
transport, as previously described for nab-paclitaxel. Herein, we report
preclinical and dissolution stability of IG-001 in comparison to
nab-paclitaxel in the ovarian cancer setting.Methods: Preclinical PK
parameters (HL, Tmax, AUCinf, Vz and CL) of the two formulations were
compared following bolus IV and IP injections (30 mg/kg) in mice. Blood
paclitaxel concentration was quantified using LC/MS/MS method and PK
parameters were obtained using the Phoenix PK program (Pharsight, CA).
Dissolution studies of nab-paclitaxel and IG-001 were performed using the
drug products reconstituted in saline and diluted in PBS or plasma.
Particle stability was monitored by dynamic light scattering using the
Malvern Nanosizer.Results: IG-001 exhibited conditional stability,
wherein stability was high in PBS and Lactated Ringer's solution but very
low in plasma. In contrast, nab-paclitaxel exhibited the expected
instability in both plasma and PBS. Across multiple experiments, there
was about a 10-fold enhancement of particle stability in serum-free
matrices. This suggests that IG-001 may have a PK advantage over
nab-paclitaxel when administered as saline-reconstituted solution into
the peritoneal cavity for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Therefore, a
PK study was performed in mice with drugs administered IP and IV. The
bolus IV injection studies in mice revealed almost identical PK
parameters for the two formulations. However, IP injection studies
indicated about a 10-fold enhanced paclitaxel levels for IG-001 vs.
nab-paclitaxel up to 1 hour post administration. Thereafter, it was not
possible to determine IP paclitaxel levels due to complete absorption of
the administered drug solution.Conclusions: Collectively, our data
strongly supports the notion that the conditional stability of IG-001
would confer an advantage in ovarian indication wherein the drug is
administered IP as a saline reconstituted drug solution. It also suggests
that the observed preferential peritoneal accumulation of paclitaxel when
Taxol was administered may not be applicable to nab-paclitaxel due to the
absence of Cremophor-EL as a sequestering agent in the peritoneal cavity.

