Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of p73 isoforms regulates proliferation and
chemotherapeutic response in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). TP73 gene is a member of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene family, which is critical in the regulation of cell cycle
and apoptosis. TP73 is located in distal 1p36 chromosomal region that is
commonly disrupted in DLBCL. TP73 gene function is controlled by a
balance between two isoforms with opposing functions, the full length
TAp73 protein (pro-apoptotic) and the NH2-terminally truncated Np73
protein (anti-apoptotic by antagonizing both TAp73 and p53). Up-regulated
expression of -Np73 isoforms has been reported in activated and germinal
center B- cells as compared to very low levels in memory B- cells and
follicular mantle cells, suggesting temporal expression of -Np73 isoforms
during specific B- cell developmental stages. In the present study we
have investigated the biological relevance of p73 isoforms in DLBCL. The
DLBCL cell line DHL-16 was transfected with TAp73 encoded mammalian
expression vector. The control cells comprised of DHL-16 cells
transfected with control vector. To evaluate growth differences under
basal conditions as well as with serum deprivation, phenotypic comparison
was performed between the two cell lines. Further, to evaluate the
response to chemotherapy and to determine the differences in
transcriptional targets, the p73 transfected and control cells were
studied for the expression of p73 transcriptional targets PUMA, BIM, and
GRAMD4. TAp73-transfected cells were more sensitive to serum deprivation
and chemotherapy and showed an increased expression of the pro-apoptotic
p73 transcriptional targets compared to control cells. We transfected
DHL-16 cells with a truncated p73 isoform functionally similar to Np73.
These Np73-transfected cells were resistant to serum deprivation and
chemotherapy and showed a reduction in the expression of the
pro-apoptotic p73 transcriptional targets PUMA, BIM, and GRAMD4 compared
to control-vector transfected cells. Together, our data demonstrate that
modulation of p73 isoform expression can alter the behavior of DLBCL and
highlights p73 as a potential new therapeutic target in DLBCL.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

