Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of essential genes for the development of hepatitis
B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma


Background and Aim: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly lethal and
prevalent cancer, posing a grave threat to human health globally.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is considered as a major risk factor
for this cancer, especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Unfortunately,
the molecular mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis remain obscure, which
hinders the development of effective therapies for the disease. In the
present study, we attempted to elucidate the molecular details of
HBV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis by investigating differentially
regulated genes at multiple developmental stages of HCC in a HBV
transgenic mouse model. Materials and Methods: The transgenic mice which
overproduced HBV large envelope polypeptide in hepatocytes and developed
liver tumors spontaneously were used in this study. To unravel
transcriptomics dynamics underlying hepatocarcinogenesis, RNA prepared
from livers of both transgenic and wild type mice of different ages (at
months 2, 12, 18 and 19) were subjected to RNA sequencing. Selected
target genes were first validated by quantitative PCR (qPCR) using a
larger set of mouse liver tissues (n=96) collected from 8 time points.
Clinical implications of the selected genes were then explored in a set
of human liver samples comprising 18 normal, 29 cirrhosis and 96 pairs of
HCC. RNA and protein expression levels were determined by qPCR,
immunohistochemical staining and Western blotting, respectively. Results:
Upon analysis of 20,209 gene transcripts, 2574 and 1035 transcripts were
found to be up-regulated (2 folds) and down-regulated (2 folds) in
tumors, respectively, when compared with the wild type controls. Among
these, 133 most prominent genes that exhibited concordant differential
expression throughout the stages of tumor progression were chosen for
validation in mouse liver tissues. Correlation analysis showed a high
correlation between RNA sequencing and qPCR data (r=0.7495; PBackground
and Aim: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly lethal and prevalent
cancer, posing a grave threat to human health globally. Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection is considered as a major risk factor for this cancer,
especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Unfortunately, the molecular
mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis remain obscure, which hinders the
development of effective therapies for the disease. In the present study,
we attempted to elucidate the molecular details of HBV-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis by investigating differentially regulated genes at
multiple developmental stages of HCC in a HBV transgenic mouse model.
Materials and Methods: The transgenic mice which overproduced HBV large
envelope polypeptide in hepatocytes and developed liver tumors
spontaneously were used in this study. To unravel transcriptomics
dynamics underlying hepatocarcinogenesis, RNA prepared from livers of
both transgenic and wild type mice of different ages (at months 2, 12, 18
and 19) were subjected to RNA sequencing. Selected target genes were
first validated by quantitative PCR (qPCR) using a larger set of mouse
liver tissues (n=96) collected from 8 time points. Clinical implications
of the selected genes were then explored in a set of human liver samples
comprising 18 normal, 29 cirrhosis and 96 pairs of HCC. RNA and protein
expression levels were determined by qPCR, immunohistochemical staining
and Western blotting, respectively. Results: Upon analysis of 20,209 gene
transcripts, 2574 and 1035 transcripts were found to be up-regulated (2
folds) and down-regulated (2 folds) in tumors, respectively, when
compared with the wild type controls. Among these, 133 most prominent
genes that exhibited concordant differential expression throughout the
stages of tumor progression were chosen for validation in mouse liver
tissues. Correlation analysis showed a high correlation between RNA
sequencing and qPCR data (r=0.7495; P<0.0001), indicating a high validity
of the data. Forty-six biologically informative genes were further
validated in human liver samples. By Gene Ontology analysis, the target
genes were revealed to play roles in a variety of biological processes
including stress and inflammation responses, metabolic and apoptotic
processes. Immunohistochemical staining and Western blotting demonstrated
significant differential expression of these genes between HCC and
non-tumorous livers. Statistical analyses revealed their significant
correlation with clinicopathological parameters including venous
infiltration, tumor size and overall survival, implicating their roles in
hepatocarcinogenesis. Conclusion: This study has demonstrated a
systematic strategy for identifying crucial genes for HBV-associated HCC,
which may have profound implications in combating this deadly cancer.

