Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spheroid culture of primary colorectal cancer cells from liver
metastases as an in vitro model of patient tumors


More than 65 % of patients with colorectal cancer require
chemotherapeutic treatment during the course of their disease. However,
colorectal tumors demonstrate pronounced heterogeneity, leading to
significant individual variation in sensitivity to standard
chemotherapeutic drugs. Tools for assessing chemosensitivity and
tailoring therapeutic regimens to the individual patient are therefore
urgently needed. A promising approach is to isolate viable cancer cells
from patient tissue and to test the chemosensitivity of the individual
tumor in vitro.The aim of the current study was to establish primary
colorectal cancer cell cultures from patient liver metastases and
investigate if the cultured cells retained important characteristics of
the original tumor. Small cell clusters were isolated from metastatic
tissue and allowed to form cell spheroids in suspension culture. The cell
composition of patient spheroids was characterized by immunostaining with
cell type specific antibodies. Cancer stem cells were identified by
staining for the markers CD44, CD166 and Lgr5. Spheroid size was
monitored over time and growth curves established for each patient. The
distribution of proliferating and apoptotic cells in the spheroids was
assessed by staining for specific markers. Overall, the 3-D culture
system was verified as a tumor model by comparing the results obtained
for the spheroids to paraffin-embedded sections of the original
tumors.Successful spheroid culture was obtained from more than 80 % of
tissue samples. Immunostaining confirmed that the primary cultures were
composed of epithelial cells with minimal contamination by other cell
types. Cell morphology and expression of intestinal markers confirmed
their malignant nature and colorectal origin. The dominating cell
populations of the original tumor could generally be identified in the
derived spheroids as well. The spheroids demonstrated significant growth
in vitro with no decrease in proliferation or increase in apoptosis
during short-term culture. In summary, spheroid cultures of colorectal
cancer cells can be established from liver metastases of individual
patients with a high success rate and the spheroids retain important
cellular characteristics of the original tumor. Spheroid culture
therefore represents a promising technique for establishing primary
cultures for chemotherapeutic screening of the individual patient.

