Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splicing factors ESRP1/ESRP2 as regulators of endocrine resistance
in breast cancer


Deregulation of alternative splicing (AS) has been implicated in the
development of drug resistance, tumor progression and metastasis.
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) as controllers of AS may act as master
regulators of cellular behavior. Among the RBPs, we previously have shown
that the expression of epithelial splicing regulatory proteins 1 and 2
(ESRP1 & ESRP2) have significantly elevated in cases with high Oncotype
DX scores and in ER-positive cells with acquired tamoxifen resistance
(MCF-7/ LCC2) (SABCS 2013). This study seeks to identify genes and their
splice variants that are regulated by ESRP1 & ESRP2 and could cause
development of endocrine resistance. To identify alternatively spliced
genes by ESRP1 & ESRP2 in endocrine resistance, we have performed a four
step bioinformatics approach as follows: 1) Motif analysis to identify
genes targeted by ESRP1 & ESRP2, 2) Comparison of differentially
expressed genes in tamoxifen treated samples (GSE17700 and GSE17705) with
genes targeted by ESRP1 & ESRP2 identified above, 3) Protein-protein
interaction from BIOGRID and 4) survival data using publically available
datasets (KM Plotter). Motif analysis identified 15,450 genes targeted
both by ESRP1 (PDeregulation of alternative splicing (AS) has been
implicated in the development of drug resistance, tumor progression and
metastasis. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) as controllers of AS may act as
master regulators of cellular behavior. Among the RBPs, we previously
have shown that the expression of epithelial splicing regulatory proteins
1 and 2 (ESRP1 & ESRP2) have significantly elevated in cases with high
Oncotype DX scores and in ER-positive cells with acquired tamoxifen
resistance (MCF-7/ LCC2) (SABCS 2013). This study seeks to identify genes
and their splice variants that are regulated by ESRP1 & ESRP2 and could
cause development of endocrine resistance. To identify alternatively
spliced genes by ESRP1 & ESRP2 in endocrine resistance, we have performed
a four step bioinformatics approach as follows: 1) Motif analysis to
identify genes targeted by ESRP1 & ESRP2, 2) Comparison of differentially
expressed genes in tamoxifen treated samples (GSE17700 and GSE17705) with
genes targeted by ESRP1 & ESRP2 identified above, 3) Protein-protein
interaction from BIOGRID and 4) survival data using publically available
datasets (KM Plotter). Motif analysis identified 15,450 genes targeted
both by ESRP1 (P<3.39e-05) and ESRP2 (PDeregulation of alternative
splicing (AS) has been implicated in the development of drug resistance,
tumor progression and metastasis. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) as
controllers of AS may act as master regulators of cellular behavior.
Among the RBPs, we previously have shown that the expression of
epithelial splicing regulatory proteins 1 and 2 (ESRP1 & ESRP2) have
significantly elevated in cases with high Oncotype DX scores and in
ER-positive cells with acquired tamoxifen resistance (MCF-7/ LCC2) (SABCS
2013). This study seeks to identify genes and their splice variants that
are regulated by ESRP1 & ESRP2 and could cause development of endocrine
resistance. To identify alternatively spliced genes by ESRP1 & ESRP2 in
endocrine resistance, we have performed a four step bioinformatics
approach as follows: 1) Motif analysis to identify genes targeted by
ESRP1 & ESRP2, 2) Comparison of differentially expressed genes in
tamoxifen treated samples (GSE17700 and GSE17705) with genes targeted by
ESRP1 & ESRP2 identified above, 3) Protein-protein interaction from
BIOGRID and 4) survival data using publically available datasets (KM
Plotter). Motif analysis identified 15,450 genes targeted both by ESRP1
(P<3.39e-05) and ESRP2 (P< 5.53e-05). 2212 of these genes were
differentially expressed in tamoxifen treated cases. This set of genes
was further categorized based on the ESRP1 & ESRP2 enhancer/ suppressor
motifs ratio resulting in 1260 genes. Further collective analysis of
survival data from KM plotter (P50) narrowed down 79 candidate genes that
are associated with tamoxifen resistance. Some of the genes (AURKA,
ERRB3, ESR2, EGFR, and MDM2) have been previously implicated in the de
novo or acquired resistance to tamoxifen. Validation of splicing variants
of these genes in human tumors is ongoing. Elevated expression of ESRP1 &
ESRP2 and its target genes play an important role in the development of
tamoxifen resistance and recurrence of ER+ breast cancer. ESRP1 & ESRP2
by affecting splicing have the potential to induce tamoxifen resistance
via multiple genes and pathways. Targeting ESRP1 & ESRP2 may offer novel
avenues for combating endocrine-resistance in breast cancer.

