Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral cellular heterogeneity of epithelial ovarian
carcinoma and its impact on tumor behavior


One of the challenging features of cancer is intratumoral heterogeneity
(ITH). The existence of ITH can have profound consequences on tumor
progression and drug sensitivity. However it is been essentially
impossible to monitor the extent to which individual clonal populations
contribute to and affect tumor behavior because of our inability to
culture tumor cells from patients in vitro without loosing initial
heterogeneity resulting from clonal selection under culture
conditions.Through our collaboration with Dr. Tan Ince, we have access to
cell culture medium (WIT-OC media) that allows primary tumor cells to
undergo continuous population doublings without selecting for or against
specific clones under culture conditions. By utilizing this media we have
generated 80 single cell clones from a Clear cell Carcinoma (CCC) patient
sample and monitored the extent of phenotypic and genomic heterogeneity
among 12 of the clonal populations. These clones showed striking
heterogeneity in copy number alterations as well as phenotypic
heterogeneity in vitro as assessed by anoikis, growth in soft agar,
doubling time, and growth in 3D reconstituted basement membrane cultures.
We also examined correlations between in vitro properties and tumor
formation in vivo using clones tagged with Gaussia-Luciferase (Gluc), a
secreted luciferase that is secreted from cells and can be assayed in
whole blood. We found that only three clones were transplantable by
themselves; however, the clone which showed the most rapid expansion in
the mouse was limited in it tumorigenic capacity, generating only ascitic
tumor populations. To address whether clonal heterogeneity could
contribute to tumor progression, we transplanted mixtures of clones and
utilized barcoded clones to analyze the clonal composition of tumor
masses. Interestingly, mixtures of the 12 clones resulted in the
generation of more aggressive tumors, including the formation of solid
tumors and metastases to lungs, liver and brain and allow in vivo growth;
these metastatic growths contain distinct mixtures of individual clonal
populations. Moreover, clones that could not initiate tumor formation
individually could generate metastatic tumors, suggesting that there is
cooperativity between the clones to enhance growth and induce
metastasis.The study has provided evidence that cell lines generated from
individual clones vary significantly in their functional activities in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover, by studying the single cell clones, we have
found evidence for the existence of interclonal crosstalk during tumor
progression and are currently studying the nature and impact of such
crosstalk on tumor progression and metastasis.

