Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-year survival for patients with metastatic melanoma who had no
evidence of disease at time of treatment with patient specific tumor stem
cell vaccines


Autologous melanoma cells that are proliferating and self-renewing in
cell culture, have the phenotypic and functional characteristics of tumor
stem cells. Such cells are responsible for invasiveness and metastases.
They express not only a variety of melanoma-associated antigens, but also
unique neoantigens associated with other mutations. Therefore such cells
should provide excellent polyvalent antigenic targets for
patient-specific vaccines. In successive trials in metastatic melanoma:
[1] 74 patients injected with irradiated proliferating autologous tumor
cells (TC) had a 20.5 month median overall survival (OS) and 29% 5-year
OS (Cancer Biother Radiopharm 2007), [2] 54 patients injected with
autologous dendritic cells that had been loaded with antigen from
autologous proliferating tumor cells (DC/TC) had a 54% 5-year OS; (Cancer
Biother Radiopharm 2009), [3] in a randomized trial survival was better
for 18 patients treated with DC/TC compared to 24 TC-treated patients (J
Immunother 2012). In the current analysis we examined the long-term
benefits of DC/TC and TC in the subset of patients who, although they had
experienced documented metastatic disease, had no detectable metastatic
disease by physical examination or radiographic imaging at the time of
vaccine treatment. OS was calculated from date of enrollment at the time
of initiating vaccine in the various trials. Log rank tests were used to
compare survival curves. In order to minimize potential bias, the study
was limited to patients who received granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or interferon gamma (IFN-g) as adjuvants, and
who received at least the first 3 planned weekly injections. There were
33 patients treated with DC/TC and 37 treated with TC. Median follow up
was greater than 5 years for both groups with 8 DC/TC and 5 TC patients
censored alive before 5 years; no patients were lost to follow up. There
were no obvious prognostic differences between the treatment cohorts in
terms of age, gender, or previous sites of metastases. Survival was
longer in patients who received DC/TC, median not reached at 60 months vs
32 months, and 5-year OS 73% vs 43% (p=0.015). The survival for the TC
cohort is consistent with the 40% to 45% 5-year survival rates reported
for similar patients treated with BCG, BCG plus allogeneic tumor cells or
melanoma peptide antigen immunotherapy following surgical resection of
stage IV metastatic disease (Morton ASCO 2007, Tagawa Cancer 2006). The
73% 5-year survival rate for DC/TC suggests that autologous DC/TC may
represent a superior adjunctive immunotherapy in such patients.
(NCI-V01-1646 and NCT00436930) Supported by the Hoag Hospital Foundation
and the Cancer Biotherapy Research Group.

