Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccine-draining lymph nodes of cancer patients for generating
anticancer antibodies


Human vaccine studies regularly demonstrate vaccine-induced antibodies in
the blood. Characterization of these antibodies shows that they exhibit
an extensive range of bioactive mechanisms. Unfortunately, there is not
yet a reliable method by which to produce these important antibodies.
Human antibodies may not require any molecular modification for
therapeutic application and have a much faster pipeline to clinical
studies than animal-derived antibodies. Lymph nodes are the primary
destination of tumor or vaccine antigens. In the node, B cells undergo
clonal expansion and somatic hypermutation, leading to the
affinity-matured populations of effector B cells secreting antibodies
that bind to the tumor or vaccine. The cancer vaccine-draining node is
the ideal source of B cells that produce anticancer antibodies. Despite
multiple human cancer vaccine studies, very little research has been done
to recover the B cells responsible for vaccine-induced anticancer
antibodies. In the present study, we used mononuclear cells from
surgically removed vaccine-draining lymph nodes of melanoma patients
vaccinated with 6 melanoma peptides derived from cancer-testis antigens
and from melanocytic differentiation proteins for generating anti-vaccine
peptide antibodies. The lymph node draining the vaccination site was
localized by lymphatic mapping with a radiotracer. The development and
maturity of B cells were assessed by determining phenotypic characters of
lymph node cells using multicolor flow cytometry. The results showed that
these vaccine-draining nodes contain high numbers of class-switched
(CD19+CD27+IgD-IgM-) B cells and plasmablasts (CD19+CD38+IgM-). B-cell
ELISpot assay was used to quantify the proportion of B cells in
vaccine-draining lymph nodes that secrete anti-melanoma peptide
antibodies. Positive ELISpot responses were observed in patients who also
showed serum antibody-reactivity towards the vaccine peptides. The
identification of lymph node cell samples exhibiting strong B-cell
responses allows efficient generation and screening of hybridomas that
secrete antibodies against cancer vaccine antigens. This study
establishes a step-wise protocol for generating anti-cancer antibodies
from vaccine-draining lymph nodes. We anticipate that the ability to
reliably generate in vitro the same antibodies observed in the blood of
vaccinated patients will further stimulate research to understand
mechanisms of human antibody activity.

