Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical activity and the risk of lung cancer death: Results from
the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey


Background: Moderate and vigorous physical activity have shown inverse
associations with lung cancer (LC) risk, as well as a dose-response
effect, in previous studies. One mechanism for this occurrence is the
anti-inflammatory effect of physical activity, which may occur due to a
reduction in visceral fat mass, with a decreased production and release
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and the creation of an anti-inflammatory
environment. Chronic inflammation has been shown to play an important
role in LC. Few studies have simultaneously examined associations between
physical activity and inflammatory factors in relation to LC. The purpose
of this study was to examine physical activity and inflammatory factors,
such as serum C-reactive protein (CRP), smoking, and obesity in relation
to LC fatality.Methods: Data from cancer-free individuals over age 40 in
the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1988-1994)
were prospectively examined in relation to physical activity,
inflammation and LC fatality. Mortality status was ascertained through
probabilistic record matching using the National Death Index. Physical
activity was assessed in the NHANES III Household Adult Questionnaire,
along with demographics, smoking and other lifestyle factors. Cox
proportional hazards regression models assessed the relationship between
physical activity, inflammatory factors and risk of LC death.Results: Of
8,950 participants, 219 individuals died of LC during the 218-month
follow-up period. Multivariate regression analyses revealed a 35% reduced
risk of LC death for smokers (HR=0.65, p=0.0061) and 34% reduced risk of
LC death for males (HR=0.66, p=0.0230) who reported that they had walked
at least a mile or more in the past month versus those who did not report
walking a mile or more in the past month, while adjusting for CRP,
smoking, age, gender, and BMI. A dose-response effect was observed for
low, moderate and high CRP levels and LC death (CRP7, respectively;
p-trend7, respectively; p-trend<0.0001). No significant associations
between physical activity and LC death were observed for non-smokers and
females in the adjusted models.Conclusions: This study showed substantial
reductions in risk of LC death among smokers and males who reported that
they walked at least a mile or more in the past month when adjusting for
other inflammation-related factors, which has not been previously
examined. These results were not observed for females and non-smokers,
however, which may suggest a different mechanism in these groups, such as
environmental or genetic factors. Additional studies are needed to
further explore these results among diverse populations.

