Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin-based concurrent chemoradiotherapy antagonizes
anti-tumor immunity in patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer


Purpose/Objectives: While viral antigens in HPV-related oropharyngeal
cancer (HPVOPC) make it an attractive target for immunotherapy,
understanding the immune effects of existing therapeutic approaches is
essential for integrating immunotherapy into HPVOPC treatment.
Preclinical data in several cancer models support an overall
immunostimulatory effect of chemotherapy and radiation; however their
effect on HPV-specific immunity on HPVOPC patients is unknown. We tested
the hypotheses that platinum-based concomitant chemoradiation, with or
without taxane-platinum-5FU (TPF) induction chemotherapy, induces a
favorable profile of circulating immunocytes ad enhanced HPV-specific T
cell responses in HPVOPC patients.Materials/Methods: Patients with stage
II-IV HPVOPC treated with standard-of-care chemoradiation underwent
serial blood sampling before, during, and after treatment for up to one
year. Circulating immunocytes including effector CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
and immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Treg) and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) were profiled by flow cytometry. Expression
levels of the negative costimulatory molecule PD-1 on T cells were also
assessed by flow cytometry. HPV antigen-specific T cell responses in
response to HPV16 E6 and E7 peptides were measured by luminex analysis of
IFN- production.Results: Pre-treatment HPV-specific T cell responses were
present in 12/18 patients, and an additional 4 patients acquired
measureable responses following induction chemotherapy. Of the 16
patients who developed HPV-specific responses before completion of
therapy, 10 lost these responses by 3 months post-treatment. The average
level of IFN-g release by PBMC after stimulation with HPV peptides was
non-significantly decreased at 3 weeks post-treatment, and significantly
decreased at 3 and 6 months. Loss of pre-existing tumor-specific immune
responses was associated with a striking (2-fold) decline in circulating
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell numbers, a lesser decline in Treg (1.5-fold), marked
elevation of MDSC (>2-fold), and decline in the CD8+:Treg and CD8+:MDSC
ratios following chemoradiotherapy. PD-1 expression levels on total and
CD45RO+ (memory) CD4+ T cells were elevated at 3 weeks after completion
of chemoradiation, returning to baseline by 3 months.Conclusions:
Contrary to our starting hypothesis, we found an overall
immunosuppressive effect of chemoradiotherapy on immune responses in
HPVOPC patients. Upregulation of PD-1 on CD4 T cells is a potential
immunosuppressive mechanism amenable to targeted therapy with clinically
available anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies. Taken together, our
results suggest that chemoradiation has profound effects on circulating
immunocyte populations and the immune response to HPV+ OPC, and highlight
the importance of further studies of the immune effects of
standard-of-care treatment for HPVOPC.

