Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combination of two tropical spice compounds potentiates
chemotherapy response in castration-resistant prostate cancer cells


Introduction: Patients with castration resistant advanced prostate cancer
(CRPC) respond poorly to potent chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., Docetaxel
or Mitoxantrone) with survival advantages that last less than 4 months.
Since chemotherapy itself has morbidity in the elderly patients, adding
another such drug is unlikely to improve the outcome. We investigated the
potential therapeutic benefits of treating CRPC with a combination of two
natural dietary anti-proliferative compounds: Curcumin and Piperine. They
are derived from the tropical spices, turmeric and black pepper,
respectively. Both are orally bioavailable and can be consumed over a
long period of time.Materials and methods: The cytotoxicity of Curcumin,
Piperine, and Docetaxel were individually tested on a CRPC cell line
PC-3, which was incubated for 48 hours or 72 hours. Cytotoxicity was
evaluated by cell counting, a colorimetric assay and by clonogenic
survival, colony-formation assay. Enhancement of Docetaxel cytotoxicity
by natural compounds was evaluated by treating cells with these compounds
24 hours before adding Docetaxel or with co-incubation. The potential
mechanism of cytotoxicity was examined by an apoptosis assay and changes
in cell cycle phase-fractions. The efficacy of the combination was
evaluated by Isobologram analysis and ANOVA.Results: All three drugs
tested on PC-3 showed cytotoxicity, Docetaxel was the most cytotoxic
(IC50 25 nM) and Piperine was the least cytotoxic (IC50 100 M). Curcumin
alone was significantly cytotoxic to PC-3 cells at 10 M but it enhanced
the cytotoxicity of Docetaxel. Piperine, when combined with Curcumin or
Docetaxel, significantly increased the cytotoxicity by 50%. Prior
exposure to Piperine resulted in enhanced cytotoxicity of Docetaxel and
Curcumin more than when in co-incubation. The increased cytotoxicity in
combination therapy was mainly due to increased apoptotic
activity.Conclusion: This study demonstrated that combining diet-derived
antiproliferatinve compounds with a chemotherapy drug can potentially
enhance tumoricidal activity and therefore, potentially reduce morbidity
and mortality of patients with CRPC. Pretreatment with dietary compounds
could potentially enhance subsequent treatment with chemotherapy agents.

