Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome and targeted sequencing identified the MAPK and PI3K
pathways as the main targets in intracranial and testicular germ cell
tumors


Intracranial germ cell tumors (iGCTs) are the second most common central
nervous system tumors in patients under 14 in Japan. The majority of
germinomas respond well to combined chemo- and radiotherapy, however
non-germinoma germ cell tumors (NGGCTs) may show resistance to therapy
and have a poor clinical outcome. Despite their clinical significance,
the biology of iGCTs is mostly unknown. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of iGCTs through a comprehensive
genomic analysis. A total of 198 germ cell tumors (GCTs) including 133
iGCTs (69 pure germinomas, 56 NGGCTs and 8 metastatic tumors) as well as
65 testicular germ cell tumors (tGCTs) (39 seminomas and 26 non-seminoma
GCTs) were collected from 13 centers participating in the Intracranial
Germ Cell Tumor Consortium in Japan. Matched normal DNA was available for
70 iGCTs and 4 tGCTs. Somatic mutations in all coding exons were
investigated by whole exome sequencing (WES) using SureSelectXT Human All
Exon v4 and a GAIIx or HiSeq 2000 system in 41 tumors and the matched
normal DNAs. Targeted sequencing with a set of custom made PCR primers
was performed using either an IonTorrent PGM or Proton System. The
results were integrated with the patients' clinical information that was
available for 124 iGCT patients. Mutations in selected candidate genes
were further evaluated in an independent tumor cohort using the
IonTorrent PGM system. On average, 15.4 non-synonymous somatic mutations
were observed in each tumor, ranging from 1 to 140 by WES in 41 iGCTs.
Based on the WES data, 41 candidate genes were selected according to the
frequency and/or significance of the mutations found. All coding exons of
these 41 genes spanning over 160kb were PCR-amplified in a further 157
GCTs using the IonTorrent system. The combined WES and IonTorrent
screenings showed that KIT was the most frequently mutated gene in both
iGCTs (27%) and tGCTs (18%). MTOR was the second most frequently mutated
also in both iGCTs (7%) and tGCTs (6%). RAS mutations (KRAS, HRAS, NRAS)
were altogether found in 13% of iGCTs and 12% of tGCTs. These mutations
were mutually exclusive to each other and also to KIT mutations.
Collectively, the genes involved in the MAPK pathway (e.g., KIT, RAS,
NF1) and the PI3K/MTOR pathway (e.g., MTOR, PTEN) were mutated in 44% and
13% of all GCTs. These alterations were significantly more common among
pure germinomas than NGGCTs. The mutated MTOR protein was shown to have
increased kinase activity, which was suppressed by a specific MTOR
inhibitor. Our comprehensive mutational genomic analysis of GCTs revealed
that alterations of the MAPK and/or PI3K/MTOR pathways play a critical
role in the pathogenesis of both iGCTs and tGCTs, although the extent of
their involvement depends on the histopathological subtypes. Our findings
will hopefully lead to the development of a targeted therapy for
treatment-resistant iGCTs.

