Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A method to identify copy number aberrations (CNAs) from whole
exome sequence (WES) data and its application to multiple myeloma cell
lines and patient samples


Duplications and deletions of large-scale genomic regions, including
whole chromosomes, are a hallmark of malignant tumors and represent an
important predictor of outcome for many tumor types. In multiple myeloma,
a core set of structural variants are regularly used for disease
prognosis (e.g., del17p, t(4;14), t(14,16)). The presence of one or more
of these lesions is predictive of a more aggressive disease and poorer
outcomes for patients. The application of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) to cancer samples has enhanced our ability to detect prognostic and
predictive copy number aberrations (CNAs). However, most NGS-based
methods for the identification of CNAs in tumors require whole genome
sequencing (WGS). Relatively fewer methods exist for the detection of
CNAs from exome sequencing and, to our knowledge, these methods all rely
on having matched normal data. However, WES is still far more common than
WGS and matched normal samples are frequently not available. Therefore,
we have developed a novel method for the identification of CNAs from
single-sample WES data. Our method combines LOWESS smoothing and
discrete-wavelet-transformation to normalize the exome coverage data with
an HMM for coverage segmentation. We have applied our new method to WES
data from 40 myeloma cell-lines for which aCGH copy number calls were
also available for training and validation. Our method shows a high
correlation with the aCGH calls (mean = 95%). In addition we have
currently analyzed 42 (of 102) tumor samples that were collected during
screening of relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma patients on three
Onyx-sponsored Phase 2 clinical trials of the proteasome inhibitor
carfilzomib (PX-171-003,PX-171-004, PX-171-005). Based on analysis of the
completed subset we find that the frequency of known and novel lesions
within these samples is similar to what has previously been observed in
other publically available myeloma CNA datasets. The most frequent event
that we find is loss of chr13 followed by gains on chr1q and chr15 all at
near 40% frequency. We also find gains of chr3, chr5, chr9 and chr11 in
30% of patients. These results indicate that we can apply this new method
to our larger set of clinical samples in order to discover new prognostic
markers for patient outcomes and response to therapy in MM.

