Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E12 and E47 are essential for TWIST1 dependent suppression of
oncogene-induced senescence in NSCLC


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and
in the world. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is not a single disease
entity, but a collection of distinct oncogene driven neoplasms. The most
common driver oncogene in NSCLC is mutant-KRAS, which is present in
20-25% of all NSCLC and for which no effective therapies exist. In
addition, acquired resistance to the current therapy for the two most
frequently observed targetable driver oncogenes in NSCLC, mutant-EGFR and
the ALK translocations, is inevitable. Clearly there is a need for novel
therapeutic strategies to target these oncogene driven lung cancers.The
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TWIST1 plays several
critical roles in promoting tumorigenesis through inhibition of
apoptosis, promotion of metastasis through induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and inhibition of
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). We recently demonstrated that TWIST1
is essential for tumor maintenance in human NSCLC containing mutant KRAS,
mutant EGFR, or amplified cMET. Moreover we have shown that Twist1
cooperates with Kras to induce adenocarcinoma of the lung in mouse models
and that inhibition of Twist1 in both a murine model and in human cell
lines causes OIS or in some cases apoptosis. We have previously
demonstrated that reactivation of OIS after inhibition of TWIST1 occurs
independently of the RB/p16, p53/p21 or p27 pathways.In the current
study, we examined the role of the TWIST1 binding partners E12 and E47,
which are encoded by the E2A locus, in mediating TWIST1 dependent
suppression of OIS. E2A encoded proteins have previously been
demonstrated to act as tumor suppressors through inhibition of cell
proliferation. However, E12 and E47 are overexpressed in several tumor
types and this expression can lead to chemoresistance. Furthermore,
previous studies have demonstrated that the E12-TWIST1 heterodimerization
stabilizes both proteins and in some cases, enhances TWIST1 activity.In
our study we have shown that in human KRAS mutant NSCLC cell lines the
silencing of the E2A gene products phenocopies the silencing of TWIST1 by
inducing either OIS or apoptosis. Furthermore, we have observed
significant downregulation of TWIST1 after silencing the E2A gene
products. Conversely, overexpression of either E12 or E47 leads to
increased TWIST1 protein levels. Interestingly, TWIST1 overexpression
leads to E12/E47 stabilization suggesting that heterodimer formation
results in a reciprocal stabilization of the binding partner. Finally, we
have shown that harmine, a harmala alkaloid that leads to degradation of
TWIST1, inhibits NSCLC cell line growth and decreases both E12/E47 levels
as well. These data suggest that E12/E47 are essential for TWIST mediated
suppression of OIS and that targeting of the TWIST1-E12/E47 axis may be
an effective therapeutic strategy against oncogene driven NSCLC.

