Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteolysis, splenic and hepatic extramedullary hematopoiesis,
MDSCs, tumor growth, and metastases by orthotopic mammary tumors are
increased by alcohol consumption and fatty diets


Fatty diets can induce low-grade inflammation that we report is increased
by chronic alcohol consumption (CAC). CAC as 16.6% of total calories when
administered in combination with the Lieber-DeCarli high-fat diet
increases inflammation included hepatic and splenic extramedullary
hematopoiesis (EMH) as assessed by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry
and a colony forming unit-granulocyte macrophage (CFU-GM) assay. Further,
an increased number of hepatic myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
CD11b+Gr1+ cells that were predominantly Ly6cbr are observed. The
increase in MDSCs is associated with an increased number of hepatic
non-parenchymal cells including adipocytes (Oil Red O). Consistent with
the increased number of hepatic MDSCs and EMH is a decrease in bone
marrow cellularity and progenitor cells measured by flow cytometry
(Lin-CD11b-Gr1-Sca-1+) and CFU-GM/femur. Unexpectedly, we observed
demineralization and osteolytic lesions by micro computed tomography
(micro CT) in all bones examined including femur, tibia, fibula and
vertebral column that was associated with osteoclast activity (Trap+).
Osteolysis was most notable in the fibula and vertebral spurs associated
with osteoclast channels, and the demineralization appeared to be
associated with areas of active myelopoiesis. The low grade, chronic
inflammation associated with the Lieber-DeCarli fatty diet and CAC
accelerated the induction of orthotopic 4T1 mammary tumors, resulting in
extensive bone osteolysis, demineralization and increased metastases at
aberrant sites including splenic, cardiac, hepatic, and extensive lymph
node foci in addition to peritoneal and pleural effusions. The latter
were haemorrhagic with a predominant nucleated cell infiltrate composed
of bands, segs and myelocytes, supporting EMH. These results support the
suggestion that a high-fat diet and CAC together increase tumor
induction, metastasis and pathology in association with MDSC
mobilization, expansion and EMH resulting in increased numbers of
osteoclasts, associated bone demineralization and suppression of T-cell
frequency and function. These results support the development of
combination therapy strategies incorporating multiple molecular
therapeutics that inhibit OCs, MDSCs and their associated mediators.

