Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-myc-SOD2/Bmi1 pathway mediates cancer stem-like cell migration
and invasion in tongue squamous cell carcinoma


Our previous studies had revealed that over-expression of manganese
superoxide dismutase (SOD2) is a frequent event in tongue squamous cell
carcinoma (TSCC) [BMC Cancer. 2010 10:365], and it contributes to the
enhanced metastatic potential of TSCC through regulating cell migration
and invasion [Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 53(1):44-50]. In the current
study, our immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed the over-expression of
SOD2 in TSCC patient cohort, and further revealed that over-expression of
Bmi1, a member of the Polycomb group of chromatin-modifier proteins that
is essential for stem cell self-renewal, is also a common event in
premalignant dysplasia, primary SCC, and lymph node metastases.
Furthermore, the over-expression of BMI1 is associated with poor
prognosis. More importantly, a statistically significant correlation was
observed between Bmi1 expression and SOD2 expression. These observations
were supported by our in vitro studies, in which knockdown of SOD2/Bmi1
in TSCC cell line (UM1) or stem cell marker-expressing side population
(SP) of the UM1 cells led to reduced cell migration and invasion, as well
as decreases in the SP proportion (in UM1 cells), proliferation, sphere
and clone formation and reduced expression of stem cell markers (ABCG,
Nanog, Bmi1). Interesting, knockdown of SOD2 in UM1 or SP led to reduced
expression of Bmi1, and knockdown of Bmi1 led to reduced expression of
SOD2, which mirrors the observed correlation between Bmi1 and SOD2 in the
TSCC patient cohort. Since c-myc is a known oncogene that has been showed
to regulate both Bmi1 and SOD2, we further examined the role of
c-myc-SOD2/Bmi1 pathway in TSCC. Direct binding of c-myc protein to the
E-box in the Bmi1/SOD2 promoter were demonstrated by ChIP assay and
Luciferase assay. Moreover, knockdown of c-myc in UM1 or SP cells led to
reduced expression of both Bmi1 and SOD2, as well as reduced cell
migration, and invasion, reduced expression of stem cell markers,
decreases in the SP proportion (in UM1 cells), inhibition in cell
proliferation, sphere and clone formation. Taken together, these data
suggest that Bmi1 and SOD2 are two major factors in the initiation and
progression of TSCC, and play an important role in the migration and
invasion of TSCC cells. C-myc directly regulated the expression of Bmi1
and SOD2, and thus mediated the migration and invasion and maintaining
the stemmness of the CSC in TSCC.

