Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterozygous expression of an oncogenic Pik3ca mutation during
murine development results in fatal embryonic and extra-embryonic defects


The PI3K/Akt signalling pathway regulates many important cellular
functions including proliferation, migration, survival and angiogenesis.
The PIK3CA gene, encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of the PI3K enzyme,
is somatically mutated in a range of human cancers and overgrowth
syndromes. We have previously described a novel mouse model with a
Cre-recombinase (Cre)-mediated knock-in of the common cancer-associated
Pik3ca(H1047R) mutation that can be targeted to selected tissues using
various Cre-expressing mouse strains. As the mutation is knocked in to
the endogenous gene, the mutant protein is expressed at normal
physiological levels.We have used the Cre-deleter mouse to induce
expression of the Pik3ca(H1047R) mutation ubiquitously from the 2-cell
stage of development. This results in embryonic lethality by E10.5 with
embryos at E9.5 demonstrating stunted growth, failed turning and abnormal
cardiovascular development in both the embryo proper and extraembryonic
yolk sac. These tissues also showed increased expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family proteins. We then selectively
targeted the mutation to the endothelial cells of the developing embryo
using the Tie2-Cre mouse strain. No Tie2-Cre:Pik3ca(H1047R) mutant
embryos survived to E11.5 and at E10.5, while successfully turned,
embryos were severely underdeveloped and no longer viable. At E9.5,
vascular remodelling was disorganised and truncated in the embryo proper
and yolk sacs. Development of the heart was also affected with clear
disruption to anterior cardinal vein and dorsal aorta development.Our
results demonstrate the importance of PI3K/Akt signalling in embryonic
development and cardiovascular formation in the mouse. The observed cell
autonomous role in vessel development was further confirmed upon targeted
expression to endothelial cells while the increased expression of various
VEGF family proteins suggests probable crosstalk between the PI3K/Akt and
VEGF signalling pathways during cardiovascular development. The lethality
associated with expression of Pik3ca(H1047R) mutation during development
likely explains the lack of inherited germline PIK3CA mutations in humans.

