Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of TGF-beta on matrix metalloproteinase-2, 9, and 13
expression and secrection in human prostate cancer cells


Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are major critical molecules assisting
tumor cells during metastasis. The production of MMPs by prostatic
epithelial and/or neighboring stromal cells plays an important role in
the penetration of extracellular matrix barriers in normal or neoplastic
growth. Activation of MMP-13 is critical in the MMP cascade and MMP-2 and
-9 are important in tumor metastasis. Transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta has been reported to exert growth inhibitory activity in
normal epithelial cells whereas it induces cell proliferation and
invasive phenotypes in advanced carcinomas.In this study, we investigated
the role of TGF-1 and TGF-3 in MMP expression and secretion in prostate
cancer cell line PC-3 and prostatic epithelial cell line RWPE-1.
Treatment with 1ng/ml of TGF-1 and TGF-3 enhanced MMP-9 expression in
both cell lines but showed no significant effect on MMP-2 expression.
TGF-1 and TGF-3 increased MMP-13 expression in PC-3 cells at 8 hr but
decreased its expression in RWPE-1 cells. As examined in conditioned
medium (CM) by zymography, TGF-1 and TGF-3 increased the secretion of
pro-MMP-9 and its active form at different time points in PC-3cells.
However, they inhibited pro-MMP-2 and no active MMP-2 activity was
detected in the same CM. On the other hand, both TGF-1 and TGF-3
increased pro-MMP-9 and pro-MMP-2 in RWPE-1 cells. TGF-3 is more potent
that TGF-1. TGF-3 also increased active MMP-2 after 18 hr. MMP-9 siRNA
abolished TGF- induced invasion in PC-3 cells but MMP-13 siRNA didnt
affect PC3 cell migration. Our results suggest that TGF-1 and TGF-3 have
stimulatory effects on MMP-9 secretion in both PC-3 and RWPE-1cells and
similar effect on MMP-2 secretion in RWPE-1 cells. However, they have
inhibitory effect on MMP-2 secretion in PC-3 cells. MMP-9 is essential
for TGF- effects on cell migration. TGF- has opposite effect on MMP-13
expression in the two cell lines and MMP-13 is not required for cell
migration.

