Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of SPARC in ovarian cancer


Epithelial Ovarian cancer (OvCa) is the leading cause of death from
gynecologic malignancies as most patients are diagnosed at late stages.
Despite aggressive surgical debulking and cytoreduction, recurrence is
common with poor patient survival. Constitutive progressive inflammation
is the hallmark of OvCa and is contributed by the interaction of
transformed OvCa cells with cues from the peritoneal microenvironment,
activating multiple signaling pathways that converge in the
(trans)activation of NFB which not only induces the transcription of
myriad inflammatory mediators but represses tumor suppressor genes (TSGs)
creating a vicious circle of disease progression, recurrence and
chemoresistance. Therefore there is a pressing need to identify new
diagnostic, prognostic biomarkers as well as new. Our earlier studies
indicated Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine SPARC is a tumor
suppressor in OvCa in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we found that SPARC
suppresses OvCa cells interactions with environmental cues within the
peritoneal milieu. We also found that the expression of SPARC was
decreased in established OvCa cell lines and microdissected OvCa cells
from advanced tumors consistent with hypermethylated of its promoter.
However, the mechanisms of epigenetic regulation of SPARC in OvCa (and
other morbidities) are unraveled. Mapping of SPARC promoter revealed
consensus binding sites for NFB subunits. Pharmacologic inhibition of NFB
as well as knockdown of p65-RelA and p50 subunits restored SPARC
expression and function in OvCa cells. Furthermore, treatment of OvCa
cells with demethylating agent 5azacytidine indicated that NFB-mediated
SPARC repression is due to methylation. In OvCa tissue microarrays, the
expression of SPARC in cancer cells inversely correlated with nuclear
p65-RelA and DNMT3a expression. Together these findings indicate that
activated NFB integrates inflammatory signals to exert epigenetic
pressure suppressing tumor cell SPARC through promoter methylation.

