Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell death resistance promoted by radiotherapy in a colorectal
cell line


Colorectal adenocarcinoma is the fourth more frequent cause of death by
cancer in the world. Despite some similarities, the rectal cancer has
characteristics that differentiate it from the colon cancer, resulting in
different treatments and outcomes. The rectal cancer in stages II and III
is treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by surgery, and the
response to neoadjuvant treatment in patients is variable and
unpredictable. Up to now, surgery intervention is required to assess the
pathologic response to therapy. The identification of predictive
biomarkers for response to therapy is of great importance, in order to
identify the patients that will benefit from such treatment. To better
understand the molecular alterations in cells that resist to the
radiotherapy, we started our research using WiDr, a colon tumor cell
line. Cell cycle synchronized WiDr cells were submitted to two cycles of
irradiation (4Gy in each cycle and 2 week of interval between the cycles)
and resistant cells were isolated. Irradiated WiDr cells (RxTWiDr) shown
a better capacity to form colonies, in colony growth assays, when
compared to parental WiDr cells. This characteristic was maintained when
they were submitted to a new round of irradiation. In addition, WiDrRxT
cells treated with Staurosporine presented a higher viability in MTT
assays than WiDr cells. We also collected the conditioned medium (CM)
from RxTWiDr and WiDr cells, and treated the parental WiDr cells. The
parental cells treated with CM from RxTWiDr cells for 15 minutes shown an
increase in the ERK1/2 activation when compared to cells treated CM from
WiDr cells. These results demonstrated that radio resistant cells are
more resilient than parental cells and that their secreted factors
activated specific signaling pathways via ERK1/2 phosphorylation. The
nature of these factors is under investigation using proteomics.Supported
by So Paulo State Foundation (FAPESP)

