Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of molecular signatures predicting response to
5-FU based chemotherapy in mouse models of colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) often arises from adenomatous polyps
that progress to invasive cancer, but polyps can also remain static in
size, regress, or resolve. Predicting which progress and which remain
benign is difficult, since longitudinal analysis of individual polyps is
impossible due to removal in humans. There are currently no molecular
signatures that can identify adenomas that will eventually progress. In
patients with stage II and III CRC , adjuvant chemotherapy on a
5-fluorouracil (5FU)-based regimen is considered following surgery.
Despite receiving post-operative therapy, almost 50% of patients with
stage III cancer recur. Again, there is no molecular signature that can
predict response to 5FU. The purpose of this study was to identify gene
expression differences in colon tumors using a mouse model. Individual
tumors in mice can be monitored longitudinally throughout progression and
treatment. Specifically, we aimed to: (1) develop and characterize a new
mouse model of colon cancer; (2) identify differences in molecular
progression prior to histopathologcial progression; and (3) identify a
priori differences in gene expression between tumors that are resistant
or sensitive to 5FU.Methods: (SWRxB6)F1.ApcMin/+ (F1.Min) mice were
treated with the inflammatory agent dextran sodium sulfate to induce
tumors in the distal colon. Colonoscopy was used to identify, follow, and
biopsy individual tumors. To best define chemotherapy response, only
tumors that exhibited stasis for 4 weeks prior were treated with 5FU.
Gene expression was analyzed from serial biopsies from pre- and
post-treatment tumor using microarray and qPCR.Results: Tumors in F1.Min
mice exhibit growth, stasis, and spontaneous regression. A majority of
tumors become static in size after an initial period of growth.
Histological evaluation of tumors revealed that many tumors remained
adenomas (71%), while some advanced to intramucosal carcinomas (23%) and
adenocarcinomas (3%). Interestingly, 3 tumors that remained adenomas and
3 that progressed to intramucosal carcinomas displayed differential
expression of 68 genes regardless of time point. Analysis of pre-5FU
biopsies from 5 resistant tumors and 6 sensitive tumors revealed
differential expression patterns of Hp1bp3 and Xpo7.Conclusions: F1.Min
mice develop tumors that can progress to invasive adenocarcinomas, and
tumor response to treatment with chemotherapy can be followed in real
time. Differential expression of genes with prognostic benefit can occur
early and can be sustained throughout tumor development. Molecular
determinants of 5FU sensitivity can be identified prior to treatment.
Defining expression patterns that predict outcomes to chemotherapy in CRC
might minimize the risk of undergoing ineffective chemotherapy and
identify patients that may benefit from other treatment approaches in the
adjuvant setting.

