Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evi1 defines leukemia-initiating capacity and tyrosine kinase
inhibitor resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia


Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder by
BCR-ABL, which can transform hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into
leukemic stem cells (LSCs) with a limitless capacity for self-renewal.
Despite substantial prognostic improvement of CML by a specific debulking
of tumor burden with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) targeting ABL
kinase, imatinib-treated CML patients in chronic phase can relapse and
progress to blast phase due to the remnant CML stem cells. Ecotropic
viral integration site 1 (EVI1), a key transcription factor in HSC
regulation, is known to predict poor outcomes in myeloid malignancies,
however, incapability of prospective isolation of EVI1-high leukemic
cells precludes the functional evaluation of intra-individual EVI1-high
cells. In this study, we hypothesized that EVI1 is a valuable marker of
CML stem cells as well as HSCs and aimed to cover in depth the regulation
of CML stem cells by Evi1. Introduction of CML into Evi1-IRES-GFP
knock-in mice, a versatile HSC-reporter strain, enabled us to separate
Evi1-high CML cells from the individual and revealed that Evi1 was
predominantly enriched in the stem cell fraction and associated with an
enhanced proliferative as well as a leukemia-initiating capacity.
Comparison of gene expression profiles between Evi1-high and -low CML
cells revealed that Evi1-high CML cells had a more quiescent feature and
a less differentiated feature than Evi1-low CML cells, suggesting that
Evi1-high CML LSK cells could keep self-renewal capacity. Furthermore,
Evi1-high CML cells exhibited apparent resistance to TKIs in vivo. Given
that Evi1 heterozygosity ameliorated CML development in vivo and that the
combination of Evi1 and BCR-ABL caused acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in
mice resembling blastic transformation of CML, Evi1 could regulate CML
development as a potent driver. In accordance to our data of
Evi1-trafficking CML mouse, our single-cell analysis of primitive or
differentiated subsets from primary CML-CP samples show that EVI1 was
highly expressed in stem cell-enriched CD34+CD38-CD90+ cells, which
implied that EVI1 could mark CML stem cells as well as normal HSCs. This
point can be translated to human CML cases like that high EVI1 means the
increasing number of CML stem cells. As opposed to Evi1-reporter CML
models, in AML model by MLL-ENL oncogene, Evi1-high MLL-ENL leukemic
cells showed no advantage in leukemia initiation compared to Evi1-low
cells. Other Evi1-reporter AML models by MOZ-TIF2 and TEL-PDGFR+AML1-ETO
never generated Evi1-high fraction, suggesting the high affinity of Evi1
for stem cell disease such as CML. In conclusion, high Evi1 can define
the population of CML stem cells which are resistant to nilotinib.
Combinatorial analyses of Evi1-IRES-GFP allele CML animals and single
cells from primary CML-CP patients also covered in depth the critical
regulation of CML stem cells by Evi1.

