Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of hypomethylating agent-resistant cell lines using
a cell line from a patient with acute myeloid leukemia evolved from
myelodysplastic syndrome (MOLM-13)


Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder of the hematopoietic
cells occurring in elderly patients in a majority of instances. They are
defined by ineffective hematopoiesis with peripheral blood cytopenias and
by the risk of evolution to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Hypomethylating
agents (HMA), 5-azacytidine (AZA) and 2-deoxy-5-azacytidine (DAC), have
demonstrated clinical activities with cytologic and cytogenetic responses
in patients with MDS, but potential problems of both agents include the
development of intrinsic and acquired resistance.HMA-resistant patients
have very poor prognosis, and this cohort of patients constitutes an
important area of research. To understand mechanisms of HMA-resistance
and overcome the resistance, we tried to establish HMA-resistant cells
using MOLM-13, which is a cell line from a patient with AML evolved from
MDS.Original MOLM-13 cell line was sensitive to both AZA and DAC in
vitro. MOLM-13 cells were exposed continuously to increasing
concetrations of AZA or DAC and we could establish an AZA-resistant cell
line (MOLM/AZA-1) and a DAC-resistant cell line (MOLM/DAC-5). The IC50 of
AZA in MOLM/AZA-1 was 96.26 M compared to 0.11 M of the parent cell line;
800-fold increase in resistance to AZA. The IC50 of DAC in MOLM/DAC-5 was
207.7 M compared to 0.07 M of the parent cell line; 2000-fold increase in
resistance to DAC. We treated th AZA- and DAC-resistant cells with
vorinostat (SAHA) and a novel agent, CG200745 to test whether the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors could overcome the HMA-resistance. Cell
viability assays showed that HMA-resistant cells were sensitive to both
HDAC inhibitors, which dramatically decreased anti-apoptotic proteins
(XIAP, MCL-1 and BCL-2) and increased PARP cleavages in the HMA-resistant
cell lines. In conclusion, we successfully established established AZA-
and DAC-resistant cell lines from an AML/MDS cell line, MOLM-13, and
found that HDAC inhibitors might be promising in overcoming
HMA-resistance. Further studies with the HMA-resistant cell lines are
ongoing for elucidation of resistance mechanisms and possible role of
other novel agents to overcome the HMA-resistance.

