Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoseroproteomic profiling of autoantibodies to tumor
associated autoantigens in African American and Caucasian men with
prostate cancer


Cancer-associated serum autoantibodies are generally considered as
sensors of molecular events associated with tumorigenesis, and thus
constitute promising biomarkers for cancer detection and management, as
well as tools for the identification of novel oncoproteins.
Immunoseroproteomics is a standard approach for the identification of
serum autoantibodies reacting with tumor-associated antigens (TAA) in
human cancer populations. This approach entails using one- and
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of proteins from aggressive PCa cell
lines, coupled with immunoblotting and mass spectrometry, to characterize
the anti-TAA antibody repertoire in a given patient. Immunoseroproteomics
has been applied mostly to cancer patients of European and Asian
ancestry, and has not been used in African American (AA) patients with
PCa. AA men show a disproportionately high incidence and mortality of
PCa, compared to other ethnic groups, and display more aggressive tumors
developing at a younger age. Recent epidemiological studies suggest that
after adjusting for socioeconomic and health care-related factors, these
disparities still persist, pointing to biological factors as contributors
to these disparities. Growing evidence indicates that genes associated
with immune function and autoimmunity are dysregulated in prostate tumors
from AA compared to Caucasian (CC) men. This prompted us to initiate an
immunoproteomic analysis of the anti-TAA autoantibody response in AA and
CC men with PCa. We hypothesize the anti-TAA autoantibody response might
be greater in AA patients with PCa, and that it could be used to identify
novel blood biomarkers for early screening and management of the disease.
In initial studies, we screened aggressive PCa cell lysates with serum
samples from AA (n=39) and CC (n=50) men. Early results showed the
autoantibody response in the AA cohort had a greater autoantibody
frequency and reactivity than the response in CC patients.
Immunoproteomic analysis of select AA sera revealed alpha-enolase,
fumarate hydratase, and annexin A11 as candidate TAAs in PCa. These
proteins have been implicated in previous PCa studies. Additional
validation will come from determining the frequency of the autoantibody
response and the expression of candidate TAAs in PCa tissue microarrays.
We are currently expanding our immunoseroproteomics analysis to sera from
a larger cohort (n>200) of AA men and CC men (n>100) with and without
PCa, stratified by age and cancer stage. Comparing the anti-TAA
repertoire between AA and CC men with and without PCa will aid in the
customization of TAA arrays for autoantibody profiling and lead to the
identification of promising biomarkers for early PCa detection and
monitoring of tumor progression in AA populations. Our approach may also
help identify unique immunoserological signatures in AA and CC men to
reveal biological determinants of PCa health disparities.

