Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transfer of regulatory protein networks via extracellular vesicles
as a candidate mechanism of apoptosis-resistance in acute myeloid leukemia


Defects in apoptosis regulation are known to impact chemotherapy
resistance and consequently refractoriness and relapse of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). We previously showed that apoptosis-resistant protein
profile of AML blasts at diagnosis is associated with shorter
disease-free survival. Specifically, by flow cytometry, we measured the
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1 and Bax in leukemic cells and combined
these parameters to define their anti-apoptosis index (AAI).
Interestingly, the AAI of normal lymphocytes in the AML patients
corresponded to the AAI of AML blasts obtained from the same patient,
reaching values far outside the normal AAI range of lymphocytes. In
addition, the AAI in both cell types displayed parallel changes during
the course of therapy. This points to a role of microenvironment in
regulation of apoptosis in bone marrow cells of AML patients. Therefore,
the aim of the current study was to assess if apoptosis-resistant AML
cells are able to regulate the AAI of apoptosis-sensitive cells by
influencing the microenvironment, as well as to perform molecular
dissection of microenvironment, to identify novel proteins that regulate
apoptosis.First, we showed that apoptosis-resistant AML blasts (high AAI)
release factors that modulate sensitive AML blasts (low AAI) to
upregulate Bcl-2 and become apoptosis-resistant. In the majority of cases
(10 out of 14), Bcl-2 expression was significantly increased in
apoptosis-sensitive AML blasts upon contact culture with
apoptosis-resistant AML blasts (1.7-fold; p=0.0067). To characterize the
AML microenvironment, conditioned medium (18 hrs) from patient samples
displaying either apoptosis-resistant (n=5) or apoptosis-sensitive
profile (n=6) were collected. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics,
comparative analysis was performed on these secretomes. Strikingly, we
found that the major functional protein clusters upregulated in
secretomes of the apoptosis-resistant AML were involved in mRNA splicing,
protein translation and chromatin remodeling/chromosome organization. We
further compared protein profiles of the soluble secretome and the
extracellular vesicle fraction of a high AAI patient to those of a low
AAI patient. Proteomic analysis of these fractions of the conditioned
medium showed that the functional protein networks found in the whole
secretome are well-represented in extracellular vesicles that are
enriched for exosome markers.Transfer of functional proteins between
cells by extracellular vesicles is a well documented phenomenon.
Therefore, it is conceivable that the regulatory protein networks
detected in the vesicles excreted by AML blasts are involved in
regulation of apoptosis-related proteins in recipient AML blasts and
other cells residing in the bone marrow, thereby contributing to therapy
resistance. Funded by STR and KiKa - Children cancer-free

