Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the ERG transcription factor in the resistance of prostate
cancer cells to the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a major public health issue as it is the second
cause of death among cancers in industrialized countries, and its
incidence is rising. Surgery is the main option for the curative
treatment of localized forms of PCa and recurrences are managed with
androgen deprivation strategies. In the case of advanced metastatic PCa
and when tumors become resistant to castration (mCRPC), chemotherapy with
taxanes is initiated. However, response rates remain low with a
restricted number of alternatives due to the intrinsic resistance of CRPC
to a wide range of cytotoxic agents. Advanced PCa are particularly
resistant to topoisomerase I (Top1) inhibitors from the camptothecin
(CPT) family, but the mechanistic bases of this resistance have not been
investigated in details. Top1 is a nuclear enzyme that induces transient
single strand breaks in duplex DNA to ensure the removal of torsional
constraints associated with crucial DNA transactions such as replication,
transcription, chromosome segregation or DNA recombination. We have
previously shown that interaction of Top1 with DNA-PKcs, a kinase
involved in non-homologous end-joining, could regulate the cellular
response to CPT independently of DNA repair. This was further confirmed
by the fact that NU7441, a specific inhibitor of the kinase activity of
DNA-PKcs, had no effect on Hela cell sensitivity to CPT. Recently, it was
shown that, in PCa cells, DNA-PKcs could interact with ERG, a
transcription factor of the ETS family. As advanced PCa are often
characterized by a TMPRSS2-ERG fusion leading to wild-type ERG
overexpression, we investigated whether ERG could play a role in the
resistance of PCa cells to CPT by regulating Top1/DNA-PKcs interaction.
We showed that VCaP cells harboring the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion resulting in a
6-fold increase of ERG protein as compared to ERG fusion-negative
(control) DU145 or PC3 cells were >100-fold more resistant to CPT. RWPE-1
stably overexpressing low levels of wild-type ERG (2-fold increase) did
not show a major change in resistance to CPT as compared to control
RWPE-1 cells stably expressing lacZ. Using two specific siRNA, we also
showed that transient downregulation of ERG drastically reduced the
sensitivity of VCaP cells to CPT, this effect being dependent on the
efficacy of ERG repression. Interestingly, this effect was not due to a
change in Top1 levels, suggesting that ERG downregulation may affect
Top1-DNA-PKcs interaction. We detected this interaction in VCaP cells by
immunoprecipitation in the presence of ethidium bromide, indicating that
it was independent of DNA and it remains to be seen whether it is
disrupted following ERG repression. Our preliminary findings provide
evidences for a new mechanism by which ERG and its interaction with
DNA-PKcs could explain, at least in part, the intrinsic resistance of PCa
to Top1 inhibitors by the regulation of Top1-DNA-PKcs interaction.

