Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel vascular targeting strategy using pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin to increase drug accumulation to tumor site and therapeutic
efficacy


Although pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) can be advantageous over
free doxorubicin because of accumulation of PLD to tumors utilizing the
enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) effect, the increase in overall
survival in patients treated with PLD has been modest. These clinical
data indicate the benefit of the EPR effect can vary among the patients.
Therefore developing novel strategies to increase the EPR effect for
enhanced PLD accumulation to tumor shall improve therapeutic outcome.
When tumor endothelial cells are damaged by PLD, the vascular
permeability for macromolecules can be increased by large pores and the
discontinuity of the endothelial cell layer. This endothelial cell damage
and increased vascular permeability (i.e., increased EPR effect) will be
eventually restored by angiogenic reaction of the vessels. Therefore, we
hypothesized that PLD, injected subsequently during the time window when
the vascular permeability is increased by initial therapy, shall
extravasate and accumulate more into tumor (Vascular Targeting Strategy:
VTS) as compared to the PLD injected after the recovery of tumor vessels
(Standard Strategy: SS). The mice bearing 4T1 murine breast cancer
growing in the mammary fat pad was injected intravenously with PLD. To
evaluate the effect of PLD on the EPR effect, pegylated FITC-Liposomes
(PFL) was injected, before, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 days after the PLD
injection. The mice at the each time point were sacrificed six hours
after the injection of PFL, and the amount of PFL extravasation and
accumulation into the tumor as well as uninvolved organs were evaluated
by immunofluorescence imaging of the tissues. The amount of PFL in the
tumor increased from day 1 as compared to those in the mice without PLD
injection. The amount reached maximum at 2 days after the injection and
returned to baseline at day 7. These data suggest that the EPR effect was
changed over time after the PLD injection. Interestingly, these effects
were found only in the tumors, but not in the uninvolved normal organs.
Then, the tumor bearing mice were randomized to the therapy groups, (1)
Control group; injection of PBS every 10 days, (2) SS group; injection of
PLD (6mg/kg) every 10 days, (3) VTS group; injection of PLD (6mg/kg) on
day 0 and Day 2. The therapeutic cycle consists with 20 days and total
amount of PLD given during the cycle was same between the mice in the SS
and VTS group. 4T1 tumor growth was fastest in the control mice. PLD
given by SS showed delay in tumor growth as compared to control. The mice
treated by VTS showed statistically best anti-tumor effect among the
three treatment groups. Pharmacokinetic analysis showed that plasma C max
as well as AUC in SS and VTS group mice were 18.0, 23.9 g/ml and 97.3,
102.9 ghr/ml, respectively. There was no obvious side effect identified
in these mice. These data suggests VTS can be a better therapeutic
regimen as compared to SS to increase therapeutic efficacy.

