Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potentiation of proteasome inhibitor cytotoxicity by co-treatment
with novel 1i-selective immunoproteasome inhibitors


The FDA-approved proteasome inhibitors bortezomib and carfilzomib have
contributed to major improvements in the treatment of multiple myeloma
(MM) following their adoption as key therapies over the last 10 years.
Despite the sucesses of proteasome inhibitor-based cancer therapies, drug
resistance as well as dose-limiting adverse events remain problematic and
prevent these agents from devliering durable and complete responses. Our
prior research indicated that unlike carfilzomib and bortezomib which
inhibit both the 5 and 5i subunits of the proteasome and
immunoproteasome, 1i-selective inhibitors are not cytotoxic. Based on an
understanding of the functional role of the 1i in cancer cells, we
hypothesized that simulatenous administration of a non-toxic 1i inhibitor
would potentiate the activity of classic proteasome inhibitors such as
bortezomib and carfilzomib. By developing novel peptide epoxyketones with
improved selectivity for 1i, we sucessfully demonstrated that such
inhibitors are both non-toxic and are capable of potentiating the
activity of cytotoxic proteasome inhibitors via 1i-dependent mechanisms.
In the future, the co-administration of 1i-targeting agents and cytotoxic
proteasome inhibitors, or the administration of novel agents which
potently target 5, 5i, and 1i may serve as therapies for multiple myeloma
and other cancers with greater efficacy, safety, and tolerabiliy than
existing proteasome inhibitor-based therapies.In order to study this
potentiating effect, we began by creating analogs of a known
1i-inhibiting tetrapeptide epoxyketone with modest selectivity for 1i
over 1. Approximately twenty tetrapeptide and tripeptide epoxyketones
were synthesized and evaluated for their activity against multiple
proteasome subunits using subunit-selective flurogenic substrates in the
presence of purified 20S proteasomes. Several promising analogs were
identified and evaluted in cell culture with human MM cell lines
including a carfilzozmib-resistant variant of the RPMI 8226 cell line.
Cell viability following treatment with various classic and 1i-targeting
proteasome inhibitors was evaluated via MTS assay.In summary, several
peptide epoxyketones with improved potency against 1i or improved
selectivity over 1 were identified. These inhibitors sucessfully
inhibited proteasome catalytic activity both in vitro using purified
proteasomes as well as in live cells in culture. Despite being non-toxic
when administered alone, 1i-selective agents significantly decreased cell
viability when combined with sub-IC50 concentrations of cytoxic
proteasome inhibitors. Additionally, this potentiating effect was
retained in a carfilzomib-resistant human MM cell line.

