Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obligate haploinsufficiency of the microRNA-processing molecule
dicer1 in a murine colitis-associated tumorigenesis model


Background: A widespread downregulated expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
is commonly observed in human cancers. Similarly, deregulated expression
of miRNA-processing pathway components, which results in the reduction of
global miRNA expression, may also be associated with tumorigenesis. Thus,
we hypothesized that the deregulation of microRNA-processing molecule
Dicer1 in intestinal epithelial cells may accelerate intestinal
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis.Methods & Results: We constructed
Dicer1 gene-disrupted mice with monoallelic and biallelic loss of its
locus. Inflammation-associated colon tumors were induced by azoxymethane
(AOM) injection with the treatment by three cycles of Dextran Sulfate
Sodium (DSS). 1) Dicer1 protein expression and subsequent mature miRNA
levels in the isolated intestinal epithelial cells were inversely
correlated with the number of intact Dicer1 alleles. 2) Although the
severity of inflammation after the induction in this model was comparable
in control and Dicer1-mutant mice, the number of colon tumors was
significantly higher in heterozygous mice but not in homozygous mice. 3)
Because the expression levels of Dicer1 were retained in tumors and its
surrounding tissues even after induction of colitis-associated tumors,
the effects of Dicer1 deletion on tumorigenesis were considered as
cell-autonomous. 4) While the expression levels of representative
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes were in most cases inversely
correlated with the expression levels of Dicer1, some genes were not
affected by Dicer1 deletion.Conclusion: Specific ablation of Dicer1 in
intestinal epithelial cells accelerates intestinal
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis. However, this effect was apparent
only when a single copy of Dicer1 was deleted, but not with complete
Dicer1 gene ablation. Generally, complete loss of the function of most
tumor suppressor genes is advantageous for tumor development. However,
our results suggest that, in case of Dicer1 gene, complete loss is
deleterious for cancer development, while its partial inactivation
promotes tumor formation. This unique obligate haploinsufficient role
colitis-associated colon tumor of Dicer and miRNAs needs further
attention to elucidate the pathogenesis of tumorigenesis related with
deregulated miRNAs.

