Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM10/Kuzbanian is upregulated during neuroendocrine prostate
carcinogenesis


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the second leading cause of cancer death in men.
Advanced prostate tumors often contain neuroendocrine differentiation,
which correlates with androgen-independent progression and poor
prognosis. Currently, androgen deprivation is the first line of therapy
for metastatic CaP. However, CaP often progresses to an
androgen-independent bone-metastatic stage, at which point chemotherapy
and radiotherapy become the primary therapeutic options. Despite recent
advances in therapeutic strategies, many cancers still develop resistance
to radiation and therapies, making the identification of new therapies
essential to improve the lives and survival rates of patients.We have
studied neuroendocrine cancer progression in the cryptdin-2 SV40-TAg
(CR2-TAg) mouse model of CaP. Since these cancers do not express androgen
receptor, they are refractory to androgen therapy. Therefore, we sought
new potential targets. We previously found that matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), which are capable of degrading many extracellular matrix proteins
and cell surface receptors, are upregulated during CR2-Tag tumor
progression. In the present study, we examined expression of a family of
a disintegrinandmetalloproteinases (ADAMs) that is actively involved in
these signaling pathways due to their role in releasing the extracellular
domain of transmembrane proteins. ADAMs contain features of both adhesive
proteins and proteinases. ADAM10 activates the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and NOTCH signaling systems controlling cell growth,
invasion, and metastasis. We found that ADAM10 expression increased
during tumor progression and was highly penetrant. We are quantifying the
expression levels and localization patterns of ADAM10 in these samples
over time. Since MMPs, like ADAMs, are capable of degrading many
extracellular matrix proteins and cell surface receptors, we determined
if MMPs (MMP 2, 7, and 9) contribute to ADAM10 expression or localization
in aggressive hormone refractory CaP. We have stained for ADAM10 in
tissue sections from the CR2-TAg mice that are each missing expression of
MMPs to determine if that particular MMP contributes to ADAM10 expression
or localization. Our research using ADAM10 localization as a potential
biomarker and therapeutic target has potential clinical value to identify
aggressive CaP earlier in patients. Our study of MMPs and their role in
ADAM10 expression will offer insight into the mechanisms of advanced
prostate tumor progression.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

