Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a high-throughput screening assay to identify UHRF1
inhibitors via time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(TR-FRET)


Aberrant DNA methylation of gene promoters can be involved in silencing
tumor suppressor genes in cancer. The protein ubiquitin-like containing
PHD and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1) is an essential component in the
cellular machinery for DNA methylation maintenance and can couple DNA
methylation and other epigenetic histone modifications. UHRF1 is thought
to bind newly synthesized hemimethylated DNA and recruit DNA
methyltransferases to copy the methylation pattern to the daughter DNA
strand. Interfering with the ability of UHRF1 to bind methylated DNA can
lead to the re-expression of epigenetically silenced genes including
tumor suppressors, which positions UHRF1 as a target for anticancer drug
development. We have created a high-throughput, time-resolved
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET)-based assay to screen
for inhibitors capable of disrupting the interaction between the UHRF1
SRA domain and hemi-methylated DNA. The assay measures the degree of
TR-FRET between a 5-fluorescein (FAM) labeled hairpin oligonucleotide and
a terbium-conjugated antibody bound to the 6xHis-tag of the UHRF1_SRA
domain polypeptide. In 384-well plate format, the assay achieved a Z'
factor of 0.74. We successfully screened the Library of Pharmacologically
Active Compounds (LOPAC) for inhibitors of UHRF1_SRA binding to
hemimethlylated DNA, and validated 6 hit compounds in a dose-response
series. These include: aurintricarboxylic acid, NF449, 6-hydroxy-DL-DOPA,
NF023, PPNDS and mitoxantrone. Additionally, we observed a decrease in
methylation one week after treatment of DU145 cells with mitoxantrone at
a concentration near its IC50 from the TR-FRET binding assay. This
suggests that mitoxantrone, a known DNA topoisomerase II poison and
general DNA intercalator, may interfere with methylation maintenance. In
summary, we have established a novel method to identify small molecule
inhibitors of the UHRF1-methylated DNA interface, and have shown that one
hit compound, mitoxantrone, can perturb methylation maintenance near its
IC50 for inhibition of SRA domain binding to methylated DNA.

