Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photonic crystal microarray sensing of breast cancer cell line
lysates


Monitoring of protein expression changes in cells or in real tissue is
commonly based on western blot and protein microarray. However, these
assays have limitations that include lack of detection sensitivity and
accuracy. Furthermore, fluorescent, radioactive or magnetic tags or
labels are typically needed for signal transduction, which may not always
be preferable, as more and more new markers are being discovered. In this
study, we have used our silicon chip based label free high throughput
high sensitivity XtremeSens Diagnostics benchtop nanophotonic platform to
detect the target proteins that are regulated by TAM67. The platform has
currently demonstrated the smallest sensor on chip with the highest
sensitivity down to 67femtograms per milliliter with specificity. The
target proteins were selected based on western blot results which shows
that when Tam67 is overexpressed in MCF-7 Tam67 clone cells, PCNA is
up-regulated; -catenin, cyclinD1, p-EGFR expression are down-regulated,
and E-cadherin seems to have no change. The probe antibodies were printed
on unique photonic crystal microcavities and cell lysates were detected
by a label-free method.The assay is based on the highly sensitive
photonic crystal platform in silicon-on-insulator chips in which
light-matter interaction is enhanced due to confinement and guiding of
light on length scales of the wavelength of light. The probe proteins are
immobilized on unique photonic crystal microcavities in the array. All
sensors are exposed to the analyte at the same instant of time. The
binding interaction alters the refractive index of the resonance cavity
and this is detected as a shift in the resonance wavelength trapped by
the device. The resonance shift is detected directly and does not require
any secondary labeling. Specificity is demonstrated using a sandwich
assay in which a second antibody was introduced following the initial
binding and washing steps and a secondary resonance wavelength shift is
observed.The impact of this study will provide the wide range of
applications including the study of cancer biomarker, signal transfection
pathway, clinical diagnosis of diseases, commercialization potential is
envisioned in other civilian markets such as environmental pollution
sensing, food pathogen detection and biodefense.

