Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevation of tumor-promoting cytokines in mice exposed to the
environmental contaminant tributyltin


Cytokines are important regulators of immune responsiveness. Alterations
of cytokine secretion from immune cells would have the potential to
disrupt both immune destruction of cancer cells and to alter the
proliferation and invasiveness of tumor cells due to their capacity to
act as growth factors, angiogenic factors, and inducers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Tributyltin (TBT) is a widespread
environmental contaminant having been used in a variety of industrial
applications and is found in human blood at levels ranging as high as 261
nM. Studies in human immune cells have shown that secretion of tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF) is altered by exposures to TBT. There have
been no in vivo studies of the effects of exposure to TBT on the cytokine
communication network. As it is not possible to examine alterations of
this network in exposed humans, we examined the effects of TBT exposure
in a mouse model using Milliplex mouse cytokine/chemokine magnetic bead
premixed 32 plex kit. Serum and spleens of TBT-exposed mice were analyzed
for changes in cytokine secretion/levels. TBT increased the levels of
IL13 in the serum of non-tumor-bearing mice and increased IL1, IL6, KC,
and M-CSF in tumor-bearing mice. The spleens of both non-tumor-bearing
and tumor-bearing mice showed increases in Eotaxin when exposed to TBT.
Of significant interest is the fact that the presence of tumor causes
increases in Eotaxin, IL12p40, M-CSF, and TNF and exposure to TBT alone
can cause increases in these same cytokines. Tumors are known to increase
levels of cytokines that enhance their ability to survive. The results
showing that TBT can amplify the levels of several cytokines that are
increased by tumor suggest that TBT may have tumor-promoting abilities by
modulating tumor growth and/or invasiveness. Experiments are under way to
dissect cytokine signaling pathways that are affected by TBT. The
findings will allow identification of molecular targets that are
necessary to intercept the tumor promoting signaling following TBT
exposure.Supported by: NIH grant 5U54CA163066-03

