Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells maintain a hierarchy of differentiation by
creating their niche


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are unique subpopulation of tumor cells that
possess self-renewal and differentiation capacity, and can give rise to
the entire heterogeneous population of the tumor tissue. The self-renewal
and differentiation properties of CSCs are regulated and maintained by
the CSC niche. However, the mechanism of this maintenance, especially the
contribution of differentiated cancer cells, remains to be fully
elucidated. It has been shown that vascular endothelial cells can
activate the Notch signaling pathway in glioblastoma (GMB) stem-like
cells, and that was required for self-renewal of GBM stem-like cells.
Given the fact that GBM stem-like cells differentiate into vascular
endothelial cells, it raises the possibility that these differentiated
cells that arise from CSCs might generate a CSC niche. In this study, we
addressed this hypothesis using a model of CSCs, miPS-LLCcm, derived from
mouse induced pluripotent stem cells (miPSCs) we have established
recently.We found in vitro cultured miPS-LLCcm cells were autonomously
balanced with stem-like cells and differentiated cells. The analysis of
VEGFR2 and VE-cadherin expression, and in vitro tube formation assay
indicated the differentiation capacity of miPS-LLCcm into vascular
endothelial cells. In the presence of the conditioned medium from bulk
population of miPS-LLCcm cells, self-renewal capacity of CSC population
of miPS-LLCcm, which was evaluated by spheroid formation in suspension
culture, was enhanced, partly in Notch depending manner. In addition, we
found that the ligands for Notch activation were secreted from the
differentiated tumor cells including vascular endothelial cells. In
addition, the secreted factor(s) from differentiated cells appeared to
regulate the differentiation lineage of CSCs, since miPS-LLCcm could not
differentiate into vascular endothelial lineages after cultivation of
only stem cell population.Our results indicate that the differentiated
progenies of CSCs containing vascular endothelium play important roles
for regulating the CSC's properties. Therefore, miPS-LLCcm cells create
their own in vitro niche to maintain themselves in the hierarchy of
differentiating CSCs.

