Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotype and expansion profile of peripheral T cells in patients
with gastrointestinal cancer


During the last decade, adoptive transfer of autologous T cells has been
paid much attention to as an alternative immunotherapy for several types
of cancer. It has been reported that human T cells have potent cytotoxic
activity against many types of tumor cell lines or primary cultured cells
in vitro. Clinical studies in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma and non-small cell lung carcinoma showed that infusion of
autologous T cells is feasible and well tolerated. One of the problems in
this therapy, however, is the difficulty for culturing peripheral T cells
in patients with cancer. Compared with healthy individuals, stimulation
with phosphoantigens or bisphosphonates results in less expansion of T
cells in some patients. The tendency can be remarkably seen especially in
those who have lower number of T cells in peripheral blood. It is still
unclear whether it is a unique phenomenon caused by something of
malignancy or just due to the culture methodology. In this study, we
investigated the characteristics of peripheral V9V2 T cells in patients
with gastrointestinal cancer including their phenotype, the percentage in
PBMC, and the proliferation activity in response to synthetic
phosphoantigen, 2-methyl-3-butenyl-1-pyrophosphate (2M3B1PP).PBMC were
prepared from patients, and then the phenotype and the number of V9V2 T
cells were measured by flow cytometry. To expand V9V2 T cells in vitro,
PBMC were cultured in AIM-V medium supplemented with 100 IU/mL IL-2, 100M
2M3B1PP, and 10% autologous plasma. The expansion of V9V2 T cells were
also examined using flow cytometry.We found that the percentage of the
V9V2 T cells in peripheral T cells varied a lot depending on the
patients. While their percentage in healthy individual was approx.
1.5-9.0%, it exceeded 10% in some patients, and even over 20% in several
patients. Phenotypic analysis revealed that almost all the V9V2 T cells
in these particular patients were effector-memory type cells with
CD45RA-/CD27-/CCR7- and they massively expanded by the stimulation with
2M3B1PP. These results suggest that V9V2 T cells in these patients have
been constantly exposed and stimulated with some specific antigens. On
the other hand, the percentage of V9V2 T cells in T cells of some
patients was less than 1.0%, and in the conventional culture methods the
cells' response to 2M3B1PP was too low for them to proliferate
themselves. However, their proliferation rate markedly increased when
PBMC were inoculated at the high density (i.e. 1.3 x 104 V9V2 T cells per
cm2 or more). The high density culture for 14 days has made it possible
to expand the number of V9V2 T cells to 100-1000 folds. We conclude that
V9V2 T cells in patients with gastrointestinal cancer have the equivalent
level of proliferation ability to healthy individual even though the
initial percentage is low, and thus these cells could be a possible
effector cell type in a novel immunotherapy for gastrointestinal cancer.

