Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment based modulation of thyroid cancer phenotype


Inflammation plays a pivotal role in the progression of solid malignant
tumor with studies showing that the presence of specific
inflammatory-immune cells, such as macrophages, at the tumor site leads
to poor prognosis. M1 polarized macrophages secrete pro-inflammatory
chemokines and cytokines which induce an epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in tumor cells; a process where epithelial cells acquire
mesenchymal traits, thus facilitating tissue infiltration and consequent
metastasis. EMT as a marker of cancer progression is understudied in
thyroid cancer. In our present study, we evaluated the crosstalk between
the macrophages and the epithelial cells in the thyroid tumor
microenvironment with the use of an in vitro model system consisting of
an immortalized thyroid cell line (Nthy-ori 3-1), three papillary cancer
cell lines (BCPAP, 8505C and TPC-1) and one follicular cancer cell line
(CGTHW-1). We observed the halt in proliferation of the thyroid cancer
cells as the epithelial cells differentiate into mesenchymal cells under
the influence of activated macrophage conditioned media. We also observed
a statistically significant (pInflammation plays a pivotal role in the
progression of solid malignant tumor with studies showing that the
presence of specific inflammatory-immune cells, such as macrophages, at
the tumor site leads to poor prognosis. M1 polarized macrophages secrete
pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines which induce an epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells; a process where epithelial
cells acquire mesenchymal traits, thus facilitating tissue infiltration
and consequent metastasis. EMT as a marker of cancer progression is
understudied in thyroid cancer. In our present study, we evaluated the
crosstalk between the macrophages and the epithelial cells in the thyroid
tumor microenvironment with the use of an in vitro model system
consisting of an immortalized thyroid cell line (Nthy-ori 3-1), three
papillary cancer cell lines (BCPAP, 8505C and TPC-1) and one follicular
cancer cell line (CGTHW-1). We observed the halt in proliferation of the
thyroid cancer cells as the epithelial cells differentiate into
mesenchymal cells under the influence of activated macrophage conditioned
media. We also observed a statistically significant (p<0.05) upregulation
of migration and invasion of thyroid tumor cells in presence of
macrophage conditioned media. Using nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from
the thyroid cancer cell lines, we observed that EMT markers including
E-cadherin, -catenin, vimentin, NFk-B, snail, slug and twist are
modulated in response to activated macrophage conditioned media.
Downregulation of E-cadherin, required for maintenance of stable junction
and -catenin essential for cell-cell adhesion was noticed in response to
macrophage conditioned media. Transcription factors like NFk-B, snail and
slug were translocated to the nucleus, which is indicative of the
initiation of EMT. Our data provides evidence that macrophage secreted
proteins play a crucial role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
thyroid tumor advancement and metastasis. We have successfully identified
some significant markers including transcription factors such as NFk-B,
slug, twist and snail that play a critical role in the induction of
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in thyroid cancer. These findings
will allow for the possible development of targeted therapy designed at
inhibiting EMT and subsequent suppression of thyroid cancer metastasis
and dissemination.

