Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of cancer stem-like cells derived from mouse
induced pluripotent stem cells transformed by tumor-derived
exosomes/microvesicles


It is widely accepted that the microenvironment/niche exert genetic
and/or epigenetic effects on stem cells. Current studies have
demonstrated that an aberrant microenvironment may contribute to the
genesis of cancer stem cells (CSCs). In the case of cancer, growing
evidence indicate a cancerous niche can play an active role in the
regulation of tumor cell maintenance and progression through
exosomes/microvesicles-based intercellular communication. It has not been
reported, however, whether this vesicle-mediated communication induces
the malignant transformation of normal stem cells/differentiating
progenitors, result in CSC generation. Recentry, we have reported that
the conditioned medium derived from the mouse Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC)
cell line can convert mouse induced pluripotent stem cells (miPSCs) into
CSCs. Here, we investigated the contribution of tumor-derived
exosomes/microvesicles (TEMVs) that are secreted from LLC cells to induce
the transformation of miPSCs into CSCs.The differentiating miPSCs were
exposed to TEMVs derived from LLC cells for 4 weeks. We used Nanog-GFP
miPS, in which GFP expression is under control of Nanog promoter,
indicative of undifferentiation state. During this period, we observed
the reemergence of the GFP-positive colonies, whereas most of cells were
differentiated and GFP-negative without TEMV-treatment. The resultant
TEMVs treated cells (miPS-LLCemv) expressed Nanog and Oct3/4 proteins
comparable to miPSCs assessed by Western blotting. The sphere formation
of the miPS-LLCemv cells in suspension culture indicated the selfrenewal
capacity of the miPS-LLCemv cells. When the miPSLLCemv cells were
subcutaneously allografted into immunodeficient mice, malignant tumors
with extensive angiogenesis developed. Phathological features such as
vementin, Ki67, PPAR gamma expression, and accumulation of lipid droplets
in tumor revealed these tumors were liposarcomas. Tumor cells established
from liposarcomas showed the capacity of spheroid formation in suspension
culture and the capacity of differntiation into adipocytes and
endothelial cells. These results indicate that miPS-LLCemv cells and
established tumor cells possess CSC properties. Interestingly, these
cells expressed Sox2 and Klf4 genes significantly higher than parental
miPS cells, might be related to selfrenewal and addipogenesis. Thus, we
concluded that TEMVs should have the potential to induce CSC properties
in normal stem cells.

