Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Localization of sipuleucel-T- expanded T cell clones into tumors
of treated prostate cancer patients


Sipuleucel-T is an FDA-approved autologous cellular therapy demonstrated
to prolong overall survival in subjects with asymptomatic or minimally
symptomatic metastatic castrate resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).
Sipuleucel-T is generated by culturing patients' own peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) with a fusion protein of prostatic acid
phosphatase and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor. While
antigen presenting cells take up this antigen and can prime antigen
specific T cells in vivo, the majority of the cells in the sipuleucel-T
product are in fact T cells. Moreover, antigen-specific T cells in the
product become activated during production of sipuleucel-T, particularly
for the 2nd and 3rd infusions.To examine whether T cells contained in
sipuleucel-T might be homing to the site of the tumor, we used a
next-generation sequencing-based method to assess T cell repertoire
diversity in the blood, sipuleucel-T product, and resected tissues of
patients participating in a neoadjuvant study of sipuleucel-T treatment
(P07-1; NCT00715104). In this trial, patients with localized prostate
cancer received sipuleucel-T prior to undergoing radical prostatectomy
(RP). DNA extracted from the different samples was amplified using a
multiplex PCR assay to amplify the CDR3 region of the T cell receptor
spanning the variable region formed by the junction of the V, D and J
segments and their associated non-templated insertions. Sequence reads
were used to quantitate absolute TCR frequencies using standardized
clonotype determination algorithms. We found that a subset of T cell
clones was enriched in the generation of sipuleucel-T. We also found that
T cell clones were expanded in patient blood after each successive
infusion. When we examined the T cell clonotypes in the prostate tissues
resected after sipuleucel-T treatment, we found that there were T cell
clones in the prostate in common with the sipuleucel-T product.
Interestingly a number of the clones present in the pre-treatment blood
were reduced or lost in the blood by the second and third infusion but
were present in the post-treatment prostate tissue, consistent with
trafficking of the T cell clones from the peripheral circulation. These
results indicate that ex vivo production of sipuleucel-T induces the
expansion of certain T cell clones that are ultimately present in the
prostates of patients treated prior to RP. Sipuleucel-T may therefore
also function as an adoptive T cell therapy.

