Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TSLP regulates expression of genes involved in cell survival in a
preclinical xenograft model of CRLF2 B-ALL


A subset of children with B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(B-ALL) are at high risk for relapse and death. Gene expression profiles
in these high-risk B-ALLs is similar to that of Philadelphia
chromosome-positive ALL. Approximately half of these Ph-like B-ALL are
characterized by genetic defects resulting in overexpression of CRLF2.
This defect occurs 5 times more commonly in Hispanic children than others
and thus is a significant biological component of pediatric cancer health
disparities. CRLF2, together with the IL-7R, forms a receptor complex
that is activated by the cytokine, TSLP. Receptor complex activation
leads to JAK-STAT5 phosphorylation. The activating JAK mutations found in
some CRLF2 B-ALL led to speculation that TSLP stimulation is not a factor
in CRLF B-ALL. However, we and others have found that TSLP increases
STAT5 phosphorylation in CRLF2 B-ALL cells, including those with JAK
defects. Our next step was to evaluate the role of TSLP-CRLF2
interactions in vivo in the human-mouse xenograft model. However, mouse
TSLP is species-specific and does not activate the human TSLP receptor
complex that includes CRLF2. Thus, traditional xenograft models do not
provide the TSLP-CRLF2 interactions that may contribute to high risk
CRLF2 B-ALL. We engineered immune-deficient NOD/SCID IL-2R null (NSG)
mice to express human TSLP (hTSLP+ mice), as well as control mice that
lack the TSLP cytokine (hTSLP- mice). Then we used this hTSLP+/-
xenograft model system to evaluate the in vivo effects of TSLP on
transplanted CRLF2 B-ALL cells harboring a JAK defect (MUTZ5 cell line).
Transplanted mice were euthanized at 5 weeks and bone marrow (BM) was
harvested. Evaluation of BM by flow cytometry showed that approximately
half of the human leukemia cells were apoptotic in mice without TSLP
while apoptosis was virtually absent in CRLF2 B-ALL cells harvested from
hTSLP+ mice. Next we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to identify
functions and pathways regulated by TSLP. Primary CRLF2 B-ALL cells were
transplanted into hTSLP+ and hTSLP- mice. Whole genome microarray
performed on primary human leukemia cells isolated from BM of xenograft
mice identified 280 genes that were upregulated and 281 genes that were
downregulated (> 2 fold up or downregulated; pA subset of children with B
cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) are at high risk for
relapse and death. Gene expression profiles in these high-risk B-ALLs is
similar to that of Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL. Approximately
half of these Ph-like B-ALL are characterized by genetic defects
resulting in overexpression of CRLF2. This defect occurs 5 times more
commonly in Hispanic children than others and thus is a significant
biological component of pediatric cancer health disparities. CRLF2,
together with the IL-7R, forms a receptor complex that is activated by
the cytokine, TSLP. Receptor complex activation leads to JAK-STAT5
phosphorylation. The activating JAK mutations found in some CRLF2 B-ALL
led to speculation that TSLP stimulation is not a factor in CRLF B-ALL.
However, we and others have found that TSLP increases STAT5
phosphorylation in CRLF2 B-ALL cells, including those with JAK defects.
Our next step was to evaluate the role of TSLP-CRLF2 interactions in vivo
in the human-mouse xenograft model. However, mouse TSLP is
species-specific and does not activate the human TSLP receptor complex
that includes CRLF2. Thus, traditional xenograft models do not provide
the TSLP-CRLF2 interactions that may contribute to high risk CRLF2 B-ALL.
We engineered immune-deficient NOD/SCID IL-2R null (NSG) mice to express
human TSLP (hTSLP+ mice), as well as control mice that lack the TSLP
cytokine (hTSLP- mice). Then we used this hTSLP+/- xenograft model system
to evaluate the in vivo effects of TSLP on transplanted CRLF2 B-ALL cells
harboring a JAK defect (MUTZ5 cell line). Transplanted mice were
euthanized at 5 weeks and bone marrow (BM) was harvested. Evaluation of
BM by flow cytometry showed that approximately half of the human leukemia
cells were apoptotic in mice without TSLP while apoptosis was virtually
absent in CRLF2 B-ALL cells harvested from hTSLP+ mice. Next we used
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to identify functions and pathways regulated
by TSLP. Primary CRLF2 B-ALL cells were transplanted into hTSLP+ and
hTSLP- mice. Whole genome microarray performed on primary human leukemia
cells isolated from BM of xenograft mice identified 280 genes that were
upregulated and 281 genes that were downregulated (> 2 fold up or
downregulated; p<.05) in leukemia cells from hTSLP+ as compared to hTSLP-
mice. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of changes in gene expression identified
Cell Death and Survival as the Molecular and Cellular Function most
impacted by TSLP (34 genes differentially regulated).These data suggest
that TSLP-induced CRLF2 signaling may contribute to leukemia cell
survival in vivo in CRLF2 B-ALL. Current studies are aimed at identifying
TSLP-regulated genes that can be therapeutically targeted as a part of
combination therapy to successfully treat CRLF2 B-ALL and reduce the
cancer health disparities for children with this disease.

