Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing for the assessment of intratumor heterogeneity


Adenocarcinoma, the most common subtype of lung cancer, is notorious for
eluding early detection. Thus, understanding the early steps of lung
tumorigenesis at the genetic level might facilitate the development of
more effective strategies for the prevention, early diagnosis, and
treatment of lung cancer. Nearly 10% of lungs resected for
adenocarcinomas harbored minute discrete foci of cytologically atypical
bronchiolalveolar cells that are designated as atypical adenomatous
hyperplasia (AAH). It has been postulated that these lesions represent an
early stage in glandular neoplasia, which is now viewed as a progression
from AAH to adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) to minimally invasive
adenocarcinoma (MIA), although, the biological nature of AAH is poorly
understood and very controversial. To delineate tumor clonal
heterogeneity as a function of tumor progression in early NSCLC
neoplasias, we isolated DNA from different zones of histologic
progression within the same lesion and performed targeted next generation
sequencing which targets a panel of 134 well-characterized cancer and
pharmacogenomics genes. We found that mutational landscape varies
significantly between the three groups of patients. The most mutated
genes in MIA were EGFR and TP53. 4 out of 5 MIA cases harbored multiple
alternations in EGFR catalytic domain and inactivating mutations in TP53
were found in 3 out of 5 patients. Furthermore, mutations in Wnt pathway
genes were found in 4 out of 5 cases. Notably, mutations/amplification in
Notch family was detected in 3 out of 5 cases (predominantly in the tumor
invasive zone). In contrast to MIA, in AIS, only one case out of 5
harbors mutated TP53 or EGFR. Unlike in MIA, only one AIS patient carried
mutated APC gene, suggesting that Wnt signaling plays insignificant role
in AIS carcinogenesis. On the contrary, we found that AIS carcinogenesis
heavily relies on alternations of AKT pathway, since aberrations in KIT,
KRAS, HRAS, IGF1R, FGFR3, MET or TSC2 genes were found in 4 out of 5
patients. For AAH cohort we sequenced 25 independent lesions from 6
patients. Sequencing revealed that RAS and AKT/ERK pathways were most
frequently affected in these lesions. In 3 cases we were able to track a
possible cancer driving mutation from AAH to the primary tumor. This
observation provides for the first time a direct link between AAH lesion
and primary adenocarcinoma. Most of the patients in all groups carried
mutations in genes associated with DNA repair and chromatin remodeling,
suggesting that deregulation of the DNA repair machinery is an early
onset event of adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis. In all groups our analysis
revealed mutations in genes that have been never implicated in lung
adenocarcinoma. Our study helps to understand the potential role of
heterogeneous clonal events in the progression of early glandular
neoplasms including the transition from non-invasive to invasive disease.

