Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of casein kinase 1 delta induces DNA damage, inhibition of
mTORC1 signaling and nucleophagy


Casein kinase 1 delta (CK1) is a conserved serine/threonine protein
kinase that regulates diverse cellular processes including vesicle
trafficking, cell cycle progression, chromosomal segregation, DNA repair,
circadian rhythm, neurite outgrowth and ciliogenesis. CK1 has been
reported to phosphorylate Mdm2, the E3 ubiquitin ligase for p53,
resulting in Mdm2 ubiquitination/degradation and concomitant accumulation
of p53, the latter functioning as a mediator of cell cycle checkpoints
and DNA repair. Mice that lack Csnk1d exhibit a perinatal lethal
phenotype and typically weigh 30-50% less than their wild type
littermates. The exact causes of death and small size are unknown. We
hypothesized that the absence of CK1 initiates cellular stresses that
adversely affect cell survival. To examine this idea, we collected mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from mice homozygous for a Csnk1d floxed
allele, and generated MEF Csnk1d null cells by infection with adenovirus
expressing Cre. Endogenous p53 protein level was significantly lower in
MEF Csnk1d null cells relative to MEF Ctl cells infected with
adenovirus-GFP. Substantial DNA damage also was detected in MEF Csnk1d
null cells, as measured by -H2AX staining. Flow cytometric analysis
revealed that early passage (P3) MEF Csnk1d null cells exhibited a larger
sub-G0 fraction (64%) than MEF Ctl cells (34%). The sub-G0 fraction
decreased sharply with increasing passage number, becoming negligible by
P10. In addition to the decline in sub-G0 fraction, we observed a
transient population of MEF Csnk1d null cells with multiple DAPI-stained
micronuclei containing both -H2AX and membranes positive for the
autophagosomal marker LC3 and lysosomal marker LAMP1. These features were
preceded by and coincided with mTORC1 pathway inactivation, as indicated
by low concentrations of phospho-Akt, phospho-mTOR and phospho-S6K,
consistent with the view that mTORC1 inhibition facilitates the induction
of autophagy. Subsequently, these differences between MEF Csnk1d null and
MEF Ctl cells subsided. Our findings demonstrate that loss of CK1
expression in proliferating MEF cells results in DNA damage and initially
a large sub-G0 peak, followed by a wave of nucleophagy and ultimately
cell survival in culture. Ongoing investigation will explore whether
similar processes occur in embryonic tissues from Csnk1d null mice and
contribute to their pathologic phenotype.

