Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translesion DNA synthesis by DNA polymerase kappa somatic variants
found in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is one of the most prevalent malignancies affecting men
worldwide, and is the most frequent cancer among men in the USA, with an
estimated 238,590 new cases and 29720 deaths in 2013 (NCI). DNA damage
found in prostate cancer promotes tumor progression. Repair of DNA
lesions that occur endogenously or in response to diverse genotoxic
stresses is indispensable for genome integrity. DNA lesions activate
checkpoint pathways that regulate specific DNA-repair mechanisms. During
replication, DNA polymerases frequently encounter unrepaired DNA lesions
and posses 35 exonuclease proofreading activities. Such polymerases tend
to stall at sites of damage, which can lead to replication fork collapse
and which, unless rescued, can eventually cause large-scale genomic
rearrangements and cell death. As a preventative measure, most organisms
have alternative polymerases that are capable of damage tolerance and can
synthesize past DNA lesions by a mechanism called translesion synthesis
(TLS). Polymerase kappa (Pol) a Y-family polymerase participates in the
process of TLS. Current study was designed to investigate the TLS of
somatic missense mutations of Pol such as p.F155S, p.L442F, p.G154E,
p.E29K, p.E449K and p.E430G found after sequence analysis of prostate
tumor DNA from 30 prostate cancer patients. We studied these variants to
identify the nucleotide incorporated opposite to the apurinic (AP) site
template, in vitro using site-specific tetrahydrofuran (AP site analog).
We report that missense somatic mutations of Pol at p.F155S, p.L442F,
p.G154E, p.E29K, p.E449K mutants significantly decreases catalytic
efficiency (k(cat)/Km). The biological consequence of an unrepaired DNA
lesion is determined by whether it is bypassed or not, bypassed error
prone. Our results provide evidence that mutations in the polymerase
kappa gene can causes interference in Translesion DNA synthesis, this
interference in pol function may play a role in prostate tumor
progression.We acknowledge to Prof. Dr. Guengerich, for providing Pol
construct.This work was supported by DOD grant PC094628, and NIH grant 8
P20 GM103518.

