Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD47 blockade to enhance adaptive anti-tumor immune responses


The success of immunotherapy has been hindered by the ability of tumors
to evade or inhibit the host immune system. One strategy tumors use to
achieve this is upregulation of CD47, a cell surface protein that
delivers a don't eat me signal. CD47 binds to SIRP-alpha on the surface
of macrophages and disables their phagocytic function. Previous data
showed CD47 blockade enhanced phagocytosis of tumor cells in vitro and
improved survival of mice transplanted with human tumors. However, CD47
blockade has yet to be examined in a fully syngeneic system where the
potential for tumor phagocytosis by macrophages and/or dendritic cells to
promote presentation of tumor antigens to T cells can be defined. It has
been reported that CD47 blockade can hinder T cell activation; however,
this also has not been examined in a syngeneic system. Our hypothesis was
that inducing tumor cell phagocytosis by CD47 blockade would enhance
T-cell-mediated anti-tumor responses. Our data show that CD47 was
expressed on the EL4 thymoma and B16-F10 melanoma cell lines that are
syngeneic to H-2b, as well as on their ovalbumin-expressing derivatives
EG7 and B16-OVA. CD47 also was expressed on CD8+ T cells and was further
upregulated upon stimulation, suggesting it might play a role in immune
effector function. However, in our hands CD47 blockade using antibody
MIAP-301 did not inhibit activation of CD8+ T cells in vitro, and in
preliminary experiments, CD47 blockade appeared to enhance activation of
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells in vivo. Ongoing work is evaluating the
effects of CD47 blockade and phagocytosis on antigen presentation in
vitro and the effects of CD47 blockade on the generation of
tumor-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells in vivo. We also plan to confirm that
T cells activated under conditions of CD47 blockade can recognize
endogenous tumor antigens to which there may be self-tolerance.Supported
by an HHMI Medical Student Fellowship (to KA), by the GREYlong
Foundation, and by grant P01 AI035296 (to MFM).

