Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin 6 and interleukin 8 inhibitors, when used in
combination with docetaxel, inhibit tumor progression in mouse model of
triple-negative breast cancer


Background: Despite recent advances in treatment for some subtypes of
breast cancer (BC), triple negative (TN) BC remains a therapeutic
challenge due to a lack of effective targeted agents. TNBC accounts for
10-17% of all breast malignancies and is associated with younger age,
more advanced stage at diagnosis, and poorer outcome when compared with
other BC subtypes. Growing evidence supports that human breast cancers
are driven by a small subpopulation of cells termed cancer stem cells
(CSCs) with greater tumorigenic potential. CSCs contribute to tumor
initiation, maintenance, metastasis, therapeutic resistance and
recurrence; thus targeting CSCs is a promising therapeutic intervention.
Our laboratory has previously demonstrated the importance of the
inflammatory signaling molecules interleukin 6 (IL-6) and 8 (IL-8) in
maintaining CSCs in several BC subtypes. Despite promising results in
other subtypes, targeting IL-6 or IL-8 alone has had less success in
TNBC. Thus, this study explores the effect of combination therapy
consisting of dual inhibition of IL-6 and IL-8 and chemotherapy on CSCs
in TNBCs.Results: Our preliminary results demonstrate that docetaxel
treatment induces three and five-fold increases in IL-6 and IL-8 levels,
respectively, in an in vitro culture system of the TNBC cell line SUM159,
most likely due to cell death. However, addition of IL-6 or IL-8
inhibitors does not change the cytokine levels or CSC population compared
to docetaxel treatment alone. We hypothesized that the tumor
microenvironment is critical to regulate the effect of cytokines on tumor
growth; we therefore tested our treatment regimen in a xenograft model by
injecting SUM159 cells into mammary fat pad of female NOD/SCID mouse.
Docetaxel treatment alone slightly reduced tumor weight compared to
vehicle control (0.60.4g v.s. 1.070.4g, p=0.04), as expected. No change
was seen in tumors treated with docetaxel and IL-8 inhibitor (0.80.2g).
Docetaxel in combination with either IL-6 inhibition (0.20.1 g) or IL-6
and IL-8 inhibitors (0.30.07 g) completely blocked tumor progression
during four weeks of treatment (p=0.008, p=0.01 respectively compared to
vehicle control). ALDEFLUOR assay was used to quantitate CSCs on these
xenografts. The combination treatment of docetaxel plus IL-6 and IL-8
inhibitors decreased the CSC population compared to both vehicle control
(0.70.3% v.s. 2.6%0.8%, p=0.01) and docetaxel alone (0.70.3% v.s 2.60.3%,
=0.001).Discussion: Our results suggest that IL-6 and IL-8 inhibition in
combination with chemotherapy can inhibit growth of TNBC possibly by
targeting the CSC population. The addition of IL-6 and IL-8 inhibition to
chemotherapy may be a promising therapeutic approach for treating TNBC
patients.

