Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling identifies Sulindac-resistant colon
tumors


Sulindac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with
established chemopreventive efficacy for colorectal cancer (CRC). Despite
its tumor suppressive effects, occasional resistance to this drug has
been observed in clinical trials. To establish underlying mechanisms that
may contribute to sulindac resistance, we have identified differentially
expressed gene sets in two groups of colon tumors - those that respond to
sulindac treatment and those that do not. Strain A mice were injected
(ip) with azoxymethane (AOM) once per week for six weeks, followed by
sulindac (180 ppm) treatment for an additional 15 weeks. Throughout the
sulindac treatment period, tumor response was monitored endoscopically
using a 3-mm fiber optic camera; tumor size and multiplicity were
measured in situ every 3 weeks, allowing a real-time evaluation of tumor
response to sulindac. At sacrifice, colons were removed and tumors were
stratified according to size; large tumors (3 mm) were considered to be
sulindac-resistant, whereas tumors 2 mm were classified as
sulindac-responsive. Endoscopic measurements showed that presumed
resistant tumors had an average doubling time of 0.9 0.16 weeks, while
sulindac-responsive tumors had an average doubling time of 4.0 2.0 weeks.
Whole genome expression analysis was conducted using an Illumina Mouse
WG-6 Expression Microarray. Using Gene Ontology analysis, genes
associated with inflammation, survival and proliferation were found to be
differentially expressed between the two groups. Of particular interest
was an increased expression of IL-1 and CXCL2, which have previously been
implicated as part of a paracrine drug-resistance network in breast and
lung cancers. Additionally, the growth factor MDK, which is involved in
drug-resistant neuroblastomas, was found to be up-regulated in the
largest colon tumors. These findings provide new insights into potential
signaling networks that may contribute to the inconsistent response to
sulindac chemoprevention and provide potential new targets for cancer
protection.

