Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tie-2 regulates stemness and metastasis of prostate cancer cells


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed male cancer
in Western countries. Currently, the major treatment challenge for
prostate cancer patients is the development of tumor metastasis. Ample
evidence supports the idea that tumor metastasis originates from a rare
population of cancer cells known as cancer stem cells (CSCs) [1].
Unfortunately, little is known about the identity of these cells, making
it difficult to target prostate tumor metastasis. Here we reported the
identification of a rare population of prostate cancer cells which
express the Tie-2 protein, a tyrosine kinase receptor required for the
bone marrow homing and colonization of hematopoietic stem cells. Notably,
this Tie-2 positive population exists exclusively in highly metastatic
prostate cancer cell lines.Methods:To study the role of Tie-2 in prostate
tumor metastasis, we have performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) to isolate the Tie-2+ population from a prostate cancer cell line
(PC-3). We then performed cDNA microarray analysis to characterize the
gene expression profile of these cells. Furthermore, we have performed
cell adhesion assay to examine the ability of the Tie-2+ cells in
adhering to osteoblasts and endothelial cells. Besides that, we have also
performed quiescent staining and drug sensitivity assay to examine
whether Tie-2+ cells are more quiescent, and thus become resistant to
chemotherapeutic drug. Finally, we have injected both Tie-2+ and Tie-2-
PC-3 cells intracardiacly into the NOD-SCID mice to determine if Tie-2
expression promote prostate tumor metastasis under in vivo
condition.Results: Data from our study revealed that Tie-2+ cells express
higher level of prostate CSC markers when compared to the Tie-2-
population. Meanwhile, Tie-2+ cells are highly adhesive to both
osteoblasts and endothelial cells, a characteristic necessary for tumor
metastasis. We also found that Tie-2+ cells are more quiescent and
resistant to the chemotherapeutic drug cabazitaxel, further support that
these cells possess CSC-like characteristics. More importantly, we found
that Tie-2+ cells, but not the Tie-2- cells population, developed
metastatic tumor in vivo.Conclusions: Our data suggested that Tie-2 plays
an importantly role in the development of drug resistance and prostate
tumor metastasis. Thus, Tie-2 might be a novel therapeutic target for
treatment of advanced prostate cancer patients.References:[1] J.E.
Visvader, G.J. Lindeman, Cancer stem cells in solid tumours: accumulating
evidence and unresolved questions, Nature reviews. Cancer, 8 (2008)
755-768.

