Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic analysis in a patient with nine primary malignant
neoplasms: A rare case of Li-Fraumeni syndrome


The identification of patients with hereditary cancer predisposition
syndromes has important clinical implications for early diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment. We applied whole exome sequencing to identify
mutations underlying a patient diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, who
had a first-degree family antecedent of breast cancer at age 42 years.
Nine primary metachronous malignant neoplasms were developed in this
patient within a period of 38 years, including upper lip neuroblastoma (7
years) and rhabdomyosarcoma (7 years), breast cystosarcoma phyllodes
carcinoma (28 years), bronchioalveolar cell carcinoma (29 years), breast
infiltrating ductal carcinoma (39 years), and thyroid papillary carcinoma
(39 years), gastric adenocarcinoma (41 years), maxillary (41 years) and
sternal osteosarcoma (43 years), as well as acute myeloid leukemia (45
years). Peripheral blood lymphocyte DNA from the patient was obtained.
Exome capture was performed using the SureSelect Human All Exon 51Mb
System, and paired-end sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq90
platform. A bioinformatics pipeline was used to analyze sequencing reads
and call single nucleotide variants (SNVs). We used a candidate strategy
to analyze mutations in the case of only a single dominantly affected
individual available. Whole-exome sequencing of peripheral blood
lymphocyte DNA resulted in an output of 30 GB of raw sequence. After
quality control, we obtained clean reads with an average depth of
coverage of 105 and 99.4% exome regions were covered at least four times.
Analysis of 451,409 SNVs revealed increased genetic risk for some
cancers, including genes related to hereditary cancer disposition
syndromes [e.g., TP53 (p.P72R and p.R273H), BRCA1, and BRCA2], and genes
associated with sporadic cancers. Pathway analysis found that, of 68
genes in p53-signaling pathway, the number of mutated genes (n=14) was
significantly higher than expected (P=0.02). Of novel mutations, five
nonsense mutations in four genes and 242 missense mutations in 233 genes
were discovered. Whole-exome sequencing can identify known and/or novel
mutations in cancer susceptibility genes and establish mutation profile
in a rare case of Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

