Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WNT5a/ROR1 axis in triple-negative breast cancer progression and
potential therapy


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of total
invasive breast cancer. These tumors are more aggressive and have a worse
prognosis relative to other types of breast cancer, partially due to the
lack of FDA-approved targeted therapy. Utilizing the RNA-seq data for
invasive breast cancer specimens deposited in the Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), we found that the mRNA expression of receptor tyrosine
kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) decreased in the luminal A (n=231),
luminal B (n=128) and Her2+ (n=58) subtypes relative to their
corresponding normal controls. In contrast, ROR1 expression increased in
all the pathologic stages of TNBC samples relative to normal specimens
and ROR1 expression correlates positively with progression of TNBC
(n=78). ROR1 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is involved in embryonic
patterning, but lacks expression in adult tissues. We undertook a series
of mechanistic studies to understand the role of ROR1 in TNBC and
evaluate ROR1 as a potential target for TNBC therapy. Using complex
bioinformatics analysis, we found that ROR1 expression correlates with
signature genes of TNBC, cancer stem cells, and TGF/SMAD pathways, which,
in addition to recent observation of potential crosstalk between
WNT5A/ROR1 signaling with TGF/SMAD, prompted us to examine if this
crosstalk contributes to TNBC. Indeed, we found that WNT5a promotes
SMAD2/3 activation in a ROR1- and TGFR1-dependent manner. Inhibiting ROR1
by neutralizing antibody shifted cancer stem cells of TNBC to a more
luminal-type, indicating a critical of ROR1 in self-renewal of cancer
stem cells. SNAI1/2, master regulators of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), are potentially involved in the WNT5a/ROR1-mediated
self-renewal of cancer stem cells. In agreement with these findings, TNBC
cell lines with the highest surface expression of ROR1 had a greater
cancer stem cell (CSC) population (CD24-CD44high). In collaboration with
Speed Biosystems LLC, we developed an anti-ROR1 immunotoxin that
specifically kills ROR1-high TNBC cells but not ROR1-low breast cancer
cells or normal epithelial cells. Our findings suggest a role of
WNT5a/ROR1 signaling in the progression of TNBC, through its role in
potentiating TGF/SMAD/SNAI1/2 pathway thus promoting EMT and stem-like
phenotype. ROR1 represents a novel therapeutic target for TNBC,
especially for late-stage diseases.

