Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering of highly controlled in vitro co-culture model to
study the mesenchymal stem cells mediated signaling in breast cancer cells


Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) mediated signaling in breast cancer cells
(BCCs) are critical for epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
metastasis. The mutual interactions between tumor cells and MSCs via
direct contact or paracrine interaction through the recruitment of growth
factors, cytokines and chemokines are thought to modulate tumor growth,
invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis. Therefore, the cell-cell
interactions that control the behaviour of cancer cells are targets with
as much potential for the development of effective therapies as the tumor
cells themselves. To this end, co-culture of BCCs with MSCs is critical
to understand the role of MSCs on breast cancer progression. However,
establishing co-culture of these cells with BCCs is challenging as the
variation in culture condition can compromise the viability and
functionality of co-cultured cells. In the present study, we have
developed an in vitro co-culture method for controlling the interaction
of BCCs with MSCs using biocompatible synthetic materials. We used
cationic and anionic polymers to create stable and consistent surfaces.
After that, these polymers were screened for the selective adhesion of
cells, to create the patterned co-culture of BCCs and MSCs. Unlike other
synthetic and natural polymers, one of the greatest advantages of
screened polymers is that they are biologically inactive material for
BCCs and MSCs cells, thus, do not alter the gene or protein expression
profile of BCCs and MSCs. Therefore, the results obtained using this
method provide true interaction of BCCs with MSCs in co-culture system
without interference of interaction of cells with matrix. In addition,
the in vitro co-culture model established in this study provides
advantage on random co-culture by spatially organise cells in definite
patterns, thereby, controlling the number and interaction of BCCs with
MSCs. Also, provides an opportunity to study direct (through E-cadherin)
and indirect (through cytokines) interaction in a single system which is
important to study collective response of interaction BCCs and MSCs on
breast cancer biology. After established co-culture model, we
investigated MSCs mediated signaling in BCCs. qRT-PCR, western blotting
and immunostaining data suggested that MSCs induce the expression of
oncogene, increased proliferation of BCCs and up or downregulate the gene
related to the drug resistance.

