Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivities of kinase inhibitors of BCR signaling are correlated
with the BCR signaling pathway activities in DLBCL and CLL


B-cell malignancies are hematologic disorders for which new therapeutic
agents and novel treatment strategies are evolving. B cell receptor (BCR)
signaling plays an important pathogenic role in diffuse large b-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). There is rapid
clinical development of inhibitors targeting BCR-associated kinases such
as Spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). Recent clinical studies using these
agents have demonstrated effectiveness and low toxicity in CLL and DLBCL
patients with relapsed/refractory disease. With a great response rate,
there are still a group of patients that do not respond to these
therapeutic agents. The goal of this study is to investigate potential
resistance mechanism(s) of BCR pathway inhibitors based on
signature-signaling profiles. 21 CLL and DLBCL cell lines with different
molecular features were assessed in this study to establish relevant
signaling features and their association with sensitivities to BCR
signaling inhibitors. First, we evaluated response of cell lines to small
molecule inhibitors targeting the BCR signaling pathways (PCI-32765,
R406, CAL 101, and Dasatinib). 28% (6/21) of the cell lines were
resistant to PCI-32765; we found that these cells lines were also non
responsive to CAL 101 and Dasatinib. Then we used phosphoflow assays and
phosphoprotein arrays to profile BCR signaling in both responsive and
non-responsive cell lines. The BCR signaling activities were assessed at
baseline, after stimulation with IgG-IgM, and following pretreatment with
phosphatase inhibitors. Interrogating pathway activity in cell lines with
pervanadate, a phosphatase inhibitor, was especially revealing. After
treatment with pervanadate, we observed an increase in phosphorylation
status of SYK, BTK, p38, and S6 in normal B cells. However, 24% of tumor
cell lines do not exhibit phosphorylation of BCR related proteins, SYK
and BTK, after pervanadate treatment. Moreover, 83% (5/6) of cell lines
resistant to PCI 32765 (IC50 > 20M) did not respond to pervanadate,
whereas only 12.5% (1/8) sensitive cell lines (IC50 B-cell malignancies
are hematologic disorders for which new therapeutic agents and novel
treatment strategies are evolving. B cell receptor (BCR) signaling plays
an important pathogenic role in diffuse large b-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). There is rapid clinical development
of inhibitors targeting BCR-associated kinases such as Spleen tyrosine
kinase (SYK), Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), and phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K). Recent clinical studies using these agents have
demonstrated effectiveness and low toxicity in CLL and DLBCL patients
with relapsed/refractory disease. With a great response rate, there are
still a group of patients that do not respond to these therapeutic
agents. The goal of this study is to investigate potential resistance
mechanism(s) of BCR pathway inhibitors based on signature-signaling
profiles. 21 CLL and DLBCL cell lines with different molecular features
were assessed in this study to establish relevant signaling features and
their association with sensitivities to BCR signaling inhibitors. First,
we evaluated response of cell lines to small molecule inhibitors
targeting the BCR signaling pathways (PCI-32765, R406, CAL 101, and
Dasatinib). 28% (6/21) of the cell lines were resistant to PCI-32765; we
found that these cells lines were also non responsive to CAL 101 and
Dasatinib. Then we used phosphoflow assays and phosphoprotein arrays to
profile BCR signaling in both responsive and non-responsive cell lines.
The BCR signaling activities were assessed at baseline, after stimulation
with IgG-IgM, and following pretreatment with phosphatase inhibitors.
Interrogating pathway activity in cell lines with pervanadate, a
phosphatase inhibitor, was especially revealing. After treatment with
pervanadate, we observed an increase in phosphorylation status of SYK,
BTK, p38, and S6 in normal B cells. However, 24% of tumor cell lines do
not exhibit phosphorylation of BCR related proteins, SYK and BTK, after
pervanadate treatment. Moreover, 83% (5/6) of cell lines resistant to PCI
32765 (IC50 > 20M) did not respond to pervanadate, whereas only 12.5%
(1/8) sensitive cell lines (IC50 < 2.5uM) did not respond to pervanadate.
The difference observed in these cell lines indicates tumor cell lines
with an abnormal BCR signaling may not be dependent upon BCR signaling
for survival. More studies are being conducted to confirm this
observation in patient samples and to further explore the molecular
causes of the abnormal BCR signaling. We also explore combination
treatments of PCI-32765, CAL-101 and other target therapy agents, which
may provide useful insights for the optimal therapeutic use of these BCR
signaling inhibitors in CLL and DLBCL. Overall, our results suggest that
profiling of signaling network activities represents a promising approach
to molecularly classifying DLBCL and CLL subtypes for target therapies.

