Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An individualized approach to bladder cancer treatment using
patient-derived cell lines to predict response to chemotherapeutic agents


Introduction: Chemotherapy (both intravesical and systemic) can reduce
the risk of recurrence and progression in various stages of bladder
cancer. However, recurrence after treatment failure is associated with an
increased risk of progression. There are currently no established methods
for predicting patient-specific responses to treatment prior to drug
selection. In our studies, we have developed a novel protocol for
efficient establishment of cell lines from primary human bladder tumors,
which enables in vitro drug sensitivity assays using chemotherapeutic
agents.Methods: Using an Institutional Review Board-approved tissue
acquisition protocol, informed consent was obtained prior to specimen
acquisition for all samples. Specimens were obtained during standard
transurethral resection of papillary bladder tumors. Following generation
of a single-cell suspension, epithelial cells were isolated using
immunomagnetic cell separation and used for establishment of adherent
cell cultures using a novel protocol. We performed immunohistochemistry
on parental tissue as well as cultured cells to confirm that the
urothelial cancer phenotype was maintained during serial passaging. For
sensitivity assays, cultured cells were passaged and treated with
chemotherapeutic agents, followed by assessment of cell viability using
MTT assays.Results: To date, seven specimens from patients with papillary
urothelial carcinoma have been obtained, resulting in the establishment
of six independent adherent cell lines. All established lines have been
serially passaged (as high as P10) without significant decline in growth
rate, and maintained expression of CK7, uroplakin III, p53, and Ki67 in
patterns similar to parental tissue. Cells from line #7 were treated with
mitomycin C, docetaxel, gemcitabine, and rapamycin at three different
equivalent concentrations, resulting in a unique sensitivity profile that
was reproduced in a replicate experiment performed at a subsequent
passage.Conclusions: We have established a novel protocol for culture and
rapid expansion of primary cells from human bladder tumors for assays of
drug response. Ultimately, we envision that this approach will provide a
basis for the design of patient-specific therapeutic regimens for bladder
cancer.

