Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling and copy number alterations of
circulating clonotypic B cells of multiple myeloma newly diagnosed
patients reveals pathways potentially involved in the development and in
the disease persistence


Background Although the advances in Multiple Myeloma (MM) therapy, the
disease remains incurable. The existence of Myeloma Propagating Cells
(MPCs) is supposed to be one of the major causes of MM drug-resistance,
leading to relapse. However, very little is known about the molecular
characteristics of MPCs, even if some studies suggested that these cells
have phenotypic characteristics resembling the memory B cells.Aim and
methods In order to molecularly characterize the 138+ neoplastic clone
and the memory B cells located both in bone marrow (BM) and in peripheral
blood (PBL), we collected the 138+ 138- cell fractions of 50 newly
diagnosed MM patients (pts). We isolated the B cell population and, when
possible, the memory B cell clone. For each cell fraction we performed a
VDJ rearrangement analysis. The complete set of genomic aberrations was
evaluated by SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix). Gene expression profile HG-U133
Plus 2.0 microarray analyses (Affymetrix) were performed according to a
standardized protocol.Results The VDJ rearrangement analyses confirmed
the clonal relationship between the 138+ clone and the memory B cells
clone.Both BM and PBL 138+ cell fractions showed exactly the same genomic
macro-alterations. In the BM and PBL 138-19+27+ cell fractions any
macro-alteration was detected, whereas several micro-alterations (range:
1-350 Kb) unique of the memory B cells clone, were highlighted. These
micro-alterations were located out of any genomic variants region and are
presumably associated to the MM pathogenesis, as confirmed by the
presence of KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes among the amplified regions.
Moreover, the memory B cells were characterized by the presence of
several LOH regions, including possibly involved tumor suppressor (TS)
genes.To get insight into the biology of the clonotypic B cell
population, we compared the gene expression profile of 7 MM B cells vs 5
donor B cells samples, thus showing a differential expression of 11480
probes (Fold Change: 2;-2; FDR: 0,05; p-value: Background Although the
advances in Multiple Myeloma (MM) therapy, the disease remains incurable.
The existence of Myeloma Propagating Cells (MPCs) is supposed to be one
of the major causes of MM drug-resistance, leading to relapse. However,
very little is known about the molecular characteristics of MPCs, even if
some studies suggested that these cells have phenotypic characteristics
resembling the memory B cells.Aim and methods In order to molecularly
characterize the 138+ neoplastic clone and the memory B cells located
both in bone marrow (BM) and in peripheral blood (PBL), we collected the
138+ 138- cell fractions of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts). We
isolated the B cell population and, when possible, the memory B cell
clone. For each cell fraction we performed a VDJ rearrangement analysis.
The complete set of genomic aberrations was evaluated by SNP Array 6.0
(Affymetrix). Gene expression profile HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray
analyses (Affymetrix) were performed according to a standardized
protocol.Results The VDJ rearrangement analyses confirmed the clonal
relationship between the 138+ clone and the memory B cells clone.Both BM
and PBL 138+ cell fractions showed exactly the same genomic
macro-alterations. In the BM and PBL 138-19+27+ cell fractions any
macro-alteration was detected, whereas several micro-alterations (range:
1-350 Kb) unique of the memory B cells clone, were highlighted. These
micro-alterations were located out of any genomic variants region and are
presumably associated to the MM pathogenesis, as confirmed by the
presence of KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes among the amplified regions.
Moreover, the memory B cells were characterized by the presence of
several LOH regions, including possibly involved tumor suppressor (TS)
genes.To get insight into the biology of the clonotypic B cell
population, we compared the gene expression profile of 7 MM B cells vs 5
donor B cells samples, thus showing a differential expression of 11480
probes (Fold Change: 2;-2; FDR: 0,05; p-value: <0,05) by unsupervised
analysis of hierarchical clustering. Among the self-renewal mechanisms,
we observed the down-regulation of Hedgehog pathway and the
iperactivation of Notch and Wnt signaling. Moreover, these immature cells
showed a particular phenotype correlated to resistance to proteasome
inhibitors, due to the attenuation of the unfolded protein response
(IRE1-XBP1: -18.0; -19.96. PBackground Although the advances in Multiple
Myeloma (MM) therapy, the disease remains incurable. The existence of
Myeloma Propagating Cells (MPCs) is supposed to be one of the major
causes of MM drug-resistance, leading to relapse. However, very little is
known about the molecular characteristics of MPCs, even if some studies
suggested that these cells have phenotypic characteristics resembling the
memory B cells.Aim and methods In order to molecularly characterize the
138+ neoplastic clone and the memory B cells located both in bone marrow
(BM) and in peripheral blood (PBL), we collected the 138+ 138- cell
fractions of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts). We isolated the B cell
population and, when possible, the memory B cell clone. For each cell
fraction we performed a VDJ rearrangement analysis. The complete set of
genomic aberrations was evaluated by SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix). Gene
expression profile HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray analyses (Affymetrix) were
performed according to a standardized protocol.Results The VDJ
rearrangement analyses confirmed the clonal relationship between the 138+
clone and the memory B cells clone.Both BM and PBL 138+ cell fractions
showed exactly the same genomic macro-alterations. In the BM and PBL
138-19+27+ cell fractions any macro-alteration was detected, whereas
several micro-alterations (range: 1-350 Kb) unique of the memory B cells
clone, were highlighted. These micro-alterations were located out of any
genomic variants region and are presumably associated to the MM
pathogenesis, as confirmed by the presence of KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes
among the amplified regions. Moreover, the memory B cells were
characterized by the presence of several LOH regions, including possibly
involved tumor suppressor (TS) genes.To get insight into the biology of
the clonotypic B cell population, we compared the gene expression profile
of 7 MM B cells vs 5 donor B cells samples, thus showing a differential
expression of 11480 probes (Fold Change: 2;-2; FDR: 0,05; p-value: <0,05)
by unsupervised analysis of hierarchical clustering. Among the
self-renewal mechanisms, we observed the down-regulation of Hedgehog
pathway and the iperactivation of Notch and Wnt signaling. Moreover,
these immature cells showed a particular phenotype correlated to
resistance to proteasome inhibitors, due to the attenuation of the
unfolded protein response (IRE1-XBP1: -18.0; -19.96. P<0,05).Conclusions
Data suggested that the MM 138+ clone might resume the end of the complex
process of myelomagenesis, whereas the memory B cells have some
intriguing micro-alterations and a specific transcriptional program,
supporting the idea that these post germinal center cells might be
involved in the transforming event that originate and sustain the
neoplastic clone.

