Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contextual synthetic lethality in human triple negative breast
cancer cells involving a novel interaction between DNA repair proteins
EGFR, PARP1, and BRCA1


Background/Objectives:Few therapeutic options are effective for triple
negative breast cancers (TNBCs) necessitating novel approaches. We
previously reported a novel synthetic lethality with combined EGFR and
PARP inhibition due to a homologous recombination (HR) repair defect
induced EGFR inhibition. The mechanism of the HR deficiency involved
disruption of EGFR/BRCA1 interaction and sequestration of EGFR and BRCA1
to the cytosol. In this study, we have extended these findings to
encompass multiple subtypes of triple negative breast cancer and EGFR
inhibitors. Additionally, we further investigated the mechanisms by which
EGFR regulates HR DNA repair.Methods:TNBC cells, including MDA-MB-231
(mesenchymal stem-like), MDA-MB-468 (basal-like), HCC1187
(immunomodulatory), BT549 (mesenchymal), MDA-MB-453 (luminal androgen
receptor), were assessed for cytotoxicity and cell viability following
EGFR inhibition (lapatinib, erlotinib, or cetuximab), PARP inhibition, or
both by colony formation or ATPlite assays. MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy
was utilized to ascertain protein-protein interaction. To confirm
interaction data and determine subcellular location we utilized
immunoprecipitation and subcellular fractionation. To determine if
interactions were dependent on DNA, lysates were treated with Ethidium
Bromide and DNAse prior to immunoprecipitation.Results:EGFR inhibition
with lapatinib, cetuximab, or erlotinib induced a contextual synthetic
lethality with the PARP inhibitor, veliparib, in vitro in multiple TNBC
subtypes, including MDA-MB-231 (mesenchymal stem-like), MDA-MB-468
(basal-like), HCC1187 (immunomodulatory), BT549 (mesenchymal), MDA-MB-453
(luminal androgen receptor). Interestingly, mass spectroscopy reaffirmed
EGFR interaction with BRCA1 but also identified a novel interaction
between EGFR and PARP1. These interactions were not found upon EGFR
inhibition with lapatinib. Furthermore, we validated with
immunoprecipitation and in vitro protein binding assays EGFR, BRCA1, and
PARP1 protein-protein interactions that were disrupted upon EGFR
inhibition. Additionally, these proteins were found to interact in the
nucleus, independent of DNA. Lastly, EGFR inhibition also reduced nuclear
EGFR and BRCA1 without significant changes in PARP1
localization.Conclusions:These results reveal a contextual synthetic
lethality between combined EGFR and PARP inhibition in multiple subtypes
of TNBC, suggesting potential generalizability of this combination in
patients with TNBC. Furthermore understanding the mechanism by which EGFR
regulates DNA repair may provide novel targets to confer other contextual
synthetic lethalities that may be exploited to treat the aggressive TNBCs.

