Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway in a murine model of
metastatic prostate cancer


The isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway (IBP) provides substrates for the
post-translational modification of key proteins in regulating malignant
cell properties, including proliferation, migration, and invasion.
Several studies have found broad inhibitors of the IBP, such as statins,
to significantly reduce the risk of advanced prostate cancer (PCa),
potentially through their induced-reduction of geranylgeranylated
proteins. However, such inhibition of the entire IBP is limited by side
effects resulting from depletion of all isoprenoids and their products.
We have developed a novel compound, geranylgeraniol bisphosphonate
(GGOHBP), selectively targeting geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase
(GGDPS) and reducing the post-translational modification of
geranylgeranylated proteins. Luciferase-expressing human-derived 22Rv1
PCa cells were injected into the left ventricle of 20 mice using
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) to visualize tumor development. After three
weeks 18/20 mice had developed tumors and daily subcutaneous (SQ)
injections of 1.5mg/kg GGOHBP were given for one month. All 18 mice
developed mandible tumors, 13 developed adrenal gland tumors, 4 developed
intestinal tumors, 2 developed femoral tumors, 2 developed liver tumors,
and 1 developed a tumor in an unidentified location in the chest cavity.
Ex vivo photon count analyses revealed an 80% (p=0.1458) reduction in
adrenal gland tumors of the treated mice as compared to vehicle-treated
controls. This corresponded to a 54% (p=0.0007) reduction in total
adrenal gland tumor weight in the treated as compared to the control
mice. Western blot analysis of the adrenal gland tumors and one
intestinal tumor showed a reduction in Rap1A geranylgeranylation in the
treated mice and not the control mice, while non-tumorous tissues showed
no Rap1A alteration. A follow-up study of non-tumor bearing mice given SQ
injections of 1.25 or 1.5 mg/kg GGOHBP daily did not reveal alterations
in Rap1A geranylgeranylation in the adrenal glands, kidneys, liver, or
heart. Our findings detail a novel compound capable of preferentially
altering the IBP in the adrenal gland tumors of a murine model of
metastatic PCa. Future work defining the mechanism behind this focal
effect and the adrenal gland isoprenoid environment will allow compound
optimization and further understanding of the IBP's role in PCa
metastasis.

