Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of tumor hypoxia by photoacoustic imaging and
limitations of bioluminescence imaging in a Mia PaCa2-luc orthotopic
model of pancreatic carcinoma


BackgroundPhotoacoustic (PA) imaging is a recent promising modality
combining advantages of ultrasounds (resolution) and photon imaging
(sensitivity), thus providing anatomical and functional data. PA can be
implemented by using the natural endogenous contrast agent hemoglobin,
providing informations such as the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (SO2).
In the field of oncology, when tumors are growing, the central area
becomes hypoxic. This phenomenon does not interfere with tumor growth
because cancer cells can switch from aerobic metabolism (using O2) to
anaerobic metabolism. Hypoxia is a crucial parameter that needs to be
investigated and quantified as it is responsible for radio and
chemoresistances. Among tumor cell lines, the MIA PaCa2 cell line
(pancreatic adenocarcinoma) appeared quite relevant for a preclinical
approach.The aim of this work was to assess the hypoxic status of tumors
in a MIA PaCa-2 Luc+ orthotopic cancer model, and to compare
bioluminescent signal and tumor volumes in a longitudinal
study.MethodsThe tumor proliferation was monitored by bioluminescence
imaging (BLI) and tumor volume with Ultrasound (US). BLI was performed
using the IVIS-Lumina II imaging system (PerkinElmer) whereas US and PA
with the VEVO LAZR system (VisualSonics). For the experiments, human
ductal adenocarcinoma MIA PaCa-2-luc model was orthotopically implanted
in nude mice. For the experiment, 7 days after engraftments, tumors were
explored both by BLI and US 3 times a week during 12 weeks. Moreover,
tumors were investigated by PA imaging so that average values of SO2 were
calculated.Results and DiscussionBLI was selected as it is one of the
reference techniques to assess tumor growth in vivo. Overall, our data
demonstrated that in our model there was a correlation between BLI and US
measurements during the first four weeks of the study. But we observed a
significant decrease in BLI signals whereas tumor volumes were
continuously increasing. Bioluminescence reaction needs ATP and O2 to
occur. In hypoxic situations, light emission becomes not proportional to
tumor volume, due to the dependence of luciferin-luciferase reaction
towards the metabolism. It appeared that BLI was no longer relevant in
the study of advanced stages of MiaPaCa-2 tumors. PA imaging confirmed
that there was hypoxia into tumors, approximately since the 5th week. So
we were able, thanks to this approach, to accurately map the areas of
hypoxia within the tumor.These results confirm that BLI should be used
with caution, in particular during an evaluation of a therapeutic drug.
The combination of these three methods (BLI, US, PA) should therefore
allow to precisely characterize orthotopic tumor models including the
control of the appearance or location of a hypoxic state within tumors,
while specifying the limits of bioluminescence.

