Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel targets for effective combination drug therapy
in ALK+ NSCLC patient derived models of acquired resistance


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. The EML4-ALK translocation is present in 4% of NSCLC cases and
responses to the ALK inhibitor crizotinib in these cases are dramatic.
However, the impact of crizotinib on patient survival is limited by the
eventual development of acquired resistance. In addition to secondary
mutations in the primary target (such as ALK L1196M), acquired resistance
develops when a bypass track develops and renders ALK signaling
redundant.Based on the concept of the bypass track, we developed a
straightforward pharmacologic platform to identify combination
therapeutic strategies capable of overcoming acquired resistance. In this
approach the GI50 of 78 test compounds is tested in the presence or
absence of a fixed concentration of ALK inhibitor (either crizotinib or
the second generation ALK inhibitor LDK378). Those drugs which are more
potent in the presence of ALK inhibitor are considered hits. We applied
this approach to 15 cell line models of acquired resistance to ALK
inhibitors. Critically, this panel of models included 9 models derived
directly from ALK+ patients who had progressed on an ALK
inhibitor.Multiple model specific effective combinations were identified
including the previously identified effective combination of crizotinib
and EGFR inhibitor. One patient derived model of acquired resistance to
LDK378 was profoundly sensitive to LDK378 is the presence of MAPK pathway
inhibitors. In this model the combination is required to effectively
inhibit downstream signaling, promote apoptosis and cause cell death.Of
particular interest, the combination of Src and ALK inhibition was
effective in a six of nine patient derived models of acquired resistance
to single agent ALK inhibitors (this effect was specific for ALK+ lines
and not seen in parallel studies done with EGFR models of acquired
resistance). The Src inhibitor sarcatinib restored sensitivity to patient
derived ALK+ cell lines with acquired resistance to crizotinib. The
combination promotes apoptosis and is effective both in vitro and in
vivo. Finally, crizotinib results in robust upregulation of Src signaling
demonstrating the adaptive response these models undergo to survive in
the absence of ALK mediated proliferation.Thus, we have developed a novel
approach to rapidly discover effective and novel drug combinations in
patient derived cell lines of acquired resistance to ALK inhibition. The
combination of ALK inhibition and Src inhibition is an attractive
therapeutic strategy for clinical translation.

