Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational drug repositioning identifies dexamethasone as
potential ERG inhibitor


Mutations in genes coding for transcription factors (TFs) are frequently
observed in tumors, many of which lead to aberrant transcriptional
activity. Unfortunately, transcription factors are often considered
undruggable due to the absence of targetable enzymatic activity and the
large surface contacting DNA. To address the transcription factor
druggability problem, we developed a computational repositioning approach
to identify small molecules that can perturb the activity of
transcription factors. Our approach involves identifying drugs that
mobilize many of the target genes of a transcription factor. This
approach uses Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to integrate genomewide
binding data (ChIP-seq) with drug perturbation differential gene
expression profiles.When applied to ENCODE ChIP-seq and the Connectivity
Map expression profiles, our approach predicted 38,000 disruptive drug-TF
interactions (FWERMutations in genes coding for transcription factors
(TFs) are frequently observed in tumors, many of which lead to aberrant
transcriptional activity. Unfortunately, transcription factors are often
considered undruggable due to the absence of targetable enzymatic
activity and the large surface contacting DNA. To address the
transcription factor druggability problem, we developed a computational
repositioning approach to identify small molecules that can perturb the
activity of transcription factors. Our approach involves identifying
drugs that mobilize many of the target genes of a transcription factor.
This approach uses Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to integrate genomewide
binding data (ChIP-seq) with drug perturbation differential gene
expression profiles.When applied to ENCODE ChIP-seq and the Connectivity
Map expression profiles, our approach predicted 38,000 disruptive drug-TF
interactions (FWER<0.1). These predictions included the known inhibitory
effect of a BRD4 inhibitor (JQ1, FWER=0.000) on MYC and of HSP90
inhibitors (e.g.17-AAG, FWER=0.031) on HSF1. We used an integrated
biological network with 22k genes and 7k drugs to identify predicted
disruptive drug-TF interactions. Based on this approach network path
length of predicted drug-TF was significantly shorter than
non-predictions (p=2.2e-16). Many predicted drug-TF interactions involved
only one protein intermediary between the drug and the TF, indicating
that our predictions are not random and suggesting that many drugs might
disrupt TFs by targeting their regulatory or interacting co-factors.We
then decided to apply our approach to identifying candidate molecules
that can inhibit ERG, a pro-invasive, oncogenic TF over-expressed in as
many as 50% of prostate cancer patients. Using ERG ChIP-seq peaks in
prostate cells, dexamethasone (FWER=0.086) was predicted to inhibit ERG
transcriptional activity. Using cell invasion and migration assays, we
found that dexamethasone significantly decreased cell invasion and
migration in DU145 prostate cancer cells over-expressing ERG, but not in
isogenic control cells. Dexamethasone also abrogated expression of PLAU,
a known ERG target, and substantially decreased binding of ERG at the
PLAU promoter. Analysis of ERG ChIP-seq peaks revealed a highly enriched
AP-1 DNA motif and preferential mobilization by dexamethasone of genes
near peaks containing the AP-1 motif (p=0.06). ChIP-seq experiments
showed that dexamethasone reduced AP-1 binding at ERG-JUN promoter sites.
These results suggest that dexamethasone inhibits ERG by disruption of
AP1, a key co-factor.Altogether, this method provides a novel, broadly
applicable strategy to computationally identify drugs that indirectly
target transcription factors. This may be of further interest for other
factors with oncogenic activity, such as FOXA1 or for reactivating
deactivated tumor suppressive transcription factors such as p53.

