Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemosensitization of tumor cells by fish oil involves regulation
of cell proliferation and apoptotic pathway in experimentally induced
colon carcinogenesis


Introduction In CRC, 5-FU is a antineoplastic chemotherapeutic drug,
however a major drawback of 5-FU is its toxicity and low therapeutic
index. Recently fish oil (FO) rich in n-3 PUFAs has been reported to
chemosensitize tumor cells to anticancer drugs through regulation of cell
proliferation and apoptotic pathway. Therefore, the current study is
designed to understand the alteration in underlying cell proliferation
and apoptotic pathway on using FO alongwith 5-FU.Experimental methods
Male Balb/c mice were divided into control and N,N'-dimethylhydrazine
dihydrochloride/dextran sodium sulphate (DMH/DSS) groups. DMH/DSS treated
animals were kept for 20wks for development of colon cancer and further
subdivided based upon the treatment with 5-FU and/or FO. After treatment,
survival rate, tumor volume and burden was determined. The colonocytes
were isolated and subjected to different estimations. Cell proliferation
index was estimated using propidium iodide staining and expression of Ras
was determined through immunofluorescence and flowcytometric method.
Apoptotic index was measured by annexinV-PI double staining,
M-30cytodeath expression using flowcytometer and DNA damage by comet
assay. The extrinsic apoptotic pathway was delineated by Fas, FasL,
Caspase8 estimation and intrinsic by Bax, Bcl-2 expression in colonocytes
using flowcytometric method. The modulators of redox signalling such as
ROS and Ca2+ levels were estimated using flowcytometer.Summary In the
current study, FO in combination with 5-FU led to a significant increase
in survival rate and decrease in tumor volume, count in contrast to other
groups. 5-FU treatment led to S phase arrest which was further
potentiated on combination with FO in comparison to DMH group.
Administration of 5-FU+DMH significantly decreased the expression of Ras
in colonocytes but the decrease was more pronounced after treatment with
5-FU+FO, suggestive of decrease in cell proliferation. In carcinogen
treated animals, a significant decrease in the percentage of early
apoptotic cells, M-30cytodeath expression and DNA damage was observed
whereas 5-FU in combination with FO resulted in a marked increase in the
above mentioned parameters and hence, an increase in apoptotic index. A
significant decline in the activation of both extrinsic and intrinsic
pathways was observed in carcinogen treated animals as demonstrated by
decrease in the expression of Fas, FasL, Caspase8, Bax and an increase in
Bcl-2. In contrast, administration of 5-FU alongwith FO significantly
enhanced the activation of both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways as compared to other groups. A significant increment in the
levels of ROS and Ca2+ was reported in 5-FU+FO+DMH as compared to other
groups.Conclusion The suppression of cell proliferation and activation of
apoptotic pathways by FO may increase the susceptibility of chemotherapy
to tumors.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

