Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MGAT5B expression in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and
RAS-mutated tumors promote maturation of tyrosine kinase receptors
through a PI3K/AKT/MGAT5B mechanism


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are aggressive soft
tissue sarcomas that occur either sporadically or in patients with
Neurofibromatosis type I. Surgery is the main stay of treatment, however,
due to the invasive growth, propensity to metastasis, limited sensitivity
to chemotherapy and radiation therapy, 5-year survival rates is only
20%-50%. Recent studies have identified several altered intracellular
signal transduction cascades and deregulated expression of kinase
receptors in MPNSTs, posing the possibility of personalized, targeted
therapeutics for these diseases. Kinase receptors depend on the
glycosylation for stabilization, maturation, transport onto the cell
surface, phosphorylation and activation. Aberrant glycosylation to
stabilize the expression of kinase receptors on the cell surface is
associated with many cancers. The appropriate and accurate modification
of glycans to proteins mainly depends on the action of highly specific
and precisely located enzymes known as glycosyltransferases and
glycosidases in different tissues and cells. In this report, we found
that glycoproteins were highly expressed in MPNST cell lines compared
with normal Schwann cells (NSC). We used the Human Glycosylation PCR
Array to profile the expression of 84 key genes encoding enzymes that
regulate protein glycosylation. We did not identify any change in
glycosidase mRNA expression levels, whereas multiple glycosyltransferases
(B4GALT5, FUT8, MGAT3, MGAT4A, MGAT5, MGAT5B, GALNT13, GALNT14, POMT1,
ST8SIA2) were overexpressed in different MPNST cell lines. This is
especially true for MGAT5B, a glycosyltransferase that promotes N-linked
or O-linked protein glycosylation, which was highly expressed in all
MPNST cell lines, many MPNST clinical specimens, as well as colon and
pancreatic cancer cell lines with K-ras mutations. Exogenous expression
of K-ras (G12V) significantly upregulated MGAT5B expression to promote
glycosylation of several tyrosine kinase receptors, whereas knockdown of
MGAT5B significantly inhibited the glycosylation and phosphorylation of
these kinase receptors. Moreover, we found AKT interacted with and
phosphorylated Ser192 in MGAT5B to promote MGAT5B transport from the
cytoplasm to the Golgi apparatus. Mutated MGAT5BS192A protein stayed in
the cytoplasm significantly attenuated experimental lung tumor metastasis
in vivo. Furthermore treatment of MPNST cells with the PI3K inhibitor
Ly294002 inhibited MGAT5B glycosyltransferase activity to attenuate
glycosylation and phosphorylation of tyrosine kinase receptors. Taken
together, these data suggest that RAS-mediated MGAT5B expression plays a
critical role in promoting glycosylation of many kinase receptors.
Targeting MGAT5B-mediated protein glycosylation may open a new
therapeutic window for the treatment of MPNSTs and RAS-related
malignancies.

