Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The requirements for dasatinib sensitivity in human melanoma cell
lines


Mutated BRAF oncogene, which fuels unregulated MAPK pathway in most
melanomas, can be targeted by a small-molecule drug vemurafenib. However,
most of patients develop an acquired resistance during treatment or have
an intrinsic resistance to this drug. Nonreceptor SRC tyrosine kinase is
deregulated in most cancer cell types and can be efficiently inhibited by
a small-molecule inhibitor dasatinib, an anticancer drug which is already
used for the treatment of some cancers and is in final clinical trials
for other tumor types. Although SRC does not have its own canonical
pathway, it is capable of activating and augmenting different signaling
routes in cancer cells. We found that melanoma tumor cell lines analysed
up to date are generally resistant to dasatinib. The exception to this
rule was Hbl, a very sensitive cell line whose cells were completely
killed by a 10 nM of dasatinib in a few days. The difference in
resistance of melanoma cell lines to dasatinib did not depend on primary
versus metastatic cell origin or the presence of BRAF or NRAS mutations.
Instead, the dasatinib sensitivity was dependent on its ability to
inhibit completely both the MAPK and AKT/mTOR signaling pathways. This
inhibition was at least as prominent as the inhibition by specific
inhibitors of the two pathways. SRC has been reported previously to have
links to this signaling pathways with the capacity to inhibit them in
some cell types. Moreover, extensive cross-talk exists between the two
pathways. Similar results were observed in several other cell lines
derived mostly from lung and colorectal cancers. Our data indicate that
the singular therapy of melanoma by dasatinib only would bring no benefit
to patients, except for the cases (probably rare) where dasatinib
strongly blocks both MAPK and AKT signaling pathways in tumor cells. More
molecular knowledge about the effects of the powerful anticancer drug
dasatinib is required in order to be used for the treatment of melanoma.
This work was supported by grant IGA no. NT/14005-3 from the Ministry of
Health (Czech Rep.) and by Institutional research project
PRVOUK-P25/LF1/2.

