Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computationally-inspired engineering of supramolecular taxane
nanoparticles


Clinical efficacy of long circulating lipid nanoparticles depend on high
drug to lipid ratio, stability during circulation and sustained drug
release after tumor accumulation. Achieving this is the holy grail of
paclitaxel (PTX) lipid nanoparticles due to its incompatible
physicochemical properties such as bulkiness, structural asymmetry,
hydrophobicity that leads to low drug loading efficiency and tendency to
crystallize leading to significant instability. Effective strategy to
overcome these limitations could be devised by understanding molecular
interactions of PTX with lipid bilayer at spatiotemporal level but these
remain poorly understood. Here, using computer simulations, we have
investigated the interactions of PTX with the model lipid bilayer at low
and high drug contents. We found that PTX at low concentrations occupied
the space in both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions of the bilayer and
did not exhibit significant destabilizing effect whereas at high
concentrations it exclusively accumulated at the hydrophilic tail region
causing significant rifts in the bilayer. In silico dynamic simulations
showed that conjugation of PTX to cholesterol using a flexible spacer
(Suprataxel, STX) stabilized the lipid bilayer at high concentrations. To
confirm the theoretical observations, we engineered supramolecular
nanoparticles of STX (STX-NP) and characterized the physicochemical and
mechanical stability. In vitro efficacy studies showed that STX-NPs is
comparable to PTX in multiple cancer cell lines. We demonstrated that
STX-NPs were more efficacious than PTX in inhibiting tumor growth in 4T1
breast cancer and K-RasLSL/+/Ptenfl/fl ovarian cancer models. This study
shows that the effective Supramolecular nanoparticles could be engineered
by understanding the interactions between the drug and the lipid
layer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

