Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient derived xenograft (PDX) of human melanoma to predict
clinical responses


The approval of three drugs targeting the MAPK pathway has led to new
standard therapies for melanoma with BRAFV600E mutations. The excitement
about these therapeutic successes is somewhat dampened by the relapse of
most if not all treated patients due to the development of acquired
(secondary) resistance. Early clinical trial results indicate that
combining BRAF and MEK inhibitors can improve survival and delay the
onset of resistance. Currently, there is a lack of good translational
models to study resistance pathways found in patients. We have developed
a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) bank for assessing patients' responses
to therapies.Human melanoma tissues were obtained following surgery, and
small pieces were implanted subcutaneously with Matrigel into NSG mice.
This technique was advantageous over injecting single tumor cells. It
also allows prior dissociation and freezing for extended time periods
prior to injection. The xenografts maintained a histological architecture
similar to the respective patients' lesions. NSG mice injected with tumor
fragments and single cells allow a high rate of tumor growth of
approximately 90%, even if few malignant cells from fine needle aspirates
are injected. When injecting decreasing numbers of tumor cells after
removal of endothelial cells, hematopoietic cells and red blood cells
(but not fibroblasts), in 5 out of 7 cases single malignant cells induced
tumors. Our current tumor bank contains 125 samples linked to patients'
clinical data and characterized for mutational status and spontaneous
metastasis rates (25%). DNA fingerprinting was matched to normal blood
DNA if available to assure identity of the samples. The samples had a
similar distribution pattern of genetic abnormalities to those in
patients, thus allowing their use for mutation-specific therapy
strategies. As an example, a PDX from a patient with intrinsic resistance
to vemurafenib was grown to compare tumor growth on a 200 ppm BRAF
inhibitor (PLX4720) diet, 200 ppm PLX4720 + 7 ppm MEK inhibitor
(PD0325901) combination diet, or control diet for 21 days. As in the
original patient, the BRAF inhibitor alone did not inhibit tumor growth,
while the combination of BRAF and MEK inhibition showed significant tumor
growth inhibition demonstrating that a PDX can predict clinical outcome.

