Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyploidy: A new breast cancer subtype and a lead compound that
targets it with high selectivity


Polyploidy, the presence of extra chromosome sets, is a feature of many
cancers. Polyploid cells have weaknesses that can be exploited for
treatmenttermed synthetic lethal. We identified polyploid breast cancers
and a polypoid-selective lead compound.METHODS: We performed 6-chromosome
FISH on 354 human breast cancers and correlated with breast cancer
subtype and clinical outcomes of up to 10 years (cohort 1). To validate
findings, we analyzed chromosome-17 ploidy on a second cohort of 1095
samples (cohort 2). To identify a polyploid-selective lead compound, a
two-stage chemical screen was performed. First, we analyzed data from
45,342 compounds by the NCI Developmental Therapeutics Program to
identify compounds selective for high ploidy cell lines. Second, we
performed a secondary screen using matched diploid-tetraploid human
cells.RESULTS: FISH analysis demonstrates that 10-14% of breast cancers
are polyploid (3N). Polyploid tumors are commonly estrogen-receptor
negative, but are found amongst all subtypes. Outcomes are worse for
polyploid cancers than non-polyploid breast cancers in both cohorts (OS;
p=0.008 cohort 1, p=0.049 cohort 2; RFS p=0.008, p=0.003). Our primary in
silico screen identified potential polyploid-selective compounds. Of
these, 35 were procured and tested in the secondary screen using matched
diploid-tetraploid human cell lines. One compound, DPBQ, was found to
have selective effects on polyploid cells. DPBQ has 3.6-fold selectivity
for inhibiting proliferation of tetraploid over diploid cells. A
structure-function analysis defined the key chemical motifs required for
maintaining polyploid selectivity. Mechanistically, DPBQ selectively
induces p53-activation and apoptosis in polyploid cells. However, other
chemicals that cause p53 activation and apoptosis lack such selectivity,
indicating that DPBQ operates via a unique mechanism.DISCUSSION:
Polyploidy indicates an aggressive subtype of breast cancer. Polyploid
cells have phenotypes distinct from normal diploid cells, suggesting an
opportunity for selective therapeutics. DPBQ is one compound identified
by a two-stage screen. This screen enforced the specificity of the effect
for polyploid cells and also the external validity across diverse cancer
cell types. Mechanistically, DPBQ selectively induces p53 activation and
apoptosis in polyploid cells. It will be important do define the direct
molecular target of DPBQ.CONCLUSIONS: Polyploid breast cancers represent
a unique high-risk subtype of breast cancer. DPBQ is a lead compound that
for selective destruction of polyploid cancers.

