Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BIBF1120, an investigational triple angiokinase inhibitor, in
combination with inhibitors of mTOR signaling shows potent antitumor
activity in preclinical models of sarcoma


BIBF1120 (Nintedanib), an investigational potent small molecule
angiokinase inhibitor, selectively binds to and blocks receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) such as vascular endothelial growth factor receptor,
(VEGFR), fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and platelet derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR). Nintedanib has shown promising results in
preclinical as well as clinical studies of non-small cell lung cancer,
colorectal, ovarian cancer and other solid tumors. We tested the in vitro
anti-proliferative activity of BIBF1120 in a panel of sarcoma cell lines
including malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), synovial
(SYO-I), Ewing's (CHP100), osteo (SaOS2) and liposarcoma (LS141). Our
results indicate that when compared to other potent RTK inhibitors such
as Imatinib and Pazopanib, BIBF1120 is highly efficient at nanomolar to
low micromolar concentrations in blocking proliferative activity of
sarcoma cell lines, specifically, SYO-I and MPNST, which are highly
dependent on PDGFR signaling. Western blot analysis to test the efficacy
of BIBF1120 confirmed significant blockade of RTK signaling pathways. Ras
activation and/or activation of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway has been shown to be critical in sarcomas including MPNST and
synovial sarcomas. Unlike Imatinib and Pazopanib, BIBF1120 also blocked
MAPK signaling pathway as demonstrated by p-ERK1/2 blockade. In addition
to the RTKs, mTOR (mammalian Target of Rapamycin) protein plays a key
role in AKT activation and downstream survival signaling. Combination of
RTK blockade by BIBF1120 and mTOR blockade by TORC1 inhibitor rapamycin
resulted in significantly stronger inhibition of in vitro cellular
proliferation compared to single agent treatments. Taken together, our
data strongly supports further clinical research of BIBF1120 in sarcoma.
Combining potent inhibitors of tyrosine kinase signaling, MAPK signaling
and inhibitors of mTOR pathway such as rapamycin could provide a new
therapeutic approach in this disease.

