Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of high throughput flow cytometry assays to support
target therapy/personalized medicine in oncology drug discovery and
development: Developing and optimizing a flow cytometry-based autophagy
detection method/panel for oncology drug discovery and development


Background: Pharmacodynamics (PD) endpoint assays are important
biomarker(s) for target therapy/personalized medicine in oncology drug
discovery & development. Identification of the informative PD
biomarkers/readouts can support dose selection in clinical trials,
identify the patient subsets, explore mechanism of action, or
differentiate compound(s) over others. Emerging evidence indicates that
enhanced autophagy promotes tumor progression in established tumors, and
inhibition of autophagy is recognized as a novel adjuvant cancer
therapeutic strategy when combined with conventional chemotherapy for
maximum therapeutic efficacy and overcoming chemoresistance. PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors have been developed for cancer treatment and, when combined
with an autophagy inhibitor, display synergistically improved efficacy.
This synergy consequently has lead to multiple clinical programs to
assess combination therapy regimes. Development of reliable high
throughput PD readouts to measure autophagy modulation is critical for
discovery of selective modulators, and/or identification of biomarkers
either for patient selection or drug combination strategy for clinical
development. Methods: Human U87MG glioblastoma and MCF7 breast cancer
cells were treated with the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor Rapamycin with or without
the autophagy inhibitor Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). Sequestered LC3
(microtubule-associated protein1 light chain 3), which is recognized as
an autophagy marker, was detected in cells by flow cytometry.
7-AAD/Annexin V staining were used for cell viability analysis. The
efficacy of individual compounds and optimal combination doses were
identified with a cell proliferation assay. Results: Our results
indicated that autophagy was induced by Rapamycin treatment. Autophagy
inhibitor Hydroxychloroquine exhibits dose dependent inhibition of in
vitro proliferation of U87 MG and MCF-7 tumor cells. U87 MG cells are
more sensitive to autophagy inhibition than MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Enhanced inhibition of cellular proliferation and increased cell death
were observed in U87MG and MCF-7 cells in combination regime when
compared to treatment with either compound alone. Conclusion: We
developed a High Throughput flow cytometry based method for screening
pharmacodynamics biomarker panel for supporting dose selection and/or
identify optimal combinations in oncology drug discovery& development.
The dynamic impacts of treatments on the activation status of autophagy
at various time points are currently under investigation, and we are
continuing to expand flow cytometry panels by incorporating other
potential biomarkers.Studies are funded by EMD Millipore (a division of
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany).Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

