Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 inhibition targets a stem cell population in a canine
urothelial carcinoma model


Recent studies have revealed that aberrant epigenetic events contribute
to the development and maintenance of a malignant phenotype in urothelial
carcinoma (UC) of the bladder, and many other tumor types. Thus, drugs
capable of reversing epigenetic alterations have been brought to focus,
and in the clinic epigenetic therapies demonstrate efficacy in the
treatment of particular hematopoietic tumors. However, despite
encouraging results from mouse xenograft studies, the clinical
application of these agents to the treatment of solid tumors has been
less successful. It is clear that new models are needed for the
development of therapeutic strategies that target the solid tumor
epigenome. Canine UC that develops commonly and spontaneously in dogs may
provide a relevant model to directly inform new clinical protocols, to
permit discovery and testing of clinical biomarkers, and, ultimately, to
predict the response of human tumors in the clinic.Although human and
canine UC share histopathologic characteristics, molecular features, and
response to medical therapy, little is known about the canine UC
epigenetic status. In human UC, EZH2 is overexpressed and, as a
consequence of its enzymatic activity that involves the tri-methylation
of histone H3 (H3K27me3), is responsible for silencing a large number of
genes, including known tumor suppressors. We have determined that EZH2 is
also overexpressed in canine UC. Therefore, we hypothesize that EZH2
provides a therapeutic target for UC.Pharmacological inhibition of EZH2
(DZNep) as well as targeted knockdown inhibits cell growth and induces
apoptosis in canine UC cells in vitro in anchorage-dependent (2D) and
anchorage-independent (3D) cultures. By conducting these experiments in
parallel with human UC cell lines, we showed that sensitivity to
inhibitor is comparable between human and canine UC cell lines. Upon
DZNep treatment, EZH2 is reduced and its activity is inhibited, as
evidenced by both decreased global H3K27me3 and upregulation of a set of
genes that are commonly silenced by EZH2. In parallel, we showed that
inhibition of EZH2 reduced the sphere forming capacity of canine UC
cells, suggesting an inhibitory effect in the growth of the stem cell
subpopulation. Taking into account that this population is responsible
for dissemination, metastasis and emergence of drug resistance, these
results support the idea that EZH2 targeting in UC could be a beneficial
addition to the existing therapeutic modalities.According to our data,
the molecular underpinnings of spontaneous UC are also shared between
dogs and humans. Therefore canine UC provides a means to understand
epigenetic dysregulation in the urothelium as well as to investigate its
clinical targeting. This provides the opportunity to easily evaluate
tumor response in vivo and obtain serial tissue samples during treatment.
Thus canine studies can provide data that are not easily obtained in
human trials and may inform clinical development.

