Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting system xc- in breast cancer cells: Development of novel
therapeutics


Cancer-induced bone pain is a major palliative condition suffered by many
afflicted with breast cancer. With current anti-cancer therapeutics
prolonging the lives of these patients without eradicating the disease
itself, quality of life concerns predominate patient care. A potential
mechanism implicates glutamate, and specifically the glutamate-cystine
antiporter called system xc-. Due to the accelerated metabolism of cancer
cells, this transporter (xCT) is upregulated to supply the cell with
adequate cysteine for detoxification of reactive oxygen species via
glutathione (GSH) synthesis.We conducted a high-throughput screening of
30,000 compounds to identify novel small molecules capable of reducing
glutamate release from MDA-MB-231 cells. Glutamate release was quantified
using Amplex Red fluorometric assay after 48 hours incubation with test
compounds. Compounds providing the greatest effect were:
4-[2-(Dipropylamino)ethyl]-1,2-benzenediol, SKF 38393, Capsazepine and
SPB 05855. Follow-up entailed confirmation of screening results (i.e.
inhibition of glutamate secretion) in a dose dependent manner (0-200uM).
GSH content of treated cells was also analyzed as it's production is
linked to xCT activity. Intracellular GSH levels were analyzed in cell
lysates using DNTB. In addition, to further explore mode of action of
these compounds, we cloned 2.6 kilobase pairs (-2329 to +278 bp) of the
human xCT promoter region from genomic DNA isolated from MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. Four truncations were also generated by PCR. Full
length and truncated clones were transferred into a luciferase reporter
gene construct (PGL3-Basic). This acted as a tool to test whether any of
these compounds inhibit glutamate release through transcriptional
regulation of xCT. MDA-MB-231 cells were transiently co-transfected with
the dual luciferase system and subsequently treated with
compounds.Glutamate release data confirmed the results of most positive
hits but revealed that SPB 05855 did not meet the original criteria, as
it had no effect on inhibition of glutamate release when re-tested.
Compound cytotoxicity was assessed using crystal violet staining and
dose-response data indicated that a concentration of 50 M was the highest
effective dose that did not result in cytotoxicity for all confirmed
compounds. GSH results indicate that only SKF 38393 reduces total GSH
levels in a dose-dependent manner. Promoter activity revealed that, of
the four compounds, only SKF 38393 significantly affected promoter
activity resulting in a 30% reduction in luciferase production.These
experiments indicate a series of potent compounds that inhibit glutamate
release and have the potential for development into novel therapeutics
aimed at the treatment of cancer-induced bone pain.

