Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AIP1 suppresses tumor metastasis by regulating tumor
microenvironment and metastatic niche


AIP1 (also called DAB2IP, a new member of RAS-GAP family protein) is
downregulated in a variety of human cancer tissues. We and others have
recently reported that AIP1 functions as a tumor suppressor in prostate
cancer models. However, the role of AIP1 in regulating tumor
microenvironment and metastatic niche is not known. In the present study,
we implanted tumor cells with the same genetic background into C57BL/6
wild type (WT) and AIP1-deficient (AIP1-KO) mice to address this
question. In subcutaneous (SQ) allograft models using B16 melanoma and
LLC Lewis lung carcinoma, tumor growth and metastasis to multiple organs
including lymph node, lung, liver, spleen and bone marrow were
significantly enhanced in AIP1-KO host, suggesting AIP1 in tumor
microenvironment limits tumor metastases. However, a direct intravenously
injection of tumor cells resulted in no differences in tumor metastasis
between WT and AIP1-KO mice, indicating AIP1 in host regulates tumor
metastasis at steps prior to extravasation to target tissues. We examined
effects of AIP1 deletion on the induction of local inflammation, tumor
cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), generation of metastatic
routes (formation of new blood and lymphatic vessels) and establishment
of pre-metastatic niche in distance tissues. SQ tumors in AIP1-KO host
showed more profound increases in macrophage infiltration, tumor cell
EMT, intratumoral angiogenesis and peri-tumoral lymphangiogenesis as well
as lymphangiogenesis in lymph nodes prior to the detection of metastatic
tumor cells. Finally, SQ tumor induced an establishment of pre-metastatic
niche in lung as indicated by increased immunostaining for fibronectin
and accumulation of VEGFR1, c-Kit and CXCR-positive cells which were
augmented in AIP1-KO mice. Importantly, WT recipient with AIP1-KO bone
marrow-derived cells showed similar phenotype to AIP1-KO mice in tumor
growth and metastasis. Taken together, our data suggest that AIP1
functions as tumor metastasis suppressor by regulating tumor
microenvironment, metastatic routes and pre-metastatic niche.

