Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific targeting of the NAD metabolome with -lapachone and
NamPT inhibition


Cancer cells require increased NAD+ synthesis to support anabolic
metabolism, to sustain signaling processes such as sirtuin activity and
ADP-ribosylation, and to maintain redox balance. Inhibitors of
Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NamPT), the rate-limiting step in
NAD+ biosynthesis, have modest anti-tumor activity in monotherapy in
vitro and in vivo, but failed clinical trials due to a lack of tumor
specificity attributed to the necessity of NAD+ synthesis in normal
proliferating cells. We found that the tumor specificity and efficacy of
NamPT inhibition can be greatly increased when small molecule NamPT
inhibitors, such as FK866, are used in combination with the NQO1
bioactivated therapeutic -lapachone (-lap). Most solid tumor cells
overexpress NQO1, which catalyzes a futile redox cycle with -lap,
resulting in the formation of a burst of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
This results in substantial DNA single strand breaks and base damage in a
tumor-specific manner, which hyperactivates poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
(PARP-1), a DNA repair enzyme that utilizes NAD+ to generate
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR)-protein moieties. Rapid NAD+ and ATP loss occurs
and tumor cells die through programmed necrosis. PARP-1-mediated NAD+
depletion caused by -lap treatment synergizes with reduced NAD+ synthesis
as a result of FK866-mediated NamPT inhibition. Enhanced cancer cell
death in terms of loss of viability and clonogenicity at lower -lap doses
was noted, while tumor specificity for NQO1 overexpressing cells was
maintained. With combination treatment, cells are primed for ROS-mediated
damage due to reduced glutathione and NAD(P)+ levels, they are unable to
recover ATP, NAD+, and NADP+ synthesis even after only a 2 hour
treatment, and they rapidly die through a caspase-independent mechanism.
This therapeutic approach is highly effective against a variety of tumor
cell lines from pancreatic, breast, and non-small cell lung, and is
expected to improve the efficacy and tumor specificity of both of these
drugs by allowing their use at lower doses in vivo. These studies were
supported by an AACR/PanCan Innovator Award and NIH R01 CA102972 to DAB.

