Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of high-grade treatment-nave prostate
tumors


Prostate cancer (PCa) will impact one in six American men and many
low-risk men endure therapy, while other men die of PCa. Optimal
treatment selection depends on distinguishing indolent tumors from those
that will cause prostate cancer specific mortality (PCSM). To date,
sequencing of prostate tumor DNA has highlighted the fact that prostate
tumors develop differently than other cancers. Instead of recurrent
protein-altering mutations, many prostate tumors harbor closed chain
structural rearrangements that may mediate tumor evolution. However, we
do not yet understand which somatic mutations are involved in aggressive
disease and PCSM.To address this crucial question, we are using whole
genome sequencing to pinpoint somatic genetic features in tumor/normal
paired samples from four PCSM and six non-PCSM patients with
treatment-nave, Gleason 8+ tumors. Tumor and normal DNA were sequenced to
a mean coverage of 95.3X and 48.3X, respectively. Tumor DNA purity ranged
from 49%-79% and tumor ploidy ranged from 1.96 to 2.22. To define the
genomic landscape of aggressive PCa, we will compare our findings with
published studies and genotype high-priority candidates in at least 50
additional low- and high-grade tumors. We will also compare somatic
mutations in PCSM versus non-PCSM cases and use network analysis to
identify pathways that may be involved in progression and metastasis.
Finally, we will characterize the clonal evolution of PCa tumors using
deep digital sequencing to distinguish mutations that were present in the
original tumor clone from subclonal mutations that arose after
oncogenesis. In this way, we aim to identify potential oncogenic drivers
and candidate mediators of progression and metastasis.Ultimately, we aim
to 1) Uncover somatic mutations that are specific to aggressive tumors 2)
Determine whether PCSM tumors have unique genetic features, and 3)
Understand the role of clonal evolution in oncogenesis and progression.
As more tumors are sequenced, this approach may yield valuable markers
for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment selection.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

