Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT3B (a de novo DNA methyltransferase) epigenetically regulates
gene expression, independent of its DNA methyltransferase activity


DNA methylation is one of several epigenetic mechanisms used by cells to
control gene expression. The de novo methyltransferases, DNMT3a and
DNMT3b, establish new methylation patterns during early development.
DNMT1, the maintenance methyltransferase, ensures propagation of
hemi-methylated DNA. Human cancers are characterized by aberrant DNA
methylation patterns, including global hypomethylation and
hypermethylation of promoters at tumor suppressor genes. This latter
change leads to transcriptional silencing. Experimentally, DNMT1 is
capable of transcriptional repression without its methyltransferase
activity, partially through interactions with histone-modifying enzymes.
We hypothesized DNMT3B may also be capable of modulating gene expression
independently of its methyltransferase activity, by recruiting repressive
epigenetic proteins to the promoters of endogenous DNMT3B targets.Using
an isogenic colorectal cancer cell culture model, we investigated the
functional consequences of the removal and re-introduction of DNMT3B on
target gene expression, methylation, and chromatin status. A stable
genetic knock out cell line, transient shRNA knock down, and
pharmacologic inhibition resulted in upregulation of a subset of
candidate DNMT3B targets identified by gene expression arrays and
validated by quantitative RT-PCR. Interestingly, reintroduction of both
wild-type and catalytically dead mutant DNMT3B in the knockout cells
transcriptionally repressed the same loci. Infinium 450K arrays were
performed to assess DNA methylation status. As expected, the loss of
DNMT3B did not result in significant changes in global methylation at
TSS, CpG islands, shores, shelves, and UTRs. However, in selected of the
above targets, locus-specific demethylation was identified.
Overexpression of both wild-type and catalytically dead mutant DNMT3B
failed to restore local methylation, in concert with transcriptional
repression of these loci, further suggesting an alternative regulatory
mechanism to explain transcriptional changes. Interactions of DNMT3B with
other repressive proteins could account for the above transcriptional
repression. ChIP studies revealed LSD1, a histone demethylase that
represses transcription, is lost in the 3B knockout cells but is
recruited back to the promoters of repressed DNMT3B target genes with
DNMT3B insertion. These data strongly suggest DNMT3B possesses a
non-canonical function as a scaffold protein for transcriptional
repressors.

