Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A discovery platform for allosteric modulators of c-Abl kinase
function


The c-Abl protein-tyrosine kinase regulates intracellular signaling
pathways controlling cell growth, adhesion, and responses to genotoxic
stress. The kinase activity of c-Abl is repressed by intramolecular
interactions involving its non-catalytic SH3 and SH2 domains. The SH3
domain interacts with a polyproline type II helix formed by the
SH2-kinase linker, while the SH2 domain interacts with the C-lobe of
kinase domain away from the active site. In addition, the myristoylated
N-terminal cap region (Ncap) binds a hydrophobic pocket in the C-lobe of
the kinase domain, clamping the SH3 and SH2 domains against the back of
the kinase domain. Small molecules that allosterically regulate c-Abl
kinase activity through its non-catalytic domains may represent selective
probes of c-Abl function in diverse tumor types. In this study, we
developed a chemical library screening assay designed to identify
chemical modulators of c-Abl kinase activity that either disrupt or
stabilize the regulatory interaction of the SH3 domain with the
SH2-kinase linker. This fluorescence polarization (FP) assay is based on
a recombinant purified protein consisting of the c-Abl Ncap, SH3 and SH2
domains plus the linker (N32L protein) and a short fluorescein-labeled
probe peptide that binds to the SH3 domain. In assay development
experiments, we found that the probe peptide binds to the recombinant
c-Abl N32L protein in vitro, producing a robust FP signal that can be
competed with an excess of unlabeled peptide. The FP signal is not
observed with control N32L proteins bearing either an inactivating
mutation in the SH3 domain or enhanced SH3:linker interaction. The assay
was optimized with respect to probe peptide sequence, probe and N32L
protein concentrations, DMSO tolerance, and FP signal stability over
time. Pilot library screens were then performed with the NCI Diversity
Set III and an FDA-approved drug library (2800 compounds total). Seven
compounds were identified that specifically reduced the FP signal by at
least three standard deviations from the untreated controls. Secondary
assays showed that one of these hit compounds enhances c-Abl kinase
activity in vitro, suggesting that it disrupts regulation of kinase
activity through the non-catalytic region. These results show that
screening assays based on the non-catalytic domains of c-Abl can identify
small molecule regulators of kinase function.

