Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of erlotinib and epigallocatechin-3-gallate induces
apoptosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck through
posttranslational regulation of Bim and Bcl-2


Purpose: Effective chemopreventive strategies could save millions of
lives. We have previously reported that the combination of the EGFR-TKI
erlotinib and the green tea constituent epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
exhibited synergistic chemopreventive effects in head and neck cancers by
inducing the expression of Bim, p21, p27, and inhibiting the
phosphorylation of ERK and AKT and expression of Bcl-2. In the current
study, we further investigated the mechanism of regulation of Bim, Bcl-2,
p21 and p27, and their role in apoptosis.Methods: Well characterized and
genetically validated squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck cell
lines were used throughout the study. Annexin V staining was conducted
for apoptosis assay. Expression of mRNAs and proteins were measured by
RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Gene overexpression and
knockdown strategies were used to activate or shut down the expression of
specific proteins.Results: siRNA-mediated silencing of Bim significantly
inhibited apoptosis induced by the combination of erlotinib and EGCG
(p=). On the other hand, overexpression of Bcl-2 significantly protected
cells from apoptosis (p=), whereas overexpression of constitutively AKT
had minimal effect on apoptosis (actual values). Analysis of mRNA
expression by RT-PCR revealed that neither erlotinib, EGCG nor their
combination had any significant effects on the mRNA expression of Bim,
p21, p27 or Bcl-2, suggesting post-transcriptional regulation of Bim,
p21, p27 and Bcl-2 by the combination of erlotinib and EGCG. Furthermore,
we found that erlotinib or the combination of EGCG and erlotinib
inhibited the phosphorylation of Bim, and that inhibition of protein
translation by cycloheximide pretreatment stabilized Bim, suggesting
posttranslational regulation of Bim.Conclusion: Our results strongly
suggest that the combination of erlotinib and EGCG induces apoptosis of
SCCHN cells by regulating Bim and Bcl-2 at the post-translational level.
Currently, a clinical trial is underway at Winship Cancer Institute of
Emory University to inhibit or reverse the progression of oral
premalignant lesions using this combination. (This study is supported by
R03CA159369, P50CA128613 and Robbins Scholar Award of Winship Cancer
Institute).

