Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CT053PTSA, a novel c-MET and VEGFR2 inhibitor, potently suppresses
angiogenesis and tumor growth


Background: In many human cancers, c-Met is activated via receptor
overexpression, amplification, mutation and/or a ligand-dependent
autocrine/paracrine loop. c-MET-driven tumor growth and metastasis may be
further stimulated by hypoxic conditions in the tumor microenvironment,
which are often exacerbated by the VEGF-pathway inhibition. Therefore,
blockades of c-Met and VEGFR2 simultaneously may yield synergistic
inhibition on tumor growth.Methods and Results: CT053PTSA is a potent,
orally bioavailable small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
against c-Met, VEGFR2 as well as Axl, Mer, and FLT3, all of which have
been implicated in tumor pathogenesis. In cell-based assays, CT053PTSA
showed IC50s of 6.7, 1.9 and Background: In many human cancers, c-Met is
activated via receptor overexpression, amplification, mutation and/or a
ligand-dependent autocrine/paracrine loop. c-MET-driven tumor growth and
metastasis may be further stimulated by hypoxic conditions in the tumor
microenvironment, which are often exacerbated by the VEGF-pathway
inhibition. Therefore, blockades of c-Met and VEGFR2 simultaneously may
yield synergistic inhibition on tumor growth.Methods and Results:
CT053PTSA is a potent, orally bioavailable small molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) against c-Met, VEGFR2 as well as Axl, Mer, and FLT3, all
of which have been implicated in tumor pathogenesis. In cell-based
assays, CT053PTSA showed IC50s of 6.7, 1.9 and < 1.0 nM against c-Met,
VEGFR-2 and Axl. In cell-based functional assays, CT053PTSA inhibited HGF
and VEGF-stimulated HUVEC proliferation and microvascular angiogenesis in
rat aortic rings with IC50 values of 8.6 and 6.3 nM, respectively. When
single dosed orally (3mg/kg) to U87MG tumor-bearing nude mice, CT053PTSA
potently inhibited the phosphorylation of c-Met and its downstream
signaling kinases AKT and ERK1/2 for up to 6 hours in tumor tissues.The
antitumor efficacy of CT053PTSA was evaluated in human tumor subcutaneous
xenograft models in athymic mice, which included Caki-1 (kidney
carcinoma), U-87MG (glioblastoma), NCI-H441 (lung adenocarcinoma),
MDA-MB-231 (breast adenocarcinoma), SMMC-7721 (hepatoma), 5637 (bladder
carcinoma) and SK-OV-3 (ovarian carcinoma). The ED50s of CT053PTSA to
inhibit tumor growth in these studies ranged from 60% across animal
species) and desirable drug exposures in mice, rats, dogs and monkeys.
Based on its potent antitumor activity, favorable PK profile and
toxicological data, CT053PTSA was granted to enter clinical trials in
China and is currently under phase I evaluation as a potential treatment
for human malignancies.

