Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CD133 expression induce the chemoresistance to
5-fluorouracil in the colon cancer cell line


Background: The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory which postulates a small
subset of tumor cells have the capacity in tumor initiation, progression
and importantly resistance to chemotherapy. CD133 is a transmembrane
glycoprotein that serves as a putative cancer stem cell (CSC) marker in
colon cancer and its relationship with the chemoresistance has been on
debate. In our previous clinical study, we found the patients with CD133+
colon cancer have better prognosis after 5 fluorouracil (5-FU)
chemotherapy compared to CD133- tumors. Purpose: To understand the role
of CSC marker expression in relation to chemoresistance in colon cancer,
we evaluated the effect of CD133 inhibition in colorectal cancer (CRC)
cell line on the genes expression which are related to chemoresistance or
cell survival. Materials & Methods: CD133 siRNA transfection was
performed on CD133+ colon cancer cell line (Caco-2). The proliferation
assay used to detect the cytotoxic effect of 5-FU chemotherapy. The
change in expression of chemoresistance related genes (AKT1, ABCG2 and
MDR1) and cell survival related genes (survivin and beta-catenin) were
evaluated by qRT-PCR and western blotting at 48hrs and 72hrs after CD133
siRNA transfection. Results: The proliferation assay demonstrated the
increased chemoresistance of colon cancer cells after inhibition of CD133
expression when 5M 5-FU was treated (p=0.0014). The mRNA expression of
chemoresistance related genes (AKT1, ABCG2, MDR1) and cell survival
related genes (survivin and -catenin) were all significantly increased
after transfection (pBackground: The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory which
postulates a small subset of tumor cells have the capacity in tumor
initiation, progression and importantly resistance to chemotherapy. CD133
is a transmembrane glycoprotein that serves as a putative cancer stem
cell (CSC) marker in colon cancer and its relationship with the
chemoresistance has been on debate. In our previous clinical study, we
found the patients with CD133+ colon cancer have better prognosis after 5
fluorouracil (5-FU) chemotherapy compared to CD133- tumors. Purpose: To
understand the role of CSC marker expression in relation to
chemoresistance in colon cancer, we evaluated the effect of CD133
inhibition in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell line on the genes expression
which are related to chemoresistance or cell survival. Materials &
Methods: CD133 siRNA transfection was performed on CD133+ colon cancer
cell line (Caco-2). The proliferation assay used to detect the cytotoxic
effect of 5-FU chemotherapy. The change in expression of chemoresistance
related genes (AKT1, ABCG2 and MDR1) and cell survival related genes
(survivin and beta-catenin) were evaluated by qRT-PCR and western
blotting at 48hrs and 72hrs after CD133 siRNA transfection. Results: The
proliferation assay demonstrated the increased chemoresistance of colon
cancer cells after inhibition of CD133 expression when 5M 5-FU was
treated (p=0.0014). The mRNA expression of chemoresistance related genes
(AKT1, ABCG2, MDR1) and cell survival related genes (survivin and
-catenin) were all significantly increased after transfection (p<0.05)
but there was no significant changes in expression at the protein level
of all genes. Conclusions: The inhibition of CD133 expression in
CD133+colon cancer cell line induce the chemoresistance to 5-FU
chemotherapy through the increased expression of chemoresistance related
genes. Therefore, CD133 expression seems to be related with the
chemosensitivity to 5-FU in colon cancer despite the mechanism needs to
be proven.

