Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A potential source in oxidative cell death mediated by thymidylate
synthase inhibitors: NADPH oxidase 2


Thymidylate synthase (TS) catalyzes the reductive transfer of a methyl
group from N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH2-THF) to dUMP, forming
dTMP and dihydrofolate (DHF). It is generally accepted that inhibition of
the enzyme leads to a deficiency of dTMP, followed by genome damage and
programmed cell death. As such, TS has long been viewed as an important
target of anti-neoplastic agents, such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and
raltitrexed (RTX), which lead to inhibition of the enzyme. Oxidative
stress is well-recognized as having a central role in cellular response
to a number of DNA damaging agents, and may be a proximate cause of
therapy-induced cell death. Despite such recognition, little detail
exists on the origin and regulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
during TS-directed chemotherapy. We have undertaken a detailed
examination of the origin, nature, and role of ROS in cell death mediated
by TS inhibitors. We have previously identified NADPH oxidase (NOX) as
the primary source of increased ROS following exposure to TS-directed
agents, as indicated by the observation of decreased ROS production and
apoptotic indices in presence of NOX inhibitors. We have found that in
response to TS inhibitors, NOX enzyme activity increases in association
with induction of the transcript for p67phox, which specifically
regulates the NOX2 isoform. This result is also verified by silencing
p67phox gene in HCT116 cells. Silencing p67phox gene inhibits
drug-induced NOX activity and decreases drug-induced apoptotic indices.
To substantiate and expand results obtained from HCT116, we used other
colorectal cancer cells, including HCT15, SW480, DLD-1, LoVo, MOSER and
LS180. We have determined that colon cancer cells exhibit diverse
responses in both basal and drug-inducible levels of apoptosis, NOX
activity and mRNA of NOX2 regulatory subunits, implicating the
heterogeneity in colorectal cancer cells. Based on these results, we
conclude that augmentation of NOX2 activity via induction of p67phox mRNA
expression is the proximate cause of programmed cell death elicited by
dTMP deficiency in HCT116 cells. Each colorectal cancer cells might have
different mechanism to undergo ROS-mediated cell death.

