Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) mutation in endometrioid endometrial
carcinoma (EEC): Master epimutator contributing to biologic aggressiveness


Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in the US.
At present, therapies for recurrent or advanced stage disease are largely
ineffective. Understanding the genetic and epigenetic factors that
contribute to biologic aggressiveness holds promise for new treatment
strategies. CTCF, a master regulator of gene expression, was identified
as a significantly mutated gene in endometrial cancers by TCGA. Our group
identified a hot spot mutation in CTCF in microsatellite instability
positive (MSI) endometrial cancers not reported by TCGA. It is noteworthy
that among cancer types analyzed to date, EEC is the only malignancy in
which CTCF mutation is a frequent defect. CTCF has thousands of binding
sites throughout the human genome and is capable of direct activation of
genes, enhancer binding and far-reaching chromatin modification, and
controls expression of numerous critical regulators of cellular
growth/survival (e.g. c-myc, p53, p19/ARF, p16/INK4A, BRCA1, p27, E2F1).
However, the role CTCF plays in EEC is largely unknown. Our analysis of a
large cohort of EEC offers further insights into CTCF's role in
EEC.Targeted ultra-deep sequencing of 540 primary ECC samples (966X mean
coverage) identified 97 different variants (excluding SNPs, low quality
variant calls, and synonymous variants) in 136 samples (25.2%). Mutations
were more common in tumors with MSI than tumors with intact DNA mismatch
repair (40% and 14% respectively pEndometrial cancer is the most common
gynecologic malignancy in the US. At present, therapies for recurrent or
advanced stage disease are largely ineffective. Understanding the genetic
and epigenetic factors that contribute to biologic aggressiveness holds
promise for new treatment strategies. CTCF, a master regulator of gene
expression, was identified as a significantly mutated gene in endometrial
cancers by TCGA. Our group identified a hot spot mutation in CTCF in
microsatellite instability positive (MSI) endometrial cancers not
reported by TCGA. It is noteworthy that among cancer types analyzed to
date, EEC is the only malignancy in which CTCF mutation is a frequent
defect. CTCF has thousands of binding sites throughout the human genome
and is capable of direct activation of genes, enhancer binding and
far-reaching chromatin modification, and controls expression of numerous
critical regulators of cellular growth/survival (e.g. c-myc, p53,
p19/ARF, p16/INK4A, BRCA1, p27, E2F1). However, the role CTCF plays in
EEC is largely unknown. Our analysis of a large cohort of EEC offers
further insights into CTCF's role in EEC.Targeted ultra-deep sequencing
of 540 primary ECC samples (966X mean coverage) identified 97 different
variants (excluding SNPs, low quality variant calls, and synonymous
variants) in 136 samples (25.2%). Mutations were more common in tumors
with MSI than tumors with intact DNA mismatch repair (40% and 14%
respectively p<.0001). Sixty-five of the 97 variants identified (67%) are
novel and sequencing of matched tumor/normal DNA confirmed variants are
somatic mutations. Most mutated samples (79%) harbored stop, frameshift
or splice site variants. As we have shown that CTCF frameshift and stop
mutations are subject to nonsense-mediated decay, these data strongly
implicate CTCF as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor. Mutation was not
associated with age, stage, grade and disease-free or overall survival.
However, among patients who recurred (n=67) the recurrence free interval
(RFI) was shorter for mutation carriers (n=15) than for patients whose
tumors had no mutation (8.5 months and 17.9 months respectively,
p=0.02).Because we saw frequent loss of function mutations we undertook
studies to determine if CTCF deletion is also a feature of EECs. Q-PCR
for 149 samples revealed 8 cases with heterozygous CTCF deletion (5%),
and in one tumor a 1741bp homozygous deletion (chr16: 67643579-67645330).
Two patients with CTCF deletion recurred and both had short RFIs (1 SD
below the mean).Investigation of the effects of CTCF mutation on gene
expression in primary tumors is ongoing. Taken together, our analyses
serve to contextualize the effects of CTCF mutations in EEC and implicate
loss of CTCF in biologic aggressiveness.

