Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid inhibits heat shock protein 90 complex and
client proteins by reducing intracellular ATP levels in breast and lung
cancer


A major contributor to carcinogenesis is the molecular chaperone heat
shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Hsp90 regulates the proper folding and
stabilization of several client proteins, including human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (ErbB2) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1).
ErbB2 is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family
of receptor-proteins, and is a clinical target for the treatment of
metastatic cancer, while HIF-1 is often stabilized and overexpressed in
several cancers. The ability for Hsp90 to become a mature complex and to
properly fold client proteins is dependent on adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) binding with the co-chaperone, p23. Specific Hsp90 inhibitors, like
geldanamycin, target the Hsp90 ATP-binding site to prevent formation of
the mature complex. Although supplementation with docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA; C22:6 n-3) has not been shown to specifically target the Hsp90
ATP-binding site, the current study demonstrates a similar effect by DHA
causing a reduction in available intracellular ATP levels. DHA is the
longest, most unsaturated omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)
existing in biological membranes and has been shown to possess
anti-cancer activity in several cancer models. Studies from our
laboratory have shown that DHA enrichment can reduce cancer cell
metabolism and intracellular ATP levels in both breast and lung cancer
models. In this study, a novel mechanism for the ability of DHA to
inhibit the Hsp90 chaperone complex is defined. In vitro analyses of
BT-474 human breast ductal carcinoma, as well as the A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines were used to determine the impact of
DHA-induced decreases of intracellular ATP levels. We found that the
reduction in ATP levels by DHA treatment resulted in significant
decreases in the association of Hsp90 and p23 in both cell lines. The
decreased association of the Hsp90-p23 complex led to decreased levels of
ErbB2 and HIF-1 client proteins, suggesting that DHA can modify Hsp90
chaperone function and attenuate client protein levels. Additionally,
similar results were found when employing 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), a
glycolytic inhibitor, which confirms that DHA and 2-DG can disrupt Hsp90
molecular chaperone function by decreasing cellular ATP levels.
Consistent with these observations, when using a dose of DHA that did not
significantly reduce intracellular ATP levels, no change in the Hsp90-p23
chaperone complex or protein levels of ErbB2 and HIF-1 were seen. These
results demonstrate a potential use for dietary intervention to improve
cancer therapy in tumors that overexpress Hsp90 client proteins.

