Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib induces the degradation of FLT3-ITD tyrosine kinase in
acute myeloid leukemia through an autophagy-dependent mechanism


Internal tandem duplication mutations of the Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3
(FLT3-ITD) are found in 30% of Acute Myeloid Leukemias and are associated
with a very poor outcome. Although the activity of FLT3 inhibitors such
as AC-220 is currently evaluated in phase II and III trials with
promising results, some studies suggest that leukemic cells can develop
various mechanisms of resistance including mutations of the tyrosine
kinase domain (TKD).In the present work, we show that AML cell lines
harboring FLT3-ITD mutation, MV4-11 and MOLM-14, are exquisitely
sensitive to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Importantly, although
bortezomib induced apoptosis in all primary AML samples (n=24), FLT3-ITD
mutated cells (n=13) are much more sensitive than non-mutated samples
(n=11). Moreover we observed a positive correlation between FLT3-ITD
mutation load (measured by the FLT3-ITD/FLT3wt ratio) and bortezomib
activity among FLT3-ITD samples (p=0.0084, r=0.719). At the molecular
level, bortezomib induced autophagy, as shown by an increase of LC3-II
protein expression and by electron microscopy analysis. This autophagy
was mainly cytotoxic as cell death was inhibited by the autophagy
pharmacological inhibitor, 3-methyladenine. Before cell death occurs, we
observed that bortezomib induced a downregulation of FLT3-ITD both in
cell lines and primary samples. Accordingly, cell signalling dependent on
FLT3-ITD (ERK/Akt/STAT5) was inhibited upon bortezomib treatment. Others
proteasome inhibitors such as MG-132 or carfilzomib were also able to
downregulate FLT3-ITD protein level. Interestingly, 3-methyladenine
restored FLT3-ITD expression and signaling after bortezomib exposure,
suggesting a role for autophagy in the downregulation of the mutated
receptor. Using confocal microscopy, we showed a co-localization between
FLT3-ITD and LC3 structures after bortezomib exposure. Electron
microscopy analyses confirmed the presence of the receptor in autophagy
vesicles. Furthermore, the membrane trafficking inhibitor dynasore
inhibited autophagy, cell death and degradation of FLT3-ITD induced by
bortezomib. We also showed that bortezomib overcomes the resistance to
AC-220 in a MOLM-14 ITD/TKD model, by triggering the degradation of the
receptor. Finally, in vivo studies using a mouse xenograft model,
confirmed that bortezomib was able to decrease FLT3-ITD protein level and
inhibit leukemic cell growth.Altogether, our results show that proteasome
inhibitors induce a downregulation of the oncogenic tyrosine kinase
FLT3-ITD in an autophagic-dependent manner, suggesting that they could be
used as an alternative strategy in AML with FLT3-ITD mutations.

