Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput screen identifies microRNAs regulating lung
cancer cell survival and response to paclitaxel


Introduction. microRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small non-coding RNAs
that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression mainly by decreasing
mRNA levels of target genes. Recently, numerous studies have shown the
important roles of miRNAs in regulating various cellular physiological
and pathological pathways including cell differentiation, proliferation
and even tumorigenesis. A large number of miRNAs are indicated to be
involved in multiple pathways that are critical for lung cancer, which is
the leading cause of adult cancer deaths. Intriguingly, some miRNAs
sensitize lung cancer to microtubule-targeting agents, such as
paclitaxel. All of these highlight the potential application of
miRNA-targeted oligos as next-generation therapeutic agents.Aims and
Methods. We aim to identify novel functional miRNAs in lung cancer. Using
a high-throughput screening platform containing a library of chemically
synthesized miRNAs, we systematically identify miRNAs that reduce lung
cancer cell survival or sensitize cancer cells to paclitaxel. The top
candidate miRNAs are validated and their mechanisms are further
investigated.Results and Conclusions. We show that miR-195 significantly
inhibits the viability of lung cancer cells in vitro, and that
transfection of miR-195 into cancer cells results in G1 phase arrest and
decreased cell invasion. Intriguingly, miR-195 does not show strong
inhibitory effects on viability of immortalized human bronchial
epithelial cells (HBECs). Analysis of miRNA expression data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) indicates lower
expression of miR-195 in lung cancer tumors compared to normal tissues.
Merging expression with clinical annotation shows that higher expression
of miR-195 in lung cancer patients is associated with longer survival.
These results indicate that miR-195 is a tumor suppressor miRNA and that
miR-195 may be an important factor in determining lung cancer progression
and prognosis. This observation is consistent with previous studies that
have shown a tumor suppressor function of miR-195 in breast cancer,
bladder cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. Overall, the inhibitory
effects on lung cancer cell growth and the correlation between expression
and survival indicate the involvement of miR-195 in critical pathways for
lung cancer. We have identified additional miRNAs that sensitize lung
cancer cells to paclitaxel, and which define a potential regulatory
pathway modulating paclitaxel sensitivity. Future studies are needed to
identify the targets of these miRNAs, elucidate their mechanisms of
action, and clarify how they are regulated in lung cancer cells.

