Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDZ-RhoGEF/-arrestin-1 interaction mediates endothelin A
receptor-induced RhoA activation and cell motility in ovarian tumor cells


-arrestins (-arrs), consisting of -arr1 and -arr2, are involved in
G-protein-coupled receptor signaling, and guide the receptor signals in
chemotaxis and cytoskeletal reorganization. Among them, receptor A for
endothelin-1 (ET-1), namely ETAR, is overexpressed in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) and promote metastatic spread. We have recently reported
that -arr1 regulates ETAR-mediated -catenin signaling to promote EOC cell
invasion. Here we evaluated the effects of ET-1 on polarized cell
migration correlating with the regulation of Rho-GTPase activity and its
subsequent organization of the actin structures supporting migration and
the involvement of -arr1 in these effects. We show that, in EOC cells
cultured on collagen type I, ET-1 promotes actin-based dynamic protrusion
resembling to pseudopodia, containing -arr-1. Furthermore, in a
-arr1/ETAR-dependent manner, ET-1 activates RhoA GTPase and downstream
the dephosphorylation/activation of cofilin, as shown by pull down assay
and immunoblotting analysis. The inhibitory effect of the Rho pathway
inhibitor I, Y-27632, demontrates that RhoA GTPase is involved in
ET-1-induced cell migration. By screening members of a Rho-guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF) family involved in RhoA activation,
we found that PDZ-RhoGEF mRNA levels are highly expressed in EOC cells.
Moreover, PDZ-RhoGEF is responsible for ET-1-induced RhoA activation
through interaction with -arr1, that in turn, promotes PDZ-RhoGEF
tyrosine phosphorylation and activation. Depletion of PDZ-RhoGEF
expression significantly impaired ET-1-stimulated migration of EOC cells,
demonstrating that PDZ-RhoGEF/-arrestin-1 interaction mediates
ETAR-driven ovarian tumor cell motility through regulation of RhoA.
Analysis of EOC human tissues revealed that PDZ-RhoGEF is overexpressed
in human EOC tissues. Collectively, our data establish a novel role for
-arr1 and PDZ-RhoGEF as regulator of ET-1-induced EOC cell migration,
unraveling new components required for tumor progression. Supported by
AIRC.

