Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiated tumor cells secrete stem cell factor (SCF) to
promote maintenance of cancer stem cells and induce EMT in colorectal
tumors


Colorectal tumors are hierarchically organized in which cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are at the top of the hierarchy and give rise to non-tumorigenic
differentiated tumor cells (DTC). The maintenance of normal intestinal
stem cells requires niche signals that are provided, at least in the
small intestine, by neighboring differentiated Paneth cells. CSC
maintenance may also depend on niche signals although little is known
about the nature of such signals and their potential source.For the
present study we tested the hypothesis that DTCs could provide
CSC-maintaining signals. We used CSC-enriched colonosphere cultures that
were established from human colorectal tumors and CSC-derived stably
differentiated offspring that was derived from them. We found that DTCs
established from multiple colorectal tumors greatly increased the
clone-forming capacity of CSCs. This effect was reproduced by
DTC-conditioned medium, suggesting the involvement of a secreted factor.
By using a cytokine array we identified stem cell factor (SCF) as a major
DTC-secreted factor. While SCF was mainly produced by DTCs, its receptor,
c-Kit, was mainly expressed by CSCs. Indeed, recombinant SCF enhanced
clone-forming capacity to a similar extent as DTC-conditioned medium.
Furthermore, basal and DTC-stimulated clone-forming capacity was strongly
reduced in the presence of an SCF-neutralizing antibody or in the
presence of the cKit inhibitors Imatinib or ISCK03. qPCR and western blot
analysis showed that inhibition of cKit caused a strong reduction in the
expression of stem cell genes, including LGR5, CD133, OLMF4 and SOX2.
Furthermore, DTCs induce the E-to N-cadherin switch in CSCs and to a
strong increase in the expression of EMT markers such as vimentin, ZEB1,
ZEB2, SNAIL1 and fibronectin. cKIT inhibitors prevented EMT.Our results
identify a critical role for non-tumorigenic DTCs in the support of
colorectal CSCs. DTCs induce EMT and EMT-associated stem cell
characteristics at least in part via paracrine SCF-cKit signaling. We
conclude that cKit inhibitors that are widely used in the clinic to treat
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
may have therapeutic value in the treatment of (a subgroup of) colorectal
tumors.

