Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model for small round cell tumors induced by the Ewing
sarcoma oncogene EWS/FLI1


Ewing Sarcoma is a malignant bone tumor in children and young adults.
Upon current multimodal therapy only 60% of patients are long term
survivors. Due to the rarity of the disease, however, only few novel
agents can be tested in clinical trials. An animal model closely
recapitulating the human disease would be highly needed to more rapidly
explore new therapies. Ewing sarcoma is driven by the EWS/FLI1 (EF)
chimeric oncogene, an aberrant Ets transcription factor that is toxic to
many cell types, but tolerated by mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Ewing
sarcoma is postulated to develop from mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPC),
but transgenic approaches tolerating EF expression lack behind. EF
expression was shown to induce a differentiation block in MSC but does
not drive full transformation. Thus, it was hypothesized that cooperating
mutations are required for sarcomagenesis. We challenged this concept in
a conditional mouse model in which EWS/FLI1 is activated early during
endochondral bone formation by a Prx1-driven Cre recombinase (EFPrx1).
EFPrx1 mice follows Mendelian ratio, but newborns suffocated due to a
malformed rib cage. Bone formation was blocked at an early chondrocytic
stage. EFPrx1 mice lacked limb bones, had reduced calvaria, craniofacial
abnormalities and polydactyly. We found that EF expression blocked
differentiation of MSC at the pre-hypertrophic chondrocyte stage due to
blocked TGF- and enhanced Hedgehog signaling (down regulated tgfrI/II,
smad1/5, dlx5 and upregulated gli1/2 and caspase 3 mRNA expression).
Moreover, EF expression blocked sox9, runx2 and osterix expression. These
genes are important for bone differentian. We established MSC-like cells
(MSCL) from EFPrx1 mice that self-renewed, but full transformation was
absent.We ought to test if the timing of EF induction plays a role,
therefor we tested many time points later that the time point described
before and we found that when Prx1Cre expression and consequently
EWS/FLI1 induction was delayed to a time point after birth using a
tamoxifen inducible system, a significant fraction of mice developed
solid tumors up to 4 months after Tamoxifen induction. The
histo-pathology of the tumors resembled PAS and VIMENTIN positive small
round cell tumors, and genetically an EWS/FLI1 signature was seen similar
to a patient-derived Ewing sarcoma gene expression pattern. These data
suggest that EWS/FLI1 can drive oncogenesis without the need for
additional genetic aberrations. We propose that this transgenic mouse
model could resemble a faithful model for a solid EWS/FLI1 induced tumor
phenocopying human Ewing sarcoma.

