Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating visfatin promotes malignant cancer behavior through
activation of STAT3 signaling in breast cancer


Adipocytokines are adipocyte-derived hormones which have been shown
potentially associated with carcinogenesis. In this study, the role of
circulating visfatin, a recently discovered adipocytokine involving in
breast cancer progression, was investigated. Our data showed that the
levels of serum visfatin in breast cancer patients were closely
correlated with several clinicopathological characteristics including
tumor stages, tumor size, and lymph node (LN) metastasis. In addition,
differential association of disease recurrence and patients survival with
hormone receptors such as estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor
(PR), and epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2/Neu) were observed.
Patients with high serum visfatin, especially in combination with ER-
status, showed the lowest survival rate. Furthermore, high serum visfatin
patients had a lower recurrence risk and better patient survival after
adjuvant hormone therapy. Notably, serum visfatin was positively
associated with STAT3 activation through tyrosine phosphorylation in
breast cancer tissues. In agreement with the clinical observation, our in
vitro data revealed that breast cancer cells treated with visfatin not
only enhanced cell proliferation but also activated STAT3 and its
upstream regulator, JAK1. Moreover, inhibition of STAT3 resulted in the
reduced cell proliferation and invasive ability of breast cancer cells.
In conclusion, we propose that high levels of circulating visfatin,
probably via activation of STAT3 signaling pathway, lead to a malignant
cancer progression and poor survival of breast cancer patients.
Therefore, the visfatin/STAT3 pathway may constitute a valuable
prognostic system for breast cancer patients. In addition, interference
of the visfatin/STAT3 signaling may represent a novel therapeutic
potential in the treatment of breast cancer.Univariate and multivariable
analysis of overall survival for breast cancer


