Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis of papillary thyroid cancer using
next-generation sequencing technologies in Korean patients


Thyroid cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers worldwide, and
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) accounts for >80% of all thyroid cancers.
Here we conducted RNA sequencing for 70 PTC and 42 paired-normal tissues
in Korean patients, and their transcriptomes were analyzed in various
aspects. First, somatic mutations were screened transcriptome-wide
throughout samples; BRAF mutation (V600E), which is the most
well-established mutation in thyroid cancer, was detected in 47 samples
out of 70 (67.14%). HRAS (Q61R, Q61K) and NRAS (Q61R) mutations were
shown in two samples, respectively. In gene fusion analysis, we
discovered four fusion mutations using our stringent criteria and these
include CCDC6-RET and PAX8-PPARG fusions, which have been previously
reported for thyroid cancer. Other EZR-ERBB4 and PAX8-GLIS3 fusions are
novel fusion mutations found in PTC, and the sample having EZR-ERBB4
mutation was diagnosed as the follicular variant subtype. This is an
in-frame mutation and previous reports have shown that ERBB4 is a driver
gene for carcinogenesis in multiple types of cancers. In addition, we
also found ETV6-NTRK3 fusion in less conservative criteria, which was a
well-known fusion in other cancer types. Each fusion mutation above was
shown in only one sample, respectively. Through gene expression analysis,
we clustered PTC cancer samples into four groups; three of them are shown
to be enriched with BRAF V600E mutation, and the other includes samples
with NRAS, HRAS mutation. In this study, we thoroughly explored the
transcriptome of PTC samples using the next-generation sequencing method
and proved well-correlation between mutation and expression profiles.
These results not only replicated several findings of previous studies
and suggested some novel genes or pathways involved in the PTC
development in Koreans.

