Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smac mimetic inhibits tumorigenicity and growth of glioblastoma by
promoting differentiation of glioblastoma cancer stem-like cells


Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) proteins are often overexpressed in human
cancers including glioblastoma (GBM) and are well characterized for their
antiapoptotic properties. Recently, a broader role of IAP proteins in
tumor biology has been described, as they also regulate several
non-apoptotic signal transduction pathways. Therefore, we investigated
the effect of non-toxic concentrations of small-molecule Smac mimetics,
which antagonize IAP proteins, on differentiation of cancer stem-like
cells (CSLCs) derived from primary GBM specimens. Since CSLCs have been
implicated in resistance to chemo- and radiotherapy and tumor recurrence,
they are considered as critical therapeutic targets in GBM. Here, we
identify a novel function of Smac mimetic in regulating differentiation
of GBM CSLCs by activating NF-B. Smac mimetic at non-lethal doses
stimulates morphological changes associated with differentiation of GBM
CSLCs. Smac mimetic increases transcriptional activity, mRNA and protein
levels of the astrocytic marker GFAP without altering expression of the
neuronal marker -III-tubulin, indicating that Smac mimetic induces
astrocytic differentiation of GBM CSLCs. Molecular studies reveal that
Smac mimetic triggers processing of the NF-B subunit p100 to p52, nuclear
translocation of p52 and p50 and increased NF-B DNA-binding.
Intriguingly, inhibition of NF-B by overexpression of dominant-negative
IB superrepressor (IB-SR) blocks the Smac mimetic-stimulated increase in
GFAP and differentiation. Interestingly, this Smac mimetic-stimulated
differentiation is associated with reduced expression of stemness markers
such as CD133, Nanog and Sox2 in GBM CSLCs. In contrast, Smac mimetic
does not alter cell morphology, differentiation and expression of
stemness markers in non-malignant neural stem cells. Importantly, Smac
mimetic treatment reduces clonogenicity of GBM CSLCs in vitro and in
vivo, suppresses their tumorigenicity in orthotopic and subcutaneous
mouse models of GBM and significantly increases the survival of mice
bearing GBM. By identifying a novel role of Smac mimetic in promoting the
differentiation of GBM CSLCs, these findings provide new insights into
Smac mimetic-regulated non-apoptotic functions with important
implications for targeting GBM CSLCs.

