Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sym013, novel pan-HER monoclonal antibody mixture, augments
radiation response in human lung and head and neck tumors


Sym013 represents a novel HER family targeting approach consisting of a
mixture of six monoclonal antibodies against EGFR, HER2, and HER3. Sym013
effectively induces rapid, simultaneous down-regulation of all HER
members. Compared with single receptor or dual receptor targeting of the
HER family, Sym013 provides broader inhibition and greater
down-regulation efficacy. In this current study, we examined the capacity
of Sym013 in combination with ionizing radiation to augment tumor
response in lung (NSCLC) and head and neck (HNSCC) cancer model
systems.The anti-proliferative effects of Sym013 were confirmed showing
30-60% growth inhibition across a variety of NSCLC and H&N cancer cell
lines that express EGFR, HER2, and/or HER3. Furthermore, Sym013 inhibited
the growth of tumor cells that exhibit resistance to cetuximab. Western
blot analysis showed a dose-dependent down-regulation of HER family
members and downstream MAPK and AKT signaling pathways following 24-hour
treatment with Sym013. Clonogenic survival analysis revealed that Sym013
enhanced radiosensitivity in tumor cells following radiation exposure. We
characterized the DNA damage profile following radiation via flow
cytometric analysis of phosphorylated histone 2AX (H2AX) foci. This
revealed a significant increase of H2AX following treatment with Sym013
and 2 Gy radiation when compared with Sym013 or radiation alone.
Furthermore, combined treatment of Sym013 and radiation induced a
significant G1 and G2 arrest. Using Annexin V/PI staining, we also found
a significant increase in the apoptotic cell population following
treatment of Sym013 and 6 Gy radiation. These results suggest that Sym013
augments radiation response via the induction of cell cycle arrest
followed by the induction of apoptosis and cell death, likely reflecting
inhibitory effects on DNA damage repair. Additional studies to examine
the impact of Sym013 to augment radiation response as well as overcome
acquired resistance to cetuximab in xenograft models are in progress.
Overall, these data suggest the significant capacity of Sym013 to augment
radiation response in lung and head and neck cancers. This unique
antibody mixture warrants additional investigation as a promising novel
HER family targeting strategy in cancer therapy.

