Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic breast cancer cells induce an osteoblast-TAF-like
phenotype and communicate with osteoblasts via gap junctions and exosomal
crosstalk to facilitate breast cancer cell quiescence in bone


Breast cancer has a high propensity for bone colonization. Although the
precise mechanism underlying preferential metastasis is unknown, bone
likely provides a hospitable environment that both attracts breast cancer
cells and allows them to colonize and grow.Metastatic lesions may
originate from disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) shed from a primary tumor.
Clinical evidence suggests that DTCs undergo a period of proliferative
quiescence for 25 years. Despite the high prevalence of dormant tumors in
humans, this area of research is poorly understood.MC3T3-E1 murine
osteoblasts (OBs) were grown to early differentiation (10 days old), then
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells (BCCs) added at a ratio of 1 BCC to
10 OBs. Co-cultures were fixed and stained for connexin 43 expression
(Cx43, representative gap junction). Cx43 expression was localized
between OBs and BCCs. No Cx43 expression was seen in the control.
Furthermore, a parachute assay was performed under similar conditions,
where at time 48 hours, CellTracker Orange CMTMR dye transfer was seen
between GFP-labeled BCCs and unlabeled OBs. Then, OBs and BCCs were grown
to confluence. Individual cultures were treated with media containing
exosome-free fetal bovine serum. Forty-eight hours later, culture
supernatants were removed and processed through a series of
ultra-centrifugation and concentration steps to purify for exosomes. Both
OBs and BCCs produced exosomes, which were characterized using a
Nanosight 500 System, and analyzed for microRNAs via real-time PCR.Next,
OBs were grown to early differentiation (10 days), and treated with
conditioned medium (CM) from BCCs. Twenty-one days later, OB-derived
protein expression was assessed. When treated with BCC CM, OBs decreased
their expression of alpha smooth muscle actin, but increased their
expression of fibroblast activating protein and matrix metalloproteinase
13. These results are consistent with a tumor-associated
fibroblast-activated myofibroblast phenotype.Finally, OBs were grown to 4
days (growth) and 10 days (early differentiation) and incubated with BCC
CM. Twenty-four hours later, total RNA was collected, and ABI TaqMan qPCR
cytokine arrays were used to assay for changes in OB-derived cytokine
expression. OB-derived cytokines were increased in the presence of BCC
CM, and included MCP-1 (CCL2), LIX (CXCL5), LIF, and NFATc2.These data
imply that BCCs communicate with OBs by intercellular crosstalk via gap
junctions and exosomes that creates a niche permissive for BCC dormancy
in bone. This work highlights the importance of investigating OBs in the
bone microenvironment as key players in BCC dormancy.Supported by the
NIH; 1RC1 CA146381, 1R01NS06994, P50 CA083639 for FCM; Ruth L.
Kirschstein Institutional Research Service Award (NRSA) T32 CA079448 and
NIH 1 K99 CA 178177-01 for KMB.

