Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential gene expression in key oncolytic pathways between
node-matched Caucasian-American, African-American and East African
triple-negative breast cancer patients


African-American (AA) women have a 20% greater mortality rate from breast
cancer (BC) than that observed in Caucasian-American women (CA).
Additional BC disparities in AA women include later stage presentation
with higher tumor grade, and increased occurrence of Triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC). In this study, we performed a series of gene
expression array analyses on archived formalin fixed paraffin embedded
(FFPE) blocks from a multi-ethnic U.S. cohort of node-negative (N0) TNBC
samples, in addition to a cohort of (N0) TNBC samples from East African
patients (Kijabe,Kenya). Using 10 m scrolls from each FFPE block, total
RNA was isolated, cDNA prepared, and hybridized to a breast-enriched gene
expression array (Affymetrix, BC DSA Research Tool). Expression analysis
was conducted using GeneSpring 12.1 analytical software. After QC
analyses, the final study cohort consisted of 10-AA, 13-CA and 21-Kenyan
samples. PCA analysis revealed that the samples clustered well with
respect to ethnicity. Unsupervised cluster analysis, based on ethnicity
and genes (p value 2.5), was performed. The resulting dendogram clearly
segregated into distinct subgroups based on ethnicity, revealing a
pattern of differential gene expression between the cohorts. A list of
differentially expressed genes from each cohort (DEG) were selected using
ANOVA analysis (fold change > 3.0, p value African-American (AA) women
have a 20% greater mortality rate from breast cancer (BC) than that
observed in Caucasian-American women (CA). Additional BC disparities in
AA women include later stage presentation with higher tumor grade, and
increased occurrence of Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). In this
study, we performed a series of gene expression array analyses on
archived formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks from a
multi-ethnic U.S. cohort of node-negative (N0) TNBC samples, in addition
to a cohort of (N0) TNBC samples from East African patients
(Kijabe,Kenya). Using 10 m scrolls from each FFPE block, total RNA was
isolated, cDNA prepared, and hybridized to a breast-enriched gene
expression array (Affymetrix, BC DSA Research Tool). Expression analysis
was conducted using GeneSpring 12.1 analytical software. After QC
analyses, the final study cohort consisted of 10-AA, 13-CA and 21-Kenyan
samples. PCA analysis revealed that the samples clustered well with
respect to ethnicity. Unsupervised cluster analysis, based on ethnicity
and genes (p value 2.5), was performed. The resulting dendogram clearly
segregated into distinct subgroups based on ethnicity, revealing a
pattern of differential gene expression between the cohorts. A list of
differentially expressed genes from each cohort (DEG) were selected using
ANOVA analysis (fold change > 3.0, p value <.05) followed by the
Benjamin/Hochberg method for multiple-testing correction. Finally, the
lists of DEG were uploaded into GeneGo MetaCore to identify functionally
enriched pathways.These analyses revealed differentially expressed genes
pathways enriched for cytoskeletal remodeling, cell adhesion and EMT
pathways. In particular, significantly deregulated genes associated with
the Wnt/-catenin pathway were observed in the AA cohort as compared to
the CA, suggesting that this pathway may contribute to the more
aggressive phenotype in AA women diagnosed with TNBC. Additionally,
significantly deregulated genes associated with the Oncostatin M pathway
were discovered in the Kenyan cohort, as compared to the AA and CA
tumors. In particular, STAT1 was significantly downregulated in the
Kenyan cohort compared to the CA and AA. Thus, our results indicate gene
expression differences within several key oncolytic pathways across these
ethnic groups. These results are being technically and biologically
validated through several parallel approaches. Validation study results
will be presented. In summary, this study represents the first direct
comparison of gene expression in TNBC specimens across U.S. CA and AA BC
patients and Kenyan East Africans. These studies have important
implications for further understanding BC ethnic disparities, as well as
future tailored approaches to prediction, prevention and therapeutic
advances.

