Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High nuclear expression of the p53 target Wig-1 is associated with
poor prognosis in cervical carcinoma


Cervical cancer is the third most common cancer in women worldwide, and
is the most common cancer in Eastern Africa, South-Central Asia and
Melanesia. Persistent HPV infection is an important feature of cervical
cancer. The central role of chromosome 3q for progression from low-grade
dysplastic lesions to higher grades and to invasive carcinomas has been
well established. Gain of 3q can occur in morphologically normal cytology
of women who developed cervical carcinomas after only a short latency.
The Wig-1 gene (wt p53-induced gene 1) is located at the frequently
gained chromosomal region 3q. We examined Wig-1 in eight cervical cancer
cell lines (Ca Ski, ME-180, MS751, SiHa, SW 756, C-4I, C-33A, and HT-3)
by FISH, Southern, Northern, qRT-PCR, and Western blotting. We did not
detect any Wig-1 gene alterations in these cell lines. C33-A and HT-3
with strong Wig-1 mRNA expression were HPV negative while the HPV
positive cells only exhibited low / moderate Wig-1 expression by Northern
blotting. However, no association was found between Wig-1 protein
expression and HPV infection. We also assessed Wig-1 expression in a
series of 38 cervical tumors, including both squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) and adenocarcinoma (ADCA), by immunohistochemistry. Interestingly,
patients who showed moderate nuclear Wig-1 expression levels and positive
cytoplasmic Wig-1 staining in their tumors had significantly better
prognosis than patients with high nuclear Wig-1 expression and no
cytoplasmic staining (Log Rank P value = 0.042). Moreover, higher nuclear
Wig-1 expression levels were associated with HPV negative cervical tumors
(P=0.003). These results suggest that a marker like Wig-1 could have
considerable impact on prediction of the prognosis in women with cervical
cancer. Our previous results indicate that Wig-1 acts as a survival
factor. Thus, high levels of nuclear Wig-1 may promote tumor growth and
survival. The exact role of Wig-1 at the molecular level during cervical
carcinoma development needs further investigation.

