Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damage response in quiescent fibroblasts elicits a distinct
secretory program and confers acquired resistance to cancer therapies


Cancer treatments including chemotherapy and radiation not only target
neoplastic cells thus providing a favorable therapeutic index in early
clinical stages, but generate a profound impact on benign cells of the
tumor microenvironment (TME). In contrast to cancer cells, the majority
of human somatic populations exist in a quiescence stage, which is
characterized by reversible exit from the G0/G1 phase of cell cycle, and
they can reenter the cell division cycle and continue proliferation under
favorable conditions. In this study we sought to determine how quiescent
cells respond to DNA-targeting agents originally utilized to kill cancer
cells, and to establish the consequence of such alterations to the TME.
The results of this study would have broad implications for physiology,
cancer biology and targeted therapies. Using genome-wide microarrays, we
examined the response of primary human prostate fibroblasts made
quiescent by contact inhibition to ionizing radiation, and evaluated the
pathological influence through an in vitro system of epithelial-stromal
interactions. We found quiescent cells maintained an intact DNA damage
response including formation of chromatin foci and although they entered
senescence, the proliferative potential was reserved as determined by
cell replicative growth surveillance. A secretory expression program
based on DNA damage was developed in quiescent cells, termed QASP; this
stress-response program was different from that of proliferative cells
(DDSP) and the spectrums only partially overlapped. In each case, an
intracellular signal transduction network activated by DNA damage repair
activities, including but not limited to the mTOR pathway and NF-B
complex, emerged and was implicated in mediating a cascade of reactions
that culminated in robust secretion, after acute cellular responses. Our
data indicate the influence of secreted factors from damaged quiescent
fibroblasts on prostate cancer (PCa) cells was comprehensive and
significant. In particular, paracrine factors of damaged quiescent
fibroblasts supported PCa resistance to cytotoxic therapies.
Intriguingly, small molecular inhibitors targeting the mTOR pathway or
NF-B complex were able to abrogate secretion of vast majority of
quiescent cell-derived effectors thereby minimizing the pathological
consequences. To date, a primary barrier to treatment of advanced cancers
is the ability of neoplastic cells to acquire resistance to cytotoxicity
that results in circumvention of effective targeting. Defining mechanisms
underlying drug resistance is critical for designing new therapeutic
strategies to selectively bypass or restrain resistance pathways. As
such, targeting QASP effectors or more systematically, resistance
mechanisms engaged by TME, in conjunction with conventional therapies may
improve clinical response to anti-cancer treatments and prolong the
patient lifespan.

