Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Status of STAT3, STAT5, and NF-B in pancreatic cancer cell lines,
small molecule inhibitors, and potential clinical implications


BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is one of the most deadly forms of
human cancer with 5-year survival less than 5%. Presently the nucleoside
analog gemcitabine is used for front line disease management but its low
response rate and the frequent development of drug resistance, which is
poorly understood, limits its effectiveness. A large body of literature
indicates that the STAT3, STAT5, and NF-B pathways are active drivers of
pancreatic cancer development and progression. Agents targeting STAT3 and
NF-B pathways are being actively being considered as potentially
effective drugs and have been tested in in vitro and in vivo pancreatic
tumor models with limited success.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We aimed to
reassess the role and function of these three transcription factors in a
panel of PC cell lines and assess the activity of WP1066, our lead
STAT3/STAT5 inhibitor, and its close congeners in the same lines. Our
reevaluation studies of the oncogenic function of STAT3, STAT5 and NF-B
were carried out in 3 established pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1,
Colo357, and MIAPaCa2) and 2 primary tumor cell lines (MDAPATC53 and
MDAPATC50) isolated from patient tumor specimens with known clinical
features and available relevant in vivo models. PC cells were separately
treated with cytokines (IL-6 and IFN-), gemcitabine and TNF- and
fractionated into cytoplasmic and nuclear portions. Levels of p-STAT3,
p-STAT5, and NF-B were assessed using Western blot, MesoScaleDiscovery,
DNA binding activity, and confocal methods.RESULTS: Collectively, our
data showed that STAT3 was constitutively activated and that
tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT3 (p-STAT3Y705) is exclusively located in the
nucleus of the ColoFG357 and MiaPaCa2 cell lines. IL-6 and IFN- treatment
induced p-STAT3Y705, and their combined use resulted in synergistically
higher levels of p-STAT3Y705 and in nuclear localization in all five PC
cell lines. In contrast, and rather surprisingly, the
tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT5Y694 and NF-B were mostly localized in the
cytoplasm in all five cell lines. Consistent with these results, the DNA
binding activity of p-STAT5 and NF-B is very low compared to p-STAT3.
Interestingly, our studies revealed that gemcitabine treatment triggers
the nuclear accumulation of NF-B in a time-dependent manner suggesting
that a combination of gemcitabine with NF-B inhibitors can have
synergistic activity in PDAC.CONCLUSION: Our findings contribute to
unraveling the functional significance of p-STAT3 and NF-B as oncogenic
transcription factors during pre- and post- gemcitabine treatment and the
critical need to concurrently inhibit several targets and develop drug
combinations or multitargeted drugs that block these pathways.
Acknowledgement: This research was supported by the grant from Viragh's
Foundation.

