Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived breast cancer targeting heavy chain antibodies


The emergence of tumor-targeting antibodies such as Trastuzumab,
Rituximab and anti-CD47 antibody has highlighted the significant role of
antibodies for effective cancer therapy. The most common approach to
generate tumor specific antibodies is to select an established tumor
specific antigen and generate antibodies to that target. The drawback
with this approach is that it does not lead to identification of novel
antigens or antigenic epitopes. Therefore, we developed a strategy that
will lead to the identification of both tumor specific antibodies and
novel tumor antigens. The approach uses the patient's immune system to
guide us to define tumor specific antigens. In order to achieve this, we
identified reactive germinal centers in the tumor draining sentinel lymph
nodes from breast cancer patients. Immunohistochemical analysis of
reactive germinal centers defined the B-cell regions for mRNA isolation
and generation of cDNA molecules for the variable heavy chain segment
(VH) of antibodies. The VH cDNA molecules were cloned into a mammalian
expression vector to generate bivalent heavy chain antibodies with a
C-terminus mouse Fc tag. At present, we have generated about 250
antigen-driven variable heavy chain clones from 27 breast cancer patient
lymph node samples. We screened 46 heavy chain antibodies against a panel
of breast cancer cell lines using immunofluorescence and identified 8
antibodies that showed strong and specific staining. Of these 8
antibodies, one of them (VH6-93) showed membrane staining preferentially
on MDA-MB-231 cells in comparison to MCF7 cells. VH6-93 antibody also
showed strong staining on conditionally reprogrammed tumor cells derived
from a breast cancer patient with only moderate staining on normal breast
epithelial cells derived from the same patient. VH6-93 also revealed
preferential binding to breast tumor tissues as compared to normal ductal
tissues evidenced by immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. To
identify the target antigens, a multi-tiered approach was used, which
included immunoprecipitation of target antigen from cell lysates followed
by peptide sequencing with mass spectrometry as well as utilizing Nucleic
Acid Programmable Protein Array (NAPPA) technology. A comprehensive
analysis of two patient-derived antibodies has produced a panel of
potential antigen targets, which are undergoing specificity and
validation analysis. In summary, this methodology of using activated
B-cells from sentinel lymph nodes is a unique way to enrich for
tumor-specific antibody clones. The findings from this research will not
only lead to tumor specific antibodies but will also reveal novel tumor
specific antigens. Identification of these novel antigens can give rise
to additional therapeutic strategies such as peptide or protein
vaccination.

