Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and isolation of circulating tumor cells in ovarian
cancer: Principles and methods


Objective:The quantitative and qualitative analysis of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) aids in diagnosis of disease, prognosis, disease recurrence,
and therapeutic response in several cancers. However, detection and
isolation of CTCs from the blood circulation is a difficult task because
of their scarcity and the lack of reliable markers to identify these
cells. Especially, in epithelial ovarian cancer, there is a little
reported data for CTCs and their CTCs has been defined to the EpCAM+
cells, even though EpCAM+ cells are just a few in ovarian cancer. The aim
of this study is to investigate the effective principles and methods to
detect and isolate CTCs through novel markers in ovarian
cancer.Methods:CTC analysis was performed in the spiking test to find
cancer cells in the human serum mixed with WBCs. Four cell lines
including OVCAR3, SKOV3, SNU8 and SNU251 were used and primary cancer
cells from 4 patients were analyzed. Cancer cells were isolated on the
basis of cell size by filtration through CytoGen capture device, followed
by identification according to validated immunocytochemistry based on the
expression of DAPI, CD45, EpCAM, CK, CA-125 and HE4.Results:We obtained
cancer cells more than 90% based on the cell size by filtration.
Immunocytochemistry confirmed the epithelial origin through the
expression of CK and EpCAM in cancer cell lines. The rate of expression
was 35-99 % for CK and 1-99 % for EpCAM. A small number of cancer cell
lines expressed CD45 that is the marker of WBC. The expression of CA-125
and HE4 showed their ovarian origin. The rate of expression was 7-98 %
for CA-125 and 40-99 % for HE4 in cancer cell lines. Primary cancer cells
were detected most effectively as the method of combination with 4
markers, including DAPI, CD45, EpCAM and HE4.Conclusion:Our findings
provide the first evidence for effective methods to detect and isolate
CTCs in ovarian cancer. Combination of DAPI, CD45, EpCAM and HE4 could be
a useful marker to support CTCs research in epithelial ovarian cancer.

