Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and pharmacological FAK inhibition disrupt a 5 integrin
signaling axis controlling anchorage-independent ovarian carcinoma growth


Ovarian cancer spreads via cell shedding and growth within malignant
ascites. Effective targeted therapies have not been developed for ovarian
cancer. Ascites contains an abundance of matrix proteins, and spheroids
maintain integrin receptor expression. Through databases analyses we find
that elevated osteopontin (OPN), 5 integrin, and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) mRNA levels are associated with decreased overall survival of
serous ovarian cancer patients treated with platinum and taxol. In
ovarian tumor tissue arrays, increased FAK activation (FAK Y397
phosphorylation) correlated with elevated tumor grade in parallel with
increased in 5 integin and OPN levels. FAK is a cytoplasmic tyrosine
kinase that remains active in spheroids, and treatment of seven ovarian
carcinoma cell lines with sub-micromolar levels of FAK inhibitor
(PND-1186) identified sensitive (HEY and OVCAR8), intermediate (OVCAR3,
ID8-IP, and IGROV1-IP), and resistant (SKOV3-IP and OVCAR10) cells to
blockage of growth under anchorage-independent conditions. Genetic or
pharmacological FAK inhibition within ID8-IP or HEY cells selectively
prevents anchorage-independent growth in culture and tumor growth in mice
with corresponding reductions in 5 integrin and OPN expression. 5
knockdown reduced HEY growth in soft agar, tumor growth in mice, FAK Y397
phosphorylation, and OPN expression in spheroids. Although FAK inhibitor
resistant ovarian carcinoma cells (SKOV3-IP and OVCAR10) were associated
with anchorage-independent Akt S473 phosphorylation, membrane-targeted
and activated Akt expression in sensitive cells (HEY and OVCAR8) resulted
in only a partial rescue of FAK inhibitor-associated growth block. These
results support the hypothesis that OPN, v5 integrins, and FAK may
function as a signaling axis promoting ovarian tumor progression.
Although Akt signaling pathway activation is a common event in serous
ovarian cancer, our results suggest that this may not impart complete
resistance to FAK inhibitor treatment.Supported by NIH CA102310

