Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolving biological and clinical concepts of radiation delivery in
NSCLC: response to ablative versus fractionated radiotherapy


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients account for over 80% of all
lung cancer cases and have a poor outcome with current radiotherapy
regimens. NSCLC has been the subject of many studies characterizing
mechanisms of initiation, proliferation, invasion and treatment response.
Recent trends in radiotherapy show an increase in the use of ablative
radiotherapy (ART) in inoperable small size tumors. Clinical studies have
shown response rates up to 90% in NSCLC patients treated with ART
compared to 15-20% in patients treated with conventional fractionated
radiotherapy (FRT). However, the biological determinants of this response
have not been investigated and recent analysis of patterns of failure in
patients treated with ART show an increased tendency towards distant
metastatic recurrence.We investigated the biological response of NSCLC
cell lines with different molecular subtypes including, A549, H1975 and
HCC827 to ART and FRT. Radiation doses of 8Gy and 12Gy were delivered in
multiple fractions or single fraction. The response to radiation was
investigated using several cellular assays including clonogenic survival,
cell proliferation, matrigel invasion, wound-healing, morphological
characterization and senescence-associated beta-galactosidase.ART
significantly reduced cell proliferation and clonogenic survival compared
to FRT in A549 cells. In addition, a significant increase in the number
of senescent cells as well as large, polynucleated cells was observed in
the ART-treated group compared to the FRT-treated group. This
differential response to delivery approach (ART vs FRT) was not observed
in HCC827 or H1975 cells which harbor EGFR mutations. Both ART and FRT
inhibited cell proliferation and clonogenic survival to similar levels in
HCC827 and H1975 cells.In contrast to reduced cell proliferation and
clonogenicity, ART significantly increased the invasive phenotype of A549
cells, but not HCC827 or H1975 cells compared to FRT. Western blot
analysis of several markers of invasion, including cMET, AKT, ERK, SPARC
and FAK revealed a significant down regulation of SPARC in A549 cells
exposed to ART, but not FRT. Further analysis of cells in Boyden chambers
showed that ART-induced senescent cells are capable of
migration/invasion.Our results unequivocally demonstrate that response to
ART is cell-line dependent. A549 cells, which harbor wild-type EGFR have
a differential response to radiotherapy based on delivery approach.
Furthermore, A549 cell exposed to ART have significantly increased
invasive and migratory capacity compared to FRT. Our findings suggest
that the extracellular matrix glycoprotein, SPARC is involved in the
modulation of radiation-induced invasion/migration. These findings can
have significant implications for NSCLC patients undergoing ART and
underscore the importance of understanding the underlying biology for
effective disease management.

