Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A miR-221 multigene pharmacodynamic signature for assessing
miR-221 inhibition


miR-221 targets key cancer pathways, inhibits translation of important
tumor suppressors, and is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Aberrant miR-221 expression has been linked to HCC progression,
while inhibition of miR-221 has been shown to reduce tumor growth. In
preclinical models, miR-221 inhibition can be assessed by measuring
de-repression of known miR-221 target genes such as p27. However, changes
in individual microRNA target genes are often small and model-dependent;
and comprehensive assessment of pharmacodynamic (PD) effects following
microRNA inhibition is often challenging. Herein, we present a miR-221
multigene PD signature that can assess miR-221 target engagement with a
large dynamic window and work across different human HCC models following
miR-221 inhibition. In the first stage, we transfected five different
human HCC lines with two chemically-modified oligonucleotides that
inhibit miR-221 functions (miR-221 anti-miRs) and a microRNA-duplex that
mimics miR-221/222 functions (mimic). The resulting global mRNA
expression changes were compared to mock treated cells using GeneChip
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (Affymetrix). Ninety unique human genes
with transcripts containing conserved and/or 8-mer target seeds
(TargetScan), that significantly went up and down after anti-miR-221s and
mimic treatment respectively, were further profiled with qPCR in the
second stage. Out of the 90 tested transcripts, 62 of them were
significantly up-regulated by anti-miR-221s but not by control
oligonucleotides (either mismatch or targeting unrelated microRNAs). From
the 62 genes, an optimal multigene signature consisted of 13 unique human
genes normalized by 6 reference housekeeping genes was identified. We
also devised a miR-221 signature score and demonstrated that our
multigene signature can separate miR-221 anti-miRs treatment from control
oligonucleotides with a high degree of sensitivity and specificity. We
further validated this multigene signature by demonstrating that it
correctly distinguished miR-221 anti-miRs treatment from controls in
three additional HCC cell lines in vitro and one HCC model in vivo. In
summary, our miR-221 multigene PD signature analysis provided a
comprehensive assessment of miR-221 inhibition, with significantly larger
dynamic window compare to individual gene analysis, that may be used to
discover, rank order and guide the development of novel miR-221 anti-miRs
for the treatment of human cancers.

