Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P16 immunoreactivity in endocervical tubo-endometrial metaplasia
(TEM) and correlation with high risk HPV (HRHPV) status by chromogenic
in-situ hybridization (HPV-CISH) and hybrid capture 2 assay


BackgroundSeveral studies have shown that endocervical TEM can
intensively over express p16 and involve more than 50% of the cells. It
could be speculated that TEM may be a precursor lesion of cervical
glandular intraepithelial neoplasm. The aim of this study is to evaluate
endocervical TEM p16 overexpression pattern and further investigate its
potential driven mechanisms by correlating with HRHPV status.MethodOur
search included cervical biopsy, LEEP, conization with TEM diagnosis from
January 2005-May 2013. Only cases with concurrent Pap smear with HRHPV
testing were selected. HRHPV detected in liquid based cytology is by
Hybrid Capture 2 Assay. Surgical specimens containing concurrent squamous
dysplasia were excluded due to potential confounding by HRHPV positivity
in dysplastic squamous epithelium. P16 stain was performed and graded as
negative, focal+ (50% cytoplasmic and nuclear stain). HRHPV data was
collected from Pap reports. HPV-CISH assays will be performed for all
cased with positive HRHPV detected in liquid based cytology.Result:Our
search generated 159 cases with TEM. Only 81 cases had concurrent Pap
smear with HRHPV testing. 48 cases were excluded due to squamous
dysplasia. A total of 33 patients with an age range of 20-59 were
available for the study. Twenty nine out of 33 had negative HRHPV in
liquid based cytology; in which, p16 stain results as: 8/29 negative,
14/29 focally +. 7/29 diffusely +. Four out of 33 had positive HRHPV
detected in liquid based cytology; in which, p16 stain results as: 1/4
negative, 3/4 diffusely +. HPV-CISH assays were performed in all 4 cases
and they were negative.ConclusionsP16 overexpression in TEM can be
intense and involve more than 50% of the cells but the pattern is
heterogenous and positivity never involves 100% of the cells. Neither
HPV-CISH nor Hybrid Capture 2 Assay detects HRHPV in TEM. P16
overexpression in TEM is most likely HRHPV-independent mechanisms..Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

