Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive biomarker program demonstrates proof of mechanism
and modulation of the tumor microenvironment due to RG7155, a novel
therapeutic antibody targeting tumor associated macrophages


The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a dynamic, highly complex network
consisting of a variety of stromal cell types which support
tumorigenesis. Myeloid derived cells probably represent the most abundant
cell lineage in the TME, including tumor associated macrophages (TAMs).
TAMs have been identified as an independent poor prognostic factor in
several cancer types. RG7155 is a novel humanized monoclonal antibody
targeting colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R). In vitro, RG7155
treatment results in cell death of CSF1-differentiated CD163+ M2-like
macrophages.The associated mode of action and clinical proof of principle
was evaluated in a first-in-man phase 1 study in patients with pigmented
villonodular synovitis (PVNS), a neoplastic disorder characterized by
CSF1 overexpression, as well as in patients with other advanced solid
tumor entities. The associated biomarker program involves mandatory
paired pre- and on-treatment biopsies of tumor and surrogate skin tissue
as well as pharmacodynamic marker assessment in circulating blood.
Biomarker analysis in tumor and skin includes multiplex IHC assays to
assess tumor associated macrophages (CD163/CD68/CSF1R), T cells
(CD4/CD8), tumor proliferation (Ki67) and vascularization (CD31). Tissue
analysis is complemented by systematic peripheral blood sampling allowing
flow cytometric analysis of circulating white blood cells
(CD45/CD3/CD4/CD8/CD19/CD56/CD14/CD16/MHCII) and profiling of cytokines
and growth factors.Here, we report the initial biomarker data from
representative patients from the ongoing Phase 1 study. RG7155 induced a
profound reduction of TAMs both in PVNS and various solid malignancies of
up to 95% vs. baseline. We also observed depletion of macrophages in the
skin which therefore may qualify as a surrogate tissue for mechanistic
response. In peripheral blood RG7155 induced sustained modulation of
CSF-1 (increase) and alternatively activated monocytes (decrease) was
detected. Furthermore, preliminary data indicates a trend for overall
increase of CD8/CD4 T cell ratio in the TME following RG7155 treatment,
thus a secondary effect of TAM depletion causing intratumoral T cell
modulation and tumor microenvironment re-education.Taken together, the
individual biomarker program accompanying the first-in-man phase 1 study
of RG7155 is demonstrating proof of mechanism and identified surrogate
tissue as well as circulating markers to support optimal biological dose
and regimen selection for future studies.

