Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: X-ray irradiation induced bio luminescence: Ex vivo and endoscopic
imaging of radiobioluminescence


Accurate dose delivery to malignant tissue in radiotherapy is essential
for enhancing the treatment efficacy while minimizing morbidity of
surrounding normal tissues. Advances in therapeutic strategies and
diagnosis technologies along with our understanding of the biology of
tumor response to radiation therapy have paved way to allow nearly 60% of
current cancer patients to be treated with Radiation Therapy. The
confluence of molecular imaging and nanotechnology fields are bridging
physics and medicine and are quickly making strides in opening new
avenues and therapeutic strategies that complement radiation therapy-
with a distinct footprint in immunotherapy, adoptive cell therapy, and
targeted chemotherapy. Incorporating optical imaging in radiation therapy
in my laboratory, endogenous bioluminescence resulting from whole body
irradiation in different organs, which is distinct from the cherenkov
radiation, is described here. Mice were subjected to 5 - 10 Gy X-ray
irradiation doses using commercially available X-RAD 320 irradiator
(1Gy/min; F2 beam hardening filter 1.5mm Al, 0.25mm Cu, 0.75mm Sn;
Precision X-ray inc, USA). The endogenous bioluminescence in response to
irradiation, described here as radiobioluminescence, was captured using
cooled CCD camera from live subjects, and from the excised
organs/tissues. Significant increase (up to 100 fold) in the amounts of
photons released as bioluminescence was detected during 5 -10 min capture
from the mice subjected to irradiation compared to that of the control.
The GI tract contributed significant portion of this radiobioluminescence
and was confirmed both by ex-vivo and minimally invasive rectal
endoscopic imaging. Other organs and tissues displaying such robust
increase in radiobioluminescence include skin, and fat depots. The role,
evaluation, and future assessment of nutrients, nutriceuticals,
microbiome, and metabolites during the course of radiation therapy become
highlighted with these findings. Thus such molecular imaging
methodologies and modalities described will be useful tools in radiation
treatment design and process.

