Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The niche specific role of CD44 splice isoform expression in blast
crisis leukemia stem cell generation


IntroductionChronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative
neoplasm initiated in hematopoietic stem cells by expression of the
BCR-ABL1 fusion oncogene and its protein product, which enhances ABL1
kinase activity. Targeted BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such
as Imatinib, and the second generation TKIs like Nilotinib as well as the
dual specific SCR and ABL inhibitor Dasatinib have significantly slowed
disease progression by eradicating the bulk of BCR-ABL1 expressing cells
in the circulation. However, progression to a therapeutically resistant
blast crisis (BC) phase is driven by CD34+CD38+Lin- progenitors that
co-opt stem cell properties, such as enhanced self-renewal and survival,
albeit in a deregulated manner. These BC leukemia stem cells (BC LSC)
harbor enhanced BCL2 and beta-catenin expression. Seminal research shows
that a key Wnt/beta-catenin target gene, CD44, plays a vital role in
cancer stem cell survival and retention in the malignant
microenvironment. Because alternative mRNA splicing in humans generates
many CD44 isoforms, we investigated CD44 variant expression and retention
of human BC LSC in specific hematopoietic niches.Methods and ResultsWe
performed whole transcriptome RNA sequencing (RNA Seq) of FACS sorted
progenitors (Lin-CD34+CD38+) from chronic phase (CP)(n=8) and blast
crisis (BC)(n=8) CML patients as well as from normal cord blood (CB)
(n=7) and adult peripheral blood (NPB)(n=4). A number of CD44 transcript
variants were detected: 3, 4 (CD44s), 5, 6, 7, 8 plus additional
variants. RNA seq analysis uncovered a higher overall CD44 expression in
BC compared to CP progenitors. Notably, one isoform of CD44, variant 3,
was highly upregulated in BC compared to CP progenitors and minimally
expressed by their normal counterparts. Moreover, BC progenitors that
engrafted in RAG2-/-c-/- harbored CD44v3 expression in the bone marrow
and the splenic niche and this differential BC LSC isoform expression was
reduced after dasatinib treatment. In addition, BC LSC in the spleen
showed a reduction of migration specific markers, such as RHAMM, ICAM-1
and Osteopontin, compared with the bone marrow resident BC LSC.
Furthermore, a comparative splice isoform specific qRT-PCR analysis of
CD44 variants expression in young versus old bone marrow showed no
correlation with aging. In fact, human embryonic stem cells harbored
variant 3 expression.ConclusionsThese data suggest that CD44 transcript
variant 3 upregulation occurs following malignant reprogramming of
hematopoietic progenitors that enables them to adopt features of an
embryonic transcriptional program in select microenvironments. Detection
of CD44 variant 3 has the potential to more precisely identify patients
at risk for relapse and progression, suggest that combined therapeutic
strategies involving a BCR-ABL specific TKI and a CD44 monoclonal
antibody may decrease relapse and BC transformation rates.

