Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting hypoxia-mediated gene transcription with a novel
polyamide drug designed to disrupt the HIF1/ heterodimer binding
overcomes resistance to hypoxia in myeloma cell lines


Despite recent advancements in therapy, multiple myeloma (MM) remains
incurable. While the reasons for this are unclear, it is felt that the
bone marrow (BM) microenvironment may confer protective advantages to MM.
The BM is known to be hypoxic compared to other tissues, and while oxygen
stress can kill tumor cells, it is also known that hypoxia promotes tumor
progression, metastasis, angiogenesis, and resistance to chemo- and
radiation therapy. This suggests that hypoxic conditions in the BM may
contribute to MM resistance, and therefore targeting the hypoxia response
may be of therapeutic benefit. The adaptive response to hypoxia is
mediated by a constitutively expressed -subunit (HIF-1), which forms a
heterodimer with the inducible -subunit (HIF-1), although HIF-1 is
frequently found to be constitutively expressed in some MM cell lines. In
order to target the hypoxic response in MM, we blocked HIF-mediated gene
transcription using a novel class of DNA-binding pyrrole-imidazole
(Py-Im) polyamide (PA) drugs that are designed to target and disrupt the
HIF1/ heterodimer from binding to its cognate DNA sequence. Using a
hypoxia chamber, we cultured MM cell lines (OPM-2, 8226, U266, MM1.S)
under normoxia (22% O2, 5% CO2) or hypoxia (0.1% O2, 5% CO2) for 72 hours
and assayed for apoptosis. We found that 8226 and U266 cell lines were
relatively resistant to hypoxia-mediated apoptosis (15-20% apoptosis),
but that OPM-2 was much more sensitive (>50% apoptosis), whilst MM1.S was
intermediate in sensitivity (25% apoptosis). Using immunoblots, we found
that cell lines with constitutive expression of HIF-1 were resistance to
hypoxia, suggesting that constitutive HIF activity predicts MM resistance
to hypoxia. We then tested whether treatment with our novel PA drug could
overcome resistance to hypoxia-induced apoptosis. After confirming the
ability of the PA inhibitor to specifically block HIF-mediated
transcription using MM cells with a HIF-response element-reporter
construct, as well as inhibition of VEGF mRNA expression, we next assayed
the effect of PA (0.1-10 M) treatment in MM cells as described above. PA
was only mildly cytotoxic to MM cells under normoxia, but we observed a
significant synergistic induction of apoptosis under hypoxic conditions.
These effects were further potentiated when PA treatment was combined
with rapamycin (0.1-100 nM). Our data suggests that the HIF-mediated
hypoxic response plays an important role in MM sensitivity to hypoxia,
likely through the induction of specific survival genes. In conclusion,
our preliminary data shows that targeting the hypoxic response in MM with
a specific polyamide drug that targets the HIF-response, alone or in
combination with mTOR inhibitors, may provide an effective and novel
treatment in the hypoxic BM microenvironment.

