Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood exposure to secondhand smoke, nicotine dependence, and
DRD1 are associated with lung cancer risk


Children who are exposed to secondhand smoke (SHS) are faced with an
increased risk of nicotine dependence later in life. We have previously
shown that children exposed to SHS have an increased risk of lung cancer
as adults. Furthermore, genetic variation plays a role in the
susceptibility of individuals to lung cancer. The gene DRD1 mediates
dopamine signaling following nicotine exposure, thus we reasoned that
DRD1 may be related to lung cancer via modulation of the nicotine reward
pathway. Our previous studies identified 4 SNPs (rs4809294, rs2292975,
rs4861327, rs686) that were predicted to modulate a microRNA binding site
and we assessed the association of these SNPs with lung cancer risk. Our
current study investigated whether these SNPs were associated with
nicotine dependence and whether this had a subsequent effect on lung
cancer risk. We used the National Cancer Institute-Maryland lung cancer
case-control study. Cases and controls were recruited from the greater
Baltimore metropolitan area. We used ordinal logistic regression to
examine the association between SNPs and nicotine dependence. Logistic
regression adjusted for age, gender and smoking was used to assess the
association between SNPs and lung cancer risk. No significant
associations were found between genotypes in the 4 SNPs and nicotine
dependence levels (n=1,450). Individuals with the heterozygous allele
(AG) exposed to SHS during childhood had increased odds of lung cancer
compared to those with the homozygous wild type allele (AA) for rs686
(OR=1.52, CI= 1.12, 2.07). Individuals with the homozygous variant allele
(GG) exposed to childhood SHS had increased odds of lung cancer compared
to individuals with the homozygous wild type allele (AA) (OR=2.11, CI=
1.45, 3.10). Individuals with the heterozygous allele (GA) and the
highest levels of nicotine dependence who were also exposed to childhood
SHS, had higher odds of lung cancer than those with the homozygous
recessive allele (AA) (OR=3.50, CI=1.37, 8.96). Consistent with earlier
findings, heterozygotes (AG) had increased odds of lung cancer but this
was not statistically significant (OR=1.90, CI= 0.82, 4.40). To further
explore this association, we examined the effect of race on this
relationship. Caucasians with the heterozygous allele (AG), the highest
levels of nicotine dependence and childhood SHS, had increased odds of
lung cancer compared to those with the homozygous recessive allele (AA)
for rs686 (OR=1.47, CI=1.06, 2.05). Caucasians with the homozygous allele
(GG) who were exposed to childhood SHS, had higher odds of lung cancer
compared to individuals with the homozygous recessive allele (AA) for
rs686 (OR=1.84, CI=1.15, 2.98). No association was found among African
Americans. Although none of the SNPs examined were found to be associated
with nicotine dependence, it appears that variations in rs686 may modify
an individual's susceptibility to lung cancer due to SHS exposure.

