Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of a chemoresistant
glioblastoma cell line from an Iraqi patient


Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and aggressive malignant
primary brain tumour in humans, and has a very poor prognosis. As it is a
well known fact that environmental factors especially radiation exposure
is a major risk for glioblastoma multiforme and Iraq had been exposed in
a relatively short period to 2 international wars with documented
radiation exposure, so this paper might give justification for
establishment of a new glioblastoma cell line. This cell line has been
established from a cerebral glioblastoma multiforme in a 72-year-old
Iraqi man who underwent surgery for an intracranial tumour in 2005. The
morphology, growth kinetics, karyotype, immunocytochemistry and
angiogenesis factor expression profile of this ANGM5 cell line were
studied. The cell line has been grown continuously for more than 200
serial passages in standard culture media presenting no sign of cell
senescence. The cultured cells are elongated or multipolar in shape and
the population doubling time is 28 hours. The karyotype is complex and
the chromosomal number varied between 46 and 48. The cell line is
resistant to Temozolomide, cisplatin, vincristine and etoposide. This
chemoresistance could be explained by the overexpression of the breast
cancer resistance protein (BCRP) which found to be overexpressed by this
cell line. Immunocytochemistry also showed that this cell line exhibited
several characteristic features of glioblastomas, analysis of glial
markers demonstrated that cells are positive for glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), and negative for nestin and calbindin. Protein microarray
analysis showed very high production of TIMP2 as well as other factors
that are important for the invasiveness and aggressiveness of
glioblastoma. This glioblastoma cell line is a useful addition to the
cell lines currently available for study of the pathobiology and
chemoresistance properties of glioblastoma multiforme as well as for
antitumour drug discovery.

