Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer immunotherapy with chitosan/IL-12


Pancreatic cancer is difficult to treat due to its late diagnoses and
limited treatment options. Strategies capable of reducing tumor mass so
that patients are eligible for tumor resection, i.e. the Whipple
procedure, and strategies for reducing metastatic deposits with
immunotherapy are needed. New immunotherapy techniques can provide an
alternative to modern chemotherapy, radiation, or surgical options which
have not been able to reduce pancreatic cancer mortality. IL-12 has been
discovered to be a potent agent in the development of anti-tumor immunity
through its ability to stimulate the activities of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes, NK cells, and macrophages while promoting Th1
differentiation. We have previously discovered that a bioadhesive
chitosan/IL-12 combination can aggressively eliminate implanted tumors in
murine models. Chitosan is a non-toxic and degradable polysaccharide
derived from crustacean shells that shows great potential for use in
immunotherapy models due to its unique binding properties. Here, ability
of chitosan/IL-12 vaccinations to slow the growth of a pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells in vivo was investigated. C57BL/6 mice received
subcutaneous inoculations with Panc02 cells. After Panc02 tumors became
visible, the mice received 4 weekly intratumoral immunotherapy treatments
with either saline or chitosan/IL-12. There was a prominent delay in the
tumor growth of the chitosan/IL-12 group at all stages of the treatment.
Seven days after the second treatment, control mice had an average tumor
volume of 180mm3 and treatment mice tumors became undetectable. Seven
days after the fourth treatment, the control mice had an average tumor
volume of 743mm3 and treatment mice had an average tumor volume of
221mm3. Cell proliferation assays showed that IL-12 had no direct effect
on the Panc02 cell line. However, interferon-, a cytokine whose
production is induced by IL-12, reduced the growth of Panc02 cells in
vitro. These data shows that chitosan/IL-12 may be an effective
immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer and also that IL-12 is not directly
cytotoxic, but rather, it initiates an effector response capable of
inhibiting pancreatic tumors.

