Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular features reflecting biological and functional ages in
elderly colorectal cancer patients


Aging is a physiological process that is accompanied by functional
decline over time. Also, aging is the single biggest risk factor for
developing cancer and limitation of active cancer treatment. The number
of elderly patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) has increased, however,
the knowledge of the clinical outcomes of colorectal cancer in elderly
patients are limited. Elderly CRC patients are a very heterogeneous
population because the aging process caused complex co-morbidities and
chronological age cannot predict the biological and functional changes.
In this study, we analyzed cDNA microarray data using integration of
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network information, demonstrating the aging effect of
cancer based on large scale data. We identified molecular features that
discriminate 120 elderly (70 age) and 31 young (40 age) CRC patients.
Elderly group had distinct molecular features compared with the young
group, and we suggest that these features may underlie the different
cancer characteristics of colorectal cancer based on aging. First, we
quantified the molecular features of total 15815 probes using ROC
analysis. The ROC representing the performance of enolase superfamily
member 1 (ENOSF1, rTS) corresponded to an area under curve (AUC) of 0.73
in the training set and 0.71 in the test set. Also the 82 differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) over 2 fold with high significance (pAging is a
physiological process that is accompanied by functional decline over
time. Also, aging is the single biggest risk factor for developing cancer
and limitation of active cancer treatment. The number of elderly patients
with colorectal cancer (CRC) has increased, however, the knowledge of the
clinical outcomes of colorectal cancer in elderly patients are limited.
Elderly CRC patients are a very heterogeneous population because the
aging process caused complex co-morbidities and chronological age cannot
predict the biological and functional changes. In this study, we analyzed
cDNA microarray data using integration of receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
information, demonstrating the aging effect of cancer based on large
scale data. We identified molecular features that discriminate 120
elderly (70 age) and 31 young (40 age) CRC patients. Elderly group had
distinct molecular features compared with the young group, and we suggest
that these features may underlie the different cancer characteristics of
colorectal cancer based on aging. First, we quantified the molecular
features of total 15815 probes using ROC analysis. The ROC representing
the performance of enolase superfamily member 1 (ENOSF1, rTS)
corresponded to an area under curve (AUC) of 0.73 in the training set and
0.71 in the test set. Also the 82 differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
over 2 fold with high significance (p<0.01) between the two groups, which
were selected as the age-related genes. To identify the key molecules, we
performed a PPI network analysis with topological metrics such as degree
and betweenness centrality (BC) using the graph module.As a result, we
found that down regulated EGFR, and AR could be key molecules in the PPI
network having higher degree and BC scores in young group, while FOXO1,
downstream signal of EGFR, was upregulated. On the other hand, the
down-regulated EWSR1 and PTPN11 could be key molecules in elderly group,
which were closely connected with SLC26A3 in PPI network. In previous
studies, the SLC26A3 expression was significantly decreased in adenomas
(polyps) and adenocarcinomas of the colon. But our result was shown the
SCL26A3 overexpression in only elderly group. We suggest that elderly CRC
has distinct molecular characteristics from young CRC and therefore, that
the expression signatures of DEGs and PPI may improve the understanding
of molecular pathogenesis and clinical behaviors in elderly CRC.

