Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing of tumor cell lines: Optimizing for cancer
variants


Initial data mining of results from several on-going public cancer
genomics initiatives has identified both known and novel somatic
alterations across multiple cancer types. A challenge of validating
putative cancer targets discovered by such studies is the identification
of appropriate preclinical cell line models with relevant genetic
alterations. Thus there is an urgent need for comprehensive mutation
information across a large panel of cancer cell lines. Mutation discovery
in cell lines brings its own unique challenges. Most cancer re-sequencing
studies published to date typically use DNA derived from both primary
tissue and matched DNA from a non-cancerous sample, often from peripheral
blood or adjacent tissue. Cell lines present a challenge for discovering
somatic mutations because a matched normal sample that can be used to
filter for somatic mutations rarely exists. To this end we have
implemented a filtering scheme that attempts to enrich for true-somatic
mutations. To assess the effectiveness of the filtering pipeline, we
compared filtered results with mutations discovered in matched normal
cell lines derived from blood for 10 cancer cell lines. We estimate that
filtering captures 68% of true somatic mutations. This rate is slightly
improved or comparable over existing methods used in previous studies
involving sequencing of cancer cell lines. Interestingly, we find that
there is typically 10% of known true somatic mutations that are unable to
be called by any of the mutation callers used in a no-normal context but
are discoverable with a normal present. In such cases, the presence of
the normal can add additional information that aids mutation calling. To
genetically characterize a panel of cell lines for pharmacological
studies, we performed exome sequencing of 223 cancer cell lines. Analysis
of filtered mutation variants reveals that cell lines harbor an average
of 270 nonsynonymous coding variants, an increase over typical amounts
found in primary tumors. Furthermore we find that for several tumor
lineages, the spectra of mutations observed reflect the mutation
signatures identified by other large scale efforts in primary tumors.
With regard to recurrently mutated oncogenes and tumor suppressors, we
observe significant overlap with existing mutation data derived from
primary tumor samples. Additionally, we identify relevant cell line
models for several novel cancer driver genes reported in recent studies.
As a resource for the scientific community, we have made both aligned
read data as well as mutation calls in various formats freely available
and easily accessible.

