Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining VELIPARIB (ABT-888) with temozolomide shows strong
synergy when treating temozolomide-resistant and recurrent GBM cell lines


Introduction: The survival trends for glioblastoma (GBM) patients have
remained largely static, reflecting lack of improvement in the
therapeutic options for patients. Less than 5% of newly diagnosed GBM
survive more than 5 years. Standard treatment for GBM comprises of
radiotherapy and temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy (chemoradiotherapy).
Methylation of the promoter region of MGMT has been shown to be
predictive of response to chemoradiotherapy. Approximately 30% of GBM are
MGMT methylated. ABT-888 (Veliparib; Abbvie) is a Poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor that has been shown to enhance response of
GBM to chemoradiotherapy in MGMT methylated patients. However, despite
response (and lack of response in the case of MGMT unmethylated
patients), recurrent GBM is refractory to treatment, occurring 2-3cm from
the original resection and patient die within few months after
recurrence. Herein we demonstrate the use of ABT-888 might be effective
in patients who have recurrent GBM.Methods: We tested ABT-888 alone and
in combination with TMZ on low passage patient derived cell lines
cultured from patients with recurrent GBM. We have used low passage
patient derived cells including BAH and HW that are MGMT methylated. We
also used U87, U251 and LN229 that are immortalized cells that are MGMT
methylated. Of these lines, only U251 harbors a mutation in the binding
domain of TP53. We also tested MGMT methylated low passage patient
derived cell lines where TMZ resistance was selected for through
continuous TMZ treatment of the cell line.Results: Consistent with
previous studies, monotherapy with ABT-888 was largely ineffective on all
of the cell lines. We combined a low dose of ABT-888 (5M) with a range of
TMZ concentrations. Combination treatment was highly efficacious with
sensitivity to TMZ improved by 30-70% when tested in 5 recurrent cell
lines. All cell lines were MGMT unmethylated. We continuously treated 3
cell lines (2 MGMT methylated and 1 MGMT unmethylated) with TMZ until
resistance was achieved. We found a response to the ABT-888/ TMZ
combination was dramatic. Cells were 75% more sensitive to ABT-888/TMZ
compared to retreatment with TMZ.Conclusion: This novel strategy of
combining ABT-888 with TMZ demonstrated synergistic antitumor activity
for the treatment of relapsed and/or chemo-resistant GBM cell lines.
Further investigation of this synergy has potential for rapid translation
into clinical studies.

