Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling anti-leukemic therapy by patient derived AML xenografts
with distinct phenotypes/geneotypes


We have recently successfully engrafted leukemic cells from bone marrow
of 3 AML patients, subtypes of M5 (AM7577), 2 (AM8096) and 6 (AM8070),
into immunocompromised NOD/SCID mice. All three displayed aggressive AML
diseases but with distinct characteristics. AM7577 displays typical M5
disease subtype, which starts at bone marrow and gradually expands to
peripheral (spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood). AM7577 also
harbors interesting genotype, including mutations of IDH2-R140Q,
FLT3-ITD, DNMT3A R882H and NPM1. AM8096, derived from a recurrent AML-M2
patient sample, also displayed aggressive disease with 100% mortality,
but many distinct pathological phenotypes: first, although with abundant
leukemic cells in bone, the peripheral symptom is significant minor,
characterized by lower leukemic counts in peripheral blood and only
slightly enlarged spleen and smaller lymph nodes, as compared to AM7577;
second, the leukemic cell morphology is also rather different where
AM8096 demonstrates less differentiated phenotype; third, the genotype,
in contrast to AM7577, is wild-types for all the above oncogenes. AM8070,
on the extreme contrary, has severe bone marrow disease, but with few
peripheral leukemia. While we have not identified the likely
leukemogenesis driver gene for these models, we are currently performing
RNAseq for all three models in order to explore the underlying molecular
pathogenesis.In addition, we are investigating the model response to
standard of care (SOC, AraC). We found that the treatment resulted in
rapid control of the disease as shown by reduction (disappearance) of
leukemic cells in peripheral blood, significantly relieved disease
symptoms and extended life. However, when drug administration was
stopped, the disease rapidly re-emerged. In order to investigate the
underlying mechanism of the rapid disease relapse without obvious
development of resistance, we examined the drug effect on leukemia at
different relevant leukemic organs: bone, spleen, lymph nodes and blood.
Surprisingly, we found that the drug has no effect on bone leukemic load,
while completely suppressed leukemia in blood, with partial effect in
spleen and lymph nodes. Our current working hypothesis is that the
failure to suppress leukemia in bone, including LICs, are likely
responsible for the observed rapid relapse of the disease immediately
after drug withdrawal. In summary, the established PDX AML models could
serve as useful experimental models to investigate the diverse
leukemogenesis and to model anti-leukemia therapies.

