Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of PI3-kinase pathway and tumor response to everolimus
in patient-derived xenografts of triple-negative breast cancer


Purpose: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) have a poor
prognosis and targeted therapies are lacking. Recent studies performed on
patients tumors showed and increased activity of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathway in TNBC. PI3K pathway is critical for cell
growth, survival, and angiogenesis. Everolimus is a mTOR inhibitor
recently showed to increase survival of patients with metastatic luminal
breast cancer. The objectives of this work were to analyze the PI3K
activation status in a large cohort of patient-derived xenografts (PDX)
of TNBC and to investigate the therapeutic potential of mTOR
inhibition.Experimental procedures: this study included a panel of 32
TNBC PDX models previously described (Marangoni et al 2007). Expression
of AKT, P-AKT, P-mTOR, S6, P-S6, P-4EBP1, PTEN and INPP4B was analyzed by
WB and IHC. Mutations of PIK3CA (exons 9 and 20), PIK3R1 (exons 11-15),
and AKT1 (exon 4) were detected by sequencing of cDNA fragments obtained
by RT-PCR amplification. The efficacy of the mTOR inhibitor everolimus
was investigated in vivo on 10 PDX models with different expressions and
mutational status of PI3K markers.Results: INPP4B protein expression was
lost in 56% of tumors (n=18) and expressed at low levels in 31% of
models, while only 2 models displayed a marked expression. PTEN
expression was lost in 78% of tumors. Thirteen PDX models (40%) displayed
a concomitant loss of both INPP4B and PTEN proteins. In 67% of tumors,
the ratio between phosphorylated and unphosphorylated AKT was greater
than 1. S6 was found to be phosphorylated in the great majority of
tumors. PI3KCA and AKT1 genes were mutated only in 1 and 2 tumors,
respectively. On the 10 PDX models treated with everolimus, 6 models
responded to treatment with a tumor growth inhibition (TGI) comprised
between 60% and 80%. Four models were classified as resistant or low
responder (TGIPurpose: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
have a poor prognosis and targeted therapies are lacking. Recent studies
performed on patients tumors showed and increased activity of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway in TNBC. PI3K pathway is
critical for cell growth, survival, and angiogenesis. Everolimus is a
mTOR inhibitor recently showed to increase survival of patients with
metastatic luminal breast cancer. The objectives of this work were to
analyze the PI3K activation status in a large cohort of patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) of TNBC and to investigate the therapeutic potential of
mTOR inhibition.Experimental procedures: this study included a panel of
32 TNBC PDX models previously described (Marangoni et al 2007).
Expression of AKT, P-AKT, P-mTOR, S6, P-S6, P-4EBP1, PTEN and INPP4B was
analyzed by WB and IHC. Mutations of PIK3CA (exons 9 and 20), PIK3R1
(exons 11-15), and AKT1 (exon 4) were detected by sequencing of cDNA
fragments obtained by RT-PCR amplification. The efficacy of the mTOR
inhibitor everolimus was investigated in vivo on 10 PDX models with
different expressions and mutational status of PI3K markers.Results:
INPP4B protein expression was lost in 56% of tumors (n=18) and expressed
at low levels in 31% of models, while only 2 models displayed a marked
expression. PTEN expression was lost in 78% of tumors. Thirteen PDX
models (40%) displayed a concomitant loss of both INPP4B and PTEN
proteins. In 67% of tumors, the ratio between phosphorylated and
unphosphorylated AKT was greater than 1. S6 was found to be
phosphorylated in the great majority of tumors. PI3KCA and AKT1 genes
were mutated only in 1 and 2 tumors, respectively. On the 10 PDX models
treated with everolimus, 6 models responded to treatment with a tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) comprised between 60% and 80%. Four models were
classified as resistant or low responder (TGI<50%). Preliminary analysis
of treated tumors from 6 models indicates increased level of P-AKT
(feedback loop) to occur only in responder models, while inhibition of S6
phosphorylation occurred in treated tumors from both responder and
resistant models. Finally, expression of INPP4B or PTEN alone did not
predict for tumor response, while a P-AKT/AKT ratio greater than 1
predicted response to everolimus (pPurpose: Patients with triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) have a poor prognosis and targeted therapies are
lacking. Recent studies performed on patients tumors showed and increased
activity of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway in TNBC.
PI3K pathway is critical for cell growth, survival, and angiogenesis.
Everolimus is a mTOR inhibitor recently showed to increase survival of
patients with metastatic luminal breast cancer. The objectives of this
work were to analyze the PI3K activation status in a large cohort of
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) of TNBC and to investigate the
therapeutic potential of mTOR inhibition.Experimental procedures: this
study included a panel of 32 TNBC PDX models previously described
(Marangoni et al 2007). Expression of AKT, P-AKT, P-mTOR, S6, P-S6,
P-4EBP1, PTEN and INPP4B was analyzed by WB and IHC. Mutations of PIK3CA
(exons 9 and 20), PIK3R1 (exons 11-15), and AKT1 (exon 4) were detected
by sequencing of cDNA fragments obtained by RT-PCR amplification. The
efficacy of the mTOR inhibitor everolimus was investigated in vivo on 10
PDX models with different expressions and mutational status of PI3K
markers.Results: INPP4B protein expression was lost in 56% of tumors
(n=18) and expressed at low levels in 31% of models, while only 2 models
displayed a marked expression. PTEN expression was lost in 78% of tumors.
Thirteen PDX models (40%) displayed a concomitant loss of both INPP4B and
PTEN proteins. In 67% of tumors, the ratio between phosphorylated and
unphosphorylated AKT was greater than 1. S6 was found to be
phosphorylated in the great majority of tumors. PI3KCA and AKT1 genes
were mutated only in 1 and 2 tumors, respectively. On the 10 PDX models
treated with everolimus, 6 models responded to treatment with a tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) comprised between 60% and 80%. Four models were
classified as resistant or low responder (TGI<50%). Preliminary analysis
of treated tumors from 6 models indicates increased level of P-AKT
(feedback loop) to occur only in responder models, while inhibition of S6
phosphorylation occurred in treated tumors from both responder and
resistant models. Finally, expression of INPP4B or PTEN alone did not
predict for tumor response, while a P-AKT/AKT ratio greater than 1
predicted response to everolimus (p<0.05, Fisher's exact
test).Conclusions: the majority of TNBC PDX models showed loss of PTEN or
INPP4B proteins or both, associated with activation of PI3K pathway.
Preliminary results obtained from 10 PDX models indicate that mTOR
targeting resulted in tumor growth inhibition in several models with AKT
phosphorylation. Additional TNBC models will be tested in order to search
for robust predictive biomarkers. This large panel of characterized PDX
of TNBC models represents a clinical relevant tool to investigate the
activity of PI3K-AKT-mTOR inhibitors and identify predictive biomarkers.

