Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional coactivator CBP regulates hTERT expression through
the cooperation with Sp1/AP-2 and predicts poor prognosis in human lung
cancers


Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is linked to tumorigenesis
and development. However, how hTERT is upregulated in tumor cells remains
poorly understood. In this study, we identified CBP as a transcriptional
coactivator that specifically binds to hTERT promoter through
co-anchoring with transcriptional factors Sp1 and AP-2 and promotes hTERT
expression in human lung cancer cells. Streptavidin-agarose pulldown and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed the tumor-specific binding
of CBP, Sp1 and AP-2 on the hTERT promoter. The colocalization and
interaction between CBP and Sp1 or AP-2 in lung cancer cells were
detected. High expression levels of CBP and hTERT in lung cancer cells
and tissues were also detected compared to normal lung cells and adjacent
normal lung tissues. Tissue array immunohistochemistry of lung
adenocarcinomas showed a strong postive correlation between CBP and hTERT
expression, and demonstrated the patients with high CBP and hTERT
expression had a significantly shorter overall survival than those with
low CBP and hTERT expression. Ectopic expression of CBP activated hTERT
promoter-driven luciferase gene and endogenous hTERT gene expression in
lung cancer cells. Inhibition of CBP expression by CBP-specific siRNA or
chemical inhibitor attenuated hTERT promoter-driven luciferase expression
and the endogenous hTERT activity, and abrogated the binding of Sp1 and
AP-2 on hTERT promoter region. Moreover, CBP knockdown by siRNA
significantly inhibited lung cancer cell proliferation, whereas CBP
overexpression promoted cell proliferation. These results therefore
indicate overexpression of CBP contributes to hTERT upregulation through
its cooperation with transactivators Sp1 and AP-2 and predicts poor
prognosis in human lung cancers.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

