Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-based analysis of oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation and
lipid peroxidation-derived protein modifications using fluorescence
microscopy


Oxidative stress plays an important role in the progression of several
diseases including inflammation, atherosclerosis, aging and age-related
degenerative disorders. Reactive oxygen species damage membrane bound
lipids resulting in lipid peroxidation-derived protein modifications.
Cell-based measurements of oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation and
protein carbonylation by traditional fluorescence microscopy provide a
powerful platform to quantitate oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation.
Here, we used three different approaches to measure oxidative stress and
lipid peroxidation in cells by fluorescence microscopy. 1) Two new
fluorogenic probes, CellROX Orange and CellROX Green Reagents to measure
oxidative stress in cells, 2) Image-iT Lipid Peroxidation Kit for a
ratiometric determination of lipid peroxidation in live cells 3) Click-iT
Lipid Peroxidation Imaging Kit, a click chemistry-based approach which
utilizes incorporation of an alkyne-modified unsaturated fatty acid
analog, linoleamide, into the cellular membranes. The resulting oxidation
products, like 9, 12-dioxo-10(E) dodecenoic acid (DODE) can readily
modify proteins and these modifications were readily detected in fixed
cells by the copper-catalyzed click reaction using fluorescent azides.
Using these approaches, we measured oxidative stress and lipid
peroxidation caused by several oxidants in cells. Increases in oxidative
stress, lipid peroxidation, and protein modifications were assessed by
high content imaging and analysis as well as traditional fluorescence
microscopy. In the models tested, at least 2-3 fold increases were
observed compared to controls was and responses were successfully
inhibited by antioxidants. The three strategies described here provide
powerful new tools for the assessment of oxidative stress in cells and
convey distinct advantages over existing cell-based methods.

