Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 3D tumor-immune cell spheroid models for assessment of
cancer immunotherapy agents


The pre-clinical development of anticancer immunotherapeutics is based on
2D co-culture systems that rely on use of allogeneic immune effector
cells and established tumor cell lines. These are, however, suboptimal
models unable to resemble the complex histopathological, morphological
and immunosuppressive features present within tumor microenvironment and
devoid of nutritional, metabolic and oxygen gradients established in
primary tumors. In addition, when maintained in 2D, tumor cells undergo
exponential growth and lack formation of proliferating, quiescent and
necrotic cores established in tumors. Due to absence of cell polarity,
the level and pattern of tumor antigen expression is different between 2D
and 3D cultures and interactions between tumor cells and immune cells in
2D sub optimally represent those occurring in vivo.To overcome these
limitations, we established novel types of 3D models that more closely
mimic the histological complexity of tumors and better resemble
cell-cell, cell-matrix and tumor-stroma interactions, i.e. 1) the
heterotypic 3D spheroids composed of tumor cells, fibroblasts,
endothelial cells, matrix components and immune effector cells, 2) 3D ex
vivo thick tumor sections offering an intact tumor microenvironment with
autologous tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). In the first model,
lymphocytes were either admixed with tumor cells, fibroblasts,
endothelial cells and matrix components (collagen, Matrigel or both)
giving rise to heterotypic 3D co-cultures containing low levels of immune
effector cells (resembling poorly-infiltrated tumors), or were stimulated
with low dose of antibody-conjugated immunocytokine (DP47-IL2v, 10 nM,
overnight), which promoted their infiltration into pre-formed
tumor/fibroblast spheroids (resembling highly-infiltrated tumors). In the
second model, primary tumors collected from nave or DP47-IL2v-treated
mice were sliced ex vivo to obtain 400 m-thick tumor sections that were
maintained in culture for up to 7 days. 3D models were characterized by
quantification of size and IHC staining of tumor, stromal and endothelial
cell antigens and immune effector cells.We further validated our models
by testing the activity of tumor- or stroma-targeted immunotherapies.
Incubation of spheroids with 50 or 100 nM of tumor-targeted T Cell
Bispecific (TCB) antibody led to crosslinking of T cells to tumor cells
resulting in elimination of tumor areas (but not of the fibroblast core)
and overall reduction in spheroid size. On the contrary, spheroids
incubated with untargeted TCB remained intact.Taken together, the novel
models presented here provide the first example of heterotypic 3D
microtissues containing the immune effector cells and offer a versatile
system to characterize the activity of tumor- and stroma-targeted
immunotherapies and explore their combinations.

