Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune modulation by the TLR8 agonist VTX-2337; a comparison of
the pharmacodynamic response in cancer patients and healthy volunteers


Immunotherapy has proven to be a successful treatment approach for some
cancer patients. One promising paradigm in immunotherapy is targeting
pathogen-associated molecule pattern receptors (PAMPS) such as the
toll-like receptors (TLRs) to activate the innate immune system and
enhance the development of tumor-directed adaptive immune responses.
However, an ongoing concern in the application of immunotherapeutics is
the potential for the immune response in cancer patients to be less
robust than in healthy individuals, due to the underlying advanced
neoplastic disease or due to previous regimens of cytotoxic drugs. To
address this concern in relation to the response to TLR8 stimulation, we
compared the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) relationship
defined in a phase 1 clinical trial of the selective small molecule TLR8
agonist VTX-2337 in oncology patients to the response in healthy
volunteers.A phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial (A101) in subjects
with advanced solid tumors (n=33) demonstrated that plasma levels of
multiple biomarkers of immune activation, including G-CSF, MCP-1, MIP1-
and TNF, increased in a dose-dependent manner and correlated with
increasing plasma levels of VTX-2337. The PK/PD relationship defined in
the initial clinical trial was closely aligned with predictions from both
in vitro assays and preclinical studies conducted in cynomolgus monkeys.
A subsequent phase 1 trial (A105) was conducted as a single-center,
open-label, two-period, randomized, crossover, phase 1 study in normal
volunteers (n=10). The objective of this study was to compare the PK/PD
profiles and local tolerance of two formulations of VTX-2337. In this
study, the two preparations of VTX-2337 demonstrated comparable PK
profiles and PD responses.At comparable dose levels, the PK profile and
overall exposure (AUC) to VTX-2337 was similar for oncology patients and
healthy volunteers. VTX-2337 induced the same repertoire of circulating
cytokines and chemokines, indicative of TLR8 activation, in both
populations. The magnitude of the mediator response in oncology patients
was also highly comparable to the response in healthy volunteers that
received a similar dose. This comparison demonstrates that the immune
system of cancer patients with advanced disease remains highly responsive
to TLR8 activation by VTX-2337.In summary, advanced neoplastic disease or
a prior treatment history with cytotoxic agents that can negatively
impact immune cell function did not appear to moderate the response to
VTX-2337 based on the PK/PD relationship using predictive biomarkers.

