Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR-regulated RGS expression contributes to paclitaxel resistance
in human lung cancer cells


Lung cancer is one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide,
and the 5-year survival of lung cancer is less than 20%. Paclitaxel is a
widely used chemotherapeutic agent to treat a variety of cancers, but its
therapeutic efficacy tends to be limited due to the development of drug
resistance, raising the need to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying paclitaxel resistance. In the current study, we investigated
the mechanisms of paclitaxel resistance in non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs). First, we established paclitaxel-resistant NSCLC cell lines,
including H460 TxR and SK-MES TxR, by pulse- or prolonged treatment of
paclitaxel. The IC50 value of paclitaxel-resistant cell lines was 50 fold
less than that of parental cells. Upon paclitaxel treatment, H460 TxR and
SK-MES TxR sublines experienced markedly greater anchorage-dependent and
-independent colony forming abilities with reduced apoptosis than did the
parental cell lines. Next, we investigated the underlying molecular
mechanism of acquired resistance against paclitaxel. Through microarray
analysis, we found 19 genes commonly-increased both in H460 TxR and
SK-MES TxR. Among them, the expression of regulator of G-protein
signaling (RGS) gene increased the most. Knockdown of RGS gene expression
by siRNA sensitized the paclitaxel-resistant cells to the drug treatment
in vitro. Furthermore, H460 TxR xenograft mice showed a significant
decrease in tumor growth after combined treatment with siRGS and
paclitaxel, implying the association of RGS with paclitaxel resistance in
NSCLC. To identify the mechanisms involved in increase in RGS expression,
we assessed the phosphorylation level of several kinases involved in cell
proliferation and survival. Among them, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) showed the most significant phosphorylation. EGFR inhibition by
erlotinib down-regulated RGS expression in a transcriptional level,
leading to the enhanced sensitivity to paclitaxel in H460 TxR. Taken
together, our results indicate that RGS overexpression is a mediator of
paclitaxel resistance in NSCLCs and represent the first link between RGS
and chemoresistance. We suggest that RGS might be a potential target of
therapeutic strategies for lung cancer patients with paclitaxel
resistance.

