Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer associated fibroblasts stimulates cancer cell invasion
through CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling in gastric cancer


Objectives: Gastric cancer is one of the most threatening malignancies
with a high incidence and metastasis rate. Many patients are diagnosed in
an advanced stage sometimes with multi-organ metastasis, which leads a
poor prognosis of gastric tumors. Chemokine and their receptors have been
originally demonstrated as essential mediators of leukocyte directional
migration, particularly during infection and inflammation, and have
further emerged as crucial players in all stages of tumor development. It
has been reported that an important CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling is involved in
tumor development and metastasis in several types of cancer including
gastric cancer. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF) are reported to
communicate microenvironment-derived signals through chemokine/chemokine
receptor interaction such as CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling. The aim of our study
was to evaluate the role of CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling in crosstalk between
gastric cancer and CAF. Methods and Results: We evaluated CXCL12 and
CXCR4 expression status by immunohistochemistry using a nonbiased
database of 89 curatively resected gastric cancers. As a result, CXCL12/
CXCR4 expression are significant correlation with metastasis.
Furthermore, we performed Western blotting analysis for CXCL12 and CXCR4
in human gastric cancer cell lines. CXCR4 expression was detectable in
all gastric cancer cell lines. We isolated CAF from human gastric cancer
tissue resected in our institute. We performed Western blotting analysis
for alpha-SMA and CXCL12 in CAF, and confirmed higher expression in CAF
than normal fibroblast (NF) isolated from normal gastric mucosa of same
patients. Then we established stable AGS gastric cancer cell line
expressing GFP. Invasion assay revealed that AGS (gastric cancer cell
line) cells with CAF showed more invasive phenotype than that without
CAF. We also found the motility of GFP-expressing AGS was elevated during
direct co-culture of GFP-expressing AGS cells and CAF compared with
NF.Conclusions: These findings revealed that cancer associated
fibroblasts were implicated in cancer cell invasion and metastasis
through CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling in gastric cancer. The therapeutic
blockade of this pathway with CXCR4 antagonist might abrogate gastric
cancer cell invasion and metastasis.

