Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational targeting of the Androgen receptor interactome in
prostate cancer


Background: The Androgen receptor (AR) is the central driver of prostate
cancer and AR signaling is intact across all stages of disease. The
interaction of AR with protein cofactors is critical for its signaling:
targeted disruption of these interactions may enable shutdown of AR
signaling.Methods: Using known crystal structure, modeled structure and
imputed structure based models, peptide agents were rationally designed
to block the interface between AR and critical cofactors in its
interactome and tested for physiologic activity using prostate cancer
cell lines, xenografts and primary tumor explants.Results: Knowledge of
the protein cofactors, their interacting motifs and structure of the
interface are needed for optimal targeting of protein-protein
interactions. Using an iterative rational design approach, we have been
able to successfully disrupt three classes of the AR interactome:1.
Interactions where the protein cofactor, the motifs and the structure of
the interface is known, (targeting AR-PELP1 interface through a helical
LxxLL motif)2. Interactions where the protein cofactor is known but the
motifs and the structure of the interface is not known, (targeting
AR-FoxA1 interaction) and3. Interactions where the motif is known, but
neither the protein cofactor nor the structure of the interface are known
(only known is a critical motif on AR).The design of initial compounds
targeting the interactions in Class 1 was based on crystal structures,
while those for Class 2 and Class 3 were based on either predicted or
imputed (motif in different context) structures. The interaction between
AR and proteins in each of these classes is disrupted by a targeted agent
as evidenced by co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous protein cofactors
and AR. The functional utility of these agents blocking the AR
interactome on AR driven gene expression and proliferation has been
validated for agents in Class 1, but is being validated for agents in
Classes 2 and 3. In each case, using significant structural modeling,
active agents were synthesized with a minimal use of synthesis of
analogues.Conclusions: The rational targeting of the AR interactome is
feasible and may be a useful complement to traditional screening
campaigns. We have demonstrated the utility of this approach to blocking
the interface in three distinct classes of protein-protein interactions.
Further validation/optimization of these drugs is needed prior to their
clinical implementation.

