Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory roles of conserved phosphorylation sites in the
activation loop of the MAP kinase


The catalytic domains of most eukaryotic protein kinases are highly
conserved in their primary structures. Phosphorylation of the activation
loop, a variable region between kinase catalytic Subdomains VII and VIII,
is a common mechanism for stimulation of protein phosphotransferase
activity. Our investigation of the distribution and evolutionary
conservation of phosphorylation sites in 492 typical human protein kinase
catalytic domains revealed that about 75% of 303 known activating
phosphosites are located within the activation loop. Extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1), which belongs to the highly studied
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, serves as a paradigm for
regulation of protein kinases in signaling modules. In addition to the
well-documented T202 and Y204 stimulatory phosphorylation sites in the
activation loop of ERK1 and its closest relative ERK2, three additional
flanking phosphosites have been confirmed (T198, T207 and Y210 from ERK1)
by high throughput mass spectrometry. T207 and Y210 correspond to
conserved phosphosites located just prior to the Subdomain VIII APE motif
in many other protein-serine/threonine kinases including CDKs, CAMKs,
PKB/Akts and PKCs, which may implicate a common regulatory role for of
these phosphosites in a wide range of kinases. To investigate the
possible roles of these obscure phosphosites in many protein kinases, we
mutated T198, T207 and Y210 of ERK1 individually and in combinations. In
vitro kinase assays with myelin basic protein (MBP) using the purified
ERK1 phosphosite mutants indicated the functional importance of T207 and
Y210, but not T198 in regulating ERK1 catalytic activity. By single
substitution of the T207 to alanine, the activity of ERK1 towards MBP
decreased dramatically without affecting the phosphorylation of the ERK1
at the T202 and Y204 sites by MEK1. However, the T207E mutant could not
mimic phosphorylation of this site and also produced a less active form
of ERK1. The Y210 site could be important for proper folding of ERK1 in
this regulatory region, since the mutation of this residue caused
decreases in protein solubility, and the Y210F mutant was not recognized
by MEK1 for phosphorylation in vitro. Preliminary data indicated that
ERK1 autophosphorylates at T207 phosphosite, after the phosphorylation of
the T202 and Y204 sites by MEK1. We hypothesize that phosphorylation of
the T207 site is required for full activation of the ERK1, and that
subsequent slower phosphorylation of the Y210 sites may result in
autoinactivation of the kinase. Hyper-phosphorylation within the kinase
activation loop may serve as a general mechanism for protein kinases to
achieve transient full stimulation by autophosphorylation following the
initial activation by other upstream kinases, which is then reversed by
inhibitory tyrosine autophosphorylation just prior to Subdomain VIII.

