Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MELK/FOXM1 axis is a master regulator of proneural to
mesenchymal transition (PMT) in glioma stem cells by controlling EZH2
transcriptional activity


In the Central Nervous System, stem cells are present in the normal brain
and primary brain tumor, glioblasotoma multiforme (GBM). Both normal and
oncogenic stem cells play central roles in organogenesis and
tumorigenesis, respectively. Previously we identified that the mitotic
kinase MELK binds and phosphorylates the oncogenic transcription factor
FOXM1 to regulate the growth of both brain-derived and GBM-derived stem
cells (GSCs). Here we demonstrate that the Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2
(EZH2), the lysine methyltransferase of Polycomb repressive complex 2, is
the major transcriptional target of the MELK-FOXM1 complex in GSCs.
PCR-based analysis of FOXM1 immunoprecipitated chromatin determined the
binding of FOXM1 to the EZH2 promoter region to drive its transcriptional
activity. This signaling is mediated through the protein complex
formation of FOXM1 and MELK in a MELK kinase-dependent manner. The
MELK-FOXM1 driven EZH2 signals are required to retain the immature stem
cell trait and mesenchymal identity in GBM, as well as GSCs' radiation
resistant phenotype in a MELK kinase-dependent manner. Clinically, GBM
tumors co-express MELK and EZH2 with significant elevation in
post-irradiation recurrent tumors. This post-irradiation elevation of
MELK and EZH2 was observed specifically in GSCs. Irradiation induces
transformation of proneural (PN) GSCs into a Mesenchymal (Mes)-like GSC
phenotype (PMT) that is highly resistant to radiation treatment, and
inhibition of EZH2 by shRNA reverses the radiation-resistant phenotype of
Mes GSCs. Elimination of MELK or FOXM1 by shRNA reduced EZH2 expression
resulting in attenuated stemness and radiation resistance in vitro and in
vivo. These phenotypes were completely restored by exogenous expression
of EZH2. To our knowledge, this study provides the first evidence of the
role of MELK-FOXM1-EZH2 signaling axis for maintenance of stem cell trait
and PMT regulation in GSCs. Identification of the role of transcriptional
regulator EZH2 in PMT by the mitotic kinase MELK and transcription factor
FOXM1 complex sheds lights on a novel therapeutic target for aggressive
cancers including GBM.

