Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZEB1 plays a pivotal role in hypoxia-mediated increase of in vitro
invasion of glioblastoma-derived cell cultures and represents a novel
neural stem cell marker in early development


ObjectiveHypoxia is thought to induce migration in many neoplasms, often
by promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), but the
mechanisms by which it affects brain tumor invasion is less well
understood. In particular, little is known about the possible role of
EMT-associated factors in hypoxia-mediated induction of migratory
phenotype in gliomas.MethodsMigration and invasion of GBM-derived cell
lines (n=3) cultivated as spheres in serum-free media under atmospheric
oxygen (21% O2) and hypoxia (1% O2) were assessed in Boyden Chamber-based
in vitro assays. Digoxin was used to inhibit the HIF-1-mediated hypoxic
response. The importance of the EMT-factor ZEB1 in our model was
investigated by inhibiting its expression using sh-RNA delivered by
lentivirus.ResultsHypoxia led to a significant increase of in vitro
invasion in all three neurosphere lines tested (GBM1 up to 6fold, 622 up
to 3fold and over 10fold for 821; p=0.001). This was accompanied by
induction of EMT effectors including ZEB1, SNAI1 and TWIST1 as compared
to normoxic cultures. Digoxin-mediated inhibition of HIF1a transcription
resulted in abolition of this phenomenon. Additionally, histological
analysis of patient-derived GBM samples revealed an abundance of ZEB1
positive cells in hypoxic, peri-necrotic tumor areas. Strikingly,
ZEB1-knockdown significantly reduced the invasive behavior of the cells.
Interestingly, we also identified numerous ZEB1-postive cells in fetal
neurogenic regions and migrating neuroblasts in both human and rodent
brains. Furthermore, analyses of human fetal neural progenitors showed
that ZEB1 expression is correlated with stem cell phenotype and
established neural stem- and progenitor markers including SOX2 and
NESTIN. Finally, analysis of TCGA and Rembrandt datasets identified
up-regulation of EMT factors such as TWIST1, SNAI1 and SNAI2 was found in
the aggressive, mesenchymal subgroup of GBM.ConclusionWhile malignant
gliomas are not epithelial tumors, hypoxia increases the invasion
capacity of GBM cells at least in part by inducing expression of EMT
markers such as ZEB1. ZEB1 is also most highly expressed in the
developing fetal brain in migrating stem and progenitor cells, suggesting
it may play a similar role in normal development.

