Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cucurbitacin B: A novel natural agent for the management of
non-small cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is the primary cause of cancer death in both men and women in
the United States and worldwide. The general prognosis is still very low
despite of developments in the treatment due to improved surgical
techniques, increased application of combined modality treatments and the
use of new drugs. Since the past decade, researchers have been
investigating a range of purified compounds from dietary sources as
possible anticancer drugs. The main issue with the use of natural
products is their effectiveness at high doses which generally could not
be delivered to humans through dietary consumption. Here, we observed
that cucurbitacin B exhibits antiproliferative effects on human non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells at very low concentrations. The
cucurbitacins are highly diverse and oxygenated tetracyclic triterpenoids
isolated from plants of Cucurbitaceae family which are well-known for
their bitterness of edible products like pumpkins, gourds and squashes.
Cucurbitacin B is one of the most abundant and has been most widely used.
In this study, we determined the effect of cucurbitacin B on the
inhibition of cell-growth and suppression of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in
human NSCLC cells. Treatment of cucurbitacin B (0.2-0.6 M; 24 h) was
found to result in 34-61% and 45-65% decrease in the viability of human
NSCLC H1792 and A549 cells respectively, but had only minimal effect on
normal human bronchial epithelial cells. The IC50 of cucurbitacin B in
these cells ranged from 0.43-0.49 M. The A549 cell colonies were also
reduced by treatment with cucurbitacin B in a dose-dependent manner. It
has been well documented that mTOR functions downstream of the PI3K/Akt
pathway and is phosphorylated in response to stimuli that activate the
PI3K/Akt pathway. Treatment of A549 cells with cucurbitacin B (0.2-0.6 M;
24 h) caused decrease in the protein expression of PI3K (p85 and p110)
and inhibition of the phosphorylation of Akt and mTOR. PI3K/Akt-dependent
phosphorylation signals through tuberin, the protein product of tuberous
sclerosis complex (TSC)1/TSC2 complex, which leads to activation of mTOR.
The mTOR also phosphorylates eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) which disassociates from the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor (eIF) 4E, allowing activation of protein
translation. Treatment of A549 cells with cucurbitacin B also caused
inhibition of the phosphorylation of p70S6K1, eIF-4E and 4E-BP1 and
downstream targets of mTOR. In cucurbitacin B treated cells, there was
also inhibition of the constituents of mTOR signaling complex such as
Rictor, Raptor, GL and PRAS40 and activation of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK) and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)2. We suggest that
cucurbitacin B could be developed as an agent for the management of lung
cancer.

