Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: System Xc- in glioma alters redox regulation, energetics and
morphology


Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common malignant primary brain tumor
with a median life expectancy of 12 months from diagnosis. Due to the
metabolic demands of rapidly proliferating cancer cells and higher free
radical generation, we show that human glioma cells, compared to primary
normal human astrocytes, express higher levels of system XC-, a
sodium-independent electroneutral transporter composed of a catalytic
subunit, xCT, and a heavy chain subunit, 4F2hc. System XC- is responsible
for maintaining redox homeostasis by importing cystine, where it is then
reduced to cysteine and used to synthesize the major antioxidant
glutathione (GSH). We demonstrate that inhibition of system XC-,
accomplished using sulfasalazine (SAS), increased intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and decreased survival of U251 glioma cells in a
dose-dependent manner. To further delineate the role of system XC- in
glioma survival and minimize the off-target effects of SAS, we generated
stable xCT-over-expressing and xCT-knockdown U251 glioma cell lines. The
xCT-over-expressing glioma cells were more resistant to oxidative stress
and chemotherapy treatment. Interestingly, the xCT-over-expressing U251
cells exhibit increased basal ATP generation compared to xCT-knockdown
and control cells, despite no difference in viability or proliferation.
The higher ATP levels correlated with increased basal levels of ROS in
the xCT-over-expressing cells. Since mitochondria generate much of the
cellular energy and produce most of the cellular ROS, we performed
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for morphological examination of
the mitochondria. TEM revealed no alteration in mitochondrial morphology
but there was a significant increase in the number of mitochondria in the
xCT-over-expressing cells compared to xCT-knockdown and control cells.
This indicates that system XC- may not only play a role in redox
regulation but also in altered energetics. Further studies to assess the
mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolism are currently under
investigation. Additionally, the xCT-over-expressing U251 cells exhibited
an altered morphology compared to the typical elongated morphology of
parental and empty vector controls. This cuboidal morphology was
associated with increased cortical F-actin staining compared to the
elongated F-actin stress fibers in control cells. Since actin stress
fibers promote cell migration, we assessed the migratory and invasive
characteristics of the xCT-modified cell lines. The xCT-over-expressing
U251 cells exhibited decreased migration and invasion while the
xCT-knock-down U251 cells exhibited increased invasion. These findings
indicate that system XC- over-expression in glioma not only promotes
survival under oxidative stress and chemotherapy treatment, but may also
modulate mitochondrial function and the migratory/ invasive properties to
promote integration into host tissue.

