Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of CRAF-mediated MEK activation is required for
effective MEK inhibition in KRAS mutant tumors


MEK inhibitors are clinically active in BRAF V600E melanomas, but only
marginally so in KRAS-mutant tumors. While MEK inhibitor treatment
resulted in sustained inhibition of ERK phopshorylation in BRAF V600E
tumors, it was associated with a rebound in ERK phosphorylation after
prolonged exposure in KRAS mutant tumors. To understand this phenomenon,
we performed an RNAi screen in a KRAS-mutant model and found that CRAF
knockdown enhanced the antiproliferative effects of MEK inhibition both
in vivo and in vitro. In agreement with previous findings, MEK inhibitor
treatment in KRAS mutant cells resulted in CRAF reactivation and
induction of MEK phosphorylation. However, MEK activated by CRAF was less
susceptible to traditional MEK inhibitors, such as PD0325901, compared to
when activated by BRAF V600E. Consistent with this observation, the
rebound in ERK phosphorylation following MEK inhibitor treatment in KRAS
mutant tumors was dependent on intact CRAF expression. Furthermore,
traditional MEK inhibitors induced RAF-MEK complexes in KRAS mutant
models, and disrupting these complexes enhanced the inhibition of
CRAF-dependent ERK signaling. In an effort to identify more effective
compounds we found that newer MEK inhibitors, such as trametinib and
CH5126766, do not only target the catalytic activity of MEK, but in
addition, they also impair its reactivation by CRAF. This occurs through
two distinct mechanisms: trametinib disrupts RAF-MEK complex formation,
as evidenced by co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous proteins and surface
plasmon resonance assays with purified enzymes. Instead, CH512676 induces
the interaction of MEK with RAF, yet it prevents the phosphorylation of
MEK in this complex. To elucidate the mechanism responsible for the
latter property, we determined the ternary structure of CH512676-bound
MEK1. CH5126766 interacts with Asn 221 and Ser 222 residues in MEK1 to
displace the activation segment and disrupt RAF-mediated phosphorylation.
These data provide a blueprint for developing better MEK inhibitors that
effectively inhibit ERK signaling in KRAS mutant tumors.

