Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-modal nanomedicine for glioblastoma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive primary neoplasm of the
brain that exhibit notable refractivity to standard treatment regimens.
Recent large-scale molecular profiling has revealed deregulated molecular
networks as potential targets for therapeutic development. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are noncoding RNA molecules which act as post-transcriptional
regulators of specific messenger RNA transcripts. miRNAs play major roles
in normal developmental processes, and their deregulation significantly
contributes to various aspects of carcinogenesis.Nevertheless, in vivo
delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) and miRNA remains a crucial
challenge for their therapeutic success. siRNAs and miRNAs on their own
are not taken-up by most mammalian cells in a way that preserves their
activity. In order to circumvent these limitations, we developed a
cationic carrier system, which can strongly improve its stability,
intracellular trafficking and silencing efficacy. Polyglycerol
(PG)-Amine, a water-soluble polyglycerol-based hyperbranched polymer
accumulates in the tumor microenvironment due to the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect, and therefore, represents an
ideal nanocarrier for antitumor biological agents.Using our novel
nanocarrier, we have studied the expression targets and functional
effects of miR-34a in several human glioblastoma cell lines and human
tissue samples. miR-34a levels inversely correlated to their target gene
levels measured in the same cell lines or tissue. Transient transfection
of PG-NH2-miR-34a polyplex into glioblastoma cells strongly inhibited
cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, and cell migration.
Consequently, we performed an in vivo experiment and achieved a
significant tumor growth inhibition effect following treatment with
PG-NH2-miR-34a polyplex in a human glioblastoma mouse model.We further
characterized the synergistic effect of combining PG-NH2-miR-34a polyplex
with chemotherapy and achieved promising results. Together, our findings
show that PG-NH2 efficiently delivers anticancer miRNAs to glioblastoma
cells and suppresses brain tumor growth. These results suggest that our
polyplex could serve as a potential nanomedicine for glioblastoma.

