Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a mechanism of acquired resistance to the combined
inhibition of PI3K/mTOR and MEK in colorectal carcinoma


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/mechanistic target of rapamycin
(PI3K/mTOR) pathway and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling cascades are central facilitators of cellular growth,
proliferation, survival and motility within a variety of tumor lineages.
To date, several ongoing oncology clinical trials are currently
evaluating the benefit of combining PI3K with MEK inhibition. While this
dual combination is well founded pre-clinically, investigating potential
mechanisms of resistance and identifying novel biological signatures of
sensitivity is of great clinical importance. We sought to establish a
model of acquired resistance by evaluating the co-treatment of a
colorectal carcinoma model with inhibitors of PI3K/mTOR inhibitor
(PF-04691502) and MEK (PD-0325901). We can associate the onset of
acquired resistance in this model to re-engagement of signaling within
the PI3K/mTOR pathway correlative to a loss of PTEN protein expression ,
relative to parental cells. In addition, next-generation sequencing (NSG)
comparing parental versus resistant cells identified a unique somatic
gatekeeper mutation located in the kinase domain of mTOR. Furthermore, a
cell proliferation screen evaluating potential cross resistance was
analyzed using a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with a chemical scaffold distinct
from PF-502 (PF-05212384). Treatment of PF-384 as a single agent (IC50
150nM) circumvented the acquired resistance derived from the combination
of PF-502+ PD-901 (IC50: 2uM and 334nM respectfully). Inhibition of
growth observed with PF-384 correlated with rescuing of PI3K/mTOR
signaling as measured by substrate phosphorylation readouts. Finally,
co-crystal structure modeling of mTOR was used to evaluate the potential
interaction of PF-502 within the ATP binding pocket and we confirm that
this interaction is hindered due to the point mutation identified at
mTOR. Furthermore, co-crystal modeling of mTOR with PF-384 illustrates an
independence and lack of PF-384 binding to the mutated site and thus
substantiates a mechanistic explanation for overcoming PF-502 acquired
resistance. In summary, we have identified and characterized a novel
mechanism of resistance to the combined treatment of a Pyrimidinone class
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor in addition to a MEK inhibitor, and have shown that
rescuing of this resistance can be achieved through the use of a Triazine
class PI3K/mTOR clinical candidate.

