Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential autophagy responses in non-tumorigenic and
malignantly transformed lung epithelial cells


PurposeWe have developed an in vitro malignant transformation model for
lung epithelial cells using hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) compounds which
are known human carcinogens associated with lung cancer. The purpose of
this study is to identify the key autophagic biomarkers that may be
dysregulated in malignantly transformed cells.Experimental MethodsThe
non-tumorigenic (Beas-2B) and malignantly transformed (B-Cr) lung
epithelial cell lines were used in all experiments. Cells were plated in
6-well plates and exposed to hexavalent chromium (Cr (VI)) doses of 20,
50, and 100M for 6 and 24h time points. Separate experiments were
conducted using inhibitors for the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, nitric
oxide (NO), and p38, with Rapamycin as a positive control. Cells were
pre-treated with Rapamycin, ABT, AG, and SB for 1hr before Cr treatment
as detailed above. Expression of auophagy-related proteins were analyzed
by Western blotting. For autophagy and apoptosis analysis, cell vacuoles
and nuclei were stained using the Cyto-ID dye kit and Hoechst dye
respectively, and scored by fluorescence microscopy.ResultsMicroscopy and
Western blotting results indicate that the malignant B-Cr cells express
lower levels of key autophagic proteins as compared to Beas-2B cells. We
also observed fewer vacuoles in B-Cr cells as opposed to Beas-2B cells.
To analyze the effect of known autophagic markers like NO, p38, and Bcl-2
in Cr (VI)-induced autophagy, we pre-treated cells as described above
with inhibitors to Bcl-2, NO, and p38 proteins. Rapamycin pre-treatment
was also used as a positive control for autophagy induction. Microscopy
results indicate that the inhibition of Bcl-2 and NO lead to an increase
in vacuole formation. Western blotting indicated an overall increase in
P-p38 expression, while Beclin-1 and LC3/atg expression levels were
decreased.ConclusionsWe conclude that early autophagic events trigger
apoptosis in response to Cr(VI) treatment. However, these events are
dysregulated in the malignantly transformed cell line. Results indicate
that the key autophagy-related proteins; Beclin-1, LC3, p38, and Bcl-2
all play a key role in autophagy induction in these lung cells. Published
data has indicated that cancerous cells that are under stress from
medical treatments such as radiation therapy and chemotherapy may
initiate the autophagy process in order to evade inevitable cell death
that the medical treatment is designed to cause. This study can lead to
the manipulation of protein expression to determine how cell death can be
specifically targeted to cancerous lung cells thereby preventing them
from using autophagy as a protective mechanism.

