Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic Myc disrupts NAMPT circadian oscillation in mouse
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line


MYC, which is overexpressed in a variety of human cancers, drives aerobic
glycolysis, also called the Warburg effect. The Warburg effect results in
regeneration of NAD+ from increased conversion of pyruvate to lactate,
such that decreased lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) activity results in
NAD+ depletion and can result in cell death. Nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), a rate-limiting enzyme that is
involved in the NAD+ salvage pathway, was reported to be directly
upregulated by Myc. Increased NAD+ synthesis thus helps to replenish NAD+
along with LDHA. In this regard, we have previously reported the synergy
of inhibiting LDHA and NAMPT in causing lymphoma xenograft regression.
Targeting NAMPT by its inhibitor FK866 has been tested in clinical
trials. However, the toxicity of FK866 in normal cells is not negligible,
with thrombocytopenia being reported. Toxicity, however, could be
diminished if therapy is administered at specific times of the day
(termed chronotherapy) when normal cells are least dependent on NAMPT,
whose levels oscillate every 24 hours. We have previously found that Myc
upregulates Rev-erb, which inhibits and disrupts oscillation of the
circadian rhythm gene ARNTL (protein name Bmal1) in the osteosarcoma cell
line U2OS. However, although NAMPT was shown oscillating in normal mouse
liver and other tissues, how the oscillation of NAMPT is affected in
cancer especially under Myc overexpression is still poorly
understood.Here we show Myc induces Nampt mRNA and protein in mouse
hepatocellular carcinoma (mHCC) cell line that has been engineered
tetracycline inducible Myc transgene expression vector. Inhibition of
NAMPT by FK866 induces perturbation of circadian gene expression in mHCC
cells, including Rev-erb, Per1 and Cry1. The alteration of circadian gene
expression can be rescued by nicotinamide, suggesting that the circadian
clock is affected by NAD+/NADH ratio. Interestingly, Nampt mRNA
oscillates in mHCC cell lines in the absence of Myc and the oscillation
was lost when Myc is induced, suggesting a therapeutic opportunity could
exist in the window between circadian regulation of the ebb-and-flow of
normal cell NAMPT level and the sustained, non-circadian cancer cell
NAMPT level. Our observation that Myc disrupts the oscillation its target
gene NAMPT provides a conceptual framework for metabolic chronotherapy
that could potentially lead to better cancer treatment strategies that
reduce side effects.We thank the following founding sources: NIH
R01CA57341, LLS 6106-14.

