Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3D model for lung cancer based on decellularized lung scaffolds
allows for in vitro testing of viral oncolysis


Introduction: Viral oncolysis has been proposed as an adjuvant therapy
for the treatment of advanced lung cancer. A more complex model would
allow for improved in vitro testing of this therapy prior to moving
towards clinical application.Methods: Lung blocks were harvested from
Sprague Dawley rats and subjected to perfusion-decellularization via the
pulmonary artery with 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 1% Triton X-100 to
obtain decellularized whole-lung scaffolds. Decellularized lung scaffolds
were placed in a bioreactor to allow perfusion of cell-specific media
through the pulmonary artery. Human lung cancer cells were seeded into
the scaffolds by tracheal delivery of cell suspensions containing 20-30
million cells. After 7-10 days of culture in the bioreactor, lung
scaffolds harboring tumor nodules were treated with a
replication-conditional Herpes Simplex Virus type-1 (hrR3) at a dose of
1x108 Plaque Forming Units delivered through the pulmonary artery. In
parallel, scaffolds with tumors treated with cisplatin served as positive
controls while delivery of phosphate-buffered saline served as a negative
control. Tissue was collected 48 hours after treatment delivery and was
analyzed by histology, immunostaining for Lac Z to allow the
visualization and localization of replicating virus, and by assessment of
cytotoxicity with a formazan-based assay.Results: There were no residual
cellular elements after the decellularization process as demonstrated by
histologic analysis, and the scaffolds showed preserved microarchitecture
of the alveolar spaces and vasculature. Human lung cancer cell lines H358
and SW1573 showed engraftment and tumor nodule formation and growth
inside the decellularized lung scaffolds. The custom-designed bioreactor
system allowed for delivery of treatments including hrR3 through the
pulmonary artery, in an easy and convenient way while maintaining
sterility. Treatment with hrR3 decreased the total tumor burden per mg of
tissue to 92% of that seen in negative controls in SW1573-seeded
scaffolds and to 52% in H358-seeded scaffolds. Both SW1573- and
H358-seeded scaffolds treated with cisplatin showed an overall >99%
decrease in tumor burden. Tumors treated with hrR3 showed different
morphology when compared to negative controls.Conclusions: Decellularized
lung scaffolds can serve as a more realistic three-dimensional model for
the in vitro study of viral oncolysis of human lung cancer, as they
account for anatomical variations and provide natural micro-architectural
barriers to oncolytic virus such as basement membranes. Differences in
the efficacy of viral oncolysis according to epithelial vs. mesenchymal
tumor phenotypes should be further investigated.

