Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic genomic mutations, RNA-Seq, and proteomic signal
transduction network analysis of tumor and stroma in metastatic triple
negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous, basal like tumor
category for which there is no molecular targeted therapy that has
significantly improved overall patient survival. While genomic sequencing
has been conducted on primary triple negative breast cancers, these data
may not correspond to metastatic TNBC because the metastatic colonies may
comprise a subclone of the primary. Moreover, it has been difficult to
identify the true driver mutations in the primary tumor. We have
hypothesized that evaluation of the protein signal transduction pathways
within the tumor-stromal microenvironment of the metastatic tumor may be
vastly different than the primary tumor and can provide potential clues
to the driver mutations and stromal interactions.Somatic genomic
mutations and RNA-Seq profiles were previously cataloged for a set of 14
fresh frozen metastatic TNBC samples. TP53, LRP1B, HERC1, CDH5, RB1, and
NF1 were mutated in multiple tumors. FOXM1 gene overexpression was noted
in tumor samples compared to non-malignant breast samples. To complement
the genetic data, we evaluated more than 70 signal transduction proteins
in tumor and stroma for 13 of the metastatic TNBC samples from this
cohort. The samples represented lymph node (n=5) and local and distant
soft tissue (n=8) metastasis. For proteomic analysis, purified
populations of tumor and adjacent stromal cells were collected by Laser
Capture Microdissection. Cell signaling pathway proteins were quantified
by reverse phase protein microarray. Proteins from diverse pathways were
included to: a) correlate our proteomic data with the previous genomic
data, b) potentially identify previously unrecognized pathways involved
in TNBC metastatic disease, and c) evaluate the tumor-stroma
microenvironment in metastatic TNBC.We compared the signaling network of
the tumor and its matched stroma to investigate tumor-stroma crosstalk.
We also compared the signal pathways to the genomic abnormalities of the
matched lesion. We confirmed the down regulation of endocrine (ER, AR,
ProgRec) and Her2 pathways. phosphoJAK2 and Her4 (total) were both
markedly downregulated. Signal pathway data provided information about
the functional importance of the genomic data.Understanding the molecular
underpinnings of metastatic TNBC may help elucidate genomic and proteomic
alterations which can potentially lead to new strategies for
individualizing therapy of metastasis.

