Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of lead organic compounds active against stem
cell-like neuroblastoma cells by high throughput screening


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are plastic in nature, a characteristic that
hampers cancer therapeutics. We previously reported the establishment of
induced neuroblastoma (NB) stem cells (iCSC), which were stable stem
cell-like NB cells in sphere culture. These cells recapitulated the in
vivo histological phenotypes of Large-Cell NB (LCN), the most aggressive
and deadly subset of NB, including vesicular nuclei and two to three
prominent nucleoli (PNAS Vol. 110: 6097-102 2013). In addition to the LCN
phenotype, high-level expression MYC or MYCN is the consistent feature of
the iCSC xenografts grown in immune-compromised mice. The goal of this
study is to identify lead organic compounds active against NB iCSCs by
high throughput screening. By using MTS assays, the SKNAS iCSC and the
parental monolayer cells were used to screen the Prestwick Chemical
Library, containing 1200 FDA-approved small molecules. Growth suppressive
compounds were defined as they exhibited cell survival reduction of
greater than 80% compared to DMSO control. There were unexplored
compounds with significant antineoplastic activity among existing
antibacterial, antifungal, antiprotozoal, and anthelmintic compounds.
Among the compounds screened, we identified a dozen of small molecules
that were preferentially growth suppressive to the SKNAS iCSC over the
monolayer cells. The secondary MTS assay confirmed so far that
Chlorhexidine (antiseptic), Benzethonium (antiseptic) and Digoxin
(cardiac glycoside) were potential anti-NB iCSC agents: they were more
effective in suppressing growth of the SKNAS iCSC than the monolayer
cells. In addition, these compounds exhibited MYC destabilizing activity
in the SKNAS iCSC. Notably, JQ1, the recently identified MYC
destabilizer, was less effective than Chlorhexidine, Benzethonium and
Digoxin in suppressing growth of SKNAS iCSC. The above three compounds
also showed the MYCN destabilizing effect in another pair of
MYCN-amplified SKNBE(2)C iCSCs and SKNBE(2)C monolayer cells. We are
currently completing characterization of the small molecules identified
with focus on their anti- iCSC growth and anti-MYC/MYCN effects. This
study would reveal specific pathways that regulate biological activities
of the CSCs. In addition, it is a promising approach that could lead to
development of safe and effective anti-cancer therapeutics not only for
NB but also other cancer types.

