Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/-catenin signaling mediates resistance of colorectal cancer
cells to chemoradiotherapy


Background: Preoperative chemoradiotherapy represents the standard
treatment for patients with rectal cancer. However, the clinical response
of individual tumors to multimodal treatment is not uniform, and ranges
from complete response to complete resistance. Therefore, the
identification of novel therapeutic targets whose modification could be
harnessed to sensitize a priori resistant tumors is exceedingly
important. In this context, we have previously demonstrated that the Wnt
transcription factor TCF4 was over-expressed in rectal cancers that were
resistant to chemoradiotherapy. The aim of this study was to explore the
functional relevance of TCF4 and Wnt/-catenin signaling for mediating
treatment resistance.Methods: Colorectal cancer cell lines SW837, SW480,
and HT-29 were transfected with shRNAs targeting TCF4. After establishing
stable single-cell clone (SCC) populations, selected clones were
irradiated at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8 Gy of X-rays. To assess the putative
Wnt/-catenin dependency, -catenin was inhibited in cancer cell lines
using siRNAs, the tankyrase inhibitors XAV939 / JW55 and the porcupine
inhibitor LGK 974. Furthermore Wnt/-catenin signaling activity was
stimulated in normal retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells through
incubation with Wnt3a.Results: RNAi-mediated silencing of TCF4 led to a
significant radiosensitization in SW837 and SW480, two cell lines with a
high basal TCF4-activity, whereas no effect was observed in HT-29 a cell
line with low activity. Inhibition of -catenin similarly caused a
pronounced sensitization of CRC cells to clinically relevant doses of
X-rays. Finally, exogenous stimulation of canonical Wnt signaling with
Wnt3a resulted in a significantly decreased sensitivity of RPE cells to
radiotherapy, i.e. induced radioresistance.Conclusion: We have uncovered
a novel role of Wnt/-catenin signaling in mediating resistance to
chemoradiotherapy. Moreover, these data suggest that targeting key
components of this pathway may represent a potential therapeutic strategy
to increase the proportion of patients that respond to chemoradiotherapy,
with considerable clinical implications.

