Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor Merlin decreases TGF/Smad signaling in
metastatic breast cancer cells


Background: Merlin is a tumor suppressor protein encoded by the NF2 gene.
Mutations in NF2 have been implicated in neurofibromas, schwannomas, and
mesothelioma. While the mutation rate of NF2 is low in breast cancer, our
lab has previously demonstrated a loss of the Merlin protein in advanced
stage breast cancers. We have shown that the matricellular
metastasis-promoting protein osteopontin activates Akt which then marks
Merlin for targeted proteasomal degradation. In the context of other
cancers, Merlin has been shown to play a role in sensitization to contact
inhibition, cell proliferation, inhibiting invasion, and the negative
regulation of focal adhesion kinase. Merlin is also an upstream regulator
of the Hippo pathway. However, the implications of the loss of Merlin in
the context of breast cancer signaling pathways that promote tumor
progression and metastasis have not been fully explored. Here we
demonstrate a Merlin-dependent decrease in TGF signaling in metastatic
breast cancer cells.Methods: Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis we analyzed
a gene expression array comparing the triple-negative metastatic SUM159
breast cancer cells and their counterparts that were stably restored for
Merlin expression. TGF was identified as a significant upstream
regulator. TGF signaling was analyzed in these cells via a SBE4-luc
luciferase assay. Signaling was further analyzed by Western blots for
SMAD and phospho-SMAD proteins.Results and Conclusions: Re-expression of
Merlin in metastatic breast cancer cells with low-levels of endogenous
Merlin decreases TGF signaling, demonstrated by decreased luciferase
assay activity, decreased rSMAD expression, decreased coSMAD expression
and increased iSMAD protein levels. Future studies will explore the
nature of this Merlin-dependent decrease in TGF
signaling.Acknowledgments: R01CA138850 to L. A. Shevde

