Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling mechanisms of resistance of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations to targeted drugs through patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: Resistance to small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) is seen in some NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations. We
evaluated in vivo PDX models for their utility in studying EGFR-targeted
drug resistance mechanisms.Methods: Surgically resected early stage NSCLC
tumors were implanted into non-obese diabetic severe combined immune
deficient (NOD-SCID) mice. Tumors were passaged and expanded in new mouse
hosts once the humane endpoint of 1.5 cm maximum diameter was reached.
EGFR TKI treatment was initiated at an average tumor volume of 150mm3.
Treatments included daily oral gavage with first and second generation
EGFR TKIs, and with weekly intraperitoneally administered
cetuximab.Results: Of the 55 NSCLC tumors with EGFR activating mutations,
only 6 engrafted (11%) and could be propagated beyond the first passage,
and 4 have been studied for their responsiveness to EGFR-targeted agents.
Model 148, developed from a patient who received pre-operative erlotinib,
showed intrinsic pan-resistance to all EGFR-targeted therapies despite
having an L858R mutation. The corresponding patient did not respond to
erlotinib, relapsed after surgery and did not receive additional TKI
therapy. Model 137, with an exon19 E746-A750 deletion, recapitulated the
patient's response to gefitinib at relapse; this model was sensitive to
first and second generation EGFR TKIs. Model 192 also has the exon19
E746-A750 deletion, however it did not recapitulate the patient's
observed sensitivity to erlotinib. Selection for a MET amplified
population during engraftment may be the cause for the disparate drug
sensitivities. Model 164 has a double exon19 L747-T751 deletion and T790M
EGFR mutation. Neither patient nor xenograft responded to erlotinib; the
xenograft responded to cetuximab. Resistance developed over time to a
second generation EGFR TKI; this resistant phenotype was not stable as
each subsequent passage of the resistant tumor exhibited the same initial
response pattern. Two potential mechanisms for this transient sensitivity
are currently being investigated: epigenetic mechanisms and intratumoural
mutational heterogeneity.Conclusions: PDX models may provide important
insight into biomarkers and mechanisms of resistance to targeted
therapies, and provide a means to test novel treatment strategies to
improve future treatment efficacies.

