Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD57 defines a novel maker of glioblastoma stem cells that have
greater invasive potential than CD133+ tumor cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and lethal brain
tumor that occurs both in children and adults. Diffuse invasion into
normal brain tissue is one of the important biologic features that make
GBM refractory to conventional therapies. While existing studies on GBM
invasion are primarily conducted using tumor core tissues from surgical
resections, it is unclear whether unresectable, infiltrative GBM cells
would be more informative for studying their invasive nature compared to
those in the resected tumor cores. More importantly, little is known if
and which cancer stem cell populations are driving glioma invasion. To
address these fundamental issues, we utilized our panel of 7 (6 pediatric
and 1 adult) patient tumor-derived orthotopic xenograft mouse models of
GBM to isolate invasive GBM cells (infiltrating normal mouse brain
parenchyma) and tumor core GBM cells and directly compared their
biological differences. Our result showed that the invasive cells have
stronger neurosphere forming efficiency in vitro in a serial dilution
assay and increased tumorigenic capacity after in vivo transplantation
(particularly at 100 cells/mouse) compared to the tumor core cells. A
screening of putative cancer stem cell markers (CD133, CD15, CD24/CD44,
CD57 and CD117) showed that invasive GBM cells are enriched (>2 folds)
with CD57+ cells compared to the tumor core cells, and these infiltrating
cells were predominantly CD57+/CD133-. Even the CD133+ cells were
frequently dual-positive with CD57 (CD33+CD57+), not only in the
xenograft tumors but also in a separate set of patient GBM samples.
Mechanistically, we found that CD57+ cells expressed high levels of
self-renewal genes and tend to stay in G0/G1 phases. In conclusion, we
showed that invasive GBM cells are biologically deferent from the matched
tumor core cells and identified CD57 as a novel stem cell marker that is
associated with GBM infiltration. Our findings suggest that new
anti-invasion therapies should target CD57+ cells in addition to CD133+
cells in GBM.

