Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frameshift mutations of chromosome cohesion-related genes SGOL1
and PDS5B in gastric and colorectal cancers with high microsatellite
instability


Cohesin is a protein complex that regulates chromatid cohesion and plays
a role in preventing aneuploidy and maintaining chromosomal stability.
SGOL1 encodes a cohesin protector, and PDS5B encodes a regulatory
cohesion factor. Both SGOL1 and PDS5B are considered putative tumor
suppressor genes. The aim of this study was to explore whether SGOL1 and
PDS5B genes are mutated and expressionally altered in gastric and
colorectal cancers. A genome database indicated that both genes possessed
mononucleotide repeats in coding sequences, which could be mutation
targets in cancers with microsatellite instability. We analyzed mutations
in 91 gastric cancers and 100 colorectal cancers with high microsatellite
instability or stable/low microsatellite instability by single-strand
conformation polymorphism analysis and DNA sequencing. We also analyzed
SGOL1 and PDS5B expression by immunohistochemistry. Overall, we found 21
SGOL1 frameshift mutations in 21 cases and 18 PDS5B frameshift mutations
in 16 cases. SGOL1 and PDS5B frameshift mutations were detected in 26.6%
and 20.3%, respectively, of high microsatellite instability but not in
stable/low microsatellite instability (0/112). By immunohistochemistry,
losses of SGOL1 and PDS5B were identified in 19% to 47% of the gastric
and colorectal cancers irrespective of microsatellite instability status.
The losses were more common in those with frameshift mutations or high
microsatellite instability than those without mutations or high
microsatellite instability. The data indicate that frameshift mutations
of SGOL1 and PDS5B and the loss of their expression may be a feature of
gastric and colorectal cancers with high microsatellite instability. In
addition, the data suggest that these alterations might contribute to
cancer pathogenesis by deregulating cohesin-related functions.

