Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unstable genomes and the average cancer cell


The high degree of multi-level heterogeneity represents a key challenge
for cancer research. Despite its importance, both the theoretical
concepts and appropriate tools for proper quantitative analysis are
underdeveloped. Specifically, the characterization of heterogeneity in
cancer cell populations of different genomic stabilities, and its effect
on systems dynamics are poorly understood. We use a single-cell and
population-based assays to describe an instability-mediated mechanism
where genome heterogeneity drastically affects cell growth, and cannot be
accurately measured using conventional averages. First, we show that most
unstable cancer cell populations exhibit high levels of karyotype
heterogeneity, where it is difficult, if not impossible, to
karyotypically clone cells. Second, by comparing stable and unstable cell
populations, we show that instability-mediated karyotype heterogeneity
leads to growth heterogeneity, where outliers dominantly contribute to
population growth and exhibit shorter cell cycles. Predictability of
population growth is more difficult for heterogeneous cell populations
than for homogenous cell populations. Since outliers play an important
role in cancer evolution, where genome instability is the key feature,
averaging methods used to characterize cell populations are misleading.
We conclude: 1) the karyotype cannot be cloned when genome instability is
high, and caution is needed for single cell analysis for cell populations
that are not genetically identical; 2) the average cancer cell does not
exist, as the statistical mean does not accurately describe systems
behavior, especially genome instability is high; and 3) single cell
analysis is needed when cells are not genomically identical. Our results
not only provide an explanation for population heterogeneity but also
explain how genome-level heterogeneity contributes to drug resistance and
cancer evolution.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

