Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harnessing the potential of idiotypic peptide therapy for the
treatment of multiple myeloma


BACKGROUND: The idiotype determinant of surface Immunoglobulin B-Cell
Receptor (IgBCR) is the most reliable clonal marker of tumor cell
population and can be exploited for novel targeting approaches. We
previously developed a novel experimental approach to identify peptide
ligands of the IgBCR idiotype determinant of neoplastic B cells, named
Id-peptides (Palmieri C., Blood 2010). These Id-peptides were validated
as a tool for specific targeting of B-cell malignancies with a potential
role as modulators of tumor microenvironment via sIgBCR signalling. In
Multiple Myeloma (MM), both mature and clonogenic tumor stem cells
(clonotype B-lymphocytes, CBLs) share the same antigenic specificity,
making these cells a suitable target for Id-peptides. In this regard, we
have recently developed Id-peptides for tumor targeting in primary
neoplastic plasma cells as well as in the 5T33MM mouse model of
MM.RESULTS: Tumor-specific Id-peptides of MM (n=8), or MGUS (n=2)
patients were selected by screening phage-displayed random peptide
libraries using the cognate serum IgG paraprotein as bait. The selected
Id-peptides specifically bound to the cognate primary neoplastic plasma
cells, as shown by FACS analysis. By confocal microscopy, we observed
that each patient-specific Id-peptide co-localized with the sIgG-BCR at
the cell surface of the cognate neoplastic plasma cell. Further, the
Id-peptides were able to target CD138pos differentiated plasma cells as
well as a number of less differentiated CD138neg, IgGpos and CD19pos bone
marrow B-cells, suggesting that they tracked the clonogenic precursors of
MM cells. Using the same screening approach in the 5T33MM mouse model of
MM, Id-peptides were able to specifically detect a significant proportion
of target cancer cells in the peripheral blood of diseased animal.
Interestingly, the in vivo exposure of 5T33 murine MM cells to
Id-peptides resulted in a reduced expression of immunosuppressive
cytokines genes (Tgfb1 and Il10) and pro-angiogenic genes (Vegf, Tbxas,
SDF, Il8, CXCr4).CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that Id-peptides can
be used to identify and purify the clonotypic precursors of MM cells,
thus providing a unique tool for assessing both the phenotypic and
functional features of the still poorly characterized MM cancer stem cell
compartment. Moreover, the Id-peptides can inhibit the expression of
genes that are crucial to promote a functional MM microenvironment and
angiogenesis, thus representing a potential tool for MM therapy.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

