Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preliminary study of the follicle-stimulating hormone / and the
pathogenesis of postmenopausal breast cancer


ObjectiveTo study the difference of serum FSH level between breast cancer
and healthy people in postmenopausal women; To investigate the internal
relations of FSH and the tumor clinical classfication ,lymph node
metastasis, and the status of ER,PR,Her-2 and Ki67; To study the
expression of FSHR in breast cancer cell line and breast cancer tissue ;
To study whether rhFSH induce proliferation and metastasis of breast
cancer cell line and the exact mechanism in vitro and in vivo.MethodPart
1: Clinical datas of 187 postmenopausal women diagnosed of breast cancer
and 374 postmenopausal healthy people were collected for statistic
analysis.Part2: Two breast cancer cell line (Bcap-37 and MDA-MB-231) have
been used to study whether the rhFSH induce proliferation and metastasis
in vitro.Part3: In vivo study of the rhFSH whether to promote tumor
proliferation.We established a postmenopausal animal model of Balb/c
nu/nu mouse by ovariectomized (OVX). The experiment was divided into four
groups: Sham , OVX control, using GnRha after OVX, using GnRHa followed
rhFSH after OVX.Part 4: RT-PCR and Reverse-PCR has used to investigate
the expression of FSHR in many breast cancer cell line. The expression of
FSHR in 17 samples of breast tissue was also been detected by
RT-PCR.ResultsPart1: The serum level of FSH ,LH in postmenopausal breast
cancer were higher than postmenopausal healthy people( 61.831.475 vs.
48.131.256 IU/L;27.830.74 vs.23.880.6499 IU/L).FSH has a positive
correlation with Ki67 and Her-2 expression in breast . Part2: It has been
found that rhFSH could promote the Bcap-37 and MDA-MB-231cell
proliferation regardless of whether low concentration (10 ng/mL) or high
concentration (50 ng/mL) in vitro. The rhFSH induce the proliferation and
metastasis by activated ERFR/ERK1/2 cell pathway. Part3: A high
concentration of rhFSH (100IU/L) could promote breast cancer cell line
Bcap-37 and MDA-MB-231 proliferation in vivo.Part4: The FSHR was not
expressed in all of the breast cancer cells tested and breast cancer
tissue.ConclusionPostmenupausal breast cancer patient favored a high
serum gonadotropin level compared with healthy people.FSH has a positive
correlation with the Her-2 and Ki 67expresssion in breast cancer. The
rhFSH cound promote the proliferation and metastasis of breast cancer
cell line Bcap-37 and MDA-MB-231 by activated the EGFR/ERK1/2 pathway. A
high concentration of rhFSH (100IU/L) may also promote the proliferation
of breast cancer cell line in vivo. However, there is no FSHR expression
in breast cancer cell line and breast cancer tissue. Further studies are
needed to charlify the exact mechanism between FSH and postmenopausal
breast cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

