Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the stress survival oncoprotein LEDGF/p75 to overcome
prostate cancer resistance to taxane therapy


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in men in the U.S. It presents a significant health burden among
African American men, who tend to develop more aggressive, chemoresistant
tumors and experience higher mortality rates compared to men from other
ethnic groups. Eliminating these mortality disparities will require
innovative therapies for the chemoresistant form of the disease. Our
group has shown previously that the stress survival protein lens
epithelium-derived growth factor p75 (LEDGF/p75) is overexpressed in PCa
cells and clinical tumors, and promotes resistance to the taxane drug
docetaxel (DTX). This study was designed to evaluate the hypothesis that
LEDGF/p75 overexpression promotes taxane chemoresistance in PCa by
antagonizing drug-induced caspase-independent cell death, and that
targeting this protein with small inhibitory RNAs (siRNAs) or small
molecule inhibitors will restore tumor cell sensitivity. We observed that
acquisition of DTX-resistance in metastatic PCa cell lines (PC3 and
DU145) is associated with increased expression of LEDGF/p75. Exposure of
these cell lines to increasing concentrations of the taxanes DTX,
paclitaxel (PTX), and cabazitaxel (CTX), and to the non-taxane drug TRAIL
for up to 72 hours revealed that DTX-resistant cells also displayed
increased resistance to PTX and CTX, compared to sensitive cells, but not
to TRAIL. This was assessed by viability and clonogenic assays, and
microscopic examination. To determine if this resistance was associated
with overexpression of LEDGF/p75, we knocked down the protein with
siRNAs. This knockdown attenuated resistance to the taxanes, but had no
effects on TRAIL-induced cell death. We then explored if
LEDGF/p75-induced taxane resistance was associated with preservation of
the structural integrity of this protein. Immunoblotting analysis
revealed that LEDGF/p75 was cleaved into distinct fragments by caspases
during TRAIL-induced apoptosis, leading to its inactivation. However,
LEDGF/p75 remained intact during treatment with taxanes, suggesting that
these drugs do not induce caspase-mediated cleavage and inactivation of
this protein. To determine if LEDGF/p75 is a druggable target for
overcoming taxane chemoresistance in PCa cells, we repositioned a panel
of small molecule inhibitors originally designed to inhibit the
interaction of the C-terminal region of this protein with HIV-1
integrase. Screening of 130 inhibitors for their cytotoxic properties in
DTX-resistant and sensitive prostate cancer cells, we identified a number
of inhibitors that induced cell death directly, or when combined with
DTX, re-sensitized the resistant cells to the drug. These promising
results provide novel insights into mechanisms by which LEDGF/p75
promotes chemoresistance in PCa cells, and have implications for the
development of innovative strategies to overcome this resistance.

