Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic miRNAs targeted selectively to tumors by mesenchymal
stem cell derived microparticles


Introduction: MiRNAs have been implicated in the development of some if
not all cancer types and have been identified as attractive targets for
therapy. However, systemic delivery of bare miRNAs faces its own set of
limitations because of degradation by RNases and filtration and excretion
by the kidneys. In this work we propose miRNAs as therapeutic agents. We
have developed a novel system for miRNA delivery applicable for both
local and systemic administration with the use of mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC) microparticles (MPs).Methodology: MSCs were isolated from the
Wharton's jelly of human umbilical cords. The MSC cultures were subjected
to serum deprivation, leading to the formation of MPs (secreted membrane
vehicles Introduction: MiRNAs have been implicated in the development of
some if not all cancer types and have been identified as attractive
targets for therapy. However, systemic delivery of bare miRNAs faces its
own set of limitations because of degradation by RNases and filtration
and excretion by the kidneys. In this work we propose miRNAs as
therapeutic agents. We have developed a novel system for miRNA delivery
applicable for both local and systemic administration with the use of
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) microparticles (MPs).Methodology: MSCs were
isolated from the Wharton's jelly of human umbilical cords. The MSC
cultures were subjected to serum deprivation, leading to the formation of
MPs (secreted membrane vehicles <1m) which were harvested and
characterized by SEM, PCR, FACS and Fluorescence Microscopy. Breast
(MDA-MB-231 & MCF-7), colon (RKO & HT-29) and ovarian adenocarcinoma
(SKOV3) cell lines were then exposed to MPs. The response to treatment
was evaluated by cell morphology, proliferation, migration, gene
expression and apoptosis. Furthermore, the therapeutic potential of MPs
was tested in vivo in xenograft tumor mouse models. Innovative imaging
modalities such as in vivo flow cytometry and whole body
fluorescence-bioluminescence were employed to dynamically investigate the
biodistribution and homing kinetics of MPs in mice.Results: In vitro
experiments confirmed that MSC-derived MPs can be internalized by the
various cancer cell lines and induce a biological effect as evidenced by
membrane damage, cell shrinkage and blebbing in the recipient cell.
Significantly, there was evidence that MPs induce apoptosis, inhibit cell
proliferation and tumor growth attenuation in a dose/time-dependent
manner. The pro-apoptotic and anti-migration effects of MPs in cancer
cells were almost completely abrogated by RNase treatment before
administration to cultures. In vivo studies demonstrated that we were
able to monitor and quantify fluorescently labelled MPs in circulation
and to detect and image the biodistribution and incorporation in cells
and organs in healthy and tumor-bearing mice.Conclusion: MSC-derived MPs
containing miRNAs possess tumor inhibitory properties both in vitro and
in vivo. Administration of MPs after RNase treatment induces the loss of
anti-cancer properties suggesting a horizontal transfer of small RNAs
from MPs to cancer cells. MPs formulated to contain specific miRNAs,
could affect the action of genes associated with carcinogenesis,
neovascularization, metastasis and other cancer characteristics, thus
leading to therapeutic benefit.

