Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the role of TGFB in osteogenic prostate cancer to bone
metastases: An integrated biological/mathematical modeling approach


Almost 90% of patients that succumb to prostate cancer will have evidence
of bone metastases. These metastases are incurable with patients often
experiencing intense pain. In bone, prostate cancer cells derive factors
necessary for growth and survival by manipulating bone forming
osteoblasts and bone resorbing osteoclasts, resulting in areas of
excessive osteogenesis and osteolysis, respectively. Our group and others
have defined transforming growth factor beta (TGF) as being a key factor
in the progression of bone metastases. Using semi-quantitative
immunohistochemical analysis, we have found in human specimens that TGF
signaling is much higher in the cancer cells relative to the surrounding
bone stroma. Therapeutic inhibition of TGF however, presents a dilemma
since TGF can have differential effects on cell types in the tumor-bone
microenvironment. Furthermore, current biological approaches are limited
in their ability to assess multicellular parallel interactions over time
but this can be overcome via the power of computational modeling. Thus,
we have developed an integrated approach where biological results inform
a predictive mathematical model, allowing for exploration of complex
parallel and multicellular interactions mediated by TGF. The model was
parameterized with empirical and published data. Simulations of the
prostate cancer-bone microenvironment over a 208 day period generated a
clinically relevant pathophysiological model with the following outputs:
1) that TGF is key for coordinating prostate cancer- induced phases of
osteolysis and osteogenesis and 2) that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are
crucial for the osteogenic component of the disease. To test these
hypotheses, we performed biological studies using a TGF antibody-based
inhibitor (1D11) that demonstrated: 1) TGF in prostate cancer cell
conditioned media significantly contributes to MSC and osteoblast
precursor recruitment and, 2) using an intratibial model of prostate
cancer-induced osteogenesis (PAIII), we identified that TGF regulates
prostate cancer induced osteolysis and osteogenesis (CT,
histomorphometry). Histological analyses of in vivo specimens will
further test the predicted outcomes of the mathematical model. Future
studies are focused on evolving the model to incorporate tumor
heterogeneity. We believe that integrated computational and biological
approaches are key to the development of powerful models that can be used
for the delivery of precision medicine to cure prostate to bone
metastases.

