Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere oligonucleotides induce DNA damage responses in cancer
cells: Mechanism of action and novel nanocomplex delivery system


Telomeres, the ribonucleoprotein complexes found at the ends of
eukaryotic chromosomes, protect genomic DNA from end-to-end fusions and
degradation by nucleases. During each round of cell division, the ends of
telomeres are incompletely replicated, resulting in a net loss of
telomeric DNA. When critically shortened, telomeres lose their ability to
protect chromosomes from sustaining damage, thereby triggering cellular
senescence or apoptosis.In numerous cancer types, administration of an
oligonucleotide homologous to 3-telomere overhang (T-oligo) induces
potent DNA damage responses, presumably by mimicking or inducing telomere
DNA damage, resulting in cell cycle arrest, senescence, or apoptosis.
Remarkably, T-oligo induces minimal side-effects in normal cells, and
thus, is actively being investigated as a novel anticancer therapeutic.
However, as an oligonucleotide, T-oligo's intrinsic instability makes it
susceptible to degradation by intracellular and serum nucleases, which
severely limits its clinical use. To develop T-oligo as an innovative,
effective therapeutic drug, it was complexed with a novel cationic alpha
helical peptide, PVBLG-8 (PVBLG-8). PVBLG has been shown to be highly
effective in delivering plasmid DNA and siRNA to a variety of cell lines,
however, it has not been investigated using oligonucleotides. Here, our
studies focus on its mechanism of action, stabilization and improved
delivery. We show that PVBLG effectively stabilizes T-oligo by forming a
nanocomplex (TOP complex), and enhances its anticancer properties both in
vitro and in vivo. In addition, we identify new proteins involved in
T-oligo's mechanism of action.The uptake of T-oligo by MM-AN melanoma
cells was confirmed by immunofluorescence, and fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis indicated that the TOP complex increased uptake by
15-fold. In MM-AN cells, T-oligo complexed with the PVBLG
(0.025-.25mg/ml) inhibited growth in vitro in a dose dependent manner by
4.5-8.3-fold, compared to 3-fold by T-oligo alone. Similar results were
seen in H358 lung cancer cells. Preformed MM-AN tumors in immunodeficient
mice treated with the T-oligo-PVBLG nanocomplex resulted in a 3-fold
reduction in tumor volume compared with T-oligo alone. This reduction in
tumor volume was associated with decreased vascular endothelial growth
factor expression and induction of thrombospondin-1 expression and
apoptosis. In addition, T-oligo treatment demonstrated downregulation of
telomere repeat factor 1, a negative regulator of telomere length, in MU
melanoma cells, indicating a role for TRF1 in T-oligo-induced DNA damage
responses. In summary, our investigation further defines T-oligo's
mechanism of action, and demonstrates the potential of a novel
nanoparticle, the TOP complex, as an effective anticancer therapeutic.

