Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Partial EMT, hybrid epithelial-mesenchymal phenotype and
epithelial plasticity: role of (miR-200/ZEB) loop


Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and Mesenchymal to Epithelial
Transition (MET) are critical for embryonic development and tissue
repair. Aberrantly regulated transitions are also implicated in cancer
metastasis. The core regulatory genetic network for these transitions
appears to allow for the existence of a hybrid epithelial/mesenchymal
phenotype (E/M). Such hybrid cells are seen during wound healing and
branching morphogenesis, and have mixed epithelial and mesenchymal
characteristics, which enable them to migrate collectively. The core
regulatory network for the cell fate determination between these three
phenotypes is composed of two highly interconnected mutual-inhibition
feedback circuits - miR-34/SNAIL and miR-200/ZEB. Here we applied a novel
theoretical framework to model the microRNA-based regulation to study
this core regulatory unit. More specifically, we looked into the
functions of the two loops in isolation, and subsequently of the combined
unit when the two loops are integrated into the full regulatory circuit.
We found that miR-200/ZEB forms a tristable circuit that acts as a
ternary decision making switch, driven by miR-34/SNAIL that is a
monostable loop which acts as noise-buffering integrator of internal and
external signals that induce or inhibit EMT/MET. Our results are
corroborated by recent experiments indicating the (miR-200/ZEB) to be the
commitment point and decision making loop (eg. Cells don't revert to
epithelial phenotype on removal of EMT-inducing signal, if ZEB expression
has been turned on.) .We associate the three stable states of the
miR-200/ZEB circuit to different phenotypes - (1,0) - (high miR-200)/(low
ZEB) - epithelial, (0,1) - (low miR-200)/(high ZEB) - mesenchymal, and
(1/2,1/2) - (medium miR-200)/(medium ZEB) - hybrid. Thus, we propose that
the hybrid epithelial - mesenchymal phenotype has concurrent expression
of both miR-200 and ZEB. Our hypothesis is consistent with recent
experimental studies (e.g. ZEB expression measurements in collectively
migrating cells), and also explains the lack of hybrid phenotype observed
during MET in colonization and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We
also present testable predictions of dynamic gene expression during
complete and partial transitions (EMT/MET).

