Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Rel is a critical mediator of NF-B-dependent apoptosis
resistance of pancreatic cancer cells against TRAIL


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) represents one of the deadliest
malignancies with an overall life expectancy of six months despite
palliative radio-chemotherapy. The transcription factor NF-B has been
shown to be a critical component of dysregulated transcription factor
activity conferring this profound resistance against chemotherapeutic
drugs and death receptor induced apoptosis. Despite extensive data on the
role of the most abundant NF-B subunit p65/RelA in PDAC apoptosis
control, only little knowledge of the role of the subunit c-Rel in solid
cancers exists. In the present study, three pancreatic carcinoma cell
lines (Panc1, Patu8988t, MiaPaca2) were analysed for the role of c-Rel in
resistance against TRAIL induced apoptosis. TRAIL resistant Panc1 and
Patu8988 cells exhibit a strong TRAIL inducible NF-B activity, whereas
TRAIL sensitive MiaPaca2 cells displayed only a small increase in NF-B
binding activity. Transfection with siRNA against the c-Rel subunit of
NF-B sensitized the TRAIL resistant cells in a comparable fashion like
siRNA targeting the p65/RelA subunit. Gel shift analysis revealed that
together with the p65/RelA subunit, c-Rel is part of the TRAIL inducible
NF-B complex in PDAC. Array analysis results suggested NFATc2 as a c-Rel
target gene that is one of the 15 strongest TRAIL inducible genes in
apoptosis-resistant Panc1 cells. siRNA targeting c-Rel strongly reduced
TRAIL induced NFATc2 activity in TRAIL resistant PDAC cells. Furthermore
siRNA targeting NFATc2 sensitized these PDAC cells against TRAIL induced
apoptosis. Finally, TRAIL induced expression of COX-2 was strongly
reduced through siRNA targeting c-Rel or NFATc2 and pharmacological
inhibition of COX-2 with celecoxib strongly increased TRAIL apoptosis.In
conclusion, c-Rel is a critical mediator of NF-B dependent anti-apoptotic
signalling in PDAC through activation of NFATc2 and COX-2.

