Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel RNAi agent can control HCV replication


Technique of RNA interference (RNAi) is important for investigating
functional gene research and drug target. miRNA-122 (miR-122) is
expressed abundantly in liver tissue, and it can control the Hepatitis C
virus (HCV) replication. Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA)-miR-122 was shown to
suppress HCV replication through inhibiting miR-122 function. Recently,
anti-HCV therapy for chronic hepatitis C by LNA-miR-122 has been applied
for clinical study in phase II. We developed alternative chemically
modified sponge oligonucleotides (SO) for inhibition of interest miRNA
function. In order to find more effective anti-viral agent, we attempted
to compare the inhibition effects for viral replication between
LNA-miR-122 and SO for miR-122.SO contained triplicated binding sites to
miR-122, composed of either DNA or RNA, which were combined with
terephthalate or glycine. We chose three types of sequences complementary
to target miR-122: one perfect match sequence and two imperfect match
sequences (bubble, and bulge). The effects of SOs on HCV replication were
assessed by using HCV replicon cells (OR6), which contained full-genome
HCV with genotype 1b and luciferase reporter genes.We compared the
luciferase activity, the expression of HCV RNA, and the expression of HCV
core protein in OR6 cells treated with LNA-miR-122 and several SO
constructions. SO composed of terephthalate-bound RNA sequences with
bulge-type imperfect complementarity was most effective in inhibiting HCV
replication. By real-time qPCR analysis, the expression level of ISG15
and RIG-I in the OR6 cell treated with SO was not significantly higher
than those treated with negative control (NC) or LNA. By XTT
incorporation assay, the cell proliferation level in OR6 treated with SO
was not also significantly affected as compared that treated with NC or
LNA.We investigated novel RNAi agent termed SO that could effectively
suppress HCV replication as compared LNA-miR-122. SO treatment did not
activate the endogenous IFN pathway nor induce the cell mortality.
Therefore SO is promising as a novel anti-vial agent.

