Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mycoplasmal DNA methyltransferases induce aberrant global
hypermethylation and activate cancer-specific genes in human cells


Malignancies originate as a result of genetic/epigenetic abnormalities in
the genome. These abnormalities, collectively, lend proliferative
advantages to the affected cells. The high-throughput DNA sequencing data
suggest that epigenetic aberrations may be a leading factor in cancer
onset and progression. DNA methylation is one of a few major epigenetic
mechanisms. In humans, DNA methylation results in the conversion of the
cytosine in the context of CG-dinucleotides into 5-methylcytosine. This
conversion is catalyzed by the DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B DNA
methyltransferases (MTases). Aberrant DNA hypermethylation, both
genome-wide and at the individual gene level, is frequently recorded in
multiple cancer types. Somatic mutations in the genes, which are directly
responsible for DNA methylation, however, are infrequent in human tumors.
Therefore, non-mutagenic factors that promote aberrant methylation should
be revealed.A community of microbial species, the microbiome, existing in
the human body, plays fundamental roles in health and disease. The
microbiome contributes to cell metabolism, signaling and regulatory
pathways, and inflammatory and immune responses. Mycoplasmas, the
smallest self-replicating bacteria, frequently infect mucous surfaces in
humans, including respiratory and urogenital tracts, mammary glands and
joints, often without apparent pathologies. Mycoplasmas grow attached to
the cell surfaces, but can spontaneously infiltrate the host cells and
promote their transformation via yet unknown mechanisms. Although
mycoplasmas are often found in prostate, renal, gastric, colon, lung,
breast, ovarian and melanoma tumors, their role in carcinogenesis is a
matter of debate.Here, we demonstrate that the Mycoplasma hyorhinis CG-
and GATC- specific MTases can promote aberrant hypermethylation in human
cells. We expressed the M. hyorhinis MTases in human cancerous and
non-cancerous cells and determined that both MTases are transported to
the cell nucleus and methylate genomic DNA. Using bisulfite sequencing
and MeDIP-seq we precisely mapped genomic locations of the de novo
hypermethylation sites. We established that mycoplasmal MTases introduced
global de novo hypermethylation and significantly altered the epigenetic
landscape in human cells. Paradoxically, we discovered that promoters of
active genes, including certain pro-tumorigenic genes, can escape the de
novo hypermethylation. Strikingly, in non-cancerous trophoblast cells,
GATC-specific hypermethylation activated the proliferation pathways via
selective upregulation of the c-JUN and MYC oncogenes, and the ATF3, KLF6
and DKK1 transcription factors. Overall, our findings demonstrate, for
the first time, that microbiome-derived factors directly impact the
epigenetic control of cancer-specific pathways in human cells.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

