Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing tumor-specific memory stem like T cells in blood
and bone marrow of breast cancer patients


The identification of memory T cells with stem cell-like properties has
been reported recently in both humans and mice. Such stem cell-like
memory T cells (Tscm) upon adoptive transfer into a humanized mouse model
had superior self-renewal, proliferation and mediated potent anti tumor
immunity. However, very little is known about their specificities,
physiological function and contribution to anti-tumor immune responses in
cancer patients.We investigated the presence of Tscm cells in the
peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM) of breast cancer patients by
multicolor flow cytometry analyses with a panel of human T cell markers
to distinguish nave (Tn), central memory (Tcm), effector memory (Tem) and
Tscm (CCR7+, CD45RO-, CD127+, CD45RA+, CD95+, CXCR3+, IL2R+) population.
Tscm cells were detected in both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the PB and BM
of breast cancer patients. Interestingly, we observed a significant
increase (3-fold) in the number of Tscm cells among the CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells in breast cancer patients as compared to healthy donors. This was
significantly higher among the CD8+ T cells as compared to CD4+ T cells.
We further evaluated the expression of exhaustion markers (PD-1 & LAG3)
and found that majority of Tscm cells (>95%) did not express PD-1 & LAG3
and comprised the least exhausted T cell compartment as compared to Tn,
Tem and Tcm. To investigate the contribution of different subsets of
memory T cells to tumor-specific T cells in breast cancer patients, we
used a panel of breast cancer associated MHC class-I pentamers against
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2348-356 , HER2435-443),
Mucin-1 (MUC112-20) and Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA571-579). Cumulative
analyses of tumor-specific pentamer+ CD8+ T cells in PB and BM showed
that 20-25% of total tumor-specific T cells were of Tscm phenotype. We
observed higher percentages of tumor-specific pentamer+CD8+ T cells among
the total Tscm cells in BM as compared to PB, however this difference was
not significant. We performed ex vivo re-stimulation assays using
autologous dendritic cells loaded with several breast cancer-specific
peptides with PB and BM of breast cancer patients to further assess the
frequency and function of tumor-specific Tscm cells. Cumulative analyses
showed that 20-23% of tumor-specific IFN-+ CD8+ and 26-32% IL-2+ CD4+ had
a Tscm phenotype.In summary, we report the presence of Tscm cells in the
PB and BM of breast cancer patients and a significant increase in their
number as compared to healthy donors. Importantly, we could show that
Tscm contribute to the population of functional and tumor reactive CD8+
and CD4+ T cells in PB and BM of breast cancer patients. Our further aim
is to investigate the therapeutic potential of Tscm cells in adoptive T
cell experiments with humanized mouse model of breast cancer.

