Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD8+T cell-specific induction of NKG2D receptor by doxorubicin
plus interleukin-12 requires the engagement of CD80 and CD28


Background: Increased infiltration of CD8+T cells into tumors inhibits
tumor progression, in which natural killer group 2, member D receptor
(NKG2D) plays a key role. At previous meetings, we have presented data
showing that NKG2D can be induced on CD8+T through treatment with
interleukin (IL)-12 plus doxorubicin (Dox), and that infiltration of this
subpopulation of effector cells into tumors is associated with increased
antitumor efficacy of treatment with IL-12 plus Dox. The mechanisms of
both NKG2D induction and the tumor-specific infiltration were unknown.
This year, we reveal the mechanism of NKG2D positive CD8+T infiltration
into the tumor microenvironment.Methods: We administered Dox, IL-12
plasmid DNA, or both via intraperitoneal injection or intramuscular
electroporation into tumor-bearing wild-type C57bl/6 mice or CD28
knockout mice. Control siRNA or CD80 siRNA were administered via
intratumoral injection followed by electroporation. Induction of NKG2D in
CD8+T cells was analyzed using flow cytometry. Cell death in tumors after
each treatment was examined using the TUNEL assay. Antitumor cytolytic
activity of CD8+T cells was examined using the CTL assay. NKG2D-positive
CD8+T cell-specific localization in tumors was examined using
immunofluorescence staining.Results: Treatment with Dox plus IL-12
specifically increased expression of NKG2D in CD8+T cells. This induced
NKG2D expression in CD8+T cells was associated with increased
accumulation of NKG2D-positive CD8+T cells in murine tumors, as well as
with increased antitumor cytotoxicity in vitro and tumor cell death in
vivo. Administration of NKG2D-blocking antibody completely abrogated the
antitumor immune response. Knocking down CD80 in tumor cells or using
CD28 knockout mice not only abolished the induction of NKG2D in CD8+T
cells, but also abrogated the accumulation of NKG2D-positive CD8+T cells
in tumors. Accumulation of NKG2D-positive CD8+T cells in tumors was
dependent on the engagement of CD28 in CD8+T cells and CD80 in tumor
cells.Conclusion: We conclude that treatment with IL-12 plus Dox induces
NKG2D in CD8+T cells in vivo and boosts NKG2D+CD8+T-dependent antitumor
immune surveillance. Induction of NKG2D and accumulation of
NKG2D-positive CD8+T cells in tumors is dependent on the engagement of
CD28 in CD8+T cells and CD80 in tumor cells. This discovery reveals a
novel mechanism showing how chemo-immune therapy synergistically promotes
T-cell-mediated antitumor immune surveillance.

