Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -catenin-dependent TCF/LEF transcriptional regulation of
phosphodiesterase expression in colon cancer cells


Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDE) regulate cyclic nucleotides,
cAMP and cGMP, blocking signaling by hydrolyzing the 3,5-phosphodiester
bond resulting in their degradation to inactive forms. We have previously
reported that certain PDE isozymes (e.g. PDE5) are elevated in several
types of cancer, which can disrupt cyclic nucleotide signaling to
suppress apoptosis. The inhibition of PDE5 by agents such as sulindac
sulfide (SS) results in increased cGMP levels and reduced
-catenin/TCF/LEF mediated transcription leading to the selective
inhibition of colon cancer cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis.
Currently, little is known regarding the transcriptional regulation of
PDE5 in cancer cells. We therefore analyzed the promoter regions of PDE5,
as well as PDE10, for transcription factor binding sites using the
Matinspector Genomatix Software. Matinspector analysis predicted that
both PDE5 and PDE10 promoters contain binding sites for TCF/LEF-1, an
important transcriptional factor that is regulated by Wnt/-catenin
signaling, which plays an important role in colorectal cancer. To
determine if Wnt/-catenin signaling can regulate PDE5 and PDE10
expression, human HCT116 colon tumor cells and normal colonic epithelial
cell line NCM-460 were treated with the GSK-3 inhibitor, lithium chloride
(LiCl) to inhibit -catenin degradation and stimulate TCF/LEF
transcriptional activity. TCF/LEF transcriptional activity was measured
by mRNA levels of genes (e.g. survivin, cyclin D1 and c-myc) that are
known to be regulated by Wnt/-catenin signaling. Survivin, cyclin D1 and
c-myc mRNA were confirmed to be significantly increased after LiCl
treatment in comparison to control cells treated with NaCl. Translocation
of -catenin to the nucleus was also evident after treatment with LiCl.
Levels of PDE5 and 10 mRNA were found to be significantly elevated after
LiCl treatment in comparison to NaCl treated cells. Inhibitors such as
SS, the novel derivative SS-D1 and a tadalafil (a selective PDE5
inhibitor) derivative TA-D1 demonstrated selective inhibition of colon
cancer cell growth in comparison to normal colonocytes. The potential
mechanism of these selective inhibitors may be through the inhibition of
Wnt/-catenin signaling and thus the inhibition of -catenin/TCF/LEF
mediated transcription. This study demonstrates a novel regulatory
mechanism of PDE5 and PDE10 expression by the -catenin-dependent TCF/LEF
transcription factor in colon cancer cells and identifies a potential
mechanism for novel chemopreventive agents. Defining the role of this
regulatory mechanism in cancer progression may provide valuable insight
into targeting PDE5 and/or PDE10 by small molecules for cancer
chemoprevention.

