Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of pterostilbene on proliferation, invasion, and migration in
ovarian and uterine cancer cells


PURPOSE: To determine the functional effects of the resveratrol analog,
pterostilbene (PTE), and its potential adjuvant role with cisplatin, in
ovarian and uterine cancer cells.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The human ovarian
cancer cell lines (OVCAR8, SKOV3) and uterine cancer cell lines (HEC1A,
ECC1) were obtained from ATCC, and grown according to standard protocols
using recommended media. Standard proliferation (MTT) and migration
assays were performed in routine fashion, with or without PTE +/-
cisplatin treatment. For the in-vitro Cell Proliferation Assay, different
concentrations of cisplatin (3 - 50 M), pterostilbene (PTE) (30 - 500 M),
or both in combination were added for 72 hours. Cell migration was
assayed using 24-mm diameter chambers with 8-m pore filters, with or
without treatment of PTE and cisplatin, and migrated cells were counted
using Image-pro program. A synergistic analysis from the MTT assay
results was calculated via the CompuSyn for Windows computer program
based on the combination index (CI) theorem of Chou-Talalay, to determine
the presence of synergy between cisplatin and PTE.RESULTS: PTE reduces
proliferation in OVCAR8, SKOV3, HEC1A, and ECC1 cells, and its
anti-proliferative effect approaches that of cisplatin. Addition of PTE
to cisplatin potentiates the anti-proliferative effects of cisplatin in
HEC1A, ECC1, SKOV3, and OVCAR8 cells. The combined effect of PTE and
cisplatin is synergistic in OVCAR8 cells based on synergy calculations
(CIPURPOSE: To determine the functional effects of the resveratrol
analog, pterostilbene (PTE), and its potential adjuvant role with
cisplatin, in ovarian and uterine cancer cells.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The
human ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR8, SKOV3) and uterine cancer cell
lines (HEC1A, ECC1) were obtained from ATCC, and grown according to
standard protocols using recommended media. Standard proliferation (MTT)
and migration assays were performed in routine fashion, with or without
PTE +/- cisplatin treatment. For the in-vitro Cell Proliferation Assay,
different concentrations of cisplatin (3 - 50 M), pterostilbene (PTE) (30
- 500 M), or both in combination were added for 72 hours. Cell migration
was assayed using 24-mm diameter chambers with 8-m pore filters, with or
without treatment of PTE and cisplatin, and migrated cells were counted
using Image-pro program. A synergistic analysis from the MTT assay
results was calculated via the CompuSyn for Windows computer program
based on the combination index (CI) theorem of Chou-Talalay, to determine
the presence of synergy between cisplatin and PTE.RESULTS: PTE reduces
proliferation in OVCAR8, SKOV3, HEC1A, and ECC1 cells, and its
anti-proliferative effect approaches that of cisplatin. Addition of PTE
to cisplatin potentiates the anti-proliferative effects of cisplatin in
HEC1A, ECC1, SKOV3, and OVCAR8 cells. The combined effect of PTE and
cisplatin is synergistic in OVCAR8 cells based on synergy calculations
(CI<1). PTE reduces cell migration in HEC1A and OVCAR8 cells, and its
addition to cisplatin treatment improves the anti-migratory
effect.CONCLUSIONS: Pterostilbene, a resveratrol analog with improved
bioavailability, reduces proliferation and migration in ovarian and
uterine cancer cells, and potentiates the anti-proliferative and
anti-migratory effects of cisplatin, thus presenting as an attractive
non-toxic alternative for potential adjuvant chemotherapy in ovarian and
uterine cancer.

