Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel selective orally bioavailable small molecule PAK4 allosteric
modulators display antitumor activity and induce apoptosis in vitro and
in vivo


P21-Activated Kinase 4 (PAK4) is a member of the PAK family of proteins
that regulate cell survival, cell division and apoptosis. The six members
of the PAK family are divided into two groups; Group I (PAK1, 2, 3) and
Group II (PAK4, 5, 6), based upon their sequence homology and regulatory
mechanisms. PAK4 is a member of the group II family of PAKs and is
amplified or mutated in many cancer types. PAK4 is also a key downstream
effector of the K-Ras pathway.Methods: Flow cytometry, CellTiter AQueous
One assay (MTS) and colony formation assays were used to determine
compound effects on cell cycle distribution, proliferation and viability.
Immunoblots were used to measure effects of compounds on protein steady
state levels and phosphorylation. The breast cancer cell line,
MDA-MB-468, and the mantle cell lymphoma line, Z-138, were used in
xenograft models in mice to test the in vivo efficacy of these
compounds.Results: We have identified selective, orally bioavailable
small molecule PAK4 allosteric modulators, which demonstrated anti-tumor
activity in a variety of cancer cell lines (IC50 values = 0.005 - 1 M).
Treatment of cancer cells with these small molecules resulted in the
reduction of PAK4 steady state levels and reduced phosphorylation of key
growth signaling proteins such as Akt, ERK1/2, p90RSK, -catenin, cofilin,
p21, and cyclin D1. These allosteric modulators induced apoptosis through
the activation of caspases 3 and 8 and subsequent cleavage of PARP. After
48 hours of compound treatment, it was found that the cancer cells were
arrested at the G1 and G2 phases of the cell cycle. In addition, we have
observed anti-tumor activity against Z-138 and MDA-MB-468 xenografts in
mice at a daily oral dose of 10 mg/kg in the absence of any clinical
signs of toxicity up to 200 mg/kg daily dose.Conclusions: PAK4 represents
a novel anti-cancer target as a major downstream effector of Ras
oncogene. We have identified selective, orally-bioavailable small
molecule PAK4 allosteric modulators with anti-tumor activity both in
vitro and in vivo. These compounds inactivate PAK4 by directly inducing
PAK4 destabilization. This represents a novel mechanism of the protein
kinase inactivation involving degradation of PAK4 rather than direct
inhibition of the kinase activity. Moreover, these allosteric modulators
induce tumor cell growth arrest and apoptosis. Based on the in vitro and
in vivo activity, these PAK4 allosteric modulators show promising results
for the treatment of a wide variety of cancers.

