Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of EMT on stem cell properties of prostate stem and cancer
cells during castration-resistant prostate cancer progression


Androgen ablation remains the mainstay of treatment for men with advanced
and metastatic prostate cancer. However, despite the introduction of new
generation anti-androgens, a majority of men succumb to castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The molecular mechanisms governing the
emergence of treatment resistance in CRPC patients are not well
understood. Recent experience suggests that tumor regeneration from
castration-resistant stem-like cells induce resistance to hormonal
therapy. Therefore, elucidating novel targets essential for driving
stem-like activity is critical to prevent and defeat CRPC. It has been
shown that normal and cancer stem cells exploit normal development
process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to survive and
metastasize, and that EMT confer stem cell properties to more
differentiated cancer cell progeny in breast and other cancers. However,
it is unclear if EMT is linked with stem cells in normal and malignant
prostate. Our lab has reported that N-cadherin, a marker of EMT, is
upregulated after neoadjuvant hormone ablation and in CRPC and is
sufficient to cause metastasis and CRPC. Therapeutic targeting of
N-cadherin by novel N-cadherin antibody inhibited metastatic and CRPC
progression. The cell population displaying N-cadherin co-expressed a
number of stem cell-associated genes in CRPC models. Here, we verified
EMT linked to stem cells in both normal prostate and CRPC. We found in
LAPC-9 CRPC tumors, the cell population expressing N-cadherin behaved
like stem cells with enhanced sphere-forming ability, which could be
specifically inhibited by novel N-cadherin antibody 2A9. We isolated
stem-like CD49fhi/Trop2hi cells from prostatectomy specimens and found
that forced N-cadherin expression promoted sphere formation of those
cells. Our evaluation of gene expression in N-cadherin-positive prostate
cancer cell lines and CRPC tumors demonstrated that N-cadherin expression
activated common EMT transcriptional regulators including Zeb1. We asked
if Zeb1 regulated stem cell properties in normal and malignant prostate.
We found that forced Zeb1 expression induced EMT with enhanced cell
invasiveness in LNCaP human prostate cancer cells. However, Zeb1
overexpression inhibited cell proliferation and CRPC tumor growth of
LNCaP. Zeb1 overexpression also surprisingly inhibited sphere formation
of normal stem/progenitor cells from prostatectomy specimens. Our data
suggest that Zeb1-regulated EMT promotes both quiescence and invasiveness
in normal and malignant prostate in which the quiescent cells may survive
and play a role in treatment resistance, while N-cadherin mediates stem
cell proliferation and self-renewal. Our research will likely provide
useful information of EMT-related biomarkers for preventing and
developing efficient therapeutics to combat the treatment resistance to
new generation anti-androgens.

