Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracellular uptake and metabolism of SH7139: Is it a targeted
prodrug for B-cell lymphomas


Selective high affinity ligands (SHALs) are novel targeting agents
composed of lysine/mini-polyethylene glycol scaffolds linking two or
three recognition ligands together. The tridentate SHAL SH7139 is
selectively cytotoxic at sub-nanomolar concentrations to lymphoma cells
over-expressing HLA-DR10. Electron microscopy examinations of Burkitt's
lymphoma xenografts from mice treated with SH7139 suggest one mechanism
for cell killing may involve cell signaling-induced apoptosis analogous
to that observed with Lym-1 antibody. An alternative mechanism is that
intracellular hydrolysis of the SHAL's amide bonds following its uptake
and metabolism by lymphoma cells could lead to the release of the three
recognition ligands and the subsequent inhibition (or promotion) of
cellular activities that trigger apoptosis or induce cell death and
necrosis. Each of the three recognition ligands (Dv, Ct, and Cb) is
independently, but non-selectively, toxic to both Raji (HLA-DR10
positive) and Jurkat (HLA-DR10 negative) cells. The Ct ligand,
3-(2-([3-chloro-5-trifluoromethyl)-2-pyridinyl]oxy)-anilino)-3-oxopropanion
ic acid, is a structural analog of aryloxyphenoxypropionate herbicides
that inhibit acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), a key enzyme in fatty acid
biosynthesis that is upregulated in many cancers to meet their need for
rapid growth and proliferation. Our studies show that although Ct could
be accommodated into the herbicide binding pocket of ACC, this ligand was
not found to inhibit human and rat ACC1 or ACC2. However, metabolic
cleavage of the single amide bond present in Ct would lead to the
production of two smaller metabolites, an aniline derivative and
malonate, both of which are known to be biologically active and
potentially toxic compounds. The Dv ligand, dabsyl-L-valine, belongs to a
family of biphenylsulfonamides, many of which have been shown to inhibit
matrix metalloproteinases such as MMP9 and MMP14 that are upregulated in
tumor cells. The Cb ligand,
4-[4-(4-chlorobenzyl)piperazino]-3-nitrobenzene carboxylic acid, is a
structural analog of a large number of inhibitors that have been shown to
block the assembly of the contractile ring and the initiation of
cytokinesis by inhibiting guanosine nucleoside binding to MgcRacGAP, a
protein that participates in the activation of the myosin motor and the
initiation of cleavage furrow ingression. A combination of SH7139
metabolism studies, computer modeling, and enzyme inhibition assays have
been performed to determine if Ct, Dv and Cb and their metabolites are
produced and whether they contribute to lymphoma cell killing.

