Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood obesity is associated with persistent minimal residual
disease (MRD) following induction therapy for pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Background: The epidemic of childhood obesity poses substantial treatment
challenges for the care of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). Obesity at time of diagnosis of ALL is associated with worse
survival as well as treatment-related morbidity. Inability to achieve a
deep initial remission following Induction as evidenced by persistent MRD
in the bone marrow is associated with poor survival and has thus become
the predominant modern prognostic indicator. We therefore hypothesized
that obesity at time of diagnosis of ALL is associated with MRD
positivity at the end-of-Induction disease evaluation.Methods: In a
cohort of children 1 - 20 years old treated for B-precursor ALL (BP-ALL)
at our institution from 2008 to 2013 on Children's Oncology Group (COG)
treatment regimens, we examined MRD at end-of-Induction as determined by
multidimensional flow cytometry. A threshold of 0.01% was used to
determine MRD positive versus negative as per COG regimens. Overweight
and obese categories were defined as 85-95th and 95th percentile for body
mass index (BMI) according to the CDC population norms. Logistic
regression analyses were performed controlling for age, gender,
ethnicity/race, presence/absence of Down Syndrome (due to the high
prevalence of obesity), National Cancer Institute (NCI) risk category,
cytogenetic classification (standard, favorable, unfavorable, unknown),
and CNS status at diagnosis. BMI was evaluated as both a continuous
variable and also as per normal, overweight, obese categories.Results: We
identified 198 patients with BP-ALL and evaluable MRD, 119 with NCI
SR-ALL and 79 with NCI HR-ALL. Of these, 55 (27.8%) had positive MRD at
end-of-Induction [27 SR-ALL (22.7%), 28 HR-ALL (35.4%). In the obese
group, 45.2% (19/42) were MRD+, compared to only 22.8% (29/127) of normal
weight and 24.1% (7/29) of overweight patients. After controlling for
above covariates, obese patients had a statistically significantly
increased risk for MRD positivity at end-of-Induction [Odds Ratio (OR)
2.64, 95 percent Confidence Interval (95%CI) 1.13-6.19, p=0.025].
Similarly, each percentile increase in BMI significantly corresponded to
an increased risk for MRD positivity (OR 1.08, 95%CI 1.00-1.17,
p=0.046).Conclusion: Obese children at diagnosis of BP-ALL are at
significantly increased risk for persistent MRD in the bone marrow at
end-of-Induction. With the established strong adverse association of
persistent MRD with poorer survival, this implies that obesity adversely
influences survival as early as this initial phase of treatment. Our
results support the need for further research into mechanisms underlying
this phenomenon and potential up-front strategies to improve efficiency
of remission induction in this population.

