Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spanxa1 is a novel mediator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in lung cancer


SPANX (Sperm protein associated with the nucleus, X-linked) gene family
express throughout spermatogenesis in agreement with a potential role in
sperm development. It has been reported as a CTA (Cancer/Testis Antigen),
which was highly expressed in testis and several cancers, such as
gliobastoma, melanoma, testicular germ tumor and hematologic
malignancies. Nevertheless, the function and molecular mechanism of SPANX
involved in the cancer progression are greatly unknown. We found that the
SPANX gene family member A1 (SPANXA1) was high-expressed in CL1-0, a less
metastatic lung cancer cell line, and low-expressed in CL1-5, a more
metastatic cell line. In vitro assays showed that the enforced expression
of SPANXA1 suppressed the abilities of migration and invasion, and
induced a dramatically mesenchymal - epithelial transition (EMT). In
contrast, knock-down SPANXA1 could increase the cell mobility and
invasiveness. To identify the underlying mechanism of SPANXA1, RNAs
derived from SPANXA1-expressed cells and mock controls wrer assayed by
gene expression microarrays and pathway analysis. The results showed that
1024 genes were differentially expressed in presence of SPANXA1 and six
of top ten pathways belonged to EMT-related pathways analyzed by MetaCore
software. The fact implied that SPANXA1 largely induces the EMT-related
signalings. Quantitative RT-PCR assays were used to validate the altered
expression of certain important genes induced by SPANXA1 in the
identified pathways. The EMT regulating transcription factor, Slug, was
decreased in SPAXA1-overexpressed cells and it also acts as a repressor
for E-cadherin expression. We found that SPANXA1 mainly localized at
nucleus and inhibited the formation of filopodia assayed by
immunofluoresence staining. To explore the function of SPANXA1 in the
nucleus, we performed Chromatin IP sequencing and the results elucidated
that SPANXA1 might bind onto chromosome and regulate gene expressions.
Furthermore, mouse model demonstrated that the distal metastasis was
dramatically decreased in SPANXA1-overexpressed cells compared with the
mock controls. These data suggest that SPANXA1 is a novel EMT modulator
involved in lung cancer progression and implies the potential therapeutic
role of SPANXA1 in the future.

