Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p62/IMP2 promotes breast cancer cell progression


Breast cancer is one of the major causes of cancer-related death for
women throughout the world. Although the early detection of breast cancer
is improving, the strategies available to treat the advanced stages of
this disease remain limited. Therefore, the identification of key
molecules that regulate the metastatic process is necessary to provide
the rationale for further therapeutic interventions. The IGF2
mRNA-binding Protein 2 (IMP2/IGF2BP2/p62) is a member of the IMP family.
Expression of IMPs in cancer cells is associated with cancer progression.
Our previous studies showed that p62/IMP2 is overexpressed in breast
cancer tissue compared to the adjacent normal breast tissue. However, the
role of p62/IMP2 in breast cancer progression remains unknown. Here, we
present evidence that transfection of p62/IMP2 into two p62/IMP2 negative
cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MCF7) increases 5 to 10 folds (P Breast cancer
is one of the major causes of cancer-related death for women throughout
the world. Although the early detection of breast cancer is improving,
the strategies available to treat the advanced stages of this disease
remain limited. Therefore, the identification of key molecules that
regulate the metastatic process is necessary to provide the rationale for
further therapeutic interventions. The IGF2 mRNA-binding Protein 2
(IMP2/IGF2BP2/p62) is a member of the IMP family. Expression of IMPs in
cancer cells is associated with cancer progression. Our previous studies
showed that p62/IMP2 is overexpressed in breast cancer tissue compared to
the adjacent normal breast tissue. However, the role of p62/IMP2 in
breast cancer progression remains unknown. Here, we present evidence that
transfection of p62/IMP2 into two p62/IMP2 negative cell lines
(MDA-MB-231 and MCF7) increases 5 to 10 folds (P < 0.05) in-vitro wound
healing and reduces 2 to 3 folds (P Breast cancer is one of the major
causes of cancer-related death for women throughout the world. Although
the early detection of breast cancer is improving, the strategies
available to treat the advanced stages of this disease remain limited.
Therefore, the identification of key molecules that regulate the
metastatic process is necessary to provide the rationale for further
therapeutic interventions. The IGF2 mRNA-binding Protein 2
(IMP2/IGF2BP2/p62) is a member of the IMP family. Expression of IMPs in
cancer cells is associated with cancer progression. Our previous studies
showed that p62/IMP2 is overexpressed in breast cancer tissue compared to
the adjacent normal breast tissue. However, the role of p62/IMP2 in
breast cancer progression remains unknown. Here, we present evidence that
transfection of p62/IMP2 into two p62/IMP2 negative cell lines
(MDA-MB-231 and MCF7) increases 5 to 10 folds (P < 0.05) in-vitro wound
healing and reduces 2 to 3 folds (P < 0.05) cell adhesion to the
extracellular matrix. Unexpectedly, the overexpression of p62/IMP2 did
not affect cell proliferation in our breast cancer cell lines.Our
analysis shows that the overexpression of p62/IMP2 leads to increased
c-myc expression in MDA-MB-231 cells but not MCF-7 cells at both the
transcriptional and translational levels. In contrast, beta-catenin
expression is increased by p62/IMP2 only in MCF7 cells. Since c-myc and
beta-catenin gene products are important regulators of metastasis in
breast cancer, and their increased expression is observed in our p62/IMP2
transfectants, our data suggests that p62/IMP2 may be an important
mediator of breast cancer progression, although its mechanism of action
may vary depending on the cellular context in which it is expressed.

