Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rosehip (Rosa canina) extracts prevent MAPK and AKT-mediated cell
proliferation in African American triple-negative breast cancer cells


Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer, characterized by its lack of the human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER-2), the estrogen receptor (ER), and the progesterone
receptor (PR). The high prevalence of triple negative tumors in young
women is more commonly observed in young African American (AA) women.
Currently, the existing targeted therapy is of minimal benefit in TNBCs.
Akt and MAPK have been shown to promote cell proliferation in triple
negative breast cancer and MAPK expression may be an underlying mechanism
contributing to the generation of chemo-resistance in triple-negative
breast cancer. Due to major concerns involving the occurrence of side
effects and the emergence of drug-resistant cancer cells, there has been
growing interest in the use of naturally occurring molecules with
chemo-preventive and chemo- therapeutic properties in cancer treatment.
Rosehip extracts have been used as dietary supplements to relieve
symptoms associated with diarrhea, gastritis, and rheumatoid arthritis
and have been shown to prevent cell proliferation in glioblastomas. This
study investigated the efficacy of rosehip extracts in preventing cell
proliferation in African American triple negative (HCC70, HCC1806) and
luminal (HCC1500) breast cancer cell lines. Each of the breast cancer
cell lines were treated with rosehip extracts (1mg/mL -25ng/mL)
demonstrated a significant decrease in cell proliferation. The rosehip
extract-mediated decrease in cell proliferation was equal to or better
than the decrease of cell proliferation observed when known inhibitors of
the MAPK (U0126, 10 M) or AKT (LY294002, 20 M) signaling pathways were
utilized. Additionally, pretreatment of these cell lines with these
Rosehip extracts (1mg/mL -25ng/mL) selectively decreased AKT, MAPK,
p70S6K, and S6 phosphorylation suggesting these extracts prevent AA TNBC
cell proliferation by blocking both the MAPK and AKT signaling
mechanisms. Results from cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry, western
blot analysis, as well as apoptosis studies demonstrate that rosehip
extracts inhibit cell proliferation but do not promote apoptosis. Rosehip
extracts also have a synergistic effect with Doxorubicin (20M), a
chemotherapeutic agent used to treat patients with breast cancer, in
preventing triple negative breast cancer cell proliferation. Taken
together these data suggest that rosehip extracts are capable of
decreasing cell proliferation in African American triple negative breast
cancer cells without promoting apoptosis and demonstrate a synergistic
inhibition of cell proliferation with Doxorubicin, and rosehip extracts
may serve as an alternative or compliment to current chemotherapeutic
regimens for triple negative breast cancer.

