Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toward understanding the genomic alterations in human gastric
cancer


Gastric cancer is one of the most prevalent and aggressive cancers
worldwide, and its molecular mechanism remains largely elusive. Although
recent genome sequencing studies have uncovered rich information on
cancer evolutions of many types, little is known about the genetic basis
of gastric cancer due to its complexity. Here we report genomic mutations
in primary gastric adenocarcinoma of human, based on the whole genome
sequences of five pairs of cancer and matching normal samples. In total,
407 non-synonymous somatic point mutations have been identified in these
genomes and the most recurrent mutations were harbored by genes such as
Mucins (MUC3A and MUC12) and transcription factors (ZNF717, ZNF595 and
TP53). 679 genomic rearrangements were detected which affect 355
protein-coding genes; and 76 genes show copy number changes. The focus of
the functional analysis is to validate the biological relevance of each
variant to cancer formation and progression, particularly to explore the
to-be-determined causal relationships between the observed mutations in
cancer genomes and cancer development. Additionally, we have attempted to
investigate the mechanism of how these variants form in each tumor and
discuss about multiple possible factors that may affect the
susceptibility to each specific chromosomal changes. For examples,
structural correlation between two boundaries of most rearrangements was
observed based on the Hi-C data analysis, which indicate these
rearrangements may happen among DNA fragments in close spatial proximity,
especially when two endpoints stay in a similar replication phase.
Sequence analysis on the flacking region of those rearrangements also
showed clear evidences that about half of these genomic changes may be
involved in the mechanism of microhomology-mediated break induced
replication (MMBIR). Furthermore, DNA integrations from Helicobacter
pylori have been detected for the first time, for instance, in the gene
region of PREX2, which may reflect a new mechanism about how H. pylori
induce cancer development. Overall, the in-depth analyses on these
sequenced genomes lead to the detection of a myriad of novel genomic
variations in gastric cancer, which in turn bring new insights in our
understanding of the genetic basis and indicate new molecular mechanism
of the gastric tumorigenesis.

