Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carnosic acid effectively inhibits metastasis of B16F10 melanoma
cells


Carnosic acid is a natural benzenediol abietane diterpene found in
rosemary and common sage and reported to exhibit anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant, and anticarcinogenic activities. The present study examined
the effects of carnosic acid on the metastatic characteristics of B16F10
cells. Results from transwell migration assays revealed that carnosic
acid inhibited B16F10 migration in a dose-dependent manner. Western blot
analysis of cell conditioned media showed that carnosic acid
significantly suppressed the secretion of MMP-9, TIMP-1, uPA, and VCAM-1.
However, the secretion of TIMP-2 was significantly increased in cells
treated with 10 mol/L of carnosic acid. Moreover, carnosic acid
suppressed the expression of mesenchymal markers such as snail, Slug,
vimentin, and N-cadherine and increased that of E-cadherin, an epithelial
marker. We previously noted that chronic consumption of a high-fat diet
(HFD) increased solid tumor growth and lymph node (LN) metastasis in
C57BL/6 mice injected with B16F10. To assess the effects of dietary
carnosic acid on HFD-stimulated LN metastasis, male C57BL/6 mice were fed
a control diet (CD, 10 kcal% fat) or a HFD (60 kcal% fat) containing 0,
0.02, or 0.04% of carnosic acid for 21 weeks. B16F10 was subcutaneously
injected 16 weeks after the initiation of feeding. The body weight and
solid tumor growth were significantly increased in the HFD group as
compared to the CD group, and these increases were suppressed by dietary
carnosic acid. Lean body mass and body fat mass were estimated by dual
energy X-ray absorptiometry. The body fat mass was tremendously increased
in HFD-fed mice, and this increase was substantially decreased in a
carnosic acid-dose dependent manner. A small but significant increase in
lean body mass was noted in HFD-fed mice, which was not altered by
dietary carnosic acid. Fasting blood glucose was markedly increased in
HFD-fed mice, which was suppressed by 0.04% dietary carnosic acid. The
tumor was resected 3 weeks after the B16F10 injection.
Immunohistochemical staining of tumor tissues revealed that the
expression of Ki67, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1,
lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor-1, phospho-tyrosine
phosphatase (a leukocyte marker), and vimentin was markedly increased in
the HFD group as compared to the CD group, and these increases were
blocked by carnosic acid. Two weeks after the tumor resection, LN
metastasis was increased in mice fed HFD, and this increase was markedly
suppressed by carnosic acid. In the present study, we demonstrate that
dietary carnosic acid potently inhibits HFD-induced solid tumor growth
and LN metastasis of B16F10 as well as tumor angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis. Carnosic acid effectively suppresses HFD-induced body
fat gains and fasting hyperglycemia, which may be parts of the mechanisms
by which carnosic acid suppresses HFD-stimulated tumor progression.

