Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Mer tyrosine kinase with a novel small molecule
inhibitor is efficacious in pre-clinical models of non-small cell lung
cancer


Background: Mer tyrosine kinase is frequently overexpressed and activated
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In addition, genetic inhibition of
Mer reduces NSCLC cell growth in vitro and tumor xenograft growth in
vivo. In this study, we examined anti-tumor effects mediated by a
first-in-class Mer-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI) in pre-clinical models of NSCLC.Methods: The effects of Mer TKI
treatment on activation of Mer and related members of the TAM-family of
kinases, Axl and Tyro3, and effects on downstream proliferative and
pro-survival signaling pathways were analyzed by immunoblot. In addition,
Mer TKI-mediated anti-tumor activity was determined in a panel of NSCLC
cell lines using soft-agar and clonogenic assays. Cells were stained with
YoPro-1-iodide and propidium iodide dyes and induction of apoptosis was
determined using flow cytometry. Finally, a subcutaneous murine xenograft
model was employed to determine therapeutic effects in vivo.Results: The
Mer TKI blocked Mer autophosphorylation in numerous cell lines at
sub-micromolar concentrations and was highly selective for Mer over Axl
and Tyro3. Treatment also inhibited downstream pro-survival signaling
through the ERK1/2 and AKT pathways, which resulted in induction of
apoptosis. Additionally, treatment reduced colony-forming potential in
soft-agar and clonogenic assays by 85% to 99% in a large panel of cell
lines. Sensitivity to the Mer TKI was independent of driver oncogene
status, as cell lines positive for EGFR mutations, KRAS mutations, and
gene fusions all responded to treatment. Interestingly, RNAi mediated
knock-down of Axl enhanced sensitivity to Mer TKI treatment in
biochemical and functional assays. Finally, in animals treatment
decreased tumor progression resulting in a significant decrease in tumor
volume.Conclusions: This Mer TKI is a novel and potent small molecule
inhibitor that is selective for Mer over other TAM family kinases in
cell-based assays. Treatment with this compound resulted in decreased
downstream pro-oncogenic signaling, increased apoptosis, and decreased
colony-forming potential in NSCLC cell lines. In addition, treatment was
therapeutically effective in murine xenografts. Taken together, these
data indicate that Mer inhibition may be an effective strategy for
treatment of lung cancer. Sensitivity to the Mer TKI did not depend on
driver oncogene status. Development of Mer TKIs for clinical application
may therefore provide a molecularly-targeted treatment option for
patients without known oncogenic mutations. In addition, Axl inhibition
sensitized NSCLC cells to treatment with Mer TKI, suggesting a functional
and/or physical interaction between Mer and Axl. In summary, the data
presented here validate this Mer TKI as a potential treatment for NSCLC
and provide critical data to support its continued development toward
clinical application.

