Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) chemosensitizes EGFR-overexpressing
inflammatory breast cancer cells to erlotinib


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is an aggressive cancer with a unique
ability of forming tumor spheroids, which invade the dermal lymphatics
causing the inflammatory phenotype. IBC cell lines and human tissues,
overexpress Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), which has been
associated with increasing IBC tumor growth rate, invasion and
metastasis. Among the current therapeutic strategies for EGFR inhibition
are the small molecule Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKIs). The high
incidence of resistance to such therapies has greatly diminished their
overall effectiveness, thus it seems feasible to identify agents that may
be combined with these TKIs to provide a sustained response for IBC
patients. For this reason, the purpose of this study is to investigate
Reishi's therapeutic potential in IBC, focusing on the regulation of the
EGFR signaling cascade and its contribution to the IBC cellular response
when treated with the EGFR TKI, erlotinib. Our hypothesis is that Reishi
sensitizes IBC cells to erlotinib therapy. EGFR-overexpressing SUM-149
IBC cells were treated with several concentrations of erlotinib,
0.025mg/mL Reishi, or both treatments simultaneously for 72h. Our results
showed a synergistic effect when erlotinib and Reishi are used
simultaneously after 72 hours of treatment. In order to study the
molecular mechanism for the improved effects of the combination treatment
we successfully developed an IBC erlotinib resistant cell line from the
parental SUM-149 cells. Our data revealed that Reishi increases erlotinib
sensitivity by inactivating AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) signaling pathways. Taken together, our results provide evidence
that Reishi chemosensitizes IBC cells to erlotinib therapy, highlighting
its anti-IBC-therapeutic potential. This project was sponsored by NIH/NCI
#1F31 CA174307 to ISA, Title V PPOHA US Department of Education
#P031M105050 to UCC, NIH/RCMI #G12 MD007583 to UCC, NIH/INBRE #5P20
GM103475 to UPR/UCC and a research donation from the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico to UCC's University Center of Integral and Complementary
Medicine (CUMIC)/MMM.

