Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct expression pattern of microRNAs bioinformatically
predicted to target SATB1 in human breast cancer


Recently, genome organizer protein special AT-rich sequence-binding
protein 1(SATB1) has been reported to promote a metastatic phenotype and
correlate with poor prognosis in breast cancer. The mechanism of SATB1
elevation in breast cancer remains elusive. This study was to investigate
whether microRNAs (miRNAs) play a role in modulating SATB1 expression in
ductual breast cancer by using archival formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) clinical samples.Firstly, four canonical target
prediction databases, including TargetScan, PicTar, miRanda and miRDB,
were utilized to predict the interaction between miRNA and the 3-UTR of
SATB1 mRNA. The results of the prediction software programs were then
integrated by displaying Venn diagram. Secondly, the Qiagen miRNeasy FFPE
kit was used to isolate total RNA from 93 specimens with primary invasive
ductual breast cancer. Expression of candidate miRNA transcriptional
levels was measured using TaqMan MicroRNA Assays with miRNA-specific stem
loop primers by relative real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The relative
levels of miRNA expression were calculated from the relevant signals by
normalization with the signal for RNU6B miRNA expression in each sample.
Meanwhile, SATB1 protein expression levels were assessed by
immunohistochemistry(IHC). Finally, correlations between the expression
levels of these miRNAs and SATB1 were analyzed. Overall 22 miRNAs, 24
miRNAs, 76 miRNAs and 75 miRNAs were found by TargetScan, PicTar, miRanda
and miRDB, to target SATB1 respectively, whereas only miR-7, miR-21,
miR-23a, miR-23b, miR-34a and miR-155 were found by all four programs to
be predicted to regulate SATB1. Quantitative RT-PCR detection analysis
showed that expression levels of miR-34a were much higher in
SATB1-negative than in SATB1-positive tumors (pRecently, genome organizer
protein special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 1(SATB1) has been
reported to promote a metastatic phenotype and correlate with poor
prognosis in breast cancer. The mechanism of SATB1 elevation in breast
cancer remains elusive. This study was to investigate whether microRNAs
(miRNAs) play a role in modulating SATB1 expression in ductual breast
cancer by using archival formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
clinical samples.Firstly, four canonical target prediction databases,
including TargetScan, PicTar, miRanda and miRDB, were utilized to predict
the interaction between miRNA and the 3-UTR of SATB1 mRNA. The results of
the prediction software programs were then integrated by displaying Venn
diagram. Secondly, the Qiagen miRNeasy FFPE kit was used to isolate total
RNA from 93 specimens with primary invasive ductual breast cancer.
Expression of candidate miRNA transcriptional levels was measured using
TaqMan MicroRNA Assays with miRNA-specific stem loop primers by relative
real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The relative levels of miRNA expression
were calculated from the relevant signals by normalization with the
signal for RNU6B miRNA expression in each sample. Meanwhile, SATB1
protein expression levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry(IHC).
Finally, correlations between the expression levels of these miRNAs and
SATB1 were analyzed. Overall 22 miRNAs, 24 miRNAs, 76 miRNAs and 75
miRNAs were found by TargetScan, PicTar, miRanda and miRDB, to target
SATB1 respectively, whereas only miR-7, miR-21, miR-23a, miR-23b, miR-34a
and miR-155 were found by all four programs to be predicted to regulate
SATB1. Quantitative RT-PCR detection analysis showed that expression
levels of miR-34a were much higher in SATB1-negative than in
SATB1-positive tumors (p<0.001). whereas lower miR-7 expression showed a
strong trend toward an association with elevated SATB1 expression (P =
0.056). We then extended the analysis of miR-34a expression in breast
cancer tissues to include all scores for SATB1 protein expression,
assessed semiquantitatively by IHC. miR-34a expression levels were
gradually decreased as SATB1 protein scores increased. Moreove, our
quantitative RT-PCR results showed no differences in miR-21, miR-23a,
miR-23b, and miR-155 expression between SATB1-negative and SATB1-positive
tumors. We thus conclude that SATB1 maybe a novel target of miR-34a in
human breast cancer. Downregulation of miR-34a promotes human breast
cancer to progress through reduced repression of SATB1. Restoration of
miR-34a may prove therapeutic in breast cancer patients in which aberrant
SATB1 expression plays a role.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

