Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label free prostate cancer cell isolation from blood by acoustic
standing wave technology - acoustophoresis


There is intense search for disease biomarkers that can reliably detect
lethal prostate cancer (PCa) at early stage, monitor response to
treatment, detect disease recurrence, and predict survival. Enrichment,
enumeration, and transcriptional profiling of rare circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) can predict survival of patients with disseminated tumors,
and may provide clinical benefit in predicting treatment responses of
targeted therapies.We exploit ultrasound radiation forces to enable label
free diversion of cancer cells from nucleated blood cells in a
temperature-controlled, microfluidic continuous flow system
(acoustophoresis). A third generation, standing-wave ultrasound microchip
(silicon/glass) incorporated a cell pre-alignment channel, and a
microchannel with a trifurcated inlet and outlet. The system is driven by
compressed air (500 mBar) to mitigate and minimize continuous
flow-fluctuations and provide more reproducible and reliable
discrimination of tumor cells from nucleated blood cells compared to
previous syringe driven setups, and allow us to process clinically
relevant sample volumes of blood (5-10 mL).We fixed, spiked, and
processed 50 or more PCa cells per mL in undiluted white blood cells
(WBC) in the acoustic microchip. The separation system is very flexible
and the ratio between cancer cell recovery and cell contamination can be
tuned by changing the sample flow rates or the acoustic energy. A
consistent and reproducible recovery of cancer cells above 90% with less
than 0.4% contamination of WBC was provided using flow rates of 100
l/min. We also found that about 90% of the contaminating WBCs were
granulocytes, whereas the vast majority of lymphocytes were reliably
diverted. Our results were consistent using different PCa cell lines
(DU145, LNCaP, PC3) along with the breast cancer cell line (MCF7).The
isolation of cancer cells by acoustophoresis is a label free method that
consistently enables high recovery of cancer cells independent of the
expression of surface antigens. This allows for separation of EpCAM
negative populations of CTCs, mesenchymal cells along with cancer stem
cells, which can be identified with subsequent qRT-PCR analysis. In
acoustophoresis, cells are separated according to size, density and
compressibility (dV/dp), where size is the major factor. Using non-fixed
samples, we can separate viable from dead cells, since dead cells display
significantly different acoustic properties to their live counterpart.
Acoustophoresis is a gentle separation method and does not affect cell
viability, allowing post isolation ex vivo cultivation of CTCs. This
allows functional assays to test CTCs ability to form metastasis. It is
therefore a promising method for future non-invasive molecular
interrogation of metastatic cancers and the characterization of CTCs will
relate CTCs to disease outcome and predict for sensitivity to treatment
and match patient to drug response.

