Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AD-O56.9: A fusion of TRAIL/Apo2L with a membrane disrupting
peptide as a novel anticancer therapeutic


BackgroundThe tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL/Apo2L) is a member of the TNF superfamily that initiates apoptosis
of tumor cells through the activation of their death receptors. The
ability of TRAIL to selectively induce apoptosis of tumor cells but not
normal cells makes it an attractive agent for cancer therapy. However,
many cancer types have developed resistance mechanisms, such as
dysfunctions of proapoptotic proteins.Hereby, we report a novel molecule
- AD-O56.9, which is composed of the soluble fragment of TRAIL (acting as
both carrier and also effector) fused with a cationic, alpha-helical
(KLAKLAK)2 antimicrobial peptide (acting as effector). The (KLAKLAK)2
peptide fused to protein transduction domain can induce cancer cell death
by triggering mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and swelling,
resulting in the release of cytochrome c and induction of apoptosis. It
creates also the capacity to cause aggregation of mitochondria that is
also a mechanism of cytotoxic action. (KLAKLAK)2 peptide is equipped with
protein transduction domain domain, to increase its internalization. To
allow separation of TRAIL fragment from the effector peptide domain
specifically in the tumor environment, we linked these two domains with a
sequence motif recognized by MMP and uPa proteases, present in tumor
cells membranes or their proximity.MethodsAD-O56.9 protein was produced
in E. coli and purified by IEC. The molecule was characterized
biochemically and biophysically. MTT assay was used to estimate killing
of carcinoma cells. Flow cytometric analysis was used to evaluate
influence of the AD-O56.9 on plasma and mitochondrial membrane integrity,
caspase 3 activation, PARP cleavage, as well as on the cell cycle of
cancer cells. The tumoricidal activity of AD-O56.9 was evaluated in
NOD/SCID mice bearing different types of tumor xenografts.ResultsAD-O56.9
exhibited cytotoxic effect on various cancer cell lines, both
TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant, but showed no toxic effect on normal
cells. This protein was also highly cytotoxic against primary cancer
cells. The component that overcomes resistance to TRAIL is
RRRRRRRR(KLAKLAK)2 peptide, but only as a component of AD-O56.9 fusion
protein. Analyzing cell cycle and plasma membrane integrity in relatively
sensitive cell line (NCI-H460) and TRAIL-resistant cell line (A549) we
showed that AD-O56.9 induced apoptosis in those cells. This protein led
to activation of caspase 3, cleavage of PARP as well as caused strong
depolarization of mitochondrial membrane. AD-O56.9 administration caused
significant regression of TRAIL-sensitive MIA PaCa-2, OE19, Colo205 and
TRAIL-resistant HepG2.ConclusionsAD-O56.9 is able to induce cell death in
many cancer cell lines, even TRAIL resistant and causes tumor regression
in mice bearing human tumors. Obtained results make this molecule worth
of further preclinical development.

