Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protein tyrosine phosphatase DEP-1/PTPRJ is an essential
promoter of vascular permeability, angiogenesis and tumor progression


Angiogenesis and increased vessel permeability play key roles during
tumor growth and cancer progression. Therefore, much current effort in
the field aims at understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the
formation and remodeling of blood vessels as a way to identify new
approaches to harness these processes. In this context, we have been
focusing our efforts on the protein tyrosine phosphatase DEP-1 (also
named PTPRJ or CD148), which was initially identified as a negative
regulator of cell proliferation and VEGFR2 phosphorylation when highly
expressed in quiescent endothelial cells. However, using an RNAi
knockdown approach, we demonstrated for the first time that through its
ability to dephosphorylate the Src inhibitory Y529, DEP-1 was also a
positive regulator of Src activation in VEGF-stimulated endothelial
cells. As Src plays key roles in the promotion of angiogenesis and
vascular permeability, we further demonstrated that DEP-1 was indeed a
promoter of these vascular functions in vitro, and that the tyrosine
phosphorylation of its C-terminal tail, allowing Src interaction and
activation, was required for this. Interestingly, the catalytic
inactivation of DEP-1 in mice led to increased endothelial cell
proliferation, but also disorganized vascular structures, in contrast
with the apparent absence of phenotype in DEP-1 knock-out (KO) mice
models. In this study, we evaluated the biological consequences of the
loss of DEP-1 expression on normal and pathological angiogenesis using a
complete KO mouse model. We first confirmed that DEP-1 was required for
Src activation and the phosphorylation of its substrates VE-cadherin and
FAK in mice lung lysates upon systemic VEGF stimulation. Consistent with
these observations, VEGF-induced vascular leakage was abrogated in the
DEP-1 KO mice, as determined using a modified Miles assay. Capillary
formation from mouse aortic rings ex vivo and in Matrigel plugs was also
impaired, demonstrating the key positive role of DEP-1 in permeability
and angiogenesis. Ischemia-induced angiogenesis was also deficient in KO
mice, as demonstrated by reduced limb blood flow and capillary formation
in a hind limb ischemia model. To assess tumor-associated angiogenesis,
the highly metastatic Mvt-1 mouse mammary tumor cells were orthotopically
injected in WT and DEP-1 KO mice. The growth of tumors in DEP-1 KO mice
was reduced by about 50% compared to those grown in WT animals, due to
inhibition of tumor angiogenesis. As tumor-associated and leaky blood
vessels contribute to dissemination of cancer cells, a 50-60% decrease in
the number and size of spontaneous and experimental metastases were also
observed in the lungs of DEP-1 KO mice. Altogether, these results
demonstrate for the first time that DEP-1 is an essential driver of
VEGF-dependent Src activation, permeability, and angiogenesis in vivo,
therefore acting as a promoter of tumor cell growth and dissemination.

