Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of tumor-derived exosomes in growth and metastasis of breast
cancer


Breast cancer (BC) mortality rates have decreased over last 30 years,
largely due to early detection and improved treatment modalities,
particularly targeted therapies. However, metastasis relentlessly drives
mortality. The pervasive mortality from metastasis highlights the
shortcomings of traditionally accepted hypotheses on the metastatic
process. The mechanisms by which malignant tumors leave the primary tumor
site, invade lymphatics, and metastasize to regional lymph nodes are
complex and interrelated. Exosomes are biological nanovesicles (30-100
nm) of endocytic origin. Exosomes mediate local and horizontal transfer
of information, such as mRNAs, miRNAs and proteins. They are indicated to
play a significant role in the genesis of tumor, growth and metastasis.
Recent advances in the exosome biology suggest that tumor-derived
exosomes (TDEs) are critical mediators of tumorigenesis and can incite a
pro-angiogenic signaling program capable of remodeling tissue matrices.
However, the role of TDEs in BC metastasis remains elusive. In this
study, we examined the role of exosomes in breast cancer metastasis using
cell culture studies. We made the following observations: i) exosomes
derived from BC cells had a mean size of 92 nm and carried exosomal
marker proteins CD63 and CD81, ii) uptake of exosomes from highly
metastatic BC cells (MDA-MB-231) by non-metastatic recipient cells (BT474
and T47D), iii) faster wound healing rate, increased migratory behavior,
and invasiveness in recipient cells treated with metastatic BC exosomes,
iv) increased endothelial cell tube formation, reflective of angiogenesis
ability with exosomes from metastatic BC cells, v) modulation in
expression levels of key EMT-associated proteins in non-metastatic cells
treated with metastatic BC exosomes favoring EMT shift, vi) difference in
metastasis-associated miRNAs levels in exosomes from invasive and
non-invasive BC cells. Our data that suggest exosomes from metastatic BC
cells carry the cargo essential for EMT and have the ability to change
phenotypic traits of the recipient cells. Determining the role of
exosomes in BC metastasis and characterization of BC exosomes components
(proteins, mRNA and miRNA) will have great potential to uncover new
targets and lead to new therapies for metastatic disease.

