Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reciprocal regulation of MYC and LKB1 modulates cell survival and
differentiation in lung cancer


MYC and LKB1 are important regulators of cell survival and
differentiation. Although recent studies have been shown oncogenic
cooperation between MYC and LKB1 loss, their relationship is unclear. In
this study, we report a reciprocal regulation between MYC and LKB1 which
modulates cell survival and differentiation in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). We found that MYC regulates LKB1 expression via miR-17.
Specifically, luciferase activity was reduced in cells transfected with
miR-17, LKB1 3 UTR constructs compared with scrambled control. Mutation
of miR-17 interaction sites rescued the luciferase activity, thus
confirming that miR-17 directly interacts with the LKB1 3 UTRs. In
agreement with our reporter gene assay results, enforced overexpression
of miR-17 decreased the expression of LKB1 mRNA and protein levels
compared with scrambled control. Conversely, miR-17 inhibition promoted
upregulation of LKB1 expression in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, miR-17
expression was inversely correlated with LKB1 expression in 532 patients
with NSCLC from The Cancer Genome Atlas data (TCGA). MYC and miR-17
overexpression promoted mTOR pathway activation, increased cell
proliferation and colony formation in NSCLC cells. In line with these
findings, similar results were obtained when we knockdown LKB1
expression, suggesting that MYC promotes mTOR pathway and cell survival,
at least in part, via LKB1 regulation. Reciprocally, we found
upregulation of MYC expression in NSCLC cell lines with LKB1 mutation or
low expression compared to LKB1 wild-type (total n=78) via reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) analysis. We validated these findings by analyzing
MYC expression via western blotting in LKB1-knockdown and
LKB1-ovexpressing stable cell lines. Mechanistically, we found that LKB1
downmodulates MYC expression via Yes-Associated protein 1 (YAP)
phosphorylation at Ser127 site, which results in YAP cytoplasmic
retention inhibiting transcription activation of its targets. In
addition, we found that LKB1 also regulates ID2, a negative regulator of
cell differentiation, via YAP/MYC axis. Taken together, our study reveals
a reciprocal regulation between MYC and LKB1 offering additional
mechanistic insights how MYC promotes cell survival and differentiation
in lung cancer.

