Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative proteomic analysis of cell-surface membrane proteins:
Biomarker discovery in esophageal squamous cancer


Background. Esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC) is associated with a
poor prognosis and high recurrence rate. Identification of proteins that
are useful for prognostic assessment and therapeutic targets in ESCC is
required. Quantitative proteomic analysis provides a powerful approach in
screening for alterations in protein levels. An analysis of the
differential expression of cell-surface membrane proteins would be useful
for identification of proteins associated with cell proliferation, cell
migration, drug resistance and therapeutic target for antibody-based
therapy.Purpose of study. To identify cell-surface membrane proteins
overexpressed in ESCC compared with normal esophageal epithelial cells,
which may represent novel biomarkers of disease and therapeutic
targets.Procedures. We performed a biotinylation-based approach for
cell-surface membrane enrichment combined with iTRAQ (isobaric tags for
relative and absolute quantitation) technology using nano-LC-MS/MS
analysis, to identify cell surface proteins overexpressed in ESCC cell
lines compared with control normal esophageal epithelial cell
line.Results. By combining biotinylation of cell-surface membrane
proteins and iTRAQ analysis, 1635 proteins were identified, which
contained 402 cell surface membrane proteins. We identified
overexpression of 12 membrane proteins, whose expression increased more
than twofold in at least four of six ESCC cell lines compared with a
normal esophageal epithelial cell line (HEEpic). By this proteomic
approach, we identified several tumor antigens which included antigens
previously associated with ESCC and antigens not previously reported in
this disease. Furthermore, we also successfully identified novel antigen
associated with proliferation of ESCC. Cell surface expression of this
antigen on ESCC was confirmed by FACS analysis and immunohistochemistry.
By transfection of siRNA specific for this novel antigen, significant
growth suppression was shown by WST8 assay and induction of apoptosis was
detected by caspase-3 assay.Conclusions. By using a high throughput
cell-surface membrane proteomic analysis combining biotinylation of
cell-surface membrane protein and iTRAQ technology, several ESCC
candidate antigens were identified. Further studies on the physiological
role of novel tumor antigens overexpressed in ESCC and their application
as biomarkers/therapeutic targets are underway..Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

