Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of lymphocytes infiltrating the breast cancer
microenvironment


Recent studies in breast cancer (BC) show that strong links exist between
the host immune response and clinical outcome. Immune cells have been
associated with both pro-tumor and anti-tumor activities with the balance
between key players likely determining the ultimate clinical result. In
an effort to understand how protective immune responses are generated we
performed a prospective analysis of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL)
in patients with primary BC. TIL present in fresh tissue homogenates
(GentleMACS with no enzymatic digestion) from untreated primary breast
tumors (n=120) were immunophenotyped using 10-color flow cytometry. TIL
were compared for density and cellular composition to non-adjacent
non-tumor breast tissue from the same patient (NANT, n=116) as well as to
normal breast tissue from mammary reductions (n=28). TIL organization and
distribution in tumors was analyzed using immunohistochemistry or
immunofluorescence (confocal microscopy) on paraffin sections from
patients in the series. Analysis of fresh tissues revealed that the
density (absolute numbers of leukocytes) in normal tissue and NANT are
remarkably similar (median: 4.4-vs-5.7 CD45+ cells/mm3 of tissue,
respectively) and could be used to establish a cutoff for TIL negative
tumors. Using NANT as an internal control, 64.5% tumors were TIL negative
(minimally infiltrated). Among total leukocytes, tumors have higher
frequencies of CD19+ B cells and CD4+ T cells compared with normal
tissue. Furthermore, the number of CD4+ are higher than CD8+ in TIL
positive tumors, which is an inversion of the CD4/CD8 ratio in TIL
negative tumors (the latter ratio is similar between TIL negative tumors
and NANT). In all of the breast tissues (normal, NANT and tumor) the CD4+
and CD8+ T cells are predominantly CD45RO+ memory cells, with a
significant proportion of these TIL expressing the immune checkpoint
receptor PD-1. In contrast, higher numbers of nave relative to memory B
cells were generally detected in both normal and tumor tissues but the
balance between these B cell populations was more heterogeneous than for
T cells. The distribution pattern of TILs (CD4+, CD8+ and B cells) in
infiltrated tumors was both widely dispersed in some regions of the tumor
bed and minimally infiltrated in other areas. Lymphocyte aggregates were
principally concentrated in the stromal and peritumoral regions, with
these areas being a preferential environment for B cells. Closer
examination of the lymphoid aggregates revealed they were tertiary
lymphoid structures containing a T cell zone predominantly composed of
CD4+ T cells and a B cell follicle with an active germinal center. These
data suggest that establishment of organized immune structures adjacent
to the tumor bed is an effective mechanism for generating anti-tumor
memory T and B cell responses.

