Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does gene transfer of gulono-lactone oxidase into human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells restore ascorbate biosynthesis


Humans are unable to synthesise ascorbate (vitamin C) due to a mutation
in the gene for gulono-lactone oxidase (Gulo), the terminal enzyme in the
synthesis pathway. Ascorbate is a vital micronutrient required for many
biological functions, including its action as a vital cofactor for Cu-
and Fe-containing enzymes. As enzyme cofactor for HIF-hydroxylases, it is
important for the regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), which
governs cancer growth and spread. A lack of ascorbate increases both the
level and activity of HIF-1 in cell culture.This study aimed to restore
ascorbate synthesis to human cells and to determine the effect of
intracellular ascorbate biosynthesis on HIF-1 levels. HepG2 cells were
gene modified using Lipofectamine LTX with a plasmid encoding the mouse
Gulo cDNA and a control plasmid encoding the green fluorescent protein
(GFP). Modified HepG2 cells were tested for genomic incorporation by PCR,
for Gulo enzyme production by Western blotting, and ascorbate synthesis
by high performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection
(HPLC-ECD). Protein levels of HIF-1alpha in hypoxic cells were measured
by Western blot analysis.Parental HepG2 cells accumulated a mean of 120
nmol ascorbate per 1 million cells when loaded for 24h with 0.5 mM
ascorbate. Gene-modified HepG2Gulo cells demonstrated a change in
morphology and an increase in adherence, compared to HepG2GFP and
parental HepG2 cells. A PCR-positive stable clone was able to synthesise
ascorbate but only when the Gulo substrate, L-gulono-1,4-lactone, was
supplied. Intracellular ascorbate levels then reached 5% of saturation
levels. Hypoxic HIF-1 accumulation was reduced by addition of
gulonolactone to this clone. However, gulonolactone also reduced HIF-1
levels in parental HepG2 cells, suggesting that it may similarly act as
cofactor for the HIF-hydroxlases.This study indicated that the ascorbate
biosynthesis pathway in human cells is significantly modified and may
contain numerous non-functional members besides gulono-lactone oxidase.
Future biochemical studies will determine which other enzymes are
non-functional.

