Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clues for targeted therapies in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive type of advanced
breast cancer characterized by rapid proliferation, early metastatic
development, and poor prognosis. The peculiar clinical presentation of
IBC characterized by breast erythema and swelling is caused by the
invasion of aggregates of tumor cells (tumor emboli) into the dermal
lymphatics, causing an obstruction of the lymph channels. Although, tumor
emboli are also occasionally demonstrated in non-IBC tumors, they are
more frequently detected and more numerous in IBC. Tumor emboli expressed
cell-cell adhesion molecules that maintain the tumor cells together. The
high risk of disease recurrence in soft tissue and lymph nodes shortly
after completion of multidisciplinary treatment particularly in patients
with residual disease supports the hypothesis that these tumor emboli are
critically related to the development of micro metastatic disease.We
developed a new model of IBC derived from the pleural effusion of a woman
with metastatic secondary IBC. FC-IBC02 cells are triple negative and
form clusters in suspension that were strongly positive for E-cadherin,
-catenin, and TSPAN24, all adhesion molecules that play an important role
in cell migration and invasion. The maintenance of cell-cell adhesions
allow the migration of tumor cells through the lymphatic and blood
vessels as clusters. FC-IBC02 cells shown a partial or incomplete
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT); these cells express some
epithelial markers (EpCAM, E-cadherin) and also mesenchymal markers (VIM,
FN1, Snai2, Twist1). Furthermore, circulating tumor cells (CTC) from IBC
patients are present in the blood as single cells and clusters supporting
the collective migration of tumor cells in IBC. FC-IBC02 cells were
highly metastatic when injected in the fat mammary pad of SCID mice and
these cells were able to produce brain metastasis in mice by intracardiac
or intra-peritoneal injections. Genomic studies of FC-IBC02 and other IBC
cell lines showed that IBC cells had important amplification of 8q24
where MYC, ATAD2 and the focal adhesion kinase FAK1 are located. MYC and
ATAD2 showed between 2.5-7 copies in IBC cells. FAK1, which plays
important roles in anoikis resistance and tumor metastasis, showed 6-4
copies in IBC cells. FAK1 is amplified, upregulated and phosphorylated
(active) in inflammatory breast cancer. Additionally, FC-IBC02 showed
amplification of ALK and NOTCH3. Our results indicate that MYC, ATAD2,
CD44, NOTCH3, ALK and/or FAK1 may be used as potential targeted therapies
against IBC. We are currently evaluating an ALK/FAK inhibitor using the
novel established IBC model.

