Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effects of peptide Rb4 derived from proteolipid protein
2 (PLP2) in a syngeneic murine melanoma model


Peptides have increasingly being investigated as drug candidates for
treatment of pathologies ranging from Alzheimer`s disease to cancer.
Literature shows that over expression of proteolipid protein 2 (PLP2) was
associated with metastasis of B16F10 melanoma. Authors showed later that
knock-down of PLP2 inhibited growth and metastasis of melanoma cells. The
present work aimed at studying the antitumor activity of peptide Rb4
derived from protein PLP2. Peptide Rb4, tested as synthetic peptide on
B16F10-Nex2 cells showed antitumor effects in vitro and in vivo. Rb4
induces a remarkable F-actin depolymerization, and also antagonizes
thapsigargin blockade of calcium channels on the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). Such effects on actin dynamics and calcium flow cause apoptosis in
murine melanoma B16F10-Nex2, and reduce the viability of several human
cancer cell lines. Chromatin condensation, DNA fragmentation, caspase 9
and caspase 3 activation are compatible with tumor cell apoptosis. Early
effects of the peptide were cell rounding and aggregation, followed by
substrate detachment. In vivo, peptide Rb4 reduced metastatic activity of
B16F10-Nex2 cells and delayed the subcutaneous growth of murine melanoma
in the syngeneic model. The protective effect of Rb4 observed in the
metastatic melanoma model was not, however, observed in immunodeficient
mice. Peptide Rb4 induces the expression of two DAMPs (damage-associated
molecular patterns), HMGB1 and calreticulin in B16F10-Nex2. Apart from a
direct adjuvant effect of Rb4 on dendritic cells (DCs), the expression of
DAMPs by tumor cells may also contribute to DCs activation thus
explaining the protective effect of the peptide in vivo against
B16F10-Nex2 melanoma. In conclusion, we suggest that peptide Rb4 is a
promising compound to be developed as an anticancer drug. Supported by
FAPESP grant 2010/51423-0 and the Brazilian National Research Council
(CNPq).

