Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMG 232, a small molecular inhibitor of MDM2 augments radiation
response in human tumors harboring wild-type p53


Activation of p53 is an attractive therapeutic target in radiation
oncology because of its tumor-suppressor activity. AMG 232 is an
effective p53 activator via inhibition of p53 interaction with its
primary negative regulator, MDM2. In the current study, we examine the
capacity of AMG 232 to augment radiation response in a variety of human
tumors derived from lung, breast, colorectal, melanoma and sarcoma.We
first examined the anti-proliferative effect of AMG 232 and confirmed a
dose-dependent growth inhibition following AMG 232 treatment across a
panel of 7 cell lines harboring wild type p53. In addition, the lack of
growth inhibition in a p53 null cell line H1299 confirmed the
p53-dependent anti-proliferative effect of AMG 232. Using clonogenic
survival analysis, we identified that treatment with AMG 232
significantly enhanced radiosensitivity in all cell lines tested.
Immunoblot analysis revealed the capacity of AMG 232 to inhibit
radiation-induced DNA damage repair via inhibition of ATM, DNAPK-DNA
ligase IV and BRCA1-Rad51/52 pathways. Flow cytometric analysis also
showed a significant accumulation of cell populations in G2/M phase and a
strong increase in H2AX expression at 48 hrs following 2 Gy of radiation
and AMG 232 treatment. Consistently, AMG 232 was shown to activate 1433
that blocked G2/M progression via inhibiting CDC2. Further imaging
studies to detect senescence-associated -galactosidase activity
identified that combined treatment of AMG 232 and radiation significantly
induced a senescence phenotype. These results suggest that AMG 232
augments radiation response via the induction of cell cycle arrest and/or
senescence followed by cell death, likely reflecting inhibitory effects
on DNA damage repair. In addition to increased apoptotic cell death
following the combination treatment, we found that autophagy-related cell
death may also be contributing to AMG 232-induced radiosensitivity.
Finally, in a variety of human tumor xenograft models, we confirmed that
the combination of AMG 232 and radiation resulted in a significant delay
in tumor regrowth and superior anti-tumor efficacy than treatment with
drug or radiation alone. Taken together, these data reveal the strong
capacity of AMG 232 to augment radiation response across a variety of
tumor types. These promising results provide a basis for the further
investigation of MDM2 antagonists combined with radiation as a novel
treatment approach in cancer therapy.

