Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of malignant melanoma growth triggered by the
brain microenvironment in experimental metastasis models


The brain offers a unique microenvironment to which malignant melanoma
frequently spreads leading to dismal prognosis for the patients. The
molecular determinants that promote melanoma brain metastases however,
remain largely unknown. Here, we show an experimental strategy utilizing
two species of immune-compromised animals in a metastasis model to
generate in vivo-cultivated metastatic tissues along with their
corresponding host tissues in order to identify molecular events
associated with brain metastases. The study was based on the melanoma
cell lines, Melmet 1 and Melmet 5 with opposing phenotypes
(invasive/proliferative, respectively) in the in vitro setting and
distinct metastatic patterns in vivo, where Melmet 1 showed a preference
to the brain. Transcriptional changes in the melanoma cells, as induced
by the brain-microenvironment in both host species, revealed the
opportunistic nature of melanoma in this context. We detected
transitioning from the invasive phenotype to the proliferative phenotype,
as the brain metastases passed from early to late growth phase. Of
significance, we identified a brain-adaptive phenotype with synaptic
characteristics and where glutamate signaling and Ca2+-dependent
effectors played a central role. The brain-adaptive phenotype was more
prominent in the earlier metastatic growth phases compared to a later
phase. Analysis of host tissue uncovered a cooperative inflammatory
microenvironment formed by activated host cells. Altogether, this
suggests that acquisition of the brain-adaptive phenotype in a permissive
environment might be critical for the establishment of metastatic growth
in the brain microenvironment and further, targeting glutamate signaling
may represent a therapeutic approach in brain metastasis. Global network
modeling and functional annotation analysis revealed that several of the
central molecular factors and pathways mediating melanoma brain
metastasis in this study, are also central to other pathological
diseases, in particular neurodegenerative diseases. The identification of
essential molecular networks that operate to promote the brain-adaptive
phenotype is of clinical relevance, as they represent leads to urgently
needed therapeutic targets.

