Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochemical and biophysical characterization of AD-O51.4 a novel
anticancer biological therapeutic agent with dual mechanism of action


BackgroundCancer growth and development is tightly related to both new
vessels formation for tissue remodeling and inhibition of anti-apoptotic
signals. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is important for
vascular development in physiological and pathological processes.
Blockade of VEGF pathway has been shown to inhibit both pathological
angiogenesis and tumor growth. Tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL/Apo2L) has been under intense scientific
evaluation because of its ability to induce apoptosis in cancer cells
while omitting normal cells. However, in most cases it wasn't potent
enough to become the effective single therapy agent. The AD-O51.4 is a
novel anticancer fusion protein. It consists of a recombinant variant of
TRAIL/Apo2L fragment, which is linked to the repeated antiangiogenic
effector peptide sequence derived from the 6th exon of VEGF ligand. The
peptide sequences are separated by a motif recognized by tumor-specific
proteases (MMP's, uPa). The structure and biophysical properties of
AD-O51.4 should be mostly derived from TRAIL/Apo2L - the carrier
component of the fusion molecule. The AD-O51.4 should be targeted to both
types: VEGF and TRAIL receptors and lead to sequestration of the VEGF
receptors on malignant and endothelial cells making them susceptible to
apoptosis induced through TRAIL/Apo2L dead receptors.MethodsThe AD-O51.4
has been produced in E. coli cells and purified using IEX chromatography.
Its structure and biophysical properties were verified using circular
dichroism (CD), size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), proteolytic
digestion of activation sequence and finally direct N-terminus
sequencing. The VEGF and TRAIL/Apo2L receptors specificity was confirmed
using surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Antitumor activity was analyzed on
a panel of established cancer cell lines and xenograft model of human
cancer.ResultsThe analysis of AD-O51.4 revealed secondary structure rich
with beta-sheets and a trimeric form of the fusion molecule what is
typical for TRAIL/Apo2L ligand. The molecule also displays strong
specific binding for both classes of receptors: VEGF and TRAIL/Apo2L what
confirms potential antiangiogenic and proapoptotic properties. Sequencing
and specific digestion endorsed molecule identity. Finally specific
cytotoxic and antitumor activities were confirmed for
AD-O51.4.ConclusionWe demonstrated that AD-O51.4 fusion protein has well
established structure corresponding to its main component TRAIL/Apo2L.
The structure of VEGF-derived peptides determines its specific
interaction with therapeutic targets and as a consequence its antitumor
properties. The obtained results confirm that a combination of two
effectors in one protein molecule may be an effective way of anticancer
compounds development.

