Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell (ADSC) has the
differentiation capacity toward cancer associated fibroblast (CAF) and
reproduce the morphology of the clinical tumor stroma


[Objectives] Crosstalk between cancer cells and Cancer-Associated
Fibroblast (CAF) plays a crucial role that comprises 3D organization of
solid cancers. It seems general understanding that the main origin of CAF
is circulating bone marrow derived Mesenchymal Stem Cell (BM-MSC), though
locally pre-existing resident MSC of adipose tissue (AD-MSC) should
partly contribute to CAF formation. The role of CAF and MSC to
tumorigenesis remains controversial,since some studies reported cancer
stimulating effect by externally added MSC or its potential
differentiating into CAF, while others showed its suppressive effect. The
capability of MSC's innate tropism for cancer, which enables us to apply
it for the cellular delivery of anti-cancer molecules, has attracted much
attention. One of the key issues should be whether externally added MSC
would accepted as a member of cancer 3D organization, and would
contribute to the cancer morphology. We tried to reveal whether AD-MSC,
which is much convenient source as engineered MSC than BM-MSC, stimulates
or inhibit tumor growth, and how MSC contribute to tumor stromal
morphogenesis.[Materials & Methods]Experiment: To evaluate the growth
advantage by adding MSC, and how MSC contribute to tumor stromal
morphogenesis, two differently-originated ADSC cell lines transfected
with GFP was mixed with human pancreatic-cancer cell line (Capan-1) at a
rate of 3106 /5106 , and inoculated into the back subcutaneous resion of
BALB/cAJcl-nu/nu mice. The tumor volume was calculated at Day4, Day7 and
Day10 to assess the growth advantage of tumor mixed with ADSC. The mice
was sacrificed at Day 10 and the histology of the resected tumor was
evaluated with fluorescence microscopy and immunostaining procedure with
anti-GFP antibody.[Results]Capan-1 formed significantly larger
subcutaneous tumor by adding with both two AD-MSC cell
lines(352mm3,265mm3) compared to control (70mm3) at Day10. In the tumor
mixed with one ADSC cell line, cancer cells formed ductal stractures and
contained fiber rich stroma with GFP positive fibroblasts among cancer
ducts, mimicked the similar distribution to that in clinical solid cancer
specimen. However, in the graft with the other ADSC cell line, cancer
cells presented cord-like structures or deregulated cell proliferation,
not formed ductal stractures. Though GFP positive cells could be
observed, they thinly and rondamly distributed in the
stroma.[Discussion]Both two AD-MSC plays promotive role in tumor growth,
and one of which strongly contribute to the tumor stromal morphogenesis.
Our AD-MSC could be regarded as a case which obviously differentiated
into CAF, and would be a good candidate source for forecomming CAF
therapy. Further studies revealing CAFs specific signature would helpful
for providing stable AD-MSC source.

