Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variability of HER2 expression between in vitro and in vivo models
within gastric cancer cell lines


In the process of developing individualized cancer therapeutics, tumor
derived cell line based preclinical (in vitro and in vivo) methods have
been widely used. Patient derived genome analysis revealed significant
cancer biomarkers for targeted drug development. Classic cancer
biomarker, HER2, overexpression was discovered as a cancer biomarker and
as a druggable target in breast cancer, which lead to the development of
Trastuzumab. HER2 is overexpressed in 10-25% of gastric cancer, and
treatment with Trastuzumab showed positive yet limited activity in
advanced gastric cancer treatment in the ToGA study. These results
present HER2 as an attractive target for gastric cancer. However, Gillet
and colleagues reported the challenges in the use of in vitro and in vivo
studies for drug validation and development. They reported variance in
gene expression patterns between the in vitro and in vivo context within
a single cancer cell line. In our study using gastric cancer derived cell
lines, we observed differences in HER2 expression between in vitro and in
vivo xenograft model. Also, we show the potential promising in vivo
xenograft model in the development of HER2 targeting agents for gastric
cancer.Eleven out of 25 gastric cancer cell lines showed HER2 expression,
which was demonstrated using the IHC assay on a cell microarray. Sixteen
out of 25 cell lines successfully produced xenograft models. Gastric
cancer cell lines (SNU-5, SNU-16, SNU-638, SNU-1967, MKN-1, MKN-28, and
NUGC-3) that had no HER2 expression when cultured in vitro showed HER2
expression in vivo. Two cell lines (NCC-19 and NCI-N87) that had HER2
expression in vitro showed a decrease in HER2 expression in vivo. Three
cell lines (SNU-484, SNU-668, and SNU-719) showed various levels of
increase in HER2 expression. Two cell lines showed minor to no changes in
HER2 expression. NUGC-4 had consistent significant HER2 expression levels
in both assays, while MKN-45 had consistent insignificant to no HER2
expression. Our study demonstrates inconsistency in HER2 gene expression
between in vitro and in vivo cancer cell line models for the first time
in gastric cancer.

