Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin and cancer risk: A cohort study in the UK Clinical
Practice Research Datalink analyzed like a randomized trial


INTRODUCTION: The biguanide metformin may reduce cancer incidence
according to recent meta-analyses of observational studies. Conversely, a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials did not support the
hypothesis that metformin lowers cancer risk. However, many of the
published pharmaco-epidemiological studies suffer from severe biases and
most randomized clinical trials are not designed or powered to look
specifically at cancer safety outcomes. Therefore, we emulated the design
and statistical analysis of a randomized trial in a large retrospective
cohort study within the United Kingdom (UK) Clinical Practice Research
Datalink (CPRD) to investigate associations comparing initiators of
metformin to initiators of other oral first-line hypoglycemic agents
among individuals newly diagnosed with diabetes in relation to risk of
total cancer and by cancer site.METHODS: We retrieved data on all
participants newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes between January 1, 1987
and December 31, 2010. Eligible participants had no prior history of
cancer and at least two years of follow-up in the CPRD after the
diagnosis of diabetes. We also excluded the initial 12 months of
follow-up after the first antidiabetic prescription. Treatment naive
participants with diabetes at CPRD enrolment that first started using
(initiators) metformin during follow-up were compared to initiators of
other oral hypoglycemic agents. Exposure to certain antidiabetic drugs
was classified only based on the initial twelve-month treatment period.
We mimicked the statistical analysis of a randomized trial in an
observational dataset using the intention-to-treat (ITT) principle. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and
95% confidence intervals (95% CI) after adjustment for known or suspected
risk factors for cancer. We also calculated adherence-adjusted estimates
using inverse probability weighting.RESULTS: A total of 95,820
participants were included. Of these, 51,484 (54%) individuals started
taking metformin monotherapy and 18,264 (19%) started sulfonylurea
monotherapy. A total of 3,805 first incident cancers were identified in a
maximum follow-up of 24 years. Compared to initiators of sulfonylurea
monotherapy, initiators of metformin had a similar incidence of total
cancer (HR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.89-1.04). There was no evidence for an
association between use of metformin and cancers of the colorectum (HR,
0.92; 95% CI, 0.76-1.13), prostate (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.83-1.25), lung
(HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.68-1.07), postmenopausal breast (HR, 1.03; 95% CI,
0.82-1.31), or any other cancer. The estimates remained similar after
adjustment for non-adherence.CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence for a
decreased or increased risk of any cancer among those exposed to
metformin versus sulfonylurea. These findings need to be confirmed in
large RCTs.

