Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mTORC2 component RICTOR plays a key role in lung cancer cell
growth


RICTOR (Rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR protein) is a key
component of mTORC2 (the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2). One of
the most-recognized targets for RICTOR-mTORC2 is AKT (Ser473). RICTOR
also carries functions independent of mTORC2. RICTOR signaling has been
suggested to play key roles in regulating cancer cell migration, invasion
and metastasis in breast, ovarian, colorectal cancers and gliomas. The
potential roles of RICTOR in lung cancer remain to be elucidated. We
first examined the expression profile of RICTOR in primary lung tumor
specimens and in lung cancer cell lines by immunohistochemistry. Among
125 FFPE patients' specimen, ninety nine were stained positive for RICTOR
(intensity 1+ to 3+). More interestingly, the RICTOR IHC expression is
stronger in squamous cell lung cancer in comparison to adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, twenty four out of 36 lung cancer cell lines showed positive
RICTOR IHC staining. Thus, RICTOR is expressed in most lung tumors. To
investigate the role of RICTOR in lung cancer cell growth, we found that
RICTOR knockdown by siRNA reduced colony formation in A549, HCC827 and
Calu3 cells, regardless of KRAS or EGFR mutational status (A549 is KRAS
mutated whereas HCC827 is EGFR mutated). Western blot confirmed RICTOR
knockdown and also decreased level of its downstream pAKT S473. We
further blocked RICTOR signaling by utilizing inducible shRNAs of RICTOR.
Similar inhibition of lung cancer cell growth was observed. Moreover, to
test the in vivo role of RICTOR, we preformed xenograft mouse
experiments. When RICTOR was inducibly knockdown by the presence of
doxycycline, the growth of A549 lung tumor xenografts was markedly
reduced by 60% (PRICTOR (Rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR protein)
is a key component of mTORC2 (the mammalian target of rapamycin complex
2). One of the most-recognized targets for RICTOR-mTORC2 is AKT (Ser473).
RICTOR also carries functions independent of mTORC2. RICTOR signaling has
been suggested to play key roles in regulating cancer cell migration,
invasion and metastasis in breast, ovarian, colorectal cancers and
gliomas. The potential roles of RICTOR in lung cancer remain to be
elucidated. We first examined the expression profile of RICTOR in primary
lung tumor specimens and in lung cancer cell lines by
immunohistochemistry. Among 125 FFPE patients' specimen, ninety nine were
stained positive for RICTOR (intensity 1+ to 3+). More interestingly, the
RICTOR IHC expression is stronger in squamous cell lung cancer in
comparison to adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, twenty four out of 36 lung
cancer cell lines showed positive RICTOR IHC staining. Thus, RICTOR is
expressed in most lung tumors. To investigate the role of RICTOR in lung
cancer cell growth, we found that RICTOR knockdown by siRNA reduced
colony formation in A549, HCC827 and Calu3 cells, regardless of KRAS or
EGFR mutational status (A549 is KRAS mutated whereas HCC827 is EGFR
mutated). Western blot confirmed RICTOR knockdown and also decreased
level of its downstream pAKT S473. We further blocked RICTOR signaling by
utilizing inducible shRNAs of RICTOR. Similar inhibition of lung cancer
cell growth was observed. Moreover, to test the in vivo role of RICTOR,
we preformed xenograft mouse experiments. When RICTOR was inducibly
knockdown by the presence of doxycycline, the growth of A549 lung tumor
xenografts was markedly reduced by 60% (P<0.05). Taken together, our
study provides the rational basis for a potential RICTOR-targeted therapy
in lung cancer.

