Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of viral agents in lymphoma tissues of
patients with ABC diffuse large B-cell lymphoma from high and low endemic
infectious disease region


Environmental factors play an important role in the development of
cancer. Infectious organisms are one of the major causes of cancer among
environmental factors. Several viruses have been classified as infectious
agents causing cancer as EBV, HTLV-1, herpes virus-8 and hepatitis. Since
the introduction of vaccines against viral infections as HPV and HBV, the
incidence of cervical cancer and HCC respectively has decreased.The aim
of the study was to investigate the detection of viral and microbial
agents in the lymphoma tissues of ABC DLBCL patients from Sweden (low
infectious disease region) and Egypt (high infectious disease region)
according to WHO classification. Microbial detection array (MDA)
technique was used to identify viral detection in the tissue samples as
well as antigen and antibody detection of serum samples of patients.A
differential detection of viruses in lymphoma tissues was noted comparing
Swedish and Egyptian patients. Viruses that were detected in all groups
(both controls and patients) were excluded leaving exclusively found
viruses in each group. HBV had the highest expression including the
complete genome and was only found in Egyptian patients. JCV was found
both in Egyptian and Swedish patients but with a higher expression in the
Egyptian patients while not detected in Swedish and Egyptian controls.
Generally, the highest expressions were found in Egyptian patients
compared to Swedish patients and controls from both countries. Few
viruses were found in the control groups.Based on serum HBV PCR, Egyptian
patients were divided into a HBV antigen positive (HBV+) and HBV negative
(HBV-) group. The relative expression of STAT3 did not differ between
HBV+ and HBV- Egyptian patients but was significantly higher in the
Swedish patients compared to the total Egyptian patient population.
Since, miR-1234 might regulate STAT3, we also related the relative
miR-1234 expression to HBV status. There was no difference in the
relative expression of miR-1234 between HBV+ and HBV- Egyptian patients,
while Swedish patients (HBV-) showed a significantly lower relative
expression of miR-1234, compared to the total Egyptian patient
population. miR-1234 related inversely to the expression patterns of
STAT3.The results indicate that Egyptian patients have a higher viral
load and that HBV was the most common virus. However, our results may be
of importance for treatment strategies in Egyptian patients since
previous data have shown HBV reactivation in patients from high endemic
infectious area during Rituximab treatment.In summary, indicated that
viral agents as JCV and HBV may be involved in the tumorigenesis of ABC
DLBCL. We could not detect a relation of STAT3 expression to HBV.
However, the regulation of STAT3 by miR-1234 might be associated to other
viral infections and to the higher viral load as noted in the Egyptian
patients.

