Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acid ceramidase promotes drug resistance in acute myeloid leukemia
through P-gp upregulation mediated by NF- kB activation


Background. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common form of adult
leukemia that affects the differentiation and survival of myeloid
precursors. AML patients have elevated immature leukemic cells known as
blasts. Failure to achieve remission commonly revolves around the drug
resistance advantage of AML blasts. P-glycoprotein (P-gp), an ATP-binding
cassette transporter (MDR1/ABCB1), is highly expressed in AML blasts.
However, P-gp inhibitors have failed to increase overall survival in AML
patients. Sphingolipids are a class of lipids that have a wide variety of
functions in cellular processes. Acid ceramidase (AC), an enzyme in the
sphingolipid network, catalyzes ceramide breakdown to generate
sphingosine. Sphingosine can then undergo phosphorylation by sphingosine
kinases to form sphingosine -1-phosphate (S1P).Aims. Our aims were to
determine whether AC is elevated in AML, is essential for AML drug
resistance and to identify the mechanism through which AC maintains drug
resistance in AML.Methods. We used microarray and fluorogenic AC
substrate to quantify AC expression and activity levels. Quantitative
real-time PCR, Western blotting and flow cytometry were used to determine
P-gp expression and activity. AC inhibitor LCL204 and AC shRNA were used
in human AML cell lines HL-60, HL-60/VCR and HL-60/ABT to uncover the
role of AC in drug resistance. We created an AC-overexpressing HL-60 cell
line to study AC-mediated drug resistance. NF-kB inhibitor JSH-23 was
used to test the pathway's involvement in AC-mediated drug resistance in
AML.Results. We demonstrate that AC expression and activity are elevated
in AML patient samples compared to normal donors. P-gp expression is also
elevated in AML patient samples compared to normal PBMC and cord blood.
Using human HL-60 cells and drug-resistant derivatives HL-60/VCR and
HL-60/ABT as our model, we found that P-gp expression is high in both
HL-60/VCR and HL-60/ABT. AC activity in both drug resistant cell lines is
also higher than the parental HL-60. Targeting AC with pharmacological
inhibitor LCL204 in HL-60/VCR cells decreases P-gp levels and increases
sensitivity to both chemotherapeutic drugs mitoxantrone and daunorubicin.
Lentiviral AC overexpression in HL-60 upregulates P-gp expression and
confers resistance to mitoxantrone and daunorubicin. Conversely, AC
knockdown in HL-60/VCR and HL-60/ABT cells decreased P-gp expression. AC
overexpression in HL-60 increases P-gp mRNA levels, which suggests
involvement of a transcriptional regulatory mechanism. NF-B inhibition by
JSH-23 decreases p65, P-gp and AC expression and warrants further
investigation into the mechanism for AC-mediated regulation of P-gp
expression.Summary. Our data supports an important role for AC in
regulating P-gp expression in AML and presents a novel target to overcome
drug resistance in AML.

