Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta-tocotrienol potentiates the antitumor activity of standard
chemotherapy with gemcitabine and abraxane in metastatic pancreatic cancer


Background: Pancreatic cancer, an aggressive and lethal cancer is the
fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States.
Gemcitabine is currently the standard chemotherapeutic agent for advanced
pancreatic cancer, but has limited efficacy due to chemoresistance and
dose escalation toxicity. Recently Abraxane has been approved for
metastatic pancreatic cancer along with gemcitabine. We have shown that
natural vitamin E -tocotrienol is the most bioactive tocotrienols against
pancreatic cancer in vitro as well as in vivo models. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the combination of -tocotrienol, gemcitabine and
abraxane on anchorage-dependent and indepencent metastatic tumor cell
growth, EMT, apoptosis, angiogenesis and oncogenic signaling in
metastatic human pancreatic cancer cell L3.6pl.Methods: Human pancreatic
cancer cell MiaPaCa-2 and human metastatic pancreatic cancer cell L3.6pl
were treated with different concentrations of -tocotrienol (10-100 M),
gemcitabine (0.5-10 M) and abraxane (0.5-10 M) alone and in combination
and anchorage-dependent growth recorded using MTT assay for 72 h. The
effect of -tocotrienol, gemcitabine and abraxane alone and in combination
on anchorage independent growth were performed using soft agar colony
formation assay. The apoptosis markers, epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), angiogenesis and oncogenic signaling markers were
determined by Western blotting.Results: Abraxane, gemcitabine and
-tocotrienol alone significantly inhibited the anchorage-dependent growth
in a concentration dependent manner. The combination of the two drugs
inhibited the growth synergistically. However the combination of the
three drugs profoundly inhibited the cell growth. Abraxane, gemcitabine
and -tocotrienol alone inhibited the soft agar colony formation but when
-tocotrienol was combined with gemcitabine and abraxane almost completely
inhibited the malignant transformation or anchorage independent cell
growth. Abraxane, gemcitabine and -tocotrienol alone induced apoptosis
(cleaved PARP1 and Bax expression) but when -tocotrienol was combined
with gemcitabine and abraxane profoundly increased apoptosis. Abraxane,
gemcitabine and -tocotrienol alone slightly decreased EMT (E-cadherin to
vimentin), angiogenesis (VEGF), pAKT and induction of cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor (p27Kip1) but when -tocotrienol was combined with
gemcitabine and abraxane profoundly decreased EMT, angiogenesis and pAKT
and more induction of p27Kip1.Conclusion: -tocotrienol potentiates
antitumor activity of gemcitabine and abraxane through inhibition of
metastatic pancreatic tumor growth, EMT, angiogenesis, cell cycle,
oncogenic signaling and induction of apoptosis in human metastatic
pancreatic cancer.

