Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired self-renewal and colitis susceptibility of colonic mucosa
in mice lacking AKR1B8


Background: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a major clinically defined form of
inflammatory bowel disease which affects individuals throughout a life
and associates with an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Aldo-keto reductase 1B10 (AKR1B10), isolated by our laboratory, is a
novel monomeric NADPH-dependent enzyme with reductive activity towards
reactive carbonyls. AKR1B10 also acts as a novel regulator of de novo
fatty acid synthesis and lipid metabolism via regulating acetyl-CoA
carboxylase- (ACCA) stability. AKR1B10 is primarily expressed in normal
human intestines, but lost in colorectal cancer and predisposition
conditions, such as UC and adenomatous polyps, suggesting its pathogenic
role in the these diseases.Aldo-keto reductase 1B8 (AKR1B8) is the mouse
ortholog of human AKR1B10, having the similar enzyme activity to
,-unsaturated carbonyls and capability of regulating fatty acid synthesis
and lipid metabolism in mice. Thereby, we generated an AKR1B8 knockout
(-/-) mouse strain to understand the etiopathogenic role of AKR1B10/8 in
the UC and associated colorectal cancer toMethods: AKR1B8 -/- mouse
strain was produced by homozygous recombination. Dextran sulfate sodium
(DSS) was utilized to induce colitis and associated colorectal tumors. In
detail, AKR1B8 -/- mice were fed with 2% DSS in drink water for four
cycles (e.g., 7 days DSS, 14 days water). Inflammatory activity and
masses were recorded, and histopathology of chronic colitis, crypt
architecture, and micro-neoplastic lesions was examined. Profiles of
multiple cytokines and reactive oxidative species in colonic mucosa were
estimated. Potential DNA mutations were identified using whole Exome
sequencing.Results: Targeted disruption of AKR1B8 disturbed the
self-renewal and injury recovery of colonic cryptic cells due to decrease
in lipid synthesis from butyrate. AKR1B8 deficient mice are highly
susceptible to colitis induced by DSS at 2% and to carbonyl and oxidative
DNA damage, leading to colitis-associated tumorigenesis and malignant
progression. Histopathological studies showed that AKR1B8 -/- mice
suffered severe inflammatory lesions and high-grade dysplasia.
Importantly, visible large masses were seen in AKR1B8 -/- mice, but not
in wild type that underwent the same DSS treatment. Furthermore, 269 gene
variants (in exons) were identified uniquely in AKR1B8 -/- colitis mucosa
and tumors, not in WT colitis. Among them, 20 genes were mutated in
colitis only and 28 genes in tumors alone. A total of 221 genes were
mutated in both AKR1B8 -/- colitis mucosa and tumors. These gene mutants
may represent the DNA damage that drives the malignant transition of
colitis.Conclusions: AKR1B8 (AKR1B10 in humans) is a critical protein
that regulates the dynamic homeostasis of self-renewal and barrier
function of colonic epithelium. AKR1B8 deficiency in colonic epithelium
is a critical etiopathogenic factor of UC and its tumorigenic
transformation.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

