Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast RHAMM promotes breast cancer aggression by promoting
expression of a subset of ERK1,2 target genes


The microenvironment plays a key role in cancer progression and
metabolism of the extracellular matrix component hyaluronan (HA), a
glycosaminoglycan, is associated with breast tumor progression. High
molecular weight HA is degraded by hyaluronidases and free radicals to
fragments of heterogeneous size, which accumulate in the peritumor stroma
and activate signaling pathways in both tumor and stromal cells. The HA
receptor RHAMM is a multifunctional protein that is found on the cell
surface, inside the nucleus and the mitotic spindles of mesenchymal
cells. RHAMM expression and HA accumulation in the tumor stroma are
linked to breast tumor progression, predicting that RHAMM/HA regulated
signaling is key to breast cancer progression. An N-terminally truncated
RHAMM isoform, RHAMMonc, is oncogenic when overexpressed in mesenchymal
cells. Intracellular RHAMMonc directly binds to ERK1, and complexes with
ERK1,2 and MEK1. Intracellular RHAMM is required for sustained ERK1,2
activation and for nuclear localization of a subset of active ERK1,2. We
hypothesized that this function results in expression of oncogenic
proteins that support breast cancer cell aggression.Study purpose:
determine the mechanism for RHAMMonc supported breast cancer
aggression.Experimental procedure: we used microarray analysis in
combination with real time PCR and ERK1,2 inhibition to identify genes
that are upregulated in response to RHAMMonc overexpression. To determine
whether nuclear RHAMMonc is required for neoplastic transformation we
added a nuclear export signal to the RHAMMonc cDNA (RHAMMNES-onc).
Mesenchymal cells overexpressing RHAMMonc or RHAMMNES-onc were injected
into immune compromised mice. To test whether these cells could support
in vivo growth of breast cancer cells, MCF7 cells were co-injected with
RHAMMonc or RHAMMNES-onc expressing cells into the mammary gland fat pad.
Tumor growth was quantified as tumor wet weight.Conclusion: Microarray
analysis in combination with real time PCR identified altered expression
of genes in all categories of the Hallmarks of Cancer in fibroblasts
overexpressing RHAMMonc compared to parental cells. A subset of these
were shown to be regulated by ERK1,2. Fusion of a nuclear export signal
to RHAMMonc (RHAMMNES-onc) resulted in export of this protein from the
nucleus, significant reduction of nuclear active ERK1,2 and modified
expression of a subset of ERK1,2 regulated genes (e.g. LOX, MMP9, CDH11).
Importantly, forced nuclear export of RHAMMonc suppressed its oncogenic
effect on fibroblasts. Furthermore, proliferation of human MCF7 breast
cancer cell xenografts was strongly stimulated by co-injection with
RHAMMonc fibroblasts but this stimulatory effect was lost when MCF7 tumor
cells were co-injected with RHAMMNES-onc. This study suggests that
nuclear RHAMMonc:ERK 1,2 interactions control an oncogenic program in
fibroblasts that support breast cancer aggression.

