Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET protein inhibitor OTX015 has selective anti-tumoral activity
in preclinical models of MYCN- amplified neuroblastoma


Neuroblastomas harboring MYCN amplifications are highly lethal tumors.
They are often resistant to standard chemotherapy, yet the development of
targeted therapies has been hampered by a lack of compounds targeting
MYCN. We and others have recently discovered that targeting BET
bromodomain proteins, especially BRD4, disrupts epigenetic regulation of
MYCN and its targets in neuroblastoma. OTX015, a new BET protein
inhibitor, is the first lead into clinical phase I/II trials and has
shown promising pharmacological properties in adults. Here, we
investigate the preclinical efficacy of OTX015 in MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma.We tested in vitro OTX015 efficacy in 6 established
neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines. We performed cell cycle profiling and
analyzed markers for apoptosis and proliferation after 72h-treatment at
500 nM OTX015. The effect of OTX015 on MYCN expression and global
MYCN-associated transcriptional activity was assessed by quantitative
real time PCR and gene expression microarray profiling, respectively. In
vivo efficacy of orally OTX015 was assessed in IMR5 xenografts, a N-MYC
driven NB model, using diffent treatment schedules (50mg/kg/day,
100mg/kg/day and 50mg/kg/bidaily).Treatment of MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma cells with OTX015 resulted in decreased cell viability,
induction of apoptosis and reduced proliferation. Concentrations of 50%
inhibition (IC50) ranged between 50nM and 500nM. OTX015 treatment also
resulted in an increase in the percentage of cells in G1 phase. This
corresponded with the downregulation of MYCN mRNA and protein levels and
MYCN-associated transcriptional activity. Interestigly, MYCN amplified
cell lines were most sensitive to OTX015 treatment. In contrast, no
effect was observed with OTX15 on normal cells. In vivo treatment with
OTX015, significantly decreased tumor burden after 4 weeks and prolonged
survival as compared to vehicle-treated mice. These preclinical findings
highlight the promise of BET bromodomain inhibitors as novel agents for
MYCN-driven neuroblastomas and serve as rationale to move forward with
early phase clinical trials for children with these highly lethal tumors.

