Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of orthotopic pancreatic adenocarcinoma using
multispectral optoacoustic tomography


Purpose:Current imaging methods cannot provide needed visualization of
pancreatic tumors due to coarse resolution (>2mm), 2D presentation of
data, requirements of ionizing radiation, or deflective light scattering
and sensitivity at depth. Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT)
detects small sound vibrations, optoacoustics, resulting from selective
absorption of light at multiple wavelengths, enabling 3D volumetric
spectrally enriched (color) imaging from deep living tissues in real time
and at high spatial resolution. In this study, we examined the use of
MSOT imaging technology in the identification of orthotopic pancreatic
tumors using a near-infrared fluorescent-labeled EGF
probe.Methods:Pancreatic cell lines, S2VP10, MiaPaCa2, and Panc-1, were
evaluated for EGFR expression using western blot. EGF probe was
constructed through bio-conjugation of functionalized EGF ligand with
CF750-ester NIR dye. Specificity and activity of the EGF probe were
evaluated using flow-cytometry and immunocytochemistry. SCID mice (5
mice/group) were orthotopically implanted with S2VP10 (1.5 x 105) or
MiaPaCa2 (2.0 x 106) pancreatic tumor cells. Once tumors were implanted,
mice were imaged using bioluminescence imaging to identify possible
injection leakage. After tumors reached 3mm, 200L of 100 nM EGF probe or
dye alone were systemically injected into mice. Mice were imaged at
6-hour intervals for 24 hours using Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography
(MSOT). EGF-probe accumulation was verified ex vivo using fluorescent
imaging and histology.Results:S2VP10, Panc-1, and MiaPaCa2 cells
expressed EGFR at 1.2X, 1.0X, and 0.6X relative abundance, respectively.
The positive control exhibited the highest EGFR expression at 1.8X, while
EGFR negative NIH:3T3 cells demonstrated a value of Purpose:Current
imaging methods cannot provide needed visualization of pancreatic tumors
due to coarse resolution (>2mm), 2D presentation of data, requirements of
ionizing radiation, or deflective light scattering and sensitivity at
depth. Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT) detects small sound
vibrations, optoacoustics, resulting from selective absorption of light
at multiple wavelengths, enabling 3D volumetric spectrally enriched
(color) imaging from deep living tissues in real time and at high spatial
resolution. In this study, we examined the use of MSOT imaging technology
in the identification of orthotopic pancreatic tumors using a
near-infrared fluorescent-labeled EGF probe.Methods:Pancreatic cell
lines, S2VP10, MiaPaCa2, and Panc-1, were evaluated for EGFR expression
using western blot. EGF probe was constructed through bio-conjugation of
functionalized EGF ligand with CF750-ester NIR dye. Specificity and
activity of the EGF probe were evaluated using flow-cytometry and
immunocytochemistry. SCID mice (5 mice/group) were orthotopically
implanted with S2VP10 (1.5 x 105) or MiaPaCa2 (2.0 x 106) pancreatic
tumor cells. Once tumors were implanted, mice were imaged using
bioluminescence imaging to identify possible injection leakage. After
tumors reached 3mm, 200L of 100 nM EGF probe or dye alone were
systemically injected into mice. Mice were imaged at 6-hour intervals for
24 hours using Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT). EGF-probe
accumulation was verified ex vivo using fluorescent imaging and
histology.Results:S2VP10, Panc-1, and MiaPaCa2 cells expressed EGFR at
1.2X, 1.0X, and 0.6X relative abundance, respectively. The positive
control exhibited the highest EGFR expression at 1.8X, while EGFR
negative NIH:3T3 cells demonstrated a value of <0.2X. Flow-cytometry
showed cellular uptake of EGF probe in S2VP10 and MiaPaCa2 cell lines,
while NIH3T3 (negative control) cell line exhibited minimum uptake.
Blocking of S2VP10, MiaPaCa2, and SKOV3ip1 (positive control) cell lines
with EGFR blocking antibody inhibited cellular binding of EGF probe. In
vivo, peak accumulation of EGF probe within the tumor site was at 6 hours
as observed using MSOT. EGF signal was observed within the pancreas tumor
in slices from 38mm 42mm. Ex vivo evaluation of EGF probe accumulation
also verified MSOT images demonstrating within the pancreas tumor, but
not the liver or kidney.Conclusions:This is the first study which
demonstrates the feasibility of detecting orthotopic pancreatic cancer at
depths of greater than 7mm in vivo using MSOT. This benefit the field of
cancer research as disease progression can be monitored at various time
points during tumor growth without unnecessary euthanizing and ex vivo
imaging.

