Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteasome inhibitor synergizes with histone deacetylase inhibitor
to trigger ROS- and ER stress-induced apoptosis of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma independent of aggresome disruption


Proteasome inhibitor and histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) can
synergistically induce apoptosis of cancer cells through aggresome
disruption or induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We
previously reported that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a
pan-HDACi, and bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor can synergistically
induce apoptosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells through reactive
oxygen species (ROS)-driven caspase-dependent mechanism. Here, we wish to
investigate the role of aggresome disruption or ER stress in the process.
We first tested the effect of bortezomib combining with a more specific
HDACi, including MS-275, apicidin or romidepsin, on proliferation of NPC
cells. Bortezomib could synergize with each of the specific HDACis to
induce killing of the NPC cells. Strong apoptosis was demonstrated by the
proteolytic cleavage of PARP and caspase-3, -8 and -9 as well as the high
percentage of annexin V/propidium iodide (AV/PI)-positive NPC cells upon
treatment with combination of bortezomib at 7.5 to 15 nM and romidepsin
at 2.5 to 5 nM. Consistently, the apoptosis was ROS- and
caspase-dependent. Interestingly, -tubulin, a key substrate of histone
deacetylase 6, was not acetylated, arguing against the involvement of
aggresome disruption. In contrast, ER stress induction might be involved
because ATF-4 and CHOP, which are markers of ER stress, were up-regulated
by combined bortezomib/romidepsin and inhibition of caspase-4 could
suppress the apoptosis. Furthermore, addition of ROS scavenger,
N-acetyl-cysteine, suppressed the expression of ATF-4 and CHOP. We
conclude that proteasome inhibitor can synergize with HDACi to trigger
ROS- and ER stress-induced apoptosis of NPC cells, independent of
aggresome disruption.This project is funded by NPC Area of Excellence
(AoE/M 06/08 Center for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Research), CRCG
(#10401264) and Epstein-Barr virus research (# 20004525) grants of A.K.S.
Chiang.

