Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of miR-9 expression and activation in canine
osteosarcoma


Introduction: Osteosarcoma (OSA) is the most common malignant bone tumor
in children and dogs. Despite aggressive treatment, no improvement in
survival times has been achieved in the past 15 years with 40% of
children and 90% of dogs still dying from disease. MicroRNAs (miRs) are
non-protein coding RNAs that have been implicated as having a fundamental
role in cancer. We analyzed primary canine OSA tumors and canine
osteoblasts for miR expression and found miR-9 to be highly expressed in
OSA tumors and cell lines as compared to normal osteoblasts. We
hypothesize that miR-9 overexpression generates a pattern of gene
dysregulation that contributes to the pathogenesis of OSA.Methodology:
Canine bone marrow derived stem cells were differentiated in vitro into
osteoblasts and expression of bone-specific markers (ALP, OP, BMP-2) was
detected by immunocytochemistry or RT-PCR. MiR expression profiling was
performed on 48 primary canine OSA tumors and 3 osteoblast cultures using
the NanoString nCounter human microRNA Expression Assay. Taqman miRNA
assays were used to measure miR-9 expression in primary canine OSA
tumors, OSA cell lines, primary osteoblast cultures, and commercially
available osteoblast cell lines. Canine OSA16 and osteoblast cell lines
were transduced with lentiviral pre-miR-9 or empty control vector
constructs and cells were evaluated for differences in proliferative
capacity, apoptosis, and the ability to migrate through Matrigel.Results
and Conclusions: We identified 84 miRs (p 0.01) differentially expressed
in primary canine OSA tumors compared to canine osteoblasts. MiR-9 was
highly expressed in primary OSA tumors and cell lines as compared to
normal osteoblast cell lines or primary cultures. Canine OSA16 and normal
osteoblast cell lines, which express low levels of miR-9 were transduced
with miR-9 lentiviral constructs resulting in high levels of miR-9
expression. Overexpression of miR-9 did not effect cell proliferation or
apoptosis, but enhanced invasion through matrigel in both malignant OSA
cells and normal osteoblasts. Our findings suggest that miR-9 may play an
important role in regulating OSA cell invasion and suggest that
overexpression of miR-9 in vivo may promote metastasis in canine OSA.
Transcriptional and proteomic profiling of osteoblasts overexpressing
miR-9 is underway to define key differences in mRNA and protein
expression and phosphorylation that may contribute to the metastatic
phenotype in canine OSA. This work will provide significant new data
regarding the impact of miR-9 on molecular pathways in OSA, thereby
laying the foundation for the development and testing of novel
therapeutics in both children and dogs affected by this disease.

