Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of various anticoagulants on the bioanalysis of drugs in
rat blood: Implications for pharmacokinetic studies of anticancer drugs


Background: Pharmacokinetic studies play a vital role in the development
and optimization of drugs, more so in cancer. Most often, pharmacokinetic
blood samples are collected in EDTA vacutainers. Heparin is used
infrequently and citrate, hardly ever. While the choice of anticoagulant
is based on scientific rationale for some drugs, it is arbitrary in most
others, with EDTA being the choice by convention. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the effects of anticoagulants on the bioanalysis of
drugs.Methods: Six drugs used extensively in cancer therapy / care were
selected. Albino wistar rats (N=6 per drug) were dosed with one of the
following drugs intraperitoneally - Pemetrexed (50mg/kg), Imatinib
(50mg/kg), Erlotinib (25mg/kg), Meropenem (60mg/kg), 6-Mercaptopurine
(20mg/kg) and Voriconazole (6mg/kg). Animals were sacrificed 2 hours
after dosing (1 hour in 6-mercaptopurine group due to short half-life) by
terminal bleeding from the retro-orbital plexus. Approximately 750 L of
blood was collected in each of Na2ETDA, heparin, trisodium citrate (TSC)
and plain (no anticoagulant) tubes. Blood levels of the drug were
determined by HPLC assay.Results: Table below summarizes the findings of
the study. Anticoagulant effect was significant for 3 out of 6 drugs.
Concentration of erlotinib and meropenam were significantly
underestimated when heparin was used, whereas EDTA led to underestimation
of 6-mercaptopurine levels. Anticoagulants did not have any effect on the
estimation of voriconazole levels. High interanimal variability in
imatinib and pemetrexed levels did not allow adequate evaluation of the
anticoagulant effect, although large differences in the average
concentration of drugs were observed.Conclusion: Careful selection of
anti-coagulant is necessary for accurate characterization of
pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs. EDTA as the anticoagulant of choice
is questionable and may lead to erroneous interpretation of
pharmacokinetic data.


