Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carcinoma-associated fibroblast-mediated regulation of anoikis in
breast cancer cells


There is accumulating evidence that carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) in the microenvironment are critical players in the promotion of
tumor progression and metastasis. However, the precise mechanisms
utilized by CAFs to enhance malignancy are only beginning to be
understood. Given the fact that cancer cells lack normal extracellular
matrix (ECM) attachment after breaking through the basement membrane, we
hypothesized that CAFs may be actively involved in the inhibition of
anoikis (ECM-detachment-induced cell death). To investigate this
question, we utilized NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts lacking the caveolin-1
gene (Cav -/-), a cell line that has previously been demonstrated to
share many similarities to human CAFs. Interestingly, the addition of
media conditioned by Cav-/- and patient-derived human CAFs led to robust
anoikis inhibition in detached MCF-10A cells, suggesting that factors
secreted by CAFs can block anoikis. Moreover, the ability of
CAF-conditioned media to block anoikis was not limited to MCF-10A cells
as we obtained similar results in other non-tumorigenic and breast cancer
cell lines. To examine if the observed differences in anoikis induction
caused by secreted factors from CAFs manifest in a more physiologically
relevant context, we employed a 3-dimensional (3D) cell culture model of
mammary acinus development. MCF-10A acini exposed to secreted factors
from CAFs were more prone to have filled lumen suggesting that factors
secreted by CAFs can promote the survival of ECM-detached cells in the
luminal space.In addition, when investigating the mechanism by which CAFs
block anoikis, we discovered that the release of mitochondrial cytochrome
c into the cytosol was robustly inhibited by CAF-conditioned media in
MCF-10A cells. Additionally, we discovered that the degradation of Mcl-1
was strongly inhibited by CAF-conditioned media suggesting that Mcl-1 was
not properly targeted to the proteasome. Stability of Mcl-1 is triggered
by activation of ILK and p-ERK and inhibition of Gsk-3. Furthermore,
using proteomic analyses, we have identified proteins of the IGFBP family
that are differentially secreted by CAFs in a fashion that is both
necessary for anoikis inhibition by CAFs and sufficient to inhibit
anoikis on their own. Lastly, we found that tumor formation in
immunocompromised mice was reduced when cancer cells were co-injected
with IGFBP-deficient CAFs rather than normal CAFs. In aggregate, these
data identify a novel mechanism by which CAFs contribute to tumorigenesis
(the inhibition of anoikis) and suggest that targeting factors secreted
from CAFs could be a novel therapeutic approach to eliminate ECM-detached
cells through the selective induction of anoikis.

