Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The breast cancer metastasis suppressor RRP1B modulates metastasis
through regulation of histone methylation


Ribosomal RNA Processing 1 Homolog B (Rrp1b) is a germline breast cancer
metastasis suppressor that regulates transcription to induce a highly
prognostic gene expression signature. Although RRP1B interacts with
chromatin- and mRNA splicing-associated factors, the mechanisms by which
RRP1B modulates metastasis-associated gene expression are unclear. In
this study, we examined the chromatin-binding properties of RRP1B to
determine the mechanism by which it regulates metastasis-associated gene
transcription.Genome-wide chromatin binding sites for endogenous RRP1B
were defined using chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) in
Hela and MDA-MB-231 cells. ChIP-seq analysis of these samples identified
689 RRP1B binding regions in Hela and 339 binding regions in MDA-MB-231
cells. Among these, 136 regions were common to both cell lines. The
expression of 40 genes located at or near these binding regions was
examined by qPCR in MDA-MB-231 cells stably over-expressing RRP1B. These
experiments demonstrated that RRP1B binding is primarily associated with
transcriptional repression. Co-occupancy of RRP1B with the
heterochromatin-associated proteins TRIM28 and HP1 at these loci were
observed through ChIP-reChIP assays. Interaction between RRP1B and TRIM28
and HP1 was confirmed through co-immunoprecipitation.TRIM28 and HP1 have
been shown to induce trimethylation of histone H3 at the lysine-9
position (H3K9me3) via the histone methyltransferase, SETDB1. Increases
in H3K9me3 are typically associated with heterochromatinization and
transcriptional repression. Given that RRP1B interacts with both TRIM28
and HP1, and binds at common chromatin regions with these factors, we
hypothesized that RRP1B is also implicated in increasing H3K9me3 levels
at these loci. To examine the effect of RRP1B on H3K9me3, ChIP assays
were performed in MDA-MB-231 cells stably over-expressing RRP1B and
control cells with an antibody against H3K9me3. ChIP-qPCR demonstrated
that chromatin regions that displayed co-occupancy of RRP1B with TRIM28
and HP1 have increased levels of H3K9me3 compared to that of the control.
Additionally, ChIP-seq for H3K9me3 in cells stably over-expressing RRP1B
demonstrated that RRP1B causes a global increase in H3K9me3 levels
compared to control.These data collectively demonstrate that RRP1B
regulates gene expression at the transcriptional level through an
association with the transcriptional repressors TRIM28 and HP1.
Furthermore, the prominent mechanism that the metastasis suppressor RRP1B
uses to regulate transcription is through epigenetic modifications, such
as histone methylation.

