Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced adipogenesis of bone marrow-derived stromal cells by
ovarian cancer cells via BMP4 and IL8 is associated with increase in
cancer stem/progenitor cells and cancer cell proliferation


Collaborative interactions between malignant cancer cells and their
surrounding nonmalignant stromal cells are increasingly recognized as
crucial factors in tumor biology. In adenocarcinomas such as serous
ovarian cancer, stromal cells in the microenvironment are recruited
either locally from neighboring tissues or distantly from the circulation
and bone marrow. To study the effects of bone marrow-derived stromal
cells on ovarian cancer, two bone marrow preadipocyte stromal cell lines,
MS5 and OP9, were used in coculture with ovarian cancer cell lines. Large
number of adipocytes was observed in coculture of ovarian cancer cells
with stromal cells when compared to stromal cells cultured alone. To
quantify the extent of adipogenesis induced by ovarian cancer cells, MS5
or OP9 was cocultured with three ovarian cancer cell lines OVCAR3, OVCAR5
and SKOV3 by using 0.4 m transwell permeable support and stained for oil
red O after 7 days. OVCAR5 coculture resulted in highest increase in the
amount of oil red O stain of 2.50.6-fold in MS5 and 2.60.8-fold in OP9
compared to MS5 or OP9 alone. Recently, it was reported that adipocytes
promote ovarian cancer growth by providing energy to cancer cells (Nieman
et al. Nature Medicine, 2011). In support of this observation, we found
that coculture of MS5 yielded a 1.90.1-fold increase in number of OVCAR5
cells. After coculturing with MS5 or OP9 stromal cells for 7 days, OVCAR5
cells were harvested from the transwell permeable support to allow
colonies to form in low melting point agarose for 28 days to determine
the number of cancer stem/progenitor cells. OVCAR5 cultured alone has a
colony formation efficiency of 2.64%. OVCAR5 that was cocultured with MS5
or OP9 has a higher percentage of colonies of 6.52% and 9.2%
respectively. A panel of 17 cytokines/growth factors was analyzed by
RT-PCR to determine the putative factors secreted by OVCAR5 that promotes
adipogenesis. BMP4 and IL8 were found to be highly expressed in OVCAR5
when compared to SKOV3, which only mildly increased adipocyte number.
shRNAs against BMP4 and IL8 were used to silence the respective cytokines
in OVCAR5 by lentiviral vectors. Coculture of shBMP4 or shIL8 OVCAR5
cells with MS5 in transwell filter each resulted in a 15 and 24% decrease
in oil red O stain, confirming the enhanced adipogenesis was partly
conferred by BMP4 and IL8 secreted by OVCAR5. Our results illustrate how
ovarian tumor cells modulate the host environment by stimulating
differentiation of adipocytes from their precursor cells from the bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells, which in turn favor the proliferation and
increase the number of ovarian cancer stem cells. This study strengthens
the importance of tumor microenvironment in providing a tumor stem cell
niche and proposes possible targets for cancer therapy that counteracts
the differentiation of adipocytes caused by ovarian cancer cells.

