Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic association study of the mitochondrial genome and
colorectal cancer risk: The Multiethnic Cohort


Background: The mitochondrial genome is highly specialized, encoding
essential mitochondrial electron transport chain proteins required for
aerobic metabolism, and involved in free radical productiontwo pathways
that are involved in carcinogenesis. The role of the mitochondrial genome
in colorectal cancer susceptibility has yet to be fully examined. We
comprehensively characterized the genetic variation across the 16kb
mitochondrial genome across five ancestral populations and examined the
association between mitochondrial SNPs (mtSNPs) and colorectal cancer
risk in a multiethnic population.Methods: We compiled mitochondrial
sequencing data from the public domain for African, Asian, European, and
Latino populations, and sequenced the mitochondrial genomes of 160 Native
Hawaiians. A total of 863 mtSNPs (MAF>1%) were identified and genotyped
in a multiethnic validation panel, identifying 621 mtSNPs with working
assays and resulting in 446 mtSNPs detected in at least one sample. A
total of 186 mtSNPs were prioritized based on MAF>2% for genotyping in a
case-control study of colorectal cancer nested in the Multiethnic Cohort
(cases/controls=1,923/10,555). To evaluate the association between mtSNPs
and colorectal cancer risk, odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI) were estimated by unconditional logistic regression, adjusting for
age, sex, and maternal self-reported ancestry. Stratified analysis were
conducted by maternal self-reported ancestry given the wide variation in
allele frequencies across ancestral groups. A Bonferroni-corrected
p-value of 8.77x10-5 was used to determine statistical significance of
associations given the number of mtSNPs tested and stratified
analyses.Results: At a nominal P1%) were associated with colorectal
cancer for all groups combined, while 5 of 114 mtSNPs, 1 of 45 mtSNPs, 7
of 65 mtSNPs, 42 of 101 mtSNPs, and 12 of 70 mtSNPs were associated among
African Americans, Native Hawaiians, Asian Americans, Latinos, and
European Americans, respectively. Statistically significant associations
with colorectal cancer were observed with seven mtSNPs (four largely
independent signals) among Latinos (P1%) were associated with colorectal
cancer for all groups combined, while 5 of 114 mtSNPs, 1 of 45 mtSNPs, 7
of 65 mtSNPs, 42 of 101 mtSNPs, and 12 of 70 mtSNPs were associated among
African Americans, Native Hawaiians, Asian Americans, Latinos, and
European Americans, respectively. Statistically significant associations
with colorectal cancer were observed with seven mtSNPs (four largely
independent signals) among Latinos (P<8.5x10-5). Among Latinos, the most
significant association was observed with mt769 that is located within
the gene that encodes for the 16s rRNA (OR=0.36; 95% CI: 0.23-0.55,
P=5x10-6); this association remained statistically significant with
adjustment for genetic ancestry based on nuclear DNA encoded ancestry
informative markers.Conclusion: Our study suggests that inherited
variants of the mitochondrial genome may be associated with colorectal
cancer risk in specific ancestral populations. Future work will further
address population stratification of the mitochondrial genome, as well as
investigate haplogroup associations and the cumulative effects of
mitochondrial genes on colorectal cancer susceptibility.

