Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of the PARP inhibitor E7449 in Ewing's sarcoma


Ewing's sarcoma affects mostly adolescents and young adults with tumors
that predominate in bone, characterized by the presence of fusion
proteins created by chromosomal translocations (EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG etc.).
Recent studies demonstrated an interaction between EWS fusion proteins
and PARP1; increased DNA damage and elevated PARP levels upon fusion
protein expression as well as sensitivity to PARP inhibition have been
reported. E7449, a potent, orally available PARP inhibitor was evaluated
in various xenograft models of Ewing's sarcoma as a single agent and in
combination with TMZ or irinotecan, chemotherapies often used in relapsed
patients.In an RD-ES (ATCC HTB166) Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1) s.c.
xenograft model, treatment with single agent E7449 or TMZ resulted in no
antitumor activity. However, when combined exquisite synergy that
resulted in tumor regression and tumor-free mice was observed, even at
the low E7449 combination dose of 1 mg/kg. E7449 dose responsive
re-growth of tumors was observed and 8/8 mice remained tumor-free in the
highest dose group (30 mg/kg) at study termination. Enhanced toxicity as
measured by body weight loss was observed in combination treatment groups
but mice generally recovered well. Significant antitumor activity was
observed for irinotecan alone in the RD-ES model; combination with E7449
enhanced that activity. Combining TMZ and irinotecan was also efficacious
in the RD-ES model. Antitumor activity was further enhanced by the
addition of E7449 which also potentiated combination toxicity. Studies
are ongoing to optimize dosing of E7449 and chemotherapy and to identify
a treatment schedule that maximizes activity and tolerability of the
various combinations.Additionally, the activity of E7449 alone and in
combination was evaluated in 2 Ewing's sarcoma patient-derived xenograft
(PDx) models. In one model (CTG-0143) neither TMZ nor E7449 as single
agents had significant antitumor activity. However, the combination of
E7449 + TMZ resulted in striking synergy and tumor regression. Although
tumors were large when treatment started, significant antitumor activity
was also observed with single agent irinotecan and combination treatment.
The second model (CTG-0142) was sensitive to E7449 alone at high dose and
to both chemotherapies (TMZ and irinotecan) as single agents. Addition of
E7449 to either TMZ or irinotecan resulted in enhanced anti-tumor
activity as measured by significantly delayed tumor re-growth following
regression. Biomarker analysis is ongoing, including gene expression
profiling and assessment of the DNA damage response in tumors from RD-ES
and PDx models following drug treatments.In conclusion, the combination
of E7449 with TMZ and irinotecan resulted in highly potent anti-cancer
activity against cell line and PDx models of Ewing's sarcoma. These data
support the assessment of E7449 as a combination therapy for Ewing's
sarcoma in clinical trials.

