Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unstable phenotype of human colon cancer tumor initiating cells


We have previously shown that long term progression of human colorectal
cancer in serial xenotransplantation is driven by a small sub-fraction of
all tumor initiating cells (TIC). These long-term TIC (LT-TIC) self-renew
extensively in vivo and are exclusively able to seed metastases in
distant organs. Defined phenotypic surface markers of LT-TIC would be
crucial to develop effective antibody-based targeting strategies.
However, it remains elusive whether a fixed phenotype of long-term TIC is
associated with their tumorigenicity thereby allowing prospective
isolation of this most relevant cancer cell fraction.To address this
question, three dimensional spheroid cultures in serum free medium
supplemented with FGF and EGF were generated from primary human colon
cancer specimens to enrich for TIC. To calculate the frequency of TIC in
spheroid cultures, cells were transplanted in limiting dilution into
cohorts of Nod/SCID-IL2RG-/- (NSG) mice. TIC frequency varied from 1 in
22 to 1 in 2x104 spheroid cells, depending on the respective patient
sample. When the spheroid cells were transferred to culture conditions
that favor their differentiation (gelatin coated plates in the presence
of serum and withdrawal of cytokines) the phenotype changed dramatically.
The primary colon cancer cells did no longer grow as spheroids but formed
an adherent cell layer and up-regulated the colon epithelial
differentiation markers CDX2, DEFA5, KRT80, Muc20 and TFF2. In addition,
CD133, a widely used marker to enrich for TICs in various solid cancers,
was strongly down-regulated upon serum treatment. Strikingly, when
xenotransplantated into NSG mice, cells cultured under spheroid and
differentiation conditions equally formed serially transplantable tumors,
demonstrating that tumor initiating and self-renewal capacity of TIC was
not restricted to phenotypically immature spheroid cells. Moreover, CD133
expression did not predict successful tumor formation in vivo. Sorted
CD133+ and CD133- cells from 3 individual patients formed tumors with
equal efficiency and regenerated both, CD133+ and CD133- cells in vivo.
Importantly, clonal analyses of individual lentivirally marked TIC clones
cultured under either culture condition revealed no systematic
differences in TIC frequency, demonstrating that phenotypic
differentiation does not lead to quantitative elimination of TIC
clones.Our results demonstrate that phenotypic differentiation does not
eliminate the tumor-initiating potential of human colorectal TIC.
Moreover, expression of CD133 does not predict their tumor forming and
self-renewal potential. This pronounced phenotypic plasticity of human
colon cancer TIC poses a grave challenge for surface-targeted elimination
of TIC in colorectal cancer.

