Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 16S rRNA saliva analysis unveils microbiome biomonitors linked to
human papilloma virus and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma


Microbiota markers in saliva able to distinguish HPV positive from HPV
negative Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, as well
as HNSCC patients from controls, will enable increases in treatment
options, reductions in treatment costs and improvements in survival
rates. In the present study we compared the microbiota present in saliva
DNA from HPV positive and HPV negative oropharyngeal cancer (OPSCC)
patients to saliva DNA from uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) patients,
used as normal oral mucosa controls.PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA
V3-V5 gene region was performed using the 357F/926R primer set. Amplified
fragments were multiplexed on the Roche/454 GS Junior sequencing
platform. Data were screened for chimeric sequences and contaminant
chloroplast DNA after pre-processing. Passing sequences were
characterized for diversity and taxonomic composition using QIIME and R
before cross-tabulation analyses were performed.Bacteroidetes,
Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria dominated the microbiome in our sample set
with less frequent presence of Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria members.
At lower taxonomic levels, the most abundant genera observed were
Streptococcus, Prevotella and Veillonella. We found statistically
significant associations in the alpha-diversity estimators of UPPP and
OPSCC patients. Specifically, the microbiota communities present in UPPP
are significantly enriched in the observed_species category (PMicrobiota
markers in saliva able to distinguish HPV positive from HPV negative Head
and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, as well as HNSCC
patients from controls, will enable increases in treatment options,
reductions in treatment costs and improvements in survival rates. In the
present study we compared the microbiota present in saliva DNA from HPV
positive and HPV negative oropharyngeal cancer (OPSCC) patients to saliva
DNA from uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) patients, used as normal oral
mucosa controls.PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA V3-V5 gene region was
performed using the 357F/926R primer set. Amplified fragments were
multiplexed on the Roche/454 GS Junior sequencing platform. Data were
screened for chimeric sequences and contaminant chloroplast DNA after
pre-processing. Passing sequences were characterized for diversity and
taxonomic composition using QIIME and R before cross-tabulation analyses
were performed.Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria dominated
the microbiome in our sample set with less frequent presence of
Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria members. At lower taxonomic levels, the
most abundant genera observed were Streptococcus, Prevotella and
Veillonella. We found statistically significant associations in the
alpha-diversity estimators of UPPP and OPSCC patients. Specifically, the
microbiota communities present in UPPP are significantly enriched in the
observed_species category (P<0.001). The raw number of operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) was also significantly higher in UPPP when
compared to OPSCC patients (p=0.02). Specifically, a threshold of 80 OTUs
was enough to discriminate UPPP from OPSCC patients.At the phylum level,
we did not detect a significant difference in taxa of UPPP and OPSCC
patients. Yet at the family level, the taxon
Fusobacteriales_Leptotrichiaceae is dramatically enriched in UPPP samples
when compared to OPSCC (p=0.02) and is present in very high numbers in
all UPPP samples. A threshold of 10 sequences assigned to
Fusobacteriales_Leptotrichiaceae discriminated UPPP from OPSCC patients.
At the genera level we found that the genus Tannerella is exclusively
observed in UPPP patients (p=0.03).At the class level,
Bacteroidetes_Flavobacteria appears significantly enriched in HPV- when
compared to HPV+ OPSCC patients (p=0.02). A threshold of 5 sequences
assigned to Flavobacteria discriminated HPV+ from HPV- OPSCC patients. At
the class level, we also observed enrichment of the taxon
Bacteroidetes_Flavobacteria in UPPP relative to OPSCC HPV+ patients
(p=0.03). And at the genus level, the low-level presence of
Aerococcaceae_Abiotrophia discriminated UPPP from OPSCC HPV+ patients
(p=0.02).Our preliminary results suggest that the microbial diversity and
taxonomic composition of the microbiota in saliva may be useful
diagnostic and early detection biomonitors for OPSCC.

