Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROCK inhibition promotes microtentacle formation and reattachment
of breast cancer cells


Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) predict poor patient outcome and increased
CTC detection is correlated with higher risk of metastasis. The
efficiency of cancers to metastasize depends on the survival and
reattachment of CTCs in distant tissues. Our lab has demonstrated the
significance of microtubule based cellular extensions, termed
microtentacles, in enhancing CTC aggregation and reattachment to the
endothelial wall. Microtentacles (McTNs) are highly dynamic protrusions
formed in free-floating suspended cells and occur at higher frequencies
in more metastatic cell lines. Recently, there has been interest
generated in using ROCK as a therapeutic target in cancers based on
emerging data that over-activation of Rho/ROCK pathway plays a role in
tumor development and metastasis. ROCK inhibitors are being considered
for clinical trials because of their pre-clinical success in reducing
tumor cell migration, invasion and metastasis. However, the effect of
Rho/ROCK inhibition on CTC reattachment and metastasis has not been well
established. ROCK promotes cellular contraction by phosphorylating
non-muscle myosin II (NMII), allowing it to crosslink actin, as well as
by phosphorylating and inhibiting the activity of Myosin Light Chain
Phosphatase (MLCP). In a normal, noncancerous cell, the outward expansion
of microtubules is balanced by the inward contraction of the actin
cortex. ROCK inhibition decreases cell contractility and shifts the
balance towards a looser, more relaxed actin cortex that is unable to
contain the outward growth of microtubules. Western blot analysis of
attached and suspended cells treated with a ROCK inhibitor showed a
decrease in phosphorylated MLCP and NMII in the breast cancer cell lines,
BT549 and Hs578T. Treatment with ROCK inhibitor significantly increased
the number of cells expressing McTNs. The increase in McTNs corresponded
with increased in vitro cell reattachment, measured by the xCelligence,
Real-Time Cell Analyser. Knocking down ROCK1 and ROCK2 with silencing
RNAs also resulted in increased McTN counts. Conversely, increasing cell
contractility by treating cells with a Rho pathway activator led to a
reduction in McTNs and cell attachment. These results show that ROCK
inhibitors could actually promote metastasis by increasing attachment of
CTCs to the vasculature. A better understanding of the effect of cancer
therapies on all stages of metastasis will prevent the use of drugs that
could reduce tumor growth and motility in the short-term but result in
increasing circulating tumor cells and elevating metastatic potential in
the long-term.

