Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A proteomic signature predicts response to a therapeutic vaccine
in pancreas cancer; analysis from the GI-4000-02 trial


Background:We have previously reported that adjuvant treatment with a
therapeutic vaccine targeting the mutated Ras oncogene product generated
mutation-specific T cell responses associated with a trend toward
improved survival in patients with post-operative residual disease (R1
resections) but no improvement in the overall population1. Initial
analysis of 90 pretreatment plasma samples using matrix assisted laser
desorption ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS)
showed the potential to predict improved RFS and OS for treatment with
GI-4000/gemcitabine, but not placebo/gemcitabine.Methods:We have
developed a novel technique, combining methods used in recent advances in
learning theory (deep learning) with newly-refined MS techniques that
allow exploration deeper into the proteome to create diagnostic tests.
Using 500,000 laser shot Deep MALDI spectra2 more than 700 mass spectral
features were identified. A subset of these was used to create many
multivariate classifiers that were filtered for performance and combined
using dropout regularization. This method allows the use of smaller
training sets and so left a test set with which performance of the
signature could be independently assessed. This new methodology was used
to create a test (BDX-001) to identify patients likely to benefit from
the addition of GI-4000 to gemcitabine.Results:Using BDX-001 for
stratification, subjects who are BDX-001(+) demonstrated a 499 day
advantage in median OS when treated with GI-4000/gemcitabine vs.
placebo/gemcitabine. Additionally, these subjects demonstrated a 351 day
improvement in median RFS. BDX-001 did not predict response for
placebo/gemcitabine treated subjects. These results were obtained using
only test set data, and although the small sample size prohibited
statistical significance, it should give an unbiased test performance
estimate to be validated independently.Conclusions:BDX-001 is a test
developed using novel proteomic and learning theory methods that appears
to predict treatment response to GI-4000 in resected pancreas cancer
patients, potentially identifying patients with improved RFS and OS in
the GI-4000/gemcitabine arm. We plan to prospectively validate BDX-001 as
a companion diagnostic in a future study of GI-4000 in pancreas
cancer.References1. Richards et al, ESMO GI. Annals of Oncology, June
2012 23 (suppl 4)2. Duncan et al, ASMS 2013,
http://asms.inmerge.com/Proceedings/2013Proceedings.aspx.

