Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in expression of lncRNAs in breast tumor, adjacent
normal-appearing breast tissue, and normal breast tissue from healthy
donors


Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an emerging class of key regulatory
RNAs that are greater than 200nt and do not code for protein. They appear
to be critical for various biological processes including gene
regulation. Increasing evidence has suggested that aberrantly expressed
lncRNAs play a key role in the initiation and progression of breast
cancer. In most studies of breast cancer, breast tumor tissue was
compared to adjacent normal-appearing tissue to identify differentially
expressed lncRNAs. However, expression of lncRNAs in normal breast tissue
from healthy donors has rarely been studied, and the differences in
expression of lncRNAs in breast tumor and normal breast tissue from
healthy donors remain largely unknown. Using RNA-sequencing data
generated from freshly-frozen breast tissue samples, we examined the
expression of lncRNAs in 119 breast tumor, 47 adjacent normal-appearing
breast tissue samples, and 23 normal breast tissue samples from healthy
donors. Bowtie and RESM algorithms were used to align raw reads and
quantify transcript abundance. Differential expression analyses were
performed using edgeR software. We assessed the expression of a total of
7,844 mapped lncRNAs using normalized transcript counts. Unsupervised
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) demonstrated that the lncRNA
expression profile of adjacent normal-appearing tissue was different
compared to normal breast tissue from healthy donors, and partially
overlapped with the tumor. At various fold change thresholds, more
differentially expressed lncRNAs can be detected when the tumor tissue is
compared to normal tissue than to adjacent non-tumorous tissue. With a
false discovery rate (FDR) Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an emerging
class of key regulatory RNAs that are greater than 200nt and do not code
for protein. They appear to be critical for various biological processes
including gene regulation. Increasing evidence has suggested that
aberrantly expressed lncRNAs play a key role in the initiation and
progression of breast cancer. In most studies of breast cancer, breast
tumor tissue was compared to adjacent normal-appearing tissue to identify
differentially expressed lncRNAs. However, expression of lncRNAs in
normal breast tissue from healthy donors has rarely been studied, and the
differences in expression of lncRNAs in breast tumor and normal breast
tissue from healthy donors remain largely unknown. Using RNA-sequencing
data generated from freshly-frozen breast tissue samples, we examined the
expression of lncRNAs in 119 breast tumor, 47 adjacent normal-appearing
breast tissue samples, and 23 normal breast tissue samples from healthy
donors. Bowtie and RESM algorithms were used to align raw reads and
quantify transcript abundance. Differential expression analyses were
performed using edgeR software. We assessed the expression of a total of
7,844 mapped lncRNAs using normalized transcript counts. Unsupervised
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) demonstrated that the lncRNA
expression profile of adjacent normal-appearing tissue was different
compared to normal breast tissue from healthy donors, and partially
overlapped with the tumor. At various fold change thresholds, more
differentially expressed lncRNAs can be detected when the tumor tissue is
compared to normal tissue than to adjacent non-tumorous tissue. With a
false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 and a fold change (FC) of more than 2,
we identified 107 differentially expressed lncRNAs for the tumor vs.
normal breast tissue, 53 lncRNAs for tumor vs. adjacent normal-appearing
tissue, and 20 lncRNAs for adjacent normal-appearing vs. normal breast
tissue. In our analyses of tumor vs. adjacent normal-appearing tissue and
tumor vs. normal tissue from healthy donors, we identified differentially
expressed lncRNAs including HOTAIR, GAS5 and ANRIL/CDKN2B-AS1 that were
previously implicated in breast cancer, with considerably higher fold
changes in latter comparison. When using normal breast tissue from
healthy donors as the baseline, we identified novel putative breast
cancer-associated lncRNAs including EMX2OS, TERC, HOTAIRM1, and WT1-AS
that are aberrantly expressed in breast tumor. These lncRNAs were not
identifiable in a direct comparison of tumor and adjacent
normal-appearing tissue. Our results suggest that adjacent
normal-appearing tissue undergoes changes in lncRNAs expression similar
to those observed in tumor tissue to some extent, and a number of new and
potentially important lncRNAs can only be detected using normal tissue
from healthy donors as an optimal baseline tissue.

