Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating inflammation markers and subsequent lung cancer risk:
A discovery and replication study


Background: Few epidemiologic studies have investigated the role of
inflammation in lung cancer etiology. We have carried out 2 independent
studies nested within the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial to assess associations between circulating
inflammation markers and lung cancer risk, after carefully controlling
for smoking. In the discovery study, we showed associations between 11
circulating inflammation markers (CRP, SAA, sTNFRII, IL-1RA, IL-7, TGF-A,
ENA 78/CXCL5, MIG/CXCL9, BCA-1/CXCL13, TARC/CCL17 and MDC/CCL22) and
prospective lung cancer risk (Shiels, JNCI 2013). To assess the
reproducibility of these associations, we have carried out a large,
independent replication study.Methods: We designed a replication
case-control study nested within the PLCO in 526 lung cancer cases and
625 controls, matched by gender, age, smoking (status, pack-years and
time since quit), study visit and years of blood draw and exit. Serum
levels of 51 inflammation markers were measured using Luminex bead-based
assays. We combined the data from the discovery and replication studies
(1052 cases and 1217 controls) and created study-specific marker
categories. Conditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios (ORs) overall and stratified by latency and histology in the
pooled dataset.Results: In our prior study, 11 inflammation markers were
associated with lung cancer risk with ORs ranging from 1.41 to 2.27. Of
these 11 markers, C-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid A (SAA),
soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFRII) and monokine induced
by gamma interferon (MIG/CXCL9) were associated with prospective lung
cancer risk in the replication study with ORs ranging from 1.70 to 2.09
(p-trend across quartiles3 years) (all p-interactions>0.2). Further, each
marker was associated with both lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma (all p-trendsBackground: Few epidemiologic studies have
investigated the role of inflammation in lung cancer etiology. We have
carried out 2 independent studies nested within the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial to assess
associations between circulating inflammation markers and lung cancer
risk, after carefully controlling for smoking. In the discovery study, we
showed associations between 11 circulating inflammation markers (CRP,
SAA, sTNFRII, IL-1RA, IL-7, TGF-A, ENA 78/CXCL5, MIG/CXCL9, BCA-1/CXCL13,
TARC/CCL17 and MDC/CCL22) and prospective lung cancer risk (Shiels, JNCI
2013). To assess the reproducibility of these associations, we have
carried out a large, independent replication study.Methods: We designed a
replication case-control study nested within the PLCO in 526 lung cancer
cases and 625 controls, matched by gender, age, smoking (status,
pack-years and time since quit), study visit and years of blood draw and
exit. Serum levels of 51 inflammation markers were measured using Luminex
bead-based assays. We combined the data from the discovery and
replication studies (1052 cases and 1217 controls) and created
study-specific marker categories. Conditional logistic regression was
used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) overall and stratified by latency and
histology in the pooled dataset.Results: In our prior study, 11
inflammation markers were associated with lung cancer risk with ORs
ranging from 1.41 to 2.27. Of these 11 markers, C-reactive protein (CRP),
serum amyloid A (SAA), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFRII)
and monokine induced by gamma interferon (MIG/CXCL9) were associated with
prospective lung cancer risk in the replication study with ORs ranging
from 1.70 to 2.09 (p-trend across quartiles3 years) (all
p-interactions>0.2). Further, each marker was associated with both lung
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma (all
p-trends<0.05).Conclusions: With results from two independent
case-control studies, we have confirmed that pre-diagnostic circulating
levels of two acute phase proteins (CRP and SAA), a receptor for a
pro-inflammatory cytokine (sTNFRII), and a chemokine (MIG/CXCL9) are each
associated with prospective lung cancer risk, after carefully controlling
for cigarette smoking. These results provide evidence implicating
inflammation in the development of lung cancer.

