Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic architecture of the field of cancerization in the
adjacent normal-appearing airway: Early mechanisms in lung carcinogenesis


Increasing our understanding of early events in the pathogenesis of lung
cancer is crucial for identification of new targets for prevention and
treatment of this malignancy. Earlier work has shown that seemingly
normal cells adjacent to the tumor carry specific molecular alterations
that are characteristic of the tumor itself suggestive of a field of
cancerization. By sampling and studying normal-appearing tissue, the
molecular field of cancerization provides biological insights into early
phases in cancer development. In this study, we sought to characterize
molecular field effects in the normal-appearing airway that are most
representative of the nearby lung tumor, and thus, are most likely to
denote early events in lung carcinogenesis. To achieve this, we performed
genome-wide expression profiling of resected field cancerization
specimens (n=20 patients) comprised of matched early-stage non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLCs), cytologically normal airways with varying spatial
distance from the tumors and distant (relative to location of tumors)
normal lung tissues (n=194 samples). Using ordinal logistic regression,
we identified 422 genes that were progressively modulated in expression
in normal-appearing airways by spatial distance from tumors. Notably,
when examined in paired NSCLC and normal lung tissues, these genes were
found to recapitulate tumor expression profiles. We then sought to
examine the role of lysosomal protein transmembrane 4 beta (LAPTM4B), a
putative oncogene that was found to be up-regulated in airways by shorter
spatial distance from tumors, in lung oncogenesis. LAPTM4B was
significantly elevated in NSCLC tissues compared to paired distant normal
lung and was predictive of poor survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
Moreover, LAPTM4B promoted anchorage-dependent and -independent lung
cancer cell growth and was crucial for cellular survival and the
autophagy response under nutrient- and serum-deprived conditions. In
addition, pathways analysis of a LAPTM4B-dependent gene expression
profile revealed decreased activation of the canonical nuclear factor
erythroid 2-like 2 (NRF2)-mediated pathway following LAPTM4B knockdown.
Further, we found that LAPTM4B augmented the expression and nuclear
translocation of the NRF2 transcription factor following serum
deprivation pointing to the probable role of the novel LAPTM4B/NRF2
signaling axis in promoting lung cancer cell survival. All in all, our
study points to molecular field of cancerization profiles in the
normal-appearing airway that highly signify the nearby lung tumor and
comprise early mechanisms (e.g. LAPTM4B) in lung carcinogenesis.

