Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the role of mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase in malignant
glioma


Mutations in the metabolic enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) were
recently found in 80% of WHO grade II-IV gliomas. These mutations inhibit
the enzyme's ability to convert isocitrate to -ketoglutarate and,
instead, confer a novel gain-of-function resulting in the conversion of
-ketoglutarate to 2-hydroxglutarate. However, the fundamental
mechanism(s) by which these mutations affect glioma cell growth remain
unclear. IDH1 and 2 function as homodimers in the cytosol and
mitochondria, respectively. Dimerization is mediated by interactions
between the two clasp domains of each IDH protein and dimeric IDH
contains two active sites each composed of amino acid residues from both
subunits. Thus, the dimerization of IDH is vital for its enzymatic role
within the cell. Interestingly, IDH mutations have been observed as
heterozygous events in glioma cells suggesting that the cells require the
wild-type IDH protein in order to function. To examine and visualize the
interaction between wild-type and mutant IDH proteins, we employed the
protein-protein interaction assay: Bimolecular Fluorescence
Complementation (BiFC). This approach is based on the formation of a
fluorescent complex though the association of two fragments of a
fluorescent reporter protein fused to two proteins of interest. An
interaction between the proteins facilitates association between the two
fragments to produce a bimolecular fluorescent complex. Since IDH1 has a
C-terminal peroxisomal targeting sequence, the N-terminal 172 amino acid
residues of Venus (VN) were fused to the N-terminus of wild-type IDH1 and
residues 155-238 amino acids of Venus (VC) were fused to the N-terminus
of mutant IDH1. IDH2, however, has an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting
sequence and thus the N-terminal and C-terminal fragments of Venus were
fused to the C-terminus of wild-type and mutant IDH2, respectively. 293FT
cells were transfected with each fluorescent reporter construct and
counterstained with nuclear and cytosolic markers to confirm complex
formation and cellular localization. Approximately 60% of the cells
showed evidence of IDH complex formation. We confirmed localization to
the cytosol/peroxisomes and mitochondria for wild-type and mutant IDH1
and IDH2 heterodimers, respectively, and observed that, in the case of
IDH1, wild-type and mutant heterodimers demonstrate physiologically
normal activity compared to inactive mutant IDH1 homodimers. Conversely,
we observed no significant difference between wild-type and mutant IDH2
heterodimers when compared to mutant IDH2 homodimers. This data suggests
that mutant IDH1 requires wild-type IDH1 in order to be enzymatically
active while mutant IDH2 does not require wild-type IDH2. To determine
the effect of wildtype and mutant IDH heterodimer formation on glioma
cell growth, we plan to assess the tumorigenic potential of IDH1
heterodimers either alone or in concert with other known glioma genetic
abnormalities in vivo.

