Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription factor signature of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Background: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) results in
significant mortality and morbidity despite current therapeutic
strategies. The molecular biology of HNSCC is related to abnormal
transcriptional regulation. A direct comprehensive genome wide analysis
of deregulation of key transcription factors (TF) in primary HNSCC has
not been performed. In this study we sought to analyze the differences in
transcription factor signatures in subtypes of cancer patients and the
normal population.Methods: To evaluate the TF signatures of 44 HNSCC
samples and 25 healthy oral mucosa samples we used the Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST Array data and estimated transcription levels
of all genes. The TF activity signature of each of 2,600 human
transcription factors was characterized by the expression of its target
genes, as reflected in TRANSFAC, and corrected for methylation and CNV
status. The significance of each TF based on the expression levels of its
targets was compared for HPV positive (HPV+) and HPV negative (HPV-)
samples. The expression of the subset of target genes of NFKB, STATs and
AP1 pathways was confirmed my qRT-PCR and co-activation of NFKB and STAT3
was confirmed by Immunistochemical (IHC) analysis.Results: Of the top
ranked TFs analyzed AP1, NFKB and STATs exhibited the greatest
differences in TF activity in HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC tumor tissue. The
changes of activity of these factors do not depend on DNA methylation or
copy loss for their targets. We have confirmed coordinated activation of
STAT3 and NFKB pathways in tumor samples, and showed that these pathways
are the most activated in HPV- population of HNSCC patients. We have also
discovered the top ten scoring genes, which expression was differentially
affected by HPV infection. Expression analysis of these ten genes allows
classification of HNSCC patients into three groups.Conclusions: We have
discovered that HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC differ significantly based on the
level of activity of the key TF, such as AP1, STATs and NFKB. These data
have implications for therapeutic targeting of tumors, as well as
potential insight into biologic variability of behavior and treatment
response for HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC patients.

