Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cediranib affects tumor progression and survival of mice bearing
patient derived ovarian carcinoma xenografts (EOC-PDX)


Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGFA/VEGFC) are over-expressed and
secreted in large amount in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) (Maneneti et
al, 2013; Decio et al, 2013). Cediranib, a potent inhibitor of VEGF
receptor tyrosine kinases has recently shown to improve PFS and OS in
women with recurrent platinum sensitive ovarian cancer (ICON6 trial).The
aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy of cediranib (AZD2171;
AstraZeneca, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, UK) on a platform of patient
derived human ovarian carcinoma xenografts (EOC-PDX; n=12), which
recapitulates the histopathological and fundamental genetic diversity of
the patient tumors and the pharmacological heterogeneity of this type of
cancer. The efficacy of cediranib alone and in combination with
the-standard-of-care chemotherapy for ovarian cancer (platinum, DDP and
paclitaxel, PTX) was investigated on EOC-PDX growing orthotopically and
disseminating in the peritoneal cavity of nude mice. Tumor progression
(tumor dissemination; soluble VEGFR) and overall survival were
investigated.The response of EOC-PDX to cediranib was heterogeneous with
some tumors being extremely sensitive, other marginally responsive to the
treatment (ILS from 12% to 85%); the length of response depended on the
duration of the treatment. Cediranib was significantly active also on
advanced stage tumor. Cediranib added to DDP based therapy improved the
response to chemotherapy treatment without increase of toxicity; the
sensitivity of the EOC-PDX to DDP (platinum sensitive vs. platinum
resistant) determined the final outcome. The histopathological analysis
at the end of treatment (interim) shows that the combination affected the
spread of solid tumor into the peritoneal cavity and ascites
formation.The combination of cediranib with combined chemotherapy
(DDP/PTX) was studied on one EOC-PDX platinum responsive. The addition of
cediranib to DDP/PTX marginally increased the survival of the mice
compared to chemotherapy; cediranib continued after chemotherapy
(maintenance regimen for 60 days) significantly improved the survival of
the mice, with 70% tumor free at the end of the treatment. These results
show that the response to cediranib of EOC-PDX reflects the behavior in
patients. The heterogeneous response of EOC-PDX to cediranib warrants
further studies for better understanding the mechanism of response
/resistance to this type of treatment.AD is a fellow of the Italian
Foundation for Cancer Research (FIRC).

