Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rad18 regulates epistatic relationship between FA-BRCA and
homologous recombination pathways to repair camptothecin induced DSB


DNA topoisomerase 1 (Top1) inhibiting anticancer agents such as
camptothecin (CPT) show broad spectrum antitumor activity. The
therapeutic activities of CPT and its analogues are attributed to
prolonged stabilization of Top1-DNA covalent complexes and converting
them into replication mediated double strand breaks (DSB). In spite of
their therapeutic success, acquired tumor resistance poses major
challenges for their therapeutic efficacy. Combination therapies using
DNA repair inhibitors can increase the cytotoxic effects of these drugs
and aid in overcoming such problems. Homologous recombination (HR) is the
predominant DNA repair pathway involved in the repair of CPT induced DSB.
Therefore, inhibition of either HR or tumors that are defective in HR
could be effectively killed by Top1 inhibitors. In the same way, cells
deficient in HR (ex. Rad51) or its associated proteins (such as Rad18,
Fanconi anemia (FA) and breast cancer associated (BRCA1, BRCA2) proteins)
are known to exhibit hypersensitivity to CPT. Specifically, FA proteins
are known to associate with replication forks and implicated in repair of
fork stalling lesions by HR in association with BRCA proteins. Thus, an
epistatic relationship between FA and BRCA pathway has been suggested in
repair of fork stalling lesions, but molecular basis for this cross-talk
is not known. We previously shown that Rad18 regulates FANCD2
monoubiquitination (a key step in FA pathway) to promote HR mediated
repair of CPT-induced DSB and cell survival. To further characterize the
molecular interactions between Rad18 and FA-BRCA pathway in regulating
HR, we have assessed their role in HR by DR-GFP reporter assays by
downregulating Rad18 and FANCD2 proteins by siRNAs either alone or in
combination. Consistent with survival data, cells deficient in Rad18 or
FANCD2 exhibited reduced level of HR. Likewise, cells deficient in both
the genes also exhibited similar results of single gene deficient cells,
suggesting these two proteins work in a common pathway that promotes HR.
Further biochemical and biophysical studies in Rad18 and FANCD2 deficient
cells revealed dramatic decrease in nuclear localization of Rad51 and its
CPT induced foci formation. Since, FANCD2 is required for BRCA2
recruitment to the sites of DSB, and BRCA2 known to associate with Rad51
and stabilize it on single stranded DNA, we further analyzed BRCA2 foci
formation and its colocalization with Rad51 in response to CPT.
Interestingly, our studies revealed reduced BRCA2 and Rad51 foci and
their colocalization in response to CPT in Rad18 and FANCD2 deficient
cells. Consistent with their role in HR, cells deficient in either of
these genes exhibited chromosomal aberrations, implicating their role in
accurate repair of replication coupled DSB. Together these data support
that Rad18 regulates epistatic relationship between FA-BRCA and HR
pathways in response to replication coupled DSB induced by CPT.

