Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive and prognostic analysis of KRAS and MSI markers in
treatment of urban African American colorectal cancer patients


Background: Advancement of molecular analytic techniques has led to the
discovery of a number of genetic biomarkers thought to be associated with
prognosis and treatment outcomes in colorectal cancer (CRC).Aim: To
analyze response to treatment in a group of CRC patients as a function of
their genetic background.Method: A retrospective chart review of patients
diagnosed with CRC from 2010- 2012 at Howard University Hospital was
undertaken. African American (AA) patients diagnosed with CRC, the
majority of whom received 5-Fluorouracil based chemotherapy, were
selected. Data was collected from in-patient and out-patient records.
Response to treatment was determined by Response Evaluation Criteria In
Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria from prior radiological investigations.
The data was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier survival estimate and log rank
test to compare the disease free survival (DFS) in correlation with
clinical and genetic markers.Results: There were 30 AA patients with CRC
who received chemotherapy. The average age of the cohort was 59 years, 53
% (n=16) were females and 80% (n=24) of the CRCs were distal. There were
10% (n=3), 23% (n=7), 37% (n=11), and 30% (n=9) patients at stage I, II,
III, and IV, respectively. After three years of follow-up, disease free
survival was 0.37 (95%CI: 0.14-0.60). Patients with MSI-H (n=3) had worse
DFS. Patients with wild-type (WT) KRAS (n=16) had better DFS than mutant
KRAS (n=10). The type of chemotherapy received did not affect
response.Conclusions: DFS was worse in patients with a higher stage at
the time of diagnosis, as well as, in patients with MSI-H versus MSS.
Further study is warranted in AA since CRC patients with MSI-H
historically have a better prognosis. DFS was found to be better in
patients with WT KRAS, independent of chemotherapeutic regimen. These
findings confirm that KRAS mutations negatively affected the prognosis in
our study population.Characteristics of Responders vs Non-responders


