Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of molecular targets for retinoid signaling to
regulate human hepatocellular carcinoma development: contribution of
OTUD7B, a negative regulator of NF-B signaling, in antitumor effect of
retinoic acid


BACKGROUND & AIMS: The loss of retinoid content and diminished retinoid
signaling and downstream gene function are closely associated with the
progression of liver disease including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We
previously identified 26 retinoic acid (RA)-responsive genes through a
gene screening based on genome-wide in silico analysis of RA response
elements. To understand the clinical and biological significance of
RA-responsive genes in HCC, we performed gene expression analysis using
clinical HCC samples and functional analyses using HCC cell
lines.METHODS: mRNA expressions of RA-responsive genes were investigated
in tumor and non-tumor tissues of the liver from 171 HCC patients by
qRT-PCR. The association of clinicopathological parameters and gene
expression with survival time was evaluated using univariate and
multivariate Cox regression modeling. Potential anti-tumor activity of
the candidate genes were evaluated using siRNA-mediated knockdown and
adenovirus-mediated overexpression experiments in HCC cells. Functional
analyses of the genes in the regulation of intracellular signal pathways
were performed using luciferase-based reporter assays.RESULTS: Among the
9 genes that showed ATRA responsiveness in HuH7 or HepG2 cells, 3 genes,
OTU domain-containing 7B (OTUD7B), kinesin family member 21B (KIF21B),
and odd-skipped related 1 (OSR1) were significantly upregulated in tumor
tissue compared to non-tumor tissue, and 4 genes, colony stimulating
factor 3 receptor (CSF3R), thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP),
cytochrome P450 26A1 (CYP26A1), and olfactomedin-like 1 (OLFML1) were
downregulated. Frizzled 4 (FZD4) mRNA level was not different between
tumor and non-tumor tissue. In tumor tissue, low expression of OTUD7B
gene, which was upregulated by ATRA, was significantly associated with a
low cancer-specific survival of HCC patients. Functional analyses
revealed that OTUD7B negatively regulates nuclear factor B (NF-B)
signaling and decreased the cell viability by inducing apoptosis in HCC
cells. Frizzled 4 (FZD4), which was downregulated by ATRA, was shown to
positively regulate Wnt/-catenin signaling and increased the cell
viability in HCC cells.DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION: Our results suggest
that the downregulation of OTUD7B expression in tumors facilitates tumor
growth and enhances the cancer phenotype, leading to malignancy and poor
cancer-specific survival. Therefore, retinoid signaling, which
upregulates OTUD7B, prevents tumor development by suppressing aberrant
NF-B signaling in HCC cells, being beneficial for antitumor therapy for
HCC. Our results also suggested that Wnt/-catenin signaling may be a
potential target for retinoid signaling to regulate HCC development.

