Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of two cell lines of anaplastic
pancreatic cancer


Background: Anaplastic pancreatic cancer is a rare malignancy with a poor
prognosis. As a whole, pancreatic cancer is a devastating prognosis but
its therapeutic strategy has not still well developed. Thus, new models
are needed to research its biology.Purpose: We have established and
characterized 2 anaplastic cancer cell lines (OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2) for
revealing tumor worsening factors and the mechanism of
dedifferentiation.Methods: We researched the present studies by comparing
with established 2 cell lines and well-known pancreatic cancer cell
lines. In vitro proliferation, migration and invasion assays was examined
in each cell lines under normoxia and hypoxia by CellPlayer 96-Well
Kinetic Cell Proliferation, Migration and Invasion Assays. Furthermore,as
assessment of chemosensitivity, IC50 values against 5Fu and gemcitabine
ware measured by MTT assay. As In vivo assays, the growth of the
xenografts in each cell lines was also measured for a month. The
immunohistochemistry (IHC) of E-cadherin and vimentin for primary tumors
and the xenografts was performed to confirm the induction of
epitherial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).Result: Both OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2
were pleomorphic cells derived from ascites of anaplastic pancreatic
cancer patients. The doubling time of OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2 was 30.9 h and
20.4 h, respectively. In migration and invasion assays, relative wound
density in new 2 cell lines ranged from 47.1 % to 98.1 % at 48 hours. The
values were not so different from that of other cell lines.
Interestingly, although a large part of OCUP-A1 is spindle shape in
normoxia, the subpopulation with polygonal structure has increased in
hypoxia. Furthermore, OCUP-A1 rapidly proliferated in hypoxia. The IC50
values of gemcitabine for OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2 were 8.77 nM and 4.90 nM,
respectively. And the values of 5-Fu for OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2 were 48.5 M
and 14.8M, respectively. Chemosensitivity of 2 established cell lines was
not superior to other cell lines. The xenografts of OCUP-A1 and OCUP-A2
more rapidly increased than other cell lines (MIAPaCa2 and Panc-1). In
IHC, the E-cadherin expression was reduced and the vimentin expression
was enhanced in both specimens.Conclusion: We established 2 anaplastic
pancreatic cancer cell lines. It was suspected that these cell lines
would have aggressive characters affected by TME and EMT.

