Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Malignancy of bladder cancer cells is enhanced by tumor associated
fibroblasts through a cytokine-chemokine loop


The tumor microenvironment plays an important role in cancer progression.
In particular, stromal fibroblasts have profound influence on migration
and invasiveness of tumor cells. We employ bladder carcinoma cell lines
of different de-differentiation grade to pursue the hypothesis that tumor
cell malignancy correlates with the cells' potential to recruit support
by tumor associated fibroblasts (TAFs).Bladder cancer cell lines RT112
and Cal29 were used as models for tumor cells of low or high
de-differentiation grade, respectively. They were grown separately or in
co-culture with tumor-associated fibroblast isolated from kidney
carcinomas. Migratory and invasive cell properties were quantified by
Boyden chamber (Matrigel) and wound healing assays. Cytokine production
of cells was measured by intracellular staining followed by cytometry, by
semi-quantitative PCR, or by subjecting conditioned medium to ELISA and
Western blot analysis.Migration and invasiveness of bladder cancer cell
lines Cal29 and RT112 was enhanced by co-cultivation with TAFs. The low
grade cell line RT112, however, was much more dependent on TAF-derived
signals to increase the malignancy parameters. Conditioned medium from
tumor cells induced the secretion of Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) and
the release of GM-CSF, HGF, and Monocyte Chemotactic Protein (MCP-1,
CCL2) by TAFs. We could identify tumor cell-derived IL-1 and as well as
TGF- as stimuli responsible for the upregulation of GM-CSF and MCP-1,
respectively, in fibroblasts. MCP-1 is implicated in inflammatory disease
states characterized by monocytic infiltrates and was shown to promote
cell migration of both bladder cancer cell lines under
investigation.Employing pathway-specific reporter gene constructs we are
currently addressing signal transduction reactions in both tumor cells
and fibroblasts underlying this crosstalk.Supported by: IZKF Jena,
European Regional Development Fund ERDF.

