Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systems biology approach for rational molecular network inference


It is increasingly likely that the high incidence of off-target effects
associated with targeted inhibitors is due, in part, to the highly
complex and dysregulated intracellular molecular networks associated with
cancer. Ignoring this complexity can lead to suboptimal results and
subsequent loss of life through ineffective therapies. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathways are two of the most dysregulated pathways across all
cancers. Several regulatory mechanisms have been proposed to explain the
apparent cross-talk between them. For example, RAS to ERK signaling in
the MAPK pathway has been proposed as an important metastases escape
mechanism when PI3K is inhibited. In order to rationally develop precise
therapeutic avenues to target these oncogenic pathways, it is critical to
understand how the pathways are wired as an integrated network, in both
normal and tumor cells.We have developed a systems biology approach that
integrates measurements of protein activation under diverse experimental
conditions, including inhibition of MEK and PI3K, with a novel network
inference computational model that predicts the causal connectivity of a
network from experimental data. The network inference model utilizes a
genetic algorithm to search for the optimal network configuration that
most closely matches the experimental data used as input. We validated
the approach using in silico data generated from a set of randomized test
networks. Next, we applied this approach to breast epithelial cell lines
(MFC10A, MCF7, MDA-MB-231, and SUM149) by performing a set of experiments
using a series of pathway specific inhibitors with and without growth
factor stimulation. From phospho western blot readouts of several
proteins in the PI3K and MAPK pathways, we have predicted network
configurations most likely responsible for the distinct experimental
output of each of the four cell lines. In some cases, our network
inference model predicted multiple optimal networks for a given cell
line. Our method predicted the next experiments needed to optimally
distinguish between the set of possible candidate networks. Our results
suggest that some proposed interactions and feedback mechanisms
attributed to MAPK and PI3K cross-talk in the literature may not be
valid.This approach has important implications for the prospect of
effective personalized cancer treatments and targeted molecular
inhibition. Elucidating the mechanisms of cross-talk between the MAPK and
PI3K pathways in cells collected from patient tumors will permit rational
discovery of the optimal combination of targeted therapies needed to
treat a specific cancer, based on the actual network that is operational
in the tumor. Moreover, our methodology and predictive network model can
be applied to any set of signaling pathways.

