Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATOH8 depletion can reprogram noncancer stem cells into cancer
stem cells


Introduction:The development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), one of
the most lethal of human malignancies, is caused by the accumulation of
multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations. Recent advances in cancer
stem cell (CSC) study have associated the poor prognosis of cancer with
CSC. ATOH8 is a nucleus factor with an obvious structural similarity to
the Drosophila proneural gene atonal. The aim of this study is to
investigated the role of ATOH8 in CSC and its therapeutic potentials for
HCC treatment.Experimental procedures:The clinical significance of ATOH8
in a cohort of 242 HCC cases was assessed by clinical correlation and
Kaplan-Meier survival analyses. ATOH8-overexpressing and scliencing cell
model was generated by Lentivirus system to detect its functional roles
in HCC both in vivo and in vitro. iPS technology is used to analyze
effects of ATOH8 on CSCs.Result:Downregulation of ATOH8 was detected in
over 40% of 242 pairs primary HCC cases, which was significantly
associated with disease free survival (P=0.031), high level of AFP
(P=0.03) and diferentiation (P=0.01). Functional studies demonstrate the
tumor suppressive role of ATOH8 in HCC, including the inhibition of cell
growth, cell proliferation, tumor formation in SCID mice and cell
motility when ATOH8 was introduced into HCC cells. Further study finds
that ATOH8 depletion can enhance the stemness of HCC including the
tumorigenicity and abilities for self-renewal, differentiation and
chemo-resistance by repressing the transcription of stemness-related
genes such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, AFP, and HCC cancer stem cell (CSC)
surface markers such as CD24 and CD133. One interesting finding in this
study is that knockdown of ATOH8 could increase CD133+ cell population in
QSG7701 and BEL7402 cells. CD133+ cells induced by ATOH8 depletion were
flow-sorted and their CSC property was characterized. The results found
that flow-sorted CD133+ cells induced by ATOH8 depletion possessed most
characteristics of CSC including the capacity to self-renew,
differentiation, sustained proliferation and chemoresistance. In
addition, ATOH8 depletion could enhance the frequency of pluripotent stem
cells (iPSC) generation induced by 4 factors (OCT4, Sox2, Klf4 and cMyc).
All these data strongly suggest that a non-CSC could be reprogrammed into
a CSC under some circumstance such as downregulation of
ATOH8.Conclusion:This study demonstrates that ATOH8 plays an important
role in HCC development, and provides a potential new HCC therapeutic
approach that ATOH8 could increase the chemosensitivity of HCC cells to
chemotherapeutics as demonstrated in this study.

