Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-200c expression and methylation status determines epithelial
characteristics of NSCLC


Background: MicroRNA (miR)-200 family members are frequently silenced in
advanced cancer and have been implicated in the process of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor invasion. In this
study, we investigated the roles of miR-200c in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Materials and Methods: We analyzed miR-200c promoter
methylation status by methylation specific PCR and expression by
quantitative RT-PCR in 34 NSCLC cell lines and 10 NSCLC clinical samples.
To eliminate the effects of contamination of normal lung epithelial cells
and mesenchymal cells in clinical samples, we used primary cultured NSCLC
cells obtained by surgical resection. We assessed the association of
miR-200c status with histology, EMT-related protein expression, and
genetic alteration. Results: Mir-200c was methylated in 10 (30%) NSCLC
cell lines and partially methylated in 7 (21%) cell lines. Expression of
miR-200c was silenced in all methylated cell lines and restored with
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine treatment. In cell lines with miR-200c methylation
and silenced, protein expression of epithelial markers was reduced and
mesenchymal markers were increased. Introduction of miR-200c into highly
invasive cells with miR-200c silencing inhibited cell invasion.
Interestingly, miR-200c was unmethylated and not silenced in many EGFR
mutated NSCLC cell lines and clinical samples. In HEK293T cells stably
transfected with wild-type EGFR, mutant EGFR, wild-type KRAS, or mutant
KRAS, miR-200c expression was up-regulated only in mutant EGFR
transfectant. Conclusions: Mir-200c expression was regulated by promoter
methylation in NSCLC, and related to epithelial characteristics and cell
invasion. In EGFR mutated NSCLC cells, miR-200c was generally
unmethylated and expressed, suggesting the existence of mechanism that
retain EGFR mutated NSCLC cells to the epithelial state through the
miR-200c expression.

