Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA) activation in human multiple
myeloma cells promotes myeloma cell growth and survival in the bone
marrow microenvironment via upregulated MCL-1 and NFB signaling


B cell maturation antigen (BCMA), a member of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor superfamily (TNFRSF17), is selectively induced during plasma
cell (PC) differentiation and is commonly expressed at high levels in
malignant PCs. Using real time RT-PCR, we here first showed that BCMA
mRNA was upregulated in CD138+ PCs from MM patients compared to normal
healthy donors, consistent with high and restrictive BCMA expression in
PCs but not normal tissues by gene expression profiling and
immunohistochemistry in previously published reports. As a specific MM
antigen, BCMA is universally expressed on the MM cell surface, confirmed
by CD38+BCMA+ dual immunofluorescence staining. We next found that
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which support MM cell growth,
survival, and drug resistance in the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment,
have detectable BCMA mRNA at significantly (9-50-fold) lower levels than
CD138+ plasma PCs (pB cell maturation antigen (BCMA), a member of the
tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF17), is selectively
induced during plasma cell (PC) differentiation and is commonly expressed
at high levels in malignant PCs. Using real time RT-PCR, we here first
showed that BCMA mRNA was upregulated in CD138+ PCs from MM patients
compared to normal healthy donors, consistent with high and restrictive
BCMA expression in PCs but not normal tissues by gene expression
profiling and immunohistochemistry in previously published reports. As a
specific MM antigen, BCMA is universally expressed on the MM cell
surface, confirmed by CD38+BCMA+ dual immunofluorescence staining. We
next found that plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which support MM cell
growth, survival, and drug resistance in the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment, have detectable BCMA mRNA at significantly (9-50-fold)
lower levels than CD138+ plasma PCs (p<0.005 for each paired sample) from
either MM patients or normal donors. Interestingly, as seen in CD138+
PCs, BCMA transcript is considerably elevated in pDC from MM patients vs.
normal donors (pB cell maturation antigen (BCMA), a member of the tumor
necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF17), is selectively induced
during plasma cell (PC) differentiation and is commonly expressed at high
levels in malignant PCs. Using real time RT-PCR, we here first showed
that BCMA mRNA was upregulated in CD138+ PCs from MM patients compared to
normal healthy donors, consistent with high and restrictive BCMA
expression in PCs but not normal tissues by gene expression profiling and
immunohistochemistry in previously published reports. As a specific MM
antigen, BCMA is universally expressed on the MM cell surface, confirmed
by CD38+BCMA+ dual immunofluorescence staining. We next found that
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which support MM cell growth,
survival, and drug resistance in the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment,
have detectable BCMA mRNA at significantly (9-50-fold) lower levels than
CD138+ plasma PCs (p<0.005 for each paired sample) from either MM
patients or normal donors. Interestingly, as seen in CD138+ PCs, BCMA
transcript is considerably elevated in pDC from MM patients vs. normal
donors (p<0.03). In contrast, BCMA is hardly detectable in CD138-negative
cells from BM aspirates of MM patients. We further define molecular
mechanisms of BCMA activation in MM cells in the BM milieu. BCMA shRNA
significantly blocks viability of MM cells (RPMI8226, MM1R, H929) and
anti-apoptotic protein MCL-1. Conversely, overexpression of BCMA in
multiple MM cell lines (RPMI8226, MM1R, H929) by pCMV6/BCMA vector
upregulates MCL-1 expression and MIP-1, as well as NFB p65 DNA binding
activity. Importantly, stimulation of MM cells by APRIL, a cognate ligand
for BCMA and mainly secreted by osteoclasts in the BM milieu, induces NFB
DNA binding activity and activates PI3K/AKT and ERK1/2 signaling. APRIL
also induces pro-survival/anti-apoptotic targets (BCL2A1, NFB1, NFB2) and
chemotactic/osteoclast activating factors (MIP-1 and MIP1) in a
dose-dependent manner. Angiogenesis and adhesion/chemoattractant factors
(VEGF, IL-8, CXCL10, RANTES) were also significantly induced upon APRIL
stimulation. In contrast, BCMA-Fc protein that blocks APRIL binding to
BCMA, inhibits secretion of these cytokines/chemokines, indicating
specific response of engagement of BCMA by APRIL in BCMA-expressing MM
cells. Finally, APRIL induced adhesion and migration of MM cells whereas
BCMA-Fc blocked APRIL-induced responses. Together, our results define
active APRIL/BCMA signaling cascade in MM in the BM microenvironment,
thus providing a niche for MM disease progression. Moreover, these
results strongly support rapid bench to bedside translation of the novel
antagonistic anti-BCMA antibody drug conjugate (abstract #
14-A-4420-AACR) to treat MM patients.

