Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of estrogen receptor turnover by lysine 302 methylation


The estrogen pathway promotes growth of breast cancer, the leading cancer
diagnosis among US women. The antiestrogen therapy Tamoxifen has been the
mainline therapy for the 70% of women whose tumors are estrogen receptor
alpha (ER) positive for over thirty years. Understanding how ER is
regulated, particularly in the context of Tamoxifen, is essential for the
treatment of breast cancer. In previous work, we showed that SetD7
mediated methylation of ER at lysine 302 (K302) is a key mediator of
estrogen receptor alpha stability. Downregulation of SetD7 or mutation of
K302 increased the rate of ER turnover resulting in a compromised
estrogen driven transcriptional response. However, the precise mechanism
by which lysine 302 methylation regulates ER stability and
transcriptional activity is not yet known. In this study, we used a novel
small molecule inhibitor of SetD7, (R)-PFI-2, as a chemical probe to
further investigate the role of K302 methylation in the regulation of ER.
Treatment of ER expressing MCF7 breast cancer cells with (R)-PFI-2
resulted in a dose-dependent shift in the 66kDa ER species to a slower
migrating form as detected by protein electrophoresis and immunoblotting.
Molecular mass estimates of this slower migrating form are consistent
with a sumoylation event. Interestingly, (R)-PFI-2-induced accumulation
of the slower migrating form was only observed upon inhibition of the
proteasome with MG132, suggesting that this alternately modified form of
ER represents an intermediate in the pathway to degradation. A similar
time-dependent shift to the same slower migrating form was observed upon
estrogen depletion of MCF7 cells stably knocked down for SetD7, but not
in control cells. Furthermore, an inverse relationship was observed
between endogenous levels of SetD7 and the levels of modified ER in two
strains of MCF7 cell line that differ in their sensitivity to Tamoxifen.
These data suggest that methylation of ER at K302 by SetD7 may stabilize
ER by blocking another post-translational modification, possibly
sumoylation, necessary for its turnover. The relationship between ER
methylation, sumoylation and Tamoxifen sensitivity will be discussed.

