Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A three-protein cytokine signature that correlates with the
prognosis of osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in pediatrics.
Despite the use of surgery and chemotherapy, the survival rate of
patients who develop a metastatic disease or a poor response towards the
chemotherapy remains dismal. Identification of novel biomarkers for early
prognostication will facilitate risk-based stratification before the
treatment is initiated, so that the high-risk patients can be treated
more appropriately to increase their chance of survival. Others and we
have previously reported that cytokines and chemokines were implicated in
OS. In this study, we employed highly sensitive Luminex beads assays to
investigate 90 cytokines/chemokines and receptors on a cohort of 40 OS
plasma samples collected at diagnosis from the Texas Children's Hospital.
The protein expression data were analysed to identify candidate
biomarkers that correlate with the chemotherapy response, initial
metastatic status, and overall survival. Then, the candidates were
validated in a large set of 250 serum samples obtained from the
Children's Oncology Group. Our results show that a three-protein
signature consisting of CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11, all ligands of the
CXCR3 receptor, is significantly associated with survival. Interestingly,
the CXCR3-axis has been previously implicated in an OS mouse model, but
its role in human is still not known. Hence, the next step is to validate
these prognostic biomarkers in an independent cohort of OS patient
samples. In addition, we will test the expression of these molecules and
their receptor in tumor samples to identify potential therapeutic
targets. In summary, we characterized the expression of circulating
cytokines/chemokines in osteosarcoma samples and identified candidate
prognostic biomarkers that are linked to the CXCR3-axis. A further study
of these molecules may allow us to develop a biomarker approach for early
prognostication and a novel therapeutic approach for treating high-risk
OS.

