Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of pancreatic cancer proteome & phosphorylome:
Indicates molecular events likely contributing to cancer & activation
status of drug targets


INTRODUCTION: LC-MS/MS proteomics is an essential technology to help
unravel the complex molecular events that lead to and propagate cancer.
We have developed an analytical workflow to quantify the expression and
phosphorylation status of thousands of proteins simultaneously in frozen
resected human pancreatic tumor (T), relative to matched non-tumor (NT)
tissue. These measurements enabled us to determine activity of
anti-neoplastic drug targets and other signaling proteins. METHODS:
Peptides resulting from tryptic digestion of proteins extracted from
frozen tissue of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and background pancreas
(n=12), were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT 8-plex), separated by
strong cation exchange chromatography, then were analysed by LC-MS/MS
directly or first enriched for phosphopeptides using Fe3+ and TiO2, prior
to analysis. In-house, commercial and freeware bio-informatics platforms
were used to identify relevant biological events from the complex
dataset. RESULTS: Of 2,101 proteins identified, 152 demonstrated
significant difference in expression between tumor and non-tumor tissue.
They included proteins that are known to be up-regulated in pancreatic
cancer (e.g. Mucin-1), but the majority were new candidate markers such
as homeodomain interacting protein kinase 1 & Myosin light chain kinase.
Of the 6,543 unique phosphopeptides identified (6,284 unique
phosphorylation sites), 635 showed significant regulation, particularly
those from proteins involved in cell migration (Rho GTPase signaling
proteins such as Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors &
Serine/threonine-protein kinase MRCK) as well as proteins involved in
disassembly of cell-cell junctions (tight junction, adherens junction)
and formation of cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) junctions (focal
adhesions). We quantified activator & inhibitory phosphorylation sites on
FYN, AKT1, HDAC1&2, GSK3&, RAF kinases, MAPKs (p38, ERK1&2), PKCs, Casein
Kinases and >20 others, as well as their downstream substrates some of
which were often found to be highly modulated ( 2 fold) in T versus NT in
different cases. CONCLUSION: Application of our LC-MS/MS proteomic
workflow to frozen resected human pancreatic T versus NT tissue
elucidated molecular events likely contributing to pancreatic cancer in
each case, particularly those contributing to cell migration, and in
future may help clinicians predict the best targeted anti-cancer therapy
bespoke for an individual patient.

