Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping of functional protein pathway modulations in non-sun
exposed skin of healthy volunteers using solar simulated light: A new
model for pharmacodynamic testing of skin cancer chemopreventive drugs


Efficient secondary prevention methods for non-melanoma skin cancers are
needed to supplement primary prevention in high-risk individuals.
Pharmacologic effects in UV-induced keratinocyte signaling may predict
efficacy of new drugs. In order to understand effects of solar light on
signal transduction networks in human skin, we exposed buttocks skin of
healthy volunteers to solar-simulated light (SSL) at doses 2x-3x of
minimum erythemal dose (MED) using a Multiport UV Solar Simulator (Solar
Light Co.). Punch biopsies (6 mm) were collected at baseline, 5 min, 1
hr, 5 hr, and 24 hr post-exposure. Biopsies were split with half fixed in
formalin and half snap-frozen for Reverse Phase Protein Microarray (RPMA)
analysis to identify relevant signaling networks activated by SSL
exposure. 24 subjects 18 y.o. with Fitzpatrick skin type II or III, with
no concurrent illness, cancer, or use of photosensitizing drugs were
recruited. 12 were exposed to SSL at 2x MED, 6 at 2.5x MED, and 6 at 3x
MED. The activation/phosphorylation or total levels of 128 key signaling
proteins and drug targets were measured for each sample. Coordinate
network-based analysis was performed on specific signaling pathways that
included PI3k/Akt/mTOR, Ras/Raf/MEK/Erk, and Fyn/RSK2. Analyte levels
were compared at baseline to those at 5 min, 1 hr, 5 hr, and 24 hr after
SSL exposure. Unsupervised and supervised statistical analysis was used
with Bonferroni multiple comparison adjustment (p Efficient secondary
prevention methods for non-melanoma skin cancers are needed to supplement
primary prevention in high-risk individuals. Pharmacologic effects in
UV-induced keratinocyte signaling may predict efficacy of new drugs. In
order to understand effects of solar light on signal transduction
networks in human skin, we exposed buttocks skin of healthy volunteers to
solar-simulated light (SSL) at doses 2x-3x of minimum erythemal dose
(MED) using a Multiport UV Solar Simulator (Solar Light Co.). Punch
biopsies (6 mm) were collected at baseline, 5 min, 1 hr, 5 hr, and 24 hr
post-exposure. Biopsies were split with half fixed in formalin and half
snap-frozen for Reverse Phase Protein Microarray (RPMA) analysis to
identify relevant signaling networks activated by SSL exposure. 24
subjects 18 y.o. with Fitzpatrick skin type II or III, with no concurrent
illness, cancer, or use of photosensitizing drugs were recruited. 12 were
exposed to SSL at 2x MED, 6 at 2.5x MED, and 6 at 3x MED. The
activation/phosphorylation or total levels of 128 key signaling proteins
and drug targets were measured for each sample. Coordinate network-based
analysis was performed on specific signaling pathways that included
PI3k/Akt/mTOR, Ras/Raf/MEK/Erk, and Fyn/RSK2. Analyte levels were
compared at baseline to those at 5 min, 1 hr, 5 hr, and 24 hr after SSL
exposure. Unsupervised and supervised statistical analysis was used with
Bonferroni multiple comparison adjustment (p < 0.01). Pathway activation
maps were constructed using p values to indicate time-dependence of
pathway activation. Differences in MED did not significantly affect
expression, so all 24 subjects were analyzed independent of SSL dose.
Most pathway modulation occurred within the first 5 hr, with cell death
and apoptosis-related endpoints maximal at 24 hr. Many kinases were
activated within 5 min and activity increased at 1-5 hr before reversing
to baseline or lower at 24 hr. Early and sustained activation of
p38/SAPK/ ERK pathways started at 5 min, continued through 5 hr and was
sustained at 24 hr. Systemic AKT-mTOR pathway activation was observed
from 5 min-1 hr, sustained through 5 hr, and decreased at 24 hr.
EGFR-HER3 activation followed a similar pattern. COX2 expression
increased at 1 hr and was sustained through 24 hr. AMPK was activated
early and sustained through 24 hr since LKB1, the dominant AMPK kinase
was activated within 5 min-1hr and sustained. Correlation-based network
maps were generated and revealed time-dependent SSL induced pathway
activation linkages. This work shows that protein pathway activation
mapping of phosphorylated proteins in relevant signaling pathways can be
used in future studies to determine pharmacodynamic activity of selective
topical agents administered in a test area exposed to SSL to determine
drug-induced modification of skin carcinogenesis pathways.

