Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD146 is a novel marker of highly tumorigenic populations and a
therapeutic target in malignant rhabdoid tumor


Background: Malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) is a rare, highly aggressive
pediatric malignancy, particularly develops during infancy and early
childhood. In contrast to significant advances in multimodality therapy
for other pediatric malignancies, effective therapies for MRT have not
been established. The origin of tumor cells in MRT has remained
undetermined: however, MRT arises from various parts of body with some
preference, eading to the hypothesis that MRT derives from neural crest
or its derivatives. CD146 is a cell surface glycoprotein expressed by
various neural crest-derived tissues, which has been expected to be a
therapeutic target for immunotherapy against various CD146-expressing
malignancies, such as melanoma and osteosarcoma. Objective: In the
current study, we investigated (1) the expression of CD146 in MRT, (2)
tumorigenic potential of CD146-expressing cells in MRT, (3) in vitro and
in vivo effect of anti-CD146 neutralizing antibody against MRT, and (4)
underlying molecular mechanisms involved in CD146 expression. Material
and Method: The expression levels of CD146 in MRT cell lines and clinical
samples were investigated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
or immunohistochemical analyses. Tumor cells were then sorted by FACS
according to the expression of CD146, and purified CD146+ and CD146-
cells were characterized by colony-formation, sphere-formation, and
invasion assays. In vivo tumorigenic potential was assessed by
subcutaneous transplantation of the purified CD146+ and CD146- cells into
NOD/Shi-scid, IL-2Rnull (NOG) mice. We developed rabbit anti-CD146
neutralizing antibody to investigate the effect of blocking CD146 both in
vitro and in vivo. DNA microarray was performed by using purified CD146+
and CD146- cells, and the association of candidate pathways was validated
by shRNA silencing or treatment of the neutralizing antibody against
CD146. Results: The expression of CD146 was observed in all MRT cell
lines and clinical samples. Compared to CD146- cells, CD146+ cells in MRT
exhibited significantly higher colony-, and sphere-forming potential, and
more invasive capacity. The data of xeno-transplant demonstrated that
stable engraftment of the purified tumor cells as well as successful
engraftment after serial transplantation was exclusively observed in
CD146+ cell-injected mice. Furthermore, our anti-CD146 neutralized
antibody effectively inhibited both in vitro proliferation and in vivo
tumor formation. Microarray analysis showed that various molecular
pathways were engaged in higher tumorigeneity in CD146+ cells. Details of
underlying mechanisms are now under investigation. Conclusion: Our data
shows that CD146 defines a distinct subpopulation with highly tumorigenic
and self-renewal capacity in MRT. Notable anti-tumor effect of anti-CD146
neutralizing antibody will facilitate a novel immunotherapy for MRT.

