Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stress-induced differential Survivin release in prostate cancer
health disparities


African-American men have the highest rate of prostate cancer (PCa)
incidence in the U.S. In addition, their prostate cancer mortality rate
is more than twice as high as the rate for white Americans. The causes of
higher rates of prostate cancer among African-American males are largely
unknown. Many studies are underway to unravel the impact of a wide
variety of potential risk factors, including dietary and other lifestyle
differences, occupational exposures, hormonal and genetic differences.
Several lines of evidence suggest that one of the main events associated
with the conversion to an aggressive phenotype is increased resistance to
apoptosis (3) mainly due to upregulation of antiapoptotic genes,
including Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1, and Survivin. Recently, we reported that
Survivin is released in PCa sera and found to be in the exosomes.
Therefore, we speculate that Survivin could be a potential target protein
released differentially in prostate cancers in African American (AA) and
Caucasian (CC) populations in response to stress. In this study, we have
collected serum samples from prostate cancer patients of AA and CC,
measured Survivin levels by ELISA. Exosome islation was perfomed by
Exoquick approach and quantified by acetylcholinesterase activity assays.
We have applied an in-vitro approach to compare the differences between
cancer cell lines derived from AA (MDA-MB-PCa) and CC (PC3) patients in
terms of stress and stress activated Survivin release by exosomes. Under
oxidative stress and drug treatments, we have identified Survivin highly
expressed in exosome derived from MDA-MB-PCa compared to PC3 cell lines.
In addition, we found a relative overexpression of Survivin protein in
AA-PCa compared to CC-PCa both in sera and exosomes. Based on our data,
Survivin may be a key stress-induced protein in AA-PCa patients. It is
possible that attempts to block Survivin release will not only interrupt
the cancer proliferation and interfere with anti-apoptotic pathways, thus
preventing cancer progression.

