Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GlioMath-DD: A multidisciplinary approach to study glioma
evolution and identify targets for individualized therapies


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent malignant primary
brain tumor in adults. GBM is classified as primary if it is assumed to
have arisen de novo or as secondary if it progressed from lower grade
astrocytoma. Previous studies have found that primary and secondary GBMs
have distinct molecular and mutational profiles. Both have a grim
prognosis with survival times of about a year with therapy. Although much
progress in delineating the temporal order of mutations and copy number
aberrations in the progression of lower grade gliomas was made in the
past years, none of the studies have actively followed individual tumors
through their progression. Whereas this method can detect aberrations
that are prevalent in gliomas, it can miss events that are important in a
subset of gliomas or are necessary for progression.The GlioMath-DD
consortium is an interdisciplinary collaboration of several groups at the
Technische Universitt Dresden (TU-Dresden) aiming to study the
progression of gliomas and to come up with a mathematical model for
gliomagenesis. The work involves analyzing pairs of gliomas obtained from
patients who had presented with a low grade glioma and who later had a
recurrence of a higher grade glioma. All tumors were checked by
pathologists and then high quality DNA and RNA material extracted and
used for analysis. The tumors are analyzed for copy number variations
(CNV) by array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH), while gene
expression changes and small mutations are analyzed using high-throughput
sequencing (RNA- and Exome-seq). The data gleaned from these experiments
and from in vitro models of cell growth and spheroid formation will be
used by bioinformaticians and mathematicians to infer key signaling
networks and formulate a mathematical model of glioma progression.The
ultimate aim of this work that spans two and a half years is to create a
comprehensive model of glioma promotion and progression. Furthermore, it
will pinpoint driver mutations and aberrations that contribute to this
progression and eventually isolate biomarkers for diagnosis and therapy.
During the conference, we will present preliminary genetic data of our
ongoing study.Acknowledgements: The GlioMath-DD project (coordinator:
Andreas Deutsch; SAB-Number 100098214) is funded by the European Social
Fund (ESF) and the Free State of Saxony

