Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of critical steps involved in optimization of next
generation sequencing (NGS) using a retrospective meta-analysis of a
large clinical testing cohort


Introduction: There is increased use of NGS technology in clinical
applications. Promise of this platform's applicability in the assessment
of somatic mutations is seen in improvements in sensitivity over other
sequencing methods, higher throughput and rapidly decreasing cost. We
analyzed a large cohort, n=1210, of sample data from routine testing
since 2012 and find that results are robust. However, there are several
areas that users of NGS technology can optimize to assure the highest
levels of accuracy for clinical-grade sequencing results.Methods: NGS was
performed as targeted sequencing of multiple exons (132 amplicons) from 5
genes (ASXL1, RUNX1, ETV6, EZH2, and TP53). Patients had a prior
diagnosis of, or were suspected of having, myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS). Validated sample types included bone marrow aspirates and
peripheral blood. DNA was extracted from samples and processed in
duplicate using a clinically validated testing procedure. Libraries were
created using a Fluidigm Access Array system and sequencing was performed
on the Illumina MiSeq platform. The limit of detection of this assay is
5% mutant allele with a minimum depth of coverage of 500x. Alignment and
variant calling was performed using NextGENe software. Custom Perl
software was used to provide quality checking of results, duplicate run
comparisons, and annotation from existing databases for known germline
and somatic variants.Results: From 1210 random patient samples run in
duplicate, 738 (61%) samples demonstrated 2081 variant calls in only one
of the two replicates. The quality and quantity of input DNA is paramount
to achieving stable results (DNA input accounts for 75% of singlicate
results in this study). In addition, specific regions of sequence have
been identified as hot spots of high variability, accounting for 21% of
the singlicate calls in this study. For example, RUNX1 accounts for 46%
of the singlicate calls and 84% of those are concentrated in exon 3, a
254bp, GC-rich region. Finally, the resulting data must be well managed
by analytical and bioinformatics tools to assure accuracy but meet the
requirements of the high throughput and robust clinical setting. Although
these factors can be mitigated, the use of duplicate testing of a large
cohort of hematologic patient specimens allowed identification of these
sources of variation, providing a cautionary note to others using NGS in
a clinical setting.Conclusions: Duplicate NGS runs from about a year of
clinical testing demonstrate robust results. However, laboratories need
to address factors that may confound results such as input sample
quantity/quality, amplicon design, and post-analytical processing. These
can introduce the potential for false-positive/negative results in
routine testing without additional confirmation.

