Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) promotes
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenomena, cell motility,
and invasion via TGF- signaling in U2OS cells


Interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) is a transcription
factor induced by interferon gamma (IFN-) and a member of the interferon
regulatory factor (IRF) family. ICSBP is predominantly expressed in
hematopoietic cells and regulates the immune response and cell growth and
differentiation. However, little is known about its function in
non-hematopoietic cells. Here we show a novel function for ICSBP in
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenomena (ELP), cell
motility, and invasion in human osteosarcoma cell lines, including U2OS
cells. IFN- treatment induced ICSBP expression and EMT-like morphological
change in U2OS cells, which were suppressed by ICSBP knock-down. To
further investigate the role of ICSBP in ELP, we established a stable
U2OS cell line that overexpresses ICSBP. ICSBP expression caused U2OS
cells to have a more elongated shape and an increased vimentin and
fibronectin expression. ICSBP expression also promoted adhesiveness,
motility, and invasiveness of U2OS cells. ICSBP up-regulated transforming
growth factor (TGF)- receptors and activated TGF- signaling cascades,
which were responsible for ELP as well as increased cell motility and
invasion. In addition, ICSBP-induced TGF- receptor activation resulted in
the up-regulation of Snail. Knock-down of Snail attenuated the
ICSBP-induced augmentation of cell motility and invasion. Up-regulation
of Snail, ELP, and increased invasion by ICSBP expression were also
observed in other osteosarcoma cell lines, such as Saos-2 and 143B.
Furthermore, ICSBP and TGF- receptor I were expressed in 45/54 (84%) and
47/54 (87%) of human osteosarcoma tissues, respectively, and showed
significant correlation (r= 0.47, p= 0.0007) with respect to their
expression levels. Taken altogether, these data demonstrate a novel
function for ICSBP in ELP, cell motility, and invasion through the TGF-
and Snail signaling pathways

