Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotoxicity of trace level of hexavalent chromium existing in
city water


Tens of millions of Americans consume trace amounts of potentially toxic
hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) through drinking city water every day.
According to the studies conducted by the Environmental WorkingGroup, 89%
of the water samples from U.S. cities are contaminated with Cr(VI) at
levels ranging from 0.03 to 12.9 g/L. While trivalent chromium (Cr(III))
is among the essential trace elements for normal carbohydrate, lipid, and
protein metabolism in humans, Cr(VI) has been extensively studied as a
toxic heavy metal ion. Cr(VI) is a well-known human carcinogen by
inhalation; in contrast, it is a rodent carcinogen by ingestion of
extremely high doses (57,300 g/L or higher) in drinking water. The United
States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and other regulatory
agencies in the world have set the maximum contaminant levels (MCL) for
total Cr or Cr(VI) in human drinking water at 50 or 100 g/L, although the
USEPA is currently re-evaluating these regulations. The mechanism by
which Cr(VI) causes genotoxicity is well-characterized at concentrations
equivalent to current regulatory levels or higher. The genotoxic mode of
action of Cr(VI) appears to be due to the intracellular reduction of
Cr(VI) to Cr(III) leading to the formation of a ternary complex between
DNA, Cr(III), and intracellular reducing molecules. However, little
information is available regarding the biological effects of Cr(VI) at
doses lower than 100 g/L. In this study, we investigated the effects of
Cr(VI) at nanomolar ranges (1 g/L or higher) on the DNA damage response
in isogenic cultured cells deficient in various DNA repair genes. Here we
show that the DNA damage response is observed after a three-day
incubation with Cr(VI) at 2-5 g/L (ppb), which is lower than the Cr(VI)
concentrations detected in some of city water in the US. Strikingly, the
genotoxicity of Cr(VI) decreased 3000 times depending on its incubation
time, ranging from three days to ten minutes. Our dose- and
time-dependent Cr(VI) genotoxicity results, combined with the estimated
transit time of Cr(VI) in the digestive tracts of humans, strongly
suggest that trace amounts of Cr(VI) in drinking water at levels 12.9 g/L
or lower are unlikely to cause a significant impact on inducing
carcinogenicity in the oral cavity and small intestine.

