Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow hematopoietic stem cell niche activation and
mobilization fosters the metastatic niche


Metastasis remains the main cause of mortality for patients with cancer.
The process whereby a localized tumor becomes metastatic remains poorly
understood. Metastasis was previously thought to be a late-stage,
unidirectional migration of cells from the primary tumor to a distant
site, due to acquired genetic mutations that conferred necessary
metastatic attributes to the cell. However, current research demonstrates
that dissemination is not a late phenomenon and although loss of
metastasis suppressor genes or gain of acquired mutations can contribute
to the metastatic phenotype, the cross-talk between the tumor and its
microenvironment has proven to be a major driver of this process. We have
found that recruited bone marrow-derived cells and changes in resident
stromal cells form a microenvironment that is conducive to metastatic
progression, termed the pre-metastatic niche. The recruited and resident
cells that form this microenvironment are active areas of investigation.
Because the bone marrow is the source for most of the recruited cell
types in these distant tissue sites, we postulated that activation of the
bone marrow's hematopoietic compartment plays a key role in metastatic
progression. We sought to profile the changes that occur within the
hematopoietic stem cell niche of the bone marrow and subsequent changes
in hematopoiesis in the setting of tumor development. Within the bone
marrow of tumor bearing mice we found increased proliferation of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. These cells are also increased
in the circulation of both tumor bearing mice and patients with
malignancy. Furthermore, we have determined that elevated levels of
circulating hematopoietic progenitor cells can be predictive of
metastatic risk, as those patients with the highest levels at diagnosis
developed metastases. This biomarker may be useful in stratifying therapy
for patients with localized disease who have the highest metastatic risk.
Better understanding of the steps and individual factors required to
establish a metastatic microenvironment can lead to novel adjuvant
therapies to target this process.

