Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Occupational exposure to agricultural pesticides and CLL risk


BackgroundPrevious literature regarding the association between
occupational exposure to agricultural pesticides and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL) risk has been inconsistent, particularly when looking at specific
lymphoma subtypes. Most recently, a large European case-control study
showed an elevated risk of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) among those
ever exposed to inorganic and organic pesticides with the strongest
association among those exposed to organophosphates. However, when
restricting the analysis to subjects with high confidence of exposure,
these associations were attenuated (Cocco P., 2013). We used case-control
data from the Mayo Clinic to evaluate whether there is an increased risk
of CLL among individuals with known occupational exposure to agricultural
pesticides.MethodsWe evaluated pesticide exposure and CLL risk in a
clinic-based study of newly diagnosed CLL cases and frequency-matched
controls enrolled at the Mayo Clinic from 2002-2012. 200 CLL cases and
474 controls returned a detailed farming and pesticide exposure
questionnaire that was modeled after the Agricultural Health Study, where
exposure was based on pesticide-specific application. Unconditional
logistic regression, adjusted for age and sex, was used to estimate odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). We evaluated the effect
of each pesticide individually, by chemical class of pesticides, and by
an aggregate of multiple pesticide exposure on CLL risk.ResultsAmong
those participants with detailed farming data, the mean age of CLL
diagnosis was 66 years and 76% were male; for controls, the mean age at
enrollment was 65 years and 66% were male. Risk of CLL was mildly
elevated, but not significant, amongst those with application of any
pesticide (OR 1.39; 95% C.I. 0.92-2.10). When broken down by chemical
class, risk of CLL was also mildly elevated, but not significant, for
application of organophosphates and carbamates (OR 1.21; 95% CI
0.84-1.73; OR 1.21; 95% 0.85-1.73, respectively). Organochlorines,
phenoxy compounds, pyrethriods and triazines showed no evidence of an
elevated risk, nor did we see evidence of a trend that CLL risk increases
with number of pesticides applied.DiscussionOur preliminary results
provide inconclusive support for the role of pesticide exposure as a
possible risk factor for CLL. However our sample size was small.
Additional data will be incorporated, including confidence of exposure
measures, as well as other modifying factors, to further evaluate these
results.

