Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipocytes inhibit trastuzumab-mediated ADCC via induction of GDF15


Background : Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that has been approved
in the treatment of HER2-expressing breast cancer. Despite its efficacy,
resistance often occurs. Little is known about the role of the tumor
microenvironment in resistance to trastuzumab. Recent studies have shown
rising role of adipose tissue in promoting cancer progression and
inducing resistance to chemotherapy. Given the abundance of adipose
tissue in breast and its proximity to cancer cells, we investigated the
impact of adipocytes on antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC),
one of the main mechanisms of action of trastuzumab.Methods: We set up a
co-culture system in the presence of undifferentiated or differentiated
human multi-potent adipose-derived stem (hMADS) cells, HER2-expressing
human breast cancer cell lines (BT474, MDA-453, SKBR3, MDA-MB-361), and
human natural killer NK-92 expressing the Fc receptor CD16.
Trastuzumab-mediated cytotoxicity was assessed by calcein-release assay.
Morphological changes on cancer cells and NK-92-CD16 cells were
investigated by microscopy and flow cytometry.Results: We found that
adipocytes, as well as pre-adipocytes, inhibited trastuzumab-mediated
ADCC by approximately 30%. Notably, this inhibition was enhanced in
hypoxic conditions with 1% O2 (up to 60% inhibition). The inhibition of
ADCC by adipose cells was not due to a titration or degradation of the
antibody, but via factors that are secreted by adipose cells into the
conditioned media. Analysis of cell phenotype did not reveal any
modification of NK cell receptors (CD16, NKG2D, NKG2A, NKp30, NKp44) or
NK cell activation markers (CD25, CD69, CD107a), nor of HER2 levels in
the presence of adipocytes. Pre-incubation of NK cells with the
conditioned medium from adipocytes did not alter NK cytotoxicity.
Conversely, pre-incubation of cancer cells with adipocyte-conditioned
medium reduced sensitivity of cancer cells to ADCC. Using transcriptomic
approach, we found GDF15 to be rapidly up-regulated in cancer cells
exposed to adipocyte-conditioned medium. Down-regulation of GDF15 by
siRNA reversed the adipocyte-induced inhibition of ADCC.Conclusion:
Adipocytes inhibit antitumor activity of trastuzumab in HER2-expressing
breast cancer cells via secretion of factors that reduce cancer cell
sensitivity to ADCC. Our findings underline the importance of adipose
tissue in the resistance to trastuzumab, and suggest that development of
approaches targeting GDF15 may sensitize cancer cells to
trastuzumab-based therapy.

