Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LRIG1 decreases cell proliferation and motility through
downregulation of ErbB2 611-CTF


The receptor ErbB2 is a membrane bound protein that controls important
cell functions including cell cycle progression; deregulated expression
of this protein is associated with the development of a variety of cancer
types. Notably, ErbB2 over-expression is observed in approximately 25% of
human breast tumors.Trastuzumab, an FDA approved therapeutic currently
used to treat ErbB2 positive breast cancer patients, is a monoclonal
antibody that directly binds the ErbB2 extracellular domain.
Unfortunately, only a fraction of patients treated with trastuzumab
durably respond to the treatment. Moreover, patients that are treated
long term with this antibody develop resistance. One of the proposed
mechanisms of trastuzumab resistance is the expression of 611-CTF, a
C-terminal fragment of ErbB2 which lacks most of its extracellular
domain. Remarkably, 611-CTF is hyperactive and has been associated with
increased cell migration, tumor progression and metastasis.Currently
nothing is known regarding mechanisms which lead to 611-CTF
down-regulation. This represents a significant knowledge gap in our
understanding of 611-CTF and receptor fragments in general. Since 611-CTF
is associated with poor clinical outcome and therapeutic resistance, it
is essential to clarify the mechanisms by which this ErbB2 fragment is
regulated. This knowledge could ultimately lead to the development of new
therapeutics which could improve the response rate of 611-CTF-positive
breast cancer.LRIG1 is a tumor suppressor that directly interacts with
ErbB2 leading to receptor degradation. In this study we examined whether
611-CTF is susceptible to LRIG1-mediated down-regulation. We find that
these proteins interact and that expression of LRIG1 is sufficient to
decrease 611-CTF protein expression in three different cell lines.
Furthermore, LRIG1 is capable of reducing 611-CTF-driven tumor cell
proliferation and migration. Our results are unexpected because LRIG1 is
thought to recognize its targets through mutual extracellular domain
interactions and 611-CTF lacks a large portion of the ErbB2 extracellular
domain.

