Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput methylation sequencing of targeted genes in breast
cancer specimens using nanofluidic PCR prepared libraries


Breast cancer is a global public health issue as it is the most
frequently diagnosed malignancy in women in the Western world with over a
million new cases every year worldwide. Previous epigenetic analyses have
identified aberrant DNA methylation signatures associated with breast
cancer. Methylation alterations resulting in aberrant gene expression are
key contributors to breast tumorigenesis. There are more than 100
candidate genes reported throughout the literatures as promoter
hypermethylated in breast cancers (Pubmeth web resource). More recently,
with the application of genome wide array-based methylation profile
analysis and next generation sequencing, hundreds of new methylation
candidate genes have been reported to be associated with breast cancer.
It is crucial to develop an approach for targeted methylaton resequencing
to validate these candidate genes in hundreds of patient samples and
develop a breast cancer detection panel for early diagnostics.We have
developed a targeted gene bisulfite-sequencing approach using a
nanofluidic platform, the Access Array system, which enables simultaneous
amplification of 48 genetic regions (amplicon) from 48 samples in
parallel. We have selected 48 breast cancer associated methylation
candidate genes, each commonly reported by multiple literatures.
Bisulfite-specific-sequencing (BSP) primers were designed for the
promoter regions of these genes. In addition, we have applied a primer
design strategy that incorporates sample-specific barcodes and Illumina
(Miseq) sequencing adaptors into each amplicon, removing the need for
additional library preparation before sequencing. We will present
methylation sequencing data collected from amplicon libraries generated
using the Access Array system. The 48 promoter regions have been
amplified in paired tumor/normal tissues and plasma DNA from 48 breast
cancer patients. Our results indicate the excellent utilization of this
approach in the validation of methylation biomarkers and selection of
detection panel for breast cancer.

