Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A sub-set of DCLK1+ve colon cancer stem cells (CSCs) survive
curcumin induced autophagy, while co-treatment with curcumin +DCLK1-siRNA
eliminates CSCs: Role of long and short isofoms of DCLK1


Curcumin induces apoptotic/autophagic cell death of colon cancer cells,
and targets cancer stem cells (CSC). In here, we examined for the first
time, possible apoptotic/autophagic effects of curcumin on colon CSCs,
positive for DCLK1/CD44/LGR5. Curcumin (20-25M) caused significant loss
in the expression of stem cell markers DCLK1/CD44/ALDHA1/LGR5, along with
down-regulation of several pluripotency factors, in tumorspheres and
xenografts derived from human colon cancer cells. Surprisingly, curcumin
induced proliferation and autophagic survival of a small subset of
DCLK1+ve CSCs. Colon cancer tumorspheres were disintegrated by curcumin,
but regrew as secondary tumorspheres after 30-40 days, suggesting the
novel possibility that autophagy-associated survival may allow CSCs to
survive and regrow as tumorspheres. We next examined inhibitory effects
of DCLK1-siRNA. Unlike curcumin, DCLK1-siRNA only induced apoptotic cell
death, with no autophagic response. Combination of curcumin+DCLK1-siRNA
caused massive apoptotic/autophagic cell death of colon cancer cells
growing as tumorpsheres or xenografts, and reversed the transformed
phenotype of CSCs, as previously reported by us (Int.J.Cancer, 2012).
Co-treatment with curcumin+DCLK-siRNA was more effective that either
agent alone in: 1)attenuating growth of tumorspheres, 2)shrinking the
pre-formed xenografts in vivo, and 3)eliminating relapse (re-growth) of
tumorspheres. We recently discovered that colon cancer cells and
adenocarcinomas from patients express DCLK1-short (S) isoform ,
transcribed from intron-V promoter; long (L) isoform was silenced by
promoter methylation. Normal intestinal cells and non-transformed
epithelial cells, on the other hand, mainly expressed DCLK1-L isoform.
Promoter-reporter studies and ChIP assays demonstrated that curcumin
significantly reduced expression levels of DCLK1-S isoform in colon
cancer cells but paradoxically increased its expression in
non-transformed/normal intestinal cells. Thus, the differential effects
of curcumin on DCLK1 expression in cancer vs normal cells may explain the
underlying mechanisms by which curcumin targets CSCs while sparing normal
stem cells. Conclusion. Our studies strongly suggest that, 1) DCLK1
represents a functional protein for colon cancers, 2) combination of
curcumin+DCLK1-siRNA may target and eradicate colon cancer stem cells.,
and 3) identifying small molecules that inhibit expression of S-isoform
may allow to specifically target cancer stem cells, while sparing normal
stem cells for cancer treatment purposes.This work was supported by NIH
Granst to PS (R01CA09795909 and RO1CA0975909-S1).

