Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific expression of fatty acid synthase promotes
angiogenesis in colorectal cancer


Up regulation of fatty acid synthase (FASN), a key enzyme of de novo
lipogenesis, is associated with metastasis in colorectal cancer (CRC).
However, the mechanisms of regulation of metastasis by FASN are elusive.
The induction of angiogenesis is crucial for metastasis. Therefore, the
purpose of the present study was (i) to determine the role of FASN in
regulation of secretion of angiogenic factors by CRC cells, (ii) to
evaluate the effect of tumor-specific expression of FASN on endothelial
cells, and (iii) to assess the role of FASN in regulation of tumor
vasculature.METHODS: The effect of FASN inhibition on secretion of
angiogenic factors was analyzed using the Human Angiogenesis Antibody
Array 1 (RayBiotech). Co-culture of CRC and HMVEC-L cells was used to
assess the effect of FASN expression on growth, migration, and tube
formation of endothelial cells. To evaluate the effect of FASN on
vasculature, we utilized murine colonoscopy, the orthotopic colon cancer
model, the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model, and the Matrigel
plug assay.RESULTS: We found that inhibition of FASN is associated with
an evident change in the profile of secreted angiogenic factors by CRC
cells and this change is associated with a significant decrease in
microvessel density as determined by analysis of CD31 staining (Aperio
Image Scope) in orthotopic colon tumors. A decrease in expression of FASN
is also associated with normalization of tumor vasculature in the CAM
model. The mechanisms of inhibition of angiogenesis by knockdown of FASN
included down regulation of VEGF189, an isoform associated with
aggressive CRC, up regulation of anti-angiogenic isoform VEGF165b, and a
decrease in expression and activity of MMP-9. Furthermore, medium
conditioned on FASN-knockdown CRC cells inhibited proliferation,
migration, and tube formation of endothelial cells via inhibition of
VEGFR-2 activation and its downstream signaling as compared to control
medium.CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that FASN promotes angiogenesis
via alteration of the profile of secreted angiogenic factors by CRC cell
and stimulation of endothelial cell proliferation. Furthermore, the
regulation of angiogenesis by FASN, at least in part, is mediated by
up-regulation of VEGF189, a VEGF-A isoform that tightly correlates with
poor prognosis in CRC, and by an increase in activity of MMP-9. Together,
these findings suggest that inhibition of FASN upstream of VEGF-A and
other angiogenic pathways can be a novel therapeutic strategy to prevent
or inhibit metastasis in CRC.

