Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic adenoviruses modulate autophagy in cancer cells via
sumoylation of LC3


Oncolytic adenoviruses are being examined as potential therapeutic agents
for malignant gliomas and other solid tumors. We have reported that
autophagy is a key component of the lysis process in adenovirus-infected
cells, influencing the adenoviral spread. We hypothesize that
understanding the regulation of autophagy should result in the generation
of more potent oncolytic adenoviruses. Our group showed that the function
of adenoviral early E1B-proteins include regulation of autophagy. Thus,
E1B19k, a Bcl2-like protein, interacts with Beclin 1 and activates
autophagy in adenovirus-infected cells. (Piya et al., PLOS One 2011). In
this work, we sought to examine the capability of the E1B55K to modulate
the autophagic process. Using mutant viruses deficient for the expression
of E1B55k, E4orf6 or E1B55k/E4orf6, we observed that viruses lacking the
expression of E1B55k were attenuated for the induction of autophagy. Upon
examining the sequence of E1B55k, we discovered the presence of an
LC3-interacting motif, termed LIR. Co-immunoprecipation assays revealed
that E1B55k heterodimerized with LC3. As expected, mutations in the LIR
sequence of E1B55k abrogated the physical interaction with LC3.
Importantly, we showed that disruption of E1B55k/LC3 complexes had
functional repercussions resulting in attenuation of the
adenovirus-mediated autophagy. Because the complex of E1B55k and E4orf6
functions as a sumo ligase, we examined whether E1B55k/E4orf6 complexes
were involved in LC3 sumoylation. Using co-immunoprecipitation studies in
HeLa-6X-his-Sumo-1 infected with wild type and mutant adenoviruses, we
showed that LC3 was sumoylated during adenoviral infection and that
E1B55k/LC3 interactions were required for this posttranslational
modification. Importantly, inhibition of the sumoylation process
drastically reduced adenovirus replication. This is the first report
showing that adenovirus induced sumoylation of cellular proteins to
regulate autophagy. Preliminary studies of cytoplasmic and nuclear
contents of LC3 and sumoylated LC3 suggest that adenovirus-mediated
sumoylation of LC3 prolongs the presence of LC3 in the cytoplasm by
modifying subcellular localization and decreasing protein degradation. We
conclude that adenoviral E1B proteins cooperate in the induction and
maintenance of autophagy in host cells. Our data provide new insights
about the regulation of autophagy and the intracellular environment
generated in cells infected with adenoviruses. It is hoped that these
findings will propel the development of more potent and selective
oncolytic adenoviruses.

