Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carfilzomib synergistically enhances ABT-263-induced apoptosis due
to NOXA induction in KRAS wild type and mutant colorectal cancer cell
lines


BACKGROUND. Proteosome inhibition is associated with induction of the
proapoptotic BH3 protein NOXA. Therefore, we hypothesize that the
combination of the irreversible proteosome inhibitor, carfilzomib, will
cooperatively enhance apoptosis induction by the BH3 mimetic drug,
ABT-263. Given that nononcogenic addiction to proteosome activity has
been reported in KRAS mutant cells, we utilized isogenic colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell lines in which the endogenous wild-type (wt) or mutant
alleles had been inactivated through targeted homologous recombination.
Since proteasome blockade results in proteotoxic stress, we determined
whether an autophagy inhibitor can enhance chemosensitivity.EXPERIMENTAL
METHODS. Isogenic KRAS mutant (MUT) CRC cells (HCT116, DLD1; obtained
from B. Vogelstein, JHU) were incubated with carfilzomib (25,50nM) alone
or combined with ABT-263 (1 M) and apoptosis was measured by caspase
cleavage and annexin V+ labeling. Synergy was measured by calculation of
the combination index. Effect of carfilzomib on Bcl-2 family proteins was
determined by immunoblotting. Interaction of NOXA with MCL-1 was examined
by immunoprecipitation. Knockdown of NOXA was achieved by lentiviral
shRNA. Cells were incubated with drugs alone or combined with
chloroquine, and autophagy (LC3I/II conversion) and apoptosis were
analyzed.RESULTS. Carfilzomib was shown to potently and synergistically
enhance ABT-263-induced apoptosis (2-fold) in both KRAS MUT and wild type
(WT) cell lines, with the effect being modestly higher in wild type
cells, as shown by annexin V+ staining and caspase cleavage. Carfilzomib
induced NOXA expression in both KRAS MUT and WT cells, and reduced MCL-1
expression. Induced NOXA was shown to bind and sequester MCL-1 proteins.
Knockdown of NOXA attenuated drug-induced apoptosis. Autophagy inhibition
by chloroquine accumulated LC3II, but only modestly increased
carfilzomib-induced cell death.CONCLUSION. Irreversible proteasome
inhibition by carfilzomib synergistically enhanced ABT-263-induced cell
death that is mediated by NOXA upregulation and its
sequestration/neutralization of MCL-1. The finding of similar efficacy in
KRAS MUT vs WT cells suggests that this combination may represent a novel
therapeutic strategy in this tumor subset.

