Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs regulated by ESE3/EHF control important mediators of
epithelial cell differentiation and stemness in prostate tumors


Deregulated expression of ETS transcription factors has emerged as an
important event in prostate cancer pathogenesis. We found that loss of
the ETS factor ESE3/EHF induced a broad dedifferentiation program
associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and induction
of metastatic and cancer stem-like cell properties. To understand the
mechanism by which ESE3/EHF controls differentiation of prostate
epithelial cells, we examined microRNA (miRNA) expression in a cohort of
primary prostate tumors and prostate epithelial normal and cancer cells
using miRNA gene arrays. A distinct set of miRNAs was specifically
deregulated in cancer cells and tumors with low ESE3/EHF expression.
Bioinformatic analysis indicated that the deregulated miRNAs controlled
many genes involved in EMT and cell stemness. Interestingly, we found
that miR-424 was at the top list of the miRNAs up-regulated in ESE3 low
expressing tumors and cell lines. This finding was confirmed by qRT-PCR
both in cells and human tumors. Functional assays showed that ESE3/EHF
controlled directly miR-424 by binding to the pre-miRNA promoter and
repressing its transcription. Inhibition of miR-424 using an antimiR
reduced anchorage-independent growth and cell migration in cancer cells
with low ESE3 expression and high miR-424 level. On the contrary, stable
expression of pre-miR-424 in cells with low endogenous miR-424 level
increased anchorage-independent growth and cell migration. Furthermore,
modulation of miR-424 expression affected in vitro prostatosphere
formation, a phenotype associated with cancer stem-like cell properties.
Consistently, inhibition of miR-424 in DU145 prostate cancer cells
reduced growth of tumor xenografts in immunodeficient mice. Integrating
bioinformatic analyses of the predicted targets and gene profiling of
cells with miR-424 overexpression we found that miRNA-424 controlled
several factors involved in protein degradation. Collectively, these
results show for the first time that ESE3/EHF controls a distinct network
of miRNAs with both oncogenic and tumor suppressor functions. Loss of
ESE3/EHF resulted specifically in increased expression of miR-424, which
has oncogenic properties in prostate epithelial cells. This represents a
novel mechanism by which deregulation of ESE3/EHF impact on prostate
tumorigenesis. Thus, targeting miR-424 could be a novel therapeutic
strategy for prostate cancer.

