Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imatinib sensitizes endometrial cancer cells to cisplatin by
targeting CD117-positive growth-competent cells


The use of molecular target therapy has not been established for
endometrial cancer. The present study investigated the potential
therapeutic strategy of targeting CD117-positive cancer cells as a novel
molecular target therapy. FACS-sorted CD117+ cells isolated from
endometrial cancer cell lines (Ishikawa or MFE280 cells) exhibited higher
proliferative capacity in vitro and colony forming activity on soft agar,
and decreased sensitivity to cisplatin, compared to CD117- cells.
Immunohistochemical analyses with surgical specimens of endometrial
cancers showed that high CD117 expression was tightly linked to advanced
FIGO stages, myometrial invasion and histological grade, and was
significantly associated with poor overall survival and relapse-free
survival (Kaplan-Meier analysis; pThe use of molecular target therapy has
not been established for endometrial cancer. The present study
investigated the potential therapeutic strategy of targeting
CD117-positive cancer cells as a novel molecular target therapy.
FACS-sorted CD117+ cells isolated from endometrial cancer cell lines
(Ishikawa or MFE280 cells) exhibited higher proliferative capacity in
vitro and colony forming activity on soft agar, and decreased sensitivity
to cisplatin, compared to CD117- cells. Immunohistochemical analyses with
surgical specimens of endometrial cancers showed that high CD117
expression was tightly linked to advanced FIGO stages, myometrial
invasion and histological grade, and was significantly associated with
poor overall survival and relapse-free survival (Kaplan-Meier analysis;
p<0.001, log-rank test). The Cox-regression hazard model identified high
CD117 expression to be an independent prognostic factor for survival
(pThe use of molecular target therapy has not been established for
endometrial cancer. The present study investigated the potential
therapeutic strategy of targeting CD117-positive cancer cells as a novel
molecular target therapy. FACS-sorted CD117+ cells isolated from
endometrial cancer cell lines (Ishikawa or MFE280 cells) exhibited higher
proliferative capacity in vitro and colony forming activity on soft agar,
and decreased sensitivity to cisplatin, compared to CD117- cells.
Immunohistochemical analyses with surgical specimens of endometrial
cancers showed that high CD117 expression was tightly linked to advanced
FIGO stages, myometrial invasion and histological grade, and was
significantly associated with poor overall survival and relapse-free
survival (Kaplan-Meier analysis; p<0.001, log-rank test). The
Cox-regression hazard model identified high CD117 expression to be an
independent prognostic factor for survival (p<0.05). In vitro assay
confirmed that stem cell factor (SCF), a ligand of CD117, was produced
specifically in CD117+ cells of endometrial cancer, and the
colony-forming activity were abrogated by adding anti-SCF antibody,
indicating an SCF-dependent growth property. Imatinib was confirmed to
selectively target CD117+ cells in vitro, and synergistically enhanced
the anti-tumor effect of low dose cisplatin in vivo, which showed only
modest effects when used as a single use. These findings suggest that
CD117 can be a marker of aggressive behavior of cells as well as an
independent prognostic marker in endometrial cancer. Targeting of the
SCF/CD117 axis by imatinib sensitized endometrial cancer cells to
cisplatin, proposing a novel therapeutic strategy for this tumor type.

