Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB9 expression associate with lymphatic invasion in superficial
pharyngeal carcinoma


Background: Early diagnosis and early treatment are the best ways to
improve cancer patient prognoses and keep quality of life of the patients
after treatment. We developed ELPS (endoscopic laryngo-pharyngeal
surgery) as an endoscopic treatment for superficial pharyngeal carcinoma.
ELPS was performed on 278 patients of superficial carcinoma of the
pharynx. However 18 lesions have lymphatic invasion, and lymphatic
metastasis have occurred in 10 patients after ELPS. HOXB9, a member of
the HOX genes, has been reported to be overexpressed in some neoplastic
tissues. The class I HOXB gene family consists of 39 members with a
shared and highly conserved 61-amino acid homeodomain motif. These genes
are significant regulators of development, and their roles in neoplastic
transformation and tumor progression have been recognized. Some studies
have suggested that HOXB9 expression promotes cellular invasiveness,
metastatic ability, and tumor vascularization in the surrounding tissue
by inducing EMT. These findings imply that HoxB9 overexpression may alter
tumor-specific cell fates and the tumor stromal microenvironment,
contributing to lymphatic invasion of superficial carcinoma. The
objective of this study is to analyze whether HOXB9 expression associates
with lymphatic invasion and causes in lymph node metastasis of
superficial pharyngeal carcinoma. METHODS: A total of 36 superficial
pharyngeal carcinoma patients who underwent endoscopic surgery were
examined. Immunohistochemical staining was performed to evaluate the
expression of HoxB9, and the association of lymphatic invasion and lymph
node metastasis with HoxB9 expression was analyzed. RESULTS: Of the 36
superficial pharyngeal carcinoma specimens, depth of tumor invasion is
epithelial layer (EP) in 19 tumors and submucosal layer (SEP) in 17
tumors. Thirteen of 19 (68.4%) EP tumors showed HoxB9 expression, and 10
of 17 (58.8%) SEP tumor showed HOXB9 expression. There is no significant
correlation of HOXB9 expression and depth of tumor invasion. Six of the
36 tumors have lymphatic invasion. All tumors having lymphatic invasion
showed positive HoxB9 expression, whereas 17 of 30 having no lymphatic
invasion showed HoxB9 expression. HoxB9 positive tumors tend to have
lymphatic invasion (p=0.07). Five of the 36 patients have lymphatic
metastasis. Four of 5 patients (80%) who have lymph node metastasis
showed positive HoxB9 expression, whereas 19 of 31 (61.3%) who have no
lymph node metastasis showed HoxB9 expression. HOXB9 positive tumors tend
to have lymphatic invasion. Conclusions: Our results suggest that HOXB9
can play a significant role in lymphatic invasion of superficial
pharyngeal carcinoma and can be a novel molecular maker for the lymphatic
metastasis.

