Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The let-7 microRNA binding site variant in the KRAS 3-UTR is not
associated with the risk of head and neck cancer


The KRAS gene is activated by somatic mutations in many cancer types.
However, KRAS mutations are relatively rare in squamous cell carcinomas.
In squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (HNSCC) amplification of
the KRAS gene has been shown to promote tumor growth. miRNAs are short
non-coding RNAs which play an important role as regulators of gene
expression. They bind to the 3-untranslated regions (UTRs) of the mRNAs
and prevent translation of their target genes. SNPs in the miRNA binding
sites are associated with disease risk and prognosis. The let-7 family of
miRNAs regulate multiple oncogenes including the KRAS gene and have been
shown to play a critical role in different cancer types. A functional
polymorphism in the KRAS gene, not included in the GWAS platforms has
been identified by candidate gene approach and was found to be a genetic
marker of cancer risk and increased susceptibility to the carcinogenic
effects of tobacco smoke. The polymorphism is referred to as the LCS6
(let-7 complementary site 6) variant and disrupts the let-7 binding site
leading to higher KRAS expression. Such an increase in KRAS expression
associated with the variant allele may represent an alternative form of
KRAS activation in HNSCC and could lead to impairment of the EGFR
signaling. In this study we evaluated the frequency of the KRAS variant
in 216 patients with head and neck cancer and 85 healthy individuals. DNA
was extracted from whole blood prior to chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The
variant allele was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Genotype and allele
frequencies were evaluated using the De-Finetti case control program. 13
% of the patients were heterozygous and 3 patients (1.5 %) were
homozygous for the variant allele. The polymorphism was present in
heterozygous form in 12 % of the controls. No homozygous individual was
detected in the control group. The frequencies of the variant allele were
92 % and 94 % in the patients and controls, respectively. Our data
indicate that the KRAS let-7 LCS6 variant allele is not associated with
an increased risk of HNSCC.

