Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biallelic DICER1 mutations in sporadic pleuropulmonary blastoma


Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is an extremely rare and aggressive
pediatric pulmonary malignancy. Recently, DICER1 mutations were reported
to be heterozygous frameshift or nonsense mutations of germline origin,
suggesting an important role of haploinsufficiency of DICER1. On the
other hand, Dicer1 heterozygous deficient mice did not develop PPB,
suggesting that DICER1 haploinsufficiency alone may not be sufficient for
tumor development. Thus, to identify genetic alterations underlying the
pathogenesis of PPB, we performed an integrated molecular study of PPB
analyzed by whole-exome, RNA and micro RNA sequencing in conjunction with
SNP array analyses.Whole-exome sequencing of 7 cases with sporadic PPB
and targeted deep sequencing of DICER1 was performed in additional 5
cases. DICER1 mutations were found in 11/12 cases by whole-exome or deep
sequencing, in which 6 cases carried compound heterozygous mutations. Two
cases carried homozygous mutations, which were caused by UPD involving
the 14q harboring the DICER1 locus. In total, biallelic DICER1 mutations
were found in 8/11 cases with DICER1 mutations. Four cases were confirmed
that compound heterozygotes of a germline nonsense/frameshift and a
somatic missense mutation, two were homozygous for somatic, missense
mutations. Conspicuously, all the 9 missense mutations were located
within the RNase IIIb domain with a mutational hotspot at G1809, for
which somatic origin was confirmed in 7 mutations.To assess the impact of
the DICER1 hotspot mutation on RNAase IIIb activity, we performed miRNA
sequencing in 3 cases with G1809R mutations. miRNA of fetal lung was used
as a control. Comparing the ratio of miRNA or miRNA* read count to
pre-miRNA read count, the tumor with G1809R mutant showed significantly
low levels of the miRNA product, but the effects were less clear in the
levels of the miRNA*, suggesting that G1809R mutants result in reduced
RNase IIIb activity but retention of RNase IIIa activity.We also
performed RNA sequencing in 5 cases, but apparent breakpoint cluster
region was not detected.Since 17p LOH was found in 8/11 cases, we checked
the TP53 mutation status in 12 cases by deep sequencing. We detected TP53
mutations in 5/12 cases, in which all 5 cases were accompanied by 17p LOH
and leading to biallelic TP53 inactivation.In conclusion, biallelic
DICER1 mutations were quite common in PPB, invariably accompanied by a
somatic RNase IIIb domain mutation. A majority of cases had mutated
DICER1 alleles in germline with or without an additional RNase IIIb
domain mutation in the remaining allele. Given that the novel hotspot
mutation, G1809R, revealed reduced RNase IIIb activity, alternative RNase
IIIb activity could be involved in the tumorigenesis of PPB. Recurrent
mutations were rare in PPB, except for frequent TP53 deletions/mutations.
Our results provide a novel insight into the critical role of DICER1
mutations and importance of TP53 inactivation in the pathogenesis of PPB.

