Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The integrin 6A splice variant regulates Wnt/-catenin and
colorectal cancer cell proliferation through autophagic degradation of
DVL2


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second cause of death by
cancer in North America. Recently, we found that both subunits of the
integrin 64 are up-regulated in colon primary tumours. The 6 integrin
subunit exists as two distinct splice isoforms, 6A and 6B, and only the
6A isoform is up-regulated in CRC. Moreover, we discovered that the
integrin formed by the 6A isoform is a pro-proliferative integrin
regulating the Wnt/-catenin pathway and tumorigenesis of CRC cells.
However, the exact mechanism by which the 6A splice variant controls the
Wnt/-catenin pathway is still unknown. Aim: In the present study, we
investigated the mechanism underlying the regulation of Wnt/-catenin by
the integrin 6A4 in human CRC, focusing on the degradation of DVL2 by
autophagy. Methods: In order to investigate the mechanism involved in the
regulation of the Wnt/-catenin pathway by the integrin 6A4, expression of
the splice variant 6A was specifically abolished, using a small-hairpin
RNA approach, in the colon adenocarcinoma cell line T84. Results:
Knockdown of the integrin 6A subunit resulted in a significant repression
of a number of Wnt/-catenin pathway end points, including a decrease in
DVL2 protein levels. Further analysis demonstrated that the Wnt/-catenin
pathway is restored by pharmacological inhibition of GSK3, (SB216763) or
by over-expression of a mutated -catenin (S37A). To determine if DVL2 is
degraded by autophagy following the abolition of the integrin 6A splice
variant, autophagy was activated using an mTOR inhibitor (rapamycin) or
inhibited using bafilomycin A1. Western blot analysis showed that
subsequent activation of autophagy in T84 sh6A cells led to a significant
decrease in DVL2 protein levels followed by a decrease in Wnt/-catenin
pathway end points, while inhibition of autophagy led to a significant
increase in DVL2 protein levels. However, no significant change in DVL2
protein levels was observed by the modulation of autophagy in T84 shctl
cells. Subsequent analysis revealed comparable autophagy flux between T84
shctl and T84 sh6A cells. The targeting of DVL2 to the autophagosome in
T84 sh6A cells was confirmed by a strong co-localization of DVL with
p62/SQSTM1. In order to confirm the significant relevance of the decrease
of DVL2, both shctl and sh6A cells were treated with a DVL-PDZ domain
inhibitor. Preliminary results demonstrated that inhibition of the
DVL-PDZ domain led to a decrease in proliferation only in T84 shctl
cells. Conclusion: Our study demonstrated for the first time a novel
function for the 6A integrin subunit in the control of the degradation of
DVL2 by autophagy to regulate the Wnt/-catenin pathway and cell
proliferation. Taken together, these results highlight the possibility
for a new therapeutic treatment for CRC taking advantage of autophagy and
the mechanism of regulation of the Wnt/-catenin by the integrin 6A
subunit.

