Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ABCG2, ALDH1A1, CD44, and CD44 variant 9 in human
oral squamous cell carcinoma and its relationship with clinical factors


[Background] A cancer stem cell (cancer initiating cell, CSC) is
considered capable of self -replication, self-differentiation, drug
resistance, and immune evasion. Recently, CSC has become increasingly
important in the treatment of malignant tumors. Cancer stem cells express
specific molecules termed CSC marker, including ATP-binding cassette, G2
subfamily (ABCG2), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 1A1, CD44, and CD44
variant 9 (CD44v9), and their expression has been reported to be the
potential prognostic values. However, the prognostic values of ABCG2,
ALDH1A1, CD44, and CD44v9 expression in patients with oral cancer are
less understood.[Purpose] The aims of present study were to evaluate the
expression of ABCG2, ALDH1A1, CD44, and CD44v9 in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) and to elucidate the relationships among the CSC marker
expression, clinical stages, histological differentiation, classification
of invasion mode, lymph node metastasis and disease-free survival
rate.[Materials and Methods] Tissue specimens were obtains from 99
patients with OSCC after surgery or biopsy. Immunohistochemistry was used
to assess ABCG2, ALDH1A1, CD44, and CD44v9 protein using at least 10%
staining-positive cells as the definition of positive staining.[Results]
Immunohistochemical analysis of 99 cases of OSCC showed that CD44 and
CD44v9 expression were strongly detected in all OSCC compared with normal
epithelial cells. Twenty eight (28.2%) cases of 99 OSCC patients
expressed ABCG2. There was no relationship between ABCG2 expression and
clinical stages, histological differentiation, metastasis, or
disease-free survival rate. There was significant association between
ABCG2 expression and classification of invasion mode. Otherwise, thirty
one (31.3%) cases of 99 OSCC patients expressed ALDH1A1. There was no
relationship between ALDH1A1 expression and clinical stagesor metastasis.
However, there was significant association between ALDH1 expression and
histological differentiation, or classification of invasion mode or
disease-free survivalrate. [Conclusions] These findings suggested that
the expression of ALDH1A1 as CSC markers in OSCC may be good marker
indicating survival in patients with OSCC.

