Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-551b is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and
expression in acute myeloid leukemia is associated with relapse and poor
survival


Despite high remission rates after chemotherapy, only 30-40% of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients survive five years after diagnosis. The
main cause for this treatment failure is insufficient eradication of a
subpopulation of chemotherapy resistant leukemic cells with a stem
cell-like character. These so-called leukemic stem cells (LSC) are
thought to be responsible for relapse.We hypothesized that success of
novel anti-AML therapies relies on functional manipulation of genes
including microRNAs, resulting in elimination of leukemic (stem) cells
while sparing residual co-existing normal hematopoietic stem cells (HSC).
We aimed at identification of microRNAs differentially expressed between
HSC, LSC and the AML bulk obtained from the same AML bone marrow, taking
into account the effects of the leukemic microenvironment.To that end, we
described immunophenotypic markers that can distinguish LSC from HSC.
Moreover, we identified that HSC have higher aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity than LSC (Schuurhuis et al. Plos One 2013). Comparing the
microRNA expression profile of LSC with that of HSC showed that
microRNA-551b (miR-551b) is highly expressed in residual HSC in the AML
bone marrow. To determine whether miR-551b is a HSC specific microRNA we
purified stem and progenitor cell subsets from normal bone marrow and
showed that miR-551b is the highest expressed in the two most primitive
CD34+CD38- populations i.e. CD90+CD45RA- HSC and CD90-CD45RA- multipotent
progenitors.To investigate whether the expression of miR-551b is of
clinical importance in AML we determined its expression in AML bone
marrow samples (n=154) and showed that high miR-551b is associated with
lower complete remission (CR) rates after the first cycle of induction
chemotherapy, shorter relapse free survival and a worse overall survival.
In line with miR-551b being a stem cell miRNA, high expression in AML was
associated with an undifferentiated morphology (FAB M0).To shed more
light on the functional role of miR-551b in AML we correlated the
expression of miR-551b with overall gene expression in a large panel of
AML patients. Many of the genes that highly correlated with miR-551b
like; MLLT3, INPP4B, HTR1F, HOPX, PROM1 and others, are also present in
published HSC signatures. In conclusion, miR-551b is specifically
expressed in normal stem and multipotent progenitor cells and high
expression in AML is associated with poor prognosis. Currently, our
research focuses on the function of miR-551b in AML.

