Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-p63 and TA-p63 exhibit intrinsic differences in transactivation
specificities that depend on distinct features of DNA target sites


TP63 is a member of the p53 gene family that encodes for up to ten
different TA- and N- isoforms through differential promoter usage and
alternative C-terminal splicing. The TA isoforms (TA-p63, , , and )
contain the N-terminal transactivation domain (TA1), whereas the N
isoforms (N-p63, , , and ) are transcribed from an internal promoter (P2)
and lack the TA1 domain. A second C-terminal transactivation domain (TA2)
present in all p63 and isoforms has been reported. Besides being a master
regulator of gene expression for squamous epithelial proliferation,
differentiation and maintenance (germline TP63 mutations are causative
for a subset of human ectodermal dysplasia syndromes -EDs-), TA- and
N-p63 isoforms play an important role in tumorigenesis. More recently,
p63 was shown to modulate apoptosis in the female and male germ line in
response to DNA damage. All isoforms share a large, immunoglobulin-like
folded DNA binding domain that is responsible for binding to
sequence-specific response elements (REs), whose overall consensus
sequence is similar to the p53 RE. Since the N-p63 isoforms lack the
N-terminal transactivation domain, it was originally proposed that these
proteins might act primarily as oncogenes through dominant-negative
mechanisms. However, different studies indicate that N-p63 protein itself
can be transcriptionally active. For example, N-p63 may directly
contribute to tumorigenesis by up-regulating the chaperone protein Hsp70,
which displays proliferative and anti-apoptotic functions or by
repressing pro-apoptotic genes. Transcriptional activation of specific
genes by N-p63, namely VDR and Id-3, has been also associated with an
anti-tumorigenic role, i.e. a decrease in cell invasion. Using a defined
functional assay in yeast where p63 isoform and RE sequence are the only
variables (more than 80 different REs were tested), as well as
mammalian-transcription assays (gene reporter assays, qPCR measurements,
western blotting), we demonstrated that human TA- and N-p63 proteins
exhibited differences in transactivation specificity. In fact 21 REs were
identified that exhibited higher or selective responsiveness to N-p63.
These differences were not observed with the related p73 and p53 proteins
isoforms and were dependent on specific features of the RE sequences.
Based on gene annotations, we propose that cis-element sequence features
might have been selected along with evolutionarily conserved, intrinsic
differences in cooperative DNA binding of p63 proteins, to establish
tighter control of the apoptotic processes.

