Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced astroglial differentiation depletes glioblastoma stem cells


Glioblastoma are among the least curable cancers in man, at least in part
because of stem-like cellular subpopulations (herein referred to as
glioma stem cells, GSC) refractory to current therapies. The cancer stem
cell hypothesis suggests that tumor cells are organized in a pyramidal
unidirectional differentiation cascade with GSC at the top and
functionally defined by the ability to self-renew and initiate tumors
identical to the original tumors from which they are derived. GSCs are
maintained by both cell intrinsic and microenvironmental factors and
conditions. In this study we focused on identifying potential small
molecules which may target tumor heterogeneity by promoting
differentiation of GSC into less aggressive, more differentiated
subpopulations. To this end, we have developed reporter models for
astroglial and neuronal differentiation in HSR-GBM1, HSR040622 and
HSR040821 tumor-derived, GSC-enriched, neurospheres lines, using
lineage-specific reporter constructs. We employed these reporter lines to
screen a library of over 600 bioactive small molecules for potential
inducers of GSC differentiation. We identified several molecules which
significantly induce astroglial differentiation in multiple GSC-enriched
lines. We focus in this report on one of these inhibitors (AD1 =
Astroglial Differentiation-1) which induces astroglial differentiation by
over 20 to 30-fold as compared with DMSO control. In addition, AD1
treatment resulted in a 40-60% reduction in cell growth in HSR-GBM1, 60%
in HSR040622, and 40% reduction in HSR040821, as determined by direct
cell counting. As differentiation should result in reduced self-renewal
capacity, we next determined the effect of AD1 on sphere formation using
the extreme limited dilution assay (ELDA). We found that AD1
significantly reduced clonogenic capacity of HSR-GBM1 reporter line by
over 90%. These data strongly suggest that AD1-induced astroglial
differentiation may be the cause for the reduced clonogenic capacity. We
are currently determining the plasticity of the system in term of
reversal of the differentiation state in vitro and in vivo. Our results
support the therapeutic value of a drug-induced differentiation and
define how differentiation affects the GSC compartment in glioma.

