Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of cancer associated fibroblasts in non-small cell
lung cancer is defined by the level of collagen gel contraction activity


Background: Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are well known to
strongly influence tumor development, progression and metastasis. Their
characteristics and prognostic gene signature in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients have been recognized. However, the functional
heterogeneity of CAFs between patients and their genetic basis were far
less known. The results revealed two functionally and also genetic
distinct subgroups of CAFs which were closely related to the degree of
tumor desmoplasia and also prognostic of survival in NSCLC
patients.Methods: 28 independent lung cancer resection specimens were
used to establish primary cultures of CAFs and noncancer fibroblasts from
the corresponding nonneoplastic lung parenchyma. We applied collagen gel
contraction and xCELLigence Real-Time Cell Analysis of proliferation and
in vivo tumorigenicity for measuring the CAF activity. To assess the
grading of desmoplasia, the percentage of desmoplasia in total tumor
stroma was used to define high desmoplasia (HD) versus low desmoplasia
(LD). Microarray data on RNA extracted from contracted gels following 8
hours incubation was performed using Illumina Human HT-12v4 Bead Chips
array and was preprocessed and normalized using RMA and values were log2
transformed.Results: We have identified that CAF activity depends on
higher ability to contract collagen gel, increased cell proliferation and
tumor growth. Using microarray gene expression analysis of the 24 CAF
cell lines (12 CAFs-HD versus 12 CAFs-LD), we observed high correlation
of differential gene expression in extreme CAF-HD to tumor stroma while
we found a high correlation between differential gene expression in
extreme CAF-LD to normal lung. We were also able to validate our previous
published subset of 11 genes (13 probe sets) in CAFs-HD versus CAFs-LD.
To study the degree of desmoplasia and outcome, we used MedBio data set
containing 181 records. We observed that desmoplasia appears to be
associated with the time to relapse in univariable analysis. The
association was far stronger in the adenocarcioma group with significance
for both univariable and multivariable analysis.Conclusion: In this
study, we provided the direct and robust evidence of functional
heterogeneity of CAFs in NSCLC patients and first showed that CAFs from
tumor with severe desmoplasia had higher gel contraction activity,
proliferation rate and enhanced tumor growth. Furthermore, we developed
desmoplasia-specific gene signature that could subgroup CAFs and
contribute to their functional heterogeneity which would also allow us to
discriminate among patients who would more likely benefit from tumor
stroma targeting therapies in the future.

