Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number detection using genomics technologies: A comparison
between aCGH and NGS


Introduction: Identification of causal DNA copy number variations (CNVs)
is critical to the understanding of cancer development and progression,
and is important clinically for accurate prognosis and efficient
treatment. T-cell lymphomas are replete with amplifications and deletions
that result in over- and under-expression of genes. Array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) has been the technology of choice to detect
CNVs but recently, it has been proposed that mate-pair Next Generation
Sequencing (mpNGS) can produce similar results. Here, we report a
comparison between the two techniques.Methods: We have developed an
algorithm based on extreme value theory to identify CNVs across the
genome at high resolution from mate-pair NGS data. The algorithm is based
on plotting the distribution of read-counts in windows across the genome,
and detecting deletions and gains by finding the windows that differ
significantly from the distribution of the normal part of the genome. We
compared this algorithm with aCGH data to detect CNVs. We ran five cases
of T-cell lymphoma with both techniques and compared the results using
concordance statistics.Results: With 50kb lower cutoff for a CNV, mpNGS
detected 98% of the cumulative deleted genome and 94% of the
amplified/gained genome that were called by aCGH. Most of the discordant
CNVs that were detected by only aCGH were in regions of repetitive areas
where mapping fails. Conversely, aCGH detected 75% of the cumulative
deleted genome and 74% of the amplified/gained genome that were called by
mpNGS.Conclusion: A detailed comparison of these techniques showed that
both have pros and cons. In general, mpNGS can detect most CNVs detected
by aCGH, as long as they are more than 50KB. Additionally, mpNGS offers
confirmatory data, particularly for deletions, based on detection of
aberrant mate pairs that map to the rejoined ends of deleted regional.
Finally, the mate-pair technology can also detect balanced translocations
and can also predict fusion genes.

