Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin signatures of DLBCL subtypes


Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) is a common and aggressive type of
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma. Gene expression profiling long ago identified two
distinct subtypes: Activated B-Cell (ABC) and Germinal Center B-Cell
(GCB), reflecting the biology associated with the cell of origin of the
lymphoma (Alizadeh et al, Nature 2000).These subtypes are histologically
non distinguishable, yet are associated with distinct outcomes. Emerging
clinical data also suggests that they are predictive of outcome for novel
therapeutics, including a BTK inhibitor, a proteasome inhibitor and an
immune modulatory agent. Reliable diagnosis of the DLBLC subtype may
therefore become a requirement for choosing the best treatment for DLBCL
patients.Since gene regulation is known to be associated with changes in
chromatin structures, we decided to investigate the chromatin
conformation around key regulators of ABC/ GCB biology using a Chromatin
Conformation Capture Assay (3C). For this assay, chromatin loops are
cross-linked; the DNA is digested and re-ligated, joining topologically
proximal ends that may be very distant along the length of the chromosome
into distinct novel fusion products. After reversing the cross-links, the
presence of these novel DNA fusions can be detected by PCR, resulting in
a binary read-out. Composites of these PCR products form a signature that
may be characteristic of disease, disease state or subtype. The
EpiSwitchTM technology has been optimized to identify these epigenetic
patterns not only in tissue, but also from blood borne tumor DNA.To
investigate characteristic changes in chromatin conformation in ABC- and
GCB- DLBCL cell lines, we focused on key genes known to be differentially
expressed in the two sub-types, including Bcl-6, IRF-4 and LMO-2 (Wright
et al. PNAS 2003,). We mapped several interactions indicating that these
loci are subject to epigenetic regulation. We also applied the assay to
blood from DLBCL patients and from healthy volunteers to exclude
background signals from normal B-cell maturation. The assay was able to
detect the same signatures as seen in cell lines.These results
demonstrate the potential of this technology to detect DLBCL subtype
specific chromatin conformation associated biomarkers in patient blood.

