Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel therapeutic strategy to effectively kill CLL cells in
stromal microenvironment by targeting lipid metabolism


The tissue microenvironment promotes cancer cell survival and drug
resistance, and thus presents a major challenge in cancer treatment.
Recent study suggests that the microenvironmental protection of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells is particular important due to the
unique metabolic properties of CLL cells. Emerging evidence suggests that
altered fatty acid metabolism may be associated with the pathogenesis of
CLL and could potentially provide a biochemical basis for targeting CLL.
In the current study, we tested three classes of compounds that
respectively inhibit the de novo fatty acids synthesis (FASN), block the
transport of fatty acids from cytosol into mitochondria, or suppress
fatty acid oxidation, for their ability to kill CLL cells in the presence
and absence of bone marrow stromal cells. While all three inhibitors
exhibited cytotoxic effect again CLL cells when the leukemia cells were
culture alone, only the compound that inhibited the transport of fatty
acids into mitochondria was highly effective in killing CLL in the
presence of bone marrow stromal cells. Mechanistic study revealed that
the cytotoxicity was not due to inhibition of ATP generation through
mitochondrial -oxidation of fatty acids, since there was no significant
decrease in mitochondrial respiratory activity. We further showed that
inhibition of FA transport into mitochondria suppressed biosynthesis of
mitochondrial phospholipid, leading to a significant depletion of
cardiolipin (CL), which is essential for maintaining mitochondrial
membrane integrity. Depletion of CL by the FA transport inhibitor in CLL
cells resulted in mitochondrial depolarization, release of cytochrome c,
and massive apoptosis. Since this cell death process was through the
intrinsic pathway and could not be rescued by the stromal environment,
this might explain why inhibition of FA transport into the mitochondrial
was highly effective in killing CLL cells in the presence of stromal
cells. Importantly, we found that inhibition of FA transport had low
toxicity in normal lymphocytes and stromal cells, suggesting that the
normal cells might be less dependent on FA transport for cardiolipin
biosynthesis. In summary, our study suggests that inhibition of FA
transport into the mitochondria is a novel therapeutic strategy to
effectively and selectively kill CLL cells in stromal microenvironment,
and may potentially improve the clinical outcome of CLL treatment.

