Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-equol, an estrogen receptor agonist, inhibits tumor growth and
progression of breast cancer


Breast cancer is the primary cause of cancer-associated mortality in
women worldwide. Estrogen and the Estrogen Receptors (ER) play a
significant role in breast cancer, with over two-thirds of breast cancers
expressing ER. Current endocrine therapy, such as aromatase inhibitors,
target estrogen biosynthesis and anti-estrogens target ER. However,
therapeutic resistance frequently arises. In addition to the importance
of ER, ER has also been shown to play a critical, but opposing role in
breast cancer. ER has been shown to inhibit the growth of ER-positive
breast cancer cells. The ratio of ER to ER, in addition to the cross talk
between ER's and growth factor signaling, has been implicated in the
development of therapeutic resistance. Recently, several plant-derived
compounds that exhibit ER agonist activity have been identified. S-equol
is a potent ER agonist and a metabolite from the soy isoflavone daidzein,
and has been previously shown to alleviate menopausal symptoms in a
clinical trial. Activation of ER, or its over expression, shifts the
balance of ER's from the oncogenic action of ER to the tumor suppressor
activity of ER, and therefore may be a valuable therapeutic approach in
the treatment of breast cancer. In this study we sought out to determine
the efficacy of the ER agonist, S-equol, in inhibiting the growth and
progression of breast tumors using a syngeneic mouse model. We used mouse
mammary tumor cells expressing endogenous ER, and to determine the
contribution of ER, cells with knockdown of ER were generated using
shRNA. ER mRNA and protein expression was analyzed using qRT-PCR and
western blot respectively. Syngeneic tumors were established and mice
were treated with either a vehicle control or S-equol. Treatment with
S-equol reduces tumor volume and inhibits the progression of mouse
mammary tumor cells in tumors expressing ER. Our mechanistic studies show
that S-equol reduces the expression of ER, and increases the expression
of p53 and p27 in an ER dependent manner. Additionally, S-equol modulates
the expression of inflammatory molecules involved in aromatase expression
and promotes the differentiation of cancer stem cells. In conclusion,
this study suggests that targeting ER may be a valuable strategy in
treatment of breast cancer.

