Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer effects of REIC/Dkk-3-encoding adenoviral vector for
the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer


Objectives: REIC/Dkk-3 is down-regulated in a broad range of human cancer
cells and is considered to function as a tumor suppressor. We previously
reported that REIC/Dkk-3-expressing adenovirus vector (Ad-REIC) induced
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and cancer-specific apoptosis in human
prostate cancer. In this study, we examined the therapeutic impact of
Ad-REIC on non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Materials and Methods: We
examined the anti-tumor effect of Ad-REIC on 25 NSCLC cell lines in vitro
and A549 cells in vivo. Two of these cell lines were artificially
established as EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistant
sublines.Results: Ad-REIC-treatment inhibited the cell viability by 40%
or more in 13 (52%) of the 25 cell lines at multiplicity of infection
(MOI) of 20 (20 MOI). These cell lines were regarded as being highly
sensitive cells. The cell viability of a non-malignant immortalized cell
line, OUMS-24, was not inhibited at 200 MOI of Ad-REIC. The effects of
Ad-REIC on EGFR-TKI resistant sublines were equivalent to those in the
parental cell lines. Here, we demonstrated that Ad-REIC treatment
activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in NSCLC cell lines, indicating
the induction of ER stress with GRP78/BiP (GRP78) up-regulation and
resulting in apoptosis. A single intratumoral injection of Ad-REIC
significantly inhibited the tumorigenic growth of A549 cells in vivo. As
predictive factors of sensitivity for Ad-REIC treatment in NSCLC, we
examined the expression status of GRP78 and coxsackievirus and adenovirus
receptor (CAR). We found that the combination of the GRP78 and CAR
expressional statuses may be used as a predictive factor for Ad-REIC
sensitivity in NSCLC cells.Conclusion: Ad-REIC induced JNK activation and
subsequent apoptosis in NSCLC cells. Our study indicated that Ad-REIC has
therapeutic potential against NSCLC and that the expression statuses of
GRP78 and CAR may predict a potential therapeutic benefit of Ad-REIC.

