Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the Src-regulated kinome by chemical proteomics


Enhanced Src activation has been implicated in many cancers, including
those of breast, lung and pancreas. However single-agent therapies
targeting Src have achieved limited success in the clinical setting. It
remains unclear what regulatory influence Src has at the kinomic level,
where many anti-cancer drug targets are found. This study aims to define
the Src-regulated kinome by using a cutting-edge chemical proteomics
strategy, and to combine this with functional genomics in order to
identify kinase signaling networks that are important for Src-induced
oncogenesis. This may ultimately identify potential therapeutic
strategies for cancers with aberrant Src activity, that involve, for
example, targeting Src in combination with a downstream kinase.We first
developed a novel kinase capture reagent termed CTx-0294885 for kinase
enrichment. This allows the identification of more than 230 protein
kinases at the level of protein expression and phosphorylation by mass
spectrometry. The combination of CTx-0294885 with 3 other existing kinase
capture reagents led to the greatest kinome coverage in a single cell
line reported to date (Zhang 2013).We then applied this kinase enrichment
technique in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry to identify
the Src-regulated kinome. This was achieved by comparing global kinase
activation profiles in control MCF-10A immortalized mammary epithelial
cells and MCF-10A cells expressing constitutively active Src. Nearly 300
protein kinases and 1500 kinase-derived phosphosites were identified from
the kinome profiling. Importantly, over 100 kinases respond to Src
activation with changes at the protein expression or phosphorylation
level. This Src-regulated kinome contains: several well characterized
kinases that are already being targeted in the clinical setting, such as
Egfr and Braf; proto-oncogenes implicated in breast cancer but with no
current functional link to Src, such as Ikk; kinases involved in tumor
suppression such as Lats1/2 and the Tao family kinases; and many poorly
characterized kinases that may represent novel targets for drug
discovery. In addition, approximately 70 other proteins co-purified with
protein kinases also exhibited changes upon Src activation. These include
several lipid kinases and numerous proteins involved in RNA metabolism.
All of these Src-regulated proteins are currently being functionally
characterized by a focused RNAi screen, specifically regarding their
roles in cell viability, migration and morphology.This study will provide
novel insights into the global impact of Src-induced transformation on
the expressed kinome and may lead to identification of novel therapeutic
targets and combination treatment strategies.Reference:Zhang L, Daly R.J
et al. 2013. Characterization of a novel broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor
CTx-0294885 as an affinity reagent for mass spectrometry-based kinome
profiling. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jul 5;12(7):3104-16.

