Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a genomic classifier (Decipher) in subsets of
primary tumors with common prostate cancer genomic alterations


BackgroundETS gene fusions and PTEN loss are the most common genomic
alteration events in prostate cancer that stratify patients into
molecularly distinct subtypes. Recently, a commercially available genomic
classifier (GC, DecipherTM) has been validated to predict metastasis in
patients with high-risk prostate cancer. In this study we evaluated the
robustness of the GC model in the light of prostate cancer molecular
heterogeneity.Methods:Analysis of PTEN expression loss, ERG
overexpression and GC scores were performed on a previously reported
genome-wide microarray dataset (Karnes et al., 2013). Microarray
probesets mapping to exons of PTEN were benchmarked to identify a
representative exon whose loss of expression was highly correlated to
FISH analysis for PTEN deletion (PTEN-loss) performed on an independent
dataset. ERG overexpression (ERG+) was determined similarly and the
microarray probesets that best correlate with the FISH status (in
independent dataset) were used to annotate the ERG status of the samples
in this study. Receiver operating characteristic area under the curve
(AUC), and multivariable regression analysis were used to assess GC
performance for predicting metastasis in subsets of patient tumors with
genomic alterations.ResultsUsing the microarray method 42% of the tumors
had ERG overexpression, 23% had PTEN-loss and 11% had both events. ERG+
and PTEN-loss were not on their own predictive of metastasis with AUCs of
0.52 (CI:0.44-0.6) and 0.47(CI 0.39-0.56), respectively. In ERG+ tumors
GC had an AUC of 0.82 (p=4e-7) and high GC score ERG+ patients had a
hazard ratio (HR) of 100 (p=6e-7) for metastasis. Similarly, in PTEN-loss
tumors GC had an AUC of 0.83 (p=7.9e-5) and high GC score PTEN-loss
patients had an HR of 62 (p=1.8e-4) for metastasis. When GC was evaluated
in patient tumors with both ERG+ and PTEN-loss the AUC was 0.85 (p=2e-15)
and high GC score patients had an HR of 95 (p=4e-4) for metastasis. In
multivariable analysis, Decipher was the only significant risk factor
with an HR of 55 (CI 12.2-249, p=1.8e-7) for metastasis after adjusting
for ERG+, PTEN-loss, Gleason score, PSA, tumor stage, margins and
adjuvant treatment.ConclusionThe Decipher genomic classifier is a
powerful prognostic marker that retains its significance for predicting
metastasis in subsets of patients with tumors that harbor common genomic
alterations. Patients with high GC scores and these alterations may
represent an extremely high-risk subset of prostate cancer.

