Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-21-5p upregulation in urine samples serves as novel
biomarkers for early stage renal cell carcinoma patients diagnosis


Early prevention of renal cell carcinoma needs a reliable and robust
bioassay to evaluate kidney cancer patients. As a novel class of
regulatory molecules in cellular activity, the recent studies showed that
microRNAs had tissue-specific patterns and were able to distinguish the
cancer from benign disease. We explored the diagnostic value of urine
microRNAs from a cohort of 160 individuals: 80 patients with renal clear
cell carcinoma and 80 normal control individuals.Material and methods:
The renal clear cell carcinomas cohort included 63% stage I cases, 10%
stage II cases, 19% stage III cases, 7% stage IV cases, 1% unknown cases.
Normal control cohort included 34% diverticulosis cases, 15% bariatric
surgery cases, 14% diverticulitis cases, 15% hernia surgery cases, 10%
hemorrhoids cases and 12% other non-cancer conditions. Every 10 urine
samples were pooled together and subjected to microRNA extraction. The
Norgen Biotek urine microRNA purification kit was used for total microRNA
extraction (including free floating microRNAs and microRNAs from
exfoliated cells) in the pooled urine samples. Urine microRNA expression
profiling was performed using nCounter miRNA Expression Assay. After
ligation and purification, hybridized microRNAs sequences were label by
specific color codes and quantified using nCounter Digital Analyzer, then
the data were normalized to the sum of the microRNAs within each pooled
sample before statistic analysis.Result: comparing to normal control
urine samples, microRNA-21-5p expression showed upregulation in kidney
urine samples, which is consistent with TCGA kidney cancer tissue
profiling results. Some recent studies also demonstrated that microRNA-21
may act as an oncomir in prostate, lung and colorectal cancers. We also
observed that microRNA-1268a and microRNA-549 were highly expressed in
urine samples from renal cell carcinoma patients.Conclusion: These
findings indicate that in urine microRNA-21-5p may serve as a potential
molecular marker for renal cell carcinoma and provide a new approach in
the diagnosis of kidney cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

