Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-depth analysis of myoma organotypic model can determine
potential markers of oral cancer invasion


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the eighth most prevalent
malignant neoplasm and accounts for 2% of all deaths by cancer worldwide.
OSCCs have a highly variable clinical course, and because it is often
diagnosed only after it has reached an advanced stage, the overall
survival rate is less than 50% in 5 years. A better knowledge of the
mechanisms that influence OSCC development and its progression is still
needed. Particularly, most of the attention has been driven to mechanisms
associated with tumor cell invasion and how the surrounding tumoral
stroma may influence it. The myoma organotypic model is a novel fully
human organotypic invasion model that mimics the tumor microenvironment
(TME) (Nurmenniemi et al. 2009). Aiming to investigate the molecular
mechanisms related to OSCC development and search for prognostic markers
for this tumor, we used the myoma organotypic assay, followed by MS-ESI
technique of laser microdissected invaded tissue, to analyze several
features related to OSCC invasive vs. non-invasive cells. Our results
showed that the HSC-3, an aggressive and invasive oral squamous cell
carcinoma cell line, invaded as small islands and cell chords and
penetrated deeply in the tissue. Unlike, the less aggressive LN2 cells,
formed a well structured epithelium layer, but they invaded less in
myoma. The proteomic analysis was able to characterize the differential
expressed proteins of these, and revealed a group of proteins exclusively
expressed in the cells that deeply invade the myoma, such as HMGA2 (high
mobility group), JUP (junction plakoglobin), PLEC (plectin), HIST1H2B
(Histone H2B), IQGAP1 (Ras GTPase-activating-like protein), EEF1A1
(elongation factor 1-alpha), HSPA9 (Stress-70 protein, mitochondrial),
HADHA (Trifunctional enzyme subunit alpha). Additionally, the TME is a
unique ambient created and shaped by the tumor, which orchestrates
molecular and cellular events taking place in surrounding tissues.
Interestingly, we found a group of high abundant proteins expressed in
the TME surrounding the invasive island. Among them are PALLD (palladin),
TNC (tenascin C), LMNA (laminin), VIM (vimentin), and COL1A
(collagen-type I-alpha I), which have been described to be involved in
cell migration and proliferation. Our preliminary data suggests that the
myoma organotypic tumor invasion assay is successful in determining new
molecules and potential pathways associated with OSCC tumor invasion. We
also present here a new insight for head and neck cancer biomarkers
research that can, ultimately, contribute to more individualized
treatment of patients affected by OSCC. However, validation of such
results in clinical sample cohorts is important for a better
understanding of the biological events associate with tumor invasion and
disease spread (metastasis) in those patients.

