Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumoral effects of orexins and their receptors OX1R in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC)


Orexins A and B were identified as hypothalamic ligands for two
serpentine G protein-coupled receptors, OX1R and OX2R. Aberrant
expression of OX1R was detected in colonic cancer cells and hepatic
metastasis. Orexins induce apoptosis in human colon cancer cell lines and
in mice models, resulting in massive reduction of tumor cell growth.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) are highly malignant neoplasms
with poor prognosis. Chemotherapy treatment shows a poor response rate.
Our previous data suggested the expression of OX1R in 98% of tested
PDAC.The aims of this study were 1) to investigate the presence of OX1R
in human PDAC cell lines and to analyse orexin-A (OX-A) effects in
relation to apoptosis and 2) to develop an in vivo heterotopic
xenografted model from the cell lines expressing OX1R, for the study of
tumor growth in response to OX-A.The expression of OX1R was studied at
mRNA (RT-PCR), proteins (immunocytochemistry) and functional levels
(number of viable cells after OX-A treatment), in 3 PDAC cell lines
(AsPC-1, HPAF-II and SW 1990). The development of an animal model
(heterotopic xenograft) from the cell line expressing OX1R, has allowed
studying the effect of OX-A in tumor growth. Resected tumors were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry.Only AsPC-1 cell line expresses OX1R.
The treatment with OX-A promoted a 32% cell growth inhibition. OX-A
injection in nude mice xenografted with AsPC-1 cells, has declined 49% of
tumor progression in treated cases. This effect was dose-dependent and
more important in weekly or twice-weekly treatments. All the tumors
corresponded to poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas expressing OX1R.
Induction of apoptosis was observed in OX-A treated tumors (activated
caspase-3). To generalize further the role of OX1R in inhibition of cell
growth and induction of apoptosis, we considered HPAF-II cells expressing
the recombinant hOX1R. Orexin-A strongly inhibited HPAF-II/OX1R cell
growth in vitro and tumor growth in vivo, whereas no effect of orexins
could be detected in the parental HPAF-II cell line. The role of OX1R in
controlling apoptosis is directly demonstrated by the expression of
recombinant OX1R in HPAF-II cells that confers the ability of orexins to
promote apoptosis in this cell line.This work has demonstrated the
antitumor and proapoptotic effect of orexins in PDAC, using in vitro and
in vivo models. In this context, orexines receptors may establish a new
therapeutic target in pancreatic antineoplastic therapies.

