Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase and
activation of Yes kinase are associated with increased metastatic
potential of prostate cancer


Metastatic Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer
related-deaths in men in the United States. Understanding the molecular
events critical to PCa metastasis should lead to novel therapies for
treatment of metastatic disease. To assess molecular alterations required
for increased PCa cell migration, a critical step in metastasis, multiple
rounds of selection of PC3 and DU145 PCa cells were performed using a
modified Boyden chamber assay. Highly migratory cells (termed PC3-Mig-3
and DU145-Mig-3) were obtained, a phenotype that has remained stable.
PC3-Mig-3 and DU145-Mig-3 cells were also increased in invasiveness,
decreased in adhesion and proliferation; thus acquiring additional
properties of metastatic cells. Following orthotopic injection into nude
mice, migratory variants were significantly increased in number of lymph
node metastases (PMetastatic Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading
cause of cancer related-deaths in men in the United States. Understanding
the molecular events critical to PCa metastasis should lead to novel
therapies for treatment of metastatic disease. To assess molecular
alterations required for increased PCa cell migration, a critical step in
metastasis, multiple rounds of selection of PC3 and DU145 PCa cells were
performed using a modified Boyden chamber assay. Highly migratory cells
(termed PC3-Mig-3 and DU145-Mig-3) were obtained, a phenotype that has
remained stable. PC3-Mig-3 and DU145-Mig-3 cells were also increased in
invasiveness, decreased in adhesion and proliferation; thus acquiring
additional properties of metastatic cells. Following orthotopic injection
into nude mice, migratory variants were significantly increased in number
of lymph node metastases (P<0.05). In examining signaling pathways
associated with migration and invasion, we determined both PC3-Mig-3 and
DU145-Mig-3 were increased in phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine 861, but
not other sites of FAK phosphorylation, relative to their isogenic
parental cells. Overexpression a FAK Y861F mutant in PC3-Mig-3 cells
decreased migration, demonstrating the importance of pY861 in migratory
and invasive potential. Further, expression of FAK pY861 in human PCa
lymph node metastases correlated with decreased overall patient survival,
suggesting phosphorylation of FAK Y861 may be a predictive biomarker of
clinical outcome. To examine potential mechanisms of differential
phosphorylation of FAK Y861, the expression and activity of Src family
tyrosine kinases was determined. The expression and activity of the Src
family kinase, Yes, but not other members of the Src family, were
increased in both migratory variants. This increased Yes expression
correlated with increased Yes mRNA expression throughout PCa progression
as determined from Oncomine. To determine the role Yes kinase in FAK Y861
phosphorylation, Yes was silenced by shRNA expression in PC3-Mig-3 cells.
Decreased Yes expression led to both decreased migration, and selectively
decreased phosphorylation of FAK Y861. Overexpression of Yes kinase in
PC3 parental cells led to specific increased phosphorylation of FAK Y861.
These results suggest: the new models of migration we developed have
similar alterations as those that occur during PCa progression in men
with PCa; Yes activation may play a unique role in PCa progression by
leading to differential phosphorylation of FAK Y861; FAK Y861
phosphorylation is important in metastatic potential of PCa cells; and
that Yes and FAK may be important markers of metastatic potential of PCa
cells. Further studies are designed to investigate specific signaling
pathways affected by increased Yes expression and FAK Y861
phosphorylation.

