Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironment stimuli elicited by fibroblasts contribute to
epithelial mesenchymal transition and acquisition of stemness phenotype
in lung cancer


Epithelial cancers could be described as abnormal organs composed of
cells with different phenotype and functional properties. It has been
suggested that only a small fraction of cells defined as cancer stem
cells (CSCs) is capable of initiating and maintaining a new tumor and
that local microenvironment could be involved in modulation of stemness
properties and metastatic colonization by induction of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To investigate how signals from
stromal fibroblasts can influence stemness properties we used a primary
lung adenocarcinoma cell line (LT73) containing a subpopulation of CD133+
CSCs (0.1%) and its derivative devoid of CD133+ cells (LT73CD133neg)
which remains stable during short-term culturing. Medium conditioned by
primary fibroblasts cell lines (CM) resulted in increase of CD133
positive cells, more pronounced in LT73CD133neg, indicating positive
regulation of the stem cell pool and de novo generation of CSCs.
Accordingly, expression of stemness related genes OCT4, NANOG and GA6 was
increased (fold change 1.5-3). In vivo experiments also confirmed that
tumors generated by injection of CM-treated cells had greater size
compared to controls and maintained increased stemness features. Moreover
stimulation with CM, associated to generation of CD133+ cells, was also
often accompanied by gene expression changes consistent to EMT
activation. To verify the importance of fibroblasts in providing the
right cues also for successful colonization of the lungs, LT73 cells were
injected in the tail vein of SCID mice. After 2 months LT73 cells
co-injected with fibroblasts were present in the lungs in larger numbers
(4 fold increase) compared to control mice indicating a possible role for
fibroblasts in the preparation of the pre-metastatic nicheFinally to
establish whether the EMT process was required for acquisition of a stem
like phenotype in presence of microenvironmental stimuli, we
overexpressed in LT73 wt cell line miR200c which has been shown to
prevent TGFbeta-induced EMT. Preliminary experiments showed that,
although miR200c was able to partially prevent the EMT process by
contrasting downregulation of the epithelial marker CDH1, its
overexpression was insufficient to abrogate upregulation of the
mesenchymal markers SNAI2, VIM, FN1 and de novo generation of stem-like
cells (CD133+) after TGFbeta treatment. This indicates that even partial
activation of the EMT process could be sufficient to modulate stemness
features.Together these data demonstrate that stimuli from fibroblasts
could de novo generate CD133+ cells modulating stem cells phenotype
probably through EMT process and that the proficient cross-talk between
fibroblasts and cancer stem cells could also be relevant for metastatic
colonization.

