Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PARP inhibitor niraparib demonstrates robust activity in a
subset of patient-derived triple-negative breast cancer xenograft models


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), which comprises 15% of all breast
cancers, has a poor prognosis and currently lacks effective treatment.
TNBCs are highly proliferative, genomically unstable and share molecular
characteristics with BRCA1-/- breast cancer. Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP) is a key DNA repair enzyme that mediates single
strand break (SSB) repair through the base excision repair (BER) pathway.
PARP inhibitors have been demonstrated to selectively kill tumor cells
that harbor BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. In addition, pre-clinical and
preliminary clinical data suggest that PARP inhibitors are selectively
cytotoxic for tumors with homologous recombination repair deficiency
caused by mutations in genes other than BRCA1 or BRCA2. Niraparib is a
potent, orally active PARP inhibitor that is being evaluated in Phase 3
clinical studies for ovarian cancer and BRCA related breast cancer. In
exploring additional tumor indications that may be sensitive to
niraparib, we investigated niraparib monotherapy activity in a panel of
17 basal breast cancer (BBC) patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models.
Thirteen of the seventeen BBC models are TNBC models. Niraparib was
administered po at a dose of 50 mg/kg once per day for 28 consecutive
days, and tumor volume and body weight were measured twice weekly.
Niraparib was well tolerated in nude mice bearing human TNBC PDXs growing
subcutaneously, as there was no indication of body weight loss or
decreased body weight gain relative to the vehicle control. Niraparib
exhibited robust efficacy in five of the seventeen models tested. All
five responsive models were TNBC. To understand the selectivity observed,
a comprehensive analysis of the tumors was conducted which included
analysis of gene mutation, gene copy number, gene expression and miRNA
expression. A number of individual biomarkers and gene expression
signatures were identified consistent with niraparib sensitivity across
the 17 PDX models and will be discussed. In conclusion, in vivo activity
of niraparib in TNBC was demonstrated in a panel of breast cancer PDX
models, and several potential markers of niraparib sensitivity have been
identified. Collectively this data supports the clinical investigation of
niraparib in a subset of TNBC patients.

