Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural peculiarities of flavonoids influence anti-angiogenic,
cytotoxic and antioxidant effects: experimental and insilico analysis


Structural diversity of flavonoids and biological activities has remained
an important discourse in the mainstream of flavonoid research. In the
present studies different class of flavonoids such as flavones,
flavanones and flavanolols were evaluated for their antiangiogenic,
cytotoxic and antioxidant activities. The anti-angiogenic activity was
evaluated using in vivo chorioallantoic membrane model (CAM), antioxidant
potential and kinetics of free radical scavenging activity was determined
using DPPH (2, 2-diphenyl-1-picryl hydrazine) and superoxide anion
radical (SOR) scavenging assays, while cytotoxicity against selected
cancer cell lines was carried out using MTT cell viability assay. The
physicochemical properties/quantum chemical discriptors of the selected
flavonoids were calculated using BioMed CAChe 6.1.10 drug. The selected
flavonoids were docked in silico onto the proangiogenic peptides such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hypoxia inducible factor
(HIF-1), and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) and
others from human origin. The results of the present investigation are
discussed in the mainstream of structure activity relationship which may
be useful in translating flavonoids as therapeutic molecules targeting
angiogenesis.References1. Gacche R. N. Shegokar Harshala, Gond Dhananjay
, A. D. Jadhav and Ghole Vikram. (2010). Effect of Hydroxyl Substitution
of Flavone on Antiangiogenic and Free Radical Scavenging Activities: A
Structure Activity Relationship Studies Using Computational Tools.
European J. Pharmaceutical Science 39, 37-44.2. Gacche R. N. Shegokar
Harshala, Gond Dhananjay , Zhenzhou Yang, A. D. Jadhav (2011). Evaluation
of selected flavonoids as antiangiogenic, anticancer and radical
scavenging agents: an experimental and in silico analysis. Cell
Biochemistry and Biophysics 61, 651-663. DOI 10.1007/s12013-011-9252-z.3.
Gacche RN and Meshram RJ (2013) Targeting Tumor Micro-environment for
Design and Development of Novel Anti-angiogenic Agents Arresting Tumor
Growth. Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 113 (2013)
333-354.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

