Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential PARP inhibitors' effects on cell cycle and
consequently homologous DNA damage repair


Background: Poly (ADP)-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibition has been
explored in pre-clinical and clinical studies with greatest successes
demonstrated in homologous DNA damage repair (HDR) pathway-deficient
cancer patients. PARP inhibitor's (PARPis) potency to inhibit PARP's
catalytic activity is well established; however non-catalytic effects
that may add to their therapeutic properties are not fully understood.
Our objective was to comparatively evaluate non-catalytic effects of
olaparib and veliparib, the two most widely used PARPis in clinical
trials, with a particular focus on cell cycle effects and HDR.Methods: To
measure DNA damage repair activity upon PARPi treatment, we used a
well-established DR-GFP reporter assay in two model cell lines,
U2OSDR-GFP and H1299DR-GFP. Cell cycle progression was assessed by
propidium iodide and monitored by flow cytometry. Depletion of targeted
mRNAs was performed by standard siRNA knock-down technique using
electroporation for transfection. Immunoblotting was used to confirm cell
cycle results and demonstrate replicative stress on the protein
expression levels.Results: We found a dramatic decrease in DNA damage
repair activity in olaparib- versus veliparib-treated U2OSDR-GFP p53 wild
type cells, regardless of inhibitory potency. This decrease in HDR
activity was a result of olaparib triggering a cell cycle arrest-like
effect as a response to strong replicative stress. Lack of the same
effect in p53-null cells suggests that olaparib's effect is
p53-dependent, which was confirmed in U2OSDR-GFP cells depleted of p53.
Finally, CHK1 is strongly phosphorylated in cells treated with olaparib
but not veliparib, confirming cells differential response to these two
PARPis.Conclusion: These data demonstrate that olaparib and veliparib
differ in their non-catalytic inhibitory effects, with olaparib but not
veliparib mitigating DNA damage repair activity via cell cycle
arrest-like effects in a p53-WT background. Moreover, olaparib but not
veliparib triggers CHK1 phosphorylation, which suggests differential
levels of replicative stress. This new insight into olaparib's and
veliparib's mechanism of action should be considered when developing
inclusion criteria for treatment of cancer patients with these PARP
inhibitors.

