Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective estrogen mimics for the treatment of tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer


Endocrine-resistant breast cancer, whether de novo or acquired, is a
major clinical obstacle. Although recent clinical trials have
demonstrated the efficacy of 17-estradiol (E2) or diethylstilbestrol
(DES) following exhaustive use of antiestrogens, E2 treatment is
associated with major side effects such as an increased risk of other
gynecological cancers, deterring the clinical community from adopting it
as a treatment strategy. Our lab has previously shown that Protein kinase
C alpha (PKC) overexpression predicts tamoxifen (TAM) resistance in the
clinic (Tonetti DA et al., Br J Cancer. 2003) and may also predict a
positive response to an estrogenic therapy (Chisamore MJ et al., Clinical
Cancer Research. 2001). Further, the ectopic overexpression of PKC in
T47D breast cancer cells, led to a TAM-resistant, E2-inhibited phenotype
in vivo which was accompanied by the translocation of estrogen receptor
alpha (ER) to extranuclear sites (Perez White B et al., Molecular Cancer.
2013). The purpose of this study was to identify novel selective estrogen
mimics (SEMs), which could achieve the positive therapeutic effects of E2
treatment in TAM-resistant breast cancers, while minimizing the side
effects. In vitro screening identified two SEMs, BTC and TTC-352, which
displayed estrogenic activity in breast cancer cell lines. BTC and
TTC-352 treatment resulted in significant tumor regression in two
xenograft models of TAM-resistant, PKC-overexpressing breast cancer.
Similar to E2, T47D:A18/PKC tumor regression was accompanied by
translocation of ER to extranuclear sites, possibly defining a mechanism
through which these SEMs initiate tumor regression. SEM treatment,
however, did not result in growth of parental, TAM-sensitive xenograft
tumors. Endometrial thickening, caused by both E2 and TAM, is directly
associated with gynecological carcinogenesis and uterine cancer.
Interestingly, SEM treatment did not increase uterine weight in mice
suggesting negligible hormonal stimulation in gynecological tissues. Both
BTC and TTC-352 resulted in regression of two TAM-resistant breast cancer
models, while displaying enhanced safety compared to E2 and TAM. These
data suggest that further development of SEMs targeted to TAM-resistant
breast cancer is a feasible therapeutic strategy.

