Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ectopic expression of a glutamate receptor gene, glur6, induces
growth arrest and senescence in breast and ovarian tumor cells


Applying a functional strategy we determined that Glur6 gene plays a role
in the cell senescence. Using chromosome transfer method, we previously
identified a YAC clone that carries a cell senescence gene, SEN6A,
mapping at 6q21. Human data base search identified GluR6, a kainate type
ionotropic glutamate receptor gene, to represent SEN6A. Glutamate
receptors are primarily located on the membrane of neuronal cells and are
important mediators of rapid synaptic transmission in central nervous
system. We cloned GluR6 gene by RT-PCR and defined the structure,
splicing pattern and its role in the cell growth and cancer. Five GluR6
splice variants (A-E), transcribed from two different promotes, are
differentially expressed in brain and other tissues and cultured cells.
GluR6A, specifically expressed in brain, is transcribed from promoter 2,
while GluR6 (B-E), transcribed from promoter 1, are expressed in other
tissues. GluR6 is either turned off or expressed at reduced level in
breast and ovarian tumor cells, whereas its expression is elevated in
aged (senescent) cells. Full length cDNAs (open reading frames) for each
of the five transcript isoforms of GluR6 were cloned, in frame with EGFP,
in a retroviral vector, PQCXIP, and introduced into breast and ovarian
tumor cell lines T47D, MCF.7 and SKOV3. Analysis of gene transfer clones
revealed that GluR6 expression inhibit the proliferation of breast and
ovarian tumor cells leading to senescence. Cells expressing transferred
GluR6 gene displayed the doubling time of 60-96 hours that gradually
extended to 3-4 days, ending in complete growth arrest and senescence.
The gene transfer senescent cells lacked DNA synthesis and were positive
for SA-gal staining. In controls, the transfer of empty vector or vector
carrying a truncated GluR6 gene did not affect the growth of tumor cells.
In addition control cultures were negative for SA-gal staining and
positive for DNA replication. Our preliminary data shows that GluR6 may
function through AKT and ROS pathways. In conclusion, in this study we
show that GluR6, which normally functions in neurotransmission and is
implicated in a number of neurological disorders, may also be involved in
the development and progression of cancer. Thus, pathways related to
GluR6 expression may prove to be new novel targets for cancer therapy.
Modulation of GluR6 function through small molecule and/or glutamate
antagonists has the potential to modify the behavior of tumors in terms
of their migration, invasion and metastasis. Drugs already developed for
the treatment of neurological disorders can be tested for treatment of
cancer.

