Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new spectrum-selective cathepsin inhibitor, VBY-825, inhibits
bone destruction in a syngeneic 5TGM1 multiple myeloma mouse model


Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common blood cancer after non
Hodgkin lymphoma. It is a monoclonal B-cell neoplasia with clinical
hallmarks of multiple osteolytic lesions causing bone pain, fractures and
hypercalcemia. Chemo- or radiotherapy may induce remissions, but MM is
generally thought to be incurable. Our aim was to observe the effects of
a cathepsin inhibitor VBY-825 on bone lesions and tumor burden in the
syngeneic 5TGM1 mouse MM model using immunocompetent C57BL/KaLwRij mice.
VBY-825 is a potent inhibitor of cathepsins K, L, B, V, and S. 5TGM1
cells were inoculated via tail vein in 7 weeks old female C57BL/KaLwRij
mice, which were divided to 4 groups: Control group received vehicle of
VBY-825 (5% dextrose 10 ml/kg daily), Control group received bortezomib
vehicle (3 ml/kg twice a week), Reference group received bortezomib (0.5
mg/kg twice a week) and Study group received VBY-825 (100 mg/kg daily).
Administration of all compounds began one day before tumor cell
inoculation and continued until day 34. Disease progression was followed
by measuring the serum levels of paraprotein (IgG2b) and TRACP 5b,
radiography, and body weight. The animals were sacrificed 5 weeks after
inoculation, examined macroscopically, and their bones were collected for
histomorphometric analysis.The reference compound bortezomib had no
effects on body weight but it delayed the disease progression based on
IgG2b measurements. It also decreased the number and total area of
osteolytic lesions, but not mean osteolytic lesion area (MOLA). VBY-825
had no effect on body weight or IgG2b level, frequency of soft tissue
tumors or intraosseous tumor area. VBY-825 decreased total and MOLA,
consistent with inhibited resorption. There was also a trend of increased
relative trabecular bone area. Serum TRACP 5b activity in the VBY-825
treated group did not differ from the respective vehicle group, whereas
the number of osteoclasts at tumor-bone interface was increased in
VBY-825 treated animals. These findings suggest that VBY-825 decreased
osteoclast function and resorption activity without decreasing the number
of osteoclastsIn conclusion, VBY-825 had no effects on tumor growth but
it inhibited bone destruction in this mouse model of MM, which is
consistent with its potency on cathepsin S and K, which are known to be
important in osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. VBY-825 is a promising
candidate for the treatment of tumor-associated bone disease.

