Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of Q356R polymorphism in BRCA1 gene of Jamaican ovarian
cancer patients


Studies in different populations worldwide have demonstrated that germ
line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for the majority of hereditary
breast and ovarian cancers. In addition, polymorphic variants in these
genes have been implicated in an increased breast and ovarian cancer
risks. Indeed, it has been known that the germ line mutations in the
BRCA1 gene can strikingly increase the life time risk of ovarian cancer
by 15-30%. Among BRCA mutations the Q356R polymorphism is a variant
causing the amino acid switch from glutamine (Q) to arginine (R) in the
putative functional domain of the protein. The present study was carried
out to assess the frequency of Q356R polymorphism in BRCA1 gene among
Jamaican ovarian cancer patients, since there is lack of data for this
population pertaining to this polymorphism. For this analysis the ovarian
cancer samples were collected from 23 Jamaican women with 21 benign and 2
malignant tumors. The genomic DNA of cancer samples was extracted and the
purity of the DNA was analyzed prior to polymorphism determination.
Polymerase chain reaction was performed using the DNA of cancer patients
as a template with the primers specific for BRCA1 gene. The Q356R
polymorphism status within BRCA1 gene was analyzed through restriction
enzyme digestion. The undigested or partially digested arginine (R)
coding allele was seen as a band at 211 bp of length, whereas the
glutamine (Q) alleles represented by the digestion products were seen at
134 and 77 bp length. The incomplete digestion of R allele indicates a
high risk and the digested Q alleles signify the medium or low risk
category. Genotyping analyses were performed in all 23 cases using the
restriction fragment length analysis. Out of 23 samples, 22 showed
digestion fragments of 134 bp and 77 bp, remaining one was partially
digested and showed a 211 bp band. Among the samples analyzed the
percentage of R allele was (4.34%) and the Q alleles were (95.65%). Our
current analysis indicates that the QR genotype frequency for Jamaican
women with non-malignant ovarian tumors is only 0.04. However, the QR
genotype frequency for Jamaican women with malignant ovarian cancer
appears to be 0.5. Thus, functional polymorphisms in BRCA1 might be
postulated to be more likely affecting ovarian cancer risk than those in
BRCA2. Though the frequency of R allele is only 4.3% in Jamaican
population, this polymorphism seems to correlate very well with the
malignant status of the tumor. Therefore, patients with this polymorphism
can be selected for more aggressive surveillance and therapeutic options.
The results presented here are from a small population of Jamaican women
with ovarian tumors but further validation of this conclusion can be
obtained by conducting a study with larger population of patients (The
authors would like to thank the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft.
Lauderdale, FL, for their generous support).

