Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Y-box binding protein 1 is correlated with lymph node metastasis
in intestinal type of gastric cancer


Gastric cancer still ranks among the top ten most common cancer in the
world, despite a declining trend in incidence. The multifunctional
protein Y Box Binding Protein-1 (YB-1) is known to regulate
transcription, translation, DNA repair and cellular response to drug
treatment. This study evaluated the correlation between YB-1 protein
expression levels with clinico-pathological characteristics in the
intestinal type of gastric cancer, which was further validated with in
vitro experimentation. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed from
specimens obtained from 167 patients diagnosed with intestinal gastric
cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis of the YB-1 protein was performed on
the TMAs . The intensity of YB-1 staining in the intestinal type of
gastric cancer was scored as absent to strong staining and the percentage
of YB-1 immunostained cells was determined. YB-1 immunoreactivity was
based on the weighted average intensity (WAI) for each specimen, which
was calculated as the sum of percentages of stained cells for each
intensity divided by the total percentage of stained cells.
siRNA-mediated silencing of the YB-1 gene in MKN7 intestinal gastric
cancer cells was verified by RT-PCR. Cell migration and invasion assays
were carried out using commercially available kits. YB-1 immunostaining
was present in all the cancer tissue samples examined. The YB-1 protein
was observed to be predominantly expressed in the cytoplasm of the
gastric cancer cells. Univariate analysis revealed that YB-1
immunohistochemical expression was significantly correlated with lymph
node status and perforation. However, multivariate analysis showed that
only YB-1 protein expression is an independent predictor of lymph node
spread. Down-regulation of the YB-1 gene expression in MKN7 cells
significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion, processes which are
important in the metastatic cascade. The findings suggest that YB-1
expression is associated with metastasis in the intestinal type of
gastric cancer and is a potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic
target in this subtype of gastric cancer.

