Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myosin-Va involvement in malignant properties of melanoma cells


Evidence has emerged on the role of myosin-Va in cancer progression.
Recently a role for myosin-Va in tumor cell migration, invasion and
metastasis has been described for cancer cell lines from lung, colon,
breast and prostate. One of the objectives of this work was to assess a
possible role to myosin-Va in melanoma cells. We knocked down the
expression of endogenous myosin-Va by using a lentiviral vector
expressing a shRNA (shMYO5A) designed to target MYO5A mRNA in 1205Lu - a
human melanoma cell line and functional studies were conductedonce
efficient knockdown was attained. Myosin-Va depletion was showed to have
no effect in cell proliferation as determined by crystal violet staining
at a time course interval. However, cell viability was significantly
reduced in MYO5A depleted cells compared to control ones. Also, a higher
apoptotic index was observed in those cells suggesting that myosin-Va is
involved in tumor growth. Subsequentlywe performed a cell
migrationanalysis and found rates 60% lower for MYO5A depleted cells.
This effect could have been caused by impairment in cell adhesion to the
substrate as we could verify by a dynamic adhesion assay in different
types of matrix. Adhesion ability to collagen, fibronectin, lamminin and
matrigel was reduced in MYO5A depleted cells. Also, cell surface levels
of integrins were lower for shMYO5A transfected cells compared to control
as measured by flow cytometry approach and imply a defect in cell
adhesion and migration caused by MYO5A knock-down.Next we evaluate cell
survival under detachment conditions by plating cells on non-adherent
surfaces and measuring cell death after 24h by annexin-V staining at cell
surface. Results suggested that myosin-Va protects cells from anoikis
(apoptosis caused by detachment) since MYO5A depleted cells presented
higher rates of apoptosis compared to wild-type. Colony formation in soft
agar showed that myosin-Va is required for anchorage-independent growth
since depleted cells presented fewer and smaller colonies 30 days after
culturing under those conditions. These findings indicate that myosin-Va
is involved in several steps of tumor growth and progression including
cell survival after detachment of the initial tumor mass and colonization
of new microenvironments, suggesting that its upregulation in melanoma
cells contributes to the rise of malignancy in this type of cancer.

