Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathological characterization of non-alcoholic
Steatohepatitis (NASH)-derived hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a
patient stratification model in mice


Therapeutic strategy against Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is determined
by tumor stage and liver function. Improvement of patient stratification
thus contributes to improved survival of patients as well as to provide
insights into the usage of anti-HCC drugs. Distinct from current clinical
strategy, however, stratification has been paid a little attention in
tumor animal models largely due to the lack of suitable model. Given the
importance of animal study for the development of anti-HCC therapeutics,
it is needed to consider stratification also in an animal HCC model. Here
we investigate the clinicopathological features of HCC in a recently
reported, non-transgenic Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)-derived HCC
model (STAM model, Fujii et al, Med Mol Morphol, 2013) and show that STAM
model is the first murine model to which the patient stratification
concept is applicable. STAM mice showed following characteristics; 1) all
male mice developed well differentiated HCC without exception, 2) HCC was
developed in the fibrotic, but not intact liver, 3) at least 4 tumor
nodules were detectable, 4) space occupied lesions were observed from 14
weeks of age by multiphase dynamic-enhance computed tomography (CT), 5)
average tumor growth rate from 14 to 20 weeks of age was 200% by CT, 6)
hypervascular in arterial phase and washout in delayed phase, 7) mice did
not exhibit ascites and visible metastasis, 8) liver function was
relatively preserved corresponding to Child-Pugh grade A or B in human,
9) expression levels of human HCC markers such as Glypican-3 were
elevated. These observations suggest that HCC in STAM mice are equivalent
to stage B to C of Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system in
human. Moreover, whether Sorafenib, which is selected as a first line
drug for patients with stage C HCC in BCLC, also shows anti-HCC activity
in this murine model or not, we evaluated the effect of Sorafenib on HCC
in STAM mice. We demonstrated that Sorafenib reduced HCC growth rate in
STAM mice. Taken together, our results indicate that STAM model is
suitable to evaluate the drug efficacy on HCC associated with NASH.
Application of stratification concept to murine study would also open new
avenue to establish fine pharmacological intervention against HCC.

