Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering potential epigenetic anti-cancer drugs derived from
natural compounds


Introduction and Aims: Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in
gene expression that are independent of changes in DNA sequence. The main
biochemical modifications that govern epigenetics are DNA methylation and
post-translational histone modifications. Small molecules modulating the
activity of the DNA/chromatin-modifying enzymes have been shown to be
able to revert malignant cells to a more normal epigenetic state. Thus,
the opportunity for developing potential epigenetic drugs is of great
interest in the fields of cancer biology and drug discovery. Natural
compounds are bioactive, have variable structures, and many known
anti-cancer drugs are derived from natural compounds. In addition, there
have been reports of natural compounds modulating epigenetic activity.
Therefore, it would be of interest to screen natural compounds as
potential epigenetic drugs. Methods: We used the YB5 cell line, a colon
cancer cell line generated by our lab by stably transfecting SW48 cells
with a vector containing GFP driven by a methylated and silenced CMV
promoter. GFP re-expression can be achieved by epigenetic drugs that lead
to demethylation or induce active chromatin marks in the CMV promoter.
After 24hr treatment with the natural compounds, FACS analysis was used
to check the GFP expression levels. After the primary screening, top hits
were validated by doing dose curves, fluorescence microscopy and qPCR. In
addition, hypermethylated genes were checked by qPCR and methylation
levels of the CMV promoter were determined by pyrosequencing. Results: We
have screened 3040 natural compounds, with 33 potential positive hits as
measured by an increase in GFP expression (more than 2.64% of GFP+) after
a 24-hour treatment. Among these, 19 hits have been validated through
dose curves, fluorescence microscopy and qPCR. Two hits have synergistic
effects with Decitabine (a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor). By using a
biochemistry-based assay, we have determined that none of the positive
hits are HDAC inhibitors. In addition, none of the hits decreased
methylation levels of the CMV promoter after 24hr treatment. These hits
can be classified into several different categories based on their
structures. Four class representative top hits were selected to do
further analysis. These four hits can reactivate two hypermethylated
genes (CDH13 and WIF1) and upregulate p21. A combination of Decitabine
and the four top hits can upregulate hypermethylated gene expression
levels synergistically in different patterns. Conclusions: We have
identified 33 natural compounds that have potential epigenetic activity.
Based on the structural analysis, gene reactivation patterns, as well as
synergistic effects analysis, these top hits may work via different
mechanisms. Further experiments are being carried out to identify other
potential target genes of the top hits, study the biological effects of
the hits and discover their potential mechanisms of action.

