Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of human breast epithelial cells


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among women in the United
States and it is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in this
population. Roughly 232,000 women in the U.S. were diagnosed with
malignant breast cancer in 2013 and approximately 40,000 of these
patients will die. The majority of breast cancers originate in the
lobular or ductal cells of the milk-producing glands. In these
structures, there are two main cell types: the inner luminal cells, which
are surrounded by basal myoepithelium. These cells are structurally
distinct and are the precursors to variable forms of breast cancer. As
such, it is important to study them not only separately but also
together. Current methods for culturing human mammary epithelial cells
select for those of a basal phenotype. Isolation of pure basal and
luminal cell populations was accomplished by using antibody-linked
magnetic beads to isolate essentially pure populations of both basal
(CALLA/CD10) and luminal mammary (MUC-1/CD227) epithelial cells from
organoid explant cultures. Organoids were isolated and plated on collagen
I coated flasks in either DFCI (basal) or MBCM (luminal) media and
cultured at 37C in 5% CO2 to induce cell migration. The media was
replenished every 2 - 3 days until the cells reached confluence. Cultured
cells were harvested and immunopurified using a CALLA/CD10 or MUC-1/CD227
antibody and magnetic beads. Positively selected cells were seeded in
tissue culture treated flasks and propagated with medium exchange every 2
- 3 days. Each cell population was analyzed using flow cytometry to
determine their purity. The DFCI/CD10 cells were over 98% CD10 positive
with very little MUC1 reactivity, suggesting that they are an essentially
pure basal epithelial cell population. The cells isolated using MBCM/MUC1
appear to be a mixed population with 86% MUC1 positive luminal cells and
the remainder being CD10 positive basal cells. A second round of
immunopurification resulted in an isolated cell population that was
greater than 95% MUC1 positive, suggesting a pure luminal epithelial cell
population. This procedure has been used on several organoid preparations
and has generated high cell yields in addition to high cell purity. These
isolated cell types can now be tested individually for drug sensitivity.

