Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-mediated loss of KDM5B expression leads to suppression of
the malignant bladder cancer phenotype


We recently identified KDM5B as a putative oncogene. The expression of
KDM5B correlated with increased cellular proliferative capacity and was
found to be overexpressed in many cancers including bladder cancer (BC).
KDM5B is a histone demethylase enzyme that modifies chromatin structure
to specify cellular transcriptional states. It is a cancer/testis
antigen; whereby in normal conditions, expression is limited to early
embryonic stages and the testis in adults. Thus, KDM5B is an excellent
therapeutic target. Since the expression of KDM5B in embryonic stem cells
is orchestrated by miRNAs and that the expression of miRNAs are altered
in BC, we hypothesized that miRNAs may be the switch that can abate the
expression of KDM5B and thus affect the malignant phenotype of BC cells.
This study was aimed at identifying and modulating the expression of
miRNAs that are able to regulate KDM5B expression and BC phenotypes. By
coupling in silico screens with RT-QPCR analysis of in vitro expression
of BC cells of different malignant potential, we predicted several miRNAs
as potential regulators of KDM5B transcripts. The functional effects of
specific miRNAs on KDM5B expression, cell cycle, proliferation and
invasion of BC cells was determined by modulating the expression of these
miRNAs using mimics (upregulation) and antagomirs (downregulation).
Expression of miR-137 in BC cells was found to be inversely correlated
with KDM5B expression. Ectopic overexpression of miR-137 led to the
repression of KDM5B expression, reduced cell growth and invasion as well
as increased apoptosis of BC cells. In contrast, the downregulation of
miR-137 expression led to reverse effects. The expression modulation of
miR-137 also affected the expression of other BC-associated genes such as
JDP2 and EGR2. While our results suggest that miR-137 can mitigate the
KDM5B-associated BC phenotype, further studies on understanding the
effect on aberrant histone methylation patterns are warranted.

