Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL6 and CXCL1 induce senescent phenotype of cancer-associated
fibroblast via autocrine loops in oral squamous cell carcinoma


Background & ObjectiveTumor-stroma interaction plays a key role in tumor
development and progression. One of the prominent components of tumor
stroma is cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). Although CAFs have been
well known to contribute to tumorigenesis, the characteristics of CAFs
are still poorly understood. For this reason, we characterized CAFs and
investigated a mechanism underlying the transformation of NOFs into CAFs
in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).Materials & MethodsFor this study,
three primary cultured NOFs and three primary cultured CAFs were used,
respectively. Expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and
senescence-associated -galactosidase (SA--Gal) enzyme activity were
compared between NOFs and CAFs. Population doubling levels and expression
of activated fibroblast marker were measured in NOFs and CAFs. The
expression levels of senescence-related markers were detected by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting. In
search of mechanism that triggers senescence in CAFs, cytokine antibody
array was employed in NOFs co-cultured with OSCC cells, and the results
were confirmed by real-time PCR.ResultsIn comparison between NOFs and
CAFs, -SMA, a marker of activated fibroblasts, showed no difference in
expression pattern. CAFs showed higher SA--Gal enzyme activity and lower
PCNA expression than NOFs at the same passage. In addition, CAFs
exhibited lower population doubling level than NOFs, indicating that CAFs
had senescent phenotype. NOFs co-cultured with OSCC cells showed higher
SA--Gal enzyme activity, p16 and p21 expression compared with
mono-cultured NOFs, whereas NOFs co-cultured with human epidermal
keratinocytes (HEK) showed no SA--Gal enzyme activity, indicating that
the induction of senescence in CAFs was not merely an artifact of
co-culture system but was triggered specifically by the co-cultured
cancer cells. Cytokine antibody array revealed that co-culture conditions
induced cytokine secretion from CAFs. In particular, IL6 and CXCL1 showed
the highest secretion level, and mRNA expression levels corresponded with
the results from cytokine antibody array. Upon treating NOFs with IL6 and
CXCL1, higher SA--Gal enzyme activity was detected in NOFs compared with
non-treated NOFs, indicating that IL6 and CXCL1 were capable of inducing
senescence in NOFs.ConclusionFrom these results, we propose that the
senescent phenotype of CAFs might be elicited by cytokines such as IL6
and CXCL1, which are secreted from CAFs in an autocrine manner.
Additional studies are in progress to identify specific factors to induce
cytokine secretion in a carcinoma milieu.AcknowledgmentsThis research was
supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(2009-0094027).

