Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment, characterization and evaluation of a panel of head
and neck patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models


Background: Head and neck cancers account for over five hundred thousand
cases worldwide each year. Primary risk factors include tobacco use,
alcohol consumption, human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection with certain cancer subtypes
disproportionally affecting minorities. Standard treatment for these
cancers consists of surgical tumor debulking followed by a platinum-based
agent alone or in combination with an EGFR-targeting therapy when
relevant. The rate of initial response to treatment is high; however, the
majority of patients develop recurrent disease resistant to most
secondary chemotherapy treatments, demonstrating the need for identifying
additional useful therapies. To better understand pathways involved in
head and neck cancers and identify useful novel therapies for this
disease, we have established a panel of low passage, patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models representing head and neck cancers and
characterized them by activating mutation analysis and receptor
expression. Panel drug screening studies were also performed comparing
platinum regimens and select targeted therapies and correlating with
clinical outcome.Methods: START-PDX head and neck models were established
in immune-deficient mice from primary or metastatic patient tissue and
once established were confirmed by histologic comparative analysis and
linked with patient treatment and outcome data. For each model DNA was
extracted and subjected to exon sequencing of known oncogenes and growth
factor receptor densities were interrogated using immunohistochemistry.
Drug sensitivity studies were performed evaluating models towards
chemotherapy and targeted agents. Study endpoints included tumor volume
and time from treatment initiation with tumor growth inhibition, delay
and regression reported at study completion.Results: To date we have
established and validated twenty-five head and neck low passage START-PDX
models. High EGFR staining (3+) was reported in over 70% of these models
but only 10% reported HER2 and HER3 staining. Activity of platinum
regimens was marked and correlated with clinical outcome with over 75%
concordance. High EGFR expression did not correlate to cetuximab
sensitivity even in models with wildtype K-Ras. However, models found
sensitive to erlotinib also demonstrated sensitivity to
cetuximab.Conclusion: We have established a panel START-PDX head and neck
models and characterized mutation status, receptor expression and
benchmarked sensitivity of platinum and select targeted therapies. This
panel can be utilized as a valuable screening tool in early and
late-stage biomarker discovery and oncology drug development.

