Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional significance of TIGAR expression in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus associated cancer
of the nasopharynx. Annual incidence in China is high, reaching up to 25
per 100,000. NPC is a highly invasive and metastatic disease. At
diagnosis, over 60% of patients have advanced disease where treatment
failure due to distant recurrence or metastasis is common. More effective
forms of therapy to treat this deadly disease are therefore urgently
needed.The TP53 induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR) is a
p53 target gene which blocks glycolysis and promotes cellular metabolism
via the pentose phosphate pathway. TIGAR promotes production of cellular
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), leading to enhanced
scavenging of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inhibition
of oxidative-stress induced apoptosis in normal cells. Previously, we
have found that a novel nucleoside analog inhibited cell growth and
induced apoptosis in NPC cell lines via down-regulation of TIGAR
expression. Moreover, the growth inhibitory effect of c-Met tyrosine
kinase inhibitors was ameliorated by over-expression of TIGAR in NPC cell
lines. These results are indicative of a pivotal role for TIGAR
expression in maintaining NPC cell survival.In this study, we
investigated the expression pattern of TIGAR in NPC tumor tissues and the
consequences of TIGAR overexpression and knockdown on NPC cell growth and
invasion. It was found that TIGAR is overexpressed in 27 out of 36 (75%)
NPC cases in the tumor cells compared to their respective normal
epithelial cells. Overexpression of TIGAR in NPC cell lines resulted in
increased proliferation, invasion, NADPH production and up-regulation of
mesenchymal markers including fibronectin and vimentin. These changes
were reversed when TIGAR expression was knocked down by transfection with
siRNA, demonstrating specificity of the observed effects. Together, our
results indicate that TIGAR expression promotes proliferation,
invasiveness and expression of mesenchymal markers in NPC cells. These
findings may form the basis for development of a new therapeutic target
for treatment of NPC in the future.

