Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cl-amidine, a PAD inhibitor, prevents UC and CRC in mice:
Exploring novel mechanisms of miRNA and oxidative stress regulation


Ulcerative Colitis (UC) is a chronic, relapsing inflammatory bowel
disease that affects millions of patients worldwide. Due to the chronic
inflammatory state of UC, which causes oxidative stress and leads to DNA
damage, patients with UC are at a higher risk of developing colorectal
cancer (CRC). Although the cause of UC is still unknown, the protein
arginine deiminase (PAD) family of enzymes has been found to be a key
component in many human inflammatory diseases and cancer, including UC
and CRC. PADs are calcium dependent enzymes that post-translationally
convert peptidyl-Arginine to peptidyl-Citrulline through citrullination.
In hopes of treating UC and preventing CRC, we developed Chlor-amidine
(Cl-amidine), a novel small molecule inhibitor of PADs. Cl-amidine
irreversibly inhibits PADs by covalent modification of Cys645 at the
active site of the PAD enzyme. Unlike current approved drugs for the
treatment of UC, Cl-amidine shows no toxicity both in vitro and in vivo.
Preliminary in vitro studies showed that Cl-amidine is able to suppress
oxidative stress, DNA damage, and the inflammatory marker, iNOS.
Correspondingly, we found similar results in our AOM/DSS mouse model of
UC, as Cl-amidine suppressed colonic inflammation. In this UC model,
Cl-amidine treatment also decreased reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production by inflammatory cells and DNA damage in epithelial cells. We
proceeded to look at the capability of Cl-amidine to prevent
carcinogenesis in our AOM/DSS mouse model of UC-associated CRC and report
that Cl-amidine treatment significantly decreased tumor incidence in this
model. To further understand how Cl-amidine prevents carcinogenesis, we
are currently exploring the effect of Cl-amidine on two separate
mechanisms: 1) miRNA and 2) oxidative stress regulation. First, our
recent studies have focused specifically on miR-16, a putative tumor
suppressor, which is downregulated in cancers. Interestingly, we have
found that Cl-amidine upregulates miR-16 expression in our in vitro and
in vivo models of UC. We aim to determine if Cl-amidine acts through
miR-16 to prevent UC and UC-associated CRC by suppressing DNA damage
and/or by suppressing cell proliferation. The second mechanism that we
are exploring involves the regulation of antioxidant enzymes such as
superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and catalase.
In vitro results reveal that Cl-amidine increased protein levels of these
enzymes. We plan to measure ROS levels in Cl-amidine treated cells that
are introduced to SOD, GPx, and catalase inhibitors. This will provide
evidence that Cl-amidine is working through these specific enzymes to
reduce ROS activity. Based on the efficacy of Cl-amidine in our models of
UC and CRC, and its potential multi-targeted mechanism of action; our
research has revealed that Cl-amidine is a cutting-edge, prospective drug
therapy for UC patients.

