Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BNIP3 suppresses mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis through
negative regulation of Warburg effect and HIF-1


BNIP3 is a hypoxia-inducible protein involved in mitochondrial dynamics
and mitophagy that is up-regulated at pre-malignant stages of various
human cancers, including breast cancer but down-regulated at later stages
of tumorigenesis. To examine the role of BNip3 in tumor progression, we
crossed BNip3 null mice to the MMTV-PyMT mouse model of breast cancer.
Loss of BNip3 promoted primary tumor growth in vivo and tumor cell
proliferation in vitro and was associated with increased aerobic
glycolysis and reduced mitochondrial respiration. BNip3 null tumor cells
also showed increased invasive properties that were cell intrinsic and
transplantable to wild-type host mice. Consistently, there was reduced
latency to lung metastasis in the MMTV-PyMT;BNip3-/- mice and increased
numbers of metastases compared to control mice. BNip3 null tumors
exhibited increased mitochondrial mass, but a greater fraction of
mitochondria were dysfunctional with reduced membrane potential and
decreased metabolite uptake compared to BNip3 wild-type tumor cells.
Consistently, increased proliferation of BNip3 null tumor cells was
associated with increased carbon flux from glucose to lipid and nucleic
acids. Interestingly, although mitochondria were less efficient at uptake
of pyruvate and glutamine, the rate of production of Krebs cycle
intermediates was increased. This indicates that defective mitochondria
due to inefficient mitophagy can induce the Warburg effect, as originally
proposed by Warburg himself. Loss of BNip3 also resulted in more hypoxic
tumors that expressed increased levels of Hif-1 and its target genes and
showed increased angiogenesis, although blood vessels were abnormal
possibly explaining increased tumor hypoxia, thus suggesting a negative
feedback loop between Hif-1 and its target gene, BNip3. Inhibition of
glycolysis or inhibition of HIF activity reduced proliferation in BNip3
null tumor cells to the levels observed in control cells. Significantly,
BNip3 null tumor cells underwent autophagic flux as efficiently as
wild-type cells demonstrating for the first time that inhibition of
mitophagy has a distinct tumorigenic consequence to general inactivation
of autophagy, as reported elsewhere. These results demonstrate that BNip3
has tumor and metastasis suppressor properties required to maintain
mitochondrial integrity, promote oxidative metabolism and mitigate
against the metastasis promoting activities of hypoxia and glycolytic
metabolism.

