Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of oncogenic-induced dedifferentiation
in neurons and astrocytes using DP-seq


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and lethal form of intracranial
tumor. Using a Cre-inducible lentiviral GBM mouse model we recently
showed that gliomas can originate from dedifferentiation of mature
neurons and astrocytes. Expression analysis of the known markers (of the
differentiated cell-types) showed diminished expression while the
expression of the undifferentiated state markers were significantly
up-regulated in the dedifferentiated transformed neurons and astrocytes.
In this study, we performed whole transcriptome analysis of these cells
along with mouse pluripotent embryonic stem cells (mESC), neural stem
cells (NSC), neurons and astrocytes to characterize the undifferentiated
state of these cells. Our analysis revealed that dedifferentiated
cell-types shared traits with neurons and NSCs at the global
transcriptome level suggesting that they have retained memory of their
cell-of-origin and share markers of undifferentiated cells with NSCs.
Functional analysis of the transcriptomics data revealed involvement of
the Wnt signaling, cell cycle and the focal adhesion pathways in defining
the state of the dedifferentiated cell-types. Our analysis further
revealed conservation of a gene interaction network in both
dedifferentiated cell-types. This network exhibited a modular
architecture, connecting components of the cell cycle pathway to Wnt
signaling and the focal adhesion pathways. One of these components,
Osteopontin (OPN), also known as Spp1, is highly expressed and secreted
by the tumors and dedifferentiated transformed neurons and astrocytes.
Attempts to inhibit the action of OPN, either by using a neutralizing
antibody or silencing the OPN gene (shRNA), blocked the formation of
tumorspheres and diminished their proliferating capacity. We are
currently assessing the effects of the inhibition of OPN function in
vivo.Further genetic perturbation of additional interacting partners
and/or the abolishment of the interactions can help elucidate the
regulatory mechanism of this network in maintaining the dedifferentiated
state of the transformed neurons and astrocytes.

