Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifactorial biological processes govern engraftment of
patient-derived tumor tissue in immunodeficient mice


TumorGrafts (also known as patient-derived xenografts) are a valuable
tool for the personalization of oncology treatment, as well as
development of new cancer therapeutics. Tumor explants are engrafted into
immunodeficient mice and allowed to develop prior to screening against a
panel of drugs or drug combinations to assess which best inhibit tumor
growth. These models capture the chaotic heterogeneity, histopathology,
and biology of the original tumor, as well its 3-dimensional interaction
with the surrounding stroma and other cells migrating into the tumor
environment. TumorGrafts will serve basic and clinical research groups as
an increasingly valuable preclinical model of cancer. One important
variable governing the generation of these models is the take rate, or
the percentage of patient tumors that successfully engraft and grow in
the mice. This is a potentially critical limitation to applying these
preclinical models for improving patient treatment and advancing novel
drug regimens to the clinic. Hence, there is a need to understand and
exploit the mechanisms that influence take rate in order to ensure that
the majority of tumor explants readily engraft and expand. We describe
here our experience in optimizing the engraftment of patient tumor tissue
in immunodeficient mice. We found a number of factors contribute to take
rate including tumor type, tissue quantity and quality, engraftment site,
oxygenation state, neovascularization and the presence of extracellular
stromal components and cells. We have also uncovered a correlation
between the growth rate of tumors in the mice and the clinical
aggressiveness of the original malignancy, information that may be useful
in guiding clinical management. Moreover, we describe how we are now able
to consistently use biopsy material rather than surgical explants to
establish TumorGrafts, a crucial step forward that allows this technology
to benefit patients diagnosed with early-stage cancers or where surgery
is not indicated. Although engraftment of patient tumor tissue in
immunodeficient mice is a complex process, with multiple factors
impacting success, we have effectively optimized this process, improving
our take rate and at the same time, reducing the time to obtaining drug
screening results, all without compromising tumor integrity.

