Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of apoptotic blebbing in tissue homeostasis and cancer


Efficient apoptotic cell clearance prevents the release of potentially
immunogenic intracellular contents into the surrounding environment to
maintain tissue homeostasis; however, the importance of membrane blebbing
for apoptotic cell recognition and clearance has not been established. To
address fundamental questions regarding the influence of ROCK1 cleavage
and consequent apoptotic membrane blebbing in cellular corpse clearance
and the maintenance of tissue homeostasis, mice were generated with a
single amino acid substitution in the caspase cleavage site (D1113A) that
converts ROCK1 to a non-cleavable (ROCK1nc) form. We previously showed
that during apoptosis, caspase cleavage of ROCK1 removes an
auto-inhibitory carboxy-terminal region to yield a constitutively active
kinase fragment that leads to phosphorylation of downstream targets which
promote contractile force generation leading to shrinkage, blebbing and
nuclear disintegration. When apoptosis was induced in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, the biochemical apoptotic programme itself was unaffected,
although cells had significantly impaired morphological alterations.
Furthermore, by imaging apoptosis of GFP labelled melanoblasts in ex vivo
embryonic skin explants, the effect of the ROCK1nc point mutation was to
impair typical apoptotic morphological changes. To understand the
biological role of membrane blebbing in the maintenance of tissue
homeostasis, we used the liver-selective genotoxic compound
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce acute tissue damage. Following DEN
treatment, we found that TUNEL positive apoptotic cells were
inefficiently cleared in ROCK1nc mice, which resulted in increased
neutrophil infiltration in response to the accumulating apoptotic debris.
Histologically, the ROCK1nc livers appeared more damaged with evidence of
steatohepatitis and perivenular damage, which was accompanied by higher
serum alanine transferase levels. We then asked whether defects in tissue
damage responses in ROCK1nc mice would affect tumor development in a
model of DEN-induced hepatocellular carcinoma. Interestingly, ROCK1nc
mice had reduced tumor volume and numbers, suggesting that defective
blebbing may be beneficial for reducing tumor initiation and growth.
Taken together, our results indicate that efficiency of phagocytic
clearance may contribute to cancer susceptibility.

