Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of antitumor activity of DSP-6434, a novel TLR7
agonist through reduction of TLR tolerance


Introduction: Systemic administration of the small molecule Toll-like
receptor (TLR)-7 agonist DSR-6434 leads to potent activation of innate
immunity and to the generation of anti-tumor immune responses. However,
clinical responses with systemically administered TLR7 agonists have been
underwhelming, in part because activation of TLRs with small-molecule
agonists can induce TLR tolerance; defined as a state of
hyporesponsiveness to subsequent agonism. This study is undertaken to
identify conditions to overcome TLR tolerance.Experimental procedures: To
confirm the anti-tumor effect of DSR-6434, mice were inoculated with the
mouse renal cell carcinoma cell line, Renca, at day 0, and then
administrated DSR-6434 weekly from day 1, or twice weekly from day 6. To
examine tolerance, wild-type or IFN-/ receptor knockout (IFN-AR KO) mice
were intravenously administrated DSR-6434 at intervals of 3, 7 or 10
days. Plasma samples were taken 2 hours after the second administration
of DSR-6434 and IFN- levels were measured. Splenocytes were isolated 24
hours following either single or sequential i.v. doses. To measure
lymphocyte activation, CD69 expression was assessed and
splenocyte-mediated cytotoxicity against YAC-1 target cells was
determined. Bone-marrow derived pDC (BM-pDC) were also treated with
DSR-6434 for 5 or 48 hours. Expression of TLR7 signaling-related genes
was determined by real-time quantitative RT-PCR.Results: Weekly
administration of DSR-6434 significantly reduced tumor burden when
compared to vehicle-treated mice. By contrast, pre-inoculation and 2qw
administration of DSR-6434 completely abolished anti-tumor activity. IFN-
induction was completely impaired following the second administration of
DSR-6434 after 3 days, partially impaired after 7 days, and fully
functional when the dosing interval was extended to 10 days. Sequential
dosing of DSR-6434 reduced the frequency of activated splenocytes
(defined as CD69+) and the level of cytotoxicity, compared with a single
administration of DSR-6434. TLR7 tolerance was also observed in IFN-AR KO
mice, suggesting this effect was independent of IFN signaling.
Interestingly, TLR7 down-regulation was only observed after DSR-6434
dosing, while the expression of other TLR7-signaling related genes was
unaltered.Conclusion: The dosing schedule of systemically administered
TLR7 agonists significantly affect TLR tolerance and antitumor activity,
offering a potential solution to overcome TLR tolerance . Furthermore,
TLR7 expression on BM-pDC cells may serve as a useful biomarker of TLR7
tolerance and aid in the optimization of dosing schedules involving
systemically administered TLR7 agonists.

