Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppressed immunity and macrophages characterize high risk high
grade DCIS


Background: High grade in situ (DCIS) features associated with high
recurrence include large size (>5cm), comedo necrosis, palpable mass,
hormone receptor (HR) negativity, and HER2 positivity. Given that high
grade, HR-neg invasive breast cancers have an inflammatory component
(significant macrophage infiltration) we sought to characterize the
immune microenvironment of DCIS to assess patterns of immune cell
infiltrates associated with high risk lesions.Methods: 48 cases of high
grade DCIS were age matched with 64 cases of non-high grade DCIS.
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed as single color stains for
the following antigens: CD115, FoxP3, ALDH, Ki-67, HER2. Two color IHC
was performed for the following antigen pairs: CD68/PCNA; CD68/Mac 387;
CD8/HLA-DR; CD68/MRC1, and CD24/CD44. HR status was determined from ER
and PR staining results in pathology reports. For each case, 3 hot spots
were identified and marked on 10 consecutive sections. Nuance
multispectral imaging software was used to image each hot spot. Protocols
for automated image analysis were developed using CellProfiler software.
Clinical parameters of interest included tumor palpability, recurrence,
and Van Nuys score, (12 point scale-margins, age, size, grade).
Associations were identified with non-parametric Spearman correlation
test.Results: High numbers of macrophages were associated with high Van
Nuys score, palpability, and high Ki-67. High CD115 (CSF-1
receptor/c-fms) was associated with HER2+, high Ki-67, and recurrence.
Mac387+ cells and FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) were significantly
associated with high Van Nuys score, comedo necrosis, high Ki-67, HR- and
HER2+. Interestingly, both Mac387 and CD115 were expressed on tumor cells
as well as macrophages and high CD115 staining on tumor cells was
associated with recurrence. The presence of CD8+HLA-DR negative T cells
throughout a section was associated with high Van Nuys score, HR-, HER2+,
and recurrence. In contrast, CD8+ T cells within the nests of tumor cells
were negatively associated with Van Nuys score, palpability, and comedo
necrosis.Conclusions: Suppressed immunity (high Treg and CD8+HLA-DR neg T
cells) and upregulated CD115 and Mac387 expression on both tumor cells
and macrophages were strongly correlated with high risk DCIS features
(increased recurrence, palpability, high Van Nuys scores, high
proliferation, HR- and HER2+). These results suggest that manipulation of
the immune microenvironment in DCIS, via local stimulation of the immune
system, depletion of Treg, and/or manipulation of macrophages could
potentially alter disease progression. Targeted agents are in trials and
could be tested in preoperative window trials using these biomarkers to
monitor the impact of presurgical immunotherapy.

