Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDLIM2 is essential for feedback regulation of the B1
integrin-FAK-RhoA signalling pathway to maintain epithelial cell polarity
and suppress transformation


PDLIM2 is a PDZ-LIM domain protein that regulates the stability of
transcription factors (NFkB and STATs) in the nucleus. It is also
associated with the cytoskeleton at cell adhesions and cell junctions and
is required for polarized cell migration. PDLIM2 expression is suppressed
by methylation in different cancers, but is strongly expressed in
invasive breast cancer cells that have undergone an Epithelial
Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). Moreover, PDLIM2 expression is associated
with poor outcome in basal breast cancers and its expression can be
enhanced by vitamin D-induced differentiation of breast cancer
cells.Since PDLIM2 expression repression may facilitate oncogenic
transformation and its expression is modulated by the differentiation
status of breast cancer cells we asked whether it is essential for
maintaining a non-transformed epithelial phenotype. To address this we
suppressed PDLIM2 in MCF10A cells and assessed the phenotype and
mechanism in 3D Matrigel cultures. We found that PDLIM2 suppression is
sufficient to disrupt cell polarization and acinar formation in Matrigel
cultures. MCF10A cells with suppressed PDLIM2 formed spheres of
proliferating cells that exhibited reduced apoptosis in the luminal
space, compared to control acini with hollow or apoptotic lumina.
Spheroids with suppressed PDLIM2 had increased expression of cell-cell
adhesion proteins including E cadherin and -catenin. Proteins associated
with cell-matrix adhesion were also up-regulated, including activated
beta 1 (1) integrin, laminin, and fibronectin production. Interestingly,
both the IGF-1 Receptor and RACK1, which scaffolds IGF-1R to 1 integrin,
were increased, indicating a transformed phenotype. FAK and cofilin
phosphorylation, and RhoA activity were also enhanced in spheroids with
PDLIM2 suppressed compared to controls. Importantly, pharmacological
inhibition of either FAK or Rho Kinase (ROCK) was sufficient to rescue
the polarity defect and abrogate all the phenotypic changes in MCF10A
cell spheroids caused by PDLIM2 suppression.We conclude that PDLIM2
mediates feedback regulation of the 1-integrin signalling pathway through
FAK and RhoA that is essential for maintenance of polarized breast
epithelial acinar structures, and for suppression of uncontrolled
proliferation and cellular transformation.

