Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox2 is necessary for glioblastoma cell plasticity


Background and Objective: The HMG-box transcription factor Sox2 is
essential for the maintenance of stem cells from early development to
adult tissues. Sox2 activates and represses the expression of different
gene sets in various tissues during development through HMG-box
domain-mediated DNA binding. Sox2 can reprogram differentiated cells into
pluripotent cells in concert with other factors, and is overexpressed in
various cancers, including glioblastoma (GBM). Employing a GBM
patient-derived cancer stem cell (CSC) and isogenic serum differentiated
cell (SDC) model we show that Sox2 regulates distinct gene sets in
glioblastoma stem and differentiated cells. Experimental Approaches:
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between Sox2-positive and
Sox2-negative cells in SDCs and isogenic CSCs were compiled from
genome-wide transcriptome data (Illumina HT12v4.0). Metacore (Thomson
Reuters) and IPA (Ingenuity Systems) software applications were used to
further analyze the datasets. Gene Expression data obtained from the TCGA
Data Portal (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/, July 2, 2012) for 517
GBM cases was used to study genes correlated with Sox2 expression.
Results: Sox2 knockdown in GBM SDCs abolished the dedifferentiation and
acquisition of CSC phenotype in vitro. Sox2 knockdown affected the
expression of 736 genes in SDCs, 453 downregulated and 283 upregulated,
and 799 genes in CSCs, 341 downregulated and 458 upregulated. The
expression of genes associated with stem cells and malignancy were
commonly downregulated in Sox2-deficient CSCs and SDCs. Upon Sox2
knockdown, proneural (PN) and classical (CL) signature genes are
downregulated in SDC and modestly in CSC, while mesenchymal (MES)
signature genes are upregulated in both groups. Genes previously shown to
be associated with pluripontency and CSCs were specifically affected in
the CSC state, while ESC self-renewal genes and cytokine signaling were
downregulated and the Wnt pathway was activated in differentiated
Sox2-deficient cells. Overlap with Sox2 binding to cis-regulatory
sequences was observed for 25.1% and 15.1% of DEGs in SDC and CSC,
respectively. Significantly, 28.6% of genes positively correlating with
Sox2 expression in the TCGA dataset overlapped with the DEGs in HF2303: 3
genes in both CSC and SDC states, 1 in CSCs, and the remaining 12 in the
SDC state suggesting that genes correlated with Sox2 expression in the
tumors are better represented in SDCs than in CSCs. Conclusions: Our
results indicate that Sox2 regulates the expression of key genes and
pathways involved in GBM malignancy, in both cancer stem-like and
differentiated cells, and maintains plasticity leading to bidirectional
conversion between the two states. These findings have significant
clinical implications.

