Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of tumor-associated antigens
as biomarkers in human prostate cancer


Autoantibodies against intracellular antigens are commonly found in a
number of systemic autoimmune diseases. Their utility in providing
insights into molecular and cellular biology and in the differential
diagnosis of autoimmune diseases is well documented. Autoimmune phenomena
manifested as antibodies to cellular components have been described in
many types of cancer. Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently
diagnosed cancer in men and the second leading cause of male cancer
deaths in the United States. PCa also presents the greatest racial
disparity in this country, with an incidence and mortality in
African-American men that is 3 times higher than in White and Latino men.
Reducing these disparities would require a multi-faceted approach that
includes developing more effective screening method for the early
detection of PCa. The objective of this study is to analyze the frequency
and specificity of autoantibodies in PCa patients, and further to
identify and characterize the targeted tumor-associated antigens. In this
study, 34 sera from PCa patients, and 30 sera from normal human
individuals were examined for autoantibodies using indirect
immunofluorescence (IIF) assay and western blotting. Autoantibodies were
detected in 18 of 34 (52.9%) PCa sera by IIF, which was significantly
higher than that in normal human sera. Of the interest is that of 34 PCa
sera, 9 (26.5%) sera were identified by western blotting analysis
containing antibodies against an unknown 70kDa cellular protein and 23.5%
PCa patients showed antibody to 45 kDa protein. No reactivity with 70KDa
and 45kDa proteins was detected in 30 normal human sera. In the further
study, these cellular proteins targeted by serum antibodies in PCa were
identified by using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) and liquid
chromatography-tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This preliminary data
supports that autoimmune responses to certain cellular proteins maybe a
by-product in the transformation to PCa, and further studies of novel
targeted proteins in PCa may provide insights into how these proteins
might be involved in malignancy.

