Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting GLI-dependent transcription by GANT61 in human colon
carcinoma cells (CC); a new therapeutic approach


Colorectal cancer constitutes the second leading cause of cancer
mortality in the United States with limited therapeutic options and poor
survival for advanced stage disease. The GLI genes, GLI1 and GLI2, are
transcription factors, which act at the distal end of the Hedgehog
pathway (SHH->PTCH->SMO->GLI) to regulate organogenesis and
differentiation in the colon. In cancer GLI1 and GLI2 are activated, are
oncogenes, and we have shown are critical to the survival of colon
carcinoma cells. Inhibition of GLI by the small molecule inhibitor,
GANT61, induces extensive cell death downstream of H2AX foci formation in
CC. GANT61 rapidly reduces GLI binding to consensus sequences in target
gene promoters (1 hr) and inhibits GLI1- and GLI2- dependent
transcription. Using the known crystal structure of the five zinc finger
GLI1-DNA complex we demonstrated, by computational docking, that GANT61
binds to the GLI1 protein, but not to the DNA binding site, via H bonds
at amino acids E119 and E167. These sites lie within the groove between
zinc fingers 2 and 3, on the opposite surface from, but in close
proximity to, the GLI1-DNA binding regions. GANT61 is not observed to
dock with DNA. The predicted binding constant for GANT61 (Kd = 2.6 M) is
consistent with GANT61 concentrations required to induce cell death in
CC. Surface plasmon resonance (Biacore) confirmed the model predictions
using immobilized GLI1 or DNA and GANT61 or GANT61/DNA as anylate,
respectively (KD= 7.5 M; IC50= 3.2M). Following GANT61 treatment of CC we
demonstrated transcriptional stalling of RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) at
sites of early elongation adjacent to GLI binding regions at target gene
promoters. This is associated with modification of promoter-bound pause
(DSIF, NELF) or pause-release (P-TEFb) factors. Single-stranded DNA
(R-loops) is detected at sites of stalled Pol II; H2AX foci are induced.
Consistent with inhibition of transcription, GANT61 induces H2AX foci in
S-phase and non-S-phase cells. A transient intra-S-phase checkpoint is
induced and cells accumulate in early S without further progression prior
to the onset of cell death. The GLI1 target gene FOXM1, and its
transcriptional target CDC6, regulate the G1/S transition and initiation
of DNA replication, and are decreased in GANT61-treated cells. Data
suggest that: 1) GANT61 inhibits GLI-mediated transcription by direct
binding to GLI; 2) GLI-dependent Pol II transcription is stalled at early
elongation in GANT61-treated cells, with formation of R-loops and DNA
DSBs; 3) GLI1, FOXM1 and CDC6 regulate events at G1/S and initiation of
DNA replication that controls outcome of the GANT61 response. These
studies open the door to exploring the role of GLI as a therapeutic
target. Since dysregulated HH signaling occurs in a wide variety of human
cancers, the proposed studies are of broad impact.

