Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of pancreatic cancer cell migration and invasion
through a targeted inhibition of the Rac GEF Vav1


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal forms
of human cancer, due in large part to a high incidence of metastasis and
resistance to conventional chemotherapies. As such, new therapies are
needed to halt the metastatic process. The proto-oncogene Vav1 is
ectopically expressed in over half of human pancreatic cancers, and its
expression correlates with a poor prognosis in humans and promotes
survival and transformation in isolated tumor cells. We have found that
Vav1, through its GEF activity towards Rac1, also potently induces
migration by pancreatic tumor cells. In addition, Vav1 also signals
through Cdc42 to drive the formation of invadopodia and matrix
degradation, which also promotes tumor cell invasion. Importantly, the
activation of Vav1 circumvents the requirement for active Src in this
process. Because Vav1 is ectopically expressed in pancreatic cancers and
is a potent regulator of tumor cell survival, proliferation, and invasive
migration, it could provide a specific therapeutic target for these
tumors. Recently, the anti-inflammatory agent azathioprine was described
as an inhibitor of Vav1/Rac1 activity in hematopoietic cells. Therefore,
we hypothesized that azathioprine could also inhibit the Vav1-driven
processes of proliferation and invasion in pancreatic tumor cells.
Indeed, we have determined that azathioprine treatment of cultured human
PDAC cells reduces viability and proliferation. Further, similar to
siRNA-mediated depletion of Vav1, azathioprine treatment reduces cell
migration, as well as the matrix degradation required for invasion.
Vav1-expressing tumor cells were more sensitive to azathioprine than
Vav1-negative cells, supporting the premise that the inhibitory effects
of azathioprine are mediated through Vav1. Finally, azathioprine also
reduces metastasis in a xenograft model of pancreatic cancer. Taken
together, these data uncover a role for aberrantly expressed Vav1 in
regulation of the cytoskeletal machinery required for migration and
invasion, and in the promotion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer. Even
with the expression of multiple Rho family GEFs, tumor cells that
upregulate Vav1 have become dependent upon this exchange factor,
implicating Vav1 as a potent node for therapeutic intervention. Supported
by R01 CA104125 and R03 CA155778 to M.A.M.

