Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel cross-linking strategy to identify distinct
proteasome subtypes


Introduction: This research was conducted to develop a practical method
to identify distinct proteasome subtypes. Approval of the proteasome
inhibitors bortezomib and carfilzomib for clinical use has validated the
proteasome as an anticancer target. These inhibitors target two
well-recognized proteasome subtypes, the constitutive proteasome and the
immunoproteasome, which comprise distinct sets of catalytic subunits.
Additional proteasome subtypes containing mixtures of constitutive and
immunoproteasome catalytic subunits have more recently been identified.
These intermediate proteasome subtypes display unique proteolytic
activity profiles and play important roles in the production of certain
tumor antigens. However, much regarding their regulation, functions, and
relevance as drug targets remains unknown, largely due to limitations in
current experimental methods used to differentiate between proteasome
subtypes. We have therefore developed bifunctional activity-based probes
capable of cross-linking different catalytic subunit pairs within
individual proteasome complexes. These probes allow a straightforward
readout of proteasome catalytic subunit composition and facilitate
functional studies of distinct proteasome subtypes.Experimental
Procedures: Bifunctional proteasome probes were synthesized by coupling
pairs of proteasome inhibitors via linkers of varying lengths and
compositions. Positions for inhibitor derivatization were selected based
on computational modeling, and linkers were chosen based on distances
between the active sites of each targeted subunit pair. The ability of
these compounds to cross-link distinct catalytic subunit pairs in both
purified proteasomes and in cancer cell lysates was visualized by western
blotting analysis. Competition assays with subunit-selective proteasome
inhibitors were employed to confirm the identities of the cross-linked
subunit pairs.Data Summary: The structures of the bifunctional proteasome
probes were confirmed by mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. Western blotting results demonstrated the ability of these
compounds to cross-link multiple pairs of proteasome catalytic subunits,
allowing the composition of distinct proteasome subtypes present within
cancer cells to be evaluated.Conclusions: We have successfully developed
a set of bifunctional proteasome probes for analysis of proteasome
catalytic subunit composition. These probes will be used to elucidate the
unique functions of distinct proteasome subtypes present within cancer
cells.

