Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for a genetic contribution to non-smoking-related lung
cancer


Introduction: Familial clustering of lung cancer has long been noted;
multiple genetic analyses of lung cancer pedigrees have been performed in
search of lung cancer predisposition genes. Because smoking is also
observed to cluster in families, this major environmental risk factor can
confound any evidence for a genetic contribution to lung cancer. We show
evidence that a genetic contribution appears likely to contribute to
non-smoking-related lung cancer.Data and Methods: Using a
population-based resource consisting of the computerized genealogy of the
Utah pioneer founders and their descendants linked to a statewide cancer
registry from 1966, we have analyzed the clustering of lung cancer cases
among close and distant relatives. Using linked death certificate data
that includes data on the contribution of tobacco to death, the subset of
deceased lung cancer cases was stratified into smoking- (n=1895) and
non-smoking-related (n=784) subsets. A test for a significant excess of
pairwise relatedness among all cases was performed by comparing the
average relatedness of these two independent subsets of lung cancer cases
to the expected relatedness in the Utah population based on analysis of
matched control sets (the well-published GIF method was used).Results:
Significant evidence for overall excess pairwise relatedness was observed
for the 784 lung cancer cases whose death certificate stated that tobacco
did not contribute to death (p= 0.001). These results suggest familial
clustering, but cannot discriminate between genetic- or
environmental-based clustering. To remove any effect of a familial
smoking effect that is not genetic, all pairwise relationships closer
than third-degree were ignored; significant excess relatedness was still
observed among non-smoking cases (p=0.019). When a similar analysis was
performed for lung cancer cases whose death certificate indicated a
contribution to death from tobacco (n=1895), overall significant excess
relatedness was observed (pIntroduction: Familial clustering of lung
cancer has long been noted; multiple genetic analyses of lung cancer
pedigrees have been performed in search of lung cancer predisposition
genes. Because smoking is also observed to cluster in families, this
major environmental risk factor can confound any evidence for a genetic
contribution to lung cancer. We show evidence that a genetic contribution
appears likely to contribute to non-smoking-related lung cancer.Data and
Methods: Using a population-based resource consisting of the computerized
genealogy of the Utah pioneer founders and their descendants linked to a
statewide cancer registry from 1966, we have analyzed the clustering of
lung cancer cases among close and distant relatives. Using linked death
certificate data that includes data on the contribution of tobacco to
death, the subset of deceased lung cancer cases was stratified into
smoking- (n=1895) and non-smoking-related (n=784) subsets. A test for a
significant excess of pairwise relatedness among all cases was performed
by comparing the average relatedness of these two independent subsets of
lung cancer cases to the expected relatedness in the Utah population
based on analysis of matched control sets (the well-published GIF method
was used).Results: Significant evidence for overall excess pairwise
relatedness was observed for the 784 lung cancer cases whose death
certificate stated that tobacco did not contribute to death (p= 0.001).
These results suggest familial clustering, but cannot discriminate
between genetic- or environmental-based clustering. To remove any effect
of a familial smoking effect that is not genetic, all pairwise
relationships closer than third-degree were ignored; significant excess
relatedness was still observed among non-smoking cases (p=0.019). When a
similar analysis was performed for lung cancer cases whose death
certificate indicated a contribution to death from tobacco (n=1895),
overall significant excess relatedness was observed (p<0.001), suggesting
familial clustering of cases; however, when close relationships were
ignored there was no longer evidence for significant excess relatedness
(p=0.271).Conclusions: Using published methods to analyze a powerful
resource linking cancer data to genealogy we have shown that while lung
cancers do appear to cluster in families, there are two distinct subsets
of cases. The familial clustering of those cases who do not smoke
provides strong evidence for a genetic contribution, while the familial
clustering of those lung cancer cases who smoke appears to resemble the
clustering expected with the shared environmental risk factor of smoking.
Gene identification efforts should focus on the subset of lung cancer
pedigrees representing cases for whom smoking did not contribute to lung
cancer.

