Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of BRAFi-resistance in melanoma cancer models
using high-throughput sequencing in patient-derived xenografts


Patients with metastatic V600E mutant melanomas treated with BRAF
inhibitors (BRAFi) frequently develop resistant tumors with aggressive
phenotypes. Furthermore, approximately 20-40% of V600E mutant tumors are
intrinsically resistant to BRAFi. Suitable models for studying mechanisms
of acquired and intrinsic resistance to BRAFi are therefore necessary. In
the present study, we applied deep sequencing techniques to identify
possible mechanisms of intrinsic and acquired resistance in our
collection of melanoma patient-derived xenograft models (MEXFs) treated
with BRAFi.Mutational and expression profiles in MEXFs were characterized
by whole-exome sequencing (WES) and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 Affymetrix chips and
correlated with BRAFi efficacy data from 3D Tumor Clonogenic Assays
(TCA). In addition, four resistant cell lines were created by
continuously treating 2D monolayer cultures of tumor cells with
Vemurafenib, all of which were initially sensitive to BRAFi and carry the
BRAF V600E mutation. Expression profiles and mutations of these cell
lines were analyzed from RNA-seq data. Potential gene candidates
responsible for conferring resistance were further investigated by Q-PCR
and Western-blot experiments.WES data revealed that the number of
mutations per model was highly variable. Some MEXFs showed a
hyper-mutated profile (>2000 mutations) and were characterized by
specific mutational signatures in agreement with those found in melanoma
(Alexandrov et al, Nature, 2013). Mutation frequencies of genes typically
mutated in melanoma are very similar to those found in The Cancer Genome
Atlas. We observed a high correlation of mutations between our MEXFs and
their respective cell lines. Among the models with a V600E mutation, only
one (MEXF 462) showed resistance to BRAFi-treatment as identified by 3D
TCA analyses. In this model, we identified gene point mutations and a
high over-expression of EGFR, MEK1, PDGFRA and NF1 in contrast to the
other models, suggesting a specific regulation of the RTK signaling
pathways. In 2D assays, synergistic interaction of Vemurafenib and
Erlotinib was shown. RNA-seq analysis of the cell line established from
MEXF 276, in which resistance to Vemurafenib was induced, revealed around
20% of genes being differentially expressed (FC>2) between sensitive and
resistant cell lines. An up-regulation of EGFR was also found in this
resistant cell line and was confirmed by Western-blot. In addition, an
overexpression of PLAU, a biomarker of invasiveness, was identified. We
currently perform expression profiling of three other models resistant to
BRAFi. Preliminary results suggest different patterns of gene regulation
involved in acquisition of resistance. A precise map of transcriptomic
and mutational profiles of the four cell lines will be generated and we
are investigating if invasiveness is increased upon acquisition of
resistance.

