Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined administration of Voluven 10% and anti-cancer drugs
increases anti-tumor efficacy


Background:Standard-of-care anti-cancer drugs exhibit anti-tumor activity
but typically display dose-limiting toxicities in patients. The aim of
the current studies was to investigate, whether a combined approach
consisting of a pre-treatment with the hydroxyethyl starch solution
Voluven 10% and a subsequent treatment with suboptimal doses of selected
anti-cancer drugs improves the anti-cancer efficacy in human tumor
xenograft models in mice.Materials and methods:Female NMRI nu/nu mice
bearing subcutaneous xenografts of the human lung squamous cell carcinoma
LXFE 397 were treated i.v. with 20 ml/kg Voluven 10% followed by a p.o.
treatment with 100 mg/kg capecitabine 1 hour later on days 0, 4, 7, 11,
and 14.In a separate study, female NMRI nu/nu mice bearing subcutaneous
xenografts of the human head-and-neck carcinoma HNXF 1842 were treated
i.v. with 20 ml/kg Voluven 10% followed by an i.v. treatment with 10
mg/kg paclitaxel 1 hour later on days 0, 7 and 14.In both studies, dosing
started on the day of randomization (day 0) when animals carried tumors
of appropriate size (50-250 mm3). Saline (20 ml/kg) served as negative
control and the anti-cancer drug alone as reference. From the day of
first dosing, the tumor growth and body weight were monitored over a time
period of 14 days in the lung carcinoma study and 18 days in the
head-and-neck carcinoma study.Results:In mice bearing human lung squamous
cell carcinoma xenografts, the median relative tumor volume increased
approximately 19-fold in the saline group during the 14 days observation
time, whereas the reference drug capecitabine moderately inhibited the
tumor growth. Combining capecitabine treatment with a Voluven 10%
pre-treatment caused a much stronger inhibitory effect on tumor growth as
evidenced by an 8.5-fold median relative tumor volume increase in
contrast to a 15.2-fold increase in the reference group (capecitabine).In
mice bearing human head-and-neck carcinoma xenografts, the median
relative tumor volume of the saline group increased 12.1-fold during the
observation period of 18 days. The treatment with paclitaxel caused a
tumor growth reduction resulting in a 7.1-fold increase of the median
relative tumor volume. This effect was further enhanced by the
pre-treatment with Voluven 10% which resulted in a 4-fold median relative
tumor volume increase over 18 days.The combination of Voluven 10% with
capecitabine or paclitaxel did not increase toxicity as demonstrated by
the body weight development.Conclusion:We showed for the first time that
the pre-treatment with Voluven 10% 1 hour prior to the administration of
the anti-cancer drugs capecitabine or paclitaxel is useful to improve
their efficacy in tumor xenograft models in mice. The enhancement of
anti-cancer drug effectiveness might allow reducing the dosage of
cytotoxic anti-cancer drugs and therefore minimizing unwanted side
effects.

