Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic changes in testis specific Y-like 5 gene in human
prostate carcinoma: Gene expression analysis and its potential as a
biomarker


INTRODUCTIONTestis specific Y-like protein (TSPYL-5) is a member of
TSPY-L family of gene, whose functions are currently unknown. TSPYL-5 was
reported to possess tumor suppressor function and a target for epigenetic
silencing in human glioblastoma and colon carcinoma. The exact nature of
TSPYL-5 gene expression and its epigenetic modification is not known in
prostate carcinoma. We hypothesize that this gene could be expressed in
prostate carcinoma cells and tissues and its methylation status could
function as an epigenetic biomarker for aggressive prostate cancer
phenotype.MATERIALS AND METHODSHuman prostate carcinoma cells (PC3,
DU145, LnCAP) was grown in DMEM-F12 media with 10% FBS at 37oC. Normal
prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1-) were maintained in keratinocyte serum
free media. Total RNA was extracted from the cells and converted to cDNA
which served as a template for PCR amplification in the presence of
TSPYL-5 gene primers. The amplified PCR products were analyzed by 2%
agarose gel electrophoresis. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was performed
with primers designed for the CpG island in the gene promoter to detect
the methylation changes in the carcinoma cells.RESULTSQuantitative RT-PCR
analysis of TSPYL-5 gene expression in different human prostate carcinoma
cells lines identified 2-3 fold higher expression (P 0.005) in lines with
metastatic propensity (PC3) compared to less aggressive ones. MSP
analysis indicated differential promoter methylation of TSPYL-5 gene in
carcinoma and normal prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1). Consistent
methylation in LnCAP and DU145 cells was observed in our experiments and
was associated with reduced expression of the gene.CONCLUSIONSExpression
of TSPYL-5 is higher in human prostate carcinoma cells derived from more
metastatic phenotype. This expression could be influenced by DNA
methylation. It is not clear whether TSPYL-5 expression in prostate
carcinoma cells could play a part in tumor suppressor function.
Alternately, the presence of this gene may play alternate roles including
treatment resistance and cell growth. Further, DNA methylation of the CpG
island of TSPYL-5 could serve as a robust biomarker of aggressive
phenotype in human prostate carcinoma.

