Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disseminated cells from primary lung cancers contain a distinct
cancer initiating subpopulation with mesenchymal-like features


Cancer initiating cells (CICs) have been shown to be responsible for
primary tumor formation, drug resistance and metastatic dissemination. We
previously demonstrated that the subset of CD133+ lung CICs co-expressing
the chemokine receptor CXCR4, is resistant to chemotherapy and endowed
with high metastasis initiating ability using in vivo experimental
metastasis assay.To investigate the role of the subset of CD133+CXCR4+
cells in the in vivo spontaneous tumor dissemination process, we analyzed
lungs of mice bearing subcutaneous implants of lung cancer patients
derived xenografts (PDXs). Using FACS and Real Time PCR analysis a small
fraction of lung disseminated tumor cells (DTCs: 0.001% to 0.01%) was
detected in 9/11 different PDX models, likely remaining at single cells
state as suggested by the lack of histologically apparent metastasis. In
particular, compared to parental subcutaneous tumors, lung DTCs were
enriched for CD133+CXCR4+ CICs not expressing the epithelial antigen
EpCAM. Modifying an innovative cancer cells culture method that allows
the recovery of highly purified and viable tumor cells (Kondo J. et al.
2011, PNAS), we also generated murine lung tissue spheroids that were 100
fold enriched in DTCs. Real Time PCR analysis of lung spheroids
consistently revealed an up-regulation of stemness and EMT-associated
genes compared to the parental tumor, in accordance with the enrichment
for disseminating CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- CICs subset observed by FACS.
Subcutaneous injection in SCID mice of lung spheroids containing
approximately 200 DTCs, generated tumors resembling the original PDX, but
also showing an increased fraction of CD133+ stem like cells and
particularly of the CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- subset. Moreover, cells recovered
from DTCs-originated tumors were able to grow in vitro as spheres in
anchorage independent condition, up-regulated EMT-genes and showed an
enhanced tumorigenic potential and increased ability to disseminate to
murine lung compared with original PDX in in vivo serial transplantation
assay, indicating that the fraction of CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- CICs enriched
in DTCs was able to efficiently originate tumors with distinctive traits.
We also found that the fraction of CD133+ cells and particularly the
CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- subset were increased in patient's metastatic lymph
nodes compared to primary tumors, confirming in a clinical setting the
role of CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- cells as metastasis initiating cells.Our data
functionally proves that lung DTCs contain a specific subset of tumor
initiating cells that is able to generate tumors showing distinct
properties and enrichment in the mesenchymal-like CICs compartment. The
relevance of this finding is confirmed in clinical setting, identifying a
new possible target for novel therapies aimed at interfering with
metastatic dissemination, which represents the main reason for lung
cancer poor outcome..

