Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spectral karyotyping characterization of ovarian adenocarcinomas
and corresponding cell lines and xenografts


Ovarian cancer is the 9th leading cancer and the 5th cause of cancer
deaths in women in the USA. To understand tumor biology, identify
oncogenic driver pathways and verify response to drugs, numerous in vitro
(cell lines) and in vivo (xenograft in mouse) models have been developed
and extensively used. In this study, we aimed to cytogenetically
characterize ovarian carcinomas and their respective in vitro and in vivo
models to investigate how representative the models are of their
originating source.Ascitic fluid was collected from 10 women with
previously untreated high grade serous papillary adenocarcinomas of the
ovary that presented with malignant ascites (stage 3). Ascitic fluid was
subjected to differential centrifugation and plating to enrich for the
tumor cell population (TCP). The TCP cells were cultured and considered
permanent cell lines (CLP) when grew continuously without evidence of a
non-malignant component and could be recovered from cryopreservation. TCP
cells were also inoculated intraperitoneally into athymic nude mice and
tumors harvested and cryopreserved (XCP). Eight pairs of TCP and CLP and
two triplets of TCP, CLP and XCP specimens were characterized by spectral
karyotyping (SKY), for a total of 22 specimens.Highly rearranged
karyotypes were detected in all specimens. All matched pairs and triplets
were obviously related, sharing most of the structural (SA) and numerical
(NA) abnormalities identified. Numerous examples of evolution from simple
to complex chromosomal rearrangements and of multiple rearrangements
originating from a single breakpoint were detected. For 9 patients, TCP
and CLP specimens had the same ploidy level (near-2n in 4, near-3n in 3
and near 4n in 2); for one patient, the ploidy changed from near-2n (TCP)
to near-4n (CLP). The 2 xenografts had same ploidy as their matched TCP
and CLP specimens. In individual analyses, specific SA accounted for 30%
in 6. Specific NA accounted for 30% in 3. In the TCP-CLP analyses, 3
pairs were very similar, differing by 30%. Higher frequency of
abnormalities was detected in the TCP specimen for 4 pairs, and in the
CLP for 3 pairs. One xenograft was very similar to both TCP and CLP,
while the other was closer to the CLP.In conclusion, the ovarian
adenocarcinomas were highly rearranged chromosomally and highly
heterogeneous. In vitro (CLP) and in vivo (XCP) models maintained a core
of the TCP's SA and NA but also displayed unique events, quantitatively
and qualitatively variable in distinct tumors, indicating evidence of ex
vivo tumor cell selection or progression events. These findings have
implications for using established tumor models in research, as well as
for potentially identifying the driver rearrangements in specific tumors.

