Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analyses of genome-wide expression of miRNAs and DNA
methylation patterns in hepatocellular carcinoma to improve functional
biomarker identification


Previous studies, including ours have examined aberrant expression of
microRNAs (miRNAs) and altered DNA methylation, and several miRNAs have
been identified as regulated by DNA methylation. However, whether this
mechanism occurs at a genome-wide level and is related to the profiles of
dysregulated miRNA commonly observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
patients is largely unknown. Using a two-phase study design, we conducted
a genome-wide screening for miRNA expression and DNA methylation profiles
in the tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues from US HCC cases. The
discovery and validation sets included, respectively, 10 and 56 paired
tumor/non-tumor tissues. TaqMan Low Density Arrays (TLDA) covering 733
miRNAs were used to measure expression profiles, and quantitative RT-PCR
was used to validate candidate miRNA signatures. Infinium
HumanMethylation 450K BeadChip arrays covering 3,439 CpG sites for 727
miRNAs were used to determine DNA methylation patterns. Comparing
expression profiles in HCC tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues, we found
that 25 miRNAs were statistically significantly different with over
2-fold expression changes after adjusting for false discovery rate (FDR);
a perfect classification of HCC tissues was observed. Six of the aberrant
miRNAs were over-expressed in HCC tumor tissue (range from 2.7 to
18-fold), while 19 miRNAs were downregulated in tumor tissue (range from
-2.5 to -7.5-fold). Several miRNAs (miR-139, miR-196b, miR-381, miR-486
and miR-1180) were identified for the first time as having a role in
hepatocarcinogenesis. After Bonferroni adjustment, a total of 1,256 CpG
sites covering 412 miRNAs showed significant differences in DNA
methylation levels between tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues,
including 185 hypermethylated and 1,071 hypomethylated CpG sites in tumor
tissues. We further conducted integrative analyses of the correlations
between miRNAs expression and DNA methylation patterns for 222 miRNAs
detected in over 80% of the tissue samples. As expected, inverse
correlations were observed for 91.7% (55/60) of up-regulated miRNAs with
a DNA hypomethylation change, and for 48.1% (78/162) of down-regulated
miRNAs with a DNA hypermethylation change. However, for only 8 miRNAs
(3.6%) did expression levels achieve statistically significant
differences between tumor and non-tumor tissues in accord with DNA
methylation alterations. A validation study of six of the candidates in
an additional 56 paired HCC tissues confirmed the aberrant miRNAs
expression patterns observed in tumor tissue. The inverse correlations
between miRNAs expression and DNA methylation were concordant for all 27
CpG sites in the 4 miRNAs (miR-18a, miR-125b-1, miR-182 and miR-199a-1).
These data suggest that a small proportion of DNA methylation changes can
lead to significant dysregulation of miRNAs in HCC tumor tissue.

