Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a citrus flavonoid as a chemopreventive agent
against breast cancer


Naringenin is a flavonone found in citrus fruits and tomatoes that may
have anti-tumor properties. Previously, our lab discovered that
naringenin induced the activity of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
and reduced phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4E-binding protein 1 (4EBP) in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. These
properties have been linked with anti-tumor actions of drugs such as
metformin and mTOR inhibitors. Based on these findings, we tested the
ability of naringenin (0 uM - 200 uM) to modulate growth of MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells and E0771 murine mammary tumor cells. In both models
for cancer cell growth, naringenin dose-dependently decreased live cell
number in a time-dependent manner. Furthermore, results of flow cytometry
and propidium iodide staining assays showed accumulation of apoptotic
cells after naringenin treatment. Naringenin also decreased expression of
cyclin D1 and elevated expression of pro-apoptotic protein Bax suggesting
that naringenin may inhibit the proliferation of mammary tumor cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest and promoting apoptosis. To test for
dose-dependent accumulation of naringenin in mammary gland tissue, female
mice were fed varying doses of naringenin (control, 0%; low dose,1.0 wt%;
or high dose, 3.0 wt% naringenin) in a high saturated fat diet for 11
weeks. Body weights and cumulative food intake were not different between
diet groups. Dietary naringenin resulted in dose-responsive accumulation
in mammary gland. Relative accumulation of naringenin in tissues was
greatest in liver (low dose, 7.61 1.14 umol/kg tissue and high dose,
37.04 8.33 umol/kg tissue) followed by mammary gland and muscle which had
a similar magnitude of naringenin accumulation (low dose 0.4 umol/kg
tissue and high dose naringenin, 2.5 umol/kg tissue) of accumulation.
Naringenin and monoglucuronide naringenin were two of the main forms of
accumulated flavonoid in mammary gland raising the possibility that
naringenin and/or metabolites are the active form of flavonoid
responsible for anti-tumor activity against mammary cancer. Evaluating
the species of naringenin metabolites in mammary gland that exert
pro-apoptotic actions will be important to evaluate in order to
understand the potential of naringenin-rich foods to contribute to
prevention of breast cancer in women.

