Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The contribution of common breast cancer susceptibility loci to
the breast density and breast cancer association and the Breast Cancer
Surveillance Consortium (BCSC) risk model


Purpose: Mammographic breast density is an established and strong risk
factor for breast cancer. Recently, a number of common genetic
susceptibility loci have been identified as risk factors for breast
cancer. We present the first report on the relative contribution of 76
validated breast cancer susceptibility loci, in the context of a
polygenic risk score (PRS), to the breast density and breast cancer
association. We also examine whether the PRS improves prediction of the
Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium (BCSC) 5-year risk model above and
beyond breast density and clinical factors included in the model.Methods:
The study population included 1643 cases and 2397 controls from three
independent epidemiologic studies: the Mayo Mammography Health Study
(MMHS), the Mayo Clinic Breast Cancer Study (MCBCS), and the Bavarian
Breast Cancer Cases and Control Study (BBCC). Data collected on patients
in each of the studies included clinical risk factor, BI-RADS breast
density [a) almost entirely fat; b) scattered fibroglandular densities;
c) heterogeneously dense; and d) extremely dense] and genotypes for the
76 breast cancer susceptibility loci known at the time of the study. We
formed a PRS from the reported per-SNP odds ratios (OR) for 76 known
breast cancer susceptibility loci, and evaluated whether BI-RADS density
and the PRS were independent risk factors for breast cancer, when
adjusted for age, 1/BMI and study. We also incorporated the PRS (OR) into
the BCSC 5-year risk model and estimated 5-year risk for the MMHS nested
case-control study of 339 invasive cases, 765 controls.Results: BI-RADS
density (pPurpose: Mammographic breast density is an established and
strong risk factor for breast cancer. Recently, a number of common
genetic susceptibility loci have been identified as risk factors for
breast cancer. We present the first report on the relative contribution
of 76 validated breast cancer susceptibility loci, in the context of a
polygenic risk score (PRS), to the breast density and breast cancer
association. We also examine whether the PRS improves prediction of the
Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium (BCSC) 5-year risk model above and
beyond breast density and clinical factors included in the model.Methods:
The study population included 1643 cases and 2397 controls from three
independent epidemiologic studies: the Mayo Mammography Health Study
(MMHS), the Mayo Clinic Breast Cancer Study (MCBCS), and the Bavarian
Breast Cancer Cases and Control Study (BBCC). Data collected on patients
in each of the studies included clinical risk factor, BI-RADS breast
density [a) almost entirely fat; b) scattered fibroglandular densities;
c) heterogeneously dense; and d) extremely dense] and genotypes for the
76 breast cancer susceptibility loci known at the time of the study. We
formed a PRS from the reported per-SNP odds ratios (OR) for 76 known
breast cancer susceptibility loci, and evaluated whether BI-RADS density
and the PRS were independent risk factors for breast cancer, when
adjusted for age, 1/BMI and study. We also incorporated the PRS (OR) into
the BCSC 5-year risk model and estimated 5-year risk for the MMHS nested
case-control study of 339 invasive cases, 765 controls.Results: BI-RADS
density (p<0.0001) and PRS (pPurpose: Mammographic breast density is an
established and strong risk factor for breast cancer. Recently, a number
of common genetic susceptibility loci have been identified as risk
factors for breast cancer. We present the first report on the relative
contribution of 76 validated breast cancer susceptibility loci, in the
context of a polygenic risk score (PRS), to the breast density and breast
cancer association. We also examine whether the PRS improves prediction
of the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium (BCSC) 5-year risk model
above and beyond breast density and clinical factors included in the
model.Methods: The study population included 1643 cases and 2397 controls
from three independent epidemiologic studies: the Mayo Mammography Health
Study (MMHS), the Mayo Clinic Breast Cancer Study (MCBCS), and the
Bavarian Breast Cancer Cases and Control Study (BBCC). Data collected on
patients in each of the studies included clinical risk factor, BI-RADS
breast density [a) almost entirely fat; b) scattered fibroglandular
densities; c) heterogeneously dense; and d) extremely dense] and
genotypes for the 76 breast cancer susceptibility loci known at the time
of the study. We formed a PRS from the reported per-SNP odds ratios (OR)
for 76 known breast cancer susceptibility loci, and evaluated whether
BI-RADS density and the PRS were independent risk factors for breast
cancer, when adjusted for age, 1/BMI and study. We also incorporated the
PRS (OR) into the BCSC 5-year risk model and estimated 5-year risk for
the MMHS nested case-control study of 339 invasive cases, 765
controls.Results: BI-RADS density (p<0.0001) and PRS (p<0.0001) were
independent risk factors for breast cancer that together showed greater
discrimination of risk (AUC=0.69) than density (AUC=0.66; AUC=0.029) or
PRS score alone (AUC=0.68; AUC=0.013; pPurpose: Mammographic breast
density is an established and strong risk factor for breast cancer.
Recently, a number of common genetic susceptibility loci have been
identified as risk factors for breast cancer. We present the first report
on the relative contribution of 76 validated breast cancer susceptibility
loci, in the context of a polygenic risk score (PRS), to the breast
density and breast cancer association. We also examine whether the PRS
improves prediction of the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium (BCSC)
5-year risk model above and beyond breast density and clinical factors
included in the model.Methods: The study population included 1643 cases
and 2397 controls from three independent epidemiologic studies: the Mayo
Mammography Health Study (MMHS), the Mayo Clinic Breast Cancer Study
(MCBCS), and the Bavarian Breast Cancer Cases and Control Study (BBCC).
Data collected on patients in each of the studies included clinical risk
factor, BI-RADS breast density [a) almost entirely fat; b) scattered
fibroglandular densities; c) heterogeneously dense; and d) extremely
dense] and genotypes for the 76 breast cancer susceptibility loci known
at the time of the study. We formed a PRS from the reported per-SNP odds
ratios (OR) for 76 known breast cancer susceptibility loci, and evaluated
whether BI-RADS density and the PRS were independent risk factors for
breast cancer, when adjusted for age, 1/BMI and study. We also
incorporated the PRS (OR) into the BCSC 5-year risk model and estimated
5-year risk for the MMHS nested case-control study of 339 invasive cases,
765 controls.Results: BI-RADS density (p<0.0001) and PRS (p<0.0001) were
independent risk factors for breast cancer that together showed greater
discrimination of risk (AUC=0.69) than density (AUC=0.66; AUC=0.029) or
PRS score alone (AUC=0.68; AUC=0.013; p<0.001). Relative to those with
scattered fibroglandular densities and average (2nd quartile) PRS, women
with extremely dense breasts and in the highest PRS quartile, had a 2.7
fold (95%CI: 1.7-4.1) increased risk of breast cancer, while those with
fatty breasts and in the lowest PRS quartile had a reduced risk (OR=0.30,
95%CI: 0.18-0.51). Incorporation of the PRS into the BCSC risk model
improved discrimination (AUC=0.031, p=0.001), for a net reclassification
improvement of 20% (95%CI: 11%-28%), split equally among cases (9%) and
controls (11%).Conclusion: BI-RADS density and the PRS are both important
risk factors for breast cancer that can be included in breast cancer risk
models to improve prediction of this disease. Using these models to
identify high and low-risk risk groups will facilitate improved tailored
screening and primary prevention interventions.

