Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multidimensional analysis of predictive biomarkers in colorectal
cancer


Background: CRC cancer is one of the deadliest diseases in Western
countries. In order to develop predictive biomarkers for CRC (colorectal
cancer) aggressiveness, we analyzed retrospectively 267 CRC patients via
a novel, multidimensional biomarker platform.Methods: Using nanofluidic
technology for qPCR analysis and quantitative fluorescent
immunohistochemistry for protein analysis, we assessed 33 microRNAs, 124
mRNAs and 9 protein antigens. Analysis was conducted in each single
dimension (microRNA, gene or protein) using both the multivariate Cox
model and Kaplan-Meier method. Thereafter, we simplified the censored
survival data into binary response data (aggressive vs. non aggressive
cancer). Subsequently, we combined the data into multidimensional scores
using inverse sliced regression for sufficient dimension reduction.
Accuracy was assessed using the Area under the Curve (AUC) and the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) method.Results: Single dimension
analysis led to the discovery of individual factors that were significant
predictors of outcome. These included seven specific microRNAs, four
genes, and one protein. When these factors were quantified individually
as predictors of aggressive disease, the highest demonstrable area under
the curve (AUC) was 0.68. By contrast, when all results from single
dimensions were combined into multidimensional biomarkers, AUCs were
dramatically increased with values approaching and even exceeding 0.9.
Conclusions: Single dimension analysis generates statistically
significant predictors, but their predictive strengths are suboptimal for
clinical utility. A novel, multidimensional approach overcomes these
deficiencies. Newly derived multidimensional biomarkers have the
potential to meaningfully guide the selection of therapeutic agents for
individual patients while elucidating molecular mechanisms driving
disease progression.

