Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in human breast cancer cells promotes fibroblast activation


In inflammation-associated carcinogenesis, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is
markedly overexpressed, resulting in accumulation of various
prostaglandins. 15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) and
prostahlandin E2 (PGE2) are the predominant COX-2-derived prostaglandins
(PGs) with oncogenic potential. In the present study, we examined the
effects of these to PGs on epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a
process by which epithelial cells lose their cell polarity and cell-cell
adhesion, and gain migratory and invasive properties. 15d-PGJ2 induced
EMT to a greater than PGE2 in human breast cancer (MCF-7) cells. Snail
and ZEB1 are known to bind to the E-boxes present in the E-cadherin
promoter, thereby repressing E-cadherin transcription. Treatment of MCF-7
cells with 30 M of 15d-PGJ2 increased the expression of Snail and ZEB1,
followed by the down-regulation of E-cadherin. Nuclear extract from
15d-PGJ2-treated MCF-7 cells showed the binding of Snail and ZEB1 to
E-box sequences in the E-cadherin promoter. In addition, among various
cytokines/chemokines examined, the mRNA level of interleukin-8 (CXCL8)
was highly elevated in 15d-PGJ2-stimulated MCF-7 cells. 15d-PGJ2-induced
up-regulation of CXCL8 expression was abrogated by the introduction of
Snail short interfering RNA. These findings suggest that CXCL8 may
function as a positive regulator of EMT in 15d-PGJ2-treated MCF-7 cells.
Moreover, the addition of conditioned medium of MCF-7 cells undergoing
EMT activates normal fibroblast cells to cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs). Co-culture of normal fibroblasts with 15d-PGJ2-treaed-MCF-7 cells
also induced the expression of -SMA and FAP, representative markers of
CAFs. As a corresponding receptor of CXCL8, CXCR2 was overexpressed in
activated fibroblasts co-cultured with 15d-PGJ2-treated MCF-7 cells.
Unlike 15d-PGJ2, its non-electrophilic analogue 9,10-dihydro-15d-PGJ2
failed to induce EMT, suggesting that the ,-unsaturated carbonyl group
located in the cyclopentenone ring of 15d-PGJ2 is essential for EMT
induction. Notably, activation of Rho kinase through direct binding of
ArhGEF5, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, with 15d-PGJ2 seems to
contribute to the EMT induction. Taken together, above findings suggest
that 15d-PGJ2 induces EMT through up-regulation of Snail expression and
subsequent production of CXCL8 which may contribute to increased EMT of
human breast cancer cells.

