Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostacyclin analogs, iloprost and treprostinil, differentially
influence proliferation of lung tumor cells


Lung cancer will kill approximately 160,000 Americans this yearmore than
the next four cancer subtypes (breast, prostate, colorectal, and
pancreatic) combined. Even if lung cancer is diagnosed at an early stage,
the 5 year survival rate is 52.2%. The poor survival rates for early
stage disease suggests that chemopreventive interventions in high-risk
populations are necessary. We found that prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2
or PGI2) synthase (PGIS) overexpression retards lung tumor growth in
preclinical chemical carcinogen and smoking models, and treatment with
iloprost (a PGI2 analog currently approved for treatment of pulmonary
hypertension) inhibits lung adenocarcinoma formation in these same
preclinical models. Oral iloprost also improves bronchial dysplasia
(precursor lesions to squamous cell lung cancer) in former smokers.
Mechanistic in vitro and in vivo studies using genetically modified mice
showed that PGI2 and iloprost exert their chemopreventive effects through
activation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
pathway rather than the classic PGI2 receptor, IP1, and that this
activation requires frizzled 9 (Fzd9) activity. Treprostinil, a next
generation PGI2 analog also approved to treat pulmonary hypertension,
activates IP1 as well, but its ability to activate PPAR/Fzd9 has yet to
be fully characterized. In vitro studies show that in addition to binding
to IP, iloprost and treprostinil differentially activate other
prostaglandin (PG) receptors suggesting that they may have different
chemopreventive efficacies. Molecular modeling of iloprost and
treprostinil binding to PPAR indicates these molecules may induce
different PPAR conformations which could affect binding of
co-activators/repressors or interaction with the retinoic acid receptor
(which is required for induction of gene transcription). While iloprost
does not affect mouse lung tumor cell proliferation in vitro,
treprostinil and prostaglandin E2 actually increase proliferation 2-5
fold in a dose dependent manner. Alveolar macrophage conditioned media
also increases mouse lung tumor cell proliferation, and this increase is
enhanced if macrophages are treated with treprostinil or PGE2 prior to
media harvest. If macrophages are pretreated with iloprost, either alone
or in combination with PGE2 or treprostinil, this increased proliferation
is attenuated suggesting that iloprost may be exerting its
chemopreventive effects directly on tumor cells and by modulating
macrophage production of pro-growth factors. Macrophage IL-6 production
decreased almost 80% with iloprost pre-treatment while little effect was
seen with treprostinil pre-treatment. Comparisons between iloprost and
treprostinil may indicate new agents/targets for lung cancer
chemoprevention.

