Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The microRNA profile is altered in fibrosis-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis in mice


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers and its
incidence is rising worldwide. The molecular mechanisms associated with
the development of HCC are complex and include multiple interconnected
alterations driven by both genetic and epigenetic events. Mounting
evidence indicates an important role of microRNAs (miRNAs),
post-transcriptional negative regulators of gene expression, in the
pathogenesis of HCC. In humans, the development of HCC is commonly
associated with liver cirrhosis. To mimic the molecular pathogenesis of
human HCC, we used a mouse model of fibrosis-associated liver cancer,
which was designed to emulate cirrhotic liver. Tumor and non-tumor liver
samples from B6C3F1 mice treated with N-nitrosodiethylamine (DEN; a
single ip injection of 1 mg/kg at 14 days of age) and carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4; 200 l/kg, 2 times/week ip for 14 weeks starting at 8
weeks of age) were analyzed. Using TaqMan array miRNA cards, we
identified a total of 52 and 45 miRNAs that were differentially expressed
in tumor and non-tumor liver tissue, respectively, from DEN/CCl4-treated
mice as compared to those in livers of vehicle-treated control B6C3F1
mice. Importantly, 27 differentially expressed miRNAs were common for
both tumor and non-tumor samples from DEN/CCl4-treated mice. These miRNAs
are involved in the major cancer pathways including apoptosis, cell
proliferation, angiogenesis, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
These results suggest that changes in miRNA expression during
hepatocarcinogenesis may occur at very early stages of the carcinogenic
process, preceding the formation of detectable neoplastic lesions. Most
notably, our results showing 27 miRNAs common for tumor and non-tumor
tissue suggest that a miRNA profile associated with the development of
HCC could potentially be used to decipher the precise molecular
mechanisms of disease progression and/or be used as early markers for
detecting neoplastic lesions in the liver.

