Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin radiosensitizes prostate cancer cells by enhancing
radiation-induced cell death and inhibiting nuclear EGFR-mediated DNA
repair


Nearly 60% of all cancer patients undergo radiotherapy at some juncture
of their treatment schedule. However, the problem of therapeutic
resistance and side effects to normal dividing cells wanes the positive
facets of radiotherapy. Radiosensitizing agents have met with limited
success in clinical settings. Hence, development of novel
radiosensitizers with a selective response is greatly desired. Herein, we
analyzed the radiosensitizing effects of silibinin, a natural plant
flavonoid on prostate cancer (PCa) cells in vitro. Clonogenic assay and
soft agar colony formation assay revealed that silibinin (25-100M) could
significantly enhance radiation (2.5-10 Gy) induced inhibition in colony
formation selectively in PCa cells. G2/M phase is the most sensitive
phase for radiation-induced damage. Silibinin enhanced and prolonged
radiation-induced G2/M arrest in both DU145 and PC-3 cells. Even though
low doses of silibinin (25M) alone did not induce significant cell death,
it could substantially enhance radiation-induced apoptosis. This could
also be due to increased and prolonged ROS production observed in
combination treatment. Foremost among the pro-survival pathways activated
by radiation which contributes to therapeutic resistance is the EGFR
pathway. Radiation-induced activation of EGFR subdues the response, both
by induction of pro-survival pathway and by activating DNA repair after
its nuclear translocation. We observed that silibinin could reduce
radiation-induced EGFR signaling and consequently reverse the resistance
mediating mechanisms within the cell. Silibinin down regulated levels of
anti-apoptotic BCl-2 and survivin, enhanced by radiation. Inhibiting DNA
repair would essentially enhance therapeutic index of radiation. Hence,
we examined whether silibinin can down-regulate the repair pathways
activated in response to radiation. Silibinin reversed the
radiation-induced activation of CHK1 and CHK2 at both mRNA and protein
levels. We further analyzed its effect on radiation-induced nuclear
translocation of EGFR. Our study revealed that silibinin inhibited the
nuclear translocation of EGFR and subsequently also affected the nuclear
localization of DNA-PK, which is known to be one of the most important
mediators of DSB repair in human cells. This was further evident by the
increase in the number of pH2AX (ser139) foci suggesting lesser DNA
repair in these cells. Thus, we found that silibinin not only enhanced
the cell death by reversing the pro-survival signaling activated by
radiation; but also suppressed the repair of DSBs by inhibiting
nuclear-EGFR mediated DNA-PK activation. Overall, since silibinin is
already in phase II clinical trial for prostate cancer patients, the
present findings indicate that a combinatorial approach involving
silibinin with radiation could prove to be more effective against
radioresistant PCa.

