Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel early detection candidate protein
biomarkers for ER+/PR+ invasive ductal breast carcinoma using
pre-clinical plasma from the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study


Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive/progesterone receptor (PR)-positive
invasive ductal carcinoma accounts for approximately 45% of all invasive
breast cancers (BC) diagnosed in the United States each year. While
mammography screening and adjuvant hormonal therapy have played key roles
in reducing breast cancer mortality, an important challenge remains the
development of clinically useful blood-based biomarkers for early
detection. The objective of this study was to identify and initially
validate novel candidate markers for ER+/PR+ ductal BC, using
pre-clinical plasma samples collected up to 12.5 months before diagnosis
from 121 cases, 121 matched controls, and 201 non-matched controls from
the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study. These specimens were
equally divided into training and testing sets and interrogated by a
customized antibody array, which included over 3,000 antibodies targeting
more than 2,000 proteins. In the training set, statistically significant
differences in matched case versus control signals were observed for 374
(11.4 %) antibodies at PEstrogen receptor (ER)-positive/progesterone
receptor (PR)-positive invasive ductal carcinoma accounts for
approximately 45% of all invasive breast cancers (BC) diagnosed in the
United States each year. While mammography screening and adjuvant
hormonal therapy have played key roles in reducing breast cancer
mortality, an important challenge remains the development of clinically
useful blood-based biomarkers for early detection. The objective of this
study was to identify and initially validate novel candidate markers for
ER+/PR+ ductal BC, using pre-clinical plasma samples collected up to 12.5
months before diagnosis from 121 cases, 121 matched controls, and 201
non-matched controls from the Women's Health Initiative Observational
Study. These specimens were equally divided into training and testing
sets and interrogated by a customized antibody array, which included over
3,000 antibodies targeting more than 2,000 proteins. In the training set,
statistically significant differences in matched case versus control
signals were observed for 374 (11.4 %) antibodies at P<0.05, with 42 of
these 374 candidates confirmed in the testing set (PEstrogen receptor
(ER)-positive/progesterone receptor (PR)-positive invasive ductal
carcinoma accounts for approximately 45% of all invasive breast cancers
(BC) diagnosed in the United States each year. While mammography
screening and adjuvant hormonal therapy have played key roles in reducing
breast cancer mortality, an important challenge remains the development
of clinically useful blood-based biomarkers for early detection. The
objective of this study was to identify and initially validate novel
candidate markers for ER+/PR+ ductal BC, using pre-clinical plasma
samples collected up to 12.5 months before diagnosis from 121 cases, 121
matched controls, and 201 non-matched controls from the Women's Health
Initiative Observational Study. These specimens were equally divided into
training and testing sets and interrogated by a customized antibody
array, which included over 3,000 antibodies targeting more than 2,000
proteins. In the training set, statistically significant differences in
matched case versus control signals were observed for 374 (11.4 %)
antibodies at P<0.05, with 42 of these 374 candidates confirmed in the
testing set (P<0.05). Four markers remained significant in the pooled
matched pairs sample set after Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons (PEstrogen receptor (ER)-positive/progesterone receptor
(PR)-positive invasive ductal carcinoma accounts for approximately 45% of
all invasive breast cancers (BC) diagnosed in the United States each
year. While mammography screening and adjuvant hormonal therapy have
played key roles in reducing breast cancer mortality, an important
challenge remains the development of clinically useful blood-based
biomarkers for early detection. The objective of this study was to
identify and initially validate novel candidate markers for ER+/PR+
ductal BC, using pre-clinical plasma samples collected up to 12.5 months
before diagnosis from 121 cases, 121 matched controls, and 201
non-matched controls from the Women's Health Initiative Observational
Study. These specimens were equally divided into training and testing
sets and interrogated by a customized antibody array, which included over
3,000 antibodies targeting more than 2,000 proteins. In the training set,
statistically significant differences in matched case versus control
signals were observed for 374 (11.4 %) antibodies at P<0.05, with 42 of
these 374 candidates confirmed in the testing set (P<0.05). Four markers
remained significant in the pooled matched pairs sample set after
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons (P<0.05/3286=1.52x10-5).
Areas under the curve for the full list of candidates ranged from 0.55 to
0.66, when assessed in an expanded sample including non-matched controls.
With specificity set at 95%, sensitivity ranged from 4 to 19%, with six
candidates having a sensitivity of 15% at 95% specificity and 20% at 90%
specificity. The majority of these putative markers did not overlap with
those identified in a parallel analysis of triple-negative BC from the
same cohort population, suggesting the potential for BC sub-type
specificity at the level of the pre-clinical plasma proteome. Additional
studies are needed to validate these findings in larger sample sets and
further explore their biologic implications in relation to ER+/PR+ BC
etiology.

