Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of the anti-apoptotic protein ARC in breast
cancer cell DNA repair


According to the American Cancer Society, more than 90% of breast cancer
patients who succumb to the condition die as a result of the cancer
metastasizing to other areas of the body. Our lab has previously shown
that the presence of a chemoresistant invasive subpopulation of breast
carcinoma cells is correlated with the prevalence of metastasis.
Additionally, we have hypothesized that chemoresistance and survival of
these cancer cells which eventually leads to relapse and metastasis
following initial treatment with chemotherapeutic agents is achieved by
enhanced DNA repair capability in this population. We reported that an
anti-apoptotic protein ARC (apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment
domain) is over expressed in the invasive mammary cancer cells that are
resistant to standard chemotherapeutic agents. Further, we have shown
that ARC over expressing cells are resistant to chemotherapy both in vivo
and in vitro. In this study, we examined cellular DNA repair signaling
pathways in order to delineate the role of ARC in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer. Utilizing cell lines where ARC was either knocked down or
overexpressed, we investigated potential correlations of ARC with DNA
repair capability by means of the single cell gel electrophoresis assay
(comet assay). The results of these experiments indicated that over
expression of ARC leads to increased cellular DNA repair while knocking
it down leads to decreased cellular DNA repair.In order to determine the
molecular basis of the role of ARC in the DNA repair pathways, we have
performed qRT-PCR based gene expression analysis on ARC modified cell
lines using techniques previously established in our lab. The results of
these experiments indicated that increased levels of ARC are correlated
with upregulation of key genes in single stranded DNA repair pathways
such as the base excision and nucleotide excision repair pathways. We are
working to identify the specific domain of ARC that serves as its
effector in the DNA repair pathways. In particular, we are looking at the
caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of ARC which is known to be key for
ARC`s function in the apoptotic pathways. Once this domain is identified,
it may serve as a potential drug target, the silencing of which could
result in the disruption of key pathways required for invasive breast
cancer cell survival. Such therapy may facilitate the ablation of
chemoresistant breast cancer cell populations, prevent metastasis and
tumor relapse, and increase long term patient survival.

