Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactivation of dormant estrogen-dependent breast cancer
micrometastases by bone marrow stromal injury in an in vitro model of
dormancy


Estrogen-dependent (ER+) breast cancer can remain dormant in the bone
marrow for more than a decade and continues to recur in a stochastic
pattern at continuous, low rates. Mechanisms of dormancy in the bone
marrow are mostly uncharacterized but data suggest that dormancy depends
on close interactions of micrometastases with stromal elements and on
effects by structural and soluble proteins. We have developed an
extensive and well characterized in vitro model incorporating relevant
elements of the bone marrow niche. We have demonstrated that FGF-2,
abundantly deposited on bone marrow stroma, induces a partial
re-differentiation of ER+ human breast cancer cell lines, manifested in
part by cell cycle arrest in G1 and re-expression of integrins lost with
dedifferentiation. Ligation of integrin 51 by incubation of cells on
fibronectin completes the model. It specifically induces a dormant
epithelial phenotype with RhoA inactivation through the Rho Gap GRAF,
cortical actin rearrangement, omnidirectional focal complex activation
and adhesion and activation of survival signaling. The signaling is
dually initiated through FGF-2 receptors and fibronectin ligation, which
activate PI3K/Akt, Erk and p38. The model is recapitulated on both human
and murine bone stromal monolayer coincubations of human ER+ breast
cancer cell lines, with the FGF-2 and fibronectin provided by the stroma.
Mechanisms of breast cancer recurrence are also not understood, but data
in other systems suggest that inflammatory cytokines can stimulate
proliferation of breast cancer cells. We hypothesized that injury to bone
marrow stroma can be the source of such cytokines. Towards this end, we
injured human and murine bone marrow stromal monolayers by oxidation and
hypoxia through one hour exposures to variable concentrations of H2O2 and
a cyanide-containing analog, respectively, and by estrogen deprivation.
These interventions induced secretion of IL-6 and IL-8, and induced
activation TGF and TNF under variable conditions. Incubation of human
recombinant IL-6, IL-8 and TGF with dormant colonies in fibronectin
culture induced dormant clones to proliferate into growing colonies.
These data suggest a potential mechanism for reactivation of dormant
breast cancer micrometastases and identify potential targets for
suppression of the effect.

