Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of EGFR/PI3K/AKT/PTEN proteins using
immunoprecipitation and analysis with mass spectrometry-based proteomics


Background: The dynamic range of protein concentrations spans more than
seven orders of magnitude in human cell lines and eleven orders of
magnitude in human plasma/serum and tissue. Currently, a major bottleneck
in the verification of candidate cancer biomarkers is the lack of
methods/reagents to quantify medium to low levels of proteins of interest
in human samples. Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry
(IP-MS) allows for the simultaneous analysis of protein expression,
protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications (PTMs)
of protein biomarkers. The immunoaffinity aspect provides both enrichment
and increased sensitivity while the mass spectrometry provides high
specificity, high selectivity and multiplex possibility. Dysregulated
EGFR-PI3K-AKT signaling is considered pivotal for many cancers, and this
pathway is a potential candidate for therapeutic targeting. The
quantitative evaluation of protein expression and PTM status of these and
other signal transduction protein targets in cell lines, tissue, and
plasma will enable precise characterization of the disease at the
diagnostic or prognostic level and to monitor its progression and
treatment response.Methods: Here we evaluated immunoprecipitation with
directly coupled antibody or biotinylated antibody with immobilized
streptavidin resin for MS applications. We evaluated several beads/resins
to precipitate EGFR from A431 cell lysate with subsequent detection and
quantitation by mass spectrometry. EGFR, PI3K, AKT isoforms and PTEN were
immunoprecipitated from two cell lysates using the optimized IP to MS
workflow. A multiplex targeted assay (LC-SRM/MS) was developed and
implemented to measure limit of quantitation (LLOQ) of the EGFR, PI3K,
AKT2, AKT1, and PTEN tryptic peptides in two cell lysates and
plasma.Results: Immunoprecipitation using magnetic beads resulted in
overall higher yield of target protein and less non-specific binding for
MS applications. Enrichment of EGFR, AKT isoforms, and PTEN in two cell
lysates permitted detection by discovery MS and quantitation by targeted
MS. Immunoprecipitation of EGFR and AKT2 resulted in simultaneous
analysis of multiple phosphorylation sites. EGFR, AKT1, AKT2 and PTEN
were quantitated in low nanogram range by LC-SRM/MS in two cell lysates.
Enrichment of as low as 7ng/mL recombinant EGFR in human plasma matrix
allowed absolute quantitation by targeted MS.Conclusion: The application
of IP to the analysis of EGFR, PI3K, AKT and PTEN protein targets permits
detection and quantitation of protein and PTMs at sub to low ng/mL
concentrations with mass spectrometry approaches.

