Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN-deficient tumors depend on Akt2 for maintenance


PTEN deficiency is frequently found in solid tumors. Since PTEN is yet to
be effectively targeted with drugs, its downstream target Akt may provide
more viable therapeutic strategies. The essential role of Akt in
PTEN-null tumor initiation has been demonstrated in a number of studies.
However, the role of Akt in the maintenance of established PTEN-deficient
tumors is not known. Moreover, whether PTEN-null tumors depend on a
specific Akt isoform for survival signaling remains elusive.In this
study, we have developed a tet-on inducible system for expressing
Akt1/2/3 shRNAs to determine the role of Akt isoforms in PTEN-deficient
cancer progression. Three-dimensional (3D) matrigel cultures are employed
to better recapitulate tumors growing in vivo. Administration of
doxycycline (dox) in Akt1 or Akt2 shRNA PTEN-null prostate tumor cells at
the start of culture resulted in the inhibition of spheroid formation,
suggesting an important role of both Akt1 and Akt2 in the initial growth
of spheroids. Conversely, when spheroids were allowed to form for 7 days,
followed by dox for further 10 days, no difference was observed between
Akt1-depleted and control spheroids. In contrast, silencing of Akt2
resulted in complete disintegration of spheroids. Confocal microscopy
studies show a significant induction of active caspase-3 and fragmented
nuclei in Akt2-silenced cells. Moreover, whereas Akt1 is uniformly
expressed, Akt2 is localized in the cytoplasm and/or on the plasma
membrane. Interestingly, the differences of effect of Akt isoforms on
cell survival in conventional 2D culture are considerably more modest.
The exclusive requirement of Akt2 for survival is also observed in other
PTEN-deficient solid tumors, including breast cancer and glioblastoma.
Importantly, shRNA silencing of Akt2 but not Akt1 promotes regression of
prostate cancer xenografts. Mechanistically, we show that Akt2 silencing
up-regulates p21 and the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and downregulates the
insulin-like growth factor receptor-1. We also show that p21 is an
effector of Akt2 in mediating prostate tumor cell survival.These results
indicate that Akt2, but not Akt1, plays a critical role in PTEN-deficient
tumor maintenance, and provide a rationale for developing therapeutics
targeting Akt2. Current efforts are aimed at identifying novel Akt
isoform-specific substrates that contribute to cancer progression using a
genome-wide proteomic screen. The results of these studies could point to
new targets for anti-cancer therapeutics.This work was supported by
grants from NIH (A.T., CA092644; R.C., K99CA157945, T32 CA081156-09;
S.B., P01 CA163227), the Department of Defense (S.B., W81XWH-09-1-0435)
and a sponsored research grant from ImClone/Eli Lilly Inc. (A.T and R.C.).

