Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of colonic claudin-3 expression characterize colon cancer
patients and predicts poor patient survival


The loss of cell-cell adhesion plays important role in promoting
epithelial transformation and malignant cancer phenotype. In this regard,
expression of claudin-3, a tight junction-integral protein, is reported
to increase in prostate and ovarian cancers which contrast the paradigm.
Notably, claudin-3 is highly expressed in the colon however its role in
the regulation of colonic epithelial homeostasis or colon cancer remains
unclear. In current studies, we have confirmed that claudin-3 is the most
abundant claudin family member in the colon, and is present throughout
the colonic crypt though it is more concentrated at the crypt top among
the terminally differentiated colonocytes. We further found that in
spontaneously differentiating Caco-2 cells, claudin-3 expression is
markedly increased in terminally differentiated cells and correlates
negatively with Vimentin and Smooth muscle actin (SMA) expressions.
Dedifferentiation of the epithelial cells underlies colon carcinogenesis.
In accordance, in a panel of 14 colon cancer cell lines, claudin-3
expression was either undetectable or low in 10 cell lines. In further
analysis, using microarray data from a cohort of 268 {colorectal
carcinoma (250) and normal (10)} colon cancer (CRC) specimens combined
from the Vanderbilt Medical Center and the Moffitt Cancer Center, we
found that claudin-3 expression level is significantly decreased in both
colorectal adenoma (pThe loss of cell-cell adhesion plays important role
in promoting epithelial transformation and malignant cancer phenotype. In
this regard, expression of claudin-3, a tight junction-integral protein,
is reported to increase in prostate and ovarian cancers which contrast
the paradigm. Notably, claudin-3 is highly expressed in the colon however
its role in the regulation of colonic epithelial homeostasis or colon
cancer remains unclear. In current studies, we have confirmed that
claudin-3 is the most abundant claudin family member in the colon, and is
present throughout the colonic crypt though it is more concentrated at
the crypt top among the terminally differentiated colonocytes. We further
found that in spontaneously differentiating Caco-2 cells, claudin-3
expression is markedly increased in terminally differentiated cells and
correlates negatively with Vimentin and Smooth muscle actin (SMA)
expressions. Dedifferentiation of the epithelial cells underlies colon
carcinogenesis. In accordance, in a panel of 14 colon cancer cell lines,
claudin-3 expression was either undetectable or low in 10 cell lines. In
further analysis, using microarray data from a cohort of 268 {colorectal
carcinoma (250) and normal (10)} colon cancer (CRC) specimens combined
from the Vanderbilt Medical Center and the Moffitt Cancer Center, we
found that claudin-3 expression level is significantly decreased in both
colorectal adenoma (p<0.05) and carcinoma (pThe loss of cell-cell
adhesion plays important role in promoting epithelial transformation and
malignant cancer phenotype. In this regard, expression of claudin-3, a
tight junction-integral protein, is reported to increase in prostate and
ovarian cancers which contrast the paradigm. Notably, claudin-3 is highly
expressed in the colon however its role in the regulation of colonic
epithelial homeostasis or colon cancer remains unclear. In current
studies, we have confirmed that claudin-3 is the most abundant claudin
family member in the colon, and is present throughout the colonic crypt
though it is more concentrated at the crypt top among the terminally
differentiated colonocytes. We further found that in spontaneously
differentiating Caco-2 cells, claudin-3 expression is markedly increased
in terminally differentiated cells and correlates negatively with
Vimentin and Smooth muscle actin (SMA) expressions. Dedifferentiation of
the epithelial cells underlies colon carcinogenesis. In accordance, in a
panel of 14 colon cancer cell lines, claudin-3 expression was either
undetectable or low in 10 cell lines. In further analysis, using
microarray data from a cohort of 268 {colorectal carcinoma (250) and
normal (10)} colon cancer (CRC) specimens combined from the Vanderbilt
Medical Center and the Moffitt Cancer Center, we found that claudin-3
expression level is significantly decreased in both colorectal adenoma
(p<0.05) and carcinoma (p<0.001) versus normal mucosa. Further, IHC
analysis of a colon cancer tissue microarray {TMA; colon tumors (67) and
normal (10)} showed 23% of the tumors to be claudin-3 negative. In
tumors, when claudin-3 was expressed, it was localized primarily in the
cytoplasm compared to the surface expression in normal mucosa and its
expression decreased with the increase in tumor grade. Overall, we
observed a negative intensity score for claudin-3 with higher tumor
grade. Further, based on the median expression levels, we found a
significant and positive correlation of the greater levels of claudin-3
expression with patient survival (disease specific, disease free or
overall survival; pThe loss of cell-cell adhesion plays important role in
promoting epithelial transformation and malignant cancer phenotype. In
this regard, expression of claudin-3, a tight junction-integral protein,
is reported to increase in prostate and ovarian cancers which contrast
the paradigm. Notably, claudin-3 is highly expressed in the colon however
its role in the regulation of colonic epithelial homeostasis or colon
cancer remains unclear. In current studies, we have confirmed that
claudin-3 is the most abundant claudin family member in the colon, and is
present throughout the colonic crypt though it is more concentrated at
the crypt top among the terminally differentiated colonocytes. We further
found that in spontaneously differentiating Caco-2 cells, claudin-3
expression is markedly increased in terminally differentiated cells and
correlates negatively with Vimentin and Smooth muscle actin (SMA)
expressions. Dedifferentiation of the epithelial cells underlies colon
carcinogenesis. In accordance, in a panel of 14 colon cancer cell lines,
claudin-3 expression was either undetectable or low in 10 cell lines. In
further analysis, using microarray data from a cohort of 268 {colorectal
carcinoma (250) and normal (10)} colon cancer (CRC) specimens combined
from the Vanderbilt Medical Center and the Moffitt Cancer Center, we
found that claudin-3 expression level is significantly decreased in both
colorectal adenoma (p<0.05) and carcinoma (p<0.001) versus normal mucosa.
Further, IHC analysis of a colon cancer tissue microarray {TMA; colon
tumors (67) and normal (10)} showed 23% of the tumors to be claudin-3
negative. In tumors, when claudin-3 was expressed, it was localized
primarily in the cytoplasm compared to the surface expression in normal
mucosa and its expression decreased with the increase in tumor grade.
Overall, we observed a negative intensity score for claudin-3 with higher
tumor grade. Further, based on the median expression levels, we found a
significant and positive correlation of the greater levels of claudin-3
expression with patient survival (disease specific, disease free or
overall survival; p<0.0008). We found a similar and significant
suppression of claudin-3 expression in colon tumors induced in mice
either spontaneously (by inactivation of the APC gene; APCmin mice) or
pharmacological means [Azoxymethane (AOM) and Dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS) administration). Notably, claudin-3 negative tumors retained
E-cadherin expression suggesting that claudin-3 loss may be a rather
sensitive marker for neoplastic colonic epithelial cells. Taken together,
our data support strong correlation between claudin-3 expression, colonic
epithelial differentiation and patient survival and highlights the
tissue-specific regulation of claudin-3 and its efficacy as a potential
colorectal tumor marker.

