Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deubiquitinase USP9X inhibition induces apoptosis in metastatic
breast cancer cells


Highly metastatic Triple Negative (ER/PR and HER2 negative) breast cancer
(TNBC) comprises 20% of all breast cancers but accounts for a
disproportionate share of mortality due to its aggressive nature and
limited therapeutic options. Thus novel metastatic breast cancer targets
and inhibitors need to be defined. Usp9x is a deubiquitinase that has
been shown to regulate the stability and function of many signaling, cell
cycle regulatory and survival proteins and has emerged as a negative
prognosticator and potential therapeutic target in several cancers. Usp9x
functions in polarization and survival of tumor cells derived from
various sites of origin. Additional studies have shown that Usp9x
expression is required to maintain growth of glioblastoma and
medulloblastomas and it suppresses the apoptotic effects of targeted-,
chemo- and radio-therapy in a broad spectrum of tumors. Previous studies
also demonstrated that Usp9x and Mcl-1 protein levels are highly elevated
in ductal breast carcinoma when compared to normal tissue. Thus, we
hypothesized that Usp9x may play a role in tumor and metastasis promoting
functions in breast cancer. We first assessed Usp9x activity and total
protein expression in a panel of benign (HME, MCF10A), tumorigenic (MCF7
and T47D) and highly metastatic (SUM149 and MDAMB231) human breast cell
lines and found up-regulation of Usp9x enzymatic activity and total
protein in tumorigenic and metastatic breast cancers as compared to
benign breast cells. Increased Usp9x expression also correlated with
increased levels of Mcl-1. Knockdown (KD) of Usp9x in four TNBC cell
lines [MDAMB231, MDAMB436, BT549 and SUM159] triggered phenotypic
apoptotic events like membrane blebbing and nuclear fragmentation, which
were further confirmed by the presence of activated caspases, cleaved
PARP and reduced Mcl-1 protein expression. Importantly Usp9x KD
specifically induced apoptosis in metastatic breast cancer cells with a
mesenchymal stem cell-like phenotype (EpCAM+/CD24-/CD44+ population of
cells) and fully suppressed TNBC colony growth and acinar structures when
grown on Matrigel. Usp9x KD in tumorigenic MCF7 cells resulted in growth
inhibition with G2 arrest, without evidence of apoptosis, whereas Usp9x
KD had no effect on the growth or survival of benign breast cells. To
examine the therapeutic potential of Usp9x inhibitors in breast cancer we
employed EOAI3402143 (G9), a small molecule Usp9x inhibitor developed in
our laboratory with efficacy in myeloma tumor regression in mice. G9
inhibited Usp9x activity, reduced Mcl-1 levels and induced apoptosis in
TNBC cells within 4h of inhibitor treatment. G9 also phenocopied the
effect of Usp9x KD in 3D culture with nM activity. Collectively, our data
shows that Usp9x plays a role in breast tumor growth and survival and its
inhibition in tumorigenic and highly metastatic breast cancers may
provide a novel therapy for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

