Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lichen derived polyphenols as potential anticancer drugs


Polyphenols such as resveratrol, curcumin, (-)-epigallocatechin 3-gallate
(EGCG) etc. have been shown to have anticancer properties. The anticancer
activities of polyphenols include, but are not limited to, anti-oxidative
effects, pro-apoptosis, DNA damage, anti-angiogenic effects, and
immunostimulation. Lichens, symbiotic systems involving a fungus and an
alga and/or cyanobacterium, are a rich source of polyphenols. Based on
our previous research we have demonstrated that crude extracts of
different lichen species affect cell proliferation, cell cycle dynamics,
and cause apoptosis in Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji cells). This research
examines the effects of a lichen-derived polyphenol compound, usnic acid,
on human colon adenocarcinoma (HT-29) cells. We treated HT-29 cells with
various concentrations (10, 30 and 50 g/ml) of usnic acid for 24 hours.
Although the viability was not affected by the treatment, there was a
significant decrease in cell proliferation in dose-dependent manner. We
also observed that after treatment, the morphology of treated cells was
completely different from that of untreated control cells. Using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), we studied the morphological
differences between control and treated HT-29 cells. The TEM micrographs
clearly show that usnic acid damaged the mitochondria, reduced the amount
of free ribosomes, and also distorted the shape of the nucleus. As the
treatment of HT-29 with usnic acid reduced the rate of cell proliferation
significantly, we investigated the effects of usnic acid on HT-29 cell
cycle dynamics. Our results indicate that with the higher usnic acid
concentrations (30 and 50 g/ml) the cell cycle was stopped at the G0/G1
stage. These results further document the pattern of decreasing
proliferation of HT-29 cells treated with usnic acid. With the distortion
of the nucleus following exposure to usnic acid, we also investigated the
effects of usnic acid on DNA the HT-29 cells. We performed a single cell
gel electrophoresis (Comet Assay) to study the DNA damaging effects of
various concentrations of usnic acid. Our results showed that there was a
dose dependent increase in damage to the HT-29 cells' DNA resulting in
56.7% of the total DNA moving into the comet tail at 50 g/ml
concentration of usnic acid.These preliminary results suggest that lichen
derived polyphenols could be a potential source of anticancer drug
therapies. However, additional research is needed to further validate
these findings.

