Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a cancer-specific monoclonal antibody LpMab-2
specific for cancer-type podoplanin


Podoplanin is a platelet aggregation-inducing mucin-like
sialoglycoprotein that is highly expressed in brain tumors, malignant
mesotheliomas, testicular tumors, and lung, esophageal, or head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas. Podoplanin has also been reported to be a
marker to enrich tumor-initiating cells. We previously established a
neutralizing monoclonal antibody (mAb), NZ-1, which inhibits the
association between podoplanin and C-type lectin-like receptor-2 (CLEC-2)
and blocks the podoplanin-induced platelet aggregation and tumor
metastasis. A human chimeric mAb, NZ-8 possesses extremely high
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-dependent
cytotoxicity (CDC), and showed high anti-tumor activities in several
xenograft models. However, those mAbs also react with normal cells
including lung type I alveolar cells, renal podocytes, and lymphatic
endothelial cells throughout the body. Recently, we established the
platform to produce a cancer-specific mAb (CasMab) by combining
glycobiology and cell engineering technologies. Herein, we report a novel
cancer-specific anti-podoplanin mAb, LpMab-2. In Western-blot analyses,
LpMab-2 did not react with sialic acid-deficient podoplanin and O-glycan
deficient podoplanin, which were expressed in Lec2 and Lec8 cells,
respectively. In enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using several deletion
mutants of podoplanin, the epitope of LpMab-2 was shown to be included in
55-88 amino acids of podoplanin, although almost all anti-podoplanin mAbs
recognize platelet aggregation-stimulating (PLAG) domain near the
N-terminus. Analyses of glycopeptides produced by Edman degradation
revealed that O-glycans were attached to glycosylation sites at residues
Thr65, Thr66, Thr70, Ser71, Ser74, and Thr76 around LpMab-2 epitope.
LpMab-2 did not react with podoplanin-negative cell lines, indicating
that not only glycans but also amino acids of podoplanin are necessary
for LpMab-2 reaction. In flow cytometric and immunohistochemical
analyses, LpMab-2 reacted with tumor cells, but not with lung type I
alveolar cells and lymphatic endothelial cells, suggesting that LpMab-2
recognizes the cancer-type conformation of podoplanin. Furthermore, human
chimeric LpMab-2 also showed cancer-specific reaction against podoplanin.
Taken together, a cancer-specific mAb LpMab-2 should be useful for
molecular targeting therapy against podoplanin without side effects such
as respiratory or renal failures and lymphatic edema. The
CasMab-producing platform could lead to establishment of the side
effect-reducing mAbs.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

