Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid attenuates survival and progression in
subtype-specific breast cancer by modifying Myc activity


Overexpression of Myc in breast cancer is associated with poor prognosis
and has a unique profile distribution among subtypes. Myc overexpression
has been shown to be greatest in basal-like tumors, 50%, and least in
luminal Her2-overexpressing tumors, 9%. Previous studies from our
laboratory have identified a relationship between docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA, C22:6 n-3) treatment and Myc activity and the effect seems to be
specific to the breast cancer subtype and Myc overexpression profile, but
is still unclear. In the current study, we investigated the effect of DHA
on tumor growth, survival, and invasion in a high Myc expressing cell
line, basal-like MDA-MB-231, and a low Myc expressing cell line, luminal
Her2-overexpressing BT-474, in vitro. Basal expression analysis confirmed
Myc overexpression levels in each cell line. While DHA treatment in the
basal-like MDA-MB-231 cells significantly decreased Myc transcriptional
activity and p-T58/S62-c-Myc phosphorylation status, the opposite
response was observed with DHA treatment in the BT-474 luminal
Her2-overexpressing cells, significantly enhancing Myc transcriptional
activity and phosphorylation status. Although different responses in Myc
activity existed between the two subtype-specific breast cancers, cell
viability and apoptosis assays produced similar findings, revealing
decreased cellular viability and increased early and late-apoptotic
cellular status in response to DHA treatment. Additionally, dramatic
decreases in wound healing and invasion index were observed in both cell
lines with DHA supplementation compared to control treatments. Myc siRNA
treatment rescued BT-474 cells from DHA treatment, confirming that
DHA-induced alterations in apoptosis and invasion were initiated by Myc
modification. Moreover, Myc knockdown in the MDA-MB-231 cell line
displayed results similar to DHA treatment, consistent with our
hypothesis that Myc activity is responsible for cellular survival and
progression in subtype specific breast cancer. These results show that
DHA is applying some of its anti-cancer effects by modifying Myc
activity, inducing apoptosis and decreasing invasion in breast cancer,
revealing new dietary targets that may enhance current therapeutics.

