Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide shRNA screen for suppressors of prostate cancer cell
invasion


Metastasis in prostate cancer is caused by genetic reprogramming leading
to increased cell motility and the formation of invasive structures which
allow cells to invade out of the primary tumour in a process known as
intravasation. In order to search for novel genes inhibiting invasive
phenotypes responsible for intravasation, a genome-wide high throughput
short hairpin RNA screen was used to identify genes which suppress
aggressive phenotypes in BPH (Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia) prostate
epithelial cells when grown in 3D matrigel culture conditions. Using the
The RNAi Consortium (TRC) lentiviral shRNA library that covers the entire
human transcriptome (80,000 unique constructs), BPH cells were infected
such that each cell would integrate a single shRNA construct that will
target mRNA expression of a known human gene. Cells were plated at 4500
cells per cm2 until a 2.5X genome-wide coverage was achieved. In 3D
matrigel culture conditions, BPH colonies exhibit normal epithelial
(round) colony morphology. Hence, we screened for clonogenic BPH colonies
that appeared fibroblastic and spindle-shaped. Collection of these hits
yield gene identities that suppress intravasation. In this ongoing study,
we have achieved 2.5x coverage of the TRC shRNA library in BPH cells.
After 11 days of growth, 7 hits from the BPH screen that exhibit an
invasive phenotype were isolated, and were validated again in 3D matrigel
culture. These hits have revealed 12 potential invasion suppressors
involved in pathways including ER stress, cortactin phosphorylation
signalling, cell differentiation and genome stability. These hits are
currently being re-validated with other shRNAs specific for each gene.
Overall, we provide a high-throughput and high-content screen for
discovering novel genes that inhibit prostate cancer progression. These
functional genomics screens which focus on altered prostate cell colony
phenotypes may open new doors for potential drug treatments and a greater
understanding of prostate cancer and BPH.


