Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uncovering vulvar cancer: Integrated analysis of genomic and
transcriptomic data


Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) is a rare gynecological cancer,
representing approximately 3-5% of genital tumors. However, its incidence
has risen considerably and no consistent profile of this disease was
established so far. Also, little is known about the genomic abnormalities
of VSCC and how they correlate with gene expression. In order to verify
which are the major genomic alterations that lead to gene expression
abnormalities we used integrative analysis in VSCC samples. Seventeen
frozen samples of VSCC were carried out in genome-wide expression (GWE)
profiling using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray 60K (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and in Array-CGH (aCGH) using the
Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray 60K (Agilent Technologies, Santa
Clara, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol. Data were
extracted and flagged with Feature Extraction version 10.5 (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and the aCGH data was processed using
NEXUS 6.0 (BioDiscovery, Hawthorne, CA, USA). JISTIC was used to classify
genes mapped at gains and losses in genomic regions. Differentially
expressed genes were identified by SAM statistical test. The CONEXIC
algorithm was applied to integrate the data and in silico functional
analysis were performed using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA)
(Ingenuity Systems). The aCGH analysis revealed 216 significant genomic
alterations including 196 gains and 20 losses. GWE profile identified
3799 differentially expressed genes in comparison with normal tissue
including 1352 up-regulated and 2447 down-regulated. The integrated
analysis showed that genomic and transcriptomic results were concordant
in 47 genes, in which 46 were up regulated and involved in gain of DNA
copy number and only 1 gene (PLXDC2) was down-regulated and associated to
genomic loss. According to IPA analysis of the top biological functions
associated with the 47 genes, 3 of them were related with tumor
morphology. Also, cell death and survival and cellular function and
maintenance were included in the list of pathways disrupted by the genes
selected as possible drivers of VSCC. Three significant networks could be
defined comprising these genes. The first network comprised 18 of the
concordant genes and was associated to functions as carbohydrate
metabolism, small molecule biochemistry, cellular function and
maintenance. The second network (18 genes) was related to RNA
post-transcriptional modification, developmental disorder and hereditary
disorder. The third network (15 genes) was associated to RNA
post-transcriptional modification, gene expression and organ development.
Thereby, important signaling networks were found disrupted by these genes
which could influence tumor development or progression in VSCC.
Therefore, these genes might be useful as a first step to identify
molecular markers to improve diagnosis and therapeutic approaches for
this tumor.

