Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of immune cell subsets in a multidrug therapeutic regimen
for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer


Purpose: To investigate the effects of docetaxel-based combination
therapy with bevacizumab and dexamethasone premedication on the immune
response in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC).Experimental Design: We studied immune responses in 13 patients
enrolled in a phase II trial at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). The
study was designed as a 13 patient expansion of a previously reported
phase II study to evaluate the immunologic response after 2 cycles of
treatment with a docetaxel-based chemotherapy regimen including docetaxel
(75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg every 3 weeks).
Dexamethasone pre-medication (4 mg) was given 12 h and 1 h prior to
chemotherapy, and again after 12 h. Patients were evaluated before
treatment and on day 40, 3 weeks after the second cycle. We compared PBMC
and serum samples collected at baseline and after 40 days of treatment.
We investigated CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and regulatory T-cells (CD4+ CD25hi
CD127- FoxP3+) by flow cytometry. T-cell proliferation, as well as
NK-cell functional activity, was evaluated. Serum samples were analyzed
for levels of cytokines, chemokines, sCD27, sCD40L and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF).Results: The baseline characteristics
were: median age 64 years, Gleason score 9, PSA 100 ng/ml, and Halabi
Predicted Survival 10.6 months. Patients had a median PSA decline of 66%
after 2 cycles. The median TTP was 14.1 months, and OS 18.7 months. At 3
weeks after the second cycle we found no significant changes in absolute
lymphocyte count, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell proliferation and NK-cell
function. The number of CD4+ T-cells decreased. CTLA4+ regulatory T-cells
did not change. There was no change in the serum levels of IL-6, IL-8,
IL-10 and TNF. As expected, the serum levels of VEGF decreased
substantially after therapy. The serum levels of sCD40L did not change
after treatment. Interestingly, an increase in the serum level of sCD27
correlated with longer OS (P= 0.037, R= 0.58).Conclusions: Treatment of
mCRPC patients with docetaxel-based combination therapy with bevacizumab
and dexamethasone premedication for 40 days did not alter the immune
response in a way that would decrease the likelihood of successful
immunotherapy, either before or after this treatment.

