Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Continuous isolation, labeling and collection of viable CTCs using
an integrated microfluidic device


The concept of studying tumor-derived circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from
a simple blood-draw of a patient, has acquired significant attention in
recent years. This relatively non-invasive approach opens many avenues in
understanding and monitoring quite a number of cancers where correlations
have since been made with CTCs and patient survival as well as patient
response to therapeutics. Additionally, studies geared towards
identifying genetic markers as well as gene profiling of CTCs are ongoing
in efforts to develop early screening markers as well as gain a more
holistic understanding of the various forms of the disease. Moreover, the
concept of personalized medicine in treating several types of cancer is
deemed indispensable due to the highly heterogeneous nature of the
disease. Extensive studies involving genetic material of CTCs are
expected to considerably develop effective therapeutics that are tailored
to meet each patient's need. However, several challenges need to be
overcome in order to harness the wealth of information that can be gained
from CTC studies, such as the rarity of such cells among other blood
cells, where CTCs occur as rarely as 1 to 1 million among other
mononuclear blood cells. In this vein we discuss the development of an
integrated, continuous microfluidic device designed to isolate and label
CTCs disseminated from cancer tumors. The 3-part device initially
exploits the size disparity of the majority of CTCs with other blood
cells and couples this with the use of size-based inertial forces to
presort CTCs from whole blood at 1.2mL/min. The CTC-rich fluid stream is
then mixed passively, on-chip, with EpCAM coated micro-beads which allows
the cells and beads to mix at the micron length scale. This is followed
by a brief period of incubation which allows cells to be sufficiently
labeled, where the majority of cells have experienced at least two-thirds
magnetic bead coverage using this mixing-incubation approach. Thereafter
on-chip magnetic sorting of CTCs from any remaining blood cells is
achieved by application of an external magnet along the magnetic sorter
of the integrated device. Cells with as little as one-third bead coverage
experience magnetic deflection to the CTC collection stream. To identify
CTCs, cells were stained positively for DAPI and CK-19, and CD45 was used
to distinguish leukocytes. We demonstrate that the isolated CTCs are not
only viable but that the range of WBC decontamination is the lowest yet
reported in literature. Based on PANC-1 cell-line experiments with the
device, an 80% recovery rate of cancer cells from other blood cells was
consistently achieved. Testing of metastatic patient samples with the
device has yielded high counts of CTCs, coupled with high purity rates.
We believe that the use of this system in characterizing CTCs and
studying cancer will contribute to understanding this aggressive disease
in a non-invasive, efficient manner.

