Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of 5,6-fused pyrimidine-based kinase inhibitors by
computer-aided drug design for the treatment of AML


FMS-like receptor tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3), a member of the class III
tyrosine kinase receptor family, is expressed by immature hematopoietic
cells, and highly associates with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While
acquired resistance to selective FLT3 inhibitors, the treatment became
inefficient. Many literatures suggested that dual FLT3-Aurora inhibition
may overcome selective FLT3 inhibitor resistance, in part due to
inhibition of Aurora kinase, and may benefit patients with FLT3-mutated
AML. Thus, utilizing dual FLT3-Aurora inhibitors may be the viable
therapy for the treatment of AML.Recently, our group reported a novel
AURKA inhibitor by using high-throughput parallel synthesis and
structure-based drug design (SBDD). Based on this, we wanted to modify
the selective AURKA inhibitor to maintain its Aurora A inhibition as well
as improve its FLT3 activity to develop dual FLT3-Aurora kinase
inhibitors. Through rapid construction of the platform of FLT3 virtual
screening, the lead was quickly and efficiently identified. Proceeding
investigation of structure-activity relationship could lead to 6-phenyl
pyrrolopyrimidine analogue, showing FLT3 inhibition with an IC50 of 101
nM as well as Aurora kinase A inhibition with an IC50 of 33 nM. To
further increase the level of inhibition of FLT3, binding energy
calculations and docking study of FLT3 model were introduced to select
terminal groups of the side chain with high priority. The selected
compounds were synthesized and evaluated the bioactivity. The dramatic
antiproliferation of the dual FLT3-AURKA inhibitor against MOLM-13 and
MV4-11 (FLT3-ITD (+) human AML cell lines) was observed, and its biologic
mechanism of inhibition of FLT3 and Aurora kinase A was proved the by
significant evidence of biomarker. For this finding, this novel inhibitor
holds potential for further development of preclinical investigations as
an anti-AML drug candidate.

