Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and validation of models for metastasis developed
from patient xenogragrafts (PDX)


While surgery, chemotherapy and radiation mostly enable a successful
treatment of primary tumors, an efficient treatment of metastasis still
remains challenging. A prerequisite for the development of new drugs is
the availability of relevant tumor models for preclinical testing. In the
last years, patient derived xenograft (PDX) models have proven to be more
relevant for drug screening and translational research than cell line
derived xenograft models. While several experimental models of metastasis
are already available (J. Hoffmann, et al., Neuro-Oncology, 2009), it was
the aim of our study to extent the panel of validated metastasis models
derived from patients. We screened PDX for their ability to metastasize
in mice. Metastatic outcome was characterized in dependence of injection
route, cell number and mouse strain. Time to develop metastases, number
of visible metastases in the lung and liver, as well the rate of human
DNA detected in these organs were used as evaluation parameter of
metastasis.Method:Tumors from stably growing PDX (I. Fichtner et al.,
Clin Cancer Res., 2008) were resected and used to produce a single cell
suspension. These cells were injected into different mouse strains by
routes indicated below to induce metastasis. At defined time points, or
when mice became moribund, mice were sacrificed and inspected for
macroscopic metastases. Quantification of early disseminated tumor cells
was done by TaqMan PCR (Becker et al., 2002). Normalised CT values
(CTnorm = CTnegative control - (CTsample) were used as degree of
metastasis.Results: Eight out of 14 PDX models including lung (2x), colon
(2x), breast, melanoma, sarcoma, and pancreatic carcinoma have been shown
to develop metastases depending on the mouse strain and injection (i.v.,
i.p., s.c., or orthotopic) route.Best results were obtained for melanoma
(MEL1956) and lung carcinoma (LU9313). Both models developed strong
metastasis in lung and liver with CTnorm values > 14 (lung) and 7.9
(liver), if cells were injected i.v. Lu 9313M cells could also be
injected orthotopically causing a high degree of metastasis (CTnorm 10
after 25 days).Metastasis of colon carcinoma was less effective when
initiated via the intravenous route, but was much better if cells were
injected i.p. with CTnorm values above 8. Other model with high
metastasis rate were the sarcoma SA10133 (i.v. route, CTnorm values >
7.5) and the pancreatic carcinoma Panc 9617 (s.c. route, CTnorm 4 - 9).
Three breast cancer PDX were also investigated, but only MA 4296
developed metastases, derived from orthotopically implanted tumor cells
with a CTnorm of 9.8 for the lung.Outlook: EPO GmbH established a panel
of eight different tumor models from PDX to induce metastasis, each with
specific conditions. The results of this study may contribute to improve
the treatment of cancer by providing models with high clinic relevance
for the testing of novel antimetastatic treatments.

