Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is PYGM dysregulation involved in breast cancer cell metabolism


Many anticancer targets with role in drug resistance are involved in key
metabolic processes. In recent years, the interest in targeting cell
metabolism and metabolic pathways connected to energy storage and redox
potential has been renewed. Comparative analyses of paired samples of
tumor cells and corresponding normal tissue can reveal the altered
metabolite profiles and can increase the understanding of metabolic
involvement in cancer progression.By applying whole exome sequencing on
eight pairs of pleiomorphic lobular carcinoma frozen samples, an
aggressive breast cancer subtype, and matched normal tissue, we recently
identified recurrent somatic mutations in four genes. Three of these
genes are already described to be implicated in breast cancer (PIK3CA,
TP53 and CDH1), and one novel mutated gene was identified: PYGM which
encodes for glycogen phosphorylase firstly isolated from muscular tissue.
Targeted sequencing performed on 27 pleiomorphic lobular carcinoma
samples confirmed PYGM as a frequently mutated gene in this pathology
(30%). Subsequent analysis of the breast gene expression TCGA dataset
uncovered that PYGM is significantly downregulated in breast cancer
samples compared to normal breast tissue, irrespectively of the breast
cancer molecular subtype. The same trend was observed in other cancer
types, such as colon, bladder or head and neck carcinoma, after analysis
of publicly available gene expression databases. PYGM is expressed in
many other cell types and initiates the breakdown of glycogen by
degradation in glucose-1-phosphate, which can be enzymatically converted
to glucose-6-phosphate. This generates an alternative cellular energy
source to immediate ATP. In muscle cells, various mutations impairing
PYGM activity lead to McArdle disease (autosomic recessive glycogen
storage disease type V) which is characterized by exercise intolerance,
pain, muscle weakness, and cramps. In cancer cells, some few
abnormalities of PYGM have been reported. We thus investigated the
potential dysregulation of PYGM expression and/or function in breast
cancer and its consequences on cell metabolism. We found that PYGM
expression is downregulated in breast cancer tissue compared to paired
normal tissue. In order to analyze the role of PYGM in preclinical
models, we established new breast cancer cell lines overexpressing PYGM.
Biochemical and molecular analyses are ongoing to investigate cell
behavior according to PYGM expression level in various culture conditions
and will inform us about a potential efficacy of PYGM targeting in new
therapy development based on metabolic biomarkers applied to breast
cancer treatment.

