Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpHA2 is an essential driver of invasion and a novel target in
KRAS mutant colorectal cancer


BackgroundColorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide. Among patients with early stage CRC, there are subsets of
patients who will not benefit from adjuvant 5-FU or 5-FU/oxaliplatin
treatment, highlighting the need for improved therapy options for early
stage disease. In addition mutations in the KRAS proto-oncogene are found
in 40%-45% of CRC patients and this mutation predicts resistance to EGFR
mAb therapies. More recently it has been shown that treatments, such as
bevacizumab or cetuximab, which prolong survival in the advanced disease
setting, cannot be translated into successful adjuvant treatment
strategies.The aim of this study was to identify therapy options which
will be effective in the adjuvant setting and also whose knock-down is
synthetically lethal with KRAS mutation in CRC models.MethodA novel
systems biology approach combined profiling of primary KRASMT/WT CRC
tissues and isogenic paired KRASMT/WT CRC xenografts models. Metacore
pathway analysis identified individual genes from novel KRAS-dependent
pathways for incorporation into a primary RNAi screen. This screen was
crossed with receptor tyrosine kinase analysis of our previously
published pre-clinical adjuvant invasive cell line models. Our findings
were validated by in vitro screening and expression analysis in CRC FFPE
sections was measured using IHC.ResultsOur comprehensive approach
identified 30 signalling pathways and 160 genes associated with KRASMT
CRC cancer. Our siRNA screen confirmed a number of novel KRAS synthetic
lethal target genes with a critical role in EMT and cell
adhesion/migration. Down-regulation of members of the Eph/Ephrin family,
in particular EpHA2, was found to be lethal in KRASMT but not KRASWT
cells. This lethality was further synergistically enhanced in the
presence of chemotherapy treatment.Overexpression of EphA2 was also
identified in each of our invasive isogenic cell line models, regardless
of genetic background, and EpHA2 silencing inhibited migration and
invasion in a panel of CRC cells. EpHA2 expression has previously been
reported as an essential component in cancer cells's ability to form
tumors in vivo and in-line with this our EpHA2 overexpressing invasive
subpopulations displayed an increased ability to form colonies.
Importantly, high EpHA2 mRNA and protein expression were found to be
associated with poor overall survival in both early stage CRC tissues and
in advanced disease.ConclusionUsing our novel comprehensive systems
biology approach we have identified novel KRAS synthetic lethal targets
and pathways. Combining these findings with targets which are effective
against our pre-clinical adjuvant models we have identified EpHA2 as a
key driver of invasion and migration and a synthetically lethal target in
KRASMT CRC. In addition, we show that EpHA2 is a poor prognostic marker
and an important novel target for KRASMT CRC tumors in both the adjuvant
and advanced disease setting.

