Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi screening identifies FGFR4 as a modulator of growth and
survival in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common cancer of bone and soft tissue
arising in children and young adults. Standard treatment of Ewing sarcoma
includes surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy largely consisting of
combinations of non-targeted cytotoxic agents. Although the survival rate
has improved for patients treated for localized disease, the survival
rate of patients with metastatic tumor remains lower than 30%. In order
to improve therapeutic options for Ewing Sarcoma, we employed a
functional genomics approach based on RNA interference (RNAi) screening
to identify genes whose silencing affected the proliferation and survival
of Ewing sarcoma cells. Four Ewing sarcoma cell lines, TC-32, TC-71,
SK-ES-1 and RD-ES, were transfected with a library of siRNA targeting 287
cancer-associated genes. The siRNA screening data were normalized and
statistical cut-offs were determined for each cell line. From the list of
siRNA hits, we identified siRNAs targeting Fibroblast growth factor 4,
FGFR4, to be among the most effective in inducing cytotoxicity in Ewing
sarcoma cells. Further validation was conducted showing that siRNAs to
FGFR4, but not FGFR1, FGFR2, or FGFR3, were able to significantly reduce
Ewing Sarcoma cell viability. Furthermore, siRNA targeting FGFR4 were
able to induce Caspase 3 activity. FGFR4 protein was shown to be
expressed in Ewing sarcoma by western blot analysis, with expression
levels lower than FGFR4 expression on rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Targeting
FGFR4 activity in Ewing sarcoma cells using a pan-FGFR inhibitor,
PD-173074, demonstrated that Ewing sarcoma cells were sensitive to FGFR
inhibition. Since FGFR4 in a potential therapeutic target in
rhadomyosarcoma, we compared the response of the Ewing sarcoma cells to
PD-173074 to that of the rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, RH-30 and RD. The
IC50s of the four Ewing sarcoma cells ranged from 3.8-4.7 M and were
slightly lower than the IC50 for the rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines RH-30
(5.6 M) and RD (7.9 M). These results indicate that FGFR4 is a potential
therapeutic target in Ewing sarcoma and that FGFR4 targeted therapy
should be tested in preclinical xenograft models of Ewing sarcoma.

