Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting miR-21 in hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains a significant unmet medical need
with few therapeutic options available. Micro RNA 21 (miR-21) has been
shown to be upregulated in HCC, however, contribution of this onco-miR to
the maintenance of tumorigenic phenotype in liver cancer remains poorly
understood. We have developed potent and specific single-stranded
oligonucleotide inhibitors of miR-21 (anti-miR-21) and used them to
interrogate dependency on miR-21 in a panel of 20 commercially available
HCC cell lines in vitro. Upon lipid-mediated transfection, anti-miR-21,
but not its mismatched (MM) control, caused significant de-repression of
known direct targets of miR-21 (ANKRD46, DDAH1, RECK1) and inhibited
survival of a large subset of HCC cell lines. Treatment of these
sensitive HCC cell lines with anti-miR-21 resulted in dose- and
time-dependent induction of caspase 3/7 activity. In contrast,
non-responder HCC cell lines failed to significantly upregulate caspase
activity and maintained viability in the presence of anti-miR compound.
Further analysis of responder cell lines revealed robust induction of
cell death, inhibition of cell migration and suppression of clonogenic
growth upon treatment with miR-21 inhibitor. To better understand the
consequences of miR-21 suppression in HCC, we carried out global gene
expression profiling of anti-miR-21 treated sensitive liver cancer cells.
Striking enrichment in miR-21 targets was noted among upregulated
transcripts. Gene ontology analysis identified key cellular processes
affected by miR-21 inhibition, including deregulation of metabolic
pathways. In addition to the induction of direct miR-21 targets, cyclin H
was found to be significantly downregulated upon miR-21 inhibition in the
majority of responder cell lines. We hypothesize that inhibition of
cyclin H expression, while an indirect effect of miR-21 suppression,
could contribute to the activity of anti-miR-21 compounds. In summary,
our data suggest that inhibition of miR-21 merits further investigation
in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.

