Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific human monoclonal antibodies isolated from cancer
patients


Introduction: New cancer-specific antigens are needed to fully realize
the potential of antibody-based cancer therapies. Cancer cells express
novel antigens that are characteristic of the transformed state and may
engender an antibody response in patients. We hypothesize that some of
these antibodies detect neo-antigens shared by diverse tumor types. We
optimized a hybridoma method for cloning human IgG monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) by screening for binding to heterologous cell lines. Here, we
describe four mAbs, isolated from cancer patients, that bind to cancer
cells.Methods: We developed immunofluorescence binding assays with the
A431, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, detecting cell-reactive human IgG
with the Operetta (Perkin Elmer). The assays were adapted for
extracellular binding as well as internalization using specific culture
conditions. We tested sera from 59 lung cancer patients with diverse
clinical features. 24 of the samples contained IgG reactivity with A431
cells at > 1:100 titer, and 17 had evidence of IgG internalization. We
generated hybridomas using peripheral blood B-cells isolated from two of
these lung cancer patients, as well as B-cells from a lymph node of a
stage I, ER+PR+ breast cancer patient. We characterized the binding of
four mAbs using immunohistochemistry (IHC), microscopy, flow cytometry
and immunoblotting. One mAb was used to identify its cognate antigen by
immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry.Results: In a panel of 59 lung
cancer patient sera, 24 had IgG that bound the A431 cell line, and 17 of
these had evidence of internalization. We isolated three human mAbs from
two lung cancer patients and one mAb from the breast cancer lymph node.
We performed IHC with three of the mAbs in formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded normal and tumor tissues and found primarily tumor cell binding
to a variety of tumor types. The 5A6 (lung) bound 3 of 4 non-small cell
lung, 3 of 4 colon, 2 of 4 ovarian and 1 of 4 small cell lung cancers.
19F10 (lung) bound 1 of 4 colon and 2 of 4 small cell lung. 2G4 (breast)
bound 4 of 4 non-small cell lung, 3 of 4 prostate, 3 of 4 ovarian, and 2
of 4 colon cancers. Some normal tissue binding was observed, such as
small intestine and distal renal tubule (2G4 and 19F10), pancreatic islet
(19F10), and prostate (2G4). The 6A10 mAb (lung) bound to the
constitutive heat shock protein, HSC70, which was localized in the plasma
membrane of cancer cell lines.Conclusion: We have cloned 4 human mAbs
from cancer patients. This supports the hypothesis that patients with
active malignancies make antibodies capable of binding cancer-specific
antigens. We identified HSC70, a protein that has an altered cell
localization in cancer cells, as one such antigen. The three mAbs tested
by IHC bound to diverse tumor types that often differed from the tumors
of the patients where the B-cells originated. The human anti-cancer
antibody repertoire holds promise as a tool to identify new targets for
mAb-based cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.

