Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maximizing the efficacy of anti-angiogenesis cancer therapy: A
multi-targeting strategy by tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Although vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors provide
significant clinical benefit, they often require dose reductions or even
withdrawals due to their severe toxicities. Furthermore, almost all
cancers show intrinsic and/or evasive resistance to VEGF inhibitors by
multiple mechanisms. Serum angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) level has been proposed
as a potential biomarker of VEGF inhibitor response in several cancers.
Response to lenvatinib (E7080; VEGFR1-3 inhibitor) is also reported to
correlate with low Ang2 level in differentiated thyroid cancer and
endometrial cancer. From these clinical observations, Ang2 and its
receptor Tie2 has been focused as promising targets. Here, we
demonstrated mechanisms of resistance induced by Ang2 and a novel
strategy to circumvent the resistance by combination of multi-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), lenvatinib and golvatinib (E7050; c-Met, Tie2,
EphB4 inhibitor). Tie2 defines a highly pro-angiogenic macrophage subset,
Tie2-expressing macrophage (TEM). Ang-Tie2 and EphB4-EphrinB2 signaling
play critical roles in pericyte-mediated vessel stabilization. Ectopic
expression of Ang2 in thyroid cancer conferred resistance to lenvatinib
and enhanced pericyte-associated endothelial network development and TEM
infiltration. In vitro analyses suggested that golvatinib/lenvatinib
combination inhibited pericyte-mediated vessel stabilization and TEM
differentiation. In thyroid and endometrial cancer models,
golvatinib/lenvatinib combination inhibited pericyte network development
and TEM infiltration, resulting in severe perfusion disorder and massive
apoptosis. Body weight loss was tolerable in mice, and no macroscopic
change was observed. These results suggest that modulation of tumor
microenvironment by strategic and well-tolerated combination of
multi-targeting TKIs sensitizes cancer to VEGF inhibitors, which warrants
further clinical investigation to determine the clinical benefit of
anti-angiogenesis cancer therapy.

