Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to enhance delivery and sensitivity of
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer by suppression of desmoplasia


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an extremely fatal
disease due to lack of efficient therapy and resistance to current
standard therapy, gemcitabine (GEM). Numerous studies implicate the
intimate reciprocal interactions due to paracrine Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
between epithelia and underlying stroma that leads to desmoplasia and
causes chemoresistance in PDAC. We report for the first time that a
non-steroidal drug, ormeloxifene (ORM) has anticancer properties and
depletes tumor-associated stromal tissue by inhibiting the Hh cellular
signaling pathway in PDAC. This provoked us to investigate the
combinatorial effects of ORM with GEM and we observed that ORM disrupts
the stroma of pancreatic tumors, alters vascular network and thereby
facilitates delivery and sensitivity of GEM.Methods: Using cell line
models, Western blotting and QPCR were used to investigate the treatment
effects of ORM, GEM and their combination on Hh signaling pathway and the
related proteins involved in PDAC. To determine the effect of ORM on
anti-tumorigenic sensitivity of GEM, we developed PDAC xenograft mice
models using PanCa cells, BXPC3. Tumor tissue sections were stained for
SHH (sonic hedgehog), cygb/STAP (stellate cell selective markers), -SMA
(PSC activation), FSP-1 (Fibroblast surface protein-1), collagen-1 by
immunoflorescence, F4/80 (macrophage), CD31 (vasularization) through
immunohistochemistry and microRNAs through in situ hybridization. ELIZA
was performed for SDF1/CXCL12 and SHH secretion.Results: ORM inhibits
cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. ORM
alone and in combination with GEM inhibits the Hh signaling pathway by
downregulating both the protein and mRNA levels of SHH and its related
important downstream targets: GLI1, PTCH1/2, NFB, p-AKT and Cyclin D1.
ORM potentiates the anti-tumorigenic effect of GEM by 75% in PDAC
xenograft mice. Investigations of treated xenograft tumor tissues show
that ORM depletes tumor-associated stromal tissue by inhibiting the Hh
cellular signaling pathway and both mouse/human collagen-1, a hallmark of
desmoplastic reaction. These xenograft tumors treated with ORM in
combination with GEM also show the inhibition of oncogenic miR-21 and
restoration of tumor suppressor, miR-132. The combination therapy
inhibits stromal cell populations infiltrating into the tumor tissue and
produces increased intratumoral vascular density and concentration of
GEM, leading to transient stabilization of tumor growth. Tumor cells,
co-cultivated with TGF stimulated human pancreatic stromal cells,
displayed increased invasive capabilities which were inhibited on
treatment with ORM alone or in combination with GEM. Conclusion: We
propose that ORM has a high therapeutic index and represents a great
promise for a combination therapy with GEM against stroma and neoplastic
cells as a treatment of choice

