Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerated proteasome turnover as a potential mechanism of
acquired resistance to carfilzomib in BxPC3 pancreatic cancer cells


Background: The addition of proteasome inhibitors bortezomib and
carfilzomib to the multiple myeloma therapy has drastically improved the
outcome of patients. However, drug resistance remains a major obstacle in
proteasome inhibitor therapy. Several resistance mechanisms have been
proposed in vitro, but have not been identified as contributing factors
to proteasome inhibitor resistance observed in the clinic. Thus, we set
out to investigate previously unexplored resistance mechanisms using
BxPC3 pancreatic cancer cells with acquired resistance to
carfilzomib.Methods and Results: We established carfilzomib-resistant
BxPC3 cells (BxPC3/Cfz) by adapting the parental BxPC3 (human pancreatic
cancer) cells to escalating drug concentrations over time. Using cell
viability assays, we confirmed that BxPC3/Cfz cells have an increased
IC50 values (10-fold) for carfilzomib compared to its parental control.
The proteasome activity of resistant and parental BxPC3 cells was
measured in vitro using the fluorogenic peptide substrate Suc-LLVY-AMC.
Our results showed that majority of the proteasome activity in BxPC3/Cfz
cells was restored within 96 hours following initial drug treatment.
Decreased drug permeability and enhanced metabolism were ruled out as
potential contributors to the lack of activity inhibition. This was based
on the lack of efflux transporter upregulation or differences in the rate
of drug degradation in the resistant cells compared to parental controls.
Given that the recovery of proteasome activity in BxPC3/Cfz cells is much
faster than the reported proteasome half-life of 5-12 days, we further
examined whether accelerated recovery of proteasome activity in BxPC3/Cfz
cells is associated with the development of acquired resistance. To
monitor the rate of proteasome degradation, we utilized an activity-based
probe to label proteasomes inside cells and in-gel fluorescence assays
for visualization. Using a similar approach, we also measured the rate of
proteasome synthesis by western blotting analysis of unlabeled proteasome
subunits.Conclusion: Here, we report that the acquired resistance to
carfilzomib in BxPC3 cells does not involve previously reported
resistance mechanisms, but may arise from accelerated proteasome
turnover. In order to further validate our findings as a novel mechanism
determining cellular sensitivity to proteasome inhibition, we are
currently assessing whether cancer cells that are intrinsically resistant
to proteasome inhibition have increased rates of proteasome turnover
compared to sensitive cells. Taken together, our findings may provide
previously unaddressed insights into cancer resistance to proteasome
inhibition.

