Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polycomb-mediated suppression of the voltage-gated potassium
channel KCNA5 promotes Ewing sarcoma cell survival


In Ewing sarcoma (ES) relapse is prevalent indicating that some cancer
cells are resistant to treatment; however, the mechanism(s) governing
treatment resistance and relapse are unknown. Voltage-gated potassium
(Kv) channels play an essential role in maintaining a balance between
cell survival and apoptosis. In particular, the Kv1.5 channel is a key
sensor of oxygen tension and regulator of apoptosis, controlling
potassium efflux and caspase activation. It was recently discovered that
brain tissue can be tolerized to conditions of hypoxia and nutrient
deprivation and that this ischemic tolerance is mediated by upregulation
of the polycomb (PcG) protein BMI-1 and epigenetic repression of the
Kv1.5-encoding locus KCNA5. Given that Kv1.5 expression is often
downregulated in human cancers and that ES cells upregulate the PcG
proteins BMI-1 and EZH2, we hypothesized that polycomb-dependent
suppression of KCNA5 contributes to ES cell survival under conditions of
stress. To test this hypothesis, we exposed ES and non-transformed cells
to conditions of hypoxia (1% O2) and growth factor deprivation and
measured cell viability in the presence and absence of potassium channel
blockers 4-aminopyridine (4AP) and diphenyl phosphine oxide-1 (DPO-1).
These studies were repeated in ES cells following BMI-1 knockdown,
treatment with the EZH2 inhibitor GSK-126 and in ES cells that were
genetically altered to ectopically express active wild-type (WT) or
inactive (Pore-Dead (PD)) Kv1.5 channel. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) was used to determine PcG protein binding at the KCNA5 locus.
Exposure of non-transformed cells to hypoxia and growth factor
deprivation resulted in significant cell death. In contrast, ES cell
viability was unaffected. Significantly, however, knockdown of BMI-1 and
inhibition of EZH2 resulted in diminished ES cell viability in conditions
of stress and this cell death was blocked by 4AP and DPO-1. Likewise,
pharmacologic inhibition of Kv1.5 also inhibited stress-induced death of
non-transformed cells. ES cells transduced to ectopically express WT- but
not PD-Kv1.5 were sensitized to stress-induced cell death and this
reduction in cell viability was again reversed by 4AP and DPO-1. Caspase
activation assays confirmed that cell death was mediated by apoptosis.
Finally, ChIP studies revealed the presence of BMI-1 and the
EZH2-dependent histone modification, H3K27me3, at the KCNA5 promoter in
ES cells. Together these data show that ES cells are resistant to hypoxia
and growth factor induced cell death and that this resistance is
mechanistically linked to downregulation of Kv1.5 channel activity.
Further, we have determined that suppression of the Kv1.5 channel is
mediated epigenetically, by polycomb-dependent repression of the KCNA5
locus. Together these studies reveal a novel mechanism of ES cell
survival under conditions of physiologic stress.

