Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of pancreatic carcinogenesis by t-CUPM, a dual
inhibitor of c-Raf and soluble epoxide hydrolase


Mutant Kras activated Raf-MAPK/ERK pathway and chronic pancreatitis are
the most common pathogenic events involved in human pancreatic
carcinogenesis. The soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), a pro-inflammatory
enzyme, generally inactivates anti-inflammatory epoxyeicosatrienoic acids
(EETs). Herein, we have synthesized a novel compound of
trans-4-{4-[3-(4-chloro-3-trifluoromethyl-phenyl)-ureido]-cyclohexyloxy}-py
ridine-2-carboxylic acid methylamide (t-CUPM) via modifying the central
phenyl ring of sorafenib and confirmed its dual inhibition of sEH and
c-Raf by recombinant kinase activity assay. Pharmacokinetic analysis
revealed that oral dosing of t-CUPM resulted in the higher blood levels
than that of sorafenib throughout the complete time course (48 h). The
effect of t-CUPM on the development of pancreatitis and pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (mPanIN) was determined in the
LSL-KrasG12D/Pdx1-Cre mice. The results showed that t-CUPM significantly
reduced the severity of chronic pancreatitis, as measured for the extents
of acini loss, inflammatory cell infiltration and stromal fibrosis. The
progression of low-grade mPanIN I to high grade mPanIN II/III was
significantly suppressed by t-CUPM treatment. Inhibition of mutant
Kras-transmitted phosphorylations of MEK/ERK was demonstrated in
pancreatic tissues and in vitro pancreatic cancer cells by Western blot
assay. qPCR analysis revealed that t-CUPM treatment resulted in
significantly decreasing the levels of inflammatory cytokines including
TNF-, MCP-1, as well as VCAM-1, and the levels of Shh and GLI1 (Hedgehog
pathway). Analysis of eicosanoid profile revealed a significant increase
of the EET/DHET ratio that further confirmed sEH inhibition by t-CUPM.
These results indicate that simultaneous inhibition of sEH and c-Raf by
t-CUPM is important in preventing chronic pancreatitis and
carcinogenesis. (supported by NIH R01CA172431)Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

