Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate conjugated site-specifically to anti-human-CD3-Fab is
efficacious in mouse models of ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer affects 22,000 women in the US each year. Folate receptor
(FOLR1) is overexpressed in a high proportion of ovarian tumors and is
generally associated with advanced stage disease. We report a
first-in-class bi-specific conjugate for ovarian cancer by using RECODE
technology that site-specifically incorporates novel amino acids into
proteins in bacterial cells. The Ambrx bi-specific conjugate (Fol-aCD3)
is developed for epithelial ovarian cancer and consists of (i) Folate
that can bind to FOLR1 receptor on ovarian cancer cells and (ii)
Anti-human CD3 Fab that can bind to the CD3 receptor on cytotoxic T
cells. The potential engagement of T cells by Fol-aCD3 provides for T
cell recruitment especially in an immune evasive, suppressive and
tolerogenic tumor microenvironment. Para-acetyl phenylalanine (pAcF)
containing anti-CD3 Fab is conjugated to hydroxyl-amine-folate
drug-linker. The resulting compound was analyzed by LC-MS with >95%
conjugation of a single folate per Fab and >95% main peak by
size-exclusion chromatography. By an in vitro LDH cytotoxicity assay
using activated human T-cells, Fol-aCD3 killed SKOV-3 and Ov-90 cells
with an EC50 of 7.4 and 4.4 ng/mL, respectively. The pharmacokinetic
half-life in CD1 mice is 20 and 60 minutes for IV and IP administration,
respectively. Fol-aCD3 delivered IV at 5, 0.5 or 0.05 mg/kg daily for 5
days inhibited tumor growth in a dose-dependent manner for Ov-90
co-implanted subcutaneously with activated T-cells in NOD-SCID mice on a
folate deficient diet. There was no body weight loss (BWL). Fol-aCD3 was
tested in a peritoneal dissemination mouse model of ovarian cancer where
the cancer cells, Fol-aCD3, and activated T-cells were injected IP. At a
dose of 1 mg/kg of Fol-aCD3 delivered every 3rd day simultaneously with
activated T-cells, the NOD-SCID mice exhibited transient BWL but
recovered by the 4th day. The treated mice experienced 30% and 50%
increase in life span (ILS) for SKOV-3 and OV-90, respectively. The
increased survival was seen for mice treated immediately upon tumor cell
inoculation (prevention mode) as well as for mice treated 17 days after
inoculation (treatment mode). Thus, Fol-aCD3 is being considered for
development as a therapeutic for ovarian cancer..

