Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin may reduce the metastatic burden in the transgenic
adenocarcioma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model


Introduction and Objective: A large body of evidence supports the role of
dietary factors in prostate cancer development and progression. We are
interested in investigating the chemopreventive potential of capsaicin,
the active compound in chilli peppers that is traditionally used
topically to treat various pain-related syndromes. Recently capsaicin has
been demonstrated to have anti-carcinogenic properties in vitro through a
number of different mechanisms. In our study we aim to study the
chemopreventive properties of capsaicin using the transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model, a murine model that
closely resembles the progression of human disease.Methodology:
Thirty-five six-week old TRAMP x C57Bk mice were randomized into two
groups: control or capsaicin. Mice received either capsaicin (5 mg/kg
body weight) or vehicle (saline) three times a week by oral gavage until
the age of 30 weeks. Body weight was measured thrice weekly. All mice
were sacrificed at 30 weeks. Body weight, genito-urinary (GU) weight,
tumour burden were assessed. Prostate, seminal vesicles, lung, liver,
esophagus, lymph nodes and pancreas were obtained for histological
analysis. Serum was collected at the termination of the study for
analysis of serum capsaicin concentration. Prostate tumours were analyzed
by immunohistochemical analysis using proliferative and mechanistic
markers. All tumours were scored by an on-site pathologist according to
the histopathic grading scale described by Hurwitz AA, et al.Results:
Interim results revealed that higher percentage of high-grade cancer in
control group (n = 18). The presence of PIN-like pre-cancerous lesions in
only the treatment group and not the control group (n = 18). The
capsaicin treated mice also demonstrated a reduced proportion of
metastatic cancers compared to the control group. There were no
significant changes in the GU wet weight between groups (n = 35).
Immunohistochemical analysis of the prostate tumour is ongoing. Capsaicin
was well tolerated, as there was no pathological liver or esophagus or
gastrointestinal toxicities or difference in body weight between groups.
Further results are currently under investigation.Conclusion: Interim
results suggest that oral administration of capsaicin is well tolerated
and may reduce the metastatic burden in the TRAMP model. Ongoing studies
are currently underway to delineate the mechanism of action.

