Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic applications of fatty acid synthase monoclonal
antibodies


Fatty acid synthase (FASN), is an enzyme capable of de novo fatty acid
synthesis and highly expressed and activated in most human carcinomas.
Fatty acid synthase is a multi-enzyme protein that catalyzes fatty acid
synthesis and is not a single enzyme but a whole enzymatic system
composed of two identical 272 KDa multifunctional polypeptides.
Fatty-acid synthesis is now associated with clinically aggressive tumor
behavior, tumor-cell growth and is associated with poor prognosis in
prostate and breast cancer. Its inhibition is selectively cytotoxic to
human cancer cells. Thus, FASN and fatty acid metabolism have become an
important focus for the diagnostic and treatment of cancer. We have
developed a panel of anti-human FASN Mab for application to several
diagnostic platforms. Recombinant full length intact FASN protein (rFASN)
was used to immunized C57BL/6 mice, sera were collected from pre- and
post-immunized mice and tested by ELISA and Western blot on rFASN protein
or rFASN immobilized on Western blot. Spleens from mice with the highest
anti-FASN antibody titer was fused with a mouse myeloma cell line
Sp2/0-Ag14 for hybridoma production. Among the panel of positive
anti-FASN clones selected, two clones with isotype of IgG1kappa have
shown strong reactivity to the rFASN and native FASN protein on Western
analysis. Upon further Western analyses with cell lysates, we have
demonstrated specific detection of FASN protein in human embryonic kidney
cells (HEK), HEK cells overexpressing the rFASN protein, HOP-62 cells
which express low levels of FASN and MALME cells, which express high
levels of FASN. Additional biochemical characterization of these
antibodies is ongoing, and includes epitope mapping and reactivity to
various FASN protein fragments. These anti-FASN antibodies will be tested
by IHC, ELISA to compare tissues expression levels of FAS by IHC or
circulating levels of the FASN in both normal and cancer patients. With
the increasing development of FAS inhibitors these antibodies will be
tested as Companion Diagnostics and tested to see if the rise and fall of
the FASN circulating levels correspond with cancer progression or therapy
response.

