Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRPK1 inhibition and modulation of VEGF alternative splicing as a
potential therapeutic strategy in prostate cancer


Angiogenesis is required for tumor growth and is induced principally by
VEGF-A. VEGF-A pre-mRNA is alternatively spliced at the terminal exon to
produce two families of isoforms, pro- and anti-angiogenic, only the
former of which is upregulated in prostate cancer. In renal epithelial
cells and colon cancer cells, the choice of VEGF splice isoforms is
controlled by the splicing factor SRSF1, phosphorylated by SRPK1.
Immunohistochemistry staining of human samples revealed a significant
increase in SRPK1 expression both in prostate intra-epithelial neoplasia
lesions as well as malignant adenocarcinoma compared to benign prostate
tissue. We therefore tested the hypothesis that the selective
upregulation of pro-angiogenic VEGF in prostate cancer may be under
control of SRPK1 activity. SRPK1 levels were up-regulated in several
prostate cancer cell lines in comparison with normal prostate epithelial
cells. A switch in the expression of VEGF165 towards the anti-angiogenic
isoform, VEGF165b, was seen in PC-3 cells with SRPK1 knock-down (KD).
PC-3 -SRPK1 KD cells resulted in tumors that grew more slowly in
xenografts, with decreased microvessel density. No effect was seen as a
result of SRPK1 KD on growth, proliferation, migration and invasion
capabilities of PC-3 cells in vitro. Moreover, VEGF over-expression from
a splicing-insensitive construct in PC-3/SRPK1 KD cells rescued tumor
growth. Small molecule inhibitors of SRPK1 are able to switch splicing
towards the anti-angiogenic isoform, VEGF165b in PC3 cells in vitro and
decrease tumor growth when administered intraperitoneally in vivo in a
mouse model of orthotopic prostate cancer. Our study suggests that
modulation of SRPK1 and subsequent inhibition of tumor angiogenesis by
regulation of VEGF splicing can alter prostate tumor growth and supports
further studies into the use of SRPK1 inhibition as a potential
anti-angiogenic therapy in prostate cancer.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

