Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VLA-4 targeted nanoparticles deliver a cMYC-MAX prodrug antagonist
extends survival a metastatic myeloma mouse model


Background: While it is well known that MYC oncoprotein drives multiple
myeloma (MM) pathogenesis, the development of several small-molecule
inhibitors of the c-MYC/MAX interaction has been limited by rapid
systemic metabolism, poor bioavailability and the inability of the drug
to reach inhibitory concentrations in the tumor.Objective: The goal of
this study was to develop and deliver an effective VLA-4-targeted Sn 2
lipase-labile Myc-inhibitor nanotherapy.Experimental Methods: A novel Sn
2 phosphatidylcholine-cMyc-Max antagonist prodrug (M1-PD) was designed,
synthesized, characterized and evaluated in vitro and in vivo. In vitro,
titrated free M1-PD was compared to free Myc-antagonist in human MM cell
lines (H929 and U266) and mouse MM (5TGM1). M1-PD was incorporated into
two lipid-based nanoparticle genera (Background: While it is well known
that MYC oncoprotein drives multiple myeloma (MM) pathogenesis, the
development of several small-molecule inhibitors of the c-MYC/MAX
interaction has been limited by rapid systemic metabolism, poor
bioavailability and the inability of the drug to reach inhibitory
concentrations in the tumor.Objective: The goal of this study was to
develop and deliver an effective VLA-4-targeted Sn 2 lipase-labile
Myc-inhibitor nanotherapy.Experimental Methods: A novel Sn 2
phosphatidylcholine-cMyc-Max antagonist prodrug (M1-PD) was designed,
synthesized, characterized and evaluated in vitro and in vivo. In vitro,
titrated free M1-PD was compared to free Myc-antagonist in human MM cell
lines (H929 and U266) and mouse MM (5TGM1). M1-PD was incorporated into
two lipid-based nanoparticle genera (<20nm and 200nm) that were
functionalized for MM targeting using a peptidomimetic VLA-4-lipid
ligand. The nanoparticles were physico-chemically characterized and
evaluated for their relative pharmacokinetics in vivo. Effectiveness of
the two VLA-4-targeted M1-PD nanotherapies were evaluated in MM cell
cultures, correlated with VLA-4 expression levels, and then studied in
C57BL/KaLwRij mice with metastatic 5TGM1.Results: Bioactivity of free
M1-PD was several orders magnitude more potent that the free cMyc
antagonist in cell culture. Binding and efficacy of M1-PD nanoparticles
correlated with integrin expression in target cells. VLA-4-M1-PD
nanoparticles (Background: While it is well known that MYC oncoprotein
drives multiple myeloma (MM) pathogenesis, the development of several
small-molecule inhibitors of the c-MYC/MAX interaction has been limited
by rapid systemic metabolism, poor bioavailability and the inability of
the drug to reach inhibitory concentrations in the tumor.Objective: The
goal of this study was to develop and deliver an effective VLA-4-targeted
Sn 2 lipase-labile Myc-inhibitor nanotherapy.Experimental Methods: A
novel Sn 2 phosphatidylcholine-cMyc-Max antagonist prodrug (M1-PD) was
designed, synthesized, characterized and evaluated in vitro and in vivo.
In vitro, titrated free M1-PD was compared to free Myc-antagonist in
human MM cell lines (H929 and U266) and mouse MM (5TGM1). M1-PD was
incorporated into two lipid-based nanoparticle genera (<20nm and 200nm)
that were functionalized for MM targeting using a peptidomimetic
VLA-4-lipid ligand. The nanoparticles were physico-chemically
characterized and evaluated for their relative pharmacokinetics in vivo.
Effectiveness of the two VLA-4-targeted M1-PD nanotherapies were
evaluated in MM cell cultures, correlated with VLA-4 expression levels,
and then studied in C57BL/KaLwRij mice with metastatic 5TGM1.Results:
Bioactivity of free M1-PD was several orders magnitude more potent that
the free cMyc antagonist in cell culture. Binding and efficacy of M1-PD
nanoparticles correlated with integrin expression in target cells.
VLA-4-M1-PD nanoparticles (<20nm and 200nm) equivalently inhibited MM
cell growth in vitro compared to controls. In C57BL/KaLwRij mice with
metastatic 5TGM1, VLA-4-MI1-PD 20nm micelles conferred significant
survival benefit (T/D) over the 20nm targeted no drug (T/ND) or untreated
controls (NT/ND) (52 days vs. 29 days, p=0.001) and versus the 200nm
VLA-4-MI1-PD nanocolloid and its controls.Conclusion: These finding
support the feasibility of a new VLA-4-directed nanotherapy to deliver
lipase-labile cMyc prodrug to disrupt MYC-MAX dimerization and improve MM
survival.

