Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of ALK fusions in circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
of NSCLC


Background:Many NSCLC patients have insufficient tumor sample or have
high co-morbidities preventing access to tissue biopsies for FISH or IHC
to determine ALK fusion and subsequent eligibility to Crizotinib therapy.
We developed a gene/protein assay for the ALK fusion and examined CTCs
and CTC subpopulation incidence and molecular characterization in newly
diagnosed NSCLC patients.Methods:10 samples from newly diagnosed NSCLC
patients prior to therapy were recruited and blood specimens were
collected and shipped to Epic Sciences. 2/10 had known ALK rearrangement
through tissue analysis. All nucleated cells were plated onto glass
slides and subjected to IF staining and CTC identification by fluorescent
scanners and algorithmic analysis. CTCs, defined as classic (CK+ CD45-
w/intact DAPI nuclei and morphologically distinct), apoptotic (CK+,
CD45-, non-intact nuclei) and CK- (CK-, CD45-, intact and distinct) were
identified. Samples were characterized with ALK IF to assess expression.
Patients with known ALK rearrangements in tissue also had their CTCs
assessed with ALK FISH.Results:Assays for the ALK protein and ALK gene
rearrangement were developed and specificity confirmed utilizing H2228
(ALK positive) & A549 (ALK negative) cells spiked into donor blood and
run through the Epic Assay. Expression of ALK fusions was visualized in
CTCs of 1/2 patients with known ALK rearrangements and 0/8 patients with
no ALK rearrangements. ALK fusion protein expression was seen in classic,
apoptotic, small and CK- CTCs.Conclusion:ALK fusion protein and ALK
rearrangement assessment with FISH utilizing the Epic CTC platform
demonstrates sensitivity and specificity to identification of patients
eligible to Crizotinib. The identification of ALK in CTC subpopulations
identifies unique tumor cell morphology and suggests evidence of
epithelial plasticity. Further clinical studies are ensuing to determine
the sensitivity and specificity of ALK in CTCs and the relevance of CTC
subpopulations related to Crizotinib therapy and NSCLC progression.

