Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational Proof-of-Concept (TransPoC), a not-for-profit
research organization enabling access to large-scale translational
oncology platforms: The Patient-Derived Xenograft network


TransPoC is a not-for-profit research organization that will deliver
open-access, large-scale translational oncology platforms to enable
greater clinical proof-of-concept success for new cancer therapies.
TransPoC will comprise three platforms: 1. CPN - Cancer Cell PoC Network
for screening compounds against 1000+ genomically-characterized cell
lines; 2. MPN- Mouse PoC Network - a multi-site platform for mouse
preclinical trials using genomically-characterized Patient-Derived
Xenograft (PDX) models; 3. BioIT - analysis and integration of genomic
information and pharmacological profiling data. Here we present an
overview of the Mouse PoC Network, define a path to implementation of
multi-center pre-clinical trials in mice and describe a pilot study to
demonstrate the feasibility of implementing such a network. PDX models
are increasingly used in pre-clinical studies as they capture and retain
the histological, molecular, and genetic heterogeneity of the original
tumor compared to cell line derived xenografts and are therefore a closer
representation of a patient's tumor in situ. To enable transformative
preclinical studies, models need to be characterized in a manner similar
to tumor samples in The Cancer Genome Atlas and the International Cancer
Genome Consortium, and must be assembled in sufficient quantity to
capture clinically relevant major cancer (sub)types. To achieve this,
TransPoC is building a global network of mouse PDX hospitals with genomic
and metabolomic profiles characterized in a consistent manner. In
addition, each mouse hospital will utilize common SOPs to generate
comparable pharmacology data sets across sites that will include testing
standard of care agents. BioIT will enable deep interrogation of data
sets and provide pipelines for pharmacogenomics correlates of response to
both standard and novel agents. To date, the network has collated over
2,000 PDX models and will enable sponsors to execute multi-center
pre-clinical trials in a manner similar to those used in
multi-institutional cooperative clinical trials. To demonstrate the
viability of MPN, a pilot study has been initiated at 6 sites located in
Canada, Italy, China and USA to evaluate the activity of MEK and RAF
inhibitors against a panel of BRAF/KRAS mutant melanoma and colorectal
cancer PDX models. An update on the initial tolerability, PK/PD/efficacy
studies and molecular characterization of PDX models in the network will
be presented. TransPoC continues to recruit new sites and characterize
their PDX models for incorporation into MPN for use by TransPoC sponsors.
Through this effort TransPoC enables rapid assessment of standard and
novel investigational therapies to determine their therapeutic potential
for translation to clinical trials with a mission to improve the chance
of observing clinical proof-of-concept.

