Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential of urinary MMP-9/NGAL complex as a novel biomarker for
the early detection of gastric cancer


The early diagnosis of gastric cancer (GC) provides the opportunity for
curative endoscopic resection. However, although endoscopy is a standard
diagnostic method for this disease, comprehensive screening endoscopy
would be invasive, expensive and could result in significant
complications. To date, there is a significant lack of useful GC
biomarkers. In fact, serum tumor markers such as CEA and CA19-9 have not
been recommended as GC diagnostics due to their low sensitivity and
specificity. With the goal of discovering non-invasive biomarkers for the
early diagnosis of GC, we have conducted a pilot case-control study
utilizing urine samples from individuals with gastric cancer vs. healthy
control samples. A cohort of 70 patients composed of 35 patients with
gastric cancer and 35 age- and sex-matched healthy controls was analyzed.
Baseline clinical characteristics were tightly controlled and no
significant differences were noted. Since changes in the microvasculature
have been described in the very early stages of GC, we conducted an
angiogenesis protein array analysis to identify potential candidate
biomarkers. Three proteins, IL-8, PECAM-1, MMP-9, were found to be
elevated in the urine of GC patients compared to controls by this method.
In confirming the elevated levels of urinary MMP-9 by gelatin zymography,
we determined that MMP-9/NGAL complex was also significantly elevated in
the GC urines compared to control samples. We therefore tested all
samples for the presence of IL-8, PECAM-1, MMP-9 and MMP-9/NGAL complex
using monospecific ELISAs. We were able to confirm that urinary levels of
MMP-9/NGAL complex were significantly higher in the GC group compared to
the healthy control group (Median, 85 pg/ml (IQR, 43-224) vs. 0 pg/ml
(IQR, 0-213), respectively, P=0.020). Urinary MMP-9/NGAL complex could
distinguish between healthy control samples and GC samples with an area
under the curve of 0.657(95%CI, 0.527-0.789) in a receiver operating
characteristics analysis. A cut-off value of urinary MMP-9/NGAL complex
was established and the statistical performance characteristics of this
urinary biomarker were also determined. In summary, urinary MMP-9/NGAL
complex emerged as a significant non-invasive biomarker for gastric
cancer including early stage disease. Ongoing studies are focused on the
large scale validation of these findings.

