Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating proteolytic products of carboxypeptidase N for early
detection of breast cancer


Background: Carboxypeptidase N (CPN) plays an important role in
regulating vasoactive peptide hormones, growth factors, and cytokines by
specifically cleaving their C-terminal basic residues. Herein we
demonstrated that the circulating peptides specifically cleaved by CPN in
the tumor microenvironment can indeed be stage-specific indicators of
breast cancer.Methods: The activity of CPN was evaluated using an ex-vivo
peptide cleavage assay, in which synthesized C3f peptide
(His6-C3f_S1304-R1320-His6) is incubated in interstitial fluids of breast
tumor and adjacent normal breast tissues in mice with orthotopic
implantation of the human cell line MDA-MB-231. Fragment profiling, by an
approach combining nanopore fractionation and mass spectrometry, revealed
the nature and extent of cleavage by CPN. These results correlated with
the level of CPN-catalyzed peptides in blood specimens taken from the
tumor-bearing mice, healthy women and breast cancer patients. CPN
expression in the same set of samples was further examined by
immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting.Results: We showed that
generation of C3f_R1310-L1319 specifically correlated with the CPN
expression level. In both the mouse and clinical patient samples, the
amount of CPN was clearly increased in tumor tissues compared to that
seen in normal breast tissue, while its counterpart in blood remained
constant. The amount of 6 CPN-catalyzed peptides predominantly increased
in sera taken from the mice (n=8) at 2 weeks after orthotropic
implantation. Six homologous peptides displayed the significantly higher
expression in the patients' plasma as early as the first pathologic stage
of breast cancer.Conclusions: The amount of circulating CPN-catalyzed
peptides reported here reflects the extent of this enzyme's activity in
tumors, and our results clearly indicate their strong potential as
biomarkers for non-invasive and early diagnosis of breast cancer. It
would certainly be nave to think that CPN-catalyzed peptides and the
enzyme itself are the only biomarkers specific for breast cancer
diagnosis. We do however argue that they can be used as a complementary
measure for very early diagnosis of tumor growth, particularly because
CPN activity within the tumor at this point is already detectable by
blood sampling. Such sensitivity together with all of the features
mentioned above lend well to their translation to the clinic, for breast
cancer and perhaps other pathologies.

