Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling event of alcohol-induced deregulation of Pol III genes
in breast cancer cells


Alcohol intake is consistently associated with an increased risk of
breast cancer. Alcohol consumption is more pronounced in ER+ breast
cancer cases than in ER- cases. However, its mechanism remains to be
determined. We reported that alcohol induces Pol III gene (RNA polymerase
III-dependent genes) transcription in vivo and in vitro. We continue to
define novel and unexpected targets, MSK1 (mitogen- stress-activated
protein kinase 1) and Brf1 (TFIIIB-related factor 1), in the
alcohol-induced response. Our aim is to delineate the mechanisms
regulating the processes of deregulation of Pol III genes, cell
transformation and tumorgenesis through this alcohol-induced response.
Brf1 specifically regulates Pol III gene transcription. Changes in Pol
III gene and Brf1 expression tightly link to cell transformation and
tumor formation. Alcohol-induced deregulation of Pol III genes may be
fundamental to the development of breast cancer. We have reported that a)
enhancement of Brf1 and Pol III gene expression is correlated with tumor
formation in alcohol-fed mice; b) alcohol increases ER activity to
elevate Brf1 and Pol III gene expression; c) alcohol activates JNK1 to
increase ER and Brf1 expression; d) ethanol induces H3ph (histone H3
phosphorylation), e) H3ph elevates Brf1 expression. However, nothing is
known about the role of MSK1 in transcription of Brf1 and Pol III genes.
Analysis of signal event has revealed that ethanol markedly stimulates
phosphorylation of MSK1 at serine 376 and threonine 581 in MCF-7 cells.
Blocking MSK1 singling decreases cellular level of Brf1 expression and
Pol III gene transcription. Further analysis indicates that MSK1 mediates
ER expression. Inhibition of MSK signaling decreases alcohol-induced
ERE-Luc reporter activity. Repression of ER expression by its siRNA
reduces alcohol-induced anchorage-independent growth of MCF-7 cells. Our
results have demonstrated that repression of MSK1 by its siRNA decreases
colony formation of MCF-7 cells. Further analysis of ChIP assay indicates
that ethanol treatment increases occupancy of ER to Brf1 promoter. These
results support the idea that alcohol activates MSK1 and enhances ER and
Brf1 expression resulting greater phenotypic changes. Together, our
studies indicate that ethanol-induced MSK1 activation may play a critical
role in alcohol-induced cell transformation and alcohol-associated ER+
breast cancer.*: The project is supported by NIH grants AA017288 and
AA021114 to Shuping Zhong

