Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting interferon-induced transmembrane protein 1: a novel
strategy to treat inflammatory breast cancer


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a very rare and aggressive form of
breast cancer that accounts for about 1 to 5% of all breast cancers
diagnosed in the United States. IBC is characterized by absence of a
discrete mass, coupled with very rapid progression and dermal lymphatic
invasion, which makes it the most lethal of the breast cancers. IBC is
currently treated by a multimodal approach involving systemic
chemotherapy, surgery, followed by radiation therapy; however, this
strategy has yielded a 5-year survival outcome of only 20 to 30%. There
is an urgent need to better understand the molecular mechanism that
contributes to the development of IBC and to use that knowledge to
identify novel targets that can be manipulated to enhance treatment
options for IBC patients. In the present study, we have examined the role
of human interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 1 (IFITM1) in the
proliferation and invasion of inflammatory breast cancer. IFITM1 is a
member of the interferon-inducible transmembrane protein family, which is
involved in many cellular functions, including the transduction of
antiproliferative and homotypic adhesion signals in lymphocytes,
inhibition of viral replication, and promotion of cell invasion. At
present, however, very little is known about the function of IFITM1 in
inflammatory breast cancer. Our in vitro studies were performed in human
inflammatory breast cancer cell lines; SUM149, SUM190, MDA-IBC-3, and
non-inflammatory MCF-7 breast cancer cells. We found that IFITM1 mRNA and
protein levels were constitutively overexpressed in SUM149 and MDA-IBC-3
cell lines but not expressed in non-inflammatory MCF-7 cells. Functional
analysis of IFITM1 by silencing of its expression with small-interfering
RNA showed that the loss of IFITM1 significantly inhibited the
proliferation and invasiveness of SUM149 and MDA-IBC-3 cells and it
completely blocked the ability of these cells to form colonies in soft
agar assays. Interestingly, we found that interferon (IFN-) significantly
induced IFITM1 expression in all three of the IBC cell lines; however,
IFN- treatment inhibited the proliferation and invasiveness of the IBC
cells. Our data also showed that several other interferon-regulated
genes, including STAT1, PLSCR1, and STAT6 were elevated in inflammatory
SUM149, MDA-IBC-3, and SUM190 cells but not in non-inflammatory MCF-7
cells. Overall, these results demonstrate that IFITM1 plays an important
role in the proliferation and invasiveness of IBC cells and they suggest
that targeting IFITM1 might be a novel strategy to treat inflammatory
breast cancer.

