Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stem cell niche detoxifies chemotherapy and protects malignant
hematopoietic cells via expression of cytochrome P450 enzymes


The bone marrow (BM) microenvironment plays a critical role in drug
resistance of malignant cells. Although both, direct contact as well as
soluble factors have been proposed, the mechanisms responsible for this
microenvironment-mediated protection remain unclear. We have recently
shown that BM stroma protects human hematopoietic stem cells from the
pro-differentiating effects of retinoid via cytochrome P450 (CYP) 26
mediated degradation (Ghiaur G et al., PNAS 2013). Here, we hypothesized
that drug metabolism by BM stroma via CYP enzymes is a general
cell-extrinsic mechanism of protection of malignant cells from
chemotherapy. First, we have designed a qPCR expression array platform
and found that human BM stroma expresses a variety of drug metabolizing
enzymes to levels comparable to human hepatocytes. Next, using qRT-PCR,
we confirmed that CYP3A4, a major drug metabolizing enzyme, is expressed
in primary BM stroma but not in multiple myeloma (MM) or acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) cells. We have found that BM stroma protects against
Bortezomib mediated kill of MM cells [H929 (pThe bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment plays a critical role in drug resistance of malignant
cells. Although both, direct contact as well as soluble factors have been
proposed, the mechanisms responsible for this microenvironment-mediated
protection remain unclear. We have recently shown that BM stroma protects
human hematopoietic stem cells from the pro-differentiating effects of
retinoid via cytochrome P450 (CYP) 26 mediated degradation (Ghiaur G et
al., PNAS 2013). Here, we hypothesized that drug metabolism by BM stroma
via CYP enzymes is a general cell-extrinsic mechanism of protection of
malignant cells from chemotherapy. First, we have designed a qPCR
expression array platform and found that human BM stroma expresses a
variety of drug metabolizing enzymes to levels comparable to human
hepatocytes. Next, using qRT-PCR, we confirmed that CYP3A4, a major drug
metabolizing enzyme, is expressed in primary BM stroma but not in
multiple myeloma (MM) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. We have
found that BM stroma protects against Bortezomib mediated kill of MM
cells [H929 (p<0.01)] and VP16 mediated kill of AML cells [KG1 (p0.01)]
(Table). Since CYP3A4 plays a major role in the metabolism of
aforementioned drugs, we studied if stromal CYP3A4 contributes to this
protection. We found that ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 antagonist,
overcomes bone marrow stroma-mediated resistance to Bortezomib (p=0.01),
and VP16 (p=0.03). Ketoconazole had no effects in stroma free cultures.
In addition, shRNA-mediated knockdown of stromal CYP3A4 renders these
cells unable to protect malignant cells from chemotherapy (p=0.01). These
studies open the possibilities that the stem cell niche serves as a
drug-free sanctuary, where malignant stem cells can survive conventional
chemotherapy. Targeting stromal P450 enzymes hold promise of improved
efficiency of stem cell directed therapies and decrease rate of relapse
in hematological malignancies.Effects of VP16 and Bortezomib on cellular
and clonogenic recovery of KG1 and H929 cells, respectively.
Stroma-CYP3A4 represents experiments performed on CYP3A4 knockdown
stroma. Control shRNA infected stroma showed no differences compared to
untransduced cells. Data are presented as meanSEM from three independent
experiments.


