Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A bispecific HER2 targeting FynomAb with superior anti-tumor
activity and novel mode of action


Upregulation of HER2 is a hallmark of 20% to 30% of invasive breast
cancers, rendering this receptor an attractive target for cancer therapy.
Although HER2 targeting agents have provided substantial clinical benefit
as cancer therapeutics, there is a need for the development of new agents
aiming at circumventing anti-HER2 resistance.Fynomers are small 7 kDa
globular proteins derived from the SH3 domain of the human Fyn kinase
(Fyn SH3) that can be engineered to bind with antibody-like affinity and
specificity to virtually any target of choice. Fynomers can be fused to
N-terminal and/or C-terminal ends of antibodies to generate multispecific
therapeutics (FynomAbs) with tailored architectures. FynomAbs can be
produced using standard antibody technology (GMP production yield of 3.3
g/L at 1000 L scale achieved), and show IgG-like biophysical properties
and pharmacokinetic profiles.Based on the approved antibody pertuzumab we
have created a panel of bispecific FynomAbs which target two epitopes on
HER2. The activity of the HER2 targeting FynomAbs was found to depend on
the FynomAb architecture, i.e. the spatial arrangement of the binding
sites of antibody and the Fynomer.The most potent of these FynomAbs,
termed COVA208, demonstrated superior tumor cell growth inhibition in
vitro compared to pertuzumab and trastuzumab. COVA208 was characterized
in detail and showed an increased ability to induce rapid
HER2-internalization and apoptosis in vitro. Moreover, it elicited a
stronger inhibition of downstream HER2 signaling which was accompanied by
a reduction of HER2, HER3 and EGFR levels in vitro and in vivo. The
therapeutic potential of COVA208 has been demonstrated in vivo in four
different HER2 mouse models, where COVA208 exhibited excellent anti-tumor
activity. Importantly, COVA208 demonstrated superior activity in vivo
compared to trastuzumab and pertuzumab.The bispecific FynomAb COVA208 has
the potential to enhance the clinical efficacy and expand the scope of
HER2-directed therapies, and delineates a paradigm for designing a new
class of antibody-based therapeutics for other receptor targets.

