Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation of tid1 regulates galectin-7 ubiquitination and
localization to suppress head and neck cancer metastasis


Background: Tid1, a DnaJ cochaperone protein mainly located in
mitochondria, functions as a tumor suppressor in different types of solid
tumors. Recently, we first demonstrate that Tid1 is negatively associated
with cell migration, tumor status, and survival prognosis in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (J Pathol 2009; 219:347-55). As a
cochaperone protein like Tid1, it should be instrumental to find the Tid1
client/interacting proteins, consequently, to understand the
physiological function of those Tid1 client/interacting proteins as
therapeutic targets for future HNSCC treatment.Methods: First, we applied
affinity chromatography and systemic proteomics analysis to identify
galectin-7 as one of client/interacting proteins of Tid1. Subsequently,
using the metastatic and/or non-metastatic cells determined tumorigenic
properties of HNSCC with overexpression and/or knockdown of galectin-7
and/or Tid1. The nuclear and cytosolic subfractions were isolated to
determine the role of Tid1 of galectin-7 nuclearization. We also
attempted to correlate the expression of Tid1 and galectin-7 with tumor
stage of HNSCC patient tissues by immunohistochemical assay. Finally,
site-directed mutagenesis was applied to identify the novel N-link
glycosylated sites of Tid1, by which to regulate the interaction and
stability of galectin-7.Results: We found metastatic cells expressed
lower level of Tid1 and higher level of galectin-7 than non-metastatic
cells. For in vitro tumorigenic analyses, we observed that overexpression
of galectin-7 resulted in elevated migration, invasion and soft agar
colony formation abilities in HNSCC. Inversely, co-overexpression of Tid1
reduced the expression of galectin-7, impaired the galectin-7 mediated
migration, invasion and soft agar colony formation ability of HNSCC, and
retarded nuclearization of galectin-7. Moreover, knockdown of galectin-7
reduced migration, invasion and soft agar colony formation ability of
HNSCC metastatic cells. Further, we found that galectin-7 ubiquitination
as revealed by antiubiquitin immunoblot analysis in immunoprecipitates.
Finally, the negative relationship was between Tid1 and Galectin-7
expression in HNSCC clinical specimen. We found out that Tid1 interacts
with galectin-7 through N-linked glycosylation. Tid1 mutants of N-link
glycosylated sites restored the level and the tumorigenic function of
galectin-7.Conclusion: Our studies first pointed out that galectin-7
plays pivotal roles in HNSCC tumorigenesis. Notably, we identified
galectin-7, which is the client/interacting protein of Tid1. We
hypothesized that Tid1/ Hsp70 may regulate galectin-7 stability by
ubiquitinylation. The molecular mechanism by which Tid1 negatively
modulates the galectin-7 warrants further investigation.

