Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytosolic domain of a disintegrin and metalloprotease
(ADAM)-15 promotes proliferation of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in worldwide,
including in Taiwan. Lung cancer can typically be grouped into two large
categories: small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), which account for 15% and 85% of lung cancers, respectively.
Despite the continuing endeavors by scientists and clinicians, the cure
rate remains low and there is urgent to develop a novel target for NSCLC
therapy. The a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)-15 is a
transmembrane protease mediating a wide variety of activities including
proteolysis, adhesion, cell fusion and signaling. The expression of
ADAM-15 is significantly up-regulated in NSCLC compared to normal tissue.
However, the mechanisms of ADAM-15-modulated tumorigenesis in NSCLC are
remained unclear. The external enzymetic activity of ADAM15 doesnt
involve in the common pathways in tumoregenesis of NSCLC, such as
HER3-EGFR signaling. ADAM15 isoforms are different in cytoplasmic tails,
which may drive different biological behavior through intracellular
signaling. Therefore, we hypothesized that the diverse cytosolic domain
of ADAM15 isoforms plays a crucial role in tumoregenesis of NSCLC. In
this study, using real-time quantitative PCR measuring the mRNA
expression of 22 ADAMs in NSCLC, we identified a correlation of higher
expression of ADAM15 in NSCLC of non-smokers (p=0.002, compared with ex-
and current smokers) and in adenocarcinoma (p=0.038, compared with
squamous cell ca). Comparing to non-invasive CL1-0 cells and matched
normal tissue, CL1-5 cells and NSCLC tissue expressed more the longest
ADAM-15 isoform with the largest amount of Src homology (SH)3-binding
domain. The association ADAM-15 with SH3-motif containing protein, growth
factor receptor-bound (Grb) 2, promoted the ability of proliferation in
NSCLC in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, we suggested that the
cytosolic domain of ADAM-15 promotes proliferation of NSCLC via enhance
of Grb2-associated signaling pathways, and the inhibition of ADAM-15 may
be a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC.

