Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammation- and angiogenesis- related genes: Interaction with
NSAID use, and serum inflammatory markers on colorectal cancer risk
within the Women's Health Initiative


Inflammation and angiogenesis are important pathways of colorectal
carcinogenesis. We investigated interactions between genes related to
both pathways and the use of NSAIDs on CRC risk. Furthermore, we assessed
whether specific variants interact with the inflammation biomarkers
C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum amyloid A (SAA).From the Women's
Health Initiative Observational Study of women aged 50-79 years, we
selected 821 Caucasian case/control matched pairs (1993-2008). We
genotyped 412 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) tagging 26 genes
related to inflammation and angiogenesis (ALOX5, CRP, IL1B, IL6, PTGIS,
PTGS1, PTGS2, TBXAS, TGFB1, TNF, ANGPT1, NGPT2, DKK4, DLL4, VEGFR1, IL10,
KDR, MAPK1, NRP1, NRP2, PGF, IK3CA, PIK3CG, TEK, VEGFA) using the
Illumina GoldenGate and Sequenom platforms. CRP and SAA were quantified
in serum by latex-enhanced nephelometry. CRC risk was estimated by
conditional logistic regression based on the co-dominant inheritance
model (or dominant if allele count Inflammation and angiogenesis are
important pathways of colorectal carcinogenesis. We investigated
interactions between genes related to both pathways and the use of NSAIDs
on CRC risk. Furthermore, we assessed whether specific variants interact
with the inflammation biomarkers C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum
amyloid A (SAA).From the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study of
women aged 50-79 years, we selected 821 Caucasian case/control matched
pairs (1993-2008). We genotyped 412 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) tagging 26 genes related to inflammation and angiogenesis (ALOX5,
CRP, IL1B, IL6, PTGIS, PTGS1, PTGS2, TBXAS, TGFB1, TNF, ANGPT1, NGPT2,
DKK4, DLL4, VEGFR1, IL10, KDR, MAPK1, NRP1, NRP2, PGF, IK3CA, PIK3CG,
TEK, VEGFA) using the Illumina GoldenGate and Sequenom platforms. CRP and
SAA were quantified in serum by latex-enhanced nephelometry. CRC risk was
estimated by conditional logistic regression based on the co-dominant
inheritance model (or dominant if allele count <10). P-values were
adjusted for correlated tests (pACT) unless genes were functional
candidates. Global P-values were obtained by likelihood ratio tests.
Additionally, in interaction analysis we controlled the false discovery
rate on the gene level (p-intadj). Interactions between SNPs and serum
inflammatory markers were evaluated by testing for different slopes of
CRC risk associated with each biomarker across genotype.One SNP in NRP1,
rs7895812 was significantly associated with CRC risk (pACT=0.02). Nine of
the examined SNPs modified the association between NSAID use and CRC
risk, although only two interactions remained significant after multiple
comparison adjustment. The protective association of NSAID use was
limited to individuals who were wildtype for PTGS2 rs1886233 (rs2383529,
intergenic: p-intadj=0.01), whereas for carriers of the variant allele in
FLT1 NSAID use was associated with a decreased CRC risk (rs1886233,
intronic: p-intadj=0.02). For serum CRP and SAA multiple interactions
with genetic variants were observed as well.We showed that genetic
variation in inflammation- and angiogenesis-related genes modified the
association between NSAID use and CRC risk; the genetic variants also
interacted with serum concentrations of CRP and SAA. This information may
aid in tailoring prevention strategies to individuals who will obtain the
greatest benefit from NSAIDs.

