Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional investigation of the CRD-BP hnRNP-K-Homology domains
for C-myc messenger RNA interaction


The coding region determinant binding protein (CRD-BP) is an oncofetal
protein, being ubiquitously expressed during embryogenesis, yet highly
repressed in adult tissues, except in cancerous tissues [Bell et al,
2013; Mueller-Pillasch et al, 1999]. CRD-BP was inherently identified by
its ability to physically associate with c-myc mRNA, and has been shown
to protect the transcript from degradation, hence prolonging its mRNA
half-life [Prokipcak et al, 1994, Noubissi et al, 2006]. In addition to
c-myc mRNA, several other mRNAs bound by CRD-BP have gene products
implicated in the development and progression of cancer [Bell et al,
2013]. As an RNA binding protein (RBP), CRD-BP is the Mus musculus
variant and homologous to the Homo sapiens IMP-1/Insulin-Like Growth
Factor 2 with 99.31% similarity, both categorized into a larger family
named VICKZ (Vera/Vg1 RBP, Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1,2,3/IMP-1,2,3,
CRD-BP, KOC, and ZBP-1). The VICKZ family of RBPs contains two RNA
Recognition Motifs (RRM) and four heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
[hnRNP]-K-Homology (KH) domains. Deletion analysis had shown that the KH
domains, and not the RRM domains, of IMP1 are important for binding RNA
substrates. To understand which of the KH domains are critical for
interaction with RNA, site-directed mutagenesis was performed to
introduce an aspartic acid (D) at the first glycine (G) of the G-X-X-G
region in the KH domains of CRD-BP. This D-X-X-G variation was
individually introduced to the four KH domains of CRD-BP. These four
CRD-BP KH domain variants were expressed, purified and assessed for
ability to bind c-myc mRNA using electromobility shift assays (EMSA). In
addition, plasmids carrying these variants of FLAG-CRD-BP were
transfected into HeLa cells. Immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-FLAG was
performed, followed by RT-qPCR to measure the relative amounts of c-myc
mRNA associated with each of the variants as compared to the controls.
The in vitro EMSA and IP cell data were all consistent with the notion
that all KH domain(s) are critical for CRD-BP-c-myc RNA interaction.
Using EMSA, additional binding assessments were carried out in a
systematic fashion to determine the smallest region of c-myc mRNA bound
by CRD-BP. These results will be presented and discussed, as they provide
insight into the role played by the KH domains of CRD-BP in binding RNA,
as well as what RNA characteristics are important for binding to CRD-BP.

