Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on experimental breast
cancer brain metastasis


The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) on breast cancer brain metastases. High
brain-metastatic variants of murine 4T1 breast cancer cells expressing
red fluorescent protein (RFP) were injected into the left ventricle of
transgenic nude mice expressing nestin-driven green fluorescent protein
(ND-GFP). ND-GFP mice express GFP in nascent blood vessels. At various
time points, the tumors and vasculature in the brain were imaged by
laser-scanning confocal and stereo fluorescence microscopy. Eighty
percent of the cells that reached the brain extravasated and grew
perivascularly; twenty percent of the cells, however, proliferated within
the vasculature which may lead to thrombosis-like infarction of the brain
parenchyma. Compared to the control group, mice treated with Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) had significant inhibition of brain metastasis
and increased survival (pThe aim of this study was to evaluate the
efficacy of Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) on breast cancer brain
metastases. High brain-metastatic variants of murine 4T1 breast cancer
cells expressing red fluorescent protein (RFP) were injected into the
left ventricle of transgenic nude mice expressing nestin-driven green
fluorescent protein (ND-GFP). ND-GFP mice express GFP in nascent blood
vessels. At various time points, the tumors and vasculature in the brain
were imaged by laser-scanning confocal and stereo fluorescence
microscopy. Eighty percent of the cells that reached the brain
extravasated and grew perivascularly; twenty percent of the cells,
however, proliferated within the vasculature which may lead to
thrombosis-like infarction of the brain parenchyma. Compared to the
control group, mice treated with Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) had
significant inhibition of brain metastasis and increased survival
(p<0.05). The results of the present study suggest the clinical potential
of bacterial therapy of breast cancer brain metastasis.

