Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Pareto efficiency model to explain hybrid cellular behavior in
tumor ecosystem


Ecological modeling provides a simple holistic view of the cancer
microenvironment to study the survival of different cancer clones
(phenotypes) within a microenvironment (ecosystem). Within a tumor
ecosystem, different phenotypic cells have different biological
properties and tasks. This heterogeneity provides tumors with an overall
phenotype that is needed for robust survival in the face of environment
stresses such as conventional chemotherapy.Here we propose a trade-off
model for understanding the tumor microenvironment, using Pareto
efficiency. The Pareto efficiency in economics describes an optimum
trade-off to satisfy different task requirements. We use this concept
from economics to see if the trade-offs correspond to the observed
behavior in various cancer phenotypes such as epithelial and mesenchymal
clones. This is based on the recent studies on using Pareto efficiency to
better understand the phenotypic evolutionary pathway in the morphospace
of an ecosystem. Extending this model to tumor ecosystems allows us to
define cellular hybrid phenotypes as a result of trade-off on performing
different tasks.Cells regulate the load of each task based on their
microenvironment stimulus. We assume tumor cells find the best trade-off
of phenotypes by weighted average of the canonical (specialized)
phenotypes, determine which genotype needs to be more expressed, and
create an overall hybrid phenotype. Studies recognize this hybrid feature
in the cancer ecology. For example based on the microenvironment
condition, epithelial, mesenchymal and stem cell phenotypes co-exist as a
hybrid phenotype.Within a heterogeneous tumor environment, experimental
observations provide quantitative values to differentiate a cell
subpopulation from others. Each cancer cell phenotype is defined by
certain quantitative features (traits) i that have value of vi, so the
whole phenotype is defined by its feature vector v.Selection pressure
forces the cancer cell to its optimal fitness function U, which can model
by an evolutionary dynamics. Although the fitness function is usually
unknown, it depends on the performance of each vital biological function,
i.e. U = U(p1(v),...,pk(v)). We assume there is a canonical phenotype k
that achieves task k with highest performance and all other hybrid
phenotypes evolve as a mixture of different canonical phenotypes. In a
tumor with three canonical phenotypes such as epithelial, mesenchymal and
stem cells, each of the above canonical phenotypes is a point on a
triangle of the tumor morphospace.Here, we examine if the presence of
hybrid phenotypic behavior such as mesenchymal-epithelial-stem hybrid
cells is the result of the tumor trade-off calculations and if all
probable phenotypes can rest in a defined geometry like a polygon or a
polyhedron in the morphospace of tumor ecosystems. It can help us to
focus on the most probable hybrid phenotype in an evolving tumor during
conventional therapies.

