Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential impact on the biology and biomarker utility of
ERG-typing in the context of ethnic differences of prostate cancer


Introduction: In comparison to other ethnicities African American men
have the highest incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer (CaP).
Recent reports on ethnic differences of ERG oncogenic activation, the
most common CaP genomic alteration, provide new insights into the ERG
based stratification of CaP in the context of the increasingly diverse
ethnic patient populations in the United States. This rapidly advancing
knowledge has potential to stratify CaP by ERG typing in a given patient
population that may eventually lead to new targeted treatments.Methods:
Whole-mounted prostate sections of 91 Caucasian American (CA) and 91
African American (AA) men matched for age, Gleason score and pathologic
stage were analyzed for ERG oncoprotein expression. High grade tumors
with a primary Gleason pattern of 4 or 5 or cumulative Gleason score of
8-10 from a total of 63 AA patients and 63 CA patients were also assessed
for ERG. Hormone nave AA CaP patients (n=306) with a minimum of two years
of follow up after radical prostatectomy were evaluated for ERG
frequencies in whole-mounted prostate specimens. Performance of PCA3, ERG
and PSA biomarkers were evaluated in 306 post-DRE urine samples from CA
and AA patients by the DTS 400 system and by whole transcriptome analyses
in selected CaP samples. The associations of biomarker scores with
clinical parameters were assessed in matching biopsies and were
stratified by ethnicity.Results: Remarkably higher frequencies of ERG
expression was noted in the index tumors of CA (63.3%) compared to AA
(28.6%) men. The observed difference was even more pronounced in higher
grade disease AA (16%) and CA (49%), respectively. ERG positive tumors
were more likely to be present in index tumors of younger AA men.
Furthermore, ERG negative tumors were significantly associated with
higher pathologic T stage. In urine assays the combination of ERG and
PCA3 scores increased the AUC performance as compared to serum PSA alone
(0.68 vs. 0.53, p = 0.0062) for predicting CaP in CA men. In contrast,
the biomarker panel showed strikingly poor performance in AA men (AUC =
0.49).Conclusions: ERG-based stratification defines molecular subtypes
and ethnic differences in the biology of CaP. Association of ERG negative
status with high grade tumors and poor prognostic features in AA patients
warrants the development of informative marker panels that includes ERG
to aid in diagnostic, prognostic and targeted therapy settings.

