Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture, isolation, and mutational analysis of single pancreatic
circulating tumor cells using NanoVelcro technology


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been developed as a
biomarker in several cancers, but not in pancreatic cancer (PDAC). The
available clinical technology for CTC study, CellSearch, suffers from
limited ability to perform molecular analysis. We sought to evaluate a
novel microfluidic NanoVelcro technology coupled to laser
micro-dissection (LMD), for CTC capture and single cell analysis of KRAS
mutations to confirm tumor origin of captured CTCs.Methods: NanoVelcro
utilizes a nano-spun polymer fiber, modified with streptavidin, to
capture CTCs using biotinylated antibodies. The system was optimized with
the CFPAC-1 (EpCAM+, KRAS G12 to V) cell line spiked into healthy donor
blood. Patient samples were collected from 2 mL peripheral venous blood
and run at the optimized flow rate of 1mL/hr. CTCs were defined by size (
10 m) and immuno-staining pattern (DAPI+/CK+/CD45-). Using LMD, single
cells were isolated and subjected to whole genome amplification followed
by PCR of KRAS exon 1 and subsequent Sanger Sequencing.Results: The
NanoVelcro system allowed for detection of mutant KRAS in isolated
CFPAC-1 cells. 6 CTCs were then isolated from a known KRAS G12 to V
mutant patient and 3/6 (50.0%) captured CTCs were found to have KRAS G12
to V mutations while normal WBCs from the same patient contained
wild-type KRAS.Conclusions: The microfluidic NanoVelcro technology
demonstrated capture of pancreatic CTCs and may prove useful in the
development of CTCs as a biomarker in PDAC. Application of LMD enabled
single cell KRAS mutational analysis confirming cancer origin of isolated
CTCs and supporting our current PDAC CTC identification criteria based on
immuno-staining. This promising technology, combined with LMD, opens the
door for molecular characterization of CTCs, thus providing insight into
the biology of metastasis while potentially revealing molecular targets
for therapeutics.

