Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short- and long-term TNF-alpha mediated NF-B signaling exerts
diverging effects on ABCB1/PgP expression


Multidrug resistance (MDR) still represents one major obstacle for cancer
chemotherapy. The ABC transporter ABCB1/PgP is an important factor
mediating resistance of tumor cells towards cytostatic drug treatment.
Among numerous overcoming strategies, persistent treatment of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) leads to down-regulation of MDR-associated genes, such as
ABCB1. The transcription factor NF-B/p65 is a known key regulator of
ABCB1 expression. We analyzed short- and long-term effects of TNF-alpha
regarding modulation of NF-B/p65 signaling and ABCB1/PgP expression in
colon carcinoma cells. Highly resistant ABCB1 endogenously overexpressing
HCT15 human colon carcinoma cells were subjected to short- (30-120 min)
or long-term (24-96 h) TNF-alpha treatment. TNF-alpha-mediated modulation
of ABCB1/PgP expression was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and
Western-blot. The effect of TNF-receptor triggered NF-B/p65 signaling on
ABCB1/PgP expression was analyzed by Western blot, ABCB1 promoter
reporter assays and by EMSA. The effects of TNF-alpha on drug
accumulation and cytotoxicity were determined by FACScan analysis and MTT
cytotoxicity assays.The studies revealed that long-term, but not
short-term action of TNF-alpha leads to TNF-receptor 1-mediated
down-regulation of ABCB1/PgP expression. It furthermore dampens NF-B/p65
activation as well as IB resynthesis. This is associated with reduced
nuclear accumulation of NF-B/p65 and lack of its binding to the NF-B/p65
consensus sequence in the ABCB1 promoter. In consequence long-term
TNF-alpha treatment mediates significant increase in drug accumulation
and sensitization of HCT15 cells towards drug treatment. The study
reveals the diverging effects of short- or long-term TNF-alpha action and
provides novel insights into mechanism of ABCB1 regulation by this
pro-inflammatory cytokine.

