Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin represses stem cell properties and induces apoptosis in
human breast cancer cells and mouse mammary epithelial cells


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are small portions of cancer cells that have
important self-renewal and proliferation characteristics, and therefore,
they play a significant role in cancer development and metastasis.
Recently, several studies have revealed CSCs of several solid tumors. The
identification and targeting of CSCs are expected to advance treatment
outcomes, but until now, only a few drugs that specifically target CSCs
have been developed.Metformin, an antidiabetic drug used for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, suppresses gluconeogenesis in the
liver and increases insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake in peripheral
tissues such as muscles. Moreover, the drug has shown an anti-cancer
effect by inhibiting cellular proliferation and protein synthesis in
several cancer cell lines. Additionally, many clinical and
epidemiological studies have suggested that metformin might be associated
with a decreased risk of cancer development and an increased response to
chemotherapy.In addition to its anticarcinogenic effect, studies about
the anti-cancer stem cell effect of metformin have been recently
reported. Several reports revealed that metformin could preferentially
kill cancer stem cells, including breast cancer stem cells. However, the
mechanism of anti-cancer stem cell activity is not well known.Therefore,
this study was planned to confirm the cytotoxicity of metformin,
especially for breast cancer stem cells as well as breast cancer cells.
To this end, several human breast cancer cell lines and normal mouse
mammary epithelial cell lines were used. In this study, metformin showed
cell growth inhibition in human breast cancer cells and mouse mammary
epithelial cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Moreover,
metformin specifically killed breast cancer stem cells. Metformin showed
reduced mammosphere formation in all cell lines. In addition, decreasing
breast cancer stem cell population by metformin treatment was identified
through FACS analysis. For the mechanism of anti-cancer stem cell
activity, western blot assay was performed. We identified decreased
levels of cyclin D and cycline E and increased levels of Bax in secondary
mammaospheres according to metformin treatment. In conclusion, this
present study show that metformin kills breast cancer stem cells as well
as breast cancer cells, and these phenomena occur by the induction of
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.

