Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D with breast cancer
characteristics and prognosis in the Pathways Study


Background: Vitamin D may be protective against breast cancer (BC), yet
current evidence from epidemiologic studies is inconsistent. We
previously reported lowest serum 25-hydyroxyvitamin D (25OHD) levels in
premenopausal women with the triple-negative (TN) subtype. We aimed to
validate our findings in an independent cohort and to further investigate
25OHD levels in association with breast cancer prognosis.Methods: Using a
case-cohort design, 1664 invasive breast cancer patients were selected
from the Pathways Study, a prospective cohort at Kaiser Permanente
Northern California (KPNC). 25OHD levels were measured by
immunochemiluminometric assay in blood samples collected close to
diagnosis. Demographic and lifestyle information at baseline came from
in-person interviews, and information on cancer characteristics,
treatment, recurrence and death were obtained from KPNC cancer registries
and clinical databases. We examined quartiles of 25OHD in association
with BC characteristics (stage, grade, estrogen receptor status, TN
subtype) using logistic regression, and with disease-free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS) using Cox proportional hazards regression with
covariate adjustment. Pending analyses will account for sampling in which
biospecimens from all minorities, all non-Lum A subtypes (Lum
B/TN/HER2-overexpressing), and a subset (30%) of white Lum A subtypes
were selected.Results: Blood collection in winter-spring, younger age,
obesity, black or Hispanic race/ethnicity, current smoking, low
moderate-vigorous physical activity, no vitamin D supplement use, and low
dietary vitamin D intake were associated with low serum 25OHD levels. In
premenopausal women, 25OHD levels were associated inversely with cancer
stage and grade, and those with the TN subtype had the lowest levels (Q4:
adjusted OR vs. Lum A=0.41, 95% CI=0.19-0.86). Among white women after a
median follow-up time of 5.9 y (range 2.5-7.8 y), high 25OHD levels were
associated with longer DFS (Q4: adjusted HR=0.67, 95% CI=0.45-0.98), as
well as OS (Q4: adjusted HR=0.58, 95% CI=0.36-0.92). Additional
adjustment for stage, grade, subtype and treatment received had minimal
effects on the above associations. The associations with DFS and OS
appeared stronger in premenopausal women than in postmenopausal
women.Conclusion: In a large prospective cohort of breast cancer
patients, we validated our previous findings of 25OHD levels being
associated with lower odds of TN tumor subtype in premenopausal patients.
Moreover, preliminary results indicate that high 25OHD levels at the time
of diagnosis were associated with longer DFS and OS, the relationships
were independent of cancer characteristics and treatment, and may be
stronger in premenopausal women. These findings support potential
benefits of maintaining sufficient vitamin D levels for improved breast
cancer prognosis.

