Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of R-Spondin fusions in various types of human
cancer


Autocrine or paracrine constitutive Wnt pathway activation occurs at a
high frequency in several tumor types. The R-spondin (RSPO) protein
family is comprised of four secreted growth factors. The four paralogs
share 40-60% pairwise amino acid sequence identity and are predicted to
share substantial structural homology. RSPO proteins are involved in
vertebrate development and their ligand-type activities overlap
substantially with those of canonical Wnt ligands. A characteristic
feature of all four RSPO members is their ability to activate -catenin
signaling and enhance WNT-mediated -catenin activation. It has recently
been described that recurrent gene fusions involving RSPO family members
RSPO2 and RSPO3 occur in 10% of colon tumors.In this study we developed a
TaqMan qRT-PCR-based approach to evaluate the expression of these three
(3) RSPO fusion transcripts in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue
(FFPET) samples. We examined 324 lung cancer, 81 colorectal cancer, 71
head & neck, 11 esophageal, 92 ovarian cancer, and 103 breast cancer
FFPET samples for the presence of EIF3E(e1)-RSPO2(e1),
PTPRK(e1)-RSPO3(e2), and PTPRK(e7)-RSPO3(e2). EIF3E(e1)-RSPO2(e1), a
fusion which is expected to produce a functional RSPO2 protein driven by
the EIF3E promoter, was identified in 1-2% of most of cancer types with
the exception of breast cancer. The PTPRK(e1)-RSPO3(e2) fusion was
expressed by 1-11% of the samples in the different cancers, making it the
most prevalent of the fusions. PTPRK(e1)-RSPO3(e2) fusion is an in-frame
fusion that preserves the entire coding sequence of RSPO3 and replaces
its secretion signal sequence with that of PTPRK. The PTPRK(e7)-RSPO3(e2)
fusion is also an in-frame fusion in which the RSPO3 native signal
peptide is replaced by the secretion signal of PTPRK. The
PTPRK(e7)-RSPO3(e2) was the least prevalent of all the fusions, positive
samples were found exclusively in the head and neck (2%) and breast
cancer samples (2%). All of the fusions detected were mutually exclusive.
The RSPO gene fusions identified may provide new potential opportunities
for therapeutic intervention.

