Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-myc interactor impacts autophagy via modulation of GSK3/mTOR
signaling


Autophagy is a cellular mechanism for removal of dysfunctional cellular
organelles, large protein complexes. It drives a specialized form of
program cell death termed as programmed cell death II. Recent studies
have demonstrated a prominent role of the process of autophagy in cancer
progression and drug sensitivity. Under conditions of stress, cancer
cells try to utilize autophagy to leverage a survival advantage; however,
excessive autophagy renders cells vulnerable.Our previous work has
demonstrated a pivotal role of N-myc interactor(NMI) in impeding breast
cancer progression and metastasis. Loss of NMI is one of the key events
that precedes and contributes to invasive progression of breast cancer.
Here we provide evidence that NMI plays a crucial role in regulation of
mTOR signaling ultimately impacting the autophagic response in breast
cancer cells. Our initial observations showed that breast cancer cells
restored for NMI expression contained more acidic vacuoles as determined
by staining with Lysotracker. Further indication of autophagy was
evidenced by the formation of distinct punctae in NMI cells upon
transfection with GFP-LC3 which was ablated upon treatment with an
autophagy inhibitor. Cells restored for expression of NMI showed
decreased levels of p62 along with an increased LC3II processing. The
mTOR signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in driving the autophagy. We
found that p70S6K phosphorylation dramatically decreases in NMI
expressing cells indicating an inhibition of mTOR signaling in these
cells. Our observations show that active GSK3, a negative modulator of
mTOR, is responsible for mediating the effects of NMI. Conversely, NMI
silenced cells showed indication of inactive GSK3 concomitant with
activated mTOR signaling.Functionally, NMI mediated sensitization of
cells to autophagy rendered breast cancer cells incapable of sustaining
stress of cisplatin treatment. The sensitivity of these cells to
cisplatin was notably reduced upon inhibition of the autophagic process.
This suggests a possible role for autophagy in NMI induced drug
sensitivity. Collectively, our results suggest that NMI plays an
important role in modulation of autophagy via activation of GSK3 and
consequent inhibition of mTOR signaling.

