Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of cancer cells in the hypoxic
microenvironment using an orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of
carbonic anhydrase IX


Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is a membrane-bound, hypoxia-inducible
enzyme that is highly expressed in many types of solid tumors, is an
independent marker of poor prognosis and functions as a critical
component of the pH regulatory machinery required by hypoxic cancer cells
for survival, invasion and metastasis. These attributes make CAIX an
attractive therapeutic target for cancer therapy. The development of
pharmacologic inhibitors that selectively target tumor-associated,
extracellular carbonic anhydrases (CAs) without off-target inhibition of
cytosolic isoforms is critical for their use as cancer therapeutics.
Here, we characterize an orally bioavailable, highly selective small
molecule inhibitor of CAIX and CAXII, SLC-0111, and investigate its
efficacy when used as a monotherapy and in combination with conventional
chemotherapy in vivo. SLC-0111 exhibited a favorable in vitro ADME
profile, including IC50 values of >100 mM against most CYP isoforms, an
IC50 for hERG inhibition of >30 mM and absence of mutagenic properties.
Incubation of the compound with 67NR cells constitutively expressing
human CAIX significantly suppressed, in a dose-dependent fashion, a drop
in extracellular pH in a cell-based CAIX activity assay. The active
compound was formulated as a self-emulsifying liquid for oral
administration in vivo and evaluation of plasma levels showed good oral
bioavailability of 40%. Toxicity studies involving repeat dosing by oral
gavage for 7 days established maximum-tolerated doses in excess of 1,000
and 750 mg/kg for rats and dogs, respectively. Daily oral administration
of SLC-0111 to mice harboring established MDA-MB-231 LM2-4 orthotopic
human breast tumors, a model of hypoxic, CAIX-positive triple negative
metastatic breast cancer, resulted in a significant, dose-dependent
reduction in tumor growth, with 30% inhibition at a dose of 50 mg/kg, no
toxicity and a 10-fold therapeutic window. Treatment also reduced viable
tumor volume as determined by 18F-deoxyglucose uptake detected by
positron emission tomography. Furthermore, treatment of mice with
SLC-0111 in combination with paclitaxel resulted in significantly reduced
tumor growth compared to either treatment administered alone, with no
additional toxicity and plasma levels of SLC-0111 similar to those
observed with its use as a monotherapy. Plasma levels of SLC-0111 showed
dose proportionality and analysis of tumor levels demonstrated a greater
than proportional relationship, with a 4-fold increase in dose (25-100
mg/kg) resulting in more than a 13-fold increase in tumor levels of the
compound. Collectively, these data demonstrate the potential utility of
SLC-0111 as a safe, target-specific inhibitor of CAIX for the treatment
of cancer, particularly in combination with conventional chemotherapy.

