Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring anti-oncogenic properties of riluzole in breast cancer


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast
cancer that lacks the three receptors that current therapy targets
(estrogen (ER), progesterone, HER2). Because of this, it is a very
aggressive type of breast cancer with a high mortality rate. In a
previous study, we discovered the drug, riluzole, to be an mGluR1
inhibitor and to reduce cell proliferation and tumor growth in triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC), resulting in apoptosis. This was a
significant finding because there are currently no major therapies
available to successfully treat TNBC. It is now being thought that
riluzole also has properties that may allow it to act as a therapy
against ER-positive breast cancer (ER+).Methods: The goal of this study
was to learn more about how riluzole functions by analyzing the
anti-oncogenic properties of riluzole. To do this, we conducted a series
of transformation assays including cell proliferation (MTT), invasion,
soft agar, adhesion, and in vivo metastasis using 4T1-12B cells (a
luciferase-expressing clone of the 4T1 mouse mammary tumor cell
line).Results: The results of the assays completed thus far indicate that
both TNBC and ER+ cells are sensitive to riluzole, with TNBC being more
sensitive. Riluzole significantly inhibits invasion of TNBC cells but not
ER+ cells. These findings are consistent with the previous study's
results showing that riluzole targets mGluR1 pathways, since ER+ cells
contain significantly smaller amounts of mGluR1 compared to TNBC cells.
Additionally, riluzole inhibits both cell proliferation and anchorage
independent growth of both cell types, suggesting both mGluR1 dependent
and independent pathways are involved.Conclusion: The results of this
study suggest that riluzole can be developed as an anti-breast cancer
therapy for both triple negative and ER-positive breast cancer patients.
Further studies silencing mGluR1 in TNBC and overexpressing mGluR1 in ER+
cell lines will help to determine any significance of mGluR1 in mediating
riluzole's mechanism of action.

