Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frizzled-1 receptor, a potential therapeutic target for atypical
teratoid rhabdoid tumor


Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid Tumors (ATRTs) are aggressive tumor types in
the field of pediatric neuro-oncology that need new therapeutic
strategies since they are associated with significantly worse overall
prognosis than other pediatric tumors. A characteristic feature of ATRTs
is usually an aberration of SMARCB1/INI1/hSNF5 gene. One of the important
developmental pathways for cellular development is the Wnt pathway. Wnt
proteins are a family of 19 secreted glycoproteins and act as ligands
that bind transmembrane receptors such as the Frizzled receptors. There
are 10 known Frizzled receptors, and the binding of a specific Wnt ligand
to a specific Frizzled receptor plays a crucial role in the regulation of
diverse cellular processes. Perturbation of the activities of Wnt ligands
can result in defects in embryonic development and diseased states such
as cancer. In our preliminary transcriptome analyses results, Wnt5b and
Frizzled-1 receptor (Fz-1) were significantly upregulated in 20 ATRT
samples and 3 ATRT cell lines. The binding of Wnt5b with Fz-1 was further
confirmed by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting analyses. Treatment
of ATRT cells with Fz-1 specific siRNA did not indicate a significant
decrease in cell viability. Similarly treatment of ATRT cells with a Fz-1
specific monoclonal antibody (Fz-1Mab) also did not indicate significant
decrease in cell viability. However, in this study treatment of cells
with a combination of Fz-1 specific siRNA and Fz-1Mab indicated a
significant decrease in cell viability. A dose response analysis was
performed over time to test various doses of Fz-1Mab with constant Fz-1
siRNA concentrations; a cell titre glo assay was then performed to assess
cell viability. The physiologically relevant Fz-1Mab dose was then used
to assess the effects of using this combination treatment on Fz-1 and
Wnt5b protein levels. A decrease in Fz-1 and Wnt5b protein levels when
Fz-1 receptor is blocked by siRNA and Mab indicates that Wnt5b bound to
Fz-1 receptor plays an important role in ATRT disease etiology and could
be a therapeutic target.

