Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors with human
nucleoside transporters


Several oral multitargeted kinase (MTK) inhibitors are approved for use
in the clinic among which, axitinib, pazopanib and sunitinib are used to
treat many solid tumors. Several clinical trials of combinations of MTK
inhibitors with gemcitabine, a nucleoside analog, have been attempted in
pancreas, renal, lung, ovarian and other malignancies with little benefit
to patients. We propose that inhibition of human nucleoside transporters
(hNTs) by MTK inhibitors results in lowered intracellular nucleoside drug
accumulation leading to poor outcomes of combination clinical trials of
MTKs with gemcitabine.Interactions of MTK inhibitors with hNTs was
studied by assessing inhibition of [3H]uridine uptake in yeast producing
recombinant hNTs individually. Inhibition of uridine uptake and
gemcitabine accumulation was examined in the pancreatic adenocarcinoma
cell line AsPC-1, lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549 and renal cell
carcinoma cell line Caki-1. We also examined sequential vs. simultaneous
combination cytotoxicity with gemcitabine and MTKs in Caki-1 cells.In
yeast, pazopanib, sunitinib and axitinib inhibited hENT1 at 4 0.3, 31 5
and 46 4 M, respectively, concentrations of test compound that inhibited
[3H]uridine uptake by 50 % relative to that of untreated cells (IC50
values). Inhibition of hENT2, hCNT1, hCNT2 and hCNT3 by all three MTKs
was seen with IC50 values greater than or equal to 100 M. In A549, AsPC-1
and Caki-1 cells, which possess major hENT1 and minor hENT2 activities,
[3H]uridine uptake and [3H]gemcitabine accumulation were inhibited by all
three MTK inhibitors. In Caki-1 cells pretreatment or co-treatment of
cells with MTK inhibitors and [3H]uridine or gemcitabine resulted in
reduced cellular accumulation of [3H]nucleosides thus indicating that
scheduling of MTK inhibitors with nucleoside drugs is important. In
combination cytotoxicity experiments of sequential vs. simultaneous
addition of drugs in Caki-1 cells, cytotoxicity was greatest when
gemcitabine was added prior to MTK inhibitors.Pazopanib > axitinib
sunitinib inhibited hNTs, especially hENT1, resulting in reduced
intracellular gemcitabine accumulation. In the clinical setting,
concentrations of MTK inhibitors in plasma and tumor tissues are
sufficient to inhibit hENT1 activity thus blocking nucleoside
chemotherapy drug uptake in cancer cells leading to reduced efficacy in
combination schedules. A prior knowledge of such interactions is
important when combining MTK inhibitors with nucleoside chemotherapy
drugs such as gemcitabine.

