Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and epigenetic alterations of the WWOX gene in head and
neck cancer


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a heterogenous disease
and the 6th most frequent cancer in the world. Despite advances in
medical treatment over the past two decades, the overall survival rate
for patients with HNSCC remains around 50%. Well known environmental risk
factors for developing HNSCC are cigarette smoking, especially in
combination with alcohol consumption or tobacco chewing. In addition,
many genetic and epigenetic changes are associated with sporadic HNSCC
including alterations in the p53, VEGF and cyclin D1genes. Yet the
molecular mechanisms of HNSCC carcinogenesis are still undergoing
intensive investigation.The WWOX gene is located on a chromosomal fragile
site 16q23.2 which spans the common fragile site FRA16D. It has been
shown that exposure to environmental carcinogens such as smoking and
alcohol consumption increases the potential for chromosomal breakage at
the FRA16D site in esophageal and non-small cell lung cancers. On the
other hand, genomic abnormalities affecting chromosome 16q are frequently
reported in cytogenetic studies of various epithelial tumors, including
prostate, breast, ovarian, esophageal, lung, gastric, and hepatocellular
carcinomas. However, there is no data in the literature investigating the
WWOX gene in the HNSCC. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine
the role of WWOX as a tumor suppressor gene in patients with HNSCC.For
this purpose, tumor and corresponding normal tissue samples obtained from
75 patients with HNSCC were analyzed for mutations in the coding exons
and the flanking intronic sequences by direct sequencing of the WWOX
gene. mRNA expression levels were also analyzed by quantitative-real
time-PCR and correlated with the methylation level of the WWOX gene
promoter. The methylation status was determined by methylation-specific
PCR(MSP).mRNA expression levels were significantly lower in tumor tissue
than normal tissue (p0.001) and this downregulation was associated with
hypermethylation of the promoter of the WWOX gene (p0.05). We identified
8 different alterations in the coding sequence of the WWOX gene with a
frequency varying between 1.56-58.93%. Additionally, 17 different
alterations in the noncoding regions were identified in our study
group.Our results indicate that the WWOX gene may play an important role
in the development of HNSCC.

