Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small proline rich protein 3 (SPRR3) is a potential mediator of
radiation resistance in HPV negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Purpose: Head and neck cancers (HNCs) are caused by two major etiologies
that have significant prognostic significance: tobacco and human
papillomavirus (HPV). Patients with HPV-positive HNC have significantly
better outcomes than those with HPV-negative HNC. We have previously
shown that this difference may be due, in part, to increased sensitivity
to radiation in HPV-positive HNCs. In order to identify additional
factors that may underlie differences in radiation sensitivity, we sought
to understand radiation-induced changes in global gene expression between
HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNCs.Methods: A panel of eight cell lines,
four HPV positive (UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90, 93-VU-147T) and four
HPV negative (SCC1, SCC6, SCC22B, SCC1483 were treated with radiation (4
Gy) or mock and total RNA isolated 4, 24, and 48 hrs after treatment.
Global gene expression was analyzed using Affymetrix Gene 1.1 ST array
chips. Comparisons between untreated, baseline control, and
post-radiation expression were made using ArrayStar. Alterations in
differentially expressed genes were validated by Real-Time quantitative
PCR (RT-qPCR).Results: Out of the top 15 hits, several members of the
small proline rich repeat (SPRR) family were identified. SPRR1A, SPRR1B,
and SPRR3 were significantly upregulated in HPV negative as compared to
HPV-positive cell lines. Differences in expression were validated using
RT-qPCR in a panel of HNC cell lines.Conclusions: We identified changes
in expression of SPRR3 in HPV negative cell lines. This gene is a member
of a protein family known to scavenge reactive oxygen species. Its
increased expression in HPV negative HNC may mediate resistance to
radiation and contribute to the poor outcomes of patients in this cohort.
SPRR3 is a potential novel molecular target that could improve the
outcomes of patients with HPV negative HNC.

