Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid to solid: Leukemic breast tumors assume the morphologic and
genetic characteristics of breast cancer


Chemoresistance is responsible for death in up to 60% of acute leukemia
patients despite high initial responses to therapy; a new approach to
residual disease is crucial. Leukemia is considered a liquid cancer that
circulates through organs and homes to the marrow niche. It sometimes
adopts, however, a solid tumor phenotype in an extramedullary organ, an
under-investigated means of developing resistance. Solid masses grow and
progress to invade other organs regardless of marrow involvement. Occult,
sub-clinical, resistant foci may occur more often than is recognized, and
lead to marrow relapse and death. Scans and autopsies are rarely
performed and only obvious tumors are reported, so the incidence of
resistant masses is unknown. We observed that leukemic tumors in breast
assume the aggressive phenotype of invasive lobular breast cancer, with
similar morphologic features (single-filing and targetoid pattern), and
metastasize to the same organs. AML and ALL tumors bear leukemic markers
and are cytokeratin-, hormone receptor-, and e-cadherin negative. Only 4
of 106 reported cases treated with only chemotherapy survived 4 years,
but when tumor excision was added, leukemia-free survival over 20 years
has occurred (Am J Hem, 2012). Based on these observations, we postulate
that understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate these solid
masses would be a potential means to overcome the chemoresistance that
prevents cure in AML and ALL. Gene expression profile studies were
performed on paraffin-fixed leukemic breast tumors (2 ALL, 1 AML) found 8
to 22 months after diagnosis while marrows remained in remission. Many of
the same genes were significantly upregulated in leukemic tumors (30 to
2877-fold) and breast cancer (9 to 108-fold). The most enriched clusters
by DAVID analysis were actin cytoskeleton organization, cell cycle, and
regulation of apoptosis. RhoGTPases were significantly upregulated in
both types, as was PI3K. Among genes related to metastasis in breast (and
other) cancers, some (PTTG1, ELMO1, VAV1, PAK1, NEK2) were upregulated 5
to 224 times in leukemic tumors. Profilin, KLF6, and CXCL14 were
significantly downregulated in both leukemic and epithelial tumors, as
were cell cycle regulators CDKN1A, CDKN1B, and cyclin D2. Wiskott-Aldrich
Syndrome gene, known to correlate with resistance in AML and ALL, was
significantly upregulated in leukemic tumors and carcinomas. Overall, the
results indicate a remodeling of the cytoskeleton, promotion of
metastasis, and a decrease in cell cycle regulation in the leukemic
tumors. Studies with 25 leukemic breast tumors are ongoing to identify
key aberrant gene targets. Characterizing the dysregulation responsible
for transformation to a tumor phenotype has the potential to lead to
specific agents. These could be used in conjunction with marrow-effective
leukemia drugs to eradicate resistant foci to cure more acute leukemias.

