Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of NF-kappaB in mammary tumor initiation


Nuclear factor kappa B signaling is accepted as a major component of
pro-survival signaling within breast cancer cells. However, less is known
about how NF-kappaB could contribute to breast tumor initiation.
Inflammatory signaling can be activated within the breast by such common
factors as obesity, involution following lactation, aging, and
psychological stress. Thus, understanding how activated NF-kappaB could
lead to the initiation of breast tumors would provide opportunities to
develop prevention strategies. We generated a doxycycline-inducible mouse
model to study the effects of constitutively active IKK2 on ductal
morphogenesis. In this model, Tet-o-cIKK2 mice are crossed with MMTV-rtTA
transgenics to target inducible expression specifically to the mammary
epithelium. Expression of cIKK2 in transplanted mammary tissue results in
enlarged terminal end-buds, increased lateral branching, and intraductal
hyperplasia. Transgene induction for only 3 days in a 6 week old female
induces filling of ductal lumens, hypercellularity and loss of strict
basal/luminal structure. Quantitative PCR of mammary tissue reveals
up-regulated markers of macrophage infiltration such as CCL2 and F4/80
and markers of inflammation including Cox-2, TNF-alpha, and CXCL1.
Interestingly, constitutive IKK2 activation also results in a decrease in
hormone receptor levels (ER and PR). Immunofluorescent staining shows
that activation of classical NF-kappaB increases nuclear p65, as
expected. However, nuclear p52 is also increased in transgene positive
cells, suggesting that a subset of the effects resulting from activation
of classical NF-kappaB are mediated by cross talk with the alternative
pathway. Taken together, we find that activation of NF-kappaB in mammary
epithelium is sufficient to induce hyperplastic growth and loss of ductal
structure. Ongoing studies seek to define what additional factors, such
as the right hormonal context, will cause the lesions to progress to
malignancy.

