Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of a microRNA signature associated with risk of
distant metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Purpose:Despite significant improvement in locoregional control following
radiotherapy (RT) +/- chemotherapy (CT) in the contemporary era,
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients still suffer from a significant
risk (20%) of distant metastasis (DM). Identifying those patients at risk
of DM would aid in personalized treatment in the future. It has become
increasingly apparent that microRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in
human cancer, and a number of miRNAs have been identified whose
expression is associated with prognosis in a variety of cancers; hence,
we proceeded to address the primary hypothesis that there is a miRNA
expression signature capable of predicting DM for NPC patients.Materials
and Methods:The expression of 734 unique human and viral miRNAs was
measured in 125 (Training Set) and 121 (Validation Set)
clinically-annotated NPC diagnostic biopsy samples using the nCounter
human microRNA panel from Nanostring. A signature associated with risk of
DM was generated by fitting a penalized Cox Proportion Hazard (PH)
regression model to the Training data set, and this signature was
subsequently tested in the Validation cohort. Pathway enrichment analysis
was then performed on validated targets of the four miRNAs comprising the
final signature, to determine the potential biological impact of their
dysregulation.Results:A 4-miRNA-expression signature, consisting of
miR-140-5p, miR-34c-5p, miR-154-5p, and miR-449b-5p was identified in the
Training set, which was significantly associated with an increased risk
of developing DM (HR 8.25; p=0.0008). This signature was then validated
in an independent Validation set of 121 NPC patient samples (HR 3.2;
p=0.01), and observed to be the strongest independent predictor when
multivariate analysis was performed including other clinically relevant
variables. Specifically, this 4-miRNA signature provided additional risk
categorization value beyond nodal status. Finally, pathway enrichment
analysis indicated that the targets of these miRNAs appear to be
converging on cell cycle pathways.Conclusion:A new 4-miRNA signature set
has been validated for DM in NPC, the major cause of death in the era of
intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Importantly, this signature
predicted for risk of DM independent of other clinical factors, including
nodal stage, which is the current most important variable associated with
DM in NPC. Important biological insights will be acquired with greater
in-depth interrogation of these 4-miRNAs, which should facilitate the
discovery and development of novel molecularly-targeted therapies that
could improve outcome for future NPC patients.

