Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) mediates fibroblast-induced HER2+
breast cancer cell migration and invasion through a mechanism involving
Stat3


Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is an intracellular kinase known to mediate
integrin signalling following cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix.
FAK is also implicated in invasive signalling pathways downstream of
growth factor receptors including the HER2. Cross talk between tumor and
stroma can result in the activation of growth factor signalling pathways
and thus may play a significant role in promoting tumor progression and
spread. In this study, we have investigated the metastatic responses of
HER2+ breast cancer cells to fibroblasts and whether FAK is involved in
these events.Conditioned medium derived from human lung fibroblast MRC-5
cells was used to stimulate Her2+ SKBr3 breast cancer cells in the
presence or absence of FAK inhibitor, PF271, or after FAK gene knockdown,
prior to determining changes in migration (Boyden Chamber assay), 3d
matrix invasion, growth and FAK-mediated signalling. To compare the role
of FAK with HER2 in these cells, the HER2 targeted agent, trastuzumab was
additionally employed.Whilst fibroblast-conditioned medium (FCM) did not
affect the growth of SKBr3 cells or their HER2- negative, ER+
counterparts MCF7 cells, FCM significantly stimulated SKBr3 cell
migration (10 fold vs control) and promoted invasive dissociation of 3d
SKBr3 cultures. FCM treatment of SKBr3 cells resulted in rapid (within 5
minutes) activation of MAPK and AKT and increased phosphorylation of the
HER4 receptor and FAK (Y861). FCM also promoted an increase in STAT3
(Y704) activity with an accompanying re-distribution to sites of membrane
ruffling and to the nucleus. Pharmacological inhibition of FAK, or FAK
siRNA, in SKBr3 cells attenuated FCM-mediated FAK activity and suppressed
STAT3 activation and subcellular re-distribution and increased the
expression of E-Cadherin. Correspondingly, FCM treatment of PF271 or
FAKsiRNA- treated SKBr3 cells poorly elicited migratory and invasive
responses. Importantly, suppression of HER2 using trastuzumab did not
significantly antagonise these FCM responses.Taken together, these
results suggest that FAK plays a role in the signalling stimulated by
fibroblast- derived stimulators of migration and invasion through a
mechanism involving STAT3. These highlight the importance of
understanding tumor-stromal interactions and support the potential of FAK
as a novel therapeutic target in HER2+ breast cancer particularly in the
context of tumor stroma interactions where it may suppress
stromal-induced tumor signalling that can contribute to progression and
spread.

