Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect between Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) and
lapatinib in HER2+ inflammatory breast cancer cells


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is the most lethal and rare form of
breast cancer. It is characterized by rapid progression, local and
distant metastases, younger age of onset, and lower overall survival
compared with other breast cancers. Although IBC, like non-IBC breast
cancers, is a heterogeneous disease and can occur as any of the five
molecular breast cancer subtypes, they are most commonly either triple
negative; or ER-, PR- and HER2+ overexpressed. There is no specific IBC
treatment; thus, it seems feasible to find a therapeutic for this deadly
disease. Our published data demonstrates that Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi)
inhibits the viability of the triple negative IBC SUM149 cell line, but
not of MCF10A noncancerous mammary epithelial cells. Consequently, in
this study, we aimed to investigate Reishi effects in the viability of
the ER-, PR-, HER2+ IBC cells lines SUM190 and KPL4. Also we studied the
effects of Reishi on IBC cells when treated in complement with the HER2
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor, lapatinib (Tykerb). Our hypothesis is that
Reishi chemosensitizes IBC cells to lapatinib therapy. Herein, SUM190 and
KPL-4 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of lapatinib
and/or Reishi for 24 or 72h. Our results demonstrate that SUM190 and
KPL-4 cells are sensitive to Reishi treatment. The combination of
lapatinib plus Reishi reduced cell viability of SUM190 cells to 70% when
treated with a concentration of 0.5mg/mL Reishi for 24h. Also, our data
shows a reduction in cell viability of 94% in KPL-4 cells treated with
lapatinib plus Reishi for 72h. We are currently directing our efforts to
continue studying the contribution of Reishi in IBC cells when treated
with lapatinib after 24 or 72h. Our results provide evidence that Reishi
inhibits cancer cell viability and chemosensitizes IBC cells to lapatinib
therapy, highlighting its anti-IBC-therapeutic potential. We thank Dr.
Kurebayashi (Kawasaki Medical School, Japan) for providing KPL-4 cells.
This project was sponsored by NIH/NCI #1F31CA174307 to ISA, Title V PPOHA
US Department of Education #P031M105050 to UCC, NIH/RCMI #G12MD007583 to
UCC, NIH/INBRE #5P20GM103475 to UPR/UCC and a research donation from the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to UCC's University Center of Integral and
Complementary Medicine (CUMIC)/MMM.

