Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Camptothecins: Tissue penetration and implications for therapy


We have evaluated distribution and micro-regional activity of members of
the camptothecin class of topoisomerase I targeting agents including
topotecan (TPT), irinotecan (IRN), Irinophore C (IrC), a liposomal
formulation of IRN and SN38, the active metabolite of IRN. Despite having
a similar mechanism of action these agents are used against different
cancers and possess significantly different pharmacological and
physicochemical properties. The native fluorescence of each agent was
used to visualize its distribution in HCT116 & HT29 tissue cryosections
that were subsequently processed via multiplexed staining to relate drug
exposure to its effect on tumor cell status (proliferation, apoptosis)
and distance from vasculature. TPT exhibited the most uniform tumor
distribution but it also experienced a significantly faster tumor
wash-out while IRN was retained longer in tumors but exhibited a larger
concentration gradient in relation to tumor blood vessels. IrC, the high
molecular weight liposomal formulation, exhibited the poorest tissue
distribution but it also displayed longer tumor retention due to its
extended plasma half-life. At a depth of 100 m away from vessels drug
levels reached 94 5 % (TPT), 41 10 % (IRN) and 4.8 2 % (IrC) of maximal
levels seen near vessels. In terms of vessel permeability, IRN and IrC
did not extravasate equally from all vessels, 50% of vessels showed
little permeation by the two drugs and, because of this, some
microregions of the tumors received much higher exposure than others.
However, despite the significant differences in their tissue
distribution, all 3 agents were able to exert a complete suppression of
cycling tumor cells at 4 hours following treatment. At 24 hours following
TPT or IRN tumor proliferation status returned to normal levels
indicating that neither drug was retained long enough to exert activity
on out of cycle cells. In contrast IrC benefited from an extended plasma
exposure and was able to inhibit proliferation over a period of several
days. The time to 50% recovery in proliferation was 3 days for TPT and
IRN versus 14 days for IrC. Tumor growth delay studies showed that both
TPT and IRN benefited somewhat from a dose splitting schedule designed to
specifically target proliferation at peak levels two days in row.
However, this strategy was still outperformed by IrC. Tumor growth delay
following 50 mg/kg drug qwx2 was 9.6 3 days (IRN) versus 27.8 3.8 days
(IrC). To determine the root cause of the discrepancy between the poor
distribution but good microregional activity of IRN and IrC an in vitro
3D tissue-disc model was employed. It was found that IRN tissue
penetration was limited by its high degree of cellular accumulation.
SN38, the active metabolite of IRN, did not accumulate to the same extent
and did penetrate tissue effectively. Hence it was concluded that the
poor tissue distribution observed for both IRN and IrC was offset by
systemic conversion to SN38, which was able to exert a more uniform
activity within tumors.

