Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of microRNA-134 as a novel
receptor tyrosine kinase-regulated tumor suppressive hub in glioblastoma


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are co-deregulated in a majority of
glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and most deadly brain tumor. In this
study, we uncovered microRNA-134 (miR-134) as a novel tumor suppressive
hub that is co-regulated by multiple RTKs via MAPK and KLF4 and that acts
via regulation of KRAS and STAT5B expressions. Using microRNA microarrays
and qRT-PCR, we screened for microRNAs that are co-regulated by multiple
RTKs in GBM. We found that miR-134 was one such microRNA that is
downregulated by the activation of MET, EGFR, and PDGFR, the three most
commonly deregulated RTKs in GBM. Using a combination of pharmacology,
promoter analysis, transcription factor functional and rescue approaches
and ChIP/qPCR, we uncovered the MAPK pathway and the transcriptional
repressor KLF4 as mediators of the effects of RTKs on miR-134 repression.
We then measured the expression of miR-134 and found that it was
downregulated in human GBM tumors and GBM stem cells (GSCs) and that it
inversely correlated with the activation levels of MET, EGFR, and PDGFR
in the tumors. We demonstrated that miR-134 inhibits GBM cell and GSC
proliferation, survival, and in vivo xenograft growth, as well as GSC
self-renewal and stemness. We uncovered the oncogenes KRAS and STAT5B as
direct targets of miR-134 with immunoblots and 3UTR reporter assays, and
showed with rescue experiments that they mediate miR-134 tumor
suppressive effects. Thereafter, using a series of molecular and
functional assays we established direct links and dependencies between
RTKs, KLF4, miR-134, KRAS/STAT5B and malignancy in vitro and in vivo.
Importantly, we also found that miR-134 induction is required for the
anti-tumor effects of small molecule RTK inhibitors. Altogether, our
extensive study identified miR-134 as a novel RTK-regulated
tumor-suppressive hub that mediates RTK and RTK-inhibitor effects on GBM
malignancy by controlling KRAS and STAT5B. These findings shed new light
onto the molecular and functional interactions between RTKs and microRNAs
and uncover opportunities for exploiting these interactions for
therapeutic purposes.

