Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model-based alternative clinical trial designs and evaluations for
SGN-CD19A, a novel antibody-drug conjugate


BackgroundSGN-CD19A is a novel antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) composed of
a humanized anti-CD19 monoclonal antibody conjugated to the
microtubule-disrupting agent, monomethyl auristatin F (MMAF) via a
maleimidocaproyl (mc) linker. Upon binding to CD19, SGN-CD19A
internalizes and releases cys-mcMMAF, which binds to tubulin and induces
G2/M arrest and apoptosis in the targeted cells. CD19 is a B-cell
specific marker that is found on B cells as early as the pro-B cell stage
and is expressed in the majority of patients with B-lineage leukemia and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The objectives of this evaluation were to
develop a semi-mechanistic PK-PD model based on the pharmacokinetics (PK)
and pharmacodynamics (PD) of SGN-CD19A in patients with leukemia or NHL
and to simulate alternative clinical trial designs using this model for
the design of future clinical trials.MethodsA semi-mechanistic integrated
PK-PD model was developed based on the mechanism of action of SGN-CD19A
and the clinical PK and PD data from the ongoing first-in-human
dose-escalation study in adult and pediatric patients with relapsed or
refractory B-cell leukemia or highly aggressive B-cell lymphoma (CT.gov
NCT01786096). Plasma SGN-CD19A ADC concentration-time profiles were
described by a two-compartment PK model with both linear and nonlinear
clearance pathways. The nonlinear clearance was modeled as
target-mediated disposition through binding to cell membrane CD19 and
internalization of the complex. Anti-tumor effects in the form of reduced
bone marrow disease burden were modeled using a cell-kill PK-PD model
driven by the internalized cys-mcMMAF concentrations. Both PK and PD data
were fitted simultaneously using NONMEM version 7.1.2. Model simulations
were conducted for alternative doses and schedules, including loading
dose regimens, and for patients with different baseline disease
characteristics.ResultsThe integrated PK-PD model accurately described
the SGN-CD19A PK and PD profiles in patients with either leukemia or NHL
at multiple dose levels. Intra-patient adjustments in doses, disease
status changes over time, and CD19 occupancy on tumor blast cells were
well described based on goodness-of-fit evaluations. Using CD19 occupancy
as the target engagement biomarker, multiple dosing schedules were
evaluated using simulations for patients with different levels of
baseline disease burden. Simulations suggested that various schedules can
achieve and maintain target saturation, which may result in comparable
anti-tumor activity.ConclusionsThe clinical PK, PD, and PK/PD of
SGN-CD19A are well-characterized by a semi-mechanistic integrated model.
Multiple dosing schedules were predicted to achieve target saturation.

