Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The activity of a new class of biologics: trastuzumab conjugates
designed to treat brain metastases of HER2+ breast cancers


Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody against HER2, is an effective therapy
for the treatment of peripheral HER2+ breast cancer. However, a
significant number of patients eventually succumb to the disease due to
brain metastases. In these patients trastuzumab is no longer effective
because the blood brain barrier reduces distribution of trastuzumab to
the brain tumor. In this study, we conjugate trastuzumab to
melanotransferrin (MTf), a protein of the transferrin family, which has
been shown to cross the blood brain barrier, and characterize its
anti-tumor activity. We used thiol-malemide linkage to conjugate
trastuzumab to MTf and generated a mixture of trastuzumab-MTf species of
varying molar ratios. Size exclusion chromatography was used to enriched
for the 1:1 heterodimer fraction and this fraction was designated as
BT2111. The activity of BT2111 against human HER2+ breast cancer cell
lines was tested with a cytotoxicity assay, an antibody dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) assay, and in a peripheral tumor xenograft
model. At equimolar equivalents, BT2111 had greater anti-tumor activity
than trastuzumab against HER2+ human breast cancer cell lines (SKBR3 and
BT474). Furthermore, significant ADCC activity directed against BT474
cells was observed when cells were treated with BT2111 and incubated with
human NK cells. Finally, both BT2111 and trastuzumab completely inhibited
the growth of peripheral xenograft tumors (BT474) in athymic mice over
the course of the experimental period (5-6 weeks). Conjugation of
trastuzumab to MTf does not alter the in vivo anti-tumor activity of
trastuzumab, supporting the conclusion that HER2 binding and Fc receptor
binding was not significantly affected by conjugation. BT2111 is the
first example of a new class of biologics that demonstrates the ability
to inhibit the growth of peripheral HER2+ tumors and has the added
benefit of penetrating the brain for the treatment of HER2+ brain
metastases.

