Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver receptor homologue-1 increases incidence of DMBA-induced
mammary tumors


Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies globally. It
accounts for approximately 15% of cancer-related deaths in Australian
women. The orphan nuclear receptor liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1)
promotes increased cell proliferation, motility and invasion in breast
cancer cell lines. Additionally, high LRH-1 expression in human breast
cancers is positively associated with estrogen receptor alpha status and
aromatase activity. However, the role of LRH-1 in tumour growth is not
well understood. Therefore, we aimed to generate a doxycycline
(dox)-inducible mammary epithelial specific LRH-1 knock-in mouse in order
to define the role of LRH-1 in mammary epithelial proliferation in vivo.
In addition, the Dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) induced mammary tumour
model was utilized with the LRH-1 transgenic mice to determine the role
LRH-1 plays in promoting mammary carcinogenesis. Given clear in vitro
roles for LRH-1 in breast cancer cell proliferation, we hypothesise LRH-1
stimulates mouse mammary epithelial cell proliferation and promotes
DMBA-mediated mammary tumorigenesis.We demonstrate increase in
proliferation markers Ki-67, PCNA and PH3 immunoreactivity in luminal
epithelial cells of dox-treated animals indicating that LRH-1 plays a
role in mammary cell proliferation in vivo. In DMBA treated animals, we
observed a five-fold increase of dense pre-neoplastic epithelial foci
(p=0.0267), and a four-fold increase in microscopic lesions in
dox-treated animals (p=0.0003). We also demonstrated that LRH-1
over-expression significantly reduced breast tumour-free survival in the
transgenic DMBA model (no dox n=11; dox n=12, Mantel-Cox test p=0.0375).
Tumour penetrance in DMBA animals not treated with dox was 9% (out of
eleven animals) versus 25.0% (out of twelve animals) in the dox treated
cohort.LRH-1 is known synergise with -catenin to induce cyclin D1/E1
mediated cell proliferation in vitro. We analysed transcript levels of
cyclin D1/E1 and show a significant increase in dox treated animals with
or without DMBA. Finally, we demonstrate an increase in the oncogene
-catenin nuclear localisation in the dox treated animals with or without
DMBA. Taken together, these data suggest that LRH-1 increases incidence
of DMBA-induced mammary tumours. Further analyses on mechanism(s)
mediated by LRH-1 are warranted to fully understand its role in mammary
tumorigenesis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

