Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cell cycle progression by Ikaros in leukemia


Control of cell cycle progression is achieved by the coordinated function
of a large set of genes that are highly conserved in eukaryotic
organisms. Malignant cells have impaired regulation of cell cycle
progression which results in uncontrolled cellular proliferation. Thus,
understanding the regulation of cell cycle progression in malignant cells
is essential to advance our knowledge of the process of malignant
transformation and for designing novel treatments. Ikaros is a zinc
finger protein that acts as a tumor suppressor in leukemia. The loss of
Ikaros activity due to deletion or mutation has been associated with the
development of high-risk B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), as
well as with T-cell ALL and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Ikaros
binds DNA and regulates transcription of its target genes via chromatin
remodeling. The mechanism of Ikaros tumor suppressor activity is largely
unknown. Here, we present evidence that Ikaros regulates cell cycle
progression in leukemia. Using quantitative Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
assay (qChIP), we demonstrate that Ikaros binds in vivo to promoter
regions of several genes that regulate cell cycle progression in B-ALL
cell lines and in primary cells from patients with B-ALL. To study how
Ikaros regulates transcription of these genes, luciferase reporter assays
were performed. The promoter regions of three Ikaros target genes were
cloned into luciferase reporter constructs. Each of these constructs has
been co-transfected with Ikaros or an empty vector (as a negative
control) into HEK 293T cells. Results showed that Ikaros represses
transcription of the three genes that promote cell cycle progression.
Overexpression of Ikaros in leukemia cells by retroviral transduction
results in reduced transcription of the cell cycle promoting genes, as
evidenced by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), as well as cell cycle
arrest. These data suggest that Ikaros regulates cell cycle progression
in leukemia by direct repression of the transcription of the genes that
promote cell cycle progression, and identifies one mechanism of Ikaros
function as a tumor suppressor in leukemia.

