Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide enhances tumor progression and disease aggressiveness
in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most malignant
cancer, with 5-year survival of a mere 6%. Chronic inflammation is
associated with an increased risk of PDAC. Nitric oxide (NO) is an
important mediator of immune and inflammatory responses and plays a role
in tumorigenesis. The principal source of an increased and sustained
level of NO is inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2). In this study, we
have tested the hypothesis that NO enhances tumor progression in
pancreatic cancer. We found that a higher NOS2 expression in tumors was
associated with poor survival in resected PDAC patients (p=0.011). We
then used a genetic strategy to investigate the role of NO in the
development and progression of PDAC by deleting NOS2 gene in a
genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with
pancreas specific activation of mutant KRAS and P53, which faithfully
recapitulates the development and progression of human pancreatic cancer.
NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed a longer survival as compared to the KPC
littermates with wild type NOS2 (pPancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
is among the most malignant cancer, with 5-year survival of a mere 6%.
Chronic inflammation is associated with an increased risk of PDAC. Nitric
oxide (NO) is an important mediator of immune and inflammatory responses
and plays a role in tumorigenesis. The principal source of an increased
and sustained level of NO is inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2). In
this study, we have tested the hypothesis that NO enhances tumor
progression in pancreatic cancer. We found that a higher NOS2 expression
in tumors was associated with poor survival in resected PDAC patients
(p=0.011). We then used a genetic strategy to investigate the role of NO
in the development and progression of PDAC by deleting NOS2 gene in a
genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with
pancreas specific activation of mutant KRAS and P53, which faithfully
recapitulates the development and progression of human pancreatic cancer.
NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed a longer survival as compared to the KPC
littermates with wild type NOS2 (p<0.01). Tumors from KPC/NOS2-/- mice
showed reduced tumor cell proliferation and increased apoptosis as
indicated by a lower expression of Ki67 and a higher level of activated
caspase-3, as compared with KPC mice. Furthermore, tumors from
KPC/NOS2-/- mice were less vascularized as compared with KPC mice, as
indicated by CD31 expression. Additionally, NOS2-deficiency led to a
decreased inflammatory response by attenuation of macrophage recruitment
in pancreatic tumors as indicated by a significantly lower expression of
F4/80. However, in contrast FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells were increased in
tumors from KPC/NOS2-/- mice. Further mechanistic analysis revealed a
higher expression of ph-FOXO3 and nuclear ph-ERK in tumors from KPC mice
as compared with KPC/NOS2-/- mice. Analysis of human PDAC samples showed
a positive correlation between NOS2 and ph-FOXO3 expression (P=0.004). In
summary, NOS2 gene expression in tumors is a candidate prognostic marker
in resected pancreatic cancer patients, and NOS2/NO signaling may
contribute to the pancreatic tumor progression by inactivating FOXO3 in
KPC mice. In this ongoing study, we are further investigating the
mechanistic role of NO in disease progression.

