Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CDK8 in estrogen receptor signaling in breast cancers


The majority of breast cancers (BrCa) overexpress estrogen receptor (ER),
which regulates transcription and drives estrogen-stimulated
proliferation of ER+ tumor cells. ER+ patients usually receive adjuvant
anti-estrogen therapy based on ER modification, downregulation, or
estrogen depletion. Tumors frequently develop resistance to anti-estrogen
therapy through various mechanisms, which may involve stimulation of ER
itself or of downstream mediators of ER-driven transcription, as well as
activation of alternative proliferation pathways, in particular those
driven by HER2/EGFR. The treatment efficacy of hormone-resistant BrCa
could be greatly augmented by targeting new druggable mediators of ER
activity. We have now identified a transcription-regulating oncogenic
kinase CDK8 as a potentiator of ER signaling and ER-driven BrCa cell
proliferation. Immunohistochemical staining of breast tissue arrays and
bioinformatics analysis of gene expression microarray data of breast
cancer patients revealed that CDK8 is overexpressed in BrCa and that
higher CDK8 expression correlates with the failure of systemic therapy.
Among systemically untreated patients, higher CDK8 expression was
correlated with shorter relapse-free survival in a subset of ER+ tumors
that expressed the lowest levels of ER. This correlation suggested that
CDK8 could play a role in the progression of ER+ breast cancers with
reduced levels of ER, possibly by stimulating the mitogenic effects of
ER-mediated transcription. Indeed, a selective small-molecule CDK8
inhibitor (Senexin A) decreased estrogen-induced ER-dependent
transcription and inhibited estrogen-stimulated proliferation of ER+ BrCa
cell lines. Microarray analysis revealed that CDK8 inhibition diminished
the induction of genes that show rapid and sustained activation by
estrogen in ER+ cells. CDK8 inhibition had an additive effect in
combination with anti-estrogens in ER+ BrCa and a synergistic effect with
fulvestrant in BrCa cells resistant to estrogen deprivation. Some of
these cell lines also express HER2/EGFR, and CDK8 inhibition in
combination with a HER2/EGFR inhibitor lapatinib synergistically
inhibited the growth of these cells. These results suggest that combining
anti-estrogen and anti-CDK8 therapy may be more effective than
conventional hormone therapy for ER+ BrCa.

