Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the mechanisms of radiosensitization by human
papillomavirus (HPV) in head and neck cancers cell lines


It has been shown in several clinical studies that HPV-positive head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have a more favorable outcome and
greater response to therapy. The reason for improved prognosis of
HPV-related head and neck cancers remains speculative. One hypothesis is
that HPV-positive cells are intrinsically more sensitive to standard
therapies and thus, respond better to treatment. Clinical studies suggest
indeed that HPV-related HNSCC actually display enhanced sensitivity to
concurrent chemoradiation therapy. The goal of this project is to verify
this hypothesis and elucidate the underlying mechanisms.For this purpose,
we determined radiosensitivity by clonogenic survival of two HPV positive
HNSCC cell lines (UPCI-SCC-154 & UPCI-SCC-90) compared to two HPV
negative ones (SCC-61 & SQD9). Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V/PI
staining. Cell cycle distribution and G2/M checkpoint were assessed by
flow cytometry. DNA damage repair was evaluated by gamma-H2Ax assay. In
addition, we investigated basal DNA damage repair efficiency by reporter
gene assay for homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ).The surviving fraction at 2Gy (SF2) for the two HPV+
cell lines was 0,13 and 0,15 for UPCI-SCC-90 and UPCI-SCC-154,
respectively while SF2 for SQD9 was 0,49 and 0,16 for SCC-61 a HNSCC cell
line described as radiosensitive. At 24h after irradiation (2Gy) there
was no significant difference in apoptosis (less than 5%) between HPV-
and HPV+ cell lines. However further time points still need to be
analysed. Cell cycle distribution 24h after irradiation, indicated a
significant increase in G2/M in HPV+ cells but also in SCC61. The
kinetics of H2Ax phosphorylation after a single dose of 2 Gy correlated
the SF2 data with a slower clearance of H2Ax for HPV+ cells, as well as
for radiosensitive SCC61. However, analysis of remaining gH2AX depending
on cell cycle phase indicated a slower clearance for cells in G2/M phase
in HPV+ cell lines (pIt has been shown in several clinical studies that
HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have a more
favorable outcome and greater response to therapy. The reason for
improved prognosis of HPV-related head and neck cancers remains
speculative. One hypothesis is that HPV-positive cells are intrinsically
more sensitive to standard therapies and thus, respond better to
treatment. Clinical studies suggest indeed that HPV-related HNSCC
actually display enhanced sensitivity to concurrent chemoradiation
therapy. The goal of this project is to verify this hypothesis and
elucidate the underlying mechanisms.For this purpose, we determined
radiosensitivity by clonogenic survival of two HPV positive HNSCC cell
lines (UPCI-SCC-154 & UPCI-SCC-90) compared to two HPV negative ones
(SCC-61 & SQD9). Apoptosis was measured by Annexin V/PI staining. Cell
cycle distribution and G2/M checkpoint were assessed by flow cytometry.
DNA damage repair was evaluated by gamma-H2Ax assay. In addition, we
investigated basal DNA damage repair efficiency by reporter gene assay
for homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ).The surviving fraction at 2Gy (SF2) for the two HPV+ cell lines
was 0,13 and 0,15 for UPCI-SCC-90 and UPCI-SCC-154, respectively while
SF2 for SQD9 was 0,49 and 0,16 for SCC-61 a HNSCC cell line described as
radiosensitive. At 24h after irradiation (2Gy) there was no significant
difference in apoptosis (less than 5%) between HPV- and HPV+ cell lines.
However further time points still need to be analysed. Cell cycle
distribution 24h after irradiation, indicated a significant increase in
G2/M in HPV+ cells but also in SCC61. The kinetics of H2Ax
phosphorylation after a single dose of 2 Gy correlated the SF2 data with
a slower clearance of H2Ax for HPV+ cells, as well as for radiosensitive
SCC61. However, analysis of remaining gH2AX depending on cell cycle phase
indicated a slower clearance for cells in G2/M phase in HPV+ cell lines
(p<0,001). Furthermore, HPV+ cells show decreased efficiency in NHEJ but
also in HR which occurs mainly in G2/M phase.These results taken
together, confirm an increased radiosensitivity of HPV+ cells and an
impaired DNA damage repair mainly by HR although at this point further
investigation is needed to elucidate the exact mechanisms. In order to
investigate whether increased radiosensitivity is directly related to the
presence of viral oncoproteins E6 and/or E7 we transfected HPV- HCT116
colon carcinoma cell line (p53 wt and -/-) with the oncoproteins and we
plan to assess their radioresponse in terms of cell cycle arrest and DNA
damage repair.

