Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High neuropilin-1 expression on monocytes is positively associated
with trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of the
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cell line


PurposeNeuropilin-1 (Nrp1) was initially characterized as a guide for
migrating cells and axons in developing nervous systems and is essential
for the precise formation of neurons and vasculature. However, it was
recently reported to also play an important role in the immune system.
This study aimed to investigate the role of Nrp1 on monocytes in
trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)
targeting the HER2-positive human breast cancer cell line SKBR3. In
addition, we evaluated the gene expression profile of monocytes
expressing high and low levels of Nrp1.MethodsPeripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy volunteers were prepared using BD
Vacutainer CPT Cell Preparation Tubes. The cells were stained with
fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-CD14 and
allophycocyanin-conjugated anti-Nrp1 antibodies, and Nrp1high and Nrp1low
monocyte subsets were sorted using FACSAria. These cells were used as
effector cells in a conventional ADCC assay with SKBR3 as target cells
and trastuzumab as the antibody. Target cell cytotoxicity was measured
using the LDH cytotoxic test kit. The effector cell to target cell ratios
of 20:1 and 10:1 were used. Gene expression analysis was performed by
Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays. All study protocols were approved by the
Ethics Committee for Clinical Research, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto,
Japan (authorization number G424).ResultsThe LDH cytotoxic test revealed
significantly higher target cancer cell cytotoxicity in sorted Nrp1high
monocytes than in Nrp1low monocytes (75% vs. 45%, pPurposeNeuropilin-1
(Nrp1) was initially characterized as a guide for migrating cells and
axons in developing nervous systems and is essential for the precise
formation of neurons and vasculature. However, it was recently reported
to also play an important role in the immune system. This study aimed to
investigate the role of Nrp1 on monocytes in trastuzumab-mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) targeting the
HER2-positive human breast cancer cell line SKBR3. In addition, we
evaluated the gene expression profile of monocytes expressing high and
low levels of Nrp1.MethodsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy
volunteers were prepared using BD Vacutainer CPT Cell Preparation Tubes.
The cells were stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated
anti-CD14 and allophycocyanin-conjugated anti-Nrp1 antibodies, and
Nrp1high and Nrp1low monocyte subsets were sorted using FACSAria. These
cells were used as effector cells in a conventional ADCC assay with SKBR3
as target cells and trastuzumab as the antibody. Target cell cytotoxicity
was measured using the LDH cytotoxic test kit. The effector cell to
target cell ratios of 20:1 and 10:1 were used. Gene expression analysis
was performed by Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays. All study protocols
were approved by the Ethics Committee for Clinical Research, Kyoto
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan (authorization number G424).ResultsThe
LDH cytotoxic test revealed significantly higher target cancer cell
cytotoxicity in sorted Nrp1high monocytes than in Nrp1low monocytes (75%
vs. 45%, p<0.01). Trastuzumab-mediated ADCC was significantly suppressed
by Nrp1 neutralization antibodies in a dose-dependent manner (Control arm
14.3%, Treatment arm 6%; pPurposeNeuropilin-1 (Nrp1) was initially
characterized as a guide for migrating cells and axons in developing
nervous systems and is essential for the precise formation of neurons and
vasculature. However, it was recently reported to also play an important
role in the immune system. This study aimed to investigate the role of
Nrp1 on monocytes in trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) targeting the HER2-positive human breast cancer cell
line SKBR3. In addition, we evaluated the gene expression profile of
monocytes expressing high and low levels of Nrp1.MethodsPeripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy volunteers were prepared using BD
Vacutainer CPT Cell Preparation Tubes. The cells were stained with
fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-CD14 and
allophycocyanin-conjugated anti-Nrp1 antibodies, and Nrp1high and Nrp1low
monocyte subsets were sorted using FACSAria. These cells were used as
effector cells in a conventional ADCC assay with SKBR3 as target cells
and trastuzumab as the antibody. Target cell cytotoxicity was measured
using the LDH cytotoxic test kit. The effector cell to target cell ratios
of 20:1 and 10:1 were used. Gene expression analysis was performed by
Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays. All study protocols were approved by the
Ethics Committee for Clinical Research, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto,
Japan (authorization number G424).ResultsThe LDH cytotoxic test revealed
significantly higher target cancer cell cytotoxicity in sorted Nrp1high
monocytes than in Nrp1low monocytes (75% vs. 45%, p<0.01).
Trastuzumab-mediated ADCC was significantly suppressed by Nrp1
neutralization antibodies in a dose-dependent manner (Control arm 14.3%,
Treatment arm 6%; p<0.01). Gene expression analysis revealed that 308
genes were up-regulated in the Nrp1high population, including
monocyte-specific chemokine receptor and hematopoietic transcriptional
factor.ConclusionThese results suggest that determination of Nrp1
expression can be used to classify monocytes as populations with and
without cellular cytotoxic activity. Analysis of Nrp1 expression levels
in monocytes can therefore be used to identify HER2-positive breast
cancer patients for whom trastuzumab therapy will be less effective.

