Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel AR splice variant identified in circulating tumor cells
from castration-resistant prostate cancer patient blood as a potentially
prognostic biomarker


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are rare cancer cells circulating in the
bloodstream that are thought to have a key role in cancer metastasis.
They have been associated with worse prognosis in several major cancer
types. There is an intense interest in the molecular analysis of CTC to
gain information that would assist treatment decisions and potentially
improve the disease outcome. There are enormous interests in the analysis
of CTCs for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) due to the nature
of the tumor that tends to metastasize to bone, making them generally
inaccessible to obtain biopsies. In this study, we applied a surface
marker independent, label-free cell trap microfluidics device for CTCs
isolation and retrieval based on cell size and deformability. A total of
47 blood samples drawn from 36 patients with CRPC were preceded for CTC
isolation followed by molecular characterization using epithelial tumor
markers and prostate cancer specific markers. We identified a novel
androgen receptor (AR) splice variant from four patients' CTCs, and
confirmed by DNA sequencing that this variant lacks a 554bp region in the
ligand binding domain of the receptor in comparison with wild type human
AR. Patients with this splice variant were found to be associated with
poor survival (pCirculating tumor cells (CTCs) are rare cancer cells
circulating in the bloodstream that are thought to have a key role in
cancer metastasis. They have been associated with worse prognosis in
several major cancer types. There is an intense interest in the molecular
analysis of CTC to gain information that would assist treatment decisions
and potentially improve the disease outcome. There are enormous interests
in the analysis of CTCs for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
due to the nature of the tumor that tends to metastasize to bone, making
them generally inaccessible to obtain biopsies. In this study, we applied
a surface marker independent, label-free cell trap microfluidics device
for CTCs isolation and retrieval based on cell size and deformability. A
total of 47 blood samples drawn from 36 patients with CRPC were preceded
for CTC isolation followed by molecular characterization using epithelial
tumor markers and prostate cancer specific markers. We identified a novel
androgen receptor (AR) splice variant from four patients' CTCs, and
confirmed by DNA sequencing that this variant lacks a 554bp region in the
ligand binding domain of the receptor in comparison with wild type human
AR. Patients with this splice variant were found to be associated with
poor survival (p<0.0001). Our study suggests that the presence of the AR
splice variant in CTC may serve as a novel prognostic biomarker for CRPC
patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

