Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment, identification and treatment data of TCGA
glioblatoma xenograft subtypes


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network recently catalogued recurrent
genomic abnormalities in glioblastoma (GBM). This genomic profiling lead
to the molecular classification of GBMs into four subtypes: Proneural,
Neural, Classical and Mesenchymal. The importance of identifying these
subtypes helps researchers and clinicians to better understand GBMs with
the potential to personalize treatment options and explore different
therapeutic approaches that each subtype may require. In addition, the
TCGA identified possible mechanisms that can cause some GBM tumors to
become resistant to therapy, including the standard of care alkylating
agent temozolomide (TMZ).For this project, we established xenografts
using patient derived tissue and passaged these xenografts until reliable
growth characteristics were obtained. Established GBM xenografts were
classified into TCGA-defined subtypes first by obtaining global gene
expression data using the GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2.0 array from
Affymetrix. Microarray data was then quantile normalized and probes were
summarized as gene expression levels using RMA. Then data was log2
transformed and genes median centered. Xenografts were subsequently
classified into one of four previously defined subtypes as described
using Classification to the Nearest Centroid (ClaNC) with the TCGA GBM
data as the training dataset.Using established xenografts from each
subtype, a panel of standard of care treatment agents (including TMZ) was
assessed by delay in tumor growth and by tumor regression. Statistical
analysis was performed using a SAS statistical analysis program, the
Wilcoxon rank order test for growth delay, and Fisher's exact test for
tumor regression. Data regarding each xenografts BRAF, EGFR, EGFRvIII,
IDH1, PIK3CA, PIK3R1, PTEN, RB1, TERT and TP53 status is reported
within.The identification of these valid xenograft models represents an
important contribution toward the ability of studying GBM subtypes, in
particular for modeling and predicting therapeutic response.

