Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of black raspberry extract (BRB) and related compounds on
mutagenesis induced by the tobacco carcinogen, dibenzo(a,l)pyrene and its
metabolites in cultured rat oral fibroblasts


BRB powder and extracts have been shown to inhibit tumorigenesis in oral
and other alimentary-tract sites in animal models; and have promising
effects on markers of carcinogenesis in several human trials. The purpose
of this study was to compare the inhibitory effects of BRB and two
related compounds (protocatechuic acid and kaempferol) on mutagenesis and
DNA adduct formation induced by the tobacco carcinogen dibenzo[a,l]pyrene
(DBP) and its metabolites, DBP-diol and DBP-diol epoxide (DBPDE), in a
rat oral epithelial cell line. Mutagenesis and DNA adduct formation
induced by DBP, DBP-diol and DBPDE were monitored in rat oral epithelial
and fibroblast cells, containing a lacI mutagenesis reporter gene; and
the order of potency in both adduct formation and mutagenesis was
DBPDE>>DBP-diol>>DBP in both cell types. In the fibroblasts for
mutagenesis, the potencies (in units of mutants/10E5 pfu /uM) were:
DBPDE, 16,320; DBP-diol, 25; DBP1.7, (above background); background was
2.9., Similar results were obtained for epithelial cells. Analysis of DNA
adducts levels is still in progress and results thus far (in units of cis
+ trans isomers of anti-DBPDE-dA/10E6 A, are: DBPDE, 2096, DBP-diol 1.8,
DBP BRB powder and extracts have been shown to inhibit tumorigenesis in
oral and other alimentary-tract sites in animal models; and have
promising effects on markers of carcinogenesis in several human trials.
The purpose of this study was to compare the inhibitory effects of BRB
and two related compounds (protocatechuic acid and kaempferol) on
mutagenesis and DNA adduct formation induced by the tobacco carcinogen
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DBP) and its metabolites, DBP-diol and DBP-diol
epoxide (DBPDE), in a rat oral epithelial cell line. Mutagenesis and DNA
adduct formation induced by DBP, DBP-diol and DBPDE were monitored in rat
oral epithelial and fibroblast cells, containing a lacI mutagenesis
reporter gene; and the order of potency in both adduct formation and
mutagenesis was DBPDE>>DBP-diol>>DBP in both cell types. In the
fibroblasts for mutagenesis, the potencies (in units of mutants/10E5 pfu
/uM) were: DBPDE, 16,320; DBP-diol, 25; DBP1.7, (above background);
background was 2.9., Similar results were obtained for epithelial cells.
Analysis of DNA adducts levels is still in progress and results thus far
(in units of cis + trans isomers of anti-DBPDE-dA/10E6 A, are: DBPDE,
2096, DBP-diol 1.8, DBP < 1.0. The above results are consistent with
mutagenesis being dependent on DNA adducts and indicate this cell culture
model reflects initiation of carcinogenesis. The background level of
mutagenesis was greater in the epithelial cells, so the fibroblasts were
then used for subsequent mutagenesis experiments. As initiation by DBP
and DBP-diol requires biotransformation to an ultimate mutagen/carcinogen
(in this case DBPDE) we initially assayed inhibition of DBP-diol induced
mutagenesis, so that effects of BRB on processes involved in activation,
as well as effects on steps after formation of DBPDE would be detected.
The parent compound, DBP, was not employed because it was very weakly
mutagenic, and studies with DBPDE are still in progress. Treatment of
cells with one M DBP-diol led to an increase in mutant fraction from 2.9
+/- 0.8 to 25 +/- 2.3 mutants/10E5 pfu. When pretreated with BRB and its
related compounds 4 hours before the addition of DBP-diol, significant
inhibition of mutagenesis was observed. With 3 uM protocatechuic acid
mutagenesis was reduced to 15.6 +/- 3.7 and with 3uM kaempferol to 13.3
+/- 4.1 mutants/10E5 pfu. Pretreatment of the cells with 25 ug/ml of an
anthocyanin-enriched BRB extract (a concentration previously used in
colon cancer cells), reduced mutagenesis to 9.8 +/- 0.35 mutants/10E5
pfu. These results suggest that BRB and specific related components will
be protective against carcinogenesis induced by certain tobacco
carcinogens. Supported by NIH grant #CA173465.

