Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-cadherin promotes docetaxel resistance through upregulated TLR4
signaling in castration resistant prostate cancers


Introduction: Docetaxel is a common therapeutic agent given to men with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, a number of
patients show poor response or eventually develop resistance. Previously,
different groups have suggested an association between chemoresistance
and epithelial to mesenchimal transition (EMT) in certain advanced
cancers. N-cadherin, a calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion surface
protein associated with EMT, is implicated in castration resistance and
metastasis in prostate cancer. We have shown in previous studies that
monoclonal antibodies raised against the extracellular domain of
N-cadherin have potential therapeutic effects in castration-resistant
tumor growth and metastasis. In this study, our objective is to determine
the role of N-cadherin expression in chemoresistance and whether
treatment with monoclonal antibodies restores chemosensitivity.Methods:
Tissue microarrays of CRPC and high grade prostate cancer clinical
samples were stained for TLR4. N-cadherin positive and negative cell
lines were evaluated for sensitivity against docetaxel. N-cadherin and
TLR4 were ectopically expressed in N-cadherin negative prostate cancer
cells (LNCaP, VCaP). Docetaxel resistant cell lines (LNCaP-DocR and
VCaP-DocR) were established through prolonged exposure to 10-20uM
Docetaxel. For in vitro experiments, these models were used to evaluate
cytotoxicity and apoptosis in the presence of docetaxel. N-cadherin
expressing cell lines were treated with 2A9 monoclonal antibody (mAb),
which was raised against the extracellular domain of N-cadherin, and by
N-cadherin siRNA knockdown. For in vivo studies, N-cadherin positive
xenografts were treated with 2A9 mAb and docetaxel, and tumor growth
monitored over time.Results: Tissue microarray results showed significant
TLR4 expression in CRPC samples (p Introduction: Docetaxel is a common
therapeutic agent given to men with castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC). However, a number of patients show poor response or eventually
develop resistance. Previously, different groups have suggested an
association between chemoresistance and epithelial to mesenchimal
transition (EMT) in certain advanced cancers. N-cadherin, a
calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion surface protein associated with EMT,
is implicated in castration resistance and metastasis in prostate cancer.
We have shown in previous studies that monoclonal antibodies raised
against the extracellular domain of N-cadherin have potential therapeutic
effects in castration-resistant tumor growth and metastasis. In this
study, our objective is to determine the role of N-cadherin expression in
chemoresistance and whether treatment with monoclonal antibodies restores
chemosensitivity.Methods: Tissue microarrays of CRPC and high grade
prostate cancer clinical samples were stained for TLR4. N-cadherin
positive and negative cell lines were evaluated for sensitivity against
docetaxel. N-cadherin and TLR4 were ectopically expressed in N-cadherin
negative prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, VCaP). Docetaxel resistant cell
lines (LNCaP-DocR and VCaP-DocR) were established through prolonged
exposure to 10-20uM Docetaxel. For in vitro experiments, these models
were used to evaluate cytotoxicity and apoptosis in the presence of
docetaxel. N-cadherin expressing cell lines were treated with 2A9
monoclonal antibody (mAb), which was raised against the extracellular
domain of N-cadherin, and by N-cadherin siRNA knockdown. For in vivo
studies, N-cadherin positive xenografts were treated with 2A9 mAb and
docetaxel, and tumor growth monitored over time.Results: Tissue
microarray results showed significant TLR4 expression in CRPC samples (p
< 0.005). In vitro studies showed TLR4 induction correlated with
N-cadherin expression. This upregulation of N-cadherin and TLR4
expression promoted docetaxel resistance in CRPC by the activation of
NF-kB signaling. Monoclonal antibodies against N-cadherin and TLR4
potentiated docetaxel induced cytotoxicity. Docetaxel resistant cells
exhibited EMT phenotypes with increased invasion and castration resistant
growth. Treatment with 2A9 antibody restored sensitivity to docetaxel.
Combination therapy with 2A9 monoclonal antibody and docetaxel
significantly affected tumor growth in N-cadherin positive CRPC xenograft
models.Conclusions: These studies suggest that N-cadherin promotes
TLR4-dependent docetaxel resistance in CRPC. Although further
investigation will be needed, therapeutic targeting of N-cadherin with
monoclonal antibodies in combination with therapeutic agents such as
docetaxel may have significant clinical benefit.

