Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mcl-1 mediates TWEAK/Fn14-induced non-small cell lung cancer
survival and therapeutic response


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the world
killing more than one million people each year. Therapeutic resistance
remains a significant clinical hurdle, contributing to a five-year
survival rate of less than 5% in advanced lung cancer. The mechanisms of
therapeutic resistance remain poorly understood and thus difficult to
combat therapeutically. The tumor necrosis factor-like weak inducer of
apoptosis (TWEAK)-fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14) signaling
axis is known to promote cancer cell survival via NF-B activation and
up-regulation of pro-survival Bcl-2 family members. Mcl-1 is
over-expressed across many tumor types and correlates with poor patient
prognosis and therapeutic resistance. We hypothesize that activation of
the TWEAK-Fn14 signaling axis can induce therapeutic resistance through
Mcl-1, and that Mcl-1 suppression can sensitize lung cancer cells to
therapeutic insult. Here we demonstrate that both Fn14 and Mcl-1 are
over-expressed and correlated in primary patient lung tumors. Mcl-1
expression correlates with both advanced stage lung cancer and poor
patient prognosis. TWEAK stimulation of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines induces Mcl-1 protein expression in a NF-B-dependent
manner. TWEAK exposure completely abrogates the cell killing effects of
cisplatin or radiation treatment in NSCLC cell lines, and this
TWEAK-induced protection is dependent on Mcl-1 expression. The
suppression of Mcl-1 through RNAi or a novel Mcl-1 inhibitor (EU-5148)
enhances the cell killing effects of cisplatin or radiation and
completely blocks TWEAK-induced cell survival, whereas Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
inhibition have lesser effect on TWEAK-induced survival. The specificity
of EU5148 is demonstrated through abrogation of the protein-protein
interaction of Mcl-1 and Bim, with no effect on the interaction of Bcl-xL
and Bim. Moreover, EU-5148 treatment inhibits cell survival across a
panel of NSCLC cell lines, representing a range of histological subtypes
and driver mutations, such as EGFR and KRAS. Collectively, these results
position TWEAK-Fn14 signaling through Mcl-1 as a significant mechanism
for NSCLC tumor cell survival, and open new therapeutic avenues to
abrogate the high mortality rate seen in advanced NSCLC.

