Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-tumor effects of acetazolamide and sulforaphane on
bronchial carcinoids: Preclinical modeling and mechanism


Background: The prognosis of patients with metastatic bronchial carcinoid
remains poor despite current conventional and targeted therapies. Here we
evaluated the therapeutic potential of acetazolamide (AZ; a pan carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor affecting pH regulation and homeostasis) and
sulforaphane (SFN; a natural isothiocyanate compound targeting multiple
pathways in cancer cells), for their anti-cancer properties. Methods: In
vitro and in vivo studies were conducted on H-727 (typical carcinoid) and
H-720 (atypical carcinoid) bronchial carcinoid cell lines. We developed a
lung orthotopic bronchial carcinoid tumor xenograft model in NOD/SCID
mice. Results: AZ and/or SFN significantly inhibited cell viability and
clonogenic capacity in a dose-dependent manner (0-80 M, 48 hours and 7
days). AZ and/or SFN downregulated phosphoH3, Ki67, EPCAM, CA9, Akt1 and
upregulated p21 and Nrf2 proteins compared to controls as confirmed by
Western blot. Upregulation of Nrf2 gene expression was confirmed by qPCR.
AZ and/or SFN significantly reduced xenograft growth and serotonin
content after two weeks treatment. In the lung orthotopic model, MR
imaging at 3 Tesla precisely identified growth of H-727 injected cells in
the ipsilateral side, and revealed liver metastasis as confirmed by
histology. A tumor initiating cell (TIC) fraction isolated under stem
cell culture conditions showing significantly enhanced tumorigenicity was
also studied. Conclusions: AZ and/or SFN inhibited tumor survival,
proliferation, invasiveness, serotonin secretion and tumorigenic
potential of bronchial carcinoid cell lines. Since the combination of
AZ+SFN was more effective than either single agent, we postulate that AZ
potentiates the effects of SFN by inhibiting PI3K/AKT, which could
enhance the inhibitory effect of SFN on P21, Ki67 and phosphoH3.
Interestingly, Nrf2 upregulation by both AZ and by SFN suggested a potent
antioxidant response. The lung orthotopic tumor model of bronchial
carcinoids permits study of carcinoid metastatic progression. As the
doses used in this study are clinically bioavailable we suggest that AZ
and SFN may have promising potential for carcinoid therapy and resolution
of the carcinoid syndrome.

