Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass spectrometry analysis of PIK3CA mutant mammary epithelial
cells identifies EGFR as a paracrine effector of PI3K in basal-like
breast cancer


PIK3CA, the gene encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of
phoshatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K), is frequently mutated in luminal-
and basal-like breast cancer. We assessed proteomic changes induced by
knock-in of PIK3CA activating mutations in MCF10A mammary epithelial
cells (MECs). Shotgun LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry revealed 72 proteins
uniquely altered in PIK3CA mutant cell lines versus isogenic wild type
cells. Nearly half the upregulated proteins are secreted or involved in
extracellular matrix (ECM) processing or signaling. The EGFR ligand
amphiregulin (AREG) was 5-fold higher in the media conditioned by PIK3CA
mutant cells compared to wild type cells. While the conditioned media of
PIK3CA mutant cells, but not that of wild-type cells, stimulated
proliferation, EGFR phosphorylation and ERK signaling in recipient wild
type MCF10A cells, this was inhibited when recipient cells were treated
with an AREG-neutralizing antibody, EGFR inhibitor (cetuximab), or MEK
inhibitor (AZD6244). PIK3CA mutant cells abundantly secreted the ECM
protein fibronectin, and fibronectin enhanced AREG-induced proliferation
of wild type MCF10A cells. PIK3CA mutant cells downregulated PTPRF, a
receptor tyrosine phosphatase. PTPRF down-regulation enhanced EGFR
signaling and proliferation in wild type cells. Conversely, PTPRF
overexpression decreased EGFR signaling and proliferation in PIK3CA
mutant cells. These data suggest that PIK3CA mutant MCF10A cells activate
EGFR-dependent proliferation by suppression of a negative regulatory
phosphatase and increased secretion of AREG and fibronectin.Eight
proteins upregulated in PIK3CA mutant MECs (transglutaminase 2,
peroxidasin, fibronectin, integrin 5, laminin 3, laminin 2,
thrombospondin and EphA2) were evaluated in a panel of breast cancer
cells. All 8 proteins were expressed at highest levels in basal-like
breast cancer cell lines over luminal and HER2-amplified cell lines.
Interrogation of microarray data demonstrated that transcripts encoding
proteins upregulated in PIK3CA mutant MCF10A cells correlated with
decreased relapse-free survival in basal-like, but not luminal breast
cancer. Interrogation of human tumor data demonstrated increased EGFR
activation in PIK3CA mutant basal-like breast cancer as compared to
PIK3CA wild type. Finally, a p110-specific inhibitor, BYL719, induced
EGFR ligand expression and activation of EGFR in PIK3CA mutant,
basal-like breast cancer cells such that dual inhibition of EGFR and p110
with cetuximab and BYL719 induced greater anti-tumor cell activity. Our
proteomic analysis of PIK3CA mutant MCF10A cells revealed mechanisms of
autocrine and paracrine induced proliferation and proteomic alterations
common in basal-like breast cancer cells which may serve as therapeutic
targets in this subtype of breast cancer.

