Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How highly purified lentiviral vectors matter when it comes to
genetically modifying your cells for the generation of in vitro or in
vivo predictive cancer models


The development of relevant predictive cancer models including genetic
modification is crucial for gene target validation and the assessment of
molecules efficacy. Such models must be conceived through the use of a
tool ensuring both the original phenotype of the cells to be strictly
maintained and a stable expression of the sequence of interest in all
target cells including primary cells. In these delicate cells as
hematopoietic lineages, classical transfection protocols are not only
transient and inefficient but they also induce cytotoxic effects and/or
proliferative arrests. Gene transfer using lentiviral vectors is safer
for such cells and the expression of the sequence of interest (cDNA,
shRNA, miRNA) is stable thanks to the vector DNA integration into genomic
DNA, bringing stable cell line at once. Using highly purified and
concentrated lentivectors, we show that not only is it possible to
transduce 100% of T lymphocytes, monocytes, M1/M2 Macrophages, and
dendritic cells, but we also manage the integrated copy number and level
of expression. With such transduction efficiency, it doesnt worth to
perform any antibiotic selection, allowing to save time and ensuring to
keep the cells phenotype. In vivo, we show that lentiviral vectors
expressing luciferase or fluorescent reporters are a good tool for
noninvasive analyses of tumor animal models. They can be efficiently used
through direct injections into adult animals and also through in vitro
transductions of any tumoral cells subsequently reimplantated in the
context of cancer models. The transplantation of genetically modified HSC
offers an attractive alternative to transgenic animal models, allowing a
more rapid and cost-effective in vivo validation of target genes for
models of hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we present data obtained
using concentrated and purified lentiviral suspension for the
transduction of Lin- bone marrow cells before their transfer into
recipient irradiated mice. These data bring out that lentiviral vectors
have to be highly concentrated and purified in order to maintain the
original cell phenotype, proliferation and viability in the goal to
achieve an effective transgene expression. These two additional criterias
combined with the lentiviral vector properties are required to ensure the
development of trustworthy predictive cancer models, and thus build the
link between in vitro assays and in vivo results to finally translate to
therapeutic applications.

