Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decursin synergistically enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis through
CHOP dependent DR5 signaling in TRAIL resistant lung cancer cells


Targeting the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL), which has been clinically established for anticancer therapy, is
the attractive strategy to specifically kill cancer cells through the
death receptors. Nonetheless, its therapeutic potential is limited due to
the resistance in cancer cells. Thus, in the present study, we evaluated
the therapeutic potential of Decursin, a pyranocoumarin isolated from the
Korean Angelica gigas root as a TRAIL sensitizer in a variety of
resistant lung cancer cells. Co-treatment of Decursin with TRAIL
synergistically induced apoptosis in TRAIL resistant lung cancer cells,
A545, H1299, H596 and Calu-1. This synergistic effect through the
induction of DR5 in Decursin treated cells was also confirmed by
immunoblotting and immunoanalysis of endogeneous and surface expression
of DR5, respectively. In contrast, in DR knockdown cells, combination
treatment Decursin and TRAIL did not induce apoptosis at all.
Furthermore, we found that DR5 induction by Decursin was mediated by
ER-stress and its byproduct CHOP. Depletion of CHOP via siRNA
transfection completely blocked Decusin induced apoptosis cell death in
TRAIL resistant lung cancer cells. Taken together, induction of the DR5
via upregulation of CHOP and its inducer, ER stress, by Decursin leads to
synergistically increase the TRAIL mediated cell death in TRAIL resistant
lung cancer cells. Our results indicate that Decursin is a useful
therapeutic strategy for overcoming TRAIL resistance in lung tumor
treatment.Key words: Decursin, DR-5, ER stress, CHOP, Trail resistant,
Lung cancerConflict of Interests: The authors disclose no potential
conflicts of interest.Acknowledgment: This work was supported by the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korea
Government (MEST) (no. 2012-0005755).

