Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing in acute myeloid leukemia: Correlation
with cytogenetic studies highlighting different spectrums of mutations


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) represents a heterogeneous group of
aggressive myeloid malignancies characterized by the accumulation of
blasts in the bone marrow. The prognosis of AML is variable, likely
reflecting its diversity at a genetic level. The pathogenesis of AML has
not been completely defined; however it is clear that recurrent
chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., translocations and numeric
abnormalities) and genetic events (e.g., point mutations and indels) are
necessary for disease development. Genetic changes are diverse and
consist of large genomic changes such as rearrangements and ploidy
anomalies, as well as submicroscopic changes, including point mutations
and indels. Few studies have correlated cytogenetically detected
anomalies with molecularly detected mutations in AML. Here we describe
our experience using a hematological next generation sequencing
(heme-NGS) panel in conjunction with conventional cytogenetic studies to
interrogate diagnostic AML specimens in a routine clinical setting. Next
generation sequencing was done using a custom designed amplicon panel and
Illumina TruSeq Custom Amplicon (TSCA) capture. Using a customized
bioinformatics pipelines we were able to detect single nucleotide
variants (SNV) and small insertion/deletion (indel) to a lower limit of
5% with 100% sensitivity and specificity. 28 genes recurrently mutated in
myeloid malignancies were examined including targeted regions of NPM1,
FLT3, KIT, PTPN11, NRAS, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, DNMT3a, EZH2, PTEN, CEBPA,
TP53, WT1, RUNX1, TET2, ATM, BRAF, CBL, MPL, SF3B1, ASXL1, HRAS, KRAS,
PHF6, GNAS, ETV6 and MYD88. Over 100 specimens were analyzed by NGS and
cytogenetics , with only a single case being normal by both tests.
Comparison of mutation-positive AML demonstrated more mutations present
in cytogenetically normal cases, compared with those with chromosome
abnormalities detected. Conversely, in 11 cases no mutations were
detected by heme-NGS, with 10/11 of these cases showing recurrent
cytogenetic abnormalities. In those cases where NGS mutations were
identified, comparison of cases with normal (CN-AML) and abnormal
(CA-AML) cytogenetic studies demonstrated different mutation frequencies,
with more mutations detected in CN-AML. Interestingly, TP53 was the most
commonly mutated gene in CA-AML and least mutated in CN-AML. These
results illustrate the complementary information gained from NGS
sequencing performed with conventional cytogenetic studies in diagnostic
AML specimens, providing a comprehensive picture of the genomic landscape
in this disease. A complete description of these combined cytogenetic and
molecular abnormalities seen in AML and correlation with clinical
features will be presented.

