Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Puupehenol natural product inhibits STAT3 signaling and induces
antitumor cell effects in vitro against human glioblastoma cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a malignant brain tumor that lacks
effective therapeutics and has a high mortality rate.
Constitutively-activated signal transducer and activator of transcription
3 (STAT3) protein is prevalent and implicated in GBM phenotype and
represents a valid anti-GBM target. To discover novel STAT3 inhibitors
suitable for GBM therapy, natural product extracts were investigated.
Whole extracts from marine organisms were first screened for effects
against cell viability using the human glioma model line, U251MG that
harbors aberrantly-active STAT3 and normal fibroblasts that do not. The
screening campaign identified the puupehenol, CC-1-2 from the whole
extracts of leiodermatium sp as a bioactive compound that suppressed
U251MG cell viability, with an IC50 4.10.1 M, compared to an IC50 value
of 7.30.3 M against normal NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts. Western blot
analysis showed pSTAT3 levels in U251MG cells substantially decreased in
a time-dependent manner in response to CC-1-2. Decreased pSTAT3 in
treated cells occurred in parallel with partial suppression of both
phospho- Janus kinase (Jak) 2 and pSrc levels and no induction of protein
tyrosine phosphatase, PTP1B. Phosphorylated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (Erk) 1/2 levels also decreased in time-dependent
manner, while pAkt remained unchanged in U251MG cells under the same
treatment conditions. Furthermore, treatment of U251MG cells with CC-1-2
led to dramatic morphological changes that occurred in a dose- and
time-dependent manner, compared to minimal changes observed for
similarly-treated MCF-7 breast cancer cells that do not harbor
aberrantly-active STAT3. Colony survival assay of U251MG cells revealed
single treatment with 1-10 M CC-1-2 decreased colony sizes and numbers in
a dose-dependent manner, compared to moderate effects on MCF-7. In vitro
wound-healing assay further showed reduced U251MG cell migration into the
denuded area in response to CC-1-2 treatment. CC-1-2 further induced
apoptosis in U251MG cells in a dose-dependent manner and suppressed the
expression of c-Myc, Cyclin D1, and Bcl-2 levels, which are known
STAT3-regulated genes. Studies together identify CC-1-2 as a natural
product inhibitor of STAT3 that preferentially induces antitumor cell
effects against human glioblastoma cells.

