Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional inhibition of HSP90 induces G0/G1 arrest and
downregulates thymidylate synthase in colorectal cancer


Purpose Objectives: Cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis are
essential steps in cancer cell growth and resistance. Thymidylate
synthase (TS) is a therapeutic target for 5FU. Ganetespib is a potent
functional inhibitor of HSP90 currently under evaluation in clinical
trials. We tested the hypothesis that HSP90 functional inhibition by
ganetespib can inhibit cell cycle progression and downregulate TS levels
in colorectal cell lines.Methods: Two colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines
were used, HCT-116 and HT-29. Cells were either untreated (control) or
treated with ganetespib at 50 nM for 24 hours. Western blot and Real
time-PCR analyses were carried out to determine the effect of ganetespib
on different signal molecules involved in cell cycle arrest and DNA
synthesis. A subcutaneous xenograft mouse model was used to evaluate the
in vivo effects of ganetespib. Pre and post ganetespib treatment tumor
biopsies from patients with rectal cancer on a phase I trial of
ganetespib were analyzed using RT-PCR.Results: Treatment with ganetespib
inhibited cyclin D1, pRb and E2F-1 at the transcriptional and
translational level and induced p21, leading to G0/G1 cell cycle arrest.
HSP90 knockdown inhibited E2F-1 and TS protein and mRNA levels in both
cell lines. Arrest in the G0/G1 phase was associated with downregulation
of the transcription factor E2F-1 and its target gene TS. Similar effects
were observed in tumors from animals treated with ganetespib. Further,
ganetespib treatment significantly inhibited the tumor growth. Inhibition
of cyclin D1, Rb, E2F-1, TS and upregulation of p21 at transcriptional
levels were observed in post treatment rectal tumor biopsies obtained
from patients receiving ganetespib.Conclusion: In this study, we present
preclinical and clinical data to support the use of HSP90 inhibitors in
colorectal cancer based on their ability to reduce expression of proteins
important for DNA repair and cell cycle progression leading to cell cycle
arrest and tumor shrinkage. Accordingly, combining HSP90 inhibitors with
chemotherapy is a rational approach for future drug development in
colorectal cancer.

