Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N- and C-terminal peptides of the tumor suppressor protein IGFBP7
differentially induce growth arrest or senescence in breast cancer cells


N- and C-terminal peptides of the tumor suppressor protein IGFBP7
differentially induce growth arrest or senescence in breast cancer
cellsTania Benatar, Yutaka Amemiya, Valentina Evdokimova, Wenyi Yang and
Arun SethWe have previously shown that insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 7 (IGFBP7) is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer. IGFBP7
treatment resulted in breast cancer cell growth inhibition via induction
of senescence and apoptotic pathways. Xenografted tumors overexpressing
IGFBP7 were significantly growth-impaired as were the xenografted tumors
treated systemically with purified IGFBP7. Given its low toxicity and
high selectivity towards cancerous tissues, IGFBP7 is considered to be a
promising anticancer agent. Its anticancer efficacy was further
strengthened by our recent findings showing that the N-terminal 97 amino
acid IGFBP7 domain is required for blocking Insulin-like Growth Factor 1
Receptor (IGF1R) activity and downstream PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling. To
further identify parameters that could predict IGFBP7-responsiveness in
breast tumors, a variety of breast cancer cell lines were examined for
growth responses and signaling pathways in response to IGFBP7 treatment.
In this study, we found that treatment of some aggressive breast cancer
cell lines, with IGFBP7 resulted in its proteolytic cleavage between
Lys-97 and Ala-98 thus creating N-terminal and C-terminal specific
peptides. While both the N- and C-terminal peptides were capable of
growth inhibition, only the C-terminal fragment was efficient at inducing
cellular senescence. The IGFBP7-responsiveness of breast cancer cell
lines was a direct consequence of their ability to process IGFBP7. In
order to compare which genes and pathways arewere affected by IGFBP7-full
length (FL) versus cleaved form (CF) overexpression, we performed
transcriptome Next- Generation sequencing from parental MDA-MB-468,
MDA-MB-468 overexpressing full length (FL) of IGFBP7-FL or overexpressing
cleaved form (CF) of IGFBP7-CF. We obtained 2486 gene differences for FL
expressers and 3953 differences for CF expressers using mapped reads with
a quality of 10 and at least a two-fold change. Of the thirteen breast
cancer-associated genes that were differentially expressed between
MDA-MB-468 cells and FL or CF expressing cells, most (10/13) were further
enhanced upon IGFBP7-CF overexpression. Taken together, Tthese results
indicate that IGFBP7s distinct N- and C-terminal functional domains, are
ideal candidates for the development of companion theranostiitcs, as the
ability of the tumor to effectively cleave IGFBP7 will determine efficacy
of treatment.

