Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Helicase-like transcription factor (HLTF) expression and gene
methylation in FFPE colon tumors


Background : HLTF, beside its roles in DNA binding, transcriptional and
chromatin remodeling, is involved in post-replication DNA repair through
its translocase and E3 ubiquitin ligase activities. HLTF is a tumor
suppressor, and hypermethylation of its promoter was observed in 30-50%
of gastrointestinal cancers. Moreover, HLTF inactivation in Apc-/+ mice
induced the transition from colon adenocarcinoma to a carcinoma with high
chromosomal instability. The epigenetic heterogeneity of the HLTF
promoter could be related to the CpG island methylator phenotype of tumor
suppressor genes in colorectal cancers. In the present study we started
to investigate HLTF expression in colon cancer progression in relation to
the epigenetic status of its gene promoter by using
pyrosequencing.Methods : The HLTF promoter contains a 653 bp CpG island
with 59 CpG sites (UCSC) among which 11 CpG sites were selected for this
study. Genomic DNA was extracted from (a) HeLa (cervix adenocarcinoma)
and RKO (colon carcinoma) cells and (b) from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) colon tumors. DNA was treated with bisulfite and
amplified by PCR the HLTF promoter fragment containing the 11 CpG sites.
Pyrosequencing was performed to determine the relative methylation
frequency at each site (HLTF PyroMark CpG Assay, Qiagen). HLTF expression
was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue sections, and by
RT-PCR and immunodetection on Western blot for the cell lines.Results :
There was a negative correlation between promoter methylation and HLTF
expression at the RNA and protein levels in RKO and HeLa cells. The
average methylation rates were 92% for RKO and 25% for HeLa cells which
presented HLTF repression and expression, respectively. IHC staining for
HLTF was performed in 14 FFPE colon tumors and good pyrosequencing
signals was obtained for DNA extracted from 6/14 samples. Three tumor
groups were defined, based on the average methylation rate in the HLTF
promoter : (a) 60%. In groups (a) and (b), the tissue was still well
organized and HTLF protein expression was detected by IHC in the
glandular epitelium. However, in group (c), the tumors were disorganized
and HLTF protein expression was low or undetectable. These preliminary
results suggest a correlation between 3 criteria : HLTF immunodetection,
tissue organization and low methylation of the HLTF promoter. Two colon
tumors did not express HLTF and presented a hypermethylated
promoter.Conclusion : We could optimize pyrosequencing methylation
analysis of genomic DNA extracted from 6 FFPE colon tumors, and confirmed
that higher HLTF promoter methylation was associated with its repression
in correlation with worse tumor phenotypes. This sensitive technique will
now be applied to larger number of samples and additional CpG sites will
be assessed.

