Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative proteomic assessment of differential ligand responses
downstream of protein kinase C activation


Bryostatin 1 (bryo 1) is an anticancer agent currently in multiple
clinical trials with a unique mechanism of action. Whereas bryo 1 binds
to and activates protein kinase C (PKC) like the phorbol esters, it
paradoxically antagonizes many but not all phorbol ester responses. In
LNCaP prostate cancer cells the typical phorbol ester PMA induces
TNFalpha secretion and apoptosis while bryo 1 fails to do so and
antagonizes the PMA effect when used in combination. The mechanisms
responsible for the unique effect of bryo 1 are still unknown. We have
shown previously, using transcription factor analysis of microarray data
from LNCaP cells, that multiple transcription factor families are
involved in the dramatic transcriptional response to PMA and bryo 1 (3131
genes for PMA and 1569 genes for bryo 1). Further, analysis of 45
signaling pathways using reporter assays identified significant changes
in 7 pathways induced both by PMA and bryo 1 at 6 hours. To further
investigate the altered pathways, the novel Simple Western capillary
immunoassay system (ProteinSimple) was used to analyze protein level
changes following PKC activation. Simple Western system performs
automated western analysis in capillaries using nanograms of lysate and
provides digital quantitation with good sensitivity and excellent
reproducibility. The system runs at a through-put of 96 sample / target
combinations in a single overnight run. We analyzed 35 signals in total
lysates (for detection of changes in protein levels and phosphorylation)
and in nuclear extracts (for detection of translocation) from LNCaP cells
treated for 60 min and 6 hrs. Changes downstream of PKC activation were
measured, including PKC/PKD1 phosphorylation, activation of multiple
members of the MEK/ERK pathway and levels of transcription factors of the
NFKB, AP1, Stat and EGR families. Simple Western results correlated very
well with conventional western analysis. The analysis validated the
changes described previously using other methods on activation of MEK/ERK
pathway and the changes in PKC phosphorylation, translocation and
degradation. Bryo1 is different from PMA in failing to induce
phosphorylation of PKCdelta at Tyr311 and the translocation of PKCalpha,
delta, epsilon, and PKD1 to the nuclear fraction. Bryo1 is similar to PMA
in inducing many of the early responses detected at 60 min
(pPKCdeltaSer299, pMEK, pERK1/2, pPKD1 in total lysates, decrease in
STAT3 levels etc.) but it fails to sustain the induced responses or to
induce the late responses detected at 6 hours (pNFBp65, increase in Fra1
and FosB levels, degradation of cMyc, translocation of cRel and RelB
etc.). Using Simple Western system, we developed an approach for precise
and accurate measurement of differential PMA and bryo 1 signaling in PKC
activation. Further investigation needs to be performed to identify the
mechanism/s responsible for the early termination of bryo 1 induced
responses.

