Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of functional long noncoding RNAs during
prostate cancer progression


Prostate cancer progression from an androgen-dependent state to an
androgen-independent phase, which is also referred to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), not only results in cancer
refractory to androgen deprivation therapy but also marks its lethal
prognosis. However, it remains largely unknown that how CRPC develops. As
a result, ideal diagnosis and therapeutic tools are still highly in
demand and under investigation. Recently, many studies indicate that long
non-coding RNA (lncRNA) can be extensively functional rather than just
transcriptional noise and lncRNAs are also widely involved in the
pathogenesis of different types of cancers. To identify and characterize
functional lncRNAs during prostate cancer progression, we firstly
developed an integrative computational strategy for predicting lncRNAs
that may be functionally important for tumorigenesis or tumor suppression
via analysis of lncRNA expression profiles, clinical information and
somatic genomic alteration profiles of tumor samples. By applying this
approach, we predicted a cohort of lncRNAs that may be clinically
important for prostate tumorigenesis and experimentally confirmed two
functional lncRNAs - PCAT6 and PCAT7 in prostate cancer cell line model.
Work from others and our lab have also shown that both androgen receptor
(AR) and polycomb group protein enhancer of zest 2 (EZH2) play pivotal
roles during prostate cancer progression to CRPC. In contrast to protein
coding genes, little is known about AR or EZH2 regulated lncRNAs during
this process. To this purpose, we also performed RNAseq in prostate
cancer cell lines and combined ChIPseq data to identify
androgen-regulated and AR/EZH2-regulated lncRNAs. These regulated lncRNAs
are also intersected with above clinically significant lncRNA list to
narrow down interesting hits for follow-up mechanistic studies. Our
integrative approach has successfully identified a cohort of potentially
functional lncRNAs which hold great potentials to be novel prognostic
biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets for treatment of advanced prostate
cancer.

