Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of mTOR pathway in myeloid-derived suppressor cells
with lysosomal acid lipase deficiency stimulates cancer cell
proliferation and metastasis


Inflammation plays crucial roles at all stages of tumor development, from
tumor initiation to metastatic progression, during which myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs) are an important participant. Although MDSCs are
known to suppress immune surveillance, their roles in directly
stimulating cancer cell proliferation and metastasis currently remains
unclear. Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) deficiency causes systemic expansion
and infiltration of MDSCs in multiple organs and subsequent inflammation.
In the LAL-deficient (lal-/-) mouse model, we found that melanoma
metastasized massively in allogeneic lal-/- mice, which was suppressed in
allogeneic lal+/+ mice due to immune rejection. Therefore, we
hypothesized that MDSCs with LAL deficiency directly stimulate cancer
cell proliferation and metastasis. Bone marrow-derived MDSCs from lal-/-
mice directly stimulated B16 melanoma cell proliferation in vitro by
co-culture analysis and in vivo by co-implantation in the Matrigel plugs.
These tumor cell-stimulatory effects were diminished when
myeloid-specific human LAL (hLAL) was expressed in myeloid cells in
lal-/- mice. In addition, lal-/- MDSCs facilitated B16 melanoma cell
metastasis in the lungs of recipient lal+/+ mice via tail vein injection.
Furthermore, the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and its downstream
gene products were significantly up-regulated in lal-/- MDSCs. Knockdown
of mTOR in lal-/- MDSCs suppressed their stimulation on B16 melanoma cell
proliferation, growth and metastasis, indicating the tumor-promoting
function of lal-/- MDSCs is mediated, at least in part, through
over-activation of the mTOR pathway. Finally, lal-/- MDSCs stimulated
proliferation and growth of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC), and transgenic
mouse prostate cancer (TRAMP-C2) cells, and these effects were impaired
after mTOR inhibition. Our results indicate that LAL plays a critical
role in regulating MDSCs ability to directly stimulate cancer cell
proliferation, and overcome immune rejection of cancer metastasis in
allogeneic mice through modulation of the mTOR pathway, which provides a
mechanistic basis for targeting MDSCs to reduce the risk of cancer
metastasis. Therefore, MDSCs possess dual functions to facilitate cancer
metastasis: suppress immune surveillance, and stimulate cancer cell
proliferation and growth.

