Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel flow cytometry-based cell capture platform for the
detection, capture and molecular characterization of circulating tumor
cells


Background: Personalized cancer treatment relies on the accurate
detection of actionable genomic aberrations in tumor cells. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) could provide an alternative genetic resource for
diagnosis as liquid biopsy; however, attempts to isolate rare CTCs for
further molecular analysis remain technically challenging by the
currently available enrichment methods. In this study, we aimed to
develop an improved capture system for molecular characterization of CTCs
based on a novel cell sorting technology.Methods: We have developed a
rare cell capture platform with On-Chip Sort (On-Chip Biotechnologies), a
novel benchtop cell sorter equipped with a disposable microfluidic chip.
Spike-in experiments using lung cancer cell lines with varying EpCAM
expression levels (H1975, A549 and H1755) were conducted to assess
capture and purification efficiency of our platform. Samples were
negatively enriched using anti-CD45-coated magnetic beads to remove white
blood cells, followed by fixation and labeling with cytokeratin
(CK)-FITC, vimentin-PE, CD45-Alexa Fluor 700 antibodies, and/or Hoechst
33342 for nuclei staining. The enriched and labeled samples were then
sorted on On-Chip Sort based on CK, vimentin, and CD45 expression.
Captured cells were immediately subjected to whole genome amplification
(WGA) followed by mutation analysis using deep targeted sequencing.
Amplicon libraries were generated using Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer
Panel and sequenced on a MiSeq sequencer. Copy number analysis of the WGA
samples were performed by quantitative PCR (qPCR).Results: Spike-in
experiments revealed excellent overall mean detection, recovery and
purity rates of 85.0 9.9%, 70.9% 10.6 and 72.9% 15.1, respectively
(n=27). These results were obtained from samples containing as few as 5
tumor cells per 4 mL of blood, independent of EpCAM expression. A 100%
success rate of mutation detection in EGFR, KRAS and BRAF genes from
captured cells (n=27) was achieved by pyrosequencing as well as by deep
targeted sequencing. The mutant variant detection rates were markedly
higher than those obtained with the CellSearch profile kit. qPCR analysis
of amplifiedDNA demonstrated reproducible detection of copy number
changes of the EGFR gene n captured tumor cells.Conclusions: Using a
novel cell sorter, we established an efficient and convenient platform
for the capture of CTCs. Results of a proof-of-principle preclinical
study indicated that this platform has potential for the molecular
characterization of captured CTCs from patients. Further evaluation using
clinical samples is warranted.

