Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Embryonic stem cells antigens: expression in acute myeloid
leukemia cells


Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is characterized by the expansion and
resistance to apoptosis of myeloid cells blocked in early stages of
differentiation. A subset of stem or progenitor cells, termed leukemic
stem cells (LSC), which retain or reacquire self-renewing properties, as
well as the capacity to remain in a poorly differentiated stage, give
rise to the leukemic clone. The identification and purification of the
LSC can provide a powerful tool for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.
Several studies suggested that LSC belong to the CD34+ CD38-
compartment.Self-renewal and lack of differentiation are properties of
embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cell which specifically express a
set of differentiation antigens (SSEA1 and SSEA3) and transcription
factors (OCT, SOX2, and NANOG), designated as ESCA. We postulate that an
epigenetic reprogramming could induce the ESCA expression on HSC.The aim
of our study was to investigate the expression ESCA in the CD34+CD38-
cells from normal bone marrow (NBM) and from 50 AML BM patients. Then
compare ESCA's expression between CD34+CD38- and CD34+CD38+ cells.We
studied the expression in 5 cell lines (NTERA-2 which is control cell
line, KG1a, U937, THP-1 and HL60 leukemic cell lines) and their potential
involvement in myeloid differentiation in 2 cell lines (HL60 and THP-1).
Thereafter, we inhibited the expression of ESCA in 3 leukemic cell lines
(HL60, KG1a and U937) to better understand their role in abnormal
proliferation or differentiation.The preliminary experiments showed an
important expression of ESCA on all 5 cell lines by Multicolor Flow
Cytometry (MFC), confirmed by RT-PCR.Then, we compared the expression of
ESCA in CD34+CD38- cells between normal and leukemic marrow. We observed
an up-regulation of two transcription factors OCT3/4 and SOX2 and the
protein SSEA3 with 2-fold higher expression in AML cells compared to
normal HSC. In addition, we found the down regulation of SSEA1 protein
involved in cell adhesion, migration and differentiation.We also compared
the expression of ESCA between the CD34+CD38- and CD34+CD38+ AML
population. We observed a higher expression of OCT3/4 and SSEA3
(1.3-fold) in CD34+CD38-. We found a higher expression of SSEA1
(1.9-fold), NANOG and SOX2 (1.2-fold) in AML CD34+CD38+ population
compared to CD34+CD38- population.We investigated whether there was a
relationship between the overexpression of ESCA and a cytogenetic
subgroup of AML. We found that AML t(15;17) expressed OCT3/4 at higher
level than the other ESCA.Finally, the inhibition experiments showed that
Oct3/4 was strongly inhibited in the KG1a cell line.In conclusion, these
results suggest that the deregulation of ESCA may have a potential role
in leukemogenesis by maintaining the LSC properties. This prompts us to
test the relevance of these markers for LSC identification and as
therapeutic strategies.

