Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of distinct subsets of cancer stem cells
within triple negative breast cancers


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) is the aggressive subtype with
limited treatment options and very poor prognosis following progression
after standard chemotherapy regimens. There is an urgent clinical need to
identify new therapeutic targets in order to improve the outcome for
these patients. Increasing evidence suggest that cancer stem cells (CSCs)
mediate therapy resistance and metastasis and may thus be responsible for
cancer relapse and deaths in breast cancer patients. We have previously
identified distinct subsets of CSCs in the most deadly form of TNBC cell
lines and patient derived cultures. Within CD44+ populations, CD24
expression defines two subsets of CSC subpopulations: CD24neg and CD24+.
Both CD44+CD24neg (CD24neg) and CD44+CD24+ (CD24+) populations have
self-renewing and tumor-initiating properties, however, the CD24+
population has Notch1 activation, generates more spheres and colonies,
and contains ALDH1+ and ESA+ subpopulations. CD24+ cells are also more
efficient at producing xenograft tumors than CD24neg. Most importantly,
only the CD24+ population can spontaneously metastasize from an
orthotopic tumor xenograft. CD24+ cells can self-renew and give rise to
CD24neg cells, while CD24neg progeny generate only CD24neg. Thus,
identifying drugs that would eradicate the CD24+ population would of
great clinical significance in the treatment of this deadly type of
cancer. Here, we test the differential response of these subsets to
chemotherapy and Gamma-Secretase Inhibitors (GSI). Surviving CD24+ cells
were enriched by paclitaxel treatment: >80% of cells surviving at day 8
were CD24+ and survival of CD24neg progeny from CD24+ was dramatically
attenuated. In contrast, the two TNBC subsets differed notably in their
responses to RO4929097, a GSI in clinical trials for cancer. RO4929097
reduced the self-renewal of CD24+ cells, but had no effect on
proliferation or survival of CD24neg. Only CD24+-generated tumors
responded to RO4929097 while the drug had no effect on tumors derived
from CD24neg cells, which comprise a majority of the population in TNBC
lines. This data provides rationale for further testing of combined
chemotherapy and Notch-targeting drugs in the treatment of this deadly
cancer. It also supports the use of CD24 as a marker in TNBCs to screen
and identify new therapeutic drugs that selectively target the most
aggressive CSCs. Surface CD24 expression may also be used to further
study the role of niche-induced interconversion between CSC subsets.
Notch1-intracellular domain (NI-ICD) overexpression in CD24neg and CD24+
cells not only increased CD24+ cells indicating increased self-renewal,
but also led to conversion of CD24neg cell to CD24+, an event we have not
observed spontaneously in culture over several years. Taken together,
these observations support the intriguing possibility that the
microenvironment may regulate the phenotypic and functional heterogeneity
present within CSCs.

