Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK suppression in bladder tumorigenesis


Bladder cancer is the fifth most diagnosed cancer in the US. In 2013
there were approximately 72,570 newly diagnosed cases and 15,210 deaths
attributing to this disease where the average age of onset for this
disease is 65 and remains one of the most expensive cancers to treat due
to lifelong surveillance and invasive procedures. Bladder cancer is
defined by two distinct pathways which result in either low grade
non-invasive or high grade invasive cancer. Although these are marked by
distinct mutations, it has been observed that both display mTORC1
activation. This suggests that activated mTORC1 may be an early
contributing factor in bladder tumorigenesis. Additionally, rapamycin, an
inhibitor of mTORC1, inhibited tumorigenesis in a mouse model of bladder
cancer further implicating mTORC1 as an essential pathway in
tumorigenesis.To elucidate the mechanism of mTORC1 activation in bladder
cancer, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a negative regulator of
mTORC1, was investigated. AMPK is a critical metabolic regulator that
suppresses cellular growth in response to metabolic stress. Additionally
it has been observed that AMPK activation is suppressed in breast and
hepatocellular carcinoma and the AMPK2 isoform is suppressed in breast
and gastric cancer. To investigate whether levels or activation of AMPK
are altered in bladder cancer a pilot cohort of adjacent non-tumor and
bladder tumor human samples was obtained as was a human bladder cancer
tissue array. In both the pilot cohort and the array, the levels of AMPK1
and AMPK2 were suppressed at statistically significant levels in low and
high grade bladder cancer when compared to adjacent non-tumor tissue.
Messenger RNA expression for both isoforms in bladder tumors revealed
that AMPK2 may be selectively suppressed at the mRNA level. However AMPK1
suppression appeared to be due to translational or post translational
regulatory mechanisms. It was also observed that AMPK1 was located
predominately in the cytoplasm while AMPK2 was located in both the
nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. This suggests that AMPK isoforms
may have distinct roles in the bladder and may be suppressed by different
mechanisms. To test the relevance of AMPK in bladder tumorigenesis the
mouse BBN bladder carcinogenesis model was employed. BBN was supplemented
in the drinking water of wild-type and AMPK2-/- mice at a concentration
of .05% over the course of 20 weeks. AMPK2-/- mice displayed a
significant increase in bladder weight indicating the presence of larger
tumors. There was also an increase in KI67 positive cells in the tumors
of AMPK2-/- mice indicating increased proliferation with no appreciable
apoptosis observed in any tumors. Ongoing studies in which BBN is
supplemented for 16 weeks and then removed for the duration aim to
validate the role of AMPK2 in bladder tumor initiation and/or
progression. In summary, loss of AMPK activity, especially AMPK2, can
promote bladder tumorigenesis through increased proliferation via mTORC1
activity.

