Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of glucose-regulated protein 78 mediating lipid
metabolism through controlling stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1


Over 230,000 new cases of invasive breast cancer are diagnosed annually
within the United States. Of these cases, 70% express the estrogen
receptor- and may be treated with antiestrogens or aromatase inhibitors.
While these drugs exhibit clinical benefits, over 50% will develop or not
respond to antiestrogen therapy, making understanding the molecular
mechanism of antiestrogen resistance critical to preventing and treating
endocrine resistant breast cancer. Recently, we have determined a key
role of the unfolded protein response endoplasmic reticulum (EnR) protein
chaperone, glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78), in mediating
antiestrogen resistance. A sole designation of GRP78 as a protein
chaperone controlling UPR signaling is limiting because GRP78 is
multifunctional. We now expand the role of GRP78 to include its novel
actions regulating lipid metabolism. Metabolic analysis of antiestrogen
sensitive LCC1 and antiestrogen resistant LCC9 breast cancer cells
indicate that inhibition of GRP78 through RNAi results in an increase in
the intracellular concentrations of the polyunsaturated fats (PUFA)
linoleate (18:2n6), linolenate [alpha or gamma; (18:3n3 or 6)],
dihomo-linolenate (20:3n3 or n6), and dihomo-linoleate (20:2n6). GRP78
knockdown results in an increase in delta-6 desaturase in the LCC9 cells
corresponding with the observed increase in PUFA. Moreover, knockdown of
GRP78 decreased stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) and fatty acid synthase
(FASN) protein levels, further supporting a role for GRP78 in lipid
metabolism. Treatment of breast cancer cells with increasing doses of
PUFA linoleic acid results in the inhibition of SCD1, suggesting that
GRP78 regulation of PUFA metabolism mediates GRP78 actions on SCD1 and
lipid biogenesis. Antiestrogen resistant cells express higher levels of
SCD1. Moreover, elevated SCD1 is associated with breast cancer
reoccurrence and reduced survival in breast cancer patient-derived data
sets, suggesting a critical role of SCD1 in mediating antiestrogen
resistance. LCC9 orthotopic tumors treated with GRP78 targeting
morpholino were re-sensitized to tamoxifen. Targeting GRP78 in vivo
resulted in reduced SCD1 protein in GRP78 morpholino+tamoxifen treated
tumors, demonstrating a key role of GRP78/SCD1 interaction in drug
resistance. Inhibition of GRP78 also increased short-chained acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase (ACADS) protein expression and decreased the fatty acid
metabolite butyrylcarnitine, indicating a stimulation of beta-oxidation.
These data suggest that the effect of GRP78 knockdown on fatty acid
metabolism and biogenesis may represent a new homeostatic ability of
GRP78 to modify fatty acid metabolism. The consequences of these
activities may help reduce EnR stress by providing an additional energy
source for protein folding/refolding and so help alleviate the
accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins accumulation within the EnR.

