Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of a chamber for studying glucose metabolism by anoxic
cancer cells


Many tumors contain anoxic areas. In vitro studies of anoxia can easily
be hampered by contamination with traces of oxygen. In order to find out
how temporal depletion of extracellular glucose effects anoxic cell death
in vitro we have developed a chamber in which 50 000-500 000 cells can be
exposed to approximately 30 l of medium, resulting in rapid depletion of
oxygen and nutrients. Before the experiments, cancer cells were seeded on
a glass plate, which was the lower glass plate after clamping with an
upper plate that contained an 80-100 m thick silicone spacer. The medium
of the cavity between the two flat glass plates could be flushed through
an inlet and outlet hole in the upper plate, located in the corners of
the cavity. Samples were collected from the outlet hole for analysis.Most
cancer cell lines use both anaerobic and aerobic metabolism to generate
ATP, resulting in a more rapid depletion of oxygen than of glucose. We
found that after 3 hours the glucose was completely consumed by the MCF-7
human breast cancer cells and that overnight exposure resulted in cell
death, except in the immediate proximity of the holes, where oxygen could
diffuse into the medium. An interesting observation was that the lactate
produced was more than double the glucose used from the medium,
suggesting that also intracellular glycogen stores had been consumed by
the cancer cells.We are especially interested in using this system to
simulate the effect of dietary restriction on individual dormant breast
tumors that have not (yet) started angiogenesis. These are hypothesized
to contain an outer ring of anoxic cells, that depend on and rapidly
consume the lowest concentrations of glucose at the end of the glucose
gradient from the nearest capillary blood vessel. A temporary decrease of
blood glucose may kill these anoxic cells and perhaps affect non-Warburg
cells less. The time dependence of cell killing on this decrease will be
investigated using this system.

