Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of intestinal organoids as a preclinical screen for agents
modulating epithelial regeneration and gastrointestinal toxicity


The mouse small intestinal in vitro organoid model was first described by
Sato et al in 2009. We have further developed this model as a robust
screening tool to aid the selection of lead candidates that may have
efficacy preventing or treating GI toxicity, and to allow early
identification of candidate toxicity. More specifically, we have been
assessing the model's potential to progress the development of novel
therapeutic agents to treat the GI mucositis, a common toxicity
associated with cancer therapy.The intestinal organoid culture conditions
were designed to mimic the stem cell niche allowing cell differentiation
and proliferation to occur. Indeed all intestinal lineages are present in
the organoids and the epithelial hierarchy closely resembles that
observed in vivo. Alteration of these organoid culture conditions allows
identification of proliferative or cytotoxic effects, changes in
differentiation and gene expression profiling of target
pathways.Sub-optimal culture conditions reduce the background level of
branching within an organoid population, allowing the quantification of
proliferative effects through an increase in branching above the
background upon agent exposure. Examples of agents inducing branching of
organoids include Wnt pathway modulators. Optimal culture conditions
allow assessment of toxicity caused by agents such as chemotherapy drugs.
Organoid viability can be assessed either visually or with MTS
techniques. In addition, differentiation by agents such as the Notch
pathway inhibitor DAPT can be assessed by histological examination of the
organoids. All of these cultures can undergo gene expression profiling
forming links to the observed biological observations. Proof of concept
gene expression data has been generated using known GI growth factors and
modulators, which have been linked to in vivo gene expression profiling
to demonstrate PD linkages.In addition, we have developed a model using
APCMin+/- mice, which develop a phenotype in culture more consistent with
a deregulated adenoma. Parallel assessment of agents on this model and
the organoids has been useful for discriminating normal vs tumour
responses, identifying agents with differential activities.Our intestinal
organoid models allow screening of multiple agents, with over 5000
screened to date including Wnt pathway regulators, cytokines, growth
factor, chemotherapy drugs, steroids and lectins.

