Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adoptive transfer of T cells overcomes barriers of homing to the
tumor microenvironment in ovarian cancer


Objectives: Chemokine-dependent molecular mechanisms could play a key
role in controlling tumor-specific T cell trafficking and the clinical
success of adoptive transfer of ex vivo expanded T cells. We thus
characterized the chemokine microenvironment in advanced stage serous
ovarian cancer and evaluated whether CD3/CD28 co-stimulation of lysate
vaccine-primed autologous T cells prepared for adoptive transfer led to
the expansion of tumor antigen-reactive T cells able to home to ovarian
cancer microenvironment.Methods: The expression of all known human
chemokines was analyzed on a gene expression microarray from 63 patients
with primary ovarian cancer and was validated on publicly available gene
expression dataset and on tissue microarray constructed from a matching
cohort of patients. Five HLA-A2 patients with recurrent ovarian cancer,
who had previously received vaccination with autologous lysate-pulsed
dendritic cell vaccine, underwent apheresis to harvest peripheral blood T
cells, which were then expanded using beads coated with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies and IL-2. T cells were analyzed for 10
chemokine receptors that matched the chemokines expressed in ovarian
cancer. Tumor-specific T cells were identified by a HER2/neu pentamer
staining. Chemotaxis assays were performed to assess the functionality of
these receptors.Results: Chemokines in general were found to be expressed
at low level in advanced stage ovarian cancer, with the 10 most highly
expressed ones being CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, CCL28, CXCL5, CXCL6 CXCL10,
CXCL12, CXCL16 and CX3CL1. The two most commonly expressed chemokine
receptors on the expanded cells were CXCR3 and CXCR4 (receptors for
CXCL10 and CXCL12). At the end of expansion, 70% of output CD4+ and CD8+
cells expressed CXCR3 and CXCR4, compared to 20% of input T cells. The
higher expression of CXCR3 and CXCR4 in output T cells resulted in
significantly increased chemotaxis toward CXCL10 and CXCL12, suggesting a
better homing ability to the tumor microenvironment. HER2/neu-specific T
cells were detected in the expanded T cell population and showed
migration toward CXCL10 and CXCL12.Conclusions: Adoptive transfer of ex
vivo expanded tumor specific T cells that are capable of tumor
engraftment holds a highly promising treatment approach for recurrent
ovarian cancer. Chemokines are key regulators of circulation, homing and
retention of these cells. Our data confirm that T cells prepared for
adoptive transfer through CD3/CD28 bead expansion comprise tumor-specific
cells, which upregulate appropriate chemokine receptors and show enhanced
migration towards chemokines highly expressed by ovarian cancer.

