Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- differentiates immortalized pancreatic epithelial cells to
form duct architecture in 3D culture


A genetically engineered mouse (GEM) strain T26 having a transgene
CAG-loxP-geo-pA-loxP-SV40 tsA58 large T antigen (=tsTAg)-pA was created
by us, which expressed tsTAg in cells Cre/loxP recombination occurred. In
a previous study, T26; Tie2-Cre mice were created, and their vascular and
lymphatic endothelial cells expressing tsTAg could be cultured in vitro
at 33C (Yamaguchi et al., FEBS J., 2008). In this study, we established
immortalized and cloned pancreatic epithelial cell lines from T26;
Pdx1-Cre mice which expressed tsTAg in pancreatic epithelial cells in
vivo by pancreas-specific Cre/loxP recombination. The cell lines were
categorized into 1) ductal epithelial cell group which expressed CK19 and
Sox9, and 2) acinar cell group which expressed Amylase2A of a digestive
enzyme. In order to elucidate regulatory mechanisms of ductal cell
differentiation and their plasticity, the immortalized ductal cell lines
were cultured in collagen gel. A part of the cells formed spheroid or
elongated and blanched architecture in the gel. Confocal or electron
microscopic analysis indicated that their architectures had lumens with
micro villi inside, and a part of them had tight junction at
intercellular domain. It is noteworthy that the spheroid property changed
into the elongated ductal (tubular) property by TGF- stimulation in the
3D culture system, and the ductal architecture formation was suppressed
by inhibitor of TGF- signaling. 3D time-laps microscopic analysis
demonstrated that a part of sphere-forming cells could change into
duct-forming cells by TGF-, which suggested existence of stem cells with
susceptibility to TGF- stimulation. The effect of TGF- to change
sphere-forming property into duct-forming property could be confirmed
partially in some originally established murine pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Taken together, these results suggested that TGF- is an important
factor for pancreatic duct and cancer differentiation and their
architecture formation.

