Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caffeine and caffeic acid inhibit growth and modify estrogen
receptor (ER)- and insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) levels
in human breast cancer


Estrogen receptor (ER)- is critically involved in breast cancer
development, progression and disease management. Emerging evidence
indicate that epigenetic and non-epigenetic mechanisms may be a frequent
cause for loss of ER during tumor progression, which in turn may be
modifiable by dietary and lifestyle factors. In line with epidemiological
reports on chemopreventive effects by coffee on breast cancer risk and
prognosis, we assessed the influence of coffee consumption on tumor
characteristics in an extended cohort of 1090 patients with invasive
primary breast cancer in southern Sweden, aged 24-99 years, with
preoperatively reported daily coffee consumption. Moderate (2-4 cups/day)
to high (5+ cups/day) daily coffee intake were associated with
significantly smaller invasive primary tumor sizes (Ptrend = 0.013),
while concomitantly lower frequency of ER+ tumors (Ptrend = 0.018),
compared to women with low coffee consumption (1 cup/day). To establish
how coffee intake may alter molecular mechanisms with impact on breast
cancer growth in relation to ER status, we extended our clinical
observations to in vitro models of ER+ (MCF-7) and ER- (MDA-MB-231) human
breast cancer cells. Exposure to the coffee constituents caffeine and
caffeic acid significantly suppressed the proliferation of both ER+ (by
59% and 38%, respectively) and ER- (by 47% and 28%, respectively) human
breast cancer cells. In line with the clinical observations, the ER+
breast cancer cells appeared more sensitive to the growth inhibitory
effects by the coffee constituents compared to ER- cells. The
antiproliferative actions were associated with altered ER levels. We
found that caffeine destabilized ER and reduced ER abundance in ER+
cells, while caffeine and caffeic acid enabled re-expression of ER in ER-
cells, both resulting in growth inhibition. In addition, caffeine reduced
the levels of the mitogenic insulin-like growth factor type I receptor
(IGF-IR) in both ER+ and ER- breast cancer cells. Together the effects by
caffeine and caffeic acid on ER and IGF-IR abundance with impact on
downstream effectors, resulted in impaired G1 to S transition with
incapacity to complete the cell cycle and enhanced cell death. In
summary, this study demonstrate multiple anticancer properties of
caffeine and caffeic acid against both ER-positive and ER-negative breast
cancer in vitro that may sensitize tumor cells to current endocrine
therapies. Together these experimental and clinical findings provide a
more comprehensive understanding of the functional and mechanistic
effects of these dietary factors that can modify cancer progression.

