Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen-specific immune responses in melanoma using stereotactic
radiotherapy combined with anti-PD1 checkpoint blockade


Purpose: Multiple pre-clinical studies and case reports have described
potential synergy between radiotherapy and immunotherapy, including
checkpoint blockade with anti-PD1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies. However,
further understanding of how radiotherapy contributes to immune mediated
cell death, especially with regards to timing and dose per fraction, is
needed to guide protocols for clinical trials. Here we investigated the
development of radiation induced antigen-specific immune responses
(RASIR) using stereotactic image guided small animal radiotherapy
combined with anti-PD1 checkpoint blockade in a B16 melanoma
model.Experimental Design: MC38 colorectal carcinoma, B16, and B16-OVA
melanoma were cultured in complete RPMI media. A gamma-cell irradiator
was used for in-vitro irradiation of cell suspensions. For in-vivo
experiments 6-8 week old C57BL/6 mice were injected with 1x10^5 or 5x10^5
B16-OVA cells into the flank. Tumors were irradiated using a stereotactic
CT guided small animal irradiator to treat a 1cmx1cm field prescribed to
isocenter. For adoptive transfer experiments mice received 2x10^6
purified OT1 T-cells via retro-orbital injection. Anti-PD1 antibody was
given intraperitoneally in three scheduled doses of 200ug. Cells were
processed, stained, and analyzed by Flow cytometry on BD FACSCaliber or
LSR II for indicated cell surface markers or intracellular
cytokines.Results: We found that irradiation with 10Gy or 20Gy increased
cell surface expression of MHC Class I, CCR7, CXCR3, and FAS in MC38
colorectal carcinoma and B16 melanoma at 24 and 48 Hours. We observed
in-vivo that stereotactic radiotherapy of B16-OVA melanoma tumors
increased CFSE labeled proliferation and Interferon-gamma activation of
adoptively transferred OT1 T-cells in the draining lymph node and spleen.
18 Gy of radiotherapy resulted in increased activation and proliferation
of antigen-specific T-cells when compared to 12Gy suggesting a possible
dose response. Furthermore, when radiotherapy was combined with scheduled
anti-PD1 antibody there was near eradication of B16-OVA melanoma tumors
accompanied by increased development of endogenous antigen-specific
immune responses.Conclusions: Radiotherapy increased expression of
immunogenic cell surface markers in MC38 colorectal carcinoma and B16
melanoma. Stereotactic radiotherapy induced endogenous CD8 mediated
antigen-specific immune responses when combined with scheduled anti-PD1
immunotherapy and resulted in near eradication of established B16-OVA
melanoma. This study provides important pre-clinical evidence to support
and guide clinical trials combining radiotherapy with anti-PD1 checkpoint
blockade in melanoma. Future goals include analyzing development of RASIR
using fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy with combined checkpoint
blockade in multiple different tumor types.

