Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAF-derived MFAP5 promotes ovarian tumor angiogenesis through
calcium dependent LPP signaling pathway


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. Although
anti-angiogenic therapies look promising, no major strides have been made
to improve ovarian cancer patient survival over the past decade.
Therefore, finding new molecular targets that can improve therapeutic
benefit from anti-angiogenic strategies are of paramount importance.
Microfibrillar-Associated Protein 5 (MFAP5) was previously reported to be
associated with prognosis and promoted ovarian cancer progression. In
ovarian tumor samples, we identified a positive correlation between
stromal MFAP5 and CD31 expressions which suggested a pro-angiogenic role
of MFAP5. This study aims at delineating the mechanism of stromal MFAP5
in modulating tumor angiogenesis and investigating the potential of
targeting MFAP5 as an anti-angiogenic therapy for ovarian cancer
treatment.Increased motility and tube formation were observed in the
presence of exogenous MFAP5 in both human microvascular endothelial cell
1 (HMEC-1) and telomerase immortalized microvascular endothelial cells
(TIME). Besides, both anti-V3 integrin antibody and cell permeant calcium
chelator, BAPTA, attenuated MFAP5 stimulated motility. These suggested
that MFAP5 exerts its biological activity through the V3 integrin
receptor and calcium signal transduction.In vivo, extensive CD34 positive
tubular network was formed in the matrigel mixed with recombinant MFAP5
injected subcutaneously into mice. Further analysis using the Leica
Metamorph software confirmed that there were significantly increases in
the number of nodes, total tube area, number of tube segment and branch
points in MFAP5 containing matrigel compared to control (pOvarian cancer
is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. Although anti-angiogenic
therapies look promising, no major strides have been made to improve
ovarian cancer patient survival over the past decade. Therefore, finding
new molecular targets that can improve therapeutic benefit from
anti-angiogenic strategies are of paramount importance.
Microfibrillar-Associated Protein 5 (MFAP5) was previously reported to be
associated with prognosis and promoted ovarian cancer progression. In
ovarian tumor samples, we identified a positive correlation between
stromal MFAP5 and CD31 expressions which suggested a pro-angiogenic role
of MFAP5. This study aims at delineating the mechanism of stromal MFAP5
in modulating tumor angiogenesis and investigating the potential of
targeting MFAP5 as an anti-angiogenic therapy for ovarian cancer
treatment.Increased motility and tube formation were observed in the
presence of exogenous MFAP5 in both human microvascular endothelial cell
1 (HMEC-1) and telomerase immortalized microvascular endothelial cells
(TIME). Besides, both anti-V3 integrin antibody and cell permeant calcium
chelator, BAPTA, attenuated MFAP5 stimulated motility. These suggested
that MFAP5 exerts its biological activity through the V3 integrin
receptor and calcium signal transduction.In vivo, extensive CD34 positive
tubular network was formed in the matrigel mixed with recombinant MFAP5
injected subcutaneously into mice. Further analysis using the Leica
Metamorph software confirmed that there were significantly increases in
the number of nodes, total tube area, number of tube segment and branch
points in MFAP5 containing matrigel compared to control (p<0.01).
Co-injection of MFAP5 overexpressing fibroblasts and cancer cells
subcutaneously into mice led to increased tumor size and number of CD34
positive intratumor microvessels. In an orthotopic mouse model, silencing
of stromal MFAP5 by siRNA delivered by nanoparticles demonstrated a
significant reduction in tumor weight (pOvarian cancer is the most lethal
gynecologic malignancy. Although anti-angiogenic therapies look
promising, no major strides have been made to improve ovarian cancer
patient survival over the past decade. Therefore, finding new molecular
targets that can improve therapeutic benefit from anti-angiogenic
strategies are of paramount importance. Microfibrillar-Associated Protein
5 (MFAP5) was previously reported to be associated with prognosis and
promoted ovarian cancer progression. In ovarian tumor samples, we
identified a positive correlation between stromal MFAP5 and CD31
expressions which suggested a pro-angiogenic role of MFAP5. This study
aims at delineating the mechanism of stromal MFAP5 in modulating tumor
angiogenesis and investigating the potential of targeting MFAP5 as an
anti-angiogenic therapy for ovarian cancer treatment.Increased motility
and tube formation were observed in the presence of exogenous MFAP5 in
both human microvascular endothelial cell 1 (HMEC-1) and telomerase
immortalized microvascular endothelial cells (TIME). Besides, both
anti-V3 integrin antibody and cell permeant calcium chelator, BAPTA,
attenuated MFAP5 stimulated motility. These suggested that MFAP5 exerts
its biological activity through the V3 integrin receptor and calcium
signal transduction.In vivo, extensive CD34 positive tubular network was
formed in the matrigel mixed with recombinant MFAP5 injected
subcutaneously into mice. Further analysis using the Leica Metamorph
software confirmed that there were significantly increases in the number
of nodes, total tube area, number of tube segment and branch points in
MFAP5 containing matrigel compared to control (p<0.01). Co-injection of
MFAP5 overexpressing fibroblasts and cancer cells subcutaneously into
mice led to increased tumor size and number of CD34 positive intratumor
microvessels. In an orthotopic mouse model, silencing of stromal MFAP5 by
siRNA delivered by nanoparticles demonstrated a significant reduction in
tumor weight (p<0.001) and intratumor microvessel densities.Finally,
microarray analysis on endothelial cells invaded into Matrigel plug,
identified a set of motility promoting genes that were associated with
calcium signaling. Among them, upregulation of Lipoma-Peferred Partner
(LPP), an actin cytoskeleton protein, was validated by qRT-PCR and
western blot analyses. Silencing LPP by siRNA abolished MFAP5 stimulated
motility in both HMEC-1 and TIME. Further western blot analyses showed
that MFAP5 modulated endothelial cell motility and invasion potential
through calcium dependent ERK/CREB/LPP signaling pathways.To conclude,
stromal MFAP5 acts on V3 integrin receptor and modulates endothelial cell
behavior through calcium signaling. It contributes to ovarian tumor
angiogenesis and tumor progression. Hence, targeting stromal MFAP5 could
be a potential anti-angiogenic therapy for ovarian cancer treatment.

