Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zoledronic acid inhibits angiogenesis through Rac1 inactivation in
ovarian cancer


Background Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from
pre-existing vasculature, is a complex and crucial process for tumor
growth and development of metastasis. Rac1, a member of the Rho GTPase
family, plays a central role in angiogenesis through regulation of
endothelial cell migration, tube formation, adhesion, invasion, and
proliferation. In this study we hypothesized that zoledronic acid (ZA)
inhibits ovarian cancer angiogenesis through the inactivation of Rac1.
Methods We treated HeyA8 MDR and Ovcar-5 cells with ZA to assess its
effects on cell invasion, proliferation, expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs; Milliplex assay) and angiogenic factors. We
also determined Rac1 activation by pull-down assay. HeyA8 MDR and Ovcar-5
orthotopic murine models of ovarian cancer were assessed for expression
of CD31 and Ki-67, Rac1 activation, and apoptosis by immunohistochemistry
after treatment with ZA, nanoparticle, albumin-bound paclitaxel
(nab-paclitaxel), or a combination. Results In vitro, we observed
inhibition of HeyA8 MDR and Ovcar-5 cell invasion and proliferation by
ZA. Moreover, ZA decreased the secretion of MMP-7 and vascular
endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C) in HeyA8 MDR cells and MMP-9,
MMP-10, VEGF-C, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, endothelin-1,
follistatin, interleukin-8, placenta growth factor, fibroblast growth
factor-1, and hepatocyte growth factor in Ovcar-5 cells. Furthermore, ZA
inactivated Rac1 in both cells lines. In vivo, ZA decreased the number of
nodules and tumor weight, inhibited angiogenesis and cell proliferation,
and increased apoptosis in both HeyA8 MDR and Ovcar-5 animal models.
These in vivo antitumor effects were enhanced in both models when ZA was
combined with nab-paclitaxel. Conclusion ZA inhibits ovarian cancer
angiogenesis through the inactivation of Rac1, suggesting that ZA
combined with paclitaxel could be a novel therapeutic approach to ovarian
cancer angiogenesis.

