Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P38MAPK plays a tumor suppressive role through differentiation of
ALDHhigh/CD44high tumor iniating cells in primary human lung
adenocarcinoma


The p38 MAPK cascade regulates body responses to a wide range of stress
stimuli in a context-dependent and tissue-specific manner. The isoform
p38alpha (p38) mediates both tumor suppressive and tumor-supportive
functions in different cancer models. However, its role in lung cancer is
not clear. Since EGFR is frequently mutated in lung adenocarcinomas in
non-smoking women and p38 is a downstream target of EGFR signaling, it is
possible that p38 plays a tumor-supportive role. Using
immunohistochemistry to analyze nuclear activated p38 expression in 90
lung adenocarcinomas, we observed p38 expression was significantly
associated with well differentiated compared to poorly-differentiated
carcinomas (pThe p38 MAPK cascade regulates body responses to a wide
range of stress stimuli in a context-dependent and tissue-specific
manner. The isoform p38alpha (p38) mediates both tumor suppressive and
tumor-supportive functions in different cancer models. However, its role
in lung cancer is not clear. Since EGFR is frequently mutated in lung
adenocarcinomas in non-smoking women and p38 is a downstream target of
EGFR signaling, it is possible that p38 plays a tumor-supportive role.
Using immunohistochemistry to analyze nuclear activated p38 expression in
90 lung adenocarcinomas, we observed p38 expression was significantly
associated with well differentiated compared to poorly-differentiated
carcinomas (p<0.001) and better patient outcome (p=0.019, disease-free
survival; p=0.03, overall survival). In vitro p38 suppression in lung
cancer cell lines did not lead to enhanced cell death. On the other hand,
p38 suppression alone or in combination with EGFR inhibition led to
increased CD44high/ALDHhigh lung tumor initiating cells (TIC); isolated
lung TIC also showed higher p38 expression. Together, the data implicate
p38 plays a tumor suppressive role in lung cancer by driving tumor cell
differentiation. Disrupting pathways that inhibit p38 expression or
enhancement of p38 expression might be useful for lung cancer treatment.

