Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: L-amino acid oxidase from Crotalas adamanteus venom induces
caspase-independent apoptosis in human NUGC-3 gastric cancer cells


L-amino acid oxidases (LAAOs), which are largely present in snake venoms,
are a group of flavoenzymes, known to catalyze oxidative deamination of
L-amino acid substrates, resulting in the formation of corresponding
-keto acids, hydrogen peroxide and ammonia. LAAOs have attracted interest
in biomedical and pharmacological research because of their
antimicrobial, anti-HIV, anticoagulant, inhibition of platelet
aggregation and apoptotic-inducing activities. The aim of this study is
to evaluate the anticancer effects of LAAO from Crotalas adamanteus snake
venom in human NUGC-3 gastric cancer cells in vitro. Cell viability and
cytotoxicity were determined by Alamar Blue and Lactate Dehydrogenase
assays. Cell cycle phases were analyzed by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was
identified by flow cytometric analysis with Annexin-V and PI staining.
The morphological changes were observed by fluorescence microscopy,
transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The
ROS level was quantified by DCFDA staining as well as malondialdehyde
formation. The results showed that LAAO reduced cell viability and
induced cytotoxicity in a dose-dependent manner. There was associated
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. Morphological changes induced by
LAAO treatment included membrane blebbing, cell shrinkage and chromatin
condensation. Apoptosis induced by LAAO in NUGC-3 gastric cancer cells as
evidenced by Annexin-V and PI positive staining, was found to be mediated
via a caspase-independent pathway without activating caspase-3 and Poly
ADP-ribose polymerase. Moreover, a concomitant increase of intracellular
oxidative stress and the translocation of the apoptosis inducing factor
(AIF) from mitochondria to the nucleus were observed. It would appear
that LAAO derived from the Crotalas adamanteus venom, induced a
caspase-independent apoptotic pathway which was incited by ROS and AIF
translocation. This study provides new biological insights into the
application of LAAO from a snake venom in cancer therapeutics.

