Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6/STAT3-dependent immunosuppressive function of
tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells in colorectal cancer


IntroductionImmunosuppression in tumor microenvironments is one of the
critical issues for cancer immunotherapy. To develop more effective
treatment, it is essential to overcome the dysfunction of immunity in
cancer patients. Recently, it has been demonstrated that myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs) have crucial roles for such immunosuppression.
In the current reports, it was indicated that activation of STAT3 was
required for immunosuppressive function of human MDSCs. In this study, we
focused on IL-6/STAT3-signaling pathway in human monocyte-derived
dendritic cells (DCs), and investigated the effects of IL-6 on
antigen-presenting ability of DCs.Materials and MethodsTumor-infiltrating
myeloid cells and PBMCs were collected from specimen of patients with
colorectal cancers. Surface molecules , such as HLA-DR, of the cells were
investigated by flowcytometry. Then, the surface molecules of
monocyte-derived DCs from healthy volunteers were evaluated after the
stimulation with IL-6 in vitro. IL-6-treated DCs were co-cultured with
autologous T cells stimulated by using anti-CD3 antibody and cytokine
production levels were investigated by ELISA. MAGE-A4-specific CD4+ T
cells were generated from PBMCs ofhealthy healthy volunteers in vitro and
co-cultured with IL-6-pretreated DCs in the presence of MAGE-A4 antigen.
Cytokine production by antigen specific T cells were measured by
ELISA.ResultsIn this study, we found that expression levels of HLA-DR and
CD86 are down regulated in tumor infiltrating CD11c+CD14+ DCs compared
with peripheral monocytes. In addition, we confirmed that HLA-DR and CD86
expressions were significantly reduced by IL-6 treatment of CD11c+CD14+
DCs in vitro. The reduction of HLA-DR and CD86 expression levels were
remarkably blocked in the presence of STAT3 inhibitor. IFN- production by
T cells after TCR-stimulation was suppressed in the presence of
IL-6-treated DCs compared with control DCs. Moreover, activation of
MAGE-A4 antigen-specific CD4+ T cells were remarkably reduced by
IL-6-treatment of DCs.DiscussionPreviously, it was reported that
CD14+HLA-DRlow/- cells increased in peripheral blood of cancer patients
and that these cells were an important population for immunosuppression.
In this study, we demonstrated that IL-6/STAT3-signaling cascade was one
of the regulating factors for surface expression levels of HLA-DR on DCs.
In addition, we confirmed that IL-6-treatment significantly suppressed
the antigen presentation by DCs for cancer antigen-specific CD4+ T cells.
Generally, MDSCs were known to induce several immunosuppressive and tumor
promoting factors such as VEGF, ARG1, and COX2. We are now investigating
target molecules of IL-6 for dysfunction of DCs in tumor
microenvironments.ConclusionIL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway regulates
immunosuppressive function of human DCs, which would be a promising
target for improving the effects of cancer immunotherapy.

