Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of the adipocyte-macrophage interaction in
breast cancer metastasis


Obesity is linked with a higher incidence of hormone-receptor positive
breast cancer in post-menopausal women. Obesity is also associated with a
worse outcome after the diagnosis of breast cancer, including greater
tumor burden and higher grade tumors. Although several theories exist to
explain these relationships, the proposed mechanisms are still being
investigated.Obesity and the resulting expansion of adipose tissue is
associated with aberrant cytokine production and a chronic inflammatory
state, characterized by the recruitment of macrophages. Macrophages have
been shown elsewhere to promote breast cancer progression. Therefore, we
hypothesize that the interaction between adipocytes and macrophages
promotes metastasis of breast cancer. Our data suggest that oxidized
lipids released from adipocytes may have a role in mediating this
interaction.We used a co-culture system to determine whether adipocytes
could promote a pro-tumor phenotype in the macrophages. THP-1 macrophages
were co-cultured with primary human visceral adipocytes using a Transwell
system for 8 hours, then macrophage mRNA was analyzed for changes in
transcription of markers for increased metastatic potential. Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF-A) mRNA levels were significantly
increased in macrophages after exposure to adipocytes in comparison to
control macrophages that were cultured alone. Co-culture experiments were
repeated using human breast adipocytes to more directly model the
conditions in the breast microenvironment. Again VEGF-A mRNA levels were
significantly increased in macrophages after co-culture with adipocytes.
Obesity is associated with stressed and necrotic adipose tissue in the
breast. Therefore, to mimic obesity related dysfunction and cell death,
we treated breast adipocytes with Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha and
Interleukin 6 prior to co-culturing with macrophages. The cytokine
treatment enhanced the effects of adipocyte co-culture on macrophage
VEGF-A mRNA levels. The increased inflammation and adipocyte dysfunction
seen in obesity has been proposed to favor the generation of biologically
active oxidized lipid mediators such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE). We
therefore treated THP-1 macrophages with 4-HNE as a model oxidized lipid,
hypothesizing that 4-HNE may convey some of the effects on macrophage
gene expression seen in co-culture. We found that transcription of VEGF-D
and platelet derived growth factor (PGF), both members of the VEGF family
of cytokines, were significantly enhanced in 4-HNE-treated THP-1
cells.Together, our data show that the interaction of adipocytes and
macrophages in obese breast tissue can stimulate pro-angiogenic
macrophage signaling. This is a novel mechanism whereby the obese
microenvironment can promote breast cancer metastasis.

