Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics, metabolism and excretion of idelalisib


Background: PI3K-delta is critical for activation, proliferation and
survival of B cells and plays a role in homing and retention in lymphoid
tissues. PI3K signaling is hyperactive in many B-cell malignancies.
Idelalisib (IDELA), currently in Phase 3 clinical development, is a
first-in-class, selective, oral inhibitor of PI3K that reduces
proliferation, enhances apoptosis, and inhibits homing and retention of
malignant B cells in lymphoid tissues. Following oral administration of
IDELA in dogs, 88% of the administered dose was recovered in the feces,
predominantly as GS-563117 (33%), an oxidative metabolite of IDELA. The
objective of the present study was to determine the mass
balance/recovery, metabolite profile, and pharmacokinetics of IDELA and
its metabolite in humans following administration of a single, oral dose
of radiolabeled IDELA.Methods: Healthy male subjects (N = 8) were
administered a single dose of IDELA (150 mg) containing 100 Ci of
[14C]IDELA. Blood, urine, and feces samples were collected up to a
maximum of 21 days or until the following criteria were met: 90% of
administered dose recovered in feces and urine, Background: PI3K-delta is
critical for activation, proliferation and survival of B cells and plays
a role in homing and retention in lymphoid tissues. PI3K signaling is
hyperactive in many B-cell malignancies. Idelalisib (IDELA), currently in
Phase 3 clinical development, is a first-in-class, selective, oral
inhibitor of PI3K that reduces proliferation, enhances apoptosis, and
inhibits homing and retention of malignant B cells in lymphoid tissues.
Following oral administration of IDELA in dogs, 88% of the administered
dose was recovered in the feces, predominantly as GS-563117 (33%), an
oxidative metabolite of IDELA. The objective of the present study was to
determine the mass balance/recovery, metabolite profile, and
pharmacokinetics of IDELA and its metabolite in humans following
administration of a single, oral dose of radiolabeled IDELA.Methods:
Healthy male subjects (N = 8) were administered a single dose of IDELA
(150 mg) containing 100 Ci of [14C]IDELA. Blood, urine, and feces samples
were collected up to a maximum of 21 days or until the following criteria
were met: 90% of administered dose recovered in feces and urine, <1% of
dose was present in consecutive sampling intervals, and plasma
radioactivity in consecutive samples were 2-fold background or
urine/feces sampling was discontinued. Concentrations of IDELA and
GS-563117 were measured using LC/MS/MS and total radioactivity assessed
by LSC. Metabolite profiling was performed in urine, feces, and plasma
samples at selected timepoints. Safety assessments were performed
throughout the study.Results: All 8 subjects completed in the study. Two
drug-related, mild (Grade 1) adverse events were observed in one subject
(lower abdominal pain and flatulence). All laboratory abnormalities were
mild in severity and one subject experienced grade 2 decreased neutrophil
counts. The mean (SD) recovery of [14C]-radioactivity was 92% (1.7%),
with 78% (3.9%) in feces and 14% (2.9%) in urine. GS-563117 was the
predominant species in feces (44% of total quantified radioactivity) and
urine (49% of total quantified radioactivity). Peak plasma radioactivity
was observed at 2 hours post-dose. Over the 24-hour period following
IDELA administration, the circulating radioactivity consisted entirely of
IDELA (38%) and its metabolite, GS-563117 (62%), formed via aldehyde
oxidase. The whole blood-to-plasma concentration ratio of
[14C]-radioactivity was 0.5, indicating that IDELA and its metabolite are
predominantly distributed to plasma, relative to the cellular components
of the blood. Low levels of other metabolites, including hydroxylation
and glucuronidation products, were observed in urine and
feces.Conclusion: IDELA was eliminated primarily in the feces and
oxidation to GS-563117 was the major metabolic pathway. IDELA and
GS-563117 were the only circulating species observed in plasma, and
GS-563117 was the main species observed in feces and urine.

