Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in vitro fluorescence-based co-culture model identifies tumour
microenvironment-mediated chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a poor prognosis, with poor
responses to cytotoxic or targeted agents. PDAC is characterised by
abundant desmoplasia and this tumor microenvironment is a major
determinant of intrinsic resistance to anticancer therapies. In
particular, pancreatic stellate cells/cancer-associated fibroblasts
(PSCs/CAFs) are periacinar stromal cells which promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and radioresistance of PDAC.
However, this unique tumour microenvironment is not recapitulated in
conventional cell monoculture or xenografts, which might attribute to the
poor predictivity of these preclinical drug screening models. To address
this, we have developed a PDA tumor cell-specific in vitro
Fluorescence-Based Co-culture (PDA-FBC) platform to investigate potential
mechanisms of stroma-mediated chemoresistance and to evaluate novel
agents and combinations. Using K8484 (PDA cell line derived from the
LSL-KrasG12D/+; LSL-Trp53R172H/+; Pdx-Cre (KPC) mouse) stably expressing
GFP, we selectively measured tumor cell viability in response to
gemcitabine, with and without the presence of stromal cells. Monolayers
of CAFs (primary fibroblast-like cells isolated from PDA tumour in KPC
mice) or NFs (primary fibroblast-like cells from the normal pancreas of
paired PC mice) were grown in 96 well plates and K8484 cells were seeded
on top, prior to 72 hour drug exposure. When co-cultured with CAFs,
K8484-GFP cells were significantly less sensitive to gemcitabine than
cells grown in absence of CAFs: gemcitabine GI50 (50% growth inhibition
concentration) is 19+/-3.2nM (n=4) in K8484 cell monolayer, 690+/-250nM
(n=4) in the presence of CAFs (p = 0.03). Transwell assays revealed that
this CAF-mediated chemoresistance was only induced in a cell-cell direct
contact-dependent manner. Moreover, similar stroma-mediated gemcitabine
resistance was not detected in co-culture of K8484 with NFs from normal
pancreas (GI50=21+/-3.3nM). We are now investigating whether the
chemoresistance phenotype extends to other cytotoxic agents. To evaluate
potential mechanisms of resistance, RNA sequencing is being conducted to
compare molecular profiles of K8484-GFP cells co-cultured with CAFs or
NFs (with/without gemcitabine), to identify the genes modulated by the
tumor-stroma interaction and potentially responsible for the decreased
gemcitabine sensitivity in co-culture. In conclusion, we have identified
that cancer-associated fibroblasts induce resistance to gemcitabine in
KPC PDAC tumour cells, in contrast to fibroblasts from normal pancreas.
This platform will have utility in the assessment of novel drug
combinations and a mechanistic understanding of the tumor-stroma
interactions may identify new candidate drug combinations.

