Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influences of extracellular matrix protein tenascin-c on
glioblastoma stem cell growth and invasion through tumor-microenvironment
interactions


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent and aggressive primary
brain tumors in adults. Recent research on cancer stroma indicates that
brain microenvironment plays substantial roles in brain tumor malignancy
and treatment responses to current anti-tumor therapy. In this work, we
investigated the effect of changes in tenascin-C (TNC), a multimodular
glycoprotein found in malignant brain tumor extracellular matrix, on GBM
proliferation, differentiation, and migration in vitro and in vivo. We
studied TNC gain-of-function and loss-of function in GBM stem-like
neurospheres, whose in vivo growth pattern closely replicates human GBM.
We found that TNC was significantly down-regulated (30-40%) during
differentiation of GBM stem cells in response to serum or retinoic acid.
TNC knockdown with shRNA had no effect on cell growth in vitro. Yet,
under differentiation conditions, TNC knockdown strongly promoted cell
adhered to laminin-coated surfaces, and increased GFAP expression by
20-fold. These suggest that endogenous TNC is important to promote the
differentiation and attachment of GBM stem cells in response to
differentiation stimuli. We further found that TNC loss-of-function
promoted GBM stem cell adhesion and actin cytoskeleton organization via
the activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) pathway as FAK pathway
inhibitors significantly inhibited (>75%) TNC knockdown mediated cell
adhesion. We further investigate the effect of TNC loss-of-function on
intracranial xenografts derived from GBM stem cells. When TNC expression
was decreased in tumor microenvironment, we detected decreased tumor cell
invasion accompanied by increased tumor size. In vitro and in vivo
studies confirmed our hypothesis that decreased TNC in tumor
microenvironment significantly altered the interactions between tumor
cells and their surrounding non-tumor cells including endothelial and
microglial cells, and therefore influenced tumor growth pattern. In
summary, we found that TNC is not involved in GBM stem cell proliferation
and maintenance, but rather in GBM stem cell adhesion and migration in
vitro. TNC loss-of-function promotes GBM stem cell adhesion and
differentiation. Decreased TNC expression in brain tumor microenvironment
prevents tumor cell migration and invasion, but alters tumor
cell-endothelial/microglial cell interactions, which results in increased
tumor growth. A full understanding of how TNC in tumor microenvironment
influences the interactions between tumor cells and their surrounding
non-tumor cells will ultimately lead to novel combinatory anti-tumor
strategies to treat malignant brain tumors.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

