Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative membrane proteome profiling to discover therapeutic
targets for adult T-cell leukemia (ATL)


Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is one of retroviruses known
as the causative agent of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), which is infected
within 20 million people in the world. ATL develops at the prevalence of
only 5% among HTLV-1-infected individuals after a long latency period
over 30 years. However, the outcomes of conventional treatment for ATL
are not satisfactory, exhibiting overall 5-year survival rate of 20%. To
discover novel therapeutic targets for ATL, we performed label-free
quantitative membrane proteome analysis for CD4+ T-cell subpopulation in
which HTLV-1 infected cells are enriched. Tryptic digests of CD4+ T-cells
were prepared from 14 normal donors (ND), 21 asymptomatic carriers (AC),
and 13 ATL patients. To focus on the membrane derived peptides,
glycosylated peptides were enriched by lectin column chromatography (Mol
Cell Proteomics. 2010,9(9),1819) since most of membrane proteins are
glycosylated. The eluates were analyzed by LC/MS/MS and 8,658
N-glycosylated peptides derived from 1,134 N-glycosylated proteins were
identified.The therapeutic targets were subsequently extracted by a
couple of criteria as follows. The all-or-nothing analysis explored
peptides detected in none or 1 case of ND+AC group, resulting in
identification of 31 peptides derived from 19 proteins. Additionally
Welch's t-test (ATL vs. ND+AC) identified 33 peptides derived from 14
proteins (p 2.0).The identified therapeutic target molecules above
included cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1 or TSLC1) which overexpresses in
ATL cells and induces organ infiltration of tumor cells. Programmed cell
death 1 ligand 1 (PD1L1) was also found in our therapeutic target list,
which was known to be up-regulated in ATL cells and involved in induction
of immune tolerance. These facts strongly emphasize the credibility of
our quantitative profiling results. We would like to show the results of
functional inhibitory experiments for novel therapeutic targets and
discuss the uncovered molecular mechanisms of ATL progression.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

