Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential activation of unfolded protein response in metastatic
vs. non-metastatic osteosarcoma cells following hypoxia and
chemotherapeutic stress


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary tumor of bone and the second
highest cause of cancer-related death in the pediatric age group. Despite
significant advances in diagnosis and treatment for this cancer, the
overall survival has remained static over the past 20 years. This is due
to the fact that little is known about the basic science mechanisms of
the pathology of human osteosarcoma as well as the mechanisms of inherent
drug resistance of OS. In particular lesser still is known regarding the
role of tumor microenvironment that govern growth and progression of
osteosarcoma in vivo. Recent clinical reports have demonstrated a
negative correlation between tumor hypoxia and overall survival in
osteosarcoma patients. In addition to the upregulation of HIFs, it has
been shown that hypoxia can trigger an adaptive response such as the
unfolded protein response (UPR) that allows tumor cells to avoid
therapy-induced death.Using in vitro experimental models of both the
non-metastatic (SAOS-2) and metastatic (143-b) osteosarcoma cell lines,
we now show that hypoxic signaling in these cells differentially
activates a pro-survival mechanism via the up-regulation of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone BiP and increased activation of the
ER stress-activated eukaryotic translation initiator factor 2alpha kinase
RNA-dependent protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK) and ATF-6, markers of
UPR allowing the cells to resist drug toxicity. Furthermore RNA
interference and dominant-negative expression studies revealed that both
ATF-6 and PERK signaling promote survival and drug resistance of OS
cells,Our findings shed light on the unknown mechanisms underlying
chemotherapeutic drug resistance in osteosarcoma patients. We propose
that hypoxic induction of UPR protects OS cells from stress insults, such
as chemotherapy. Our research may lead to novel therapies that seek out
and destroy the chemoresistant OS cells within the hypoxic core of
tumors, thereby preventing survival and metastasis, and ultimately
improving the chances of survival amongst OS patients.

