Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of imaging-based orthotopic tumor models for
pharmacological evaluation of anticancer agents


Since its emergence in the mid 90's, the in vivo bioluminescent imaging
(BLI) technology has been widely accepted by academia and pharmaceutical
industry for research and pre-clinical drug development. The
non-invasiveness and high sensitivity nature of BLI enables tumor lesions
to be detectable far before they are palpable, allowing longitudinal
tracking of tumors from their early development stages. BLI is
particularly advantageous for monitoring systemic and orthotopic tumors
that are not accessible by caliper measurement. Current preclinical
evaluation of anti-cancer agents relies heavily on subcutaneous xenograft
models. However, ectopically developed tumors in the subcutaneous tissue
differ drastically in tumor stromata in aspects of cell contents and drug
permeability, thus will often poorly predict pharmacological efficacy of
the test agents. The notion that orthotopic models can better
recapitulate the clinical tumor development and metastasis, thus better
predict the clinical outcome of the anticancer drugs has gradually gained
acceptance. Towards the development of better mouse models for
pre-clinical drug development, we have established over twenty imaging
based orthotopic tumor cell lines, including U87MG and AM38 brain tumors,
HCT116, LoVo and SW620 colorectal cancers, A549 lung cancer, MSTO-211H
mesothelioma, Raji and Namalwa lymphoma, MiaPaca-3 and Panc-1 pancreatic
cancer, HepG2 liver cancer, and DU145 prostatic cancer. These tumor cells
are extremely bright in luminescence emission, ranging from 1085 to 6397
photons/second/cell, thus allowing very sensitive detection in orthotopic
tissues even with a few hundred cells. The tumorigenicity of the
luciferase labeled cells has been validated in the pertinent orthotopic
models. Evaluation of the responsiveness of some of the models to
standard therapeutic agents has been conducted. In the U87MG orthotopic
glioma model, we observed tumor regression in mice treated with
temozolomide in a 5 mg/kg, po, q2d x 5 regimen. Current study of the
orthotopic MSTO-211H mesothelioma model in response to standard clinical
treatment drugs, such as pemetrexed, carboplatin and paclitaxel is in
progress. It is expected that these imaging based orthotopic models will
improve the pre-clinical pharmacological evaluation of anti-cancer agents
and therefore better bridge the preclinical to clinical translation.

