Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine-tuning T cell receptors for adoptive T cell therapy


Adoptive T cell therapy (ACT) with gene-modified T cells is emerging as a
highly promising strategy for the treatment of many types of cancer.
Therapies associated with the induction of anti-tumor immunity, such as
the administration of vaccines or the ex-vivo expansion of
patient-derived TILs, have historically had limited success. This lack of
efficacy is almost certainly brought about as a consequence of thymic
selection, leading to a paucity of T cells, and T cell receptors, in the
circulating repertoire, with a sufficient degree of sensitivity towards
tumor-associated antigens. An alternative approach, which has generated
promising results, relies on the adoptive transfer of patient-derived T
cells that have been first modified to express a chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR). Nevertheless, a lack of tumor-specific antibody targets
limits the wider applicability of CAR T cells.To overcome these issues we
have developed a strategy that involves the transfer of T cells
expressing engineered TCRs with optimised affinity for a defined tumor
antigen. Since TCRs recognize peptide antigens presented on the cell
surface in complex with human leukocyte antigen (HLA), they give access
to the large pool of intracellular proteins. Furthermore, the use of TCRs
means that the natural interaction between a T cell and the corresponding
antigen presenting cell is preserved. Importantly, for any given antigen,
engineered TCRs require individual optimization, to ensure the
appropriate balance between potency and specificity.Recent and emerging
clinical data using engineered TCRs for ACT are beginning to corroborate
promising pre-clinical findings, with evidence of both potent and durable
responses in vivo. However, experiences have also highlighted the dangers
of this approach. The main risks associated with TCR adoptive therapy are
target presentation on healthy tissue and TCR cross-reactivity to a
look-alike peptide. Understanding these risks and ensuring comprehensive
and robust safety testing mechanisms are in place is pivotal to mitigate
these risks.

