Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the cerebrospinal fluid proteome from central
nervous system pediatric tumors using bait loaded hydrogel nanoparticles
and mass spectrometry


Central nervous system (CNS) tumors are the second common pediatric
malignancies, accounting for approximately 25% of all childhood
neoplasms. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a very valuable source of
biomarkers for brain tumors and represents a potential indicator of
pathological processes that happen in the CNS. CSF biomarker discovery
poses some physiological and technical challenges: low protein levels
(total protein concentration 0.3 to 0.7 mg/mL), dynamic range (up to
approximately 12 order of magnitude), and the presence of highly abundant
proteins masking the less abundant ones. In order to overcome these
challenges, we used core-shell capturing hydrogel nanoparticles that can
capture, preserve and concentrate candidate low molecular weight, low
abundance proteins in solution in one step improving the effective
sensitivity of mass-spectrometry by several orders of magnitude. CSF
samples from pediatric brain cancer patients (14 medulloblastoma, 4
high-grade glioma, 6 ependimoma, 4 PNET, 2 atypical teratoid rhabdoid
tumor) either at initial diagnosis (n=27) or at tumor recurrence (n=3)
and 21 non-brain pediatric oncology controls (extra-CNS non Hodgkin
lymphoma) were processed with core-shell hydrogel nanoparticles and then
analyzed with reverse-phase liquid chromatography/electrospray tandem
mass spectrometry (MS/MS). We identified 559 non redundant proteins, 147
(26%) of those not present in the public comprehensive CSF proteome
database (www.biosino.org). Functional classification analysis performed
with IPA Ingenuity System showed that CSF contained proteins normally
involved in neurological diseases, developmental disorders, cellular
movement, cellular growth and proliferation. Several candidate proteins
that show a statistical difference (p-value Central nervous system (CNS)
tumors are the second common pediatric malignancies, accounting for
approximately 25% of all childhood neoplasms. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
is a very valuable source of biomarkers for brain tumors and represents a
potential indicator of pathological processes that happen in the CNS. CSF
biomarker discovery poses some physiological and technical challenges:
low protein levels (total protein concentration 0.3 to 0.7 mg/mL),
dynamic range (up to approximately 12 order of magnitude), and the
presence of highly abundant proteins masking the less abundant ones. In
order to overcome these challenges, we used core-shell capturing hydrogel
nanoparticles that can capture, preserve and concentrate candidate low
molecular weight, low abundance proteins in solution in one step
improving the effective sensitivity of mass-spectrometry by several
orders of magnitude. CSF samples from pediatric brain cancer patients (14
medulloblastoma, 4 high-grade glioma, 6 ependimoma, 4 PNET, 2 atypical
teratoid rhabdoid tumor) either at initial diagnosis (n=27) or at tumor
recurrence (n=3) and 21 non-brain pediatric oncology controls (extra-CNS
non Hodgkin lymphoma) were processed with core-shell hydrogel
nanoparticles and then analyzed with reverse-phase liquid
chromatography/electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). We
identified 559 non redundant proteins, 147 (26%) of those not present in
the public comprehensive CSF proteome database (www.biosino.org).
Functional classification analysis performed with IPA Ingenuity System
showed that CSF contained proteins normally involved in neurological
diseases, developmental disorders, cellular movement, cellular growth and
proliferation. Several candidate proteins that show a statistical
difference (p-value <0.05, Fisher test) between brain tumor and non-brain
oncology controls, were involved in the process of extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling which has a key role in the transition to invasive
cancer and is often an indicator of worse prognosis. Two examples were a)
the ECM protein collagen XVIII, which was previously identified in
meningioma tissue with a fast progression, and b) procollagen
C-endopeptidase enhancer, an extracellular matrix glycoprotein related to
tumor growth and angiogenesis. Statistical analysis between
non-metastatic and metastatic patient samples also highlighted
potentially relevant proteins such as GDNF family receptor -2 (GFR2); two
other family members GFR1 and GFR3 were reported to have a role in tumor
growth and invasiveness. In conclusion, combining a unique dataset of CSF
from pediatric cancer patients with a novel enabling nanotechnology
allowed us to identify important insights for diagnosis, prognosis and
molecular stratification of CNS pediatric tumors.

