Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of lemur tyrosine kinase-3 in high grade pediatric
tumors


High grade gliomas are the most common primary brain tumors in adults,
but also occur in childhood, with a poor prognosis in all age groups .
Lemur tyrosine kinase 3 (LMTK3) is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase that
seems to play a pivotal role in oncogenesis in breast cancer. It
regulates the estrogen receptor alpha and is evolutionarily selected for
in humans compared to non-human primates. LMTK3 expression levels were
strongly associated with survival and therapy response.This study
assesses the role of LMTK3 in pediatric high grade brain tumors at both
the protein and mRNA levels.We initially assessed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) the expression levels of LMTK3 in well described cohorts of patient
specimens with brain cancer. First, we performed an IHC analysis using a
brain tumor tissue microarray (TMA) purchased from US Biomax (#T175), in
order to examine the LMTK3 levels in a variety of brain
tumors.Preliminary analysis revealed variable LMTK3 expression levels in
brain tissue, scored as negative, low, moderate and high. We demonstrate
that LMTK3 appears to be expressed at low levels at normal brain tissue
samples and epithelial meningioma tissues (benign tumors). On the
contrary, LMTK3 was expressed at different levels in cases with grade 2
or grade 4 gliomas. Further immunohistochemical analysis was therefore
undertaken on a selection of TMAs containing pediatric high grade
gliomas. Genome wide gene expression analysis (using the Affymetrix
U133plus2 chip) previously undertaken on a cohort of pediatric high grade
gliomas demonstrated measurable LMTK3 mRNA expression in many samples.
Our preliminary analysis was correlated with various tumor
characteristics that are available in Nottingham datasets (including
demographic and overall survival data). In conclusion, LMTK3 is expressed
in pediatric high grade gliomas and may have differential expression
depending on the histological grade of the tumor. This work will lead to
larger scale studies to elucidate the exact role of LMTK3 in high grade
brain neoplasms.

