Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Illuminating the effects of tissue degradation to improve the
management of tissues used in cancer research or clinical applications


The collection and preservation of tissues from surgery to the lab
affects the quality and value of research and/or healthcare applications
for cancer patients. To this end we are further defining best practices
in the management of surgically resected tissues through the analysis of
a systems biology model. In the first steps of this process we defined an
experimental animal model to assess gene expression signatures of
biological pathways related to preservation intervals. Athymic nude
murine tissues (kidney, liver, brain, and PDX-models) were excised at
baseline and immediately aliquots of tissue were incubated at varying
intervals (t=0, 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 9 hours, temperature during intervals was
maintained at 37C). All tissues were preserved at -80C and total RNA was
extracted from these tissues using a uniform RNA isolation kit (RNeasy
Mini Kit from Qiagen, Inc.) by the same technician. The RNA Integrity
Number (RIN) was obtained using the Agilent's BioAnalyzer 2100 and RNA
concentration using the Nanodrop 8000. Subsequently, cDNA was synthesized
using Thermo Scientific's RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit, and
qPCR analysis of each tissue was performed using the Qiagen RT2 Profiler
PCR Arrays including the Cell Death PathwayFinder (murine origin liver,
kidney, brain) and Hypoxia Signaling Pathway (human origin PDX-model)
arrays. Results show a variation of transcripts s that were upregulated
(Bax, Bcl2, Fos, Egr1, Tnfrsf10b) or downregulated (Ctss, Hmox1, Epo,
Snca) with increased length of tissue incubation and tissue-specific
patterns of regulation were observed. Furthermore, these changes in gene
expression did not correlate with a decrease in RIN scores, which raises
questions about the suitability of RIN as a comprehensive assessment of
RNA quality at the transcript level. These findings have important
implications for cancer research, namely that tissues that have not been
stabilized within several minutes of excision from the host might have
undergone degradation of RNA templates that reflect tissue
management-related biological activity versus disease-related
transcriptome. In future work, we plan to compare macroanalytes such as
microRNAs, non-coding RNAs and proteins across different tissue types
with an assumption that gene signatures and biological effects will
differ per tissue type. We will use results from our experimental
biopreservation model to continue the emphasis on transcriptome changes
within the context of biological relevance.

