Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary sodium, potassium and fluid intake and clear cell renal
cell cancer: heterogeneous effects by DNA methylation of genes involved
in renal salt homeostasis


Introduction: Sodium, potassium and fluid play a key role in renal salt
homeostasis. We showed that sodium intake is associated with higher renal
cell cancer (RCC) risk. Promoter CpG island methylation, leading to
silencing of tumor suppressor genes, may also affect RCC carcinogenesis.
We investigated whether associations between sodium, potassium and fluid
intake and RCC risk differed for RCC subtypes defined by promoter
methylation of genes involved in renal salt homeostasis.Methods: The
Netherlands Cohort Study (NLCS) with case-cohort design included 120,852
subjects aged 55-69 years. Diet was measured with a food frequency
questionnaire. After 20.3 years of follow-up, paraffin-embedded tumor
blocks from 454 incident RCC cases were collected, of which 80% had clear
cell (cc) histology. Methylation-specific PCR was used to analyze
promoter CpG island methylation in tumor DNA. Genes involved in renal
salt homeostasis were of interest if exhibiting 1) promoter CpG island
methylation in ccRCC cell lines and not in normal kidney tissue in a
genome-wide methylation screen (MBD-affinity massive parallel sequencing)
and 2) ccRCC-specific down-regulation in public expression data. We
identified ARHGDIG, ATP1A1, SCNN1B and SLC8A3 as candidate genes, which
were then combined into a methylation sum score and categorized
representing no (0 genes methylated), low (1 gene methylated) and high (2
genes methylated) methylation. Cox regression analyses were stratified
accordingly and included 4,439 subcohort members and 348 ccRCC
cases.Results: ARHGDIG, ATP1A1, SCNN1B and SLC8A3 were methylated in
22.7%, 16.4%, 42.2% and 5.5% of ccRCC tumors. High sodium intake
increased overall ccRCC risk [HR(95%CI): 1.42(1.06-1.89)] regardless of
methylation status (P-heterogeneity = 0.69). High potassium intake was
differently associated with ccRCC risk (P-heterogeneity = 0.02); ccRCC
risk was lower for tumors without methylation [HR(95%CI):
0.59(0.36-0.98)], but higher for tumors with high methylation [HR(95%CI):
1.50(0.89-2.52)]. For fluid intake, HRs similarly differed across the
methylation subtypes, but heterogeneity was not significant
(P-heterogeneity = 0.45). Individual gene analyses showed that SCNN1B was
most indicative of the heterogeneous effects.Discussion: Our findings
indicate for the first time a joint influence of diet and epigenetics to
determine ccRCC risk. By investigating specific dietary intakes and DNA
methylation in selected genes we provide a biological rational for the
role of renal salt homeostasis in the development of ccRCC. In
particular, we show that, besides sodium intake, also potassium and fluid
intake may be implicated in ccRCC etiology, when the epigenetic
environment is considered. Further exploration of the temporal
relationship and exact pathological pathway is however warranted.

