Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Medical providers perceive a lack of trust in the medical system
leads to suboptimal esophageal cancer care for African American patients


Background: Although patient outcomes for esophageal cancer have
improved, there remains a reduced survivorship among African Americans
compared to Caucasians, possibly due to lower use of surgery in African
Americans. While various factors contribute to this disparity, we noted a
decreased referral of African American patients to thoracic surgeons in
our institution. We hypothesized that interviews with medical providers
would provide the reasons behind the barriers that hinder the ability of
minority patients to receive optimal care for esophageal cancer.Methods:
Providers (n=20) in the Detroit Metro area that treat African Americans
with esophageal cancer participated in 30-minute semi-structured
interviews to elicit their perspectives regarding barriers and
facilitators in their care for this population. The interview inquired
into the challenges faced and techniques employed by providers in
establishing trust within this population. Interviewed providers included
thoracic surgeons, medical oncologists, gastroenterologists, and
radiation oncologists.Results: Most providers suggested that
socioeconomic status, not race, was the primary barrier to accessing
adequate cancer care. Within the African American population, 80% of
providers reported that mistrust was not an issue in their personal
experiences in treating minorities with esophageal cancer, but 95% of
providers cited mistrust in the medical system as a contributing factor
to unfavorable outcomes. Providers who indicated mistrust in the medical
system referred to historical instances that may deter African American
patients from trusting the medical system. Many also cited techniques for
establishing trust including honesty and patient empowerment. Finally, 3
of 20 respondents referred to direct experiences where patient refusal to
participate in clinical trials may have contributed to poorer
outcomes.Conclusions: Medical providers believe that mistrust in the
medical system is a key barrier for African American patients with
esophageal cancer to receive optimal care. Further investigation to
elicit patient perspectives should be explored through direct patient
surveys. Particular attention should be directed toward how African
Americans' trust of the medical community affects the use of surgical
treatment for esophageal cancer.

