Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin induces pancreatic cancer cell death by targeting IAPs


BackgroundPancreatic cancer has among the highest mortality rates
compared to other cancer types, with 94% of patients dying within five
years of diagnosis. Contributing to the high mortality rate, patients
with pancreatic cancer do not present significant symptoms until the
disease is advanced. Moreover, treatment strategies have not improved
substantially over the last decade. For this reason, a recent trend has
led toward focusing on the use of herb-derived compounds, such as
curcumin (turmeric derivative), to explore alternative treatments that
will improve current pancreatic cancer therapy.ObjectiveThe objectives of
this study were (1) to determine the effects of curcumin on pancreatic
cancer cell metabolism, viability, cell cycle and morphology, and (2) to
determine the mechanism by which curcumin induces cell death in
pancreatic cancer cells by analyzing intracellular expression levels of
inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs).Design/methodPancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines (Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2) were used to assess the
effects of curcumin in pancreatic cancer. Effects on metabolism,
viability and cell cycle were assayed by Alamar Blue, Trypan Blue and
Propidium Iodide (PI) staining/flow cytometry (FACSCalibur).
Morphological imaging was performed using Hoffman Modulation microscopy.
Apoptosis was detected by Annexin V/PI flow cytometry (MACSQuant) and the
expression of IAPs was assessed by Western blot.ResultsThese data show
that curcumin decreases pancreatic cancer cell metabolism and viability.
Cell cycle stages were arrested in pancreatic cancer cells treated with
curcumin compared to the non-treated controls. Apoptotic cells were
detected by microscopy and confirmed by Annexin V/PI staining with
subsequent flow cytometry analysis. IAPs levels are reduced in pancreatic
cancer cell lines treated with curcumin compared to non-treated
controls.ConclusionThese results demonstrate that pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines are sensitive to curcumin treatment. Moreover,
curcumin's possible mechanism of action is inducing apoptosis by
targeting IAPs. Collectively, these data suggest a potential role for
curcumin in pancreatic cancer therapy.

