Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a molecular understanding of non-small cell lung cancer
resistance to standard taxane-platin chemotherapy


Purpose: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients show benefit from
neoadjuvant chemotherapy given before surgical resection or adjuvant
chemotherapy administered after tumor resection. However, several of
these patients still relapse and die with metastatic NSCLC. These
relapses represent resistance of the tumors to chemotherapy. NSCLC
resistance to standard taxane and platin doublet chemotherapy is a major
problem. Identifying and overcoming resistance mechanisms are thus
urgently needed and the focus of this research.Methods: (A) NSCLC cell
lines were exposed long term to cycles of paclitaxel + carboplatin in
clinically relevant dosage ratios, to select and subsequently
characterize resistant cells. (B) Subcutaneous xenografts of parental and
resistant cell lines were established in NOD/SCID mice to include
expression changes that are retained in vivo. (C) Molecularly and
clinically annotated dataset of NSCLC patient tumors obtained after
neoadjuvant taxane + platin chemotherapy (N = 66; some had long term
disease free survival and some had tumor relapses) were subjected to gene
expression and survival analyses.Results and Significance: NSCLC cell
lines NCI-H1299 and NCI-H1355 treated for 16-18 cycles with paclitaxel +
carboplatin developed >50 fold resistance. Cells also developed
cross-resistance to doxorubicin and vinorelbine. In addition, these
resistant cell lines showed decreased response to docetaxel + cisplatin
doublet in vivo. Consistent with the literature, cells showed increased
expression of multi-drug transporter ABCB1/MDR1. This corresponded to
decreased intracellular docetaxel accumulation in resistant cells. Cell
line variants showed reversal in resistance when exposed to MDR1
inhibitors or with ABCB1 knockdown. Reversal in both cases was however
partial, suggesting additional resistance mechanisms. This was also
indicated by repeating long term drug selection in presence of MDR
inhibitor, wherein cells still developed resistance. Microarray profiles
of resistant cell lines suggested mRNA expression changes in stem cell
pathways, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes and certain
epigenetic modulators. Cross-comparison of gene hits from cell lines and
xenografts yielded 14 commonly up-regulated and 21 down-regulated genes
that formed a resistance signature from preclinical models. This 35-gene
resistance signature could successfully classify neoadjuvant treated
patient tumors into two main clusters with significant differences in
tumor recurrence and cancer-free survival. Studies are underway to
determine whether this signature is purely prognostic or also has a
functional role in causing resistance. Such information will provide both
clinically useful biomarkers to type tumor response in patients and also
potentially new therapeutic targets to overcome standard taxane-platin
drug resistance in NSCLC.

