Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Akt1 accelerates carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis in
mammary gland of virgin and post-lactating transgenic mice


Introduction The data from in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that
activation of Akt regulates cell survival signaling and plays a key role
in tumorigenesis. To explore oncogenic role of Akt1 in the development of
mammary tumor, transgenic mice were created. Methods The transgenic mice
were generated by expressing myristoylated-Akt1 (myr-Akt1) under the
control of MMTV-LTR promoter. The carcinogen 7, 12
dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracene (DMBA) was used for inducing tumor formation.
Results The MMTV driven myr-Akt1 transgene expression was detected
primarily in mammary glands, uterus, and ovaries and the expression level
increased significantly in lactating mice, suggesting the response was
hormone dependent. The total expression level of Akt in the mammary gland
was also high in these lactating mice. Interestingly, the expression of
MMTVmyr-Akt1 in ovary of transgenic mice caused significant increase in
circulating estrogen levels, even at post-lactating stage. Expression of
myr-Akt1 in mammary glands alone did not increase tumor formation
frequency. However, an increased susceptibility to the induction of
mammary tumors by DMBA was observed in transgenic mice, especially in
post-lactating mice. DMBA induced 42.9% of mammary tumors in
post-lactating transgenic mice within 34 weeks, but none in
post-lactating wild-type mice. The myr-Akt1 driven mammary tumors induced
by DMBA had increased phosphorylated-Akt1 and showed strong expression of
estrogen receptor (ER) and EGFR. Cyclin D1 was more frequently
up-regulated in mammary tumors from transgenic mice compared to tumors
from wild-type mice. Overexpression of Cyclin D1, however, was not
completely dependent on activated Akt1. Interestingly, mammary tumors
that had metastasized to secondary sites had increased expression of
twist and slug, but showed low expression of Cyclin D1. Conclusions In
summary, activation of Akt1 in mammary gland accelerated
carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis, especially in post-lactating mice.

