Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tailored antibody drug conjugate (ADC) therapy depending on a
quantity of tumor stroma


Although many monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been already approved for
the therapy of cancer, they are usually used in combination with
anticancer agents (ACAs), because of limited anti-tumor activity as
single agent. Antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), is a promising next
generation therapeutic antibody strategy to enhance the cytotoxic effect.
Most human solid tumors, however, possess abundant stroma that hinders
the distribution of ADC. Also, heterogeneity of the tumor cells
complicates the development of ADC therapy based on cell-specific
antigens. Moreover, conventional ADC depends upon enzymatic cleavage of
the agent following internalization into the cytoplasm or lysosome and
the process of cell-uptake can be diminished by a stromal barrier in
fibrotic tumors.To overcome these drawbacks, we have developed
stroma-targeting ADCs, namely CAST (Cancer stromal targeting) as a novel
type of therapy. SN-38 was conjugated to mAbs against collagen 4, or
fibrin via ester-bonds. These ADCs bound to collagen 4 or fibrin networks
in the stroma. Sustained release of SN-38 from ADCs diffused throughout
the tumor tissue, and caused marked damage to both tumor cells and tumor
vessels in a pancreatic cancer model. We also prepared SN-38-conjugated
anti-CD 20 mAb via carbamate-bond as a conventional ADC. This
cell-targeting ADC enabled SN-38 to be released by a carboxylesterase
inside of the tumor cell following internalization and showed strong
anti-tumor activity against malignant lymphoma which is a hypervascular
and stroma poor tumor type. Our results indicate that the
conjugate-design, in parallel with the choice of targeting antibodies,
should be selected to maximize the therapeutic effect in each individual
tumor depending upon the quantity of its stromal component.We will
present data on this novel tailored antibody drug conjugate (ADC) therapy
and discuss our development strategy for its clinical use.[1] Matsumura
Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer
chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and
antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res. 46:6387-92. 1986.[2] Yasunaga M,
Manabe S, Matsumura Y. New concept of cytotoxic immunoconjugate therapy
cancer-induced fibrin clots. Cancer Sci. 102:1396-1402, 2011.[3] Yasuanga
M, Manabe S, Tarin D, Matsumura Y. Cancer-stroma targeting therapy by
cytotoxic immunoconjugate bound to the collagen 4 network in the tumor
tissue. Bioconjugate Chem.22:1776-1783, 2011.[4] Matsumura Y. Cancer
stromal targeting (CAST) therapy.Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 64:710-719, 2012.[5]
Yasuanga M, Manabe S, Tarin D, Matsumura Y. Tailored immunoconjugate
therapy depending on a quantity of tumor stroma. Cancer Sci. 104:231-7,
2013.[6] Hisada Y, Yasunaga M, Hanaoka S, Saijou S, Sugino T, Tsuji A,
Saga T, Tsumoto K, Manabe S, Kuroda J, Kuratsu J, Matsumura Y. Discovery
of an uncovered region in fibrin clots and its clinical significance. Sci
Rep. 3:2604, 2013.

