Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of ellagic acid and its major urolithin metabolites in
inhibiting growth of prostate cancer cells


Pomegranate juice, in the last several years, has gained tremendous
attention for its proven ability to slow down prostate cancer as evident
by reduced prostate-specific antigen doubling time. However, a bioactive
compound responsible for this action has not yet been confirmed and thus,
limited its chemo-preventive/therapeutic potential. Pharmacokinetic
studies of oral consumption of pomegranate juice in human have shown
partial hydrolysis of ellagitannins, major component in the juice, into
ellagic acid which is subsequently converted to various urolithin
metabolites by the gut microbial digestion. Urolithins are shown to have
extended plasma half-life and are detected in urine up to 48 after oral
consumption of pomegranate juice. We investigated the potential of
ellagic acid and major urolithin metabolites; urolithin A and urolithin
B, that were synthesized in our laboratory, in inhibiting the growth and
survival of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells, PC-3 and DU-145
cells in vitro. We found significantly high dose and time-dependent
inhibition of growth and proliferation of both cell lines by all three
compounds tested. Ellagic acid was found to be the most potent inhibitor
as evident by significantly lower IC50 of 8.17 M and 1.57M respectively
for DU-145 and PC-3 cells after 48 hours. Urolithin B was more efficient
than Urolithin A against DU-145 cells (IC50 of 17.42M vs. 73.78M) while
it was reversed in PC-3 cells (IC50 of 92.25 M vs. 36.96 M). Similarly,
these compounds also induced substantial levels of dose-dependent
apoptosis in either cell lines, however, with variable sensitivity.
Western blot analysis of signaling proteins to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms of observed effects correlated with altered levels of proteins
that mediate cell-cycle regulation. P21, an inhibitor of CDK2-CyclinA/E
complex that regulates protein elongation and cell-cycle progression from
G1 to S phase was highly upregulated in compound-treated PC-3 cells and
DU-145 cells, while cyclinD1 which regulates G1 to S phase transition in
consort with CDK4 was significantly decreased in treated cells in
comparison to untreated and vehicle-treated control. Studies are underway
to understand the synergistic effects between these compounds, in vitro
and in vivo. Taken together, our results indicates EA and its gut
metabolites are significant anti-survival and anti-proliferation
candidates against prostate cancer cells and hold a tremendous
chemo-therapeutic and chemo-preventive potential, for its high efficacy
and natural, low toxic source.

