Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypothalamic beta-endorphin neuron transplants modulate colonic
proinflammatory cytokines and epithelial-mesenchymal transition factors
and suppress preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in
1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced colon cancer


In recent years, experimental studies suggest that impaired
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis modulates colonic motor
function and pathologies. However, little is known about the functional
role of beta-endorphin (BEP) neural populations, which control HPA
function, on colonic function in response to inflammation or injury of
colon. Based on our previous published work showing that transplantation
of BEP neurons in the hypothalamus suppress tumor growth and development
in numerous animal models including prostate, breast and liver cancer, we
determined whether transplantation of BEP neurons into the hypothalamus
suppress preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions and modulate colonic
proinflammatory cytokines and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
enhancing innate immune response. Colon cancer (injury) was induced in
Sprague-Dawley male rats with BEP or control cell transplants by
injecting 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH) for 16 weeks. Our results reveled
that control groups developed tumors at 100% incidence, while BEP
transplanted animals developed tumor only at 30% rate. The mean volume of
tumor in colon was smaller in BEP neurons transplanted rats than in
control cells transplanted rats. Furthermore, histological results
revealed that BEP neurons transplanted animals had lesser
histopathological lesions such as aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and
adenocarcinoma development in the colon than the control groups. In
addition, immunohistochemical and western blot analyses of colon showed
that DMH treatment increased expression of Ki-67, TNF- and NF-B more in
cortical cells transplanted animals than in BEP cell-treated groups.
Also, splenic NK cells cytolytic proteins such as perforin, granzyme B
and IFN- levels in BEP neurons transplanted rats were higher when
compared to control groups. Interestingly, BEP neurons transplantation
repressed the expression of Snail and Twist, transcription factors linked
to EMT, and concomitantly maintained E-cadherin, an epithelial cell
marker expression. These data suggest that the antitumor action of BEP
neuron transplants are due to the suppression of inflammatory milieu and
EMT as well as the activation of NK cells mediated innate immune
responses. These data also identify the potential use of BEP cell therapy
to combat tumor growth and progression. (Supported by R37 AA08757)

