Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of specific CD44 variants mediate endocrine
insensitivity and invasion in breast cancer cells


The majority of breast cancers express the oestrogen receptor and are
potentially amenable to antihormone therapy; however the clinical
effectiveness of these agents is limited by the phenomenon of acquired
resistance which is associated with disease relapse and poor prognosis.
In vitro evidence suggests that acquired resistance to tamoxifen and
fulvestrant results in a significant gain to the migratory and invasive
nature of breast cancer cells which may augment their metastatic
potential in vivo. We have previously demonstrated that the CD44 receptor
is overexpressed in acquired endocrine resistance and contributes to a
gain in aggressive phenotype and poor outcome clinically. However, little
is known regarding the effects of CD44 splice variants in this context.
Here we have explored the role of CD44 variant 3 (v3) and CD44 variant 6
(v6) in endocrine-resistant and endocrine-sensitive breast cancer
models.CD44v3 and CD44v6 isoform expression was assessed in cell models
of acquired tamoxifen (Tam-R) and fulvestrant (Fas-R) resistance along
with their endocrine-sensitive MCF-7 counterparts by microarray analysis,
Western blotting, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. The
ability of CD44v3 and CD44v6 to modulate tumor cell growth (cell counting
assay), migration (fibronectin motility assay), invasion (Matrigel Boyden
chamber assay), adhesion (matrix adhesion assay) and response to
endocrine agents were determined using cells in which CD44v3 or CD44v6
expression was modulated by overexpression (MCF-7) or by siRNA (Tam-R,
Fas-R). Changes in cellular signalling pathways as a result of CD44
modulation and activation were assessed using Western blotting.CD44v3 and
CD44v6 were overexpressed at gene and protein level in Tam-R and Fas-R
cells versus endocrine-sensitive MCF-7 cells. Inhibition of CD44
expression (all isoforms) in resistant cells resulted in a loss of
migratory, proliferative and invasive phenotype. Overexpression of CD44v6
in MCF-7 cells resulted in a gain in EGFR signalling and enhanced their
intrinsic invasive capacity and promoted a loss of endocrine response. In
contrast, overexpression of CD44v3 decreased EGFR pathway activity in
MCF-7 cells and did not augment their invasive capacity or alter their
endocrine sensitivity.Our data suggests that upregulation of CD44v6 in
acquired resistant breast cancer may contribute to their gain in
aggressive phenotype and loss of endocrine response through
transactivation of the EGFR pathway. Future therapeutic targetting of
CD44v6 may prove to be an effective strategy alongside EGFR targeted
agents in delaying/preventing acquired resistance in breast cancer.

