Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying cross-phenotype inflammatory effects in cancer


Through genome-wide association studies we now better understand many of
the genetic factors contributing to cancer. However, the overlap between
cancer associated loci and inflammation associated loci remains poorly
understood. Inflammation has long been considered the underlying basis to
several complex traits and plays well-established roles in elevating risk
to various cancer types. In fact, genome-wide association studies have
identified loci associated with inflammatory biomarkers and risk of
cancer. Therefore we sought to test cross-phenotype genetic effects
between cancer and inflammation biomarkers. While genome-wide significant
loci on their own typically account for very little of the measured
narrow-sense heritability, polygenic approaches show greater promise to
account for the missing heritability of complex traits. Therefore we
built polygenic signatures from inflammatory biomarker genome-wide
association studies. Preliminary analysis of a case control pancreatic
cancer dataset (304 cases/1425 controls) where we applied seven
inflammatory signatures indicates that polygenic scores built from IL-10
and C-reactive protein (CRP) are significant predictors of case control
status. Importantly the directions of effect for IL-10 and CRP are
consistent with the canonical roles of these proteins. We extended this
approach to a breast cancer dataset (1082 cases/1086 controls) where we
found that polygenic scores built from CRP are significant predictors of
case control status. In both the pancreatic and breast cancer datasets
CRP polygenic scores decrease risk of case status. This approach will not
only inform us of the cancers with overlapping inflammatory effects, but
also allow us to identify the components of the immune system that
mediate cancer risk. Ultimately this understanding may lead to the use of
anti-inflammatory medication for individuals at risk for a particular
cancer. Therefore this research addresses cancer prevention by studying
the inflammatory genetic component to risk.

