Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and preclinical evaluation of single agents with tubulin
and multiple receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition


Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) inhibitors lead to
the reduction of angiogenesis but are cytostatic, not tumoricidal. These
inhibitors have shown significant promise in the clinic when used in
combination with cytotoxic agents, and several clinical trials with such
combinations are in progress. We have previously reported preclinical
studies on AG119, a compound that inhibits both VEGFR2 and tubulin,
thereby affording antiangiogenic and cytotoxic effects in a single agent.
Structural modifications of AG119 afforded AG321, a unique compound with
four separate mechanisms of action in a single agent. AG321 inhibits
platelet derived growth factor receptor- (PDGFR) and epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), in addition to VEGFR2 and tubulin. AG321 is a
colchicine site binding agent with potency comparable with that of
combretastatin A-4 against bovine brain tubulin assembly. AG321 has
potency comparable with that of erlotinib in tumor cell lines
overexpressing EGFR and potency comparable with those of erlotinib,
PD153035 and DMBI and in cell lines overexpressing PDGFR. It also has
potency comparable with those of sunitinib and semaxinib in cell lines
overexpressing VEGFR2. AG321 reduced tumor size (control: 15.7 2.9
mm3/day; AG321 treated: 5.7 0.7 mm3/day; p Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) inhibitors lead to the reduction of
angiogenesis but are cytostatic, not tumoricidal. These inhibitors have
shown significant promise in the clinic when used in combination with
cytotoxic agents, and several clinical trials with such combinations are
in progress. We have previously reported preclinical studies on AG119, a
compound that inhibits both VEGFR2 and tubulin, thereby affording
antiangiogenic and cytotoxic effects in a single agent. Structural
modifications of AG119 afforded AG321, a unique compound with four
separate mechanisms of action in a single agent. AG321 inhibits platelet
derived growth factor receptor- (PDGFR) and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), in addition to VEGFR2 and tubulin. AG321 is a colchicine
site binding agent with potency comparable with that of combretastatin
A-4 against bovine brain tubulin assembly. AG321 has potency comparable
with that of erlotinib in tumor cell lines overexpressing EGFR and
potency comparable with those of erlotinib, PD153035 and DMBI and in cell
lines overexpressing PDGFR. It also has potency comparable with those of
sunitinib and semaxinib in cell lines overexpressing VEGFR2. AG321
reduced tumor size (control: 15.7 2.9 mm3/day; AG321 treated: 5.7 0.7
mm3/day; p < 0.01 by one way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparisons post
test) and the number of lung metastases in the 4T1 triple negative mouse
breast cancer allograft model and was superior to docetaxel, without
overt systemic toxicity. A range of potential therapies that target EGFR
are currently in development or in clinical trials for the treatment of
glioblastoma. Targeting both VEGFR2 and PDGFR, which are two key
mediators of tumor angiogenesis, increases the antiangiogenic effect even
in the often intractable late stage of solid tumors. Hence, AG321, a
multiple receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor which may also be
effective against EGFR-amplified glioblastoma [AG119 reduced tumor size
and vascularity in vivo in the U251 glioma model]. In summary, AG321 with
antiangiogenic effects via multiple RTK inhibition and cytotoxic effects
via tubulin inhibition in a single entity may delay or prevent tumor cell
resistance, circumvent pharmacokinetic problems that can occur with
multiple agents, avoid drug-drug interactions, be used at lower doses to
alleviate toxicity and be and have reduced toxicity.

