Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms for the inhibition of estrogen receptors by estrogen
related receptor beta and oxysterols


We have previously shown that Estrogen Related Receptor Beta - Short Form
(ERR-SF) inhibits the transcriptional activity of the Estrogen Receptors
Alpha (ER) and Beta (ER). Our lab and others have also shown the
importance of these receptors in prostate cancer (PCa) as well as other
ER positive, hormonally responsive, cancers such as breast and uterine.
We have recently found, via RNA-Seq anlyses, that the overexpression of
ERR-SF in the DU-145 PCa cell line changes the expression of many
oxysterol metabolizing enzymes. These include, for example, CYP27A1
increased 69% and CYP46A1 increased 300% (although with a very low read
number). These enzymes are responsible for the production of
27-hydroxycholesterol (27-OHC) and 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol (24(S)-OHC),
respectively. Interestingly, the enzymes that catabolize these
cholesterol metabolites were: CYP7A1 - not expressed, CYP7B1 - not
expressed, and CYP39A1 which decreased by 63%. We hypothesized, that this
represents two potential mechanisms for the inhibition of ER activity by
ERR-SF. Oxysterol concentrations are increased when ERR-SF is
overexpressed, this will either: 1) inhibit ERs through the known
mechanism of directly binding to and inhibiting ERs, as has been
previously shown for 27-OHC, or 2) inhibit by a novel mechanism in which
oxysterols bind to ERR-SF and increase its ability to bind to and inhibit
ER activities. To test these hypotheses, we used a transcriptional assay
with an Estrogen Response Element driven Luciferase (ERE-Luc) reporter
gene. ERs were expressed independently, or with ERR-SF, and treated with
various oxysterols in the Ishikawa uterine cancer cell line. Using this
assay, we have found that 27-OHC inhibits ER activity with a 4 fold
difference between ER and ER (IC50s = 4M and 1M, respectively). 24(S)-OHC
inhibits ER only, with no effect on ER at concentrations as high as 10M.
Interestingly, 10M 24(S)-OHC increased the growth of Ishikawa cells >20%
within 24hrs treatment under all conditions tested. Unfortunately, due to
the overlap in ERE binding by the ERR and ERs, it was difficult to test
the proposed novel mechanism using the ERE-Luc assay. To address this we
are creating a new FRET based assay to observe the effects of the ligands
on the ERR-ER interaction. We are further confirming the endogenous
concentrations of the 24(S)-OHC and 27-OHC metabolizing enzymes via
qRT-PCR. In conclusion, we have identified a potential molecular
mechanism via oxysterols for the inhibitory action of ERR-SF on the ERs.
This may explain the role of cholesterol metabolites in prostate cancer
progression.

