Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRRM4 and the loss of REST may promote the emergence of the
neuroendocrine /neuronal phenotype in castration resistant prostate cancer


Introduction: Recent findings suggest that neuroendocrine/neuronal (NE)
differentiation may be associated with the development of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Our objective was to
characterize the NE phenotype in CRPC.Methods: Using specimens obtained
at rapid autopsy at the University of Washington, 2 tissue microarrays
were made from (1) 155 metastatic sites from 50 autopsy patients who died
from CRPC and (2) 24 LuCaP prostate cancer xenografts. NE markers,
including Chromogranin A (CHGA), Synaptophysin (SYN), androgen receptor
(AR), and prostate specific antigen (PSA) were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). To characterize the molecular features of the
NE phenotype in CRPC, transcript levels in 78 corresponding metastatic
sites and 24 LuCaP xenografts were determined by hybridization to whole
genome microarrays.Results: Co-expression of CHGA and SYN (by at least
>10% of cells) was observed in 22 of 155 sites (11 sites were AR-). PSA,
a surrogate of AR activity, was absent in all NE CRPC tumors that did not
express AR. Four of the 24 LuCaP xenografts displayed an NE phenotype
(all were AR-). Gene expression data were generated from 78 laser
captured metastases, and 24 LuCaP xenografts. Five metastatic sites were
CHGA+, SYN+ and AR-, and 5 were CHGA+, SYN+ and AR+, 4 LuCaP xenografts
were CHGA+, SYN+ and AR- by IHC. Only CHGA+, SYN+ sites had a NE
transcript signature, with the CHGA+, SYN+ and AR- specimens expressing a
greater number of genes associated with the NE phenotype. In addition, a
decrease in the expression of REST was observed in the 10 CHGA+, SYN+
metastatic sites and LuCaP xenografts. SRRM4 transcript expression was
associated with the NE signature in 5 of the 6 CHGA+, SYN+ patients and
the LuCaP xenografts. Furthermore RT-PCR comparing the epithelial to the
NE LuCaP xenografts correlated the expression of SRRM4 with a splice
variant of REST that lacks the repressor domain and the NE
phenotype.Conclusions: Our data suggest that a) the CRPC NE phenotype can
be defined by CHGA+, SYN+ dual positivity and is more common in CRPC than
historically in hormone sensitive primary disease, b) NE status from
different sites in the same patient can be heterogeneous c) the NE
phenotype is not necessarily associated with the loss of AR activity, and
d) the loss of REST expression or the splicing of REST through the
activity of SRRM4 could promote the NE phenotype in CRPC. These molecular
studies suggest that evolution from hormone sensitive, to castration
resistant on to NE disease involves the loss of REST or the loss of REST
repressor activity due to alternate splicing by SRRM4.

