Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Id2 In the proliferation of glioma-initiating neural
progenitor cells


There are more than 14,000 new cases of malignant high grade glioma
diagnosed each year in the US, and although surgical resection,
radiation, and cytotoxic therapies are available, these current treatment
methods are not curative. Inhibitor of DNA Binding 2 (Id2), a
helix-loop-helix (HLH) protein, functions as a dominant negative
inhibitor of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors and is
highly expressed in glioma. Recent data from our laboratory defines a
critical role for Id2 in the pathogenesis of a subset of glioma known as
proneural glioma. Id2 protein function has been characterized in neural
progenitor cells (NPCs) where it acts to suppress differentiation and
enhance cell cycle progression. These are two key characteristics that
are shared with glioma-derived stem cells. We have identified three
phosphorylation sites on Id2 in proliferating NPCs using mass
spectrometry, and prepared altered Id2 molecules that cannot be
phosphorylated at each of these sites. Id2-/- NPCs expressing WT and
phosphorylation-site-ablated Id2 have been prepared to examine the role
of Id2 phosphorylation in mediating its interactions with binding
partners and in modulating the rate of proteasome-dependent degradation.
We found an increased level of Id2 in NPCs expressing a mutant form of
Id2 that cannot by phosphorylated when compared with NPCs expressing WT
Id2. Moreover, the level of WT Id2 protein decreases when NPCs exit the
cell cycle; however, unphosphorylated Id2 resists this degradation and
exhibits a longer half-life. Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in
cell culture (SILAC) experiments revealed that unphosphorylated Id2
molecules bind significantly less than WT Id2 to several anaphase
promoting complex (APC) subunits. These findings suggested a possible
mechanism for phosphorylation-dependent proteasome-mediated degradation
of Id2 in NPCs. Understanding the effect of Id2 phosphorylation in
modulating steady state levels of this important protein will inform
future studies designed to identify pathways of interest in the
transformation of NPCs and the malignant progression of NPC-initiated
glioma. This work was supported in part by the Theodora B. Betz
Foundation.

