Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of colorectal cancer cell proliferation is associated
with modulation of Wnt pathway signaling components by Resveratrol


Our previous studies showed that modulation of cell cycle-regulating
genes by Resveratrol (RV) is directly correlated with suppression of
colorectal cancer (CRC) cell proliferation. The Wnt pathway, which
consists of the canonical pathway (CAN) and non-canonical pathways
(N-CAN) is an intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with
cellular processes including proliferation and differentiaion. Some cell
cycle regulating genes are downstream targets of the Wnt pathway. The CAN
utilizes -catenin whereas the N-CAN pathways are activated independent of
-catenin. The CAN and the N-CAN are antagonistic and modulate each
other's activities. Few studies have been conducted to determine the
effect of naturopathic and nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV on
the Wnt pathway in human cancers. The aim of this study was to determine
whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV is related to
modulation of Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n=3) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell proliferation
was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was performed using
commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway gene expression
arrays. RV treatment resulted in a significant decrease of CRC cell
proliferation (52% inhibition; pOur previous studies showed that
modulation of cell cycle-regulating genes by Resveratrol (RV) is directly
correlated with suppression of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell
proliferation. The Wnt pathway, which consists of the canonical pathway
(CAN) and non-canonical pathways (N-CAN) is an intricate ensemble of
signaling components involved with cellular processes including
proliferation and differentiaion. Some cell cycle regulating genes are
downstream targets of the Wnt pathway. The CAN utilizes -catenin whereas
the N-CAN pathways are activated independent of -catenin. The CAN and the
N-CAN are antagonistic and modulate each other's activities. Few studies
have been conducted to determine the effect of naturopathic and
nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV on the Wnt pathway in human
cancers. The aim of this study was to determine whether suppression of
CRC cell proliferation by RV is related to modulation of Wnt pathway
components. CRC cells derived from surgical specimens (n=3) were treated
with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell proliferation was determined using MTS
assay and gene expression was performed using commercially available
quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway gene expression arrays. RV treatment
resulted in a significant decrease of CRC cell proliferation (52%
inhibition; p<0.005) compared to untreated cells. The suppression of CRC
cell proliferation by RV was correlated with modulation of both CAN and
N-CAN components. The CAN components modulated significantly (pOur
previous studies showed that modulation of cell cycle-regulating genes by
Resveratrol (RV) is directly correlated with suppression of colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell proliferation. The Wnt pathway, which consists of the
canonical pathway (CAN) and non-canonical pathways (N-CAN) is an
intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with cellular
processes including proliferation and differentiaion. Some cell cycle
regulating genes are downstream targets of the Wnt pathway. The CAN
utilizes -catenin whereas the N-CAN pathways are activated independent of
-catenin. The CAN and the N-CAN are antagonistic and modulate each
other's activities. Few studies have been conducted to determine the
effect of naturopathic and nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV on
the Wnt pathway in human cancers. The aim of this study was to determine
whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV is related to
modulation of Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n=3) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell proliferation
was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was performed using
commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway gene expression
arrays. RV treatment resulted in a significant decrease of CRC cell
proliferation (52% inhibition; p<0.005) compared to untreated cells. The
suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV was correlated with
modulation of both CAN and N-CAN components. The CAN components modulated
significantly (p<0.05 or greater) by RV included ligand 10A (3.6 fold
increase), the receptor frizzled 7 and the transcription factor TCF7L1
(2.2 and 2.6 fold decrease respectively) compared to untreated cells. The
N-CAN components modulated significantly by RV were ligands 7A and 11
(2.9 and 2.5 fold increase respectively), and dishevelled-binding CAN
antagonist NKD1 (2.5 fold increase) relative to untreated CRC cells. This
study demonstrates that RV modulates expression of multiple components of
the CAN and N-CAN pathways in CRC cells. The collective effect appears to
favor N-CAN activation leading to retardation of the CAN pathway. Thus,
upregulation of CAN ligand 10A is expected to be countered by the
observed increase in N-CAN Wnt ligands 7A and 11, as well as CAN
antagonist NKD1. This observation is consistent with our previous
demonstration of the effects of RV on regulation of cell cycle gene
expression in CRC leading to inhibition of cellular proliferation. Given
the excellent tolerance profile of NNS such as RV, the capacity of such
agents to modulate the Wnt pathway and particularly the N-CAN in favor of
inhibition of tumor proliferation, offers the opportunity to investigate
the effects of chronic administration of these agents on tumor growth and
progression in patients.

