Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression and function of CDCA5 in oral squamous cell
carcinoma


Molecular target drugs are used in the treatment of various malignant
tumors. However, the development of molecular targeted therapy for oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is lagging behind other cancers. In this
study, we have attempted to identify an appropriate molecular target for
treatment of patients with OSCC. We determined the gene expression
profiles of human 9 OSCC cell lines and an immortalized non-neoplastic
human keratinocyte cell line by microarray analysis, and then found cell
division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5) as one of genes which were commonly
overexpressed in OSCC cells. CDCA5 was initially identified as substrate
of anaphase-promoting complex and as a regulator of sister chromatid
cohesion in HeLa. In addition, it has been reported that CDCA5 plays a
critical role in human lung carcinogenesis. However, function of CDCA5 in
OSCC remains still unknown. First, we confirmed the overexpression of
CDCA5 in 5 human OSCC cells by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western
blotting. The expression levels of CDCA5 mRNA and protein were markedly
elevated in all human OSCC cell lines compared to a non-neoplastic human
epithelial cell line. Next, we examined the effect of synthetic small
interfering RNAs specific for CDCA5 (siCDCA5) on the growth of human OSCC
cells. RNAi effect of siCDCA5 was confirmed by Western blotting.
Transfection of siCDCA5 suppressed the expression of its target protein
in all types of cells. The growth inhibitory effect of siCDCA5 in OSCC
cells was evaluated by WST-8 assay. Knockdown of CDCA5 significantly
inhibited the growth of OSCC cells in vitro. Subsequently, we analyzed
the influence of siCDCA5 on cell cycle by flow cytometry. Suppression of
CDCA5 resulted in the decrease in percentage of cells in G0/G1 phase and
increase in G2 phase. This indicated that the anti-proliferative effect
of siCDCA5 was due to G2 arrest. Furthermore, we investigated the
clinical significance of CDCA5 expression in OSCC. The expression of
CDCA5 mRNA in tumor and adjacent normal tissues derived from the patient
with OSCC was examined by qRT-PCR. Expression levels of CDCA5 mRNA in the
OSCC tissues were significantly higher than in normal tissues. We also
examined the expression of CDCA5 protein in 80 OSCC cases by
immunohistochemistry with anti-CDCA5 antibodies. Tissue expression of
CDCA5 was divided into high or low group at 50% stained tumor cells,
resulting in 36 cases as high expression and 44 cases as low expression.
We then examined the association of CDCA5 expression with various
clinicopathological parameters of OSCC patients, and found a significant
association between CDCA5 expression levels and pathological staging,
metastasis, and recurrence. These results suggest that CDCA5 functions as
a critical gene supporting the growth of human OSCC cells and targeting
CDCA5 appears a useful therapeutic strategy for the patients with OSCC.

