Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor operational signaling pathways in an Nf1 mutant mouse model
system


Purpose/Objectives: NF1 is recognized as a tumor suppressor, via its role
as a Ras GTPase activating protein. However, the precise mechanisms
critical to tumor development in NF1 patients remain unclear. NF1
heterozygosity confers susceptibility to tumorigenesis, promoted by
genotoxins such as radiation. We mutagenized Nf1 heterozygous mice using
radiation to generate a diverse panel of Nf1 null tumors. Using these
novel reagents we interrogated signaling pathways essential for tumor
development and propagation towards identification of potential targets
for therapeutic approaches.Materials/Methodology: Cell lines were derived
from solid tumors developing after focal irradiation of Nf1 heterozygous
mice. Radiation-induced tumors included mammary carcinomas, squamous
carcinomas, and sarcomas. We employed a high-throughput toxicity screen
of 94 conventional and targeted FDA-approved chemotherapeutics directed
across diverse core cellular signaling pathways. Drug sensitivity
profiles were determined by quantifying cell numbers after a 72 hour drug
exposure, and tumor cell lines, non-transformed wild-type and Nf1 null
MEFs, and mutant Ras-transformed cell lines (added as controls) were
compared. Validation of identified drug sensitivities was performed by
enzyme activity assays, phosphoprotein analysis, and soft-agar colony
formation.Results: Nf1 mutant tumors failed to demonstrate a common drug
sensitivity signature, but instead revealed a heterogeneous pattern of
differential sensitivities, with subgroups clustering independent of
tumor histology. However, radiation-induced Nf1 null tumor lines
exhibited increased sensitivity to inhibition of the Ras-Erk and
PI3K-mTOR axis as compared to non-transformed controls. Enhanced
sensitivity to agents targeting cell cycle and survival pathways was also
observed selectively within the Nf1 null tumor cell lines.Conclusions:
These studies indicate that Nf1 null tumors, even those of the same
histology, do not intrinsically share a signature sensitivity profile to
pharmacologic inhibition. This suggests that therapeutic targeting of
signaling pathways in Nf1 mutant tumors is not likely to be defined
strictly by Nf1 loss alone. Notably, these Nf1 null tumors evidence
varied operational dependence upon PI3K-mTOR and Raf-MEK activity.
Current efforts are directed towards further resolving essential
mediators, with the goal of more precisely defining signaling pathways
which drive progression of the malignant state.

