Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-1 enhanced cell migration involving pluripotent transcription
factor OCT4 in endometriosis


Endometriosis is the eutopic and/or ectopic growth of endometrial
tissues. High levels of TGF- in peritoneal fluid and increased expression
of OCT4 have been well documented in endometriosis. However, the
molecular mechanism between TGF- and OCT4 expression in endometriosis
still remains largely unknown. In this study, we examined the roles of
OCT4 in TGF--induced endometrial cell migration and the progression of
human ectopic endometriosis. We analyzed the plasma levels of TGF- (n =
80) and gene expression levels of TGF-R1 in patient tissues (n = 60) by
an ELISA assay and quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The serum TGF- and
tissue TGF-R1 expressions were significantly increased in the ectopic
endometriotic tissues (n = 54, 29 for adenomyosis tissues and 25 for
chocolate cysts) comparing with the normal endometrium (n = 5). The TGFR1
transcriptional level in endometriotic tissues was positively correlated
with expressions of OCT4 and genes associated with cell migration, such
as VIMENTIN, TWIST, SNAIL and SLUG. TGF- dose-dependently increased the
OCT4 expression both in gene and protein levels in human endometriotic
stromal cells and, at a less intensity, in HEC1A endometrial carcinoma
cell line. Additionally, TGF-increased the expression of
migration-associated genes and proteins (SNAIL and N-CAD)
dose-dependently both in gene and protein levels in human endometriotic
stromal cells. Knockdown of OCT4 significantly suppressed the
TGF--induced the expressions of migration-associated genes and proteins
(N-CAD and SNAIL), and promoted the migration of endometrial cells as
evidenced by wound-closure and transwell assays. Conclusions:
TGF-,TGF-RI, and OCT4 are significantly upregulated in human ectopic
endometriotic tissues. The significant OCT4 expression may be involved in
the pathology of ectopic endometrial growth through TGF--induced
migration of endometrial cells.

