Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biological basis of aggressive phenotype in African-American
prostate cancer cell line


Introduction: It is well established that African American men (AAM) with
prostate cancer (PC) present more frequently with higher grade tumors
compared to Caucasians. While the disparity is likely multifactorial, the
biological basis is perhaps the strongest contender. Protein kinase D1
(PKD1) is a tumor and metastasis suppressor in PC. Down regulation of
PKD1 was shown to increased cell proliferation, migration and metastasis
in PC. Aim and experimental procedure: In order to address the
fundamental question whether PC in AAM is inherently aggressive, we
compared the proliferation, invasion and the expression of PKD1-centered
signaling based 13-biomarker panel in primary and metastatic AAM cell
lines (E006AA and MDApca2b) to benign (RWPE) and metastatic Caucasian
cell lines (LNCaP and C4-2) using Western blot within different cell
compartments. The results were further validated by RT-PCR and
immunofluoroscent staining. Results: The proliferation, viability and
invasion assays showed that E006AA cells proliferate and invade matrigel
significantly more rapidly than metastatic LNCaP and MDAPca2b cells. The
13-biomarker panel analysis showed PKD1-centered dysregulaiton in AAM
prostate cancer cell lines. Although E006AA is a primary PC cell line,
PKD1 was down regulated similar to more aggressive C4-2 cells. Nuclear
androgen receptor (AR), which shows active AR, was higher in LNCaP and
MD2Pca2b; Vimentin showed higher expression in C4-2 and E006AA.
Localization of E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin, T120 phosphorylated - Catenin,
MMP-2 and S11 phosphorylated snail in MD2Pca2b was similar to LNCaP cells
but different to C4-2 and E006AA. Conclusion: Our Data demonstrates that
the dysregulaiton of PKD1-centered signaling occurs in primary AAM
prostate cancer cell line E006AA is akin to other metastatic PC cell
lines suggesting an inherently aggressive nature of PC in
AAM.Acknowledgment: Authors would like to thank Dr. Shahriar Koochekpour
(Roswell park institute, University at Buffalo,State University of
NewYork) for his kind gift E006AA cell line.

