Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical models for the development of HER2-specific T-cell
therapy


The adoptive transfer of autologous, tumor-reactive T cells to treat
cancer patients is a promising tool in immunotherapy. One of our clinical
goals is the adoptive transfer of autologous T cells transduced with a
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-directed TCR in patients
with advanced breast cancer. We successfully established cytotoxic T-cell
clones and CD8+ T cells transduced with a TCR specific for the tumor and
self-antigen HER2 and tested their lytic capability in vitro.Since HER2
is a self antigen that is not only expressed by malignant cells but also
in normal tissue, e.g. the heart, we tested the recognition of normal
HER2+-cell lines by HER2-directed T cells in vitro. For this purpose
HER2-directed CD8+ T cells were used to analyze the recognition and lysis
of HLA-A2+ cardiomyocyte cell lines in IFN-ELISA and
chromium-release-assay. Compared to HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cell lines recognition of the cardiomyocytes by HER2-directed T cells was
much lower. From these data we hypothesize that there might be a
therapeutic window, which may allow the treatment with HER2-directed T
cells without having any unwanted side effects, like cardiac
dysfunction.To further analyse this, we are establishing a mouse model
using HLA-A2-transgenic NOD/SCID-HHDII mice. We injected a human breast
cancer cell line s.c. into NOD/SCID-HHDII mice, waited until a solid
tumor had been established, and evaluated the responsiveness of tumor
cells towards adoptive T cell transfer. Our data show an improvement in
tumor growth inhibition after adoptive T cell transfer and IL-15
treatment; however, no significant tumor reduction was observed yet.
Furthermore, in the NOD/SCID-HHDII mice we are able to detect potential
autoimmune reactions. Subsequent experiments will analyze the combination
therapy of transferred HER2-directed T cells with HER2-directed antibody
treatment (Trastuzumab and/or Pertuzumab) in order to increase the
anti-tumor response. These pre-clinical studies, as well as the in vitro
tests, are important for the evaluation of possible unwanted side effects
after adoptive transfer of TCR-transduced T cells specific for
self-antigens like HER2.

