Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between plasma tissue factor and tumor volume: A novel
sensitive method for detecting plasma tissue factor


Currently, much accumulated clinical evidence indicates that abnormal
blood coagulation occurs in patients with various cancers. Tissue factor
(TF) is an initiation factor of the extrinsic coagulation pathway, and
plays a major role in blood coagulation. Increased blood levels of TF may
be associated with a higher incidence of thrombotic complications. TF
occurs in three functional forms: full-length TF (flTF), which is located
in the cellular membrane as a transmembrane glycoprotein, micro-particles
TF (MPsTF), which is released as microvesicles from cells, and
alternatively spliced TF (asTF), which lacks a transmembrane domain and
is released into the extracellular space. TF overexpression has been
detected in several solid tumor cells. Especially in one study, TF was
detected in 340 of 408 (83%) of pancreatic cancer tissue specimens. High
TF expression has been reported to be associated with a poor prognosis in
cancer patients. In the present study, we developed a new immunoassay
system for human TF.We prepared a model of pancreatic cancer by
subcutaneous implantation of the high TF-expressing human pancreatic
cancer cell line BxPC-3 (n=10). Rat anti-human TF monoclonal antibody
(anti-hTF mAb) clones 1006 and 1849 were prepared in our laboratory and
used for our new sandwich ELISA system; anti-hTF mAb clone 1849
conjugated to magnetic beads for capturing, and anti-hTF mAb clone 1006
used for detecting antibody. In mice bearing subcutaneous tumors, the
plasma and urinary TF concentrations before and after tumor resection
were evaluated. The associations between tumor growth and the plasma and
urinary TF concentrations were also evaluated.The ELISA system appeared
to detect both the BxPC-3 cell lysate and the released TF present in the
BxPC-3-conditioned medium. The anti-hTF mAb clone 1849 did not
cross-react with mouse TF. Therefore, the novel sensitive human TF
detection system specifically detected tumor-derived TF.Plasma TF
increased with increase of the tumor volume. To evaluate the association
between the tumor volume and plasma TF, we collected blood and urine
every 10 days after the tumor inoculation. Plasma TF values, shown as
meansSD, were 52163 pg/mL at 10 days, 161444 pg/mL at 20 days, and 380843
pg/mL at 30 days after the inoculation. In the case of BxPC-3 tumor
resection, the plasma TF was 2.03.0 pg/mL at 10 days after the resection.
There was a positive correlation between the tumor volume of BxPC-3 and
the plasma TF (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient, rs=0.555,
P=0.0005). The TF forms detected in the mice bearing BxPC-3 xenografts
were MPsTF and asTF, as determined by western blotting. On the other
hand, urinary TF values were lower than the detection limit in this
study.Plasma TF was positively associated with the subcutaneous tumor
volume of BxPC-3. Thus, plasma TF may be useful as a tumor marker. We
propose to apply our novel sensitive human TF detection system to human
plasma samples.

