Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of common and unique epigenetic signatures of
chronic hepatitis infection and alcohol abuse in human liver disease


Dysregulation of the intrinsic DNA methylation landscape is a ubiquitous
feature of human carcinogenesis, manifested by global hypomethylation and
promoter-specific hypermethylation, ultimately resulting in genome
instability and tumor suppressor gene silencing, respectively.
Alterations in DNA methylation are particularly apparent in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) which afflicts roughly 750,000 new
patients each year [1]. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that a variety
of tumor suppressor genes (e.g. p53, E-cadherin) are hypermethylated and
silenced in HCC [2-4]. Importantly, HCC is accompanied by the
premalignant stage of cirrhosis in 80% of cases. One major roadblock to
understanding the methylome in HCC is the presence of multiple etiologies
such as Hepatitis C virus (HCV), Hepatitis B virus (HBV), and chronic
alcoholism. Therefore, we performed genome-wide methylation profiling to
dissect the methylation patterns of more than 170 primary liver samples
to stratify etiologic and stage-specific changes in the DNA methylation
landscape. Our results profile the DNA methylation landscape across
normal, cirrhotic, and HCC livers in the largest study of its kind to
date. We unveil distinct locus-specific and large-scale effects of HCV,
HBV, and chronic alcoholism in hepatocarcinogenesis. Furthermore,
analysis indicates a specific methylation profile for individual
etiologies as well as conserved patterns throughout cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Our study demonstrates that each etiology
contains potential biomarkers and targets for downstream clinical
therapeutics. This study is our first step toward defining the epigenome
in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma and will be combined with
future genomic and epimutational data (e.g. transcription, histone
modifications, miRNA) to determine the true extent and interplay between
epigenetic marks across different stages of liver cancer. Overall, this
research has the potential to improve our understanding of epigenetics
and result in diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic epigenetic
signatures in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, which are expected
to allow for more timely and efficient detection of disease.1. Jemal, A.,
et al., Global cancer statistics. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians,
2011. 61(2): p. 69-90.2. Tischoff, I. and A. Tannapfe, DNA methylation in
hepatocellular carcinoma. World journal of gastroenterology : WJG, 2008.
14(11): p. 1741-8.3. Calvisi, D.F., et al., Mechanistic and prognostic
significance of aberrant methylation in the molecular pathogenesis of
human hepatocellular carcinoma. The Journal of clinical investigation,
2007. 117(9): p. 2713-22.4. Lambert, M.P., et al., Aberrant DNA
methylation distinguishes hepatocellular carcinoma associated with HBV
and HCV infection and alcohol intake. Journal of hepatology, 2011. 54(4):
p. 705-15.

