Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Context specific effects of the BRAFV600E mutation on
hematopoiesis identifies novel models of BRAF mutant hematopoietic
disorders


BRAFV600E mutations have recently been identified in nearly 100% of
patients with the chronic lymphoproliferative disorder hairy cell
leukemia (HCL), as well as a small percentage of patients with the plasma
cell malignancy multiple myeloma. Despite extensive knowledge regarding
the functional effects of BRAFV600E expression in epithelial tissues,
very little is understood about the role of the BRAFV600E mutation in
hematopoietic transformation. We therefore utilized a conditional
BRafV600E murine model crossed with Mx1-cre, Vav-cre, Cd19-cre, and
C1-cre transgenic mice to delineate the effects of mutant BRaf expression
in pre-natal and post-natal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
(HSPCs), B-lineage cells, and germinal center B cells respectively. We
also investigated the origin of the BRAFV600E mutation in HCL patient
bone marrow samples using prospective isolation of sorted HSPC
populations followed by quantitative sequencing for the BRAFV600E
mutation.Surprisingly, we identified the presence of the BRAFV600E
mutation in long-term hematopoietic stem cells of HCL patients, and we
also observed marked alterations in HSPC frequencies. Consistent with the
human genetic data, expression of BRafV600E in HSPCs of mice resulted in
a lethal transplantable hematopoietic disorder characterized by
splenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased circulating soluble
CD25, and increased clonogenic capacity of B-lineage cells- all classic
features of human HCL. In contrast, restricting expression of BRafV600E
to B-lineage cells did not result in disease even up to 1.5 years of
age.We next assessed the effects of the BRafV600E mutation on HSPC
self-renewal and lineage specification. We plated whole BM cells from
Mx1-cre BRafV600E mice in methylcellulose containing myeloid/erythroid
cytokines or lymphopoietic cytokes (IL-7). BRafV600E cells demonstrated
impaired colony formation in myeloid/erythroid conditions. However,
BRafV600E HSPCs exhibited limitless replating capacity when plated in the
presence of IL-7, indicating that the BRAF mutation induces aberrant B
lineage cell self-renewal. A clear competitive advantage was also seen
with competitive transplantation of BRafV600E BM cells, identifying an
increase in HSPC self-renewal associated with the BRAF mutation.Data from
the murine models studied here and characterization of the BM compartment
in HCL patients suggest that the cytopenias seen in HCL patients are due
in part to HSPC-intrinsic effects of the BRAFV600E mutation on
erythropoiesis, megakarypoiesis, and myelopoiesis. Moreover, these data
suggest that the use of therapies targeting MAP-kinase signaling in HCL
may lead to durable remissions not only through effects on mature
leukemic cells, but also through targeted inhibition of signaling and
survival in mutant HSPCs.

