Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase is critical for the
growth and migration of triple negative breast cancer cells


Background: Breast cancer constitutes 30% of all new cancer cases in
women. Despite steady decrease in breast cancer mortality, the lack of
therapeutic targets is still a major problem. While the hormone-receptor
positive (ER+) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive
(HER2+) breast cancers respond to current targeted therapies, no targeted
therapy is available for the treatment of triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC), which lacks the expression of ER alpha (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR), and HER2-receptor. Hence, there is an urgent need for
effective targets against this sub-type of breast cancer. Previous
studies in our laboratory used gene expression profiling of human breast
cancers to identify kinases overexpressed in ER-negative breast cancers.
One of these highly expressed kinases is the maternal embryonic
leucine-zipper kinase (MELK). MELK is a serine/threonine protein kinase
known to have a role in cell cycle progression, apoptosis and DNA repair.
The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that MELK is
required for the growth and migration of TNBC.Methods: RNA and protein
was isolated from a panel of TNBC and ER-positive breast cancer cell
lines and MELK expression was quantified by qPCR and immunoblotting. To
determine whether MELK regulates cell growth, ER-positive and TNBC cell
lines were transfected with siRNA targeting MELK and cell number was
measured by manual counting. Anchorage-independent growth was measured
using soft agar assays. Effect on migration and invasion was determined
using Boyden Chamber assays. Immunostaining with actin-phalloidin was
performed on MELK knockdown cells to determine effect of MELK loss on the
cytoskeleton.Results: MELK mRNA and protein levels were significantly
higher in TNBC cell lines compared to ER-positive breast cancers.
Knockdown of MELK suppressed growth (50% growth inhibition) in six TNBC
cell lines but had no effect on growth of six ER positive cell lines.
Colony formation was also greatly reduced in TNBC cell lines but was not
affected in ER positive cell lines upon siRNA knockdown of MELK. In
addition, knockdown of MELK reduced migration of three TNBC cell lines
(MDAMB231, MDAMB468 and Hcc70) but had no effect on the ER-positive cell
line (MCF7). Decreased staining of actin filaments was observed in cell
lines where migration was reduced upon MELK knockdown suggesting a role
of MELK in formation of actin cytoskeleton. Current studies are focused
on understanding how MELK regulates the cell growth and migration in
TNBC. Conclusions: MELK is an important growth regulator of TNBC, but not
of ER positive breast cancers. Our results indicate that MELK promotes
cell migration in TNBC cells. These findings suggest that MELK is a
promising target for the treatment of TNBC. Supported by a Susan G. Komen
for the Cure Promise Grant (KG081694), and the John Charles Cain Award.

