Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the role of metabolic reprogramming in breast cancer
progression and metastasis


Background: The emergence of metastatic breast cancer is the most deadly
aspect of the disease and once it has spread from the primary site, it is
largely incurable. Important metabolic changes have been correlated with
breast cancer progression and acquisition of the metastatic phenotype.
One prominent example includes the well-established Warburg effect, which
stipulates that cancer cells preferentially utilize rapid glycolytic
metabolism over mitochondrial respiration to produce energy. Such a
metabolic shift ensures that cancer cells can meet the bioenergetics and
biosynthetic demands associated with increased proliferation.Objectives:
The energetic requirements of individual cancer cells will greatly vary
as the tumor grows and acquires malignant characteristics. The metabolic
demands during tumor initiation will differ from those that occur during
tumor growth at the primary site and dissemination to distant metastatic
sites. Therefore, we hypothesize that distinct metabolic signatures are
associated with each one of these steps and that a better
characterization of these transitions, as well as the key regulators
governing this process, will help identifying potential therapeutic
targets.Results: Using a series of mouse mammary cancer cells derived
from a spontaneous mammary tumor, which includes 67NR
(tumorigenic/non-metastatic), 66cl4 (tumorigenic/lung metastatic) and 4T1
(tumorigenic/metastatic to multiple sites), we examined changes in
several parameters of cellular metabolism that could be associated with
different stages of tumor progression. Using mass spectrometry, we
assessed the uptake and metabolic flux of labeled glucose through the
cellular metabolic pathways. Our results suggest that there is a further
shift towards a Warburg-like phenotype as tumor cells acquire aggressive
characteristics. Using an in vivo selection approach on the 4T1 breast
cancer cells, we have established subpopulations that aggressively form
liver metastases. Glucose tracing experiments reveal an accumulation of
lactate at the expense of reduced allocation of glucose towards citrate
production suggesting that these cells have a further increased
glycolytic phenotypes compared to the 4T1 parental cells. These results
raise the possibility that unique metabolic processes and checkpoints are
engaged in metastatic populations that contribute to their metastatic
ability. PDK1 is an enzyme that prevents the uptake of pyruvate into the
TCA cycle. We show that PDK1 is upregulated with the increase in
metastatic potential. This has led us to hypothesize that the
Warburg-like phenotype observed is mediated by a PDK1-induced switch
favouring glycolysis. We demonstrate that PDK1 is required to form liver
metastases in vivo following splenic injections. Ongoing experiments are
being pursued to uncover the mechanism by which PDK1 is regulated and how
it influences the metastatic process.

