Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of MET overcomes invasive resistance to Bevacizumab and
prolongs survival in orthotopic mouse models of glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumor. Despite
recent therapeutic improvements, the median overall survival remains
poor. Due to its high grade of vascularity, GBM is an ideal candidate for
anti-angiogenic therapy. In 2009, US Food and Drug Administration granted
accelerated approval for Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody
directed against VEGF-A, for patients with recurrent disease. Its use in
newly diagnosed GBM is currently being evaluated. In the recurrent
setting, Bevacizumab provides a transient improvement in PFS that
unfortunately does not translate into increased OS. In fact, most tumors
become resistant to Bevacizumab and patients invariably experience tumor
regrowth. Moreover, a large number of recurrent tumors display an
infiltrative and invasive phenotype, thus leading to extremely aggressive
tumor growth. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying invasive
resistance to Bevacizumab represents a key step towards the development
of improved therapeutic strategies for GBM. We hypothesized that
Bevacizumab-induced tumor hypoxia could be responsible for the activation
of pro-invasive pathways. We tested this hypothesis using different human
GBM cell lines, both in vitro and in orthotopic mouse models of GBM. In
vitro, hypoxia promoted increased expression of MET, the high affinity
receptor for Hepatocyte Growth Factor(HGF), in all GBM cells analyzed.
Increased MET expression resulted in higher sensitivity to HGF
stimulation and in enhanced invasiveness. Higher MET levels were not due
to transcriptional activation of c-met, but rather to
post-transcriptional redistribution of the MET protein from the cytoplasm
to the plasma membrane. In vivo, Bevacizumab did marginally improve
survival of mice implanted orthotopically with human GBM tumors, but
exacerbated tumor hypoxia and resulted in MET activation. Histological
analysis of Bevacizumab-treated tumors revealed a highly invasive and
infiltrative phenotype. Combined treatment with Bevacizumab and
JNJ-38877605, a highly selective, orally available small molecule MET
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, significantly prolonged mouse survival
compared to both placebo and Bevacizumab alone. Histological examination
showed no infiltrative phenotype in the combined treatment arm. Treatment
with JNJ-38877605 alone also improved mouse survival in both tumors
displaying HGF-MET autocrine stimulation (implanted in nude mice) and in
tumors requiring paracrine HGF stimulation (implanted in human HGF
knock-in SCID mice). These results unveil a new mechanism by which GBM
may become resistant to Bevacizumab, generating proof-of-concept for
conducting clinical trials using angiogenesis inhibitors in combination
with MET inhibitors.

