Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A breakthrough in application of a drug delivery nanoparticle
system for therapy and diagnosis of solid tumor


Introduction:Nanoparticle systems are usually designed to deliver the
incorporated molecular to tumors. However, we found an interesting
breakthrough in conducting the super carbonate apatite (sCA)
nanoparticles itself. So far we have introduced the sCA as an in vivo pH
sensitive delivery system of doxorubicin (PLoS ONE 8(4): e60428. 2013) or
siRNA, which simply consist of inorganic ions and quickly accumulate
specifically in tumors yet yield no serious adverse events in mice and
monkeys. Intravenously administered sCA-siRNA markedly accumulated in the
tumor cells at 90 min and survivin-siRNA delivered by sCA significantly
inhibited in vivo tumor growth, compared with the two other in vivo
commercially available delivery reagents, Invivofectamine 2.0 and
Atelocollagen. In this study, we confirmed a unique characteristic of sCA
itself, not as a drug delivery system. Empty sCA alone markedly enhanced
the uptake of low molecular chemicals into tumor cells in vitro and in
vivo.Methods:Doxorubicin (DXR), fluorouracil (5-FU), oxaliplatin (L-OHP)
and indocyanine green (ICG) are used as low molecular chemicals. Cellular
uptake of doxorubicin was analyzed by flow cytometry using a BD FACS Aria
II instrument (BD Biosciences). Cell viability was examined by WST-8
assay (Dojindo). As for the in vivo tumor imaging assay, sCA and ICG were
simultaneously administered via the separate routes to the mice bearing
colon cancer HT29; sCA was administered i.v. (intravenously) and ICG was
administered i.p. (intraperitoneally). Mice were imaged under anesthesia
using IVIS (PerkinElmer) for ex vivo and in vivo imaging.Results and
Discussions:Empty sCA itself enhanced the uptake and cytotoxic effect of
anti-cancer agents in vitro, although sCA itself was not toxic. The flow
cytometric analysis showed the mean florescence index (MFI: 2186) of the
cells, first treated with sCA for 24 h and then treated with DXR for
another 24 h, was higher than the MFI (1684) of the cells directly
treated with DXR for 24 h. The IC50 (M; mean SD) of 5-FU and L-OHP in
colon cancer HCT116 were 47.6 10.0 and 31.3 2.2, whereas the IC50 of both
drugs in the sCA pre-treated cells for 24 h were 11.7 2.0 and 3.70 1.1,
respectively. Furthermore, the empty sCA itself also improved the
efficacy of in vivo tumor imaging by ICG, even when ICG and sCA were
administered through the separate routes; sCA was administered i.v. and
ICG was administered i.p.. We should mention that we had not been able to
incorporate ICG into sCA nanoparticles before this experiment. Time
course studies showed that ICG levels in tumors with treatment of sCA
plus ICG were significantly higher throughout the examined time points
than those treated with ICG alone (P = 0.0142 for 4 h, P = 0.0139 for 8
h, P = 0.0433 for 12 h, P = 0.0304 for 24 and 48 h).Conclusion:Our data
suggest that sCA itself, while designed as an in vivo delivery device,
can facilitate entrance of low molecular chemicals into tumor cells in
vitro and in vivo.

