Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular reprogramming in high-risk progressive neuroblastoma


High risk disease in infants with neuroblastoma significantly contributes
to the pediatric cancer death. We investigated the molecular
reprogramming in neuroblastoma cells that drives favorable neuroblastoma
to aggressive disease. For this, multi-site aggressive tumors from
animals that received parental (SH-SY5Y) cell xenotransplantation were
assayed and compared to the animals with subtle non-metastatic
xenografts. Establishment of highly malignant neuroblastoma cell line
(NBP4) and its comparative (with SH-SY5Y) cytogenetic/phenotypic
physiognomies were reported elsewhere. Ex vivo whole genome gene
expression identified a total of 33 genes upregulated and another 33
genes downregulated (>40 fold change) in NBP4 cells as opposed to
parental SH-SY5Y cells. QPCR analysis revealed a conforming upregulation
of SEMA3D, MEGF10, GRB10 and suppression of RD3 in multi-site aggressive
tumors. Tissue microarray (72 core) constructed with aggressive multiple
tumors and non-progressive controls coupled with immunohistochemistry
showed robust levels of SEMA3D, GRB10, MEGF10 and complete loss of KCNQ2,
KRTAP1-1 and RD3. Consistently, translational modifications of SEMA3D,
GRB10, MEGF10, KCNQ2 and RD3 in multi-site aggressive tumors were
validated with immunoblotting. More importantly, selective knockdown of
KCNQ2 or KRTAP1-1 in parental SH-SY5Y cells robustly modified the
cellular phenotype and significantly increased the tumorosphere
formation. Conversely, discrete muting of GRB10, KIAA2022, MEGF10 or
SEMA3D ex vivo (in aggressive NBP4 cells) endorsed the cellular
differentiation, adherence and resulted in complete regulation of
tumorosphere formation. Together, these data suggests that the milieu
based molecular reprograming of the neuroblastoma cells drives the
development of high-risk disease and further implies that GRB10,
KIAA2022, MEGF10, SEMA3D, RD3 and KCNQ2 may concert and orchestrate the
disease progression. Signal flow-through and molecular driver(s) that
orchestrate favorable to high-risk disease are yet to be understood and
are currently in progress in our laboratory.

