Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel aspirin based selenium compounds as therapy against
pancreatic cancer


Inflammation plays an important role in tumor growth promotion and has
been linked to several human cancers. Evidences have demonstrated that
inflammation has a high correlation with pancreatic cancer (PC) growth
and promotion. An important mediator of inflammatory process is
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) protein, which has been shown to be
over-expressed in PC. Another major pathway which is crucial for
inflammatory responses, cell proliferation, and resistance to apoptosis
is the nuclear factor B (NF-B) pathway. It has been demonstrated that
NF-B pathway is responsible for drug resistance in PC. Aspirin, a
well-known non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), has been shown
to have anti-cancer effects against PC. The mechanism of action of
aspirin against PC is partially dependent on COX inhibition, as well as
COX independent mechanism. Through extensive structure-activity
relationship studies on Se-NSAID compounds, we have recently identified
two Se-Aspirin compounds, ASD-43 and ASD-49, designed by incorporating
selenium (Se) into salicylic acid structure, rendering it lethal to
cancer cells. Previously, we had reported that Se-aspirin hybrid
compounds were effective in different cancers, including PC. In this
study we sought to evaluate the mechanism of action of these compounds in
inhibiting the growth of PC. Since aspirin induces its effect partially
by inhibiting COX, we hypothesized that these agents (ASD-43 and ASD-49)
showed their anti-cancer activity by potently inhibiting COX activity as
well as by modulating the inflammatory NF-B pathway. Our studies, in
Panc-1 cells, have shown that both ASD-43 and ASD-49 inhibited the
degradation of IB-alpha, which inhibits NF-B from going into the nucleus,
in presence of tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Upon treatment with ASD-43
and ASD-49, NF-B regulated proteins like survivin and Bcl-xL expression
was down regulated. Furthermore, a dose dependent induction of apoptosis
in these cells was detected by activation of caspase-3 and PARP cleavage.
Taken together, these results suggest that both ASD-43 and ASD-49 may
represent potentially promising therapeutic agents for PC that induce
apoptosis via the inhibition of COX and NF-B pathways. Detailed
investigations regarding the efficacy and mechanism of action of these
compounds will be presented.

