Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3-dimensional tumoroid model made up of lung cancer cells,
fibroblasts, and endothelial cells is predictive of drug activity in
animal models


Lung cancer is a very heterogeneous type of cancer. Among various
subtypes, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) comprises about 80 % of all
cases, and the KRAS mutant subtype, has a generally poor prognosis and
response to chemotherapy or targeted therapeutics. There is an urgent
unmet medical need for development of effective treatments.Anticancer
drugs are often selected based on studies performed on adherent cultures
of tumor cells where the cells grow in two dimensional monolayers.
However, tumors grow in 3 dimensions and are not composed exclusively of
malignant cells, but of a mixture of cancer cells and stromal cells
embedded in an extracellular matrix. These interactions involve a complex
mechanical and biochemical interplay that is missed when cells are
cultured in classical monolayer-based models. NSCLC 3-D heterotypic
models that preserve epithelial and stroma cell interactions in a
well-defined 3-D microenvironment should more accurately identify drug
candidates for lung cancer treatment.We developed a 3-D heterotypic in
vitro lung tumor model that recapitulates the human tumor
microenvironment and is useful for selection of novel anticancer drugs.
This in vitro 3-D KRAS mutant NSCLC model includes H358 epithelial cancer
cells, stromal cell types such as lung cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs), and microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs) cultured on a
relevant cellular substrate component such as collagen type I. Each cell
type was fluorescently labeled and the cultures grew to form what we
named a tumoroid structure. The tumoroid is a palpable 2 mm3, spheric,
dense structure that resembles the architecture of a human lung tumor and
has features such as a capillary-like vasculature structure and areas of
epithelial/stromal interaction as confirmed by microscopy and H&E
staining. This model was used to test agents impacting known pathways in
the tumor and stromal microenvironment to determine their effect on
tumoroid viability and apoptosis. Test compounds included a DR5 agonistic
monoclonal antibody, CNTO 95 (pan v integrin monoclonal antibody),
Cetuximab (EGFR monoclonal antibody) and Bevacizumab (VEGF monoclonal
antibody). Cetuximab, CNTO 95, and DR5 significantly inhibited H358
tumoroid viability, and Bevacizumab disrupted the tumoroid capillary-like
structures. Conversely, Cetuximab and CNTO 95 did not inhibit H358 cell
viability when grown in 2-D cultures and Bevacizumab did not have an
impact on H358 cells grown on plastic. However, previous publications
have shown that Cetuximab and Bevacizumab inhibit H358 tumor growth in
animal models. The results suggest that the in vitro tumoroid model is
more predictive of the activity seen in animal models than 2-D cell
culture techniques. The tumoroid model may therefore be useful for
anticipating the effectiveness of new drugs in vivo and could reduce the
need for evaluating numerous compounds in animal models.

