Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1 as a potential novel
therapeutic target for head and neck cancer


Background: Protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) are a class of
histone modifiers that have recently been reported to be mutated,
amplified and overexpressed in a variety of cancers and are emerging as
attractive targets for drug development. Squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck (SCCHN) is a common malignancy with a poor prognosis.
Recently, we found that WHSC1, a protein methyltransferase of the NSD
family of PKMTs (NSD1, WHSC1/NSD2, WHSC1L1/NSD3), is overexpressed in 75%
of SCCHN patients. In addition, the TCGA project recently reported that
the NSD-family of PKMTs is altered in 26% of SCCHN patients in a mutually
exclusive pattern. Given the above and the fact that an upcoming
WHSC1-inhibitor is under development, we decided to further investigate
the role of WHSC1 as a mediator of oncogenesis and thus as a potential
novel therapeutic target for SCCHN.Methods: Cytotoxicity assays (MTTs)
were performed in one HPV-positive and 3 HPV-negative SCCHN cell lines
using WHSC1-specific siRNAs. Annexin V assays were performed to evaluate
whether cell death was mediated through apoptosis. Cell cycle analysis by
flow cytometry was also performed. Immunohistochemistry for WHSC1 and
H3K36me2 was conducted in a cohort of 123 patients with SCCHN. To
identify downstream targets of WHSC1, cDNA microarrays were conducted in
a loss-of-function SCCHN cell line. ChIP assays were performed to assess
transcriptional downstream targets directly regulated by WHSC1.
Immunoprecipitation assays and mass spectrometry analysis were conducted
and candidate substrates were further characterized by in vitro
methyltransferase assay.Results: Knockdown of WHSC1 with WHSC1-specific
siRNAs caused significant growth suppression in 4 SCCHN cell lines. Cell
death was mediated partially through induction of apoptosis, as evidence
by an increase of sub-G1 and annexin V-positive cells. Cell cycle
analysis also revealed a significant decrease in the S-phase cells.
Survival correlations of WHSC1 in a cohort of 123 SCCHN patients is
currently underway. cDNA microarray analysis revealed that knockdown of
WHSC1 in a SCCHN cell line was associated with downregulation of genes
involved in cellular differentiation, apoptosis and mitosis, including
NEK7, MAPK8 and HIPK3, which were validated with qPCR. NEK7 was further
validated to be downregulated at the protein level after WHSC1 knockdown.
ChIP assay for NEK7 revealed that WHSC1 directly binds to four different
gene body regions of NEK7.Conclusions: Based on these data, it is
possible that WHSC1 may function as a driver of oncogenesis in SCCHN, and
could thus serve as a novel therapeutic target for this disease. With a
WHSC1-inhibitor already under development, advancing our knowledge of the
function of WHSC1 and the other NSD-PKMTs in SCCHN and other cancer types
with NSD-aberrancies could accelerate the introduction of relevant
inhibitors in clinical trials.

