Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chitinase-3-like-1 protein expression associated with pulmonary
inflammation accelerates metastasis to the lung


Disseminated metastasis accounts for majority of breast cancer deaths.
Recently, elevated serum levels of a glycoprotein known as
chitinase-3-like-1 protein (CHI3L1) has been correlated with poor
prognosis and shorter survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
We found that there are elevated levels of CHI3L1 in plasma of mammary
tumor-bearing mice. However, the biological and physiological functions
of CHI3L1 are still unclear. We previously found that CHI3L1 has an
inhibitory role on the expression of interferon-gamma, and in
up-regulation of pro-inflammatory mediators such MCP-1, IL-8 and MMP-9
all of which contribute towards tumor growth and metastasis. In
determining the cause of high levels of CHI3L1 in plasma, we found that
in addition to tumor cells, splenic macrophages and more interestingly
pulmonary macrophages from mammary tumor bearers secrete high levels of
CHI3L1. Additionally, allergic mice also expressed higher levels of
CHI3L1 in circulation and lung tissue. More specifically, CD11b+Ly6C+
cells from the lungs of allergic mice produced higher amounts of CHI3L1
compared to control mice. We have previously established that pulmonary
myeloid cells through their production of CHI3L1 set up the proper
microenvironment for growth of incoming mammary tumor cells. Thus, we
hyphothesize that CHI3L1 levels in the lungs of mice with allergic
pulmonary inflammation could accelerate metatstasis. To understand the
role of CHI3L1 in accelerating pulmonary metastasis, pulmonary
inflammation was induced by sensitization with ragweed allergen. Allergic
mice implanted with either 4T1 or 67NR mammary tumors had a 5-fold
increase in tumor volume, and formation of metastatic foci in their lungs
compared to control mammary tumor bearers. Further, allergic mice showed
accelerated tumor growth and shorter survival. In contrast, CHI3L1 null
mice showed decreased tumor volume and metastasis, and increased survival
compared to control mice. In vivo administration of chitin
(-(1-4)-poly-N-acetyl D-glucosamine) microparticles, the ligand for
CHI3L1, to control and allergic mammary tumor bearers resulted in a
significant reduction in pulmonary metastasis and tumor growth. These
studies suggest that CHI3L1 plays a role in tumor progression and that
chitin microparticles can inhibit the pleiotropic effects of CHI3L1
giving support to the idea that CHI3L1 is a useful target for treatment
of breast cancer.

