Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of breast stem cells in high-risk benign breast lesions
and association with breastfeeding


Background: Invasive breast cancers contain a subpopulation of cancer
stem cells that are thought to maintain the heterogeneity and
self-renewing potential of the tumor. In our previously published data,
we demonstrated that stem cells in normal adjacent tissues were
associated with triple negative breast cancer. The objective of this
study is to determine the presence of stem cells in high risk breast
lesions. We hypothesized that stem cells in high-risk lesions and normal
adjacent breast tissue may represent a biomarker for increased breast
cancer risk. Methods: We identified biopsies from 42 high-risk women seen
in the Cancer Prevention Center at The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center between 1988-2011. We collected information on breast
cancer risk factors. The biopsies contained high-risk lesions including
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) n=21, lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)
n=5, atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) n=7 and atypical lobular
hyperplasia (ALH) n=6. The tissues were fluorescently labeled for stem
cell markers CD44/CD49f/CD133, and were scored positive if more then 1%
cells were positive for all markers using an automated fluorescent
microscopy software. The presence of stem cell markers was compared in
the normal adjacent tissues and high-risk lesions from a subset of 25
patients. Results: We identified stem cells in 46% of samples containing
DCIS, 67% of LCIS, 63% of ALH, and 70% of ADH. There was a 79%
concordance in stem cell positive status between the high-risk lesion and
adjacent normal tissue. Women with positive stem cell high-risk lesions
had no significant difference in age at first birth (24.4 years vs 26.6
years p=0.3), parity (1.7 vs 1.9, p=0.5), or body mass index (27.8 vs
31.8, p=0.07) compared to women without positive stem cell high-risk
lesions. Women with positive stem cell high-risk lesions had shorter
breastfeeding duration than women without (2.4 months vs 9.0 months p=
0.05). Conclusion: This is the first report, to our knowledge, that stem
cells are present in some high-risk lesions and their associated normal
breast tissue. Correlation with future development of invasive breast
cancer could lay the foundation for future targeted breast cancer
prevention strategies.

