Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigallocatechin gallate inhibits colon cancer cell proliferation
by modulating epigenetic enzymes (DNMTs, HDACs, and HATs)


Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a major constituent of green tea, has
been shown to exhibit antioxidant and antitumorigenic properties using in
vitro and in vivo models of colon cancer and in small cohort studies of
colorectal cancer patients. The development of colon cancer is influenced
by both genetic and epigenetic factors, with increased risk associated
with age, lifestyle, and environmental exposures. Thus, parsing the
interactions of genetic components and epigenetic modulators of gene
expression in colon cancer development and progression is essential. The
mechanism by which EGCG exerts antitumorigenic activity against colon
cancer has not been completely elucidated. This study investigates
potential mechanism(s) by which EGCG inhibits proliferation of HCT-116
and HT-29 colon cancer cell lines, via epigenetic pathways.Briefly,
HCT-116 and HT-29 cells were treated with EGCG (5-150 M) and control
drugs: 5-FU (50-200 g/mL), 5-AZA (5 M), SAHA (1-10 M), and anacardic acid
(10 M) for 48-72 h. Cell proliferation (MTT), cell cycle and apoptosis
(PI-FC and TUNEL), enzyme activity, gene and protein expression were
measured. EGCG inhibited proliferation of HCT-116 and HT-29 by promoting
S-phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Expression and global enzyme
activity of DNMTs (1, 3a, 3b), HDACs (1-4), and HATs (P300, PCAF, P400)
were differentially expressed in both cell lines. A consistent
upregulation of DNMT3b and downregulation of HDAC3 in both cell lines
were observed. Global and gene-specific regulation of DNA methylation and
histone acetylation by EGCG is under current study in our lab.The
antiproliferative effects of EGCG can potentially be attributed to
restoring normal global and gene-specific methylation/acetylation pattern
in colon cancer cells by regulating DNMTs, HDACs, and HATs. This study
provides evidence for the utilization of EGCG as a potential
chemopreventive agent against colon cancer. Furthermore, identifying
mechanisms by which EGCG overrides tumor-driven genetic deregulation to
inhibit carcinogenesis expands our knowledge on pathways contributing to
colon cancer and plausible targets for epigenetic therapy/prevention.This
project is supported by NIH: RO1CA96694 and P30CA054174.

