Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of tolerogenic enzymes IDO-1, IDO-2 and TDO in commonly
used mouse tumor models and impact on model selection for evaluation of
immunosuppression reversal by novel therapeutics


Objective:Inhibition of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO-1),
indoleamine-2,3- dioxygenase-2 (IDO-2), and/or tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase
(TDO) represent novel opportunities for reversing the immunosuppressed
microenvironment found in cancer patients. However, little is known about
the relative expression of these enzymes in tumors and associated lymph
nodes of mouse tumor models, including those previously utilized in the
preclinical characterization of tool compounds or even clinical
candidates that inhibit one of these enzymes. This report describes the
systematic characterization of expression of these enzymes in several of
the most commonly used mouse tumor models.Study Design:Tumor models
evaluated included B16F10 melanoma, B16-GMCSF melanoma and PAN02
pancreatic in C57BL/6 mice, and 4T1 breast and CT26 colon in Balb/c mice.
Cells were injected s.c. into the flanks of 8-week old female mice. In
each model, tumors and draining lymph nodes were collected from separate
cohorts of mice when the mean tumor volumes reached 100 and 1,000 mm3,
respectively. Expression of the 3 enzymes of interest was assessed using
a variety of techniques, including qRT-PCR, Western blot and
FACS.Results:A highly complex picture arises from our study. Expression
levels of each of the enzymes studied here were highly dependent on the
choice of tumor cell, the tissue analyzed (tumor vs. lymph node), as well
as the stage of growth of the tumor. In general, the most commonly
expressed of the 3 enzymes was IDO-1, primarily on tumor cells and
dendritic cells in the lymph nodes.Conclusion:It is critically important,
in the preclinical evaluation of potential new drugs, to select mouse
models that recapitulate specific and well-characterized elements of the
signaling pathway targeted by those drugs. The results presented in this
communication should be of particular interest to those investigators
pursuing a therapeutic strategy of immunosuppression reversal.

