Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea polyphenol-mediated epigenetic reactivation of TIMP-3
reduces invasiveness and gelatinolytic activity in human breast cancer
cells


The molecular pathway from tumor development to clinically evident
metastasis is complex and consists of multiple sequential steps.
Substantial data indicate the involvement of gelatinases/ type IV
collagenases (MMP-2/9) secreted by tumor cells during cancer cell
invasion and metastasis. MMP-2/9 are produced in a latent form as
pro-matrix metalloproteinases that require activation and are inhibited
by tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). TIMPs are
natural inhibitors of MMPs and are involved in diverse biological
processes including cell proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, metastasis
and angiogenesis. Four TIMP genes (TIMP-1, -2, -3, -4) and proteins are
known in human which inhibit active form of most MMPs but with different
affinities. TIMPs inhibit MMPs by binding in a 1:1 stoichiometry through
strong non-covalent interaction. The balance between active MMPs and
TIMPs determine tumor progression by regulating the net activity of MMPs.
Aberrant epigenetic silencing of TIMP-3 has been implicated in the
pathogenesis and metastasis of breast cancer. In the present study, we
demonstrate that green tea polyphenols (GTP) and its major constituent,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) mediate epigenetic induction of TIMP-3
levels and play a key role in suppressing invasiveness and gelatinolytic
activity of MMP-2/9 in breast cancer cells. Treatment of MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with 20M EGCG and 10g/ml GTP for 72 h
significantly induces TIMP-3 mRNA and protein levels. Interestingly,
investigations into the molecular mechanism revealed that TIMP-3
repression in breast cancer cells is mediated by epigenetic silencing
mechanism(s) involving increased activity of the enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) and class I histone deacetylases, independent of
promoter DNA hypermethylation. Treatment of breast cancer cells with
GTP/EGCG significantly reduced EZH2 and class I HDAC protein levels.
Furthermore, transcriptional activation of TIMP-3 was found to be
associated with decreased EZH2 localization and H3K27 trimethylation
enrichment at the TIMP-3 promoter with a concomitant increase in histone
H3K9/18 acetylation. Our findings highlight TIMP-3 induction as a key
epigenetic event modulated by GTP/EGCG in restoring the MMP:TIMP balance
to delay breast cancer progression and invasion. Although case-control
and epidemiological studies provide some clues that regular consumption
of GTP and EGCG could decrease the risk of breast cancer invasion and/or
progression however these studies do not provide further insight into the
molecular mechanism, related to tumor inhibition. Based on our present
findings, TIMP-3 can be used as a surrogate marker of GTP/EGCG response
and warrants further investigation through well designed clinical trial.

