Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular classification of triple negative breast cancer via
RNA-sequencing data


Introduction:Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) are characterized as
lacking estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression and TNBC patients
have higher rates of recurrence and death compared with other breast
cancer subtypes. For TNBC patients who fail standard chemotherapy, there
are a lack of novel drug therapies, given the absence of well-defined
molecular targets. Recently, a microarray meta-analysis identified 7
triple negative subtypes, including the validation of the luminal
androgen receptor (LAR) positive subtype [Lehmann, 2011]. However,
microarray technology is dependent on probe-target specificity and the 7
subtypes have yet to be validated using RNA sequencing data, and the
presences of recurrent genomic alterations in the 7 subtypes are
unknown.METHODS:We obtained 1106 breast cancer RNA-Seq bam files from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and aligned with Tophat v1.3. The PAM50
intrinsic gene signature was used to extract a cohort of 128 TNBC
samples. Consensus clustering of genes, greater than 75th percentile of
variance, was performed using Kmeans clustering in Spearman's correlation
space. A nearest centroid prediction model was developed from genes
differentially expressed among the clusters. Eighty independent TNBC RNA
sequencing samples were obtained (British Colombia; BC) [Shah, 2012]
which were calibrated to our TNBC conditional quantile normalized cohort
and sub-typed by our model.RESULTS:Using RNA-Seq gene expression count
data, we identified 5 clusters, all of which were stable, including the
LAR cluster. Signaling pathway impact analysis (SPIA) implicated
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, leukocyte transendothelial
migration, and regulation of actin cytoskeleton pathways commonly altered
in the non-LAR TNBC subtypes. In contrast, cell cycle, ECM-receptor
interaction, endocrine regulated calcium reabsorption, and insulin
signaling pathways were altered in the LAR versus non-LAR subtypes.
Neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions were observed to be altered
commonly between all sub-types. We then applied our model to the Shah, et
al cohort. In this cohort, the LAR subtype was consistent with Shah's
classification of other TNBC and contained no basal samples by PAM50
intrinsic modeling. Analysis of sub-type specific mutation data from the
BC cohort demonstrates an increased mutational load in ECM-related
proteins, particularly the myosins, along with increased TP53 clonality
in the non-LAR subtypes.CONCLUSIONS:Using TCGA RNASeq data, we have
confirmed the presence of 5 major TNBC subtypes, including the LAR; which
was negligible in basal composition by PAM50 intrinsic modeling. SPIA
pathway analysis indicates a core set of pathways demonstrating altered
expression across the TNBC sub-types and the identification of molecular
targets within each subtype is ongoing.

