Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of selective therapy of childhood ALL and Ewing's
sarcoma using targeted-hybrid polymerized liposomal nanoparticles (HPLN)


Until now a lot of understanding and research of cancer biology can make
it possible to develop many anticancer drugs which can inhibit the
specific pathways required for growth, proliferation, and survival of
cancer cells. The current success in cancer therapy using these drugs
improves the survival rate of patients but unfortunately it is not the
case of all cancers and still many different kinds of cancers continue to
have a poor prognosis. Furthermore the incompleteness of cancer therapies
causes a variety of side effects such as secondary cancers, heart or lung
damage, infertility or chronic hepatitis. Therefore a reliable tumor
specific therapy is urgently needed to treat cancer patients. It is
widely recognized that the recent chemotherapy could be far more
effective if higher doses could be specifically delivered to the tumor
and not to normal tissues. Targeted nanoparticles have shown the
potential to deliver the anticancer drugs to cancer cells selectively and
to overcome unexpected cytotoxicity and limited efficacy of the
chemotherapy caused by the unselective delivery to the normal cells. In
our study a novel nanoparticle (HPLN) was used for the treatment of
childhood ALL and Ewing's sarcoma. AntiCD19 and antiCD99 antibodies were
used for targeting of ALL and Ewing tumor, respectively. These tumor
specific HPLNs effectively inhibit tumor growth in a murine model.
Removal of targeting antibody or drug eliminates the antitumor effects,
which proves this anticancer effect of HPLN is very specific to the
target cancer cells and dependent upon drug. No abnormalities in liver
and kidney function tests, complete blood counts or pathology of major
organs are observed from tail-vein administrations. Theses targeted HPLNs
showed much better cytotoxicity over a conventional untargeted
PEG-liposomal Doxorubicin formulation (Doxil). Additionally the targeted
HPLN could be found in the tumor cells in a murine model. In conclusion,
we have found the safe and efficient targeted HPLN delivery system of
anticancer drugs to childhood ALL and Ewing's Sarcoma.

