Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of PI3K and MEK inhibitor chemosensitivity in human
tumor explants and cell lines using the Mosaic Blue assay and
relationship to biomarkers by immunohistochemistry


The PI3K and MEK pathways promote tumor cell survival through a variety
of downstream signals and are commonly explored in cancer research. Many
agents are in clinical development and new evidence suggests that a
combination of these inhibitors may be required to achieve optimal
anti-tumor activity. Twenty-one viable colorectal and non-small cell lung
cancer tissue explants with matched formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded
(FFPE) tissue and 8 cell lines (A431, AGS, HCT-116, HT-29, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-468, MKN45, and T47D) were used for this study. Fresh tissues were
disaggregated into single cells and exposed to GDC-0941, a PI3K
inhibitor, and AZD6244, a MEK inhibitor, both as single agents and in
combination in the Mosaic Blue assay. Combination results were compared
to single agent results. Samples were classified as resistant or
sensitive. Matched FFPE tissues and cells were stained with the following
biomarkers to identify predictive relationships: pAKT, p4EBP1, pPRAS40,
ppS6 kinase, pS6 ribosomal protein, pERK, PTEN, cMET, EGFR, HER3, Ki-67,
and p53. To assess pharmacodynamics changes, the 8 cell lines were also
exposed to 1 concentration of each inhibitor both as single agents and in
combination. The cells were fixed and paraffin embedded for IHC staining
of the following biomarkers to identify pharmacodynamic relationships:
pAKT, p4EBP1, pPRAS40, ppS6 kinase, pS6 ribosomal protein, pEGFR, pHER3,
pMET, pERK, and Ki-67. The combination of inhibitors demonstrated
additive growth inhibition in the explants and cell lines. The average
combination IC50 was more potent than single agents, with greater
additivity demonstrated in colorectal cancer compared to lung cancer.
Predictive and pharmacodynamic biomarkers were identified with both
single agent and combination treatments, and differences were observed
between the two inhibitors. In summary, this study demonstrated that the
Mosaic Blue assay is a useful tool for classifying sensitive and
resistant tumor explants and cell lines and also confirmed that dual
targeting of PI3K and MEK pathways is a valuable approach to achieving
higher therapeutic activity in vitro. Evaluation of biomarker profiles
revealed predictive and pharmacodynamic relationships in this setting.

