Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In situ imaging of antibody drug conjugate (ADC) binding and
pharmacodynamic biomarkers of response in models of human cancer


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are clinically validated as a modality
for targeted therapy of solid and hematological cancer due to
advancements in target selection, conjugation chemistry and linker
technology. However, much about mechanism of action (MoA) is yet to be
fully understood. Our goal was to interrogate ADC pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics establishing proof of mechanism (PoM) of drug action
with a diverse panel of ADCs. Herein, we describe the development of
novel immunohistochemical (IHC) methods for in situ visualization of ADCs
binding to target expressing cells and their cognate downstream
biomarkers of response in formalin fixed paraffin embedded cells/tissues.
We demonstrate specific binding of 4 different ADCs spanning 2 solid
tumor targets and an endothelial cell target using IHC with anti-human
IgG in human tumor xenograft models expressing the respective targets.
ADC binding to target is observed as early as 20 minutes after a single
dose of ADC at 3 mg/kg. Utilizing an anti-microtubule inhibitor (MTI)
payload-specific antibody we additionally detect ADC binding to tumor
cells by monitoring the cytotoxic payload. The cell type where the
antibodies and payload localized was identified by double and triple IHC.
Pharmacodynamic biomarkers of response for two payload classes (DNA
damaging agents and MTIs) were detected with antibodies against
phospho-Histone H2AX and phospho-Histone H3, respectively - confirming
the expected ADC MoAs. Downstream apoptosis of target cells was detected
with cleaved caspase 3 IHC. The kinetics of biomarker response and
downstream cellular impact was quantified via image analysis with
biomarkers evident as early as 24 hours after a single dose for both
tumor cell and vascular targets. Furthermore, we observed a correlation
between biomarkers of response and efficacy of the ADCs as measured by
statistically significant tumor growth inhibition for the 4 ADCs we
studied. These data suggest that IHC interrogations of drug action should
be used to further the clinical development of ADCs via demonstration of
pharmacodynamic activities at the cellular level, establishing PoM data,
and enabling predictive preclinical oncology models in order to reduce
clinical attrition of ADCs.

