Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secretome signature associated with TITF1/NKX2-1-negative
non-small cell lung cancer


Background: TITF1/NKX2-1 is a master transcription factor of peripheral
airway cells and a known lineage-specific oncogene in lung cancer cells,
whereas it also suppresses tumor progression and is associated with
favorable prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma. In our previous study, a
protein signature for TITF1 was found in plasmas of mouse models of lung
adenocarcinoma, leading to the identification of concordant circulating
protein signatures in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Following
study demonstrated one of TITF1 signature proteins, pro-SFTPB, as a
predictive biomarker for NSCLC. To identify additional biomarkers which
would complement the performance of pro-SFTPB, we studied secretome from
forty NSCLC cell lines in terms of TITF1 expression.Materials and
Methods: Forty NSCLC cell lines were cultured according to the standard
SILAC protocol. The same batch of cells was used for analysis of whole
cell extract and conditioned media. Samples were fractionated and
subjected to mass spectrometric analysis. Gene expression data for the
same set of NSCLC cell lines were obtained using the Illumina Human WG-6
v3.0 Expression BeadChips.Results: NSCLC cell lines were divided into two
groups by median of TITF1 gene expression (TITF1-positive and negative).
In secretome analysis, overall 10,399 proteins were identified and
semi-quantified with using total number of spectral counts.
Interestingly, top abundant secretome proteins in TITF1-negative NSCLC
cell lines contain many cytokine/chemokines (IL6, CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL5)
and growth factors (CTGF, PDGFA, PDGFC, and VEGFC). Among top abundant
secretome proteins, gene expression of SRGN was most significantly and
inversely correlated with TITF1 gene expression. SRGN is a proteoglycan
and physiologically associated with some proteases and cytokine secretion
in hematopoietic cells. In addition recent studies have indicated that
SRGN is also associated with aggressive phenotype in some cancers, thus
considered as a promising biomarker candidate for TITF1-negative NSCLC.
Then we determined whether SRGN would be directly regulated by TITF1.
Suppression of TITF1 by siRNA or TNF alpha treatment increased SRGN
expression, suggesting potential transcriptional regulation of SRGN by
TITF1. Finally we studied functional roles of SRGN in TITF1-negative cell
lines. Knockdown of SRGN by siRNA did not affect cell proliferation.
However two chemokines, CXCL1 and CXCL5, which are abundant in secretome
of TITF1-negative cell lines, were decreased by SRGN knockdown. In
addition, macrophage migration was also decreased in the conditioned
media of SRGN knockdown cells compared with control cells.Conclusion: Our
findings suggest functional relevance of SRGN in tumor microenvironment
and tumor aggressiveness in TITF1/NKX2-1-negative NSCLC. Validation study
for plasma levels of CXCL1 and CXCL5 in NSCLC subjects is now on-going.

