Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions of the fusion protein Nup98-Hoxa9 with Pbx3, p300 and
HDAC1: widening the targeted therapy window in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML)


The chromosomal translocation t(7;11)(p15,p15), that results in the
oncogenic fusion protein Nup98-Hoxa9 (NH), appears in 1% of patients with
AML and is associated with very poor prognosis and short overall
survival. Despite the large severity of the leukemia induced by this
fusion protein, the oncogenic events triggered by NH are poorly
understood, although a potential role as an aberrant transcription factor
has been proposed. We have generated a human Hematopoietic Progenitors
(hHP) cellular model expressing NH constitutively to identify the
molecular mechanisms supporting the malignancy of this fusion protein,
facilitating the search for therapeutic targets.We identified the DNA
binding sites of NH by performing ChIP-seq experiments, which were
validated by qRT-PCR analysis on ChIP selected DNA and Luciferase assays.
Expression profiling was performed in hHP-NH and co-Immunoprecipitations
(Co-IPs) were done to demonstrate the interaction of NH with different
transcriptional regulators. Specific drug sensitivity of the hHP-NH model
was assessed in cell proliferation assays.Our work provides the first
description of the DNA binding sites of NH, most of which are regulatory
regions of genes involved in the development of AML. In particular, we
demonstrate that NH induces the overexpression of MEIS1, HOXA9 and PBX3,
transcription factors forming an activator complex that is a key element
in the leukemic onset driven by other chromosome rearrangements.
Interestingly, we show that NH directly interacts with this complex
through Pbx3. To evaluate the biological relevance of the interaction of
the MEIS1-HOXA9-PBX3 complex with NH, we have analyzed the sensitivity of
hHP-NH to the HXR9 peptide (an inhibitor of the HOXA9-PBX3 interaction).
Supporting our hypothesis, we observed an inhibitory effect on hHP-NH
viability after HXR9 treatment. Finally, by combining the expression
profile data from hHP-NH and the ChIP-seq results using GSEA analysis, we
show that NH is able to induce both overexpression and down-regulation of
its target genes. To provide evidences of the activator-repressor role of
NH, we performed different Co-IPs that demonstrated its direct
interaction with both p300 (transcriptional activator) and HDAC1
(transcriptional inhibitor).Taken together, we show that the direct
overexpression of the complex MEIS1-HOXA9-PBX3 is one of the pathogenic
mechanisms induced by NH. As expected, the disruption of this complex
with the HXR9 peptide in the hHP-NH model has a direct effect on cell
viability. Furthermore, we show that NH interacts with this complex via
PBX3 and also with p300 and HDAC1. The features and architecture of these
interactions need to be further explored, but these findings allow us to
consider the use of the HXR9 peptide or some HDAC inhibitors as possible
treatments for these patients.

