Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2BP1 and MYCN cooperate in an oncogenic feedback loop, in
high-risk neuroblastoma


Previous studies have shown chromosomal 17q21-ter amplification in
neuroblastoma is both a common and highly prognostic event. The oncogene,
insulin-like growth factor-2 mRNA-binding protein 1 (IGF2BP1), is located
near the proximal edge of this amplified region. IGF2BP1 is also
essential for neurocrest migration during development. This study
analyzes for the first time the DNA copy number and expression of the
IGF2BP1 gene in neuroblastoma, and importantly dissects the previously
unknown molecular interplay of the IGF2BP1 and MYCN oncogenes. Firstly,
IGF2BP1 was found to be highly expressed in neuroblastoma and
outperformed other described oncogenes, including MYCN, by Kaplan-meier
analyses of mRNA microarray data sets. High IGF2BP1 mRNA expression was
significantly associated with stage 4 tumors (P = 0.019), and decreased
patient survival (P = 6.3e-05). IGF2BP1 was also associated with MYCN
amplification and MYCN mRNA expression.Additionally, in another patient
cohort we found DNA copy number, mRNA and protein levels were all
significantly higher in stage 4 disease as compared with localised
disease. Significantly, high IGF2BP1 protein expression was associated
with lower patient survival (p = 0.0249). IGF2BP1 protein expression was
significantly correlated with MYCN mRNA levels. In vitro studies,
confirmed IGF2BP1's promotion of MYCN, as IGF2BP1 knockdown decreased
MYCN RNA and protein expression. Interestingly, IGF2BP1 is an RNA-binding
protein, and is known to target MYC, PTEN, IGF-2, MDR1, and other
transcripts important in neuroblastoma. We determined that IGF2BP1
decreased MYCN RNA half-life. Moreover, we have evidence showing MYCN
promotes IGF2BP1 expression, including that the MYCN protein binds the
IGF2BP1 promoter and also that IGF2BP1 is significantly upregulated in
precancer cells, in a MYCN-driven neuroblastoma mouse model.Finally,
ongoing work aims to determine miRNAs significantly reduced in stage 4
tumors neuroblastoma versus lower-risk stages. We have performed and
analysed Next Generation miRNA Sequencing from 30 neuroblastoma tumors,
the most extensive study of its type in neuroblastoma to date. We have
elucidated several novel miRNAs with great prognostic and drugable-target
potential in neuroblastoma, as well as a putative role in regulating the
IGF2BP1-MYCN signaling loop.These data demonstrate, for the first-time,
IGF2BP1 as a potential oncogene and biomarker in neuroblastoma, which has
an important role within MYCN-driven carcinogenesis.

