Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Cyclin A1 promoter by the Wilms tumor gene, WT1


Cyclin A1(CCNA1) is a unique type of Cyclin A expressed predominantly in
highly proliferative tissues such as the testis and bone marrow. In
hematopoietic cells CCNA1 expression has been observed in CD34+
progenitor cells, leukemia stem cells and leukemia cell lines. Similarly,
Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene expression has been observed in these highly
proliferative, undifferentiated cells. Regulation of CCNA1 expression is
poorly understood, but the CCNA1 gene promoter is a highly GC-rich
TATA-less sequence, containing three potential WT1 binding sites.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of two of the three sites revealed
binding of the WT1 protein to chromatin in K562 leukemia cells. To assess
the role of WT1 in CCNA1 regulation, activation of the CCNA1 promoter by
WT1 was measured using luciferase reporter constructs in K562 cells. The
distal construct (-1180/+145 ) contains two potential WT1 sites, and the
activity of this reporter construct was up-regulated by WT1
co-transfection. In contrast, the proximal (-454/+145) promoter region
contains no canonical WT1 binding sites. Suprisingly, the proximal
promoter was also up-regulated by WT1 co-transfection. Transcription
factor binding site analysis revealed 6 GC boxes -within the core
promoter region of the proximal promoter construct that we predicted
could serve as non-canonical WT1 binding sites. To determine the
importance of these GC boxes for WT1 binding, we treated K562 cells with
Mithramycin A, which blocks binding at GC rich sequences. We found that
Mithramycin A treatment decreased the activity of both the distal and
proximal promoter constructs. Finally we demonstrated that WT1 mediated
activation of CCNA1 promoter required an intact DNA binding domain, as a
mutant WT1 expression construct lacking the zinc finger domain failed to
activate any of the CCNA1 promoter constructs. Overall these results show
that WT1 binding can up-regulate the CCNA1 promoter. This observation
supports our previous finding that overexpressing WT1 in K562 cells
increased CCNA1 mRNA. These data suggest that elevated WT1 expression
could mediate increased CCNA1 expression in leukemia cells and thereby
enhance proliferation. Overall, our results are consistent with the
hypothesis that both WT1 and CCNA1 behave as oncogenes in leukemia.

