Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histamine in myeloid cell maturation and malignant glioma
development


Multiple epidemiological studies have demonstrated an association between
allergic conditions and protection from glioma development. Also, use of
anti-histamines has shown up to a 3.5-fold increase in the risk of
malignant glioma. Previous studies have shown deviations in myeloid cell
maturation in mice deficient for histidine decarboxylase (HDC-/-), the
key enzyme in histamine production. HDC-/- mice exhibited increased
levels of CD11b+GR1+ immature myeloid cells (IMC). This cellular
phenotype is associated with myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC),
which are thought to be IMC that can inhibit T cell function and have
been shown to promote tumor development. From this data, we hypothesize
that histamine is important to normal myeloid maturation, whereas a lack
thereof can promote accumulation of immunosuppressive IMC, which can
stimulate glioma development.Utilizing our de novo tumor model, we
observed faster tumor induction as well as increased growth in the HDC-/-
mice compared to wild type (WT). Also, HDC-/- mice exhibited decreased
symptom-free survival (SFS) compared to WT (74 vs 86 days, respectively;
p=0.04). Analysis of brain-infiltrating leukocytes (BIL) a time of
symptoms demonstrated increased frequency of CD11b+Gr1+ IMC in HDC-/-
mice compared to WT (52% vs 34%; p=0.02). While not reaching statistical
significance, there was a trend towards increased CD11b+GrLo compartment
(28% vs 11%; p=0.08).Furthermore, SB-derived glioma cell lines from both
HDC-/- and WT mice were generated. No significant differences were
observed in in vitro growth dependent upon HDC expression or histamine
concentration. These cell lines were utilized for in vivo studies via
intracranial orthotopic injections. No differences in survival or growth
were observed when HDC-expressing cell lines were utilized, whereas
significantly increased tumor volume at day 14 and decreased SFS was
observed in HDC-/- mice compared to WT when the HDC-/- glioma cells were
used (15 vs 23 days; p=0.04). HDC-/- mice exhibited increased CD11b+Gr1Lo
compared to WT in the BIL (45% vs 28%; p=0.03). Also, HDC-/- mice
possessed decreased CD8+CD107a+ cells at the tumor site, suggesting a
decreased T cell response in the absence of histamine. This data suggests
a more crucial role for local compared to systemic histamine on glioma
development.Additionally, we believe that the presence of glioma can
inhibit HDC expression further leading to the accumulation of IMC. By use
of HDC-eGFP mice, in vitro studies showed that the addition of glioma
supernatant prevented the upregulation of HDC in bone marrow cells by
growth factors. In vivo HDC expression in CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells was
decreased in bone marrow, spleen, and BIL in mice with glioma compared to
non-tumor bearing mice. These collective data suggest that disruption of
histamine signaling can promote glioma development by augmenting the
accumulation of immunosuppressive IMC leading to decreased T cell
response.

