Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Jak/Stat signaling pathway is highly effective in
xenograft models of early T cell precursor (ETP) acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL)


ETP ALL is a recently described subtype of T-ALL with poor prognosis and
is defined by a unique immunophenotype, expressing T-lineage and
myeloid/early progenitor markers. ETP ALL blasts have a diverse array of
genetic alterations without a unifying mutated gene or pathway. A
fraction have mutations in genes involved in Jak/Stat signaling, and we
hypothesized targeting Jak/Stat may be effective for some ETP ALL
patients.We evaluated Jak/Stat signaling by phosphoflow cytometry and
immunoblotting of blasts collected from patients with ETP ALL with and
without Jak/Stat pathway mutations and compared them to non-ETP T-ALL
blasts. We xenografted blasts from 6 different ETP ALL patient samples
with heterogeneous mutations (Table) into immunodeficient NSG mice and
tested the in vivo efficacy of the Jak1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib (rux).
Mice were randomized to rux or vehicle after they developed >1%
peripheral blood (pb) blasts (cytoCD3+/CD45+) by flow cytometry (FACS).
Disease burden was assessed by FACS enumeration of pb blasts weekly and
splenic blasts at sacrifice.We found that the Jak/Stat signaling pathway
was dysregulated in ETP ALL samples, including in samples without
identifiable mutations in Jak/Stat. ETP ALL blasts had marked increased
expression of pSTAT1 (p = 0.01), pSTAT3 (p = 0.01) and pSTAT5 (p = 0.02)
when compared to non ETP T-ALL by immunoblot, results confirmed by
phosphoflow. All 6 ETP samples had a profound in vivo response to rux;
circulating and splenic blasts were markedly reduced in all treated
animals compared to controls (Table). The degree of response was
comparable to that seen with TKIs in BCR-ABL ALL, using the same
xenograft model. These results strongly suggest that ETP ALL blasts may
be addicted to Jak/Stat signaling, irrespective of the presence of
identifiable Jak/Stat mutations and that clinical trials testing Jak/Stat
inhibitors are needed.


