Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Base resolution epigenomic analysis reveals a role for Tet2 in
modulating enhancer activity


Cytosine methylation (5mC) is a well-established epigenetic mechanism
essential for genomic imprinting, silencing of retrotransposons, and
lineage-specific expression of developmental genes. This epigenetic mark
is extensively remodeled during mammalian development through the action
of several DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) and the Ten-Eleven-Translocation
(TET) family of protein dioxygenases. TET proteins function in DNA
de-methylation by catalyzing the oxidation of 5mC to
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) and other oxidized intermediates.
Recurrent loss of function mutations of Tet2 are found in 27% of acute
myeloid leukemia patients. In mouse models, TET2 loss is sufficient to
cause myeloid malignancy through defects in hematopoietic stem cell
differentiation. However, it remains unclear how TET2-dependent
de-methylation regulates differentiation, a process often disrupted in
tumorigenesis.Base-resolution methylomes have revealed that 5mC is
dynamically regulated in a cell-type specific manner. Notably, DNA
methylation is depleted at distal regulatory elements such as enhancers,
where reduction of 5mC is correlated with the activity of these
sequences. 5hmC is also significantly enriched at distal cis-regulatory
sequences, suggesting that dynamic DNA methylation at these regions is
likely mediated by interplays between DNMT-mediated methylation and
TET-mediated de-methylation.Despite these discoveries, several open
questions remain. First, are the different TET proteins functionally
redundant? Does Tet2 uniquely modulate the methylome? If so, how? Second,
what is the precise role of DNA hypomethylation and hydroxymethylation at
enhancers? Do these modifications play active roles in gene regulation?We
have employed genome-wide technologies to examine the effects of loss of
Tet1 and Tet2 genes on DNA methylation, chromatin modification and gene
expression landscapes in mouse embryonic stem cells. We generated base
resolution DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation maps in wild type and
Tet1 or Tet2 mutant mES cells, and determined the genomic regions where
dynamic DNA methylation depends on either Tet1 or Tet2. Loss of Tet2
leads to dramatic reduction of DNA hydroxymethylation genome-wide, and
local hypermethylation predominantly at enhancers. Furthermore, we
observed reduced activities of re-methylated enhancers in Tet2-/- mES
cells, supporting an active role for Tet2 and DNA hypomethylation at
enhancers. Together, our results clarify the distinct functions of Tet1
and Tet2 in mammalian cells and highlight an active role of DNA
hypomethylation at enhancers.

