Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of protein kinase C alpha (PKC) and all
trans retinoic acid (ATRA) synergize to inhibit the proliferation,
migration and cancer stem-like properties of a triple-negative mammary
cancer model


To study the interaction between PKC and retinoic acid pathways on the
biology of breast cancer, we employed a murine mammary triple negative
cell model (LM38-LP, composed by luminal (LEP), myoepithelial (MEP) and
cancer stem cells (CSC). We proposed to: A) Study the effect of ATRA (1M)
on the expression of PKC and Retinoic Acid Receptors (RARs) in LEP, MEP
and CSC (mammospheres); B) Evaluate the combined effect of ATRA and a PKC
pharmacological inhibitor (1 uM Go6976) on cell proliferation employing a
method to determine the interaction type; C) Analyze the effect of
ATRA/PKC inhibitor on migration and MMP activity on LM38-LP;. D) Analyze
the effect of ATRA/PKC inhibitor on proliferation, self-renewal and
differentiation of CSC; E) Study the expression profile of pluripotent
genes in CSC and their modulation by treatments.By RT-PCR we found that
ATRA (48 h) induced a decrease in PKC in LEP, MEP and CSC. The same
treatment increased RAR2 and RAR2 in CSC, and only RAR2 in LEP.ATRA and
PKC inhibitor interaction results from the proliferation assay were
analyzed by Chou-Talalays method. We found that the inhibitory effect
exerted by ATRA/PKC inhibitor was synergistic with CI=0.59 (Synergistic
with CITo study the interaction between PKC and retinoic acid pathways on
the biology of breast cancer, we employed a murine mammary triple
negative cell model (LM38-LP, composed by luminal (LEP), myoepithelial
(MEP) and cancer stem cells (CSC). We proposed to: A) Study the effect of
ATRA (1M) on the expression of PKC and Retinoic Acid Receptors (RARs) in
LEP, MEP and CSC (mammospheres); B) Evaluate the combined effect of ATRA
and a PKC pharmacological inhibitor (1 uM Go6976) on cell proliferation
employing a method to determine the interaction type; C) Analyze the
effect of ATRA/PKC inhibitor on migration and MMP activity on LM38-LP;.
D) Analyze the effect of ATRA/PKC inhibitor on proliferation,
self-renewal and differentiation of CSC; E) Study the expression profile
of pluripotent genes in CSC and their modulation by treatments.By RT-PCR
we found that ATRA (48 h) induced a decrease in PKC in LEP, MEP and CSC.
The same treatment increased RAR2 and RAR2 in CSC, and only RAR2 in
LEP.ATRA and PKC inhibitor interaction results from the proliferation
assay were analyzed by Chou-Talalays method. We found that the inhibitory
effect exerted by ATRA/PKC inhibitor was synergistic with CI=0.59
(Synergistic with CI<0.7).ATRA/PKC inhibitor treatment reduced LM38-LP
migration more efficiently than each treatment alone, showing a synergic
effect (% migration: Control: 80,16,9, ATRA: 55,45,6, PKC inhibitor:
37,39,5, ATRA/PKC inhibitor: 20,01,7; p0.05). Furthermore, MMP2 activity
was strongly reduced by the combined treatment. Interestingly, we
observed that only the combined treatment induced a decrease of RAR2
expression in the highly migratory MEP cells.ATRA/PKC inhibitor treatment
synergized to reduce mammospheres growth (Diameter in m at 96h: Control:
1768, ATRA: 12910; PKC inhibitor: 13011 ATRA/PKC inhibitor: 1035 p0.05).
Pre-treatment with ATRA/PKC inhibitor for 96h dramatically affected CSC
self-renewal (Number of secondary mammospheres: Control: 31319; ATRA/PKC
inhibitor: 6921; p0.05). While in a 3D matrigel culture assay
ATRA-pretreated CSC formed organized colonies with presence of lumen, the
combined treatment led to the formation of small undifferentiated
structures and evidence of cell death.By RT-PCR we determined that CSC
expressed higher levels of pluripotent genes, such as Nanog, Sox2, Slug
and Sox9, than the parental LM38-LP cell line. Besides, only the combined
treatment for 96 h induced a decrease in the levels of Nanog and Slug in
CSC.Our findings suggest that the pharmacological inhibition of PKC and
ATRA synergize to inhibit proliferation and migration possibly through
the decrease of RAR and the inhibition of MMP2 activity. Furthermore, the
blockage of CSC expansion by the combined treatment, possibly occurred
through the down regulation of Nanog and Slug.

