Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis by whole exome and transcriptome
sequencing of tumor samples from EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer
patients with acquired resistance to erlotinib


Background: NSCLC p with EGFR mutations initially respond to EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) but ultimately relapse. Sub-genomic
molecular studies indicate that the EGFR T790M mutation and the
activation of MET, PI3K, AXL, HER2 and MAPK can lead to acquired
resistance to EGFR TKIs. To date, no integrated comprehensive genomic
investigation of EGFR TKI resistance has been reported.Methods: FFPE
biopsies of erlotinib-sensitive and erlotinib-resistant tumors were
obtained from 16 EGFR mutant NSCLC patients. The samples were analyzed by
whole exome sequencing and whole transcriptome sequencing utilizing the
Illumina HiSeq2500 platform. In addition, targeted gene sequencing was
performed with the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon-Cancer Panel and run on the
MiSeq system.Results: Erlotinib resistant NSCLC specimens harbored known
resistance drivers, including EGFR T790M mutations (6/16; 38%), MET
amplification (2/16; 13%), and AXL upregulation (3/16; 19%). Differential
expression analysis between resistant and pre-treatment states revealed
enrichment in the post-resistant tumors of ERBB2, and FGFR signaling
pathways. Biopsies from patients that developed an EGFR T790M mutation
post resistance exhibited enrichment in pathways associated with cell
cycle, meiosis, telomere maintenance and transcriptional regulation. Copy
number analysis demonstrated amplifications in the post-resistance
setting that correlated significantly with progression free survival,
including regions containing NFKBIA, NKX2-1, and TSC-1. There was also
strong correlation between the copy number changes observed and the
expression mRNA levels of specific genes. Of note, each resistant tumor
exhibited greater copy number similarity to the corresponding matched
pre-treatment sample compared to other tumors within the resistance
cohort.Conclusions: We conducted the first ever comprehensive integrated
genomic analysis of EGFR TKI resistant NSCLC patients, and identified
both known and potentially novel drivers of EGFR TKI resistance. This
study demonstrated the feasibility and utility of comprehensive genomic
analysis in the clinical management of NSCLC receiving targeted therapy.
Together, our data provide unprecedented insight into the molecular
pathogenesis of escape from EGFR oncogene inhibition in NSCLC. We are now
conducting a prospective observational study in additional NSCLC patients
on targeted therapy.

