Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering strategies to control stoichiometry, site of
conjugation, serum stability and effector functions of antibody-drug
conjugates


A promising approach to enhance the antitumor activity of antibodies and
reduce the systemic toxicity of small molecule anti-cancer drugs is to
covalently attach the small molecule to the antibody thus forming
antibody drug conjugates (ADCs). Conventionally, ADCs are produced by
chemical conjugation of drugs to antibodies through either lysine side
chain amines or native cysteine sulfhydryl groups generated by reduction
of interchain disulfide bonds. Both of these methods yield heterogeneous
conjugates with complex biophysical properties. To limit these
liabilities, we have designed, characterized, and validated antibody
variants, which allow precise control of the site of conjugation and the
drug load; such as two and/or four drugs per antibody can be
site-specific conjugated. These engineered antibody variants can be
efficiently and site-specifically conjugated with drug payloads at
milligram and gram scales to yield homogenous ADC products. Engineered
antibody variants described here retain antigen-binding affinities, FcRn
binding, and have biochemical, biophysical and manufacturability
properties similar to their non-engineered parent antibodies. Upon
conjugation to highly cytotoxic drugs with anti-mitotic and/or DNA
alkylating activities, the antibody variants have potent in vitro and in
vivo anti-tumor activity. Furthermore, we describe ADCs vehicles that
provide efficient scaffolds for site-specific conjugation of drugs while
offering the opportunity to minimize off-target toxicities often observed
with ADCs as a result of their binding to cells expressing Fc-gamma
receptors. Finally, we show the impact of the identified sites for drug
conjugation on the in vivo pharmacokinetic and safety profile of ADCs in
rats. Our strategies for engineering ADCs with defined sites for
conjugation, controlled drug loads, potentially decreased off-target
toxicity, and optimal serum stability are broadly applicable to any
full-length IgG or Fc-containing therapeutics as they involve the Fc
constant domain of the antibody.

