Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of GRM1 by estrogen receptor in breast cancer


Metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (GRM1), first recognized as an
important factor in the central nervous system, has more recently been
implicated in melanomagenesis and breast cancer pathogenesis. Oncogenic
mediators of GRM1-associated effects include both MAPK and AKT signaling
cascades. Modulation of GRM1 activity in melanoma and estrogen receptor
negative (ER-) breast cancer cells inhibits anchorage independent growth,
migration, proliferation, and/or downstream activation of Akt and ERK.
Data from our laboratory show that a significantly higher fraction of
breast tumors express GRM1 compared to normal breast tissue, and GRM1
expression is more highly correlated with ER positivity. Moreover, higher
GRM1 expression in human ER+ breast cancers treated with the
anti-estrogen tamoxifen associates with a shorter distant metastasis free
survival as compared to low expressors further supporting a critical role
in ER+ breast cancer.We hypothesize that ER has both genomic and
non-genomic effects on GRM1. We evaluated the effect of hormonal
treatment on GRM1 protein expression in ER+ MCF7 and ER- MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. Estradiol increases GRM1 expression, and this effect
is abrogated by the anti-estrogen tamoxifen in MCF7 but not in MDA-MB-231
cells. These genomic effects may be exerted through three putative ER
binding sites within the GRM1 promoter. We have confirmed that ER binds
to one of these sites by chromatin immunoprecipitation, further supported
by ChiPSeq data. GRM1 promoter activity is increased by estradiol
treatment using a luciferase reporter assay validating transcriptional
activation by ER. To support a non-genomic role for ER with GRM1, we have
shown that ER physically interacts with GRM1 in breast cancer cells by in
vitro proximity ligation assay and by co-immunoprecipitation in
immortalized mouse mammary epithelial cells (iMMECs) stably expressing
GRM1. Stable introduction of GRM1 into iMMECs, which lack endogenous
GRM1, reduces sensitivity to tamoxifen as compared to control iMMECs. In
MCF7 cells, the combination of tamoxifen with GRM1 modulators riluzole or
BAY 36-7620 produces synergistic effects.As estradiol activates MAPK
signaling in breast cancer cells, we hypothesize that this may be
mediated by both the physical interaction of GRM1 and ER and the indirect
effects on GRM1 transcription. Results of these studies suggest that GRM1
may be a valuable therapeutic target in ER+ breast tumors.

