Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between worse prognosis and higher expression of the
JAK2 gene in corresponding non-neoplastic tissue in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma, extracted by multiarray analysis


[Background & Aim] Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) often recurs in the
liver after surgery removing the primary lesion. Multi-centric occurrence
(MO) is more common than intrahepatic metastases (IM). Then, it is
insufficient to predict the prognosis by considering factors only in
resected primary tumor. Factors in the background liver will also play
important roles in prognosis.[Material & Methods] Our control samples,
termed super normal (SN) liver, were taken from normal tissues of 11
cases of metastatic liver cancer. We selected a corresponding
non-neoplastic (CN) tissue of a typical HCC case with chronic hepatitis C
as a sample to compare. Then, expression profiling and methylation arrays
were performed for comparing the SN and the CN. We identified genes
showing differences in gene expression and the rate of methylation.
Prognosis was predicted for 100 cases of HCC based on gene
expression.[Results] The expression profiling showed that expression of
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) gene was increased 2.378 in CN, and methylation
array analysis showed a lower value for CN (0.13) than SN (0.75). We then
studied JAK2 gene expression by quantitative real time RT-PCR.
Unfortunately, the average expression value of JAK2 (JAK2 x103/GAPDH) had
decreased in matching normal tissue (9.247.46) relative to SN
(35.2121.38). Only one case was expressed higher than SN average in CN.
We divided the cases into two groups. Group A showed higher 70% of JAK2
expression cases (70 cases) and group B showed lower 30% of expression
cases (30 cases). Then, the group A had a significant correlations with
worth prognosis (p=0.017) by univariate analysis and showed independent
worth prognostic factor (p = 0.032) by multivariate analysis.[Discussion
& Conclusion] It has been reported that JAK2 has an important role in
reproduction of normal hepatocyte, and maintenance of liver functions in
the super normal liver. While, in HCC tissues, STAT3-JAK2 pathway was
reported as an oncogenic factor in proliferation and progression. In this
study, the expression of the JAK2 gene in the background liver in HCC
cases also had an important meaning and likely to be a good biomarker.
When assessing cases of HCC, as well as considering malignant factor of
the primary cancer lesion, it is important to extract prognostic factors
from background liver tissue.

