Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of PIM and PI3 kinases shows an enhanced
efficacy in a number of solid tumour cell lines


Introduction: PIM kinases play an important role in a number of aspects
of the regulation of cell cycle and proliferation. Over expression of PIM
kinases is associated with oncogenicity in a number of haematological and
solid tumours. Recent evidencesuggests that PIM expression is upregulated
by inhibition of signalling on the AKT/PI3K/mTOR pathway. We set out to
examine the effects of inhibition of PIM kinases in a number of solid
tumor cell lines and to explore the effects of concomitant inhibition of
the AKT/PI3K/mTOR pathway with novel agents having dual PIM kinase and
PI3k inhibition. Representative cell lines for colorectal, lung,
oesophageal and prostate tumors (HCT116, A549 and H460, OE21, PC3
respectively) were chosen for testing in a cytotoxicity assay. Compounds
tested were GDC-0941, a prototypical PI3K inhibitor, AZD 1208, a pan-PIM
inhibitor (i.e. equi-active on all 3 PIM isoforms), IBL- 201 and IBL-202
(dual-acting PI3K/PIM inhibitors) and IBL-301 and IBL-302 (triple-acting
PI3K/PIM/mTOR inhibitors). Rapamycin the prototypical mTOR inhibitor and
cisplatin were also tested as reference compounds.Results: The pan-PIM
compound AZD1208 showed efficacy in all cell lines in the micromolar
range. Rapamycin was also active across similar concentrations. GDC-0941,
the PI3K inhibitor exhibited moderate efficacy across the cell line panel
. The dual and triple inhibitors showed cytotoxic effects at sub
micromolar concentrations, with the OE21 and PC3 oesophageal and prostate
lines respectively showing the most sensitive responses.Conclusion: These
results suggest that in selected solid tumor cell lines combined
inhibition of PIM and PI3 kinases can lead to an increased cytotoxic
effect. Further studies are under way to determine if this observation is
corroborated in vivo. Combined inhibition of PIM and PI3 kinases with a
single molecule may offer significant opportunities in the clinic for
efficacy in key tumour subsets and to circumvent acquired resistance via
feedback mechanisms.

