Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD1152-hQPA Accurins: Nanoparticle formulations showing extended
release and the potential for improved therapeutic index


The prodrug, Barasertib (AZD1152) is a potent selective inhibitor of the
Aurora B kinase which plays a pivotal role in chromosomal segregation
during the cell cycle. In a Phase 2 randomised study in elderly AML
patients unfit for intensive therapy, Barasertib showed a statistically
significant improvement in Overall Complete Response Rate and a trend for
improved Overall Survival as a continuous infusion over 7 days
(Kantarjian et al, Cancer 2013;119:2611-2619) . The Dose Limiting
Toxicities were neutropenia and stomatitis. AccurinTM nanoparticle
formulations of the active metabolite, AZD1152-hQPA, have been developed
utilizing medicinal nanoengineering to optimize critical nanoparticle
properties such that a short infusion has the potential for extended
target cover and an improved therapeutic index from increased
biodistribution to the tumour site. In nude rats bearing SW620 tumours,
AZD1152-hQPA Accurins gave extended target cover leading to sustained
pharmacodynamic (PD) inhibition of phospho-histone H3 in the tumour
relative to Barasertib at the same dose. Interestingly the Accurins gave
a differentiated PD profile with maximal PD seen at later time points.
This profile led to improved anti-tumour effects when AZD1152-hQPA
Accurins were dosed intravenously at 25mg/kg on day 1 and 3, compared to
Barasertib dosed at 25mg/kg on days 1, 2, 3, 4. Significantly, one of the
AZD1152-hQPA Accurins had minimal impact on bone marrow pathology,
demonstrating the potential for increased efficacy and lower toxicity at
half the dose intensity of Barasertib in this preclinical model. The
impact on efficacy of different dose intensities and schedules with this
AZD1152-hQPA Accurin has also been explored in the equivalent nude mouse
SW620 model. Together these studies demonstrate that by careful selection
of formulation parameters, AZD1152-hQPA can be formulated with an
extended release profile able to deliver improved efficacy and
tolerability in pre-clinical models. AZD1152-hQPA Accurins offer the
potential to overcome the therapeutic index challenges which previously
limited the clinical development of agents in the class.

