Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKG2D receptor activation of mTOR and NFB enhances antitumor
immunity in effector CD8+ T cells


To induce strong anti-tumor immune responses, nave CD8+ T cells require
stimulation through the TCR and costimulatory receptors. Each
costimulatory molecule can have a unique effect on the function of T
cells due to differential activation of downstream signaling pathways and
gene expression. However, the effect of stimulating costimulatory
receptors on activated T cells is still unclear. One costimulation
receptor that is likely to be engaged in the tumor microenvironment is
NKG2D since the ligands for this receptor are expressed on over 80% of
tumors. In order to determine how activation of costimulatory receptors
in the tumor microenvironment affects CD8+ T cell functions, this study
investigated the differential activation of signaling pathways by two
costimulatory receptors, CD28 and NKG2D. Specifically, this study focused
on the activation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 along with NFB, all of which have
been shown to have important roles in anti-tumor functions of CD8+ T
cells. Stimulation through the CD3 and NKG2D receptors differentially
activated the mTOR and NFB pathways compared to the other receptors in
our study. Activation of CD8+ T cells through CD3 and NKG2D lead to
increased phosphorylation of signal transduction pathway members upstream
of mTOR, including AKT, p70 S6K, and GSK3. Also, expression of genes
upstream and downstream of mTORC1 and mTORC2 were differentially
activated after stimulation through NKG2D, indicating that activation of
mTOR pathways are altered after CD3/NKG2D stimulation as compared to
stimulation through CD3 or CD3/CD28. In addition, IKK, IB, and NFB
phosphorylation and IB degradation was increased after CD3/NKG2D
stimulation. This increased activation of the NFB pathway also lead to
increased gene expression and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
including IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma, and decreased gene expression and
secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-10 and VEGF-alpha.
Together, these data show that stimulation through NKG2D leads to the
differential activation of signaling pathways and alters the anti-tumor
functions of effector CD8+ T cells.

