Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer stem-like cells display aggressive behavior
mediated through the activation of FoxQ1


Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains as one of the most aggressive and deadly
malignant diseases with poorest clinical outcome, and it is the 4th
leading cause of cancer-related death in the USA. Higher mortality of
patients diagnosed with PC is in part attributed to treatment resistance
and early metastatic disease. Sub-populations of cancer cells commonly
known as cancer stem cells (CSCs) or cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs) have
been identified from most tumors including PC, and the existence of these
cells are being recognized to be clinically relevant. Emerging evidence
suggests that CSLCs are responsible for many cellular functions including
their propensity of increased cell growth/proliferation,
migration/invasion, metastasis, and chemo-radio-therapy resistance, all
of these attributes lead to poor clinical outcome. However, the
pathogenesis and biological significance of CSLCs in PC has not been well
characterized. In the present study, we found that triple-marker positive
cells (CD44+/CD133+/EpCAM+ cells) cells isolated from human PC cell lines
behave like CSCs. These CSLCs exhibit aggressive behavior such as
increased cell growth, migration, clonogenicity, and self-renewal
capacity. The mRNA expression profiling analysis showed that CSLCs
(triple-marker positive cells) exhibit differential expression of more
than 1600 mRNAs including Bmi1, BMP4, BST2, BTG1, FOLR1, FoxQ1, PRKAR1A,
Sox2, TACSTD2 and Wnt3a, compared to the cells that are triple-marker
negative (CD44-/CD133-/EpCAM- cells). The knock-down of FoxQ1 by its
siRNA in CSLCs resulted in the inhibition of aggressive behavior,
consistent with reduced expression of EpCAM and Snail. These data clearly
suggest the role of differentially expressed genes in the regulation of
CSLC characteristics, which further suggest that targeting some of these
genes in order to eliminate CSLCs could be important for the development
of novel therapies for achieving better treatment outcome of patients
diagnosed with PC.

