Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic stress enhances tumorigenic potential of PPAR in colon
cancer cells


Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) is reported to be
deeply implicated in the process of colon carcinogenesis. However, the
crosstalk between PPAR in colon cancer cells and a hypoxic tumor
microenvironment is not entirely understood. Hypoxia (Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) is reported to be deeply
implicated in the process of colon carcinogenesis. However, the crosstalk
between PPAR in colon cancer cells and a hypoxic tumor microenvironment
is not entirely understood. Hypoxia (<1% O2) and deferoxamine (a hypoxia
mimetic) induced the expression of tumor-promoting cytokines, IL-8 and
VEGF, in colon cancer cells (HCT116). In contrast, the induction of IL-8
and VEGF by hypoxic stress was greatly attenuated in PPAR-knockout HCT116
cells. Consistently, while HCT116 cells stimulated with hypoxic stress
were able to promote the vascular formation of endothelial cells and the
migration of macrophages, the capacity of PPAR-knockout HCT116 cells to
induce angiogenesis and macrophage activation was greatly attenuated.
Hypoxic stress enhanced DNA binding activity of PPAR in HCT116 cells
showing PPAR transactivation was stimulated by hypoxic stress.
Overexpression of p300 enhanced deferoxamine-induced transcriptional
activation of PPAR whereas siRNA knockdown of p300 decreased
deferoxamine-induced PPAR transactivation. Inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway
by LY294002 or siRNA-Akt resulted in the decrease of PPAR transactivation
induced by hypoxia and deferoxamine in HCT116 cells. Collectively, the
results show that PPAR plays a role in hypoxic stress-induced cytokine
expression in colon cancer cells, leading to the promotion of
angiogenesis and macrophage activation in the tumor microenvironment.
p300 and the PI3K/Akt pathway participate in the regulation of hypoxic
stress-mediated PPAR transactivation in colon cancer cells. Our results
suggest that the positive crosstalk between PPAR in colon cancer cells
and hypoxia in tumor microenvironment aggravate and accelerate the
progress of tumorigenesis.

