Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody blockade of Semaphorin 4D promotes tumor rejection and
improves response to immune checkpoint blockade and chemotherapy


Semaphorin4D (SEMA4D) normally functions to regulate, adhesion, motility
and activation state of multiple cell types including those of the
nervous, vascular and immune systems. In the setting of cancer, SEMA4D
has been shown to promote tumor progression and metastasis. SEMA4D and
its high affinity receptor plexin B1 are broadly expressed in human and
murine tumors, and expression levels correlate with invasive disease in
several human tumors. The interaction of plexin B1 with MET and ERBB2 can
lead to SEMA4D-mediated transactivation of these membrane receptor
kinases with a direct effect on tumor cell migration and invasive growth.
Moreover, SEMA4D is highly expressed by inflammatory cells that are
recruited to the tumor microenvironment.Purpose: Determine the role(s) of
SEMA4D in shaping the tumor microenvironment, and investigate the
anti-tumor response mediated by antibody neutralization of SEMA4D as a
single agent or in combination with other immunomodulatory
therapies.Methods: Subcutaneous colon and orthotopic ERBB2+ breast
carcinoma models were employed to investigate treatment with a monoclonal
antibody to SEMA4D. Anti-tumor response and tumor infiltrating immune
cell profiles were characterized by in vivo growth kinetics,
immunohistochemistry, FACS, and functional assays.Results: We describe an
immunomodulatory function of SEMA4D within the tumor microenvironment,
whereby SEMA4D influences the recruitment and activity of cytotoxic CD8+
T cells, the density of B cells within the tumor, and regulates the
balance and localization of inflammatory M1 and tolerance-inducing M2
macrophage in tumor stroma. Antibody blockade of SEMA4D modifies the
balance of immune cells and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines
within the tumor microenvironment, promotes tumor rejection, and induces
30% tumor growth delay (TGD) in Colon26 and >70% TGD in Tubo breast tumor
models. Furthermore, combination of SEMA4D antibody with immune
checkpoint blockade inhibitor antibodies to CTLA4 and PD1, significantly
improves frequency of complete tumor rejection (58% and 37%) and
increases survival (>295% and >55% TGD respectively) as compared to
monotherapy with these targeted agents. Similar combinatorial effects
were observed when anti-SEMA4D antibody is administered with
immunomodulatory chemotherapy, such as cyclophosphamide, which increases
efficacy (81% TGD) and frequency of complete rejection (40%) in tumor
engrafted mice.Conclusion: SEMA4D represents a novel immunological target
and antibody neutralization of SEMA4D may be a novel therapeutic option
for cancer treatment. The humanized anti-SEMA4D antibody, VX15/2503, has
successfully completed IND-enabling toxicology testing and the dose
escalation phase of a Phase I trial, in which the highest doses were well
tolerated in adult patients with advanced solid tumors.

