Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of DCA and metformin on murine colon cancer growth


Background: Dichloroacetate (DCA) and metformin (M) have been reported to
have many effects on cancer cells including alterations in pH homeostasis
and glucose metabolism, cell cycle arrest, induction of autophagy and
modulation of the tumor microenvironment. These effects have been shown
to increase tumor apoptosis, inhibit neoplastic cell proliferation,
improve the immune response against tumor cells and decrease the
protective inflammatory response in tumors, which has led to the
investigation of these drugs as anticancer agents. This study examines
the effects of DCA and metformin in a murine colon cancer model both in
vivo and in vitro.Methods: Murine colon cancer cell lines (ATCC
CT26-CL25, CT26-WT) and cells isolated from subcutaneous metastatic colon
cancer tumors (CT71911) were grown in the presence of DCA (serial
concentrations from 12 mM to 192mM) and M (serial concentrations from 8
mM to 48 mM). Viable cells were counted and averaged for 3 separate
assays. Balb/c mice in triplicate were injected IP with serial
concentrations of DCA and M (8,24,48 mM) beginning one day prior to tail
vein administration of 7.5 x 103 colon cancer cells (CT26-WT, CT71911).
Daily IP injections of DCA and M were continued for 6 weeks or until the
mice succumbed to metastatic cancer. All mice were autopsied and cause of
death was recorded.Results: All three cell lines demonstrated a linear
reduction in growth and increased apoptosis with increasing
concentrations of DCA. All tumor cells were killed at concentrations
above 96 mM. M was cytostatic but not cytotoxic for all three cell lines
with minimal growth at 8 mM and no growth at higher concentrations. In
vivo, administration of IP DCA prolonged survival by 80 - 89% (days after
tumor challenge), while IP metformin prolonged survival by 35 - 38%.
Increased survival with both DCA and M was not dose dependent with
variation between concentrations less than 10%. All mice died of lung
metastases.Conclusion: Both DCA and M demonstrated beneficial effects on
murine colon cancer cells with reductions in cell growth and increased
apoptosis in vitro and increased survival in vivo. M exhibited cytostatic
activity and a lower improvement in survival while DCA exhibited
cytotoxic activity and a longer survival benefit. Further investigation
in the use of these agents as adjunct therapies for colon cancer is
warranted.

