Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained adrenergic signaling promotes intratumoral innervation
through BDNF induction


Mounting clinical and preclinical evidence supports a key role of
sustained adrenergic signaling in the tumor microenvironment as a driver
of tumor growth and progression. However, the mechanisms by which
adrenergic neurotransmitters are delivered to the tumor microenvironment
are not well understood. Sustained adrenergic signaling resulted in
increased tumor growth and was correlated with a significant increase in
intratumoral nerve density and norepinephrine in several orthotopic
models of disease. These effects were completely abrogated by
hexamethonium bromide (ganglionic blocker), but not by removal of the
adrenal glands. To elucidate mechanism by which tumor cells induce nerve
growth, we analyzed gene expression changes and found BDNF to be a key
factor upregulated by catecholamine treatment. Treatment with different
ADRB agonist and blockers determined that ADRB3 is required for the
induction of BDNF. Use of cAMP and Epac agonist/antagonist demonstrated
that this axis is required for catecholamine induced BDNF expression.
Further analyses revealed that JNK exerts its control of BDNF expression
through the regulation of AP-1. In various orthotopic models of disease,
chronic stress significantly increased tumor growth and intratumoral
innervation, an effect completely blocked by BDNF siRNA-DOPC
nanoliposomes. Moreover, BNDF overexpression was sufficient to induce
tumor growth and intratumoral innervation. Silencing of TrkB, BDNF
receptor, on the host by murine BDNF siRNA-Chitosan nanoparticles blocked
the effects of sustained adrenergic signaling on tumor growth and
innervation. Additionally, inhibition of host TrkB activity in a
transgenic TrkB Kinase-Switch mouse model inoculated with ovarian cancer
cells showed that adrenergic induced tumor growth and innervation is
mediated by the host TrkB. In cancer patients, high tumor nerve density
was significantly associated with increased BDNF and norepinephrine
levels, and worse overall survival. Collectively, these data describe a
novel pathway for tumor neo-innervation with resultant biological and
clinical implications.

