Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C/EBPdelta links hypoxia and inflammation to the promotion of
tumor cell stemness through inhibition of FBXW7: A molecular target for
HDAC inhibitor action


Hypoxia and inflammation are linked to progression of epithelial cancers
by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem
cells (CSCs). A better understanding of the mechanisms by which these
conditions augment tumor progression is necessary to combat metastases
and treatment resistance. The transcription factor C/EBP promotes hypoxia
adaptation and inflammatory signaling by inhibiting expression of FBXW7,
which targets many oncoproteins (e.g. Notch, c-myc) and also C/EBP for
degradation (Balamurugan et al., EMBO J, 2010; Nature Commun 2013). FBXW7
is also known to regulate self-renewal, differentiation and quiescence of
neural and hematopoietic stem cells. Therefore, we hypothesized that
C/EBP supports the development of CSCs through inhibition of FBXW7 and
that this pathway has potential as therapeutic target.We investigated the
roles of C/EBP and FBXW7 through overexpression and silencing approaches
in human breast tumor cell lines and primary mouse mammary tumors;
followed by gene expression analyses and assays for stem cell-like
functions under hypoxia and in response to interleukin 6 (IL-6). We found
that C/EBP augments _ while FBXW7 inhibits _ hypoxia- and IL-6-induced
formation of mammospheres, a surrogate assay for stem cell function, and
expression of markers for EMT and CSCs. Furthermore, C/EBP was necessary
for hypoxia-induced expression of IL-6, providing a link between these
pathways. Indeed, silencing of C/EBP delayed the outgrowth of MCF-7
xenograft tumors, indicating that C/EBP supports CSC development.Because
C/EBP can interact with histone deacetylases (HDACs), we tested the
effect of HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) that are in clinical trials for breast
cancer (e.g. SAHA). HDACi inhibited C/EBP expression and induced FBXW7
expression. Furthermore, HDACi reduced mammosphere formation specifically
under hypoxia, and this effect could be partially reversed by FBXW7
knockdown. These results suggest a therapeutic benefit of HDACi for
breast cancer through activation of FBXW7 and inhibition of C/EBP
followed by reduction in CSCs. Future investigations will explore drug
combinations with HDACi to maximize the effectiveness of the FBXW7 tumor
suppressor pathway under hypoxia and inflammatory conditions.

