Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin-mediated adaptive response: a risk factor for IGRT


Exposure of cells to very low doses of ionizing radiation can induce an
enhanced resistance or adaptive response to a subsequent larger radiation
dose as demonstrated by an increase in cell survival. Expression of a
radio-adaptive response has been attributed to pro-survival signaling
processes induced by very low radiation doses in the range of 5 to 100
mGy. The radiation-induced adaptive response is gaining considerable
attention due in part to the expanding use of imaging technologies such
as computerized axial tomography and portal imaging to monitor tumor
response and positioning during multi-dose standard radiation therapy
protocols. The focus of this study was to investigate whether this
process could occur when the very small imaging radiation dose was
administered prior to or following the administration of the first of two
typically used radiation therapy level doses. SA-NH mouse sarcoma cells
and SA-NH cells stably transfected with mutated IB (SA-NH+mIB1) to
inhibit the activation of NFB were grown to confluence in vitro or as
tumors in the right hind leg of C3H mice. Percentage of cell survival,
apoptosis frequencies and survivin protein levels were determined as a
function of radiation conditions and transfection of cells with survivin
siRNA. A significant radio-adaptive response was observed in cells
exposed to 5 mGy - 100 mGy 15 min to 6 h prior to or after irradiation
with the first of two 2 Gy therapeutic radiation doses and was associated
with a concomitant reduction in apoptosis frequencies and a rapid
elevation in survivin protein levels. The very low dose radiation-induced
elevation in survivin levels, the reduction in apoptosis frequencies and
enhanced cell survival were not observed in SA-NH+mIB1 cells or SA-NH
cells transfected with survivin siRNA. We have identified a very low
radiation dose-induced survivin-mediated adaptive response that could
compromise therapeutic outcomes associated with the increased usage of
imaging procedures in radiation therapy. This work was supported by
NIH/NCI grant R01 CA132998 and DOE Low Dose Program/Project Grant
DE-SC0001271 (D.J.G.)

