Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem-like triple negative breast cancer cells exhibit a distinct
response to selectin/selectin ligand interactions


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) often over-express sialofucosylated
glycans, which bind to E-selectin presented on vascular endothelial
cells. This interaction facilitates the initial tethering and rolling
adhesion events in CTC extravasation during cancer metastasis. Though
selectins and their ligands are well-established cell adhesion molecules,
relatively little is known about their roles as cell signaling molecules
for regulating growth, migration, and apoptosis in breast cancer (BC). To
investigate the effects of selectin/selectin ligand interactions on BC
cell signaling and adhesion, Hs578T, and MDA-MB-231 stem-like triple
negative cell lines and BT-20, MCF-7, and ZR-75-1 non-stem-like
hormone-receptor-positive cell lines were grown on tissue culture plates
pre-treated with recombinant E-selectin or perfused over
E-selectin-presenting substrate at physiologically relevant laminar flow
conditions. In culture, cell lines demonstrated a dose dependent response
on substrates pre-treated with increasing concentrations (1-10 g/ml) of
recombinant E-selectin. More specifically, cell lines exhibited little
change on substrate treated with low concentrations of recombinant
E-selectin (1-5 g/ml) relative to human Fc fragment and fibronectin
controls, yet displayed varying degrees of membrane blebbing and, in some
cases, aggregate formation and reduced proliferation on substrate treated
with 10 g/ml of recombinant E-selectin. Notably, the stem-like triple
negative cell lines, specifically Hs578T cells, had the most pronounced
response to culture on E-selectin substrate as defined by blebbing and
formation of cell aggregates. Furthermore, when Hs578T cells were
cultured on substrate with adjacent areas treated with either recombinant
E-selectin (10 g/ml) or fibronectin (molar equivalent), cells failed to
attach and grow on E-selectin but successfully seeded and proliferated in
culture on fibronectin. In the laminar flow assay, Hs578T and MDA-MB-231
stem-like triple negative cell lines had four fold fewer adhesions on
E-selectin substrate relative to the adhesion of BT-20, MCF-7, and
ZR-75-1 non-stem-like hormone-receptor-positive cell lines. Moreover, the
average rolling velocity of the stem-like triple negative cell lines on
E-selectin substrate was significantly greater than the average rolling
velocities of the other cell lines, which illustrates that under dynamic
flow conditions stem-like triple negative BC cell lines have relatively
fewer and weaker interactions with E-selectin. These data show that BC
cells, especially Hs578T stem-like triple negative BC cells, differ in
response to selectin/selectin ligand interaction under static and dynamic
conditions, and illustrate that threshold levels of selectin/selectin
ligand interaction may regulate cell signaling in certain types of BC
cell lines. Thus targeting these interactions may lead to novel BC
therapeutics.

