Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic characterization and specific targeting of breast
cancer stem cells


Metastasis causes 90% of the mortality associated with solid tumors, such
as breast cancer. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying metastasis
remain poorly understood and no effective approaches are available to
cure metastasis. The identification of cancer stem cells (CSCs), a
subpopulation of cancer cells with stem cell properties, has brought us a
new perspective on cancer, including leukemia and solid tumors. CSCs are
proposed to mediate cancer relapse and metastasis due to their resistance
to conventional therapies. Our work has demonstrated that breast cancer
stem cells (BCSCs) are able to mediate spontaneous lung metastases in
human-in-mouse xenograft models. We have also identified that miR-30c, a
human breast tumour prognostic marker, regulates both invasion and
chemo-resistance, through targeting TWF1, VIM, and downstream IL-11. TWF1
encodes an actin-binding protein and promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). An IL-6 family member, IL-11 was identified as a
secondary target of TWF1 in the miR-30c signalling pathway. Expression of
miR-30c inversely correlated with TWF1 and IL-11 levels in primary breast
tumors and low IL-11 correlated with relapse-free survival in breast
cancer patients. Our study demonstrates that miR-30c is transcriptionally
regulated by GATA3 in breast tumors. Identification of a novel
miRNA-mediated pathway that regulates chemo-resistance in breast cancer
will facilitate the development of novel therapeutic strategies. Future
ongoing interactive basic and translational research directions include:
(1) to understand CSCs using cutting-edge single cell sequencing
technology and functional studies; (2) to image CSCs (their dynamic
behavior and interactions with immune cells and non-CSCs) during
metastasis using bioluminescence imaging and intravital imaging systems;
and (3) to target CSCs with novel therapeutics delivered by nanoparticles.

