Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic 18F-FDG PET parameters variation in patient-derived breast
cancer xenograft and correlation with outcome following treatment with
cytotoxic agents


Using pharmacokinetic modeling for dynamic 18FDG PET (D-PET) the temporal
and spatial uptake pattern of 18FDG may be separated into components
reflecting perfusion and metabolism. Patient-derived breast cancer
xenografts (bcPDX) reflect morphology, gene and protein expression
profiles of those in patients. The outcome for conventional treatment
with cytotoxic agents may be dependent on the perfusion and tumor
aggressiveness among others. The purpose of this study was to utilize
D-PET for assessment of perfusion and glucose metabolism of 6 bcPDX and
correlate these parameters with treatment outcome.Each of the 6 bcPDX, 3
basal-like (HBCx12a, HBCx28, HBCx39) and 3 luminal-like (HBCx3, HBCx34,
MAS98.06), were inoculated bilateral in mammary fat pad of 6 athymic nude
mice (ANM). D-PET (1hour scan) was performed with injections of 10 MBq
18FDG. A well-established three-compartment FDG distribution model was
fitted to the uptake curves voxel-by-voxel. The rate constants k1 and k3,
and vascular fraction vp were calculated. Each of 6 bcPDX was inoculated
in 20 ANM. When tumors measured 500mm3, mice received either vehicle or
paclitaxel 15mg/kg twice a week, doxorubicin 8mg/kg once every three week
or carboplatin 10mg/kg once a week for 6 weeks. Tumor double time was
calculated and correlated to k1, k3 and vp using a Spearman rank test.The
median k1, k3, vp and tumor double time (TDT) (see table) were
significantly different for the majority all bcPDX(pUsing pharmacokinetic
modeling for dynamic 18FDG PET (D-PET) the temporal and spatial uptake
pattern of 18FDG may be separated into components reflecting perfusion
and metabolism. Patient-derived breast cancer xenografts (bcPDX) reflect
morphology, gene and protein expression profiles of those in patients.
The outcome for conventional treatment with cytotoxic agents may be
dependent on the perfusion and tumor aggressiveness among others. The
purpose of this study was to utilize D-PET for assessment of perfusion
and glucose metabolism of 6 bcPDX and correlate these parameters with
treatment outcome.Each of the 6 bcPDX, 3 basal-like (HBCx12a, HBCx28,
HBCx39) and 3 luminal-like (HBCx3, HBCx34, MAS98.06), were inoculated
bilateral in mammary fat pad of 6 athymic nude mice (ANM). D-PET (1hour
scan) was performed with injections of 10 MBq 18FDG. A well-established
three-compartment FDG distribution model was fitted to the uptake curves
voxel-by-voxel. The rate constants k1 and k3, and vascular fraction vp
were calculated. Each of 6 bcPDX was inoculated in 20 ANM. When tumors
measured 500mm3, mice received either vehicle or paclitaxel 15mg/kg twice
a week, doxorubicin 8mg/kg once every three week or carboplatin 10mg/kg
once a week for 6 weeks. Tumor double time was calculated and correlated
to k1, k3 and vp using a Spearman rank test.The median k1, k3, vp and
tumor double time (TDT) (see table) were significantly different for the
majority all bcPDX(p<0.05). TDT was not significantly correlated to k1,
k3 and vp except for paclitaxel treatment, where TDT was increased for
models with low k1, k3 and vp can be explained by higher treatment
resistance of well vascularized and perfused tumor with high glucose
metabolism. We showed that different bcPDX have different perfusion and
glucose metabolism as measured by D-PET with low intermodal variations
except HBCx28. D-PET appeared to be a robust technique and potentially
can be used for monitoring of these parameters.


