Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RPS4X, a new prognostic and predictive biomarker of ovarian and
breast cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a disease responsible for more cancer
deaths among women in the Western world than all other gynecologic
malignancies and breast cancer is leading cause of cancer death among the
women worldwide. A major problem with such cancers is chemoresistance;
hence the need to identify predictive biomarkers. Interestingly,
overexpression of YB-1 in ovarian and breast cancer cells induces
cisplatin resistance. Platinum coumpounds like cisplatin is often used in
the treatments of these cancers. Y box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) is a
multifunctional protein that affects transcription, splicing and
translation of mRNA. In this study, we used a tagged YB-1 construct to
identify by mass spectrometry the proteins that interacted with YB-1 and
required for cisplatin resistance. Using the combination of two
bioinformatics databases (Oncomine public microarray and genomic
hybridization), we focused on the YB-1 protein partners that are
potentially involved in cancer progression. We used the siRNA technique
to screen different partners of YB-1 that are directly involve in the
cisplatin resistance of MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells lines. From this
analysis, we found that the RPS4X protein, a new partner of YB-1, would
be a good marker of cisplatin resistance in breast cancer patients.
Interestingly, the YB-1/RPS4X complex was also found in ovarian cancer
cells. Like in the breast cancer cell lines, the depletion of RPS4X
protein induced the cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer cells lines
(SKOV3 and OVCAR3). Finally, we used a validate antibodies to assess by
immunohistochemistry the protein levels of RPS4X and YB-1 in tumor tissue
samples from 192 high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer patients. We
found that RPS4X correlated significantly with ovarian cancer patient
outcome.Taken together, these results suggest that, the YB-1/RPS4X
complex is a significant potential target to counteract cisplatin
resistance in breast and ovarian cancers. Also, we have established that
RPS4X is a new promising prognostic marker for patients with high-grade
ovarian cancer. More importantly, RPS4X is shown to be predictive of
cisplatin response. Additional immunohistochemistry studies on low-grade
ovarian cancers and breast cancers are required to confirm the predictive
value of RPS4X.

