Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Procyanidin B2 3,3-di-O-gallate (B2G2), a biologically active
constituent of grape seed extract, inhibits angiogenesis targeting
multiple molecular pathways


Prostate cancer (PCA) is the single largest cause of non-cutaneous
malignancy among men in the United States, and is the second leading
cause of cancer-related deaths. According to American Cancer society
estimates, in 2013, 238,590 new cases of PCA will be diagnosed and 29,720
men will die of this disease in the US alone. One of the hallmarks of
prostate carcinogenesis is the extensive angiogenesis involved in both
primary tumor growth and metastasis. Numerous studies to date have
confirmed a direct correlation of angiogenesis with Gleason score, tumor
stage, progression, metastasis and survival; and it has emerged as an
important cancer prevention and therapeutic target. Therefore, targeting
aberrant angiogenesis using non-toxic phytochemicals has emerged as an
attractive option against PCA. B2 3,3-di-O-gallate (B2G2) is a major
biological constituent of grape seed extract (GSE), a well-known dietary
agent that has shown strong chemopreventive and anti-cancer efficacy
against various malignancies including PCA. Recently, we reported strong
efficacy of B2G2 against human PCA LNCaP, C4-2, 22Rv1, DU145 and PC-3
cells. In the present study, we investigated the anti-angiogenic efficacy
of B2G2 using human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human
prostate microvascular endothelial cells (HPMEC). Our results showed that
B2G2 (10-40 M) inhibits proliferation and induces apoptotic cell death in
both HUVEC and HPMEC in a time- and dose-dependent manner. B2G2 treatment
also induced cell cycle arrest (in G1 phase) in HUVEC by upregulating CDK
inhibitors (p21(Cip1/Waf1) and p27(Kip1)) expression, and downregulating
CDKs (Cdk2 andcdc2), cyclins (D1 and A) and Cdc25c phosphatase. B2G2
treatment also up regulated the pro-apoptotic molecules Bax and Smac/
Diablo, and down regulated the cell survival molecule survivin in HUVEC.
Furthermore, B2G2 inhibited the capillary-like tube formation and
invasiveness of both HUVEC and HPMEC on matrigel. Molecular analyses
showed that B2G2 treatment of HUVEC decreased the phosphorylation of
PI3K, PDK1, Akt, GSK3 and ERK1/2, which are known to regulate
proliferation, apoptosis, tube formation and invasiveness of endothelial
cells. Next, we analyzed the angiogenic potential of conditioned media
(CM) collected from human PCA LNCaP and PC-3 cells treated with either
DMSO or B2G2 (50 M) under normoxic and hypoxic (1% O2) conditions. CM
from PCA cells grown under normoxic and hypoxic conditions significantly
enhanced the capillary tube formation in HUVEC, while capillary tube
formation in these endothelial cells was significantly compromised in the
presence of CM from B2G2-treated PCA cells under both normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. Taken together, our current findings clearly
demonstrate the anti-angiogenic property of B2G2 suggesting its
usefulness in PCA management.

