Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 induces P-gp expression through hyaluronic acid binding and
transcriptional activation


The main causes of treatment failure and mortality in cancer are
metastases and the development of drug resistance. CD44 and P-gp are two
membrane proteins well-known determinants of metastases and drug
resistance respectively. We and others have shown that CD44 induces P-gp
expression in cancer cells. We also showed that there is a physical
interaction between these two proteins as they immunoprecipitate and
co-localize in the cell membrane. Hyaluronan (HA) is a well known ligand
for CD44, involved in tumor cell signaling and the development of
malignant properties. Others have shown that HA is necessary for the CD44
induction of P-gp expression and drug resistance. However, it is not
known whether HA binding to CD44 is indeed necessary for this induction.
To answer this question, we generated different mutants of the CD44 HA
binding domains (CD44 HABD). We transfected CD44 HABD mutants as well as
CD44 wt into ovarian cancer cells (TOV112D) and human embryonic kidney
cell lines (HEK 293). Unexpectedly, we found that P-gp expression was
induced both in CD44 wt and CD44 HABD mutants. However, the P-gp
induction was significantly less in the CD44 HABD mutants. We tested
whether the P-gp induced by the CD44-HABD mutants was functional by
testing for drug sensitivity in an MTT assay. We observed that cells
transfected with CD44 HABD mutants became drug sensitive as compared to
CD44 wt transfected cells even when the whole HA binding domain was
deleted. We then determined if deletion of the CD44 HABD domain had an
effect on the physical interaction between CD44 and P-gp. By
co-immunoprecipitation experiments we showed that CD44 and P-gp were
physically interacting even in CD44 HABD mutants. These results indicate
the existence of an additional mechanism for P-gp induction through CD44
that is independent of HA binding. Previously, we showed that the
intracytoplasmic domain of CD44 (CD44-ICD) is transported into the
nucleus where it binds to DNA promoters and is involved in the
transcriptional regulation of various genes. Therefore, we investigated
whether CD44 was involved in transcriptional regulation of P-gp as the
additional mechanism of Pgp upregulation. Co-transfection of CD44 or
CD44-HABD mutants with luciferase driven MDR1 promoter showed increased
luciferase activity in both CD44wt and CD44-HABD mutants. However, this
MDR1 promoter does not have the CD44 DNA binding consensus sequence.
Therefore, CD44-ICD could be inducing other genes that in turn activate
the MDR1 gene. We conclude that although HA binding to CD44 is important
for the induction of P-gp, CD44 transcriptional activation of MDR1
promoter also plays a role. Furthermore, we show that CD44
transcriptional activation of MDR1 is independent of HA binding. These
results further the understanding to the present knowledge of CD44
involvement in drug resistance and uncovers new mechanisms involved in
this process that are HA-independent.

