Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced Tip60 expression in human gastric cancer


The tumor suppressor Tip60 plays a major role in gene transcription, DNA
damage response, apoptosis and cancer development, but its role in
gastric cancer is unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of
Tip60 in gastric cancer pathogenesis and assessed its prognostic value.
Using tissue microarrays consisting of 567 cases of gastric cancers (78
for training set and 489 for validation set), we found that Tip60
expression was significantly reduced in advanced gastric cancer compared
to early stages of gastric cancer (P The tumor suppressor Tip60 plays a
major role in gene transcription, DNA damage response, apoptosis and
cancer development, but its role in gastric cancer is unknown. In this
study, we investigated the role of Tip60 in gastric cancer pathogenesis
and assessed its prognostic value. Using tissue microarrays consisting of
567 cases of gastric cancers (78 for training set and 489 for validation
set), we found that Tip60 expression was significantly reduced in
advanced gastric cancer compared to early stages of gastric cancer (P <
0.001). Reduced Tip60 was correlated with gastric cancer lymph node
metastasis (P The tumor suppressor Tip60 plays a major role in gene
transcription, DNA damage response, apoptosis and cancer development, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. In this study, we investigated the
role of Tip60 in gastric cancer pathogenesis and assessed its prognostic
value. Using tissue microarrays consisting of 567 cases of gastric
cancers (78 for training set and 489 for validation set), we found that
Tip60 expression was significantly reduced in advanced gastric cancer
compared to early stages of gastric cancer (P < 0.001). Reduced Tip60 was
correlated with gastric cancer lymph node metastasis (P < 0.001) although
no significant correlation was found between Tip60 expression and gastric
cancer distant metastasis. Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis showed
that reduced Tip60 expression was associated with a poorer five-year
overall survival in gastric cancer patients from both training set (P =
0.010) and validation set (P The tumor suppressor Tip60 plays a major
role in gene transcription, DNA damage response, apoptosis and cancer
development, but its role in gastric cancer is unknown. In this study, we
investigated the role of Tip60 in gastric cancer pathogenesis and
assessed its prognostic value. Using tissue microarrays consisting of 567
cases of gastric cancers (78 for training set and 489 for validation
set), we found that Tip60 expression was significantly reduced in
advanced gastric cancer compared to early stages of gastric cancer (P <
0.001). Reduced Tip60 was correlated with gastric cancer lymph node
metastasis (P < 0.001) although no significant correlation was found
between Tip60 expression and gastric cancer distant metastasis.
Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis showed that reduced Tip60 expression
was associated with a poorer five-year overall survival in gastric cancer
patients from both training set (P = 0.010) and validation set (P <
0.001). Our data indicate that Tip60 may play an important role in
gastric cancer metastasis and serve as a potential biomarker for gastric
cancer patient outcome.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

