Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restriction of androgen receptor and target gene expression


Background: The androgen receptor (AR) is activated and pathogenic in
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) due to a variety of escape
mechanisms from anti-androgen treatment. The cell of origin of prostate
cancer is not finally defined, but in different models prostate
epithelial basal cells have been shown to develop into cancer with
authentic prostate cancer features. The AR and target genes are
effectively silenced in prostate epithelial basal cells. Given the
importance of activated AR in prostate cancer we performed a reassessment
of the basis of its silencing in prostate epithelial basal cells.Results:
EP156T cells are derived from primary prostate epithelial basal cells and
were propagated in monolayer cultures with features of transit amplifying
cells in medium with low calcium concentration. The AR was not detectable
in these cells and neither the AR nor target genes such as KLK3 (PSA),
TMPRSS2 and NKX3-1 were induced following treatment with synthetic
androgen (R1881) and a variety of growth factors and combinations as
determined using sensitive Taqman real-time quantitative PCR assays, gene
expression microarrays of cell lysates and PSA assays of cell
supernatants. This was in contrast to LNCaP control cells where KLK3 was
12-fold and TMPRSS2 was 8-fold increased following R1881 induction.
EP156T cells underwent epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and a
series of progeny cells with an accumulating number of malignant
hallmarks were derived. In these cells a spontaneous, but limited
increase in AR mRNA was found. But the cells were neither androgen
responsive nor androgen dependent as determined using R1881 stimulation
and bicalutamide inhibitor, respectively. Shift to high calcium
concentration in the medium rapidly induced morphological differentiation
of basal cells, but still the AR and AR target gene expression was
restricted. In 3-dimensional cultures in Matrigel structures with a
distinct outer cell layer versus different inner cells were observed. A
variety of methods was used to explore the molecular basis of restricted
AR and target gene expression in these different culture conditions,
including chromatin immunoprecipitation, indirect immunofluorescence,
fluorescent promoter reporter constructs, gene expression and Western
blot assays.Conclusion: In human prostate epithelial cells with basal
cell traits we found strong restrictions to expression of the AR and AR
target genes in monolayer cultures with a large variety of growth factors
and combinations, including androgens. High calcium concentration induced
morphological changes associated with epithelial differentiation, but
with restricted AR and target gene expression. Growth of epithelial cells
in Matrigel was associated with evidence of morphological
differentiation. This model is useful for further identification of the
molecular basis of restricted AR and target gene expression in prostate
cells in comparison with malignant prostate cells.

