Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic reprogramming by tumor-derived EZH2 gain of function
mutants leads to aggressive 3D-cell morphologies in both epithelial and
melanoma cells


In addition to numerous genetic changes underlying cellular
transformation, cancer cells are also characterized by epigenetic changes
that are likely to play important roles in disease progression. EZH2 is
an epigenetic repressor that plays well-established roles in development.
In addition to widespread overexpression in a variety of tumors, the
discovery of gain of function (GOF) mutations of EZH2 in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular lymphoma, and melanoma strongly
suggests an important function for this histone methyltransferase in
cancer. To ascertain the function of elevated EZH2 catalytic activity, we
expressed either wild-type EZH2 (WT) or EZH2 GOF mutants in both
non-tumorigenic (immortalized epithelial cells) and tumorigenic (melanoma
cells) settings. In both systems, EZH2 GOF mutants greatly increased
global levels of H3K27me3 and decreased H3K27me2 levels, similar to the
epigenetic pattern seen in DLBCL cell lines with endogenous EZH2 GOF
mutations.In epithelial cells, expression of an EZH2 GOF mutant caused
striking changes in 3D-morphology and gene changes that are indicative of
cells that have undergone an epithelial to mesenchymal transition. In the
disease relevant melanoma cells, several distinct EZH2 GOF mutants (but
not EZH2 WT) caused prominent branching morphology in 3D-culture.
Interestingly, these GOF mutants did not affect 2D-cell morphology or
proliferation of melanoma cells. Furthermore, catalytic inhibition of
EZH2 GOF mutants with a commercially available tool compound attenuated
the 3D-phenotype. Importantly, EZH2 inhibition in melanoma cells
expressing an endogenous GOF mutation also caused similar changes in
3D-morphology. RNA-seq analysis revealed genes involved in processes such
as cell adhesion and axonal guidance that were down-regulated by EZH2 GOF
mutants. Finally, melanoma cells expressing ectopic EZH2 GOF mutants
formed larger tumors than control cells in mouse xenograft studies.
Collectively, these results suggest that EZH2 GOF mutants may alter the
interaction of tumor cells with their microenvironment and in this way
provide a selective advantage to such tumors.

