Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora A kinase inhibitor MLN8237 suppresses neurosphere
proliferation of pediatric glioblastoma and prolongs animal survival in
patient tumor-derived orthotopic xenograft mouse model


Background: Pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) is highly aggressive and
development of novel therapy is needed. Aurora A kinase is critical for
mitosis and its overexpression results in malignant transformation of
normal cells. MLN8237 (Alisertib) is the first orally available
reversible selective inhibitor of the Aurora A serine/threonine kinase.
We investigated the effects of MLN8237 on glioma stem cell proliferation
and animal survival, as well as the effects on clinically-proven therapy
resistant GBM cells.Methods: Levels of Aurora A kinase expression were
screened in a panel of patient tumor-derived orthotopic xenograft mouse
models. Anti-tumor effects was examined by Cell Counting Kit-8 assay in
paired monolayer cell lines (in FBS-based media) and neurosphere cultures
(in serum-free media containing EGF and bFGF) from two xenograft mouse
models, IC-4687GBM (previously untreated) and IC-R0315GBM (established
from a therapy-resistant autopsy sample). Therapeutic efficacy was
examined in vivo by orally administered MLN8237 (30 mg/kg/day for 12
days) in NOD/SCID mice (n=10 per group) two weeks post intra-cerebral
tumor cell implantation. Tumor growth was examined by MRI and
histopathological analysis.Results: Overexpression of Aurora A kinase
mRNA (4-10 fold over normal control) was observed in our pediatric GBM
models. Tumor growth in FBS medium was suppressed in the previously
untreated line (4687GBM) but not in the therapy-resistant line
(R0315GBM). Cell growth of neurospheres, which are enriched with cancer
stem cells, was suppressed in both GBM lines in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. In IC-4687GBM, suppression of xenograft tumor
growth was confirmed by MRI and histopathological analysis along with
significant prolongation of animal survival in the treatment group. In
the therapy-resistant model IC-R0315GBM, no significant suppression was
observed, which correlates with the in vitro lack of effect on the
monolayer cells.Conclusion: We detected high levels Aurora A kinase
expression in pediatric GBM models and demonstrated the efficacy of
MLN8237 in targeting GBM in vitro and in vivo. Our data in the
therapy-resistant model IC-R0315GBM suggests the need for combination
treatment in therapy-resistant GBMs. Our results support the evaluation
of MLN8237 as a novel agent for pediatric GBMs.

