Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective bioluminogenic HDAC activity assays for profiling HDAC
inhibitors


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play critical roles in the regulation of
gene transcription and cell signaling events by deacetylating histones
and other important non-histone substrates. Aberrant increases in HDAC
enzyme activities are therefore implicated in a number of human
infirmities, including cancers, metabolic disease and neurodegeneration.
Fortunately, HDAC enzymes represent attractive pharmacological targets
because they are readily tractable with small molecule inhibitors. In
fact, several HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have recently proceeded through (or
are near) the FDA approval process for the treatment of hematologic
malignancies. However, the promise of clinical HDACi therapy has been
hampered by significant dose-limiting toxicities. These off-target
effects have led to a renewed focus on basic HDAC biology and the
development of isoenzyme-specific HDAC inhibitors which could avoid
off-target effects. To help facilitate the discovery of compounds with
better defined selectivity profiles, we have developed lysine deacetylase
assays that selectively measure specific isoenzyme activities in cells,
extracts, or purified recombinant preparations. These assays are based on
substrates that are selective due to a combination of extended peptide
sequence and novel chemical modifications. Deacetylase activity is
measured by delivering a single, pro-luminogenic, homogeneous assay
reagent to assay wells, resulting in luminescence proportional to HDAC
activity. In addition to being isoenzyme selective, these novel
substrates are cell permeable allowing for lytic and non-lytic cell-based
HDAC assays. Lastly, these assays are also fully compatible with
fluorescent viability and/or cytotoxicity assays. This provides
additional flexibility for multiplexed formats which examine not only
selective HDAC inhibition, but the functional consequences they exert on
cell health.

