Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global African ancestry is not associated with lung cancer survival


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality among men
and women in the United States, accounting for 27% of all cancer-related
deaths. Blacks experience poorer 5-year survival compared to whites. We
hypothesized that individuals with higher global African ancestry have
poorer survival compared to individuals with lower global African
ancestry. We identified incident non-small cell lung cancer cases in the
Southern Community Cohort Study (SCCS), a prospective study of low-income
adults recruited from across the Southeast region of the United States.
Individuals who donated a biospecimen were genotyped using the Illumina
Human Exome BeadChip, which contains a panel of ancestry informative
markers (AIMs). After standard quality control, 398 individuals (262
self-reported black and 134 self-reported white) remained for analysis.
Global ancestry was estimated from 2,604 AIMs using the software program
ADMIXTURE. Self-reported blacks had a median global African ancestry of
88.12%, while the median global African ancestry in self-reported whites
was less than 0.01%. We estimated hazard ratios and 95% confidence
intervals using Cox proportional hazard models adjusted for age, sex,
body mass index (BMI), cigarettes per day, disease stage, treatment,
insurance coverage, family history of lung cancer and recruitment site.
BMI, age, cigarettes per day and global African ancestry were modeled
using restricted cubic splines. We estimated time dependent area under
the curve (AUC) for our main effects model and a main effects model with
interactions, both with and without genetic ancestry. We found that the
main effects model had an average AUC of 0.81. When global African
ancestry was excluded, the AUC was minimally reduced to 0.80. When
interactions were added to the main effects model, the AUC increased to
0.88. Removal of global ancestry from the interactions model reduced the
AUC to 0.84. In the main effects model, the two most predictive variables
were stage and treatment with X2 values of 36.13 (degrees of freedom,
df=2) and 15.47 (df=4), respectively. While we conclude that global
African ancestry has little effect on overall survival, a relationship
between global African ancestry and stage or treatment remains to be
investigated.

