Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics as a clinical decision support
tool


As sequencing of tumor samples is entering clinical practice, there is an
urgent need for new tools that facilitate the interpretation of sequence
data so that they can effectively inform treatment decisions. To this
end, we are evolving the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics into a clinical
decision support tool. The cBioPortal is a web-based visualization and
analysis engine that makes complex cancer genomics data accessible to a
wide range of cancer researchers and clinicians.To transition the
cBioPortal towards use in clinical practice, we have recently developed
the following new functions:1. Filtering of oncogenic mutations: By using
information about the known or likely oncogenic effects of specific
mutations, the portal can now filter out passenger events and highlight
known and potentially druggable drivers.2. Clinical timelines: Compact
and interactive visualization of a patient's clinical and treatment
history3. Image support: Interactive visualization of histology images4.
Support for multiple tumor samples from a single patient: The portal can
display genomic differences and similarities of different samples (e.g.
multiple sites of the same tumor, recurrence, metastasis, post-treatment)
in the context of a patient's treatment history.5. Tumor clonality:
Assessment of a tumor's purity and clonality / heterogeneity6. Targeted
treatment suggestions: The portal matches drugs to drug targets that are
altered in the patient's tumor.7. Clinical trial matching: Based on a
patient's clinical history and the genomic alterations found in the
tumor, the cBioPortal will identify relevant clinical trials.By making
complex genomic data easily interpretable and linking it to information
about drugs and clinical trials, the system has the potential to
facilitate the proper use of genomic data in clinical decision making. We
are constantly improving the software and will initially focus most
strongly on the matching of patients to clinical trials. We are sharing
the software with other hospitals, where it can be used by oncologists
and tumor boards.

