Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capturing the elusive foe: A novel telomerase promoter-based
approach to detect melanoma circulating tumor cells


BACKGROUND: The treatment of melanoma is rapidly evolving, with many
recently introduced systemic therapies. The management of individual
patients, however, remains challenging. Decisions on when to initiate and
discontinue specific treatments rely on imprecise methods such as imaging
studies, and patient outcomes often remain less than optimal. An assay
that can be performed conveniently, safely, and serially could usefully
complement current assessments of disease burden. Circulating tumor cell
(CTC) analysis fulfills all these criteria and may assist in determining
true disease status and risk stratification. However, commercial CTC
assays that target epithelial cell markers are ineffective for melanoma.
We, therefore, investigated the use of a novel telomerase-based assay for
melanoma CTCs.METHODS: The assay utilizes an adenoviral vector that, in
the presence of elevated human telomerase (hTERT) activity, drives the
expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP). This confers sensitivity
and specificity, as telomerase activity is elevated in almost all cancer
cells but not elevated in almost all normal cells. The tumor cells are
identified via an image processing system that applies cutoff criteria of
fluorescent intensity and size. The cells are co-stained with
anti-Melan-A to confirm their melanoma origin. The assay was tested on
melanoma cells in culture, in control blood, and on samples from 10
patients with metastatic melanoma.RESULTS: The assay was effective for
all melanoma cell lines tested with sensitivity of 92% (95% confidence
interval (CI) 84.4-99.1%) and specificity of 99% (95%CI 99.5-99.6%). It
was also effective in control blood from healthy volunteers (limit of
detection = 1.1 CTCs/mL). In a pilot trial of patients with metastatic
disease, CTCs were identified in 9 of 10 patients (the tenth patient was
without evidence of disease after treatment) with mean count of 6.0
CTCs/mL (range 0.7-27.1 CTCs/mL). In a linear regression model, CTC
counts were significantly increased in patients with greater burden of
disease (p = 0.02) and significantly decreased in patients with current
or recent cytotoxic chemotherapy (p = 0.02). Interestingly, prior or
active immunotherapy did not significantly affect CTC levels. Patient
demographics, primary tumor location, and sites of metastases also did
not appear to significantly affect CTC levels.CONCLUSIONS: To our
knowledge, this is the first report of a telomerase-based assay for
detecting melanoma cells. This assay was effective in identifying
melanoma cells in culture and in the peripheral blood of patients with
metastatic melanoma. Greater disease burden appears to be associated with
increased CTC levels while cytotoxic chemotherapy appears to be
associated with decreased CTC levels. Longer term follow-up and serial
assays may validate the ultimate usefulness of this assay in the
management of patients with melanoma.

