Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of human satellite RNA in the serum of high-risk
patients of pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Most satellite repeats in pericentmeric heterochromatin are
epigenetically silenced and rarely transcribed into RNAs. However, in
some pathological conditions, satellite RNA are transcribed and may
deregulate cellular homeostasis. Recently, human satellite repeat II
(HSATII) RNA were reported to be highly and specifically detected in
human pancreatic cancers. However, precise localization of HSATII RNA
expression in pancreatic cancer tissues and the time-course of its
expression during carcinogenesis are unknown, mainly due to the technical
difficulties to detect repetitive RNA sequences, which are difficult to
amplify by PCR-based method. In this study, we determined the precise
localization of HSATII RNA expression in pancreatic carcinoma tissues and
developed a new method to detect HSATII RNA from the patient
serum.Methods: 1) Highly sensitive and specific custom-made locked
nucleic acid-modified oligonucleotide probes were synthesized to detect
HSATII RNA expression by Northern blotting and RNA in situ hybridization.
Resected tissues containing pancreatic carcinoma lesions and those
adjacent lesions in the same section from individual patients were used
to determine the precise localization of HSATII RNA expression, along
with tissue arrays. 2) Total RNAs were extracted from the serum of
pancreatic cancer, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), and
non-cancerous patients. Custom-made biotinylated RNA probes for HSATII
RNA were hybridized with the patient RNA. Paired RNA was collected, and
visualized by applying modified RNA protection method.Results: 1) While
no HSATII RNA expression was detected in pancreatic tissues without
carcinoma, it was expressed in almost all pancreatic carcinoma tissues.
Interestingly, the expression levels were clearly higher in non-cancerous
lesions adjacent to carcinoma rather than in cancerous lesions
themselves. 2) HSATII RNA was detected from 200 l of the serum of
pancreatic cancer and IPMN patients, whereas not detected from non-cancer
patients.Conclusion: HSATII RNA is highly expressed in the tissues
surrounding human pancreatic cancerous lesions. This non-coding RNA could
be detected in the serum of pancreatic cancer patients as well as
patients with pre-cancerous lesions. These results may facilitate the
development of novel methods to determine high-risk patients of
pancreatic cancer.

