Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic characterization of the extracellular matrix in multiple
myeloma


Background:The extracellular matrix is a major component of the tumor
microenvironment, contributing to the regulation of cell survival,
proliferation, differentiation and metastasis. In multiple myeloma (MM)
ECM components, such as integrins, fibronectin and collagens, have been
shown are critical to the pathogenesis of MM and the development of drug
resistance. To date, despite some knowledge of the composition of the ECM
in tumors, detailed profiling of the composition of the ECM in MM has not
been carried out. Recent advances in proteomics have led to the
characterization of the ECM and ECM-related proteins (matrisome) in
normal human tissues and tumors in a systematic and comprehensive
approach.Methods:Tumor Xenograft models; MM1S-GFP-Luc+ cells (5x106) were
injected intravenously into SCID-Bg mice (n=4/group) and animals
underwent weekly bioluminescent imaging (BLI). Mice were sacrificed after
two weeks in order to mimic early tumor development (luminescence= 1x105
p/sec/cm2/sr). and compared to mice demonstrating high tumor burden
(1x108 p/sec/cm2/sr) 5 weeks post injection. Human bone marrow aspirates;
Whole bone marrow was obtained from MM patients (newly diagnosed n=9,
relapsed n=9) and healthy human donors (n=9) following written informed
consent. Sequential extractions of whole pooled bone marrow from mice and
individual bone marrow humans was performed using the
CNMCS(Cytosol/Nucleus/Membrane/Cytoskeleton) Compartmental Protein
Extraction Kit (Cytomol, CA). Following this, proteins underwent
reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography followed by tandem
mass spectrometry (MS). Identified peptide spectra were counted as a semi
quantitative measure of abundance.Results:We detected a total of 1202,
982 and 329 unique proteins from enriched whole bone marrow samples from
relapsed patients, newly diagnosed patients and mice, respectively. Of
these, critical ECM components such as laminins, matrix
metalloproteinases and collagens were found to be enriched in human MM
ECM in comparison to healthy donors with increased abundance apparent
with disease progression in mice. Specifically Bone Marrow Proteoglycan
and Proteoglycan 3 were amongst the ECM proteins significantly enriched
in the ECM of newly diagnosed patients. PRG3 is a p53 responsive gene
that has been demonstrated to be upregulated in apoptotic cells in
several cancers, including CLL. The ECM protein Elastin, the expression
of which is closely associated with the invasive/metastatic potential of
various cancer types, was also upregulated in the MM ECM where it may
play an important role in the tumor-ECM interaction.Conclusions:We have
profiled the ECM in MM using mass spectrometry with a view to determining
the specific components that may be important in MM disease biology.
Through this approach molecular mechanisms that influence MM development
and progression can be uncovered and potential targets for therapy
identified.

