Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of colon cancer metastasis by sprouty-2


Introduction: We earlier established that sprouty-2 is overexpressed in
human colon cancer and up-regulates c-met and thereby increases the
growth phenotype and metastatic potential of colon cancer cells
(Oncogene, 29: 5241-53, 2010). To our knowledge, this was the first study
to demonstrate the tumor oncogene phenotype of sprouty-2 in colon cancer
metastasis. On the contrary, cancer protective role of sprouty-2 was
noted in breast, liver and prostate cancers. However, a recent report on
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) discovered that silencing of sprouty-2
reduced c-met expression and thus confirmed our findings in colorectal
cancer (PNAS, 110: 8573-78, 2013). We further extended our studies to
demonstrate that this pathway modulates gastrointestinal specific
microRNAs (miRNAs) and regulates various oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes in colon cancer cells. Methods: RNA from control and shRNA
sprouty-2 transfected cells were labeled with Hy5 and Hy3 respectively
and hybridized to miRCURY LNA arrays. Unsupervised miRNA clustering was
carried out and a heat map prepared with Java TreeView. MicroRNA targets
were identified by Real-time PCR, western blotting and 3UTR luciferase
assays. Migratory phenotype of colon cancer cells was confirmed by cell
migration and invasion assays in trans-well chambers. Cancer cells were
transfected by miRNA mimics to assess the expression levels of target
genes. Human colon cancer tissue microarrays were utilized to assess the
expression of miRNA target genes. Human tumor sections were evaluated by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining. Results: Sprouty-2
shRNA transfected stable cell lines demonstrated upregulation of tumor
suppressive miRNAs and down-regulation of oncogenic miRNAs.
Overexpression of gastrointestinal specific miRNA mimics inhibits colon
cancer cells proliferation and metastasis. On the contrary,
overexpression of miRNA inhibitor in colon cancer cells promotes
proliferation and colonization. Studies further indicated that miRNA
down-regulates expression of CDK7, RB1, AKT, FASL, IGF1R, EGFR and
N-cadherin and up-regulates expression of P21 and E-cadherin. MiRNA
regulated genes were responsible for cell cycle arrest, enhanced
apoptosis and decreased metastasis. AKT was upregulated whereas
E-cadherin was downregulated at the invasive fronts in human colon
tumors. Conclusion: Sprouty-2/miRNA expression levels could be used to
risk-stratify patients for CRC recurrence and sprouty-2 axis regulation
may lead to the development of therapeutics in colon and lung cancer.

