Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOV C-ter: A novel preclinical anti-angiogenic agent


NOV (Nephroblastoma OVerexpressed) C-ter (NOV C-ter) is the
carboxy-terminal sequence (170aa) of NOV/CCN3 protein. NOV/CCN3 (357aa),
a member of CCN family, is secreted by quiescent endothelial cells and is
involved in the regulation of various cellular functions including
angiogenesis, proliferation, differentiation, survival, adhesion and
migration. Although NOV C-ter does not have a direct cytotoxic effect
when tested on a large panel of human cell lines including the NCI 60
cell lines (NCI Drug Screening Program), our data demonstrates
significant anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effects in a variety of
experimental models. NOV C-ter inhibits in vitro endothelial cell tube
formation in a dose-dependent fashion, using endothelial cells derived
from porcine aorta, human microvasculature, or human umbilical vein
(HUVECs). In addition, NOV C-ter impairs HUVEC proliferation, migration,
invasion and adhesion. Interestingly, inhibition of HUVEC proliferation
occurs via interference with growth-promoting signals involving Apelin-13
and adenomedullin. Furthermore, NOV C-ter specifically reduced
phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt in endothelial cells, with no significant
effect on the p44/42 (ERK1/2) pathway. In vivo, NOV C-ter had significant
anti-tumor effect as a single agent in a murine glioblastoma xenograft
model using human X-12 culture-adapted cells and in a nude mouse
xenograft model using human non-small-cell lung cancer cells (A549). In
these two systems, NOV C-ter provided superior survival benefit compared
to treatment with bevacizumab or vehicle (PBS). Similarly, NOV C-ter
significantly increased overall survival versus vehicle (PBS), an effect
which was comparable to temozolomide treatment, in a murine syngeneic
orthotopic glioblastoma model using the GL-261 cell line. To directly
study the effect of NOV C-ter on angiogenesis, we treated zebrafish
embryos prior to the onset of angiogenesis, and found a considerable
reduction in vessel formation compared to bevacizumab-treated or
untreated zebrafish. NOV C-ter also reduced tumor neovascularization in
human breast cancer (T47D cell line) implanted in zebrafish. In summary,
NOV C-ter demonstrates anti-angiogenic and tumoricidal effects via a
novel mechanism of action. Mechanistic studies of NOV C-ter are underway
to evaluate its precise effects on key signaling pathways in endothelial
cells. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology studies are also underway
with a plan to advance to early-phase clinical trials.

