Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of MER tyrosine kinase in the tumor
microenvironment decreases tumor growth in a mouse model of breast cancer


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and other tumor-infiltrating
myeloid-derived cells are known to support tumor growth, proliferation
and metastasis. Increased numbers of TAMs are also associated with poor
prognosis in many solid tumors, including breast cancer. Previous studies
have shown that targeting TAMs, either by re-programming or depletion, is
an effective method to reduce solid tumor growth. MER, a receptor
tyrosine kinase, is expressed on macrophages. MER-dependent signaling
upon recognition and ingestion of apoptotic material (efferocytosis)
suppresses proinflammatory cytokine production and increases secretion of
immunosuppressive, wound healing cytokines. Recently we have identified
MER as a potential therapeutic target in the tumor microenvironment
utilizing polyoma middle T (PyVmT) orthotopic and transgenic models of
breast cancer in Mertk-/- mice. Genetic deletion of MER in the tumor
microenvironment led to a reduction in tumor growth, as well as increased
proinflammatory cytokines and decreased IL-10 production.To further
investigate the utility of MER inhibition in the tumor microenvironment
as a therapeutic strategy, the efficacy of a first in class
MER-selective, orally bioavailable, small molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (UNC TKI) was evaluated in immunocompetent C57Bl/6 mice
implanted orthotopically with PyVmT mammary gland tumor cells. These
PyVmT tumors cells do not express MER, AXL or TYRO3. Treatment with UNC
TKI inhibited phosphorylation of MER in mouse macrophages in vitro, but
did not affect survival of macrophages or MER-negative PyVmT tumor cells.
However, after four weeks of daily treatment with UNC TKI, primary tumor
growth was reduced two-fold compared to vehicle-treated tumor bearing
mice. Serum IL-10 and IL-4 levels were reduced by 20% and 30%,
respectively, in UNC TKI treated tumor-bearing mice compared to
vehicle-treated tumor-bearing mice. Taken together, these data suggest
that MER inhibition in the tumor microenvironment reduces tumor growth by
altering the immunosuppressive environment and stimulating anti-tumor
immunity. Moreover, these data validate UNC TKI as a promising strategy
for immune-mediated treatment of breast cancer.

