Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Artemisinin derivatives synergize with paclitaxel by targeting
FOXM1 through Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling pathway in ovarian cancer


Objective:Artemisinin, the active principle of the Chinese medicinal herb
Artemisia annua and its derivatives have the most efficacies against
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Artemisinin contains an endoperoxide
bridge that reacts with ferrous iron to generate free radicals which
leads to macromolecular damage and cell death. In this study, we aim to
determine if artemisinin derivatives dihydroartemisinin (DHA) can improve
the efficacy of paclitaxel and cisplatinum in human ovarian cancer cells
in vitro and its possible underlying molecular mechanism and novel
molecular targets.Methods:Ovarian cancer cell lines SKOV3 and OVCAR3 were
treated with paclitaxel/cisplatinum/DHA or a combination for 72 hrs and
cytotoxicity was assessed by sulfarodamine B assay. Drug combination
effects were determined by calculating the combination index (CI) values
using the Chou and Talalay method (CI 1.10 antagonism). Quantitative
RT-PCR and western blot were performed to determine changes in FOXM1
expression and its downstream molecules. In MAPK signaling studies, cells
were starved for 24 hrs, stimulated with 20% FBS for 30min with
pre-incubation of DHA for 30 min, and then probed with anti-phospho-MAPK
for western blot.Results:Application of DHA to ovarian cancer cells
induced cytotoxicity with IC50 between 1M to 2M. Drug combination studies
demonstrated that DHA synergized with paclitaxel (CI value 0.6-0.73) and
additive to cisplatinum (CI value 0.98-1.11) in SKOV3. In addition, low
dose DHA (0.5M) significantly synergized to the combination of paclitaxel
and cisplatinum in SKOV3 cells (CI 0.40-0.83). To reveal the underlying
molecular mechanism, we analyzed the cell cycle upon DHA treatment which
proved that DHA alone arrested cells in G2/M phase (30.8%) compare to
control (17.3%) after 24 hrs treatment. Furthermore, DHA significantly
downregulated oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 expression and the
transcription of downstream molecules such as CCNB1, BIRC5 and STMN1.
Therefore, targeting FOXM1 by DHA delay G2/M transition, induce apoptosis
and stabilize microtubule dynamics to sensitize the tumor cells to
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis, contributing to the synergistic effects.
Finally, FOXM1 is phosphorylated for nuclear translocation before entry
into G2/M, and one of the major kinase is MAPK. The western blot
demonstrated that DHA inhibit serum-induced phosphorylation of MAPK,
indicating the inhibitory effects of DHA toward Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling
pathway.Conclusion:These results demonstrate that inhibition of
Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling by DHA led to suppression of FOXM1 target gene
expression and contribute to cellular cytotoxicity and drug synergism in
ovarian cancer. In conclusion, we provide the new information in the
knowledge of artemisinin derivatives involved signaling pathways and
potential molecular targets.

