Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of pancreatic cancer to chemoradiation by the Wee1
inhibitor AZD1775


Gemcitabine-based chemoradiation is standard therapy for locally advanced
pancreatic cancer and is associated with an approximately one year median
survival. In order to improve the efficacy of this therapy, integration
of agents which target the DNA damage response, such as inhibitors of
Wee1, is a promising strategy. The goals of this study were to determine
the efficacy of the Wee1 inhibitor AZD1775 in sensitizing pancreatic
cancer cells to gemcitabine-radiation and to begin to identify predictive
biomarkers of response. Sensitization was assessed by clonogenic survival
in MiaPaCa-2 cells. Potential biomarkers, H2AX and pChk1 S345, were
analyzed by FACS, immunofluorescence and immunoblotting. In addition, we
tested a novel biomarker platform which utilizes ex vivo-treated 200m
tumor slices to query biomarkers of DNA damage with the ultimate goal of
being able to predict patient response from a single biopsy. We found
that AZD1775 in combination with gemcitabine further increased
radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 cells with an enhancement ratio (ER) of
2.10.2 compared to radiosensitization by gemcitabine alone (100nM; ER
1.30.2; PGemcitabine-based chemoradiation is standard therapy for locally
advanced pancreatic cancer and is associated with an approximately one
year median survival. In order to improve the efficacy of this therapy,
integration of agents which target the DNA damage response, such as
inhibitors of Wee1, is a promising strategy. The goals of this study were
to determine the efficacy of the Wee1 inhibitor AZD1775 in sensitizing
pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine-radiation and to begin to identify
predictive biomarkers of response. Sensitization was assessed by
clonogenic survival in MiaPaCa-2 cells. Potential biomarkers, H2AX and
pChk1 S345, were analyzed by FACS, immunofluorescence and immunoblotting.
In addition, we tested a novel biomarker platform which utilizes ex
vivo-treated 200m tumor slices to query biomarkers of DNA damage with the
ultimate goal of being able to predict patient response from a single
biopsy. We found that AZD1775 in combination with gemcitabine further
increased radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 cells with an enhancement ratio
(ER) of 2.10.2 compared to radiosensitization by gemcitabine alone
(100nM; ER 1.30.2; P<0.05). In order to begin to identify predictive
biomarkers of chemoradiosensitization by AZD1775, we assessed H2AX by
FACS in MiaPaCa-2 cells and found that while gemcitabine/radiation
resulted in H2AX positivity, the addition of AZD1775 caused the
appearance of a more intensely stained H2AX population of cells. Upon
immunoflourescent analysis of H2AX we found that this more intensely
stained H2AX population was associated with pan-nuclear H2AX versus the
focal H2AX observed in response to gemcitabine/radiation. In addition, we
examined pChk1 S345 as a predictive biomarker and found that
sensitization of MiaPaCa-2 cells to gemcitabine-radiation was associated
with a concentration-dependent increase in pChk1 S345 protein levels.
Thus, we went on to assess pChk1 S345 in ex vivo-treated slices of two
independent patient-derived tumor xenografts. Following ex vivo treatment
of tumor slices with AZD1775 and gemcitabine-radiation, we observed that
AZD1775 induced pChk1 S345 in response to gemcitabine-radiation in one
xenograft but not the other suggesting the possibility of differential
sensitivity to AZD1775 treatment across patient-derived xenografts.
Together, our results suggest that AZD1775 sensitizes pancreatic cancers
to gemcitabine-radiation and in association with induction of
pharmacodynamic biomarkers such as pChk1 S345 and H2AX. These results
support our approved clinical trial assessing the efficacy of AZD1775
with gemcitabine-radiation in locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Future
studies will establish correlations between these biomarkers and
therapeutic responses in vivo as well as investigate these biomarkers in
primary pancreatic tumor specimens.

