Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA mediated regulation of TGF- signaling leads to stem cell
alterations in myelodysplastic syndromes


Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are hematologic malignancies
characterized by hematopoietic stem cell dysfunction that leads to
ineffective hematopoiesis and cytopenias. Even though a third of MDS
cases transform to leukemia, most of the mortality in MDS is due to low
blood counts that occur because of failure of hematopoiesis. Development
of effective treatments for MDS have been impeded by a limited
understanding of the molecular pathways that suppress hematopoietic stem
cells. We previously demonstrated that the myelosuppressive cytokine TGF-
mediated SMAD2 activation can inhibit stem and progenitor cells in MDS.
We demonstrated that SMAD7, a negative regulator of TGF- receptor-I
kinase, is markedly reduced in MDS, and can lead to ineffective
hematopoiesis by overactivation of Smad2/3 mediated TGF- signaling. To
determine the cause of SMAD7 reduction in MDS, we analyzed the 3UTR of
the gene and found a highly conserved binding site for microRNA-21.
Strikingly, we observed significantly elevated levels of miR-21 in MDS
marrow samples when compared with age matched controls. miR-21 was shown
to directly bind to the 3UTR of SMAD7 and reduce its expression in
hematopoietic cells. Next, we tested the role of miR-21 in regulating
TGF- signaling in a TGF- overexpressing transgenic mouse model that
develops progressive anemia and dysplasia and thus serves as a model of
human bone marrow failure. Treatment with a chemically modified miR-21
inhibitor led to significant increases in hematocrit and an increase in
SMAD7 expression in vivo. Inhibition of miR-21 also led to increase in
erythroid colony formation from primary MDS bone marrow progenitors,
demonstrating its ability in stimulating hematopoiesis in vitro. Even
though miR-21 was found to be elevated in MDS, the mechanisms of its
elevation in MDS as well as in other cancers are not well elucidated. The
miR-21 gene locus has been shown to contain upstream STAT3 binding sites.
Furthermore, STAT3 has also been shown to directly lead to miR-21
upregulation in myeloma and other immune cells. Genomic profiling of
highly purified hematopoietic stem cells in MDS by us demonstrated that
STAT3 is selectively upregulated in these cells. STAT3 overexpression was
validated in an expanded set of 183 MDS CD34+ cells as well. These
results suggest that a STAT3-miR-21 pathway leads to enhancement of TGF-
signaling, thus leading to ineffective hematopoiesis in MDS.

