Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of RSK2 as a novel regulator of the ER
stress-activated autophagy in cancer cells


Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle that plays an essential role
in protein folding and post-translational modification, but is often
stressed by various physiological and pathological stimuli. To recover
normal ER function, an evolutionarily conserved response, termed unfolded
protein response (UPR), is triggered. Recently, it has been reported that
autophagy, a cellular self-degradative process, is also activated in
response to ER stress for removal of the unfolded proteins that cannot be
eliminated via the ubiquitin/proteasome system. Although the importance
of autophagy in mitigating ER stress has been increasingly appreciated,
the molecular mechanisms and pathways by which ER stress induces
autophagy remain incompletely understood. Here, we report that p90
ribosomal S6 kinase 2 (RSK2), a serine/threonine protein kinase
implicated in control of cell growth and differentiation, plays a
critical role in regulating the ER stress-induced autophagy. In the human
breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, we observed a concomitant
activation of autophagy and RSK2 following treatment with the ER
stressors, tunicamycin and thapsigargin. Notably, silencing of RSK2
expression blunted the autophagic response in the ER stressed cells. To
explore the pathway linking RSK2 activation and ER stress, we determined
the role of IRE1, an ER membrane-associated protein that mediates UPR and
alleviates ER stress. We demonstrated in the ER stressed cells that
silencing of IRE1 expression blocked the phosphorylation of RSK2, and
that partial inhibition of UPR by suppressing eIF2 led to increases in
the protein levels of IRE1 and phospho-RSK2, suggesting that IRE1 is
required for activation of RSK2 under ER stress. AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), an energy sensor that regulates cellular metabolism and a
positive regulator of autophagy, appeared to play a role in the
RSK2-activated autophagy, as silencing of RSK2 expression caused a
reduction in the level of phospho-AMPK. Furthermore, suppression of the
ER stress-activated autophagy via silencing of RSK2 expression aggravated
ER stress and promoted apoptotic cell death in the cancer cells. This
study identified RSK2 as a critical regulator of autophagy under ER
stress, and demonstrated the involvement of the IRE1-RSK2-AMPK pathway in
this process. As ER stress is highly induced in a variety of cancers and
is closely associated with oncogenesis, cancer cell survival, and
resistance to anti-cancer therapies, the revelation of the role of RSK2
in ER stress-induced autophagy provides an additional rationale for
targeting RSK2 as a potential therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment.

