Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sodium butyrate suppresses production of chemokines in human U937
cells


Sodium butyrate (NaB) is a sodium salt of butyric acid. It is a HDAC
inhibitor implicated in many studies as a potential therapy for various
forms of cancer. Due to its ability to promote total and gamma globin
during erythroid differentiation, low concentrations (1.5 mM) have been
shown to activate apoptosis in several cancer cell lines including
prostate, endometrial, breast and leukemia. Low concentrations of NaB
influence multiple signaling pathways that are known mediators of
cytokine production. However, it is not known whether high concentrations
alter these pathways having the capacity to modulate cytokine expression
in cancer cells and alter the cancer microenvironment, which is the
purpose of this study. We exposed U937 leukemia cells to NaB at 5 or 10
mM doses for various time points. The culture media of the cells were
harvested and analyzed by Human Multi-Analyte Cytokine ELISArray for
levels of chemokines and chemotactic properties via migration assay. As
evidence of apoptosis, we monitored cells for caspase-3 activation and
cell viability. Our results indicate NaB induces a 2-fold activation of
caspase-3 but a decrease in cell viability by 60%. Also, NaB induces a
significant decrease in levels of chemokines CCL2 and CCL5 in 24 hours.
Moreover, monocyte migration towards culture media from NaB treated
cells, decreased in time-dependent manner. To elucidate the signaling
mechanism(s) used by NaB (5mM), we investigated whether NaB alters the
phospho-protein levels of AKT, ERK1/2, p38 and JNK. We observed an
increase in phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, but a decrease in ERK1/2 in
response to NaB. Also, there was an initial decrease in p-AKT level
within 2 minutes suggesting a decline of Akt activation. However, this
was followed by re-activation of AKT by 24 hours post-treatment.
Interestingly, NaB did not influence activation of JNK. This data
suggests that while promoting apoptosis, NaB has the potential to
influence cancer microenvironment by inducing differential expression of
cytokines. While the mechanism by which NaB induces differential
expression of cytokines remains unknown, potentially, it could occur via
the AKT and/or MAPK mediated pathways. These effects may influence the
biology of normal and cancer cells thereby altering the status of the
patient receiving NaB therapy. *Pulliam is supported by NHLBI T32
Pre-doctoral training grant #2-T32-HL007735-16 to Dr. Adunyah and CTSA
award #UL1TR000445 from the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences. Additionally, Dr. Adunyah is supported by NCI Cancer
Partnership U54 grant #5-U54-CA163069-02 and NIMHD MeTRC grant
#8-U54-MD007593-04. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.

