Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On the role of experimental microenvironmental conditions in
targeted inhibition of the pH-regulating carbonic anhydrase IX in
colorectal carcinoma cells


Tumor hypoxia, causing metabolic changes towards enhanced glycolysis and
lactic acid production, is a common microenvironmental feature of solid
tumors, and is recognized as a main mechanism both of therapeutic
resistance and metastasis. The hypoxia-inducible factor-1 conducts
transcription of a number of genes involved in adaption to the hypoxic
condition. Among these is the tumor-specific carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX), a membrane-bound protein that regulates extracellular (pHe) and
intracellular (pHi) pH by catalyzing the reversible hydration of carbon
dioxide (CO2) to bicarbonate (HCO3-) and protons, enabling tumor cell
survival in the acidic microenvironment. To improve therapeutic outcome
and reduce metastatic risk, targeted inhibition of CAIX is an attractive
strategy. Here we report on effects of a CAIX inhibitor in a panel of
colorectal carcinoma (CRC) cell lines, giving specific emphasis to the
microenvironmental conditions.Five CRC cell lines were incubated for 24
hours under normoxic (21% O2) or hypoxic (0.2% O2) condition, either in
the presence (22 mM HCO3-, 5% CO2) or absence (0 mM HCO3-, 0% CO2) of
HCO3- in the culture medium. The cells were treated with
4-(3-(3,5-dimethylphenyl)ureido)phenyl sulfamate (termed S4), considered
to be a CAIX-specific inhibitor, and clonogenicity, pHe, and pHi
(measured as cells labeled with a pH-sensitive dye) were assessed.In
CO2/HCO3--buffered medium under normoxia, differential inhibition of
clonogenicity following S4 treatment was observed among the five cell
lines, correlating with individual CAIX levels: strong suppression in
cell lines with high CAIX expression, weaker S4 effect in cell lines with
low expression, and no effect in the CAIX-negative cell line. When
incubating with this medium under hypoxia, despite significant induction
of CAIX, no additional effect of S4 on clonogenicity was observed. Of
note, when changing the cell culture medium to CO2/HCO3--free condition,
S4 strongly inhibited clonogenicity of hypoxic HT29 cells (high CAIX
expression) but not of the normoxic counterpart, while HCT116 cells (low
CAIX expression) showed no clonogenic response to S4 with either
oxygenation status. In all of the five cell lines, hypoxia caused
significant acidification (decrease in pHe) of culture media. In parallel
with the clonogenic response, S4 treatment significantly counteracted the
hypoxia-induced pHe decline in HT29 cultures incubated in the
CO2/HCO3--free condition. pHi was not altered with any of the tested
conditions.This set of data demonstrated that the CO2/HCO3- buffering
system determined CRC cell response to targeted CAIX inhibition. To
enable reliable assessment of experimental S4 effects, strict control of
the microenvironmental conditions was required. We believe this
information may be of note for future evaluation of this specific
therapeutic approach.

