Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein expression analysis of premature termination codon
containing mutant proteins in colon cancers with high microsatellite
instability


Frameshift mutations at coding mononucleotide repeats (cMNR) are common
in the tumors with high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). These
mutations invariably generate mRNAs containing abnormal coding sequences
and premature termination codons (PTC). Normally, these mRNAs containing
PTC are degraded by nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) system. However,
mRNAs containing PTC located in the last exon are not subject to be
degraded by NMD system, and thus expected to generate truncated mutant
proteins. We identified 29 novel mutations at coding region
mononucleotide repeats (cMNR) genes by a PCR based method and sequencing.
The frequency was varying (10% to 90%) in the 10 MSI-H colon cancer cell
lines. To confirm the mRNA level, we analyzed the mutant mRNAs from
identified genes in colon cancer cell lines and found that the mutant
mRNAs were not degraded in cells. For mutant protein detection, we
adopted both immunobloting and a target mass method to detect endogenous
mutant proteins in cells. By immunobloting analysis, we found rare level
of endogenous mutant proteins in cells. Using a target mass method,
however, we could detect potential mutant protein candidates and
confirmed one of the mutant candidates (VPS37B mutant proteins) is stably
expressed in cells by in vitro overexpression experiments. When mutated,
VPS37B mutant proteins came to acquire very short neopeptides (only two
novel amino acids) which mainly disturb the stable expression of mutant
proteins and this might explain the intact expression of VPS37B mutant
proteins. Taken together, our findings suggest that frameshift mutations
at cMNR of genes usually lead to the rare expression of the mutant
proteins in tumor cells but, some mutant proteins with short neopeptides
could be stably detected by a highly sensitive target mass method.

