Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-glycosylation on lung cancer cell-secreted IL-6 prolongs its
activation on JAK/STAT pathway


Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is overexpressed in various cancer cells,
intriguingly contributing to both tumor growth and modulating anti-tumor
immunity. Cell-type-specific glycosylations on IL-6 have been deduced in
early studies; however, the glycosylation pattern and biological function
of cancer cell-secreted IL-6 remain unclear. Here, we describe the
glycosylation pattern of lung cancer cell-secreted IL-6 and its impact on
the activation of JAK/STAT pathway. IL-6 molecules with different
molecular weights were detected in the conditional media of
IL-6-overexpressed lung cancer cell lines by immunoblot. Because in
NetNGlyc 1.0 Server, one possible N-glycosylation site has been predicted
at N73 on IL-6, we used treatment of N-glycosylation-specific inhibitors
and site-directed mutagenesis on N73 to demonstrate that lung cancer
cell-secreted IL-6 is modified by N-glycosylation. To examine which
glycotransferases may participate in the modification, we had screened
the expression of glycosyltransferases using qPCR and found that the
expression of fucosyltransferase 8 (FUT8), responsible for core
fucosylation on N-glycosylated proteins, was higher in lung cancer cells
compared to normal bronchial cell. We then reduced core fucosylation on
lung cancer cell-secreted IL-6 by silencing FUT8 with shRNA transduction.
Subsequently, cells were treated with conditional media containing
fully-glycosylated or core fucose-depleted IL-6 to uncover the potential
influences on cellular signaling from glycosylation on IL-6. The
fully-gycosylated IL-6 induced prolonged STAT3Y705 phosphorylation and
distinct gene population compared to core fucose-depleted IL-6. The
nuclear retention of STAT3 was concordant with the prolonged STAT3
activation in cells treated with fully-gycosylated IL-6. In paired normal
(N) and tumor (T) tissues from lung cancer patients, higher FUT8 mRNA was
detected in tumor part than normal part. Besides, we found similar
glycosylation pattern in the secreted IL-6 of short-term cultured lung
cancer cells derived from malignant pleural effusions. Together, we
report the presence of specific IL-6 glycoforms secreted from lung cancer
cell lines and lung cancer cells from clinical samples. Moreover, the
glycosylation on IL-6 changes its activity on the regulation of JAK/STAT
pathway.

