Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide association study suggests evidence of variants at
6p21.32 associated with marginal zone lymphoma


Marginal zone lymphomas (MZL) are a group of indolent non-Hodgkin's
B-cell lymphomas (NHL) comprising extranodal MZL of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT) type, splenic MZL and nodal MZL. MZL comprises
7-12% of adult NHLs. The genetic etiology of MZL is poorly understood. To
better understand the genetic risk factors for MZL, we conducted the
first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of this lymphoid malignancy.
The GWAS included 824 MZL cases and 6,220 controls of European ancestry
from 22 studies of NHL. Genotyping was carried out at the Cancer Genomics
Research Laboratory (CGR) of NCI using Illumina Human OmniExpress arrays.
Standard genotyping quality controls were performed. Imputation of common
SNPs was performed using IMPUTE2 software and 1000 Genomes Project
release version 3 data. Association testing was subsequently performed
using SNPTEST, assuming a log-additive genetic model adjusting for age,
gender and three significant eigenvectors. We identified one locus at
6p21.32 within the HLA class II region that attained genome-wide
significance (PMarginal zone lymphomas (MZL) are a group of indolent
non-Hodgkin's B-cell lymphomas (NHL) comprising extranodal MZL of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type, splenic MZL and nodal MZL.
MZL comprises 7-12% of adult NHLs. The genetic etiology of MZL is poorly
understood. To better understand the genetic risk factors for MZL, we
conducted the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of this lymphoid
malignancy. The GWAS included 824 MZL cases and 6,220 controls of
European ancestry from 22 studies of NHL. Genotyping was carried out at
the Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory (CGR) of NCI using Illumina Human
OmniExpress arrays. Standard genotyping quality controls were performed.
Imputation of common SNPs was performed using IMPUTE2 software and 1000
Genomes Project release version 3 data. Association testing was
subsequently performed using SNPTEST, assuming a log-additive genetic
model adjusting for age, gender and three significant eigenvectors. We
identified one locus at 6p21.32 within the HLA class II region that
attained genome-wide significance (P<5x10-8). When a small number of
additional cases (n=58) and controls (n=66) genotyped using Taqman assays
were included, rs9461741 (BTNL2) was associated with an increased risk of
MZL (per-allele odds ratio = 2.38, 95% confidence interval: 1.74-3.24;
P=4.32x10-8). Other SNPs at the 6p21.32 locus were also highly associated
with MZL, suggesting that this is unlikely to be a chance finding.
Promising signals yet to be confirmed were also observed on chromosomes 3
and 14. The BTNL2 protein has extracellular immunoglobulin domains and is
expressed in multiple tissues including various immune organs and the gut
and it inhibits T-cell activation. Genetic variability at BTNL2 has been
associated with inflammatory and infectious phenotypes, highlighting the
importance of this locus for immune diseases. In conclusion, findings
from this GWAS identify the HLA class II region as an important
susceptibility locus for MZL.

