Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of biomarkers for antitumor drug resistance using 450K
methylation data of NCI60


The National Cancer Institute Antitumor Cell line panel NCI60 is a very
frequently used collection of cancer cell lines that has been largely
characterized in different biological aspects. Data from proteomic and
RNA expression analyses of this panel is already available to the
scientific community. Also, the IC50 data for more than 100,000 different
compound treatments is accessible in the developmental therapeutic
program of NCI (dtp). However, very little has been explored about the
epigenetic component of this panel. We have performed a thorough
correlational study combining the available molecular information of
NCI60, the data of our 450K NCI60 dataset and the IC50 data from the dtp
to discover candidate genes for new biomarkers of resistance to antitumor
agents. Finding new biomarkers to determine the most probable response to
the therapy seems to be a key stage in the development of personalized
medicine. Due to its stability and how easy it is to detect its level of
methylation, DNA methylation changes appear to be a perfect candidate
mark for the construction of this new generation of biomarkers. In this
study we obtained multiples candidate genes whose methylation correlated
to resistance to different drugs. In order to perform validation analyses
we chose a gene that showed a strong positive correlation with the
resistance to several DNA damage agents (DDA).Using overexpression and
silencing assays we were able to demonstrate that the expression of this
gene has a profound influence on the cell sensitivity to the DDA.
Furthermore, through gene expression validation assays, such as
5-azacytidine treatments, we demonstrated that the promotor methylation
of this gene is associated to its non-expression. In addition, we
observed that this gene methylation correlates with a lower overall
survival in an ovarian cancer cohort treated with platinum agents. Little
is known about our candidate gene but it seems to be related to the DNA
repair machine and also to have a function in the cell cycle control.
These features could give an explanation to the importance of its
presence in the response to DDA treatment. Our studies show that the
analysis of DNA methylation changes in cancer cells in combination with
other molecular alterations can be used in correlational studies to find
trustworthy biomarkers for antitumor drug resistance.

