Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive signature of response to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer cells by tyrosine kinase
activity profiling


Background: There is an urgent need to develop companion diagnostics for
response prediction to increase the success rate of anticancer drug
development. Constitutively activated protein kinases are major targets
for cancer treatment. However, blockade of target molecules may not
necessarily lead to treatment response. Thus we attempted to investigate
the consequences of target kinase inhibition by comprehensive tyrosine
kinases activity profiling, which can be applied to establish a response
prediction signature. Here we employed clinically validated EGFR-targeted
inhibition as in vitro model utilizing PamChip peptide
micro-arrays.Methods: Eight lung cancer cell lines harboring either
wild-type EGFR (A549, H1781 and H441) or mutant EGFR (HCC4006, PC9,
HCC827, H1650 and H1975) were used. Chemosensitivity to EGFR inhibitors
(gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib) was evaluated by MTT assay and IC50
values were obtained. For assessment of protein tyrosine kinase activity,
cell lysates were prepared, aliquoted and stored at -80C until use. The
tyrosine kinase activity of the lysates was measured with or without EGFR
TKIs on PamChip peptide micro-arrays, containing 144 peptides derived
from known human phosphorylation sites. Data analysis was carried out on
both basal and inhibition profiles. Inhibition profiles were calculated
for each EGFR TKI by taking the log-ratio of peptide phosphorylation
measured with or without EGFR TKIs using BioNavigator6 software. Peptides
that did not show increase of signal in time (indicative of kinase
activity) were excluded from the analysis.Results: Basal tyrosine kinase
activity profiles showed a clear segregation between EGFR driven
(HCC4006, PC9, and HCC827) and EGFR independent (H1650, H441 and A549)
cells. Additionally, overall tyrosine kinase activities in EGFR mutant
cells were higher than those in EGFR wild-type cells. Based on IC50
values for three EGFR TKIs, the cell lines were divided into responders
(PC9, HCC4006 and HCC827 with IC50 values 0.1 mol/L), non-responders
(H1650, H441 and A549 with IC50 values >1 mol/L) and intermediate
responders. Basal phosphorylation signals on a number of peptides
differed between responders and non-responders. The responders showed
phosphorylation on sites responsible for activating RAF, ERK1/2 and MAPK7
and on sites for inactivating the phosphatases PP2AB and PTN11. The
phosphorylation was absent in the non-responders, possibly as a
consequence of constitutive activation of the RAS/RAF pathway. This
peptide set was suggested to serve as a predictive signature of response
to EGFR TKIs.Conclusions: Kinase activity profiles reflect the
biochemical consequences of EGFR mutant non-small-cell lung cancer.
Tyrosine kinase activity profiling may serve as companion diagnostic in
drug development and this should be further explored.

