Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the role of CSF-1 and its receptor in the bone
marrow stroma microenvironment in acute myeloid leukemia


Supporting cells in the bone marrow microenvironment are an essential
source of growth factors and cytokines that drive both normal
hematopoeisis and leukemogenesis. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a
heterogeneous and growth factor-dependent disease of the bone marrow. The
human macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF, CSF-1) is a cytokine
produced by supporting cells in the bone marrow that promotes the
differentiation and maturation of monocytes and macrophages from myeloid
precursors. Since CSF-1 is an essential factor in myelopoeisis, it has
important implications in AML, a disease characterized by the increased
proliferation of immature myeloid blast cells. Moreover CSF-1 and CSF-1R
are highly expressed in some AML cases, lending further support for their
investigation. CSF-1 exists as a full-length secreted (variant 1 or v1)
and membrane-bound (variant 3 or v3) isoform. The membrane-bound v3
isoform is the predominant form in the bone marrow. CSF-1 binds to the
colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), a class III receptor
tyrosine kinase found on mononuclear phagocytes. CSF-1R activation leads
to stimulation of survival, proliferation and differentiation pathways.
In this study, the effects of the CSF-1/CSF-1R interaction were
investigated in the context of the bone marrow microenvironment in an
in-vitro co-culture system. In this model, human leukemic cells (patient
samples and cell lines) were grown in co-culture with mouse stromal cells
expressing human CSF-1. The cellular and molecular responses arising from
the interaction between leukemic cells expressing CSF-1R and stromal
cells producing CSF-1 were examined.AML cells cultured with
CSF-1-expressing stroma displayed better long-term (2-5 weeks) growth and
survival than cells cultured with non-CSF-1-expressing stroma. There was
a 2-fold increase in the number of cells on CSF-1 v3 stroma compared to
empty vector (ev) control stroma after 5 weeks of co-culture. AML cells
were maintained on CSF-1 v3 stroma 1.5-1.75 fold longer than on ev stroma
(survival in days). Co-culture of AML cells with CSF-1-expressing stroma
led to a decrease in CSF-1R expression on the surface of AML cells,
accompanied by an increase in CD34 and decrease in CD38 expression.
CSF-1-expressing stroma led to increases in phosphorylation of Akt and
p70S6K, effectors of the PI3k/Akt pathway, in AML cells. Analysis of
cytokine production in AML-stromal cell co-cultures revealed an increase
in the secretion of IL-3 and IL-6 from stromal cells and an increase in
IL-8 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) from AML cells.These
findings suggest that CSF-1 presented by stromal cells mediates the
growth and survival of AML cells through changes in cell surface markers,
molecular signaling effectors and cytokine secretion. This work has
helped identify targets of interest that may be exploited for therapeutic
purposes in AML-stromal cell interactions.

