Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA editing enzyme induces accelerated cell cycle in normal
hematopoiesis


We have previously shown that inflammation-responsive RNA editase ADAR1
(ademosine deaminases acting on dsRNA) is a contribution factor in CML
(chronic myeloid leukemia) disease progression. Whole transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-Seq) data on primary CML chronic phase and CML blast
crisis patient demonstrated over-representation of inflammatory
IFN-pathways involved in hematological development. The resulting ADAR1
up-regulation plays important roles in both stem cell differentiation and
self-renewal, as indicated by in vitro colony-formation assay and in vivo
CML xenotransplantation mouse model. Though we have established
ADAR1-mediated RNA editing as a novel theraputic target for treating CML,
we do not yet understand the underlying mechanism of RNA editase's
involvement in normal hematopoietic stem cells self-renewal and
differentiation. In our new study, we describe ADAR1's role in cell cycle
regulation of normal hematopoietic stem cell and its molecular editing
targets.Normal cord bloods or aged bone marrow samples (CD34+) were
lentivirally transduced with either backbone or ADAR1-overexpression
vector. The cell cycle status of progenitors was analyzed by FACS and
immunofluorescence. The expressions of genes in various cell cycle stages
were analyzed by qRT-PCR. CML BC (CD34+) was transduced with
lenti-shADAR1 and transplanted into immunodeficient mice. After 20 weeks,
hematopoietic organs were harvested and analyzed for cell cycle status by
FACS and serial transplantation.Our results demonstrated that ADAR1
accelerates G0 to G1 phase transition in normal hematopoietic stem cells,
coupled with increased cell size and elevated expression of Ki67. The
expanded population maintains stemness without any significant increase
in differentiation. qRT-PCR microarray of cell cycle genes indicates that
p21 expression level is reduced by >70% when ADAR1 is overexpressed.
Moreover, shRNA knockdown of ADAR1 in CML BC sample shows a reduction of
engraftment in bone marrow and spleen, and an enrichment of G0 population
in the remaining cells. A decrease of self-renewal capacity as
demonstrated by serial engraftment suggests the residual LSC failed to
propagate.Our finding suggests carefully regulated A-to-I editing by
ADAR1 is essential for the maintenance of proper cell grow and
proliferation in HSC. It is plausible that the elevated expression level
of ADAR1 observed in CML BC LSC contributes to false regulation of cell
cycle that leads to the expansion of malignant leukemia stem cells.

