Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying analytes associated with poor prognosis in CRC


Cancer patients with undetectable micrometastases at the time of
diagnosis are in danger of subsequent metastatic growth that worsens
their outcome. Therefore, identification of these patients with latent
metastases could reduce morbidity and mortality by helping physicians to
choose whether to treat with an adjuvant therapy. In colorectal carcinoma
(CRC), 20-30% of stage II patients will have a recurrence at a distant
site after removal of the primary tumor. In order for cancer cells to
metastasize, they must switch to an invasive phenotype. To identify
molecular changes in cancer that drive invasion, our laboratory
previously built a molecular network model of invasive subcellular
structures termed invadopodia. Centrality and random walk analyses
identified candidate signaling hubs that may control invadopodia
formation or activity. To identify which of these hubs control invasion
in specific cancers, we are mining reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
data from publicly available human tumor datasets. In this study, we
focused on analysis of RPPA data from TCGA in CRC patients, segregated by
poor prognosis and good prognosis. We tested three different definitions
of poor prognosis: recurrence, survival, and TNM status at diagnosis. We
found several promising analytes that were significantly associated with
each poor prognosis definition, and recurrence provided the best
separation of good vs. poor prognosis. Interestingly, many of the
analytes significantly associated with survival are involved in
apoptosis. Additionally, we refined the analysis by using a subset of
patients (stage I-II), which resulted in even better separation of good
vs. poor prognosis. We identified several analytes that are already
significantly associated with the invadopodia network (src kinase and PI
3-kinase). We also identified some potential new invadopodia regulators,
such as Cox2. This method has potential both to improve CRC survival by
identifying patients that need adjuvant therapy as well as identify novel
drivers of invadopodia.

