Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transketolase (TKT) is a critical component of the metabolic
machinery of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)


Hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC, is one of the commonest malignant cancers
in human liver. The prognosis of HCC patients is extremely poor mainly
because of late symptom presentation and absence of effective therapy.
Liver is the metabolic engine that maintains the homeostasis of various
nutrients; nevertheless, how the metabolic reprogramming of HCC cells
benefits tumor progression remains largely unknown. Understanding the
metabolic machinery of HCC is important for the development of new
therapeutic approaches for HCC. Increased glucose intermediates through
glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) is a metabolic
signature of cancer. The PPP works collaboratively with glycolysis to
support rapid tumor growth by producing NADPH, the major antioxidant in
the cells, and ribose-5-phosphate, the backbone of RNA. One of the key
enzymes that connect PPP with glycolysis is the transketolase family
(TK). The TK family comprises 3 members namely transketolase (TKT),
TKT-like 1 (TKTL1) and TKTL2. Many studies have indicated that strong
TKTL1 protein expression was correlated with invasive features and poor
clinical outcome in other cancers. However, our transcriptome sequencing
data from 16 pairs of human HCC and non-tumorous liver (NT) tissues
revealed that (1) the TKT is the predominant TK member in the liver and
HCC; (2) TKT, but not other TK family members, is overexpressed in HCC.
In an expanded HCC cohort consisting of 60 human HCC cases, we confirmed
that TKT is significantly overexpressed and is closely associated with
aggressive HCC clinicopathological features including tumor
microsatellite formation (P = 0.04), venous invasion (P = 0.01), and
large tumor size (P = 0.04). Stable knockdown of TKT by various short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequences in multiple HCC cell lines (MHCC97L,
SMMC-7721, and BEL-7402) consistently suppressed cell growth, elevated
intracellular ROS level (CM-H2DCFDA staining), and decreased glucose
uptake (2-NBDG staining). In line with the in vitro observations, stable
knockdown of TKT drastically impeded HCC growth in orthotropic and
subcutaneous tumor models. More interestingly, pharmacological inhibition
and genetic knockdown of TKT by oxythiamine (OT) and shRNA, respectively,
sensitized HCC cells to the treatment of 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), a
glycolysis inhibitor. Inhibition of PPP and glycolysis by co-treatment of
OT and 2-DG completely suppressed HCC growth. Taken together, our present
data suggested that TKT overexpression strongly favors HCC cell growth in
vitro and in vivo. Our data also showed that TKT is a critical component
of the metabolic machinery of HCC and therefore an attractive therapeutic
target.

