Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of osteoprotegerin expression in breast cancer cells by
nuclear factor-kappaB


Acquisition of osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression by breast epithelial
cells appears to be linked to the formation of malignant breast
neoplasia. Previous in vitro studies demonstrate that OPG expression by
breast cancer cells increases resistance to tumor necrosis factor related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) mediated apoptosis, suggesting a tumor
promoting role for OPG. Recently we have observed reduced ability to
metastasize in the chick embryo model by MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
after reducing OPG expression using RNAi methods, further substantiating
a tumor promoting role of OPG.In order to direct inhibitory strategies,
we investigated the regulation of OPG expression in human breast cancer
cell lines. Based on regulation of OPG in other cell types, we
hypothesized that OPG expression is regulated by the transcription factor
Nuclear Factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB).OPG expression was examined in
MDA-MB-231 (basal, triple negative), MCF-7 (luminal, ER-positive) and
SK-BR-3 (HER-2 positive) breast cancer cells. We used real time RT-PCR
and ELISA to confirm that all cell lines expressed OPG mRNA and protein,
respectively. NF-kappaB activity was modulated using thymoquinone (TQ; 10
M) and BMS345541 (1 M; both inhibitors) and Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and Interleukin-1-beta (IL-1-beta; 10 ng/ml, both
activators). Specificity for these modulators was determined by NF-kappaB
promoter driven luciferase reporter assay.In MDA-MB-231 cells, inhibition
of NF-kappaB lowered basal levels of OPG mRNA and protein expression,
suggesting constitutive NF-kappaB activity plays a role in OPG
expression. TNF-alpha and IL-1-beta treatment increased OPG mRNA and
protein expression significantly above basal levels. Inhibition of
NF-kappaB ameliorated TNF-alpha and IL-1-beta induced OPG expression to
baseline. In MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 cells, basal levels of OPG mRNA and
protein expression were not reduced by the NF-kappaB inhibitors.
TNF-alpha and IL-1-beta treatment increased OPG mRNA and protein
expression significantly above baseline, however inhibition of NF-kappaB
did not ameliorate the induction of OPG mRNA and protein expression.Our
data suggests that the mechanisms regulating OPG expression in breast
cancer cells may depend on breast cancer subtype. It appears in the basal
cell line, MDA-MB-231, NF-kappaB's tumor promoting effects may be
modulated in part by increasing OPG expression. The regulation of OPG
expression in cells from other breast cancer subtypes requires further
investigation.

