Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting for sphingosine kinase 1 in epithelial
ovarian cancer


Purpose: Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) is over-expressed in various human
cancers with pro-growth effects and its inhibitors has been suggested
potential anti-cancer agents. This study was designed to investigate the
therapeutic potential of SK1 inhibitor in epithelial ovarian carcinoma
(EOC).Experimental design: The expression of SK1 protein was evaluated
using immunohistochemistry in patients with EOC. EOC cell lines (A2780,
SKOV3ip1, A2780-CP20, SKOV3-TR, ES2 and RMG2) were used in this study to
test SK1 siRNA or inhibitors. We used two kinds of SK inhibitor including
SK inhibitor (for both SK1 and 2) and FTY720 (specifically inhibiting
SK1) to check cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and invasion
using MTT, FACS, ELISA and wound-healing assay, respectively.
Furthermore, in vivo experiments were performed to test the FTY720 on
tumor growth in orthotopic EOC mouse model.Results: The expression of SK1
protein in primary EOC tissues was strongly observed in all of patients;
however, there was no expression of SK1 protein in the normal ovarian
epithelium (n=5). Blocking SK1 by its siRNA or inhibitors significantly
affected cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and invasion in
A2780-PAR andSKOV3ip1 cells. SK1 inhibitors led to decrease of SK
enzymatic activity in cells. Furthermore, utilizing the in vivo animal
model (A2780-PAR), FTY720 treatment significantly decreased the total
tumor weight compared with control (P Purpose: Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1)
is over-expressed in various human cancers with pro-growth effects and
its inhibitors has been suggested potential anti-cancer agents. This
study was designed to investigate the therapeutic potential of SK1
inhibitor in epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC).Experimental design: The
expression of SK1 protein was evaluated using immunohistochemistry in
patients with EOC. EOC cell lines (A2780, SKOV3ip1, A2780-CP20, SKOV3-TR,
ES2 and RMG2) were used in this study to test SK1 siRNA or inhibitors. We
used two kinds of SK inhibitor including SK inhibitor (for both SK1 and
2) and FTY720 (specifically inhibiting SK1) to check cell proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and invasion using MTT, FACS, ELISA and
wound-healing assay, respectively. Furthermore, in vivo experiments were
performed to test the FTY720 on tumor growth in orthotopic EOC mouse
model.Results: The expression of SK1 protein in primary EOC tissues was
strongly observed in all of patients; however, there was no expression of
SK1 protein in the normal ovarian epithelium (n=5). Blocking SK1 by its
siRNA or inhibitors significantly affected cell proliferation, apoptosis,
angiogenesis and invasion in A2780-PAR andSKOV3ip1 cells. SK1 inhibitors
led to decrease of SK enzymatic activity in cells. Furthermore, utilizing
the in vivo animal model (A2780-PAR), FTY720 treatment significantly
decreased the total tumor weight compared with control (P <
0.05).Conclusions: These results show that therapeutic targeting of SK1
with its inhibitor could have potentials of novel therapeutics for EOC.

