Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblasts promote endometrial cancer cell
proliferation in vitro and in vivo


Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) recently demonstrated
tumor-promoting roles in various cancer types, yet their implication in
endometrial cancer (EC) has not been fully explored. We isolated
fibroblasts (CAFs) and its epithelial counterpart from human EC tissues
using CD90- and CD326-antibodies conjugated magnetic beads, respectively.
We collected CAFs secretion by concentrating spent supernatants from
cells growing in media containing 2% fetal bovine serum. Both human EC
cell lines and primary EC epithelial cells showed increased cell
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, following treatment with CAFs
secretion. This was in contrast to the growth inhibitory effects shown
with secretions from normal endometrial fibroblasts. EC cells also
demonstrated increased cell motility and invasiveness in response to CAFs
secretion. Using cytokine array and ELISA, we further identified several
cytokines which were overexpressed in CAFs compared to normal endometrial
fibroblasts: macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), interleukin-6
(IL-6), growth regulated oncogene (GRO), regulated on activation, normal
T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF). These cytokines may activate MAPK/Erk and/or PI3K/Akt
pathways to promote EC cell proliferation, as shown by immunoblotting and
ELISA. Indeed, CAFs-mediated EC proliferation was suppressed
independently by specific inhibitors for PI3K/Akt (LY294002) and MAPK/Erk
(U0126). To determine if CAFs promote EC tumor proliferation in vivo, we
inoculated fluorescently labeled-epithelial cell and CAFs subcutaneously
at the flank of nude mice in the ratio of 1:2 and 1:4. Tumor sizes were
measured twice a week using calipers and monitored weekly using in vivo
imaging. Inoculation of CAFs and normal fibroblasts alone did not induce
any tumor growth; however, co-injection of EC with CAFs (1:4) showed
approximately 3 times higher growth rate when compared to EC alone. More
interestingly, there was no sign of tumor growth in mice inoculated with
combination of EC and normal fibroblasts (1:4) at the end of experiment.
Taken together, our data suggests that CAFs exert tumor-promoting effects
both in vitro and in vivo partly via specific cytokines-mediated
activation of MAPK/Erk and PI3K/Akt pathways. Delineating the roles of
CAFs in EC tumor microenvironment may provide potential therapeutic
targets for the treatment of EC.

