Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the novel fusion molecule with high dual
antiangiogenic and anticancer potential


Angiogenesis, the process of new blood vessels formation, is essential
for tumor growth and metastasis. Since tumors are unable to grow beyond a
millimeter diameter in the absence of angiogenic factors, it was
postulated that blocking of angiogenic factors could provide a new
strategy to inhibit tumor leading to a potential novel anticancer
therapy.Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL/Apo2L) was considered as a promising anticancer agent due its
remarkable ability to induce apoptosis in cancer cells without harming
normal cells. However, in clinical practice TRAIL efficacy was too low to
become the effective single therapy agent.Here we present a novel fusion
protein based on TRAIL/Apo2L and equipped with an antiangiogenic effector
peptide originating from VEGF exon 6 that binds to natural VEGF receptors
and competes with their natural ligand. The proposed fusion protein,
AD-O51.4, consists of extracellular soluble portion of TRAIL linked to
two tandemly arranged copies of the effector peptide, separated by a
sequence that contains the motif recognized by tumor-specific proteases
(MMP's, uPa).The AD-O51.4 fusion molecule exerts its dual cytotoxic and
antiangiogenic activity upon interaction with cellular death and VEGF
receptors on cancer endothelial cells. In consequence, the peptide blocks
the binding of VEGF to its receptors, preventing new vessels formation.
In addition, due to the presence of VEGF receptors on cancer cells, they
can be also targeted by VEGF receptors-binding domain of AD-O51.4 making
them susceptible for TRAIL-induced apoptosis.Indeed, an extensive panel
of discovery-stage studies of AD-O51.4 showed broad cytotoxic activity on
primary cancer cell lines but no toxic effects on normal cells and strong
antitumor activity on subcutaneous and orthotropic xenograft models with
complete tumor remission. Based on these data, early preclinical part of
the program was initiated.An LC\MS-based method, specific for the intact
molecule, was set up as the detection and quantification tool, enabling
detection of AD-O51.4 in different biological matrices. Safety of the
molecule was evaluated using healthy hepatocytes form humans and
cynomolgus monkeys. To verify tumor targeting capacity of the molecule,
tumor-specific accumulation in subcutaneous xenograft model of human
colorectal cancer as a function of time was assessed using imaging
techniques. Tumor specific accumulation was also confirmed using LC\MS
method even after single administration. To analyse the pharmacological
properties of the AD-O51.4, PK profiles were evaluated in Wistar rats and
cynomoglus monkeys. Finally, strong antitumor activity was confirmed
using PDX models of human lung, colon, rectal and pancreatic cancer.
Currently the molecule is approaching formal ADME\Tox panel.

