Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grainyhead-like 2 regulates molecular subtype switching in
epithelial ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is clinically heterogeneous, comprising
different histological and biological subtypes. Despite tumor
heterogeneity, patient stratification is lacking and targeted therapeutic
options for EOC are limited. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), an
important developmental process that allows the conversion of epithelial
cells to mesenchymal phenotype, has been implicated in contributing to
the molecular heterogeneity in EOC. Emerging evidence suggests that EMT
in EOC may be associated with tumor progression and metastasis. We aim to
decipher the underlying EMT mechanisms by using a panel of 42
EMT-phenotyped EOC cell lines. We found that Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2), a
transcription factor, was expressed exclusively in EOC cells with
epithelial phenotype by using qPCR, ELISA and western blots. EOC tumors
with Mesenchymal molecular subtype also showed a decrease in GRHL2
expression. These data suggest that GRHL2 is required for maintaining
cell polarity or cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, manipulating the
expression of GRHL2 might switch the EMT-related molecular subtypes in
EOC. Here, we showed that knocking down of GRHL2 resulted in EMT changes
in EOC cells with Epithelial molecular subtype, accompanied by an
increase in cell motility and directional migration. GRHL2-deficient
cells also showed a tendency to migrate individually instead of
collectively, thus suggesting that GRHL2 might be required for collective
cell migration. Knock-down of GRHL2 not only downregulates E-cadherin
expression, but also interferes with the stability of E-cadherin at
cell-cell junctions. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq)
identified GRHL2 transcriptional targets that might be the downstream
mediators for this molecular subtype switch. In conclusion, GRHL2 is an
important regulator in maintaining the epithelial phenotype and crucial
player in molecular heterogeneity in EOC.

