Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of 1115 patients tested for MET amplification and therapy
response in the MD Anderson phase I clinic


Background: Increased c-Met activity has been implicated in numerous
oncologic processes. However, its prevalence among different cancers,
association with demographics and genetic aberrations, and implication in
therapy resistance has not been fully described.Patients and Methods:
Between May 2010 to November 2012, 3607 patients were referred to the
investigational cancer therapeutics department at MD Anderson Cancer
Center for consideration of a phase I protocol. Among these patients,
1115 underwent MET amplification testing via fluorescence in-situ
hybridization and were included in this analysis. Copy numbers are
expressed as a ratio to the centromeric gene CEP7 with amplification
defined as MET/CEP7 2 or >20 gene copies in >10% of nuclei. Patient
demographic, histologic, and molecular characteristics were stratified
based on MET amplification status. Among patients with MET amplification,
20 were treated on a phase I protocol and evaluated for therapy response.
Responses were categorized by RECIST criteria with objective responses
defined as stable disease lasting 6 months or any observed partial
responses. Categorical variables were compared via Chi-Squared and Fisher
Exact Tests, while continuous variables were compared via Student's
T-Test. Overall survival from the date of first consultation at our phase
I clinic were compared via the Log-Rank test.Results: Twenty-nine (2.6%)
patients exhibited MET amplification (median 3.48; range 2.05-16.14). Of
these, 2 exhibited MET/CEP7 ratios 20 MET copies among >10% of nuclei.
The highest prevalence was in tumors of adrenal (2 of 13; 15%) and renal
(4 of 28; 14%) origins. Stratifying by MET amplification status, no
differences were observed in demographic characteristics including age,
ethnicity, or gender (all P>0.10). Amplified patients exhibited more
organ systems involved with metastatic disease (median 3 vs. 4,
P=0.0005). MET amplification was correlated with higher incidence of BRAF
mutation, high-grade histology, and PTEN loss (all PBackground: Increased
c-Met activity has been implicated in numerous oncologic processes.
However, its prevalence among different cancers, association with
demographics and genetic aberrations, and implication in therapy
resistance has not been fully described.Patients and Methods: Between May
2010 to November 2012, 3607 patients were referred to the investigational
cancer therapeutics department at MD Anderson Cancer Center for
consideration of a phase I protocol. Among these patients, 1115 underwent
MET amplification testing via fluorescence in-situ hybridization and were
included in this analysis. Copy numbers are expressed as a ratio to the
centromeric gene CEP7 with amplification defined as MET/CEP7 2 or >20
gene copies in >10% of nuclei. Patient demographic, histologic, and
molecular characteristics were stratified based on MET amplification
status. Among patients with MET amplification, 20 were treated on a phase
I protocol and evaluated for therapy response. Responses were categorized
by RECIST criteria with objective responses defined as stable disease
lasting 6 months or any observed partial responses. Categorical variables
were compared via Chi-Squared and Fisher Exact Tests, while continuous
variables were compared via Student's T-Test. Overall survival from the
date of first consultation at our phase I clinic were compared via the
Log-Rank test.Results: Twenty-nine (2.6%) patients exhibited MET
amplification (median 3.48; range 2.05-16.14). Of these, 2 exhibited
MET/CEP7 ratios 20 MET copies among >10% of nuclei. The highest
prevalence was in tumors of adrenal (2 of 13; 15%) and renal (4 of 28;
14%) origins. Stratifying by MET amplification status, no differences
were observed in demographic characteristics including age, ethnicity, or
gender (all P>0.10). Amplified patients exhibited more organ systems
involved with metastatic disease (median 3 vs. 4, P=0.0005). MET
amplification was correlated with higher incidence of BRAF mutation,
high-grade histology, and PTEN loss (all P<0.01). There were no
differences in overall survival when stratifying by amplification status.
Of the 20 patients with MET amplification treated and evaluated on a
phase I protocol, 6 (30%) achieved objective responses on any phase I
protocol. No patients treated with a c-Met inhibitor (0 of 6) achieved an
objective response. Considering only the best response on a phase I
protocol, the highest response rate was observed with agents targeting
VEGFR (4 of 7, 57%).Conclusions: Although caution must be stressed when
interpreting these results, MET amplification exhibits an association
with higher metastatic burden, specific molecular characteristics (BRAF
mutation, PTEN loss), and high grade histology. Patients with MET
amplification in this cohort exhibited a high response rate to VEGFR
inhibitors while c-Met targeted agents showed little activity.

