Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ampk and hdac pathways and regulation rassf1c gene expression


Introduction: We have previously shown that RASSF1C promotes cell
proliferation, migration and attenuates apoptosis in cancer cells. We
have also shown that RASSF1C is significantly up-regulated in breast and
lung cancer tissues compared to normal tissues. Together these
demonstrate that RASSF1C, is not a tumor suppressor like RASSF1A, but
instead appears to function as an oncoprotein.Currently nothing is known
about the upstream signaling cascades involved in regulating RASSF1C gene
expression and thus we performed transcriptome PCR array study to
identify chemicals inhibitors that modulate(s) RASSF1C expression.Method:
A transcriptome PCR array was obtained from Qiagen. It consisted of cDNA
from breast cancer cell line MCF7 cells treated with 90 different
chemical inhibitors that regulate various signaling pathways. The array
was screened with RASSF1C gene specific primers. Data analysis was
performed by importing the Ct values obtained into data analysis
software.Results: The PCR array screen identified several chemical
reagents that appear to up-regulate and several that seem to
down-regulate RASSF1C expression by 1.5 fold. The two most notable
reagents are Dorsopmorhin (AMPK inhibitor) which up-regulates RASSF1C
expression by 2.8 fold and Trichostatin A (HDAC inhibitor) which down
regulates RASSF1C expression by 2 fold. We are in process of confirming
the effect of these inhibitors in a panel of breast and lung cancer
cells.Conclusion: The findings are novel and suggest that inhibition of
AMPK pathway induces RASSF1C expression while inhibition of HDAC pathway
suppresses RASSF1C gene expression. We should note that Trichostatin A
has been shown to activate AMPK, inhibits HDAC, arrests cell growth, and
induces apoptosis in human cancers. Our findings provide a potential
mechanism for regulating RASSF1C gene expression through the modulation
of AMPK and HDAC pathways.

