Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cells deficient in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) are
selectively sensitive to inhibition of the DNA dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK)


Many solid tumors, including a significant proportion of colorectal,
endometrial, gastric and urothelial tract cancers, are functionally
deficient in MMR. This results in an altered clinicopathological
phenotype. With the objective of identifying potential MMR-deficient
(dMMR) synthetic lethal vulnerabilities, we performed a large scale
screen of drugs which included a library of kinase inhibitors.Using a
pair of isogenic colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines, deficient and
proficient for MLH1, we identified that exposure to an inhibitor of the
catalytic subunit of DNA-PK (Ku-57788) was associated with a reduction in
cell viability in MLH1-deficient cells at nanomolar concentrations.
Validation studies demonstrated a ten-fold difference in sensitivity in
clonogenic assays and a significant correlation between MMR status and
Ku-57788 across a panel of cancer cell lines. Inhibition of expression of
DNA-PK using RNA interference reproduced the dMMR selectivity. The dMMR
phenotype was associated with a reduction in cellular proliferation,
leading to apoptosis. Given the role of MMR in the repair of oxidative
damage, we assayed levels of 8-oxo-dG, a marker of oxidatively damaged
DNA, and observed increased levels in dMMR cells. Upregulation of the
anti-oxidant response was observed on exposure to Ku-57788, whilst
addition of antioxidants to culture media resulted in complete abrogation
of dMMR selectivity. We assessed the effect of combining Ku-57788 with
standard chemotherapeutics used in CRC and observed a supra-additive
effect with irinotecan. In vivo, treatment of CD1 nude mice with a DNA-PK
inhibitor was associated with a reduction in growth of MLH1-deficient
cancer cell line xenografts with no effect observed in
MLH1-proficiency.We report for the first time that inhibition of DNA-PKcs
using small molecule inhibitors, either as a single agent or in
combination with chemotherapeutics, may be a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of cancers deficient in DNA MMR.

