Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The KISS1 metastasis suppressor appears to integrate glycolysis,
mitochondrial biogenesis and metastasis via regulation of a PGC1 pathway


Considering the enormous energy requirements and stresses of the
metastatic cascade, an interrelationship with aerobic glycolysis seems
intuitive, but has not been definitively established. The purpose of
these studies was to determine whether there is a relationship between
KISS1 metastasis suppression and metabolism. Wild-type KISS1 expressed in
human melanoma cells were metastasis suppressed and took up less glucose
and produced less lactate, corresponding to higher pH[Ex]. Metabolism and
metastasis changes did not occur when KISS1 was missing the secretion
signal peptide (SS). Changes in glucose transport and key glycolytic
enzymes did not consistently correlate with metabolic changes; however,
V-ATPase, which promotes extracellular acidification, invasion and
metastasis, appears to be involved in KISS1-mediated metabolic changes.
Also corresponding with the shift from glycolysis to oxidative
phosphorylation, KISS1-expressing cells have 30-50% more mitochondrial
mass accompanied increased higher expression of PPAR co-activator 1
(PGC1), a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. PGC1-mediated
downstream pathways (i.e. fatty acid synthesis and -oxidation) are
differentially regulated by KISS1, apparently reliant upon direct KISS1
interaction with Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1 (NRF1), a major
transcription factor involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. KISS1 does not
affect PGC1 mRNA expression but stabilizes the protein through
interaction with the ubiquitin-like protein, UBQLN1. To test whether a
KISS1- PGC1 axis is critical for metastasis suppressor function, shRNA to
KISS1 or PGC1 was introduced into KISS1-expressing cells. Metabolic
changes and suppression of invasion and migration were reversed.
Importantly, knock-down of PGC1 abolished KISS1-mediated metastasis
suppression in vivo, strongly suggesting that PGC1 is an essential
downstream mediator of KISS1 as a metastasis suppressor. Taken together,
these data define a novel signaling pathway controlling metabolism and
metastasis. Moreover, these data appear to directly connect changes in
aerobic glycolysis, mitochondrial metabolism, and cancer metastasis.

