Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Super carbonate apatite as simplified systemic nanoparticle
carrier for therapy of solid tumors


Introduction: RNA interference technology is underway in clinical trials
for limited diseases. RNAi technology for solid tumors, especially in
systemic administration, still faces hurdles and has not emerged on the
clinical stage. Here we introduce an in vivo pH sensitive delivery system
of siRNA and microRNA using super carbonate apatite (sCA) nanoparticles
(mean size: 10 nm), which simply consist of inorganic ions. In order to
show the therapeutic superiority of the sCA system over currently
available in vivo siRNA delivery systems, we perform further experiments
comparing the sCA system with Invivofectamine 2.0 (IF) and Atelocollagen
(Atelo). Finally we examine the toxicity of sCA nanoparticle system in
mice and monkeys.Methods: To assess the bio-distribution of fluorescently
labeled siRNA in normal organs and tumor tissues, we used the IVIS
Spectrum CT system (PerkinElmer) and fluorescence microscopy. In
addition, the multiphoton live imaging system (SP5; Leica) and light
sheet fluorescence microscopy (Carl Zeiss) were employed for detailed
analysis and clear visualization of extravasation and intracellular
distribution of fluorescent siRNA in tumor cells. To examine therapeutic
potential of the sCA system, we administered survivin siRNA in
pre-established HCT116 tumor mice models.Results & Discussions: Ex vivo
imaging analysis using IVIS Spectrum CT showed that the fluorescence of
sCA-siRNA was highly accumulated into the tumors as early as 90 min.
Light sheet fluorescence microscopy revealed that sCA-siRNA accumulated
in the cytoplasm of HCT116 cells with considerable green fluorescence
signals at 4 h after intravenous injection. On the other hand, IF-siRNA
and Atelo-siRNA did not accumulate in tumor cells. sCA-survivin-siRNA
exhibited anti-tumor effects on day 11 and the tumor volume of mice
treated with sCA-survivin-siRNA was significantly smaller than in mice
treated with sCA-control-siRNA (P = 0.0008), IF-survivin-siRNA (P =
0.0028), or Atelo-survivin-siRNA (P = 0.0046) on day 18. For in vivo
safety, we carried out a toxicity study by intravenous injection of sCA
to mice. Blood chemistry tests and HE stained sections of the liver,
kidney and spleen showed no physiologically significant difference
between the saline and sCA treated groups. To aim the final goal of
therapy and diagnosis of human tumors, we made up approximately 70-fold
sCA of that administered in mouse per injection and administered it to
monkeys on 4 consecutive days (n = 3). Consequently intravenous
administer of sCA did not cause any serious adverse events in
monkeys.Conclusion: We have demonstrated a highly efficient in vivo siRNA
delivery system targeting solid tumor models, which is characterized as
10 nm minimal particle size and quick accumulation in tumors, thus it can
realize to deliver abundant intact siRNA into tumor cells.

