Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted metabolic profiling of gliomas and glioma stem cells
identifies methionine as a differentially regulated metabolite: Proof of
principle supporting methionine-pet imaging


Purpose: At present, 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose(FDG)-positron emission
tomography (PET) is the most commonly used diagnostic imaging modality in
clinical practice for predicting prognosis in malignant brain tumors. The
diffusive nature of glioblastoma (GBM) often makes FDG-PET detection
inaccurate and there is no diagnostic gold-standard for GBM. Thus, it is
necessary to find new criteria independent of conventional FDG-PET
diagnosis to delineate tumor versus normal tissues. Molecular imaging
using 11C-Methionine-PET (Met-PET) is one of the most promising
approaches to this challenge.Methods: We employed a targeted metabolomic
approach to study the extracellular and intracellular levels of
methionine in established (ATCC) and patient derived primary glioblastoma
(GBM) cell lines, glioma stem cells (GSC) and normal human astrocytes
(NHA) to gain a better understanding of methionine uptake.
Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) is an enzyme that plays a vital
role in polyamine metabolism and methionine salvage. Therefore, we
determined the expression profile of MTAP in these cells using RT-qPCR.
We then extracted the intracellular and extracellular metabolites of GBM,
GSC and NHA to estimate their methionine levels using LC-MS Quadropole
Time of Flight (Q-TOF) and LC-MS Triple Quad (QQQ) instruments. Thus, by
using metabolic fingerprints of methionine, we quantified methionine
accumulation / uptake in GBM, GSC and NHA.Results and Conclusion: PET
provides real-time information of metabolism through the behavior of
single molecules. Despite clinical trials advocating Met-PET imaging as a
superior imaging modality compared to FDG-PET for brain tumors, to date
Met-PET has not been widely used in clinical diagnostics. Through this
metabolic profiling of gliomas, we have shown for the first time that GBM
and GSC accumulate methionine when compared to NHA. Uptake studies
through exogenous addition of methionine in GBM, GSC and NHA show a
significant uptake of methionine by GBM and GSC when compared to NHA. The
results of our study establish the scientific basis for Met-PET imaging
in GBM and provide a rationale for incorporating Met-PET imaging in
future brain tumor clinical trials to evaluate its prognostic value.

