Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ETS factor ESE3/EHF controls Lin28A and Lin28B and acts as a
barrier for stemness in prostate epithelial cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
Several studies have provided evidence for the presence of self-renewing
cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) in many solid tumors, including prostate
cancer. Understanding the molecular mechanism leading to induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stemness will help to find
new therapies for metastatic PCa. We have reported that the ETS factor
ESE3/EHF is a tumor suppressor involved in the maintenance of the
differentiation state of normal prostate epithelial cells (PrECs).
Prostate epithelial cells upon knockdown of ESE3/EHF (ESE3KD PrECs)
undergo transformation involving EMT, enlargement of the stem cell
compartment with broad reprogramming of the transcriptome. In the process
to identify the genes responsible for the activation of stemness in
ESE3KD PrECs, we found a significant increase of Lin28A and Lin28B
compared to control PrECs. Consistent with their crucial role in stemness
maintenance, higher level of Lin28A and Lin28B were detected in the
cancer stem cell compartment compared to the bulk population of adherent
growing cells and in xenografts derived from the cancer stem
cell-enriched population. To relate these effects directly to ESE3/EHF we
searched for ETS-binding sites (EBS) in the promoters of the Lin28A and
Lin28B. Computational analysis revealed putative EBS in the promoter
region of both genes and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed the
binding of ESE3/EHF to the predicted sites in PrECs and LNCaP cells.
Furthermore, ESE3/EHF repressed Lin28A and Lin28B promoter activity in
luciferase reporters. Transcriptional repression of Lin28A and Lin28B by
ESE3/EHF was confirmed by the enrichment of repressive markers H3K9me and
H3K27me in their promoters in LNCAP cells. Knockdown of Lin28A and Lin28B
in ESE3KD PrECs by siRNAs reversed anchorage independent growth and in
vitro prostatosphere formation. Furthermore, inhibition of Lin28A and
Lin28B significantly reduced tumor initiating properties of ESE3KD PrECs
in vivo. In contrast, re-expression of Lin28A and Lin28B promoted
anchorage-independent growth and increased prostatosphere formation and
self renewal in PrECs and LNCaP cells. Together, these data indicate that
ESE3/EHF maintains in a repressed state Lin28A and Lin28B and constitutes
a barrier to dedifferentiation of prostate epithelial cells. These data
indicate also a role of Lin28A and Lin28B in the expansion and
maintenance of the stem cell compartment in prostate cancer and
underscore their validity as potential therapeutic targets.

