Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TLR4 activation by paclitaxel promotes breast cancer recurrence
and metastasis


Background: Paclitaxel (PXL) is a widely-used drug for breast cancer
therapy. Resistance, however, occurs frequently and the evasion
mechanisms remain unclear. PXL is known to activate Toll-like Receptor-4
(TLR4), a major signaling receptor expressed on immune cells responding
to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS activation of TLR4 in the immune cells
substantially enhances their migratory, invasive, proliferative, and
pro-survival functions as necessary for the body defense. Since PXL is a
functional LPS mimetic, we hypothesized that acquisition of such
phenotype by TLR4-expressing cancer cells promotes tumor growth,
metastasis, and resistance to therapy.Methods: We tested this hypothesis
in two breast cancer luciferase-tagged models genetically modified to
either suppress TLR4 expression in a positive line, MDA-MB-231, or
overexpress it in a negative line, HCC1806. Modified cell lines and their
controls were orthotopically implanted in mice followed by measuring
tumor growth prior and post-PXL treatment. Incidence and burden of lymph
node (LN) and lung metastases were quantified by measuring luciferase
activity in respective organs. TLR4-induced inflammation was assessed by
measuring cytokines in blood, tumor lysates, and metastatic organs using
RT-qPCR and ELISA. Cell composition of spleens and bone marrow from
control and treated mice were analyzed by FACS. TLR4-induced changes in
tumor vasculature were determined by immunostaining for blood and
lymphatic vessel markers.Results: TLR4 expressed in tumor cells
significantly increased rate of recurrence and metastasis, an event
augmented by PXL treatment. Local inflammation was also enhanced by the
PXLTLR4 axis as illustrated by a 276-fold increase in IL-6 in lysates of
TLR4+ tumors from treated mice as compared with samples of isogenic
tumors with depleted TLR4. Activation of this pathway also increased
cytokine levels in the blood and distant organs as indicted by 3-6 fold
increase in IL-4 and IL-10 in LNs and lungs. These pro-inflammatory
systemic changes promoted generation of myeloid progenitors in bone
marrow and spleen evident by 4-5 fold increase in Ly6C+ cell population
in TLR4-overexpressing tumors compared with those lacking TLR4.
Importantly, activation of the PXLTLR4 axis induced intratumoral
formation of lymphatic vessels in HCC1806 tumors absent in all other
experimental groups.Conclusion: These data imply that PXL therapy
activates TLR4 often overexpressed in breast cancer. Activation of this
pathway substantially increases local tumor and systemic inflammation
leading to generation of myeloid progenitors that can promote metastasis
by inducing angiogenesis and lymphatic vessel formation, particularly
inside the tumor. These findings suggest that tumor expression of TLR4
may indicate poor prognosis and response to therapy, and that blocking
the TLR4 pathway may improve current anti-cancer treatments.

