Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipose stem cell-derived interferon gamma alters breast
epithelial stem cell hierarchy


Autologous adipose stem cell transplantation is increasingly being used
for soft tissue reconstruction, particularly after mastectomy. However, a
recent study demonstrated recurrence of invasive ductal carcinoma in the
breast within four months of autologous fat grafting. Previous studies
have documented how cancer cells commandeer adipose stem cells (ASC) to
support their survival by altering extracellular matrix composition and
stiffness. This study focused on delineating the effects of ASCs on the
self-renewal capacity of breast epithelial cells. The immortalized breast
epithelial cell line MCF-10A, MCF-10A overexpressing Slug, and MCF-10A
overexpressing SRC were examined using a mammosphere assay and flow
cytometry for the effects of ASCs on their self-renewal and stem-luminal
progenitor-differentiated cell surface marker profile. MCF-10A-Slug cells
provided a unique model system to study breast epithelial cell
dedifferentiation as Slug functions downstream of the breast cancer
susceptibility gene BRCA1 and is a major suppressor of progenitor cell
lineage commitment and differentiation. Interestingly, results with these
established cell lines were reproduced in primary breast epithelial cells
isolated from a high-risk patient. We show that secreted factors from
ASCs promote self-renewal of all cell types examined. ASC co-culture or
treatment with ASC conditioned media (CM) altered the number of
CD49fhigh/EpCAMlow stem-like and CD49fmedium/EpCAMmedium luminal
progenitor cells in 2D culture and mammosphere assays. ASCs secrete
Interferon gamma (IFN), CD40 ligand, IL-23 and SERPINE1. Among these
factors, only IFN treatment altered stem cell hierarchy; while
MCF-10A-Slug cells displayed only luminal progenitor phenotype, cells
treated with IFN contained a distinct stem-like cell population. These
results suggest that paracrine activity of adipose stem cell-derived
factors can either enhance dedifferentiation and promote proliferation of
dormant tumor cells or predispose normal cells to transformation by
blocking differentiation.Financial support: Susan G. Komen For the Cure
SAC110025 and Zeta Tau Sorority (HN)

