Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ube2e inhibits the ubiquitination and degradation of EGFR mediated
by Cbl and Ube2d


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) have a demonstrated role as drivers of
malignant transformation. Many RTKs (e.g., EGFR, MET, FLT3) are
negatively regulated by ubiquitination and degradation mediated by Cbl
proteins a family of RING finger (RF) ubiquitin ligases (E3s). There are
three mammalian family members Cbl, Cbl-b and Cbl-c. All Cbl proteins
have a highly conserved N-terminal tyrosine kinase binding domain and a
C3HC4 (RF) domain. Loss of Cbl protein function has be associated with
malignant transformation drive by increased RTK activity. E3s such as the
Cbl proteins confer specificity to the ubiquitination process and direct
the conjugation of ubiquitin to one or more lysines on the specific
target proteins in collaboration with ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes
(E2s). The E2s bind to the E3 and together they mediate ubiquitination of
specific substrates. There are approximately 30 human E2s. All of the E2s
have a highly conserved catalytic domain (UBC domain). In this study, we
characterized the interaction of Cbl with E2s. Using an in vitro E3
assay, we found that only the Ube2d family (Ube2d1, Ube2d2, and Ube2d3)
of E2s mediates autoubiquitination of the three Cbl proteins.
Subsequently, using the yeast two-hybrid system, we found that Ube2e1,
Ube2e2, Ube2e3, Ube2L3, Ube2u, Ube2w and Ube2z can interact with Cbl even
though they do not support autoubiquitination of Cbl in vitro E3 assay.
Among these E2s, three Ube2e family members and Ube2w bind to the RF
domain of Cbl as demonstrated by the loss of interaction when the RF
domain is disrupted. Further, we demonstrated that Ube2e family members
are involved in regulation of EGFR activity mediated by Cbl in HeLa
cells. Knockdown of Ube2e increases down-regulation and ubiquitination of
EGFR in HeLa cells. We further showed that three Ube2e inhibit
autoubiquitination of Cbl mediated by Ube2d2 in vitro. Together these
data suggest that RTK degradation can be modulated by competition between
E2s for the Cbl E3s.

