Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of WW domain-containing oxidoreductase in
methotrexate-induced cell death in human squamous cell carcinoma


Refractory cancer cells to initial chemotherapy in squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) may cause subsequent disease relapse and distant
metastasis. We show that the susceptibility of SCC cancer cells to
methotrexate (MTX) was associated with higher expression levels of tumor
suppressor WW domain-containing oxidoreductase (designated WWOX, FOR or
WOX1). Upregulation of WWOX/WOX1 expression by MTX treatment, accompanied
by caspase activation and apoptotic cell death, was observed in
MTX-sensitive SCC cell lines and tumor biopsies. Ectopically
overexpressed WWOX/WOX1 sensitized MTX-resistant SCC-9 cells to
MTX-induced apoptosis. Conversely, transient expression of a dominant
negative mutant or an siRNA construct targeting WWOX/WOX1 suppressed
MTX-mediated cell death in SCC-15 cells. Interestingly, following MTX
treatment, significant downregulation of autophagy-related Beclin-1,
Atg12-Atg5 and LC3-II protein expression and autophagosome formation was
observed in MTX-sensitive SCC-15 cells, while autophagy remained robust
in MTX-resistant SCC-9 cells. Increased phosphorylation of mTOR and its
downstream substrate p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K) was detected in MTX-treated
SCC-15 cells, whereas MTX suppressed the autophagy-inhibitory mTOR
signaling in SCC-9 cells. We determined that activation of mTOR and
p70S6K by MTX treatment in SCC-15 cells was mediated by WWOX/WOX1.
Ectopic overexpression of WWOX/WOX1 in SCC cells induced significant
downregulation of Beclin-1, Atg12-Atg5 and LC3-II protein expression, and
MTX treatment exacerbated their diminution. Suppression of WWOX/WOX1 by
lentiviral shRNA prevented MTX-induced reduction in LC3-II expression in
SCC-15 cells. Our findings indicate that WWOX/WOX1 renders SCC cells
susceptible to MTX-induced apoptosis by dampening autophagy, and the
failure to induce WWOX/WOX1 expression leads to chemotherapeutic drug
resistance.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

