Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 blockade immunologically suppresses brain metastasis of lung
cancer


Epidemiological studies have highlighted associations between the regular
use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and reduced cancer
risks in human. In addition, NSAIDs reduce VEGF-D production levels,
which in turn inhibit lymphatic vessel dilation and eventually cancer
metastasis. Most NSAIDs function as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors
that prevent the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The PGE2 induces
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the bone marrow of
cancer-bearing hosts, which is known to be responsible for T-cell
suppression in chronic inflammation. Based on these findings, we
hypothesized that COX-2 blockade would suppress brain metastasis of
cancers by inhibiting MDSC development and their chemokine-mediated
accumulation in the tumor microenvironment (TME). In both mouse and human
brain metastasis cases, the expression levels of COX-2 and CCL2, a
chemokine primarily attracting MDSCs, were increased in the brain tumor
tissues compared with normal brain or peripheral bloods. Concomitantly,
the infiltration of MDSCs (CD11+Gr-1+ for mice and CD14-CD15+HLA-DRlow
for human, respectively) was observed at high levels in the tumor
tissues. In the mouse brain tumor models using LL/2 murine lung cancer
cell line, treatment with NSAIDs inhibited the PGE2 production levels and
the formation of brain metastases. Furthermore, the NSAID treatment
reduced the CCL2 in the TME, which was associated with a reduction in
Ly6ChighLy6Glow monocytic and Ly6ClowLy6Ghigh granulocytic MDSCs in both
the bone marrow and the TME. Mice genetically deficient for CCR2, a
receptor for CCL2, exhibited low penetration of brain metastases along
with reduced infiltration of MDSCs. Collectively, our findings show that
the COX-2 pathway promotes brain metastases of lung cancers by supporting
systemic development of MDSC and their accumulation in the TME mediated
by the CCL2-CCR2 chemokine axis.

