Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the tumor suppressor gene THY1 in suppression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Background and aims:THY1 has been successfully identified as a tumor
suppressor gene (TSG) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) in our
laboratory. The frequency of down-regulated THY1 protein expression was
found to be significantly associated with NPC lymph node metastases.
However, direct functional evidence is still lacking for THY1 being
anti-metastatic in NPC. Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is
well-known as a closely associated process for stem cells as well as
tumor cells to invade to other part of the body. We aim to study the
association of EMT with the THY1 in NPC.Methods: Functional analysis of
restoration of THY1 expression in the NPC cell lines was studied. The
RhoA negative regulator, p190 Rho GTPase-activating protein (p190RhoGAP)
and the E-cadherin/beta-catenin cell junction was examined in the
THY1-expressing NPC cells.Results: Both real-time and conventional
invasion chamber assays clearly showed that the invasive ability of the
THY1 transfectants was consistently lower than vector-alone control. The
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) results show
that the gene expression of cell invasion-associated gelatinase MMP-9 was
significantly down-regulated in the THY1-transfectants compared with the
vector-alone control. The p190RhoGAP was greatly activated by
phosphorylation in the THY1 transfectants, when the THY1 gene was
switched on in the absence of doxycycline (dox, an analogue of
tetracycline). In the presence of dox when THY1 was switched off, the
phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP was reduced. It appears that the
phosphorylation status of p190RhoGAP is positively regulated by THY1 in
NPC cells. The immunofluorescence (IF) confocal microscopy results show
that beta-catenin and E-cadherin were much more frequently translocated
to the cell-cell junction in the THY1 transfectants than the
vector-alone.Conclusions: These findings suggest that THY1 inhibited NPC
cell invasion via the formation of adherens junction and up-regulation of
p190RhoGAP. The enhanced formation of cell adherens junction by THY1 is
likely to be one of the possible mechanisms to suppress EMT in NPC.

