Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Construction of immunoglobulin light chain IL2 immunocytokines and
mouse-specific surrogates for studying the effects of IL2 receptor
selectivity in mouse tumor models


Armed antibodies are an increasingly important approach to cancer therapy
and include the use of anti-tumor antibodies for the delivery of
radioactivity (RIT), cytotoxic drugs (ADCs), additional antibody domains
(bi-specifics) and immune-stimulatory cytokines (immunocytokines, or
ICs). While these approaches have been in development for more than two
decades, recent successes have come only after refinements that have
balanced tumor targeting with minimal systemic toxicity. For ADCs, this
has come from new linker technology that minimizes cytotoxic drug
activity until the conjugates have been taken up by target cells.
Immunocytokines are also intended to act locally, within the tumor
microenvironment, but their systemic delivery by intravenous injection is
complicated by their ability to activate circulating immune cells
expressing the cytokine receptor(s). For IL2 containing ICs, pre-clinical
mouse tumor models have shown excellent anti-tumor activity while in
cancer patients, the therapeutic index is lower, due to a greater (10-20
fold) ability to activate the human intermediate affinity IL2 receptor
(IL2R). This suggests it would be advantageous to construct IL2 based ICs
with normal activity on the high affinity IL2R (L2R), but reduced (but
not absent) ability to trigger IL2R. A new IC platform has been developed
in which cytokines (or other proteins) are fused to the C terminus of the
IgG light (L) chain. This greatly restricts the freedom of movement of
the N-terminal region of the fused protein. For IL2, this restricts
access to aspartic acid 20 (D20) of IL2, a key site of interaction with
the chain of the IL2R, and reduces the ability of the IC to trigger IL2R
activation. For human cells expressing only IL2R, activity is reduced
10-20 fold, but normal for cells expressing IL2R. This receptor
selectivity can be increased by shortening the N-terminal region of IL2.
Interestingly, an IC with a 100 fold reduced activity for IL2R appears to
have full activity once the IC binds to antigen coated beads, at least
for human immune cells. Unfortunately, the same molecules have very low
activity for mouse immune cells expressing only IL2R, making mouse models
non-predictive. To address this, a set of ICs (mouse model surrogates)
have been made using a mutant IL2 with increased affinity to IL2R that is
independent of the sterically-restricted D20 contact site. The L-chain
fusion protein with a full length IL2 N-terminus is 50-100 times more
potent than the same IC with native IL2 on human IL2 expressing cells and
is being tested for activity with mouse splenocytes. Further
modifications of the length of the IL2 N-terminus will be used to create
molecules with the receptor specificity matching the ICs intended for
human clinical trials. Once identified, these molecules will be tested
for antigen-induced activation of IL2R.

