Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of EWS-FLI1 on the Rho/Actin/MRTF circuit in Ewing
sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common bone tumor in children and
adolescents. The disease is characterized by the expression of the
aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1, which is a fusion gene product
originating from the chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). Despite
good treatment outcomes for patients with localized ES, about 25% of
patients already harbor metastatic disease upon presentation and are
prevalently faced with poor overall survival. The metastatic cascade is a
complex process. Remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton is the first step
for a cell in order to acquire a migratory phenotype. The major regulator
of the actin cytoskeleton is the Rho family of GTPases, which upon
G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling gets activated and promotes
the polymerization of monomeric G-actin into stress fibers. Concurrently
G-actin releases the myocardin-related transcription factor family (MRTF)
of transcriptional coactivators. MRTFs translocate into the nucleus where
they, together with the transcription factor serum response factor (SRF),
bind to serum response elements (SRE) in the promoter of genes involved
in cell adhesion, migration and motility. However, the ternary complex
factor (TCF) family, a class of transcriptional coactivators activated
through Ras signaling, can compete with MRTFs for SRF complexing and
binds to ets-motifs on SRE. The ets-transcription factor EWS-FLI1 has
been shown to substitute for TCFs, potentially interfering with SRF
target gene expression. We therefore hypothesize that EWS-FLI1 interferes
with GPCR downstream signaling by competition with MRTFs. By gene
expression profiling, we show that several putative MRTF target genes are
repressed in the presence of EWS-FLI1 in ES cell lines and are strongly
induced upon EWS-FLI1 knockdown. Using the MRTFA target gene transgelin
(TAGLN) as an example, we show that knockdown of MRTFA can only reduce
its serum inducibility in the absence but not in the presence of EWS-FLI1
supporting our hypothesis of EWS-FLI1 perturbing GPCR signaling in ES.
With this study we want to elucidate the role of EWS-FLI1 in the
regulation of early steps of the metastatic process in ES.Supported by
the Liddy Shriver Sarcoma Initiative.

