Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of orthotopic liver cancers by a combinatorial therapy
of radiation and adenoviral vectors expressing interleukin 12


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer
death worldwide. Because of difficulty in early diagnosis, only a
minority of HCC patients are candidates for resection or transplantation,
the traditional curative treatments. Recent development of image-guided
radiotherapy and stereotactic radiotherapy offer an alternative
therapeutic option for HCC patients with advanced diseases. In addition
to eradicate tumor cells via DNA double-strand breaks or induction of
apoptosis, radiotherapy also induces immunogenic tumor cell death,
releasing a variety of danger-signaling molecules, which may help induce
adaptive immune responses against the irradiated local tumors as well as
the non-irradiated metastatic tumors. To further increase the therapeutic
effect and enhance the antitumor immune responses, we proposed to combine
radiation therapy with interleukin 12 (IL-12), a cytokine which has the
ability to sensitize suppressive tumor-associated bone marrow-derived
stromal cells, enhancing their ability to stimulate CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
responses. BALB/c mice were injected at the left liver lobe of 3 x 105
BNL cells, a murine HCC cell line. At day 10, when the tumor volume
reaching about 50 mm3, the hepatic tumors were receiving the following
treatment: (1) a single dose of radiation of 10 Gy delivering at a mean
dose rate of 6.72 Gy/min, (2) a single intratumoral injection of 108
p.f.u. of adenoviral vectors encoding a single-chain murine IL-12
(Ad/IL-12), (3) a combination therapy of 10 Gy radiation and 108 p.f.u.
Ad/IL-12, and (4) no treatment. At day 30, mice were sacrificed and the
tumor volume was measured by a caliper. The tumors in the control none
treated group grew progressively with a mean tumor volume of 2,797 304
mm3. The single treatment of radiation or Ad/IL-12 resulted in objective
tumor growth suppression, reducing the mean tumor volume to 367 203 mm3
and 241 204 mm3, respectively, but none of the tumors were regressed
after the single agent treatment. In contrast, the combinatorial
treatment of radiation and Ad/IL-12 led to a partial (> 50% regression)
or complete tumor regression in 80% (8 of 10) of tumors and substantially
delayed tumor growth in the tumor-bearing mice. Our preliminary data also
showed that the combinatorial treatment of radiation and Ad/IL-12 induced
antitumor immune responses and suppressed systemic metastasis.
Mechanistic studies of the combinatorial treatment of radiation and
Ad/IL-12 are under investigation. Our results suggest that a
combinatorial treatment of radiation and IL-12 may represent an
alternative therapy for advanced HCC.

