Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative t cell receptor (tcr) repertoire analysis by
next-generation sequencing (ngs) in non-small cell lung cancer patients
treated with therapeutic cancer peptide vaccines


Cancer immunotherapy is expected to become one of the major treatment
options of cancer, and there is lots of enthusiasm for the development of
therapeutic cancer vaccines. To better understand the molecular mechanism
of action of therapeutic cancer peptide vaccines and also to better
monitor patients' immunological response as a predictive biomarker, a
fast, sensitive, comprehensive, and quantitative method to characterize T
lymphocytes is highly desired. However, TCR repertoire diversity and
clonotype follow-up after cancer vaccination represent a major challenge
due to the enormous complexity of the TCR that characterizes individual T
cell clones. Here, we demonstrated a new high throughput sequencing
method to investigate the detailed genetic profiling of the TCR
repertoire of millions of peripheral T lymphocytes from non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who had been treated with cancer vaccine
cocktail of peptides derived from CDCA1, URLC10, and KIF20A. The new
technology of cDNA sequences of TCR and chains using next generation DNA
sequencer (Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) with 400bp
sequencing chemistry) enabled us to assess the comprehensive TCR and
repertoire information in an unbiased way. We also developed a novel
algorithm VDJ decomposition with soft-clipping that allowed us to
identify the rearranged V-(D)-J regions in both TCR and chains, to
analyze non-template nucleotides added at the junction sites, and also to
determine the exact length and sequence of the complement determining
region 3 (CDR3). In total, 16 samples from 5 NSCLC patients with
different time points (before and after treatment) were analyzed for both
TCR and repertoire. We obtained average 239,689 (range: 103,851 -
329,817) VJ identified reads for TCR sequences and 499,210 (range:
193,753 - 982,040) VDJ identified reads for TCR sequences. Significant
increases of specific TCR CDR3 sequences were observed in patients
showing stable condition after vaccine treatment. In patient #1 with long
stable disease (SD) after treatment, two enriched clones of CASSSLQNIQYF
and CASSPSVGLAGVAQKETQYF were present after vaccine treatment, suggesting
those clones might represent peptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Similarly, enriched CDR3 clones of CASTVRQKDGYTF and CSVGAYRGETQYF were
observed in patient #3 and #5 at SD condition. In conclusion, this
newly-developed NGS technology with the novel algorism should contribute
to the better understanding of the immune responses in patients treated
with immunotherapy. Our approach can also be applied for the
investigation of a wide range of immune-related disorders including
rejection after organ transplantation.

