Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The amino acid transporter SLC6A14 is an effective drug target for
treatment of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is the deadliest of all cancers with worst outcome and
poor survival rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine works well for early
stage cancer, but becomes ineffective for advanced-stage cancer. As such,
there is a dire need for new approaches to treat this cancer. The
metabolism of tumor cells is very different from that of normal cells. In
particular, the differences in amino acid metabolism are gaining
increasing attention in cancer biology. Selective amino acid transporters
are upregulated in cancer in response to the increased demands for amino
acids in tumor cells. Such tumor-selective amino acid transporters are
logical druggable targets for cancer therapy. As such, pharmacologic
blockade of such upregulated transporters would lead to cell death
selectively in tumor cells by depriving the tumor cells of essential
nutrients. With this in mind, we analyzed 8 different publically
available microarray datasets in Gene Expression Omnibus for the amino
acid transporters that are upregulated in pancreatic cancer. This led to
the identification of three transporters (SLC1A5, SLC7A5, and SLC6A14)
that are overexpressed in tumors compared to normal tissue. Among these,
the fold-increase in expression was the highest for SLC6A14 in all
datasets (range for fold-increase, 1.3 - 163.3; range for p value, 0.05 -
2x10-14). The fold-increase for the other two transporters is 2 at the
maximum. We confirmed these findings using primary pancreatic cancer
tissues and cancer cell lines. First, we used paired samples of
pancreatic cancer tissues and the corresponding adjacent normal tissues.
SLC6A14 mRNA was increased at least by 7-fold in tumor versus normal
tissue. The same was true with three additional unpaired cancer and
normal pancreatic tissues. We then evaluated the expression of the
transporter at mRNA and protein level in a normal pancreatic cell line
(HPNE) and five different pancreatic cancer cell lines. The transporter
expression was higher in cancer cell lines compared to the normal cell
line. This was confirmed by immunofluorescence by comparing the
transporter expression between the normal cell line HPNE and the cancer
cell line BxPC-3. Blockade of the transporter function in BxPC-3 cells
with -methyltryptophan (-MT) induced amino acid starvation, activated
autophagy, altered cell cycle distribution and inhibited mTOR and colony
formation. Decreased invasion and migration observed with -MT in tumor
cells was associated with a decrease in stabilization of HIF-1. Xenograft
studies in nude mice showed that administration of -MT decreased the
growth of BxPC-3 and Mia PaCa-2 cells into tumor. To conclude, SLC6A14 is
upregulated in pancreatic cancer and blockade of the transporter with -MT
shows differential and selective detrimental effects on pancreatic tumor
cells, both in vitro and in vivo. These studies identify SLC6A14 as a
novel and effective drug target for pancreatic cancer treatment.

