Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pterostilbene, a natural phytoalexin, effectively protects against
UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis by increasing antioxidant cellular
defenses and preventing mutagenesis


Clinical and laboratory studies have demonstrated that skin exposure to
ultraviolet radiation (UV) is the main cause of non-melanoma skin cancer
(NMSC) ( 99%) and melanoma ( 95%) development. The procarcinogenic
effects of solar exposure are mainly due to UVB radiation (290-320 nm
range), the same tight range that produces burning in human skin
(erythema), inflammation, oxidative stress, DNA damage, etc. The number
of skin cancers around the world keeps increasing and, thus, it is an
urgent need to find effective protection remedies. Phytoalexins of
polyphenolic structure are naturally occurring compounds involved in the
defense against pathogens and environmental stresses in plants.
Epidemiological studies confirm that diets enriched in plant polyphenols
may offer protection against chronic diseases related to oxidative
stress. In this sense polyphenols have shown anticarcinogenic and
photoprotective effects (e.g. Clifford JL & DiGiovanni J. Cancer Prev Res
3:132-5, 2010). Seminal studies showed that resveratrol
(trans-3,5,4-trihydroxystilbene; Resv) exerted chemopreventive activity
in a model of mouse skin carcinogenesis where topic administration of
this polyphenol inhibited multistage carcinogenesis [Jang M et al.
Science 275:218-20, 1997]. Pterostilbene
(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-trans-stilbene; Pter), a Res analog, shows a
higher half-life and more potent anticancer effects in vivo than Res. We
compared the potential anti-UVB protection of both polyphenols in a
murine model of chronic irradiation (180 mJ UVB/cm2; 3 doses/week; for a
total of 30 weeks) that experimentally resembles long-term chronic human
exposure to damaging sun radiations. We observed that topical
pretreatment of the skin with Pter (1-2 mol/cm2 per dose, administered
right before UB exposure), but not with Resv, fully prevents chronic
UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis. The molecular mechanism underlying this
protective effect involves a Pter-induced increase in antioxidant skin
defenses and a decrease in the rate of mutagenesis.

