Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRC family kinase FYN promotes MET tyrosine kinase activation,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and metastasis in human prostate
cancer


Introduction: FYN is a Src family kinase (SFK) member that has been shown
to be upregulated in human prostate cancer tissues and cell lines (PCa).
The majority of the studies on SRC kinases have focused on the classical
c-SRC. We demonstrated previously that knockdown of FYN in PCa cell lines
leads to reduced tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. We hypothesized that
MET, an oncogenic tyrosine kinase receptor implicated in metastasis and
therapeutic resistance of a variety of solid tumors is regulated by FYN
expression in prostate cancer.Methods: We performed in vitro growth
assays, migration and invasion assays and studied PCa cell response to
HGF in wildtype, FYN-depleted and FYN-reconstituted cells. Additionally,
we studied the role of FYN in promoting metastasis in vivo in xenograft
mouse models.Summary: In this study, we demonstrate that knockdown of FYN
leads to reduced migration, invasion and metastatic dissemination of PCa
cells in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, ectopic expression of FYN
promotes enhanced tumor growth and invasion. Hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) induced activation of MET is perturbed in FYN knockdown cells and
overexpression of FYN leads to excessive MET activation suggesting a
possible feedback loop between FYN and MET in prostate cancer. Consistent
these findings, PC3 prostate cancer cells overexpressing FYN are
resistant to treatment with a MET inhibitor upon ligand stimulation. More
importantly, we show that FYN promotes epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of PCa cells and knockdown of FYN leads to reversal of
EMT and alters radiation sensitivity of PCa cells. To further identify
the molecular mechanism of FYN mediated regulation of tumor growth, we
performed integrated RNA sequencing analysis of FYN knockdown cells and
found MET and a network of molecular targets that appear to regulate FYN
mediated tumor progression and metastasis.Conclusions: We demonstrate
that FYN mediated MET activation promotes PCa invasion, EMT and
metastasis. None of the SFK inhibitors currently in clinical trials are
specific for SFKs alone. Therefore, it is imperative to develop and test
novel inhibitors that selectively target FYN and other SFKs. Our findings
have therapeutic implications since clinical trials are being performed
for both SFK inhibitors and MET inhibitors in castration resistant PCa
patients. Our studies reveal that FYN and MET interact in PCa cells and
this interaction is clinically relevant given the success of XL-184 (a
MET inhibitor) in phase III clinical trials in human prostate cancer.
Clinical studies with translational endpoints are the need of the hour
with agents that effectively inhibit FYN and MET in a variety of settings.

