Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modification of gene expression in tumor cells by the culture
microenvironment


Purpose: Since cell culture techniques were developed in 1950s, in vitro
assays using monolayer cell cultures have played a major role in cancer
research. Despite the absence of cross-talk between tumor cells and their
respective host organ-microenvironment, data produced by in vitro assays
have often been used to address challenge. However, the potential
discrepancy between in vitro and in vivo mircoenvironments should not be
overlooked. We have investigated the influence of culture conditions of
the biology of tumor cells by comparing the genetic profiles of tumor
cells growing in different culture conditions, such as culture media,
sera, concentration of sera, and cell confluence.Materials and Methods:
We profiled the gene expression of human breast cancer tumor cells
(MDA-MB-231) that were cultured for 48 hours under various culture
conditions; in different media (MEM, DMEM, RPMI-1640), different sera
(FBS, horse serum), different concentrations of FBS (10%, 0.1%), and
different cell confluence (90%, 50%) using microarray analysis of total
cellular RNA using an Illumina platform (human HT-12v12 expression
beadchip)Results: Upon analysis, 2,234 genes were differentially
expressed among cultures with varied cell confluence, 2,981 genes
differentially expressed in cultures with various FBS concentrations, 422
genes were differentially expressed in cells cultured with different
sera, and 8,925 genes were differentially expressed in cells cultured
with different media. Of 8,925 genes, 10 (ARHGEF6, CAPN3, COPG, DAMM2,
GSTK1, PGM1, QPCT, QPRT, SLC1A4, and VAT1) were identified as commonly
upregulated in confluent cultures, regardless of the media, as compared
with sub-confluent cultures. In addition, 5 genes (IL7R, MPP4, NOP56,
G3BP1 and IFP38) were identified as commonly downregulated in confluent
cultures. Collectively, these data indicate that the gene expression
profiles varied significantly across different cultures
conditions.Conclusion:These results demonstrated that even under commonly
simplified culture conditions, gene expression profiles can significantly
vary across cells exposed to different culture conditions. Some of these
conditions parallel those found in vivo, i.e., sub-confluent versus
confluent cultures, where cell division is more active in the former than
the latter condition. The significant differences in gene expression by
cells exposed to fetal bovine serum as compared to horse serum are likely
caused by different levels of growth factors within the sera. Likewise,
the different gene expressions in tumor cells growing in different media
can be attributed to different levels of glucose and salts present.
Collectively, our data indicate that any change in culture conditions can
lead to significant changes in the gene expression of tumor cells. Hence,
to obtain reproducible data, one must strictly adhere to specified
experimental details.

