Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The utility of plasma vascular endothelial growth factor and
heparanase as pharmacodynamic markers following treatment with PG545, a
heparan sulfate mimetic: preliminary evidence from preclinical and
clinical settings


Background: The heparan sulfate mimetic PG545 has been demonstrated to
inhibit the function of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
heparanase (HPSE) in vitro whilst downregulating HPSE expression in tumor
and metastatic tissue in vivo. Although there are reports of consistent
drug-induced increases in plasma VEGF with VEGF inhibitors such as
bevacizumab, similar data are lacking for HS mimetics. Given PG545's
mechanism of action which involves inhibition of both angiogenesis and
metastasis, the evaluation of plasma VEGF and HPSE may represent
pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers for each of these key processes.Materials
and Methods: The levels of plasma VEGF and HPSE were measured using ELISA
in samples from preclinical models of ovarian cancer (syngeneic ID8 and
xenogeneic A2780 models) and a small cohort of patients (dosed with PG545
by the subcutaneous route) with advanced solid tumors from a Phase I
clinical study. In tumor models, PG545 was administered once weekly by
intravenous or intraperitoneal routes and efficacy was determined by
quantifying tumor burden using the following methods: measurement of
palpable solid tumors, abdominal circumference, ascites volume and/or by
tracking cells using bioluminescent reporter imaging (depending on the
model). In the A2780 model and the clinical samples, the pharmacokinetics
of PG545 was also evaluated using LC-MS/MS, which ensured multiple
samples to facilitate the measurement of VEGF and HPSE in plasma over the
duration of the dosing interval following treatment with PG545.Results:
PG545 demonstrated potent antitumor and antimetastatic activity when
administered once weekly via intravenous or intraperitoneal routes in
preclinical studies. These studies also indicated that PG545 treatment
led to increases in plasma VEGF and HPSE. Importantly, plasma samples
from advanced cancer patients treated with PG545 also revealed increases
in these PD markers with initial peaks often correlating with Cmax of
PG545 but longer-term gradual increases also noted in some instances. We
consider that these increases in plasma levels result from PG545 binding
to, thereby inhibiting, VEGF and HPSE in the tumor
microenvironment.Conclusion: Given the questionable utility of single
time point measures of plasma PD markers (including VEGF), these
preliminary data suggest that kinetic profiling can reveal the previously
undetermined dynamics of circulating VEGF and HPSE following treatment
with PG545. Thus, the measurement of VEGF and HPSE appears to represent
potential markers of pharmacodynamic activity. A new Phase I trial with
intravenously-administered PG545 has recently commenced and should
further clarify the potential utility of these basic PD biomarker
responses in advanced cancer patients.

