Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inability of putative ovarian cancer stem cells to engage OXPHOS
confer 2-deoxyglucose-mediated prevention of in vivo recurrence


Background:Mortality in ovarian cancer does not usually occur at primary
diagnosis but rather in the recurrent setting where patients present with
chemoresistance and carcinomatosis. Prevention of recurrence can
therefore have an impact on patient survival. Due to its inherent
chemoresistance, cancer stem cells that are left after surgery are
thought to drive recurrent disease owing to its tumor-initiating
properties and enhanced capacity for repair. We demonstrate that the
putative epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) stem cells have a unique
bioenergetic profile that can be targeted with the goal of delaying
and/or preventing recurrent disease.Methods:In vitro: Pure clones of
CD44+/MyD88+ and CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells were treated with 20 mM 2-DG, 5 M
Oligomycin, or 1 mM dinitrophenol (DNP). ATP levels were quantified using
Celltiter Glo. Mitochondrial content and membrane potential (MMP) were
measured using Mitotracker Green and Red, respectively. In vivo:
CD44+/MyD88+/mCherry+ EOC stem cells were injected i.p. in nude mice.
Mice received four doses of 12 mg/kg Paclitaxel q3d and then randomized
to maintenance with 2-DG (500 mg/kg every MWF) or maintenance with
saline. All treatments were given i.p. Tumors were monitored by live in
vivo imaging using In Vivo FX System and quantified using the region of
interest (ROI) tool based on mCherry fluorescent area.Results:Treatment
with Oligomycin or DNP did not affect viability nor ATP content in
CD44+/MyD88+ EOC stem cells but 2-DG induced rapid decline in ATP and
death, which was not rescued with Succinate co-treatment. In contrast, in
CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells, treatment with Oligomycin, DNP, or 2-DG only
slightly decreased ATP without inducing cell death. Despite having more
mitochondria, EOC stem cells have: (1) lower levels of Cox- I, -II, and
-IV; (2) undetectable levels of pyruvate dehydrogenase; (3) and higher
levels of UCP2 compared to CD44-/MyD88- EOC cells. Administration of
2-DG, as maintenance treatment post-chemotherapy, significantly delayed
progression of recurrent disease and decreased i.p. tumor burden in the
xenograft model. All mice maintained in saline recurred with average
time-to-recurrence of 11 days. In contrast, only 25% of the mice
maintained in 2-DG demonstrated recurrence with average
time-to-recurrence of 19 days. Finally, analysis of tumors post-mortem
show high levels of the autophagic markers p-AMPK and cleaved LC3 in the
2-DG maintained group compared to control.Conclusion:We demonstrate that
the exclusive reliance of EOC stem cells to glycolysis to meet its ATP
requirement and its inability to engage OXPHOS even under stress
conditions can be exploited to target these otherwise chemoresistant
cancer cells for the prevention of recurrence. Our results show the
potential of maintenance treatment with glycolysis inhibitors,
administered following standard chemotherapy, in improving survival in
patients with ovarian cancer.

