Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation as a reprogramming modulator: An epigenomic
roadmap to induced pluripotency


During cellular reprogramming to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs),
somatic cells rebuild their epigenetic architecture to acquire a steady
self-renewing state. Here we systematically characterize the epigenomic
roadmap to pluripotency by performing whole genome bisulfite sequencing
of the Project Grandiose (PG) samples, along with analysis of histone
modification and the transcriptome. The differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) of the DNA samples revealed that hypermethylated-DMRs (Hyper-DMRs)
gradually accumulated throughout reprogramming whereas there was a
distinct gain in hypomethylated-DMRs (Hypo-DMRs) once cells reached the
ESC-like state. ESC-associated transcription factor binding sites
(ESC-TFBSs) were highly enriched in the Hypo-DMR group. During high
transgene expression, leading to the pluripotent F-class state, cells
exhibited focal DNA demethylation at the binding sites of the activated
reprogramming factors, whereas ESC-like pluripotent cells exhibited
widespread demethylation surrounding these sites. Genes associated with
CpG rich promoters demonstrated a stable low DNA methylation state with
strong engagement of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 histone marks (histone
modification-driven control). CpG poor promoter-related genes were
repressed by DNA methylation, with transcriptional activity occurring
upon promoter demethylation (DNA methylation-driven control). We further
report that a proportion of genes proposed to be ESC-pluripotency
predictors, including Dppa2, Eras, and Esrrb, are associated with CpG
poor promoters and become transcriptionally activated upon DNA
demethylation in ESC-like cells. Gene expression leading to ESC-like
pluripotency is impacted and specifically orchestrated by dynamic changes
of DNA methylation and histone modification. These results suggest that
DNA methylation plays a crucial role within the epigenetic switch that
drives somatic cells to pluripotency.

