Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC switches from a pro-apoptotic to a pro-survival signal in
K-ras dependent lung cancer


Oncogenic mutations in KRAS are found in about 25% of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC), however only a subset of these tumors are dependent upon
K-ras for survival. We have previously shown that PKC is required for
transformed growth of NSCLC cells that are dependent on K-ras, and for
growth of K-ras driven lung tumors in vivo. PKC also plays an essential
role in DNA damage-induced apoptosis in many cell types. Analysis of 14
mutant KRAS NSCLC cell lines that are K-ras independent for survival
(A549, H157, H460, SW1573, H1155, H1792), or K-ras dependent (H2009,
H727, HCC44, H2122, SW900, H1573, H358, H441) reveals that the
pro-tumorigenic and pro-apoptotic functions of PKC segregate with the
K-ras dependency status, and reflect differential regulation of survival
signaling by PKC in these two cell populations. K-ras-independent NSCLC
cells are sensitive to DNA-damage-induced apoptosis, and shRNA mediated
depletion of PKC in these cells results in suppression of apoptosis and
increased activation of the MEK/ERK pathway. In contrast, K-ras dependent
NSCLC cells are resistance to DNA-damage-induced apoptosis and depletion
of PKC enhances apoptosis and suppresses MEK/ERK activation,
anchorage-independent growth, and invasion/migration. To explore why
K-ras dependent NSCLC cells are resistant to apoptosis, we analyzed PKC
Y64 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, events we have previously
shown are critical for the pro-apoptotic function of PKC. Surprisingly,
K-ras dependent cells have an up to 7-fold increase in the
nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio of PKC, increased phosphorylation of PKC Y64,
and increased (1.5-3 fold) PKC mRNA and protein, suggesting that these
cells may be refractive to PKC driven apoptosis. To test this we
expressed a mutant of PKC targeted to the nucleus by the addition of a
SV40 nuclear localization signal. Expression of PKCNLS induced apoptosis
and increased DNA damage-induced apoptosis in K-ras independent but not
K-ras dependent NSCLC cells, confirming that the later are unable to
activate apoptotic pathways downstream of PKC. These studies define two
distinct subsets of NSCLC cell lines in the context of mutant KRAS. NSCLC
cells that are independent of K-ras preferentially utilize PKC for
apoptosis, while cells dependent on oncogenic K-ras preferentially use
PKC for proliferation and survival. We are currently using two large,
publicly available lung cancer cell line gene expression datasets (GEO
accession #'s GSE4824 and GSE36133) to identify pathways and signaling
networks unique to these two populations of NSCLC cells.

