Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial genetics and cellular metabolism regulate
tumorigenicity and metastatic potential


Current paradigms of carcinogenic risk suggest that genetic, hormonal,
and environmental factors combine to influence an individual's
predilection for breast cancer and related metastatic tumor formation.
The genetic component, in particular, has become the focus of many
emergent studies. A renewed focus on cancer metabolism and the Warburg
Effect has similarly cast a spotlight on the role, if any, of the
mitochondrion in directing disease progression. Analysis of the direct
contribution of mitochondrial DNA on tumorigenicity is made possible
through the use of mitochondrial-nuclear exchange (MNX) mice in which
nuclei from normal FVB mice (the background strain of the tg: MMTV-PyMT)
were transferred onto cytoplasms containing C57BL/6 or BALB/c
mitochondria. Crossing male FVB:tg:MMTV:PyMT mice with
FVB(nDNA)C57BL/6(mtDNA) or FVB(nDNA)BALB/c(mtDNA) females maintained
nuclear FVB nDNA and takes advantage of maternal inheritance of mtDNA.
These PyMT transgene positive female progeny are then scored for primary
tumor onset and pulmonary metastatic density. Present data indicate
primary tumor latency segregating by mitochondrial DNA as PyMT-FVB
wild-type animals develop primary tumors in 57 days compared to
PyMT-FVB(n)C57BL/6(mt) which develop primary tumors in 65 days and
PyMT-FVB(n)BALB/c(mt) animals having detectable tumors in 52 days. One
group of animals were aged 40 days following primary tumor detection and
a second group were sacrificed when aged to 70 days, allowing for
evaluation of metastatic severity and confirmation of differential
primary tumor growth, respectively. This work hypothesizes that the
pre-existent normal mitochondrial haplotype harbored by an individual
conveys risk in determining tumor latency and metastatic susceptibility.
Furthermore, these changes in susceptibility will be accompanied by
altered mitochondrial functional characteristics that can be attributed
to differences in mitochondrial haplotype. To address those mitochondrial
differences, primary mammary epithelial cells were isolated from resected
tumors which were then assessed for Complex I and Complex IV activity. In
addition, isolated mammary epithelial cells from tumor and healthy
animals had bioenergetic profiles generated using the Seahorse XF24
analyzer. Markers of ROS production will also be assessed as they too
have been implicated increasingly frequently in cancer aggressiveness.

