Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using synthetic lethal screening to identify therapeutic targets
for innately platinum resistant lung cancer


Although platinum-based chemotherapy is the standard of care for most
cases of advanced lung adenocarcinoma, its effectiveness is limited by
the frequent incidence of innate chemoresistance. As a result, response
rates rarely exceed 20%, even though cis-platinum and carboplatin are
highly effective in other settings such as small cell lung, ovarian and
testicular cancers. We hypothesized that innate chemoresistance in lung
adenocarcinoma is mediated by one or more signalling pathways dependent
on the expression of a single gene, and that these pathways could
ultimately be targeted therapeutically. To address this question, we
developed a synthetic-lethal high throughput siRNA screen using the
innately resistant A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell line. Optimisation of
the screen was performed using a siRNA death control (PLK1), which
induced cell death in the absence of platinum, and a sensitization
control (MTOR), which enhanced cell death only in combination with a
sublethal concentration of carboplatin. These independent controls
revealed that the screening protocol performed within acceptable limits
of variability, quality and reproducibility as determined by Z factor
analysis. Screening was then performed using a pool of four siRNAs
targeting a single gene in conjunction with vehicle treatment, or with
carboplatin. After screening siRNAs targeting the 720 kinases, 256
phosphatases and 4794 druggable targets of the human genome, we
identified 50 candidate targets based on fold change difference between
platinum and vehicle treatments, and statistical significance determined
by multiple t-test corrected for false discovery rate. Preliminary
integrated pathway analysis of RNA expression array and screening
datasets revealed a highly significant enrichment of sensitizing genes in
previously identified pathways as well as novel pathways. These data
demonstrate that a synthetic-lethal approach can be used to identify
therapeutic targets that could potentially sensitize lung adenocarcinoma
to platinum-based chemotherapy.

