Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative meta-analysis of prognostic gene signatures for
late-stage ovarian cancer


Numerous gene signatures of patient prognosis for late-stage, high-grade
serous ovarian cancer (HSOC) have been proposed, but diverse data and
methods make these difficult to compare or prioritize for clinical
application. However, the corresponding volume of publicly available
expression data creates an opportunity to validate previous findings and
to develop more robust signatures. To establish the current state of HSOC
prognostic gene signatures, we undertook a systematic review and
meta-analysis of the publicly available microarray data and published
prognostic gene signatures. This effort generated a curated database of
1,319 clinically annotated HSOC microarray assays from 10 studies
(Ganzfried et al., DATABASE 2013) and implementations of 14 published
prognostic signatures for evaluation in independently available data. For
each published prognostic signature we evaluated 1) its reproducibility,
2) its prognostic accuracy for overall survival in independent datasets,
and 3) the prognostic value of the genes used in each signature relative
to random gene sets. Twelve published models performed better than 97.5%
of randomized risk scores, and six out-performed 97.5% of random
signatures of the same size trained on the same data. The four top-ranked
models achieved overall validation C-Indices of 0.56 to 0.60, and shared
anti-correlation with expression of immune response pathways. Most models
demonstrated lower accuracy in new datasets than in validation sets
presented in their publication. This analysis provides definitive support
for several prognostic models, but confirms that these require
improvement to be of clinical value. This work addresses outstanding
controversies in the ovarian cancer literature, including whether the
prognostic signature proposed by The Cancer Genome Atlas Consortium
(Nature 2011) improved on existing signatures, the impact of batch
effects on a frequently re-used, high-profile dataset (Dressman et al., J
Clin Oncol 2007), and the prognostic value of a recently proposed DNA
damage repair signature (Kang et al., J Natl Cancer Inst 2012). Finally,
this work provides a reproducible framework for meta-analytic evaluation
of gene signatures.

