Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver and blood miRNA alterations as putative biomarkers of
hepatotoxic response to short-term furan exposure in mice


Epigenetic miRNA-based changes measured in accessible matrices may serve
as useful biomarkers of environmental exposures and human health effects.
We investigated miRNA profiles following short-term exposure to a known
cytotoxic hepatocarcinogen, furan. We measured global liver and blood
miRNA changes in female B3C6F1 mice exposed to furan for 3 weeks p.o. at
daily doses of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg. Small RNA was extracted from
frozen samples using Exiqon miRCURY RNA Isolation kit and quantified by
Qubit. RNA quality was checked by Nanodrop and Bioanalyzer, and liver
miRNA were measured by miRNA-seq on the Illumina HiScanSQ platform. Blood
miRNA were measured from pooled RNA samples by Affymetrix GeneChip v3
microarrays. In the liver, the 1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg doses resulted in 0,
10, 17 and 14 differentially altered miRNAs, respectively (>1.5-fold; B-H
corrected p-valueEpigenetic miRNA-based changes measured in accessible
matrices may serve as useful biomarkers of environmental exposures and
human health effects. We investigated miRNA profiles following short-term
exposure to a known cytotoxic hepatocarcinogen, furan. We measured global
liver and blood miRNA changes in female B3C6F1 mice exposed to furan for
3 weeks p.o. at daily doses of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg. Small RNA was
extracted from frozen samples using Exiqon miRCURY RNA Isolation kit and
quantified by Qubit. RNA quality was checked by Nanodrop and Bioanalyzer,
and liver miRNA were measured by miRNA-seq on the Illumina HiScanSQ
platform. Blood miRNA were measured from pooled RNA samples by Affymetrix
GeneChip v3 microarrays. In the liver, the 1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/kg doses
resulted in 0, 10, 17 and 14 differentially altered miRNAs, respectively
(>1.5-fold; B-H corrected p-value<0.05). The majority of miRNA changes in
the low-dose exposure group (2mg/kg) were not seen with other treatments
(7 of 10 miRNA). Conversely, most altered miRNA observed with high-dose
(4 or 8 mg/kg) exposures were shared (10 miRNA), indicating different
miRNA-mediated pathways for non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic furan
exposures. Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), liver miRNAs altered
by the carcinogenic doses of furan (4 and 8 mg/kg) significantly enriched
(B-H corrected p-valueEpigenetic miRNA-based changes measured in
accessible matrices may serve as useful biomarkers of environmental
exposures and human health effects. We investigated miRNA profiles
following short-term exposure to a known cytotoxic hepatocarcinogen,
furan. We measured global liver and blood miRNA changes in female B3C6F1
mice exposed to furan for 3 weeks p.o. at daily doses of 0, 1, 2, 4, and
8 mg/kg. Small RNA was extracted from frozen samples using Exiqon miRCURY
RNA Isolation kit and quantified by Qubit. RNA quality was checked by
Nanodrop and Bioanalyzer, and liver miRNA were measured by miRNA-seq on
the Illumina HiScanSQ platform. Blood miRNA were measured from pooled RNA
samples by Affymetrix GeneChip v3 microarrays. In the liver, the 1, 2, 4,
and 8 mg/kg doses resulted in 0, 10, 17 and 14 differentially altered
miRNAs, respectively (>1.5-fold; B-H corrected p-value<0.05). The
majority of miRNA changes in the low-dose exposure group (2mg/kg) were
not seen with other treatments (7 of 10 miRNA). Conversely, most altered
miRNA observed with high-dose (4 or 8 mg/kg) exposures were shared (10
miRNA), indicating different miRNA-mediated pathways for non-carcinogenic
and carcinogenic furan exposures. Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA),
liver miRNAs altered by the carcinogenic doses of furan (4 and 8 mg/kg)
significantly enriched (B-H corrected p-value<0.05) functions related to
cellular development, growth and proliferation, movement, cell cycle,
death and survival; other categories identified by IPA were related to
hepatotoxicity, liver inflammation, and cancer. Using predicted
miRNA-mRNA interactions, 68 mRNAs were expressed in a contrasting pattern
to miRNA expression (upregulated miRNA/downregulated mRNAs and vice
versa). Associated mRNAs showed enrichment of pathways similar to miRNAs.
Measurements in whole blood samples indicated that 6 out of the 21 miRNAs
altered by the carcinogenic doses of furan were also altered in the blood
(4 in the same direction). Blood miRNAs included mmu-miR-34a, -146b,
-183, -5099 (upregulated), and -10a, -99b (downregulated). Results
demonstrate distinctive miRNA profiles in rodent liver for carcinogenic
doses of furan with corresponding changes for a subset of liver miRNAs in
blood. Our findings support ongoing efforts to identify novel miRNA
biomarkers in accessible matrices related to environmental health
effects. This abstract does not necessarily reflect the policy of the US
EPA.

