Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere transcripts improve synthetic inhibitors of telomerase


Most tumors express telomerase for infinite cell growth capacity.
Telomerase was recognized recently as central regulator of all of the
hallmarks of cancer and synthetic inhibitors of telomerase, such as
Imetelstat blocking the RNA subunit of telomerase TERC, are in clinical
trials. RNA transcripts from telomeres called TERRA were identified to
block telomerase activity (TA) potentially via direct binding to TERC. We
established recombinant expression systems to modulate TERRA transcripts
in cell culture cells and study in vitro cell growth and viability
directly and in combination with telomerase inhibitors.Adeno- and
lentivirus constructs (AV and LV) were established for transient and
stable recombinant TERRA expression in TA tumor cell lines (N=3) and
mortal fibroblast cells as control. AV and LV express TERRA under control
of hH1 promoter with around 120 units of UUAGGG repeats in sense (S) or
anti-sense (AS) orientation. Similarly, AV and LV express polyadenylated
form of TERRA under control of CMV promoter and polyadenylation signaling
sites. Telomere length (TL), endogenous and recombinant TERRA expression
was analyzed by qPCR, TA by TRAP assay. Population doubling (PD) times
were calculated from cell growth numbers of LV clones. Small molecule
telomerase inhibitors and AVs expressing dominant-negative telomerase and
shRNA against hTERT were used in MTT cell viability and clonogenicity
assays.TERRA expression was modulated transiently and stably by
recombinant AVs and LVs as compared to virus controls expressing eGFP.
Moderate 1.5-1.7 fold elevation of recombinant TERRA-S transcripts caused
reduction of TA to 23-38%. In contrast, AS expression reduced TERRA 3-8
fold without reduction of TA. TL, PD time, cell viability and
clonogenicity were not affected by TERRA-S and -AS expression up to 3
weeks in culture. Single cell clones were isolated from cells infected by
LVs. Significant improve of telomerase targeting approaches was
identified as IC-50 values decreased 2.0-2.6 fold in LV cell clones
expressing moderate recombinant TERRA-S compared to TERRA-AS and eGFP.
Similarly, clone formation capacity decreased 1.3-1.7 fold. Human
fibroblasts showed 15 fold increased TERRA expression compared to tumor
cells and were not affected by treatments applied. Preliminary data with
modified RNA oligonucleotides containing TERRA sequences indicate that
up-take by cells was efficient. Furthermore, IC-50 values of TA inhibitor
MST-312 in combination with 3 nM TERRA oligonucleotides decreased 1.9-3.9
fold compared to mismatch controls. Effective concentrations were 1000
fold lower compared to DNA oligonucleotide telomerase inhibitors
currently in clinical trials.We demonstrated that recombinant expression
of TERRA significantly improved telomerase targeting approaches in tumor
cells but not in mortal fibroblasts. TERRA oligonucleotides are
candidates for in vivo application in combination with telomerase
targeting approaches or other tumor therapies.

