Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted oncology therapeutics show unique cardiotoxic profiles:
Ponatinib as a case study


Although tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have greatly improved the
treatment and prognosis of multiple cancer types, unexpected clinical
cardiotoxicity has occurred with some of these agents that was not
predicted by standard preclinical toxicity assessment methods. Since
cardiotoxicity with TKI are often caused by the inhibition of signaling
pathways that are critical to cardiac cell function, multi-targeted TKI
that block multiple pathways increase the likelihood for cardiac cell
damage. We recently demonstrated that an in vitro multi-parameter test
panel assessing the effect of drug treatment on overall cardiac health
and function could accurately predict the cardiotoxicity of four
FDA-approved TKI. The multi-targeted TKI that are clinically associated
with cardiac adverse events (crizotinib, sunitinib, nilotinib) all proved
to be cardiotoxic in our in vitro tests while a more targeted and
relatively cardiac-safe drug, erlotinib, showed only minor changes in
cardiac cell health. The present studies expand upon this initial
observation using a broad panel of drugs such as TKI (including the
recently withdrawn TKI ponatinib), chemotherapeutic agents, and
non-oncology compounds, which were grouped based on their known clinical
toxicity profiles ranging from cardiac safe to withdrawn. We assessed
each compound's cardiotoxic potential by examining their effect on cell
viability, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, lipid formation,
troponin secretion and beating activity in a human induced
pluripotent-derived cardiac stem (iPS) cell model. The results showed a
unique cardiotoxic signature of oncology therapeutics that was
significantly different from other drug classes. Oncology compounds,
including ponatinib, induced metabolic stress (ROS generation and lipid
formation) resulting in potent cardiac cell death and troponin secretion
while other classes of drugs disrupted cardiac cell beating with minimal
impact on cardiac cell health. In comparison, cardiac-safe drugs,
including non-oncology compounds and more targeted TKI, did not impact
any of the endpoints that assessed cardiac cell health and function. Our
results demonstrate unique toxicity profiles for different drug classes
which may reflect multiple mechanisms of cardiotoxicity. For oncology
compounds specifically, multi-targeted TKI and chemotherapeutic agents
show potent cardiac toxicity while more targeted agents are less cardiac
toxic. These studies show that a multi-parameter approach provides a
comprehensive and robust assessment of cardiotoxic potential by
evaluating several parameters that are important to cardiac cell health
and function in a more predictive adult cardiac cell model. A panel such
as this aids in early risk assessment of cardiotoxic compounds and may
reduce drug failure due to toxicity discovered in later phases of
development or after drug approval such as that shown with ponatinib.

