Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of ECM and media permeation in 3D modeling of breast
cancer


Background: Three dimensional (3D) culture is a more physiologically
relevant method to model cell behavior in vitro than two dimensional
culture. 3D modeling of cancer is of particular importance in drug
development where predicting in vivo effectiveness is challenging. Not
only is the 3D structure important for proper modeling of cancer but the
response from the surrounding microenvironment, including the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and fibroblasts, is also necessary to
accurately predict drug response. A major hindrance to 3D culture is loss
of cell viability due to nutrient limitation. Herein, we demonstrate the
ability of our novel bioreactor system to prolong viability of 3D
cultures and the importance of ECM composition in breast cancer modeling.
Methods: To gain further understanding of the effect of different ECM on
the 3D arrangement of breast cancer cells and breast fibroblasts, three
different variations of ECM were tested: 1) 100% basement membrane (BM,
reduced growth factor Matrigel) diluted to 9-12 g/ml, 2) an equal volume
of BM and Collagen I (50% BM + 50% Collagen I), and 3) 10% BM in Collagen
I. MDA-MB-231 (231) breast cancer cells were grown in each ECM in
monoculture or co-culture with breast fibroblasts (ratio of 2:1) for 3 or
7 days. The formation of cell aggregates, as seen in most infiltrating
carcinomas of the breast, was assessed by image analysis. To improve
viability, 250 M channels penetrated the 3D co-cultures (consisting of
231 cells and fibroblasts (2:1) mixed into 10% BM/Collagen I) in our
perfusion bioreactor system. Proliferation, measured by Ki-67
immunostaining, was compared over time in solid co-cultures and perfused
and non-perfused co-cultures after 3 or 7 days. Results: In 3D
monocultures, significantly greater cell aggregation was seen with 100%
BM compared to 50% and 10% BM at both 3 and 7 days (pBackground: Three
dimensional (3D) culture is a more physiologically relevant method to
model cell behavior in vitro than two dimensional culture. 3D modeling of
cancer is of particular importance in drug development where predicting
in vivo effectiveness is challenging. Not only is the 3D structure
important for proper modeling of cancer but the response from the
surrounding microenvironment, including the extracellular matrix (ECM)
and fibroblasts, is also necessary to accurately predict drug response. A
major hindrance to 3D culture is loss of cell viability due to nutrient
limitation. Herein, we demonstrate the ability of our novel bioreactor
system to prolong viability of 3D cultures and the importance of ECM
composition in breast cancer modeling. Methods: To gain further
understanding of the effect of different ECM on the 3D arrangement of
breast cancer cells and breast fibroblasts, three different variations of
ECM were tested: 1) 100% basement membrane (BM, reduced growth factor
Matrigel) diluted to 9-12 g/ml, 2) an equal volume of BM and Collagen I
(50% BM + 50% Collagen I), and 3) 10% BM in Collagen I. MDA-MB-231 (231)
breast cancer cells were grown in each ECM in monoculture or co-culture
with breast fibroblasts (ratio of 2:1) for 3 or 7 days. The formation of
cell aggregates, as seen in most infiltrating carcinomas of the breast,
was assessed by image analysis. To improve viability, 250 M channels
penetrated the 3D co-cultures (consisting of 231 cells and fibroblasts
(2:1) mixed into 10% BM/Collagen I) in our perfusion bioreactor system.
Proliferation, measured by Ki-67 immunostaining, was compared over time
in solid co-cultures and perfused and non-perfused co-cultures after 3 or
7 days. Results: In 3D monocultures, significantly greater cell
aggregation was seen with 100% BM compared to 50% and 10% BM at both 3
and 7 days (p<0.002, ANOVA). A similar result was seen in 3D co-cultures
with fibroblasts (pBackground: Three dimensional (3D) culture is a more
physiologically relevant method to model cell behavior in vitro than two
dimensional culture. 3D modeling of cancer is of particular importance in
drug development where predicting in vivo effectiveness is challenging.
Not only is the 3D structure important for proper modeling of cancer but
the response from the surrounding microenvironment, including the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and fibroblasts, is also necessary to
accurately predict drug response. A major hindrance to 3D culture is loss
of cell viability due to nutrient limitation. Herein, we demonstrate the
ability of our novel bioreactor system to prolong viability of 3D
cultures and the importance of ECM composition in breast cancer modeling.
Methods: To gain further understanding of the effect of different ECM on
the 3D arrangement of breast cancer cells and breast fibroblasts, three
different variations of ECM were tested: 1) 100% basement membrane (BM,
reduced growth factor Matrigel) diluted to 9-12 g/ml, 2) an equal volume
of BM and Collagen I (50% BM + 50% Collagen I), and 3) 10% BM in Collagen
I. MDA-MB-231 (231) breast cancer cells were grown in each ECM in
monoculture or co-culture with breast fibroblasts (ratio of 2:1) for 3 or
7 days. The formation of cell aggregates, as seen in most infiltrating
carcinomas of the breast, was assessed by image analysis. To improve
viability, 250 M channels penetrated the 3D co-cultures (consisting of
231 cells and fibroblasts (2:1) mixed into 10% BM/Collagen I) in our
perfusion bioreactor system. Proliferation, measured by Ki-67
immunostaining, was compared over time in solid co-cultures and perfused
and non-perfused co-cultures after 3 or 7 days. Results: In 3D
monocultures, significantly greater cell aggregation was seen with 100%
BM compared to 50% and 10% BM at both 3 and 7 days (p<0.002, ANOVA). A
similar result was seen in 3D co-cultures with fibroblasts (p<0.002,
ANOVA). 3D cultures without channels (solid) demonstrated a reduced Ki-67
labeling index over time (65% at 1 day, 35% at 3 days, and 8.5% at 7
days). Whereas, 3D co-cultures with channels, both perfused and
non-perfused, had a more constant Ki-67 labeling index over time (49.6%
at 3 days and 37.3% at 7 days with perfusion and 37.4% at 3 days and
34.4% at 7 days without perfusion). Conclusions: Using 3D co-culture with
fibroblasts and ECM to model breast cancer recapitulates in vivo
tumor-stromal interactions in breast carcinomas better than monocultures
in 2D. The formulation of ECM affected cell arrangement, with the
presence of BM promoting cell aggregation. The use of our perfusion
bioreactor system improved cell proliferation in comparison to solid 3D
cultures, which did not sustain growth over time. We anticipate that
further refinement of our 3D culture system will allow more accurate
investigation of tumor-stromal interactions and drug testing in breast
cancer.

