Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of BRCAness phenotype by curcumin and hydroxyurea in WT
BRCA ovarian cancer cells


The field of ovarian cancer therapeutics has made a substantial leap
forward with the discovery that ovarian cancers with a BRCA mutation, can
be exploited with synthetic lethality. In patients who have a BRCA
germline mutation, this phenomenon is achieved by blocking PARP
(poly-ADP-ribosyl-polymerase), which has a role in compensating for the
missing or low levels of the BRCA protein. PARP activity is essential for
DNA repair in patients with BRCA mutations as their cells attempt to
maintain a normal genotype; however, PARP is not enough to compensate for
the BRCA mutation, and these patients eventually develop ovarian cancer.
Out of the five major mechanisms of DNA repair, PARP compensates for
missing BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 proteins required for homologous repair, base
excision repair and nuclear excision repair. If PARP is inhibited in
BRCA-mutant patients, DNA mutations accumulate and are not repaired
because PARP is not available to ribosylate the areas of cut or damaged
DNA, which would signal that repair is needed. The BRCA-mutant genotype,
in which there is a germline-inactivating mutation in one allele and loss
of heterozygosity or somatic mutation in the other allele, only occurs in
5-10% of the cancer population. We wondered, is there a way to apply the
concept of synthetic lethality to the 90-95% of the ovarian cancer
patients who do not have BRCA mutations? We tried to answer that query by
testing different gene-expression, modulating agents. We found that
low-concentration hydroxyurea can sometimes potentiate the cytotoxicity
of alkylating agents, suggesting a mechanism that involves DNA repair.We
found synergistic apoptosis in 4 (ovcar-8, TOV21G, PA-1 and UACC1598)
ovarian cancer cell lines treated with hydroxyurea and the PARP
inhibitor, Olaparib, and in cells treated with curcumin with Olaparib.
When the Ovcar-8 cancer cell line was treated with a single agent, the
percentage of apoptosis was 17%, and when treated with synergistic agents
together, relative apoptosis increased to 45%.In these cell lines, both
curcumin and hydroxyurea significantly decreased BRCA1 and BRCA2 mRNA and
protein levels. We also found that curcumin triggered BRCA1,2 promoter
methylation, which led to cessation of gene expression. Whereas,
hydroxyurea, not only caused BRCA1,2 promoter methylation, but also
elicited an increase in miRNA hsa-miR-17-5p and hsa-miR-182-5p, causing
BRCA1 mRNA degradation.This finding suggests greater than 5-10% of
wild-type, BRCA ovarian cancer patients may benefit from PARP inhibitors
and DNA cross-linking agents, such as mitomycin C. if they can be induced
into BRCAness,

