Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Par-4 mediates EMT in response to TGF- stimulation


Endometrial cancer is the most common cancer affecting the female genital
tract; this disease also stands as the fourth most frequent cancer
affecting occidental women. Endometrial cancer is generally well
manageable; however, the high metastatic potential of endometrial tumors
represents one of the major hurdles in the treatment of this disease. The
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been considered for a long
time as a central mechanism by which cancer cells acquire invasive
abilities necessary for metastasis formation. Multiple regulatory
networks dictate this complex process; however TGF- has been shown to be
one of the most important inductor of EMT in cancer cells. Still, the
process by which TGF- induces this transition has yet to be fully
understood. Our study demonstrates that TGF- upregulates the expression
of Par-4, a tumor suppressor protein concomitantly with the onset of EMT.
Four uterine cell lines (Hec-1-a, KLE, HeLa, HIESC), one ovarian cell
line (SKOV-3) and one breast cell line (MCF7) were used in this study. We
first investigated the effect of exogenous TGF- treatment on these cell
lines to determine its effect on Par-4 expression. We've observed that
TGF- increased Par-4 levels in every cell lines. Preliminary analysis
determined that this regulation was made through both Smad4 and p65,
which was confirmed by the use of siRNA. We've also demonstrated that
this regulation was made at the transcriptional level by RT-qPCR. We then
sought to confirm the effect of TGF- on our cell lines and its effect on
EMT induction. Our experiments demonstrated that TGF- promotes EMT as
suggested by the upregulation of multiple EMT markers. Transfections
using Par-4 expression plasmids induced similar changes, indicating the
involvement of Par-4 in TGF- mediated EMT induction. We then proceeded to
assess the effect of Par-4 knockdown concurrent with exogenous TGF-
stimulation. This experiment revealed that Par-4 knockdown reduced the
ability of TGF- to induce Snail expression, further demonstrating the
importance of Par-4 in the process of TGF- mediated EMT. To conclude the
study, we sought to understand the effect of XIAP in this process. Our
experiments uncovered that XIAP regulates full length Par-4 levels
through the inhibition of its caspase-mediated cleavage. Furthermore, the
inhibition of XIAP by siRNAs, and thus of Par-4 cleavage, resulted in the
reduction of Par-4 EMT inducing capabilities. In conclusion, our study
proposes a novel function of Par-4 as an inductor of EMT in multiple cell
lines.

