Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective association between obesity and statin use with
conversion from high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) to
prostate cancer (PC)


BACKGROUND: HGPIN shares many phenotypic and genetic traits with PC, and
historically, a patient with HGPIN at biopsy was at high-risk for PC at
future biopsy. Although obesity and certain medications have been
associated with PC risk, no lifestyle or chemoprevention recommendations
are available to prevent PC in high-risk men with HGPIN.OBJECTIVE:
Determine the prospective association between obesity and medication use
for obesity-related comorbidities with the conversion from HGPIN to PC at
follow-up.METHODS: Men seeking a prostate biopsy were targeted for
recruitment. After consent, we measured weight, height, sitting height,
and waist and hip circumferences, and demographics by questionnaire.
Pathology charts were reviewed to identify patients with HGPIN and
without PC or other suspicious findings. Medication use for diabetes,
BPH, high cholesterol, and hypertension at recruitment were extracted
from medical charts. There were 105 HGPIN patients with at least one
follow-up prostate biopsy and thus with a potential for PC at follow-up.
Multivariable logistic regression was used to determine the association
between body size and medication use with PC risk, controlling for age at
recruitment, number of follow-up biopsies (1, 2, >2), PSA (ng/ml), and
prostate size (mls).RESULTS: Average age, PSA level, and prostate size
were 65 years, 6.4 ng/ml, and 49 mls, respectively. Median follow-up was
5 years, and 13 patients had more than one follow-up biopsy. During
follow-up, 45 men were diagnosed with PC. Increasing waist-hip ratio
(WHR) was significantly associated with conversion from HGPIN to PC (OR =
2.26 (1.14, 4.47), p=0.02, per 0.1 increase in WHR). Men with a WHR >
1.00 were 2.7 times more likely to be diagnosed with PC compared to men
with a WHR=BACKGROUND: HGPIN shares many phenotypic and genetic traits
with PC, and historically, a patient with HGPIN at biopsy was at
high-risk for PC at future biopsy. Although obesity and certain
medications have been associated with PC risk, no lifestyle or
chemoprevention recommendations are available to prevent PC in high-risk
men with HGPIN.OBJECTIVE: Determine the prospective association between
obesity and medication use for obesity-related comorbidities with the
conversion from HGPIN to PC at follow-up.METHODS: Men seeking a prostate
biopsy were targeted for recruitment. After consent, we measured weight,
height, sitting height, and waist and hip circumferences, and
demographics by questionnaire. Pathology charts were reviewed to identify
patients with HGPIN and without PC or other suspicious findings.
Medication use for diabetes, BPH, high cholesterol, and hypertension at
recruitment were extracted from medical charts. There were 105 HGPIN
patients with at least one follow-up prostate biopsy and thus with a
potential for PC at follow-up. Multivariable logistic regression was used
to determine the association between body size and medication use with PC
risk, controlling for age at recruitment, number of follow-up biopsies
(1, 2, >2), PSA (ng/ml), and prostate size (mls).RESULTS: Average age,
PSA level, and prostate size were 65 years, 6.4 ng/ml, and 49 mls,
respectively. Median follow-up was 5 years, and 13 patients had more than
one follow-up biopsy. During follow-up, 45 men were diagnosed with PC.
Increasing waist-hip ratio (WHR) was significantly associated with
conversion from HGPIN to PC (OR = 2.26 (1.14, 4.47), p=0.02, per 0.1
increase in WHR). Men with a WHR > 1.00 were 2.7 times more likely to be
diagnosed with PC compared to men with a WHR=<1.00 (p=0.02). Waist
circumference (WC) was marginally associated with conversion to PC (OR =
1.04 (1.00, 1.08), p=0.05, per cm). BMI, height, and sitting height were
not significantly associated with PC. Furthermore, use of statins or
anti-hypertensive medications at baseline were marginally significantly
associated with a lower PC risk (Statin: OR=0.43 (0.18, 1.06), p=0.06;
HTN: OR=0.47 (0.20, 1.09), p=0.08). In contrast, diabetes and BPH
medications, or regular aspirin use, were not associated with PC.
Strengths include systematic HGPIN evaluation from one pathologist,
little patient migration, measured body size, and medical chart data.
However, inference is restricted to those HGPIN patients who received a
follow-up biopsy.CONCLUSION: Centralized obesity measured as WHR
increased the risk of PC among HGPIN patients, while statins and
hypertension medications were associated marginally with lower PC risk.
The role of hyperlipidemia and statins in PC progression following HGPIN
development requires further investigation.

