Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the potential inhibitors of DNA polymerase kappa


Background and Purpose:The therapeutic effect of many anticancer agents
is due to induction of replication-blocking DNA lesions. Human DNA
polymerase kappa (pol ) is a trans-lesion synthesis polymerase that can
catalyze direct replication past minor groove lesions, such as the one
induced by mitomycin C. Pol has been found to be upregulated in 70% of
gliomas and its upregulation associated with poorer prognosis in glioma
patients. Therefore, small molecule inhibitors of pol in combination with
chemotherapy may be useful in the treatment of cancer with upregulated
pol expression.Methodology:Lead hits were initially identified from a
screen of a library of 400,000 compounds at 5 different concentrations,
using a strand-displacement DNA synthesis approach. From several thousand
potential hits, these were systematically triaged, with 335 potential
inhibitors of pol identified for further analyses.A direct, gel-based
primer extension assay was used to test for inhibitory effects of these
335 bioactive compounds. In this assay, pol was preincubated with
individual compounds, and added to 32P-labeled DNA substrate to initiate
primer extensions. The reactions were incubated for 30 minutes at room
temperature and terminated by the addition of a DNA-denaturing solution.
The products were then separated through a 15% acrylamide gel and
visualized with a PhosphorImager screen. Compounds that significantly
inhibited the polymerization activity of pol were further tested for the
ability to intercalate into DNA by incubation with double-stranded DNA
for 15 minutes at room temperature, followed by separation through a 1%
agarose gel. DNA was stained with ethidium bromide and visualized by
Alpha Innotech ChemiImager.Results:Through a series of rigorous triaging
procedures, this investigation identified a total of 42 small molecule
inhibitors of pol with the estimated potencies being the low micromolar
range or less. All 42 compounds were confirmed not to exhibit their
inhibitory effects through DNA intercalation. These compounds need to be
further tested with other members of the Y family polymerase to ensure
their specificity to pol and determine if they are amenable to medicinal
chemistry.Conclusion:Further investigation and characterization of these
compounds will allow for a more efficient therapeutic approach in
patients who have upregulated pol receiving chemotherapy.

