Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to copy number assessment by whole genome
sequencing reveals extensive spatial heterogeneity in diffuse low-grade
glioma


Introduction: The disease course of patients with diffuse low-grade
gliomas (LGGs) is notoriously unpredictable. Detailed analysis of the
genetic make-up is therefore key to understand this wide variety in
overall survival of patients diagnosed with LGGs. Reports on the
prognostic value of CNAs other than 1p/19q co-deletion are conflicting,
which may be explained by spatial copy number heterogeneity.Aim:
Prognostic implications of spatial and temporal copy number aberrations
in LGGs by whole genome sequencing.Methods: Approximately 25% of LGG
patients have a life expectation of more than 20 years following
diagnosis, which necessitates collection of samples with long clinical
follow up information. Therefore archival material was selected for this
project and WGS was developed to access these samples without the
requirement for a normal reference. We collected 156 formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples in a discovery cohort of 98 LGG patients
with extensive clinical follow-up data, which included recurrent tumours
and spatially distinct regions. An independent cohort of 126 samples was
obtained from a recently published study (Alentorn et al, Neuro-oncology
2014). Technical challenges for genome-wide inference of copy number
aberrations include repetitive and common DNA sequences in the genome and
sequence variation across the general population, as well as the
compromised and variable quality of DNA obtained from archived tissues.
We developed a robust and cost effective method that infers copy number
aberrations from WGS data of approximately 0.1x coverage, without the
need for a reference signal. This method implements (1) a combined LOESS
correction for mappability and GC content, and improves on previous
methods by (2) comprehensive filtering based on public genome project
data, 1000-Genomes project and ENCODE blacklists.Results: Both prognostic
value, temporal evolution and spatial heterogeneity of CNA were assessed
by WGS. We confirmed prognostic favourable value of 1p/19q co-deletion,
and demonstrated loss of 10q to be an unfavourable marker. In paired
recurrences 10q loss was invariably maintained and surfaced in 4
additional recurrences of the discovery cohort. In spatial regions of
LGGs we recognized extensive copy number heterogeneity; 15 of 17 LGGs
show spatial variability of CNAs. 1p/19q co-deletion is homogeneous,
while loss of 10q is heterogeneously present.Conclusions: we present
clinically relevant CNAs, but also demonstrate extensive spatial copy
number heterogeneity in diffuse LGGs that might complicate unequivocal
biomarker discovery.

