Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-10b functions as a novel tumor suppressor in uterine
leiomyosarcoma by promoting overexpression of SDC1


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous RNA transcripts that play a critical
role in regulating pleuripotency and differentiation. Altered miRNA
expression is a well-established feature of nearly all human cancers.
However, the mechanisms by which dysregulated miRNA expression promote
tumorigenesis remain poorly understood.To evaluate the role of miRNAs in
uterine leiomyosarcoma (uLMS), we profiled patterns of small RNA
expression in matched specimens of healthy myometrium (n=34), uterine
leiomyomas (n=34) and uterine leiomyosarcoma (n=12) using Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS). After quantile normalization, patterns of mature miRNA
transcripts were compared. We found that 37 individual miRNAs were
differentially expressed >2-fold (p8-fold, p2-fold when uLMS were
compared to myometrium (p2-fold when uLMS were compared to myometrium
(p<0.01) were then screened using established miRNA target prediction
algorithms (TargetScan, MiRanda). We discovered that levels of syndecan 1
(SDC1), a highly glycosylated cell surface proteoglycan implicated in
maintaining pluripotent progenitor cells, is highly overexpressed in uLMS
(2.71-fold, p2-fold when uLMS were compared to myometrium (p<0.01) were
then screened using established miRNA target prediction algorithms
(TargetScan, MiRanda). We discovered that levels of syndecan 1 (SDC1), a
highly glycosylated cell surface proteoglycan implicated in maintaining
pluripotent progenitor cells, is highly overexpressed in uLMS (2.71-fold,
p<0.001). Levels of SDC1, a predicted miR-10b target, were also
dramatically reduced when uLMS cells lines transfected with miR-10b mimic
were compared to controls (n=3). Lastly, we found that the number and
size of tumor implants created when SK-LMS cells stably expressing
miR-10b inoculated into the peritoneal cavity of immunodeficient mice
were significantly reduced when compared to controls. The smaller size of
miR-10b-expressing xenografts was accompanied by decreased rates of
proliferation (as assessed by Ki-67 expression) and enhanced apoptosis
(as assessed by TUNEL).Collectively, these results identify a novel
sequence of events whereby the loss of miR-10b plays a key role in
driving the growth and metastasis of uLMS by enhancing SDC1 expression.
More fundamentally, the relationship between miR-10b and SDC1 in these
aggressive cancers may also identify a critical link between the
dysregulation of mesenchymal stem cells and sarcomagenesis.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

