Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 mediates tumor-associated matrix metalloproteinase 2 and
Cathepsin L protease activities in ovarian carcinoma


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related deaths among
women in the United States. At diagnosis, disease has commonly spread
beyond the ovary. Ovarian cancer cells dislodge from primary tumor and
spread locally throughout the abdominal cavity and lymphatics. Cancer
cell shedding and colonization at other sites involves the degradation of
extra cellular matrix (ECM) by tumor-associated proteases, such as matrix
metalloproteinase (MMPs) and cathepsin proteases. Heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) is an ATP-dependent molecular chaperone that interacts with and
stabilizes MMPs in some solid tumors. Whether HSP90 regulates cathepsin
activity is currently unknown. To determine the role of HSP90 on
tumor-associated MMP and cathepsin protease activities in ovarian
carcinoma, HSP90 activity was inhibited using pharmacologic and RNA
interference (RNAi) approaches. A small molecule inhibitor, ganetespib,
and two HSP90 targeting siRNAs were used to determine the effects of
HSP90 inhibition on ovarian carcinoma cell line invasion using transwell
and spheroid invasion assays. The effects of ganetespib or HSP90
targeting siRNA treatment on MMP and cathepsin protease activities were
assayed by gelatin zymography (MMPs), enzyme assay (cathepsins) and by
dynamic imaging using protease cleavable imaging probes. The effects of
ganetespib treatment on in vivo orthotopic tumor growth, dissemination
and tumor associated protease activities were determined using human
ovarian carcinoma xenograft models. In vitro, ganetespib treatment or
expression of HSP90-targeted siRNAs inhibited transwell and spheroid
invasion, and MMP-2 and cathepsin L protease activities. In vivo,
ganetespib treatment resulted in decreased growth of primary tumors and
disseminated tumor nodules and decreased tumor-associated MMP and
cathepsin activities. Importantly, significant inhibition of MMP and
cathepsin activities was detected prior to differences in tumor volume,
demonstrating rapid functional response to the drug. These results show
that HSP90 regulates ovarian carcinoma-associated proteolytic activities
that are essential to tumor progression and dissemination. They also
point to the potential utility of HSP90 inhibition as a therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

