Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo anti-metastatic effects of uPAR retargeted oncolytic
measles virus


The urokinase receptor (uPAR) is a clinically relevant target for novel
biological therapies. Here, we investigated the antimetastatic effects of
oncolytic measles virus retargeting uPAR (MV-uPA) in breast cancer
metastases models. Species specificities of recombinant viruses
retargeted against human (MV-h-uPA) or mouse uPA (MV-m-uPA) were
demonstrated in vitro in human and murine breast cancer cell lines.
MV-h-uPA and MV-m-uPA induced in vitro cytotoxicity and replicated in
human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231, MDA-MB436 and MCF-7) and murine
mammary cancer cells (4T1), respectively. A syngeneic model of mammary
cancer metastases was established by intravenous injection of 4T1 cells
(5x10e4 per mouse) expressing highly efficient firefly luciferase into
immunocompetent BALB/C mice. Seven days after tumor cell inoculation,
MV-m-uPA or vehicle was administered into tumor-bearing mice via the tail
vein (virus dose: 110e6 TCID50 per injection, three injections, every
other day). Metastases progression was assessed by bioluminescence
analysis. In this highly aggressive syngeneic model, MV-m-uPA treatment
was associated with delay in metastases progression and improvement in
survival, compared to controls. These effects were associated with
detection of viable viral particles from lungs of mice treated with
MV-m-uPA, as well as detection of MV-N staining in lung samples in tumor
bearing treated mice. Finally, we validated the above effects in a model
of human breast cancer metastases. This model was established by
injection of 110e6 MDA-MB231-luc2 cells via tail vein into female nude
mice. Ten days after tumor cell injection, mice were treated with three
IV injections (every other day) of PBS or MV-h-uPA (110e6 TCID50).
Metastases progression (by bioluminescence evaluation) was markedly
inhibited in treated mice, compared to controls, resulting in improvement
in survival. In conclusion, systemic administration of MV-uPA is
effective in the treatment of breast cancer metastases in
immune-competent and immune-deficient model, suggesting that measles
virus mediated virotherapy may present a novel and promising strategy for
treatment against metastatic breast cancer.

