Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome and pathway analysis identifies IRF1 as a predictor
of progression free and overall survival in ovarian carcinoma


Background: Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) is the most lethal female
reproductive tract malignancy with nearly 200,000 new cases and > 125,000
deaths attributable to the disease each year worldwide. Most patients
present with advanced stage disease and the cornerstone of treatment is
surgical debulking followed by platinum-based chemotherapy. The major
contributor to the high fatality-to-case ratio is chemoresistant disease.
In fact, while 80% of patients have a complete clinical response to their
primary therapy, the majority will die from disease recurrence within 5
years. The underlying tumor biology that distinguishes between platinum
sensitivity and resistance is largely unknown. We sought to identify
candidate biomarkers/pathways which could distinguish between these two
states and test their prognostic ability.Methods: Ovarian tumor samples
from patients with primary high-grade serous ovarian cancer were divided
into two groups based on response to platinum status. Transcriptome
analysis was performed using RNA-Seq and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
was used to explore differences between these two sets of samples.
Findings were validated using qtRT-PCR. Survival analysis was performed
in two independent sample sets. The largest set consisted of the gene
expression data and relapse free and overall survival information
downloaded from GEO (Affymetrix microarrays only), EGA and TCGA,
representing more than 1400 samples.Results: IPA highlighted that
Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) was differentially expressed
between the two clinical groups and that IRF1 expression was upregulated
in the platinum-sensitive group. Validation studies performed on 31
patient tumor samples demonstrated a significant difference in PFS
between the low and high IRF1 groups (P = 0.027) as well as a distinct
difference in the probability of recurrence. High levels of IRF1 strongly
correlated with increased overall survival in late-stage disease
regardless of debulking status and grade in those patients who received
platinum therapy.Conclusion: The goal of this study was to identify
candidate genes/pathways which might play a role in distinguishing
between different platinum states of EOC. Using an RNA-Seq / pathway
based approach, we identified differential levels of IRF1 as a predictor
of both PFS and OS in patients treated with platinum agents - the gold
standard of treatment. Future studies will evaluate the clinical utility
of these findings.

