Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel regulator of Wnt-signaling in colorectal cancer


Background: Active Wnt signaling is a hallmark of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Alterations in Wnt pathway components activate the pathway and
thereby initiate and drive carcinogenesis. Recent efforts have aimed at a
comprehensive structural characterization of the genomes of a variety of
cancer types including colorectal cancer. The function of many altered
genes, however, is still elusive.Methods: We used an integrative genomics
approach, combining functional genomic data from a genome-wide RNAi
screen for Wnt-regulators in colon cancer cells and structural genomic
data to identify novel oncogenes in CRC that regulate Wnt/-catenin
signaling. Candidates were validated and characterized in vitro with
molecular biologic- and biochemical assays and in silico with
bioinformatic analyses.Results: Synovial sarcoma translocation gene on
chromosome 18-like 1 (SS18L1) is a homolog of the synovial sarcoma
driving translocation gene SS18. It was one of the top hits in the
genome-wide RNAi screen and it showed significant gene amplifications
(8%) and mRNA upregulation (35%) in the TCGA CRC cohort. Silencing of
SS18L1 in CRC cells led to decreased TCF4/Wnt-reporter luciferase
activity and decreased levels of canonical target gene AXIN2 in qPCR and
Western analyses. GFP-tagged SS18L1 was localized nuclear, suggesting
involvement in transcriptional regulation by -catenin. Indeed, we found
interaction of SS18L1 with -catenin and TCF4, as well as with known
interacting proteins CBP and p300 by co-immunoprecipitation. Furthermore,
interaction of SS18L1 with -catenin deletion mutants indicated binding of
SS18L1 to -catenin. Copy number of the SS18L1 gene in the CRC cohort of
TCGA was positively correlated with RNA expression levels of the gene.
Analysis of differentially expressed genes in SS18L1 overexpressing
tumors showed enrichment of Wnt-pathway related genes.Conclusions: Our
data suggests that SS18L1 regulates Wnt-signaling by interacting with the
complex of -catenin, TCF4 and CBP/p300. Gene copy number gains and
increased mRNA expression levels are detected in CRC. SS18L1 may act as
an oncogene in CRC enhancing cell proliferation.

