Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin inhibits lipid metabolism by primarily targeting the
master regulator sterol response element binding protein 1 (SREBP1) in
prostate cancer cells


Aberrant lipid metabolism is a major factor in growth, progression and
invasion/metastasis of prostate tumors. Prostate cancer (PCa) cells are
unique in terms of their low glycolytic rate and weak expression of
glucose transporters. Concomitantly, PCa cells overexpress fatty acid
synthase (FASN) which is considered a metabolic oncogene. As glucose
consumption is not elevated in PCa, a metabolic switch to lipogenesis and
fatty acid oxidation provides energy and cellular building blocks for
abnormal cell growth and proliferation. In the present study, we
evaluated the effect and related molecular mechanisms of a natural
flavonoid silibinin in inhibiting lipid metabolism in PCa cells. Results
showed that silibinin (30-90 M) inhibited lipid and cholesterol
accumulation specifically in human prostate carcinoma LNCaP and DU145
cells but not in non-neoplastic prostate epithelial PWR-1E cells. This
inhibition by silibinin was mediated via a decrease in the expression of
key enzymes regulating fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis including
FASN, acetyl CoA carboxylase, acetyl CoA synthetase and HMG CoA
reductase. Since most of these lipogenic enzymes are transcriptionally
controlled by SREBP, we next analyzed the effect of silibinin on this
master transcriptional regulator of lipogenesis. Silibinin inhibited
SREBP1 (as well as SREBP2) protein expression without affecting its mRNA
level in PCa cells suggesting a post-translational mode of regulation.
SREBP1 activation involves proteolytic cleavage of precursor protein (125
kDa), generating a 68 kDa fragment that translocates to the nucleus and
binds to sterol response element on target genes. Confocal and Immunoblot
analyses confirmed that silibinin inhibited the proteolytic cleavage and
subsequent nuclear translocation of SREBP1. Importantly, silibinin
activated AMPK that phosphorylates SREBP1 (at Ser-372 site) inhibiting
its nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity. Moreover, AMPK
inhibition, through Compound C, reversed silibinin-mediated inhibition of
nuclear SREBP1 and lipid accumulation. The central role of SREBP1 in
silibinin-mediated effects on lipid accumulation and cell growth
inhibition was also established by using a specific synthetic SREBP
inhibitor, fatostatin. Parallely, we also observed that silibinin
attenuates fatty acid uptake through down regulating LDL receptor
expression. Furthermore, silibinin also significantly reduced AMACR
(-methylacyl-CoA racemase) expression in PCa cells, suggesting that it
could also negatively regulate fatty acid oxidation. Overall, we found
that silibinin targets SREBP1 and metabolically starves PCa cells by
reducing de novo lipogenesis and lipolysis leading to a strong growth
inhibition. Considering the critical role of lipid metabolism in prostate
carcinogenesis, non-toxic silibinin could be useful in PCa prevention and
treatment.

