Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- enhances mir-455-5p expression that regulates tumorigenesis
through UBE2B in betel quid-associated oral cancer


Oral cancer is the fourth foremost case of death from cancer, and the
major causes of death are local recurrence and distant metastasis. The
strong associations between oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and
dietary habits such as alcohol consumption (A), betel quid chewing (B)
and cigarette smoking (C) and its predominance in men have been well
documented. Evidences have shown that miRNAs are involved in
tumorigenesis of various cancers through regulating their downstream
targets. In order to identify changes in miRNAs specific for betel
quid-associated oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), we investigated the
expression profiles of miRNAs in a panel of 40 pairs of OSCC specimens
and their matched non-tumorous epithelial counterparts. Our data showed
that the expression levels of mir-455-5p are significantly (POral cancer
is the fourth foremost case of death from cancer, and the major causes of
death are local recurrence and distant metastasis. The strong
associations between oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and dietary
habits such as alcohol consumption (A), betel quid chewing (B) and
cigarette smoking (C) and its predominance in men have been well
documented. Evidences have shown that miRNAs are involved in
tumorigenesis of various cancers through regulating their downstream
targets. In order to identify changes in miRNAs specific for betel
quid-associated oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), we investigated the
expression profiles of miRNAs in a panel of 40 pairs of OSCC specimens
and their matched non-tumorous epithelial counterparts. Our data showed
that the expression levels of mir-455-5p are significantly (P<0.0001)
higher in tumor tissue than in their counterpart normal tissue. In
addition, the expression levels of mir-455-5p in oral cancer cell lines
are also higher than normal oral epithelial cell line. Knockdown of
mir-455-5p reduces both anchorage-independent growth and proliferative
ability in two head and neck cancer cells, and vice versa in mir-455-5p
overexpressing cells. Collectively, these evidences showed that
mir-455-5p serves as an oncomir in betel quid-associated oral cancer.
Furthermore, by analyzing both the array data from cancer patients and
cell lines, and then intersected with the results from website tools, we
have identified ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2B (UBE2B) to be the target
of mir-455-5p, which was further validated by 3-UTR luciferase reporter
assay and Western blot analysis. We also revealed that UBE2B suppression
actually rescued both cell transformation and growth ability in
mir-455-5p knockdown cells. Our data further demonstrated that the
expression level of mir-455-5p is regulated by transforming growth
factor- (TGF-) pathway. Moreover, mir-455-5p expression was suppressed by
the treatment of TGF- downstream regulators. In conclusion, our results
showed that the expression of mir-455-5p is regulated by TGF--dependent
pathway, which subsequently leads to alteration the expression of UBE2B
and contribute to the tumorigenesis of betel quid-associated oral cancer.
(This work was supported by following grants: National Health Research
Institutes CA-101-PP-22, National Research Program for Biopharmaceuticals
100CAP015-5 and National Science Council 102-2325-B-400-007)

