Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia leads to deregulation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling in
prostate cancer stem cells


Tumor initiating subpopulations of cancer cells, also known as cancer
progenitor or cancer stem cells (CSCs) were recently identified and
characterized in prostate cancer. Emerging evidence suggests that
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1A) contributes to CSC maintenance
and influences the PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis, a pathway which is frequently
altered in prostate cancer. In our study, we assessed the effects of
hypoxia on PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling in a subset of basal prostate cancer
stem cells in a murine model of prostate cancer. First, we successfully
isolated Lin-/Sca-1+/CD49f+ basal stem cell subpopulations from primary
prostate tumors of TRAMP (transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate)
mice. We observed a consistent decrease in S6 phosphorylation within the
CSC subpopulation, in agreement with an mTOR pathway inhibition. However,
AKT phosphorylation in the CSC subpopulation was simultaneously elevated,
thus prompting further investigations. To analyze the molecular pathways
leading to this deregulation, we used a cell line model and isolated
Sca-1+/CD49f+ CSC-like subpopulations from the murine prostate cancer
cell line TRAMP-C1 and CD44+/CD49f+ CSC-like subpopulations from the
androgen independent human prostate cancer cell line DU145. We used
sphere formation assays and expression of Notch 1 and Oct 3/4 to confirm
the stem and progenitor cell properties of the sorted subpopulations. We
could confirm the decrease in mTOR/S6 signaling and identify the
upregulation of AKT through IRS-1 mediated feedback loop in prostate
CSC-like cells under hypoxic conditions. This AKT/mTOR deregulation was
promptly reversed in normoxia, suggestive of the involvement of hypoxia
inducible factors. We found elevated HIF1A protein levels as well as
increased target gene expression in CSC subpopulations in vitro and in
vivo. Further, lentiviral knockdown of HIF1A restored AKT/mTOR activity
in CSC-like cells. We could show that CSC-like prostate cancer cells with
elevated expression of basal stem cell markers, such as CD44, Sca-1 or
CD49f, show a hypoxic deactivation of feedback inhibition on AKT
signaling through IRS-1. In light of these results, we propose that
deregulation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway via HIF1A may be critical for
cancer stem cell quiescence and maintenance, slowing down cancer stem
cell metabolism and growth via mTOR and promoting their survival via AKT
signaling.

