Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RSK2-mediated phosphorylation of stathmin promotes microtubule
polymerization, providing a pro-invasive advantage to metastatic cancer
cells


Metastasis is responsible for over 90% of cancer related deaths. Breast
cancer, lung cancer, and head and neck cancer commonly metastasize to
vital organs resulting in poor clinical outcomes. However, the molecular
processes underlying such cellular changes remain elusive. Therefore,
identifying genes that induce cancer cell signaling changes and
understanding how these changes control pro-metastatic mechanisms is
necessary to develop molecular therapies for metastasis and to improve
clinical prognosis for late-stage cancer patients. Protein kinases have
been implicated in mediating pro-metastatic signaling in human cancers.
We previously demonstrated that a serine/threonine kinase, p90 ribosomal
S6 kinase 2 (RSK2) promotes cancer cell invasion and migration, anoikis
resistance, and tumor metastasis in human cancers, including head and
neck cancer, breast cancer, and lung cancer.Here, we investigated the
role of RSK2 in the regulation of microtubule dynamics and its potential
implication in cancer cell invasion and tumor metastasis. SiRNA-mediated
knockdown of RSK2 disrupted microtubules in diverse metastatic human
cancer cell lines including lung cancer A549, breast cancer SKBR3, and
head and neck cancer 212LN cells. Stathmin (STMN) is a microtubule
destabilizing protein, which is an essential regulator of microtubule
polymerization. We found that stable knockdown of RSK2 resulted in
decreased phosphorylation of STMN at Serine 16 in the aforementioned
metastatic cancer cell lines. Moreover, we found that RSK2 directly
phosphorylated STMN at Ser16 in an in vitro RSK2 kinase assay using
recombinant RSK2 and STMN proteins. We observed that phosphorylation of
STMN by RSK2 resulted in reduced STMN-mediated microtubule
depolymerization in vitro, while stable expression of phospho-deficient
STMN S16A mutant but not STMN wild type (WT) led to decreased invasive
potential of metastatic cancer cells. These data together suggest STMN as
a potential novel RSK2 substrate/effector, which may contribute to
RSK2-mediated pro-metastatic signaling.Our finding demonstrates that RSK2
signals through STMN to regulate microtubule polymerization and cancer
cell invasion via direct phosphorylation of STMN at Serine 16, providing
a pro-invasive and metastatic advantage to cancer cells. Therefore, the
RSK2-STMN pathway represents a promising therapeutic target in the
clinical prognosis and treatment of metastatic human cancers.

