Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation neuropathology - Improving diagnostic accuracy for
brain tumors using DNA methylation array-based molecular profiling


BackgroundThe current World Health Organisation (WHO) classification of
central nervous system tumors comprises over 100 entities. Most of these
are defined by purely histological criteria, with varying and often
overlapping spectra. Histological diagnosis is often challenging,
however, especially in cases with limited or non-representative biopsy
material. Thus, molecular technologies that can complement standard
pathology testing have the potential to greatly enhance diagnostic
precision and improve clinical decision-making. DNA methylation
profiling, acting as a fingerprint of cellular origins and molecular
alterations, is one such promising technology.MethodsWe have assembled a
reference dataset of more than 2,000 methylation profiles using the
Illumina HumanMethylation450 (450k) array, currently representing over 50
brain tumor entities or subgroups. The array platform is suitable for
both frozen and paraffin-embedded material, with minimal DNA input
required. This reference set is iteratively updated, and a random forest
algorithm used to produce a classification scheme. Each new diagnostic
case receives an entity prediction with an associated probability score.
Genome-wide copy number profiles and target gene methylation data (e.g.
MGMT) generated from the array provide important additional
information.ResultsIn addition to the reference cohort, more than 300
diagnostic samples from Heidelberg University Hospital and external
institutions have been processed. Many cases displayed a discrepancy
between histological and molecular diagnoses. Careful re-examination of
these often resulted in refinement of the original diagnosis, and
improved patient care.Furthermore, samples collected for the reference
cohort have led to significant improvements in our understanding of the
biology of several tumor types, including the identification of further
subgroups for several entities and associations with recurrent copy
number changes.ConclusionOur understanding of the molecular alterations
underlying brain tumors has grown enormously in recent years, and it is
crucial that this is translated into the clinic promptly. DNA methylation
profiling is one tool with the potential to become an important part of
the diagnostic armoury of neuropathologists. This relatively inexpensive
and robust method is well suited to complement standard histopathologic
techniques and improve diagnostic accuracy, thereby optimising patient
management. It offers a diagnostic assessment completely independent of
histopathological evaluation, and may thus be especially valuable in
histologically uncertain cases. We are currently expanding our pipeline
to include additional diagnostic sites, allowing for further refinement
and validation as well as broader access across the globe.

