Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA replacement and RNAi-mediated silencing of ALK as
combined targeted therapies for neuroblastoma


The effective treatment of advanced Neuroblastoma (NB) is still a
challenge in pediatric oncology, because the clinical use of most
therapeutics is limited by insufficient drug delivery to the tumor and
high systemic toxicity. The discovery of the RNAi has great promise for
anti-cancer therapeutics but, as in high-grade solid tumors a single
oncogene addiction is rare, multi-'gene' target combinations are required
and a targeted delivery system is mandatory to successfully translate
RNAi-based therapeutics into the clinics.It is now ascertained the master
role of ALK and related genes such as PHOX2B, able to promote its
transcription, in NB growth and survival, opening new perspectives for
RNAi-mediated therapies for NB. Nevertheless, even if the counterpart of
tumor suppressor (TS) regulators in NB is not completely known, a number
of miRNAs with TS functions have been found aberrantly under-expressed in
NB and associated with aggressive phenotypes.To develop a new generation
of targeted and multi-RNAi-directed therapeutics for NB, we are
exploiting our well-established NB-specific delivery system, the
GD2-Targeted Liposomes entrapping specific siRNAs, TL[siRNA], or miRNAs
mimics, TL[miRNA]. The final purpose is to get simultaneously the
silencing of the oncogenic functions of ALK and related genes and the
replacement of miRNAs with TS functions in clinically relevant mouse
models of NB. We have planned to test different combinations of
individually entrapped TL[siRNA] or TL[miRNA] for in vivo therapeutic
efficacy.In a pilot study, NB-bearing mice were treated with different
TL[siRNA]. After 65 days from i.v. injection of HTLA-230 (WT ALK) cells,
we observed: about 50% of TL[siALK]-treated mice still disease-free,
marginal effects with TL[siPHOX2A] and moderate effects with TL[siPHOX2B]
formulations alone and a significant increased mice survival with an
equimolar combination of TL[siRNA] of each gene. The enhanced efficacy of
ALK and PHOX2 genes knockdown combination highlights a powerful
therapeutic potential.After pilot transfection studies of SH-SY5Y (F1174L
mut ALK) and GI-LI-N (WT ALK) cell lines, TS miRNAs mimics were screened
and selected. Cell proliferation was evaluated at different days
post-transfection. miR-96, miR-34a and let7b replacement resulted the
most effective in inhibiting NB cell growth. Liposomal preparation of
miRNA-NC and the above mimics for in vivo studies was tuned up according
to the number of negative charges of the stem-loop sequence with an
entrapment efficiency of 80-90%. Currently, an ongoing in vivo trial
indicates promising results after replacement of miR-34a and let7b.We
believe that the use of tumor-targeted biocompatible carriers of RNAi
molecules able to replace loss-of-functions and to knockdown
gain-of-functions in cancer cells at the same time is likely to represent
an innovative modality for a more effective gene therapy.

