Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced intra-tumoral immune cell infiltration following tumor
targeted delivery of chemotherapy using theranostic nanoparticles in an
orthotopic mouse pancreatic model


Development of novel therapeutics that have the dual capacity to de-bulk
a tumor mass as well as induce tumor-specific immunological responses are
critical to potent, effective and sustainable clinical responses against
cancer. Such an integrated therapeutic approach has the potential to
significantly improve the survival of cancer patients. Our lab has
developed a receptor targeted magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle (IONP)
platform for targeted tumor imaging and drug delivery and demonstrated
its effect on tumor growth inhibition in breast, ovarian, and pancreatic
cancer mouse models. Active targeting of IONPs requires the conjugation
of ligands that will bind specifically to tumor cells, tumor associated
cells as well as the tumor stroma such as the urokinase plasminogen
activator receptor (uPAR). uPAR expression is also associated with
increased invasiveness and patients with uPAR gene amplification are
considered a clinically high risk population which further makes this
protein an ideal target. In an orthotopic mouse pancreatic cancer model
in C57BL/6 mice (PANC02), we found that intraperitoneal delivery of 5
mg/kg cisplatin equivalent of uPAR-targeted IONP-cisplatin twice per week
for four injections led to a reduced orthotopic tumor burden of 40%
relative to untreated mice. We observed increased accumulation of the
IONPs in the tumor center following uPAR-targeted delivery of the
IONP-cisplatin by Prussian Blue staining relative to non-targeted
IONP-cisplatin delivery. Importantly, we found increased infiltration of
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as well as CD20+ B cells into pancreatic tumors
compared to tumors obtained from the mice treated with conventional
cisplatin or non-targeted IONP-cisplatin. Although we observed an
increase in clusters of CD20+ B cells in the tumor, we did not detect
tumor-specific antibody responses in serum samples obtained from those
mice suggesting the presence of immune suppressive mechanisms in the
tumor that inhibited tumor-specific immune responses. However, the
presence of higher levels of T and B lymphocytes in the center of the
tumors suggest the opportunity to activate cytotoxic T cell responses and
tumor-specific antibody production by the addition of immune-modulatory
factors to the theranostic nanoparticles which is under current
investigation in our laboratory. Taken together, these findings indicate
that receptor-targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs using IONPs has
the potential to simultaneously induce direct anti-tumor activity and
enhance the intratumoral infiltration of immune cells thus providing an
optimal environment for further tumor-specific immune activation.

