Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-mediated Tie2 nuclear translocation results in enhanced
NHEJ repair and glioma radioresistance


Glioblastoma is the most frequent subtype of primary brain tumor in
adults and are resistant to current strategies of surgery, irradiation,
and chemotherapy. Patients suffering from this disease exhibit a median
survival that ranges from 9 to 15 months. Glioblastomas invariably recur
after therapy due to the presence of cells exhibiting a
multitherapy-resistance phenotype. To decipher the aberrant DNA repair
pathways that enable tumor cells to survive DNA damage upon chemotherapy
and radiotherapy should guide us to provide our patients with a more
efficacious therapy. The abnormal function of tyrosine kinase receptors
(TKRs) is a hallmark of malignant gliomas. Our group reported the
expression of the TKR Tie2 in in brain tumor stem cells (BTSCs) and in
human surgical glioma specimens in relation to malignancy. In in vivo
experiments, consisting of ionizing irradiation (IR) of mice bearing
intracranial BTSCs-derived xenografts showed unexpected Tie2 nuclear
localization. We observed that Tie2 traffics from the cellular membrane
to the nucleus upon IR stimuli, as assessed by immunoflurorescence
studies using confocal microscope and subcellular fractionation followed
by Western blots. This phenomenon is ligand dependent, as increased
levels of Tie2 natural ligand, Angiopoietin1 (Ang1), were observed after
ionizing radiation, and nuclear Tie2 levels were decreased using soluble
Tie2, which blocks the Ang1/Tie2 interaction. Of clinical significance,
the presence of Tie2 in the nucleus is significantly associated with
radioresistance, as observed by cell viability and clonogenic assays.
Tie2 trafficking was associated to Caveolin-1, and this functional
complex was disturbed when Caveolin-1 inhibitor or siCaveolin-1 were
used, resulting in decreased Tie2 nuclear levels. In addition, we
observed that upon IR treatment, nuclear Tie2 bound to DNA/protein
complexes, and specifically to the key DNA repair protein H2AX, as a
component of the DNA-repair foci. Based on these results, we hypothesized
that Tie2 was involved in DNA damage repair and focused on one of the
main pathways involved in double strand break (IR induced), the
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair mechanism. By using a
fluorescent reporter construct in which a functional GFP gene is
reconstituted following an NHEJ event (gift from Dr. Gorbunova,
University of Rochester), we observed that Tie2-expressing cells
displayed a more efficient NHEJ repair than Tie2 negative counterparts.
Mutation of a Tie2 nuclear localization signal significantly decreased
NHEJ efficiency repair and radiosensitization of BTSCs, suggesting a role
of nuclear Tie2 in DNA damage repair, specifically in the NHEJ repair
mechanism. Collectively, our results should propel the development of
preclinical studies of the combination of nuclear Tie2-targeting
strategies with radiotherapy for patients with glioblastomas.

