Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences of DNA methylation patterns according to histologic
subtypes of early gastric carcinomas


Background: The DNA methylation change is known to play a crucial role in
early gastric carcinogenesis. However, its association with the
histologic subtypes of EGCs has not been fully elucidated. In this study,
we aim to know whether the subtypes of early gastric carcinomas (EGCs)
are related to the differences of DNA methylation or not using genome
wide methylation assay. Materials and Method: The comprehensive
methylation analysis was performed by Illumina Infinium methylation assay
(IIMA, 450K BeadChip kit) covering 450,000 sites on 12 tumors and 12
matched non-tumor mucosa from 12 patients with EGC. Hisytologically, the
EGCs were devided into intestinal type (group A, n=6) and non-intestinal
type (group B, diffuse=4 and mixed=2). The CpG sites in 450K microarray
chip are classified into CpG islands, shores (2kb), shelves (2kb4kb) and
open sea (>4kb) by CpG content and neighborhood context. According to the
functional genomic distribution they are classified into promoter, body,
3UTR and intergenic. To determine DMRs, average -values were computed
with -values in signal intensity of over 3000. The -value was a result
substracted average -value of one from the other. When is over 0.2 or
below -0.2, it was considered to be meaningful and refered to
differentially methylated regions (DMRs) . Results: There were 484 DMRs
in group A tumor and 208 DMRs in group B. The pattern of DMRs were
different between two groups. In group A tumor, most of DMRs (97.73%)
were hypermethylated and 75.26% were in CpG island. On the other hand,
the group B tumors showed that 63.94% of DMRs were hypermethylated and
only less than half of them (48.87%) were in CpG island. In terms of
functional genomic distribution of DMRs, promoter (38.66%) was the most
common site in group A while body (54.14%) was in group B. On
Hierarchical clustering analysis, the clear grouping was made by 208 DMRs
in three cases, two of them being mixed-type, by both correlation and
Euclidean methods. However, no distinct grouping was found with DMRs in
group A. Hierarchical clustering analysis of non-tumor mucosa showed a
distinct separation between group A and B. Conclusions: DNA methylation
pattern was distinctively different between the histologic subtype of
EGCs. In the intestinal type of EGCs, the DNA methylation seems to be
started in non-tumor mucosa.

