Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1 promotes the infiltration of regulatory T cells into the
tumor via TGF-


In the growing tumor under hypoxia, a transcription factor,
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) plays a critical role in regulating
expressions of various genes associated with tumor growth. In order to
elucidate the immunosuppression promoted by the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment, we focused on a relationship between HIF-1 and an
immunosuppressive cytokine, transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-). TGF-
which is released from either tumor cells or tumor stromal cells and
suppresses anti-tumor immune responses in tumor-bearing hosts may be
regulated by HIF-1 in the hypoxic tumor microenvironment. In this report,
we hypothesized that inhibition of HIF-1 in tumor cells would improve an
immunosuppression to augment anti-tumor immune responses, and examined
the possibilities in the tumor-bearing mice model. The transfected mouse
lymphoma cells E.G7 with HIF-1 shRNA was administered to C57BL/6 mice
subcutaneously at the flank. Three weeks later, anti-tumor immune
responses elicited in the mice were examined. As results, in mice bearing
the transfected E.G7 with HIF-1 shRNA, the protein level of TGF- in the
tumor tissue was decreased as compared with that in mice bearing the
transfected E.G7 with control shRNA or the non-transfected E.G7. The
infiltration of Foxp3+ cells in the tumor tissue was decreased in mice
bearing the transfected E.G7 with HIF-1 shRNA. When spleen cells from
those tumor-bearing mice were stimulated with E.G7-derived antigen,
cytotoxic activity against target E.G7 cells were enhanced in mice
bearing the transfected E.G7 with HIF-1 shRNA. While there were no
significant differences in the cell proliferation between the transfected
E.G7 cells with HIF-1 shRNA and those with control shRNA or
non-transfected E.G7 cells in vitro, tumor growth was effectively
suppressed in mice bearing the transfected E.G7 with HIF-1 shRNA.
Inhibition of HIF-1 in tumor cells decreased the level of TGF- in the
hypoxic tumor microenvironment, leading to suppression of infiltrating
Foxp3+ cells and improvement of anti-tumor immune responses. These
results demonstrate that hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment is
responsible for the induction of immunosuppression through the
infiltration of regulatory T cells by TGF-.

