Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKTT320, a novel monoclonal antibody activates the
immuno-stimulatory functions of human invariant natural killer T cells


Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKTs) are innate-type lipid-reactive T
lymphocytes that directly kill tumor cells as well as exhibit robust
capacity to trans-activate the anti-tumor functions of dendritic cells
(DC), natural killer (NK), T and B cells. Based on their dual functions
as potent cytokine producers and tumor killers, iNKTs serve as a powerful
tool for use in cell-based immunotherapies for cancer. In most cases,
iNKT cell functions are T cell receptor (TCR)-dependent and require
engagement of the invariant T cell receptor (iTCR) by lipids such as the
potent iNKT agonist -galactosyl ceramide (GC). However, transformed cells
often down-regulate CD1d expression and as a result, they become
invisible to iNKT cell attack. To circumvent this critical barrier, which
limits our ability to capitalize on the therapeutic potential of iNKTs,
we recently characterized the iNKT stimulatory properties of a novel
monoclonal antibody (NKTT320), which is specific for the human iTCR.
NKTT320 is a recombinant DNA derived humanized monoclonal antibody that
binds selectively and with high affinity to the CDR3 loop of the alpha
chain within the - hetero-dimer of the extracellular domain of the human
iTCR. For these studies, we have developed methods to successfully expand
human iNKTs up to 1000-2000 fold and purify them from human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. To assess whether the NKTT320 antibody induces
human iNKT cell functions, highly purified human iNKTs were cultured with
or without varying concentrations (0.01-10.0 g/ml) of plate-bound NKTT320
antibody. At varying times, culture supernatants were collected and cells
were harvested, counted and viability assessed. iNKT cell activation (by
examining for upregulation of activation markers [CD25, CD69],
degranulation (measured by exposure of CD107 on the cell surface) and
proliferation (by measuring CFSE dilution) was assessed by flow
cytometry. Cell culture supernatants were evaluated for the secretion of
a wide array of cytokines and chemokines using Luminex. Strikingly,
immobilized NKTT320 antibody induced a robust dose-dependent iNKT cell
activation, proliferation and degranulation. Additionally, iNKTs
stimulated by the plate-bound antibody secreted increased levels of Th1
(IL-1, IFN-, TNF-, IL-2, IL-6) and Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, IL-10) cytokines as
well as chemokines in a dose-dependent manner. Our in vitro studies are
consistent with in vivo data in V24 transgenic mice, which express the
human iTCR alpha chain. Dosing of NKTT320 in these animals led to iNKT
cell activation (upregulation of activation markers and intracellular
IFN- production), as well as incorporation of BRDU indicating in vivo
iNKT cell proliferation. These studies provide a framework by which human
iNKT cell functions could be enhanced for therapeutic purposes in cancer.

