Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage infiltration is associated with release from dormancy
in a novel model of dormant prostate cancer


Background: Circulating tumor cells are found in approximately 70% of men
with prostate cancer at the time of primary treatment. Less than a third
of these men will develop recurrent cancer within 20 years of primary
treatment, suggesting that only a subset of dormant tumor cells are able
to escape dormancy and develop into clinical metastases. Escape from
dormancy, though, is clinically significant since these men are at
greatest risk of dying from prostate cancer. Mechanisms by which cancer
cells escape dormancy are poorly understood and very few models exist to
study dormancy, especially in prostate cancer. We previously found that
when a dormant prostate cancer cell line was seeded into a bioscaffold
and placed in vivo, tumor formation was detected after 6-8 weeks, whereas
no growth was seen up to six months after the dormant cells were injected
s.c. with Matrigel. Analysis of the tumors revealed significantly greater
macrophage infiltration into the scaffold tumors. Gene expression and
cytokine antibody arrays demonstrated increased expression of macrophage
associated cytokines in scaffold tumors. While macrophages have been
implicated in metastatic spread of various cancers, their role in escape
from dormancy has not been elucidated.Objective: To determine if
macrophages play a role in escape from tumor dormancy in prostate
cancer.Methods: In vitro we cultured a dormant prostate cancer cell line,
M12mac25, with macrophage conditioned media and then examined
proliferation and gene expression. In vivo, mice were implanted with
sphere-templated polyHEMA bioscaffolds pre-seeded with M12mac25 cells. To
inhibit macrophage activity, mice received s.c. injections of clondronate
liposomes or PBS liposomes as a control for 6 weeks.Results: In vitro
culture of M12mac25 cells with macrophage-derived conditioned medium led
to increased proliferation of the M12mac25 cells and similarly
upregulated genes as those seen the in vivo bioscaffold-derived tumors.
In vitro treatment of primary bone-marrow derived macrophages with
clondronate liposomes resulted in apoptosis while exposure to PBS
liposomes did not affect the macrophages. In contrast, M12mac25 cells
were not affected by either PBS or clondronate liposomes. In vivo,
clondronate liposomes effectively eliminated macrophages from the
M12mac25 seeded scaffolds and prevented tumor growth in these
scaffolds.Interpretation: Macrophages contribute to M12mac25 escape from
dormancy.

