Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of ATRX decreases survival and improves response to DNA
damaging agents in a novel mouse model of glioblastoma


Pediatric glioblastoma (GBM) remains one of the most difficult childhood
tumors to treat, and most patients will die within the first two years of
receiving this diagnosis. ATRX is a histone chaperone protein that is
mutated primarily in adolescent GBMs. No previous animal model has
demonstrated the effect of ATRX loss on GBM formation. In this study, we
determined the contribution of ATRX knockdown to GBM formation and
treatment response in a novel mouse model of GBM. Using the
second-generation shRNA-mir library, we cloned an ATRX knockdown sequence
into a plasmid with flanking sequences recognized by the Sleeping Beauty
(SB) transposase for insertion into host genomic DNA. Glioblastomas were
induced in mice using the SB transposase system injecting plasmids
encoding luciferase, shp53 and NRAS, with or without shATRX, into the
ventricle of neonatal mice. Uptake of plasmid DNA as well as development
of intracranial tumors was monitored by bioluminescence. When animals
showed symptoms of tumor burden they were euthanized and brains were
processed for histological evaluation or placed in culture with neural
stem cell media (with EGF and FGF supplementation). Tumors in both groups
(with or without shATRX) showed histological hallmarks of human grade IV
glioblastoma. The loss of ATRX was confirmed by IHC, and was specifically
localized within tumors generated with the shATRX plasmid and not in the
tumors generated with shp53 and NRAS alone, nor in the adjacent normal
cortex. Notably, loss of ATRX reduced median survival of mice by 43%
(p=0.012). Tissue was analyzed by FISH telomere probe as ATRX loss in
human tumors is associated with alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT). ATRX-deficient tumors were significantly more likely to show
chromosomal aneuploidy (p=0.015) by telomere FISH. Cell lines generated
from ATRX-deficient tumors were confirmed to have reduction of ATRX
expression. Tumor cell lines (with and without ATRX loss) were plated,
treated at 24 hours with intervention or control, and analyzed for
viability at 72 hours. ATRX-deficient tumor cells were significantly
(p0.005) more sensitive to DNA damaging agents, including: (1) 5-FU, (2)
doxorubicin, (3) UV irradiation, and (4) adenoviral thymidine kinase with
ganciclovir; with the notable exception of temozolomide (p=0.86), which
is the standard of care for treatment of pediatric GBM. Loss of ATRX in a
mouse model hastens glioblastoma formation and decreases survival. In
addition, loss of ATRX leads to aneuploidy and improved response to DNA
damaging agents, providing possible targeted therapies for tumors with
this mutation. This mouse model prospectively validates ATRX as a tumor
suppressor in pediatric GBM for the first time in an animal model; and
provides a platform for analysis of relevant pathways and development of
potential novel therapies.Supported by NIH/NINDS grants to MGC and PRL.

