Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Veliparib (ABT-888) potentiates the cytotoxic activity of DNA
alkylating agents by trapping PARP onto damaged chromatin


PARP-1 and PARP-2 are required for base excision repair (BER) and also
function to regulate homologous recombination and non-homologous end
joining. Inhibitors of these enzymes have demonstrated context-dependent
anti-tumor activity, particularly in combination with DNA damaging agents
and in tumors with DNA repair deficits. For this reason, there is
considerable interest in the ongoing clinical development of PARP
inhibitors as anti-cancer therapies. However, due to the diversity and
complexity of PARP function in DNA repair, the mechanisms of action of
PARP inhibitors have not been fully characterized. Recent reports have
suggested that one mechanism whereby PARP inhibitors potentiate
cytotoxicity of DNA alkylating agents is via trapping of PARP at sites of
DNA damage during BER, generating bulky PARP-DNA lesions that prevent
subsequent steps in the BER process and ultimately lead to cytotoxic
double-strand breaks. Two non-mutually exclusive models have been
proposed to explain this effect. In the first, PARP inhibition prevents
auto-PARylation, which is known to promote dissociation of PARP from DNA.
In the second, PARP inhibitors allosterically enhance the affinity of
PARP for damaged DNA in a manner not predicted by catalytic potency. In
support of this model, it has been reported that the PARP inhibitors
veliparib and olaparib differ significantly in ability to induce trapping
while having similar catalytic potency. Contrary to this hypothesis, both
compounds robustly potentiate the activity of alkylating agents in vitro
and in vivo, achieving similar efficacy when combined with temozolomide
in xenograft studies. In this study, we used a combination of biochemical
and cellular techniques to characterize the ability of veliparib to trap
PARP onto damaged DNA at pharmacologically relevant concentrations. A
comparison of veliparib to other PARP inhibitors revealed a strong
correlation in potency with respect to catalytic inhibition, trapping and
potentiation of DNA alkylating agents. Furthermore, kinetic and
equilibrium binding analysis of PARP DNA binding activity revealed no
evidence of allostery with any of the PARP inhibitors examined.
Collectively, these observations favor the auto-PARylation model and
provide no justification to invoke an allosteric mechanism. Consequently,
there is no premise for PARP inhibitor differentiation based on catalytic
versus trapping potency. Moreover, it is noteworthy that we have thus far
been unable to observe trapping with other classes of DNA damaging
agents, suggesting that this mechanism may not translate to other
combination regimens currently being evaluated in the clinic.Disclosures:
All authors are employees of AbbVie. The design, study conduct, and
financial support for this research were provided by AbbVie. AbbVie
participated in the interpretation of data, review, and approval of the
publication.

