Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin nanoformulation: A new therapeutic approach for cervical
cancer treatment


Background: Cervical cancer is one of the most common and deadly cancers
among women worldwide and is associated with persistent Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Currently, Cisplatin based chemo and
radio therapy is the best standard treatment for cervical cancer. While
screening for cervical cancer can reduce the incidence and mortality,
treatment of advanced stage cervical cancer is difficult and often
unsuccessful. Resistance to chemo-radio therapy with prolonged treatment,
resulting in an invasive form of cancer, requires the development of
novel therapeutic modalities to conquer chemo resistance and improve
overall life expectancy of patients. Nanotechnology provides targeted
delivery of anti-cancer drugs and indicates a new approach for cancer
diagnosis and treatment. Our lab has developed PLGA (poly
[lactic-co-glycolic acid]), an FDA approved polymer coated
nanoparticle(s) using a well-known anti-cancer drug Curcumin (CUR) for
the enhanced bioavailability and improved therapeutic efficacy of CUR.
Therefore, we hypothesized that having targeted drug delivery, curcumin
nanoparticles (NC) will show improved anti-cancerous effects on cervical
cancer cells and will also overcome drug (Cisplatin) resistance when
compared with free curcumin.Methods: The effect of NC on the
proliferation of Caski cervical cancer cells was determined by MTS and
colony formation assay. Annexin V/7AAD and propidium iodide (PI) staining
was analyzed by flow cytometry to determine NC's effect on apoptosis and
cell cycle inhibition, respectively. The expression of apoptotic markers
such as poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), Caspase 3 and Caspase 9 was
determined by immunoblotting. The potential of NC to modulate the
expression of miRNAs associated with drug resistance was determined by
quantitative RT-PCR. In order to assess efficacy of NC to reduce tumor
growth, an orthotopic mouse model was generated using Caski cells stably
transfected with fluorescent gene td tomato.Results: NC effectively
inhibited Caski cell growth and also induced apoptosis as determined by
staining for Annexin V/7AAD and immunoblotting for cleaved PARP, Caspase
3, and Caspase 9. PI staining clearly revealed that NC treatment arrests
growth cycle of Caski cells in the G1- S phase. Additionally, NC
treatment caused a marked decrease in the levels of miRNA 21, an
oncomiRNA associated with chemoresistance, and enhanced miRNA 214, a
tumor suppressor, when compared to free Curcumin. Moreover, NC
formulation effectively reduces the tumor burden in athymic nude
mice.Conclusion: Our findings show that PLGA based NC significantly
inhibits Caski cervical cancer cell growth and regulates the expression
of miRNAs, associated with cervical cancer. In vivo experiments show that
NC is efficacious in reducing the tumor burden. Therefore, NC may be a
novel chemo-preventive and therapeutic modality for the overall
management of cervical cancer.

