Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive characterization of urothelial bladder cancer: a
TCGA Project update


Urothelial carcinoma (UC) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality for
which there are no approved molecularly targeted agents and few good
treatment options beyond cisplatin-based chemotherapy. As part of The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Project, we analyzed 131 chemotherapy-naive,
muscle-invasive UC tumors for somatic mutations, DNA copy number variants
(CNVs), mRNA and microRNA expression, protein expression and
phosphorylation, DNA methylation, transcript splicing, gene fusion, viral
integration, pathway perturbation, clinical correlates, and
histopathology (TCGA Research Network, Nature, in press). Whole-exome
sequencing showed 29 recurrently mutated genes. Potential therapeutic
targets include altered PIK3CA, ERBB2, FGFR3, TSC1, and ERBB3, plus
mutated chromatin-regulating genes MLL, MLL2, MLL3, CREBBP, CHD7, SRCAP,
ARID1A, KDM6A (UTX), and EP300. There were 22 arm-level CNVs and 27
focally amplified or deleted regions. CDKN2A was deleted in 47%. Low-pass
whole genome sequencing identified FGFR3-TACC3 fusions. Viral DNA was
identified in 6% (CMV, HHV6B, HPV16, BK polyoma), and viral transcripts
were identified in 4% (CMV, BK polyoma, HPV16).. mRNA-seq identified 4
tumor clusters. Cluster I shows papillary morphology and FGFR3
dysregulation. Clusters I and II express high HER2 (ERBB2) and estrogen
receptor beta signaling signature, sharing features with Luminal A breast
cancer. Cluster III shows similarities to Basal-like breast and squamous
cell head and neck carcinomas.. Integrated analyses confirm alteration of
multiple pathways, including cell cycle regulation (93%), kinase and
PI3-K signaling (72%), and epigenetic regulation (histone-modifiers: 89%;
SWI/SNF nucleosome remodeling complex: 64%). Recurrent alterations in the
PI3-kinase/AKT/mTOR pathway (42%) and RTK/RAS pathway (44%) are
potentially actionable.. Overall, this study and others have identified
multiple druggable targets in UC. FGFR3 is activated by mutation, gene
fusion, and overexpression, suggesting clinical trials of FGFR3
inhibitors. PI3-kinase/mTOR/AKT/TSC1 pathway alterations are frequent,
and mutation in TSC1 has been associated with response to mTOR
inhibitors. ERBB2 amplifications and activating mutations may be
targetable with agents such as trastuzumab, trastuzumab-DM1, lapatinib,
and neratinib. The frequent alterations in epigenetic regulatory pathways
suggest trials of agents such as the bromodomain inhibitors. The project
is now being updated on the basis of data on 117 additional tumors.

