Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method for live cell sorting based on RNA expression
levels of cancer biomarkers maintains normal cellular function as
confirmed by downstream functional testing


Enrichment of cells within a mixed population has been confined to fixed
cells or in the case of live cell sorting to a limited set of cell
surface markers which are typically not specific to the target
population. Furthermore, cell surface antibodies may activate cell
surface receptors altering the state of the cells such that they are no
longer representative of the original population. Intracellular staining
requires fixation and permeabilization and thus renders the cells
unusable in downstream functional assays.Through the use of a unique
nanoparticle sequence based detection technology we have shown the
ability to detect specific RNA within live cells which does not affect or
alter the cells and allows further testing of the target population
following the enrichment. Both microRNA and mRNA species have been used
to enrich for specific target populations through Fluorescence Activated
Cell Sorting (FACS). Sorting cells based on the expression level of any
specific RNA allows researchers the ability to utilize targets of
biological interest within isolated populations of cells. Since this
method is non-destructive to live cells the enriched cells can then be
used for downstream functional assays.Here we present data showing the
live cell enrichment of a target cell population within a heterogeneous
mixture of cells based on their RNA expression levels. RNA probes to
miR-221 and miR-222 were generated for the enrichment of invasive cells
from the non-invasive. A mixture of breast cancer cells (MD-MB-231 and
T47D) were sorted based on their expression levels of the RNA probes
through FACS. The high and low expressing sort products were then each
subjected to a collagen invasion assay. As expected the fractions which
showed high expression of miR-221 and miR-222 showed a high level of
invasion through the matrix while the low expressing fractions showed
extremely low invasion.Live cell sorting based on RNA levels of cancer
biomarkers in a non-destructive manner enables researchers the ability to
study the expression of a diverse group of targets beyond the traditional
surface markers with the added benefit of utilizing the enriched cells
for downstream functional assays.

