Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of properly timed HPV16 synthetic long peptide
vaccination during standard carboplatin-paclitaxel chemotherapy in
animals and in patients with metastatic cervical carcinoma


We previously developed a synthetic long overlapping HPV16 E6/E7 peptides
(HPV16-SLP) vaccine that was clinically active in patients with HPV16+
high-grade vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. Complete lesion regression
was related to a strong vaccine-prompted HPV16-specific effector T-cell
response. However, in patients with HPV16-induced metastatic cervical
cancer the vaccine-induced T-cell responses were weaker and did not
result in clear clinical benefit. A new study on the immune constitution
of PBMC of such patients revealed increased numbers of myeloid cells, low
T-cell reactivity against common microbial recall antigens and a lower
stimulatory capacity of antigen presenting cells, indicating an
immunosuppressive status. When these patients were subsequently treated
with standard carboplatin-paclitaxel chemotherapy we observed that at a
specific time point during chemotherapy this tumor-biased immune profile
was normalized to a profile similar to that found in healthy subjects.
Experiments in an HPV16+ mouse tumor model showed that the tumor-induced
abnormally high myeloid cell level was also normalized by this
chemotherapy, not only among PBMC but also locally in the tumor. Residual
tumor-present myeloid cells phenotypically mirrored activated
non-suppressive antigen presenting cells. Moreover, combined HPV16 SLP
vaccination and chemotherapy effectively led to a higher cure rate of
mice with established tumors. Together these data indicated that standard
chemotherapy has an immune stimulatory effect by deletion of suppressive
myeloid cells in the mouse tumor model and in patients with metastatic
cervical cancer . Therefore, a clinical trial was started in which such
patients were treated with standard chemotherapy in combination with
HPV16 SLP (ISA101) vaccination. Comprehensive immune monitoring confirmed
the beneficial effect of myeloid cell depletion associated with a robust
induction of HPV16-specific T-cell responses that were sustained
throughout several cycles of chemotherapy. The data of these studies will
be reported. Currently, we have started a multicenter clinical trial
(ISA-HPV-01-12) in which vaccination with the HPV16 SLP ISA101 vaccine is
combined with carboplatin-paclitaxel and type I interferon to assess
clinical and immunological outcome in a group of HPV16+ metastatic
cervical cancer patients.

