Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking and increased age in hematuric patients significantly
confound the accuracy of classifiers for the diagnosis of urothelial
cancer


Smoking and increased age in hematuria patients significantly confound
the accuracy of classifiers for the diagnosis of urothelial cancerRicardo
de Matos Simoes (a), Brian Duggan(b), Mark W. Ruddock (c), Frank
Emmert-Streib (a), Declan O'Rourke (d), Hugh F. O'Kane (b), Funso
Abogunrin (e), Cherith N. Reid (c), Neil H Anderson (f), David Curry (b),
Kate E. Williamson (a). a Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology,
Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, UK. b Department of
Urology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK. c Randox
Laboratories Ltd., County Antrim, UK. d Department of Pathology, Belfast
City Hospital, Belfast, UK. e Department of Urology, Craigavon Area
Hospital, Northern Ireland, f Department of Pathology, Royal Victoria
Hospital, Belfast, UK.There is an urgent need for evidence-based risk
stratification of hematuria patients. Currently, we have insufficient
understanding of the characteristics which confound the accuracy of
diagnostic classifiers for urothelial cancer (UC). Between November 2006
and October 2008 156 hematuric patients were recruited to a case control
study. We defined UC diagnostic classifiers for 16 stratified
subpopulations. Using a random forest classification based on 29
biomarkers measurements in urine, serum and plasma and random
sub-sampling we generated 1000 training and test patient datasets to
estimate probabilities of correct, incorrect and inconsistent
classification for each patient. We defined classifiers for control and
UC classified subpopulations. The distribution of characteristics across
classifiable and non-classifiable patient subpopulations was explored
using Fisher's exact test. The non-smoking stratified subpopulation
achieved the greatest accuracy AUC = 0.95 (sd = 01). One hundred patients
(64%) were classified correctly; 46/156 (30%) were non-classifiable, and
10/156 (6%) were inconsistently classified. The 23 non-classifiable UCs
comprised 21 pTa, one pT1 and one CIS; two pTa and one pT1 were
inconsistently classified. Five patients with newly diagnosed cancers
other than UC, seven with no diagnosis and 11 with benign conditions were
misclassified as UC. Consideration of smoking, increased age and
antihypertensive medication in addition to biomarker profiles may achieve
more accurate classification of UC in hematuria patients. This novel
approach to diagnostic classifiers, once fine-tuned, may have the
potential to correctly classify low risk bladder tumours and to reduce
false positive cases.

