Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression phenotype of SNPs linked to the risk for prostate
cancer


Numerous Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies of large populations have
provided limited biomarkers for cancer and few linkages to phenotype. We
investigated whether SNPs that are known to be associated with prostate
cancer (PCa) affect expression in prostate stroma. The stroma of prostate
tumors provides genetically homogenous tissue type with hundreds of
tumor-dependent expression changes [1] which favors linkage
identification. We surveyed published GWA studies covering a total of
90,000 patients and selected the most significant 35 susceptibility loci
for further linkage analysis. We also selected 4030 transcripts
previously associated with PCa diagnosis and prognosis. We then
investigated 47 PCa cases using genetic variations in nontumor DNA
(Illumina Human1M-Duov3_B snp arrays) and correlating the genotypes with
RNA gene expression data from the same patients (U133 plus 2.0 arrays). A
novel eQTL (Expression Quantitative Trait Loci) analysis was carried out
by a modified BAYES method to analyze the associations between the risk
variants and expressed transcripts jointly in a single model. The model
assumed that a risk variant can be associated with multiple RNA
expression changes and vice versa. We observed 47 significant linkages
between 8 risk variants and 46 significant expression changes. The false
discovery rates of two resampling studies are 0.03 and 0.05,
respectively, which indicated the 47 linkages are significant. All
linkages are trans' linkages indicating remote effects of key SNPs on
expressing genes. This is the first study to identify trans-linkages
between multiple SNPs and multiple significant expression changes
identified in cancer stroma. The linkages also associated with trends in
clinical phenotypes. The strongest trend is between linkage
rs9623117(C)-FOXD1 and biochemical relapse (p=0.01). The study reveals
links between SNPs associated with PCa risk and transcription, which may
identify the subset of patients where these genotypes may affect relevant
phenotypes.[1] Jia et al., Cancer Research 2011; 71:2476-2487.

