Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling signaling pathways in chronic lymphocytic leukemia using
reverse phase protein array


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common adult leukemia
remains incurable despite advancements in treatment regimens over the
past decades. B-cell receptor (BCR) mediated signaling is well recognized
for its central role in the pathogenesis of CLL. Small molecular
inhibitors targeting BCR signaling pathway and its downstream PI3K/AKT
pathway are currently investigated in clinical trials because of their
ability to induce apoptosis or block protein interactions in CLL cells.
However, variability in pathological conditions and genetic aberrations
render these small molecule inhibitors not equally effective in all CLL
patients and highlights the need for individualized treatment options. In
this pilot study, we analyzed differential protein expression of 18 CLL
patient and 6 normal B-cell samples using reverse phase protein array
(RPPA). RPPA enables us to study the proteome as well as phospho-proteome
of CLL samples. When probed with 167 monoclonal antibodies RPPA revealed
distinct protein expression patterns between CLL and normal B-cells. RPPA
data was analyzed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering and CLL patient
samples were clearly separated from normal B-cell samples. Proteins of
BCR and downstream PI3K/AKT pathway such as SYK, LCK, PDK1, AKT, RICTOR,
mTOR, TSC1, TSC2 and p70S6K were all upregulated in CLL samples.
Harvesting the full potential of RPPA to study phosphorylation changes,
we observed an increase in PI3K pathway activating signals such as
PDK1-pS241, p70S6K-pT389, 4EBP1-pS65 and 4EBP1-pT70 suggesting a cell
proliferative mechanism. There was also decrease in inhibitory signals
such as RICTOR-pT1135. Pro-apoptotic factors BID, BAX, Caspase 7-cleaved
and ANXA1 were poorly expressed in CLL samples compared to normal B-cells
suggesting a defect in apoptosis mechanism is predominant in CLL samples.
As previously reported, we have seen overexpression of anti-apoptotic
factor BCL2. BIM isoforms, BIM-EL and BIM-L were overexpressed in CLL
compared to normal samples; however the ratio of BIM-EL to BIM-L was
higher in normal B cells compared to CLL cells. For the first time, we
generated a comprehensive BCR protein and phospho-protein expression
profiles in primary CLL samples. Our results reveal novel anti-apoptosis
and cell proliferative mechanisms in CLL and potentially identified new
therapeutic targets in CLL.

