Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem like cells in human breast cancer: EP4 as a therapeutic target


Background: A tumor cell subset known as stem like cells (SLC) defy
conventional therapies, requiring identification of SLC-specific
therapeutic targets. We established that elevated COX-2 expression by
breast cancer cells promotes tumor progression via inactivation of host
immune cells, enhancement of cancer cell migration and invasiveness, and
promotion of tumor-associated angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis
primarily by activation of the PGE-2 receptor EP4 on tumor and host
cells. Cardiovascular side effects of long term use of COX-2 inhibitors
argued for an alternative target, potentially EP4. Objectives/approaches:
We asked whether COX-2 or EP4 additionally stimulates SLC in breast
cancer. COX-2 and HER-2, often co-expressed in human breast cancer, are
both major determinants of cancer progression. To define the roles of
COX-2 in HER2 +ve and -ve cells, COX-2 cDNA was stably transfected into
COX-2-low, HER-2-ve, ER+ve, non-metastatic MCF-7 and COX-2-ve, ER-ve,
HER-2-high SKBR-3 human breast cancer cell lines to derive MCF-7-COX-2
and SKBR-3-COX-2 cells which were tested for changes in phenotype and
functions in vitro and in vivo. Results: Both COX-2 over-expressing lines
showed (1) EMT (low E-Cadherin and high Vimentin, Twist and N-Cadherin),
(2) higher proliferation/ migration/ invasion, (3) upregulation of EP4
and angiogenic/ lymphangiogenic factors VEGF-A/C/D, (4) markedly
increased SLC contents indicated by clonogenic spheroid formation for
successive generations in vitro, increased ALDH activity and
co-expression of COX-2 and multiple SLC markers in spheroids. (5) COX-2
expression markedly increased during spheroid formation in COX-2
disparate cell lines, indicating a selection of COX-2 expressing cells.
(6) EP4 activation of COX-2 low cell lines with PGE2 or EP4 agonists
markedly increased spheroid-forming efficiency. (7) Functional changes
listed above (2-5) were blocked with COX-2 inhibitors or an EP4
antagonist (EP4A), indicating dependence on COX-2 and EP4 activity. (8)
MCF-7-COX-2 cells showed dramatically increased lung colony forming
ability and growth at 4-6 wks in NOD/SCID/GUSB null mice (identified by
GUSB staining), which were blocked with EP4A treatment or EP4 knockdown;
(9) MCF-7-COX-2 (as low as 5000) cells showed increased orthotopic
tumorigenicity in NOD/SCID/IL-2R deficient mice on transplantation for
successive generations. (10) Finally, expression of COX-2 and EP4 were
positively correlated with the SLC marker ALDH in human breast cancer
tissues, and associated with poor patient survival. Conclusion/
Significance: EP4 represents a novel therapeutic target to eradicate SLCs
in breast cancer. EP4 antagonists may spare cardiovascular side effects
of COX-2 inhibitors, primarily attributed to cardio protective effects of
PGI2. (Supported by the CBCF, Ontario Chapter and OICR grants to PKL,
TBCRU and CIHR-STP fellowships to MM, CBCF fellowship to EL and a gift of
EP4A, RQ-15986 by RaQualia Pharma).

