Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic identification of germline mutations in
rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma using massively paralleled sequencing


Despite improvement of survival using multimodal chemo- and
immunotherapy, high mortality and morbidity is still substantial for
pediatric patients with metastatic cancers. Recent large-scale sequencing
studies of pediatric tumors including rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and
neuroblastoma (NB) have been focusing on somatic mutations, and revealed
a low somatic mutation rate and surprisingly few recurrently somatic
mutated genes in these childhood tumors. Currently, only a small portion
of pediatric cancer cases can be explained by somatic driver events;
whereas the cause for the majority of these diseases remains unknown.
Because both these two types of tumors are uncommon, here we hypothesize
that infrequent germline mutations (frequency5% in a normal human
population using the 1000 Genomes data. Due to our interest in the
enriched variants, we further required the frequencies of variants in our
rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma patient cohorts are higher than those
in the ESP dataset, a non-cancer control population comprising 6503
individuals. There are 63247 SNVs fulfilled these selection criteria.
Among them, 1589 have been reported in these pediatric cancers or in
other malignancies in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project; and 1178
variants are present in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD). Of these
HGMD variants, 49 have been reported in human diseases and 34 of them are
known disease-causing mutations for human cancers and genetic disorders
including TP53, ALK, CHEK2, and PINK1. Interestingly, the most frequent
germline mutations in these pediatric tumors were rarely found in the
TCGA project which mostly consists of adult cancers. This observation
suggests a very different genetic background of pediatric cancer patients
from that of the adult cancers, and warrants a careful examination of
germline mutations in these cancers. Furthermore, previous studies have
highlighted the importance of expression of variant genes (including
tumor suppressor genes) for identification of driver mutations in
cancers. Therefore we will use 178 transcriptome sequencing experiments
available for these tumors (RMS=84; NB=93) to identify expressed variants
in tumor. Statistical and pathway analyses are currently underway to
determine potential pathological or casual germline mutations associated
with neuroblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma.

