Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of drug-linker hydrophobicity in the
disposition of antibody-drug conjugates


The in vitro potency of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) is generally
proportional to the level of drug loading, with higher drug per antibody
levels producing more potent ADCs. However, this intuitive relationship
often fails to translate in vivo, presumably because plasma clearance of
the ADC also increases with drug loading, resulting in substantially
reduced exposure to highly loaded ADCs (Hamblett, KJ et al, Clin. Cancer
Res. 2004, 10: 7063-7070). We postulated that this accelerated clearance
effect is not purely a function of the number of drugs per antibody, but
also of the intrinsic hydrophobicity of each drug-linker. Collectively,
drug-linker hydrophobicity and number of drugs per antibody determine the
overall hydrophobicity of the ADC. To test this hypothesis, we designed
and prepared a series of drug-linkers within the auristatin class that
varied in hydrophobicity, and used them to produce a corresponding series
of homogeneous 8-loaded ADCs. The pharmacokinetic profiles of these ADCs
were determined and found to correlate well with their relative retention
times by hydrophobic interaction chromatography. We further postulated
that hydrophobicity-driven clearance is likely to be mediated by cells of
the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS). To identify the specific cell
populations responsible for accelerated ADC clearance, we performed an
immunohistochemistry-based biodistribution study which has provided clear
evidence for the cellular sites of hydrophobic ADC clearance which are
not operative on native antibodies or hydrophilic ADCs. Using the
information gained from these studies, we have successfully prepared a
hydrophilic auristatin drug-linker which enables the preparation of ADCs
uniformly loaded with 8 drugs per antibody at defined cysteine sites.
These ADCs evade clearance by the MPS, maintain native antibody
pharmacokinetics, and translate their high in vitro potency into the in
vivo setting.

