Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering multiple chimeric antigen receptors in T cells for the
treatment of multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell neoplasm accounting for
10% of all hematologic malignancies. With advanced treatments, the
average survival has significantly improved. Recent progress in
immunotherapy based on antibody and T cell receptor (TCR) engineering has
shown great potential for treating cancer including MM. We hypothesize
that immune cell engineering that overcomes immune suppression in the BM
may completely eradicate residual cancer cells. To test our hypothesis,
we have developed a streamlined approach to generate lentiviral
constructs with chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) of T cells based on
single chain antibodies that target multiple MM antigens including CD138,
CD269 (mature B cell marker BCMA, or TNFRSF17), CD317 (hm1.24), and CD319
(CS1). To increase safety, we also incorporated a self-destructive,
inducible suicide caspase 9 gene, which is fused with the CAR. Memory CD8
T cells were isolated from BM specimens of MM patients and immortalized
for prolonged in vitro studies. These primary BM T cells were transduced
using lentiviral vectors encoding the MM-targeting CARs, and co-cultured
with MM cell lines to measure killing effect. The MM-specific killing
activity was demonstrated based on annexin V and propidium iodide
staining and flow cytometry analysis for quantitation of cell death. In
transient (24 hours) killing assays, both CD138 and CD 319 CARs displayed
moderate MM killing activities, at 48% and 36%, respectively, when using
a CAR T effector to MM Target (E/T) ratio of 0.5/1. Interestingly, a
synergistic MM killing effect (a five fold increase at an E/T ratio of
1/1) was observed when these two CARs were used in combination. On the
other hand, CD269 and CD317 CAR T cells displayed marked MM killing
activities, approximately 80% for both at an E/T ratio of 0.5/1 in 24
hours. In a long term CAR T/MM co-culture setting at E/T ratios of 0.5/1
and 1/1, we observed near complete MM killing (100%) by all four
MM-targeting CAR T cells in two weeks. The self-destructive function of
the inducible suicide gene in the CAR T cells was also demonstrated in
the long-term co-cultures. Interestingly, upon killing of the CAR T cells
by apoptotic induction, residual MM cells rebounded from the CD319 CAR
T/MM co-culture, but not the other three CAR T/MM co-cultures, suggesting
that rapid and efficient killing of MM cells by CAR T cells is necessary
for complete eradication of MM cells. In summary, all four CARs
demonstrated MM killing activities in short term and long term T cell
co-cultures. Combination of multiple CARs may be necessary for effective
suppression of MM residual disease in vivo and to prevent antigenic
escape phenomenon. Together with the inducible apoptotic gene design,
increased safety and efficiency for the CAR-based immunotherapy may be
attained in future clinical trials.

