Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local tumor irradiation combined with -PDL-1 immune checkpoint
inhibition results in local and systemic anti-tumor responses: Successful
translation of a mouse model to a human case series


Introduction: Tumor irradiation induces innate and adaptive immune
responses which, rarely, lead to tumor regression at distant sites, the
abscopal effect. We have previously demonstrated that immunotherapy
including Toll-like-receptor agonists (CpG) and checkpoint inhibitors
(anti-CTLA4) both preclinically and clinically (NCT00185965 &
NCT01769222) can significantly increase the rate of systemic, abscopal
responses (Kim, Blood 2012 & Brody, JCO 2010). Here we provide the first
report of a preclinical murine model and patient case series following
local radiation and systemic anti-PD-L1 (NCT01375842).Methods:
Preclinical modeling was performed in a two-tumor, syngenic, A20,
lymphoma BALB/c model combining fractionated single tumor radiation and
systemic (i.p.) anti-PD-L1. Patients receiving MPDL3280A, a human mAb
containing an engineered Fc-domain, as part of the phase 1 clinical trial
with mixed responses or asymptomatic progression of disease were eligible
for the addition of local radiation therapy. Murine and human immune
responses including cell phenotype and function, specifically assessing
expression of PD-L1 and production of IFN were determined by standard
flow cytometry and time of flight mass cytometry (CyTOF).Results:
Fractionated radiation delayed tumor growth at the treated site only, and
systemic anti-PD-L1 reduced tumor growth rate at both sites, however
despite prolonged survival all mice died by day 38 following either
monotherapy (radiation or anti-PD-L1). In contrast, combination local
fractionated radiation and systemic anti-PD-L1 flattened tumor growth at
both the irradiated and un-irradiated site, and prolonged survival with
50% survival at day 48 post-tumor inoculation. Modulation of PD-L1
expression post-radiation and tumor-specific augmentation of IFN
secretion correlated with the enhanced anti-tumor activity. Five patients
including four with solid tumors received fractionated, non-definitive
dose radiation with at least stabilization of systemic progression in all
patients and a RECIST partial response at systemic sites in 1 patient,
notably with a synovial sarcoma. Transient, grade 1-2 inflammatory
adverse events (fevers, flu-like symptoms) occurred with no DLTs or
serious immune-related toxicities. Modulation of PD-L1 expression, T cell
phenotype and IFN secretion was observed and updated clinical and immune
response will be presented.Conclusion: We provide the first report of
combination local radiotherapy with anti-PD-L1 demonstrating synergy in a
preclinical model and clinical activity in a limited case series. The
magnitude of the immune response and abscopal response rate in mice and
humans provides proof-of-concept that anti-PD-L1 may be an equally if not
more potent combination immunotherapy with radiation compared to our
experience with CpG and/or anti-CTLA4.

