Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mst2 is required for tumor progression and Yap activity


The survival of patients with head and neck cancer has remained unchanged
for decades [1]. Novel therapeutic approaches are needed. The
transcription co-activator Yap is known to initiate proliferation and
migration programs in response to cytoskeletal cues [2]. As evidence of
the relevance of Yap in cancer increases, the lack of pharmacological
strategies to inhibit it hinders the possibility of clinical testing. The
main Yap regulatory signals in mammals are cytoskeletal integrity and
cell shape [2]. Interestingly, Mst2 regulates microtubule coordination in
parallel to kinesin Eg5 motor activity[3] and actin polymerization
through Rac1 activation [4]. We set out to explore the role of Mst2 in
cancer biology and the influence of its cytoskeletal effects in Yap
activity using silencing and overexpression systems in early passage oral
squamous cell cancer cell lines. In clinically annotated databases, high
Mst2 expression correlated with poor prognosis in lung, breast and head
and neck cancer. Standard in vitro experiments showed that Mst2 was
required and promoted cell migration and invasion. Immunofluorescence
staining quantification revealed that Mst2 was necessary for actin
polymerization, microtubule targeting to the focal adhesions and
microtubule distribution. These effects increased cell height and reduced
cell spreading. In keeping with cytoskeletal and cell shape changes, in
luciferase reporter assays Mst2 was required for Yap activation, and
inhibition of kinesin Eg5 with Monastrol reduced Yap activity in an Mst2
dependent manner. Confocal imaging quantification of 3D organotypic
tumors revealed that Mst2 was required for primary tumor invasion into
human dermis. Consistently, in an orthotopic xenograft model, tumors with
lower Mst2 expression showed a significant reduction in circulating tumor
DNA and lung metastasis formation. Although further preclinical studies
are warranted, our results support the hypothesis that kinesin Eg5
inhibitors may be used to target Yap activity in oral squamous cell
cancers with high Mst2 expression.1. CRUK. CRUK Oral Cancer Statistics.
2009 [cited 2013; Available from:
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-info/cancerstats/types/oral/].2.
Pan, D., The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. Dev Cell,
2010. 19(4): p. 491-505.3. Mardin, B.R., et al., Components of the Hippo
pathway cooperate with Nek2 kinase to regulate centrosome disjunction.
Nat Cell Biol, 2010. 12(12): p. 1166-76.4. Mou, F., et al., The Mst1 and
Mst2 kinases control activation of rho family GTPases and thymic egress
of mature thymocytes. J Exp Med, 2012. 209(4): p. 741-59.

