Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic therapy reduces expression of PECAM-1/CD31 and decreases
peritumoral edema in a mouse model of malignant glioma


Patients with malignant brain tumors have a median survival of
approximately one year following diagnosis, regardless of currently
available treatments which include surgery followed by radiation and
chemotherapy. Improvement in the survival of brain cancer patients
requires the design of new therapeutic modalities that take advantage of
common phenotypes. One such phenotype is the metabolic dysregulation that
is a hallmark of cancer cells. It has therefore been postulated that one
approach to treating brain tumors may be by metabolic alteration such as
that which occurs through the use of the ketogenic diet (KD). The KD is
high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet that induces ketosis and has been
utilized for the non-pharmacologic treatment of refractory epilepsy. We
and others have shown that this diet enhances survival and potentiates
standard therapy in mouse models of malignant gliomas, yet the anti-tumor
mechanisms are not fully understood.It has been previously shown that
caloric restriction, which induces ketosis, reduces microvessel density
in mouse and human brain tumor models, suggesting an anti-angiogenic
effect. We now report that in animals fed KetoCal (KC) (4:1
fat:protein/carbohydrates) ad libitum, peritumoral edema is significantly
reduced early in tumor progression when compared to those fed a standard
rodent diet (SD). Western blot analysis showed a reduction of platelet
endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM1/CD31) in tumors from animals
maintained on KC. These results were supported by immunohistochemical
staining for CD31 which also revealed abnormal vessel structure in the
tumors from animals fed SD but not in those fed KC, suggesting a
normalizing effect by the KC. Furthermore gene expression profiling
demonstrated that KC decreases expression of a group of genes involved in
angiogenesis and vessel structuring including the genes encoding vascular
endothelial growth factor B (VEGFB) and angiopoetin 1 receptor (TEK),
integrin beta 1 (ITGB1), urokinase-type plasminogen activator (PLAU) and
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases 1 (TIMP1). Taken together our data
suggests that KC alters the angiogenic processes involved in malignant
progression of gliomas. A greater understanding of the effects of the
ketogenic diet as an adjuvant therapy will allow for a more rational
approach to its clinical use.

