Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic characterization of zoledronic acid-resistant prostate
cancer cells identified key proteins in cytoskeleton organization and
cancer stem cell markers associated with a very aggressive phenotype


The aminobiphosphonate Zoledronic acid (ZOL) inhibit osteoclast-mediated
bone resorption and it is used to prevent skeletal complications from
bone metastases. Accumulating evidences in both preclinical and clinical
studies indicated that ZOL might also have anticancer activity. We have
recently selected for the first time the ZOL-resistant DU145R80 prostate
cancer (PCa) cell line that demonstrated an antiapoptotic and
proangiogenic phenotype with increased invasive capability and epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT), compared to parental DU145 cells.
Interestingly, we also demonstrated that both the acquired resistance to
ZOL and the aggressive phenotype are mediated by p38-MAPK (Milone et al.
Cell Death Dis. 2013, 4:e641). To further investigate the mechanism of
ZOL-resistance and of the parallel acquisition of an aggressive phenotype
in this novel syngeneic model of PCa, we took advantage of a
two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)/mass
spectrometry (MS) proteomic approach, to investigate differential
expressed proteins between DU145R80 and DU145 cell lines. We found 21
statistically differentially expressed protein spots between the two cell
lines (average volume ratio threshold of 1.4-fold and 95% level of
significance, pThe aminobiphosphonate Zoledronic acid (ZOL) inhibit
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and it is used to prevent skeletal
complications from bone metastases. Accumulating evidences in both
preclinical and clinical studies indicated that ZOL might also have
anticancer activity. We have recently selected for the first time the
ZOL-resistant DU145R80 prostate cancer (PCa) cell line that demonstrated
an antiapoptotic and proangiogenic phenotype with increased invasive
capability and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), compared to
parental DU145 cells. Interestingly, we also demonstrated that both the
acquired resistance to ZOL and the aggressive phenotype are mediated by
p38-MAPK (Milone et al. Cell Death Dis. 2013, 4:e641). To further
investigate the mechanism of ZOL-resistance and of the parallel
acquisition of an aggressive phenotype in this novel syngeneic model of
PCa, we took advantage of a two-dimensional difference gel
electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)/mass spectrometry (MS) proteomic approach, to
investigate differential expressed proteins between DU145R80 and DU145
cell lines. We found 21 statistically differentially expressed protein
spots between the two cell lines (average volume ratio threshold of
1.4-fold and 95% level of significance, p<0.05) and 15 of these were
identified by MS and validated by real-time PCR, 1D or 2D immunoblots.
The identified proteins were involved in cell metabolism, cytoskeleton,
nuclear lamina organization, protein fate and RNA processing, such as
ALDH7A1, ANXA1, Lamin A/C, Filamin A, Lamin B2, PSMA6 and eEF1. Several
of these proteins are related with the acquisition of a cancer stem cells
(CSC) phenotype and indeed we showed in DU145R80 also the overexpression
of additional prostate CSC markers such as Nanog, Oct-4, Snail and
Integrin-aV. Furthermore, in DU145R80 compared to DU145 cells, we
observed the increased presence of numerous podosomes/invadopodia and
membrane bleb protrusions where FLNA clearly co-localize with actin.
Interestingly, by using publicly available genomic data on PCa
(http://www.oncomine.org) we demonstrated statistically significant
higher expression of the genes codifying the identified proteins, in PCa
vs normal tissues. Finally, proteomic results were further processed by
interactome pathway analysis demonstrating a strong relationships between
the identified proteins and additional effectors in both direct/indirect
analysis, including p38-MAPK, and generating a relevant statistically
significant network associated with cancer disease as well as with
cellular movement and organization. Overall we confirmed that
ZOL-resistant PCa cells developed an aggressive phenotype related with
stemness feature and identified novel potential prognostic markers and/or
therapeutic targets for PCa.

