Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictions for recurrence of non-muscle invasive bladder cancers
by circulating miRNAs


Background: Circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) have been extensively
associated with disease conditions, and shown to be involved in
tumorigenesis. In the current study, we aimed to identify miRNAs which
are present specifically in the serum of non-muscle invasive bladder
cancer (NMIBC) patients and correlate these miRNAs with clinical
outcomes. Method: A pilot study was first conducted to profile the
expression of 754 miRNAs using the Taqman microRNA Array and identified
89 miRNAs that can be detected at high levels in more than 30% of
samples. In this study, we applied a two-stage design with discovery
phase of 280 cases followed by the validation phase of 276 cases using
the Fluidigm BioMark System to assess whether these 89 miRNAs were
associated with bladder cancer clinical outcomes. Results: Among 280
cases in the discovery phase, 134 recurrence events were observed.
Further stratification by treatment showed that 147 patients received
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) treatment and 78 patients received
transurethethral resection only (TUR). COX regression on dichotomized
expression of miRNAs revealed that 2 and 6 miRNAs were associated with
recurrence in the BCG group and the TUR group with p-values Background:
Circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) have been extensively associated with
disease conditions, and shown to be involved in tumorigenesis. In the
current study, we aimed to identify miRNAs which are present specifically
in the serum of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) patients and
correlate these miRNAs with clinical outcomes. Method: A pilot study was
first conducted to profile the expression of 754 miRNAs using the Taqman
microRNA Array and identified 89 miRNAs that can be detected at high
levels in more than 30% of samples. In this study, we applied a two-stage
design with discovery phase of 280 cases followed by the validation phase
of 276 cases using the Fluidigm BioMark System to assess whether these 89
miRNAs were associated with bladder cancer clinical outcomes. Results:
Among 280 cases in the discovery phase, 134 recurrence events were
observed. Further stratification by treatment showed that 147 patients
received Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) treatment and 78 patients
received transurethethral resection only (TUR). COX regression on
dichotomized expression of miRNAs revealed that 2 and 6 miRNAs were
associated with recurrence in the BCG group and the TUR group with
p-values <0.05, respectively. The most significant observed association
with recurrence had p-values of 0.008(BCG) and 0.005 (TUR). We
constructed risk scores for recurrence using previous miRNAs identified
by COX regression. Patients with high risk scores had significantly
shorter recurrence-free survival in BCG group (p=0.006, mean survival
time 9.04 and undefined for high risk and low risk scores) but not in TUR
group possibly due to small sample size (p=0.114, mean survival time 4.60
and 14.04). We are in the progress of further verifying associations
between candidate miRNAs and clinical outcomes in an additional 276 NIMBC
samples. Conclusion: Our preliminary results demonstrate the potential of
miRNAs as predictive markers for NMIBC recurrence.

