Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia targeting fluorescent nanobodies for optical molecular
imaging of preinvasive breast cancer


Introduction:Optical molecular imaging is a novel strategy in diagnosis
and therapy of breast cancer. Essential for succesful implementation of
this technology is a high tumor-to-normal tissue ratio (TNR), which
requires tumor-specific probes/tracers. However, most tumor markers are
expressed in a minority of tumors only. Therefore, we have developed a
novel probe binding to the membrane-bound protein carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX), which is commonly expressed in solid tumors as a result of
hypoxic conditions. The probe is based on nanobodies (15 kDa, variable
domains obtained from heavy-chain antibodies present in animals from the
Camelidae family), that has a faster tumor uptake and body clearance than
conventional (monoclonal) antibodies, and can be applied for molecular
imaging of pre-invasive breast cancer.Methods:High affinity CAIX-specific
nanobodies were selected using a modified phage display technology and
site-directed conjugated to IRDye800CW. Mice bearing orthotopically
transplanted MCF10DCIS (DCIS) and CAIX-overexpressing MCF10DCIS
(DCIS+CAIX) xenografts were injected with fluorescent CAIX-specific
nanobody (B9-IR), or non-specific control nanobody (R2-IR) and imaged up
to 48 hours non-invasively. Tumors were resected under image-guidance.
Nanobody uptake was assessed in tissue sections and quantified using a
biodistribution assay.Results:A highly specific nanobody for CAIX was
obtained. In DCIS+CAIX xenografts, mean TNR was 4.30.6 (8 mice) already
two hours after injection. In DCIS tumors, mean TNR was 1.80.1 (8 mice),
which was higher than TNR obtained after injection with R2-IR (1.40.2, 4
mice). After three hours, probe accumulation was sufficient to allow
imag-guided tumor resection. Biodistribution studies showed that B9-IR
uptake was 4.60.8% of injected dose per gram in DCIS tumor tissue
(%I.D./g), while 2.00.2 %I.D./g was found with R2-IR. Upon fluorescence
imaging of tissue sections, B9-IR was present in perinecrotic areas,
while R2-IR showed no accumulation in these regions.Conclusion:We have
developed a novel IRDye800CW-labeled anti-CAIX-nanobody that can be used
for rapid optical molecular imaging of (pre-)invasive breast cancer
before and during surgery. Furthermore, the stability of the conjugate
allowed for molecular fluorescence pathology, which might results in
better contrast than conventional chromagen based immunohistochemistry at
the pathology department.Acknowledgement:This research was supported by
the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (MAMMOTH).

