Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide induces cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and
MAPKinase signaling cascade in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells


Arsenic trioxide (ATO) has recently been successfully used in the
treatment of all-trans retinoic acid resistant relapsing acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients both alone or combination with
other drugs. Its use as induction and consolidation therapy has resulted
in complete remission rate of both de novo and relapsed APL patients.
However, the detailed molecular mechanisms of its therapeutic action are
poorly known. We have used human leukemia (HL-60) cells as a model to
elucidate the anti-cancer properties of arsenic trioxide. We hypothesized
that ATO arrests cell cycle progression of HL-60 cells at G1 phase and
leading to cell death by intrinsic pathway of apoptotic signaling. To
test the hypothesis, we used western blotting, confocal imaging and
spectrofluoremetric techniques to identify detailed cellular and
molecular mechanisms of ATO action in HL-60 cells. We found that the
expression levels of pro-apoptotic molecules (Bax) and cytochrome C were
up-regulated, while that of anti-apoptotic Bcl2 protein was
down-regulated at 4 and 6mg/mL ATO doses significantly. We also found
that ATO stimulates signaling molecules like P38, JNK in a dose dependent
manner in HL-60 cells. Oxidative stress and related imbalance of pro- and
anti-apoptotic molecules lead to change of mitochondrial membrane
potential and opening of the mitochondrial membrane transition pores. Our
confocal imaging data shows a clear translocation of Bax from cytosol to
mitochondria and of cytochrome c from mitochondria to cytosol in
ATO-treated cells. A dose-dependent decrease/drop-down in mitochondrial
membrane potential was also observed in ATO-treated cells, as evidenced
by JC-1 leveling and spectrofluoremetric potential recording. On the
basis of these findings, we conclude that mitochondrial pathway of
apoptosis plays a key role in ATO pharmacology and should be further
assessed as a drug target in APL chemotherapy.

