Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal killing of RAD54B-deficient colorectal cancer
cells by targeting SOD1


Synthetic lethality is a rare genetic interaction that results when two
independently viable mutations occur within the same organism/cell and
results in cell death. Synthetic lethality is thus a rational approach to
identify drug targets that can specifically kill cancer cells harboring
somatic mutations in specific genes. RAD54B encodes a protein involved in
homologous recombination repair whose expression is normally required to
maintain genome integrity. RAD54B is somatically altered in 4% of the
colorectal cancers and numerous other tumor types including breast,
prostate and lung. Accordingly, a synthetic lethal approach designed to
uncover novel drug targets that selectively exploit and kill cancer cells
harboring defects in RAD54B is highly warranted.In budding yeast, Rad54B
is synthetic lethal with Superoxide dismutase 1 (Sod1). We hypothesized
that silencing or targeting SOD1 would result in specific killing of
RAD54B-deficient cells in a human cancer context. Using a combination of
cross-species gene approaches, RNAi and high-content imaging we
identified and validated a synthetic lethal interaction between RAD54B
and SOD1 in colorectal cancer cells. We demonstrated that silencing SOD1
resulted in specific synthetic lethal killing of RAD54B-deficient
colorectal cancer cells while RAD54B-proficient colorectal cancer cells
remained viable. Additionally, chemical compounds (e.g. ATTM and 2ME2)
that induce reactive oxygen species phenocopied the synthetic lethal
interactions observed using RNAi-based approaches. In fact,
RAD54B-deficient cells were >10-fold more sensitive to these chemicals
when compared to RAD54B-proficient cells. SOD1 is an enzyme responsible
for maintaining the levels of superoxide radicals within tolerable limits
in cells. We reasoned that targeting SOD1 would lead to excessive
superoxide anions, leading to DNA double-strand break and render
RAD54B-deficient cells amenable to synthetic lethal killing. To determine
if defects in DNA double-strand break repair occurred in these cells,
semi-quantitative imaging microscopy was performed and we confirmed the
persistence of two surrogate markers of DNA damage, namely -H2A.X and
53BP1, following treatment with either ATTM or 2ME2 relative to controls.
Finally, we show that apoptosis as reflected by an increase in cleaved
Caspase 3, has a key role in the synthetic lethal killing of the
RAD54B-deficient cells relative to controls.Together these results
indicate that RAD54B and SOD1 are synthetic lethal interactors, and
further identify SOD1 as a novel candidate therapeutic target. The
pharmacological targeting of SOD1 has implications beyond the colorectal
cancer context employed above as RAD54B is altered in many tumor types.

