Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sipuleucel-T-induced immune response against secondary cancer
antigens is associated with improved overall survival


Introduction and Objective: Tumor cell death in response to immunotherapy
may lead to the release of secondary (non-targeted) cancer antigens that
prime subsequent immune responses (antigen spread) 1. This may contribute
to tumor control and reveal post-treatment biomarkers of clinical
outcome. Sipuleucel-T, an immunotherapy targeted towards the
prostate-specific antigen, prostatic acid phosphatase, is approved in the
US and EU for treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic,
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. We evaluated: (i)
antigen spread after sipuleucel-T treatment, based on IgG antibody
responses against secondary cancer antigens, and (ii) association of such
IgG responses with overall survival (OS).Methods: ProtoArray, an unbiased
protein microarray platform, was used to characterize the spectrum of
serum IgG responses after treatment. IgG responses against secondary
antigens were confirmed using an independent platform, Luminex, xMAP.
Pre- and post- treatment sera from two clinical trials of sipuleucel-T
were analyzed: IMPACT 2 (double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3,
NCT00065442) and ProACT (open-label, phase 2, NCT00715078). The
correlations between IgG responses ( 2 fold elevation post-treatment) and
OS were assessed in IMPACT using a Cox regression model, adjusted for
baseline PSA, LDH, bone lesions, Gleason score, and prior bisphosphonate
use.Results: Serum IgG responses (p0.01). In the sipuleucel-T arm of
IMPACT (N=140), an IgG response to PSA 2 weeks after treatment was
positively correlated with increased OS, compared to patients with no IgG
response to PSA (Cox p0.01). In the sipuleucel-T arm of IMPACT (N=140),
an IgG response to PSA 2 weeks after treatment was positively correlated
with increased OS, compared to patients with no IgG response to PSA (Cox
p<0.01, HR0.41 [95% CI=0.22-0.78]). Other IgG responses (such as those
against E-Ras and hK2) at 2 or 10 weeks after treatment, also showed
trends towards improved OS.Conclusions: Sipuleucel-T elicited IgG
responses against multiple cancer antigens. Sipuleucel-T- induced IgG
response against PSA was positively correlated with improved OS. These
data enhance our understanding of sipuleucel-T's mechanism of action, and
may help to identify pharmacodynamic biomarkers of clinical outcome. The
methods and results presented here may also help in the characterization
of antigen spread and pharmacodynamic biomarkers after treatment with
other cancer immunotherapies.1. Ribas A, et al. Trends Immunol. 24:58-61
(2003)2. Kantoff PW, et al. N Engl J Med. 363:411-22 (2010)

