Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of molecular dynamics simulations to rationalise the DNA
sequence-selectivity of pyrrolobenzodiazepine-MPB conjugates


We have previously reported the identification of a GC-interactive
non-covalent-binding moiety, a biaryl
4-(1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-3-yl)benzenamine (MPB) motif, through a combined
approach involving rational library design and a Fluorescent
Intercalation Displacement (FID) assay. This MPB motif, when tethered to
a covalently-binding pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) moiety via either an
imidazole or pyrrole linkage to form PBD-Imidazole-MPB or PBD-Pyrrole-MPB
structures, results in cytotoxicity in the low picomolar range in some
tumour cell lines. To assess the DNA-binding affinity and sequence
selectivity of PBD-Imidazole-MPB (TSG-1301) and PBD-Pyrrole-MPB
(TSG-1302), we have previously reported the use of a FRET-based DNA
melting assay based on a duel-labelled hairpin-forming oligonucleotide
containing only one PBD binding site. Although having similar
cytotoxicities, the sequence selectivity of TSG-1301 and TSG-1302 differ
markedly. Melting temperatures (Tm) showed that TSG-1301 stabilised both
AT- and GC-rich sequences of DNA to an equal extent (i.e., Tm of 6C for
each), with TSG-1302 selectively stabilising AT-rich sequences with an
approximately 3.5-fold selectivity (i.e., Tm of 5C for AT-rich sequences
and 1.4C for GC-rich). Therefore, Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations
were undertaken to try to understand these differences in sequence
selectivity.Simulations were first conducted in implicit solvent for
25ns, and confirmed using extensive explicit solvent simulations using
the AMBER software. The results clearly demonstrate the importance of the
imidazole ring nitrogen of TSG-1301 in inducing GC-selective interactions
through hydrogen bonding. Both the distance between the imidazole ring
nitrogen and the terminal ester (an average of 12 over the duration of
simulation), and the shape of the molecule, were found to be crucial for
the production of GC interactions, with the Im-MPB moiety ideally
spanning side-by-side guanine residues. The AT-selectivity of TSG-1302
could be rationalised using similar techniques, with the Py-MPB moiety
contributing to van der Waals interactions between the ligand and AT-rich
DNA, due to the MPB moiety presenting a strongly van der
Waals-interactive face to the minor-groove. These results were further
exemplified using free energy of binding calculations from implicit
solvent simulations which provided a difference of -2kcal/mol in favour
of the interaction of TSG-1302 with AT-rich compared to GC-rich
sequences. The results of this MD study are consistent with observations
from our previously reported FRET studies, and the simulations have
provided valuable insights into the mode of DNA-interaction of minor
groove-binding ligands of this type. This information can be used for the
rational design of further generations of agents with improved DNA
sequence-selectivity.

