Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIC-1: A gene silenced in cancer stem cells of glioma


Background : According to the cancer stem cell hypothesis, tumors contain
and are driven by a minority cellular population which has retained or
re-established key stem-cell properties. Studies have demonstrated
frequent hypermethylation of the HIC-1 locus in human cancers and recent
work has demonstrated hypermethylation of HIC-1 in ES cells. Targeted
methylation of HIC-1 has been shown to transform mesenchymal stem cells
into cancer stem/initiating cells. However, so far no study has
established the epigenetic role/status of HIC-1 in cancer stem
cells.Methods and Results: U87MG, a glioblastoma cell line, showed a
consistent decrease of HIC-1 expression in gliomaspheres obtained in Stem
cell media compared to same tumor cells grown in normal media. To examine
for the role of HIC-1 in regulating stemness (Sox-2, Oct-4, Nanog), we
established a U87 cell line with dominant negative p53 (dn-U87)
expressing low HIC-1 levels. Increase in expression of stemness markers
was observed in dn-U87 compared to wt-U87.Moreover,effect of hypoxia in
increasing stemness was more pronounced in the dn-U87 cell line.Knockdown
of HIC-1 in U87MG grown in normal or stem cell media exhibited an
increase in expression of stemness markers (Sox2, Oct4, Nanog and Nestin)
under both conditions compared to Mock and control, further confirming
role of HIC-1 in modulating stemness expression . Also, gliomaspheres
were obtained much earlier (i.e. on Day 4) in HIC-1 knockdown samples
grown in stem cell media compared to both Mock and Control (Day7).To look
for the difference in epigenetic signature of HIC-1 gene between
gliomaspheres and tumor cells, we checked for changes in methylation and
chromatin accessibility in the two cell populations. MNAse assay
ascertained heterochromatization of the HIC-1 promoter in gliomaspheres
compared to normal U87 cells, while bisulfite sequencing or High
Resolution Melt PCR could not detect any change in methylation pattern of
the HIC-1 promoter in the two cell populations studied.Interpretation and
Conclusion: Down-regulation of HIC-1, by i) epigenetic changes or ii)
knockdown by siRNA or iii) using mutant p53 cell line, may be responsible
for contributing to stem cell-like properties to tumor cells. Since HIC-1
is a tumor suppressor gene silenced in many cancers as a result of
promoter hypermethylation, it could by itself be a new target for
epigenetic therapy. Moreover, increase in stemness on knockdown of HIC-1
could provide new insights into the behavior of cancer-initiating stem
cells.

