Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of allosteric regulators of the dimerization domains
of the plasminogen-related growth factor family for the treatment of
pancreatic cancer


The plasminogen-related family of growth factors includes the hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) and macrophage stimulating protein (MSP), both of
which normally mediate a variety of cellular behaviors including
proliferation, survival, and migration. A major contributor to the
formation and persistence of various cancers is the dysregulation of
these growth factor systems. Overexpression of the HGF receptor, c-Met,
is common in many cancers including pancreatic cancer, and is associated
with poor prognosis. Dysregulation of this system often leads to
tumorigenesis and induction of various malignant phenotypes including
increased proliferation, survival, migration, and invasion. In order to
activate c-Met, HGF must first undergo an activation step in which it
forms an HGF homodimer. Small molecule antagonists with homology to a
putative hinge region within the HGF sequence have been developed that
bind to HGF and allosterically block dimerization, therefore inhibiting
c-Met signaling. Norleual [Nle-Tyr-Ile--(CH2-NH2)3-4-His-Pro-Phe] has
previously been shown to inhibit HGF dimerization and HGF-dependent c-Met
activation. We have assessed the ability of Norleual to block HGF
dimerization and activation of c-Met within pancreatic cancer cells.
Similar to the HGF/c-Met system, over-activation of the closely related
MSP/Ron (MSP receptor) growth factor system has been identified as a
critical contributor to pancreatic cancer progression. Due to overall
high sequence homology between HGF and MSP, including the putative hinge
region, we have hypothesized that MSP must also dimerize in order to
efficiently activate the Ron receptor, and that this activation step can
be targeted by hinge region homologs. Our results indicate that MSP
naturally forms dimers and incubation with Norleual and similar hinge
region antagonists inhibits dimerization. Further, we have demonstrated
that MSP dimerization may be biologically significant and inhibition of
dimerization suppresses MSP-dependent cell signaling and cell behaviors.
The ultimate goal of this work is to develop a dual inhibitor capable of
suppressing both the HGF and MSP growth factor systems, and further
assess the therapeutic potential of these inhibitors for treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

