Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of molecular markers of pathological vascular
subtypes with differential sensitivity to therapies targeting the VEGF
pathway


Therapeutic targeting of the VEGF pathway has not matched the efficacy
suggested by preclinical tumor models. To date, the limitations of this
form of therapy stem either from inherent or acquired resistance of the
tumor vasculature to the reduction of VEGF signaling. Previous studies
have described morphological phenotypes of different blood vessel types
in human and mouse tumors. Recapitulation of these vascular phenotypes
with a surrogate Ad-VEGFA164 model has shown differential sensitivity of
these vascular subclasses to inhibitors of the VEGF pathway. The goal of
the current study was to identify molecular markers for the various
subtypes of pathological vessels and to assess whether similar molecular
signatures are found in blood vessels in mouse tumor models and human
disease. Using the Ad-VEGF-A164 flank model, microarray analysis was
performed to identify molecular markers at each time-point, representing
distinct stages of vessel development and maturation. We identified
unique gene signatures at the various time-points and confirmed
differential expression of the genes by qRT-PCR and/or
immunohistochemistry. We found that vascular markers such as CD31, Ang2,
and Tie1 were pan-endothelial markers at all time-points. However, other
markers such as CD34, MECA-32, vWF, SMA, Tie2, CD105, and AQP1 were
expressed on subclasses of endothelial cells. Expression of the molecular
markers in tumors models revealed different subclasses of tumor vessels
in patient-derived xenografts which were sensitive or resistant to
anti-VEGF-A or anti-VEGFR-2 treatment. These vascular subtypes were also
found in tissues from human breast and gastric cancers. Together these
results indicate that multiple molecular markers can be used to identify
unique pathological subclasses of tumor vessels. Some of these vascular
subtypes may be insensitive to inhibitors targeting the VEGF pathways and
their signatures may be useful biomarkers to predict vascular sensitivity
to anti-angiogenic therapy.

