Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent, non-lytic, real-time cell viability assay


Cell-based assay development for cancer drug discovery continues to
advance toward more innovative methods that provide efficient workflow
and meaningful data. Rapid, sensitive techniques that are non-lytic and
therefore facilitate multiplexing with a wide range of assays allow more
data to be gained per well and conserve precious samples. Real time
measurement of cell viability also allows numerous measurements over time
without the need for separate plates at each time point. Real time
measurements allow unique analyses including interrogation of the timing
of drug killing, identification of static vs toxic drug effects, and
determination of the ideal time to multiplex an additional assay. Cancer
drug discovery would benefit from novel assay technologies that allow
real time measurements with multiplexing capability.We have developed a
homogeneous, non-lytic, and bioluminescent method to analyze cell
viability in real time through measurement of the reducing potential of
the cell. The signal correlates with the number of viable cells making it
well-suited for cytotoxicity studies. This Real Time Cell Viability Assay
utilizes the NanoLuc luciferase enzyme, which is 100-fold brighter than
either firefly (Photinus pyralis) or Renilla reniformis luciferase, and
the novel substrate, furimazine. Together these reagents produce high
intensity luminescence through an ATP-independent reaction.The assay can
be performed in two formats, live cell endpoint or continuous read. The
live cell endpoint method is sensitive, rapid, and enables extensive
multiplexing opportunities due to the non-lytic measurement and signal
depletion upon cell lysis. When the assay is set up in the continuous
read format, the cell viability reagents can be added at the same time as
cell plating, drug dosing, or at whatever point in the assay the
researcher would like to start obtaining viability readings. The
luminescent signal can be continually monitored from the same wells over
an extended period of time to analyze cell viability in real time.This
real time cell viability assay enables non-lytic cell viability
measurements, extensive multiplexing options including both fluorescent
and luminescent assays with no special filter requirements,
straightforward normalization studies, conservation of precious samples
and reagents, and a sensitive, real time measurement of cell viability.

