Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reptin as a tumor-associated antigen of epithelial ovarian cancer


Background:Reptin is also known as RuvBl2, Tip48, TIP49b, ECP51 and
CGI-46, is a member of AAA+ (ATPases associated with diverse cellular
activities) superfamily. Reptin is associated with cell viability and
development of S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, X. laevis, or D. rerio has
a lot of functions including transcriptional regulation, DNA damage
repair and telomerase activity.Self-reactive IgG autoantibodies are
present on human sera.Each self-reactive IgG autoantibody derived from
pre- and post-treatment of ovarian cancer patients is competitively
combined with cancer tissue gotten during the operation, self-reactive
IgG autoantibodies bound to tumor antigens. As a result, self-reactive
IgG autoantibodies may be decreased after treatment. In this study, we
have identified and investigated the function of Reptin as an available
therapeutic biomarker for ovarian cancer using difference of
self-reactive IgG autoantibody amounts.Method:We carried out the
two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis analysis of
immunoprecipitated tumor antigens (2D-DITA) to compare with expression
level of autoantibodies in pre- and post-treatment sera of 14 ovarian
cancer patients. Autoantibody differentiated between pre- and
post-treatment sera was identified by MALDI-TOF.We performed qRT-PCR with
8 human ovarian surface epitheliums (HOSEs) and 14 ovarian cancer cell
lines for validation studies. Reptin was also detected in other ovarian
cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We constructed SKOV-3 cell
line for overexpression Reptin using lentiviral system. For investigating
function of Reptin, we performed proliferation, wound healing, and
invasion assay.Results:We identified Reptin as a tumor-associated antigen
of epithelial ovarian cancer. Relative mRNA level of Reptin showed higher
levels in ovarian cancer cell lines than in HOSEs. Reptin protein levels
were significantly upregulated in ovarian cancer tissues than normal,
benign, and borderline ovarian tumors. In SKOV-3 cells, overexpression of
Reptin induced inhibition of cell proliferation (PBackground:Reptin is
also known as RuvBl2, Tip48, TIP49b, ECP51 and CGI-46, is a member of
AAA+ (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities) superfamily.
Reptin is associated with cell viability and development of S.
cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, X. laevis, or D. rerio has a lot of
functions including transcriptional regulation, DNA damage repair and
telomerase activity.Self-reactive IgG autoantibodies are present on human
sera.Each self-reactive IgG autoantibody derived from pre- and
post-treatment of ovarian cancer patients is competitively combined with
cancer tissue gotten during the operation, self-reactive IgG
autoantibodies bound to tumor antigens. As a result, self-reactive IgG
autoantibodies may be decreased after treatment. In this study, we have
identified and investigated the function of Reptin as an available
therapeutic biomarker for ovarian cancer using difference of
self-reactive IgG autoantibody amounts.Method:We carried out the
two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis analysis of
immunoprecipitated tumor antigens (2D-DITA) to compare with expression
level of autoantibodies in pre- and post-treatment sera of 14 ovarian
cancer patients. Autoantibody differentiated between pre- and
post-treatment sera was identified by MALDI-TOF.We performed qRT-PCR with
8 human ovarian surface epitheliums (HOSEs) and 14 ovarian cancer cell
lines for validation studies. Reptin was also detected in other ovarian
cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We constructed SKOV-3 cell
line for overexpression Reptin using lentiviral system. For investigating
function of Reptin, we performed proliferation, wound healing, and
invasion assay.Results:We identified Reptin as a tumor-associated antigen
of epithelial ovarian cancer. Relative mRNA level of Reptin showed higher
levels in ovarian cancer cell lines than in HOSEs. Reptin protein levels
were significantly upregulated in ovarian cancer tissues than normal,
benign, and borderline ovarian tumors. In SKOV-3 cells, overexpression of
Reptin induced inhibition of cell proliferation (P<0.0001), migration and
invasion (PBackground:Reptin is also known as RuvBl2, Tip48, TIP49b,
ECP51 and CGI-46, is a member of AAA+ (ATPases associated with diverse
cellular activities) superfamily. Reptin is associated with cell
viability and development of S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, X. laevis,
or D. rerio has a lot of functions including transcriptional regulation,
DNA damage repair and telomerase activity.Self-reactive IgG
autoantibodies are present on human sera.Each self-reactive IgG
autoantibody derived from pre- and post-treatment of ovarian cancer
patients is competitively combined with cancer tissue gotten during the
operation, self-reactive IgG autoantibodies bound to tumor antigens. As a
result, self-reactive IgG autoantibodies may be decreased after
treatment. In this study, we have identified and investigated the
function of Reptin as an available therapeutic biomarker for ovarian
cancer using difference of self-reactive IgG autoantibody
amounts.Method:We carried out the two-dimensional differential gel
electrophoresis analysis of immunoprecipitated tumor antigens (2D-DITA)
to compare with expression level of autoantibodies in pre- and
post-treatment sera of 14 ovarian cancer patients. Autoantibody
differentiated between pre- and post-treatment sera was identified by
MALDI-TOF.We performed qRT-PCR with 8 human ovarian surface epitheliums
(HOSEs) and 14 ovarian cancer cell lines for validation studies. Reptin
was also detected in other ovarian cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). We constructed SKOV-3 cell line for overexpression Reptin using
lentiviral system. For investigating function of Reptin, we performed
proliferation, wound healing, and invasion assay.Results:We identified
Reptin as a tumor-associated antigen of epithelial ovarian cancer.
Relative mRNA level of Reptin showed higher levels in ovarian cancer cell
lines than in HOSEs. Reptin protein levels were significantly upregulated
in ovarian cancer tissues than normal, benign, and borderline ovarian
tumors. In SKOV-3 cells, overexpression of Reptin induced inhibition of
cell proliferation (P<0.0001), migration and invasion
(P<0.0001).Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that Reptin is a tumor
-associated antigen of ovarian cancer, i.e. tumor suppressor.

