Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent methods for investigating metabolic pathways


Cancer cells are dependent on metabolic pathways that have been altered
to support unique requirements for cancer cell growth and survival. The
central role of these pathways makes them attractive targets for new
treatment approaches. Rapid and sensitive assays, amenable to
high-throughput screening, are needed to study the enzymes, metabolites
and cofactors involved in cancer cell metabolic pathways. We developed a
bioluminescent technology to address these needs and monitor changes in
the fundamental metabolic co-factors nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides
and key metabolites such as lactate.The bioluminescent method uses a
novel proluciferin substrate for the enzyme diaphorase. Luciferin is
produced in the presence of NAD(P)H, resulting in a luciferase-generated
light signal proportional to the starting NAD(P)H concentration. This is
a versatile technology for measuring dinucleotide concentrations, enzyme
activity and also metabolite levels. When lactate dehydrogenase is
included in the reaction, the cellular metabolite lactate, an indicator
of glycolytic rate, can be measured. NAD, NADP, NADH and NADPH can be
measured in enzyme reactions or in biological samples, such as cells and
tissues, with the use of NAD- and NADP-specific cycling enzymes.Total
NAD+NADH or NADP+NADPH levels in cultured cells were rapidly monitored
using a one-reagent addition, in-well plate protocol without the need for
cell processing. Additionally, the levels of individual dinucleotides and
their ratios were determined from cell and tissue samples using a
streamlined in-well acid and base-treatment protocol. The effects of
small molecules on cellular dinucleotide levels can be quickly assessed,
as demonstrated with FK866, an inhibitor of NAD biosynthesis.Advantages
of the bioluminescent approach over other detection methods include
higher sensitivity (LOD 50 nM), larger maximum signal windows (S/B > 100)
and compatibility with automated, high-throughput protocols (Z' > 0.8).
By providing these features, the bioluminescent assays should be useful
tools for facilitating the study of cancer cell metabolic pathways and
the development of therapeutics that target these pathways.

