Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting estrogen-related receptor alpha using pyrrole-imidazole
polyamide


Estrogen-related receptor (ERR), an orphan nuclear receptor, is a
prominent regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and function. We
previously showed that liver-specific PTEN deletion and the subsequent
activation of PI3K/AKT pathway lead to tumorigenesis. Here we show that
Pten-null hepatocytes established from Pten-null mice exhibit
dramatically increased ERR expression, accompanied by elevated
mitochondrial mass, cellular oxygen consumption and reactive oxygen
species production. Silencing ERR by siRNA in Pten-null hepatocytes not
only suppresses mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration but also
attenuates hepatocytes' proliferation and colony-forming potential.
Cohort analyses of clinical datasets from liver tissues revealed a
negative correlation between expressions of PTEN and ERR in patients with
liver cancer. Therefore, targeting ERR might provide therapeutic
implication for treating tumors bearing abnormal PTEN-ERR signaling. ERR
exerts transcriptional activity towards its target genes via binding to
consensus DNA sequences named estrogen-related receptor response elements
(ERRE). The DNA-binding activity of ERR could be modulated by polyamides,
a class of synthetic amino acid oligomers capable of binding to DNA minor
groove with sequence specificity. By designing and employing polyamide
that specifically targets ERRE in Pten-null hepatocytes, we found the
mRNA levels of two ERR target genes, cytochrome c (cyt c) and ATP
synthase (ATP5b), are reduced. Biochemical gel-shift assay showed the
binding between ERR and ERRE is significantly diminished by polyamides in
vitro. Moreover, polyamide treatment in hepatocytes reduced mitochondrial
respiration and colony-forming ability. In conclusion, our findings show
that ERR is significantly induced via PTEN-AKT signaling pathway and in
turn activates mitochondrial bioenergetics, which likely provides growth
and survival advantages. The crucial role in mitochondrial metabolism and
the association with PTEN signaling make ERR a useful target for cancer
therapy. Synthetic polyamide that disrupts transcription factor-DNA
interaction can be utilized to modulate ERR's activity, highlighting its
potential as a future therapeutic target.

