Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel target for monoclonal antibody therapy of
breast and ovary cancers


In our recent research activities, we identified a panel of novel
candidate markers for prevalent cancers by a systematic
immune-histochemical screening with a large collection of polyclonal
antibodies (approximately 1600) raised against membrane-associated and
secreted human proteins currently marginally characterized. Of utmost
interest were those proteins over-expressed detected in one or more
tumors showing surface exposure on cancer cells. Among them, here we
describe the molecular characterization of a novel surface-associated
protein (EXN36) belonging to the lectin-binding protein family for which
very little is presently known. We found that the protein is mainly
over-expressed in breast and ovary cancers (frequency of approximately
30-40% of tested cases, based on analysis of 50 patients) and it is
involved in cell proliferation, migration and invasiveness, as
demonstrated by gene silencing. With the intent of exploiting EXN36 as
therapeutic target for monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy, highly specific
murine mAbs were generated and proved to recognize the protein on the
surface of selected breast and ovary cell lines. Of particular interest
are two mAbs, which, upon binding, are efficiently internalized by breast
and ovary cancer cells. These two mAbs influence the viability of breast
and ovary cells in vitro. One of them shows antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro in breast cancer cells. An analysis
of their biodistribution in normal human tissues showed that these mAbs
have limited cytoplasmic reactivity in some tissues. Overall, the
functional properties of the anti-EXN36 mAbs make them amenable for the
generation of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs). Moreover, they could be
exploited for immune-nanoparticles targeted delivery systems. In vivo
efficacy in breast and ovary xenograft cancer models are ongoing to
evaluate their therapeutic activity either as naked antibodies or ADCs.
Overall, data indicate that EXN36 and the specific mAbs represent
innovative and promising tools for a targeted mAb therapy of breast and
colon cancer, either alone or in combinatorial therapeutic strategies.

