Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Keeping glioblastoma (GBM)in check by targeting the
CHK1-STAT3-CIP2A axis


Checkpoint kinase1 (CHK1) is a DNA damage kinase, which has been observed
to be constitutively active in human cancers. Unfortunately a number of
new generation CHK1 inhibitors, currently in clinical trials, have shown
deleterious effects on normal cells, thus limiting their clinical
utility. Therefore, identification and targeting of cancer specific
effectors of CHK1 signaling has emerged as an attractive therapeutic
alternative.Analysis of the REMBRANDT and TCGA datasets revealed a strong
positive correlation for CHK1 and CIP2A expression in 422/522 and 356/454
glioma patients respectively. By contrast, there was negligible
correlation observed in normal samples. Additionally, high mRNA
expression of both CHK1 and CIP2A was associated with reduced overall
survival in glioma patients and marked a more aggressive form of the
disease. Notably, CIP2A amplification found in 14.72% cases in the
Rembrandt study was associated with worse overall survival in GBM
patients. Mechanistically, we identify STAT3 as a transcriptional
mediator for CHK-dependent CIP2A expression in GBM cells. We demonstrate
that CHK1 positively regulates CIP2A transcription by promoting
phosphorylation of STAT3 at Tyrosine 705 both in vitro and in vivo.
Further, depletion of STAT3 by siRNA or chemical inhibitors resulted in
decreased CIP2A expression in GBM cells. Functionally, both CHK1 and
CIP2A promoted viability, clonogenicity and anchorage-independent growth
of GBM cells. Importantly, inhibition of cancer cell viability and
clonogenicity by Chk1 inhibition can be partially rescued by exogenous
overexpression of CIP2A. Higher CIP2A, p-S345-CHK1 and p-Ty705-STAT3
levels were observed in de novo and patient-derived GBM, and U251MG cells
relative to levels in normal human astrocytes (NHA). Analogously, CHK1
and CIP2A mRNA expression is increased 10 to 15 fold in genetically
engineered mouse(GEM) models of human GBM (Pdgf-Cre-driven Ptenf/f and
Pdgf-Cre-driven Ptenf/f;/p53f/f double mutant mice compared with
wild-type mice). Finally, using xenograft mouse models we show that both
PF477736 (a small molecule inhibitor of CHK1) and CIP2A depletion
inhibits tumor growth.These results highlight CHK1 and CIP2A expression
as potential diagnostic and prognostic markers in human GBMs. Further,
these findings identify CIP2A as a cancer specific therapeutic target
downstream of constitutively active CHK1 and STAT3 signaling in GBM.
Together, these data serves as a platform for using CIP2A expression in
GBM, to either directly target CIP2A or to stratify patients for CHK1
and/or STAT3 inhibition.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

