Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is loss of MGMT a therapeutic target in lung cancer


Background: MGMT is a DNA repair protein which removes alkylating DNA
adducts from the O6 position of guanine. Expression of MGMT is often
silenced by promoter methylation in human cancers. MGMT methylation is a
predictive marker for prolonged survival in glioblastoma patients treated
with an alkylating agent, temozolomide. As MGMT methylation has been
found in lung cancers, there is an increasing interest on the clinical
utility of temozomolide in the treatment of human cancers. However, it is
essential to use appropriate quantitative or semi-quantitative method
methods to definitively establish the methylation status of the
tumour.Methods: We critically assessed MGMT methylation status in 6 lung
cancer cell lines and 56 lung tumours using three different
methodologies. We first assessed the MGMT methylation pattern using
methylation sensitive - high resolution melting (MS-HRM). The methylation
status at each CpG dinucleotide was assessed bisulfite pyrosequencing of
methylated clones. The level of MGMT methylation was quantified using
quantitative methylation specific PCR.Results: MGMT methylation was found
in 3 lung cancer cell lines by MS-HRM. The melting profiles of all
methylated samples were indicative of heterogeneous methylation pattern
by melting curve analysis. To examine the methylation status at each CpG
sites of individual template, two MGMT methylated lung cell lines (H1666
and H69) were further tested by limiting dilution analysis and bisulfite
pyrosequencing. The number and site of methylated CpG dinucleotides
greatly varied in each template, confirming the heterogeneous methylation
pattern in both cell lines. In 56 lung tumours, heterogeneous MGMT
methylation was detected in seven samples (13%) by MS-HRM. The level of
MGMT methylation was then estimated. 17 lung tumours, including the 7
MS-HRM positives and 10 additional tumours, were positive. However, the
methylated level in all of the methylated samples was low, ranging from
below 1% (12 samples) and up to 12%.Conclusions: The level of MGMT
promoter in lung cancer is difficult to estimate. Ideally clonal analysis
should be used to estimate the proportion of methylated alleles.
Alternatively, methylation profiling using MS-HRM followed by
pyrosequencing can be used to identify tumours showing significant levels
of methylation. If MGMT methylation is found only in a small proportion
of tumour cells, it is unlikely to be a useful target for therapy.
Overcalling of MGMT methylated tumours may provide the explanation for
the lack of survival benefit with temozolomide treatment in
MGMT-methylated lung cancer patients in a recent phase II clinical trial
(NCT00423150). This indicates that incorporation of immunohistochemistry
for the MGMT protein should also be part of the assessment of the MGMT
status of lung cancer.

