Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of cyclooxygenase-2 by dual-specificity phosphatase-2
ameilorates cancer malignancy


Aberrant production of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and COX-2-derived
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) have been demonstrated to contribute to tumor
development and malignancy in many human cancers. However, the initiating
factor responsible for maintaining high levels of COX-2 expression during
cancer development remains enigmatic. We hypothesize that aberrant
expression of COX-2 in cancer cells is initiated by hypoxia, a common
phenomenon occurs in very early stage during cancer development. Herein,
we present data demonstrating that levels of COX-2 in cancer cells are
induced by hypoxia in a hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)-dependent
manner. Intriguingly, HIF-1 does not directly induce COX-2 promoter
activity. In contrast, induction of COX-2 expression is mediated by
HIF-1-induced downregulation of dual specificity phosphatase-2 (DUSP-2),
a MAPK-specific phosphatase. Forced expression of DUSP2 reduces the
levels of COX-2, while knockdown of DUSP2 induces COX-2 expression in
cancer cells. Moreover, depletion of DUSP2 also induces the expression of
microsomal prostaglandin E synthase (mPGES) and consequently increases
the production of PGE2. Further study reveals that re-induction of DUSP2
abolishes hypoxia-induced COX-2 expression and PGE2 production. To test
the hypothesis that COX-2 mediates loss-of-DUSP2-induced tumorigenesis, a
selective COX-2 inhibitor, NS-398, was used to block the function of
COX-2 in the DUSP2-knockdown xenograft mouse model. Knockdown of DUSP2
markedly enhances tumor growth while treatment with NS-398 reverses
loss-of-DUSP2-induced tumor development in vivo. Taken together, our data
indicate that DUSP2, a negative regulator of COX-2, plays a critical
tumor suppressive role and hypoxia, a common stress during cancer
development, suppresses DUSP2 to initiate COX-2 overexpression and
promote cancer progression. Our findings suggest that preventing DUSP2
from hypoxia-mediated downregulation or re-induction of DUSP2 during
cancer development may represent a potential approach for cancer therapy.

