Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro pharmacogenomic study of ovarian cancer finds novel
genetic variants associated with response to platinum and taxane therapies


Background: The standard treatment for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
patients with advanced disease is initial debulking surgery followed by
carboplatin-paclitaxel combination therapy. Unfortunately, even with
modern chemotherapy, most patients with advanced disease relapse and die
of EOC. One of the biggest challenges in the treatment of EOC is the
large inter-patient variation in clinical response and toxicity observed
for taxane and platinum therapies. Purpose: To determine pharmacogenomic
markers related to carboplatin-paclitaxel therapy with 33 Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from EOC
patients for which genome-wide genetic information exists. Methods: The
33 LCLs were treated with increasing concentrations of carboplatin and/or
paclitaxel, followed by MTT cytotoxicity and Caspase3/7 assays. Using the
measurements of MTT absorbance or Caspase3/7 fluorescence, dose response
curves were fit to estimate the in vitro drug response (MTT or
caspase3/7) for each LCL and treatment (paclitaxel, carboplatin, and
combination) using the inflection point of the fitted curve (i.e.., the
MTT IC50 or effective dose that kills 50% of the cells). The six in vitro
phenotypes where then associated with genome-wide SNP data, imputed up to
the markers in the 1000 Genomes Project. Results: Genetic association
analysis of carboplatin, paclitaxel and combination therapy cell
viability, as measured by MTT, found one SNP, rs202167095 within HS3ST4,
in common with all three phenotypes (p Background: The standard treatment
for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients with advanced disease is
initial debulking surgery followed by carboplatin-paclitaxel combination
therapy. Unfortunately, even with modern chemotherapy, most patients with
advanced disease relapse and die of EOC. One of the biggest challenges in
the treatment of EOC is the large inter-patient variation in clinical
response and toxicity observed for taxane and platinum therapies.
Purpose: To determine pharmacogenomic markers related to
carboplatin-paclitaxel therapy with 33 Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from EOC patients
for which genome-wide genetic information exists. Methods: The 33 LCLs
were treated with increasing concentrations of carboplatin and/or
paclitaxel, followed by MTT cytotoxicity and Caspase3/7 assays. Using the
measurements of MTT absorbance or Caspase3/7 fluorescence, dose response
curves were fit to estimate the in vitro drug response (MTT or
caspase3/7) for each LCL and treatment (paclitaxel, carboplatin, and
combination) using the inflection point of the fitted curve (i.e.., the
MTT IC50 or effective dose that kills 50% of the cells). The six in vitro
phenotypes where then associated with genome-wide SNP data, imputed up to
the markers in the 1000 Genomes Project. Results: Genetic association
analysis of carboplatin, paclitaxel and combination therapy cell
viability, as measured by MTT, found one SNP, rs202167095 within HS3ST4,
in common with all three phenotypes (p < 0.0001). HS3ST4 is regulated by
TRF2 and activates natural killer cells. Furthermore, TRF2 maintains
telomere integrity and is involved in activating DNA damage response
(DDR) pathway.. Similarly, three SNPs were found to be associated with
the three Caspase3/7 activities: SNPs on chromosome 3 (rs13098237 and
rs13098239), and a SNP on chromosome 10 (rs138004421 within LINC00858).
Lastly, SNPs in the following genes were associated with carboplatin IC50
with p Background: The standard treatment for epithelial ovarian cancer
(EOC) patients with advanced disease is initial debulking surgery
followed by carboplatin-paclitaxel combination therapy. Unfortunately,
even with modern chemotherapy, most patients with advanced disease
relapse and die of EOC. One of the biggest challenges in the treatment of
EOC is the large inter-patient variation in clinical response and
toxicity observed for taxane and platinum therapies. Purpose: To
determine pharmacogenomic markers related to carboplatin-paclitaxel
therapy with 33 Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformed lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCLs) derived from EOC patients for which genome-wide genetic
information exists. Methods: The 33 LCLs were treated with increasing
concentrations of carboplatin and/or paclitaxel, followed by MTT
cytotoxicity and Caspase3/7 assays. Using the measurements of MTT
absorbance or Caspase3/7 fluorescence, dose response curves were fit to
estimate the in vitro drug response (MTT or caspase3/7) for each LCL and
treatment (paclitaxel, carboplatin, and combination) using the inflection
point of the fitted curve (i.e.., the MTT IC50 or effective dose that
kills 50% of the cells). The six in vitro phenotypes where then
associated with genome-wide SNP data, imputed up to the markers in the
1000 Genomes Project. Results: Genetic association analysis of
carboplatin, paclitaxel and combination therapy cell viability, as
measured by MTT, found one SNP, rs202167095 within HS3ST4, in common with
all three phenotypes (p < 0.0001). HS3ST4 is regulated by TRF2 and
activates natural killer cells. Furthermore, TRF2 maintains telomere
integrity and is involved in activating DNA damage response (DDR)
pathway.. Similarly, three SNPs were found to be associated with the
three Caspase3/7 activities: SNPs on chromosome 3 (rs13098237 and
rs13098239), and a SNP on chromosome 10 (rs138004421 within LINC00858).
Lastly, SNPs in the following genes were associated with carboplatin IC50
with p < 1x10-6 (i.e., the top associated SNPs with any drug response
phenotype): JAKMIP3 (p=2.3x10-7), TSHZ3 (p = 4.9x10-7) and TGFA
(p=3.6x10-7). JAKMIP3 has been implicated in some cancers and interacts
with other janus kinases and JAK-STAT pathways, while TSHZ3 inhibits the
expression of CASP4, thus limiting cell apoptosis. Lastly, TGFA codes for
a growth factor that is a ligand for epidermal growth factor receptor,
which activates a signaling pathway for cell proliferation,
differentiation and development. Conclusions: Identifying genetic loci
associated with response to platinum-taxane therapies will ultimately
improve clinicians' ability to tailor therapy decisions for EOC patients.
This research discovered novel candidate genes for which further research
is needed to understand the mechanism by which they impact clinical
response.

