Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting stepwise HER2 and VEGF can overcome multidrug resistance
in small cell lung cancer


Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 15% of primary
lung cancer and has the poorest outcome of all its histological types.
One of the major reasons of extreme aggressiveness of SCLC is that it
recurs shortly after initial therapy with multidrug resistance (MDR)
phenotype. However, standard therapeutic strategy for relapsed-SCLC has
not been established yet. As one of the targetable receptor tyrosine
kinases, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was reported to
be a negative prognostic factor in extensive-disease SCLC (Micke et al.
Int J Cancer. 2001;92:474-9). We found that HER2 was more frequently
overexpressed in SCLC cell lines of Japanese origin (6/10) compared to
those of Caucasian origin (0/3). We also detected HER2 expression in SCLC
tissues in 7 out of 25 patients tested by our highly sensitive
immunohistochemistry system. Moreover, we found that HER2 was upregulated
when HER2-positive SCLC cells acquired MDR. Trastuzumab, a humanized
monoclonal antibody against HER2, exerted differential levels of killing
effect on HER2-positive parental and chemoresistant SCLC cells only when
Fc receptor-positive natural killer (NK) cells coexisted. This result
suggests that trastuzumab-induced SCLC cell-killing effect was caused
mainly via antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) but not
via direct inhibition of HER2 signal. Among these cell lines,
etoposide-resistant SCLC cells were most susceptible to trastuzumab in
vitro and in vivo, and the antitumor effects of trastuzumab were not only
dependent on the amount of HER2 expression on SCLC cells. We focused on
cell-cell contact between SCLC cells and NK cells to determine the
molecule affecting trastuzumab-mediated ADCC other than HER2. We found
that intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 was abundantly expressed on
etoposide-resistant SCLC cells, and trastuzumab-mediated ADCC was
canceled in the presence of an ICAM-1 functional blocking antibody. These
results indicate that ICAM-1 expression on SCLC cell surface is
indispensable to augment trastuzumab-mediated ADCC. Thus, trastuzumab
could overcome etoposide-resistance in SCLC. On the contrary,
irinotecan-resistant SCLC cells were still refractory to trastuzumab. The
reason for this was thought that they not only lacked ICAM-1 expression
but also came to produce abundant vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against VEGF,
treatment could significantly inhibit the in vivo growth of
irinotecan-resistant xenografts through decreasing microvesseles in mice.
These results suggest that bevacizumab-mediated antiangiogenesis is a
promising therapeutic strategy to salvage
irinotecan-resistance.Collectively, targeting stepwise HER2 and VEGF
could overcome MDR in SCLC and bring about a favorable outcome for
patients with relapsed-SCLC.

