Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MenaINV interaction with 51 promotes tumor cell invasion in
response to gradients of growth factors and fibronectin


To metastasize and disseminate, carcinoma cells must invade the
surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) and migrate to reach blood or
lymphatic vessels. Collagen (CN) and fibronectin (FN), two components of
the ECM surrounding tumors, are highly expressed in metastatic tumors and
their patterns of expression can correlate with metastatic outcome in
patient samples. Mena, an actin regulatory protein, is upregulated in
breast cancer and is alternatively spliced to produce protein isoforms
with distinct functions during tumor progression. The invasion-specific
MenaINV isoform increases metastasis by potentiating tumor cell motility
and invasion responses to various growth factors. All Mena isoforms bind
directly to the 5 subunit of the 51 integrin, an FN receptor. We
hypothesized that the interaction between MenaINV and 51 plays an
important role in integrating signals from the ECM as well as growth
factors to drive invasion.MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells expressing
MenaINV showed increased adhesion to FN alone as well as mixture of FN
and CN, compared to control cells. MenaINV cells also had an increased
number of 5-positive adhesions as well as increased signalling at focal
adhesions as measured by phospho-Paxilin, compared to control. In 3D
invasion assays, addition of FN to a CN gel drove invasion of
MenaINV-expressing cells even in the absence of any growth factor ligand,
an effect driven by its interaction with 5 and dependent on signalling
via EGFR and Met. Furthermore, addition of FN caused an even greater
potentiation of EGF-induced invasion by MenaINV, an effect that was
dependent upon its interaction with 5. Next, we examined how MenaINV
affects tumor cell responses to a gradient of FN within a 3D collagen
gel. Control cells failed to respond to an FN gradient, while cells
expressing MenaINV migrated preferentially towards FN and significantly
reorganized both the collagen and FN surrounding them. Deletion of the 5
binding site or treatment with an 5 function blocking antibody ablated
the effects MenaINV on movement towards a FN gradient as well ECM
reorganization.Overall, these results suggest that some aspects of the
pro-metastatic effects of MenaINV involve its ability to bind 5 and
regulate bidirectional signaling with FN and growth factors in the tumor
microenvironment.

