Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the EphB1 gene in mediating migration, proliferation, and
radiosensitization of medulloblastoma cells


Eph/ephrin signaling in a variety of cancers has been reported to promote
aspects of tumorigenesis, including proliferation, migration, and
angiogenesis. Medulloblastoma is an aggressive primitive neuroectodermal
tumor originating in the cerebellum. Recently performed integrative
genomic approach to a large cohort of medulloblastomas has identified
four subtypes (A-D) based on clinical presentation, transcription
profiles, genetic abnormalities, and clinical outcome. We show high
levels of EphB1 expression in tumors derived from children with group D
medulloblastomas, which are known to exhibit a poorer response to current
therapies. The purpose of this study is to examine the effect knockdown
of EphB1 has on cellular migration, proliferation, and radiosensitization
of medulloblastoma tumors. Using a human-derived medulloblastoma cell
line (DAOY) and small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting EphB1, we
compared cell migration in an electrical impedance-based transwell Boyden
chamber assay (xCELLigence RTCA DP system). We show that siRNA knockdown
of EphB1 results in significantly decreased migration. Assessment of
proliferation by MTT assay indicates that knockdown of EphB1 affects cell
cycle progression in DAOY. Results from cell cycle and sub-G1 analysis by
flow cytometry demonstrate that knockdown of EphB1 results in G1 arrest.
Our previous systems analysis investigation of global gene expression
regulated by an intact ATM gene product also identified EphB1 as a
downstream signaling molecule correlating with enhanced cellular
radiation resistance. Our data strongly support EphB1 as an unequivocal
target for radiation sensitization in human fibroblasts as well as in
vitro medulloblastoma cell lines. siRNA knockdown of EphB1 expression in
human medulloblastoma cell lines known to express high levels of EphB1
results in sensitization to ionizing radiation by clonogenic survival
assays. Preliminary data from an in vivo xenograft medulloblastoma animal
model suggest an enhanced response to radiation in tumors lacking the
EphB1 gene. Our data indicate that EphB1 is a potential molecular target
for medulloblastoma cancer treatment and radiosensitization. The
mechanisms and downstream signaling cascades underlying EphB1's action on
cell migration, proliferation, and cellular radiosensitization are
currently under investigation.

