Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral microbiome and risk of head and neck cancer, a nested
case-control study


Introduction: The oral microbiome is intimately involved in inflammatory
processes in the oral cavity and may be involved in metabolism of
carcinogens in tobacco smoke. Our hypothesis is that oral microbiota may
promote head and neck carcinogenesis, possibly related to smoking. To
test this hypothesis, we conducted a nested case-control study to
prospectively examine the role of the oral microbiome in head and neck
cancer, in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Trial cohort.Methods: Subjects in the PLCO Trial completed risk
factor questionnaires and provided oral wash samples. Trial participants
were followed for cancer incidence by annual follow-up, medical chart
review and search of mortality databases. During follow-up, 87
histologically confirmed head and neck cancer cases occurred subsequent
to oral wash sample collection. We matched these cases to 174
cohort-nested controls (matched by age, gender, and race). DNA was
extracted from oral wash samples, 16S rRNA genes were amplified by
universal primers, and product was bar-coded and sequenced by 454 FLX
technology. 16S rRNA bacterial gene sequences were binned into
operational taxonomic units (based on 97% identity) and further assigned
to taxonomy in the QIIME pipeline. We performed nonparametric Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests and conditional logistic regression to compare
differences between head and neck cancer cases and controls, with respect
to overall bacterial community structure and relative abundance of
specific taxa.Results: From 261 oral samples, we obtained 2,548,067 high
quality 16S rRNA gene sequence reads. Overall community structure, based
on a weighted UniFrac phylogenetic distance index, did not differ
significantly between cases and controls (p>0.05). The major phyla in
controls were Firmicutes (59.5%), Actinobacteria (15.5%), Bacteroidetes
(11.3%), Proteobacteria (10.3%), and Fusobacteria (2.8%). Decreased
abundance of Proteobacteria was observed in cases (7.8%) compared to
controls (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.008, FDR controlled p=0.041). After
consideration of age, race and sex in conditional logistic regression
analysis, an inverse association of Proteobacteria with head and neck
cancer risk was observed in smokers (OR comparing extreme tertiles =0.34,
95% CI 0.15-0.79; ptrend = 0.009 [FDR controlled p=0.065]), but not in
non-smokers (ptrend=0.62). We also noted a relative increase in abundance
of Bifidobacteriales order (multivariate p=0.002, FDR controlled p=0.045)
and Lactobacillaceae family (multivariate p=0.005, FDR controlled p>0.05)
in cases compared with controls.Conclusion: This first prospective study
of the oral microbiome and head and neck cancer suggests that
Proteobacteria and Bifidobacteriales are related to risk of head and neck
cancer. Replication of these first observations is needed.

