Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination strategy of endoscopic resection and
telomerase-targeting oncolytic virus for eradicating lymph node
metastasis of submucosal invasive colorectal cancer


Endoscopic resection is now one of the options as minimally invasive
therapy for early colorectal cancer, However, surgical resection has been
still standard for submucosal invasive colorectal cancer, because about
10% of that have LN metastasis. To secure endoscopic resection for
submucosal invasive colorectal cancer, an alternative, innovational
strategy to purge potential LN metastasis is required. We previously
reported that a telomerase-dependent oncolytic adenovirus (OBP-301)
spreads to the regional LNs, selectively replicates, and eradicates
metastatic cancer cells in LNs, when administered into the orthotopically
xenotransplanted rectal tumor in mouse model. In this study we evaluated
whether OBP-301 could inhibit LN metastasis after the local resection
mimicking endoscopic resection in a submucosal invasive rectal tumor
mouse model. Human colon cancer HCT-116 cells expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) were orthotopically implanted into the
submucosal layer of the rectum in nude mouse, to develop resultant rectal
tumor mimicking submucosal invasive one. LN metastasis was observed in
78.5% of mice as early as 7 days after cancer cell inoculation. The
rectal tumor was injected with OBP-301 peritumorally, and then got
locally excised mimicking Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD)
technique. Seven days after tumor resection, the treatment with OBP-301
showed a significant inhibition in LN metastasis, whereas the other
control treatment did not. Moreover, LN metastatic recurrence was not
detected in OBP-301-treated group even 4 weeks after tumor resection.
Similar results were also observed in another model with human colon
cancer Colo-205-GFP cells. These results suggest that a novel combination
of ESD and OBP-301 might have potential to take place of the conventional
surgical approach in treating submucosal invasive colorectal cancer.

