Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biopsy induced metastasis: Role of SOX4/TGF- driven EMT and
immunosuppressive microenvironment


As a consequence of advances in digital diagnostic imaging, breast
cancers are being diagnosed earlier in their development. These smaller
tumors are less likely to be metastatic at time of discovery. The
majority of newly diagnosed breast cancers in North America are confirmed
using an incisional core needle biopsy (CNB). However an increasing
number of studies highlight the pro-metastatic inflammatory and
microenvironment changes occurring after incisional procedures on breast
cancer tumors. This may account for reported higher incidences of lymph
node metastases with increased risk of local recurrence and distant
metastasis among patients undergoing incisional procedures.Evidence from
our studies using a metastatic mouse model shows that incisional core
needle biopsies lead to increased pulmonary metastasis. To study the
mechanism(s) involved we monitored changes in circulating tumor cells
(CTC), cytokine levels, variations in gene expression, microenvironment
alteration and pulmonary metastatic burden, following CNB.Gene expression
analysis by real-time qPCR showed increased TGF- expression accompanied
by SOX4 upregulation at 3 hours post biopsy (SOX4 is a Master regulator
of EMT). This was followed, at 24 hours post biopsy, by significantly
increased levels of the SOX4-associated Ezh2 gene and other EMT genes
(ZEB2, SNAI2, SNAI3, and CDH2). Monitoring of CTCs over the same time
frame showed them to be significantly increased in biopsied mice from 6
to 24 hours post biopsy, indicating continual CTC egress from biopsied
tumors. Flow cytometry analysis of tumor microenvironment showed an
immunosuppressive microenvironment with increased MDSC levels, reduced
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, macrophage and NKT cell. Interestingly, similar
analysis of the Lung microenvironment 4 days later (day 7 post biopsy)
revealed an inversion of the tumor situation, in the form of a
significant uptick in Th1 type changes described by increased CD4+ and
CD8+ type T cells, macrophages and NK cells, as well as increased TNF-
gene expression indicators corresponding to an early response to growth
of metastases. We also compared H&E stained histological sections of
lungs from biopsied and un-biopsied mice and recorded significant
increase in pulmonary metastasis for the biopsied group.The findings of
our study indicate that performance of CNB results in increased
metastasis with immunomodulation of the tumor microenvironment and
unregulated SOX4/TGF- . Additional studies are needed to further
elucidate the mechanism, and explore mitigating strategies to counter CNB
related metastasis.

