Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune related melanoma gene expression profile predicts
neoadjuvant ipilimumab clinical benefit


BackgroundPatients with regionally advanced melanoma were treated with
neoadjuvant ipilimumab in a previously reported study (ASCO 2012). Gene
expression profiles of tumors of treated patients were investigated for
their therapeutic predictive value.MethodsPatients were treated with
ipilimumab (10mg/kg IV every 3weeks x2 doses) bracketing surgery. Tumor
specimens were obtained at baseline and at definitive surgery (week 6-8).
Gene expression profiling was performed on the tumor biopsies of 32
patients using U133A 2.0 Affymetrix gene chips. Significance Analysis of
Microarrays (SAMR) was performed to test the association of each gene
with outcome. Pathway analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis software. The Benjamini and Hochberg method was used to adjust
for multiple testing in the pathway analysis.ResultsPathway analysis
identified biologically relevant pathways enriched with genes that are
significantly associated with clinical outcome at baseline in relation to
progression free survival (PFS) and disease non-progression (NP) as well
as early on-treatment outcomes (PFS and overall survival, OS). These
pathways and the top associated molecules were notably immune related and
highly statistically significant. Pathways associated with clinical
outcome overlapped between baseline and on-treatment specimens as well as
across clinical endpoints tested. Table1 summarizes the top canonical
pathways identified at baseline (PRE) and on-treatment (POST) and their
association with PFS, NP and OS.ConclusionsGene expression profiling
identified pathways and genes related to inflammation and autoimmunity
that significantly predict clinical benefit from neoadjuvant ipilimumab
at baseline and early on-treatment. These findings warrant further
investigation in relation to ipilimumab and other immunotherapeutics.
(Supported by NIH award P50CA121973 and BMS)Pathways identified at
baseline and on-treatment and their association with PFS, NP and OS


