Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maintenance of breast cancer stem cells in an inert matrix is
mediated by mesenchymal stem cells in the tumor stroma


Introduction: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) hypothesis relates cancer
recurrence to a small population of tumor cells with the ability to
self-renew to maintain the tumor mass. Recent studies demonstrate that
conventional therapies eliminate the differentiated cells that form bulk
of the tumor, while leaving CSCs unharmed. There is increasing evidence
that the maintenance of CSCs in the tumor tissue is regulated by
microenvironment. In particular, human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and
associated soluble factors as part of the tumor stroma play a significant
role in self-renewal and maintenance of CSCs (1). Our laboratory has
developed an inert 3D synthetic matrix with defined properties that
maintains and enriches the CSC sub-population of tumor cells within a
certain range of stiffness (2). The objective of this work was to
investigate the effect of co-encapsulation of MDA-MB-231 (MDA) human
breast cancer cells with human hMSCs in the engineered patterned matrix
on tumorsphere formation and CSC maintenance.Methods: Thee effect of MSCs
on MDA cells was investigated in a patterned matrix with defined
stiffness to control tumorsphere size. To separate the patterned cellular
matrix from the glass substrate, a layer of the gel without cells was
first crosslinked on the glass substrate by UV radiation. Next, a mixture
of MDA and hMSCs (5x105 cells/mL each) in the hydrogel precursor solution
was patterned by UV radiation on the gel covered glass slide with a UV
mask. The stiffness of the matrix was controlled by the concentration of
macromer in the hydrogel precursor solution. Tumorsphere size and
density, and expression of CSC markers were determined with incubation
time in tumor CSC culture medium.Results and Conclusion: The
micro-patterned 3D synthetic hydrogel matrix with defined modulus
supported tumorsphere formation and expression of CSC markers.
Specifically, co-culture of MDA cells with hMSCs increased the expression
of CD44 and ABCG2 markers of stemness by three-fold after 6 days of
encapsulation in the engineered matrix from 25 to 58 for CD44 and 14 to
42 for ABCG2. Likewise, tumorsphere density more than doubled and average
tumorsphere diameter increased from 25 to 47 m after 6 days of incubation
when MDA cells were co-encapsulated with hMSCs. The model inert matrix
can be used to understand the effect of individual cell types in the
tumor stroma on CSC maintenance and tumorigenesis.

