Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemopreventive effects of carvedilol on skin carcinogenesis


Skin cancer, the majority of which is non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), is
the most common type of cancer in the US. The rate of NMSC is increasing
mainly due to depletion of the ozone layer and increased exposure to
ultraviolet radiation. To reduce the risk of skin cancer, it is
recommended to all individuals to limit sun exposure and use sunscreens.
Despite these efforts, the incidence of NMSC continues to rise. Novel
chemopreventive targets and nontoxic agents are needed. Epidemiological
studies identified an association of psychosocial factors such as chronic
stress or depression with cancer onset and progression. These factors are
partly mediated by activation of the sympathetic nervous system which
results in release of norepinephrine and epinephrine, the effects of
which are mediated through the alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors
(alpha- and beta-AR). Further, the use of beta-AR antagonists
(beta-blockers) has been associated with reduced cancer incidence.
However, whether beta-blockers have chemopreventive activity or whether
beta-ARs contribute to carcinogenesis is unknown. To determine whether
agonizing or antagonizing beta-ARs affect skin cell transformation, we
tested the beta-AR agonist isoproterenol (Iso) and antagonist carvedilol
on epidermal growth factor (EGF)-mediated transformation of JB6 P+ cells
(a skin cell model to study tumor promotion). The cells were treated with
EGF (10 ng/mL) plus 0.1 M or 1.0 M Iso, yet no effect was observed.
However, treatment with carvedilol dose-dependently inhibited the
formation of EGF-induced soft agar colonies. Such effect was not caused
by growth inhibition, because cytotoxicity and inhibition of cell
proliferation were not observed for tested concentrations. Next, the
expression of beta1-, 2- and 3-AR was determined in JB6 cells using
RT-PCR. The results showed that only beta2-AR was detectable. We also
determined whether beta-ARs are expressed in other types of cancer. In
tissues derived from a rat model of 7, 12-dimethylbenz[]anthracene
(DMBA)-induced mammary cancer, expression of beta1- and 2-AR was
up-regulated in tumors in comparison with normal tissues. The human
cancer cell lines A549 and MDA-MB-231 also express beta2-AR. To determine
the in vivo chemopreventive activity of carvedilol, we used a skin
hyperplasia model in SENCAR mice induced by topical treatment with 100 nM
DMBA twice a week for four weeks. Carvedilol was tested topically (5 and
10 M) or orally (5 and 20 mg/kg), beginning at two weeks before the first
dose of DMBA, three times a week, for six weeks. DMBA alone increased the
epidermal thickness from the average of 77.8 + 13.6 nm in normal skin to
294 + 49.7 nm in DMBA-treated skin. Both topical and oral carvedilol
treatment inhibited DMBA-induced hyperplasia (P Skin cancer, the majority
of which is non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), is the most common type of
cancer in the US. The rate of NMSC is increasing mainly due to depletion
of the ozone layer and increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation. To
reduce the risk of skin cancer, it is recommended to all individuals to
limit sun exposure and use sunscreens. Despite these efforts, the
incidence of NMSC continues to rise. Novel chemopreventive targets and
nontoxic agents are needed. Epidemiological studies identified an
association of psychosocial factors such as chronic stress or depression
with cancer onset and progression. These factors are partly mediated by
activation of the sympathetic nervous system which results in release of
norepinephrine and epinephrine, the effects of which are mediated through
the alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors (alpha- and beta-AR). Further,
the use of beta-AR antagonists (beta-blockers) has been associated with
reduced cancer incidence. However, whether beta-blockers have
chemopreventive activity or whether beta-ARs contribute to carcinogenesis
is unknown. To determine whether agonizing or antagonizing beta-ARs
affect skin cell transformation, we tested the beta-AR agonist
isoproterenol (Iso) and antagonist carvedilol on epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-mediated transformation of JB6 P+ cells (a skin cell model to study
tumor promotion). The cells were treated with EGF (10 ng/mL) plus 0.1 M
or 1.0 M Iso, yet no effect was observed. However, treatment with
carvedilol dose-dependently inhibited the formation of EGF-induced soft
agar colonies. Such effect was not caused by growth inhibition, because
cytotoxicity and inhibition of cell proliferation were not observed for
tested concentrations. Next, the expression of beta1-, 2- and 3-AR was
determined in JB6 cells using RT-PCR. The results showed that only
beta2-AR was detectable. We also determined whether beta-ARs are
expressed in other types of cancer. In tissues derived from a rat model
of 7, 12-dimethylbenz[]anthracene (DMBA)-induced mammary cancer,
expression of beta1- and 2-AR was up-regulated in tumors in comparison
with normal tissues. The human cancer cell lines A549 and MDA-MB-231 also
express beta2-AR. To determine the in vivo chemopreventive activity of
carvedilol, we used a skin hyperplasia model in SENCAR mice induced by
topical treatment with 100 nM DMBA twice a week for four weeks.
Carvedilol was tested topically (5 and 10 M) or orally (5 and 20 mg/kg),
beginning at two weeks before the first dose of DMBA, three times a week,
for six weeks. DMBA alone increased the epidermal thickness from the
average of 77.8 + 13.6 nm in normal skin to 294 + 49.7 nm in DMBA-treated
skin. Both topical and oral carvedilol treatment inhibited DMBA-induced
hyperplasia (P < 0.05). In conclusion, these results suggest that
beta-blockers may have chemopreventive activity. This study also suggests
that beta-ARs may serve as a novel target for cancer prevention.

