Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Norrin controls colon cancer angiogenesis


The purposes of the study: Colorectal (CRC) tumors depend on mediators in
the tumor microenvironment, such as vascular endothelial growth factor,
to promote angiogenesis. Norrin is a ligand that binds to the cell
surface Frizzled-4 receptor, stimulating canonical Wnt signaling, and is
known to mediate blood vessel growth in the eye and ear. We investigate
here the role of Norrin secreted by colon cancer cells in endothelial
cell growth and motility as well as the expression of the Norrin
signaling pathway components in the CRC tumor
microenvironment.Experimental procedures: Primary human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC) expressing green fluorescent protein and a
HUVEC-derived endothelial cell line, EAhy926 were utilized for in vitro
angiogenesis assays measuring cell motility and in vitro angiogenesis.
Experiments were performed with and without the addition of
Norrin-containing conditioned medium from a transfected CRC cell line
CaCO2 and with and without blocking anti-Norrin antibodies. Tissue
specimens from human CRC patients were evaluated with a double signal
amplification system to define the expression of Norrin, Frizzled-4, LRP5
and TSPAN12 in tumor blood vessels.Summary of data: Blocking generated by
the endothelial cells themselves Norrin reduced endothelial cell
motility, branch point number during in vitro angiogenesis (1/sq. mm),
and the network length (mm/sq. mm) during in vitro angiogenesis. Norrin
conditioned medium produced by CRC cell line CaCO2 transfected with
Norrin expression construct increased endothelial cell motility.
Colorectal tumors express Norrin protein. Endothelial cells in the
colorectal tumor blood vessels contain all of the components of the
Norrin signaling pathway needed for the endothelial cells to respond to
Norrin in the tumor microenvironment.Statement of the conclusions: This
study presents both in vitro and in vivo data that colorectal tumors use
Norrin protein as an alternative mechanism that promotes angiogenesis in
the CRC tumor microenvironment.

