Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of RKIP on MMP expression and regulation of breast cancer
metastasis


Raf Kinase Inhibitory Protein or RKIP was initially identified as a Raf-1
binding protein using the yeast 2-hybrid screen. RKIP inhibits the
activation phosphorylation of MEK by Raf-1 by competitively inhibiting
the binding of MEK to Raf-1 and thus exerting an inhibitory effect on the
Raf-MEK-ERK pathway. RKIP has been identified as a metastasis suppressor
gene. Metastasis is a complex multiple-step process. Expression of RKIP
is low in cancer metastases. Although primary tumor growth was
unaffected, re-expression of RKIP inhibits cancer metastasis.
Mechanistically, RKIP constrains metastasis by inhibiting angiogenesis,
local invasion, intravasation, and colonization. The molecular mechanism
of how RKIP inhibits these individual steps remains undefined. Using an
unbiased PCR based screening and by analyzing DNA microarray expression
datasets we observed that the expression of multiple metalloproteases
(MMP) including MMP1, MMP3, MMP10 and MMP13 were negatively correlated
with RKIP expression in breast cancer cell lines and clinical samples.
Since expression of MMPs by cancer cells is important for cancer
metastasis, we hypothesize that RKIP may mediate suppression of breast
cancer metastasis by inhibiting multiple MMPs. In this study we show that
the expression signature of RKIP and MMPs is better at predicting high
metastatic risk than the individual gene. Using a combination of loss-
and gain-of-function approaches, we found that MMP13 is the cause of
RKIP-mediated inhibition of local cancer invasion. Interestingly
expression of MMP13 alone was not sufficient to reverse the inhibition of
breast cancer cells metastasis to the lung due to the expression of RKIP.
We found that RKIP negatively regulated MMP13 through the Erk2-Fra1
transcriptional axis and the repression of MMP13 by RKIP requires the
presence of the a TPA-responsive element in the MMP13 proximal promoter.
Together, our findings indicate that RKIP inhibits cancer cell invasion,
in part, via MMP13 inhibition. These data also implicate RKIP in the
regulation of MMPs transcription, suggesting a potential mechanism by
which RKIP inhibits tumor progression and metastasis.

