Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOTAIR modulates -catenin signaling pathway through NLK and NFAT5
in human glioblastoma


BackgroundGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant tumor of human
central nervures system with poor prognosis. A new class of transcripts,
long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), has been recently found to be pervasively
transcribed in the genome. Recent progress suggests that the involvement
of lncRNAs in human cancers could be far more prevalent than previously
appreciated. HOTAIR, lncRNA Hox transcript antisense intergenic RNA, has
been characterized as a novel hall marker to predict poor prognosis in
glioma. HOTAIR serves as a modular scaffold by interacting with the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and the lysine-specific demethylase
1 (LSD1) corepressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor
(CoREST) complex to silence the HOXD loci in trans. Constitutive
activation of the Wnt/-catenin pathway is a common feature of human
cancers and contributes to its development, progression and
metastasis.MethodsRNA sequencing and qPCR were used to determine HOTAIR
expression status in GBM samples. TOP/FOP flash luciferase assays and
western blot were employed to identify the effect of HOTAIR's function on
the Wnt/-catenin pathway activity. In addition, FCM, transwell assay,
clone formation assay were used to examine HOTAIR's biological function
in regulating GBM cell phenotype.ResultsWe show -catenin pathway is
associated to HOTAIR expression by RNA sequencing in GBM cell lines and
large scale glioma samples. Besides, increasing NLK and NFAT5 expression,
PKM2 and -catenin pathway inhibition is induced by HOTAIR knockdown in
vivo and in vitro. Moreover, HOTAIR knockdown can partially overcome
hypoxia stimulation to U87 and U87VIII cells, block cell cycle at G1
phase, and attenuate GBM cell invasion or EMT like transformation. And
EZH2 domain may contribute to HOTAIR's biological function.ConclusionOur
data indicate that HOTAIR expression is correlated with the
overexpression of-catenin pathway activation in both GBM cell lines and
tissues. And HOTAIR can serve as a therapeutic target in gliobalstoma,
relating its oncogenic effects to activation of -catenin pathway.

