Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disseminated tumor cell formation promoted by lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA) involves ZEB1/miR21-dependent activation pathway


Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a natural bioactive lipid that promotes
metastasis of many types cancer cells. We have shown that blocking LPA
receptor type 1 (LPA1) activity inhibits early stage of bone metastasis
by inhibiting motility and invasion of breast cancer cells. However, the
signaling pathways and gene activation involved in this process have not
been well characterized. Micro-ARNs (miR) are well known master
regulators of gene expression. Based on the complete miR expression
profile in human MDA-MB-231 breast cells stimulated by LPA, we found that
miR-21 was one of the most up regulated miR. Using the Taqman RT-QPCR
system, we found that LPA induced a rapid increase in miR-21 expression
in MDA-MB-231 cells and in their highly osteotropic sub-clone MDA-B02
cells reaching a plateau by two to three folds (EC50 = 0.1M) after 45 min
of stimulation. MiR-21 is well known to act as an oncomiR promoting
metastasis in multiple cancers. Also, it is known that miR-21 expression
is controlled by several transcription factors. The full transcriptomic
analysis of our breast cancer cell lines showed that among those
transcription factors, ZEB1, STAT3 and cFos were up regulated by LPA.
Interestingly, silencing ZEB1 expression in these cells using synthetic
ZEB1-siRNAs abolished LPA-induced miR-21 expression whereas silencing
STAT3 or sFos had no effect. Hence, silencing ZEB1 up-regulated the
expression of miR-21 target genes PDCD4, PTEN and SPRY2 in MDA-MB-231
cells stimulated by LPA. RT-QPCR analyses also showed that LPA1 was the
most abundant LPA receptor in MDA-MB-231 cells
(LPA1>LPA2>>LPA6=LPA7>LPA5) whereas LPA3 and LPA4 were not detectable. We
found that the treatment of our breast cancer cells with Ki16425, a
LPA1/LPA3 antagonist, inhibited LPA-induced miR-21 expression. Silencing
LPA1 expression in these cells using synthetic LPA1-siRNAs also abolished
LPA-induced miR-21 expression. We showed in animal that Debio0719,
another LPA1/LPA3 antagonist, inhibits implantation of disseminated tumor
cells (DTC) into the bone marrow. Here, we found that the pretreatment of
MDA-B02 cells with a specific blocker of miR-21 (mirVana miR-21
inhibitor) before injection of these cells in BALB/c nude mice decreased
the incidence of DTC-positive animals and decreased the number DTCs at
the metastatic sites. All together our results demonstrate that miR-21
controls the prometastatic activity of LPA involving LPA1-dependent
activation of ZEB1 in breast cancer cells.

