Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of FOXM1 targets both high and low PSA expressing
prostate cancer cells resistant to Enzalutamide


Advances in castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) treatment using
androgen receptor (AR) targeted therapies have produced striking survival
advantages in clinical studies; recently approved AR inhibitor
Enzalutamide (ENZ) prolongs survival of patients with incurable CRPC.
Although enthusiasm for this approach remains high, prostate tumor
heterogeneity and the inevitable development of resistance as seen
currently in the clinic and in our pre-clinical model, dictates a
critical need for a better understanding of the mechanisms of resistance.
We have recently developed a unique model of LNCaP-CRPC-ENZ-resistance
and found that cell lines derived from serially passaged ENZ resistant
tumors express different levels of prostate specific antigen (PSA).
Especially low PSA expressing cells are believed to be highly enriched
with cancer stem cells with high self-renewal and these cells have been
considered difficult to target with current therapies.To define molecular
mechanisms contributing to treatment resistance in an unbiased manner, we
performed gene profiling on LNCaP, CRPC and ENZ resistant cell lines
expressing low and high levels of PSA. Using systems biological
approaches, we found that several genes and pathways involved in stem
cell maintenance were altered in Enzalutamide resistant cells.
Interestingly, forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) was one of the key pathways
potentially maintaining cancer stem cells and driving dedifferentiation
during ENZ resistance. FOXM1 is a transcription factor that confers
treatment resistance and is required for maintenance of pluripotency in
stem cells and PCa CSC-like spheroid formation as well as induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and invasion. Interestingly, FOXM1
and its downstream targets were upregulated in both PSA high and low
expressing ENZ resistant cells compared to CRPC cells and correlated with
poor survival and Gleason score in CRPC. In addition, mining public data,
we found that FOXM1 is highly expressed in prostate cancer cells with low
PSA expression, indicating that also low PSA expressing prostate cancer
stem cells could be targeted by inhibiting FOXM1.Using systems biological
approaches, we further found out that the antibiotic ionophore and
oxidative stress inducer Monensin, reduces FOXM1 pathway activity in ENZ
resistant cells. The validation results indicated that Monensin reduced
cell viability, FOXM1 transcriptional activity as well as FOXM1 protein,
gene and its target gene expressions in both PSA high and low expressing
ENZ resistant prostate cancer cells. Taken together, the results suggest
that inhibition of FOXM1 by Monensin is a potent novel mean to target ENZ
resistant cells including low PSA expressing prostate cancer stem
cell-like cells.

