Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualization of endogenous melanoma initiation and progression
using intravital microscopy


The death rates for malignant metastatic melanoma continue to rise
because melanoma is largely refractory to existing therapies. Loss or
inactivation of the tumor suppressor PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog
on Chromosome Ten) is observed in 40-50% of melanoma, and BRAF and PTEN
mutations exist coincidentally in approximately 20% of melanoma cases. In
mouse GEMM models, these mutations cooperate to promote metastatic
melanomagenesis. However, existing methods to activate these lesions with
Tyr-CreERT2 and topical tamoxifen application yields multifocal primary
tumors whose origins cannot be accurately determined. To improve this
model, we combined a tdTomatoLSL allele that serves as a visual marker of
Cre recombination with Tyr-CreERT2;BrafCA;Ptenlox/lox to produce an
animal where we can reproducibly initiate tumorigenesis in a
spatiotemporally controllable manner by transiently applying extremely
low doses (The death rates for malignant metastatic melanoma continue to
rise because melanoma is largely refractory to existing therapies. Loss
or inactivation of the tumor suppressor PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin
Homolog on Chromosome Ten) is observed in 40-50% of melanoma, and BRAF
and PTEN mutations exist coincidentally in approximately 20% of melanoma
cases. In mouse GEMM models, these mutations cooperate to promote
metastatic melanomagenesis. However, existing methods to activate these
lesions with Tyr-CreERT2 and topical tamoxifen application yields
multifocal primary tumors whose origins cannot be accurately determined.
To improve this model, we combined a tdTomatoLSL allele that serves as a
visual marker of Cre recombination with Tyr-CreERT2;BrafCA;Ptenlox/lox to
produce an animal where we can reproducibly initiate tumorigenesis in a
spatiotemporally controllable manner by transiently applying extremely
low doses (<20 nM) of tamoxifen to the dermis of the ear. Due to
melanocyte-specific expression of the fluorescent protein tdTomato, we
can track tumor progression from endogenous cells using two-photon
intravital imaging. Starting from a single primary tumor on the ear, we
can detect distant metastases in cervical lymph nodes and lungs via
macroscopic fluorescent imaging, qRT-PCR and histology. We are using this
model in combination with targeted therapy to investigate the effects of
selective molecular inhibitors on the growth and metastasis of endogenous
BRAFV600E/PTEN-/- metastatic melanoma at the cellular level. Preliminary
studies using intravital imaging and a selective MEK1/2 inhibitor, GSK212
(Trametinib, FDA approved treatment for metastatic melanoma) show that
targeted therapy causes heterogeneous reorganization of the tumor cells
as early as 3 days post-treatment. After several weeks of continuous
treatment, the remaining, resistant tumor cells are highly correlated
spatially with bundled collagen structures detected by second harmonic
generation signal, suggesting that cellular milieu strongly influences
drug response. In addition, GSK212 treated animals still had lung
macro-metastatic tumors, indicating that despite continuous MEK1/2
inhibition, metastatic tumor growth in the lung was still possible. In
summary, we have developed an inducible endogenous model of melanoma
metastasis that can be used to directly investigate both heterogeneous
effects of targeted therapy at the cellular level and the efficacy of
targeted therapy against metastasis.

