Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence of decreased prevalence of the t(11;14) translocation in
black patients with multiple myeloma: A multi-center study


The incidence of multiple myeloma (MM) is twice as high in blacks
compared with whites. MM consists of several different cytogenetic
subtypes, with differing presentations, response to therapy, and
prognosis. The studies that have characterized the distribution of the
primary cytogenetic abnormalities by fluorescence in-situ hybridization
(FISH) testing have been primarily conducted in white populations, and
more data are needed on whether the distribution of these cytogenetic
abnormalities differs in black compared with white MM patients, and to
determine if the increased prevalence of MM in blacks is related to
specific subtypes of the disease. In this multi-center study, we examined
four common clinically assessed cytogenetic subtypes (t(11;14), t(4;14),
del13q, and del17p) at time of MM diagnosis in 245 black patients from 3
clinics who had prior FISH testing available in medical records. We
compared the prevalence of these subtypes with our previously
characterized Mayo Clinic cohort which was all Caucasian (n=484). The
t(11;14) translocation was seen in 9 of 245 (4%) black patients with MM;
this was significantly lower than the rate of t(11;14) translocations
seen in white patients from Mayo Clinic (18%), p The incidence of
multiple myeloma (MM) is twice as high in blacks compared with whites. MM
consists of several different cytogenetic subtypes, with differing
presentations, response to therapy, and prognosis. The studies that have
characterized the distribution of the primary cytogenetic abnormalities
by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) testing have been primarily
conducted in white populations, and more data are needed on whether the
distribution of these cytogenetic abnormalities differs in black compared
with white MM patients, and to determine if the increased prevalence of
MM in blacks is related to specific subtypes of the disease. In this
multi-center study, we examined four common clinically assessed
cytogenetic subtypes (t(11;14), t(4;14), del13q, and del17p) at time of
MM diagnosis in 245 black patients from 3 clinics who had prior FISH
testing available in medical records. We compared the prevalence of these
subtypes with our previously characterized Mayo Clinic cohort which was
all Caucasian (n=484). The t(11;14) translocation was seen in 9 of 245
(4%) black patients with MM; this was significantly lower than the rate
of t(11;14) translocations seen in white patients from Mayo Clinic (18%),
p < 0.0001). In contrast to t(11;14), the prevalence of the t(4;14)
translocation across the two groups was similar (p= 0.92). We conclude
that the prevalence of t(11;14) translocation is significantly lower in
blacks with myeloma compared with whites. Our findings suggest that the
distribution of cytogenetic subtypes found in MM may differ significantly
by race, and further studies assessing differences in the prevalence of
other primary cytogenetic abnormalities such as trisomies, t(6;14),
t(14;16), and t(14;20) are needed. Furthermore, these results support the
hypothesis previously put forth that there are several different subtypes
of multiple myeloma that may be defined by the major cytogenetic
translocations. Since these results differ from those previously reported
(Baker et al 2013, Blood), we are conducting further analyses of these
data to examine possible factors that could account for the differential
association of translocation by race, including probes used.

