Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anticancer effects of chemically derived natural products


Despite the advances in the early detection of tumors and in the use of
surgery, radiation and chemical therapies for disease management, cancer
deaths are projected to more than double worldwide over the next two
decades. New approaches to prevention and therapy for cancer include
enhancement of Natural Killer Cells, antiangiogenic processes,
antioxidant defense systems and direct cytotoxicity against cancer cells
without harming normal cells are urgently needed. An assay system is
described that addresses the ability of chemically defined natural
products, such as Curcumin (derived from Curry), Genistein (derived from
Soy), Resveratrol (derived from grape skins) and Artemisinin (derived
from the Sweet Wormwood plant) to actually destroy cancer cells in vitro.
These compounds are used as food supplements in many parts of the world
and are important in the prevention of cancer, heart disease and
immunological diseases such as arthritis. The purpose of this research is
to develop an accurate, fast assay method to determine cell
concentrations of viable cells in culture that are exposed to various
compounds developed from natural sources. K562 Erythroleukemic cells were
added to 48 well plates in 500ul portions [10(5) cells/ml], cultured 48
hr. and exposed to the various compounds for up to 72 hr. All compounds
were dissolved in DMSO and diluted sufficiently to prevent solvent
effects. A unique cell viability stain, which allowed the rapid staining
of dead cells by membrane penetration using propidium iodide, was used to
measure the cell viability of the surviving cells by gating on forward
light scatter (size) and fluorescence flow cytometry. The control
cultures were greater than 95% viable during and at the end of the
experiments and were used as a baseline to measure the degree of killing.
All samples were run as 3-6 replicates and SD determined. Both the
Phytosome Curcumin derivative and pure Curcumin showed complete killing
of as many as 10(6) cells/ml (zero detected cells) at a concentration of
25 M as early as 20 hr. of culture. Genistein showed 94% killing at 65
hrs. but only 16% killing at 20 hrs. at a concentration of 100 M.
Artemisinin revealed 71% killing at 65 hrs. but only 2% killing at 20
hrs. for 100 M. The delayed killing may reflect apoptotic events.
Transferrin was used up to 800g/ml without affecting K562 cell viability
to potentially load the cells with iron. No enhancement in killing at 72
hr. was seen with Artemisinin, which requires iron for its cytotoxic
peroxide activity, suggesting saturation with iron in the K562 cells had
already occurred. Resveratrol at 50 M completely destroyed the cancer
cells at 67 hrs. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) showed minimal cytotoxicity of
13% for 200 M at 65 hrs. This assay system will allow for the study of
synergism of the compounds in a rapid, precise method to assess cancer
cytotoxicity.

