Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1 from tumor-surround fibroblasts contributes to breast cancer
malignant progression


As tumor-surrounding stromal cells (such as fibroblasts) are integrate
components of the tumor environment that together as an entity plays
critical roles in the tumor progression, we investigated whether HIF-1
from tumor-surrounding fibroblasts plays a critical role in breast cancer
(BCa) malignant progression. We co-cultured BCa 4T1/GFP cells with MEF
fibroblasts that either expressed or lacked the HIF-1 gene in a 3D
culture system established in our lab. The mixed cells (BCa:MEF) grew in
a suspension manner and formed aggregates/spheroids. We found that HIF-1
plays a role under hypoxia in the 3D BCa cells' protrusion formation, an
established marker for invasive, aggressively malignant tumor cells that
start to invade the surrounding matrix. These protrusions (fluorescent)
only appeared in mixed-cell aggregates containing HIF-1 wild-type MEF
fibroblasts; but not appear in mixed-cell aggregates containing HIF-1
knockout MEF fibroblasts, implying HIF-1 from fibroblasts (MEF) plays a
critical role in inducing surrounding epithelial BCa cells to form
protrusions, an indicator that tumor cells have become invasive.
Moreover, we performed transwell overnight invasion assay of BCa LM2
cells with and without cocultured MEF under both normoxia (21% O2) and
hypoxia (1% O2). We found that MEF significantly promoted BCa invade
through matrigel, and HIF-1 WT MEF promoted BCa invasion more than HIF-KO
MEF did under hypoxia. Furthermore, by using Boyden's chamber-based cell
migration assay, we found that migration of HIF-1 WT BCa (MMTC-PyT) cells
increased more than two fold under hypoxia than normoxia. However, this
hypoxia-induced increase in migration disappeared if HIF-1 KO
counterparts were used. The loss of this hypoxia-induced migration in
HIF-1 KO cells can be rescued by exogenous HIF-1 with Ad-HIF-1
transduction. A similar pattern of HIF-1-dependent, hypoxia-stimulated
cell migration was observed in fibroblasts when we analyzed HIF-1 WT and
KO MEF cells, demonstrating that hypoxia stimulated a HIF-1-dependent
cell migration in both BCa and MEF cells. Together, these results
indicate that HIF-1 from tumor-surrounding fibroblasts plays critical
roles in promoting BCa malignant progression.

