Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural redistribution of end-protection proteins in aging cells
as telomeres shorten


Telomeres are the nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear
chromosomes. In mammalian cells, a six-member protein complex, called
shelterin, protects telomeres from being recognized as DNA double-strand
breaks and from nucleolytic degradation. It has been speculated that as
telomeres become progressively shorter with each round of replication,
the number of binding sites for the components of shelterin would
decrease as well. In an attempt to determine whether there is a
relationship between the length of telomeres and shelterin binding,
primary human dermal fibroblasts from neonatal foreskin (HDFn) were grown
in culture, and the levels of a number of shelterin components were
measured over time. Unlike other previous studies where artificially
constructed telomeres were used to address this question, we are
following the natural progression of aging of a population of cultured
cells. Comparisons were made between young cells at a population doubling
(PDL) between 3 and 6 and aged cells at a PDL of 28 to 38. Southern
blotting using a telomeric probe showed that the aged cells possessed
significantly shorter telomeres than their younger counterparts,
supporting the notion that there will be fewer shelterin binding sites.
Using immunoblotting to compare the levels of several shelterin subunits
(TRF2, hRAP1, and POT1), we found that TRF2, the DNA binding subunit that
targets hRAP1 to the telomeres, and POT1 decrease in level as would be
expected when fewer binding sites are present for the complex.
Interestingly, the levels of hRAP1 did not decrease proportionally and
remained relatively high compared to other subunits. These data suggest
that as telomeres decrease in length and shelterin binding sites become
less numerous, most shelterin subunits are degraded, but hRAP1 most
likely plays an additional role. We have stressed young HDFn cells with
hydrogen peroxide to age them prematurely. Upon treatment, the young
cells (PDL of 8) became similar in appearance to the untreated, aged
cells at PDL greater than 25. In the treated, young cells, hRAP1 levels
in the nucleus decreased in a manner that was unaffected by inhibition of
the proteasome, suggesting that during the oxidative stress, hRAP1
translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Taken together, our data
suggest that RAP1 plays a role in stress signaling or response to
cellular aging.

