Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alterations in biopsy samples predict the chemosensitivity
of pediatric osteosarcoma


PURPOSE: Sensitivity of preoperative chemotherapy, evaluated by a
histological analysis using resected tumor tissue, is the most important
prognostic factor for osteosarcoma (OS). Methotrexate, doxorubicin,
cisplatin (MAP regimen), and ifosfamide (IFO) are recognized as key drugs
for OS, although it is still debatable whether addition of IFO for all OS
patient is beneficial or not. In this study, to construct a prediction
system of chemosensitivity of preoperative chemotherapy for pediatric OS
patients, array CGH and NGS technologies were applied.METHODS:
Pre-therapeutic biopsy tumor samples of 30 pediatric conventional OS
patients treated in our institute who had homogeneous
clinicopathological- and therapeutic- background were analyzed. The
patients were divided into three groups (A:MAP-sensitive, B:IFO-sensitive
and C:resistant to both) according to the histological response to
chemotherapy including MAP and/or IFO. Twenty-two tumor samples were used
as a learning set for searching candidate markers. Additionally, 8 tumor
samples were used for independent analysis as a validation set. Genomic
DNAs were prepared from frozen biopsy samples and used for CGH analysis
with Agilent 44k DNA microarray. Target-sequencing by using the Ion
Torrent AmpliSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel containing 409 cancer-related
genes were also conducted for 10 tumor/non-tumor pairs.RESULTS: Survival
analysis of this cohort assured that response levels to chemotherapy were
significantly correlated to the patient outcomes. Differential aberration
analyses of the copy number data resulted in selection of 8 putative
genomic markers for classifying into A, B and C groups with differential
chemosensitivity. Scoring system to predict chemosensitivity of each
tumor was developed with these genomic markers and subsequent validation
analysis indicated that the scoring system was remarkably consistent to
the patient properties. Target re-sequencing of 409 cancer-related genes
by using Ion Proton sequencer identified 98 candidate non-synonymous
single nucleotide variations (SNVs) (average 10 SNVs per tumor), however,
significantly recurrent mutations in C group have not been observed so
far.CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that copy number changes in OS
biopsy samples could be good predictors of response to preoperative
chemotherapy. These signatures as well as global mutation information may
be useful for the future genomics-based personalized chemotherapy for OS
patients.

