Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of BDNF-induced Trk B signaling inhibits peritoneal
carcinomatosis arising arising from colorectal cancer


Background:Tropomyosin-related receptor kinase B (TrkB) signaling,
stimulated by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) ligand, promotes
tumor progression, and is related to the poor prognosis of various
malignancies. Studies in our laboratory revealed: an association between
TrkB levels and tumor progression and patient prognosis in gastric
cancer; the association of TrkB with chemotherapy resistance in
esophageal cancer; and TrkB's involvement in the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in colorectal cancer. We have also demonstrated the
involvement of the BDNF/TrkB pathway in tumor progression in gastric
cancer.Aim:We sought to examine the clinical relevance of BDNF/TrkB
expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues, its prognostic value for
CRC patients, and its therapeutic potential in vitro and in
vivo.Methods:Two hundred and twenty-three CRC patient specimens were used
to determine both BDNF and TrkB mRNA levels. The expression of these
proteins in their primary and metastatic tumors was investigated by
immunohistochemistry. CRC cell lines and recombinant BDNF and K252a (a
Trk inhibitor) were used for in vitro proliferation, migration, invasion,
anoikis resistance and in vivo peritoneal metastasis
assays.Results:Tissue BDNF mRNA levels were significantly associated with
an undifferentiated histology as well as lymph node and liver metastasis.
The co-expression of BDNF and TrkB mRNA was significantly associated with
lymph node, and liver metastasis and peritoneal carcinomatosis. Patients
with high BDNF mRNA had a significantly poor prognosis, and those that
co-expressed both BDNF and TrkB mRNA showed a trend toward poor
prognosis. BDNF promoted tumor cell proliferation and migration,
facilitated invasion and inhibited anoikis in the TrkB-expressing CRC
cell lines. These effects were suppressed by K252a. In mice injected with
DLD1 co-expressing BDNF and TrkB, and subsequently treated with K252a,
peritoneal tumor metastasis was found to be significantly reduced, as
compared with control mice.Conclusion:Blockade of BDNF-induced Trk B
signaling inhibits peritoneal carcinomatosis arising arising from
colorectal cancer. BDNF/TrkB signaling may thus be a potential target for
treating the peritoneal carcinomatosis arising from colorectal cancer.

