Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy of malignant pleural mesothelioma using MET specific
t cells


Background: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an incurable cancer
predominantly induced by asbestos exposure. This aggressive tumor
commonly presents at an advanced stage of disease. Although surgery,
combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be used in disease
management, median survival from diagnosis is less than 12 months. New
therapeutic approaches are required to improve outcome in this
disease.Chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) are fusion molecules that couple
the HLA-independent binding of a selected cell surface target antigen to
the delivery of a tailored T-cell activating signal. Using CAR
technology, we aim to develop a novel immunotherapy for MPM that is both
safe and effective. These molecules are delivered to patient T-cells
using retroviral gene transfer, thereby stably re-directing their
specificity for antigen. The receptor tyrosine kinase MET is
overexpressed in >80% of MPM patients making it an attractive candidate
for CAR directed immunotherapy.Methods: Three MET-targeted
peptide-binding motifs have been incorporated into a second generation
CAR framework containing a fused CD28/CD3 endodomain. Functional
assessment of MET-targeted CARs has been assessed by co-cultivation of
genetically enhanced test and control T-cells with MPM cell lines that
express MET at various levels.Results: In preliminary studies we have
shown that human T-cells engineered to express MET CARs can destroy
mesothelioma tumor cell monolayers, accompanied by T-cell proliferation
and cytokine production. Xenograft models are currently under development
using bioluminescence to further evaluate functionality and toxicity in
vivo.Conclusions: These findings demonstrate proof of concept for the
utility of CAR engineered T-cells to recognise and destroy MET-expressing
MPM tumor cells. We envisage that regional i.e. intrapleural delivery of
human CAR positive T-cells could be used to maximise therapeutic index of
this approach.

