Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-angiogenic CXCL8 signalling underpins microenvironment-induced
relapse to anti-androgen therapy of prostate cancer


Introduction and Objectives: Bicalutamide induces a rapid and sustained
hypoxia in growing LNCaP prostatic tumors. This treatment-induced hypoxia
(>14 days) increases synthesis of the CXC-chemokine Interleukin-8(CXCL8)
co-incident with increasing oxygen tension and the restoration of tumor
vascularisation1. Consequently, our current hypothesis is that hypoxia
induced CXCL8 signalling underpins resistance to bicalutamide-treated
tumors and facilitates the adoption of more aggressive cancer
cells.Results: Culturing of LNCaP (PTEN null) and 22Rv1 (PTEN wt) cells
under hypoxic conditions (mimicking a bicalutamide-treated tumor
microenvironment) increased transcriptional activity of the androgen
receptor (AR), Hypoxia-Inducible Factor (HIF-1) and NF-kB, inducing
expression of downstream target genes associated with survival, metabolic
adaptation and angiogenesis. The magnitude and duration of these
responses was greater in PTEN-null LNCaP cells. Experiments were
conducted to determine how bicalutamide-mediated inhibition of AR
signalling would affect hypoxia-induced potentiation of AR, HIF and NF-kB
transcription. Bicalutamide or an AR-targeted siRNA failed to reduce
expression of pro-angiogenic, pro-survival and metabolism-associated
genes. However, concurrent knockdown of both HIF-1 and NF-kB activity
using gene-targeted siRNA's repressed expression of these hypoxia-induced
disease-progressing genes. Amongst the genes up-regulated in hypoxic and
PTEN-deficient LNCaP cells was expression of CXCL8 and its receptors,
CXCR1 and CXCR2, which we have previously shown to be regulated by HIF-1
and NF-kB activity. Potentiation of CXCL8 signalling under hypoxia was
found to sustain AR, HIF and NF-kB transcription. Combination of
bicalutamide with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib attenuated
hypoxia-induced AR expression and transcriptional activity and decreased
HIF-1 activity but failed to reduce NF-kB activity. In contrast, only
direct inhibition of CXCL8 signalling was shown to repress activity of
AR, HIF-1 and NF-kB in hypoxic LNCaP cells and increased LNCaP cells
sensitivity to bicalutamide.Conclusion: Our data suggests that targeting
CXCL8 signalling may therefore be a relevant strategy to enhance tumor
response to anti-androgen therapies. Inhibiting signalling of this
chemokine attenuates key transcriptional approaches induced in the
hypoxic microenvironment of bicalutamide-treated tumors. Moreover,
inhibition of CXCL8 signalling may prevent the re-vascularization
previously observed in hypoxic LNCaP tumors.

