Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) with a novel DNA-alkylating agent,
DGN462, are highly potent in vitro and in vivo against human cancer models


Most ADCs in the clinic utilize a tubulin-binding small molecule as the
cytotoxic payload. Although many cancers are sensitive to tubulin agents,
some are more responsive to DNA-interacting agents. We have developed a
new class of highly potent cytotoxic agents, IGNs, for use in ADCs that
consists of indolino-benzodiazepine dimers with a novel DNA-alkylating
mechanism of action. We found that IGNs containing a di-imine moiety act
via DNA-crosslinking and -alkylating, whereas IGNs with a mono-imine
induce DNA alkylation only. Although ADCs with either form of IGN were
highly active, ADCs containing di-imine IGNs caused delayed toxicity in
mice, leading to mortality. The mono-imine IGN, DGN462, was selected as
our lead IGN as, when conjugated to an antibody via a cleavable linkage,
the resultant ADC had favorable tolerability in mice (maximally tolerated
dose of 40 mg/kg; 700 g/kg DGN462 dose) without delayed toxicity.The
ability of DGN462 to alkylate DNA was demonstrated by measurement of DNA
adduct formation with double-stranded DNA and in cells. DGN462 formed
covalent DNA adducts through alkylation of the C2- amino group of
guanine. Consistent with the activity of other DNA alkylating agents,
DGN462-treated cells progressed slowly through S-phase and were arrested
in G2/M phase of the cell cycle in a dose dependent manner.ADCs
consisting of 3 molecules of DGN462 per antibody, attached via a
cleavable linker, had desirable biochemical characteristics, including
high monomer content (> 97%), low free drug (Most ADCs in the clinic
utilize a tubulin-binding small molecule as the cytotoxic payload.
Although many cancers are sensitive to tubulin agents, some are more
responsive to DNA-interacting agents. We have developed a new class of
highly potent cytotoxic agents, IGNs, for use in ADCs that consists of
indolino-benzodiazepine dimers with a novel DNA-alkylating mechanism of
action. We found that IGNs containing a di-imine moiety act via
DNA-crosslinking and -alkylating, whereas IGNs with a mono-imine induce
DNA alkylation only. Although ADCs with either form of IGN were highly
active, ADCs containing di-imine IGNs caused delayed toxicity in mice,
leading to mortality. The mono-imine IGN, DGN462, was selected as our
lead IGN as, when conjugated to an antibody via a cleavable linkage, the
resultant ADC had favorable tolerability in mice (maximally tolerated
dose of 40 mg/kg; 700 g/kg DGN462 dose) without delayed toxicity.The
ability of DGN462 to alkylate DNA was demonstrated by measurement of DNA
adduct formation with double-stranded DNA and in cells. DGN462 formed
covalent DNA adducts through alkylation of the C2- amino group of
guanine. Consistent with the activity of other DNA alkylating agents,
DGN462-treated cells progressed slowly through S-phase and were arrested
in G2/M phase of the cell cycle in a dose dependent manner.ADCs
consisting of 3 molecules of DGN462 per antibody, attached via a
cleavable linker, had desirable biochemical characteristics, including
high monomer content (> 97%), low free drug (< 0.1%) and symmetrical mass
distribution profiles. These DGN462 ADCs were highly potent and
antigen-specific in vitro against various cell types, including
PgP-expressing cells, with IC50 values ranging from 2 pM to 3 nM
depending on the target, cell type and antigen density. DGN462 ADCs
display bystander activity in vitro, indicating that intracellular
processing of conjugate by target cancer cells releases metabolites that
can kill antigen-negative cells in direct proximity, which may provide an
advantage in solid tumors expressing antigen heterogeneously.A
CD33-targeting DGN462 ADC was highly active against AML xenografts, with
a minimal efficacious dose (MED) of 0.6 mg/kg (conjugate dose), while a
non-targeting control was inactive. A DGN462 ADC targeting epidermal
growth factor receptor was highly active and antigen-specific against a
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma model, with a 1.6 mg/kg MED. The
intact conjugate half-life was approximately 90 hours in mice, and
bioactivity of conjugate was maintained at 72 hours post dosing,
indicating that intact conjugate remains active in vivo.DGN462 ADCs have
an acceptable safety profile and potent antigen-specific DNA-alkylating
mechanism of action with the potential for activity in tumors with low
sensitivity to tubulin agents, heterogeneous antigen expression and/or
PgP-mediated drug resistance.

