Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An siRNA screen identifies CHD4 as a target for epigenetic therapy


Background and aims: In the past decade, epigenetic mechanisms in the
regulation of tumor-specific gene expression have been elucidated
partially, prompting the development of therapeutic approaches in cancer
cells. In this study, we used an unbiased screen to investigate
therapeutic targets which might be effective combination with DNMT
inhibitors in reactivating hypermethylated genes. Methods: We screened an
siRNA library targeting 188 gene predicted as epigenetic regulators using
colon cancer cells that harbor a GFP locus stably integrated and silenced
by a hypermethylated cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. GFP-positive cell
percentages were measured using Guava EasyCyte Plus flow analyzer
software. For genome wide gene expression analysis, affymetrix
microarrays were performed. DNA methylation status was evaluated by
pyrosequencing analysis and Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of
Methylation (DREAM), based on next generation sequencing analysis. To
access biological effect of the combination therapy, we evaluated cell
growth using several cell lines. Results: We identified the chromodomain
helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) as a target; CHD4 depletion in
combination with DNMT inhibition synergistically reactivated expression
of GFP and endogenously methylated genes. Synergy was most pronounced for
genes with very low basal expression. DREAM analysis revealed that
methylated genes with promoter CpG islands were enriched among
reactivated genes compared to background genes (57% vs 27%, PBackground
and aims: In the past decade, epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of
tumor-specific gene expression have been elucidated partially, prompting
the development of therapeutic approaches in cancer cells. In this study,
we used an unbiased screen to investigate therapeutic targets which might
be effective combination with DNMT inhibitors in reactivating
hypermethylated genes. Methods: We screened an siRNA library targeting
188 gene predicted as epigenetic regulators using colon cancer cells that
harbor a GFP locus stably integrated and silenced by a hypermethylated
cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. GFP-positive cell percentages were
measured using Guava EasyCyte Plus flow analyzer software. For genome
wide gene expression analysis, affymetrix microarrays were performed. DNA
methylation status was evaluated by pyrosequencing analysis and Digital
Restriction Enzyme Analysis of Methylation (DREAM), based on next
generation sequencing analysis. To access biological effect of the
combination therapy, we evaluated cell growth using several cell lines.
Results: We identified the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 4
(CHD4) as a target; CHD4 depletion in combination with DNMT inhibition
synergistically reactivated expression of GFP and endogenously methylated
genes. Synergy was most pronounced for genes with very low basal
expression. DREAM analysis revealed that methylated genes with promoter
CpG islands were enriched among reactivated genes compared to background
genes (57% vs 27%, P<0.0001). DNA methylation levels of reactivating
genes after combination therapy were identical with DNMT inhibitor
monotherapy, suggesting that siCHD4 as a supplement to DNMT inhibition
works by a parallel, synergistic mechanism. Combination treatment
inhibited cell growth of colon cancer cell lines better than treatment
with a single DNMT inhibitor with minimal effects on the cell growth of
non-cancerous cell lines. Interestingly, depletion of CHD4 alone also
inhibited cell growth of colon cancer cell line but not of non-cancerous
cell lines. Conclusions: Combination treatment of siCHD4 and DNMT
inhibitor strongly reactivated hypermethylated and silenced genes in
cancer cell lines. CHD4 inhibition is a promising new approach to
epigenetic targeted therapy.

