Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BreaKmer: Detection of structural rearrangements in targeted
next-generation sequencing data using kmers


Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) to capture genes or regions of
interest has proven to be a cost-effective alternative to whole genome
sequencing (WGS), particularly for cancer research and clinical cancer
care. In this context, biologically or clinically relevant selected
genes/regions are sequenced to several hundred-fold coverage. However,
current algorithms and tools for detecting large structural variants
(SVs), such as translocations, fail to achieve either high specificity or
sensitivity, due to the fact that most available methods were designed
for WGS data, and thus do not take advantage of the reduced size and
higher coverage of targeted sequencing to improve SV calling.We developed
a novel method, BreaKmer, to detect indels, rearrangements, and
translocations from single sample targeted genomic reads. The algorithm
extracts mis-mapped single or paired-end NGS reads. From these reads,
hypothesized to contain SV breakpoints, contigs are built with a kmer
strategy: reads are broken into k-length substrings or kmers, and those
occurring in the reference are filtered. The remaining kmers represent
sequences containing any sequence variant from the reference, ranging
from single nucleotides to larger variants. Contigs are assembled from
reads containing sample specific kmers. SVs are called based on alignment
of the contigs to the reference sequence. With paired-end (PE) reads,
discordantly mapped paired reads are extracted and coupled with SV calls
that are made.To demonstrate BreaKmer, we analyzed NGS data from 166
samples enriched using 3 different capture panels (ranging from 305-504
genes). Our dataset contained 25 cancer specimens with known
translocation events verified by orthogonal clinical methods and a
negative control set of 141 normal samples with no known SVs. The samples
represented DNA extracted from FFPE, fresh frozen, blood and cell lines.
Among 25 samples, 15 had additional replicate samples. Mean target
coverage over all the samples was on average 150x. Specimens were
barcoded at library preparation and pooled, followed by hybrid-capture
targeting cancer genes and sequenced 2x100bp PE.All translocation events
from the 25 test samples and their replicates (46) were detected by
BreaKmer. An additional 19 translocations were detected among all the
samples and their replicates, while no translocation calls were made for
the 141 negative control samples.Our novel kmer strategy to detect SVs
displayed high sensitivity and specificity. We reliably detected
rearrangements of ALK, BCL2-IGH, BCR-ABL1 from lung adenocarcinoma,
B-cell lymphoma, and chronic myeloid leukemia samples, respectively;
indicating real clinical utility of this algorithm. In addition, our tool
effectively detects other SV types - such as indels in FLT3 and KIT,
among other genes. Our algorithm thus serves a pressing need for improved
SV detection in targeted NGS data, particularly in precision cancer
medicine.

