Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pan-cancer analysis of inferred homologous recombination
deficiency identifies potential platinum benefit in novel subtypes


Personalized medicine in cancer aims to improve treatment outcome, by
exploiting the molecular alterations of the individual tumor to inform
therapeutic decisions. Ovarian and triple-negative breast cancers with
defects in homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair are highly sensitive
to treatment with platinum-based DNA-damaging agents. Reliable biomarkers
to identify HR-deficient cancers prior to the initial treatment may be
used to stratify patients for platinum chemotherapy. Extensive genome
damage caused by deficient HR is readily observed as high frequencies of
allelic imbalance and loss of heterozygosity in cancers with loss of
either of the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 or BRCA2, but is also common
in ovarian and triple-negative breast cancers with no BRCA1/2 mutations,
indicating HR loss due to alternative mechanisms.Recently, three
independent methods were published that each quantitate the state of HR
deficiency in a given cancer, by summarizing different types of DNA
aberrations that are likely to be caused by improper DNA repair. Here we
compare the three scores, named NtAI (1), LST (2), and HRD (3), utilizing
a panel of 4400 patients representing 13 cancer types from The Cancer
Genome Atlas.We found that the three scores are highly correlated with
each other, suggesting they measure the effect of similar types of DNA
damage. We found a strong association with overall survival only in
ovarian cancer, which is consistent with frequent BRCA-related HR
deficiency reported for this type of cancer. Next, we compared the
distribution of the scores across cancer types, and found that those
types ordinarily receiving platinum as standard of care have the highest
median scores. Importantly, in most types not generally given platinum
chemotherapy we also found small sub-populations of high scoring tumors,
which may represent subtypes with a previously overlooked potential to
respond to platinum agents. Lastly, we used RNAseq to identify genes
whose expression is associated with high DNA aberration scores. We
compared the 100 genes most highly correlated with each score and found a
shared set of 53 genes; these were enriched for genes involved in cell
cycle progression, mitosis and chromosome segregation. This suggests that
replication stress, perhaps combined with or induced by HR deficiency,
could play a role in the generation of the measured DNA
aberrations.Overall, our results demonstrate that the three methods
measure correlated aberration patterns possibly generated through
replication stress, and that they show prognostic potential in patients
who receive platinum chemotherapy. In addition, we identify subsets of
patients suffering from cancers not presently receiving platinum
chemotherapy, who may benefit from it.1) Birkbak NJ, et al. (2012) Cancer
Discov 2: 366-3752) Popova T, et al. (2012) Cancer Res 72: 5454-54623)
Abkevich V, et al. (2012) Br J Cancer 107: 1776-1782

