Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoring sensitivity to cisplatin or TRAIL by targeting drug
resistance master regulators in endometrial cancer


Understanding the molecular mechanisms of drug resistance is vital to
enhance the efficacy of current therapeutic regimens. In particular,
metadherin (MTDH) and FOXM1 overexpression has been independently
demonstrated to have a critical role in chemoresistance. Overexpression
of MTDH correlates with poor clinical outcome in many cancers, including
endometrial cancer. Our previous study showed that endometrial cancer
cells are sensitive to the combination treatment of tumor necrosis
factor--related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) with histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor LBH589, an effect that could be enhanced by
depletion of MTDH. In this study, we focused on the therapeutic
strategies to restore sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin or
apoptosis-inducing TRAIL by disrupting drug resistance genes FOXM1 or
MTDH. CUDC907 is a novel investigational dual inhibitor designed to
target PI3K and HDACs. The high frequency of PI3K /PTEN/AKT pathway
dysregulation in endometrial cancer suggests that CUDC907 will also be
effective in this disease. Indeed, CUDC907 potently induced apoptosis
when combined with TRAIL in MTDH-depleted endometrial cancer cells.
Cisplatin is a frontline treatment for advanced endometrial cancers.
However, drug resistance causes treatment failure. Although the detailed
mechanisms of drug resistance are still elusive, gradual induction of
FOXM1 and its downstream target gene network may be involved in the
development of resistance to cisplatin. We found that co-treatment with
cisplatin and the Nedd8 conjugation system inhibitor MLN4924 restored
sensitivity to cisplatin by down-regulating drug resistant gene FOXM1.
These findings imply that simultaneously depleting drug resistant master
genes, such as MTDH and FOXM1, is a potentially novel avenue for
reversing therapeutic resistance to current chemotherapy and targeted
therapies in patients with endometrial cancer.

