Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusogenic liposomes: A novel therapeutic strategy to efficiently
target and destroy prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy in North American men.
While patients have benefited from advances in androgen deprivation
therapy, prostate cancer ultimately evolves to a metastatic or
castrate-resistant state that makes it the second-leading cause of cancer
mortality in males. In the past 3 years, new chemotherapeutic drugs with
efficacy in advanced disease have been introduced. Yet their efficacy is
limited by dose-limiting toxicities and side effects due primarily to
suboptimal biodistribution - they do not target tumors directly. To
overcome these limitations, we have developed a novel drug encapsulation
system for efficient and specific delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to
prostate tumors. The reptilian reovirus-derived fusion-associated small
transmembrane (FAST) protein (p14) increases the fusion of liposomes to
cell membranes. In this study, we combine these fusogenic liposomes with
peptides targeted to gastrin-releasing peptide receptors (GRPR) to
improve the delivery of chemotherapeutic payloads specifically to
prostate cancer cells while sparing normal tissue.A fusion protein
containing p14 and a C-terminal bombesin peptide was produced in a
baculovirus expression system and incorporated into liposomes. The
targeting and fusogenic properties of the p14-bombesin protein-containing
liposomes were confirmed using flow cytometry. These experiments
demonstrated improved delivery to cancer cells in vitro (PC3, LNCaP),
compared to non-tumoral cells (BPH). The specificity of targeted
fusogenic liposomes was confirmed by knockdown of GRPR and by blocking
with free bombesin peptides. We then used intravital imaging in an avian
xenograft model to measure the accumulation and specific uptake of the
fusogenic targeted liposomes in prostate tumors compared to benign (BPH)
and normal tissue, and found a significant increase in uptake in
GRPR-expressing prostate cancer tumors using the bombesin-targeted
fusogenic liposomes compared to controls. As a further proof of
principle, we modified a commercial formulation of Doxil to incorporate
our p14-bombesin fusion protein. This formulation showed significantly
enhanced cancer-specific cytotoxicity in vitro and increased efficacy in
xenograft models.Taken together, these studies demonstrate that
molecular-targeted fusogenic FAST liposomes are a promising platform for
improving the efficacy of chemotherapies that should show enhanced
activity in advanced and metastatic prostate cancers.

