Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erlotinib induces NF-kappa B dependence that promotes EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance in lung adenocarcinoma


The vast majority of patients with lung adenocarcinomas harboring
activating mutation in EGFR respond to EGFR tyrosine inhibitors (TKI)
(i.e. erlotinib). However, the magnitude of tumor regression is variable
and responses are short-lived with a median duration of 9-12 months. We
recently identified activation of the NF-B (Nuclear Factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) signaling pathway as a
key mediator of de novo resistance to EGFR TKI therapy in cell lines and
tumor xenograft models of lung adenocarcinoma. However, the role of NF-B
activation in mediating EGFR TKI acquired resistance in lung
adenocarcinoma is not well defined. We have found that erlotinib
treatment of EGFR TKI sensitive lung adenocarcinoma cell lines promotes
the rapid phosphorylation and degradation of IB (inhibitor of NF-B) and
subsequent activation of the NF-B subunit RelA. RelA activation is
accompanied by transcriptional activation of downstream NF-B target
genes, including IL6. Prolonged exposure of EGFR TKI sensitive lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines to erlotinib leads to EGFR TKI acquired
resistance that is accompanied by sustained NF-B activation and IL6
expression. EGFR TKI acquired resistance can be overcome by treating
cells with erlotinib in combination with PBS-1086 (relMD, Inc.), a direct
Rel inhibitor. Furthermore, concomitant treatment of EGFR TKI sensitive
lung adenocarcinoma cells with erlotinib + PBS-1086 prevents the
development of EGFR TKI acquired resistance. Together, these results
demonstrate the molecular basis for the synthetic lethality of combined
EGFR and NF-B inhibition and provide mechanism-based rationale for
polytherapies against both EGFR and NF-B to enhance response in lung
adenocarcinoma patients. Broadly, our findings provide novel insights
into the biological and clinical consequences of the context-specific and
dynamic functional interplay between EGFR and NF-B signaling.

