Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-155 In chronic lymphocytic leukemia influences B-cell
receptor signaling


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can influence the expression levels of genes that can
affect the clinical outcome of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). In a well-defined cohort of 86 patients, we observed heterogeneity
in the relative leukemia-cell expression of miR-155. Cases that expressed
high-levels of miR-155 more frequently expressed zeta-associated protein
of 70 kD (ZAP-70), used unmutated Ig heavy-chain-variable-region genes
(IGHV), and had shorter treatment-free survival (TFS) and overall
survival (OS) than cases with low-level expression of miR-155. Recursive
partitioning allowed us to define a threshold for high-level expression
of miR-155 (in copy numbers per CLL cell) that best associates with
adverse clinical outcome.We examined the potential basis for this
association. One of the genes targeted by miR-155 encodes the
phosphatidylinositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase SHIP-1, which can
dephosphorylate proteins that had been activated in response to B-cell
receptor (BCR) ligation. We found that CLL cells with high-level miR-155
expressed significantly lower levels of SHIP-1 protein and were more
sensitive to ligation of surface- than CLL cells with low-levels of
miR-155. Transfecting CLL cells with miR-155 reduced their expression of
SHIP-1 and enhanced the stimulatory-response to surface- ligation.
Conversely, transfection of CLL cells with a miR-155 inhibitor had the
opposite effects. The enhanced sensitivity to BCR-ligation of cells
expressing high-level miR-155 may account for its association with
adverse clinical outcome in patients with CLL.However, within any one
patient we also find heterogeneity in the expression levels of miR-155.
By GEO data analysis (GSE21029) we found that CLL cells in blood
expressed lower levels of miR-155 than did CLL cells in lymphoid tissues,
where they interact with supportive cells, such as Nurselike cells or
activated T cells, which can provide survival- or growth-promoting
signals via expression of BAFF/APRIL or CD40L, respectively. We found
that stimulation of CLL cells in vitro via CD40 ligation or exogenous
BAFF could induce higher expression of miR-155, leading to reduced
leukemia-cell expression of SHIP-1 and enhanced sensitivity to surface-
ligation. Moreover, we found that the proliferative subgroup of blood
CD5brightCXCR4dim CLL cells, which represent CLL cells newly released
from the tissue microenvironment, expressed higher level of miR-155 and
lower levels of SHIP-1 protein, and were more sensitive to surface-
ligation than the resting subgroup of blood CD5dimCXCR4bright CLL cells,
which represent cells that may be due to enter the tissue
microenvironment. As such, this study also demonstrates that miR-155
could be upregulated by signals in the CLL microenvironment, leading to
lower-level expression of SHIP-1, and enhanced stimulation in response to
BCR ligation.

