Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleolin phosphorylation profiling under normal and cellular
stress conditions


Nucleolin (NCL) is a ubiquitous nucleolar phosphoprotein that integrates
critical cellular processes, from cell growth (ribosome biogenesis) and
cell proliferation to cell cycle arrest and cell death. Deregulation of
these processes often lead to different pathological conditions including
cancer and heightened levels of nucleolin are often found in a variety of
tumors. Nucleolin is highly phosphorylated at the N-terminus by two major
kinases: interphase casein kinase 2 (CK2) and mitotic cyclin-dependent
kinase 1 (Cdk1). Although increased nucleolin phosphorylation by CK2 is
finely regulated in exponentially dividing cells, the role of nucleolin
phosphorylation in regulating cell cycle remains largely unexplored. The
high content of acidic stretches in the N-terminus of nucleolin protein
limits the effective use of mass-spectrophotometry as well as our ability
to generate various phosphorylation-specific nucleolin antibodies. In
this study, we used novel phosphate-binding tag to analyze nucleolin
phosphorylation in human osteosarcoma cells. With phosphate affinity gel
electrophoresis and subsequent western analyses, we have enabled the
detection and quantification of different phosphorylation states of
nucleolin during interphase as well as in mitosis. CK2 phosphorylated
nucleolin (as in interphase) has multiple bands that migrate slower when
bound to phos-tag as compared to hypo-phosphorylated nucleolin mutant
(6/S*A, where six consensus CK2 sites were modified from serine to
alanine and hence defective in undergoing phosphorylation). In contrast,
a single hyper-phosphorylated nuclolin band was predominant in mitotic
arrested cells. Furthermore, we elucidated nucleolin phosphorylation
patterns under various cellular stresses e.g. DNA damage (UV, CPT) as
well as kinase stimulation (e.g. arachidonic acid) or inhibition by
CK2-specific inhibitor CX4945. Our data provide for the first time
informative nucleolin phosphorylation patterns during different cellular
conditions. This profiling of nucleolin phosphoprotein is essential in
understanding the role of nucleolin phosphorylation in various cellular
processes as well as during cellular response to stress. This work is
supported by grants PSC/CUNY 66740-00 44 and CA175794.

