Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage conditioned media increases the expression of a
metastasis-associated oncogene, RhoC, and the migration of inflammatory
breast cancer cells


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most lethal form of breast cancer
because it progresses rapidly and often presents with distant metastases
at diagnosis. RhoC GTPases, known to play an important role in the
movement of cells, are overexpressed in IBC tumor cells. The mechanism
that causes this increase in RhoC expression is unknown. Tumor associated
macrophages (TAMs) have been found to facilitate the movement and
invasion of breast cancer. Therefore, as a component of the immune system
attracted to sites of inflammation, we hypothesized that TAMs play a role
in increasing RhoC expression in IBC cells, which consequently leads to
IBC's severe migratory and metastatic capabilities.The expression of RhoC
increased in two different IBC cell lines, SUM149 and SUM190, in the
presence of conditioned media (CM) from macrophage-differentiated U937
cells. This increase was not observed in either the normal-like MCF-10A
cell line or the non-IBC MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. From this
observation, a novel microfluidic device allowed the study of the
migratory phenotype of individual cells of the two IBC cell lines in
response to standard chemoattractants as well as the macrophage CM. As
expected, the presence of a serum gradient promoted the chemotaxis of IBC
cells versus serum-free control. A CM gradient also increased the
migration of IBC cells to a moderate degree. However, in the overlapping
presence of CM without a gradient and serum with a gradient, the cells
exhibiting an extreme migratory phenotype migrated roughly twice the
distance of the serum gradient control. We believe the CM acts to prime
the IBC cells in order to manifest an ultra-response to the serum
chemoattractant. In both IBC cell lines stably-transfected with shRNA
targeted to RhoC, we observed decreased migration when exposed to the CM
migration conditions. Therefore, RhoC expression is necessary for this
increase in migration.Studies involving RhoC inhibitors are ongoing, but
could yield promising therapies for the prevention of metastasis of IBC.
Future studies will aim to identify which cytokines in the CM and which
specific pathways are responsible for the increased RhoC expression and
migration of IBC cells. By understanding the specific mechanism of TAMs'
effects on IBC cells we hope to learn better how to control the lethal
metastatic nature of inflammatory breast cancer.

