Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer identification of mutated pathways and protein complexes


Large-scale cancer sequencing efforts such as The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and others have shown that tumors exhibit extensive mutational
heterogeneity with relatively few genes mutated at significant frequency
and many genes mutated in only a small number of individuals. This long
tail phenomenon complicates the identification of driver mutations by
their observed frequency. The long tail is explained in part by the fact
that driver mutations target genes in signaling and regulatory pathways,
and these pathways may be perturbed by different mutations in different
tumors.We developed two complementary algorithms, HotNet2 and Dendrix++,
to analyze combinations of mutations in known or novel pathways. HotNet2
uses prior knowledge of pathways and protein complexes represented in a
genome-scale protein-protein interaction network, and identifies
significantly mutated subnetworks using a heat diffusion model. HotNet2
simultaneously assesses both the significance of mutations in individual
proteins and the local topology of protein interactions. Dendrix++
identifies combinations of mutations de novo, without prior knowledge of
pathways or protein interactions, by finding sets of mutations that are
mutually exclusive across the tumor cohort. There are numerous examples
of mutually exclusive mutations between interacting proteins; e.g. BRAF
and KRAS in colorectal cancer. Dendrix++ generalizes this idea to find
larger groups of mutually exclusive mutations.We applied HotNet2 and
Dendrix++ to whole-exome sequencing and copy number aberration data from
3299 samples of twelve tumor types from TCGA Pan-Cancer project. Both
algorithms identified gene sets that overlap well-known cancer pathways
(e.g. TP53, MAPK, and RAS signaling pathways), as well as genes and
complexes with less characterized roles in cancer (e.g. the cohesin and
condensin complexes). HotNet2 subnetworks also contained novel candidate
cancer genes that were rarely mutated in this cohort and thus not
reported by single-gene tests of significance, including KDM5A, SHPRH,
and ARID4A, each of which interacts with well-known cancer genes. Many of
these gene sets have biological functions often perturbed in cancer, such
as chromatin modification (e.g. the SWI/SNF and BAP1 complexes) and DNA
damage repair (e.g. SHPRH). These results demonstrate the ability of
HotNet2 and Dendrix++ to identify novel combinations of mutations in
thousands of tumors, prioritizing genes and mutations in the long tail
for further experimental studies.

