Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The folate receptor-targeted agents, vintafolide and etarfolatide,
are not substrates for the reduced folate carrier or the proton-coupled
folate transporter


Vintafolide (EC145), a folate-targeted small molecule drug conjugate
(SMDC) of desacetylvinblastine hydrazide (DAVLBH), and etarfolatide
(EC20), a folate-targeted companion imaging agent, are currently being
evaluated in global phase 2 and 3 studies for the selection and treatment
of patients with folate receptor (FR)-positive tumors. Both of these
compounds have been shown to bind with high affinity and specificity to
the FR, which is known to be internalized via endocytosis. Though the FR
is the major route for delivery of folic acid (an oxidized folate
congener) into a cell at physiological pH, two other transporters, the
reduced folate carrier (RFC) and the proton-coupled folate transporter
(PCFT), play key roles in transporting folates and antifolates across the
cell membrane at neutral and acidic pH, respectively. It is not known,
however, if these two transporters play any role in the uptake of folic
acid-based SMDCs. Therefore, this study was designed to determine whether
vintafolide and/or etarfolatide are substrates for active transport by
the RFC or PCFT, or whether their cellular uptake is specific only to the
FR. To achieve this, we utilized a set of isogenic Chinese hamster ovary
cell lines which have been engineered from transporter-null R2 cells to
express the RFC, PCFT, or FR-, to evaluate cellular uptake of
3H-vintafolide and 3H-etarfolatide:Re. The results of the uptake studies
showed that no RFC or PCFT-specific transport of either SMDC occurred
under the optimal conditions for transporter activity (pH 7.2 for RFC,
and pH 5.5 for PCFT). Conversely, 3H-MTX, a known RFC and PCFT substrate,
showed significant uptake by both the RFC and PCFT-expressing cells, and
uptake was blocked by PT523 (specific inhibitor for RFC) and AG94
(specific inhibitor for PCFT). Though levels of 3H-vintafolide uptake by
the RFC-expressing PC43 cells were similar to that of 3H-MTX, no
inhibition of 3H-vintafolide uptake was seen with PT523 suggesting that
this uptake is not mediated by the RFC. As expected, very high
3H-vintafolide and 3H-etarfolatide:Re binding and uptake was seen in the
FR-expressing RT-16 cells, and this uptake was competable with excess FA
indicating that the interaction was specific to the FR. Collectively,
these results show that vintafolide and etarfolatide are specifically
transported via the FR and are not substrates for the RFC or PCFT.

