Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of ALDH1A3 as a driver of resistance to both
low-dose metronomic and conventional cyclophosphamide chemotherapy in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer in North American males.
Conventional, maximum tolerated dose (MTD) chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide (CPA) has been used in the past for PCa treatment, but
has been replaced by docetaxel. However, renewed interest in CPA is
emerging given its frequent use in low-dose metronomic (LDM) chemotherapy
regimens known for their antiangiogenic properties. While therapeutic
resistance limits the clinical utility of both LDM and MTD CPA, such
resistance appears to occur through at least partially distinct
mechanisms.To investigate the molecular changes contributing to
resistance formation, we have generated LDM and MTD CPA resistant PC-3
human prostate cancer cell variants (LCR and MCR, respectively), and
corresponding control variants (NS), through in vivo passaging in mice.
Using next-generation sequencing and gene expression analysis, we
observed 453 differentially regulated genes in LCR vs NS, and 1141 genes
in MCR vs NS. An intersecting set of 158 genes found to be differentially
expressed in both resistant tumor cell lines was further characterized.
The genes most up-regulated (including ALDH1A3, MAGEA2 and ELOVL2) and
down-regulated (comprising FN1, IL8 and IGFBP3) were chosen for
validation by qRT-PCR studies. We also undertook pathway analysis using
the DAVID database and the Reactome FI Cytoscape Plugin.Collectively, our
studies revealed that glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, biosynthesis of
unsaturated fatty acids and activated drug metabolism may contribute to
resistance to both LDM and MTD CPA. In addition, numerous chemokine
signaling pathway-related genes were found to be downregulated. Current
studies are focusing on the role of ALDH1A3 in LDM and MTD CPA
resistance. ALDH1A3 is amongst the most differentially regulated genes
found in our analysis, and it has been associated with chemotherapy
resistance, stemness and aggressive tumor behaviour.Despite different
mechanisms of action, there are overlapping mechanisms of resistance to
LDM and MTD CPA chemotherapy. If our studies confirm an essential role of
ALDH13A in such resistance, this could be rapidly clinically translated
by repurposing approved pharmacological ALDH inhibitors as anticancer
agents.

