Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling signaling networks using reverse phase protein arrays:
validating FOXM1 as a potential target to radiosensitize glioblastoma
(GBM) stem cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) continues to be the most frequently
diagnosed and lethal primary brain tumor. Adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy
remains the standard of care following surgical resection. In this study,
using reverse phase protein arrays (RPPAs), we assessed the biological
effects of radiation on signaling pathways to identify potential
radiosensitizing molecular targets. We examined levels of 172
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated proteins under conditions of
Ionizing radiation (IR) in patient derived GBM stem cells and established
U251, U87 GBM cell lines in vitro and in an in vivo orthotropic mouse
model. We identified subsets of proteins with clearly
concordant/discordant behavior between GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. In
general, molecules involved in anti-apoptotic, cell-cycle, survival
pathways, tumor metastasis and DNA repair were affected. Comparing in
vivo and in vitro samples after IR, 9 proteins were commonly elevated;
phospho(p)-STAT3, CDC2, CyclinB1, BAX, pEIF4BP1, pAKT, pRB, pMEK1, and
FOXM1. Conversely, 4 other proteins were commonly decreased; pPRKCA,
pPRKCD, pNDRG1 and pRPS6. Recent evidence of FOXM1 as a master regulator
of metastasis and its important role in maintaining neural, progenitor,
and GBM stem cells intrigued us to validate it as a radiosensitizing
target. We show high expression of FOXM1 across different patient derived
stem cells. When GBM stem cells (NSC11, GBAM1) were differentiated in
serum, we observed a decrease in FOXM1 levels, attaining more
differentiation markers. In both differentiated and un-differentiated GBM
stem cells, treatment with IR resulted in an increase of FOXM1
expression. However, inhibition of FOXM1 was only seen to have an effect
on un-differentiated GBM stem cells, and resulted in reduced cell
viability, a significant reduction in clonogenicity, and
anchorage-independent growth, along with enhanced radiosenstivity with
IR. Importantly, the combination of IR with FOXM1 inhibition showed these
same effects irrespective of serum-differentiation. These results clearly
suggest, inhibition of FOXM1 leads to radiosensitization. Since GBM stem
cells, which comprise a subpopulation of tumor cells, maybe responsible
for therapeutic resistance, we show that FOXM1 inhibition stands as a
potential cancer stem-cell specific chemo-radio therapeutic target for
GBM.

