Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-body bio-distribution of anti-5T4-mcMMAF (anti-5T4-ADC)
using fluorescence molecular tomography (FMT) imaging in a non-small cell
lung cancer mice model


Introduction: Currently bio-distribution of biologic drugs is evaluated
by PET imaging, autoradioraphy using radio-labeled molecules or ex vivo
methods. Advances in optical probes and non-invasive imaging technologies
have given us an opportunity to conduct such studies without the use of
radio-labeled materials or by traditional pharmacokinetic (PK) studies.
5T4 (also known as TPBG or oncofetal antigen) is a transmembrane
glycoprotein expressed highly on tumor-initiating cells. Anti-5T4-mcMMAF
used in these studies is an anti-5T4-antibody drug conjugate (ADC) that
reacts to human, cyno and marmoset orthologs of 5T4. Previously, we
showed the efficacy of anti-5T4-ADC in pre-clinical models (Sapra et
al.,). In this study we show the utility of Fluorescence Molecular
Tomography (FMT) imaging in bio-distribution studies with this ADC using
a H1975 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) xenograft model.Methods: For
the H1975 xenograft model, five million cells in 50% matrigel were
injected into the subcutaneous flanks of the female nu/nu mice, and a
biodistribution study was initiated when the tumors reached 500 mm3. The
anti-5T4-ADC and a control ADC (non-binding) were conjugated with near-IR
fluorophore VivoTag680XL. The labeling efficiency and quality was
determined by Nanodrop-8000 spectrophotometer and binding assays. FMT
imaging was performed longitudinally at 5min, 6hr, 24hr, 48hr, 96hr and
240hrs post injection of labeled ADCs. Ex vivo imaging of organs was
performed at intermittent time points after perfusing with PBS. Data was
analyzed using TrueQuant software. Plasma and tissues were collected at
various time points and analyzed by GyrolabTM workstation and LCMS
methods.Results: VivoTag680XL conjugation was efficient and achieved
degree of labeling between 2-3. Three-dimensional quantitative analysis
of FMT data showed significant specific targeting of anti-5T4-ADC to the
tumors (ex vivo and in vivo comparison), relative to the control
non-binding ADC. The peak accumulation in tumor was observed at 48hrs
post injection and the concentration decreased in later time points.
Liver was the major organ for the non-specific accumulation of these
antibodies/ADCs, followed by kidneys and lung. Both 5T4-ADC and
Control-ADC showed similar accumulation at 48hrs and 96hrs in liver,
whereas it decreased significantly at 240hrs. The FMT imaging data was
comparative and correlated with the traditional plasma PK profile
data.Conclusion: These results show that anti-5T4-ADC targets the tumor
better than non-binding ADC. This study also shows the utility of FMT in
bio-distribution studies of biologics. Since the fluorophore can be
conjugated to any protein/peptide, this novel approach can become a
platform technology in conducting biodistribution studies of all biologic
drugs.

