Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficiacy of NU7441-encapsulated PLGA nanoparticles in radiation
sensitization of prostate cancer cells


Introduction: Prostate cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related
mortality in men with an estimated 241,740 new cases and 28,170 deaths
expected by end of 2012. Conventional cancer treatments such as radiation
therapy can be ineffective due to radiation resistance of prostate cancer
cells. This resistance arises due to their increased DNA double strand
break (DSB) repair ability, especially through Non-Homologous End Joining
(NHEJ). In this study, we have developed biodegradable and biocompatible
poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA)-based nanoparticles containing the
potent radio-sensitizer NU7441
(8-dibenzothiophen-4-yl-2-morpholin-4-yl-chromen-4-one) for radiation
sensitization of prostate cancer cells by inhibiting DNA-dependent
protein kinase, which regulates NHEJ.Methods: PLGA nanoparticles
encapsulating NU7441 and iron oxide as an imaging and targeting agent
were prepared by a standard double emulsion technique and characterized
for size and surface charge. R11 peptide was surface conjugated onto the
nanoparticles for prostate cancer-specific targeting. Stability studies
in de-ionized (DI) water and serum were conducted over 5 days followed by
drug release studies in DI water at 37oC. Further, in vitro studies were
done to study cytocompatibility with prostate epithelial cells (PZ-HPV7)
and cellular uptake by prostate cancer cells (PC3). DSB repair kinetics
of prostate cancer cells following nanoparticle uptake was studied using
a DSB repair assay.Results: Our nanoparticles had an average size of
274.13+ 79.96 nm and showed good stability in water and serum for 5 days.
The nanoparticles also showed bi-phasic NU7441 release within 21 days at
37oC and >80% PZ-HPV7 cell viability up to 2000 g/ml nanoparticle
concentration. Further, the particles were selectively uptake by PC3
cells in a dose and magnetic field-dependent manner and showed effective
radiation sensitization of these cells in vitro.Conclusions: Our results
thus demonstrate that R11-conjugated PLGA-iron oxide nanoparticles
containing NU7441 are biocompatible and can be potentially used to
radio-sensitize prostate cancer cells in vivo.

