Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity to trastuzumab for gastric cancer is regulated by
miR-223/FBXW7 pathway


Background: A recent large-scale phase III study (the ToGA trial)
demonstrated the significant efficacy of trastuzumab in addition to
chemotherapy in patients with HER2-positive gastric cancer (GC). Although
trastuzumab has become a key drug in recent cancer treatment, resistance
to trastuzumab for breast cancer is a major problem in clinical practice.
However, it is unclear whether similar mechanisms of trastuzumab
resistance act in GC. F-box and WD repeat domain-containing 7 (FBXW7) is
the substrate recognition components of an evolutionarily conserved SCF
(complex of SKP1, CUL1, and F-box protein)-type ubiquitin ligase
complexe, which has been well characterized and shown to have important
roles in regulating the stability of multiple oncoprotein substrates,
including cyclin E, c-Myc, Notch, c-Jun, mTOR, and MCL1. Therefore, FBXW7
is recognized to be one of the major causes of drug resistance. The aim
of the current study is to clarify the novel microRNA (miR)-FBXW7 pathway
regulating resistance to trastuzumab. Method: Using 5 GC cell lines, we
examined the following items in vitro. 1. We examined the status of FBXW7
expression by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR).
2. We established the trastuzumab resistance GC cell line with continuous
trastuzumab administration. Parent GC cell line and resistance GC cell
line are subjected to miR PCR array. 3. We focused on miR223-FBXW7
pathway. We examined the status of HER2, miR223, FBXW7, and its target
gene MCL1 expression by up or down regulation of miR-223 in GC cell
lines. 4. We investigated whether the miR-223-FBXW7 pathway can affect
the resistance of trastuzumab. Result: FBXW7 and miR-223 expression
showed inverse correlation. Moreover, miR-223 expression was increased
and FBXW7 expression was decreased whereas MCL1 expression, downstream
targets of FBXW7, was increased while no significant change was observed
both in HER2 and p-HER2 in GC trastuzumab resistance cells.
Overexpression of miR-223 decreased FBXW7 expression persisting HER2 and
p-HER2 expression and can induce the resistance of trastuzumab. The
suppression of miR-223 increased FBXW7 expression persisting HER2 and
p-HER2 expression and can simultaneously restore the sensitivity of
trastuzumab.Conclusion: Our current study revealed for the first time
that regulated the sensitivity of HER2-positive GC cell line to
trastuzumab. These findings suggest that this pathway may be crucial to
the mechanism of resistance to trastuzumab in GC, which may lead to the
development of individualized treatment in clinical practice.

