Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted multifunctional lipid-PLGA hybrid nanosystems for
metastatic breast cancer imaging and therapy


Introduction: Targeted theranostic nanoparticles based on near-infrared
fluorescence is a novel concept in next-generation medicine that combines
diagnostics and therapeutics simultaneously to radically change the way
we diagnose, image and treat the breast cancer. Often these targeted
therapies are efficacious and at the same time less toxic than
traditional regimens. Our aim is to formulate a multifunctional
theranostic agent capable of tumor targeting and tumor imaging along with
anticancer therapy for metastatic breast cancer.Methods: We engineered
lipo-polymeric composite multifunctional nanoparticles co-encapsulated
with long lived dyes (like ADOTA) together with a combination of
anticancer drugs, docetaxel and curcumin by nanoprecipitation. These
anticancer agents have been found to show synergistic anti-angiogenic
effects. Further, curcumin has the potential to downregulate
P-glycoprotein expression which helps in reversing drug resistance seen
with drugs like docetaxel, thereby potentiating the activity of the drug
at lower concentrations. The formulated composite nanoparticles are
conjugated to Annexin A2 (AnxA2) peptide (LCKLSL) to enable specific
targeting to tumor site. LCKLSL hexapeptide in the amino-terminal domain
of the AnxA2motif is essential for tissue plasminogen activator binding.
Therefore AnxA2 peptide will serve as a useful therapeutic target against
invasion and metastasis.Results: Multifunctional nanoparticles were
successfully formulated and then characterized for drug loading
efficiency, particle size, encapsulation efficiency, surface morphology,
zeta potential and in vitro drug release profiles. The results show
smooth and spherical nanoparticles when seen under TEM with drug
encapsulation of 50% for curcumin and 19% for docetaxel. The particle
size distribution showed uniform distribution with average size
being11010nm. Zeta potential varied between -355mV. Percent AnxA2 peptide
attachment on the nanoparticles was determined by using Flow cytometry
and found to be 74%. Intracellular uptake in breast cancer cell line (MDA
MB231) was carried out and showed robust uptake. The nanoparticle
formulations were further evaluated by cytotoxic studies and synergy
between anticancer drugs was established. Mouse xenograft studies showed
significant tumor regreesion for AnxA2 targeted curcumin and docetaxel
loaded hybrid nanoparticles as compared to untreated mice.Conclusion:
This study would help validate these targeted theranostic nanoparticles
in metastatic breast cancer mouse model thus highlighting the immense
clinical potential of targeted multifunctional theranostic nanoparticles
for imaging and therapy of metastatic breast cancer.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

