Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCAM (breast cancer attractor metagenes): A new tool for assessing
breast cancer prognosis


The winning model of the Sage Bionetworks/DREAM Breast Cancer Prognosis
Challenge (Sci Transl Med, 17 April 2013: Vol. 5, Issue 181, p. 181ra50)
made use of several novel molecular features, called attractor metagenes,
as well as another metagene involving the expression levels of two genes,
FGD3 and SUSD3, which are genomically adjacent to each other. Here we
present the results of our follow-up work developing a breast cancer
prognostic test, called BCAM (Breast Cancer Attractor Metagenes). BCAM
was derived from the Challenge winning models by excluding unusable
features and optimizing performance in predicting breast cancer specific
survival. BCAM incorporates underlying tumor biology by including five
molecular features: the FGD3-SUSD3 metagene and four attractor metagenes
(CIN, MES, LYM, and HER2, which are associated with mitotic chromosomal
instability, mesenchymal transition, lymphocyte infiltration, and
expression of the HER2 amplicon, respectively); as well as incorporating
the extent of disease: tumor size and the number of positive lymph nodes.
Based on analysis of three breast cancer data sets with appropriate whole
transcriptome and clinical outcomes data (allowing for time to recurrence
as a phenotype), our results suggest that the combination of features
used in BCAM outperforms the combination of features used in existing
breast cancer biomarker products: Oncotype DX, Mammaprint and PAM50. The
molecular features in BCAM were also shown to have improved performance
against the Oncotype DX and PAM50 features in the subset of ER positive
tumors treated with hormonal therapy, and against MammaPrint in the
subset of lymph node negative tumors with size less than 50 mm. In
addition, performance was significantly improved when the ER group of the
Oncotype DX panel was replaced by the FGD3-SUSD3 metagene. All
evaluations of prognostic performance were shown to be statistically
significant by multiple rounds of random splitting. We also present a
web-based version of BCAM (http://128.59.65.24:8080/brcabiomarker), in
which uploaded gene expression data from a patient's tumor are analyzed
and integrated with tumor size and number of positive nodes, and a report
is generated containing a percentile prognostic score against the 2,000
patient METABRIC data set (Nature, 21 June 2012: Vol. 486, Issue 7403, p.
346-52), the corresponding ten-year breast cancer specific survival rate,
and additional scores representing individual molecular features. We
currently envision this facility evolving into an open crowd-sourced
biomarker tool providing prognosis and therapy response prediction. This
facility will also allow these scores to be directly obtained and used in
any breast cancer cohort study.

