Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitor VS-6063 (defactinib)
preferentially targets cancer stem cells in triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is defined phenotypically as the
lack of ER, PR and HER2 expression, and comprises a heterogeneous group
of breast cancers. Cancer stem cells (CSCs), identified as either ALDH1+
or CD44hi/CD24lo subpopulations in breast cancer, have been shown to be
resistant to standard chemotherapy and associated with poor clinical
outcome. In recent reports, the presence of ALDH1+ (but not ALDH1-) cells
in axillary lymph nodes following neo-adjuvant chemotherapy was
associated with poor overall survival. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a
non-receptor tyrosine kinase that orchestrates cell signaling through
integrins and growth factor receptors. In addition to regulating the
proliferation, survival, invasion and metastasis of cancer cells, FAK
also plays a critical role in the self-renewal and survival of CSCs.
VS-6063 (defactinib) is a potent, selective, and orally bioavailable FAK
inhibitor with demonstrated tolerability and preliminary signs of
clinical activity as a single agent and in combination with paclitaxel in
phase I clinical trials. We report here that VS-6063 preferentially
targets CSCs in preclinical models of TNBC. The effect of VS-6063 on CSCs
was assessed in a panel of orthogonal assays. Treatment of human TNBC
cells with VS-6063 in 3D matrigel reduced the percentage of Aldefluor+
CSCs, Hoechst dye-excluding side population (SP) CSCs, and
tumorsphere-forming efficiency in a serial tumorsphere passaging assay,
suggesting that VS-6063 preferentially inhibits CSCs. VS-6063 also
reduced the proportion of Aldefluor+ CSCs in primary breast cancer tissue
specimens cultured ex vivo. Consistent with the concept that the effect
of VS-6063 on CSCs is mediated by FAK inhibition, siRNA-mediated
knockdown of FAK in SUM159 TNBC cells recapitulated the inhibitory effect
of VS-6063 on CSCs. In contrast, the standard-of-care (SoC)
chemotherapeutic agents paclitaxel and doxorubicin enriched the
percentage of CSCs, suggesting that these SoC agents preferentially
target bulk tumor cells relative to CSCs. When administered in
combination, VS-6063 attenuated the chemotherapy-induced enrichment of
CSCs. Following oral administration of VS-6063 in the MDA-MB-231 human
TNBC xenograft model in vivo, reduction of CSCs in tumors was evidenced
by a decrease in secondary tumorsphere-forming efficiency. Importantly,
cells dissociated from VS-6063-treated tumors displayed reduced
tumor-initiating capability upon re-implantation into immunodeficient
mice in limiting dilutions. In summary, our results indicate that the FAK
inhibitor VS-6063 preferentially targets TNBC CSCs and support the
clinical development of VS-6063 in combination with SoC agents, such as
paclitaxel, to potentially improve clinical outcomes for patients with
TNBC through simultaneous targeting of both CSCs and bulk tumor cells.

