Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor miR-30a inhibits LOX expression and progression
in anaplastic thyroid cancer


one of the most aggressive human malignancies with a median survival time
of less than one year. A better understanding of the molecular events
involved in ATC initiation and progression that could be targeted for
therapy is gravely needed. There is limited data on the role of miRNAs in
ATC. Screening of miRNA expression profile in thyroid cancer samples
showed significant downregulation of miR-30a in ATC compared to
differentiated thyroid cancer and normal tissue. Ectopic expression of
miR-30a in vitro decreased invasion and migration of ATC cells with
downregulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and
Lysyl Oxidase (LOX) expression, a predicted target of miR-30a. Using an
in vivo mouse model of ATC metastases, miR-30a significantly decreased
lung metastasis with decreased vimentin, CD44 and LOX expression in lung
metastases tumor tissue. We also found that LOX and its downstream target
TWIST-1 are highly expressed in ATC, and the expression of both were
significantly, inversely correlated with miR-30a expression (p= 0.0026).
In addition, the analysis of 454 primary thyroid cancer samples from The
Cancer Genome Atlas dataset demonstrated upregulation of LOX and
downregulation of miR-30a in high-risk thyroid cancer. These findings
suggest that LOX and miR-30a are prognostic markers for aggressive
thyroid cancer.To determine whether LOX is a direct effector of miR-30a,
the 3UTR region of LOX was cloned into a luciferase reporter plasmid.
Transient transfection of 3UTR-LOX along with miR-30a in ATC cell lines
led to a decrease in luciferase activity when compared to the
co-transfection of 3UTR-LOX with negative control miRNA, demonstrating
that LOX is a direct target of miR-30a.In vitro treatment of 4 ATC cell
lines with -aminoproprionitrile (BAPN), an irreversible inhibitor of LOX,
had no effect on cell proliferation but inhibited cell invasion and
migration and significantly decreased EMT markers and CD44 expression.
Moreover, BAPN-treated mice with metastatic human ATC tumors had
significantly fewer tumors and smaller size of lung metastases. Our data
taken together support a critical role of miR-30a in ATC progression,
which is mediated by LOX, and suggests that miR-30a and LOX is possible
therapeutic target in ATC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

