Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum fucosylated haptoglobin is a novel prognostic biomarker for
prostate cancer: Detailed analyses of its oligosaccharide structures


Fucosylation is a crucial oligosaccharide modification in cancer and
inflammation, which is catalyzed by alpha 1-3 (Futs3-7and Futs9-11)/
alpha 1-6(Fut8) fucosyltransferases. Alpha1-3 fucosyltransferase is
involved in synthesis of Lewis type fucosylation and alpha 1-6
fucosylation is involved in core fucosylation. We have reported that
fucosylated haptoglobin (Fuc-Hpt) is a cancer biomarker for patients with
pancreatic cancer and colorectal cancer, and developed a lectin-antibody
ELISA to measure serum levels of Fuc-Hpt. In the present study, we
evaluated serum Fuc-Hpt levels in patients with localized prostate cancer
and analyzed the molecular mechanisms in terms of the sources of Fuc-Hpt
producing tissue.Methods: Fuc-Hpt levels in 98 preoperative serum samples
from patients who underwent radical prostatectomy (RP) were measured by
lectin-antibody ELISA. Expression of Fut8 and haptoglobin proteins in
prostate cancer cell lines (LnCAP, 22Rv1, DU145, and PC3) and
prostatectomy specimens were analyzed by Western blot and
immunohistochemical analysis, respectively. Site-specific N-glycan
analyses of haptoglobin in sera obtained from patients with prostate
cancer were performed using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry.Results: Fuc-Hpt levels were significantly associated
with Gleason score (GS), but not with PSA levels. The area under the
receiver-operator characteristics curve (AUC) for Fuc-Hpt of the
prediction of Gleason score 7 or more in prostatectomy specimens was
0.753, in contrast to the PSA AUC of 0.561 and the PSAD AUC of 0.558. The
Fuc-Hpt AUC of the prediction of GS upgrading from biopsy GS6 to RP GS7
or more was 0.689, in contrast to the PSA AUC of 0.588 and the PSAD AUC
of 0.557. Multivariable analysis revealed that Fuc-Hpt levels were
significantly associated with biochemical recurrence after prostatectomy.
Western blot analysis showed that prostate cancer cells expressed both
Fut8 and haptoglobin. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive Fut8
and haptoglobin staining in prostate cancer cells in prostatectomy
specimens. Mass spectrometry analyses demonstrated that the
oligosaccharide structure of Fuc-Hpt from men with prostate cancer was
different from that from patients with gastrointestinal
cancer.Conclusions: Fuc-Hpt in sera of patients with prostate cancer is
mainly core Fuc-Hpt, but not Lewis type Fuc-Hpt. It is suggested that
Fuc-Hpt is produced from prostate cancer cells. Elevations in serum
Fuc-Hpt from patients with high Gleason score could be value in further
studying Fuc-Hpt as a serum biomarker. Serum Fuc-Hpt levels may aid in
prognostication of localized prostate cancer.

