Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker-driven inhibition of MET and EGFR pathways in
hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma models with increased efficacy in a
sorafenib-tolerant model


Introduction: c-MET and EGFR pathways are often deregulated in human
cancer progression including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
cholangiocarcinoma (CK), in which high levels of c-MET and EGFR have been
correlated with poor prognosis. Moreover, MET and EGFR has been involved
in sorafenib and platinum resistance. Our study was aimed at
characterizing MET and EGFR expression in various HCC and CK models and
to evaluate their inhibition on cell properties in terms of cell
signaling, viability, and invasion.Material and Methods: SU11274 and
lapatinib are specific inhibitors of activated MET and EGFR/HER2
respectively. Antiproliferative effects were evaluated in the HCC cell
lines, SK-HEP1 and its sorafenib-tolerant counterpart, SK-Sora as well as
in the cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, Mz-chA-1, Mz-chA-2, OZ, HuCCT-1 and
SK-CH using MTT assay. Protein levels were assessed by Western blot. Cell
motility was investigated by wound-healing and matrigel invasion
assays.Results: Expression levels of MET and EGFR defined two subgroups
of cells. SK-Sora, Mz-ch-A1, Mz-ch-A2 and HuCCT-1 expressed high levels
of MET but low levels of EGFR (high-MET/low-EGFR cell lines); whereas
SK-HEP1, OZ and SK-CH were characterized by low MET expression and high
EGFR levels (low-MET/high-EGFR cell lines). These subgroups displayed
differential sensitivity towards MET and EGFR inhibitors. Whereas 5M
SU11274 induced 62-85% growth inhibition in the group of
high-MET/low-EGFR cells, low-MET/high-EGFR cells displayed 0-48 % growth
inhibition. By contrast, low-MET/high-EGFR cells were much more sensitive
to lapatinib than high-MET/low-EGFR cells with a mean growth inhibition
at 20M of 70% and 35%, respectively. As well, HGF-dependent invasion was
more potently inhibited in high-MET/low EGFR than in low-MET/high-EGFR
cells. Cells sensitivity to receptor inhibition could be explained by the
intrinsic inducibility of MET and EGFR pathways. HGF-induced MET
activation was associated with differential patterns of p-MET, p-GAB1,
p-ERK1/2, and p-AKT between the two cell groups. This increased
inducibility of high-MET/low-EGFR cells was translated into increased
sensitivity to SU11274 inhibition compared to low-MET/high-EGFR cells.
Differential effects of lapatinib on cell signaling and invasion will be
detailed.Conclusion: MET and EGFR expression profiles defined two
subgroups of HCC and CK cell lines with differential inhibition
sensitivity towards MET and EGFR inhibitors. To maximize the inhibition
potential of these molecules, our results suggest that high-MET/low EGFR
might be the candidate tumor types to evaluate MET inhibitors, whereas
low-MET/high-EGFR tumors may be preferentially tested for EGFR pathway
inhibition. Moreover, these results suggest that MET could be an
attractive target in sorafenib resistant HCC patients.

