Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of immune signatures predicting for clinical
outcome measured by flow-cytometry and immunogenetic analysis of PBMCs
from breast cancer patients treated with docetaxel alone or docetaxel
plus vaccine


Background: Therapeutic vaccination is emerging as a potential treatment
to prolong cancer patient survival. However, there are not markers
available to identify patients that could benefit from this treatment.
The aim of this retrospective study was to identify PBMC immune cell
subsets and immunogenetic signatures of metastatic breast cancer patients
that, before treatment, could predict for clinical outcome.Methods: We
applied multi-color flow-cytometry analysis of PBMCs harvested prior to
treatment from metastatic breast cancer patients (n=43) enrolled in a
randomized phase II trial of docetaxel alone or docetaxel + vaccine
(PANVACTM-V and PANVACTM-F). The frequency of more than 200 immune
sub-populations was measured using an LSR-II (BD Biosciences) and
analyzed by FlowJo (TreeStar). A peripheral immunoscore was calculated
based on the correlation of each subset with PFS. From the same PBMC
samples, gene expression analyses were performed using GeneChip Human
Gene 1.0 ST Arrays (Affymetrix). Data set were analysed using Partek
Genomic Suite and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software.Results: The
flow-cytometry analysis showed that, in the vaccine plus docetaxel arm,
10 immune subsets from PBMCs at baseline correlated with PFS; these cell
subsets were used for the calculation of the peripheral immunoscore.
Patients with a peripheral immunoscore above the median showed a longer
PFS compare to patients with a peripheral immunoscore below the median
only in the docetaxel plus vaccine arm but not in the docetaxel alone.
The survival prediction analysis based on gene expression identified 7
genes that best distinguish (p0.05) with PFS in patients treated with
docetaxel alone.Conclusions: The calculation of a peripheral immunoscore
by flow-cytometry and associated gene expression analysis of PBMCs before
treatment, could be used for the identification of a specific immune
signature of cancer patients that will most likely benefit from vaccine
immunotherapy. Larger prospective trials are necessary to validate and
confirm the potential application of these methods to other patient
populations treated with immunotherapy.

