Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical validation of solid tumor fusion gene detection in a
comprehensive NGS-based clinical cancer genomic test


Background: As the number of clinically actionable cancer genes grows and
the size of most diagnostic biopsies decreases, next-generation
sequencing (NGS) becomes increasingly attractive as a diagnostic tool, as
it can detect all classes of genomic alterations in all cancer genes in a
single test. However, for NGS to achieve its full utility in the clinic,
robust analytical validation and performance comparisons against
established detection methodologies are required for each class of
targetable genomic alteration.Methods: Previously, we reported on the
development and validation of an NGS-based diagnostic test for accurate
detection of clinically-relevant genomic alterations across all exons of
287 cancer genes in routine FFPE specimens (Frampton, et. al, Nat.
Biotech. Oct 2013). Here, we present systematic validation of fusion gene
detection in the test, enabled by hybrid-selection and deep sequencing of
commonly rearranged introns in 19 (or, in an alternative version, 31)
genes. We created reference samples reflecting key determinants of
detection accuracy for gene fusions, including extent of stromal
admixture and variety of partner genes: We obtained 5 solid tumor
fusion-bearing cell-lines (2 ALK, 1 RET, 1 ROS1, 1 TMPRSS2) and mixed
these into 23 variably sized pools, such that each fusion was represented
at 100%, 50%, 33%, 25%, and 20% simulated cellular fraction at least
once. Gene fusions were called if a well-mapped cluster of 5 chimeric
reads or greater was observed in a targeted intron. We then verified that
the observed performance translated to FFPE clinical samples by examining
test concordance in 43 tumors (20+/23-) characterized for ALK
rearrangement by FISH. Finally, we evaluated the test broadly by
assessing detection prevalence of the three most common gene fusions
(ALK, ROS1, RET) in 724 lung adenocarcinoma FFPE patient samples,
including needle biopsies.Results: Of 32 tested gene fusion instances in
the 28 cell-lines samples, all were successfully detected (sensitivity
100%, 95% CI 89%-100%), with no false positive calls. Robust performance
translated to FFPE: of the 20 ALK FISH+ specimens, 18 were unequivocally
(+) by NGS, with remaining 2 specimens showing sub-threshold evidence of
the events. 22/23 FISH- specimens were NGS-, with the remaining specimen
an apparent false (-) by FISH. Clinical lung adenocarcinoma samples
showed 5% ALK, 3% RET, and 2% ROS1 rearrangement rate respectively, in
line with published data.Conclusions: We present rigorous validation and
performance benchmarks for efficient targeted fusion gene detection for
solid tumors in an NGS-based test for use in clinical oncology. Given the
ability of NGS to detect a much broader range of genomic alterations than
currently available technologies, particularly on limited tissue, this
type of testing can be a direct component of patient care and potentially
expand targeted treatment options.

