Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iodoacetate and 3-bromopyruvate exert differential effects on
human neuronal tumor SK-N-SH and U-87 cells


Recent interests in the Warburg effect stimulated a variety of studies
that have demonstrated many aggressive cancers have adapted to hypoxia
and shifted to a glycolytic phenotype depending on their
micro-environment. However, the mechanisms underlying their adaptive
behavior have not been delineated. To further investigate our hypothesis
that glycolytic enzymes are targets for new anti-cancer drug discovery,
we have examined the effects of iodoacetate (IAA), an inhibitor of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and 3-bromopyruvate (3-BP), an
inhibitor of hexokinase II, on human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH and
astrocytoma U-87 cells. Our results from survival assays showed that both
IAA and 3-BP induced concentration- and time-dependent lowering of
survival of both cell types, with the effects of IAA being more potent
than those of 3-BP in both cell types while SK-N-SH cells being more
susceptible than U-87 cells to 3-BP-induced cytotoxicity. Employing
lactate dehydrogenase release from cells to medium as a marker for
necrosis, we also found IAA was more potent than 3-BP in inducing
necrosis in both cells types. Further investigation employing flow
cytometric analysis revealed that at 1-10 M, IAA induced more apoptosis
in SK-N-SH than in U-87 cells while at the higher levels in this range,
IAA induced more necrosis relative to apoptosis in both cell types.
However, at 10-40 M, 3-BP induced mainly apoptosis but little necrosis in
both cell types. Our results are therefore consistent with the notion
that IAA and 3-BP exert differential effects in inducing apoptosis and
necrosis in SK-K-SH and U-87 cells. Studies are ongoing to further
elucidate the signaling mechanisms mediating these effects induced by IAA
and 3-BP. Thus, our findings may have pathophysiological and therapeutic
implications in employing glycolysis as a target for discovering new
drugs for treating aggressive brain tumors.

