Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The druggable proteome: Identifying novel target families for
cancer


Cancer drug attrition rates in the clinic continue to be unacceptably
high (1). As most failures are due to lack of observed efficacy, greater
focus is being placed on target validation (1), which in turn is driving
drug discovery efforts towards safer targets and pathways. Meanwhile,
large scale omic efforts are showing us that there are hundreds of
potential cancer drivers outside of the key targets known to the cancer
field. Furthermore, cancer drugs can function through the exploitation of
non-oncogenes (2). To mirror the systematic, large-scale and objective
identification of potential cancer drivers, we have applied a
large-scale, objective, systematic and multifaceted chemogenomic
approach. This combines biological, chemical, pharmacological and 3D
structural data (3,4) to prioritize druggable proteins and protein
families, identifying novel untapped families with potential for cancer
drug discovery. We have carried out computational druggability assessment
of the human proteome (35854 RefSeqs) using ligand-, structure-,
network-, precedence- and feature-based druggability analysis methods.
This has identified over 20 families that are likely to be druggable and,
as can be gleaned from the literature, have had little or no chemical
exploration efforts. We combine this with bioinformatics analysis of
multiomic data from 18 different cancer types, with a focus on GI cancers
of unmet medical need, in order to rank the families based on potential
evidence of deregulation in these cancers. Here we present the results of
this analysis, along with preliminary RNAi knockdown results of some of
the families. Application of these objective methodologies allows
identification of previously untapped druggable families for cancers, in
addition to establishment and application of a computational pipeline for
druggability assessment.1. Arrowsmith, J. & Miller, P. Trial Watch: Phase
II and Phase III attrition rates 2011-2012. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12, 569
(2013).2. Workman, P. & Al-Lazikani, B. Drugging cancer genomes. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 12, 889-890 (2013).3. Patel, M. N., Halling-Brown, M. D.,
Tym, J. E., Workman, P. & Al-Lazikani, B. Objective assessment of cancer
genes for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12, 35-50 (2013).4.
canSAR.icr.ac.uk at

