Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PM01183 shows an improved therapeutic index relative to
trabectedin and suppresses EWS/FLI1 activity at clinically achievable
concentrations


BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a pediatric malignancy characterized by the
fusion of the EWSR1 and FLI1 genes, which creates a constitutively
activated transcription factor, EWS/FLI1. It is widely known that Ewing
sarcoma cells depend on the transcriptional program of EWS/FLI1 for cell
survival. Therefore, the goal of this research is to develop and
clinically translate small molecules that suppress EWS/FLI1 activity. We
have previously reported that the natural product trabectedin suppresses
EWS/FLI1 activity. In addition, the compound synergizes with irinotecan
to suppress Ewing sarcoma tumor growth. However, the compound suffers
from a narrow therapeutic index that limits the poisoning of EWS/FLI1 in
patients. In this report, we show that the trabectedin analog PM01183 has
improved targeting of EWS/FLI1 and preserved synergy with irinotecan. In
addition, the compound is known to have a dramatically improved
therapeutic index suggesting improved activity of this compound in the
clinic.METHODS: In this report, we characterize the mechanism of
suppression of EWS/FLI1 by trabectedin using confocal immunocytochemistry
and chromatin immunoprecipitation. We show enhanced suppression of
EWS/FLI1 by PM01183 using the Fluidigm platform and confirm the results
with a luciferase reporter construct and high-content quantitative PCR.
Finally, we tested the ability of PM01183 to suppress tumor growth in
xenograft models of Ewing sarcoma both in the absence and presence of
irinotecan.RESULTS: PM01183 more effectively suppressed the gene
signature of EWS/FLI1 than the parent compound trabectedin. In addition,
the drug re-localizes EWS/FLI1 away from target genes in the nucleus
leading to suppression of these EWS/FLI1 targets. These results are
consistent with the activity of the parent compound, trabectedin, that
blocks binding of EWS/FLI1 to chromatin. More importantly, the drug
causes a regression of a TC32 xenograft and markedly suppresses growth of
a TC71 xenograft when combined with irinotecan. Finally, PM01183 has a
substantially improved pharmacologic profile in patients in comparison to
trabectedin suggesting that these effects are bio-achievable in
patients.CONCLUSIONS: In comparison to trabectedin, we have shown that
its structural analog, PM01183 shows enhanced suppression of an EWS/FLI1
gene signature and preserves the synergy with irinotecan that we
previously reported. We suggest a mechanistic basis for this activity
against EWS/FLI1 and show excellent activity against Ewing sarcoma
xenografts. Together, these results suggest that the clinical translation
of PM01183 as an EWS/FLI1 targeted therapy both alone and in combination
with irinotecan is warranted.

