Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of cyclin D1 in regulation of liver cancer stem
cells


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are capable of self-renewal, multipotency, in
vivo tumorigenicity, and driving metastasis. CSCs are more resistant to
conventional therapy, allowing recurrence of tumor. Thus, novel therapies
capable of eliminating CSCs are needed. Cyclin D1 is deregulated in many
types of cancers. Beyond being a cell cycle regulator and oncogene,
cyclin D1 also enhances stem cell (SC) self-renewal and promotes induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) reprogramming efficiency. Yet, the role of
cyclin D1 in regulation of CSC is not well defined.Here we investigated
whether and how cyclin D1 could regulate liver cancer CSC properties. We
overexpressed cyclin D1 in two lines of HCC cells, Huh7 and 97H and found
that the sphere formation capacity was enriched in Huh7 cyclin
D1-expressing cells than Huh7 cells. From dissected single spherical
cells, the secondary sphere formation capacity was significantly higher
in cyclin D1-expressing cells than both parental Huh7 (p=0.00) and 97H
(p=0.02) cells. Anchorage-independent spherical colonies (spheres) are
composed of a small number of cancer cells with stem-like properties.
Thus, the results suggest that overexpression of cyclin D1 enhanced
self-renewal capacity of liver CSCs. The cyclin D1-expressing spheres
displayed an increased expression of stem cell-associated genes Nanog,
Oct4, and Nordal/Activin. Smad2/3, a TGF- signaling effector, was highly
phosphorylated in cyclin D1-expressing spheres compared to monolayer or
spheres without cyclin D1 expression.More importantly, TGF-/Smad
inhibitor (SB431542) inhibited cyclin D1-expressing CSC self-renewal
shown by significantly reduction of sphere formation in two lines of
cyclin D1-expressing HCC lines, whereas it had no effects on sphere
formation in parental cells without cyclin D1 overexpression. In
addition, Erk inhibitor (UO126) showed no inhibiting effects, a further
proof of the role of cyclin D1 mediated activation of Smad2/3. These
results indicate that TGF-/Smad inhibitor might have therapeutic
potential for targeting liver CSCs.HCC cells are highly resistance
chemotherapy resulting in enriched CSC population. We further
investigated the sphere formation capacity of D1-expressing cells under
the treatment of chemotherapeutic agents in combination with Smad
inhibitor. We found that SB431542 could inhibit cyclin-D1 expressing
spherical cancer cell proliferation therefore sensitized the cells to
chemo drug cisplatin. In summary, our results suggest that cyclin D1
might promote liver CSC proliferation and self-renewal via activation of
TGF-/Smad signaling, with underlining mechanism is under investigation.

