Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG hypermethylation marks potentially curable acute myeloid
leukemia


Purpose: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous blood
malignancy. Genetic markers identify distinct subgroups. Epigenetics can
refine the classification and prognostic stratification. Our pilot data
on a small subset of genes suggested that DNA hypermethylation was an
indicator of prolonged survival.Experimental Design: To expand the
analysis, we used Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of Methylation
(DREAM) for high resolution quantification of CpG methylation at CCCGGG
sequences across the genome. We analyzed pretreatment bone marrow samples
from 100 AML patients and 19 control samples of normal blood
leukocytes.Results: We quantified methylation at 22,576 CpG sites and
identified 3004 variable CpG sites with the standard deviation of
methylation in AML greater than 20%. Hierarchical clustering of
methylation values at these variable sites divided the patients into
three clusters. Cluster 1 showed extensive hypomethylation when compared
to the remaining AML patients and normal controls. Mutations of DNMT3A in
the R882 codon were observed in 8/32 (25%) patients while 2 patients (6%)
had an IDH mutation. Cluster 2 had the methylation pattern similar to
normal controls. IDH mutations were found in 5/45 (11%) patients. DNMT3A
R882 mutations were detected in 3 patients (7%); in two of them they were
associated with an IDH mutation. Cluster 3 had the highest proportion of
IDH mutations - 7/22 (32%) patients; two of these patients also harbored
the DNMT3A R882 mutation. This cluster displayed the CpG Island
Methylator Phenotype (CIMP) with hypermethylation at multiple CpG sites.
We identified significant hypermethylation at 785 CpG sites (P20% when
compared to Clusters 1 and 2). One third of the hypermethylated sites
mapped within 1 kb of gene transcription start sites (TSS). We used DAVID
Bioinformatics Resources 6.7 to characterize ontology of the genes
associated with the hypermethylated sites. We found significant
enrichment for negative regulators of transcription. Hypomethylation was
rare in the CIMP Cluster 3. We did not find any significantly
hypomethylated CpG sites when compared to Clusters 1 and 2. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed significant differences in the overall survival
among the clusters of AML patients, all treated with standard ara-C +
anthracycline chemotherapy. Median survival in Cluster 1 and 2 was
similar, 1.5 and 1.0 years, respectively. The CIMP cluster of 29 patients
showed a remarkably long median survival of 14 years
(P=0.003).Conclusion: We propose that CIMP characterizes a subset of AML
patients with a good response to chemotherapy and long survival.This work
was supported by the NIH Leukemia SPORE grant CA100632 and by a Stand Up
To Cancer-American Association for Cancer Research Dream Team
Translational Cancer Research Grant, Grant Number SU2C-AACR-DT0109.

