Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative RNA-Seq analysis of MIS signaling: Potential relevance
as therapeutic strategy in ovarian cancer treatment


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in women
in the US. Mllerian inhibiting substance (MIS) is a glycoprotein hormone
that causes Mllerian duct regression through a complex of TGF- family
homologous receptors: a type II ligand-binding receptor (T2R) and a
tissue-specific type I receptor (T1R) that initiates downstream
signaling. MIS has been proposed as potential therapeutic agent in OC. We
have previously shown that specific combination of T2R/T1R receptors are
expressed on OC cells, however data is lacking on the MIS-dependent
pathways activated in OC cells in a T1R-specific manner. These
limitations hinder further development of MIS as a therapy. We sought to
determine the downstream signaling pathways activated by MIS in a T1R
specific manner. We designed a chimeric OC cell model system in which
GM-CSF can function as the ligand to specifically activate candidate
T2R/T1R combinations (MISRII with either ALK2, ALK3, or ALK6). RNA-Seq
technology was used to identify differentially expressed early and late
response genes. Over 15,032 genes were analyzed, restricted to genes in
which there were > 32 counts for duplicate samples. Pathway analysis was
performed using Ingenuity's Integrative Pathway Analysis Tool (IPA) for
genes which were expressed over 2 fold, with an False Discovery Rate
(FDR)-0.001. We observed 56, 37, and 51 early response (1hr) genes which
were up- or down-regulated after stimulation in OC cells engineered to
express either ALK2, ALK3, and ALK6, respectively. We identified a subset
of 18 of genes (e.g., ID1, SMAD7, FOSB) which were upregulated after
treatment in all MISRII/T1R combinations, suggesting redundancy amongst
the three T1R partner receptors. These observations will be confirmed by
RT-qPCR and immunoblotting. A majority of these redundant genes are known
to play roles in TGF- signaling and cell proliferation pathways.
Importantly, as we have previously shown that not all T1R candidates are
expressed in OC, we report subsets of genes (e.g., RASSF6, C/EBPB, CSMD3)
which were uniquely altered after stimulation only in the presence of a
specific T1R. This indicates specific pathway activation is dependent
upon T1R expression pattern in OC and likely determines response. In
addition to previously known TGF- signaling pathway, we found gene
signatures (e.g. FOSB, RASSF6, LRP1B, ID1) suggesting pathways which
affect cell proliferation, apoptosis, chemotherapy resistance, and DNA
repair in response to MIS. This is the first study to begin to define the
specific roles candidate T1R's play in signaling in response to MIS in an
OC model. An understanding of these pathways is a necessary prerequisite
to examining MIS as a therapy. These preliminary data suggest a role for
MIS in apoptosis, cytotoxic drug resistance and DNA repair. This can be
used to test combination therapy with currently available drugs and MIS
in OC treatment.

