Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression of structural change in breast cancer metastasis


Structural variations (SVs) have been shown to be a major source of
genetic instability in cancer and metastasis but remains understudied.
This is due to: (1) the limited power of paired-end sequencing (PES) in
detecting SVs that frequently occur around repetitive regions and (2) the
large amount (4ug) of high-molecular weight DNA required for mate-pair
sequencing (MPS), which is specifically designed to detect SVs even in
repetitive regions. Importantly, DNA obtained from FFPE tissue is heavily
sheared and therefore not suitable for MPS - excluding most metastatic
tissues in tumor banks.To overcome the barriers of MPS, we leveraged the
University of Pittsburgh Rapid Autopsy Program and the Health Sciences
Tissue Bank to obtain matched primary/metastatic frozen tumor samples
from 6 patients (19 total tumor samples).Multiple large-insert (3-5, 5-8,
& 8-12 kb) mate-pair sequencing, was performed for each sample to obtain
a complete catalogue of SVs. Additionally, whole exome sequencing was
performed to identify point mutations and to de-convolute clonal
evolution within each patient.After removing SVs found in matched
germline DNA, we identified extensive somatic SVs within the primary
tumor that tended to decrease in metastatic samples. This is likely due
to extensive genetic heterogeneity in the primary tumor that underwent
clonal selection due to metastasis and/or treatment. Well-known hotspots
(such as 17q), showed extensive intra- and inter- chromosomal SVs in both
primary and metastatic tumors indicating that these are likely early and
essential events in tumorgenesis. However, metastatic specific events
also clustered with 17q suggesting that this region continues to play a
role during metastasis. Somatic single-nucleotide variations (SNVs)
revealed obvious high density clustering of mutations (kataegis) that
overlapped with SV breakpoints. Further analysis revealed that these SNV
clusters were primarily TT-TC, which is a signature of the deaminase
APOBEC3B recently been shown to bind around dsDNA breaks and cause high
levels of mutations. We have observed examples of kataegis as early,
shared events and metastatic specific events indicating that kataegis is
an ongoing process through metastasis.Together these data show that
extensive SV occurs during breast cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis and
these SVs often co-occur with kataegis. As more samples and distant
metastases are sequenced, RNA-seq will be used to help prioritize
specific metastatic specific SVs for functional studies demonstrating the
role in the development of the metastatic phenotype.

