Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3D culture model for screening of cancer therapeutics


3D cell culture models are currently of great interest to the bioscience
community. This is most notable in the cancer biology area, where a
growing body of evidence suggests that more relevant and translational
observations can be made by testing compounds in a physiological relevant
3D model compared to a 2D model. In this study, we take a kinetic,
live-cell imaging approach to measure the growth or shrinkage of
non-adherent tumor spheroids using Ultra Low Attachment (ULA) 96-well and
384-well microtiter plates (Corning). These round-bottomed, hydrogel
coated plates facilitate the formation of spheroids by promoting
self-adherence as opposed to adherence to the plate surface. In a single
cell type, monoculture model, A549 lung epithelial carcinoma cells
developed into single spheroid structures in each well of 96 and 384-well
plates within 48-96 hours in culture. In both plate types, the resulting
spheroid size, ranging from 330 m - 600 m, was proportional to the number
of cells (1K - 5K cells per well). Post formation, spheroids remained
untreated or were subjected to three test agents, staurosporine,
oxaliplatin or cycloheximide. The increase or decrease in spheroid size
was monitored over 3 - 10 days using the IncuCyte ZOOM Live Content
Imaging system. Using the red fluorescent channel, spheroid growth was
analyzed using fluorescent area and intensity metrics. Whereas
staurosporine and oxaliplatin significantly decreased spheroid size at
high concentrations, cycloheximide treatment resulted in a cytostatic
response, effectively inhibiting spheroid growth in a concentration
dependent manner, while not reducing total spheroid area at any tested
concentration. Interestingly, in side-by-side comparisons of kinetic 2D
and 3D assays, we observed a significant, 10-fold (one log) shift in the
pharmacology of cycloheximide. In a 3D co-culture breast cancer model,
this study also illustrates the effect of Lapatinib on SK-BR-3 cells
grown in the presence of mammary derived stromal cells (fibroblasts).
Together, this study describes a kinetic, live-cell approach to measuring
spheroid size over time, illustrates a differential response of
cycloheximide in a 3D system compared to identically treated cells grown
in a 2D monolayer, and details a complex co-culture method for
elucidating the effect of Lapatinib in a physiologically relevant 3D
model of breast cancer.

