Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabozantinib affects multiple signaling pathways in glioblastoma
and is effective in a subset of xenograft tumors


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive form of
brain tumor characterized by poor prognosis and high recurrence rate.
Several new targeted agents are being considered for the adjuvant
treatment of GBMs. Cabozantinib, a multi-kinase currently in clinical
trials for several malignancies, including glioblastoma, targets c-Met
and VEGFR2 receptors, as well as Ret, Kit, Flt-1/3/4, Tie2, and AXL. Our
goal is to first evaluate sensitivity and molecular response of
patient-derived GBM cancer stem cells (CSCs) to XL184 in vitro.
Anti-tumor efficacy of cabozantinib as a single agent and in combination
with the DNA-alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ) in orthotopic xenografts
was then evaluated.Methods: Neurospheres enriched in CSCs were cultured
from resected GBM tumors. Sensitivity to cabozantinib was determined in
vitro. Cells were treated (IC40) in triplicate, and cell lysates were
analyzed by reverse phase protein microarrays. GBM CSCs were implanted
intracranially into nude mice. Cabozantinib was administered by oral
gavage at a dose of 60mg/kg for 4 weeks (5 days/week) as a single agent
or in combination with 40mg/kg TMZ. Tumor growth and response to
treatment were monitored by non-invasive in vivo biolumiescent imaging
(BLI) using the Xenogen IVIS System (Caliper Life Sciences), and overall
survival.Results: Sensitivity to cabozantinib treatment varied for the
different GBM CSCs. From 70 proteins and phosphoproteins measured, 29
distributed among several signaling pathways were significantly altered
after treatment in both resistant and sensitive GBM CSCs. Cabozantinib
single agent treatment reduced GBM tumor growth and increased mouse
survival in two xenograft lines. Cabozantinib monotherapy reduced tumor
size, as measured by BLI, but had no significant effect on overall
survival for another xenograft line, however, the combination treatment
resulted in sensitization of these xenografts to TMZ
treatment.Conclusion: The use of multi-kinase inhibitors is a promising
strategy for GBMs, and given the range of responses, identifying
predictive biomarkers, though challenging, will be invaluable for patient
stratification.

