Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncocidia: a small molecule dual targeting pan-anticancer
theragnostic strategy


Research on imaging contrast media over the last decades has led to the
discovery of small molecular necrosis-avid compounds (NACs) for potential
applications in diagnosis of myocardial infarction and therapeutic
assessment of tumor ablation using MRI, nuclear scintigraphy and optical
imaging [1,2]. The in vivo affinity of NACs to necrosis appears to be
orders of magnitude higher than in vivo antigen-antibody, ligand-receptor
and biotin-avidin interactions, implying their possible superb
applications. Based on a soil-to-seeds hypothesis [3], this stroma
targetability has now been extended from diagnostic to theragnostic
utilities by combined use of vascular disrupting agents (VDAs) to
formulate a novel anticancer approach, namely a small molecule sequential
dual targeting pan-anticancer theragnostic strategy or briefly OncoCiDia.
The dual targeting property and conjugated iodine-131 that emits both
beta and gamma radiations render solid cancers (Onco) with both
tumoricidal (Ci) and diagnostic (Dia) effects, thus the acronym of
OncoCiDia. Instead of directly attacking multimutant and refractory
cancer cells (seeds) as elaborated in most other cancer therapies,
OncoCiDia treats solid malignancies overnight by selectively destroying
and radioactively sterilizing their microenvironment (soil) in two steps
[3]. On day one, a VDA such as Combretastatin A4 phosphate (CA4P) is
intravenously (iv) injected to specifically shut down tumoral blood
vessels by disrupting the immature endothelium and to cause ischemic
tumor necrosis. However, peripheral residual cancer cells always survive
as the seeds for tumor re-growth, leading to cancer relapse. Thus, on day
two, a NAC such as hypericin (Hyp) carrying the beta emitter iodine-131
is iv infused, which selectively accumulates at the newly generated
intratumoral necrosis to create a harsh environment with crossfire
radiation and lethally irradiates the adjacent viable tumor cells to
prevent their repopulation. One episode of OncoCiDia exerts persistent
theragnostic effects over weeks to months due to the long decay half-life
of 8 days with iodine-131 and prolonged necrosis target residence of
131I-Hyp. Multicenter proof-of-principle studies and extensive
preclinical investigations on the efficacy, safety, formulations and
dosimetry have been conducted and the results will be demonstrated in
details. Our studies suggest that OncoCiDia appears to be a novel
unconventional anticancer strategy that may offer a simple, workable,
affordable and generic solution for diverse cancers, and deserve further
exploitation [3].References:1. Ni Y, et al. Necrosis avid contrast
agents: functional similarity versus structural diversity. Invest Radiol
2005; 40: 526-35.2. Ni Y. Metalloporphyrins and functional analogues as
MRI contrast agents. Current Medical Imaging Reviews 2008; 4: 96-112.3.
Li J, et al. A dual targeting anticancer approach: soil and seed
principle. Radiology 2011; 260:799-807.

