Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-affinity small molecule inhibitors of the menin-MLL
interaction reverse oncogenic transformation mediated by MLL fusion
proteins in leukemia


The protein-protein interaction (PPI) between menin and Mixed Lineage
Leukemia (MLL) plays a critical role in acute leukemias with
translocations of MLL gene, and inhibition of this interaction with small
molecules represents a new potential therapeutic strategy for the MLL
leukemia patients. We identified novel small molecule inhibitors of the
menin-MLL interaction with distinct molecular scaffolds by performing a
High Throughput Screening (HTS) of over 300,000 compounds. Extensive
medicinal chemistry efforts performed for two lead classes to improve
inhibitory activity of these compounds resulted in menin-MLL inhibitors
with low nanomolar binding affinities. The menin-inhibitor co-crystal
structures revealed that these compounds directly bind to menin and
closely mimic the key interactions of MLL with menin, resulting in their
high binding affinity. Interestingly, the hydroxymethylpiperidine class
of the menin-MLL inhibitors extends beyond the MLL binding region on
menin, providing additional opportunity for their optimization. We
combined extensive crystallography studies with structure-based design to
perform rational optimization and scaffold modification to rapidly
improve activity and modulate physicochemical properties of the menin-MLL
inhibitors. Treatment of MLL leukemia cells with the most potent
menin-MLL inhibitors we developed resulted in very effective and
selective inhibition of cell proliferation, induced apoptosis and
differentiation of these cells. These effects were associated with
downregulation of Hoxa9 and Meis1 expression, the downstream targets of
MLL fusion proteins required for their leukemogenicity, demonstrating a
very specific mechanism of action for these newly developed menin-MLL
inhibitors. In vivo studies are currently undergoing to assess the effect
of these compounds on leukemia progression in animal models of MLL
leukemia. Our studies provide a novel and very attractive scaffolds for
further development as a new potential therapeutic approach for the MLL
leukemia patients.

