Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS mutation status is associated with enhanced dependency on
purine biosynthesis and related pathways in non small cell lung cancer
cells


KRAS gene mutation is linked to poor prognosis and resistance to oncology
therapeutics in Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). We have explored the
possibility of exploiting inherent differences in KRAS mutant cell
metabolism to enhance the efficacy of treatment. We have identified a
greater dependency on purine biosynthesis and related pathways in KRAS
mutant compared to KRAS wild type NSCLC cell lines. Purine synthesis
requires factors generated from other metabolic reactions including
ribose-5-phosphate from the pentose phosphate pathway, THF cofactors from
folate metabolism and glycine / amide nitrogen groups from glutamine and
aspartate metabolism. In this study, microarray gene expression and
biological pathway analysis identified higher expression of purine
synthesis and accessory pathways such as folate metabolism,
5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide biosynthesis and glycine synthesis
pathways in KRAS mutant NSCLC cells compared to wildtype counterparts.
KRAS knockdown and overexpression studies demonstrated the ability of
KRAS to regulate expression of genes that comprise purine synthesis and
folate metabolism pathways. Moreover, pathway analysis and knockdown
studies suggest a role for MYC, an oncogene previously associated with
KRAS mutant tumors, in the regulation of these pathways in KRAS mutant
NSCLC cells. Proliferation studies demonstrated higher responsiveness to
antifolates such as methotrexate and pemetrexed in KRAS mutant NSCLC
cells, both of which may interfere indirectly with purine biosynthesis.
In vivo analysis of NSCLC tumorgraft models in nude mice also identified
an association between KRAS mutant tumor status and response to
pemetrexed. The expression of a KRAS driven folate/purine synthesis gene,
Methylenetetrahydrofolate Dehydrogenase 2 (MTHFD2), was also correlated
with antifolate activity suggesting its use as a possible biomarker of
response to antifolates. We propose that KRAS mutation drives increased
purine synthesis activity and as a result an elevated dependency on the
factors needed to feed this biosynthetic pathway such as those generated
by folate metabolism. Thus, antifolates can indirectly inhibit purine
synthesis through the depletion of folate cofactors which may account for
the stronger response to these agents in KRAS mutant cells. We are
currently expanding this study to examine alternative inhibitors of
purine synthesis as possible therapeutics in KRAS mutant NSCLC and other
cancers. Collectively, our findings highlight that a better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms underlying the dependency of cancer cells on
specific metabolic pathways may result in more effective metabolic
targeting and new approaches in treating specific cancers.

