Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendritic cell-based immunotherapy in combination with programmed
cell death 1 blockade reduced established tumors by activating Th-1 type
immune responses in a murine hepatocellular carcinoma model


Progress in treatments for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has improved
the prognosis of patients with HCC. However, HCC is usually associated
with cirrhosis and often recurs even after complete treatment of the
tumors in the remaining part of the cirrhotic liver. Thus, there is a
strong need for the development of a new intervention therapy that
suppresses the occurrence or recurrence effectively with fewer side
effects. Immunotherapy may be such a treatment and several clinical
trials have been performed for HCC treatment. Dendritic cells (DCs) are
known as professional antigen-presenting cells characterized by their
potent ability to elicit immune responses to tumor-specific T cells
against tumor-associated antigens. Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) has
been identified as a marker of exhausted T cells in chronic disease
states, and blockade of PD-1-PD-ligand interactions has been shown to
partially restore T cell function. In this study, we evaluated the
efficacy of the combination of DC-based vaccine and PD-1 blockade, and
investigated the mechanisms of the antitumor effects of the combined
therapy.In protection model, mice were injected with DCs or/and
PD-1-antibody before the murine HCC tumor cell (BNL cell) challenge. 40%
of mice treated with both DCs and PD-1-antibody rejected tumor challenge,
whereas other groups observed a palpable tumor in all mice tested. In
therapeutic model, tumor-bearing mice were inoculated with DCs or/and
PD-1-antibody. Significant suppression of outgrowth of the established
tumors was observed in the DCs and anti-PD-1 combination treatment group
(DCs + anti-PD-1, 138.00 56.66 mm2 vs control, 402.33 40.63 mm2 on day
42, P = 0.0073 vs controls). Immunohistochemical analyses of therapeutic
model showed marked infiltration of CD4+ cells, CD8+ cells and CD11c+
cells in the established BNL tumors of mice treated with both DCs and
PD-1-antibody. To investigate induction of tumor-specific immune
responses, we stimulated splenocytes of DCs or/and PD-1-antibody treated
mice twice weekly by DCs in vitro. Significant tumor-specific cytolysis
was detected when splenocytes of mice treated with both DCs and anti-PD-1
were used as effector cells (30.0% 2.8% for BNL and 7.3% 0.1% for YAC-1,
effector to target ratio; E/T=40).Our findings suggest that blockade of
the PD-1 PD-ligand enhanced the Th1-type antitumor immune responses
induced by DC vaccine. The combination of DC vaccine and PD-1 blockade
may be a possible candidate for a cancer vaccine for clinical trials.

