Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin inhibits proliferation and chemosensitizes gastric
carcinoma cells to 5-Fluorouracil


Background: Capsaicin (trans-8-methyl-N-vanillyl-6-nonenamide) is the
principal pungent component in hot peppers. The role of capsaicin in
carcinogenic processes is quite controversial. Although some
investigators suspect that capsaicin is a carcinogen, co-carcinogen, or
tumor promoter, others have reported that it has chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic effects. Interestingly, capsaicin has been found to
preferentially repress the growth of some transformed human and mouse
cells. Although the antiproliferative activity of capsaicin has been
ascribed to its ability to induce apoptosis. For example, The American
Association for Cancer Research reports studies suggesting capsaicin is
able to kill prostate cancer and lung cancer cells by causing them to
undergo apoptosis. The present study aimed to evaluate the cytotoxicity
and chemosensitizing activities of capsaicin alone and on 5-Flourouracil
(5-FU) treated gastric carcinoma cells.Material and methods: In this
study, the gastric cancer cell line HGC-27 was used. Cytotoxicity and
chemosensitizing activities were analyzed with MTT assay. Capsaicin used
a chemosensitizer and 5-FU was used as chemotherapeutic agent.
Supernatant levels of Lactate dehydrogenases (LDH), Glucose (GLU) were
detected as biochemical markers of cell viability. Additionally,
cytochrome c and apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) were evaluated with
western blot. Colonigenic assay and wound healing assays were also
employed.Results: Capsaicin and 5-FU both detected cytotoxic and
anticolonigenic on HGC-27 cells dose dependent manner after 24h/48h
incubation. Both compounds were found more effective at 48h incubation.
Furthermore, it is observed that the concentration of capsaicin higher
than 12 M may cause sensitization to 5-FU. Results suggested that
capsaicin had significant anticancer and chemosensitizing abilities; such
capsaicin were capable of causing multi-fold decreases in the half
maximal inhibitory concentration IC50 value of 5-FU. The chemosensitizing
ability of the capsaicin on HGC-27 metastatic lymph node from a gastric
cancer patient diagnosed histological as undifferentiated carcinoma
cells, in the present study is notable. The cytotoxic effect of capsaicin
was observed cytochrome c activation dependent pathway.Conclusions: The
continuing controversy surrounding consumption or topical application of
capsaicin clearly suggests that more well-controlled epidemiologic
studies are needed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of capsaicin use.
In summary, the present study demonstrated that capsaicin has the
potential to be used in chemosensitization for treating gastric carcinoma
in vitro.

