Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-cancer potential of thrombospondin-1 by inhibiting
angiogenesis and stroma reaction during cervical carcinogenesis


Introduction: Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is an endogenous angiogenic
inhibitor with different biological functions on various cell types. The
invasion process of cancers is associated with stroma reaction, which is
characterized by fibroblasts activation. Our study was to investigate the
role of TSP-1 in angiogenic switch and tumor stroma reaction, which is
mainly characterized by fibroblast activation to create a permissive
microenvironment for tumor progression.Material and Methods:
Immunohistochemistry was used to check TSP-1 expression and the stroma
makers for human surgical specimens. Subcutaneous tumors were generated
by inoculating 107 SiHa-vector or SiHa-TSP-1 cells into SCID mice.
Matrigel multi-cellular co-culture invasion assay was used to detect the
inhibitory ability of TSP-1 on the invasive ability of activated
fibroblasts (NIH-3T3) into tumor cells cluster.Results: The disruption of
TSP-1 fence (the expression in basal epithelia) in human surgical
specimens occurred concordantly during the transition from low grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) into high SIL. Meanwhile it was
accompanied by an emergence in the upregulation of stroma markers, -SMA
and desmin. Transfection of SiHa cervical cancer cells with a plasmid
expressing the TSP-1 exhibited anti-angiogenic activity in vitro, and
resulted in reduced tumor growth in SCID mice. It was accompanied by a
decrease in tumor vascularization and lower expressions of -SMA and
desmin, as compared with vector controls. Transfection with TSP-1 and
purified TSP-1 added to NIH3T3 cells did not alter the protein levels of
-SMA and desmin, but significantly inhibited matrix metalloprotease-2
(MMP-2) activity. Transforming growth factor (TGF-), which is a major
factor in the fibroblast activation, increased -SMA and desmin
expression, and the ability of cell migration and invasion in NIH3T3
cells. The increased migration ability and the invasive ability into
tumor cluster of TGF--treated-NIH3T3 cells were dose-dependently
inhibited by TSP-1. In contrast, transfection and exogenous addition of
TSP-1 in SiHa cells has little effect on the invasive ability of the
NIH3T3 cells. Discussion: Our findings suggest that TSP-1 play an
inhibitory role in the angiogenic switch during cervical carcinogenesis.
Meanwhile, TSP-1 can inhibit tumor stroma reaction that could be
attributed to the blockage of activated fibroblasts from invading cancer
cells. Our current study demonstrates that TSP-1 plays a broader role in
tumor cell biology including the ability to block activated fibroblast
(myofibroblasts) migration and invasion, in addition to its well-known
anti-angiogenic effects.

