Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor educated B cells acquire immune suppressive function and
promote tumor growth


B lymphocytes may play a role in inhibiting the immune response against
certain tumors, but the underlying mechanisms by which B cells facilitate
tumor growth are poorly understood.Murine EMT-6 mammary tumors grow
readily in wild type mice (WT) but are rejected or grow very poorly in
B-cell deficient -/- BALB/c mice (BCDM). Relative to BCDM, B cell
reconstituted BCDM demonstrate enhanced tumor growth, marked expansion of
Tregs in response to EMT-6 implantation, increased infiltration of both B
cells and Tregs into tumor, and a markedly reduced cytolytic T cell
response. Markedly decreased levels of CD49b+ NK cell and CD8+ T cell
infiltration into the tumor bed were seen in WT or in B cell
reconstituted BCDM, compared to levels of infiltration seen in BCDM.
Adoptive transfer of either IL-10-/- B cells or MHC-II-/- B cells into
BCDM also promoted tumor growth and expansion of Treg and suppressed
cytotoxic CD8+ T cell anti-tumor activity and IFN- production in vivo. We
hypothesized that tumor infiltrating B cells promote Treg expansion but
also may directly suppress T cell activation and proliferation due to
acquired regulatory function.In vitro co-culture of EMT-6 tumor cells
with nave B cells generated B cells of a distinct phenotype
(PD-L1hiCD86hiIAdhiCD62LhiLAP+CD44lo but CD25-CD69-CD80-). EMT-6
co-cultured B cells markedly suppressed nave CD4 T cell proliferation.
Flow cytometric analysis of tumor infiltrating B cells (TIL-B) revealed
that at day 21 post tumor implantation, TIL-B cells are
LAPhiCD62LhiCD86hiIAdhiPD-L1hiCD44+CD25-. LAP/TGF- expression on TIL-B
cells was gradually upregulated as tumor burden increased, from 23% on
day 8 to 50% of infiltrating B cells by day 21. In contrast, splenic B
cells at day 21 did not express LAP/TGF-. TIL-B cells also markedly
suppressed CD4+ T cell proliferation in-vitro when compared to splenic B
cells.Our studies indicate that the T cell anti-tumor response is
enhanced in the absence of B cells, due to acquisition of a suppressive
immmunoregulatory phenotype by migrating B cells following tumor
infiltration. We are currently looking for evidence of human correlates
of B regulatory activity observed in murine models.

