Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron chelation therapy increased the anticancer effect of
sorafenib in hepatocarcinoma


[Purpose]Iron overload is known to associate with the progression of
chronic hepatitis and the increase risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). We have reported that iron depletion inhibited the cancer cell
proliferation and reciprocally induced angiogenesis. Anti-angiogenic drug
synergistically enhanced the anti-tumor effect in iron depletion
condition. Sorafenib is molecular-targeting drug with anti-angiogenic
effect in HCC. We hypothesized that iron depletion also enhanced the
effect of sorafenib and investigated it.[Experimental Design]HepG2 and
HLE (Human HCC cell line) were used in this study. We used sorafenib
(NexavarTM) and an oral iron chilator, deferasirox (EXJADETM). The
anti-cancer effect and mechanism were determined using cell viability
assay, VEGF ELISA, Flow Cytometry, Western blot analysis and in vivo
subcutaneous tumor model. In clinical cases, we retrospectively analyzed
the relationship between sorafenib response and serum iron-related
makers(n=58).[Results]In HepG2 and HLE cells, deferasirox suppressed the
cancer cell proliferation by itself and increased the suppression of
sorafenib. Deferasirox increased VEGF secretion of supernatant on dose
dependent manner. In the analysis of combination therapy, cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis was enhanced in the combination therapy by
down-regulation of cyclinD1 and cyclinE and up-regulation of cleaved
PARP. The suppression of HepG2 subcutaneous tumor was enhanced in the
combination therapy. In clinical cases, sorafenib prolonged overall
survival in TIBC high and Ferritin low group.[Conclusion]Iron depletion
by deferasirox increased the anti-cancer effect of sorafenib in vitro and
in vivo experiments. In clinical cases, sorafenib was also effective in
iron deficient patients. These results suggested that iron depletion
therapy can be a novel combination chemotherapy with sorafenib for
hepatocarcinoma patients.

