Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput multiplex Sequenom MassARRAY clinical diagnostic
assay for the identification of actionable genetic variants in
hematologic malignancies


Recent cancer genome sequencing efforts have led to an enhanced
understanding of the somatic mutation profile of hematologic malignancies
in the context of known cytogenetic abnormalities. For cytogenetically
normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML), mutations in NPM1, DNMT3A, CEBPA,
TET2 and IDH1/2 are thought to have potential predictive utility and may
impact patient management with regard to initial and consolidation
therapy, including stem cell transplantation. As most potentially
clinically relevant variants currently are not tested for within the
diagnostic setting, we established a high-throughput multiplex assay
capable of simultaneous detection of a range of somatic mutations in
hematologic malignancies. Using iPlex chemistry and the Sequenom
MassARRAY platform, we established the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
(PM) Hematologic Malignancies Panel v1.0, comprised of 110 individual
assays profiling 186 mutations in 22 relevant genes, in a 16-well assay
format. We conducted an in silico analysis to identify genes with hotspot
mutations capable of being analyzed by Sequenom; genes with mutations
distributed throughout the coding sequence (e.g., CEBPA, TET2) were
excluded from the panel. To best integrate this technology in the
workflow of our routine clinical molecular diagnostic testing we
developed the PM Panel as an RNA-based test, requiring 1 g of patient RNA
for the initial reverse transcription reaction. To validate the assay we
tested 222 patient-derived samples, including 5 normal samples, 82 AML
(57 with normal cytogenetics, 24 with cytogenetic changes and 1
therapy-related), 44 myelodysplastic syndromes, 32 myeloproliferative
neoplasms, 21 additional cases tested for KIT mutation, and 38 B-lymphoid
malignancies (including 3 multiple myeloma cases),. Concordance with
established lab assays for NPM1, FLT3-TKD and JAK2 mutations was 100%;
other identified mutations were verified by Sanger sequencing at 98%
concordance (2% of cases were below the limit of sensitivity of Sanger
technology). Approximately 50% of samples were positive for at least one
mutation with 174 mutations detected overall. Cytogenetically normal AMLs
and myelodysplastic syndromes were most informative, with 2.3 and 1.8
mutations per positive case respectively. Samples already known to carry
a leukemogenic driver fusion protein (e.g., PML-RAR, AML1-ETO, or
BCR-ABL) had a significantly decreased identified somatic mutation load
than their cytogenetically normal counterparts (average of 1.4 mutations
per case, compared to 0.3, p Recent cancer genome sequencing efforts have
led to an enhanced understanding of the somatic mutation profile of
hematologic malignancies in the context of known cytogenetic
abnormalities. For cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
mutations in NPM1, DNMT3A, CEBPA, TET2 and IDH1/2 are thought to have
potential predictive utility and may impact patient management with
regard to initial and consolidation therapy, including stem cell
transplantation. As most potentially clinically relevant variants
currently are not tested for within the diagnostic setting, we
established a high-throughput multiplex assay capable of simultaneous
detection of a range of somatic mutations in hematologic malignancies.
Using iPlex chemistry and the Sequenom MassARRAY platform, we established
the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre (PM) Hematologic Malignancies Panel
v1.0, comprised of 110 individual assays profiling 186 mutations in 22
relevant genes, in a 16-well assay format. We conducted an in silico
analysis to identify genes with hotspot mutations capable of being
analyzed by Sequenom; genes with mutations distributed throughout the
coding sequence (e.g., CEBPA, TET2) were excluded from the panel. To best
integrate this technology in the workflow of our routine clinical
molecular diagnostic testing we developed the PM Panel as an RNA-based
test, requiring 1 g of patient RNA for the initial reverse transcription
reaction. To validate the assay we tested 222 patient-derived samples,
including 5 normal samples, 82 AML (57 with normal cytogenetics, 24 with
cytogenetic changes and 1 therapy-related), 44 myelodysplastic syndromes,
32 myeloproliferative neoplasms, 21 additional cases tested for KIT
mutation, and 38 B-lymphoid malignancies (including 3 multiple myeloma
cases),. Concordance with established lab assays for NPM1, FLT3-TKD and
JAK2 mutations was 100%; other identified mutations were verified by
Sanger sequencing at 98% concordance (2% of cases were below the limit of
sensitivity of Sanger technology). Approximately 50% of samples were
positive for at least one mutation with 174 mutations detected overall.
Cytogenetically normal AMLs and myelodysplastic syndromes were most
informative, with 2.3 and 1.8 mutations per positive case respectively.
Samples already known to carry a leukemogenic driver fusion protein
(e.g., PML-RAR, AML1-ETO, or BCR-ABL) had a significantly decreased
identified somatic mutation load than their cytogenetically normal
counterparts (average of 1.4 mutations per case, compared to 0.3, p <
10^-6). The PM Hematologic Malignancies Panel v1.0 is now being
integrated into the current clinical diagnostic workflow. We therefore
report the development of a versatile, RNA-based high-throughput
multiplex platform for the identification of somatic mutations present in
hematologic malignancies for use in a clinical diagnostic setting.

