Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicorRNA-27a functions as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer
through targeting SPGG1 and Smad2


Colorectal cancer is one of the most common malignant diseases worldwide,
but the causes of colorectal carcinogenesis are largely unknown. Using a
miRNA array we have identified differential expression of some microRNAs
in colorectal cancer and adjacent normal mucosa. Most of these miRNAs
have been validated in colorectal tissues by quantitative RT-PCR. One of
the most changed miRNAs is miR-27a. The level of miR-27 was significantly
reduced in colon cancers in compared with matched normal mucosa, the
reduced expression of miR-27a was also associated with colorectal cancer
pathological stages - miR-27a was more reduced at stages III/IV, compared
to stage II. The levels of miR-27a in human colon cancer cell lines were
also less than that in human normal colon epithelial cell lines. Using
bioinformatic and systemic analysis, two targets of miR-27a were
predicted, they were SPGG1 and Smad2. The expression levels of SPGG1 and
Smad2 were negatively correlated with miR-27a. Dual luciferase assay
showed that overexpression of miR-27 significantly repressed SPGG1 and
Smad2 transcriptional activities. Increasing miR-27 expression also
inhibited SPGG1 and Smad2 protein levels in colon cancer cells.
Functional studies revealed that overexpression of miR-27 inhibited colon
cancer cell proliferation, promoted apoptosis and attenuated cell
migration, which were linked to downregulation of p-STAT3 and
upregulation of phosphorylated JNK1. Taken together, our results
demonstrated that the expression levels of miR-27a were lower in
colorectal cancer tissues in comparison to the non-tumor tissues and was
related to pathological stages, suggesting that down-regulation of this
miRNA could contribute to colorectal tumorigenesis and the acquisition of
a more aggressive phenotype in colorectal cancer, which could be through
targeting SPGG1 and Smad2.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

