Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-sensitive multiplex analysis of somatic mutations in plasma
DNA by InsightTM Onco mutant enrichment parallel sequencing for cancer
personalized medicine


In cancer personalized medicine, targeted treatments can produce dramatic
tumor regression, but responses are often short-lived because of arisen
resistant cancer cells. The major strategy proposed for overcoming
resistance is a combination therapy. This approach requires a new method
of diagnosis, the molecular fingerprint, an analysis of the tumor's
genetic changes. A periodic monitoring of genetic changes has crucial
role in targeted therapy. With the desire for this monitoring, a demand
for non-invasive, indirect sampling without uncomfortable and painful
biopsy has been increased. Fortunately, cell-free DNA in the blood
consists of DNA derived from cancer tissues and has been studied for
non-invasive diagnostic procedures. Nevertheless, this circulating DNA is
rare in blood, and its detection is considered as a technical challenge.
A number of methods have been examined, but identifying low level somatic
mutations will continue to be a challenge for researchers because of
limited sensitivity and specificity.Here, we developed a mutant specific
enrichment system for somatic mutation to increase resolution of low
level somatic changes within a high background of wild-types, and which
is built into the InsightTM Onco Panel and is available in Next
Generation Sequencer. This NGS based InsightTM Onco Lung Multiplex panel
have been available with multiple analysis (about 60 mutations within
EGFR, BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA and HER2 genes) which can detect as few as 0.05%
somatic changes in the background of wild-type DNA.We investigated
analytic performance of the multiplex panel. Sensitivity was assessed
using mixture of cell line DNA with low level of mutant alleles.
Mutant-type (SW48, PC9, H1975, SNU601, Colo205 and HCT116) and wild-type
(Hela) cell lines were processed to produce artificial mixture of mutant.
Sample mixtures were analyzed by the InsightTM panel and general 454
sequencing. Furthermore, diagnostic possibility in the non-invasive
samples was assessed using clinical plasma samples.The InsightTM Onco
Lung Multiplex Panel showed significant detection of serially diluted
target libraries as low as 0.05% of somatic mutations with dose-response
manner. Moreover, the panel revealed a remarkable detection of low level
somatic mutations in only 5ng of plasma DNA with significant concordant
with mutant enrichment based q-PCR result (PNAClamp Real Time PCR).
Moreover, these plasma results similarly reflect the results of 15ng of
tissue FFPE samples.In conclusion, the InsightTM Onco Panel provides a
reliable direction for non-invasive validation of acquired resistance to
cancer therapy as well as mutant characterization for drug discovery and
development.

