Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The eicosanoid 20-HETE triggers Ras activation, pancreatic cancer
growth and metastasis through inflammatory macrophage signaling


Prolonged, unresolving inflammation is increasingly implicated in the
pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer, but the critical inflammatory
mediators remain largely unknown. Most efforts to elucidate these
mediators have focused on protein cytokines rather than lipid autacoids.
Lipid autacoids are metabolites of arachidonic acid and other related
fatty acids that regulate inflammation and tumor growth. Among these, the
metabolites of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenases and -hydroxylases,
including EETs and 20-HETE, respectively, have been largely neglected in
cancer. Recently, we showed that epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs)
stimulate multi-organ metastasis and tumor dormancy escape. We report for
the first time, that elevated levels of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
(20-HETE), a product of the -hydroxylases CYP4A/F, stimulate primary
pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. Using genetic and pharmacological
manipulation of endogenous 20-HETE, we demonstrate that systemic
administration of 20-HETE promotes primary human and murine pancreatic
cancer in subcutaneous and orthotopic models. Furthermore, a transgenic
murine model of endogenously high 20-HETE level (Tie2-CYP4F2 Tr),
exhibited spontaneous liver and mediastinal lymph node metastasis after
resection of subcutaneous primary pancreatic tumors. In contrast,
wild-type mice did not develop liver and mediastinal lymph node
metastasis after primary tumor resection. We show that 20-HETE activated
Ras in human pancreatic tumor cell lines and the 20-HETE antagonist,
HET0016, decreased Ras activity. The p65 subunit of NF-B also increased
in a 20-HETE-dependent manner in these tumor cell lines. 20-HETE induced
migration of human macrophages in vitro, and tumor-associated macrophages
expressed the 20-HETE generating enzyme CYP4F2. Depletion of macrophages
with clodronate liposomes impaired CYP-metabolite-stimulated tumor
growth. In addition, we show that 14,15-EET promotes pancreatic tumor
growth in vivo. Moreover, inhibitors of soluble epoxide hydrolase, the
enzyme that metabolizes EETs, elevated EET levels and promoted pancreatic
tumor growth. Either the 20-HETE antagonist HET0016, or the EET
antagonist 14,15-EEZE alone significantly inhibited primary tumor growth.
Remarkably, systemic administration of both antagonists together resulted
in sustained regression of established pancreatic tumors. This
combination of 20-HETE and EET antagonists also suppressed ascites
formation and prolonged survival in an orthotopic pancreatic cancer model
without toxic effects. Thus, 20-HETE and EET production by macrophages in
the tumor microenvironment critically regulates Ras activation,
pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. Our studies offer a mechanistic
rationale for using 20-HETE and EET antagonists as a novel approach and
anti-cancer therapeutics for pancreatic cancer.

