Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF)-mediated growth inhibition
of human myeloid leukemia cells is CAK-independent but links to
cdc25c-CDK1 pathway


The cell cycle progression is controlled by cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs). CDK-Activating Kinase (CAK) is an enzyme complex that is capable
of phosphorylating (activating) all CDKs and is essential for G1 and G2
CDK activities. CAK is composed of CDK7, cyclin H, and Mat 1. CDK (CDK1
and CDK2) activity is also controlled by two inhibitory phosphorylation
sites (tyrosine 15 and threonine 14) on the CDK. Dephosphorylation of
these two sites by cdc25c activates CDK activity. We have previously
reported that TGF inhibits growth of human myeloid leukemia cells via
downregulation of multiple CDKs and cyclins. In this study, we
investigated the effect of TGF on activity and expression of CAK and
cdc25, the two upstream molecules of cell cycle regulatory molecules in
human myeloid leukemia cells. TGF- inhibited the proliferation of TF-1
and MV4-11 accompanied by an increase in p27 level and decrease in CDK1,
CDK2, CDK4, cyclin A, cyclin D3, and cylcin B. However, TGF- had no
effect on the expression of CDK7, CDK 9, CDK11, cyclin H, Mat1, and their
complexes (CDK7-cyclin H and CDK7-Mat1) for the time period tested up to
72 hours, detected by Western blot and immunoprecipitation, respectively.
There were no detectable changes in the phosphorylation status of CDK7,
CDK9, CDK11 in the cells treated with TGF- as compared with the cells
without TGF. In contrast, these cells showed marked decrease in the
levels of MAT1 and CDK7 in response to retinoic acid and phorbol ester
(PMA) stimulation. On the other hand, TGF significantly downregulated
expression of cdc25c starting from 3h and with a maximum inhibition being
observed at 72h. We also observed a transient dephosphorylation
(activation) of cdc25c followed by significant decrease in the amount of
dephophorylated 25c at 48 and 72h. Taken together, our data suggest that
TGF-induced growth inhibition of human myeloid leukemia cells is
CAK-independent but is linked to inhibition of early entry into mitosis
of the cells by downregulating cdc25c-CDK1 pathway. Most likely, the
downregulation of multiple CDKs and cyclins by TGF is regulated at
translational or posttranslational but not transcriptional levels,
because TGF had no any effect on the expression and phosphorylation of
the CDKs that are involved in regulation of transcription factor TFII
(CDK7 and CDK11) and TAK/P-TEFb (CDK9), respectively. (Supported by
Faculty Incentive Grant and NIH-NIGMS MBRS RISE: R25 GM059244-13, Barry
University).

