Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of ALDH1A2 expression is critical for cancer stem cell
properties in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is an aggressive tumor characterized by its heterogeneity
ranging from spontaneous regression to malignant progression, and
accounts for 15% of all cancer-related deaths in children. Despite
current aggressive therapies, over 50% of high-risk neuroblastoma
patients have experienced a tumor relapse. As in most cancers, recurrent
neuroblastoma is primarily driven by chemoresistant cancer stem cells
(CSCs), which are identified as a subpopulation of cancer cells with the
multipotent ability to self-renew, generate differentiated progeny, and
recapitulate a heterogeneous population of cancer cells in xenograft
cancers. An increasing number of studies isolated CSCs as spheres, side
population cells, and cell-surface marker-positive cells based on the
markers associated with stem cell populations in a variety of cancers.
Although high activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), which catalyzed
the oxidation of aldehydes to carboxylates and comprised 19 isoforms in
human cells, was used to identify and isolate CSCs from many types of
cancers, it remained to be characterized in neuroblastoma. In the present
study, we investigated the ALDH activity and the expression profile of 19
ALDH isoforms in spheres and parental cells of neuroblastoma. The ALDH
activity was enriched in spheres compared to parental cells, while the
expression profile was considerably varied among different neuroblastoma
cells. Among ALDH isoforms consistently induced in spheres, ALDH1A2
knockdown most severely impaired the sphere and colony formation.
Reciprocally, increased expression of ALDH1A2 enhanced these functions in
neuroblastoma cells. ALDH1A2 expression was further correlated with the
differentiation of neuroblastoma xenografts, the resistance to
13-cis-retinoic acid (13-cRA), and the overall survival of neuroblastoma
patients. These results suggest that the induction of ALDH1A2 expression
is critical for CSC properties in neuroblastoma.

