Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menopausal hormone therapy and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
risk in the Los Angeles County NHL Case-Control Study


Introduction: Immune modulation has long been established as a risk
factor for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT)
has been shown to affect immune function in both animal and human
studies. However, the evidence for an association between MHT and NHL
remains unclear. Cohort studies have suggested either no association or
increased risk between MHT use and NHL, particularly for the follicular
lymphoma subtype. A recent pooled analysis of case-control studies from
the United States, Europe, and Australia reported a decreased risk for
NHL among women who used MHT, but this analysis was limited by the lack
of information on MHT formulation, dose, and duration.Methods: The Los
Angeles County NHL Case-Control Study comprises 1010 B-cell NHL patients
diagnosed 2004-2008 from the Los Angeles Cancer Surveillance Program,
matched 1:1 by age and race to female neighborhood controls. Extensive
information on MHT use was ascertained, along with information on
demographic and known NHL risk factors. Among 685 post-menopausal women
diagnosed with NHL and 685 matched controls, we conducted conditional
logistic regression, adjusting for age, race and socioeconomic status, to
evaluate the association between MHT use, formulation, dose and duration,
and risk for B-cell NHL.Results: B-cell NHL risk was reduced among women
who reported having ever used MHT (HR = 0.66, 95% CI = 0.52-0.85)
compared to never users. This risk reduction was similar for women who
reported using unopposed estrogen only (HR = 0.75, 95% CI =0.56-1.01),
estrogen plus progestin only (HR=0.62, 95% CI =0.45-0.85), sequential use
of unopposed estrogen followed by estrogen plus progestin (HR=0.36, 95%
CI=0.18-0.70), and sequential use of unopposed estrogen plus progestin
followed by unopposed estrogen (HR=0.57, 95% CI=0.32-1.00). Among women
who reported using unopposed estrogen or estrogen plus progestin by pill
or patch (prescription only), reduced B-cell NHL risk was most pronounced
among those who started MHT use early, at age 45 years or younger
(HR=0.60, 95% CI=0.42-0.85) and generally among women with longer
duration of use. The protective associations associated with MHT use were
consistent among major B-cell NHL subtypes, including diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma.Conclusions: These data provide
evidence for an association between MHT use - either unopposed estrogen
or estrogen plus progestin use - and decreased risk of B-cell NHL,
supporting a role for postmenopausal hormones in B-cell NHL etiology.

