Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Separation of tetraspanin CD151 from its integrin partner 31
reflects an alter migratory state and predicts prostate cancer progression


The dysregulation of cell migration enables tumor cells to escape their
tissue of origin and disseminate. Since cancer-related deaths are
primarily caused by the dissemination of tumor cells, mechanisms of
migration are both a target for therapy and an indicator of disease
progression. The regulation of cell adhesion is widely recognized as a
rate-limiting step in metastasis but how tumor cells achieve dynamic
control over their adhesion receptors is poorly understood. During an
analysis of prostate cancer progression we discovered that 31 expression
is reduced and that its tetraspanin partner, CD151, is not integrin-free.
We were able to detect integrin-free CD151 using antibodies specific to
the integrin-binding domain of CD151. Dual staining of tumor tissue and
normal tissue from prostate cancer patients for total CD151 and
integrin-free CD151 revealed that the appearance of integrin-free CD151
corresponds with poor-patient outcome. In fact, the detection of
integrin-free CD151 is an independent predictor of prostate cancer
progression. Surprisingly, the clustering of integrin-free CD151
immobilizes tumor cells in vivo and prevents metastasis suggesting that
the ability of CD151 to control migration does not depend on its 31
integrin partner. Indeed, integrin-free CD151 is now associated with
non-integrin partners through which it can regulate tumor cell
motility.These observations demonstrate that the appearance of
integrin-free CD151 reflects the disruption of the CD151/ 31/laminin axis
and thereby reveals an altered migratory ability in tumor cells. This has
clinical as well molecular implications. Integrin-free CD151 can be used
as a molecular indicator of disease progression and assist in the
distinction between indolent (benign) and advanced disease (Palmer et al.
2013). In addition, the identification of new CD151 partners can provide
new therapeutic targets to inhibit the motility of tumor cells that have
undergone this change in migratory status. A preliminary evaluation
identified a similar appearance of integrin-free CD151 in cancers derived
from other tissues, suggesting that this change in molecular status is
broadly applicable to most solid tumors.Palmer, et al. (2013).
Integrin-free tetraspanin CD151 can inhibit tumor cell motility upon
clustering and is a clinical indicator of prostate cancer progression.
Cancer Research.

