Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A proteome analysis of the cadmium response in human bronchial
epithelial cells: Identification of potential biomarkers related to
cadmium exposure


Cadmium (Cd) and Cd derivatives are ubiquitously-distributed in the
living environment. In particular, the contamination of Cd in the food
chain, occupational exposure and tobacco smoke provide important sources
of human exposure to Cd. Here, we provide a proteomic analysis of human
bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) treated with CdCl2, with the aim of
identifying protein response to Cd toxicity. Comparative proteome
analysis was conducted at the intracellular (cell lysate) and
extracellular (spent medium) levels to identify global changes in the
protein expression profiles of sham-exposed and Cd-treated cells.
Proteins were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis and visualized
by silver staining. We reported that while a low level (2 M) of Cd
treatment for 36 h elicited negligible cytotoxicity and produced no
significant proteome changes between the treated group and the control,
however, high levels (20 or 30 M) of Cd treatment for 36 h induced
obvious proteome changes and cell death in BEAS-2B cells.
Differentially-expressed proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS and further
confirmed by Western blot analysis. The proteins that were significantly
up-regulated included molecular chaperones (e.g. HSP90B1, HSPA6,
TCP-1-epsilon), antioxidative stress enzymes (e.g. GST-P1 and -O1,
thioredoxin, peroxiredoxin-1 and -2), as well as pro-apoptotic proteins
(e.g. GAPDH, eIF-5A-1). Interestingly, we also found that the
redox-sensitive transcription factor NF-B is up-regulated; while the
tumor suppressor p53 is significantly down-regulated by high levels of Cd
treatment. Pretreatment with the thiol antioxidant glutathione before Cd
treatment effectively abrogated the up-regulation or down-regulation of
these marker proteins and prevented cell death. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that high levels of Cd cause oxidative stress-induced
cytotoxicity, while a low level of Cd may exert a more noticeable effect
after long-term exposure, but not after transient exposure.

