Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin decreases expression of thymidylate synthase and
enhances the response to pemetrexed in preclinical studies and a Phase
I/II clinical study of subjects with non-small cell lung cancer


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80-85% of lung cancers
and almost half of patients with newly diagnosed NSCLC have metastatic
disease. Platinum-based chemotherapy regimens given as first-line
treatment for advanced NSCLC patients with metastasis are standard but
have modest response rates. Pemetrexed is well tolerated and inhibits
several folate-dependent enzymes including thymidylate synthase, TS.
Increased expression of TS confers resistance to pemetrexed in vitro and
is a predictive factor for poor response to pemetrexed. Rapamycin is a
mTOR inhibitor and suppresses protein synthesis. Here, we show that
rapamycin decreases endogenous expression of TS in NSCLC cells. The
combination of rapamycin and pemetrexed synergistically inhibits NSCLC
cell proliferation and enhances the inhibition of 4E-binding protein 1
(4E-BP1) activation that is regulated by mTOR. Although pemetrexed as a
single agent upregulated expression of TS, pretreatment with rapamycin
suppressed pemetrexed-upregulated TS expression. In vivo, the combination
of rapamycin and pemetrexed inhibited the growth of NSCLC xenografts,
which correlated with decreased mTOR activity and inhibition of
pemetrexed-induced upregulated expression of TS. Based on these
preclinical data, we have conducted a Phase I/II clinical trial combining
rapamycin and pemetrexed in subjects with relapsed NSCLC. This regimen
was well tolerated, and resulted in a 22% partial response rate that is
above what is expected for response to single agent pemetrexed (9%). In
biomarker analyses, pretreatment with rapamycin decreased the expression
of TS in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, which correlated with
increased progression free survival. Collectively, these studies identify
rapamycin and pemetrexed as an effective combination in NSCLC, and
suggest that rapamycin enhances the efficacy of pemetrexed by suppressing
TS expression.

