Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Planar filtered gene regulatory networks in breast cancer


Gene co-expression network analysis has been shown to be effective in
identifying functional co-expressed gene modules associated with complex
human diseases such as cancer, Alzheimers disease, obesity and diabetes.
However, existing techniques to construct co-expression networks require
some critical prior information such as predefined number of modules to
be detected and numerical thresholds for defining
coexpression/interaction, or do not naturally reproduce the hallmarks of
complex systems such as scale-free degree distribution of
small-worldness). In order to mitigate these problems as whole or in
part, we have developed a novel co-expression network analysis approach,
Planar Filtered Network Analysis (PFNA). PFNA utilizes a graph filtering
technique to identify true interactions by means of embedding candidate
interactions on a topological sphere(2, 3). Planar Filtered Networks
(PFN) are naturally scale-free, small-world, and are comprised of a
number of highly co-expressed gene modules). Furthermore, PFNA allows
differential topology analysis of networks from different disease states
based on centrality and peripherality metrics).We performed PFNA on the
breast cancer data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and identified a
number of novel gene modules associated with overall survival of the
whole cohort or patient subgroups defined by receptor status (ER, PR,
HER2) and PAM50 biomarkers(6). PFNA uncovers not only gene modules
enriched for genes in well-known cancer pathways such as cell-cycle and
immune response, but also novel modules that prognostically stratify
patients with triple negative or basal breast cancers. Notably, several
modules involved in G-protein coupled receptor signaling, protocadherin
and pathways are highly predictive of survival for patients with triple
negative disease. Furthermore, the differential topology analysis reveals
that breast cancer biomarkers such as PAM50 and poor prognosis gene sets
developed by vant Veer et al(7) are more central in the tumor network
than the one based on the matched adjacent normal breast tissues.In
summary, PFNA reveals a number of novel high-level molecular features of
the highly heterogeneous breast cancer. This novel network analysis
method provides a set of unsupervised tools to objectively identify
subnetworks that are associated with complex diseases such as breast
cancer.1. R. Albert, A. L. Barabasi. Rev Mod Phys 74, 47.2. M.Tumminello,
T. Aste, T. Di Matteo, R. N. Mantegna. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
102,10421.3. T.Aste, T. Di Matteo, S. T. Hyde. Physica A 346, 20.4. W.M.
Song, T. Di Matteo, T. Aste. Phys RevE Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys
85,046115.5. F.Pozzi, T. Di Matteo, T. Aste. Adv Complex Syst 11, 927.6.
J. S. Parker et al.. Journal of clinical oncology: 27, 1160.7. L.J. van
't Veer et al.. Nature 415, 530.

