Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldolase A induces invasion/metastasis of lung cancer through
modulating HIF1- and is a marker for poor clinical outcome


The dysregulated metabolism is an emerging hallmark of cancer. However,
little is known about the metabolic requirements during cancer
progression. Therefore, identifying metabolic genes that are critical for
supporting cancer invasion/metastasis may provide novel targets for
cancer diagnosis and therapy. By analyzing gene expression and proteomic
profile of invasive lung cancer cells CL1-5 and its parental counterpart
CL1-0, we identified Aldolase A (ALDOA), an enzyme of glycolysis pathway,
is overexpressed in CL1-5 and is significantly associated with disease
recurrence in lung cancer patient microarray datasets. Moreover, HIF-1
was identified as the most significant transcription factor in
ALDOA-recurrence gene signature by IPA upstream regulator analysis.
Furthermore, Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed the expression of
ALDOA was markedly higher in lung cancer tumors than in normal lung. High
ALDOA expression was found significantly associated with lymph node
involvement and disease recurrence. Moreover, overexpression of ALDOA was
significantly associated with poor outcome in both overall and
disease-free survival. Knockdown of ALDOA expression was found to
suppress invasion potentials in highly invasive lung cancer cell lines
while complementary overexpression of ALDOA in poorly invasive cells
promoted it in vitro and in vivo. ALDOA overexpression also accelerated
glucose consumption, ATP utilization and lactate production. Knockdown of
ALDOA expression in CL1-5 abolished HIF-1 expression with concurrent
Mesenchymal-to-Epithelial Transition (MET). Moreover, IHC analysis shows
an inverse correlation between ALDOA and E-cadherin and combination of
high ALDOA and low E-Cadherin showed an unfavorable outcome, in a sharp
contrast, compared to patients with low ALDOA and high E-cadherin. Here,
we identified ALDOA as a critical glycolytic enzyme involved in lung
cancer progression and may be a marker for poor clinical outcome.

