Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tyrosine kinase Syk plays a role in the maintenance of
intercellular adhesive junctions in human breast cancer cells


The non-receptor spleen tyrosine kinase Syk has mainly been studied in
hematopoietic cells in which it plays a key role in the immune-response
signalling. We previously demonstrated that Syk is also present in
mammary epithelial cells and that its expression is lost during malignant
progression of breast cancer cell lines. Clinical studies confirmed loss
of Syk expression, not only in breast tumors but also in other carcinomas
and melanoma. Xenotransplantation animal experiments evidenced that Syk
acts as a tumor and metastasis suppressor in breast cancer and melanoma.
The mechanisms by which Syk exerts its anti-oncogenic activity remain,
however, unrevealed. Using a quantitative phospho-proteomic SILAC
approach in breast cancer cells, we identified new potential Syk
substrates involved in intercellular adhesion and epithelial cell
polarity, both characters of cell differentiation that are lost during
tumor progression.Using in vitro kinase assays, we demonstrated that
E-cadherin and various catenins are direct Syk substrates. The tyrosine
residues phosphorylated by Syk were identified by mass spectrometry and
phospho-peptide-specific antibodies were generated. By
immunofluorescence, we observed that endogenous Syk and E-cadherin
colocalize at adherens junctions and that transient DsRed-Syk
transfection induces phospho-E-cadherin- and phospho-catenin epitopes at
cell-cell contacts. Immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that
phosphorylated E-cadherin and catenins are associated in a complex.
Syk-mediated phosphorylation of E-cadherin seems to be important for the
proper localization of p120-catenin at adherens junctions. Syk knockdown
in breast cancer cells partially inhibits the re-aggregation of cells and
increases invasion in Matrigel. Using Syk knockdown and overexpression we
explored its potential role in the maintenance of an epithelial
phenotype, preventing EMT.In conclusion, Syk might play a role in the
establishment and maintenance of intercellular junctions via the
phosphorylation of the E-cadherin/catenin complex. Loss of Syk expression
or function might lead to the destabilization of these complexes and
promote invasion (supported by Fondation ARC SL220110603480)

