Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dormancy and growth of metastatic breast cancer cells in a
bone-like microenvironment


We have developed a three dimensional cell culture model (bioreactor) in
which cancer cells are cultured in a bone-like microenvironment. When
co-cultured with MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and the resulting bone-like matrix,
MDA-MB-231 (231) human metastatic breast cancer cells attach, form single
cell files, develop invadapodia, infiltrate and partially degrade the
thick matrix. Eventually, the cells form large colonies. By contrast, the
metastasis-suppressed variant, MDA-MB-231BRMS1, (231BRMS1) demonstrates a
dormant phenotype in the same system. They loosely attach, and are slow
to proliferate. This pattern of growth is also observed in femurs of mice
inoculated with these cells. We hypothesized that changes in the cytokine
microenvironment or the matrix structure would either cause the 231 cells
to become dormant or the 231BRMS1 cells to proliferate. Because of
anecdotal evidence that bone trauma or breakage is associated with latent
metastasis, we added either a cocktail of inflammatory cytokines (IL-6,
IL-8, MCP-1, VEGF, GRO ) or bone remodeling cytokines (IL-6, TNF, IL-1,
PGE-2 ). The inflammatory cytokines had little effect on the morphology
or proliferation of either cell type. In contrast, bone remodeling
cytokines stimulated the 231BRMS1 cells to grow vigorously. Of the
remodeling cytokines, we determined that TNF and IL-1 were sufficient to
cause the change in growth. However, we were able to block the response
of the 231BRMS1 cells with indomethecin, a cyclooxygenase inhibitor or
with an inhibitor to the receptor for PGE2. These data suggest that the
additional cytokines lead to prostaglandin production.We also modulated
the matrix by growing the osteoblasts with charcoal-stripped serum to
reduced estradiol. The osteoblasts differentiated under these conditions
(alkaline phosphatase positive) but did not fully mineralize the matrix
(minimal von Kossa staining ). In the presence of the modified matrix,
both the 231(ER-) and the 231BRMS1(ER-) cells showed increased
proliferation. In contrast, MCF-7 cells (ER+) maintained a dormant
phenotype and did not grow. In conclusion, our data highlight the
importance of a bone-like microenvironment in maintaining breast cancer
dormancy. Disrupting the microenvironment could result in dormant cells
re-entering the cell cycle. We are currently determining the role of the
cytokine microenvironment and the matrix alteration in the modulation of
the cancer cells dormancy or growth in the bone.This work was supported
by the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command under
W81XWH-12-1-0127, and by the Metavivor Research Foundation.

