Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of TRPC3 enhances sensitivity to cisplatin and
inhibits motility in epithelial ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) remains the most lethel gynecological
malignancy. In the absence of an effective screening strategy, two thirds
of patients are diagnosed in advanced clinical stage. Despite
chemotherapy with cisplatin and paclitxel, primary or acquired
chemoresistance faciltates survival of cancer cells, resulting in disease
recurrence and death. Our previous studies indicate that ovarian cancer
patients whose tumors overexpress transient receptor potential channel C3
(TRPC3) protein tend to relapse early and have shorter overall survival.
In vitro studies indicated that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
induced resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis could be partially
reversed by blocking expression of TRPC3 in EOC cell lines. To enhance
sensitivity to platinum compounds, we have investigated the relationship
between resistance to cisplatin and TRPC3. We have now found that
expression of TRPC3 in recurrent cancer following chemotherapy is higher
than in specimens from primary cytoreductive surgery. The expression of
TRPC3 in the cisplatin-resistant EOC line A2780cp is higher than in the
sensitive parental cell line A2780. An in vitro study showed that
transient treatment of the EOC cell line HEY with cisplatin upregulated
TRPC3 mRNA and membrane localized protein. Induced cisplatin-resistant
cell line HEYcp augmented the expression of TRPC3 and enhanced invasive
capacity in cell migration assays. Knockdown of TRPC3 expression in EOC
cell lines with specific siRNA or miRNA decreased cell migratory ability
and enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis when compared to EOC cells
treated with scrambled control RNA. Our data indicate that TRPC3 may play
an important role in cisplatin-resistance of EOC and could serve as a
therapeutic target to resensitize cancer cells to cisplatin in culture
and in xenografts.

