Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of BET bromodomain targets PTEN positive endometrioid
endometrial cancers


Introduction: Endometrioid endometrial cancers (EEC) are commonly
characterized by PTEN mutations and loss of function. JQ-1 is a selective
small-molecule BET bromodomain inhibitor, and BET inhibition by JQ-1
leads to the downregulation of c-Myc transcription. Thus, JQ-1 functions
as a novel c-Myc inhibitor and has been found to potently suppress tumor
growth in many human cancers. Given the known interactions between c-Myc
and the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, we aim to assess the impact of JQ-1 on
human EEC cell lines and further explore the mechanism underlying
cellular resistance to JQ-1 treatment.Methods: Six EEC cancer cell lines
were used in this study. Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay and
colony formation assay after exposure to JQ-1. Cell cycle progression was
evaluated by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was assessed by Annexin V-FITC
assay. Expression of c-Myc, PTEN, phosphorylated-Akt, phosphorylated-S6,
cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) was detected by Western
blotting analysis. Up- or down-regulation of PTEN was achieved by stable
transfection with pcDNA3.1-PTEN or shRNA-PTEN, respectively.Results: JQ-1
significantly suppressed proliferation in the EEC cell lines that were
PTEN positive (IC50=75 nM for HEC-1A, 550 nM for KLE and 1000 nM for
ECC-1), but not in those that were PTEN negative (IC50>10000 nM for
Ishikawa, AN3CA and RL 95-2). JQ-1 induced G1 cell cycle arrest in the
PTEN positive HEC-1A and KLE cell lines, but had minimal effects on cell
cycle progression in the PTEN negative Ishikawa and AN3CA cell lines.
Western blotting analysis demonstrated that JQ-1 suppressed the
expression of c-Myc, cyclins and CDKs. JQ-1 up-regulated PTEN expression
and decreased phosphorylation of downstream targets of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway, including Akt and S6. Knock-down of PTEN led to
cellular resistance to JQ-1 in the HEC-1A and KLE cells, while
over-expression of PTEN sensitized Ishikawa and AN3CA cells to JQ-1
treatment.Conclusions: We find that JQ-1 significantly suppressed
cellular proliferation through G1 cell cycle arrest in the EEC cell lines
with abundant PTEN expression. Knock-down of PTEN caused cellular
resistance while over-expression of PTEN sensitized EEC cells to JQ-1.
This evidence suggests that JQ-1 may be a promising targeted therapy for
EEC patients with PTEN positive tumors.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

