Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of cisplatin, vorinostat, and their combinations on
EGFR-overexpressing cell lines


Cisplatin is one of the most commonly used drugs against human
malignancies. Its cytotoxic effects are mainly mediated by formation of
cisplatin-DNA adducts, which activate series of DNA damage-responsive
proteins that ultimately trigger cell death. In spite of its potent
activity, some malignancies treated with cisplatin may develop resistance
after initial response while others may be intrinsically insensitive.
Accordingly, cisplatin is frequently combined with other drugs to reduce
resistance or to attain synergy. The presented work was conducted in
EGFR-overexpressing cancer cells, DU-145 and MDA-MB-231, to examine the
possible molecular effects of cisplatin alone or in combination with
vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor. Proliferation assay, annexin
V staining, western blotting and RT-PCR were used to study effects of
those drugs on cell viability, apoptosis and molecular events in both
cell lines. In the present study, incubation of DU-145 cells with
cisplatin exerted dose-dependent antiproliferative and apoptosis-inducing
effects. In addition, cisplatin significantly increased the apoptosis
markers, cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase 7; depleted total EGFR and
decreased ERK activation. This molecular response was also associated
with dose-dependent increase in phosphorylated ATM (an early sensor of
genotoxic stress), phosphorylated p38 and mRNA level of DDIT3 (a late
sensor of DNA damage). On the other hand, in MDA-MB-231, cisplatin did
not affect percent of apoptotic cells as compared with the untreated
control, indicating a cisplatin-insensitive phenotype. The insensitive
response towards cisplatin treatment was confirmed through absence of
cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase 7 in total cell lysates. Although
cisplatin increased the level of phosphorylated ATM and phosphorylated
p38 in MDA-MB-231, it failed to affect DDIT3 mRNA level as compared with
untreated cells. This may suggest that sensitivity towards cisplatin may
be related to late DNA damage processing rather than early DNA damage
response. Treating DU-145 and MDA-MB-231 cells with vorinostat elicited
dose-dependent decrease in proliferation and increase in percentage of
apoptotic cells. It also dose-dependently cleaved PARP and caspase 7,
time-dependently degraded EGFR and decreased ERK activation in both cell
lines. In spite of that potent activity, vorinostat synergized the effect
of cisplatin only in DU-145 and failed to circumvent the insensitivity of
MDA-MB-231 cells towards cisplatin. In conclusion, cisplatin decreased
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis only in DU-145 cells but not
MDA-MB-231 cells. Combination of vorinostat and cisplatin synergistically
reduced percent cell viability and triggered apoptotic response in DU-145
cells when compared with the effects of individual drugs. However, in
MDA-MB-231cells, addition of vorinostat to cisplatin did not
significantly change any of the measured parameters.

