Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro biotransformation of and inhibitory effects of CZ48 in
human liver microsomes


BACKGROUND AND PURPOSECZ48 is a novel potent anticancer agent currently
in a phase I clinical trial. The absorption of CZ48 in humans is
approximately less than 10% based on the excretion ratio of the unchanged
form in the feces following oral administration. It was reported that
CZ48 acts as a pro-drug and exerts its anticancer activity through the
active metabolite CPT in vivo. The specific enzymes involved in its
biotransformation have not been identified. To date, it has been very
difficult to predict drug-drug interactions with CZ48 in the clinical
setting due to a lack of information. Cytochrome P450 enzymes are
primarily found in liver cells but are also located in other organ cells
throughout the body. Therefore, in vitro studies were conducted to
identify and characterize the cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the
formation of the major metabolite CPT. In this study, we conducted in
vitro experiments by using in vitro human liver models which have been
developed in the past few decades, including isoenzymes, microsomes,
cytosol, S9 fraction, statins and inhibitors/inducers to allow us to
evaluate the potential for drug-drug interactions.METHODSUsing an
integrated approach CZ48 biotransformation was studied for CYP-mediated
metabolic reaction with human liver microsomes (HLM), cytosol and S9
fraction. Seven major isoenzymes were used to investigate, through
relative activity factor approach, the contribution of selective statins
or of several inhibitors/inducers in the phase-I metabolism of
CZ48.RESULTSExperiments revealed that 97.9% of CZ48 was metabolized in
HLM in 2 hours, and 64.8% of CZ48 was biotransformed in the S9 fraction,
while cytosol was less responsible (13.4%) for CZ48 biotransformation.
The majority (68.5%) of CZ48 was metabolized into CPT when co-incubated
with CYP3A4. The statins, mevastatin (lovastatin), atorvastatin and
simvastatin, are specific CYP3A4 substrates and inhibited CZ48
biotransformation. In contrast, rosuvastatin showed no inhibitory effect.
At CZ48 concentrations of 0.25, 0.5 and 1 uM, verapamil, erythromycin,
clarithromycin and CYP3A4 showed the strong inhibitory effects on CZ48
biotransformation. However, based on results with human liver microsomes
in the presence of the CYP3A4 inducers phenytoin, rifampicin and
carbamazepine, it was suggested that cz48 was partly metabolized by other
enzymes in the microsomes.CONCLUSIONSOur results establish the metabolic
pathways of CZ48, revealing the significant role of CYPs in its
metabolism. Of the major human CYPs, CYP3A4 is responsible for catalyzing
the biotransformation of CZ48. Indeed, CYP3A4 has extremely broad
substrate specificity and is responsible for the metabolism of 50% of
drugs in current use. Our results provide insight into the underlying
biochemical mechanisms of CZ48, which would help to predict clinical
outcomes.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

