Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P-cadherin overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in
pancreatic carcinoma and is regulated by its promoter hypomethylation


[Background] P-cadherin belongs to the family of classic cadherin, and
accumulating evidences shows hat P-cadherin is strongly associated with
carcinogenesis and confers alignant phenotype of various cancers.
Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis, with an overall 5-year survival
rate of only 5%. Despite advances in therapy recently, its survival rate
still remains poor. This study aimed to analyze P-cadherin expression and
its prognostic value in pancreatic carcinoma and to validate the
P-cadherin gene (CDH3) promoter methylation status as the mechanism of
this gene regulation.[Methods] Seventy-three patients diagnosed with
pancreatic cancer were enrolled in this study. P-cadherin expression was
examined by immunohistochemistry, and correlated with various
clinicopathological features and prognosis. Furthermore, P-cadherin
expression and its promoter methylation status were analyzed in
pancreatic cancer cell lines.[Results] In pancreatic tissues, 50.7%
(37/73) of cases shows a high expression of P-cadherin by
immunohistochemical analysis, and high expression of P-cadherin was
significantly correlated with gender, posterior tissue invasion and other
organs invasion. In multivariate analyses, P-cadherin expression was the
independent prognostic factors for disease-free survival (relative
risk:2.68, p=0.005). P-cadherin expression was found to be related to its
promoter methylation status in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Furthermore,
when P-cadherin was down-regulated by specific siRNA, cell migration and
invasion were significantly reduced.[Conclusion] These results suggested
that expression of P-cadherin is a useful prognostic marker and seems to
be important in the malignant behavior in pancreatic cancer. We are now
conducting experiments to validate the CDH3 methylation status in the
cancerous tissues and their adjacent normal counterpart, and
investigating the biological role of P-cadherin in pancreatic
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

