Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 14g2a-based GD2-specific chimeric antigen receptors (CARs)
constitutively signal, leading to rapidly induced T-cell exhaustion and
poor antitumor efficacy in vivo


Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) provide a promising new approach for
generating T cells for the adoptive immunotherapy of cancer. In both
pre-clinical and clinical studies, we have observed potent anti-tumor
effects using CD19 CAR T cells (CART) to treat B cell malignancies.
However, we observe less success when targeting solid tumors with GD2
CART. We hypothesized that the observed differences could be due to a
more hostile microenvironment in solid tumors, and/or variable CAR
potency. To address these issues, we created a CD19+GD2+ osteosarcoma
(143B-CD19). This double positive solid tumor line allowed us to directly
compare the in vivo efficacy of the GD2 and CD19 CARs, normalized for
tumor type. In vitro 51Cr release demonstrated that CD19 and GD2 CART
were equally active against 143B-CD19. However, in vivo models showed a
significant difference in anti-tumor efficacy. NSG mice were injected
with 143B-CD19 and treated with control, GD2 or CD19 CART 14d later. GD2
CART failed to persist in mice and did not inhibit tumor outgrowth.
However, CD19 CART did persist and cleared the mice of all CD19+ solid
tumor disease. Therefore, we conclude that the solid tumor
microenvironment is not a barrier to effective CART therapies, and
hypothesize that poor GD2 CAR potency leads to poor in vivo
efficacy.Further comparison of GD2 and CD19 CART demonstrated that
excessive, rather than insufficient, signaling by the GD2 CAR contributes
to the poor in vivo efficacy. GD2 CART have increased expression of
activation makers (CD25, CD127, CD137) and increased size compared to
CD19 CART following in vitro expansion. Despite this increased
activation, GD2 CART expand poorly, have high rates of apoptosis, produce
IL2, TNFa and IFNg poorly, and express high levels of PD1, TIM3, LAG3,
and BLIMP1. This phenotype is consistent with T cell exhaustion, a state
of poor effector function due to chronic antigen stimulation. This
phenotype is prevented by knocking out GD2 CAR signaling through point
mutations in the CD3 zeta and CD28 domains of the receptor, implicating
tonic signaling through the CAR during in vitro expansion as the source
of T cell exhaustion. Interestingly, we did not identify GD2 expression
in the culture system. Point mutations in the CAR antigen-binding site,
though blocking GD2 binding, did not prevent exhaustion. Thus, we
postulate that constitutive receptor signaling may occur via interactions
between the framework regions of the CAR, leading to exhaustion. This
exhausted phenotype was recapitulated with CD19 CART when expanded in the
presence of a crosslinking anti-idiotype antibody, suggesting that
over-activation via other CARs also has the potential to limit efficacy.
Ongoing experiments focus on elucidating the molecular pathways that link
CAR signaling and induction of T cell exhaustion, as well as identifying
the structural features of the GD2 CAR that lead to excessive signaling.

