Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SN38 delivery to gastrointestinal cancer cells using a
fucose-bound nanoparticle approach


Background & Aims: Prognosis of patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer (CRC) has been improving by introduction of molecular targeting
therapy combined with chemotherapeutic agents. However, metastatic CRC
still needs new strategies to improve treatment efficacy and survival
rate. Increased expression of fucosyltransferases (FUTs) is common in CRC
cells. FUTs are key enzymes accelerating malignant transformation through
the fucosylation of different sialylated precursors, suggesting a crucial
requirement for fucose by metastatic CRC cells. With this in mind, we
developed fucose-bound nanoparticles as vehicles for delivery of
anticancer drugs specifically to CRC cells. Methods: L-fucose-bound
liposomes were produced by the modified cholate dialysis method as
vehicles for delivery of Cy5.5, FAM and SN38. The production of CA19-9
was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The CRC cell lines
were exposed to SN38 or L-fucose-bound liposomes carrying SN38, and
cytotoxicity was monitored with BrdU assay. Introduction of Cy5.5 or FAM
by L-fucose-bound liposomes was analyzed by flow cytometry or
fluorescence microscopy. The effect of L-fucose-bound liposome carrying
SN38 in vivo was analyzed by intravenous injection in mice engrafted with
CRC cell lines. All statistical tests were two-sided. Results:
L-fucose-bound liposomes containing Cy5.5 or SN38 were effectively
delivered into CA19-9 expressing CRC cancer cells. Excess L-fucose
decreased the efficiency of Cy5.5 introduction by L-fucose-bound
liposomes, suggesting L-fucose-receptor dependency. Intravenously
injected L-fucose-bound liposomes carrying SN38 were successfully
delivered to CRC cells, mediating efficient tumor growth inhibition as
well as prolonging survival in mouse xenograft models. Conclusions:
Fucose-bound liposomes carrying anti-cancer drugs should provide a new
strategy for patients with colorectal cancer.

