Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Water-soluble ureidomustine (BO-1055) potently suppresses
orthotopic 22Rv/HL2 prostate tumor xenografts: early preclinical studies


In developed countries, prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading
causes of death in men. PCa often recurs and metastasizes after an
initial response to hormone therapy. Once PCa progresses to the
castration-resistant stage, it becomes incurable. New and effective
agents against PCa are therefore urgently needed. The objective of this
study is to evaluate the antitumor activity of ureidomustine (BO-1055),
which is a chemically stable and water-soluble phenyl N-mustard-benzamide
conjugate previously synthesized from our laboratory. We previously
demonstrated that ureidomustine exhibited potent therapeutic efficacy in
nude mice bearing various human tumor xenografts, such as human colon
cancer HCT-116 and prostate adenocarcinoma PC-3 xenografts (subcutaneous
implantation), inhibiting growth by >95% and >99%, respectively. To
broaden the antitumor spectrum of this agent, we evaluated the
therapeutic efficacy of ureidomustine in nude mice bearing 22Rv/HL2 human
PCa tumors implanted at an orthotopic site. The results showed that
ureidomustine was as efficacious as docetaxel (>92% tumor suppression)
and more potent than carboplatin (62% suppression) against 22Rv/HL2 PCa
tumors in an orthotopic xenograft model. It revealed that ureidomustine
exhibited low toxicity in mice, with no apparent pathological changes. We
also studied the cytotoxicity of ureidomustine against normal murine
cells and human hematopoietic stem cells (cord blood CD34+). The results
showed that this agent exhibited low cytotoxicity against human
hematopoietic stem cells (cord blood CD34+), primary human endothelial
cells, and mesenchymal stem cells (BSC). Moreover, we performed the early
preclinical studies including pharmacokinetics in rats, rat plasma
protein binding, metabolic stability in rat liver microsomes, the 14 day
intravenous acute toxicity in mice, and the biodistribution in rat, to
determine whether this agent is a candidate for future clinical studies.
The results indicate that ureidomustine is as potent as docetaxel against
22Rv/HL2 PCa cells in orthotopic xenograft models with low toxicity. In
addition, this agent has low toxicity to human hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells and stromal cells such as BM-derived endothelial
cells (BMEC) and MSC. Furthermore, early preclinical studies (ADME)
suggest that ureidomustine has high potential for the treatment of
advanced PCa in the clinic.

