Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of downstream targets of polo-like kinase 1 in
melanoma by large-scale label-free comparative proteomics profiling


Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is a serine-threonine kinase that plays a
critical role in the cell cycle by regulating mitotic entry, progression
and exit. In recent years, Plk1 has gained considerable attention as a
promising mechanism-based therapeutic target in a variety of cancers.
Pre-clinical studies have suggested that Plk1 inhibition is capable of
reducing cancer cell growth both in vitro and in vivo with tremendous
efficacy and with minimal detriment to normal cells. This evidence has
spurred the development of many Plk1-specific inhibitors that has
culminated in over 30 clinical trials, either completed or ongoing.
However, the remarkable pre-clinical success of Plk1 inhibitors has yet
to be validated at the clinical level, thus stressing on an urgent need
for a better understanding of Plk1 signaling. In an effort to further
elucidate the molecular function of Plk1 inhibitors, we performed a
comparative quantitative proteomics strategy to compare the proteome of
human melanoma cells (A375) following treatment with the Plk1-specific
ATP competitive inhibitor BI 6727 (25 nM, 24 h). We employed label-free
nano-LC/MS/MS technology on a Q-exactive followed by SIEVE processing to
identify more than 1800 proteins, 1% false discover rate, 343 of which
had significantly altered expression. Using ingenuity pathway analysis
(IPA) to select for proteins with more than two unique peptides and
greater than a two-fold change, our proteomic analysis resulted in the
identification of more than twenty proteins that were significantly
dysregulated following Plk1-inhibition, many of which have not been
previously shown to be associated with Plk1 signaling. Interestingly, the
metabolic and proteasome pathways harbor the greatest portion of
differentially expressed proteins, including five subunits of the 20S
proteasome core particle and five members of the glycolysis pathway.
Given the importance of these two pathways in cancer cell survival, this
study provides two potential mechanisms of Plk1 inhibition that have yet
to be explored. Further studies are currently ongoing in our laboratory
to validate our findings in additional experiments.

