Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylation underlying hMAPK-induced ER mRNA repression


Estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer is more aggressive and
associated with both shorter disease-free and overall survival than ER+
breast cancer. While anti-estrogen therapies have greatly improved
treatment for ER+ breast cancer, both de-novo and acquired resistance
occurs. Anti-estrogen therapies are not effective in ER- breast cancers,
thus identifying mechanisms underlying lack of ER expression in ER-
breast cancers is imperative. Hypermethylation of the ER promoter has
been demonstrated to repress ER, and is found in 25% of ER- breast
cancers. Previously we demonstrated that hyperactivation of MAPK (hMAPK)
downstream of overexpressed EGFR or overexpression/amplification of Her2
represses ER protein and mRNA expression. Abrogation of hMAPK in ER-
breast cancer cell lines and primary cultures causes re-expression of ER
and restoration of anti-estrogen responses. hMAPK-mediated ER mRNA
repression involves repression of transcription. We found that the ER
mRNA synthesis rate and ER promoter activity, assessed with run-on assays
and ER promoter reporter constructs, respectively, were significantly
reduced in hMAPK-MCF-7 cell line models, with little to no ER expression,
compared to control-transfected MCF-7 (coMCF-7) cells with high ER
expression. Co-transfection of dnERK1/2 abrogated this repression
restoring promoter activity to levels comparable with coMCF-7s but
promoter bashing did not identify specific sequences responsible for this
hMAPK repression. Thus we hypothesized that epigenetic mechanisms may be
involved in hMAPK mediated repression of ER transcription; however, we
could not detect ER promoter methylation in our hMAPK-MCF-7 models, nor
in several breast cancer cell lines with hMAPK.In this study, we
performed an epigenetic compound screen in the ER- SUM 149 breast cancer
cell line, which presents hMAPK, and had been previously demonstrated to
re-express ER with MAPK inhibition. Three candidate compounds, all HDAC
inhibitors, were identified, validated in individual luciferase assays,
and evaluated with rtPCR and Western blotting to verify their ability to
modulate ER expression and estrogen signaling. They have been validated
in additional ER- cell lines and clinical tumor samples lacking ER
promoter methylation, as well. Finally, they have been used in our
hMAPK-MCF-7 cells to demonstrate the role of hMAPK in histone
deacetylation of the ER promoter.While HDAC inhibitors have been
evaluated previously for their ability to sensitize anti-estrogen
resistant ER+ breast cancers and re-express ER in ER- breast cancer cell
lines exhibiting ER promoter methylation, histone deacetylation of ER in
ER- breast cancers lacking ER promoter methylation has not been
previously identified. Collectively, these data link histone
deacetylation as an underlying mechanism in hMAPK-repression of ER mRNA
suggesting this is may be a common epigenetic mechanism in the generation
of ER-negative breast cancer.

