Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of VEGF with ziv-aflibercept (VEGF Trap) enhances
anti-tumor efficacy of CTLA-4 blocking antibody in an Fc dependent manner


VEGF-dependent angiogenesis is required for tumor progression.
Ziv-aflibercept (VEGF Trap) is a VEGF inhibitor, which exhibits potent
antitumor activity in preclinical models and was approved by the FDA in
combination with FOLFIRI for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) who did not respond or progressed following an
oxaliplatin-containing regimen. Recent data suggest that VEGF blockade
may also modulate tumor immunity by promoting necrosis and inflammation,
however the precise mechanism is not fully understood. CTLA-4 blockade
promotes tumor immunity by, in part, reversing suppressive effects of
CTLA-4 receptor on T cell activation, and exhibits synergistic effects
with other immunomodulatory agents in both clinical and experimental
settings. In this study, we examined the combination of ziv-aflibercept
(at 10 mg/kg) and CTLA-4 blocking antibody (at 200 ug/mouse) administered
five times within two weeks in two mouse colon carcinoma models (Colon26
and MC38). Prophylactic therapy with either single agent inhibited
Colon26 tumor growth. Responses to ziv-aflibercept were associated with
reduction of tumor vascularity, while those to -CTLA-4 murine IgG2b
antibody were associated with enrichment of tumor CD8, but not CD4, T
cells as measured by flow cytometry. Combination therapy resulted in
complete tumor regression and significantly improved survival (0%, 30%
and 70% survival in ziv-aflibercept, -CTLA-4 and combination groups
respectively). Pathological evaluation of ziv-aflibercept treated tumors
by histostaining revealed increased tumor necrosis, which became more
severe in the combination group. -CTLA-4 antibody did not promote
definitive tumor necrosis, but resulted in increased immune cell
infiltrate composed mainly of lymphocytes and macrophages. To address the
role of the immunoglobulin constant region of -CTLA-4 antibody, we
compared the effect of murine IgG2a and IgG2b antibody versions with high
and low effector function respectively. -CTLA-4 IgG2a antibody was
significantly more potent than IgG2b, resulting in eradication of
established Colon26 tumors and partial growth inhibition of established
MC38 tumors, whereas these established tumors were resistant to -CTLA4
IgG2b therapy. Co-administration of ziv-aflibercept significantly
improved -CTLA4 IgG2a antibody efficacy against established MC38 tumors.
These results suggest that combining immunotherapy and ziv-aflibercept
may be beneficial for the treatment of established tumors in a clinical
setting.

