Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the tumor vasculature with antibody drug conjugates


Clinical use of vascular targeting antibody drug conjugates (VT-ADCs) has
not yet been explored. Herein, we preclinically demonstrate utility,
mechanisms and advantages of VT-ADCs as targeted cancer therapeutics. A
monoclonal human IgG1 antibody selective for murine VEGFR2 (B3) is
non-VEGF-A neutralizing and traffics to the lysosome. B3 was conjugated
to a proprietary auristatin microtubule inhibitor with a non-cleavable
maleimidocaproyl linker, resulting in the proof-of-concept VT-ADC,
B3-mcMTI. In vitro, free-payload and anti-VEGFR2-mcMTI selectively
inhibit proliferating endothelial cells (ECs) with pM and low nM IC50s -
suggesting that even with a broadly expressed, low-level target, a VT-ADC
should be potent and tumor specific. To test this in vivo, we treated
three cell line xenografts (CLX, HT29, Ls174T, A498) and a colorectal
carcinoma patient derived xenograft (CRC PDX) with B3-mcMTI at 3 mg/kg
q4d, resulting in tumor stasis in four models. In the HT29 colon
carcinoma CLX and the CRC PDX model, B3-mcMTI was superior to
VEGF-neutralizing antibody G6-31 (anti-VEGF mAb). In standard-of-care
(SOC) chemotherapy (irinotecan and 5-FU) combination studies in HT29,
B3-mcMTI had improved anti-tumor activity over SOC alone, and, moreover,
was as effective in inhibiting tumor growth as a single agent ADC as
anti-VEGF mAb combined with SOC. In the 4T1 orthotopic anti-VEGF
resistant breast carcinoma setting, B3-mcMTI outperformed anti-VEGF mAb,
and when combined with SOC (paclitaxel) demonstrated improved activity
over single agent without an increase in metastases. B3-mcMTI
internalization in endothelial cells is VEGFR2-mediated, with antibody
binding and active payload releasing in normal and tumor tissues at
concentrations above the in vitro IC50s; however, payload activity as
measured by quantitative image analysis of pharmacodynamic biomarkers
such as phospho-Histone H3 and cleaved caspase 3 is overwhelmingly
localized to tumor ECs. Targeted vessels are smooth muscle invested,
suggesting that VT-ADCs may target vasculature that contributes to
anti-VEGF resistance. In conclusion, VT-ADCs are effective both as single
agents and when combined with SOC, and VT-ADCs may overcome resistance
mechanisms to standard anti-angiogenics. Taken together, these data
suggest that payloads selective for proliferating ECs enable ADC-mediated
targeting of widely expressed EC surface proteins, supporting the
clinical pursuit of VT-ADCs.

