Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transmembrane 2-3 loop domain of the proton coupled folate
transporter (PCFT) forms a novel reentrant loop structure and is
functionally important


The proton coupled folate transporter (PCFT) is a proton-folate symporter
with a twelve transmembrane domain (TMD) structure. Human PCFT (hPCFT) is
highly expressed in many solid tumors and has an acidic pH optimum,
suggesting its high activity in the acidic tumor microenvironment. Our
recent studies have focused on exploiting PCFT for targeting solid tumors
with novel cytotoxic antifolates. Predicted topology models suggest that
the loop domain between TMDs 2 and 3 resides in the cytosol. However,
mutations in TMD2-3 loop residues Asp109 or Arg113 result in loss of PCFT
activity, suggesting an important role in transport activity.
Additionally, TMD2 may itself form a part of the substrate binding
domain, suggesting functional importance for TMD2 residues. Using
site-directed mutagenesis, we replaced each of the seven cysteine (cys)
residues of hPCFT with serine, creating functional cys-less PCFT for use
in substituted cys accessibility methods (SCAM). We then used
site-directed mutagenesis to create 34 single cys mutants spanning TMD2
and the TMD 2-3 loop region (positions 85-118) in a cys-less PCFT
background. These mutants were transfected into R1-11 HeLa cells, which
express no endogenous folate transporters. We measured [3H]methotrexate
uptake at pH 5.5 as a readout of PCFT activity and confirmed PCFT protein
expression by western blotting. All 34 mutants were detected on westerns
and 29 mutants were active, while W107C, D109C, G112C, R113C, and R114C
were inactive. Using functionally active mutants, we performed pull-down
assays with 2-aminoethyl methanethiosulfonate-biotin (MTSEA-biotin) and
steptavidin beads, in order to determine the aqueous accessibility of
each mutant. We found that mutants G93C, F94W, G105C, A106C, S110C, and
L116C reacted with MTSEA-biotin, suggesting that these residues are
aqueous-accessible. For G93C, F94C, and L116C, MTSEA-biotin labeling was
inhibited by pemetrexed pretreatment, and MTSEA-biotin treatment
inhibited transport activity of G93C and F94C. Our results suggest that
the TMD 2-3 loop domain is aqueous accessible and must form a novel
functionally important reentrant loop structure. Additionally, residues
located in TMD2 (Gly93 and Phe94) appear to play a key role in substrate
binding to PCFT. Better understanding of functional and structural
determinants of PCFT membrane transport will be critical to the
development of novel PCFT-selective antifolate drugs for targeting solid
tumors.

