Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CXCR4 pathway augments trastuzumab sensitivity in
HER2 positive breast cancer cells with intrinsic and acquired trastuzumab
resistance


The clinical benefit from trastuzumab (T) in HER2-positive breast cancers
is limited by de novo or acquired resistance. By serial exposure of HER2+
breast cancer cell lines BT474 and SKBr3 to T at 200 g/ml for 1 year and
clonogenic selection, we have developed T-resistant cell lines and
identified differentially expressing genes including consistent
overexpression of CXCR4 at the mRNA and protein levels. CXCR4 is involved
in breast cancer metastasis and proliferation and its overexpression in
human breast cancer specimens is linked to poor prognosis. We sought to
functionally validate CXCR4 as a resistance mechanism to T. CXCR4 mRNA
was quantified using qRT-PCR, and CXCR4 protein expression was quantified
by Western blotting. Stable clones overexpressing CXCR4 were selected by
transfecting CXCR4 full length sequence-containing lentivirus into
parental trastuzumab sensitive BT474 and SKBR3 cells. Stable CXCR4
knockdown clones were selected by transfecting three CXCR4 sequence
specific shRNA containing lentivirus along with scrambled sequence as a
control, into acquired T-resistant cell lines termed BT474R1 and SKBR3R1
and intrinsically T-resistant HCC-1419 cell line. Stable clones of
BT474R1 with tetracycline controlled (tet-on) CXCR4 expression, were
created using the pSLIK-hygro lentiviral system. CXCR4 expression was
assessed by Western blot assay and by flow cytometry. MTT cell viability
analysis was performed on these transfected cell lines to characterize T
dose responsiveness with parental sensitive and T-resistant BT474R1 cells
as control. BT474R cells demonstrated a 100-fold increase in IC50 to T
treatment when compared to parental BT474 cells and also exhibited a
4-fold increase in CXCR4 mRNA and a corresponding increase in CXCR4
protein. Transfection of CXCR4 into sensitive BT474 and SkBR3 cell lines
showed a greater than 100 fold increase in the IC50 value by MTT assay
after treatment with T as compared to the parental cell lines.
Semi-quantitative analysis by Western-blotting confirmed a 7 to 8 fold
increase in CXCR4 expression in CXCR4-transfected cells as compared to
parental cells. shRNA-mediated knockdown of CXCR4 in BT474R1 as well as
primarily resistant HCC-1419 cell line showed a significantly improved
responsiveness to trastuzumab with a 100 fold decrease in the IC50 value
whereas a moderate response was seen in the SKBR3R1 cells. CXCR4
overexpression and activation of the CXCR4/CXCL-12 pathway contributes to
trastuzumab resistance in human breast cancer cell lines. shRNA-mediated
inhibition of the CXCR4 pathway in resistant cells significantly augments
trastuzumab sensitivity. CXCR4 targeting may represent a therapeutic
strategy to reverse de novo and acquired resistance and to improve the
efficacy of trastuzumab in HER2-positive breast cancer.

