Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of breast tumor kinase (Brk) expression in triple
negative breast cancer integrates cell stress and cortisol signaling
pathways


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) lack expression of the molecules
currently exploited for targeted therapy (estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor, and HER2). These tumors frequently respond well to
chemotherapy, but emergence of chemotherapy-resistance is a common
clinical problem. Thus, identification of drivers of TNBC that may be
exploited for targeted therapy is of great importance. Breast tumor
kinase (Brk), also known as protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6), is a
soluble tyrosine kinase that is absent from normal mammary epithelial
cells but inappropriately expressed in 85% of breast cancers. Previous
studies from our lab have shown Brk to be a critical regulator of breast
cancer cell migration in vitro and a potent driver of basal-type mammary
tumors in vivo. Notably, we recently identified a novel mechanism of
upregulation of Brk expression in TNBC cells. Brk expression is induced
following exposure to cell stress, including hypoxia, oxidative damage,
and nutrient starvation. Moreover, we found that Brk is a direct target
gene of both hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1) and HIF-2. It is
becoming increasingly evident that cortisol signaling via activation of
the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) leads to enhanced survival and
chemoresistance in tumors of epithelial origin, such as breast cancer. In
fact, GR expression in TNBC predicts poor outcome. Herein, we sought to
investigate crosstalk between cell stress pathways (HIFs) and cortisol
signaling (GR) that may influence expression of Brk in TNBC. Brk mRNA and
protein were induced in response to the GR ligand, dexamethasone (dex),
in both normoxia and hypoxia, and blocked following treatment with RU486,
a GR antagonist. Brk mRNA and protein failed to be induced following dex
treatment in cells lacking HIF-1 and HIF-2, suggesting that even in
normoxia, GR regulation of Brk requires HIF-1/2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed HIF and GR recruitment to
multiple regions of the Brk promoter in response to either hypoxia (a
ligand-independent GR action) or treatment with dex, indicating that Brk
is a direct GR/HIF target gene. These data show that cortisol signaling
via GR is a novel mechanism of upregulation of Brk expression in TNBC.
Additionally, GR upregulation of Brk is HIF-dependent, revealing
molecular linkage between cell stress pathways and stress hormone
signaling. Collectively, our studies suggest that GR and HIF cross talk
may promote aggressive tumor behavior, in part via upregulation of Brk.
Breast cancer patients are routinely given dex (a GR agonist) to
alleviate the inflammatory side effects of chemotherapy. This treatment
may inadvertently promote tumor progression via induction of Brk
expression.

