Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A spontaneous developmental lineage plasticity that underlies the
response of prostate cancer cells to androgen deprivation


Androgen-dependent prostate cancer (PCa) cells can acquire features of
neuroendocrine- (NE-) cells under acute androgen deprivation (AD). Gene
expression studies show that other neuroectodermal/mesenchymal (NE/M)
cell phenotypes develop under chronic AD. We propose that a transient PCa
stem-like cell mediates these transdifferentiations and we sought to
reveal and maintain this stem-like state using a special growth medium
that is compatible with stem cells that could give rise to these complex
lineages. LNCaP or CWR22r cells were plated at low density on coated
plates then switched to an androgen-free stem-transition medium
compatible with NE/M-derived stem cells. Eight days later, cells were
transferred in the same medium and were characterized for morphology and
3-dimensional (3D) growth properties. Growth in the medium converted
these cells, en masse, to small, rounded proliferating cells that grew as
3D rosettes then to spheroids. Gene expression and cell surface CD
antigen profiling of converted LNCaP cells were most consistent with a
neural/neural crest stem-like (N/NCSL) identity. N/NCSL PCa cells fail to
express androgen receptor (AR) or PSA protein and they are significantly
more resistant to hypoxia and enzalutamide than parental LNCaPs.
LNCaP-N/NCSL cells have significantly increased tumor-initiating
capability and formed tumors in nude mice from only 100 xenografted cells
vs 1 X 106 parental LNCaP cells needed to form tumors. When LNCaP N/NCSL
cells were placed into differentiation mediums without androgen, they
acquired morphological features and expressed biomarkers of neuron-,
glia-, oligodendrocyte or osteocyte-like cells. When they were
redifferentiated in androgen-containing medium, they reverted to an
epithelial cell that resembles parental LNCaPs but they overexpressed AR
and retained expression of nestin, a neural stem marker. Our outcomes
show that differentiated (AR+) PCa cells have a previously unsuspected
developmental plasticity that allows them to return back to a
neural/neural crest stem-like state with drastically increased tumor
initiating capability under certain microenvironmental conditions. Our
new model cell culture system allows us to maintain them in this state or
to differentiate them to a variety of NE/M-derived cell lineages.
Reactivation of androgen signaling, however, returns them to a modified
prostate epithelial-like state that overexpresses AR and retains
expression of some stem genes. We believe that our model culture system
reveals a novel pathway associated with progression of PCa to
therapy-resistance.*Authors contributed equally

