Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A BRCA2-targeting antisense oligodeoxynucleotide enhances
cisplatin effectiveness by decreasing human tumor cell proliferation,
metastatic frequency, and metabolic response


BRCA2 is involved in homologous recombination repair of double-stranded
DNA breaks in human cells. Inactivating mutations in BRCA2 predispose to
early onset cancer of the breast, ovary and other tissues. However,
patients with tumors that harbor BRCA2 mutations respond better to cancer
therapy. Therefore, reducing BRCA2 in cancer cells capable of homologous
recombination repair may sensitize otherwise resistant tumors to
DNA-damaging anti-cancer treatment. We developed a second generation
antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (BR-1) that specifically targets BRCA2.
BR-1 decreased BRCA2 mRNA and protein and inhibited BRCA2-mediated RAD51
repair focus formation. BR-1 potently sensitized A549 (lung), SKOV-3
(ovarian), and MDA-MB-231 (breast) cells to cisplatin as evidenced by
decreased cell proliferation. However, non-cancerous HK-2 kidney cells
were not sensitized to cisplatin by BR-1. In A549 cells BR-1 enhanced
cisplatin or ionizing radiation-induced inhibition of in vitro colony
formation. Cisplatin-resistant head and neck squamous cancer cells
(HN-15a) were rendered as sensitive to cisplatin following BR-1 treatment
as the parent population. In addition, BR-1 plus cisplatin treatment
decreased A549 cell metastatic frequency in an in vivo chicken
chorio-allantoic membrane (CAM) model by over 70% when compared with drug
treatment alone. Treatment with BR-1 and cisplatin decreased cellular
respiration (decreased oxygen consumption) compared to control
oligonucleotide plus cisplatin treatment, suggesting that downregulation
of BRCA2 in the context of platinating drug treatment alters cellular
metabolism. This change in respiration occurred independently of changes
in mitochondrial number. We are continuing to develop and test BR-1 with
the aim of applying it in an adjuvant setting with cisplatin in human
clinical trials in the future. Supported by grants from the Ontario
Centres of Excellence (OCE)

