Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential survival and self-renewal of LSC and HSC in aged and
leukemic niches


Background:Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is a highly lethal disease
with only 20% of 5 years survival. Progression to therapy resistant AML
is driven by leukemia stem cells (LSC) harboring enhanced survival,
dormancy and self-renewal capacity in supportive niches. Evidence
indicates that in the development of AML deregulation of stem cells
activity is as important as deregulation of the microenvironment. We have
recently reported that inflammatory changes in the aging bone marrow (BM)
niche via aberrant RNA editing and splicing may predispose patients to
leukemic transformation. However, little is known about the functional
effects of niche driven aberrant RNA processing in the AML pathogenesis,
as well as of role of aberrant RNA editing and splicing in human aged
stem cell fate, dormancy and regeneration in the context of
microenvironment. Here we investigate: 1/ the LSC impacts to the BM niche
and 2/ changes in the activity of BM niche cells contribute to AML
pathogenesis.Methods:BM CD34- cell from normal donors and AML patients
were used for the development of the primary human stromal monolayers :
young (y-BM, n=3); old (a-BM, n=3) and AML (n=3). Human CD34+ cells were
selected from AML primary samples (n=6). As a control, CD34+ cells from
cord blood (CB, n=5), y-BM (n=3) or a-BM (n=3) were used for the
co-culture experiments and then plated in survival and self-renewal
assays.Results:AML- and normal BM-derived stroma differ in their ability
to support HSC and LSC: LSC (n=6) were capable to self-renew after 9
weeks of co-culture with both normal and AML stroma, while cord blood HSC
(n=5) lost their self-renewal potential after only 2 weeks of co-culture
with the AML stroma. Aged BM also impaired survival and self-renewal of
cord blood HSC (n=3) in stromal co-culture models. In similar experiments
HSC from a-BM (n=3) demonstrated significantly higher survival and
self-renewal capacity then co-cultured with y-BM stroma (n=3) compared to
a-BM stroma (n=3). Conditioned media (CM) both from-, or co-culture
with-, old or AML stroma impaired HSC survival and self-renewal. Notably,
co-culture conditions resulted in a greater reduction in survival and
self- renewal capacity, suggesting that cell-cell contact or unstable
secreted factors exacerbate the effects. Cord blood HSC were also
co-cultured with AML-derived stroma or CM , and this severely impaired
their survival and self-renewal. Moreover, pre-treatment of the HS-5
cells with CM from a-BM or AML stroma for 4 weeks prior to co-culture
experiments led to significant inhibition of the cord blood HSC (n=3)
survival and self-renewal.Conclusions:Together these data indicate that
microenvironmental cues play a key role in regulating normal HSC versus
LSC survival and maintenance, and leukemic and aged stroma exibit
severely compromised ability to maintain normal HSCs, but effectively
support LSCs. Targeting this pathological interplay could represent a
novel avenue for treatment of AML.

