Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An Rgnef (p190RhoGEF/Arhgef28) signaling axis regulates ovarian
cancer progression


Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in women, is usually
diagnosed in late stage, and currently has insufficient effective
targeted therapies. The primary mode of metastasis is unique in that
dissemination occurs via tumor cell shedding into the peritoneal cavity,
survival and growth within ascites, and re-adhesion and proliferation of
tumor cells at sites within the abdomen. Therefore, molecules and
pathways involving cell adhesion and survival in non-adherent
environments are of particular interest. Rgnef (p190RhoGEF/Arhgef28) is a
Rho family guanine exchange factor that associates with focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) and functions both as a downstream target of FAK tyrosine
kinase activity and a regulator of FAK activity following integrin
stimulation. FAK regulates cell adhesion, migration, and survival.
Expression of FAK is associated with poor clinical outcome, its activity
(as measured by FAK Y397 phosphorylation) is frequently increased in
serous ovarian carcinomas, and it is currently under investigation as a
therapeutic target in ongoing clinical trials. Immunohistochemical
analysis of human tumor tissue arrays with antibodies specific for Rgnef
and FAK pY397 reveal a positive correlation between Rgnef expression and
FAK activation and increased stage/grade of serous-type ovarian cancer.
Stable knockdown of Rgnef in human ovarian carcinoma cells grown as
subcutaneous or intraperitoneal xenografts in mice suggest that Rgnef may
play roles in both primary tumor growth and ascites-associated cell
survival and spread. Here, we use a transgenic model of spontaneous
ovarian cancer (MISIIR-T-Antigen) to test the role of Rgnef in ovarian
cancer progression. Female Rgnef+/+;TAg+ and Rgnef-/-;TAg+ mice were
monitored by ultrasound imaging from age 12 to 17 weeks before
euthanasia. Rgnef-/-;TAg+ tumors were significantly smaller (p=0.0006)
and contained fewer Ki67 positive cells than Rgnef+/+;TAg+ controls at 17
weeks. Tumors and ovarian carcinoma cells isolated from Rgnef-/-;TAg+
mouse ascites have reduced FAK pY397 and increased E-cadherin expression
compared to controls, suggesting that loss of Rgnef results in a less
aggressive tumor phenotype. These findings identify Rgnef as a component
in signaling pathways promoting FAK activation and regulating ovarian
tumor progression.

