Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JunB/AP-1 controls MM cell proliferation, survival and drug
resistance in the bone marrow microenvironment


The activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor is a dimeric complex
that comprises members of the JUN, FOS, activating transcription factor
(ATF) and musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma (MAF) protein families.
Resultant heterodimers and homodimers determine the genes that are
regulated by AP-1. Functionally, AP-1 has been implicated in a multitude
of biological processes but also tumorigenesis, dependent on the cell
type and the pathophysiologic context. In multiple myeloma (MM), the role
of AP-1 is largely unknown. The present study focuses on the impact of
JunB, a central member of the AP-1 family, in MM growth, survival and
drug resistance.First, our data demonstrate rapid and strong induction of
AP-1/JunB expression in MM cell lines and primary tumor cells upon
co-culture with bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs), i.e. isotypic primary
BMSCs as well as BMSC lines KM-105 and HS-27A. Importantly, utilizing a
non-contact co-culture system, we show that this effect is predominantly
mediated by soluble factors secreted by BMSCs rather than direct MM-BMSC
contact. Consistent with gene expression profiling data, JunB mRNA levels
detected by quantitative real-time PCR are increased in MM cells when
co-cultured with BMSCs. Specifically, we found that upregulation of JunB
occurs predominantly at the translational level, since cycloheximide, but
not actinomycin D or MG-132 significantly blocked BMSC- induced JunB
expression.Pharmacologic inhibition was used next in order to identify
upstream signaling pathways, which mediate BMSC- induced JunB
upregulation in MM cells. Our data demonstrate that activation of
MEK/MAPK or NF-kB, but not PI3K/Akt is required for induction of JunB
expression and AP-1 transcriptional activity.To delineate the specific
functional role of JunB in MM pathogenesis, we subsequently generated
stable MM cell lines carrying the pLKO.1-puro-JunB shRNA vector or the
pLKO.1-puro control vector, respectively. Our preliminary data show
significantly decreased proliferation and resistance to chemotherapy in
MM/ pLKO.1-puro-JunB shRNA but not MM/ pLKO.1-puro control cells when
co-cultured with BMSCs. Consistently, 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT) treatment
of MM cells stably transduced with pBabe-puro-JunB-ER-IRES-GFP but not of
MM cells transduced with pBabe-puro-IRES-GFP promotes tumor cell
proliferation, survival and drug resistance, independent of BMSC
co-culture. Ongoing studies aim to identify downstream effectors of JunB,
using gene array profiling of MM/ pLKO.1-puro-JunB shRNA cells versus MM/
pLKO.1-puro control cells. Furthermore, we are conducting a survey of
published and unpublished datasets to uncover the clinical and prognostic
relevance of JunB expression in MM patient samples.In summary, our data
demonstrate for the first time an important role of AP-1/JunB in MM
tumorigenesis and strongly propose it as a novel therapeutic target in MM.

