Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor PTEN regulates cancer stem cells of glioblastoma
multiforme: identification of signaling pathways as targets of therapy


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), a WHO defined grade IV astrocytoma, is a
uniformly fatal CNS malignancy. The high rate of recurrence is attributed
to the presence of its untreatable cancer stem cells (CSC). Phosphatase
and tensin homologue on chromosome 10 (PTEN), a tumor suppressor is a
central negative regulator of PI3K/AKT signaling axis that controls
multiple cellular functions, including cell growth, survival and
proliferation. Recent evidence suggests that PTEN loss is associated with
increased CSC in GBM. Furthermore, downstream from PTEN/PI3K/AKT is mTOR,
an atypical serine threonine kinase that exists in two multiprotein
complexes (mTORC1 and mTORC2), which regulates growth and dissemination
of GBM. The molecular mechanism involved in regulation of CSC by PTEN and
its interacting pathways remains elusive. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the role of PTEN in regulation and maintenance of CSC in GBM,
and define the potential downstream targets of therapy. In order to
achieve our goals, we evaluated the presence of activated AKT/mTOR, and
stem cell marker nestin in surgically resected GBM tumors. GBM cell line
U87 (PTEN mutated) was transfected with PTEN plasmids (wild type and 3
phosphorylated mutants) to evaluate its role in CSC self-renewal.
Pharmacological treatments included an inhibitor of EGFR, gefitinib
(Iressa), with or without inhibitors of PI3K (LY294002; LY) or inhibitors
of mTORC1 (rapamycin) or mTORC1/2 (PP242). Expression of mTOR and stem
cell markers were assessed using IHC or IF analysis, and protein
expression was determined via Western Blotting. Functional analysis
included self-renewal, drug withdrawal, differentiation, proliferation
and migration. Results demonstrated that a significant number of GBM
tumors expressed stem cell markers nestin as well as pAKT and pmTOR. Wild
type PTEN expressing CSC had decreased self-renewal compared to PTEN
expressing mutant CSCs. PI3K inhibitor, LY, with gefitinib was most
effective in suppressing neurosphere formation. Rebound following
withdrawal of inhibitors showed a significant upregulation in
self-renewal of CSC in cells treated with gefitinib and either LY or
PP242. These combinations also significantly suppressed CSC
proliferation. mTOR suppression altered the expression of stem cell
markers nestin and SOX2. In conclusion, the findings of this study
demonstrate that PTEN/PI3K/mTOR signaling forms a complex network that
regulates and maintains GBM CSC; this also underscores the combined
suppression of interacting signaling pathways, such as EGFR, in targeting
GBM CSC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

