Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic vaccination with GM-CSF gene-transduced iPS cells
induces potent T cells-mediated antitumor immunity


Development of a novel therapeutic modality targeting cancer stem cells
(CSCs) holds great promise for the eventual eradication of cancer. It was
demonstrated that CSCs shared antigenic similarities with embryonic stem
(ES) cells and the vaccination using ES cells could generate antitumor
immunity. However, the use of ES cells raises potential immunological and
ethical issues. Recently, by the forced ectopic expression of defined
transcription factors, autologous somatic cells were successfully
reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells that closely
resemble ESCs. We hypothesized that novel cell vaccines using mouse iPS
cells genetically engineered to express the immunostimulatory cytokine of
GM-CSF would cross-react CSC cells and induce long term antitumor
immunity against poorly immunogenic syngeneic LLC mouse lung cancer
cells. Our results of in vitro assays demonstrated that non-transmissible
recombinant Sendai virus-mediated mouse GM-CSF gene transfer to iPSCs
(iPS/GM-CSF) was effective to produce abundant GM-CSF in vitro and
iPS/GM-CSF cells maintained their stemness in terms of morphology and
antigenicity as evidenced by the expression of SSEA-1,Oct3/4 and alkaline
phosphatase compared with unmodified iPS cells. Prophylactic iPSCs
vaccine studies revealed that wild-type female mice subcutaneously
vaccinated with irradiated iPS (ir.iPS) cells on weeks 1, 2, and 3 before
the tumor challenge with LLC cells significantly suppressed the LLC tumor
growth compared with untreated mice (pDevelopment of a novel therapeutic
modality targeting cancer stem cells (CSCs) holds great promise for the
eventual eradication of cancer. It was demonstrated that CSCs shared
antigenic similarities with embryonic stem (ES) cells and the vaccination
using ES cells could generate antitumor immunity. However, the use of ES
cells raises potential immunological and ethical issues. Recently, by the
forced ectopic expression of defined transcription factors, autologous
somatic cells were successfully reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells that closely resemble ESCs. We hypothesized that novel cell
vaccines using mouse iPS cells genetically engineered to express the
immunostimulatory cytokine of GM-CSF would cross-react CSC cells and
induce long term antitumor immunity against poorly immunogenic syngeneic
LLC mouse lung cancer cells. Our results of in vitro assays demonstrated
that non-transmissible recombinant Sendai virus-mediated mouse GM-CSF
gene transfer to iPSCs (iPS/GM-CSF) was effective to produce abundant
GM-CSF in vitro and iPS/GM-CSF cells maintained their stemness in terms
of morphology and antigenicity as evidenced by the expression of
SSEA-1,Oct3/4 and alkaline phosphatase compared with unmodified iPS
cells. Prophylactic iPSCs vaccine studies revealed that wild-type female
mice subcutaneously vaccinated with irradiated iPS (ir.iPS) cells on
weeks 1, 2, and 3 before the tumor challenge with LLC cells significantly
suppressed the LLC tumor growth compared with untreated mice (p<0.05).
Importantly, mice carrying pre-established LLC tumor treated with
ir.iPS/GM-CSF cells showed significantly suppressed tumor growth compared
with mice treated with ir.iPS/GFP cells (pDevelopment of a novel
therapeutic modality targeting cancer stem cells (CSCs) holds great
promise for the eventual eradication of cancer. It was demonstrated that
CSCs shared antigenic similarities with embryonic stem (ES) cells and the
vaccination using ES cells could generate antitumor immunity. However,
the use of ES cells raises potential immunological and ethical issues.
Recently, by the forced ectopic expression of defined transcription
factors, autologous somatic cells were successfully reprogrammed to
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells that closely resemble ESCs. We
hypothesized that novel cell vaccines using mouse iPS cells genetically
engineered to express the immunostimulatory cytokine of GM-CSF would
cross-react CSC cells and induce long term antitumor immunity against
poorly immunogenic syngeneic LLC mouse lung cancer cells. Our results of
in vitro assays demonstrated that non-transmissible recombinant Sendai
virus-mediated mouse GM-CSF gene transfer to iPSCs (iPS/GM-CSF) was
effective to produce abundant GM-CSF in vitro and iPS/GM-CSF cells
maintained their stemness in terms of morphology and antigenicity as
evidenced by the expression of SSEA-1,Oct3/4 and alkaline phosphatase
compared with unmodified iPS cells. Prophylactic iPSCs vaccine studies
revealed that wild-type female mice subcutaneously vaccinated with
irradiated iPS (ir.iPS) cells on weeks 1, 2, and 3 before the tumor
challenge with LLC cells significantly suppressed the LLC tumor growth
compared with untreated mice (p<0.05). Importantly, mice carrying
pre-established LLC tumor treated with ir.iPS/GM-CSF cells showed
significantly suppressed tumor growth compared with mice treated with
ir.iPS/GFP cells (p<0.05). No serious adverse events were observed
without any organ damages of liver and kidney. Furthermore, the antitumor
effects observed in mice treated with ir.iPS/ GM- CSF cells were
significantly abrogated when CD4+ T or CD8+ T cells were depleted,
showing their capacity to incite T cells-mediated antitumor immunity.
Lastly, we performed a cDNA microarray analysis to identify commonly
upregulated genes of the putative CSCs-associated antigens as a target of
iPS cells-based vaccines among LLC cells, iPS vaccine cells. Several
sperm- or cell surface- specific antigens were predominantly expressed
and shared between the 2 distinctive cell fractions.Taken together, our
results demonstrated that iPS cells-based vaccine could induce both
prophylactic and therapeutic antitumor immunity in syngeneic mouse
models, and suggested that this novel vaccine strategy may be a promising
modality for cancer immunotherapy.

