Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: III-tubulin is required for the tumorigenic phenotype and
resistance to anoikis via the PTEN/AKT signaling axis in non-small cell
lung cancer


BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a dismal prognosis and
remains the most common cause of cancer death worldwide. Expression of
III-tubulin, encoded by the TUBB3 gene, is associated with clinical
resistance and aggressive disease in NSCLC1. Herein, we interrogated the
mechanistic role of III-tubulin in regulating the tumorigenic potential
of NSCLC.METHODS: Functional studies involved independent clones of NSCLC
H460 cells stably expressing shRNA targeting III-tubulin, H460 controls
stably expressing (non-functional) shRNA and III-tubulin rescue clones
established in our laboratory2. Differential proteomics was conducted
using fluorescence based 2D-DIGE and mass spectrometry. Gene and protein
expression performed by qRT-PCR and western blotting respectively. To
assess effects on tumor growth and incidence we used metastatic (tail
vein) and subcutaneous models of NSCLC. Tumors monitored by CT or Xenogen
imaging.RESULTS: Functional and differential proteomics revealed that
III-tubulin regulates expression of tumor growth- and
metastases-associated proteins. In particular, the tumor suppressor
maspin, associated with adhesion and metastasis, was differentially
regulated by III-tubulin. Functionally, III-tubulin suppression led to
altered cell morphology, increased cell adhesion and increased
sensitivity to anoikis. Mechanistically, we identified PTEN and AKT
kinase as a key signaling axis mediating anoikis and regulated by
III-tubulin levels in NSCLC cells. Finally, III-tubulin suppression was
shown to reduce NSCLC tumor growth and incidence in vivo. Collectively,
these data identified III-tubulin as a regulator of tumor growth and
metastasis through regulation of PTEN and AKT signaling. We conclude that
suppressing III-tubulin may reduce tumor growth in NSCLC.SIGNIFICANCE:
This is the first study to show that silencing III-tubulin alters the
expression of proteins involved in promoting tumorigenicity and increases
sensitivity to anoikis, leading to reduced tumor incidence. Targeting
III-tubulin could be a promising strategy for inhibiting tumor growth and
metastasis in NSCLC.1 Kavallaris, M. Nature Rev Cancer, 10:194-204, 20102
McCarroll et al. Cancer Res 70 :4995-5003, 2010

