Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenic recovery under chronic exposure to sunitinib is
associated with vasculogenic mimicry in renal cell carcinoma


Background. Sunitinib inhibits VEGFR/PDGFR signaling in cancer cells and
reduces tumor blood flow, leading to tumor starvation, hypoxia, and
necrosis. The aim of this study was to investigate mechanisms associated
with adaptive resistance to sunitinib in vitro and in vivo in renal
cancer models (RCC).Materials and Methods: CAKI1 (VHL+) and 786-0 (VHL-)
RCC cells were exposed in vitro to stepwise increasing doses of sunitinib
for >6 months. In vitro, vascular mimicry was assessed by pseudo-tube
formation assay using Matrigel. Pseudo-tube networks were quantified by
angiogenesis analyzer for Image J, assessing the meshes number. CAKI1 or
786-0 cells were engrafted in nude mice and treated at 60 mg/kg/day of
sunitinib until progression.Results. We confirmed that the VHL pathway
was functional in CAKI1 but not in 786-0 cells. In vivo, sunitinib
significantly delay tumor growth with a median time-to-tumor progression
of 50 days versus 17 days (pBackground. Sunitinib inhibits VEGFR/PDGFR
signaling in cancer cells and reduces tumor blood flow, leading to tumor
starvation, hypoxia, and necrosis. The aim of this study was to
investigate mechanisms associated with adaptive resistance to sunitinib
in vitro and in vivo in renal cancer models (RCC).Materials and Methods:
CAKI1 (VHL+) and 786-0 (VHL-) RCC cells were exposed in vitro to stepwise
increasing doses of sunitinib for >6 months. In vitro, vascular mimicry
was assessed by pseudo-tube formation assay using Matrigel. Pseudo-tube
networks were quantified by angiogenesis analyzer for Image J, assessing
the meshes number. CAKI1 or 786-0 cells were engrafted in nude mice and
treated at 60 mg/kg/day of sunitinib until progression.Results. We
confirmed that the VHL pathway was functional in CAKI1 but not in 786-0
cells. In vivo, sunitinib significantly delay tumor growth with a median
time-to-tumor progression of 50 days versus 17 days (p<0.001) in CAKI and
over 60 days versus 22 days (pBackground. Sunitinib inhibits VEGFR/PDGFR
signaling in cancer cells and reduces tumor blood flow, leading to tumor
starvation, hypoxia, and necrosis. The aim of this study was to
investigate mechanisms associated with adaptive resistance to sunitinib
in vitro and in vivo in renal cancer models (RCC).Materials and Methods:
CAKI1 (VHL+) and 786-0 (VHL-) RCC cells were exposed in vitro to stepwise
increasing doses of sunitinib for >6 months. In vitro, vascular mimicry
was assessed by pseudo-tube formation assay using Matrigel. Pseudo-tube
networks were quantified by angiogenesis analyzer for Image J, assessing
the meshes number. CAKI1 or 786-0 cells were engrafted in nude mice and
treated at 60 mg/kg/day of sunitinib until progression.Results. We
confirmed that the VHL pathway was functional in CAKI1 but not in 786-0
cells. In vivo, sunitinib significantly delay tumor growth with a median
time-to-tumor progression of 50 days versus 17 days (p<0.001) in CAKI and
over 60 days versus 22 days (p<0.01) in 786-0 xenogratfs. In CAKI1 and
786-0, quantitative immunohistochemistry and fluorescence analyses at the
time of sunitinib progression showed patterns of angiogenesis recovery
with tumor blood vessel sprouting associated with reduction of hypoxic
and necrotic areas. In these sunitinib-resistant tumors, cancer cells
displayed stem cell and mesenchymal differentiation markers such as CD133
vimentin and CXCR4. Vessels sprouting under sunitinib exposure contained
CD10/CD31/von Willebrand co-stained cells embedded in their walls
suggesting vascular mimicry. We further investigated whether cancer cell
differentiation into endothelial cell was related to chemical inhibition
of VEGFR/PDGFR by sunitinib. We first characterized CAKI and 786 cells
for VEGFR and PDGFR expression, showing that CAKI expressed high level of
PDGFR, whereas 786 expressed low levels of VEGFR and PDGFR. In normally
oxygenated culture conditions, 786-0 cells formed spontaneously more
meshes than CAKI1 cells (22 versus 0.33, pBackground. Sunitinib inhibits
VEGFR/PDGFR signaling in cancer cells and reduces tumor blood flow,
leading to tumor starvation, hypoxia, and necrosis. The aim of this study
was to investigate mechanisms associated with adaptive resistance to
sunitinib in vitro and in vivo in renal cancer models (RCC).Materials and
Methods: CAKI1 (VHL+) and 786-0 (VHL-) RCC cells were exposed in vitro to
stepwise increasing doses of sunitinib for >6 months. In vitro, vascular
mimicry was assessed by pseudo-tube formation assay using Matrigel.
Pseudo-tube networks were quantified by angiogenesis analyzer for Image
J, assessing the meshes number. CAKI1 or 786-0 cells were engrafted in
nude mice and treated at 60 mg/kg/day of sunitinib until
progression.Results. We confirmed that the VHL pathway was functional in
CAKI1 but not in 786-0 cells. In vivo, sunitinib significantly delay
tumor growth with a median time-to-tumor progression of 50 days versus 17
days (p<0.001) in CAKI and over 60 days versus 22 days (p<0.01) in 786-0
xenogratfs. In CAKI1 and 786-0, quantitative immunohistochemistry and
fluorescence analyses at the time of sunitinib progression showed
patterns of angiogenesis recovery with tumor blood vessel sprouting
associated with reduction of hypoxic and necrotic areas. In these
sunitinib-resistant tumors, cancer cells displayed stem cell and
mesenchymal differentiation markers such as CD133 vimentin and CXCR4.
Vessels sprouting under sunitinib exposure contained CD10/CD31/von
Willebrand co-stained cells embedded in their walls suggesting vascular
mimicry. We further investigated whether cancer cell differentiation into
endothelial cell was related to chemical inhibition of VEGFR/PDGFR by
sunitinib. We first characterized CAKI and 786 cells for VEGFR and PDGFR
expression, showing that CAKI expressed high level of PDGFR, whereas 786
expressed low levels of VEGFR and PDGFR. In normally oxygenated culture
conditions, 786-0 cells formed spontaneously more meshes than CAKI1 cells
(22 versus 0.33, p<0.05). Interestingly, chronic exposure of CAKI1 cells
to sunitinib led to a 32-fold increase in the number of meshes (10.6
versus 0.33, pBackground. Sunitinib inhibits VEGFR/PDGFR signaling in
cancer cells and reduces tumor blood flow, leading to tumor starvation,
hypoxia, and necrosis. The aim of this study was to investigate
mechanisms associated with adaptive resistance to sunitinib in vitro and
in vivo in renal cancer models (RCC).Materials and Methods: CAKI1 (VHL+)
and 786-0 (VHL-) RCC cells were exposed in vitro to stepwise increasing
doses of sunitinib for >6 months. In vitro, vascular mimicry was assessed
by pseudo-tube formation assay using Matrigel. Pseudo-tube networks were
quantified by angiogenesis analyzer for Image J, assessing the meshes
number. CAKI1 or 786-0 cells were engrafted in nude mice and treated at
60 mg/kg/day of sunitinib until progression.Results. We confirmed that
the VHL pathway was functional in CAKI1 but not in 786-0 cells. In vivo,
sunitinib significantly delay tumor growth with a median time-to-tumor
progression of 50 days versus 17 days (p<0.001) in CAKI and over 60 days
versus 22 days (p<0.01) in 786-0 xenogratfs. In CAKI1 and 786-0,
quantitative immunohistochemistry and fluorescence analyses at the time
of sunitinib progression showed patterns of angiogenesis recovery with
tumor blood vessel sprouting associated with reduction of hypoxic and
necrotic areas. In these sunitinib-resistant tumors, cancer cells
displayed stem cell and mesenchymal differentiation markers such as CD133
vimentin and CXCR4. Vessels sprouting under sunitinib exposure contained
CD10/CD31/von Willebrand co-stained cells embedded in their walls
suggesting vascular mimicry. We further investigated whether cancer cell
differentiation into endothelial cell was related to chemical inhibition
of VEGFR/PDGFR by sunitinib. We first characterized CAKI and 786 cells
for VEGFR and PDGFR expression, showing that CAKI expressed high level of
PDGFR, whereas 786 expressed low levels of VEGFR and PDGFR. In normally
oxygenated culture conditions, 786-0 cells formed spontaneously more
meshes than CAKI1 cells (22 versus 0.33, p<0.05). Interestingly, chronic
exposure of CAKI1 cells to sunitinib led to a 32-fold increase in the
number of meshes (10.6 versus 0.33, p<0.01), which could be related to
the inhibition of the PDGFR pathway.Conclusions. Our data showed that
chronic exposure to subtoxic doses of sunitinib might force cancer stem
cells to differentiate into endothelial-like cells in vitro and in vivo
independently of the VHL status of tumor cells. This phenomenon known as
vasculogenic mimicry is associated with poor prognosis in renal cell
carcinoma. VHL-mutated 786-0 cells appeared more prompt to form vessels
and can spontaneously form meshes in normoxic condition in vitro.
Interestingly, this plastic capacity of forming vessels in normoxic
condition can be acquired in wild-type VHL CAKI1 when treated chronically
with subtoxic doses of sunitinib.

