Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive miRNA-145 inhibits IGF-1 and cell viability in
prostate cancer cells


Castrate resistant prostate cancer that metastasizes (mCRPC) to the bone
is the cause of most fatalities of prostate cancer (PCa). Interaction of
tumor with the bone microenvironment is critical to progression of bone
metastases, enhancing cancer cell survival and proliferation. One of the
bone microenvironment-induced factors that promotes metastatic growth is
IGF-1, the ligand for IGF-1R, a protein tyrosine kinase receptor
frequently overexpressed in bone metastases and when overexpressed,
correlated with poor prognosis. We have demonstrated that activation of
the IGF-1/1R signaling pathway also induces crosstalk, leading to
activation of growth factor receptors including c-MET, currently a target
for several inhibitors in clinical trial for mCRPC. We have therefore
examined new therapeutic strategies that might integrate targeting IGF-1R
and c-MET. We focused on miRNA-mediated gene regulation and new delivery
strategies for miRNAs that may lead to therapeutic efficacy. Our work
delivering miR-34a through chitosan nanoparticles in vivo, demonstrated
decreased tumor growth in the bone. miR-34a inhibits c-MET, Axl, and
c-MYC, among other gene products important in PCa progression. However,
miR-34a is not predicted to target IGF-1/1R pathway. We thus used miRNA
target prediction algorithms to identify miRNAs targeting IGF-1/1R
pathway. miR-145, a tumor suppressive miRNA, was predicted to bind the
3UTR of both IGF-1 and IGF-1R. In many cancers including PCa, miR-145 is
shown to be downregulated and in PCa its loss is predictive of poor
survival. However, whether miR-145 targets the IGF-1/1R signaling axis
and therefore decreases PCa cell survival has not been studied. We
performed transient transfection of miR-145 in vitro and demonstrated
that while IGF-1R was not inhibited, IGF-1 was inhibited at both the
protein and mRNA levels. As a result, constitutive phosphorylation of
IGF-1R was inhibited, leading to decreased cell viability and G1 arrest.
In conclusion, our in vitro work demonstrates for the first time that
miR-145 inhibits IGF-1 expression and decreases PCa cell survival. Future
studies will determine if miR-145 can be used for in vivo delivery to
inhibit growth of prostate cancer cells in the bone. Since, miR-34a and
miR-145 can target multiple genes with overlapping and distinct functions
that contribute to PCa growth in the bone, we will also determine whether
miRNA combination therapy can be used for inhibiting prostate cancer cell
growth in vitro and in vivo and potentially overcome de novo resistance
due to receptor crosstalk. The goal of our work is to deliver miRs that
inhibit critical pathways as a treatment strategy for bone metastatic PCa.

