Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule perturbation regulates remodeling of tumor
microenvironment by modulating the composition of tumor cell secretome


Microtubules (MTs) represent one of the most effective targets in cancer
chemotherapy. However, MT-targeting drugs, such as the taxanes, often
fail in the metastatic setting and mechanisms underlying drug resistance
are poorly elucidated. An important process during tumor development and
metastasis involves the dynamic remodeling of the 3D microenvironment
surrounding the tumor cells which enables them to successfully
proliferate and metastasize. We hypothesized that tumor cell MTs may
regulate the cellular signaling process that controls tumor-mediated
remodeling of the microenvironment by paracrine activation of
fibroblasts. To assess the role of MT dynamics in the secretion of
factors from the tumor cells that mediate communication with the
microenvironment, we collected conditioned medium (CM) from untreated or
paclitaxel (PTX)-pre-treated metastatic breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells
and applied it to HMF3S human mammary fibroblasts. We observed that CM
from untreated 231 cells resulted in fibroblast activation as evidenced
by their increased directional 3D cell motility towards a serum gradient.
CM from PTX-pretreated 231 cells, at concentrations that suppress MT
dynamics, but not from the PTX-resistant -tubulin mutation 231 clone,
231K20T cells, did not result in activation of fibroblasts' 3D motility,
suggesting that MT-mediated secretion of soluble factor(s) (secretome)
underlies fibroblast activation. Mass-spectrometry analysis of CM derived
from untreated or PTX-pretreated 231 cells identified proteins whose
secretion was diminished following suppression of MT dynamics and which
are involved in cell motility, cell-cell communication, or ECM
remodeling, such as TGF, CTGF, c-Met, fibronectin, and lysyl oxidase 2.
Treatment of 231-derived CM with an anti-TGF blocking antibody diminished
HMF3S fibroblast motility in 3D, suggesting that the presence of TGF in
the tumor cell secretome mediated the activation of tumor associated
fibroblasts. To further probe the MT-dependent regulation of TGF
secretion we showed that PTX treatment prevented trafficking of
intracellular TGF to the cell surface in 231 cells, likely underlying its
reduced secretion. Confocal reflectance and two-photon microscopic
imaging revealed that CM treatment of HMF3S fibroblasts induced
significant collagen remodeling comparable to treatment with exogenous
TGF alone. Our findings point to a novel role of interphase MTs in tumor
cell secretome and raise the possibility that MTs may regulate secretion
of distinct soluble factors in different types of tumor cells, which then
mediate the communication between tumor cell compartment and the tumor
microenvironment. These novel insights have significant implications for
the mechanism of action and resistance to MT inhibitors.

