Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase and proteasome inhibitors synergistically
induce apoptosis in colon cancer, multiple myeloma and CTCL cells through
induction of the immediate early genes ATF3 and JUN


Background/Aim: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are approved for
the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. We have previously
demonstrated that HDACi-mediated apoptosis is linked to the induction of
a defined transcriptional response involving up-regulation of the
immediate-early (IE) genes FOS, JUN, ATF3, EGR1 and EGR3, in cell lines
derived from multiple tumour types. To identify other drugs which induce
a similar transcriptional response we compared the HDACi-induced
transcriptional response with that induced by >1000 bioactive molecules
using the Broad Institute's Connectivity Map database. The proteasome
inhibitor, MG-262, was identified as inducing the most comparable
transcriptional response to HDACi. Notably, combination treatment with
HDAC and proteasome inhibitors has been shown to synergistically induce
apoptosis in vitro, and a phase III trial of this combination
demonstrated activity in patients multiple myeloma. The aim of this study
was to determine whether these effects are mediated through the additive
induction of IE genes.Methods: The effect of the HDACi SAHA and the
clinically approved proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib, alone, and in
combination, on apoptosis induction was determined in colorectal,
multiple myeloma and CTCL cell lines PI staining and FACS analysis.
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed to determine gene expression changes
upon drug treatment. MAPK pathway activation and histone
hyper-acetylation was determined by western blot analysis.Results: Single
agent treatment of multiple cancer cells with SAHA or Bortezomib induced
expression of the IE genes FOS, JUN and ATF3. In both cases IE gene
induction was sustained over 24h. Proteasome inhibitor-induced IE gene
expression and apoptosis was selectively dependent on activation of the
JNK and p38 stress response pathways, while HDACi-mediated effects were
selectively dependent upon the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors,
indicating these agents induce IE gene expression and apoptosis via
independent mechanisms. Co-treatment with Bortezomib and SAHA resulted in
synergistic induction of IE gene expression and apoptosis in cell lines
derived from multiple tumour types. Importantly, apoptosis induction by
the combination was partially inhibited by siRNA-mediated downregulation
of two IE genes, ATF3 and JUN.Conclusions: This study provides insight
into the mechanistic basis by which combination treatment with HDAC and
proteasome inhibitors synergistically induces apoptosis in tumour cells.

