Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasticity of CD44+ colorectal cancer stem cells depends on
TGF-beta-induced epithelial mesenchymal transition(EMT): Evidences from
an ex vivo culture


BackgroundEpCAMhigh CD44+ colorectal cancer (CRC) cells are thought to be
cancer stem cells. Recently CD44- CRC cells are also suggested to gain a
character of cancer stem cells, but the molecular mechanisms have not
been clarified. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is
observed in several caner cell lines, could be a possible process of
cancer cells to obtain stemness. However, whether primary human CRC cells
underwent EMT has not been proven.Patients and MethodsWe obtained
surgical specimens of 30 cases of advanced CRC, and cultured isolated
primary cancer cells in matrigel-based medium containing several growth
factors. For induction of EMT, TGF-beta was added into the culture of
CD44+ and CD44- cells. Immunocytochemistry staining and flow cytometry of
the spheroid cells and single cell PCR analysis of the cultured cells
using 48-gene set that included EMT-related genes (BioMark HD
System:Fluidigm Corporation) were performed.ResultsCancer cells grew
spherically (50 m> diameter) in 20 out of 30 samples after a week culture
of whole isolated cancer cells. The sphere mostly consisted of CD44+
cells, and non-sphere forming single cells were CD44-negative. Isolated
CD44+ cells from primary samples gave rise to CD44+ and CD44- cells in a
week culture. Interestingly, 10% of CD44- cell from primary samples also
expressed CD44. Similar to the previous findings of cell lines that
TGF-beta-induced EMT could convert CD44- cells into CD44+ cancer
initiating cells, increased number of CD44+ cells appeared from primary
CD44- cells cultured with TGF-beta. In this culture, N-cadherin+ cells
increased time-dependent manner and most of this N-cadherin expressing
cells co-expressed CD44. In single cell PCR analysis, increased
expression of EMT-related genes, vimentin and TWIST1, were preferentially
detected in CD44+N-Cadherin+ cells.ConclusionsTo our knowledge, this is
the first report that CD44- cells from primary samples undergo EMT and
convert into CD44+ cells by TGF- treatment. Investigation whether these
CD44+ converted cells have cancer stem cell properties such as
tumorigenic potential in immunodeficient mouse, self renewing ability and
drug resistance is underway.

