Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene and protein expression profiling identifies molecular
signature of resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in ovarian cancer


Purpose: Angiogenesis plays an important role in ovarian cancer
progression, and the addition of anti-angiogenic agents targeting the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathways to
conventional chemotherapy improves progression-free survival in relapsed,
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer when bevacizumab is given as concurrent
or maintenance therapy. Unfortunately, the long-term clinical benefits of
anti-VEGF therapy have been consistently limited by the rapid development
of tumor resistance. Understanding of tumor's functional adaptations to
anti-VEGF therapy and identifying early indicators of resistance are
crucial for better exploiting anti-angiogenic therapies. The objective of
this study was to perform gene and protein expression profiling of
ovarian cancer to identify tumor and stroma signature of anti-VEGF
treatment-resistance using preclinical resistance models.Methods: We
developed phenotypic resistance xenograft models of anti-VEGF therapy
that mimic the clinical feature of resistance. SKOV3 xenografted mice
were treated with sorafenib or bevacizumab over two months until there
were phenotypic differences between tumors that remained responsive to
the treatment and that regained growth after initial response. We
conducted Illumina next generation sequencing to compare the gene
expression in resistant and sensitive tumors. Sequencing analysis was
performed using Perkin Elmer's Genesifter software and alignment to the
H. sapiens and M. musculus reference genomes. Further, Reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) analysis was done to identify differentially
expressed proteins between resistant and sensitive tumors.Results: Our
sequencing analysis revealed significant differences in expression of
various genes between sensitive and resistant tumors. Based on their role
in angiogenesis and angiogenesis resistance, we chose a set of genes for
follow-up studies. In sorafenib treatment group amphiregulin and
heparanase expression was 4 fold higher (P 0.05) in resistant group
compared to sensitive group. In bevacizumab resistant group prostaglandin
E receptor 1 and keratin 24 3 fold higher expression ((P 0.05) was
observed. RPPA analysis indicated that proteins such as ER alpha,
VEGFR-2, elF4G, E-cadherin, mTOR and beta-catenin expressed 2.8 fold (P
0.0001) higher in sorafenib resistant tumors compared to sensitive
tumors. Neurofibromin 2 (NF2) protein is expressed 2 fold (P 0.0001)
higher in bevacizumab resistant tumors compared to sensitive
tumors.Conclusion: Using gene and protein profiling, we identified
important tumor and stroma biomarkers of resistance to anti-VEGF therapy
in ovarian cancer that may provide insight into ovarian tumor's adaption
principles to VEGF inhibition.

