Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the chemotherapeutic response of nanoliposomal topotecan
in conjunction with radiotherapy on tumor and its microenvironment


Topotecan (TPT), a highly active, water soluble analogue of camptothecin,
is currently being used in the treatment of various localized cancers
from different tissue origin including the breast. Topotecan is
classically known for its ability to inhibit topoisomerase I activity as
well as accumulation of HIF-1 to block upregulation of pro-angiogenic
factors. Despite its known anticancer and antiangiogenic properties the
clinical use of TPT is limited owing to its rapid clearance and
hematological toxicity. Liposomal encapsulation of TPT can potentially
increase its efficacy by shielding it from systemic clearance, allowing
greater uptake and extended tissue exposure in solid tumors. We
hypothesize that tumor cell biology and treatment response would be more
informative when done in the presence of stromal components, like
endothelial cells. To that end we have developed a 3D in-vitro/ in-vivo
murine model of Triple Negative Breast Cancer where 4T1-GFP tumor cells
are co-cultured with their stromal component (2H11 murine endothelial
cells) in hanging drops of medium. In the present study we have
determined the effective dose of radiation and TPT for 4T1 tumor and 2H11
endothelial cells by cell viability and clonogenic assays. Based on the
observed toxicity treatment response of actively loaded liposomal
topotecan (ALLTs) and free drug with or without radiation exposure (3Gy)
in tumor-endothelial spheroids was determined by monitoring the spheroid
size and quantitation of apoptotic changes observed.100nm DSPC and m-PEG
DSPE (95:5 mol: mol) nanoliposomes were prepared in ammonium besylate and
then TPT was actively loaded by pH gradient method. Tumor-endothelial
spheroids grown in hanging drops, were subsequently transferred to cell
repellent plates for high throughput in-vitro analysis. Our studies
indicate that endothelial cells are more sensitive to TPT treatment (IC50
of 0.13M) than tumor cells (IC50=63M). Combinatorial treatment with
topotecan loaded nanoliposome (ALLT) and radiation of tumor endothelial
spheroid reveals a decrease in spheroid size and severe disruption of the
peripheral layers with time. ALLTs based chemotherapy in conjunction with
radiation was thus observed to be more efficacious in disrupting the
integrity, more specifically the extracellular matrix of
tumor-endothelial spheroids. Unlike the free drug which gets hydrolyzed
into its relatively inactive carboxylate form, we expect that the ability
of ALLTs for extended release of active TPT (more than 24 hours) in a
metronomic fashion, may contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of its
combined treatment with radiation. Efforts are underway to implant these
spheroids in mammary fat pad and dorsal skin fold window chamber and
study the effect of ALLTs in combination with radiation on tumor growth
and neovascularization and metastasis.Supported by NCI grants R25CA153954
and CA173609

