Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of reactive oxygen species in doxorubicin-induced apoptosis
of myeloid-derived suppressor cells


The expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) in the blood,
secondary lymphoid organs and tumor beds in animal cancer models and in
patients with many types of cancers participates to the immunosuppressive
environment associated with the development of tumors. MDSC frequency
correlates with the disease stage and prognosis. MDSC can not only impair
innate and adaptive antitumor immune responses, but these cell also
contribute to enhance tumor angiogenesis and metastatic potential. The
therapeutic targeting of MDSC (depletion,functional inactivation or
differentiation into pro-inflammatory cells) promotes the efficacy of
immunotherapeutic interventions. Conventional anticancer agents such as
docetaxel, gemcitabine or sunitinib have been used to eliminate
tumor-induced MDSC. We have observed that the anthracycline doxorubicin
can deplete MDSC that expanded in the murine mammary tumor models 4T1 and
EMT6 and in the EL4 thymoma model. Doxorubicin-mediated elimination of
MDSC is associated with increased T and NK cell activity and the
combination of this drug with adoptive T lymphocyte transfer impairs
tumor development and metastatic spreading. We here present results
indicating that doxorubicin-mediated apoptosis of MDSC may depend on an
increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by these cells.
MDSC from gp91-/- mice (lacking the gp91phox glycosylated subunit of the
NADPH oxidase flavocytochrome b558, responsible for the production of
superoxide ion O2-) were less sensitive to doxorubicin-induced cell death
than their wild-type counterparts. Consistently, the effects of
doxorubicin onMDSC were partially impaired in tumor-bearing gp91-/-
animals compared to wild-type mice. Interestingly the level of ROS in
CD4+ or CD8+ T and NK cells were low and unchanged by doxorubicin
administration. These observations may partly explain the selective
effects of this chemotherapeutic agent on immunosuppressive MDSC while
effector lymphocytes are spared and the subsequent increased in the
effector to suppressor cell ratios, resulting in a mitigated
immunosuppressive tumor environment.

