Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the dichotomy of Runx1 in breast cancer


Each of the Runx family of transcription factors (Runx1, Runx2 and Runx3)
is associated with specific human cancers. Recent genetic evidence
suggests that Runx1 plays an important role in human breast cancer. It
has been shown to be frequently mutated in certain breast cancer
subtypes, and an inverse correlation between Runx1 expression and
increasing tumor grade was established. Although Runx1 is considered to
be a tumor suppressor, one study suggests otherwise, with loss of Runx1
in epithelial cancer cell lines impairing tumor growth. Thus, the
dichotomous nature of Runx1 during breast cancer progression and
metastasis remains ambiguous.Using the MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model
of breast cancer and complementary in vitro models, we are further
defining the role of Runx factors, particularly Runx1, in breast cancer
progression. MMTV-PyMT mice and age- matched controls were sacrificed at
multiple time points (4-15 weeks) representing all stages of disease
progression. Mammary gland (primary site), tumor and lung (metastatic
site) were excised and analyzed: Runx1 RNA and protein expression in the
mammary gland was significantly increased over controls as early as 8
weeks. This increase persisted throughout the course of the disease with
Runx1 levels being highest at late time points (13 and 15 weeks),
concomitant with the presence of metastatic lesions in the lung. During
tumor progression, Runx1 (and to a lesser extent, Runx2) levels were
consistently elevated. In the lungs, Runx1 (and Runx2) protein expression
significantly increased as a function of the number/size of metastatic
lesions present. Furthermore, phenotypic analyses as well as relevant
RNA/protein expression were determined in both normal mouse mammary gland
epithelial cells (NMuMG) and an MMTV-PyMT tumor-derived cell line (MMTV):
MMTV cells exhibited superior rates of growth, invasion and migration and
expressed 3-fold more Runx1 (yet only half as much Runx2) than NMuMG
cells; complementary knockdown studies were used to reveal the
contribution of Runx1 to these processes. Additionally, analysis of
microRNA expression using microRNA arrays and QPCR in both mouse and cell
line models revealed the potential for specific microRNAs in the temporal
regulation of Runx factors during breast cancer progression.Overall, our
results support roles for Runx factors, particularly Runx1, in breast
cancer. Notably, increased Runx1 expression is associated with disease
progression and metastasis as well as a more aggressive phenotype in our
models. Moreover, in our disease models potential regulation of Runx
factors by specific microRNAs is demonstrated. Taken together, these data
highlight Runx1 as a promising novel therapeutic target in breast cancer.

