Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of autophagy and oncogenic phenotypes through
CYB5A-TRAF6 signaling influence prognosis of resected and metastatic
pancreatic cancer


High-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization in a cohort of 44
radically resected pancreatic cancer patients revealed a correlation
between shorter survival and loss of the 18q22.3cytoband. The present
study investigated the genes encoded by this cytoband and provided
mechanistic insights on their role in the suppression of oncogenic
properties. We studied mRNA and protein expression of FBXO15, C18orf55,
CYB5A, CPGL and CPGL-B in frozen laser-microdissected tissues from
radically resected (N=48) and biopsies from metastatic patients (N=50).
Low CYB5A expression correlated with 18q22.3 deletion and shorter
survival, both in resected and metastatic patients (i.e. 6.5 vs. 12.7
months, P=0.004). Association with outcome was validated in a
tissue-microarray of a second cohort of radically resected patients
(N=100): patients with low expression levels of CYB5A had significantly
shorter OS, and multivariate analysis confirmed CYB5A prognostic
relevance (increased risk of death=2.0, P=0.02). The role of CYB5A was
evaluated in 11 pancreatic cancer cell lines, 5 primary cultures, and a
normal pancreatic ductal cell line through retrovirus-mediated
up-regulation and siRNA. With these analyses we characterized a novel
function of CYB5A, autophagy induction, concomitant with reduced
proliferation and migration/invasion of pancreatic cancer cells. Marked
accumulation of autophagic vacuoles was detected by electron microscopy,
while immunofluorescence revealed CYB5A modulation of LC-3. Activation of
pro-autophagic pathways was corroborated by gene and kinase arrays
showing a significant up-regulation of several ATG-genes, accompanied by
down-regulation of BCL-2 and MAPK14. Additionally, inhibition of multiple
components of EGFR, Akt and Src signalling favored cancer cell death
while preventing potentially deleterious cross-talk between key oncogenic
players. Network analysis suggested CYB5A interaction with TRAF6, which
was confirmed by TRAF6 down-regulation after CYB5A reconstitution (-69%
in SU.86.86-CYB5A+, P=0.005). CYB5A silencing had opposite effects,
restoring TRAF6 expression and wound-healing. In vivo studies were
performed in genetically and histopathologically characterized
patient-derived CYB5A+ orthotopic models (N=6 mice/group), monitored by
Firefly and Gaussia-luciferase bioluminescence, MRI and
high-frequency-ultrasound. CYB5A induced autophagy, as demonstrated by
immunohistochemical analyses of p62 down-regulation, and ATG7/ATG16L2
overexpression, while inhibiting tumor growth/metastasis and increasing
survival (57 vs. 44 days, P=0.03). These results define CYB5A as a novel
prognostic factor, exerting its tumor-suppressor function via
autophagy-induction and TRAF6 modulation, which holds a potential as a
novel therapeutic approach in the clinical management of pancreatic
cancer.

