Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperthermia treatment overcomes temozolomide resistance in glioma
cells by downregulating MGMT expression and increasing temozolomide uptake


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant brain
tumor. Current standard treatment for GBM following maximum safe
resection includes temozolomide (TMZ) with concurrent radiotherapy.
Despite the improvement of survival by TMZ and radiation, the overall
prognosis remains poor for GBM patients. This is partially attributed to
drug resistance. Expression of DNA repair protein O6-methylguanine
methyltransferase (MGMT) in gliomas confers TMZ resistance and a worse
prognosis. Therefore, development of novel therapy to suppress MGMT
expression and overcome TMZ resistance is highly desired. Hyperthermia
has been shown to increase TMZ sensitivity in melanoma and this provides
a good rationale to evaluate whether hyperthermia overcomes TMZ
resistance in glioblastoma cells.In this study, we investigated the
effect of hyperthermia treatment (43C) on TMZ sensitivity of four human
glioblastoma cell lines using clonogenic assays. Our results showed that
hyperthermia treatment increased TMZ-induced cell death in TMZ-resistant
glioma cells, but had no additional beneficial effect in the
TMZ-sensitive cells. Hyperthermia in combination with radiation further
overcame TMZ resistance. To study the molecular targets, we found that
hyperthermia downregulated MGMT expression through increasing
proteasome-mediated MGMT degradation, which can be reversed by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Hyperthermia had no effects on p53
expression and MGMT promoter methylation which was responsible for MGMT
gene silencing. In addition, liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis showed an increase of TMZ and its
downstream product 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AIC) in
hyperthermia-treated cells, indicating an increase of TMZ drug uptake and
breakdown.In conclusion, these results suggest that hyperthermia
overcomes MGMT-mediated resistance of glioblastoma cell lines to TMZ and
increases TMZ drug uptake. This study suggests a potential benefit of
using hyperthermia in the treatment of GBM, particularly those with more
adverse prognosis.This work was supported by Debrule Research Fund.

