Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase sensitizes cells to
sapacitabine


CNDAC, the active form of sapacitabine, is a nucleoside analog which
kills cells by a unique mechanism of action. Incorporation of CNDAC
triphosphate into DNA results in a single-strand break, which is
converted to a one-ended double-strand break (DSB) upon subsequent
collapse of the DNA replication fork. CNDAC-induced DSBs are repaired
predominantly through the homologous recombination pathway which consists
the key recombinase Rad51 and its associated proteins. Chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm; its central pathogenesis
is a reciprocal chromosomal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22.
This abnormal chromosomal fusion results in the formation of a chimeric
gene that encodes a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, Bcr-Abl, which
promotes CML through stimulating downstream signaling cascades for cell
survival and deregulated cell growth. Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase modulates
DNA repair mechanisms to protect leukemic cells from DNA damage induced
cell death. In response to DSBs, it phosphorylates Rad51 at Tyr315 which
enhance the damage repair process. Based on this evidence, we
hypothesized that inhibition of Bcr-Abl will further sensitize cells to
CNDAC. To test this postulate, we used the CML cell line K562 as well as
murine Ba/F3 cells transfected with wild-type Bcr-Abl (Ba/F3p210wt) or
the Bcr-Abl mutant (Ba/F3p210T315I) as model systems. Two tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) were utilized to inhibit Bcr-Abl. Imatinib, the first
generation TKI, is only effective inhibiting wild type Bcr-Abl.
Ponatinib, a subsequent TKI, is potent in inhibiting both wild type and
mutant Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinases. First, these cells were treated with
CNDAC, imatinib or ponatinib alone to determine the IC50 values for each
drug using PrestoBlue cell viability assay. Based on the single drug
IC50s, combinations of CNDAC with imatinib or ponatinib were applied to
these cell lines and their combination indexes were calculated by
CalcuSyn software. We found that CNDAC and imatinib were synergistic in
K562 and Ba/F3 wild type Bcr-Abl cells while they were additive in the
Bcr-Abl T315I mutant cells. In contrast, ponatinib sensitized CNDAC
treatment as their combination was synergistic in all these cell lines.
Finally, to investigate the mechanism underlying the observed synergism,
K562 cells were treated with either equitoxic concentrations of CNDAC,
imatinib or ponatinib alone or in combinations for 48 hours when lysates
were collected for immunoblot analysis. It was found that when Bcr-Abl
was inhibited, the phosphoryation of Rad51 at Tyr315 was reduced, phospho
H2AX and cleaved caspase 3 were increased in response to CNDAC. Thus
further sensitization of CNDAC was a result of deficient damage repair
due to Bcr-Abl inhibition. Together, our results link the Bcr-Abl
tyrosine kinase to CNDAC-induced DNA damage repair process and provide
rationale for CNDAC/sapacitabine combination therapy in diseases such as
CML.

