Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor efficacy of a novel anthracycline derivative
aldoxorubicin in an orthotopic mouse model of glioblastoma


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and most
malignant of all primary brain tumors with a median survival of only
12-15 months despite standard-of-care, including surgical resection,
radiotherapy, and temozolomide. In this study, we evaluated the
preclinical efficacy of a novel albumin-binding prodrug of doxorubicin,
aldoxorubicin, for the treatment of GBM in a murine model, and compared
its antitumor effect with doxorubicin. Methods: U87MG human glioma cells
(5 x 105) expressing firefly luciferase (U87-luc) were stereotactically
injected into the left striatum of nude mice. After 12 days, mice (n=8 in
each group) received either vehicle or a single intravenous injection of
24 mg/kg [3/4 maximum tolerated dose (MTD)] aldoxorubicin, or 6 mg/kg
(3/4 MTD) of doxorubicin once a week. Tumor growth was monitored weekly
using in vivo quantitative bioluminescence imaging (photons/sec), and
survival compared using Kaplan-Meier curves. Aldoxorubicin concentrations
in the tumors and uninvolved brain tissues harvested from these mice were
quantified by HPLC. Results: All animals in the control and doxorubicin
groups developed large tumors (median tumor size 5.0 x 108 photons/sec)
by day 22 and died within 34 days after tumor implantation. During the
same period, animals treated with aldoxorubicin displayed significant
tumor regression (median tumor size 1.6 x 108 photons/sec) and remained
alive with a median survival of more than 60 days. Fluorescence
microscopy showed selective accumulation of aldoxorubicin, but not
doxorubicin, in the tumor tissues resected from tumor-bearing mice 24h
following intravenous injection of these drugs. HPLC analysis revealed 3-
to 4-fold higher aldoxorubicin retention in the tumor tissues than in the
surrounding brain tissues. Immunohistochemical evaluation of
aldoxorubicin-treated tumors showed that the drug significantly decreased
the number of dividing cells stained with the nuclear-localized Ki67
proliferation marker, and activated the apoptosis effector cleaved
caspase-3. Conclusion: Our preliminary findings indicate that
aldoxorubicin, but not doxorubicin, administered intravenously induces
tumor regression and significantly increases survival in an in vivo
xenograft tumor model employing intracranial injection and growth of
human GBM cells. Preferential accumulation and prolonged retention in the
tumor tissues, combined with its safety profile, provide significant
rationale for the assessment of aldoxorubicin in the treatment of
patients with GBM tumors.

