Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of embryonic signaling pathways in lung cancer


Background: Embryonic signaling pathways that play an important role
during embryo development, later on support the maintenance of adult stem
cells and are also found activated in various cancers. The activated
embryonic signaling, mainly Hedgehog (HH), WNT and NOTCH, have been shown
to be activated in a number of cancers and demonstrated to promote
growth, provide survival advantage and resistance to various drugs. The
role of these embryonic signaling pathways in the development of lung
cancer is not well defined. Identification of particular pathways active
in cancer and elucidation of their mechanism of action in cancer
development could provide a basis of devising a successful therapeutic
intervention.Objective: Define the role of embryonic signaling pathways
in cancer cells.Methodology: The presence and functional interaction of
various embryonic signaling pathways in lung cancer was evaluated using
human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell lines (e.g. HOP62, A549, H23,
H522) as model system. The signaling pathways were inhibited using
specific small molecule inhibitors and shRNAs mediated knockdown of the
pathway components. The lentiviruses expressing shRNA were made and used
to deliver the shRNA in NSCLC cells. The effect on the target gene
expression (quantitative real time RT-PCR and western blotting), cell
proliferation (ATP quantitation), cell migration (scratch/wound assay)
and anchorage independent growth (soft agar assay), was evaluated.
Currently, the activation of pathways in cancer cells of primary lung
cancer samples is being evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and RNA
in situ hybridization (ISH).Preliminary Results and Conclusions:
Attenuation of individual embryonic signaling pathways using specific
small molecule inhibitors and shRNAs, indicated crosstalk and hierarchy
of these pathways in controlling various processes in tested cancer
cells. Our results suggest the predominance of HH signaling in non-small
cell lung carcinoma. We are in the process of expanding our observation
to more cell lines and human cancer samples. Our work will establish the
role of embryonic signaling pathways in lung cancer and would further
help in establishing a framework for future therapeutic intervention.

