Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-targeting construct aimed at c-Met


C-Met is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that is activated by the
binding of its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). The HGF/c-Met
pathway contributes to embryonic development, wound healing, cell
proliferation and survival, motility and morphogenesis. It is also one of
the most frequently dysregulated pathways in a variety of human cancers,
including breast, ovarian, prostate, lung, and pancreatic. Importantly,
cell surface elevation of c-Met has been associated with drug-resistance,
including acquired resistance to current signal-blocking
therapies.Tumor-targeting strategies that do not require signal
inhibition may prove more effective on c-Met positive cancer cells. This
may be addressed by ligands that recognize c-Met to trigger cell uptake
of attached therapeutics, thus bypassing the need to block signaling. HGF
has the potential to accomplish this but its requirement for
tetramerization and disulfide bonding presents technical complications
for therapeutics development. An alternative, and potentially superior
ligand for c-Met targeting may possibly be derived from a bacterium that
causes food-poisoning.The human pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes, binds
c-Met to invade host cells through its surface proteins called
Internalins. Specifically, Internalin B (InlB) triggers receptor-mediated
endocytosis after c-Met binding. InlB and HGF recognize different regions
of c-Met, and InlB does not require tetramerization or disulfide bonds
for binding. Consequently, InlB is more suitable for recombinant protein
production than HGF.We have previously shown that PBK10, a recombinant
protein derived from the adenovirus capsid penton base, can mediate gene
and drug delivery into cells through the membrane penetrating activity of
the penton base. Moreover, PBK10 can be targeted to tumor cells via
recombinant fusion to tumor-homing ligands. Here, we explore the
possibility of fusing the receptor-binding site of InlB to PBK10 for
targeting attached cytotoxic agents to c-Met positive cancer cells, and
transporting such agents directly into these cells via receptor-mediated
endocytosis and membrane penetration.

