Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional new insights into the regulation of the androgen
receptor by PMEPA1/NEDD4-1 in prostate cancer


Introduction: Androgen receptor (AR) stability has been shown to be
regulated by MDM2 E3 ubiquitin ligase. Our data suggest a role for PMEPA1
and NEDD4-1 in the regulation of AR protein in prostate cancer cells. The
AR inducible PMEPA1 recruits NEDD4-1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, to degrade
AR. Decreased or absent PMPEA1 was observed in more than 65% of prostate
tumors. PMEPA1 depleted transfectant is established in LNCaP cells with a
shRNA lentivirus system and shown elevated AR protein levels, AR
signaling and increased cell growth. In the current study, we
investigated the growth and AR signaling of PMEPA1 depleted prostate
cancer cells in the presence of AR inhibitors. Also we investigated the
role of PMEPA1 silencing by DNA methylation in the regulation of
AR.Methods: PMEPA1 depleted LNCaP cells were treated with AR inhibitors
(MDV3100 or bicalutamide) in the presence or absence of the synthetic
androgen R1881. Cell growth was monitored by cell counting, BrdU
incorporation, colony plating and soft agar assays. Cell cycle was
analyzed with propidium iodide staining based flowcytometry. AR, PMEPA1,
PSA proteins were assessed by immunoblot assay. Methylation of the PMEPA1
gene was evaluated in LCM-enriched tumor samples by combing precipitation
of methylated-DNA and methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme digestion
(COMPARE-MS). The transcript levels of PMEPA1 gene was assessed by
qRT-PCR.Results: PMEPA1 depleted LNCaP cells are more resistance to
growth inhibition by MDV3100 or bicalutamide in both hormone and
hormone-depleted conditions, which demonstrated stronger BrdU
incorporation abilities, cell plating efficiency and colony formation
capacities in soft agar under MDV3100 or bicalutamid treatment compared
to controls. The half life of AR was increased, and more cells in S-phase
and less apoptotic cells in PMEPA1 depleted LNCaP cells. Methylation of
PMEPA1 gene and mRNA levels showed significant correlation in prostate
tumors (n=77, P=0.001). The higher frequency of PMEPA1 gene methylation
was noticed in Caucasian American patients.Conclusions: PMEPA1 depleted
prostate cancer cells develop increased resistance to AR inhibitors
through enhanced AR signaling. Silencing of PMEPA1 may contribute to AR
activation in prostate cancer. These data highlight that PMEPA1
deficiency may confer resistance to AR inhibitors during prostate cancer
progression.This study is supported by the NIH grant (R01CA106653) to SS.

