Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of circulating tumor cells in newly diagnosed
colorectal cancer


Background: The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTC) is associated
with poor prognosis in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC).
This study was conducted to determine if the presence of CTC prior to
surgery and during follow-up in patients with newly diagnosed
non-metastatic CRC identifies patients who are at risk for disease
recurrence.Methods: In a prospective single center study 183 patients
with newly diagnosed non-disseminated CRC scheduled for surgery were
enrolled from 2003 till 2008 and followed up for a median of 5.1 years.
CTC were enumerated with the CellSearch System in 4 aliquots of 7.5 ml of
peripheral blood before and after surgery (1-26 weeks), after adjuvant
therapy and 1, 2, 3 and 4 years after surgery.Findings: 1 CTC/ 30ml of
blood were detected in 44 (24%) patients before surgery. CTC frequency
did not change significantly at the time points after surgery. Patients
with CTC before surgery had a significant decrease in Recurrence Free
Survival (RFS, logrank test p=0.014) and Colon Cancer Related Survival
(CCRS, p=0.002). Five year RFS dropped from 75% to 61% and five year CCRS
from 83% to 69% for patients with CTC before surgery. In a multivariate
analysis of CTC, T-Stage and N-stage, the presence of CTC and N-stage
remained as significant factors for RFS and CCRS. Surprisingly the
presence of CTC after surgery was not significantly associated with RFS
and CCRS whereas CTC 2-3 years after surgery was again significantly
associated with RFS and CCRS.Interpretation: The presence of CTC in
patients with stage I-III CRC before surgery is associated with a
significant reduction RFS and CCRS. Although similar amounts of CTC were
detected within 3 months after surgery they were not associated with RFS
or CCRS. In contrast CTC were again highly significant for RFS and CCRS
2-3 years after surgery. These findings suggest a role of CTC detection,
to assess which patients need adjuvant treatment. To implement CTC
detection in the non-metastatic setting a validated CTC detection
technology is needed with increased sensitivity and specificity.

