Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-testicular transplantation of purified autologous stem cells
for treatment of chemotherapy-induced male infertility


Post-chemotherapy-induced male infertility in patients with childhood
cancers represents a major complication for long-term survivors. There is
a significant risk for tissue damage in the seminiferous tubules, and
subsequent impairment of spermatogenesis both in children and adult males
who receive chemotherapy. These therapeutic regimens have deleterious
effects on male fertility, resulting in the deficiency of functional
spermatozoa. In adult males, fertility can be protected ahead of cancer
treatment by cryopreservation of mature spermatozoa; however, this is not
always possible in pre-puberty children. Autologous bone marrow stem
cells (BMSCs) are suitable candidates for treating infertility after
testicular exposure to low or moderate doses of chemotherapy due to their
differentiation potentials into functional cell types that can promote
spermatogenesis.In this report, we present a method for restoration of
male fertility in post-chemotherapy cancer survivors, through
intra-testicular transplantation of autologous, purified, bone
marrow-derived CD34+/CD133+ stem cells.We isolated CD34+ and CD133+ cells
from human bone marrow using the clinical-grade CliniMACSPLUS Cell
Purification System. CD34+/CD133+ cell populations were directly
separated from MNCs collected from the bone marrow. Flow cytometry
analyses for purified cell populations showed 94.5 (+3.2) % purities.
CD34+/CD133+ purified populations were then injected intra-testicularly
in patients on the same day of the procedure. Patients were then followed
up for up to 5 years post-transplantation. No complications were reported
in any patient in this study.Nine out of twenty seven patients (33%)
showed pathological changes. Some cases developed spermatids in the
testes (7%), while others developed fully mature spermatozoa (11%).
Spermatocytes and sperms appeared in the seminal fluid in a few other
cases after SCT (26%). Long term results yielded 6 natural pregnancies, 2
live births, and 1 successful IVF out of 3 (1/3) done for three
couples.The advantage of using autologous adult BMSCs is in the
generation of the patients' own biological offspring. Additionally these
cells differentiate in vivo when placed in the gonad environment to
spermatocytes, spermatids, and even mature spermatozoa. All together,
this procedure minimizes the risk of genetic instability, since no
propagation takes place in vitro (culture), avoids manipulation and
epigenetic alteration, stabilizes the properties of the mature
spermatozoa and produces a healthy offspring after transplantation. The
introduction of purified, uncultured, un-manipulated, CD34+/CD133+ BMSCs
into the testicles of infertile patients is a promising technique that
may carry some hope for male infertility patients.

