Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin gene expression is associated with 5-fluorouracil drug
resistance in colon cancer


Background: Resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs complicates the
treatment of cancer patients. The extracellular matrix protein
osteopontin (OPN) plays multiple roles in the proliferation and
metastasis of cancer cells. We therefore attempted to determine whether
OPN expression correlated with drug resistance. Methods: OPN expression
in the HCT 116 colon cancer cell line was inhibited by an OPN-short
interfering RNA (siRNA). We determined the cytotoxic effect (IC50) of
5-fluorouracil (5FU) on these cells. Patients with recurrence or
colorectal cancer or harbored residual tumor cells were treated with
S-1-based chemotherapy. The levels of OPN mRNA expression in the tumors
were determined and compared with the patients responses to chemotherapy.
Results: The IC50 of 5FU for HCT 116 cells transfected with the OPN-siRNA
was 32.9 M. In contrast, the IC50 values for cells transfected with a
negative control siRNA, mock-transfected cells, or untreated cells were
6.58 M, 7.08 M, and 6.76 M, respectively (PBackground: Resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs complicates the treatment of cancer patients. The
extracellular matrix protein osteopontin (OPN) plays multiple roles in
the proliferation and metastasis of cancer cells. We therefore attempted
to determine whether OPN expression correlated with drug resistance.
Methods: OPN expression in the HCT 116 colon cancer cell line was
inhibited by an OPN-short interfering RNA (siRNA). We determined the
cytotoxic effect (IC50) of 5-fluorouracil (5FU) on these cells. Patients
with recurrence or colorectal cancer or harbored residual tumor cells
were treated with S-1-based chemotherapy. The levels of OPN mRNA
expression in the tumors were determined and compared with the patients
responses to chemotherapy. Results: The IC50 of 5FU for HCT 116 cells
transfected with the OPN-siRNA was 32.9 M. In contrast, the IC50 values
for cells transfected with a negative control siRNA, mock-transfected
cells, or untreated cells were 6.58 M, 7.08 M, and 6.76 M, respectively
(P<0.001). The level of OPN mRNA expression in the S-1 non-responder
group was significantly lower than that of the responder group (P =
0.0387). Survival analysis revealed no significant difference between the
responder and non-responder groups (P = 0.8737). Conclusions: The level
of OPN expression plays a role in the resistance of colorectal tumor
cells to 5FU.

