Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of global DNA methylation signatures in
glioblastoma-derived cancer stem cells


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and most aggressive brain tumor in
adults. Its frequent recurrence after resection and dismal prognosis are
thought to be due to a small population of stem-like tumor cells that
efficiently propagate tumors and resist cytotoxic therapy. In this study,
we performed an in depth analysis of the DNA methylation landscape in
GBM-derived cancer stem cells (GSCs). Parallel comparisons of primary GBM
tumors and GSC lines derived from these tumors with normal controls (a
neural stem cell (NSC) line and normal brain tissue) identified two
groups hyper- and hypomethylated of genes that display a trend of either
increasing or decreasing methylation levels in the order of controls,
primary GBMs, and their counterpart GSC lines, respectively.
Interestingly, concurrent promoter hypermethylation and gene body
hypomethylation were observed in a subset of genes including MGMT, AJAP1
and PTPRN2. These unique DNA methylation signatures were also be found in
primary GBM-derived xenograft tumors suggesting that they were not tissue
culture-related epigenetic changes. Integration of GSC-specific
epigenetic signatures with gene expression analysis further identified
candidate tumor suppressor genes that are frequently down regulated in
GBMs such as SPINT2, NEFM, and PENK. The comparison between the NSC line
and the normal brain tissue sample leads to the identification of a group
of NSC-specific differentially methylated regions (nsDMRs). Cluster
analysis using nsDMRs revealed the presence of stem cell-specific DNA
methylation signatures in both primary GBM and GSC lines. Higher
expression of genes associated with stem cell-specific DNA methylation
signatures such as DNMT3A, STAT5A, CSTB, PMEPA1 and G6PD in GBM patients
was found to be associated with poor patient survival. The results from
this study demonstrate the utility of using cancer stem cell models for
advancing understanding of the pathobiology of gliomas.

