Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive integrated genomic analysis


Despite recent advances in the understanding of the biology and genetics
of lung cancer, and despite the introduction of multiplex somatic
mutation testing in the clinic, the long-term survival for all lung
cancer patients, particularly for those with advanced disease, remains
low. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death globally, resulting
in 1.4 million deaths annually, including 165,000 patients in the United
States per year. In order to address the critical need for comprehensive
profiling of these patients, we developed a novel, CLIA-certified, whole
exome and low-coverage whole genome sequencing assay that applies a
disease-focused, integrated approach to identify therapeutically
actionable drivers of disease. A panel (12) of surgically resected NSCLC
specimens along with corresponding adjacent normal tissue underwent DNA
extraction in a clinical (CLIA) environment. Tumor and normal genomic DNA
was prepared for whole exome sequencing using the using the Agilent
SureSelectXT Human All Exon V5 kit according to the manufacturer's
instructions, and libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2500 at
an average depth of 500X. Genomic DNA was then prepared for whole genome
sequencing using Illumina's Nextera system and run on the Illumina
HiSeq2500 platform at an average depth of 1-2X. Somatic variants were
detected using Strelka and somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) were
identified using a novel algorithm comparing normalized read counts
within genomic segments as well as genes in the tumor to a panel of
normal tissues. In parallel, the same tumor/normal specimens were
analyzed by two separate CLIA laboratories via 1) a clinically validated
Ion Torrent AmpliSeq Cancer Panel assay, and 2) a clinically validated
cancer-focused, high-resolution comparative genome hybridization (CGH)
array. In addition, a well-characterized panel of 10 germline samples
obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project were pooled to simulate a broad
spectrum of somatic single nucleotide variant and indel allele
frequencies. Sequencing, data analysis and clinical reporting were
completed for all 12 cases with an average turnaround time of less than 3
weeks. Single nucleotide variants and indels were identified with an
accuracy of greater than 99%, with a limit of detection of 5-10% mutant
allele frequency. Somatic copy number alterations were observed with an
overall accuracy of greater than 95%. Actionable variants were identified
by cross-referencing individual results with our internally developed,
lung-cancer focused therapeutic association database.

