Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FKBP51 sustains the constitutive NF-B activation in melanoma


Constitutive activation of NF-B occurs in a significant percentage of
human cancers, including melanoma. Aberrant NF-B activation sustains
cancer survival, contributes to tumor invasion and accounts for therapy
resistance. Several studies support a role for FKBP51 in NF-B activation,
however, mechanisms by which FKBP51 controls NF-B pathway are still not
known. FKBP51 has been previously found to interact with IKK. We studied
FKBP51 interactions with a wide number of -B proteins by transfecting
expression vectors, carrying each tagged-protein. Our results confirmed
that FKBP51 strongly interacts with IKK, in addition, a weaker binding
was also found with IKK, IKK and TAK1. To investigate whether FKBP51
interaction with IKK components was essential for NF-B activation, we
knocked down FKBP51 in two different metastatic melanoma cell lines,
namely A375 and SAN. Kinase assays showed a reduced phosphorylation of IB
in knocked down melanoma cells, in comparison with control melanoma. The
reduced phosphorylation of IB resulted in its reduced proteasomal
degradation, both at the basal level and following TNF- stimulation.
FK506, that inhibits FKBP51 PPIase activity, did not interfere with
FKBP51/IKK interaction in co-IP experiments, but the drug reduced the IB
phosphorylation levels, suggesting that FKBP51 PPIase activity is
required for IKK kinase activity. EMSA confirmed the absence of NF-B
activity in FKBP51 knocked down melanoma, even after TNF- stimulation.
Consistent with this finding, an increased apoptosis was measured in
FKBP51 silenced cells, stimulated with TNF-, or chemotherapeutic agents.
TRAF2 (TNF- receptor associated factor-2) is a prototypical member of the
TRAF family, it transduces signals generated by several members of the
TNF receptor superfamily. We found FKBP51 modulated TRAF2 at mRNA and
protein level. In particular, data obtained by QPCR showed that TRAF2
mRNA decreased by 30% in knocked down melanoma cells, compared with
levels in control cells. This finding was in accordance with the notion
that TRAF2 is a transcriptional target of NF-B. In addition, we also
found that FKBP51 regulated TRAF ubiquitination via TPR domain. In fact,
co-expression of HA-ubiquitin and FKBP51WT prevented TRAF2
ubiquitination. By contrast, co-expression of HA-ubiquitin and FKBP51
mutated in TPR, but not PPIase-domain, determined a TRAF2 degradative
ubiquitination. In conclusion, our study provides mechanistic insights
into the functions of FKBP51 in regulation of NF-B activation, namely: 1)
FKBP51 isomerization of IKK enables the kinase complex to phosphorylate
IB, via FK domains; 2) FKBP51 stabilizes TRAF2 and prevents its
proteasomal degradation, via TPR domains. Strategies to inhibit NF-B
represent a therapeutic option against cancer, and FKBP51 targeting is a
promising strategy.

