Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Np63 is critical for progression of high grade non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer to muscle-invasive disease


Background. Non-Muscle Invasive Bladder Cancer (NMIBC) represents a
heterogeneous disease with very different outcomes depending on
progression to muscle invasive disease (MID). NMIBC is one of the major
causes of malignancy-related morbidity and mortality worldwide and it is
the ninth most costly cancer in the United States in terms of overall
expenditures. Even though some clinical and molecular risk factors have
been reported to predict progression, they have shown limited prognostic
ability in the clinical setting to define which patients should be
treated immediately with radical cystectomy. It is therefore critical to
identify markers that can help clinicians provide individualized
risk-stratified decision-making. In preliminary clinical studies we have
uncovered the significance of Np63 as a protective individual marker of
NMIBC tumor progression. The main goal of this project is to study the
mechanism by which Np63 loss triggers tumor progression to
MID.Experimental design. We generated a Knock-down cell line (RTT112_sh)
using specific shRNA against the Np63 isoform in the RT112 NMIBC cell
line (RT112_P). Gene expression and in vitro functional analysis such as
cell cycle, proliferation, colony formation and matrigel invasion assays
were performed comparing RT112_P and RT112_sh cells. Moreover, we used a
novel bladder orthotopic xenograft mouse model to examine the in vivo
effects of Np63 loss in bladder tumor progression.Results. Gene
expression analyses revealed that 164 genes were significantly
upregulated and 104 downregulated in RT112_sh cells, some of them
involved in critical pathways of tumor invasion. Functionally, we
observed that RT112_sh cells showed a higher proliferation both in vitro
and in vivo as well as an increased colony formation activity when
compared to parental cells. Furthermore, RT112_sh cells displayed a
superior invasion capacity in vitro, which correlated with a higher tumor
initiation in the bladder orthotopic in vivo mouse model. Notably,
RT112_sh bladder tumors were significantly associated with higher rate of
lung metastasis than RT112_P tumors.Conclusions. Here we show that Np63
loss is a major event implicated in the progression of NMIBC to MID
through alteration of important genetic pathways. Our findings can
ultimately assist clinicians in developing personalized medicine,
identifying patients who will benefit from early radical cystectomy to
prevent tumor progression, as well as patients with low risk.
Consequently, it will have a great impact in reducing the economic cost
of this disease for the health care system. Finally, these studies unlock
the opportunity of generating new therapeutic strategies to target
previously unknown altered pathways in these tumors.

