Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1A regulation of ATAD2 in gynecologic cancer


ARID1A the DNA binding component of the SWI/SNF nucleosome and chromatin
remodeling complex has recently been identified as a tumor suppressor and
inactivating mutations have been reported in several tumor types
including uterine and ovarian cancer. Approximately 30% of ovarian
endometrioid cancers (OEC), 50% of clear cell ovarian cancers (OCCC) and
40% of uterine endometrial cancers harbor ARID1A inactivating mutations.
Little is known regarding the subunit composition of SWI/SNF complexes
that contain ARID1A in ovarian and uterine cells and less is known
regarding the transcriptional and functional consequences of ARID1A loss.
In order to further explore the function of ARID1A in gynecologic cancers
we restored ARID1A in ACI-98 (undifferentiated uterine cancer) an ARID1A
negative and TP53 positive cell line using an inducible Tet-on system.
Restoration of ARID1A induced apoptosis in ACI-98 cells after 48h
doxycycline (Dox) treatment. We examined the proteome of these cells and
catalogued the protein changes following ARID1A complementation using LC
MS/MS. Specifically we identified 523 highly significantly differentially
expressed proteins (z-score ARID1A the DNA binding component of the
SWI/SNF nucleosome and chromatin remodeling complex has recently been
identified as a tumor suppressor and inactivating mutations have been
reported in several tumor types including uterine and ovarian cancer.
Approximately 30% of ovarian endometrioid cancers (OEC), 50% of clear
cell ovarian cancers (OCCC) and 40% of uterine endometrial cancers harbor
ARID1A inactivating mutations. Little is known regarding the subunit
composition of SWI/SNF complexes that contain ARID1A in ovarian and
uterine cells and less is known regarding the transcriptional and
functional consequences of ARID1A loss. In order to further explore the
function of ARID1A in gynecologic cancers we restored ARID1A in ACI-98
(undifferentiated uterine cancer) an ARID1A negative and TP53 positive
cell line using an inducible Tet-on system. Restoration of ARID1A induced
apoptosis in ACI-98 cells after 48h doxycycline (Dox) treatment. We
examined the proteome of these cells and catalogued the protein changes
following ARID1A complementation using LC MS/MS. Specifically we
identified 523 highly significantly differentially expressed proteins
(z-score <0.01) from this analysis. Among these was the AAA domain
containing 2 (ATAD2) that was dramatically down-regulated in ARID1A
restored cells. ATAD2 is a highly conserved protein normally expressed in
germ cells but is also over-expressed in some cancers. Affymetrix gene
expression results also showed that ATAD2 is over-expressed in some
ovarian and uterine cancers compared to normal controls. We further
examined the clinical consequence of ATAD2 expression in ovarian cancers
using the Kaplan-Meier plots website (http://kmplot.com) and found that
the high-expression group has a worse overall survival than those in the
low-expression group. ATAD2 associates via its bromodomain with histone
H3 and it is known to act as a co-factor for E2Fs, MYC, androgen and
estrogen receptors and whose over-expression drives the expression of
target genes that induce cell proliferation and resistance to apoptosis.
qRT-PCR results indicated that transcription of ATAD2 was not changed by
restoration of ARID1A, moreover, anti-ARID1A ChIP-sequence revealed that
SWI/SNF-ARID1A is not binding to the promoter of ATAD2. From these
results, we suspect that the down regulation of ATAD2 is through a
non-transcriptional mechanism. In addition, ARID1A-IP-MS result suggested
that ARID1A is itself making complexes with ATAD2. We performed ATAD2 and
ARID1A immunohistochemistry on a set of OCCC and OEC primary cancers and
found that all cases with ARID1A negative staining preferentially
over-express ATAD2. In summary our data indicate that ARID1A decreases
levels of ATAD2, that ARID1A-negative OCCC and OEC are a subset of ovary
cancer that preferentially overexpress ATAD2, and that ATAD2
over-expressing cancers have worse survival than weak expressers.

