Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of WDR26 promotes breast cancer cell growth,
migration and invasion via enhancing PI3K/AKT signaling


Background: The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is one of
the most deregulated pathways in breast cancer. One of PI3K isoforms,
p110 , has been shown to be activated predominantly by G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) through the heterotrimeric G protein subunits (G), and
plays a key role in breast cancer development. PI3Ks mediates their
effects primarily through the activation of select AKT, which consists of
three isoforms. We have recently made important observations that diverse
GPCRs converge at G to promote breast tumor cell growth and migration
both in vitro and in vivo, and that a novel G-interacting protein, WDR26,
promotes G-dependent signal transductions, including PI3K/AKT activation.
In this study, we have evaluated the role of WDR26 in regulating PI3K/AKT
signaling for breast tumor cell growth, migration and invasion.Methods:
The level of WDR26 expression was evaluated in breast cancer cells and
human breast cancer samples by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry
analysis. WDR26 was then downregulated by siRNAs or overexpressed in
breast cancer cells, and the effects on PI3K/AKT activation, tumor cell
proliferation, migration and invasion were evaluated in vitro.Results:
WDR26 was upregulated in a subset of highly malignant and invasive breast
tumor cell lines (such as MDA-MB231 and DU4475), and high grade human
breast tumor samples. Upon GPCR stimulation of breast tumor cells, WDR26
facilitated the formation of a signaling complex consisting of G, PI3K
and AKT2. Downregulation of WDR26 in MDA-MB231 and DU4475 cells using RNA
interference inhibited PI3K/AKT activation, tumor cell growth, migration
and invasion. Similar effects were achieved by disruption of WDR26
function through induced expression of WDR26 deletion mutants in
MDA-MB231 cells. Conversely, overexpression of WDR26 in MCF7 cells
enhanced PI3K/AKT activation and rendered MCF7 cell migration and
enhanced proliferation.Conclusions: Together, these results indicate that
WDR26 serves as a scaffold to foster interactions between G, PI3K and
AKT2, thereby promoting G-dependent PI3K/AKT activation, thereby
regulating breast tumor progression. WDR26, thus, may represent a novel
target for the intervention of breast tumors.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

