Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of nab-paclitaxel on 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) resistant
human gastric cancer cell lines


Purpose: 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)-based combination chemotherapy is widely
used for the treatment of advanced gastric cancer in Japan. Thus, the
development of effective chemotherapy for 5-FU-resistant gastric cancer
after 5-FU-based chemotherapy is important. Nab-paclitaxel is an
albumin-bound, 130-nm particle form of paclitaxel that exhibits a higher
activity and lower toxicity than solvent-based paclitaxel. In the present
study, the activity of nab-paclitaxel alone or in combination with 5-FU
was evaluated in four 5-FU resistant cell lines.Method: 5-FU-resistant
human gastric cancer cell lines were established from parent cells
(MKN-45, MKN-74, NCI-N87, and KATO-III) by continuous exposure to
escalating concentrations of 5-FU over a one-year period. The
sensitivities of these cell lines to chemotherapeutic agents (5-FU and
nab-paclitaxel) were evaluated using the WST-8 colorimetric assay. To
evaluate the effects of the combination of 5-FU and nab-paclitaxel, the
combination index (CI) value was calculated using CalcuSyn 2.0 (Biosoft,
Cambridge, UK). The gene expressions of secreted protein acidic and rich
in cysteine (SPARC) in the parent and 5-FU-resistant cell lines were
evaluated using a Whole Human Genome 44K oligo DNA microarray (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).Results: The IC50 value of 5-FU ranged
from 2.35 to 36.7 M, and its ratio (resistant cell lines/parent cell
lines) ranged from 2.6 to 15.6. The IC50 value of nab-paclitaxel ranged
from 4.45 to 54.5 nM, and its ratio ranged from 1.0 to 1.2. Therefore,
the 5-FU-resistant cell lines used in this study showed no signs of
cross-resistance to nab-paclitaxel. The calculated CI value treated with
5-FU and nab-paclitaxel was approximately 1; therefore, nab-paclitaxel
additively inhibited the cell growth when administered in combination
with 5-FU. Interestingly, the combination of 5-FU and nab-paclitaxel had
an additive cytotoxic activity in the 5-FU-resistant human gastric cell
lines in vitro. The relative expression of SPARC mRNA in the resistant
cell lines to that in the parent ones ranged from 0.86 to 1.47, and SPARC
expression might be weakly correlated with the acquisition of 5-FU
resistance. Conclusion: Nab-paclitaxel might be a promising agent for the
treatment of 5-FU-resistant human gastric cancer when used alone or in
combination with 5-FU. These results suggest that nab-paclitaxel might be
a promising chemotherapy for gastric cancer patients who relapse after
undergoing 5-FU-based chemotherapy.

