Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of NF-B signaling in myeloid cells enhances
urethane-induced lung tumorigenesis via neutrophil-derived IL-1


The transcription factor Nuclear Factor B (NF-B) is a master regulator of
inflammation, and its activation is associated with tumorigenesis in a
variety of cancers. Our group and others have shown that NF-B signaling
in lung epithelial cells is critical for lung carcinogenesis. However,
pharmaceutical inhibition of NF-B signaling has not been effective for
the treatment of lung tumorigenesis in animals or humans for reasons that
remain unknown. We hypothesized that attenuation of NF-B signaling in
myeloid cells contributes to inefficacy of NF-B-targeted therapies by
unmasking pro-tumorigenic characteristics of inflammatory cells. For our
studies, we utilized mice with IKK deleted specifically in myeloid cells
(IKKmye) and induced lung tumorigenesis with a single intraperitoneal
injection of the lung carcinogen urethane (1g/kg). We found that IKKmye
mice developed more atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) lesions at 6
weeks and more lung tumors at 16 weeks after urethane compared to WT
mice. These histological differences were correlated with enhanced lung
inflammation in IKKmye mice which was observed 1 week after urethane and
persisted for up to 6 weeks. Flow cytometric analysis of myeloid cell
populations revealed that IKKmye mice contained more pulmonary
neutrophils at 1 and 6 weeks after urethane compared to WT mice. In bone
marrow chimeras generated by transplantation of bone marrow from IKKmye
or WT donors into recipient NF-B reporter mice, we showed that depletion
of neutrophils using Ly6G antibody treatment (100 ug/twice weekly IP
injection) during the first 6 weeks of lung carcinogenesis blocked NF-B
activation in stromal cells and reduced tumor multiplicity in IKKmye mice
to levels observed in urethane-treated WT mice. Thus, these studies
indicated that neutrophils play an important role in lung tumorigenesis
during early tumor development and may do so by limiting NF-B activation
in lung epithelial cells. Evaluation of cytokines in the lungs of WT and
IKKmye mice at 1 week after urethane revealed higher levels of IL-1 in
IKKmye mice compared to WT mice. Further examination of myeloid cells
sorted 1 week after urethane identified neutrophils as the key producers
of IL-1 in the lungs of IKKmye mice. Neutralization of IL-1 signaling by
IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) treatment during the first 4 weeks of
carcinogenesis decreased the number of AAH lesions in IKKmye mice 6 weeks
after urethane and reduced the number of tumors at 16 weeks in IKKmye
mice. Taken together, our data suggest that neutrophils can support tumor
promotion through production and secretion of IL-1, which may activate
pro-tumorgenic NF-B signaling in the lung epithelium. We speculate that
the paradoxical increase in inflammation and IL-1 production resulting
from NF-B inhibition in myeloid cells contributes to the lack of
effectiveness of NF-B inhibitors in patients with lung cancer.

