Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain metastasis depends on tumor cell initiated coagulation


Background: The incidence of brain metastasis exceeds that of primary
brain tumors tenfold and is most frequently associated with lung cancer,
breast cancer and melanoma. Despite a prognosis of only 6-9 months for
patients with brain metastases, mechanisms of tumor cell brain
colonization from the blood stream are unknown. Understanding this step
could enable effective therapeutic strategies to prevent the development
of incurable metastatic brain disease.We found that blood borne
metastatic cancer cells reside within the cerebral microvasculature for
several days and associate with platelets while crossing the blood brain
barrier. Intravascular tumor cell survival and extravasation during this
time may critically limit the success of brain metastasis. Activation of
coagulation, platelets and fibrin formation contribute to tumor
progression, cancer-associated thrombosis and metastatic spread to
peripheral organs. However the function of coagulation in the seeding of
brain metastases is unknown.Aims: We evaluated whether tumor
cell-expressed tissue factor, a key activator of coagulation, promotes
tumor cell seeding of brain metastases by initiating critical tumor
cell-vascular interactions.Methods: We developed models of experimental
brain metastasis to study how intravascular tumor cells cooperate with
the coagulation system during early stages of brain colonization to
survive and cross the blood brain barrier. Human breast cancer cells,
injected into the left cardiac ventricle of immune deficient mice, are
tracked during the initial phase of brain metastasis and progressive
metastatic brain disease by detailed and quantitative histological
analyses. We address how coagulation contributes to brain metastasis by
targeting human tissue factor with specific inhibitory antibodies. We use
ex-vivo bioluminescence imaging and immunohistochemical analyses at later
stages of brain metastasis to determine the extent to which an early,
transient treatment will result in long-term inhibition of brain
metastatic disease.Results: We demonstrate that inhibition of tissue
factor expressed by tumor cells reduces brain colonization. Targeting of
tissue factor inhibits development of breast cancer brain metastasis and
extends animal survival. We find that tissue factor properties which
initiate coagulation or promote cytoprotective signaling pathways
differentially contribute to brain metastasis development. Blockade of
tissue factor-initiated coagulation inhibits intravascular tumor cell
survival and prevents brain metastases in vivo. Our findings indicate
that the inhibition of coagulation can prevent the seeding of breast
cancer cells into the brain.Conclusions: Our studies provide mechanistic
insights into the process of tumor cell brain colonization and identify
targets for development of therapeutics to prevent cancer metastasis to
the brain and enhance patient survival.

