Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of PHLPP promotes glycolysis in colon cancer cells


PHLPP belongs to a novel family of Ser/Thr protein phosphatases. Our
previous studies have shown that PHLPP can antagonize multiple signaling
pathways by negatively regulating signaling molecules such as Akt, S6K,
and PKC. Functionally, PHLPP serves as a tumor suppressor to inhibit cell
proliferation, promote apoptosis and increase therapeutic sensitivity in
colon cancer cells. Here, we further examined the role of PHLPP in
regulating metabolic pathways in colon cancer. Control and PHLPP
knockdown cells colon cancer cells, as well as wild-type and Phlpp
knockout MEF cells, were subjected to bioenergetic phenotype analysis
using Seahorse XF96 analyzer. The mitochondrial respiration measurements
revealed that decreased PHLPP expression resulted in an increase in
oxygen consumption rate (OCR) suggesting enhanced cellular respiration.
In addition, PHLPP depletion significantly stimulated glycolysis as
indicated by increased extracellular acidification rate (ECAR).
Consistently, the rates of glucose consumption and lactate production
were significantly increased in PHLPP knockdown cells. Furthermore, the
numbers of apoptotic cells were increased in PHLPP knockdown cells
compared to control cells when cultured in glucose-free medium,
suggesting that loss of PHLPP expression render cells more sensitive to
glucose deprivation as they became relied on glycolysis. To begin
determining the underlying molecular mechanism, we found that the
activity of both Akt and S6K was largely induced in PHLPP-knockdown
cancer cells and PHLPP-knockout MEF cells. Since both kinases are known
to play important roles in re-programming metabolic networks to favor
tumor growth, it is likely that PHLPP inhibits glycolysis by negatively
regulating Akt- and S6K-mediated metabolic effects. Taken together, our
studies identified PHLPP as a novel regulator of glucose metabolism in
colon cancer cells. Downregulation of PHLPP may promote tumorigenesis by
providing metabolic advantages in colon cancer

