Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational landscape of LN metastasis and recurrence in HNSCC


Recent whole exome sequencing (WES) studies have reported the mutations
that characterize primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).
While exposure to tobacco, alcohol and HPV infection are known to
contribute to HNSCC development and prognosis, the largest obstacle to
long term survival is recurrent and metastatic disease. Approximately 50%
of patients present with synchronous lymph node metastases (SLNM), where
5-year adjusted survival is 85% for patients without SLNM compared with
30-60% in patients with SLNM. 20-30% of patients cured of their primary
HNSCC go on to develop recurrent disease, which is usually refractory to
standard therapies. Here, we report the first WES study of paired primary
tumor and SLNM from 14 HNSCC patients, and paired primary tumor and
metachronous loco-regional metastases (MLRM) from 11 HNSCC patients.
Primary tumors averaged 67 nonsynonymous mutations per tumor (n=21), SLNM
averaged 89.3 (n=12), and MLRM averaged 41.7 (n=9). TP53 was the only
gene mutated in a majority (57%) of primary tumors in our cohort. We
observed similar rates of mutation in several of the TCGA-defined HNSCC
signature genes in our primary cohort, including FAT1 (14.3%) and CASP8
(4.8%), among others. While the size of our cohort does not allow for
appropriately powered statistical analyses; 206 and 204 genes, were
mutated in metastatic tumors, but not the respective paired primary
tumors, in the SLNM and MLRM cohorts, respectively. AP2B1 and ITPR3
mutations were enriched in SLNM, as newly acquired mutations were seen in
multiple (2 and 2/12) SLNM samples. GLUL and DDR2 mutations were enriched
in MLRM, as newly acquired mutations were seen in multiple (2 and 2/9)
MLRM samples. All 4 genes have previously been implicated in the
metastatic process in other cancers. The potential enrichment of DDR2
mutations in HNSCC metastases is especially intriguing, as mutations in
this gene have been shown to confer sensitivity to the SRC-family kinase
inhibitor, dasatinib, in lung and breast cancer. Here we report exquisite
sensitivity to dasatinib in our HNSCC preclinical models harboring DDR2
mutations, suggesting further investigation of this drug is warranted in
recurrent HNSCC.

