Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPI-169, a novel and potent EZH2 inhibitor, synergizes with CHOP
in vivo and achieves complete regression in lymphoma xenograft models


Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is the histone lysine
methyltransferase (HKMT) component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
(PRC2). In conjunction with other members of the complex, EZH2 represses
gene expression through methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27).
EZH2 overexpression is implicated in tumor progression and correlates
with poor prognosis in several tumor types and enzymatic hyperactivity of
EZH2 has been linked to aberrant repression of tumor suppressor genes in
diverse cancers. Recently, direct inhibition of EZH2 HKMT activity by
small molecules has been shown to be effective in inhibiting the
proliferation of EZH2 mutant diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell
lines and the growth of tumors in EZH2 mutant DLBCL xenografts.We have
identified and optimized a series of small molecule EZH2 inhibitors that
is structurally distinct from previously published chemotypes. CPI-169, a
representative compound from that effort, inhibits the catalytic activity
of PRC2 with an IC50 of Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is the histone
lysine methyltransferase (HKMT) component of the Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2). In conjunction with other members of the complex, EZH2
represses gene expression through methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27
(H3K27). EZH2 overexpression is implicated in tumor progression and
correlates with poor prognosis in several tumor types and enzymatic
hyperactivity of EZH2 has been linked to aberrant repression of tumor
suppressor genes in diverse cancers. Recently, direct inhibition of EZH2
HKMT activity by small molecules has been shown to be effective in
inhibiting the proliferation of EZH2 mutant diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) cell lines and the growth of tumors in EZH2 mutant DLBCL
xenografts.We have identified and optimized a series of small molecule
EZH2 inhibitors that is structurally distinct from previously published
chemotypes. CPI-169, a representative compound from that effort, inhibits
the catalytic activity of PRC2 with an IC50 of < 1nM, decreases cellular
levels of H3K27me3 with an EC50 of 70 nM, and triggers cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in a variety of cell lines. Importantly, compound treatment
triggers a sequence of downstream functional consequences of EZH2
inhibition whereby apoptosis is not induced before ten days of continuous
target engagement.Administered subcutaneously at 200 mpk twice daily
(BID), CPI-169 is well tolerated in mice with no observed toxic effect or
body weight loss. In the present study we show that CPI-169 treatment led
to tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of an EZH2 mutant KARPAS-422 DLBCL
xenograft. The TGI is proportional to the dose administered and to the
reduction of the pharmacodynamic marker H3K27me3. The highest dose, 200
mpk, BID led to complete tumor regression.Since CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone) is the standard treatment of
advanced DLBCL, we were interested in combining a suboptimal dose of
CPI-169 (100 mpk, BID) with a single dose of CHOP in the KARPAS-422
model. After a week of combinatorial treatment the tumors rapidly
regressed and became unpalpable. Four weeks after the last dose only a
single mouse presented a palpable tumor.The immunohistochemical analysis
of tumor samples revealed a strong correlation between the global
decrease of H3K27me3, the decrease in the proliferation marker Ki-67 and
the increase in cleaved-caspase 3 positive cells.In conclusion, we
identified a strong synergistic anti-tumor activity between the standard
of care CHOP and CPI-169, a distinct EZH2 inhibitor in an in vivo model
of DLBCL.

