Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splicing factor kinase regulates metastatic dissemination of human
prostate cancer


Metastasis causes the vast majority of cancer-associated deaths. Despite
its clinical significance, the molecular mechanisms that regulate this
multi-step process are poorly understood. To successfully disseminate a
cancer cell must escape the primary tumor, travel to a distant site,
arrest, enter the stroma and grow in a new microenvironment. The presence
of circulating tumor cells in patients with metastatic disease and
experimental animals with metastatic cancers suggests that tumor invasion
is a critical, rate-limiting step in the metastatic process. To identify
the key molecular determinants that regulate invasive metastatic lesion
formation we performed the first whole-genome, in vivo RNAi screen in an
avian embryo model using advanced intravital imaging techniques. We
identified numerous novel regulators of cancer cell invasion, including
JL1, a splicing factor kinase.In secondary assays, we demonstrated that
JL1-depletion inhibits migration of several human cancer cell lines with
no effect on proliferation or survival. Furthermore, JL1-deficient human
cancer cells display diminished metastatic potential in chicken embryo
and mouse models of metastasis. Cancer microarray database mining shows
that JL1 gene expression is strongly associated with indicators of poor
clinical outcome in prostate cancer, including pathological Gleason score
and metastasis. To experimentally determine JL1 association with advanced
disease we performed histological examinations of prostate cancer tissue
and determined that JL1 staining strongly correlates with prostate cancer
progression. JL1 kinase regulates alternative splicing of numerous
cellular transcripts in response to stress and growth signals. To examine
the molecular mechanism behind JL1 regulation of cancer cell metastasis,
we performed exon level microarray analysis on JL1-depleted cancer cell
lines. Subsequent interactome analysis identified an enrichment of key
regulatory proteins in pro-metastatic networks. Therefore, we hypothesize
that abrogated JL1 activity directly promotes prostate cancer cell
migration and invasion. In summary, JL1 is a novel regulator of cancer
cell metastasis that represents a potential pathological marker for
prostate cancer progression, and novel drug target to block invasion and
metastasis.

