Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in treatment of severe oral dysplasia: Knowledge
translation in the COOLS trial points to a pressing concern


Purpose: Oral severe dysplasia is a high grade precancerous lesion for
which there is limited knowledge on effective treatment and outcome. The
Canadian Optically-guided approach for Oral Lesions Surgical (COOLS)
Trial, funded by Terry Fox Research Institute, is an ongoing Phase III
clinical trial assessing the clinical, molecular and cost-efficacy of
fluorescence visualization (FV)-guided surgery to reduce local recurrence
of high-risk oral lesions: 140 patients will have high-grade lesions, the
rest invasive cancer. One critical gap, identified by COOLS knowledge
translation component, is the lack of information on treatment practices
and outcomes for patients with primary severe dysplasia outside of the
trial. The purpose of this study is to establish an evidence base about
variation in treatment and outcomes.Methods: We are extracting primary
data on practice variation and patient outcomes from available data
sources in the study sites across Canada (chart review, pathology reports
and cancer registries, reports of cohort databases). This information
will be supplemented via other knowledge translation methods including
literature review and knowledge synthesis, and key stakeholder interviews
and focus groups.Results: We report here on file review of 106 primary
oral severe dysplasia in longitudinal follow-up in British Columbia (BC)
for outcome outside of the COOLs trial. Follow-up was standardized for
this cohort; treatment was at discretion of the attending clinician.
There was considerable variability in treatment. When treated, the lesion
tended to be excised conservatively before (2004), when FV began to be
used in BC clinics, but wider margins were more common thereafter. When
severe dysplasia were not treated (n=55), prognosis was poor: 5-year
progression rate was 50.1% (31.2%-63.9%); when the lesion was removed
conservatively (before 2004, n=7), the rate was worse (58.3%, Cl:
0%-84.1.1%)), and when the lesion was more aggressively removed (after
2004, n=42), the rate was significantly improved (9.4%, Cl: 0%-32.3% P =
0.002).Conclusion: A knowledge translation project turned up
research-to-practice variation in the treatment of severe oral dysplasia
and an association with patient outcomes. Extension of this study to all
COOLS sites will assess whether such variation in surgical practice for
severe oral dysplasias, and associated outcome effects, is widespread. We
support greater attention to these issues, and dialogue and deliberation
among key stakeholders to establish consensus about best treatment of
high-grade oral dysplasias and priorities for further research.

