Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computing tumor growth rate across pre- and post-treatment periods
uncovers anti-tumor activity in patients treated by a pan-CDK inhibitor
(BAY1000394)


Background: Recent studies suggest that tumor shrinkage as measured by
RECIST 1.1 criteria may not be adequate to assess early signs of
anti-tumor activity in phase I trials. The value of Tumor Growth Rate
(TGR) evaluation in this context has been suggested. Methods: We analyzed
the TGR of solid tumors from patients prospectively enrolled in a
dose-escalation phase I trial investigating the pan-CDK inhibitor
BAY1000394 on a 3 days on/4 days off 21 day treatment cycle. Only
patients who had tumor imaging evaluation at least one month before the
onset of the experimental treatment, a baseline tumor imaging, and at
least one tumor evaluation after 2 cycles of treatment were eligible.
Patient consent was obtained prior to analysis. We computed the TGR
across the pre- (REFERENCE) and post-treatment (EXPERIMENTAL) evaluation,
as described by Fert et al (Clin Cancer Res, 2013) and compared these
results to RECIST-based response evaluation. Each patient was used as
his/her own control.Results: A total of twelve patients were eligible for
both RECIST and TGR evaluation. At the time of first evaluation, 9
patients were classified as progressive disease (PD) and 3 as stable
disease (SD) using RECIST. Conversely, TGR decreased in 6 out of 12
patients (median: - 9.8 %; CI 95% - 27.4 to 2.3), suggesting antitumor
activity by the investigational drug. However, these 6 patients were
classified as PD due to the occurrence of new lesions and then
discontinued from the trial. They had small cell lung, colorectal,
thymic, and bladder cancer. Interestingly, two patients suffering from
ovary adenocarcinoma with durable SD (10 treatment cycles) had almost no
tumor growth rate change between the REFERENCE and the EXPERIMENTAL
period, suggesting no anti-tumor activity, and could potentially have
been discontinued earlier from the trial. Conclusion: Computing the
variation of TGR in the context of a phase 1 trial investigating a
pan-CDK inhibitor reveals early signs of antitumor activity in specific
patients, not previously identified by RECIST. Its use to guide the go/no
go decision-making in the early drug development context is promising.

