Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of novel cancer cell derived
factors that dictate vascular endothelial cell biology


Cell-cell communication in the tumor microenvironment drives tumor growth
and facilitates neovessel recruitment from the adjacent vasculature. The
aim of these experiments were to identify novel cancer derived factors
that modulate the vascular endothelial response in a paracrine manner. An
array of cancer cell lines from multiple tissue types (Panc1; Hep2G;
LnCap; Skmel; Hep3B; PL45; SCC25; CaCo2; PaCa2; SKBR3) were grown under
normoxic or hypoxic (1% oxygen) conditions for a total of 20 conditions.
After 48 hours, conditioned media was collected and filtered prior to
testing on endothelial cells. The effects of these media on endothelial
apoptosis, proliferation and tube formation were investigated. In tandem
with these endothelial cell fate assays, the proteomic and lipidomic
profile of these 20 conditions were profiled and assessed using the Berg
Interrogative Biology platform. Our results reveal that conditioned media
from all cancer cells tested can alter endothelial cell apoptosis,
proliferation rate and tube formation in 3D matrigel assays i.e. critical
cell fate decisions that enable formation of nascent vessel formation.
Interestingly, the predominant effect of tumor-derived conditioned media
on endothelial apoptosis was a protective anti-apoptotic effect, with the
discernable exception of normoxic Panc1 derived media. An unexpected
finding was the general anti-proliferative effects of tumor-derived
conditioned media on endothelial cell growth, with the exception of
Hep2G, LnCap and PaCa2 cell derived media. Using a media fractionation
strategy and the Berg Interrogative Biology platform, we identified
several endothelial anti-apoptotic candidates from Panc1 cells within a
unique molecular weight range. Upon application of ASO gene knockdown in
Panc1 cells, these targets were verified for apoptotic and proliferation
effects on vascular endothelial cells.Specific factors that determine
paracrine cell-cell interaction in the tumor microenvironment have been
identified and validated using the Berg Interrogative Biology platform.

