Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Independent validation of a prognostic gene-signature based risk
score in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded melanomas


Current staging of melanoma, as defined in 2009 by the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC), is based mainly on histopathological criteria
but is limited in predicting outcome. Complementary molecular markers are
not available for routine prognostic assessment.We have previously
identified and validated a prognostic nine-gene signature expressed in
fresh-frozen (FF) primary cutaneous melanomas (training cohort: n=91;
validation cohort: n=44). A signature-based risk score predicts patient
overall survival (OS) independently of AJCC staging (multivariate
regression analysis: p = 0.0004; hazard ratio: 3.8). However, clinical
application requires adaptation to formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) melanomas.Therefore, we have transfered signature expression
analysis onto FFPE melanomas. From FFPE melanomas matching the training
and validation cohorts of the above FF melanoma study (n=125), RNA was
prepared and transcribed into cDNA. Following cDNA pre-amplification,
expression of the 9 signature genes, 2 additional candidate genes, and 3
housekeeping genes was quantified by real-time PCR. Correlation of gene
expression with OS was evaluated using Cox regression analysis.
Expression of a signature of 8 out of 11 genes (risk gene: KBTBD10;
protective genes: DCD, GBP4, COL6A6, PIP, SCGB1D2, SCGB2A2, KRT9) was
associated with OS in univariate regression and Kaplan Meier analysis. A
signature-based risk score predicted OS independently of AJCC staging
(multivariate analysis: p=0.0059, hazard ratio 3.09). The
misclassification rates were 20% overall, 13.8% for low risk, and 5.7%
for double low-risk (combined with AJCC staging). The risk score
complemented and refined conventional AJCC staging. Thus, the FF melanoma
risk score was successfully transfered onto FFPE melanomas.In order to
validate the FFPE melanoma risk score, we analyzed signature expression
in an independent cohort of 130 selected FFPE melanomas, which were
particularly difficult to classify by AJCC staging (misclassification
rate 40.8%), in order to stringently test the performance of the risk
score. The misclassification rate of the FFPE melanoma risk score was
comparable, even slightly better (39.2%) than that of AJCC staging,
confirming its prognostic performance.The FFPE melanoma risk score was
also externally validated in a Molecular Diagnostics Lab (Dermatologikum
Hamburg). The concordance of melanoma classification exceeded 85%,
demonstrating technical robustness of the risk score.We have established
and independently as well as externally validated a quantitative, robust
prognostic FFPE melanoma risk score that is complementary to AJCC staging
in predicting outcome. This demonstrates clinical applicability and
allows retrospective risk assessment of melanomas. The score identifies
patients at low risk, not identified by AJCC staging, and defines
high-risk patients in need of adjuvant therapy.

