Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of substituted chromone-2-phenylcarboxamides as
anti-breast cancer agents


Breast cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers and causes
the second leading cancer deaths in women. The overall survival rate of
breast cancer patients has substantially increased during the last
decades due to early tumor detection. Unfortunately, the recovery rate of
advanced breast cancer by current available drug treatment is still
unacceptably low. Although chemotherapy is the main stay of cancer
treatment at present, most of the drugs cause general toxicity to any
proliferating cells and tend to severely limit the therapeutic values of
these drugs. In an attempt to overcome these problems, the synthesis of
new anti-breast cancer agents with unique mechanisms of action was
developed. Chromones are benzannulated oxygen containing heterocyclic
compounds widely distributed in nature that have a -pyrone ring. The
chemical core of chromone has been classifies as a privileged structures
in drug discovery, due to its uses in a wide variety of pharmacologically
active compounds such as anti cancer, anti-HIV, antibacterial and
anti-inflammatory agents. Based on these considerations, we attempted the
synthesis of novel substituted chromone-2-phenylcarboxamides as
anti-breast cancer agents. The starting material chromones-2-carboxylic
acid was obtained by the hydrolysis reaction of ethyl esters with the
mixture of glacial acetic acid and concentrated HCl (2:1v/v) and the
mixture was heated to reflux for 12 h. The acids were obtained in 70-80%
yields. A suspension of substituted chromone-2-carboxylic acid in DMF was
added to substituted anilines, in the presence of diphenylphosphorylazide
and triethylamine. The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature
for 24 h, which furnished the target compounds i.e., substituted
chromone-2-phenylcarboxamides. These compounds were evaluated for their
cytotoxic effects on MCF-7 ER+ve breast cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 ER-ve
breast cancer cell lines and Ishikawa cells using the CellTiter-Glo
luminescent cell viability assay.
N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dimethoxy-4-oxo-4H-chromene-2-carboxamide showed
the most potent cytotoxicity with an IC50 values of 29.5 and 25.7 M on
MCF-7 and Ishikawa cell lines, respectively.This research was supported
by National Center for Research Resources and the National Institute of
Minority Health and Health Disparities of the National Institutes of
Health through Grant Number 8 G12MD007582-28.

