Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EVI1 transcriptionally represses SLUG to regulate
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human colon cancer


Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) is an oncogenic transcription
factor that is frequently implicated in hematological malignancies and in
some solid tumors. Deregulated expression of EVI1 impairs several
pathways including proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and cell
cycle through different mechanisms in different cell types. EVI1 was
found to be overexpressed in 53% of human colorectal cancer samples, 100%
of colon adenocarcinoma samples, 100% of human colon cancer cell lines
and its presence might affect disease progression and sensitivity to
chemotherapy. To investigate the stage specific expression pattern of
EVI1 in colon cancer patient samples, we analyzed two of the publicly
available microarray datasets (GEO database) of colon cancer patients and
observed that although EVI1 is upregulated in the initial stage of the
disease, the expression level decreases with the progression of the
disease. In cancer cells loss of epithelial adhesion molecule E-cadherin
is considered to be a fundamental event in EMT. To decipher whether EVI1
is involved in EMT, we checked five transcription factors (SLUG, SNAIL,
TWIST, ZEB1 and ZEB2) which controls the expression of E-cadherin in
cancer cells. Significant negative correlation was observed between the
expression levels of EVI1 and all the above transcription factors in
colon cancer patient samples. Recently it was shown by using ChIP
sequencing that EVI1 target SLUG and SNAIL in SKOV3 cells. To understand
whether EVI1 directly binds to both SLUG and SNAIL, we did an in silico
analysis and searched for EVI1 binding site(s) in the functional promoter
region of both SLUG and SNAIL. Although we did not observe any binding
site in SNAIL promoter region; we observed two EVI1 binding sites in the
SLUG promoter region. To validate the predicted target sites in vivo, we
did a ChIP assay and found that EVI1 binds to one of the site and not
both of them. To determine the transcriptional regulation, we cloned the
promoter region of SLUG (-1100 bp) in pGL3 vector and did luciferase
assay, which revealed that EVI1 significantly represses SLUG activity in
EVI1 transfected cells. Analysis of gene expression databases
corroborates the above finding and shows that EVI1 negatively regulates
SLUG expression in each stage of the disease as well as in colon cancer
cell lines. We have worked on the functional aspects of the binding in
terms of EMT which will be presented in the poster.

