Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigations into the tumor specific regulation of HER2 by Grp94
in breast cancer


Background: Grp94 is the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) paralog of the Hsp90
family of chaperones. Overexpression of Grp94 in tumors correlates with
advanced stage and poor survival in various cancers and is closely linked
to cancer growth and metastasis. Until recently, the major focus of
cancer related studies on Grp94 was on the involvement of this protein in
the secretion of IGF-II and the regulation of Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs)
and integrins.Objective/Hypothesis: Our group combined compound library
screening with computational tools to develop potent and selective
inhibitors of Grp94 and of Hsp90, the cytosolic HSP90 paralog. We
hypothesize that these small molecules are important pharmacologic tools
to investigate, in a tumor-by-tumor manner, Grp94 and Hsp90 associated
oncogenic mechanisms.Approach/Results: Using the Hsp90 paralog specific
inhibitors we produce preliminary evidence for an unanticipated role for
Grp94 in maintaining the architecture of high density HER2 formations at
the plasma membrane, particularly in cancer cells where HER2 is required
to channel an amplified signaling through the receptor. Our data indicate
that under conditions in which stress is imposed on the cell by proteome
alterations (i.e. HER2 overexpression), the chaperoning function of Grp94
is vital for proper HER2 functioning. In these cells Grp94 translocates
to the plasma membrane where it functions to maintain an active
conformation of HER2 and to stabilize downstream signaling through the
receptor. Our data show that inhibition of Grp94 in these cells is
sufficient to destabilize membrane HER2, inhibit its signaling properties
and target HER2 towards a degradative pathway. These effects are
associated with cancer cell viability loss and induction of
apoptosis.Significance: These findings reveal a novel mechanism of
HER2-regulation at the plasma membrane, where Grp94 is implicated in HER2
regulation at this location in the specific case of HER2 positive tumors.
They also provide a strong rationale for the use of these inhibitors in
the investigation of Grp94 associated oncogenic mechanisms. Further, this
study proposes the development of Grp94-based cancer therapeutics for
HER2 overexpressing breast cancer.

