Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex in vitro and in vivo prostate cancer models for the
PREDECT consortium


The failure of many drugs in the clinic - drugs proven to be active in
pre-clinical assays - has raised question marks on the predictive power
of these models, often based on cell line data. The divergence of these
cell lines from the original tumors, and their rapid growth as simple
monocultures on 2D plastic were highlighted as potentially causing these
issues. Implantation of the cell lines into mice adds complexity to these
models, but the crosstalk with mouse stroma also leads to confounding
results (eg, HGF, IL-6).PREDECT, a European consortium funded by the
Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI), has the goal to build and
characterise more predictive Oncology model platforms for three
pathologies (lung, breast and prostate). Signalling pathways and
heterogeneity of these model platforms are compared to each other as well
as to primary human tissue using a central TMA-based platform.For
prostate cancer, a 3D tumor growth assay system was established recently
using RFP/FLuc-labelled LNCaP, PC346C, or VCaP human prostate cancer
cells grown in a matrix of Matrigel, collagen, or a mix of the two, in
the presence or absence of GFP/RLuc labelled human stromal cells (WPMY,
or an immortalised cancer-associated fibroblast cell line, CAF). Cell
densities, ratios, and matrix concentrations/volumes were optimised for
cells cultured for 3 weeks. In an approach to improve tumor-stroma
crosstalk in vivo, LNCaP cells pre-grown in 3D cultures with or without
human stromal cells were implanted orthotopically into SCID mice. Growth
of the tumor and stromal cells was monitored by in vivo bioluminescence,
and the effect of the co-implantation on the primary tumor and metastasis
was analysed via ex-vivo luciferase assays and IHC.Whereas LNCaP and
PC346C cells readily formed spheroids in 3D culture, VCaPs remained as
single cells. Growth of VCaPs was facilitated by pre-forming spheroids in
vitro, followed by matrix embedding. Addition of stromal cells stimulated
growth of not only the tumor, but also the stromal cells in some
conditions, as monitored using RFP and GFP live cell imaging. 3D, as well
as stromal cell-mediated treatment resistance was observed. Using the
fluorescent dyes Hoechst, EdU, and NucView, the proliferative status of
individual cells within spheroids could be analysed in situ. Finally,
paraffin-embedding of the 3D cultures allowed for TMA analysis and
comparison to other models and patient samples.Results will also be shown
on the orthotopic growth of LNCaP tumors and the effect of stromal cell
co-implantation.Introducing complexity to cell culture may help to
generate more realistic, and thus also more predictive models - in a
first step using even standard cell lines.

