Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inhibitor of NF-B kinase, IKK, regulates the stability of GLI1
transcription factor


Lymphoma microenvironment has a crucial role in lymphoma initiation,
progression and drug resistance. Fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs)
participate dynamically in the cytokine microenvironment of the lymph
node paracortex as well as the regulation of cell trafficking and access
of T-cells into the paracortex. The FRC niche also participates in the
cytokine microenvironment of lymphomas providing homing and survival
signals including CCL19, CCL21, IL-7, CXCL12 and hedgehog (Hh) ligands.
Hh signaling is evolutionary conserved signaling pathway that serves
several physiological and development processes mediated by externally
secreted Hh ligands. We previously demonstrated that the canonical Hh
ligand-PTCH1-SMO-GLI axis is functional and contributes to cell survival,
proliferation and enhances chemo tolerance in DLBCL. We further showed
that GLI1, Hh signaling transcription factor is aberrantly activated in
87% of DLBCL and this activation is in part mediated by sonic Hh ligands
secreted by stromal cells. Although the importance of GLI1 in tumor
development is well recognized, the molecular mechanisms controlling the
transcriptional activity of GLI1 is limited. To identify regulatory
components that participate in the transcriptional activity of GLI1, we
explored GLI1 putative interacting proteins by liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry following immunoprecipitation of endogenous
GLI1. We identified the inhibitor of NF-B kinase, IKK as a novel
GLI1-binding protein. In addition, we found that the kinase activity of
IKK is critical to recruit and phosphorylate GLI1 in the C-terminal
fragment. We further showed that in DLBCL cells stimulated with TNF, IKK
phosphorylates GLI1 and restricts the binding between GLI1 with HECT-type
E3 ubiquitin ligase (ITCH) resulting in GLI1 stability and increased
oncogenic potential. Inhibition of IKK-mediated GLI1 phosphorylation
restored the binding between GLI1 and ITCH and promoted ubiquitination
and degradation of GLI1. Collectively, these results indicate that IKK
regulates the transcriptional activity of GLI1 by phosphorylating GLI1
and modulating the binding between GLI1 and ITCH. In DLBCL, canonical
NF-B and GLI1 mediated Hh signaling pathways are strongly responsive with
tumor microenvironment; our study will help to understand the cross talk
between these two pathways which could represents a novel therapeutic
approach for DLBCL.

