Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AXL tyrosine kinase inhibition selectively sensitizes mesenchymal
cancer cells to antimitotic agents


Molecularly-targeted drug therapies have revolutionized cancer treatment,
however, resistance remains a major limitation to their overall efficacy.
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to acquired
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), independent of
mutational resistance mechanisms. AXL is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
associated with EMT that has been implicated in drug resistance, and has
emerged as a candidate therapeutic target. Across 643 human cancer cell
lines that were analyzed, we found that elevated AXL was strongly
associated with a mesenchymal phenotype, particularly in triple negative
breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. Here we experimentally
established a model system to induced EMT by exposure to TGF- and we
observed that the resulting TGF--induced mesenchymal cells exhibit
substantially increased AXL expression, become relatively drug-resistant
to their appropriate TKI and cross-resistant to a variety of anti-cancer
agents. We tested the ability of AXL inhibition to restore erlotinib
sensitivity, in both a TGF--induced resistance model and in two different
models of acquired resistance to erlotinib. Here, our observations do not
support the previously reported role for AXL inhibition in overcoming
acquired resistance to TKIs in the EMT context. However, in an unbiased
screen of small molecule inhibitors of cancer-relevant processes, we
discovered that AXL inhibition was specifically synergistic with
anti-mitotic agents in killing cancer cells that had undergone EMT and
demonstrated associated TKI resistance. Inhibition of AXL in combination
with anti-mitotic agents enhances death in mitosis by promoting cells to
enter mitosis through the down-regulation of CDK1, resulting in G2M cell
cycle arrest. In summary, our findings highlight the utility of
combination drug screening to reveal novel potentially useful anti-cancer
drug combinations to improve clinical responses. While we did not
identify a functional role for AXL in the context of acquired resistance
to TKI therapies, we did observe that AXL inhibition may be an effective
therapy in the context of mesenchymal tumors, specifically when used in
combination with anti-mitotic agents. These findings reveal a novel
therapeutic strategy for tumors displaying mesenchymal features that
otherwise render them treatment-refractory.

