Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted PF1, JARID1B inhibition induces epigenetic reprogramming
in triple negative breast cancer


Triple Negative Breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast
cancer associated with early recurrence and poor prognosis. The treatment
options are limited due to lack of expression of common drug targets:
estrogen receptor (ER), Progesterone receptor (PR) and Epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (Her2). Epigenetic programs can generate aberrant
transcription contributing to TNBC progression; however the dynamic and
reversible nature of epigenetic changes offers the possibility to
reprogram cancer cells to re-express targets that can render TNBC
sensitive to targeted therapies like tamoxifen. Envisioning such
epidrugs, we previously published that targeting PAH2 domain of the
master transcriptional scaffold Sin3 by stable expression of 13-mer
peptide corresponding to a specific motif called SID (mSin3A interaction
domain) disrupts its interaction with a small group of SID-containing
transcription factors. This interference reverts the expression of
important breast cancer-associated genes and impairs tumor growth in
vivo. We have now extended our study towards the evaluation of a cell
penetrating SID peptide (pSID) in in vitro and in vivo models to
establish parameters for the design of targeted epigenetic therapy for
TNBC. pSID co-localizes with Sin3A and interference with PAH2-mediated
Sin3A functions by pSID is shown by disruption of Sin3A-MAD1 interactions
in Co-IP and Duo-Link assays. pSID treatment in MDA-MB 231 cells results
in functional re-expression of CDH1 and ER along with increased H3K4 and
decreased H3K27 methylation on their promoters. We also show reduction in
the tumorsphere formation by pSID-pretreated MDA-MB-231 cells indicating
possible epigenetic reprogramming of tumor initiating stem cells towards
a differentiated phenotype. Support to this hypothesis is added by the
50% reduction in tumor growth and re-expression of CDH1 observed in FVB
mice injected with pSID-pretreated MMTV-myc cells. Moreover, microarray
expression analysis indicates pSID-induced EMT reversal, increased cell
adhesion and reduced cell migration. Intriguingly, upon further
dissection of the mechanism of epigenetic regulation by pSID we show
dissociation of two important chromatin readers/modifiers from the Sin3
complex: histone H3K4Me3/2 demethylase JARID1B and H3K4Me0 binding
PHD-like domain containing protein PF1; both with significantly
correlated overexpression in invasive breast carcinoma. We also observe
loss of recruitment of JARID1B but not Sin3A from the CDH1 promoter.
Currently studies are underway to understand the cooperative role between
JARID1B and PF1 in potentiating the aberrant transcription regulation by
Sin3 at important breast cancer-associated promoters that can be
selectively reprogrammed by SID decoys. We believe this selectivity can
limit the otherwise adverse affects that may be observed by the use of
generic HDAC inhibitors and demethylating agents.

