Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA in biofluid as robust biomarkers for cancer


microRNAs constitute a class of small cellular RNAs (typically 19-23 nt)
that function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression.
Current estimates indicate that more than one third of the human cellular
transcriptome is regulated by this small class of RNA (2000 miRNA). The
study of extracellular microRNAs and their potential as
pathophysiological markers has greatly expanded in the last couple of
years. microRNAs have been shown to be actively exported from tissues
into the circulation through a variety of mechanisms including exosome
and microvesicle transport, and complexing with RNA binding proteins or
HDL. The high relative stability of microRNAs in common clinical source
materials (FFPE blocks, plasma, serum, urine, saliva, etc.) and the
ability of microRNA expression profiles to accurately classify discrete
tissue types and specific disease states have positioned microRNAs as
promising new biomarkers for diagnostic application in cancer. We have
applied Exiqons highly sensitive LNA-based qPCR platform for detection of
microRNAs, which has enabled microRNA profiling in biofluids where levels
are extremely low. The platform uses a single RT reaction to conduct full
miRNome profiling and allows high-throughput profiling of microRNAs
without the need for pre-amplification. Thousands of biofluid samples
including serum/plasma and urine have been profiled to determine normal
reference ranges for circulating microRNAs as well as to identify
biomarkers of disease. Extensive data qualification and analysis methods
have been developed and are central parameters to secure high quality
data from biofluids. The methods can quickly and robustly be applied in
biomarker discovery and validation projects. We will present examples
from our collaborative cancer diagnostic projects. Also we have developed
a new exosome enrichment method and will present a comparison of microRNA
profiles obtained with this method to profiles obtained with different
commercial available exosome isolation methods and standard profiles of
whole plasma and serum.

