Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of the role of microRNA-155 in a murine model of
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent cancers
worldwide with increasing incidence and mortality. Risk factors for this
deadly disease include acquisition of the Hepatitis B or C virus, alcohol
use, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Due to their ability to
regulate multiple genes and their therapeutic potential, miRNAs (miRs)
have received considerable attention for their role as tumor suppressors
or oncogenes. In our previous study to identify miRs involved in the
pathogenesis of HCC, we have demonstrated consistent upregulation of
miR-155, a pro-inflammatory microRNA, in a CDAA diet-induced mouse model
of HCC that mimics the progression of steatohepatitis to HCC in humans
(B.Wang et.al, Hepatology. 2009). Importantly, increased miR-155 level in
humans is an independent predictor of poor prognosis and survival and
also correlates with invasion in HCC patients. Upregulation of miR-155 at
very early stages of HCC suggested that it plays a causal role in NASH
and HCC and that its absence will result in decreased inflammation,
fibrosis, and eventually, development of HCC. The overall goal of this
study is to establish the role of miR-155 in the pathogenesis of HCC for
future development of anti-miR therapy. For this purpose, male C57BL6
mice and miR-155KO mice were fed the chow diet (control) or the CDAA diet
for 4 or 8 weeks. Blood and liver were then harvested for serologic,
pathologic, and biochemical studies. Additionally, body and liver weight
were also measured at the time of sacrifice. Analysis of the ratio of
liver weight to body weight demonstrated a small but significant increase
of this ratio (in the absence of any increase in body weight) in the
miR-155KO mice compared to the control mice. As expected, reduced
inflammation was seen in the miR-155KO mice that correlated with
decreased NF-B activity. Histopathological analysis also revealed
increased steatosis in the KO mice suggesting that miR-155 plays a role
in hepatic lipid metabolism. Global gene expression analysis performed on
RNA isolated from livers was consistent with reduced inflammation and
enhanced steatosis in the miR-155KO mice. Importantly, changes in
expression of genes associated with hepatic necrosis, fibrosis and cancer
indicated reduced liver damage in miR-155KO mice suggesting that these
mice will be less prone to tumorigenesis. Reduced expression of the p65
subunit of NF-B in the miR-155KO mice was identified as one of the
mechanisms of decreased NF-B activity. Currently studies are underway to
explore further the mechanism of regulation of p65 expression/NF-B
activity and lipid metabolism in HCC by miR-155.

