Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AD-O64.4 - a novel bioconjugate for tumor-targeted drug delivery


Although standard chemotherapy is still one of the most effective
treatment for many types of cancer - often causes side effects.
Chemotherapeutic agents primarily damage cancer cells with a rapidly
dividing and growing profile, thereby also destroy healthy cells with
such characteristics, which leads to side effects. Scientists are
continually working to identify new, safer drugs, methods of
administering chemotherapy, and combinations of existing treatments that
have fewer side effects.In recent years, drug delivery systems (DDS)
based on a concept of conjugation anticancer agents to carrier protein
have been developed, achieving a better clinical response and
tolerability. Protein-drug conjugates represent a whole new concept for
cancer treatment which, although highly effective, cause much fewer sides
effects than traditional chemotherapy.The present work is aimed to create
a new conjugate molecule which essentially demonstrates greater effect
than the summarized effects of its components due to specific targeting
to cancer cells. We generated AD-O64.4 complex molecule, consisting of
fusion protein INF- - TRAIL/Apo2L conjugated with the anti-mitotic agent
SN-38 via the thioether linker.Carrier protein is a fusion molecule which
is composed of soluble fragment of TRAIL (acting as a targeting carrier
and effector) fused with artificial dimer of IFN- (acting as
effector).SN-38, a topoisomerase I inhibitor with low nanomolar potency,
the active metabolite of irinotecan, cannot be given directly to patients
because of its toxicity and poor solubility. Linking SN-38 to the carrier
fusion protein results in selective drug delivery to tumors which
consequently leads to increased amount of the drug reaching the tumors
and minimized damage of healthy cells.Analysis of the conjugate was
performed by LC-MS and resulted in determination of drug-protein ratio.
Agregation studies of the molecule complex were conducted by DLS and
fluorescent protein aggregation assay. Cytotoxicity was evaluated with
MTT assay and efficacy was performed on female SCID mice xenograft model
bearing Human Uterine Sarcoma (MES-SA/Dx5).Our results show an effective
process of conjugation of anticancer compound SN-38 to the carrier
protein which leads to formation of an active complex with enhanced
efficacy.AD-O64.4 exhibited cytotoxic effect on various cancer cell
lines, (IC50 about 10 ng/ml), but showed no toxic effect on normal cells.
This conjugate was also highly cytotoxic against primary cancer cells.
AD-O64.4 was highly active (up to 75% tumor remission) against
subcutaneous multiple drug resistant, MES-SA/Dx5, tumor xenografts in
severe combined immunodeficient mice with better activity compared to the
carrier protein alone, as well as to combination of the carrier protein
with free-drug. Overall, these results represent a novel and a valuable
system for drug delivery to the tumor and its microenvironment.

