Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of somatic alterations in plasma from lung cancer
patients


Tumor-specific (somatic) mutations in plasma can serve as biomarkers for
tumor detection, monitor tumor response to specific therapies, detect
residual disease after surgery, and long-term follow-up. The intrinsic
low abundance of circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cfDNA) makes the
detection and quantification of such mutations in plasma a challenging
task. This small scale study aims to establish a comprehensive strategy
to be used in the detection of clinical relevant somatic alterations in
plasma of lung cancer patients.Plasma samples obtained at different
stages of disease progression and/or treatment were collected from a
group of 11 lung cancer patients and used to isolate cfDNA. Genetic
alterations in the EGFR gene (p.E746_A750del and p.L858R) identified at
diagnosis in tumor biopsies were used as surrogate markers to optimize
and validate the next generation sequencing strategy and data analysis
workflow. The Ion AmpliSeq Colon and Lung cancer panel was used to
analyze hotspot and targeted regions of 22 genes implicated in colon and
lung cancers, including the EGFR gene mutations mentioned. The amplified
products were used to prepare libraries and were sequenced using the Ion
PGM system. Quantitative real time PCR and digital PCR assays were used
to confirm selected results.Tumor derived genetic alterations could be
identified in as little as 10ng of cfDNA. EGFR alterations identified in
cfDNA mirrored the alterations identified in all tumor biopsies. EGFR
alterations with allelic frequencies as low as 3% could be detected in
cfDNA. Additionally, in case of samples collected after therapy, a clear
decrease in the cfDNA allelic frequency of the EGFR mutation, that made
the patient eligible for therapy, was observed. Furthermore, the
screening of a larger panel of genes allowed the identification in two
cases of additional gene mutations (e.g. MET and KRAS) that may have
impact in the clinical management of patients.In this study, we
demonstrate the capacity to identify clinically relevant somatic EGFR
mutations in plasma. The possibility to assess information from a larger
panel of genes makes this strategy attractive for further optimization of
treatment options. The strategy is now being extended to a larger cohort
of patients to push forward the concept of liquid biopsy in the clinical
management of cancer patients.

