Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating the mechanism of Wnt pathway inhibition by
niclosamide


The Wnt signaling pathway regulates genes critical for normal development
and is dysregulated in many cancers. Indeed, more than 80% of all
sporadic and hereditary colorectal cancers (CRCs) show hyperactivation of
the Wnt/-catenin pathway due to mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli
(APC) or -catenin genes. As a result, drugs that modulate the Wnt pathway
are highly sought-after as the basis of a new generation of innovative
therapeutic agents to treat CRC. Unfortunately, the ability to target
this pathway with small molecule inhibitors has hampered drug discovery
such that no approved drugs specifically targeting the pathway have been
identified. To address this gap, we constructed a chemical genetics
high-throughput screen that evaluated internalization of the Frizzled
receptor in order to identify modulators of the Wnt/Frizzled/LRP5/6
signaling pathway. Using this assay we discovered the small molecule drug
niclosamide, a FDA-approved anthelmintic agent, decreased -catenin levels
and inhibited Wnt/-catenin signaling, findings since confirmed by others.
To support efforts to evaluate niclosamide in clinical studies of
colorectal cancer with aberrant Wnt signaling, we studied the
translocation of Frizzled1-GFP induced by niclosamide and the kinetics of
inhibition of Wnt signaling in cell culture. We found that niclosamide
induces the co-localization of Frizzled1-GFP and lysosome markers
indicating the translocation of Frizzled1-GFP to the lysosome. Kinetic
studies indicated that -catenin levels are reduced significantly within
three hours and that both the levels of -catenin and -catenin gene
transcription remained significant decreased 12 hours after the compound
was removed. These data suggest a mechanistic hypothesis in which an
extended duration of inhibition of Wnt signaling by niclosamide may
result from the induced degradation of key proteins in the Wnt signaling
pathway and that continuous exposure to niclosamide may not be necessary
over the entire dosing period to maintain sufficient pathway inhibition.
Overall, the findings support plans to investigate the use of niclosamide
in clinical trials of CRC.

