Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reovirus synergy with proteosome inhibitor carfilzomib and Akt
inhibitor perifisone overcomes therapy resistance of multiple myeloma:
promising preclinical activity


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a hematological malignancy of
plasma cells and despite recent therapeutic advances that have increased
the median survival rates of patients, is still currently felt to be
incurable. We recently demonstrated the potential of reovirus as a novel
therapeutic agent for several MM cell lines and ex vivo patient tumors.
Therapy resistant disease however, still remains a problem. In the
present study we demonstrate that reovirus acts synergistically with
carfilzomib and/or perifisone in oncolysis of therapy resistant MM cell
lines.Methods: The MM cell lines RPMI 8226, U266, NCIH929, U266, INA-6,
KMS11 and OPM2 were incubated with live (LV) or UV-inactivated (DV)
reovirus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 40 for 24, 48, and 72
hours respectively and cell death was assessed via the WST assay.
Reovirus resistant OPM2 and moderately sensitive KMS-11 as well as
reovirus sensitive RPMI8226 were selected for combination therapy and
treated with reovirus and drugs at various concentrations to evaluate
Effective Dose 50% (ED50) values. ED50 values for each drug and reovirus
was combined in various concentrations but with consistent ratios and
percent of toxicity was determined. Using Calcusyn software, combination
index (CI) values were generated and synergism determined as per
Chou-Talalay method.Results: Synergistic cytotoxicity was observed with
reovirus and carfilzomib and perifisone in both reovirus resistant OPM2,
KMS-11 or sensitive RPMI8226 cell lines. Interestingly, reovirus
resistant cell lines demonstrated enhanced synergism in comparison to
reovirus sensitive RPMI8226.Conclusion: Not all MM cell lines are
amenable to reovirus mediated cell death. As phase II clinical trials for
MM are currently underway this has important implications for the future
use of reovirus as a therapeutic agent for cancer. The present study
highlights the significance of preclinical studies in evaluating
effective reovirus drug combinations for future use that could be
extrapolated to a clinical setting. Currently we are also evaluating the
effects of these drug combinations in vivo in a mouse model that
represents the clinical scenario of MM. The mechanisms underlying the
cytotoxicity mediated by reovirus and drug combinations is also being
investigated at present. Understanding the signalling pathways of
resistant tumor will help develop a more personalized approach of
reovirus therapy for cancer patients in the future.

