Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble biomarkers identify mCRC patients subgroups showing
increased benefit from the VEGF signaling inhibitor cediranib in
combination with chemotherapy


Identifying potential predictive biomarkers differentiating
sensitivity/resistance to VEGF signaling inhibitors (VEGFi) will enhance
use of these therapies. We used >580 pre and on-treatment serum samples
and 259 tumours diagnostic biopsies from mCRC patients enrolled in a
Phase III trial (HORIZON II) treated with chemotherapy cediranib(a
VEGFi), to screen the potential predictive value of multiple serum
proteins and tumour genes.At baseline leptin was the most significant
marker associated with OS of patients treated with chemo-ced
(Pinteraction30) showed improved OS when treated with chemo-ced compared
to non-obese patients (HR=0.55, 0.36-0.85, p=0.008). In the same
patients, we identified two gene expression signatures associated with
benefit on chemo-ced. Patients characterized by a high expression of
GAHGL (Glucose metabolism, Angiogenesis, Hypoxia, Glutamine metabolism,
Leptin signaling) (Pinteraction=0.028) and low expression of LOPS (Lipid
metabolism, Oxidative activity, Proliferation and Serine synthesis) gene
signature (Pinteraction=0.002) had improved OS in chemo-ced treated
patients. Serum leptin concentration was found positively correlated with
expression of genes involved in GAHGL in patients.In addition a baseline
signature (BS) of 47 biomarkers including VEGFA, VEGFD, VEGFR2, VEGFR3
and TIE-2, defined two distinct subgroups of patients. Patients treated
with chemotherapy plus cediranib who had high BS had shorter PFS
(HR=1.82, p=0.003) than patients with low BS. This BS had no effect on
PFS of the patients treated with chemotherapy plus placebo.Finally, we
identified a profile of 16 pharmacodynamic (PD) proteins on treatment
associated with PFS (HR=0.58, p30) showed improved OS when treated with
chemo-ced compared to non-obese patients (HR=0.55, 0.36-0.85, p=0.008).
In the same patients, we identified two gene expression signatures
associated with benefit on chemo-ced. Patients characterized by a high
expression of GAHGL (Glucose metabolism, Angiogenesis, Hypoxia, Glutamine
metabolism, Leptin signaling) (Pinteraction=0.028) and low expression of
LOPS (Lipid metabolism, Oxidative activity, Proliferation and Serine
synthesis) gene signature (Pinteraction=0.002) had improved OS in
chemo-ced treated patients. Serum leptin concentration was found
positively correlated with expression of genes involved in GAHGL in
patients.In addition a baseline signature (BS) of 47 biomarkers including
VEGFA, VEGFD, VEGFR2, VEGFR3 and TIE-2, defined two distinct subgroups of
patients. Patients treated with chemotherapy plus cediranib who had high
BS had shorter PFS (HR=1.82, p=0.003) than patients with low BS. This BS
had no effect on PFS of the patients treated with chemotherapy plus
placebo.Finally, we identified a profile of 16 pharmacodynamic (PD)
proteins on treatment associated with PFS (HR=0.58, p<0.001) and OS
(HR=0.52, p30) showed improved OS when treated with chemo-ced compared to
non-obese patients (HR=0.55, 0.36-0.85, p=0.008). In the same patients,
we identified two gene expression signatures associated with benefit on
chemo-ced. Patients characterized by a high expression of GAHGL (Glucose
metabolism, Angiogenesis, Hypoxia, Glutamine metabolism, Leptin
signaling) (Pinteraction=0.028) and low expression of LOPS (Lipid
metabolism, Oxidative activity, Proliferation and Serine synthesis) gene
signature (Pinteraction=0.002) had improved OS in chemo-ced treated
patients. Serum leptin concentration was found positively correlated with
expression of genes involved in GAHGL in patients.In addition a baseline
signature (BS) of 47 biomarkers including VEGFA, VEGFD, VEGFR2, VEGFR3
and TIE-2, defined two distinct subgroups of patients. Patients treated
with chemotherapy plus cediranib who had high BS had shorter PFS
(HR=1.82, p=0.003) than patients with low BS. This BS had no effect on
PFS of the patients treated with chemotherapy plus placebo.Finally, we
identified a profile of 16 pharmacodynamic (PD) proteins on treatment
associated with PFS (HR=0.58, p<0.001) and OS (HR=0.52, p<0.001) in
patients treated with chemotherapy plus cediranib. This PD profile had no
effect on PFS and OS in patients treated with chemotherapy plus
placebo.This work provides original candidate biomarkers to select
patients most likely to benefit from VEGFi therapies.

