Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct effects of eribulin on axonal microtubule composition and
modifications relative to paclitaxel, vincristine and ixabepilone in
preclinical models: correlations with lower levels of eribulin-induced
peripheral neuropathy


Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) are widely used anti-cancer drugs.
They suppress microtubule dynamics, prevent complete spindle formation
and induce cell cycle arrest and cell death in rapidly dividing tumor
cells. Unfortunately, systemic administration of different MTAs can also
lead to significant side effects including debilitating, dose-limiting
peripheral neuropathy. Interestingly, different MTAs vary with respect to
the frequency and severity of neuropathic symptoms. MTAs are hypothesized
to induce neuropathy by disrupting the normal functions of microtubules,
including maintenance of elongated axonal structures and mediating axonal
transport of cellular components between the cell body and nerve endings.
Consistent with this notion, different MTAs vary in their mechanisms of
microtubule binding and regulation of microtubule dynamics. To begin
testing the hypothesis that differing molecular mechanisms underlie the
variable nature of peripheral neuropathy, we examined biochemical changes
in microtubule composition, modification and the levels of selected
microtubule associated proteins, all of which affect microtubule dynamics
and microtubule action. We compared sciatic nerves from mice treated with
a Q2Dx3 schedule for 2 weeks at the maximum tolerated doses of
paclitaxel, ixabepilone, vincristine or eribulin. Sciatic nerves were
fixed, sectioned and immunostained with antibodies directed against
-tubulin, acetylated-tubulin and tyrosinated tubulin as well as the
microtubule (+) end binding proteins EB1 and EB3. Images, acquired by
confocal microscopy, were analyzed with Imaris software to quantitate
drug-induced changes. The most marked effects were observed with eribulin
treatment. Sciatic nerves from eribulin treated mice exhibited 2.5 fold
increase in -tubulin signal, 12 fold increase in acetylated tubulin
signal, 1.5 fold increase in tyrosinated tubulin signal and 2 fold
increase in EB1 signal. No significant change was observed for EB3. In
contrast, with the exception of a 5 fold increase in the acetylated
tubulin signal in paclitaxel treated mice, no other statistically
significant effects were observed with paclitaxel, ixabepilone or
vincristine treatment. The data suggest that the mechanisms of eribulin
action alter normal axonal cell biology, leading to increased abundance
of tubulin and EB1. Increased levels of acetylated tubulin observed with
paclitaxel and eribulin treatment suggests increased microtubule
stabilization. Taken together, the data suggest that eribulin affects
neuronal microtubules differently than paclitaxel, ixabepilone or
vincristine, correlating with its relatively low level of induced
peripheral neuropathy. We gratefully thank Eisai Inc. for support of this
research.

