Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating mechanisms of resistance to FGFR inhibitors in
endometrial cancer


Preclinical studies by our lab and others have demonstrated Fibroblast
Growth Factor Receptor (FGFR) inhibition is a viable therapeutic strategy
in FGFR2-mutant endometrial cancer (EC). A significant clinical issue
that we aim to address is that of intrinsic and acquired resistance to
anti-FGFR therapeutics in the context of EC.Using mutagenesis screens, we
have identified mutations in the FGFR2 kinase domain that cause
resistance to the FGFR inhibitors dovitinib and NVP-BGJ398 and explore
the mechanism of action of the drug-resistant mutations. We previously
reported the N550K and V565I mutations caused resistance to dovitinib.
The sensitivity/resistance of these FGFR2 mutants to emerging FGFR
inhibitors including AZD4547, NVP-BGJ398 and LY2874455 has now been
tested.To gain insights into potential mechanisms of acquired resistance
to FGFR inhibitors in EC cells we generated subclones of FGFR2mutant
AN3CA, MFE280 and JHUEM-2 EC cells resistant to FGFR inhibitors PD173074,
Dovitinib and NVP-BGJ398, respectively. Phospho- protein arrays, gene
expression profiling, exome sequencing and SNP analysis were performed to
identify genes and signalling pathways that mediate resistance to FGFR
inhibitors. Sequencing of AN3CAresistant and MFE280resistant subclones
excluded secondary FGFR2 mutations as the resistance mechanisms.
Upregulation of downstream survival pathways such as pERK and pAKT was
observed in some of the JHUEM-2resistant and AN3CAresistant subclones. To
further characterise these subclones we are currently analysing data from
exome sequencing and copy number analysis, to determine the molecular
mechanisms of resistance in these cell lines. In the MFE280resistant
cells resistance to FGFR inhibition is associated with an EMT phenotype.
Signaling through pERK and pAKT is downregulated in these cells,
suggesting that resistance is not mediated by activation of kinase-driven
survival pathways. Analysis of expression data is underway to understand
how these cells have become resistant to FGFR inhibitors. This research
will provide insight into possible combination therapies that may combat
drug resistance in FGFR-mutant endometrial cancer.

