Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcitriol effects on breast cancer tumorgrafts


Antiproliferative effects of calcitriol were mainly detected in breast
carcinoma lineages exposed in vitro to high hormone concentrations, which
is associated with hypercalcemia in human beings. To test the hypothesis
that intra-tumoral administration of calcitriol would allow higher tissue
concentration of the hormone and activation of the genomic pathway, a
tumorgraft model, that more closely reproduces the molecular
characteristics of the primary tumor, was established. Freshly collected
breast cancer samples from 14 patients were ortothopically grafted in
nude mice. On the sixth week after xenografting, no palpable nodules were
detected in mice implanted with 6 samples. Intra-tumoral weekly
injections of calcitriol 0.06 g (dose that allow peak serum calcitriol
levels in the predicted therapeutic range) or vehicle were initiated and
maintained for six weeks in mice xenografted with another 8 samples.
Tumorgraft proliferation, apoptosis and target genes expression were
evaluated through immnunohistochemistry reactions or RT-PCR. At the end
of the experiment, tumorgrafts originated from three samples were
available for analysis. VDR expression was detected in these samples as
well as a trend towards higher expression of CYP24A1 mRNA (10-18 fold) in
calcitriol treated samples, indicating that the genomic pathway was
induced. A high proliferative index, evaluated by Ki67 expression, was
observed, however, neither differences in the expression of proliferation
markers (BrdU incorporation, Ki67 and CDKN1B expression) nor in apoptosis
markers (cleaved caspase 3 and BCL2 expression) between vehicle and
calcitriol treated tumorgrafts was detected. Additionally, no difference
between groups was noticed for the expression of CDKN1A mRNA. In summary,
in this small study, calcitriol antitumoral effects were not observed in
tumorgrafts, established from highly proliferative breast cancer samples.
This preclinical model in conjunction with pharmacokinetic calcitriol
determinations might contribute to clarify the hormone effects in breast
cancer.

