Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune suppressive myeloid cells expansion in vitro requires a
simulated tumor microenvironment


Elevated levels of immune suppressor cells induced by tumor derived
factors are associated with inhibition of immune responses. One such
group of immune suppressor cells is Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells
(MDSCs). They are phenotypically defined in humans as HLADR low or
negative and CD33, CD11b, and CD15 or CD14 positive and functionally by
their ability to suppress the activation of other immune cells such as T
cells. We hypothesized that MDSCs generated in vitro could be propagated
but would lose their suppressive ability on the action of T cells in the
absence of a simulated tumor microenvironment. MDSCs were first
differentiated in vitro from normal donor peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) using a simulated tumor microenvironment consisting of
either cytokines (GMCSF and IL-6) or tumor cell lines (pancreatic
adenocarcinoma SW-1990 or head and neck cancer CAL-27). The MDSCs
generated in vitro suppressed T cell proliferation of autologous T cells
using the carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) assay (31%, 46%
and 75% suppression for cytokines, CAL-27 and SW-1990, respectively).
Given the MDSCs obtained from co-culture of PBMCs with SW-1990 were the
most suppressive on the proliferation of T cells, we attempted to
proliferate these cells in vitro to expand the number of MDSC available
for experimentation rather than having to purify MDSC from clinical
samples. In vitro generated MDSC were propagated using a Rho-associated
kinase (ROCK) inhibitor. Generated MDSC collected via magnetic bead
isolation (CD33) were cultured with irradiated fibroblast feeder cells (
3000 rad) in F medium [3:1 (v/v) F-12 Nutrient Mixture (Ham)-Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium, 5% fetal bovine serum, 0.4 g/mL hydrocortisone,
5 g/mL insulin, 8.4 ng/mL cholera toxin, 10 ng/mL epidermal growth factor
(or 10 ng/mL GMCSF), and 24 g/mL adenine]. The ROCK inhibitor was added
at 10 M and the media was exchanged every 3 days. The generated MDSC did
propagate as measured by CFSE staining of the generated MDSC; however,
the generated MDSCs completely lost their ability to inhibit T cells by
day 11 in culture. In conclusion, generated MDSCs can be propagated in
culture but lose their ability to suppress T cells in the absence of a
simulated tumor microenvironment and the presence of a Rho kinase
inhibitor.

