Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and validation of novel serum glycoprotein biomarkers
for Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma


BACKGROUND: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is one of the most rapidly
increasing cancers globally. The majority of EAC cases are diagnosed at
very late stages during pathogenesis hence BACKGROUND: Esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) is one of the most rapidly increasing cancers
globally. The majority of EAC cases are diagnosed at very late stages
during pathogenesis hence <15% of the patients survive 5 year
post-diagnosis. There is an urgent need to improve diagnosis of EAC and
its pre-cancer metaplastic condition, Barrett's esophagus (BE). BE
patients are monitored using upper gastro-esophageal endoscopy with
biopsy for early neoplastic changes. However, being an asymptomatic
condition, it is very difficult to identify BE patients for screening.
Moreover, endoscopy is unsuitable for population screening due to high
cost, requirement of technical expertise and patient non-compliance. The
aim of this project is to identify serum biomarkers for diagnosis of BE
and EAC, with the goal of translating to blood tests.APPROACH &
METHODOLOGY: We focused on alterations in circulatory protein
glycosylation, using a panel of 20 lectins to isolate different glycan
structures on serum glycoproteins, as reported recently [1, 2]. Serum
samples from healthy (n = 9), BE (n = 10) and EAC (n = 10) patient groups
were analyzed by lectin magnetic bead array-coupled mass spectrometry
(LeMBA-MS/MS) [1, 2]. Data analysis was performed using a customized
database and analysis package GlycoSelect which incorporates outlier
detection and sparse Partial Least Squares regression discriminant
analysis (sPLS-DA) [3].RESULTS & DISCUSSION: We identified a ranked list
of candidate glycobiomarkers that distinguish a) EAC from BE b) BE from
healthy and c) EAC from healthy group. In general, glycoproteins bound
several lectins, reflecting heterogeneity and multiplicity of
glycosylation. Specific glycan structure changes were observed as loss
and gain of binding to a single lectin while maintaining binding to other
lectins. Top two candidate biomarkers were validated using orthogonal
validation technique LeMBA-immunoblotting in an independent patient
cohort (n = 80). The biomarkers showed Area under Receiver Operating
Characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.74 to discriminate EAC from BE and 0.71
to discriminate BE from healthy patient group. Future work will validate
all candidate protein-lectin pairs using lectin-affinity array coupled
with triple quadrupole quantitative mass spectrometry measurements for
the independent patient cohort. The specificity and sensitivity of panels
of glycoprotein biomarkers will be determined for formulating a serum
screening test for BE and EAC.[1] Choi et al., Electrophoresis 32,
3564-3575 (2011)[2] Loo et al., J Proteome Res 9, 5496-5500 (2010)[3] L
Cao et al., BMC Bioinformatics 12, 253-268 (2011)

