Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RARRES1 is a modulator of angiogenesis and autophagy


Retinoic Acid Receptor Responder (RARRES1) is a putative tumor suppressor
gene that exerts its tumor suppressor function via unknown mechanisms.
Determining the molecular mechanisms involved in the function of RARRES1
in important biological processes, angiogenesis and autophagy, is the
focus of our study and may delineate molecular targets for therapeutic
intervention.Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from
pre-existing vessels, is a vital requirement for the growth and
metastasis of tumors. It constitutes a pivotal step in cancer
progression. For the tumors to grow and have the propensity to
metastasize they have to undergo the angiogenic switch. This switch
depends on the dynamic balance between the pro-angiogenic factors (such
as HIF-1 and VEGF) and the anti-angiogenic factors (such as
thrombospondin, VEGI). Stimuli for angiogenesis include hypoxia,
inflammation or genetic variations in tumor suppressors. We sought to
determine if RARRES1 expression could modulate angiogenesis. Our results
indicate that overexpression of RARRES1 in HUVECs severely impairs in
vitro angiogenesis. The data also indicate reduced levels of angiogenic
markers and signaling molecules, phospho-VEGF-R and phospho-p38 MAPK. The
results demonstrate that RARRES1 expression significantly lowers
H2O2-induced ROS production, a known inducer of
angiogenesis.Bioinformatics searches of RARRES1 revealed a potential MAPK
binding site, the Erk-D domain and multiple PKC phosphorylation sites.
PKC signaling (ERK phosphorylation) has been implicated in cellular
autophagy. It is an evolutionarily conserved self-degradative process
that plays a housekeeping role by eliminating damaged organelles and
misfolded or aggregated proteins via the lysosomal degradation pathway.
Deregulation of autophagy has been reported in various cancers.
Interestingly, our data indicates that RARRES1 expression induces
phospho-ERK in multiple cancer cell lines. We hypothesized that the
increased phospho-ERK levels in RARRES1 expressing cells would result in
autophagy induction. Our results demonstrate that RARRES1 expression
induces the expression of autophagy markers, ATG3, beclin and LC-3.In
summary, the data presented here indicate that (a) loss of RARRES1
results in increased ROS production and angiogenesis by p38 MAPK
activation and (b) autophagy defects in RARRES1-deficient cancer cells
facilitates tumor progression. Our study implicates that RARRES1 may be a
novel anti-angiogenic molecule that induces autophagic response. Future
studies will determine the mechanism between these important
cell-biological processes and if RARRES1 may serve as a target for
therapeutic intervention both in cancer and in angiogenesis-related
disorders.

