Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel series of androgen receptor antagonists with
potential therapeutic applications in castration-resistant prostate cancer


The human androgen receptor (AR) represents a well-established drug
target for prostate cancer treatment. All clinically used antiandrogens,
such as Bicalutamide and Enzalutamide, possess similar chemical
structures and bind to the AR in the androgen binding site (ABS). These
AR antagonists are initially effective, but resistance invariably
developed in the castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Even in
late-stage patients, the AR activity is still persistent in the
progression of the disease. Thus, there is a continuing need for novel
chemical classes of AR antagonists that could overcome the drug
resistance.In this study, we performed a virtual screening against the AR
ABS, and identified novel AR antagonists with chemical structures
completely different from existing antiandrogens. A
10-(4-Hydroxybenzylidene)anthracen-9(10H)-one compound was discovered
that not only effectively inhibits AR transcription and strongly
displaces androgen in the ABS, but induces AR degradation in prostate
cancer cells. Starting from the initial hit compound, a series of
10-benzylidene-10H-anthracen-9-ones were synthesized and evaluated by in
vitro assays. A close analogue with enhanced potency was identified as a
lead compound, which demonstrated strong androgen displacement potency,
effective AR transcriptional inhibition, and a profound ability to cause
degradation of AR. Notably, it exhibited significant activity against
MDV3100-resistant prostate cancer cells. This lead compound was evaluated
in both non-castrated and castration-resistant LNCaP xenograft models,
and demonstrated significant effect on inhibiting tumor growth and
reducing prostate specific antigen (PSA). This series of compounds were
predicted to adopt a different binding mode from current antiandrogens,
which may circumvent the resistance rendered by identified
gain-of-function mutations. Further development of this series of AR
antagonists may have great therapeutic potential in CRPC.

