Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Laminin-5 gamma-2 (LAMC2) is highly expressed in anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma and is associated with tumor progression, migration and
invasion by modulating signaling of EGFR


Context: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is an aggressive malignancy
having no effective treatment. Laminin subunit gamma-2 (LAMC2) is an
epithelial basement membrane protein involved in cell migration and
tumour invasion and might represent an ideal target for the development
of novel therapeutic approaches for ATC.Objective: Study the role of
LAMC2 in ATC tumorigenesis.Design: LAMC2 expression was evaluated by
RT-PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry in tumor specimens,
adjacent non-cancerous tissues and cell lines. shRNA approach was used to
investigate the effect of LAMC2 knockdown on tumorigenesis of
ATC.Results: LAMC2 was highly expressed in ATC samples and cell lines
compared to normal thyroid tissues. Silencing LAMC2 by shRNA in ATC cells
moderately inhibited cell growth in liquid culture and dramatically
decreased growth in soft agar and in xenografts growing in
immunodeficient mice. Silencing LAMC2 caused cell cycle arrest and
significantly suppressed migration, invasion and wound healing of ATC
cells. Rescue experiments by overexpressing LAMC2 in LAMC2 knockdown
cells, reversed the inhibitory effects as shown by increased cell
proliferation and colony formation. Microarray data demonstrated that
LAMC2 shRNA significantly altered expression of genes associated with
migration, invasion, proliferation and survival. Immunoprecipitation and
co-localization experiments showed that LAMC2 bound to EGFR in ATC cells.
Silencing LAMC2 partially blocked EGF-mediated activation of EGFR and its
downstream pathway. Interestingly, cetuximab (EGFR blocking antibody) or
EGFR siRNA additively enhanced the anti-proliferative activity of the
LAMC2 knockdown ATC cells compared to control cells.Conclusions: To our
knowledge, this is the first report investigating the effect of LAMC2 on
cell growth, cell cycle, migration, invasion and EGFR signaling in ATC
cells, suggesting that LAMC2 may be a potential therapeutic target for
treatment of ATC.

