Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel camptothecin analog and antiapoptotic protein inhibitor
FL118 appears to be a great backbone platform for development of
personalized anticancer drugs


We recently characterized a novel camptothecin analog FL118.
Interestingly, different from the two clinically used camptothecin
analogs irinotecan and topotecan, which are topoisomerase 1 (Top1)
inhibitors, FL118 appears to be a poor Top1 inhibitor at its therapeutic
dose range. Instead, FL118 selectively inhibits multiple cancer survival
and proliferation-associated antiapoptotic proteins including survivin,
Mcl-1, XIAP, and cIAP2. We have demonstrated that genetic knockdown or
overexpression of survivin, Mcl-1, XIAP, or cIAP2 modulates FL118's
ability to inhibit cancer cell growth and induce apoptosis. FL118 is able
to eliminate both small and large human tumor xenografts in animal
models. Importantly, FL118 effectively overcomes topotecan
treatment-induced resistance of human colon tumor in animal models.
Pharmacokinetics (PK) studies indicated that FL118 prefers to be
accumulated in tumor and rapidly cleared in blood stream in animal
models. Furthermore, our most recent studies demonstrated that
maintenance of a free hydroxyl group in the lactone ring of FL118 is
critical for its antitumor activity, and the superior antitumor efficacy
of FL118 heavily depends on its steric configuration (Zhao et al.,
Molecular Pharmaceutics). Based on the current observation of FL118
properties, we hypothesize that FL118 is an ideal lead for development of
novel analogs that may possess distinct antitumor selectivity to overcome
different treatment resistance. In this regard, we tested 146 new
camptothecin analogs, which were synthesized based on either the FL118
core structure or the camptothecin core structure, in four cancer cell
lines and two normal cell lines. We identified 19 top candidates that
showed inhibition of cancer cell growth and induction of apoptosis that
are better than or comparable to FL118. Intriguingly, all of the 19 top
compounds possess the FL118 core structure. Further investigation of the
19 compounds using cancer cells with distinct treatment resistant
backgrounds indicated that these compounds showed distinct antitumor
selectivity among different treatment resistant cancer cells. Therefore,
while our finding would need further investigation using in vivo human
tumor animal models, we propose to develop a series of FL118 analogs for
personalized cancer treatment to overcome different treatment resistance.

