Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic inhibition of growth of triple-negative breast cancer
cells by co-targeting PARP and HDAC


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) have a poor prognosis after it has
spread beyond the breast. Existing therapies remain inadequate. Despite
similarities with BRCA-mutated breast cancers (such as high sensitivity
to cisplatin reflecting defects in DNA repair pathways), Poly ADP Ribose
Polymerase (PARP) inhibitors failed to improve prognosis of
non-BRCA-mutated TNBC. Histone DeACetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are targeted
therapies that can modulate expression of genes by affecting chromatin
conformation, including down-regulation of genes encoding proteins
involved in Homologous Recombination (HR). A previous study noted that
the HDAC inhibitor, vorinostat, can induce DNA damage which normal but
not cancer cells can repair. Thus, our goal was to determine if HDAC
inhibitors could sensitize TNBC cells to PARP inhibitors.We studied the
effect of olaparib in combination with vorinostat in 8 TNBC cell lines.
Median IC50 for olaparib and for vorinostat were 146M and 6.4M,
respectively. Remarkedly, the combination of 2M of vorinostat decreased
the median IC50 for olaparib by 3.47-fold (from 146M to 45M, p=.033).
Further studies showed the drug combination was synergistic for seven of
eight cell lines with an average Combination Index (CI) of 0.62 ( 0.20),
using CompuSyn software. Synergism was also observed with belinostat
(another HDAC inhibitor) when combined with olaparib. Furthermore,
co-treatment with vorinostat and olaparib drastically inhibited
clonogenic growth of TNBC cells in soft-agar. Also, olaparib (10M) and
vorinostat (2M) markedly increased G2 arrest (46%0.8 after 48 hours,
p=.033) and significantly increased the percentage of apoptotic cells
(17%1.91 cells positive as measured by Annexin V - Propidium Iodine
staining after 48 hours, p=.022), compared to either drug alone using
MDA-MB-157 TNBC cells. Similar trends were observed in two other TNBC
lines (MDA-MB-231 and HCC1937). Regarding mechanisms involved in this
observed synergism of the two drugs: #1 expression of several proteins
involved in HR (RAD51, Chk2 and BRCA1) were decreased; #2 P-H2AX
expression markedly increased with combination treatment suggesting the
two drugs caused greater DNA breaks. As a result, the P-H2AX/RAD51 ratio
increased when the two drugs were used together (occurring in both
BRCA1-wt and -mutant TNBC lines).Our results provide evidence that
treatment with a HDAC inhibitor can sensitize TNBC cell lines to olaparib
in BRCA-mutated as well as in BRCA-wt cells, irrespectively of their
initial sensitivities to olaparib alone. Both drugs are at an
advanced-stage in clinical development and are well tolerated in humans,
offering the opportunity to test the association in a clinical trial.

