Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel role of STAT-3 in anoikis resistance and metastasis in
melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo


Anoikis is an anchorage-independent cell death. Resistance to anoikis is
one of the key features of metastatic cells. The role of STAT-3 in
anoikis resistance in various melanoma cells was analyzed in the current
study. Significant proportion of SK-MEL-28, SK-MEL-2, MeWo, SK-MEL-5 and
B16-F0 cells resisted anoikis when grown under anchorage-independent
conditions. Cells that resisted anoikis were observed to a have higher
rate of migration and invasion as compared to the cells grown under
anchorage dependent conditions. The anoikis resistant cells also
exhibited significantly higher expression and phosphorylation of STAT-3
at Tyr 705 than the cells that were attached to the basement membrane.
Treatment of these cells with IL-6, a cytokine which phosphorylates
STAT-3, prevented the induction of anoikis. STAT-3 inhibitors AG490 and
PL induced anoikis in a concentration-dependent manner in anoikis
resistant cells, whereas IL-6 blocked anoikis. Over-expression of STAT-3
by transfection in SK-MEL-28 and SK-MEL-2 cells significantly increased
the anoikis resistance, confirming the role of STAT-3 in anoikis
resistance. On the other hand, silencing STAT-3 in SK-MEL-28, SK-MEL-2,
SK-MEL-5 and MeWo cells decreased the potential of cancer cells to resist
anoikis. Furthermore, STAT-3 (-/-) melanoma cells were more sensitive to
anoikis, as compared to cells overexpressing STAT-3 (+/+) cells. STAT-3
(-/-) SK-MEL-28 cells and the SK-MEL-28 cells that were treated with PL
completely failed to develop tumors when injected subcutaneously in
immune-compromised mice. Moreover, these cells also failed to metastasize
when injected intravenously. On the other hand, anoikis resistant wild
type cells not only formed aggressive tumors subcutaneously but also
highly metastasized when injected intravenously. The metastasis was
confirmed by H & E staining. In summary, our results establish STAT-3 as
a critical player that renders anoikis resistance to pancreatic cancer
cells and enhance their metastasis potential. [Supported in part by R01
grant CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer Institute].

