Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining the apoptotic pathways required for the EZH2
inhibitor, GSK-126, in a mouse model of B cell lymphoma


Background: Approximately 40% of B-cell lymphomas are characterized by
the presence of recurrent chromosomal translocation affecting the
Myc/8q24 locus. Further, similar breakpoints may also occur as secondary
events giving rise to Double Hit (DH) lymphomas. DH lymphomas frequently
involve Myc with concurrent, Bcl-2 or Bcl6 translocations. These Myc
associated B cell lymphomas are linked with poor survival, with a median
overall survival of only 0.2-1.5 years, and novel therapeutic strategies
are urgently required. EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and is shown to correlate with disease
progression in many cancer types. EZH2 is involved in gene repression via
tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and its expression is
demonstrated to be increased by Myc, highlighting a potential therapeutic
target towards Myc driven B cell lymphomas. In this study we determined
the antitumor activity of a specific EZH2 inhibitor, GSK-126. Taking
advantage of the well characterized E-myc B cell lymphoma mouse model, we
screened tumors with defined genetic alterations in apoptotic pathways to
determine GSK-126 antitumor activity. Methods: The anti-tumor effects of
GSK126 or ectopic expression of an EZH2 mutant deficient for histone
methyltransferase activity (SET-EZH2) was assessed towards E-myc B cell
lymphomas, and compound mutant B cell lymphomas (E-myc/Bcl2,
E-myc/p53-/-, E-myc/p19-/-, and E-myc/apaf1-/-) by uptake of propidium
iodide. Further apoptotic assessment was performed using annexin, cell
cycle analysis, mitochondria damage and caspase activity by flow
cytometry. GSK-126 inhibition of EZH2 activity was determined by H3K27me3
expression by immunoblot. In vivo anti-tumor activity was determined by
transplanting E-myc lymphomas and E-myc compound mutants expressing
control of SET-EZH2 plasmids to wild type mice. Overall survival was
determined by Kaplan-Meier analysis. Results: Preliminary data
demonstrates that GSK-126 treatment of E-myc lymphomas results in rapid
apoptotic cell death in a dose dependent manner. GSK-126 mediated
apoptosis is independent of p53, though requires mitochondria damage.
Further experiments described above are currently being performed.
Conclusion: Our current data demonstrate that EZH2 inhibition induces
apoptosis in E-myc B cell lymphomas independent of p53, but requires
mitochondrial damage. Overall, this study will lead to a more
comprehension of the apoptotic mechanisms underlying GSK-126 therapeutic
effect and will provide translational tools to predict the therapeutic
response in DH lymphomas overexpressing Bcl2 or Bcl6.

