Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of miR-17-92 cluster and its target, Frabin, with
development of aggressive prostate cancer


Androgen blockade therapy has become the mainstay for advanced prostate
cancer. However, prolonged androgen blockade leads to outgrowth of
androgen independent (AI) cells and the development of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The transition to androgen independence
can occur through several adaptive mechanisms and usually results in the
acquisition of a more aggressive phenotype, compared to their androgen
sensitive progenitors. Recently, the role of MicroRNAs (miRNAs) has been
demonstrated in regulation of gene expression for cancer progression,
metastasis, and resistance to therapeutic strategies. However, the role
of miRNAs in progression of androgen sensitive prostate cancer to CRPC
has not been clearly defined. To study this transition, we subjected
androgen sensitive (AS) LNCaP prostate cancer cells to androgen
deprivation and androgen receptor antagonist bicalutamide (CDX) therapy
until a subset of cells (CDXR) survived. Genome-wide expression profiling
of miRNAs identified a subset of miRNAs that are significantly
deregulated in these cells. The miR-17-92 cluster is one of the groups of
miRNAs that becomes down regulated as the cancer cells progresses towards
androgen blockade therapy (ADT) resistance. More than a 4 to 24-fold down
regulation of these miRNAs were noted in CDXR compared to AS LNCaP cells.
We monitored the expression status of the miR-17-92 cluster in patient
tumor tissues, which showed down regulation of these miRNAs in 64-82% of
the tissues tested. Target prediction database searches identified
FGD4/Frabin, a novel RhoGEF as one of the targets of this cluster.
Previous studies have shown Frabin to be involved in filopodia formation
and cell migration through interaction with CDC42. Beyond this, little is
known about Frabin function in cancer or whether it is involved in the
development of CRPC. Western blot analysis of treated cell lysates
confirmed increased expression of Frabin in AI and CDXR LNCaP cells.
Analysis in tissue microarray (267 cores) showed a significant up
regulation of Frabin in advanced prostate cancer tissues including AI
specimens. More than 90% of the AI tissues and 88% of tissues with 8-10
Gleason scores showed a median staining intensity between 2-3-fold higher
compared to BPH tissues. Ectopic expression of mir-17-92 clusters in AI
PC3 cells down regulated Frabin expression and improved sensitivity of
these cells to docetaxel (DTX) treatments.Our results show a novel
involvement of a miRNA cluster/mRNA axis in development of AI and
aggressive prostate cancer. This study also provides important insight
into the molecular mechanism of development of CRPC and identifies
potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for management of advanced
prostate cancer.

