Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of TNF-induced NFB activation by XAF1 via
inhibition of the TRADD/TRAF2/RIP1 signal complex


Introduction:X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP)-associated
factor 1 (XAF1) was originally implicated as a tumor suppressor due to
its inhibitory effect on anti-apoptotic XIAP. It contains an N-terminus
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor associated factor (TRAF) Zn finger
domain that is highly conserved in TRAF family members. XAF1 expression
can be induced by TNF; however, its role in the signal cascade initiated
by TNF/TNF receptor (TNFR) 1 has not yet been clearly elucidated. Here we
report that XAF1 can negatively regulate TNF-induced nuclear factor kappa
B (NFB) activation via inhibition of signaling molecule TRAF2 and signal
complex formation downstream of TNF/TNFR1.Methods:To investigate the
effects of XAF1 on TNF signal transduction machinery, we assessed
TNF-induced expression of the NFB response gene IL-8 by real-time PCR,
and phosphorylation of inhibitor of NFB (IB) by immunoblotting with an
anti-phospho-IB antibody, in HEK293 cells with an inducible XAF1
expression vector. Interaction between TRAF2 or RIP1 and XAF1 was
investigated by immunoprecipitation. NFB transcriptional activation
potential, induced by ectopic TRAF2 or RIP1 with or without co-expressed
XAF1, was quantified by luciferase assays. Inhibition of TRAF2
ubiquitination by XAF1 was also assessed by immunoblot. Transient
transfection of plasmids expressing TRADD, TRAF2, RIP1 and/or XAF1
followed by immunoprecipition was performed to further investigate the
role of XAF1 on the signal complex formation.Results:Luciferase assays
and real-time PCR studies showed that XAF1 inhibited TNF-induced NFB
activation and IL-8 expression. Both TRAF2 and RIP1 interacted with XAF1
according to our immunoprecipitation results but only TRAF2 activity was
inhibited by XAF1. Poly-ubiquitination of TRAF2 was attenuated when XAF1
was present. In addition, immunoprecipitation and immunoblot data showed
that XAF1 interfered with RIP1/TRADD association and regulated TRADD and
RIP1 turnover.Discussion:Our data demonstrated an inhibitory effect of
XAF1 on TNF-induced NFB activation and gene expression. A possible
mechanism may be via inhibition of TRAF2, an E3 ubiquitin ligase
responsible for signal transduction leading to NFB activation. XAF1
inhibited both TRAF2-mediated NFB activation and TRAF2 ubiquitination,
which is essential for its signal delivery function. XAF1 also interacted
with RIP1 yet did not block RIP1-induced NFB promoter activity. However,
the binding of RIP1 to TRADD, an adaptor protein of TNFR1-mediated signal
pathway, was disrupted by XAF1. Furthermore, degradation of TRADD and
RIP1 was accelerated when XAF1 was present. These data suggested that
XAF1 may act as a TNF-induced negative regulator of NFB activation by
inhibiting TRAF2 ubiquitination and by regulating the integrity of the
signal complex of TRADD/TRAF2/RIP1.

