Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of thermochemotherapy using cisplatin and
ferucarbotran (Resovist) in head and neck cancer


Background: Radical surgery for patients with advanced head and neck
cancer causes dysfunctions as well as decreases quality of life. To
overcome this issue, we developed a new combination therapy of cisplatin
and inductive hyperthermia using ferucarbotran (Resovist). Ferucarbotran,
which is made of superparamagnetic iron oxide, generates heat when
exposed to an alternating magnetic fields (AMF). Herein, we explored
whether ferucarbotran could be used as a heat source for hyperthermia
upon exposure to AMF in the presence of cisplatin. Our aim is to evaluate
the simultaneous therapeutic efficacy of chemotherapy and inductive
hyperthermia for head and neck cancer.Materials and Methods: OSC-19 and
HSC-3, human oral cancer cell lines, were used in this study. Cell
proliferation was assessed by methyl thiazolyl tetrazorium (MTT) assay.
The intracellular level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was measured
using fluorescent dye 2, 7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate.
Apoptotic cells were stained with Annexin V, allophycocyanin conjugate
and 7-amino-actinomycin D, and measured by fluorescence activated cell
sorting (FACS), to evaluate early and late apoptosis. Thermal images and
temperature were obtained by thermograpy and thermometer. Alternating
magnetic fields were generated by a transistor-driven vertical coil at a
frequency of 308 KHz and electric current (EC) 250 A.Results:
Ferucarbotran generated heat in a dose- and time-dependent manner when
exposed to an AMF, suggesting that ferucarbotran could be used as a heat
source for hyperthermia. As we expected, Cisplatin suppressed
proliferation of OSC-19 and HSC-3 cells in a dose-dependent manner, not
only furucarbtran. First, we performed MTT assay and ROS generation assay
to evaluate whether hyperthermia effect enhanced anti-cancer effect in
the presence of cisplatin. Simply incubation at 42 C for one hour
enhanced the anti-cancer effect and ROS generation in the presence of
cisplatin. Cisplatin induced apoptosis of OSC-19 and HSC-3 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Ferucarbotran further promoted cisplatin-induced
apoptosis compared to cisplatin alone, when exposed to an AMF for an
hour. Thus, the combination of cisplatin with ferucarbotran /AMF was more
effective than cisplatin alone, suggesting that we could reduce the
amount of cisplatin in clinical usage.Conclusion: Our findings suggest
that combination therapy of cisplatin and ferucarbotran in an AMF may be
used to develop a new combination therapy for head and neck cancer.

