Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of SPARC and radiation suppresses HSP27 and induces
p21(CIP1/WAF1) in neuroblastoma tumor cells


Neuroblastoma (NBL) is the third most common malignancy in children and
accounts for more than 15% of cancer-related deaths in children in the
US. Approximately 50% of patients present with advanced-stage and/or high
risk disease. Despite significant intensification of conventional
chemotherapy regimens, the long-term survival rates for these children
remain less than 40%. A somewhat improved outcome has been obtained with
multimodality therapeutic approaches including chemotherapy, surgery,
autologous bone marrow transplantation, radiation therapy and use of
biological agents. However, long-term survival rates for children with
high-risk disease remain poor and survivors experience significant
immediate and late toxicities which further limits conventional
chemotherapy dose intensification. Novel biological therapies are
therefore much needed. Secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine
(SPARC), also known as osteonectin or BM-40, belongs to the matricellular
family of secreted proteins, which also includes thrombospondin 1 and 2,
osteopontin, and tenascins C and X. The biological functions of SPARC are
known to be variable in human cancers. In neuroblastoma however, SPARC
expression has been found to be associated with impaired tumor growth and
angiogenesis. Our previous studies showed that overexpression of SPARC
induced autophagy-mediated apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells. In the
present study we have attempted to decipher the mechanisms of this
apoptotic induction. We used two neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-BE2
(p53mt) and NB1691 (p53wt) and transfected them with plasmid
overexpressing Myc-DDK-tagged SPARC with and without ionizing radiation.
We observed that overexpression of SPARC accompanied with ionizing
radiation (5Gy) suppressed HSP27 in NB1691 (5-fold) and SK-N-BE(2)
(2-fold) cells. Further we also observed that expression of
p21(CIP1/WAF1) was increased in SPARC overexpressed radiated (5Gy) cells;
4-fold in NB1691 cells and 0.5-fold SK-N-BE(2) cells. Levels of cyclin B
were also found to be increased in both SK-N-BE2 (3-fold) and NB1691
(5-fold) after exposure to radiation. However SPARC overexpression in
radiated cells caused a decrease in levels of Cyclin B in NB1691 (-3
fold) and SK-N-BE(2) (-2 fold) cells. Cell cycle analysis revealed that
radiation induced G2-phase arrest in both NB1691 and SK-N-BE(2) cells.
This G2 phase arrest was followed by decreased mitochondrial membrane
potential () in SPARC overexpressed cells when compared to controls. We
further observed that suppression of native SPARC by siRNA in both
SK-N-BE2 and NB1691 cells altered their sensitivity to radiation as
determined by MTT assay. Our results demonstrate that SPARC expression
regulates radiation sensitivity in NB1691 (p53wt) and to a lesser extent
in SK-N-BE2 (p53mt) cells via modulation of the heat shock protein HSP27
and the DNA damage response molecule p21(CIP1/WAF1).

