Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel assay to predict cisplatin resistance in cancer cells


Background: Cisplatin-based chemotherapy is the standard regimen for
patients with newly diagnosed advanced head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, chemo-resistance to cisplatin is frequent,
unpredictable, and contributes to treatment failure in over 90% of HNSCC
patients with metastasis. Cisplatin acts mainly through the induction of
various types of DNA damage. The mechanisms of cisplatin resistance
include reduced uptake, increased DNA damage repair and decreased
apoptosis. DNA repair capacity is the most promising predictor of
cisplatin sensitivity, but, to date, no assay has been able to accurately
predict the probability of a given tumor to respond to platinum-based
chemotherapy. Recently, we developed a novel and highly sensitive
primer-anchored DNA damage detection assay (PADDA) that accurately
quantifies the in vivo levels of DNA damage. Here, we used PADDA to
quantify DNA damage induced by cisplatin and assessed PADDA's ability to
predict tumor cell response to cisplatin.Aim: (1) To document PADDA's
sensitivity to quantify in vivo oxidative DNA damage induced by free
radicals, such as those induced by cisplatin treatment. (2) To determine
PADDA's ability to quantify DNA damage and repair after cisplatin
treatment, and therefore predict cisplatin resistance in cancer
cells.Methods: Induced oxidative DNA damage was quantified in human
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells exposed to diverse doses of H2O2 and
allowed to recover for 0, 3 and 24 h. To determine the in vivo levels of
cisplatin induced DNA damage, SCC cell lines were exposed to escalating
doses of cisplatin and allowed to recover for up to 48 h. Overall DNA
damage was measured using PADDA on a high-throughput setting. DNA double
strand breaks were detected by immunofluorescence analysis of -H2AX. Cell
viability and cell growth were determined by MTT assay. Data were
analyzed by Student's t test and exact non-parametric tests.Results:
PADDA detected a dose-dependent increase in oxidative DNA damage induced
by H2O2 and documented an inverse correlation between damage repair and
H2O2 dose. Cisplatin treatment induced DNA damage detectable by PADDA in
all doses and SCC cell lines. A significant decrease in cell viability
and cell growth was observed in both cisplatin sensitive and resistance
cell lines up to 48 h. However, a linear dose-dependent increase in in
vivo DNA damage was observed only in cisplatin sensitive
cells.Conclusion: We show for the first time that PADDA is highly
sensitive to quantify cisplatin-induced DNA damage and subsequent repair.
These types of data are essential to determine whether resistance to
cisplatin is due to increased DNA damage removal or damage tolerance and
will facilitate the development of individualized strategies targeting
drug resistance. Of high clinical relevance, PADDA detects a
dose-dependent increase in DNA damage only in cisplatin sensitive cells,
suggesting that PADDA can be used to predict patient response to
cisplatin therapy.

