Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropeptide Y Y5 receptor in neuroblastoma chemoresistance


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric tumor with heterogeneous phenotypes.
While low stage tumors carry favorable prognosis, over 50% of high risk
NB relapses after treatment with fatal outcome. Thus, developing
therapies targeting this refractory form of NB remains an unsolved
clinical problem. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a sympathetic neurotransmitter
released from NB cells. High systemic levels of NPY are associated with
poor clinical outcome of the disease, which is in agreement with its
proliferative effect in NB cells and angiogenic properties. While all of
the above functions of NPY are mediated mainly by its Y2 receptor (Y2R),
predominantly expressed in NB and endothelial cells, some NB cell lines
additionally express NPY Y5R. The goal of our study was to elucidate
functions of Y5R/NPY pathway in NB. We have shown that, in contrast to
the constitutively expressed Y2R, expression of Y5R was induced in
pro-apoptotic conditions, such as serum deprivation, hypoxia or lack of
attachment. Under such cellular stress, blocking Y5R by its selective
antagonist or siRNA augmented NB cell death, suggesting pro-survival
activity of Y5R/NPY axis. This effect was associated with a decrease in
activity of p44/42 MAPK, a known mediator of NPY neuroprotective actions.
This anti-apoptotic activity of Y5R contributed to chemoresistance of NB
cells. Expression of Y5R and NPY was significantly increased in NB cells
treated in vitro with chemotherapy. This effect was more pronounced in
cells derived from relapsing tumors of patients that were previously
treated with chemotherapy, suggesting pre-activation of the pathways
inducing Y5R/NPY expression in these cells. Additionally, these
refractory NB cell lines had elevated basal levels of Y5R and NPY
expression, as compared to corresponding cell lines derived from the same
patients at diagnosis. In line with this observation, 100% of surviving
NB cells in tissues derived from chemotherapy-treated NB tumors was
highly positive for Y5R, while in non-treated tumors only single,
isolated Y5R-positive cells were observed. Blocking Y5R in chemoresistant
NB cells rich in this receptor sensitized them to chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis, as shown by a decrease in the number of viable cells and
increase in caspase 3/7 activity. Consequently, Y5R significantly
inhibited growth of NB xenografts derived from chemoresistant NB cells,
which was associated with a 4-fold increase in cell death, while no
significant changes in the levels of NB cell proliferation and tumor
vascularization was observed. In summary, Y5R/NPY axis is an inducible
pro-survival pathway activated in NB under cellular stress. This
Y5R-mediated anti-apoptotic effect contributes to NB chemoresistance,
implicating this receptor as a novel therapeutic target for patients with
refractory NB, thus far lacking adequate treatment.

