Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel dynamic delivery system enabling high efficiency
transfection of cells


Transfection is an enabling technique for cellular and molecular
biologists to study expression and knockdown of gene expression. Over the
past decade, many researchers have utilized liposomal systems to deliver
nucleic acids; however, this method has many caveats including low
transfection efficiency and high cellular toxicity in some cell types. To
address these shortcomings, Mirus Bio has developed a novel non-liposomal
technology called the TransIT-X2 Dynamic Delivery System. This unique
polymeric delivery system is able to effectively condense negatively
charged nucleic acids (plasmid DNA and/or siRNA), enter cells and break
out of the endosomal compartment, a critical barrier for transfection.
The plasmid and siRNA can then be delivered to their respective
functional locations, the nucleus and the cytoplasm.In this study, we
demonstrate functional transfection of labeled plasmid DNA co-delivered
with labeled siRNA illustrating the dual abilities of the TransIT-X2
Dynamic Delivery System. Additionally, extensive head-to-head comparisons
with a popular liposomal reagent, Lipofectamine 2000 were performed using
a luciferase expression assay in 30 cell types; TransIT-X2 demonstrated
superior performance in 20 cell types with 11 showing greater than 2-fold
higher expression compared to Lipofectamine 2000. Transfection efficiency
of green fluorescent protein (GFP) was measured using flow cytometry and
visualized by microscopy; most cell types had greater than 50% GFP
efficiency. Lastly, gene knockdown after delivery of siRNA or miRNA was
assessed. Two endogenous genes, GAPDH and AHA1, were targeted for siRNA
knockdown and mRNA levels were assessed by qRT-PCR. miRNA function was
assessed by the decrease in the miR-1 target mRNA PTK9. The TransIT-X2
Dynamic Delivery System shows effective knockdown via siRNA or miRNA.The
TransIT-X2 Dynamic Delivery System offers researchers exceptional
broad-spectrum transfection of plasmid DNA and siRNA. This cutting edge,
non-liposomal polymeric delivery method enhances endocytic release of the
transfection complexes allowing researchers to obtain very high
transfection efficiencies.

