Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Three-dimensional in vivo photoacoustic tracking of targeted
nanoparticles in a pancreatic cancer model


The use of targeted gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) has shown tremendous
promise in the early detection and improved therapy of cancer. Successful
development and implementation of these new theranostic approaches,
however, depends on sufficient transvascular migration and specific
accumulation of AuNPs to extravascular tumor tissue. This study utilized
photoacoustic (PA) imaging to track - in three dimensions and through 24
hours - the extravasation and accumulation of targeted AuNPs in a
subcutaneous murine model of prostate cancer. AuNPs (nanorods; 760-nm
peak) targeting the Luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone receptor were
systemically injected into three mice bearing PC-3 human prostate cancer
tumors; as a control, three additional mice were injected with PEGylated
AuNPs. For all particle-tracking studies, multi-wavelength (680, 760,
800, 920, & 940 nm), volumetric (spherical volume with 25.6-mm diameter)
PA imaging was conducted at pre-injection, post-injection, 15-min,
60-min, 240-min, and 24-hr time points; the imaging volume contained the
tumor and the spleen (control). Following imaging, tumors were excised
and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) of samples and
two-photon imaging of histological sections was performed to confirm AuNP
accumulation and diffusion, respectively. Volumetric PA perfusion
assessment was then conducted by monitoring the wash-out of indocyanine
green (ICG) in near real-time (0.25 Hz for 180 s post-injection). All PA
imaging studies were performed on the Nexus 128 preclinical imaging
system (Endra Inc., Ann Arbor, MI). Spectral unmixing of the
multi-wavelength PA data was achieved to segment AuNPs and
deoxy-/oxyhemoglobin (i.e. for local hypoxia assessment). Accumulation
and extravasation data of the targeted AuNPs in the tumor were then
compared to tumor perfusion data, PA-derived tumor hypoxia data,
PEGylated AuNP accumulation data in the tumor, AuNP accumulation data in
the spleen, and ICP-MS/histological analysis. Results of the study
establish that volumetric PA imaging with multi-wavelength unmixing is
able to track nanoparticle accumulation and extravasation throughout an
in vivo tumor model. The location and relative degree of particle
accumulation was also found to correlate with PA-based perfusion and
vascularity assessment. This study demonstrates that volumetric PA
imaging has the spatiotemporal resolution and sensitivity to track
extravasation of AuNPs in an in vivo tumor model. This in vivo tracking
ability - along with concurrent PA-based perfusion and hypoxia mapping -
could be of significant benefit in understanding and improving
nanoparticle targeting for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer.

