Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of gene body cytosine modifications in MGMT expression
and sensitivity to temozolomide


The goal of precision medicine is to use patient-specific markers to
design individualized treatment strategies. Promoter methylation of
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), which encodes for the DNA
repair protein MGMT, has been shown to predict glioblastoma patient
survival after treatment with temozolomide. Unfortunately, there is no
approved therapeutic alternative for patients whose tumors have an
unmethylated MGMT promoter and are unlikely to respond to temozolomide
treatment. Promoter methylation status of MGMT is used to predict
expression levels of MGMT, despite some observed discordance between
promoter methylation and protein levels. We hypothesized that
incorporation of MGMT gene body cytosine modification levels in models of
temozolomide response may lead to better prediction of MGMT expression
levels and, more importantly, improved methods of prediction for
glioblastoma patient response to temozolomide. Using 91 human
glioblastoma samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we observed
significant variation in MGMT expression levels in patients with an
unmethylated promoter, with higher levels of gene body cytosine
modification correlating with higher gene expression levels. Furthermore,
inducing hypomethylation across the MGMT gene body with decitabine
resulted in decreased levels of MGMT gene expression in lymphoblastoid
and glioblastoma cell lines. These data indicate an important functional
role for gene body cytosine modifications in maintaining gene expression
levels. We reasoned that the decrease in MGMT expression induced by
decitabine might render resistant glioblastoma cell lines more sensitive
to temozolomide. Indeed, MGMT-expressing glioblastoma cell lines
pre-treated with decitabine became significantly more sensitive to
temozolomide-induced cytotoxicity. Overall, our results demonstrate a
functional role for gene body cytosine modification in regulating gene
expression of MGMT and suggest that patients with an unmethylated MGMT
promoter could benefit from pre-treatment with decitabine to increase
tumor sensitivity to temozolomide.

