Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidized macrophage migration inhibitory factor (oxMIF) expressed
by tumor stroma and tumor cells, contributes to tumor growth


Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) was found to be upregulated
in many cancers and to act in para- and autocrine loops within the tumor
microenvironment. MIF has pleiotropic effects and plays a role in tumor
growth via several mechanisms. (i) MIF acts directly on tumor cells by
activating signaling pathways that promote cell proliferation and cell
survival. (ii) MIF facilitates invasion of the extracellular matrix and
induces angiogenesis and tumor vascularization. (iii) As a
proinflammatory cytokine, MIF is one of the mediators of tumor
micro-inflammation. However, MIF occurs in two immunologically distinct,
redox-dependent isoforms. In its reduced form (redMIF), MIF is abundantly
expressed and is present even in healthy subjects. In contrast, oxidized
MIF (oxMIF) is found in patients with cancer. Highly selective, fully
human monoclonal antibodies that specifically target oxMIF can
counter-regulate the biological functions of MIF, indicating that oxMIF
is the disease-related isoform of MIF and a relevant drug target. Animal
studies and in vitro studies revealed that novel human antibodies that
selectively target oxMIF, inhibit proliferation by reducing
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and AKT, promote apoptosis by activating
caspase 3, inhibit angiogenesis and metastasis by reducing VEGF
expression and blood vessel density within the tumor, and decrease
cancer-associated inflammation of the tumor by downregulating the
production of proinflammatory cytokines. We used MIF wild type (wt) and
MIF knockout (KO) murine pancreatic cancer cells and MIF wt and MIF KO
mice with C57Bl/6 background to dissect the contribution of stromal
versus tumor derived MIF to tumor progression. Transfer of a pancreatic
cancer cell line expressing MIF into wt mice or MIF KO mice resulted in
aggressive tumor growth, liver metastasis, and survival of approximately
30 days in both models. Similar results were obtained by transferring a
MIF KO pancreatic cancer cell line into MIF wt mice. Only transfer of a
MIF KO cell line into MIF KO mice led to improved overall survival of
approximately 80 days and completely abrogated metastasis. In a tumor
xenograft model, an intravenously applied oxMIF-specific fully human
antibody was able to penetrate the cancerous tissue and was detected in
the stroma and the tumor. We conclude that both tumor stroma and tumor
cells are an efficient source of oxMIF to promote tumor growth and
metastasis, and that anti-oxMIF antibodies are able to neutralize oxMIF
in the stroma and the tumor. A phase 1 clinical study of a novel human
antibody that selectively targets oxMIF is currently ongoing in patients
with solid malignancies (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01765790).

