Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective targeting of KRAS mutant cancer cells by a novel small
molecule compound


We report here the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the anti-tumor
activity of the novel small molecule, C1, which was previously shown by
our group to trigger autophagy-associated apoptosis via a ROS-dependent
manner in a variety of human cancer cell lines and primary cells derived
from patients. Our results indicate the paradoxical involvement of mutant
K-RAS as a specific target of this drug and its highly selective
preference for cells with a mutant KRAS phenotype; HCT116 colorectal
carcinoma cells that harbor an inherent mutated KRAS allele (V13D) are
significantly more sensitive to this drug than HT29 cells that express
wild type RAS. Exposure of HCT116 cells to C1 resulted in activation of
KRAS which in turn activated downstream crucial effector, AKT.
Interestingly, activated AKT was responsible for downstream ROS
production, which sensitized HCT116 cells to cell death. Corroborating
the upstream involvement of KRAS in the anti-tumor activity of C1,
transient gene silencing of KRAS abrogated ROS generation and death
inducing activity of C1 in HCT116 cells. In contrast, activation of KRAS
and AKT as well as downstream ROS production were absent in HT29 cells.
To confirm the specificity of C1 for KRAS mutant cells, we evaluated the
effect of the small molecule compound on RWPE-1 prostate epithelial cells
transformed with mutant KRAS. Interestingly, exposure to C1 resulted in a
significant reduction in colony forming ability in mutant KRAS prostate
cells (RWPE-1-KRAS), compared to the control RWPE-1-Vector cells.
Importantly, ROS generation was also significantly higher in RWPE-1-KRAS
cells than the RWPE-1-Vector cells. To provide further evidence for the
specific involvment of mutant RAS signaling in the anti-cancer activity
of C1, we made use of HCT116 mutant KRAS knock-out cells (KO), which have
its mutant KRAS allele deleted and carries a single wild-type KRAS allele
and phenotype. Notably, C1 could not trigger mitochondrial ROS production
in KO cells. Furthermore, our results show that C1 could trigger
KRAS-dependent Bax translocation effectively in HCT116 cells as well as
RWPE-1 KRAS cell lines. We postulate that this novel small molecule
compound exploits the vulnerabilities of KRAS mutant cells by targeting
directly on the active KRAS, further activating it and impacting its
downstream effectors, AKT in particular, with the resultant increase in
intracellular ROS and execution of Bax translocation that signal for
death. Taken together, these data could have tremendous therapeutic
implications given the paucity of chemotherapeutic strategies
specifically targeting cancers with mutated KRAS.

