Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential plectin isoform expression correlates with aggressive
prostate cancer phenotypes


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer amongst
men and the second most common cause of cancer related-deaths in the US.
Although PCa has a long latent period of development, clinically, the
disease has very heterogeneous phenotypes ranging from indolent
asymptomatic cases to very aggressive metastatic life threatening and
lethal forms. The most critical clinical challenge in the management of
the patients is identifying those individuals at risk of developing
aggressive metastatic disease. Currently there are no biomarkers that
accurately predict the aggressiveness of PCa based solely on standard
clinicopathologic features. Our long term objective is to identify the
molecules and characterize the mechanisms that are involved in PCa
metastasis. We recently demonstrated that plectin is upregulated in
aggressive versus non-aggressive forms of syngeneic prostate cancer cell
lines. In this study, we show that PCa aggressive phenotype correlates
with the over expression of specific plectin isoforms. Understanding the
mechanism and roles of different plectin isoforms in the progression of
PCa will potentially better discriminate the more aggressive metastatic
forms and provide better treatment and clinical management opportunities
of the disease.Methods: We have compared the mRNA and protein expression
profiles of plectin isoforms in prostate cancer cell lines and
prostatectomy tissues with different ethnic backgrounds and malignancy
phenotypes. Validations of differentially expressed isoforms have been
done by Western blot, qRT-PCR, siRNA knockdowns, proliferation assays and
invasion assays, flow cytometry, IHC and IFA.Results: We demonstrate the
correlation between the expression of specific isoforms with aggressive
PCa. This was validated by Western blot, confocal microscopy and
immunohistochemistry. SiRNA knockdown of specific plectin isoforms
suppresses the invasive and migratory capacity of PCa cells. To our
knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate that differential
expression of plectin isoforms correlates with the invasion and
metastasis in PCa.Conclusions: We have identified plectin isoforms that
are differentially expressed in PCa cells lines and prostatectomy tissues
with different malignancy phenotypes. These findings are currently being
validated using disease stratified TMAs. Further studies are focusing on
uncovering the mechanisms responsible for progression and metastasis of
PCa that are modulated by specific plectin isoforms. These could assist
in the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the
disease.

