Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the molecular basis of intrinsic taxane resistance in
gastric cancer


Gastric cancer (GC) is histologically divided into intestinal (INT) and
diffuse (DIF) clinical subtypes. Even though these two GC groups are
structurally and biologically different, this classification is not used
to inform choice of treatment.The taxanes (i.e., docetaxel and
cabazitaxel) are widely used for the treatment of cancer and for GC
specifically the TAX-325 study revealed a significantly improved survival
when docetaxel (DTX) was added to cisplatin and fluorouracil. Despite
this advancement, patients still exhibit intrinsic or acquired resistance
to DTX. Yet, the molecular basis of drug resistance remains unknown.We
performed a post-hoc analysis of the TAX-325 study to examine the
potential influence of GC subtypes in clinical response to DTX. We
classified randomized patients as diffuse or non-diffuse histology and
correlated histology with clinical outcomes using a Cox proportional
hazards model. Non-diffuse GC showed a significant improvement in overall
survival with the addition of DTX (12.1 v 8.8 mo, p=0.002), whereas
diffuse histology was not associated with an improvement in survival (8.3
v 8.5 mo, p=0.66). To investigate the molecular mechanism of GC DIF
subtype resistance to taxanes, we used a panel of 12 GC cell lines
representative of both subtypes (4 intestinal subtype, 8 diffuse
subtype). DTX cytotoxicity assays revealed that similarly to what we
observed clinically, 5/8 (63%) DIF GC cell lines were resistant (IC50 >
600 nM) to DTX compared to 1/4 (25%) INT GC cell lines. Further
functional studies revealed that there was minimal DTX drug-target
engagement in the DIF GC cells, as, assessed by confocal microscopy of
the microtubule network and tubulin polymerization assays. These results
suggested that DTX interaction with its target, microtubule, was impaired
in the DIF GC cell lines. To rule out multi-drug resistance (MDR) as
potential cause of intrinsic DTX resistance in these cells we performed
flow cytometric evaluation of P-glycoprotein and found that all of the
DIF GC cell lines were negative. Additionally, drug accumulation studies
with C-14 radiolabeled DTX revealed that the drug accumulated
intracellularly in all of GC cell lines in our panel.Next generation
sequencing of our panel of untreated or DTX-treated GC cell lines
revealed a number of genes/pathways that are differentially expressed in
the drug-sensitive versus the resistant cell lines. Gene set enrichment
analysis is currently ongoing in order to identify a subset of
genes/pathways implicated in intrinsic DTX resistance in GC. These
studies will provide novel insights into mechanism of intrinsic drug
resistance and will ultimately allow us to design more effective targeted
therapies to overcome chemo-resistance and eventually prolong patient
survival.

