Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FPA144: A therapeutic antibody for treating patients with gastric
cancers bearing FGFR2 gene amplification


A subset of patients with gastric cancer have an amplification of the
receptor tyrosine kinase fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)
gene. The amplification is most common in the diffuse type of gastric
cancer and its presence correlates with poor patient prognosis. Although
it has been reported that there is high expression of FGFR2 protein in
patients with the amplification, it has been unknown which of the two
major FGFR2 isoforms, FGFR2b or 2c, is expressed. In this study, we
demonstrate, by both qPCR and immunohistochemistry using FGFR2b-selective
antibodies, that it is the FGFR2b isoform, and not FGFR2c, that is
overexpressed in gastric cancer tumors that contain the FGFR2
amplification.Five Prime Therapeutics has developed an FGFR2b-specific
antibody, FPA144, to treat patients with gastric cancers bearing
amplification of the FGFR2 gene. FPA144 is glycoengineered for enhanced
antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC). FPA144 causes tumor growth
inhibition by 72% to 100% in gastric cancer xenograft models with FGFR2
gene amplification that overexpress the FGFR2b protein isoform. In the
SNU-16 model, FPA144 reduces the levels of FGFR2b protein expressed in
the tumors by approximately 50%, and decreases both FGFR2b
phosphorylation and phosphorylation of the downstream effector, FRS2. The
anti-tumor effect of FPA144 is additive with the standard of care
chemotherapy regimens of 5-fluoruracil/cisplatin and paclitaxel in the
OCUM-2 gastric cancer xenograft model. Since FPA144, unlike small
molecule FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, blocks signaling by only the
FGFR2b and not the other FGFRs, we expect a favorable toxicology profile,
either alone or in combination with chemotherapy. In addition, by
engaging immune effector cells for direct tumor cell killing, FPA144 has
a second mechanism of action that small molecule FGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors do not have. We anticipate starting clinical trials of FPA144
in the last quarter of 2014.

