Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cells metastasize to bone through E-selectin+
vascular gateways


The bone marrow (BM) has been suggested to serve as a protective
environment for disseminated breast cancer cells (BCCs). The precise
molecular signals that circulating BCCs use to identify and adhere to BM
vasculature are unknown, yet these interactions are essential for the
development of bone metastases. To address this question, we used in vivo
fluorescence microscopy to track the interactions of estrogen receptor
(ER)+ and ER- BCC lines with bone in real time in an intracardiac
injection xenograft mouse model. Our data show that circulating tumor
cells enter the bone through unique vascular niches where endothelial
cell expression of the adhesive molecule E-selectin and of the chemokine
SDF-1 are both upregulated. These vascular niches are the same sinusoidal
capillary beds that serve as the site of entry for peripherally
circulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) returning to
the BM. Similar to HSPCs, BCCs aberrantly express the major cell surface
molecules known to regulate hematopoietic cell entry and exit through the
BM, including CXCR4 (SDF-1 receptor) and multiple E-selectin ligands.
While neither CXCR4 blockade nor general chemokine signaling inhibition
in BCCs prevented BM dissemination, E-selectin blockade by the specific
glycomimetic antagonist GMI-1271 decreased BCC entry in the BM by
approximately three fold at 2 and 24 hours after treatment. Moreover, in
studies comparing FACS isolated stem and non-stem MCF-7 BCCs, GMI-1271
inhibition of E-selectin specifically targeted CD44+CD24- breast cancer
stem cell homing. Non-stem CD44+CD24+ BCCs demonstrated significantly
less BM homing compared to stem BCCs, and their BM trafficking was less
E-selectin dependent. These data reveal for the first time a molecular
mediator of bone metastases at the point-of-entry for BCCs in the BM. In
addition, the ability of BCCs to hijack HSPC trafficking pathways to
metastasize to bone correlates with E-selectin ligand expression and may
be a specific characteristic of the BCC stem cell subpopulation.

