Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UGT2B17 is a unique co-regulator of the androgen receptor and
androgen receptor splice variants in prostate cancer


Background: Expression of the steroid glucuronidating enzyme, UGT2B17, is
suppressed by ligand bound full-length androgen receptor (AR-FL).
However, we have shown that the AR constitutively active AR splice
variants AR-V7 and ARv567es significantly increase the expression of
UGT2B17 in prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts. Further, recent
studies demonstrated that UGT2B17 is increased in patients with castrate
recent prostate cancer. We have also shown that UGT2B17 is increased in
multiple cell lines when AR splice variants (AR-Vs) increase in response
to androgen deprivation therapies such as enzalutamide and
abiraterone.Objective: Since UGT2B17 functions to glucuronidate
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and decrease intracellular androgen, it would
be a potential mechanism for generation of constitutively active AR-Vs by
androgen deprivation therapy-induced alternative splicing. In xenografts
that have been shown to harbor genomic rearrangements that encode for
AR-Vs, we see marked elevations of UGT2B17, an indication that it was not
necessary for generation of AR-Vs but has additional activities to
enhance AR-Vs signaling. The purpose of this study was to determine the
interaction of UGT2B17 with AR-Vs, in cell lines that have not been shown
to harbor AR genomic rearrangements.Results: In the parental LNCaP cell
line, expression of UGT2B17 decreased after growth in charcoal stripped
serum (CSS) supplemented with 10-9M DHT. Expression increased following
growth in CSS alone and when enzalutamide was added to CSS. In contrast,
in LNCaP-abl or LNCaP 95 cells, which are castration resistant sublines
that express AR-Vs, basal UGT2B17 was significantly elevated compared
with LNCaP baseline levels. Further, in these castrate resistant
sublines, UGT2B17 exhibited less suppression by DHT and there was no
increase in UGTB17 over baseline following enzalutamide treatment. ChIP
assays in parental LNCaP cells stably transfected with ARv567es
demonstrated binding to the UGT2B17 promoter in the absence of DHT and
decreased binding in the presence of DHT. In control LNCaP cells
transfected with empty vector, no binding to the UGT2B17 promoter was
seen in the presence of DHT. Similar results were seen in enzalutamide
resistant VCaP xenografts: UGT2B17 was elevated in the castrated state
but suppressed when DHT was added. When lysates from LNCaP-abl, LNCaP 95,
or VCaP cells grown in CSS were immunoprecipitated with UGT2B17 antibody
then blotted with an AR-N terminal antibody, AR and AR-Vs were noted to
be present. AR-negative M12 cells and LNCaP cells grown in DHT
demonstrated no pull-down of AR in the UGT2B17 IP's.Interpretation: This
study demonstrated that UGT2B17 is a unique co-regulator of AR-Vs
activity and it is up-regulated by AR-Vs and suppressed by androgen
transactivated AR-FL receptor. UGT2B17 may thus be part of an
autocrine-loop driving castrate resistant prostate cancer by AR-Vs.

