Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly tractable stem cell-driven mouse model of colonic neoplasia
with features of familial adenomatous polyposis


The ApcMin mouse, which harbors a germline mutation in Apc, is the most
widely utilized mouse model of colorectal neoplasia; a major drawback to
this model is that the tumors arise mainly in the small intestine. In
addition, tumorigenesis occurs randomly within the epithelium,
complicating examination of the precise tumor cell-of-origin and local
environmental cues that promote tumorigenesis. Given the growing
importance of stem cells in tumor initiation, it is desirable to build
models that target this population. To this end, it is surprising that
elimination of one Apc allele in Lgr5+ stem cells does not result in
subsequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and tumor formation.We recently
reported that Lrig1, a pan-ErbB inhibitor, marks a population of stem
cells at the base of colonic crypts. To examine the dynamics of colonic
tumor initiation and progression, and to compare our disease model with
human patients, we examined tamoxifen-induced Lrig1-CreERT2/+;Apcfl/+
mice where Apc LOH occurs in the Lrig1+ stem cells yielding high-grade
lesions, faithfully recapitulating this key genetic event in human colon
cancer (CRC) initiation. Colonic lesions grow into the luminal space over
the span of 50-100 days and can be visualized by both colonoscopic and
FDG-PET non-invasive imaging. This inducible mouse model also harbors
extra-colonic features of human Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), an
autosomal dominant variant of CRC caused by germline mutations in APC.
With stochastic LOH, affected individuals develop colonic adenomas that
invariably progress to CRC and many patients develop peri-ampullary
tumors, gastric abnormalities, desmoid and soft tissue tumors, along with
characteristic eye findings. To further examine the molecular parallels
between the mouse and human colonic tumors, we performed RNA-Seq analysis
and validated selected targets with immunofluorescence. Interestingly, a
number of genes were found to be differentially regulated in the
Lrig1-CreERT2/+;Apcfl/+ colonic tumors compared to ApcMin colonic tumors,
despite both models being driven by the Wnt/-catenin pathway.This model
is the closest mimic of FAP to-date and represents a tractable system to
test the efficacy of innovative therapeutic interventions whose efficacy
can be monitored over time by colonoscopy and non-invasive imaging
modalities. Our inducible system also allows a detailed dissection of the
pre-neoplastic spatiotemporal events that occur following removal of one
Apc allele in the mouse colon. To complement these studies, we are
currently examining both Lgr5+ and Lrig1+ stem cell participation in
colonic tumor initiation both in vivo and ex vivo at super resolution,
using our newly developed Lrig1-Apple and Lrig1-Apple/+;Lgr5-EGFP
fluorescent reporter mice.

