Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin packaging into exosomes is lipid raft-dependent


We have shown that Survivin is exported out of the cancer cell via
exosomes despite its lack of a secretory signaling peptide. However, the
mechanism of Survivin exosomal loading is not yet known. Exosomal protein
sorting can be endosomal sorting complex required for transport
(ESCRT)-dependent or ESCRT-independent. ESCRT dependent protein sorting
requires monoubiquitination of the target protein, which serves as an
exosome sorting signal. The ESCRT independent mechanism is through
preferential aggregation of the proteins which is based on intrinsic
physical properties to lipid-rafts present in exosomes. Our lab has
recently shown that exosomal Survivin is associated with both Hsp70 and
Hsp90, as well as PRDX1 which have also been shown associated with
detergent-resistant lipid rafts. Here, we determine whether Survivin is
lipid-raft dependent and whether Hsp70 and Hsp90 and/or PRDX1 are
required for exosomal Survivin loading. Exosomes were collected from
conditioned media taken from HeLaS cells and isolated by centrifugation.
Colocalizations of Survivin with Hsp70, Hsp90 and PRDX1 in the cell and
exosomes were detected by immnocytochemistry visualized by confocal
microscopy and immunoprecipitation. HeLaS cells were treated with
increasing concentrations of methyl--cyclodextrin to disrupt lipid rafts
as a way to determine protein lipid raft association. Hsp70, Hsp90 and
PRDX1 knock-down using siRNAs will be accomplished to verify the
requirement of these proteins for Survivin exosome loading and lipid-raft
dependents. Here we show that Survivin colocalizes with Hsp70, Hsp90 and
PRDX1 in HeLaS cells as well as their exosomes. Increasing concentrations
of methyl--cyclodextrin disrupts lipid rafts in the HeLaS cells and
releases exosomes which also subsequently contain decreasing PRDX1 and
Survivin protein amounts. The release of Survivin into the tumor
microenvironment is an important finding as this IAP may contribute to
the aggressiveness of the cancer as well as the development of
chemoresistance. Despite lacking a secretory signaling peptide, Survivin
is being released into the extracellular space via exosomes using
chaperones. Knowing how Survivin is exosomally packaged may prove useful
in selecting patient specific treatment regimens.

