Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival of colorectal cancer cells following chemotherapy relies
on a SIRT1-dependent increase in oxidative phosphorylation


Background: Altered energy metabolism is one of the hallmarks of cancer.
Tumor cells reprogram their energy metabolism to meet the demands of
uncontrolled cell division. During tumorigenesis the vast majority of
cancer cells become highly glycolytic (Warburg effect) accompanied by a
decrease in oxidative metabolism. Chemotherapy is likely to affect the
energy metabolism of tumor cells, but how specific drugs affect specific
metabolic pathways is only beginning to be addressed.Methods: the effects
of cytotoxic agents on energy metabolism were assessed by flow cytometric
uptake of Mitotracker, the ratio of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA on
qRT-PCR, western blotting for protein levels of the different complexes
of the respiratory chain and oxygen consumption rate by the Seahorse
Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Cell death was analyzed by flow cytometric
uptake of Propidium Iodide, Nicoletti assay and protein levels of
caspases 3 and 8.Results: Gene expression analysis was performed on 119
resected liver metastases of colorectal tumors. Of all clinical variables
tested, neoadjuvant chemotherapy was most prominently associated with
changes in gene expression. Gene ontology and pathway analysis tools
revealed that many of the chemotherapy-associated genes were involved in
the regulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos). To test whether
chemotherapy affects OxPhos patient derived colorectal spheroids were
treated with the standard cytotoxic agents oxaliplatin and
5-fluorouracil. Chemotherapy strongly increases mitochondrial load,
oxygen consumption rate and mitochondrial ATP synthesis.In line with
these results chemo-treated tumor cells displayed a higher ratio of
mitochondrial-to-nuclear DNA and expression of respiratory complex
components was strongly increased following chemotherapy. Chemotherapy
strongly induced expression of the histone deacetylase SIRT1, which has
been implicated in mitochondrial biogenesis. Inhibition (by either
nicotinamide, EX-527, Tenovin-6) or knockdown of SIRT1 prevented the
chemotherapy-induced increase in oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover,
SIRT1 knockdown greatly reduced tumor cell survival and clonogenic
capacity following removal of chemotherapy.Conclusion: Chemotherapy
induces an increase in oxidative phosphorylation via SIRT1 and this is
required for tumor cell survival following drug removal. Since DNA repair
requires ATP, mitochondrial biogenesis may be part of the tumor cell
response to DNA-damaging agents. Post-chemotherapy targeting of SIRT1 (or
OxPhos enzymes) may be an interesting novel approach to increase
chemotherapy efficacy.

