Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical models of prostate cancer: New patient-derived
xenografts for preclinical studies and evaluation of prostate cancer
biology


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a heterogeneous disease and in order to increase
our understanding of PCa biology and evaluate efficacy of novel pipeline
agents, clinically relevant models are needed. It is well known that PCa
xenografts are difficult to establish and propagate with approximate take
rates of only 20%. During past the 20 years we have established and
characterized a large series of LuCaP prostate cancer patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs). Herein, we present a summary of the biological and
molecular characterization of these PDX LuCaP models.LuCaP PCa PDX models
were derived from primary PCa and various sites of metastases. The
histology of the LuCaP PDXs is similar to the originating clinical
specimen, and the unsupervised gene expression array clustering analyses
revealed an association between the xenograft and the originating
specimen. Twenty four of the lines are adenocarcinoma and four exhibit a
neuroendocrine phenotype. Characterization of the LuCaP PDX tumors
includes expression arrays, RNASeq, exome sequencing, and IHC for
multiple markers. Some of the models show Rb deletion, TMPRSS2/ERG
translocation, PTEN deletion, PI3K activation and other critical
characteristics detected in clinical specimens and associated with PCa
progression. In vivo characterizations show responses to androgen
suppression spanning the range of responses to this therapy seen in
patients; differential levels of serum PSA, tumor-doubling time, and
responses to docetaxel. Furthermore, seven of our models elicit an
osteoblastic reaction when implanted in the bone.In summary the diversity
of phenotypes and responses of the LuCaP PDXs to therapy are
representative of responses seen in the clinical setting. Therefore, the
LuCaP PCa PDXs are highly clinically relevant models to study PCa biology
and evaluate new treatment modalities. These models are available to
researchers worldwide for studies aiming to improve survival of PCa
patients and quality of life of men suffering from this disease.

