Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crocin-supplemented cisplatin is highly effective in killing
breast cancer cells than cisplatin alone


Breast cancer afflicts women of all ages. Limited treatment options that
are currently available include use of hormone antagonists and various
platinum-based chemical agents (Cisplatin, Carboplatin and Oxaliplatin).
Cisplatin, is a widely used chemotherapeutic drug that is often
prescribed for the treatment of hormone resistant breast tumors. Through
inter- and intra-strand DNA cross linking, Cisplatin induces apoptosis in
cancer cells. Although, it is very effective in its action, the use of
Cisplatin is accompanied with high overall toxicity due to its
indiscriminate killing of normal cells along with cancer cells;
therefore, it has to be used at less than the effective dose.Crocin, is a
phytochemical that efficiently kills cancer cells without affecting the
normal cells even at higher doses. Due to this property, it is currently
being tested as an anti-cancer drug either alone or in combination with
various novel and traditional anticancer agents to supplement and even
use the otherwise toxic anticancer drugs at a lower dose.In this study,
we supplemented Cisplatin with Crocin to reduce the amount of Cisplatin
that could kill breast cancer cells. MCF-7 and MDA MB-231 breast cancer
cells in culture were initially treated with Cisplatin and Crocin alone
for 24, 48 and 72 hours using a spectrum of concentrations for each drug
(Cisplatin: 1 to 100ug/ml; Crocin: 0.25 to 10mM) to assess the cell death
by MTT assay. The concentration that induced fifty percent killing of the
cancer cells was designated as IC50. FACS based Annexin V assay was used
to confirm the results obtained from MTT assays. Using isobologram
analysis we tested various combinatorial doses of Cisplatin and Crocin
that were lower than IC50 to determine the extent of synergism displayed
by the drug combinations. The formula used to ascertain the synergy index
was: q= I(A+B)/ (IA+IB - IA*IB), where I(A + B) represented the
inhibition rate of the Crocin + Cisplatin combination; IA and IB were the
inhibition rate of Crocin and Cisplatin individually and respectively. If
the drug combination showed q= 0.85 to 1.15, it was considered as simple
addictive effect, while a value of q= 1.15 to 2.0, indicated that the
drugs were showing a degree of synergism. q= >2.0 indicated significant
synergistic effect between the two agents. Experimental data were
statistically analyzed to ascertain significant p-value.In our
experiments, we could reduce the effective dose of Cisplatin by
supplementing it with Crocin, and with this combination, we could achieve
enhanced killing of breast cancer cells that was until now only possible
with higher doses of Cisplatin, when used alone. These results suggest
that cancer patients can benefit from this study as plant based
anti-cancer compounds can be used to reduce toxicity from higher doses of
traditional anti-cancer drugs, but without compromising their
effectiveness.

