Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C8-linked pyrrolobenzodiazepine (pbd)-benzofused conjugates with
low-picomolar in vitro cytotoxicity


There is significant interest in developing small-molecule ligands that
can locate and bind to specific sequences of DNA as potential antitumor
agents. Such molecules could be used, for example, to inhibit
transcription factors and other control proteins from interacting with
DNA at their consensus recognition sites. A set of DNA-interactive
benzofused building blocks based on phenyl-substituted heterocycles have
been developed with sufficient length to span two DNA base pairs. These
building blocks have been conjugated to DNA minor-groove covalent-binding
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) molecules via a four-carbon linker to produce
C8-linked PBD-Benzofused hybrid molecules. These focused libraries
contained structural variations where the benzofused building blocks were
either directly linked to the PBD core or separated by pyrrole/imidazole
heterocycles or GC-recognizing methylpyrrolebenzenamine (MPB) biaryl
building blocks. The design rationale was based on the unique
longitudinal curvature of these PBD conjugates which produces greater
isohelicity with the DNA minor groove, and also on predicted
hydrogen-bonding interactions with individual DNA bases.These molecules
showed significant enhancement of melting temperatures of designed
oligonucleotides in a FRET-based assay compared to the PBD core alone,
highlighting the synergistic effect of joining non-covalent benzofused
rings to the covalent-binding PBD unit. The cytotoxicity of these
compounds was assessed in primary CLL cells and a panel of other tumor
cell lines (A431, A2780, A549, MIA PaCa2, HeLa and MDA-MB-231) after 48h
and 96h exposure using the Annexin V apoptosis assay and the MTT
colorimetric assay, respectively. Normal lymphocytes and the non-tumor
fibroblast cell line WI38 were used as controls. Some of these compounds
were highly potent (i.e., low picomolar) in the primary CLL and other
cell lines with at least 3-orders of magnitude selectivity compared to
the normal lymphocytes or WI38 cells. Importantly, molecules with
different distances of separation between the benzofused ring moieties
had significant differences in cytotoxicity, thus not only providing
useful SAR information but also suggesting that there was scope for
optimizing activity through a medicinal chemistry approach.The effect of
these conjugates on regulation of the NF-B-associated regulatory proteins
IKK and IKK was studied in the CLL and breast cancer cell lines in which
NF-B is known to be active and closely correlated with the initiation and
progression of malignancy. The lead PBD-Benzofused conjugate KMR-28-32
exhibited marked inhibition of both IKK and IKK proteins at 4h and 24h
time points at concentrations of 0.1nM and 1nM, respectively, with
negligible effect on tubulin expression which was used as a housekeeping
control.

