Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double targeting nanoscale drug delivery system for treatment and
imaging of metastatic solid cancers


Purpose: As an alternative to the drawbacks of current advanced cancer
treatments such as conventional chemotherapy, we propose a
multifunctional double targeting drug delivery system that utilizes the
combination of cancer-targeting peptides fused to amphiphilic polymer
coated iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) and loaded with suitable
anticancer drugs as the payload.Methods: PC3 human prostate cancer cell
line will be used initially to test the efficiency of the proposed drug
delivery system. Our target sites of choice are the luteinizing hormone
releasing hormone receptor (LHRH-R) and the urokinase-type plasminogen
activator receptor (uPAR), and docetaxel was selected as the payload. A
modified LHRH (ligand for LHRH-R) and AE105 (ligand for uPAR) were
conjugated to polymer coated IONPs according to the manufacturer's
protocol.Results: Conjugated IONPs were characterized by gel
electrophoresis and Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS). IONPs showed expected
narrow size distribution after conjugation with peptide ligand. The
average hydrodynamic size of non targeted IONPs (36.84 nm) was increased
upon conjugation of double peptide to their surface (44.06 nm).
Conjugation of peptides to carboxylic groups of polymer coating on IONPs
resulted in a decrease of zeta potential from -70.43 mV to -58.06 mV.
Prussian blue staining demonstrated that LHRH and AE105 conjugated IONPs
were internalized efficiently by the PC3 cells. The drug loading and
release capability of conjugated IONPs will be evaluated by HPLC. In
addition the internalization of conjugated IONPs will also be examined
utilizing Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), and tumor eradication will be
determined by MTT assay.Conclusions: We expect a significant enhancement
in the binding efficiency of the LHRH-IONPs-AE105 to the prostate cancer
cells, increased efficiency in tumor eradication, and better imaging and
monitoring capabilities because IONPs can be visualized by MRI during
molecular imaging of the prostate cancer cells. Therefore, we believe the
optimization of the proposed system will enhance targeted nanomedicine
and significantly improve the health outcomes and quality of life for
cancer patients because of the following reasons: 1) its ability to
deliver anticancer drugs specifically to cancer cells while sparing the
surrounding normal tissues, and 2) the capability of in situ monitoring
of the therapeutics.

