Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine signaling through release of ATP and activation of P2X7
receptor promotes migration of human lung cancer cells


Cell migration is essential step of cancer metastasis. TGF-1 plays a key
role in cancer progression through induction of various biological
effects, including cell migration. Extracellular nucleotides, such as
ATP, released from cells play a role in signaling through activation of
P2 receptors. However, it remains poorly understood whether ATP-P2
receptor signaling is involved in cancer progression. We show here that
release of ATP followed by activation of P2X7 receptors plays a key role
in migration of lung cancer cells. Treatment with TGF-1 facilitated
migration of human lung cancer A549 cells, which was blocked by
pretreatment with ecto-nucleotidase and P2 receptor antagonists in a
wound healing-based assay and Transwell assay. ATP and P2 agonists
facilitated cell migration. TGF-1-induced actin remodeling, which
contributes to cell migration, was also suppressed by pretreatment with
ecto-nucleotidase and P2 receptor antagonists. Knockdown of P2X7 receptor
suppressed TGF-1-induced migration and actin remodeling. These results
indicate the involvement of TGF-1-induced ATP release in cancer cell
migration, at least in part, through activation of P2X7 receptors. We
found that TGF-1 caused release of ATP from A549 cells within 10 minutes.
Both ATP-enriched vesicles and expression of a vesicular nucleotide
transporter (VNUT) SLC17A9, which is responsible for exocytosis of ATP,
were found in cytosol of A549 cells. TGF-1 failed to induce release of
ATP from SLC17A9-knockdown cells. TGF-1-induced cell migration and actin
remodeling were also decreased in SLC17A9-knockdown cells. These results
suggest the importance of exocytosis of ATP in cell migration. In
addition, treatment with specific antagonist of P2X7 receptor (A438079)
suppressed TGF-1-induced migration of another human lung cancer H292
cells, but not of non-cancerous BEAS-2B cells. H292 cells released ATP in
response to TGF-1 stimulation, while BEAS-2B cells did not. Furthermore,
in high-motile human lung cancer PC-9 cells, a large amount of ATP was
released under standard cell culture condition, and P2X7 receptor was
constitutively activated. Blockade of P2X7 receptor significantly
suppressed motile activity of PC-9 cells. Taken together, these results
suggest that autocrine signaling through release of ATP and activation of
P2X7 receptor play a role in migration of human lung cancer cells.

