Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA regulator of NMI: implications for breast cancer


Recent investigations by our laboratory have demonstrated that NMI
expression is down-regulated in patient breast tumors, especially those
displaying invasive/metastatic features. In breast cancer and melanoma
cell lines, restored expression of NMI suppresses tumor growth.
Furthermore, NMI negatively impacts TGF-driven
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) and alsometastatic invasion of
breast cancer. Thus the mechanisms that regulate NMI expression are of
potential interest to understand the etiology of breast tumor
progression, invasion, metastasis and to identify potentially novel
therapeutic targets.MicroRNAs are critical regulators of gene expression.
MicroRNA target prediction searches revealed that the NMI transcript
could be targeted by the miR-29 family, a group of miRNAs with multiple
roles in diverse cancer types. We hypothesized that miR-29 will
negatively regulate NMI expression. Luciferase reporter assays using
pMIR-REPORTTM confirmed the projected interaction of miR-29 in the seed
region of the 3 UTR of NMI. Manipulation of miR-29 levels in breast
cancer cells by overexpression or silencing showed its inverse
relationship with NMI expression. Invasive mesenchymal-like breast cancer
cell lines showed elevated endogenous levels of miR-29 relative to
tumorigenic/non-metastatic (epithelial like) breast cancer cell lines.
Moreover, transient overexpression of miR-29 enhanced breast cancer cell
invasion as measured by modified Boyden chamber assay and silencing
miR-29 using anti-miRs decreased invasion. Investigations on the impact
of miR-29 modulation on EMT revealed that increasing miR-29 levels in
epithelial-like breast cancer cell lines caused 3D morphological changes
indicative of invasive mesenchymal-like growth, while decreasing miR-29
levels from mesenchymal-like cell types using anti-miRs reversed the
phenotype and the growth pattern resembled acinar structures. The
significance of our observation was realized when we compared RNA
isolated from patient derived breast cancer tumors and compared with RNA
from matched adjacent normal breast specimens. Analysis using the
McNemar's test showed a strong, inverse relationship between the
expression of NMI and the miR-29. We contend that aberrant miR-29
expression may account for reduced NMI in some invasive breast cancers.

