Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KDM3A promotes cell growth and cisplatin-resistance in ovarian
cancer cells


Background: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological cancer
affecting the women worldwide. One of the main challenging hurdles in
ovarian cancer treatment is the high recurrence rate due to therapeutic
resistance. Recent evidences showed that JmjC-domain (JMJD) containing
histone demethylases plays a critical role in controlling gene expression
during normal development and cancer progression.Aims: To determine
whether histone demethylase plays a role in ovarian cancer progression
and therapeutic resistance.Methods: We developed cisplatin-resistance
ovarian cancer cell lines SKOV-3 and OVCAR-5 and isolated total RNA to
screen the expression pattern of JMJD family genes by real-time RT-PCR.
We performed stable knock-down of KDM3A by lentiviral mediated ShRNA
transfection and studied its effects on cell proliferation and apoptosis
by MTT assay and western blot analysis (PARP, caspase-3), respectively.
We also determined the effect of KDM3A knock-down on cell cycle and
apoptosis regulators by western blot.Results: Our observations indicated
the differential expression of various JMJD family proteins between
cisplatin-resistance and sensitive cell lines. To further evaluate our
results, we also tested the expression of those differentially expressed
JMJD proteins in a widely used cisplatin-resistance and sensitive A2780
cell lines. We observed that KDM3A/JMJD1A is consistently overexpressed
in all the cisplatin-resistance cell lines studied. Next, we stably
knock-down KDM3A in cisplatin-resistance OVCAR-5 and A2780 cell lines.
More interestingly, we found that KDM3A depletion inhibited cell
proliferation, induced apoptosis and enhanced the sensitivity to
cisplatin treatment. Further, we confirmed that the important regulators
of cell cycle and apoptosis including p21 and Bcl-2 were modulated by
KDM3A knock-down.Conclusions: Our results indicate that KDM3A is a
critical epigenetic factor required for the ovarian cancer growth by
promoting cell proliferation and cisplatin-resistance. Our findings might
have important clinical implications in targeting ovarian cancer cells by
using specific histone demethylase inhibitors.Grant support: This work
was supported by Carl and Roberta Deutsch, and Kelly Day Foundations.

