Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of IL-6 in inflammatory breast cancer and its modulation by
Ganoderma lucid (Reishi)


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and lethal form of
breast cancer with symptoms that include a diffuse redness and swelling
of the breast. These signs resemble an inflammation, which may suggest
the involvement of both immunological and inflammatory processes in the
pathogenesis of this disease. Unique pathological findings indicate the
presence of tumor emboli invading the dermal lymphatics of the breast; a
process considered to be responsible for the inflammatory phenotype.
However, these tumors produce inflammatory mediators such interleukin-6
(IL-6), which may act as a growth factor to contribute to cancer
progression. Thus, cancer cells stimulated with or that secrete IL-6 via
an autocrine loop, auto-activate these pathways resulting in malignant
features such as enhanced invasion and increased metastasis. Our
published data demonstrates that the medicinal mushroom, Ganoderma
lucidum (Reishi), disintegrates tumor emboli, and reduces tumor growth.
We hypothesize that IL-6 enhances while Reishi reduces IBC progression
via modulation of the JAK-2/STAT-3 pathway both in vitro and in vivo.
SUM-149 wound-healing assays were performed to determine the migratory
phenotype of IBC cells stimulated with IL-6 or treated with Reishi.
Immunoblots of SUM-149 and KPL-4 IBC cell lysates were performed to
detect the expression of the JAK-2/STAT-3 signaling pathway and its
downstream effectors upon Reishi treatment. Cell fractioning was
performed to delineate if the proteins affected by Reishi belong to the
nuclear or cytoplasmic fraction of the cell. For in vivo studies, severe
combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice were injected with SUM-149 IBC cells
in their mammary fat pad and treated via oral gavage with various
concentrations of Reishi for 10wk. Our data from the in vitro studies
indicate that IL-6 causes wound closure after 24h, an effect prevented by
Reishi. Additionally, our data suggests that Reishi has an
immunomodulatory role, demonstrated by its ability to reduce the
phosphorylation of the IL-6/JAK-2/STAT-3 pathway. Cell fractioning of
SUM-149 and KPL-4 cells show a drastic reduction in the expression of
proteins corresponding to the nuclear fraction of the cell when treated
Reishi. Finally, our in vivo data show a dose dependent reduction by 3.0
and 5.5 fold in tumor volume, when mice where treated with 7mg/kg BW and
14mg/kg BW of Reishi, respectively. This data suggests that Reishi may be
used as a targeted therapeutic for women afflicted with IBC, for whom no
direct therapeutics are currently available. We thank Dr. Kurebayashi
(Kawasaki Medical School, Japan) for providing KPL-4 cells. This project
was sponsored by Title V PPOHA US Department of Education #P031M105050 to
UCC, NIH/RCMI #G12 MD007583 to UCC, NIH/INBRE #P20 GM103475 to UPR/UCC
and a research donation from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to UCC's
University Center of Integral and Complementary Medicine (CUMIC)/MMM.

