Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential impact of body mass index (BMI) on absolute and
percent breast density; implications regarding their use as breast cancer
risk (BCR) biomarkers


Percent breast density (PBD) is a commonly used biomarker of BCR.
However, its use is greatly confounded by the strong influence of
non-dense breast tissue on its measurement and factors, such as BMI,
which have a direct impact on this non-dense tissue. Consequently, BMI, a
potent BCR factor, is actually negatively correlated with PBD. We propose
that absolute breast density (ABD), a more direct determinant of BCR
which can be easily and accurately measured on a routine basis, is a more
accurate and valid biomarker of BCR. To address this issue, we compared
the correlation between PBD and ABD with baseline demographics (e.g.,
age, BMI, waist:hip ratio, reproductive parameters, family history of BC
and personal history of breast biopsies) and dietary and physical
activity variables (measured using a modified version of the NCI Diet
History Questionnaire and the International Physical Activity
Questionnaire, respectively) in a group of 169 healthy postmenopausal
women enrolled in a chemoprevention trial testing the individual and
combined effects of the antiestrogen Raloxifene and the omega-3
preparation Lovaza on BD used as a biomarker of BCR (NCT00723398). A
volumetric breast density software (Volpara, Matakina, Wellington, New
Zealand) was used for determination of ABD and PBD since it may be
superior to the two-dimensional method in predicting BCR. As observed
previously, a strong negative correlation between PBD and BMI was
observed (Rho = -0.5, PPercent breast density (PBD) is a commonly used
biomarker of BCR. However, its use is greatly confounded by the strong
influence of non-dense breast tissue on its measurement and factors, such
as BMI, which have a direct impact on this non-dense tissue.
Consequently, BMI, a potent BCR factor, is actually negatively correlated
with PBD. We propose that absolute breast density (ABD), a more direct
determinant of BCR which can be easily and accurately measured on a
routine basis, is a more accurate and valid biomarker of BCR. To address
this issue, we compared the correlation between PBD and ABD with baseline
demographics (e.g., age, BMI, waist:hip ratio, reproductive parameters,
family history of BC and personal history of breast biopsies) and dietary
and physical activity variables (measured using a modified version of the
NCI Diet History Questionnaire and the International Physical Activity
Questionnaire, respectively) in a group of 169 healthy postmenopausal
women enrolled in a chemoprevention trial testing the individual and
combined effects of the antiestrogen Raloxifene and the omega-3
preparation Lovaza on BD used as a biomarker of BCR (NCT00723398). A
volumetric breast density software (Volpara, Matakina, Wellington, New
Zealand) was used for determination of ABD and PBD since it may be
superior to the two-dimensional method in predicting BCR. As observed
previously, a strong negative correlation between PBD and BMI was
observed (Rho = -0.5, P<5e-12) due to the strong positive correlation of
BMI with non-dense breast. However, we also observed a strong positive
correlation of BMI with ABD (Rho = 0.41, PPercent breast density (PBD) is
a commonly used biomarker of BCR. However, its use is greatly confounded
by the strong influence of non-dense breast tissue on its measurement and
factors, such as BMI, which have a direct impact on this non-dense
tissue. Consequently, BMI, a potent BCR factor, is actually negatively
correlated with PBD. We propose that absolute breast density (ABD), a
more direct determinant of BCR which can be easily and accurately
measured on a routine basis, is a more accurate and valid biomarker of
BCR. To address this issue, we compared the correlation between PBD and
ABD with baseline demographics (e.g., age, BMI, waist:hip ratio,
reproductive parameters, family history of BC and personal history of
breast biopsies) and dietary and physical activity variables (measured
using a modified version of the NCI Diet History Questionnaire and the
International Physical Activity Questionnaire, respectively) in a group
of 169 healthy postmenopausal women enrolled in a chemoprevention trial
testing the individual and combined effects of the antiestrogen
Raloxifene and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on BD used as a biomarker
of BCR (NCT00723398). A volumetric breast density software (Volpara,
Matakina, Wellington, New Zealand) was used for determination of ABD and
PBD since it may be superior to the two-dimensional method in predicting
BCR. As observed previously, a strong negative correlation between PBD
and BMI was observed (Rho = -0.5, P<5e-12) due to the strong positive
correlation of BMI with non-dense breast. However, we also observed a
strong positive correlation of BMI with ABD (Rho = 0.41, P<2.5e-8), a
relationship which is not well established in the literature and supports
the use of ABD as a more accurate indicator of BCR. We also observed that
correction of PBD by BMI did not frequently provide the same information
as ABD, thus further indicating that the latter should be the gold
standard for BD measurement. The strong positive association between BMI
and ABD implies that even a modest change in BMI (as can be expected with
dietary and physical activity manipulations) is likely to obscure the
independent effect of an intervention on ABD. We indeed observed that
many correlations between dietary variables and ABD did not emerge until
adjustment was made for BMI. Our data support the following conclusions:
1) ABD instead of PBD (even after adjustment for BMI) should be used for
assessment of BD; 2) based on our novel observation of the strong
positive correlation between BMI and ABD, ABD should be adjusted for BMI
when testing the influence of an intervention on BD as a biomarker of
BCR. (Supported by grant KG081632 from Susan G. Komen for the Cure.)

