Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput size and deformability-based cancer cell separation


Cancer cells are ultra-rare in the peripheral blood of cancer patients,
with numbers as low as a few in 10^6-10^7 leukocytes. Separation and
enrichment of these cancer cells has historically been extremely
difficult, often akin to pinpointing a needle in a haystack. Microfluidic
devices, which are capable of sorting and detecting cells by structural
constraint and immuno-identity, have been working well in isolating
subpopulations of the cells with desired physical characteristics and
phenotype from blood. However, it is not a new matter that the use of
microdevices is often subject to low throughput, and therefore, there has
been an assumption for the trade-off between the sample processing time
and the purity of the cells to be collected. Size exclusion-based
microdevices, e.g., the microfilter and the microsieve chip, provide a
significantly shorter processing time than other microdevices, but fail
to enrich cancer cells at a higher purity. Adding a second enriching
parameter by means of cell deformability, in addition to cell size, has
improved the purity. The effort of this paper is to develop a new type of
microfluidic device, the spiral flow microfilter (SFF), which
incorporates a third parameter of differential migration for the
clog-free processing of large volume of blood. A spiral microchannel was
constructed as the main flow pathway for the whole blood with high flow
speed. It employs inertial lift and drag forces within the channel due to
the radius of the bend to force the whole blood toward the outer wall of
the inner channel. This outer wall is composed of small slits which,
while allowing the normal blood cells through, deflects the large cancer
cells, leaving them in the inner section. The slits are spaced 5m apart,
forming a comb. This comb is formed from millions of micro-scale pillars,
with the assumption that a cancer cell is larger and stiffer than a
normal blood cell, and will not pass between the pillars as normal cells
do. To enhance the filtration process through slits, a minor vacuum is
supplied through the outlet of the outer section of the spiral channel
for the quick removal of normal cells. Simultaneously, cancer cells are
retrieved from the outlet of the inner section. The SFF was made via soft
lithography and Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) casting. Using
photolithography, the master of the SFF geometry is made. The SFF is then
cast using the master from PDMS. In testing, breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-453) or a mixture with human leukocytes were
guided through the SFF. The flow rates and pressure drop were monitored.
The deformation of the cells inside the channel was visualized using a
high-speed camera. Our results concluded that cancer cells can be quickly
separated from normal cells in minutes with purity and recovery greater
than 90%. This device could be a useful tool for point-of-care analysis
of circulating tumor cells in patients as a promise of personalized
treatment planning and monitoring.

