Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular ATP-induced intracellular ATP concentration
elevation mediated by macropinocytosis promotes growth, survival, and
drug resistance of cancer cells


Cancer cells switch from highly efficient mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to low efficiency glycolysis for ATP synthesis
even when oxygen is abundant, a phenomenon called the Warburg effect.
Because of the higher rates of cell growth and proliferation, cancer
cells need more ATP than normal cells of the same tissues. However, the
switch is counterintuitive since cancer cells need more ATP but cancer
cells prefer to use a low efficiency pathway to produce ATP. How cancer
cells secure all their ATP needs is not well understood. On the other
hand, extracellular ATP concentration in cancer (intratumoral ATP
concentration) are found to be in the range of several hundred M,
10^3-10^4 times higher than those found in normal tissues. Huge
differences exist between cancer and normal cells regarding extracellular
ATP. Based on these observations, we hypothesized that cancer cells take
up ATP from extracellular space to supplement their energy needs. Here we
report that in multiple cancer cell lines belonging to multiple cancer
types, 0.5-3 mM ATP, within the intratumoral ATP concentration range,
elevated intracellular ATP levels by more than 50%. Extracellular ATP
also reduced stress and promoted survival of cancer cells that were under
OXPHOS and glucose metabolism inhibitions. Furthermore, extracellular ATP
increased the viability of cancer cells treated with sunitinib or
pazopanib, anticancer drugs working as ATP analogs by competing with ATP
for the ATP binding site of targeted tyrosine kinases (TKs). In contrast,
extracellular ATP did not affect the activity of paclitaxel, a drug
unrelated to ATP. Inhibitor studies revealed that the extracellular
ATP-induced intracellular ATP increase shows no dependence on OXPHOS,
glycolysis, master ATP regulator AMPK, transcription or translation.
These results strongly suggest that not all the increased intracellular
ATP is synthesized inside of cancer cells. Fluorescence microscopy study
showed that human lung cancer A549 cells, which are KRas oncogene
mutation-positive (KRas+), exhibit macropinotcytosis, a type of
endocytosis that non-specifically take in extracellular nutritional
molecules by fluid drinking. Inhibition of macropinocytosis resulted in
decrease in dextran take-up and intracellular ATP levels, and alleviated
the drug resistance to TKIs in dose-dependent manners. These strongly
suggest that macropinocytosis is responsible, at least in part, for
transporting extracellular ATP into cancer cells, which led to drug
resistance. All these results demonstrate, for the first time,
unrecognized roles of extracellular ATP in contributing to the
intracellular ATP pool and increase drug resistance in cancer cells and
suggest a novel ATP transport mechanism. These findings challenge our
traditional view on ATP and shed new lights on ATP homeostasis and
ATP-induced drug resistance in cancer cells.

