Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glutaminase induces slows tumor growth cell
autonomously and promotes survival in a MYC driven hepatocellular
carcinoma mouse model


Glutamine catabolism has been shown to be critical in many cancer types,
particularly in MYC dependent tumor types. Given that MYC dependent cell
lines have been shown to be dependent on glutamine for growth and
survival, we hypothesize that inhibiting glutamine metabolism could slow
the growth of MYC driven tumors in vivo. Small molecule (BPTES)
inhibition of kidney-type glutaminase (GLS) is being developed as an
anti-cancer therapy, yet basic questions remained unanswered about
glutamine inhibition. The BPTES insensitive liver-type glutaminase (GLS2)
has been proposed to act as a tumor suppressor in liver cancer cell
lines. We have found that hepatocellular carcinomas downregulate GLS2 and
upregulate GLS compared to surrounding tissue in both humans and mice,
leaving hepatocellular carcinomas potentially sensitive to GLS
inhibition. BPTES slows the growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines
in vitro. Here were report the first study that demonstrates the ability
of BPTES to slow tumor progression in genetic cancer models in
immunocompetent mice, showing the BPTES prolongs survival of mice in a
MYC driven hepatocellular carcinoma model. However, we could not
determine from these data if the anti-cancer effects of GLS inhibition in
vivo were systemic or cell autonomous, causing us to switch to a
xenograft system. Using prostate and lymphoma cell lines overexpressing
the BPTES resistant GLS K325A mutant, we show that BPTES functions
through on-target inhibition of GLS in vitro. We then used a p493-6
B-cell lymphoma cell line to determine the cell autonomous effects of
BPTES in vivo. P493-6 xenograft growth was slowed by BPTES treatment,
while p493 xenografts overexpressing either wild type GLS or BPTES
resistant GLS K325A were not slowed by BPTES treatment in vivo. We then
set out to develop an alternative method to perform tumor specific knock
down GLS in vivo to obtain genetic evidence of the role of GLS in tumor
cells, developing a human specific vivo-morpholino that targets GLS for
nonsense-mediated decay. Consistent with the effect of BPTES on tumor
cells, the human GLS targeting vivo-morpholino slowed p493-6 xenograft
growth in vivo. As the vivo-morpholino knockdown of GLS was xenograft
specific, it demonstrates that GLS inhibition slows cancer growth through
cancer cell autonomous methods and not though systemic changes that alter
the tumor niche. In summary, we find that BPTES exhibits on target GLS
inhibition in vivo to prolong survival in mouse hepatocellular carcinoma
mouse models.

