Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical studies of brain/brain tumor disposition and antitumor
efficacy of the aromatase inhibitor letrozole


In this study, we investigated the potential role of aromatase (CYP19) as
a target for the treatment of CNS malignancies, as well as brain
disposition and anti-tumor efficacy of letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor,
in Sprague Dawley rats.Cytotoxicity and aromatase activity of letrozole
against human glioma cell lines were measured using MTT assay and Enzyme
Immunoassay respectively. For brain and brain tumor PK of letrozole, rats
with and without orthotopic implantation of C6 glioma received letrozole
(4 - 12 mg/kg; i.v. andor oral). Dual probe intracerebral microdialysis
was performed to determine the unbound extracellular fluid (ECF)
letrozole concentrations. Serial ECF and blood samples were
simultaneously collected over 8 hrs. PET/CT imaging was performed using
18F FDG to evaluate changes in active tumor volumes pre- and
post-treatment of letrozole. Brain tissues were collected at the end of
the experiment for histological evaluations.All glioma cell lines
included in this study expressed CYP19 and letrozole exerted marked
cytotoxicity against these cells ( IC50s 0.1 - 3.5 M). The relative brain
distribution coefficients, measured as the ratio of the observed AUC in
ECF and AUC of unbound letrozole in plasma (AUCecf/AUCp,ub) ranged from
0.31 - 0.98. Furthermore, the tumoral ECF levels of letrozole was 1.5 - 2
fold higher relative to tumor-free region of the brain, resulting in
tumoral ECF Cmax values that were 10 and 35-fold higher than the observed
IC50 value of 0.1 M against C6 gliomas cells in culture. PET/CT imaging
showed a marked reduction of active tumor volume (75-90%) after 8-10 days
of letrozole treatment (N=7). Oral administration of letrozole showed
similar brain disposition and efficacy of letrozole. Immunohistochemical
analysis of aromatase demonstrated selectivelymarkedly higher aromatase
expression in tumoral regions of the brain as well asand a clear
considerable reduction in aromatase expression in letrozole the treated
rats relative to the treatment group as compared to the control group.
Thus, employing multifaceted and cutting edge in vitro and in vivo
methods, we conclude: a) aromatase is abundantly expressed in glioma cell
lines examined, b) letrozole exerts marked cytotoxicity in these cells
presumably due to aromatase inhibition, c) letrozole has selectively
higher accumulation in tumoral region of the brain and d) In vivo PET/CT
studies show marked efficacy of letrozole on C6 glioma in a preclinical
rat model.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

