Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling breast cancer progression through geographical and
temporal sequencing


Background: The aim of this study was to interrogate primary/metastatic
breast cancer (BC) genetic heterogeneity using next generation whole
exome sequencing and copy number analysis from an autopsy series of BC
patients (pts).Methods:To reconstruct the trajectories of BC progression,
we performed exome sequencing (Illumina HiSeq2000, Truseq DNA sample
preparation kit v2 and Exome Enrichment Kit v2; alignement done with BWA,
substitutions and indels called with GATK and DINDEL respectively)
coupled to validation by Sequenom and deep re-sequencing (ongoing), as
well as copy number (CN) analyses (Oncoscan, Affymetrix) on DNA from
matched primary (n=1-6/pt), axillary lymph node (ALN, n=1-6 for 4 pts),
local recurrence (for 1 pt) and distant metastatic (n=1-5/pt) FFPE
samples obtained from an autopsy series of 10 BC pts. Results:1/ The
degree of primary/metastatic genetic heterogeneity is proportional to the
time elapsed between the diagnosis of the primary tumor and the emergence
of the metastases (mutations: corr=0.76, CN: corr=0.63); metastases from
pts with a longer cancer history being genetically more different from
their corresponding primary tumor than those from pts with a shorter
cancer history. 2/ The phylogenetic analyses revealed that in all but 1
pt, the various distant metastases are present on the same branch of the
phylogenetic tree. This suggests that the majority of the metastases
arise from a single metastasizing event, with one or more distant sites
further re-seeding additional organs. ALN metastases are genetically less
evolved compared to distant metastases. 3/ Distant metastases from a same
patient only share between 11 and 50% metastasis-specific mutations. This
implies that metastasis-specific potentially targetable genetic
alterations might either be present in all metastases from a given
patient (such as EGFR, PDGFRA amplification for pt 3, AR amplification
for pt 8) or only in some metastases (such as NOTCH2 mutation in the
liver metastasis of pt 6). 4/ Primary tumor samples and metastases from
one ER+/HER2- pt were hypermutated (696 unique mutations in total). The
substitutions were enriched for the APOBEC-related mutational signature,
possibly linked to the somatic APOBEC3B D316N mutation observed in all
samples from this pt. Conclusions: Here we report for the first time that
primary/metastatic BC genetic heterogeneity is proportional to the time
elapsed between the diagnosis of the primary tumor and the emergence of
the metastases. These results therefore suggest that it is extremely
relevant to interrogate distant metastatic lesions, multiple if possible
to account for inter-metastatic heterogeneity, to guide treatment,
especially but not only, in those pts relapsing a few to many years after
initial diagnosis.

