Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new multiplex genotyping assay using PNA clamping-assisted
fluorescence melting curve analysis


Recent studies on molecular mechanisms of anti-EGFR therapies revealed
importance of mutation screening and genotyping of multiple target
oncogenes. For example, KRAS mutations have been associated with poor
responsiveness to anti-EGFR therapies. Determining the KRAS status of a
newly diagnosed cancer patient prior to initiating anti-EGFR therapy
would be required in selecting effective therapeutics among tyrosine
kinase inhibitor and monoclonal antibody therapy.Peptide nucleic acid
(PNA) is an artificially synthesized polymer. The negatively charged
deoxyribose phosphate backbone of DNA is replaced by an electroneutral
peptide-like backbone consisting of N-(2-aminoethyl) glycine units
directly linked to the nucleotide bases. Complementary PNA/DNA complex
has stronger binding affinity than complementary DNA/DNA complex. A PNA
probe has higher specificity and mismatch discrimination towards its
target DNA than a DNA probe. Furthermore, it shows a remarkable
biological stability to enzymatic degradation. PNA is not recognized by
DNA polymerase so it cannot be used as a primer.PNAClamp technique is the
PNA-based PCR clamping that selectively amplifies only the target
(mutated) DNA sequence as a minor portion in the mixture with the major
non-target (wild type) DNA sequences. Therefore, PNAClamp technique
provides better limit of detection than conventional PCR method.PANA
S-Melting (PNA probe-based fluorescence melting curve analysis) based on
change in fluorescent signal as a sample thermally denatured (melting
temperature shift). This is a powerful tool for mutation detection
(screening and genotyping) by a single probe. It can distinguish multiple
sequence variants adjacent to each other on a small target region.We
developed a new technique, which combines two techniques; PNAClamp and
PNA probe-based fluorescence melting curve analysis. This new
PNAClamp-assisted melting curve method can discriminate a sequence
variant from a wild-type sequence with a relatively large Tm difference.
Therefore, it could easily detect presence of sequence variation without
an additional data analysis process. This technique can be performed in
any real-time PCR machine, which has melting curve analysis function.We
tested a new multiplex genotyping assay of KRAS gene mutation using this
combined method in lung cancer cell line samples. This new assay could
detect a total of seven sequence variants (6 genotypes of codon 12 and 1
genotype of codon 13) in a single closed reaction tube using three
different fluorescent dyes. The results showed that 0.5 % mutations were
detected using this multiplexing assay system.This new multiplex
genotyping method offers a cost-effective and highly sensitive mutation
genotyping method that can be used in various clinical areas including
personalized medicine.

