Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The multikinase inhibitor K252a suppresses hepatocellular
carcinoma tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model


There are several ongoing clinical trials of molecular-targeted therapy
for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but no clearly effective therapy has
yet emerged. Under such conditions, we have been focusing on potentially
powerful anticancer effects of the novel multikinase inhibitor K252a,
since it targets unique kinases, including PKC, CaMKII, c-Met, TrkB,
MLCK, and phosphorylase kinase. Indeed, the former five targets are
expressed in HCC tissues and involved in cellular proliferation,
invasion, and metastasis (Yoshiji et al., Cancer Res 1999, etc.). The
broad spectrum of the targets may block escape pathways in HCC cells,
that are resistant to conventional anticancer drugs and even sorafenib.
The AIM of this study was to assess whether K252a suppressed cellular
proliferation and altered malignant phenotypes such as
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) both in vitro and in vivo.
Materials and Methods: The human HCC cell lines HAK-1A, HAK-1B (Yano et
al., Hepatology 1993), KYN-2 (Yano et al., Pathol Int 1988), and Huh7
were used in this study. Effects of K252a on the proliferation and the
cell cycle were assessed by a commercialized kit (Promega) and flow
cytometry, respectively. Protein expression and localization was analyzed
by Western blot and immunocytochemistry, respectively. Cellular mRNA
level was evaluated by real-time PCR using TaqMan probes. HAK-1B-based
xenograft model in nude mice was used to evaluate in-vivo efficacy of
K252a. Results: K252a suppressed proliferation and clearly caused G2
cell-cycle arrest in all the cell lines studied. Additionally, the agent
induced both polygonal transformation in cell shape and increase in cell
size in several HCC cell lines having endogenous mesenchymal features. In
Western blot analysis and immunocytochemistry, the expression levels of
E2A, an EMT-regulating transcriptional factor, were universally decreased
in the cells treated with K252a, in concert with increased expression
levels of E-cadherin in some cell lines. In real-time PCR analyses, the
decrease in E2A mRNA levels and the increase in E-cadherin mRNA levels
were ubiquitously found. Of note, xenografted tumor tissues obtained from
mice treated with K252a exhibited significant increase in E-cadherin
protein expression, in comparison with those from control mice.
Conclusions: Our findings suggest that K252a has robust antitumor effects
on HCC through, at least in part, reversing EMT and inducing G2
cell-cycle arrest. This kind of multikinase inhibitor may help us
establish the proof-of-concept for closing escape routes in
drug-resistant HCC cells.

