Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The transcription factor iroquois homeobox 2 (IRX2) is a candidate
metastasis suppressor that acts as regulator of cellular motility and
chemokine expression in breast cancer cells


The onset of the metastatic cascade -the main cause of cancer related
death- is the dissemination of single tumor cells into distant organs.
The presence of disseminated tumor cells is an independent prognostic
factor for the risk of recurrence and overall survival of cancer patients
in different cancer entities. We found that low expression of the
transcription factor iroquois homeobox 2 (IRX2) in primary breast and
lung tumors is associated with the presence of disseminated tumor cells
in the bone marrow. Accordingly, IRX2 represents a candidate metastasis
suppressor gene. The purpose of this study is to gain insights into the
significance of IRX2 expression in the progression of breast cancer. To
assess its physiological relevance in breast cancer, we evaluated IRX2
expression in large publically available breast cancer cohorts.
Additionally, we established two breast cancer cell lines with ectopic
IRX2 protein expression and subjected those cell lines to a variety of
functional assays.IRX2 mRNA expression was found to correlate with tumor
grading and estrogen receptor status in primary breast tumors. Western
blot analysis of IRX2 protein expression in breast cancer cells lines
revealed that luminal and HER2 positive cell lines expressed IRX2,
whereas cell lines belonging to the basal molecular subtype did not
express the IRX2 transcription factor. SAM-analysis in combination with
gene ontology analysis revealed that 6 out of the 40 genes, whose
expression is most strongly correlated with IRX2 expression belong to the
chemokine signaling pathway. Coincidently, in BT-549 and Hs578T with
ectopic IRX2 expression we found markedly reduced levels of CCL5 and
CXCL10 mRNA expression. A gene reporter assay also revealed a decreased
trans-activation of the CCL5 proximal promoter in BT-549 cells in the
presence of ectopic IRX2 expression. Furthermore, we could detect
significantly lower CCL5 protein levels in cell culture supernatants
obtained from this cell line. When used as chemoattractant, conditioned
cell culture medium from this cell line also diminished migration of
parental MDA-MD-231 and BT-549 breast cancer cells. BT-549 cells with
IRX2 over expressing also showed clearly reduced motility in both wound
healing as well as Boyden chamber assays.Our results imply that the IRX2
transcription factor might represent a novel metastasis suppressor
protein that also acts a repressor of CCL5 gene transcription. Loss of
IRX2 expression could contribute in particular to early hematogenous
dissemination of breast and lung cancer cells by sustaining CCL5
secretion and enabling autocrine stimulated cell motility.

