Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a new in vivo model for human T-cell
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) suitable for evaluation of the tumor
stromal component


T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a hematological hematopoietic T
cell precursor disorder with a not well defined etiology, although it
would be linked to NOTCH signaling defects. CUTLL1 (Columbia University
T-cell Lymphoblastic Lymphoma 1) is a human T-ALL cell line displaying
biological responses to NOTCH inhibition, thus mimicking the diseases
etiology. The absence of human T-ALL cell lines with verifiably clinical
aspects turns the establishment of an in vivo model an asset for
preclinical assays; further, it serves to study the interaction between
disease-mimicking cells and their surrounding niche.We have established
an in vivo model for T-ALL in immunosuppressed NOD.CB17-Prkdc scid/J mice
using CUTLL1 cells. Tumors developed after subcutaneous inoculation of a
minimum dose of 2x10E7 cells and became visible 2.5 weeks
post-inoculation into the right flank (809.167.33 mmE3). Administration
of larger cell doses (4x10E7) did not affect the lapse at which tumors
appear, but originated larger tumors (38301571 mmE3, pT-cell
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a hematological hematopoietic T cell
precursor disorder with a not well defined etiology, although it would be
linked to NOTCH signaling defects. CUTLL1 (Columbia University T-cell
Lymphoblastic Lymphoma 1) is a human T-ALL cell line displaying
biological responses to NOTCH inhibition, thus mimicking the diseases
etiology. The absence of human T-ALL cell lines with verifiably clinical
aspects turns the establishment of an in vivo model an asset for
preclinical assays; further, it serves to study the interaction between
disease-mimicking cells and their surrounding niche.We have established
an in vivo model for T-ALL in immunosuppressed NOD.CB17-Prkdc scid/J mice
using CUTLL1 cells. Tumors developed after subcutaneous inoculation of a
minimum dose of 2x10E7 cells and became visible 2.5 weeks
post-inoculation into the right flank (809.167.33 mmE3). Administration
of larger cell doses (4x10E7) did not affect the lapse at which tumors
appear, but originated larger tumors (38301571 mmE3, p<0.05). Tumors were
histological characterized indicating high neoplastic proliferation
infiltrating the tumor stroma with high content of fibroblast-like cells
and microvessels. Tumor progression is modulated by microenvironmental
factors, among them stromal cells regulating neoplastic cells. Since
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are incorporated into the tumor
microenvironment, we evaluated the participation of MSCs as stromal
component in this model. We administered MSCs into lymphoma-bearing mice
and measured MSCs tumor stroma homing. MSCs tumor homing ability of
pre-labeled DiR/CMDiI+ MSCs injected intravenously (1x10E6 cells) was
measured by infrared detection and microscopic examination. MSCs levels
at the tumor stroma reached highest values at smallest tumor volume
(3,967x10E5 p/sec/cm2/sr /1004,372mm3) indicating a negative correlation
between tumor size and MSCs homing ability and pointing at the high
homing MSCs capacity into a niche of hematological neoplastic
cells.Microenvironmental tumor factors may directly affect cell migration
and promote tumor progression. We evaluated MSCs migratory in vitro
capacity observing that MSCs are able to respond to chemotactic stimuli
derived from CUTLL1 cells. Cell recruitment by tumor-derived factors may
affect tumor progression and our data suggests that tumor recruited MSCs
may be involved in tumor development in this model.This is the first
report to our knowledge, of a xenomodel using the clinically
representative cell line CUTLL1. The establishment of an in vivo model
with T-ALL clinical aspects such as Notch signaling defects, serves as a
relevant model and allows the study of stromal and neoplastic cell
interaction within an in vivo tumor microenvironment.

