Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: What do they do? Patient navigator actions and timely treatment
within 30 days of diagnosis in Latinas with breast cancer: The Six Cities
Study


Background: Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in
Latinas, primarily due to screening and treatment disparities. Patient
navigation has emerged as an effective means to reduce these disparities,
although how this is achieved is insufficiently documented.Methods: We
analyzed navigator logs of activities conducted on behalf of 42 navigated
Latinas diagnosed with breast cancer from July 2008-January 2011. Women
were navigated by locally trained navigators who resolved
patient-reported barriers using one of 10 specific actions: referral,
accompaniment, transportation, telephone support, records assistance,
health education, appointment reminders, family support, translation
services, or health care system intervention. We calculated the frequency
of patient-reported barriers to cancer treatment, their association with
navigator actions (correlation), and the association of these actions on
time to primary treatment initiation within 30 days of confirmed
diagnosis (Chi-squared analysis).Results: Patients reported 323 potential
barriers to care between diagnosis and initial treatment. Translation
(44.3%), specific or generalized fear (14.9%), and transportation (6.5%)
were the most commonly reported barriers. Barriers were resolved
utilizing activities defined above as determined by navigators; some
barriers were resolved with as few as one action. Correspondence
(correlation) between reported barriers and navigator actions was high
(r=0.985 to r=1.000). Five navigator actions were associated with earlier
treatment relative to navigated women not utilizing these specific
services (accompaniment: p=.006; transportation: p=.007; telephone
support: p=.034; family support: p=.030; translation services:
p=.004).Conclusions: Specific patient navigation activities significantly
increase the proportion of Latinas with breast cancer women who begin
treatment within 30 days of diagnosis. It likely results in reduction of
mortality in this group.

