Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of MICAL1 in NEDD9 invasive signaling


Metastasis is the final step leading to patient death in most solid
tumors, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). For
metastasis to proceed, tumor cells must become mobile and invasive,
losing their communal behavior. A goal of our work is to delineate the
downstream effectors of growth factor signaling pathways that contribute
to invasion. Using a phosphotyrosine proteomics screen we previously
identified neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally
down-regulated 9 (NEDD9; CasL) as a mediator of VEGF and IGF-1 signaling
to invasion in HNSCC cells. NEDD9 tyrosine phosphorylation led to matrix
metalloproteinase9 (MMP9) expression and secretion, invadopodia formation
and enhanced invasion. To determine the molecular details of NEDD9
protein:protein interactions leading to invasion, we have generated a
series of NEDD9 substrate domain tyrosine (Y to F, YXXP) and SH3 domain
mutants. Mutation of all 13 YXXP motifs to FXXP blocked NEDD9 tyrosine
phosphorylation, MMP9 expression and invadopodia formation. Of note, we
found that NEDD9 co-immunoprecipitated with Molecule Interacting with
CasL 1 (MICAL1). To further define this interaction and its downstream
impact, stable NEDD9 or MICAL1 silenced HNSCC cell lines expressing
select shRNAs were generated, with each exhibiting reduced migration and
invasion. MICAL shRNA transfected cell lines also exhibited decreased
MMP9 secretion, consistent with our findings that lack of MICAL1
decreases cell invasion and with findings of other labs that MICALs
interact with Rab proteins altering intracellular trafficking. Further,
we have verified that MICAL1 and NEDD9 form complexes in cells based on
coimmunoprecipitation analyses. Better understanding of this pathway will
undoubtedly lead to the identification of novel therapeutics for the
prevention of invasion and metastasis. Supported by NIH R01CA134845
(SAR), P30 CA138313 and NIH/NCRR UL1 TR000062/TL1 TR000061 from the South
Carolina Clinical & Translational Research Institute (COH).

