Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-mediated ROS enhances HGF-induced cancer cell invasion and
suppresses cell cycle progression


The cellular response to hypoxia is a major influence on the
aggressiveness of primary tumors, yet much of how this response mechanism
influences other signaling pathways is unknown. The MET proto-oncogene,
which encodes the tyrosine kinase receptor for hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), is often overexpressed in cancers and can drive cell
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Prior studies demonstrated that
the Met tyrosine-kinase receptor drives cell invasion and metastasis
under hypoxic conditions, and this invasive phenotype is lost if MET
expression is suppressed. Hypoxia also has been shown to sensitize HGF
driven invasion through an as yet undefined molecular mechanism. The high
mortality rate of metastatic cancer makes it crucial to understand the
functional integration of these two prevalent drivers of metastasis,
hypoxia and Met signaling, and to identify ways to selectively block
cancer cell invasiveness. We show that hypoxia enhanced HGF-mediated
invasion in the papillary renal cell (PRC) carcinoma cell lines ACHN and
UOK112. Cells under hypoxic conditions accumulated high levels of ROS,
which in turn sensitized the Erk pathway to enhance HGF-driven invasion.
ROS accumulation was also associated with suppression of MAPK phosphatase
DUSP2 mRNA. The other prevalent arm of Met mediated signaling, the
PI3K/Akt pathway, normally drives cell survival and proliferation. In
hypoxic conditions, however, Akt activation is suppressed by ROS mediated
PP2a activation. This is accompanied by metabolic shift towards autophagy
and decreased cell cycle progression. Thus hypoxia modifies HGF biologic
program by enhancing invasion and suppressing proliferation. Identifying
the specific effectors responsible for the integration these signaling
pathways will improve our understanding of pro-metastatic invasiveness
and potentially identify novels targets for its selective blockade.

