Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The heritability of melanoma differs between light- and
dark-skinned individuals of European descent


Melanoma is strongly associated with exposure to ultraviolet radiation
(UV). The prevalence of melanoma is much higher in lighter-skinned
Caucasians as compared to darker-skinned Caucasians who have a higher
concentration of melanin in their skin which absorbs UV radiation and
prevents it from reaching deeper layers of the skin to cause DNA damage.
This suggests that the relative contributions of genes and environment in
the etiology of melanoma and the genetic architecture of melanoma
susceptibility may differ between these two groups.To test this
hypothesis, we assessed the heritability of melanoma separately in
self-reported light- and dark-skinned Caucasians using data from a
previously published melanoma GWAS of 2000 cases and 1000 controls (Amos
et al, 2011). Employing the GCTA method developed by Visscher et al (Yang
et al, 2011), which estimates the additive genetic contributions of all
genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to phenotypic variance,
we observed that melanoma was highly heritable in dark-skinned Caucasians
(h2 = 66%, SE = 25%, p = 0.0058), but not significantly heritable in
light-skinned Caucasians (h2 = 15%, SE = 22%, p = 0.25). This suggests
that whereas inherited common genetic variation contributes significantly
to melanoma susceptibility in dark-skinned Caucasians, this is not the
case in lighter-skinned Caucasians.To determine the consequences of this
difference in heritability on melanoma risk, we investigated the
enrichment of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) separately in
light-skinned Caucasians and dark-skinned Caucasians using a
permutation-based strategy. We generated 1000 permutations of the
melanoma GWAS, shuffling case-control status each time. In each of the
permuted datasets, we calculated the percentage of significant
disease-associated variants that are also eQTLs. Then we compared the
actual percentage of GWAS hits that are eQTLs to the expected percentage
under the null based on the permutations to assess whether there is a
significant enrichment of functional variants in the GWAS. We found a
significant enrichment of skin and lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) eQTLs
in among the melanoma-associated SNPs (p Melanoma is strongly associated
with exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UV). The prevalence of melanoma
is much higher in lighter-skinned Caucasians as compared to
darker-skinned Caucasians who have a higher concentration of melanin in
their skin which absorbs UV radiation and prevents it from reaching
deeper layers of the skin to cause DNA damage. This suggests that the
relative contributions of genes and environment in the etiology of
melanoma and the genetic architecture of melanoma susceptibility may
differ between these two groups.To test this hypothesis, we assessed the
heritability of melanoma separately in self-reported light- and
dark-skinned Caucasians using data from a previously published melanoma
GWAS of 2000 cases and 1000 controls (Amos et al, 2011). Employing the
GCTA method developed by Visscher et al (Yang et al, 2011), which
estimates the additive genetic contributions of all genotyped single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to phenotypic variance, we observed that
melanoma was highly heritable in dark-skinned Caucasians (h2 = 66%, SE =
25%, p = 0.0058), but not significantly heritable in light-skinned
Caucasians (h2 = 15%, SE = 22%, p = 0.25). This suggests that whereas
inherited common genetic variation contributes significantly to melanoma
susceptibility in dark-skinned Caucasians, this is not the case in
lighter-skinned Caucasians.To determine the consequences of this
difference in heritability on melanoma risk, we investigated the
enrichment of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) separately in
light-skinned Caucasians and dark-skinned Caucasians using a
permutation-based strategy. We generated 1000 permutations of the
melanoma GWAS, shuffling case-control status each time. In each of the
permuted datasets, we calculated the percentage of significant
disease-associated variants that are also eQTLs. Then we compared the
actual percentage of GWAS hits that are eQTLs to the expected percentage
under the null based on the permutations to assess whether there is a
significant enrichment of functional variants in the GWAS. We found a
significant enrichment of skin and lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) eQTLs
in among the melanoma-associated SNPs (p < 10-4) in the GWAS of
light-skinned but not dark-skinned Caucasians. Furthermore the target
genes of these eQTLs showed a functional enrichment of response pathways
to ultraviolet radiation (UV), the major cause of melanoma.Taken
together, these findings indicate that melanoma susceptibility not only
has varying contributions of genes and environment but also different
genetic architectures in light- vs dark- Caucasians. More broadly,
heritability can provide important insights into variable contributions
of genetics and environment to cancer and other complex diseases, and can
be used to divide patients into genetically homogenous subsets to
maximize power to detect significant genotype-disease associations.

