Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of biomarkers from highly enriched prostate cancer
microparticles for prognostication of prostate cancer


Prostate cancer microparticles (PCMPs) are essentially fragments of tumor
cells that are present in various bodily fluids such as plasma and urine.
By using nanoscale flow cytometry, multiple biomarkers can be assessed on
PCMPs in patient plasma, a convenient fluid biopsy for prostate cancer
(PCa). Discovering biomarkers specific for metastatic PCMPs would
establish a non-invasive fluid biopsy for detecting the earliest onset of
metastatic disease for patients post-prostatectomy. Discovery of
biomarkers specific to Gleason score 6 (3+3) and 8 (4+4) lesions that are
decorated on the surface of PCMPs would help establish a non-invasvie
fluid biopsy for tumor upstaging (i.e., Gleason 6 to 7) of patients
placed on active surveillance who have deferred prostatectomy. We
hypothesize that biomarkers specific for metastatic PCMPs or Gleason
Score-specific PCMPs can only be discovered via proteomics analysis on
highly purified PCMPs from plasmas which have minimal levels of
non-target microparticles and plasma proteins. To do this, plasmas were
incubated with biotinylated anti-PSMA mAb and PSMA+ve microparticles were
isolated from plasma by using a magnetic column after several
purification runs. Eluted samples were then submitted to nanoscale flow
cytometry in which elution fractions that exhibited minimal non-target
microparticle concentrations (5 ng/mL, Gleason Score 3+3) and metastatic
(N=7, confirmed bone metastases, PSA>10 ng/mL, Gleason 4+4) were
isolated, evaluated and submitted for iTRAQ labeling, high pH reversed
phase fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis. All data was analyzed using
Proteome Discoverer 1.3 and MASCOT v2.3 software. Mass spectometry
analysis revealed 8 proteins significantly upregulated and 5 proteins
downregulated in the majority of metastatic plasma samples compared to
localized plasma samples. Data was normalized to albumin levels by
western blot and mass spectrometry. Based on these results, we have
identified 8 proteins that may be specific for a subpopulation of PCMPs
from metastatic PCa patients. Out of these, 6 may be candidates for flow
cytometry because they are membrane-bound or are cytoskeletal elements
potentially exposed to the extracellular space (CLIC1, PVR, YWHAE, KRT16,
K1C10, KRT2).

