Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constraints-based metabolic flux analysis approach links tumor
stage to metabolic adaptations and survival in cancer cells


The Warburg effect has been observed in many cancers and their high
glycolytic capacity has signified their dependence on glucose. More
recently, glutamine has emerged not only as an important nutrient for
many cancers, but also necessary for their elevated energetic
requirements. Due to these high energetic demands, certain cancer cells
become addicted to glutamine to maintain viability. We postulate that
distinct metabolic reconfigurations of certain cancers define their
dependence or independence on glutamine for survival while maintaining
their proliferative propensity and redox status. An intricate picture of
the metabolic profiles is to be drawn from estimating intracellular
fluxes, by combining stable isotope tracer measurements and experimental
metabolomics data from different cancer cell lines, which have been
observed to be glutamine dependent and independent. To this extent, we
describe an approach that utilizes a redox-balanced model incorporating
the electron transport chain and comprehensive amino-acid metabolic
reactions to elucidate the importance of oxidative phosphorylation, often
overlooked in classical approaches. Diving deeper into the foray of
metabolic reprogramming, we perform in silico experiments using a
constraint-based multi-objective modeling approach. This methodology
elucidates the switching of metabolic pathways in glutamine-dependent and
-independent cancers under nutrient-available and nutrient-deprived
conditions. Our approach assumes that cancer cells operate at optimal
levels, maintaining multiple objectives under certain environmental
conditions. Constraining the proliferative phenotype from a maximal to
minimal levels of the cells under different nutrient conditions emulates
the observed behavior of glutamine-dependent cells under deprivation
conditions and contrasts their metabolic reprogramming against that of
glutamine-independent cells. We corroborated our simulations with
experimentally derived metabolic fluxes and found that glutamine
anabolism over catabolism dictates adaptations and survival in invasive
cancers. Our results will lead to identification of potential targets for
inducing nutrient-sensitivity and enhance current therapeutic approaches.

