Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the contribution of heterogeneity and the tumor
microenvironment in companion diagnostic approaches


As our understanding of the factors which affect efficacy of a targeted
therapy increases, the reliance on histopathological analysis of a
biomarker has also increased. This is often due to the necessity to weigh
the critical factors of a target or biomarker protein in tissue and
cellular context. Currently, histopathologic assessment of tumors which
aims to project patient clinical outcome utilize drug target response
factors, such as relative expression of the drug target of the drug
target or a resistance mechanism in the target (tumor) cells or the tumor
microenvironment (TME ). Multiple studies have also shown that TME
factors such as inflammatory cell content can be prognostic and
predictive. For example, adding the Immunoscore assessment to the TNM
classification systems improves the accuracy of disease prognosis. This
correlation has led to the concept of predictive immunoprofiling, which
uses an individual's immune system profile to predict that patient's
response to immunomodulating antibody therapy. For these reasons, it is
critical to evaluate the drug target or biomarker in conjunction with TME
features when defining a patient selection strategy.Critical factors such
as tissue and/or cellular compartmentalization and tumor heterogeneity
direct the interpretation of these measures and their predictive value.
To address the need for careful, contextual interpretation of
histopathological evaluations, Flagship has built CellMap image analysis
algorithms to directly measure heterogeneity and the TME components in a
whole tissue section. These approaches allow biomarker interpretation in
the complex context of spatial, architectural, and morphological
information to aid histological definition and quantification. In this
study, we utilized a cohort of specimens from 20 colorectal cancer (CRC)
patients and immunologically stained them in order to visualize c-Met, as
a characteristic and biologically relevant therapy target; and CD3+ and
CD8+ to visualize the inflammatory cell environment. Using these
immunohistochemical markers as a prototype for a simultaneous evaluation
of a molecular target and the TME, we characterized the biomarker and
inflammatory content in both the tumor and stroma using our CellMap image
analysis algorithms. This provided detailed accounting of the molecular
target profile (tumor vs stroma; membrane vs cytoplasm vs nucleus), and
the immunoprofile, which allowed us to quantitatively describe and
associate these features relative to each other in the context of
heterogeneity. This data demonstrated discrete patterns of association
between c-met and the TME, serving as a potentially critical measure
which reflects a biological process relevant to disease outcome. These
studies demonstrate novel tools which can assess both the prognostic and
predictive value of key measurements which reflect complex tumor biology.

