Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen synergizes cytotoxic activity of
4-(E)-{(4-hydroxyphenylimino)-methylbenzene, 1,2-diol} (HPIMBD), a novel
resveratrol analogue against breast cancer cells


Tamoxifen is currently the first line of therapy against estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. Prolonged treatment with tamoxifen
has been associated with the development of resistant tumor phenotypes.
Moreover, this treatment strategy is ineffective against ER-negative
breast cancers. In this study, we have investigated the role of
4-(E)-{(4-hydroxyphenylimino)-methylbenzene, 1,2-diol} (HPIMBD), a novel
analog of resveratrol, either alone or in combination with tamoxifen on
the growth inhibition of breast cancer cells. Breast cancer cell lines
MCF-7, T47D, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 as well as non-neoplastic breast
epithelial cell lines MCF-10A, MCF-10F and HMEC were treated with
different doses of HPIMBD or a combination of tamoxifen (2M) and HPIMBD
(at its IC50 dose). Cell proliferation was determined by MTT assays. No
effect on cell proliferation was observed upon treatment of
non-neoplastic breast cells with HPIMBD. A dose dependent growth
inhibition was demonstrated upon treatment of breast cancer cells with
HPIMBD. IC50 values of HPIMBD were determined. Tamoxifen at a dose of 2M
showed no effect on the growth of breast cancer or non-neoplastic breast
epithelial cell lines. However, a significant increase in inhibition of
cellular proliferation of breast cancer cells was demonstrated when
tamoxifen (2M) was used in combination with HPIMBD at its IC50 dose. To
investigate the mechanism of inhibition, autophagy markers, beclin-1 and
LC3B were quantified by Western blot analyses. The combination treatment
significantly increased the expression of autophagy marker beclin-1 and
the cleavage of LC3BI to LC3BII. Cell cycle analysis showed an arrest in
the S-phase by HPIMBD and G0/G1-phase by tamoxifen. Our studies suggest
that a combination of tamoxifen and HPIMBD synergistically inhibit the
proliferation of breast cancer cells. Autophagy and cell cycle arrest
appear to be the primary mechanisms of inhibition by the combination
treatment.

