Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive biomarker identification for response to vantictumab
(OMP-18R5; anti-Frizzled) by mining gene expression data of human breast
cancer xenografts


The Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway has been shown to play key roles in
both normal development and tumorigenesis (Polakis, 2007; MacDonald et
al., 2009).We have developed a monoclonal antibody, vantictumab, that
blocks canonical WNT/-catenin signaling through binding of five Fzd
receptors (1, 2, 5, 7, 8) at a conserved epitope within the extracellular
domain. This antibody inhibits the growth of several tumor types,
including breast, pancreas, colon and lung. Furthermore, studies also
showed that vantictumab reduces tumor-initiating cell frequency and
exhibits synergistic activity with standard-of-care chemotherapeutic
agents (Gurney et al., 2012).Predictive biomarkers are central to
maximizing clinical benefit by targeting breast cancer patients most
likely to respond to vantictumab. We analyzed microarray gene expression
data from 8 minimally passaged breast cancer xenograft models (mostly
triple-negative) with established in vivo responses to vantictumab
combined with paclitaxel (4 responders, 4 non-responders). We utilized
support vector machinerecursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE, Guyon et
al., 2002) to identify genes that can distinguish between responder and
non-responders and SVM for classification. Leave-one-out cross-validation
was used to measure positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive
value (NPV), sensitivity and specificity of the models. The selected
6-gene signature achieved the best performance with
PPV=NPV=sensitivity=specificity=100% in the 8 breast cancer models. In
addition, we observed a strong correlation between the gene signature
biomarker and the ratio of tumor volume (RTV) observed in the breast
xenograft experiments.The identified 6-gene biomarker was used to predict
the response to vantictumab in combination with paclitaxel in 6
additional, HER2-negative breast cancer xenograft models. The efficacy in
all 6 models was predicted successfully by the biomarker. Prevalence data
for the biomarker will be presented for both HER2-negative and
triple-negative breast cancers. The 6-gene biomarker is currently being
evaluated in a Phase 1b study of vantictumab in combination with
paclitaxel in patients with locally recurrent or metastatic HER2-negative
breast cancer.

