Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D deficiency promotes hepatocellular carcinoma tumor
growth in TGF- impaired mice by Smad3 heterozygous deletion


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. Vitamin D (VD) has been implicated in
the prevention of multiple cancers, some of which are characterized by
inactivation of TGF- signaling. Recently, inactivation of TGF- signaling
has been associated with development of HCC. We examined the potential
role of VD in HCC chemoprevention in the context of TGF- inactivation in
a mouse model. Methods: Wild type, Sptbn1+/- and Smad3+/- male mice were
treated with 50 mg/kg of the chemical carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DEN)
via i.p. injection at 14 days of age. At 8 months, the animals were
changed from regular chow (2,200 IU/kg VD) to one of two diets: lower
than normal VD (200 IU/kg) or high VD (10,000 IU/kg). At one year of age,
the livers were harvested for tissue analysis. Several metrics were
assessed including expression levels of 164 proteins from liver tumors by
Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA). Results: Twenty three mice were
treated with lower than normal dose VD while 26 received high dose VD. We
did not find significant differences in blood calcium levels in animals
on either diet. As expected, high VD intervention after 8 months of DEN
injection did not affect the total number of tumors the mice developed;
however, the lower than normal VD regimen promoted tumor growth in the
context of Smad3 disruption (liver-to-body weight ratio 18.37% in
Smad3+/- mice treated with low dose VD vs. 6.25% in Smad3+/- animals
treated with high dose, p=0.028). Furthermore, RPPA data revealed that
the lower than normal VD intake in DEN-treated Smad3 heterozygous null
mice results in repression of tumor suppressing genes such as PDCD4 and
concomitant up-regulation of tumor promoting genes like Stat5A, Bcl2-XL,
PDGFRB and PEA15. Conclusions: Remarkably, lower than normal VD in the
context of Smad3 disruption promotes tumor growth possibly through
repression of tumor suppressing genes such as PDCD4 and up-regulation of
oncogenes like Stat5A, Bcl2-XL, PDGFRB and PEA15. These results suggest
that VD treatment strategies could potentially be significant for
chemoprevention and treatment of HCC in the context of inactivation of
TGF- signaling in patient populations with underlying deficiency of VD.

