Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of HDACi resistance in DLBCL leads to a switch in
subtype towards a more differentiated B-cell and is associated with
increased sensitivity to proteasome inhibition


Diffuse Large B Cell Lymhoma (DLBCL) is a highly heterogeneous disease in
terms of clinical presentation, cell morphology, molecular
characteristics and response to therapy. Gene expression profiling
studies in patients have indicated that DLBCL can be sub-classified in
relationship to the different stages of normal B cell development at
which the cancer arises; germinal center B cell (GCB) and activated B
cell (ABC). More recently, a similar approach distinguished three
different reproducible clusters referred to as oxidative phosphorylation
(OxPhos), B cell receptor/proliferation (BCR) and host response (HR).
Importantly, DLBCL has also been well characterized at the genomic level.
A large number of genes encoding epigenetic modifying enzymes are mutated
in DLBCL, which implicates epigenetic regulation as an important factor
in DLBCL pathogenesis, and a potential target for therapy. Among
epigenetic therapies, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have shown
some clinical activity in DLBCL patients ranging from 5 to 25%, although
responsive patients ultimately develop resistance.Aiming to understand
resistance and response to HDACi in DLBCL, we developed HDACi-resistant
cell lines from the GCB and BCR subtype cells SUDHL6 and SUDHL4. Gene
expression array analysis was performed in parental SUDHL6 and the
resistant clone SUDHL6-X. Strikingly, we found that the resistant cells
have switched gene expression profile from GCB to ABC subtype and from
BCR to OXPHOS. Also, we observe features of more differentiated,
plasmablast-like cells in SUDHL6-X cells and in all other resistant
subclones we developed, including inactivated B cell receptor signaling,
increased endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the unfolded
protein response. These characteristics are reflected in a distinctive
response pattern to other targeted drugs. We observe that HDACi-resistant
cells become cross-resistant to the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab, but,
interestingly, they gain susceptibility to inhibitors of the proteasome
bortezomib and MLN2238. Importantly, analysis of lymphoma cells isolated
from de novo resistant DLBCL patients treated with the HDACi panobinostat
for 15 days showed a switch in gene expression profiles from GCB to ABC,
similar to SUDHL6X cells, indicating that our observations are not
exclusive of in vitro systems. In conclusion, we have shown for the first
time that resistance to HDACi is associated with differentiation of
lymphoma cells that we predict makes them insensitive to drugs targeting
the B cell receptor and anti-CD20 antibody, but sensitive to proteasome
inhibition.

