Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical studies of EpCAM-targeted therapy for human
hepatocellular carcinoma with specific inhibition of stem cell features


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is known to demonstrate a morphological
variety of macroscopic appearances, but their pathological and molecular
differences remain unclear.First, the clinicopathologic characteristics
as well as genome-wide gene expressions were analyzed in relation to the
gross morphology of HCC. Among the patients with nodular type HCC,
significantly poor prognosis was recognized in confluent multinodular
(CM) type in overall survival as well as recurrence-free survival.
Analysis of the genome-wide expression patterns revealed significant
deference of CM-type HCC from other types of HCC. In particular, a stem
cell marker EpCAM was dominantly expressed in CM-type HCC.Next, the
effects of VB4-845, an immunotoxin targeting EpCAM, were evaluated in
HCC. In vitro effects of VB4-845 on human HCC cells, the cytotoxic
activity, sphere-forming ability, and expression of hepatic
stem/progenitor markers were analyzed. In vivo effects of VB4-845 were
evaluated using subcutaneous and orthotopic liver xenograft models. In
all HCC cell lines expressing EpCAM, VB4-845 showed potent cytotoxicity
and was significantly effective in combination with 5-FU. Although 5-FU
did not affect the sphere-forming ability and increased the populations
expressing other stem/progenitor markers CD133 and CD13, VB4-845 strongly
suppressed the sphere-formation and decreased the population expressing
CD133 and CD13. In subcutaneous xenograft models, the combination of
VB4-845 plus 5-FU showed significant regression of tumors compared with
the control. Moreover, in orthotopic liver xenograft models, the
combination therapy dramatically decreased the tumor volume compared with
the control.Our preclinical investigation suggests that EpCAM-targeted
therapy may offer a promising and specific approach for the treatment of
HCC with the poor prognostic phenotype.

