Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bench-to-bedside development of a novel idiotype vaccine against
lymphoma


Available therapies for lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) provide no
survival advantage if started before symptoms of end organ damage
develop. Current recommendations are to follow a program of observation
while patients are in the asymptomatic phase of disease. In this clinical
study we will use idiotypic determinants of B-cell lymphoma surface
immunoglobulins as tumor-specific antigens (idiotype) to develop a
patient-specific vaccine against LPL. By activating the host immune
system through vaccination to eradicate tumor cells, we postulate that
disease control of asymptomatic phase lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma can be
maintained. This novel 2nd generation idiotype vaccine was initially
developed by genetic fusion of idiotype antigen in single-chain format
with a pro-inflammatory chemokine. The central hypothesis is that
antitumor immunity can be triggered by targeting antigen delivery to
antigen-presenting cells in vivo by chemokine receptor-mediated binding,
uptake and processing of idiotype antigens for more efficient
presentation to T cells. A large body of preclinical data demonstrated
that the immunogenecity of the idiotype antigen was considerably enhanced
by such a genetic modification by a mechanism of facilitating antigen
presentation. As a consequence, vaccine-induced prophylactic and
therapeutic antitumor effects were significantly potentiated. To
translate our vaccine therapy from bench to bedside, we established a CLP
laboratory for vaccine preparation. Furthermore, we developed reliable
technology to differentiate lymphoma idiotype antigens from idiotypic
cell-surface immunoglobulins on normal B cells. Using this technology, we
successfully cloned the cDNA encoding variable regions of heavy and light
chains of LPL idiotype, and generated patient-specific plasmid constructs
containing LPL idiotype single chain in fusion with macrophage
inflammatory protein 3 alpha (MIP3a). All three engineering rounds of
down-stream GMP amplification of clinical-grade plasmid DNA have been
accomplished, which eventually paves the way for us to take a lab-grown
agent to a first-in-human clinical trial.

