Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of B-Raf/MEK/ERK signaling suppresses
DR5 expression and impairs cancer cell response to DR5 activation-induced
apoptosis


Inhibition of B-Raf/MEK/ERK signaling is an effective therapeutic
strategy against certain types of cancers such as melanoma and thyroid
cancer. While demonstrated to be effective anticancer agents, B-Raf
inhibitors have also been associated with increased risk of secondary
neoplasms. The induction of apoptosis following ligation of tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) with its
receptor, death receptor 5 (DR5), offers a potent anticancer strategy.
Importantly, this is also a natural immunosurveillance mechanism against
cancer cells. We previously demonstrated that activated B-Raf/MEK/ERK
signaling positively regulates DR5 expression. Hence, our current work
seeks to address whether B-Raf/MEK/ERK inhibition and the consequent
suppression of DR5 expression impedes cancer cell response to DR5
activation-induced apoptosis. We found that both B-Raf (e.g., PLX4032)
and MEK inhibitors (e.g., AZD6244 and PD0325901) effectively inhibited
ERK1/2 phosphorylation and reduced DR5 levels in both human thyroid
cancer and melanoma cells. Similar to the observed effect of genetic
knockdown of the B-Raf gene, pretreatment of cancer cell lines with
either B-Raf or MEK inhibitors attenuated or abolished cellular apoptotic
response induced by TRAIL or the DR5 agonistic antibody AMG655. Our
findings clearly showed that inhibition of the B-Raf/MEK/ERK signaling
suppresses DR5 expression and impairs DR5 activation-induced apoptosis.
These findings warrant further investigation of potential negative impact
of B-Raf or MEK inhibition on TRAIL- or DR5-targeted cancer therapy and
on TRAIL/DR5-mediated cancer immunosurveillance.(This study was supported
by the Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar award,
NIH/NCI SPORE P50 grant CA128613 andWinship Cancer Institute Robbins
Scholar award. FR Khuri and SY Sun are Georgia Cancer Coalition
Distinguished Cancer Scholars. YT Oh is a recipient of Winship Cancer
Institute Robbins Scholar award)

