Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JQ1 suppresses tumor growth in tumorgraft models of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most common form of
pancreatic cancer, is one of the most deadly of malignancies. Patients
often present late in the course of disease limiting treatment options,
with the majority of patients receiving chemotherapy. However, currently
available chemotherapy has not impacted overall patient survival, and new
therapies are urgently needed.Recently, our lab has documented that
tumorgrafts derived specifically from primary PDAC tumors retain
characteristics of the tumors of origin. In terms of drug evaluation,
tumorgraft models have been shown to be predictive of clinical utility
because these models retain tumor heterogeneity, recapitulate tumor
architecture, and contain human stroma. To date, most efforts to use
tumorgraft models to identify effective agents for the treatment of PDAC
have taken an all comers approach; but this approach has thus far
identified no effective therapies.We proposed that JQ1, a compound that
targets the oncogene c-Myc, would be efficacious for the treatment of
PDAC, based on molecular characteristics of these tumors. The oncogene
c-Myc is amplified or overexpressed in a 30-45% of primary or metastatic
PDAC tumors. Also, overexpression of this oncogene is sufficient to
induce tumor formation in a genetically engineered mouse model of PDAC,
suggesting a critical role in the tumorigenesis of this tumor type. JQ1
is a novel compound in that it is a relatively specific bromodomain
inhibitor. Bromodomain containing proteins recognize acetylated lysine
residues on histones and direct the assembly of macromolecular molecules
to the chromatin for transcription. A specific subfamily of these
proteins, known as BETs (bromodomain and extra-terminal), recruit c-Myc
to specific sites for transcription. Exposure of PDAC cells to JQ1
decreases the expression and therefore the activity of c-Myc.To test the
effectiveness of JQ1 in vivo, we administered 50 mg/kg of JQ1 i.p. once a
day for 28 days and monitored tumor growth in a panel of 5 PDAC
tumorgraft models. This dose and schedule of JQ1 administration was well
tolerated in mice with no significant toxicity. Our data indicate that
JQ1 suppressed tumor growth in all 5 models, compared to vehicle control
treated mice. The data also showed a modest, JQ1-induced down regulation
of c-Myc and NFkB. We conclude that JQ1 and other bromodomain inhibitors
warrant further investigation as potentially effective agents for the
treatment of PDAC.This work was supported by UAB/UMN SPORE in pancreatic
cancer (P50 CA101955).

