Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docetaxel-induced mucositis in breast cancer patients: Association
with plasma alpha-1-acid glycoprotein level and SLCO1B3 genotype


Mucositis is one of the major non-hematological adverse effects (AEs) of
docetaxel, besides fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and rash which
limit its use in cancer patients. Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) is an
acute phase reactant glycoprotein and is a primary carrier of docetaxel
in the blood. Docetaxel demonstrates extensive binding to plasma proteins
(>98%) including AAG, lipoproteins and albumin. However, there is a
remarkable inter-individual variation of AAG level among cancer patients.
Low plasma AAG levels will result in excessive free drug in the
circulation, which in turn causes more AEs. Consequently, either the dose
is reduced or treatment modality is diverted. In addition, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes encoding for proteins involved
in the transport of docetaxel (SLCO1B3) could lead to reduced clearance
and accumulation in the circulation and subsequent AEs. Hence, we
investigated 91 Malaysian breast cancer patients receiving docetaxel as a
single agent chemotherapy at 90-100 mg/m2 and 75 mg/m2 in the adjuvant
and metastatic settings respectively, to determine the association
between the SNP (SLCO1B3 334TG), plasma AAG level and docetaxel AEs. The
plasma AAG level was determined using Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) technique, while the SNPs were analyzed using PCR-RFLP technique
followed by DNA sequencing of selected samples. The patients consisted of
49 Chinese (54%), 34 Malays (37%) and 8 Indians (9%). We found a
significant difference in plasma AAG level between patients with
mucositis and those without (17874 mg/dl vs 22597 mg/dl,PMucositis is one
of the major non-hematological adverse effects (AEs) of docetaxel,
besides fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and rash which limit its use
in cancer patients. Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) is an acute phase
reactant glycoprotein and is a primary carrier of docetaxel in the blood.
Docetaxel demonstrates extensive binding to plasma proteins (>98%)
including AAG, lipoproteins and albumin. However, there is a remarkable
inter-individual variation of AAG level among cancer patients. Low plasma
AAG levels will result in excessive free drug in the circulation, which
in turn causes more AEs. Consequently, either the dose is reduced or
treatment modality is diverted. In addition, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes encoding for proteins involved in the
transport of docetaxel (SLCO1B3) could lead to reduced clearance and
accumulation in the circulation and subsequent AEs. Hence, we
investigated 91 Malaysian breast cancer patients receiving docetaxel as a
single agent chemotherapy at 90-100 mg/m2 and 75 mg/m2 in the adjuvant
and metastatic settings respectively, to determine the association
between the SNP (SLCO1B3 334TG), plasma AAG level and docetaxel AEs. The
plasma AAG level was determined using Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) technique, while the SNPs were analyzed using PCR-RFLP technique
followed by DNA sequencing of selected samples. The patients consisted of
49 Chinese (54%), 34 Malays (37%) and 8 Indians (9%). We found a
significant difference in plasma AAG level between patients with
mucositis and those without (17874 mg/dl vs 22597 mg/dl,P<0.05).
Moreover, patients with mutant SLCO1B3 334GG who developed diarrhea also
had mucositis (pMucositis is one of the major non-hematological adverse
effects (AEs) of docetaxel, besides fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
and rash which limit its use in cancer patients. Alpha-1-acid
glycoprotein (AAG) is an acute phase reactant glycoprotein and is a
primary carrier of docetaxel in the blood. Docetaxel demonstrates
extensive binding to plasma proteins (>98%) including AAG, lipoproteins
and albumin. However, there is a remarkable inter-individual variation of
AAG level among cancer patients. Low plasma AAG levels will result in
excessive free drug in the circulation, which in turn causes more AEs.
Consequently, either the dose is reduced or treatment modality is
diverted. In addition, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes
encoding for proteins involved in the transport of docetaxel (SLCO1B3)
could lead to reduced clearance and accumulation in the circulation and
subsequent AEs. Hence, we investigated 91 Malaysian breast cancer
patients receiving docetaxel as a single agent chemotherapy at 90-100
mg/m2 and 75 mg/m2 in the adjuvant and metastatic settings respectively,
to determine the association between the SNP (SLCO1B3 334TG), plasma AAG
level and docetaxel AEs. The plasma AAG level was determined using Enzyme
Linked Immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technique, while the SNPs were
analyzed using PCR-RFLP technique followed by DNA sequencing of selected
samples. The patients consisted of 49 Chinese (54%), 34 Malays (37%) and
8 Indians (9%). We found a significant difference in plasma AAG level
between patients with mucositis and those without (17874 mg/dl vs 22597
mg/dl,P<0.05). Moreover, patients with mutant SLCO1B3 334GG who developed
diarrhea also had mucositis (p<0.05). In conclusion, patients with lower
plasma AAG level are more susceptible to develop mucositis. In addition,
patients carrying mutant SLCO1B3 334GG who have diarrhea tend to develop
mucositis concurrently. Plasma AAG level and SNPs could serve as
potential predictive biomarkers of docetaxel-induced mucositis.We would
like to thank Malaysian Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE) and
University Malaya for funding this project through FRGS (04-04-10-848FR)
and HIR (UM.C/625/1/HIR) grants.

