Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of beta-catenin and cyclin D1 in endometrial
cancer


Introduction:Wnt/beta-catenin/cyclin D1 pathway has been suggested to be
involved in cell proliferation in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas
(EEC), in addition to the activation of the PI3K pathway via PIK3CA
and/or PTEN mutations. We previously reported that the mutations of
cyclin D1 (CCND1 gene) promotes cell proliferation in EEC. However, the
role of beta-catenin and its relationship with cyclin D1 is not yet well
known. In this study, we focused on alterations of beta-catenin and
cyclin D1 and their clinical impact in EEC.Methods:This study was
conducted under approval of ethics committee of the institute and
informed consent from each patient. Expressions of cyclin D1 and
beta-catenin were examined by tissue microarray in formalin fixed 120
samples of EEC. The expression levels were evaluated by two pathologists,
and the staining was classified as overexpressed when >50% of tumor cells
showed strong staining in cytoplasm (for beta-catenin) and nucleus (for
cyclin D1). Genomic DNA was isolated in 91 primary surgical specimens.
Mutations of beta-catenin (exon 3 of CTNNB1 gene) and Cyclin D1 (exon 5
of CCND1 gene) were examined by PCR-direct sequencing. We constructed
expression plasmid of various types of mutant beta-catenin and performed
colony formation assay using these plasmids.Result:In 120 samples, beta
catenin and cyclin D1 were overexpressed in 5 (4%) and 7 (6%) cases,
respectively. Median follow-up period of these patients is 85 months.
Interestingly, over-expression of these two proteins was not overlapped
each other. In these 12 samples, 7 of 12 cases (58%) were stage III or
IV. However, recurrence was only observed in one patient (5-year
progression free survival rate is 92%). Mutations of CCND1 and CTNNB1
were detected in 2 (2%) and 9 (10%) cases, respectively. We confirmed
that all these mutations are somatic. Mutations of CCND1 and CTNNB1 were
also mutually exclusive. Although the two cases with CCND1 mutations died
of disease, none of the nine cases with CTNNB1 mutations got recurrent
(p=0.018 by Fisher's exact test). In colony formation assay, mutant
beta-catenin at codon 32 and codon 37 did not increase the colony number,
compared with wild-type beta-catenin (control), although mutants at codon
34 significantly augmented the colony formation.Conclusion:Aberrant
expression of both beta-catenin and cyclin D1 are present in EEC, through
mutations and/or overexpression, and alterations of beta-catenin might be
associated with favorable prognosis. Our data suggest that function of
mutant beta-catenin might be distinct among each mutation type. Further
study is warranted to clarify the role of wnt/beta-catenin/cyclin D1
pathway in EEC.

