Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors targeting the activation function-2 site
of estrogen receptor-


Approximately 75% of Breast Cancers (BCas) are classified as Estrogen
Receptor alpha (ER) positive. Treatment with anti-estrogens such as
Tamoxifen has been the main therapeutic approach for more than 30 years.
However, one third of women treated with Tamoxifen for 5 years develop
recurrent disease. Experimental and clinical observations have suggested
that ER signalling continues to play an important role even after the
development of resistance. Moreover, biopsies from BCa patients who
relapsed on Tamoxifen indicated that ER expression was retained in more
than 50% of the cases. Because of the emergence of hormone resistance,
there is a clear need to develop entirely novel anti-ER therapeutics,
such as drugs that would directly disrupt the interaction between ER and
its coactivator proteins at the corresponding regulatory interfaces,
exemplified by a well-characterized Activation Function-2 (AF-2) site.In
the current study we have used state of artificial intelligence systems
to rationally select new anti-ER drug candidates. Using the power of
modern computers, we performed large-scale docking using millions of
existing chemicals from the ZINC database and identified several
promising small molecules as candidate AF-2 binders. We then conducted
biological screens to identify compounds that can bind to the AF-2 pocket
and inhibit ER transactivation. A reporter assay was developed using
T47D-Kbluc breast cancer cells, a line which had been stably transfected
with an estrogen responsive luciferase reporter gene construct consisting
of three estrogen response elements (EREs) upstream of a TATA promoter,
to evaluate the potential of these compounds to inhibit ER
transcriptional activity. Compounds that inhibited ER-mediated
transcription of the reporter gene in a concentration dependent manner
were further analysed. These compounds do not displace estrogen, but
block ER-coactivator interaction, as measured by TR-FRET assay, thereby
confirming that inhibition of coactivator recruitment is not by the
allosteric mechanism of conventional antagonists. One of our best
compounds, VPC-16046, shows direct reversible binding to the ER ligand
binding domain as detected by Biolayer Interferometry assay. This
compound demonstrated a strong anti-proliferative effect on MCF7, T47D
and Tamoxifen resistant cells without affecting the growth of ER-negative
HeLa cells, used as a control in MTS assay.In summary, our study has
identified a novel class of ER AF2 inhibitors that have the potential to
effectively inhibit ER transcriptional activity by a mechanism which does
not target the estrogen binding site and thereby circumvents treatment
resistance seen with conventional, clinically used anti-estrogens.
Treatment with these inhibitors should lead to a substantial improvement
in the survival rate of women with advanced Tamoxifen-resistant BCa.

