Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cripto/GRP78 signaling promotes the stem cell phenotype in normal
and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells


Microenvironmental factors are critical regulators of stem cell and tumor
cell behavior. However, few stem cell factors have been identified and
targeted in breast and other cancers. Using a highly enriched stem cell
pool isolated from fetal mammary rudiments and single cell analyses, we
have identified the onco-fetal protein Cripto as a potent soluble factor
that regulates the mammary stem cell state. Cripto is a
GPI-anchored/secreted signaling protein and a known regulator of PI3K/AKT
and TGF-beta pathways. Here, we develop a novel Cripto antagonist,
ALK4L75A-Fc, which selectively blocks the growth factor-like effects of
soluble Cripto. We show that this antagonist promotes the differentiation
of mammary stem cells cultured ex vivo while Cripto treatment maintains
the stem cell phenotype and yields colonies with enhanced mammary gland
reconstitution capacity. We previously discovered that Cripto signaling
requires binding to cell surface Glucose Response Protein 78kDa (GRP78).
GRP78 is an HSP70 family member that is induced by stresses including
hypoxia and glucose deprivation and it is highly expressed in tumors
where these conditions prevail. We show here that cell surface GRP78
marks fetal mouse mammary stem cells and a population of bipotent adult
mammary epithelial cells that are selectively responsive to soluble
Cripto in vitro. GRP78high mammary epithelial cells also harbor
substantially higher stem cell activity upon transplantation than
GRP78low cells. Consistently, we further show that deletion of GRP78 from
adult mammary epithelial cells ex vivo blocks mammary gland
reconstitution. Finally, we find that Cripto antagonism with ALK4L75A-Fc
inhibits the proliferation of triple negative breast cancer cell lines in
vitro and that this antagonist can also inhibit tumor growth in vivo.
Since Cripto and GRP78 are both induced by hypoxia and other stressful
conditions found in tumors, our data raise the possibility that
Cripto/GRP78 signaling may exacerbate breast and other cancers by
increasing the number of stem cell-like tumor cells in tumor
microenvironments where these conditions predominate.

