Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1 is a crucial factor in the development of peritoneal
dissemination via natural metastatic routes in scirrhous gastric cancer


BackgroundThe molecular mechanisms of peritoneal dissemination in gastric
cancer still remain unclear. This study was designed to clarify the role
of HIF-1 in the development of peritoneal dissemination of gastric
cancer.MethodsHIF-1 knockdown (KD) cells were established in the
scirrhous gastric cancer cell line 58As9 by siRNA transfection. In
western blot analysis, HIF-1 expression was assessed using KD and the
control transfectant (SC) cells under normoxia (20%O2) as well as hypoxia
(1%O2). A series of in vitro analysis were conducted and compared between
the 2 transfectants. Using nude mice, peritoneal dissemination was
evaluated by orthotopic implantation (o.i.) and intraperitoneal injection
(i.p.) models. Finally, tumor angiogenesis of venous and lymph vessels
was immunohistochemically analyzed.ResultsDeficient HIF-1 expression was
observed in KD, but not SC cells under normoxia and hypoxia. In vitro
proliferation and invasion was significantly reduced in KD compared with
SC cells. On contrary, HIF-1 exerts unfavorable effects on anoikis
resistance and adhesion ability.In o.i. model, stomach tumor was highly
developed in both of KD (86.7%) and SC mice(100%). On the other hand,
peritoneal dissemination was more frequently observed in the SC mice
(93%) than in the KD mice (13%) (p BackgroundThe molecular mechanisms of
peritoneal dissemination in gastric cancer still remain unclear. This
study was designed to clarify the role of HIF-1 in the development of
peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer.MethodsHIF-1 knockdown (KD)
cells were established in the scirrhous gastric cancer cell line 58As9 by
siRNA transfection. In western blot analysis, HIF-1 expression was
assessed using KD and the control transfectant (SC) cells under normoxia
(20%O2) as well as hypoxia (1%O2). A series of in vitro analysis were
conducted and compared between the 2 transfectants. Using nude mice,
peritoneal dissemination was evaluated by orthotopic implantation (o.i.)
and intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) models. Finally, tumor angiogenesis
of venous and lymph vessels was immunohistochemically
analyzed.ResultsDeficient HIF-1 expression was observed in KD, but not SC
cells under normoxia and hypoxia. In vitro proliferation and invasion was
significantly reduced in KD compared with SC cells. On contrary, HIF-1
exerts unfavorable effects on anoikis resistance and adhesion ability.In
o.i. model, stomach tumor was highly developed in both of KD (86.7%) and
SC mice(100%). On the other hand, peritoneal dissemination was more
frequently observed in the SC mice (93%) than in the KD mice (13%) (p <
0.001). In the i.p. model, the dissemination highly occurred in both mice
(each 100%), while greater number of nodules was observed in the KD mice
(p = 0.017). Angiogenesis with vascular invasion were more highly
developed in the SC stomach tumors (venous vessels: p=0.001, lymph
vessels: p=0.043). In the disseminated nodules, the vascular invasion was
developed at intratumoral regions in the SC o.i. mice, however such
appearance was not found in i.p. mice.ConclusionsThis study clearly
showed that HIF-1 is crucial for the development of peritoneal
dissemination in the spontaneous metastatic (o.i.) model. Moreover, in
i.p. model, larger number of dissemination was found in KD than SC mice,
indicating that the dissemination by o.i. would not be developed via
seeding mechanism. Analysis of tumor angiogenesis in o.i. model
demonstrated that HIF-1 activated venous as well as lymph angiogenesis in
the stomach tumor. In peritoneal disseminated nodules, vascular invasion
was observed at intratumoral area in o.i. SC mice, but not in the i.p.
mice. This unique feature further suggests that the dissemination in o.i.
mice might be developed by extravasation of cancer cells, which are
micro-connected to the stomach tumor via trans-vessel route.

