Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bryostatin 1 and the simplified analog Merle 23 have similar and
opposing properties on mouse epidermal cells and mouse skin


Protein kinase C (PKC) is differentially regulated in a range of cancers
and has become an attractive therapeutic target. A number of natural
compounds exist that have been found to regulate PKCs, and the biological
responses of each compound can vary. The PKC activator PMA is an
established tumor promoter, while others, such as the bryostatins, are
non-tumor promoting and have inhibitory effects on the PKC pathway.
Because of its effects on the PKC pathway, bryostatin 1 is currently in
clinical trials as an anti-cancer agent. Limited availability and the
difficulty involved in synthesizing bryostatin 1 make its use as an
anti-cancer agent less attractive. Merle 23, a simplified synthetic
analog of bryostatin 1, could be an alternative to bryostatin 1 if it
acted similarly. Initial investigations of Merle 23 have revealed
biological responses both similar to bryostatin 1 and similar to PMA,
depending on the system. In U937 leukemia cells Merle 23 acts similar to
PMA, and in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line it behaves more like
bryostatin 1. Its behavior in mouse skin is of particular interest, since
this is the system in which the tumor promoting activity of PMA and the
anti-tumor promoting activity of bryostatin 1 have been characterized.
The activity of Merle 23 was compared to PMA and bryostatin 1 in mouse
epidermal cells and mouse skin. In mouse primary keratinocytes PMA
produces a prolonged morphological response, while the morphological
response to bryostatin 1 is transient. The response to Merle 23 is
intermediate, but more similar to bryostatin 1. When applied
simultaneously, Merle 23, like bryostatin 1, is able to protect the cells
from the morphological response induced by PMA. In the PKC pathway, all
three compounds promote similar levels of initial PKC activation and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation. By 24 hrs, however, the responses differ. At high
concentrations, bryostatin 1 protects PKC from down regulation whereas
Merle 23 does not. Bryostatin 1 is also much more potent for down
regulation of PKC, whereas Merle 23 and PMA are similar. The inflammatory
response was measured by monitoring the transcript levels of various
genes involved in inflammation. PMA induced the largest increase in
transcript levels, while Merle 23 was more similar to bryostatin 1.
Short-term in vivo analysis reveals no epidermal thickening in response
to low doses of Merle 23 whereas the corresponding dose of PMA induced
significant hyperplasia. The in vivo analysis of Merle 23 is ongoing. The
results presented suggest that Merle 23 behaves more similarly to
bryostatin 1 in the mouse epidermal cells at the level of biological
response, raising the possibility that it may likewise be non-promoting.
The results emphasize that the structure activity relations responsible
for the distinct behavior between PMA and bryostatin 1 are distinct for
different cellular systems and different biological endpoints.

