Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of hyperthermia on DNA repair capacity and long term
survival in ovarian and colon carcinoma cells


Background:Gynecological and gastrointestinal malignancies have the
potential to spread into the peritoneal cavity. Peritoneal carcinomatosis
is associated with rapid disease progression and poor prognosis.
Aggressive cytoreductive surgery combined with intraperitoneal
hyperthermic chemotherapy (HIPEC) is actually considered as promising
treatment option. However, it is unknown if all cytotoxic drugs currently
used in the clinics can be efficiently potentiated by hyperthermia.
Furthermore, the mechanisms of hyperthermia induced sensitization of
cancer cells to chemotherapy are poorly understood.Methods:Two ovarian
(Ovcar 3, Ovcar 8) and 2 colon carcinoma cell lines (HCT116, LOVO3) were
pulse treated for one hour with clinically relevant dosages of cisplatin,
oxaliplatin, doxorubicin, mytomycin C, paclitaxel, and 5-FU at 37C or
42C. Long term survival was assessed using colony forming assay. Single
and double strand breaks were quantified using alkaline COMET immediately
after treatment and in a time course for up to 8 h. Efficacy of DNA
repair was determined by H2AX, Rad51, and P53BP1 foci
formation.Results:Hyperthermia significantly potentiated cytotoxicity of
cisplatin, oxaliplatin, mitomycin C, and doxorubicin in all cell lines
investigated. The most prominent effects were observed with doxorubicin
leading to an almost complete loss of viability. Of note, hyperthermia
did not affect cytotoxicity of paclitaxel and 5-FU.The molecular
mechanism of hyperthermia induced sensitization to doxorubicin was
further investigated. Hyperthermia significantly influenced doxorubicin
transport since intracellular concentration was approximately doubled at
42C compared to 37C. However, despite adjusting the concentration of
doxorubicin at 42C to that observed with 37C, hyperthermia still
potentiated cytotoxicity indicating that other mechanisms are also
involved. We detected no differences in the amount of DNA strand breaks
immediately after treatment between 37C and 42C. However, time course
experiments revealed a significant delay in DNA repair at 42C. Whereas
DNA strand breaks were almost completely repaired after 8 h at 37C, there
was hardly any repair detectable at 42C. This was also mirrored by an
enhanced number of H2AX foci in nuclei of cells treated with doxorubicin
at 42C 3 h after treatment. Interestingly, we observed no differences in
the number of Rad51 but a significantly enhanced number of P53BP1 foci at
42C indicating a shift towards unfaithful non homologous end joining
(NHEJ) at higher temperature.Conclusion:Hyperthermia significantly
potentiated effects of DNA damaging agents such as doxorubicin via two
different mechanisms. (1) Enhanced temperature leads to an enhanced
uptake or reduced efflux of doxorubicin. (2) Hyperthermia reduces DNA
repair capacity and potentially shifts DNA double strand repair to an
error-prone NHEJ.

