Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual MMP-7-proximity-activated and folate-targeted nanoparticles
for siRNA delivery


We have developed a dual, folic acid (FA) and matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP), proximity-activated targeting (PAT) smart polymeric nanoparticle
(SPN) for tumor-specific siRNA delivery. The nanocarrier was designed to
expose concealed FA ligands specifically in regions of elevated MMP
activity, resulting in targeted uptake by folate receptor-expressing
cells.Site-selective chemistry and reversible addition-fragmentation
chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization were used to prepare diblock
copolymers {p(DMAEMA)-b-p(DMAEMA-PAA-BMA) (SPN)} terminated with either
MMP-7 peptide coupled to a Y-shaped 20 kDa PEG (PAT-SPN) or a 2 kDa
linear PEG coupled to FA (FA-SPN). These amphiphilic polymers were
co-assembled in aqueous media, forming mixed micelles consisting of 0,
25, 50, 75, 100 mol% FA and presenting zeta potentials of -0.21, -0.20,
+1.75, +6.71 and +12.2 mV, respectively. Cleavage by MMP-7 was confirmed
by decreased particle diameter (e.g., 25% FA micelle diameter decreased
from 54 to 48 nm) and simultaneous increase in zeta potential (-0.20 to
+8.11 mV). These data suggest that MMP-7 removal of the PEG corona from
the nanocarriers revealed the underlying polycationic charge of the
pDMAEMA core.Intracellular uptake of PAT/FA-SPNs was investigated in FA
receptor-expressing breast cancer cells by confocal microscopy and flow
cytometry. Pre-treatment with exogenous MMP-7 to mimic the
proteolytically active microenvironment of human breast cancers, elevated
cellular uptake 2.3-fold for single targeting PAT-SPN and 4.6-fold for
dual-targeting PAT/FA-SPN compared to intact PAT-SPN. Cell uptake of
uncleaved PAT/FA-SPN was statistically equivalent to untreated cells.
These data suggest that the 20 kDa Y-shaped PEG effectively shields both
the underlying cationic charge and the FA, and also blocks nonspecific
cellular interactions of the SPN. 75-100% FA-SPN polymer reduced the
dependency of cellular uptake on MMP-7 activity. Excess FA reduced the
uptake of FA-SPN-containing micelles, consistent with FA
receptor-dependent uptake following MMP activation.Functional protein
knockdown delivered by PAT/FA-SPN was validated using
luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells. 50% PAT/FA-SPN, pre-activated
with MMP-7and loaded with luciferase siRNA, resulted in significant
suppression of luciferase expression relative to controls (no MMP
activation or competitive inhibition with free FA or scrambled siRNA),
confirming the efficient dual PAT/FA targeting and endosomal escape of
this designed nanoparticle.Unlike other similar technologies, this
micelle design is optimized for use in vivo. Animal studies confirm an
extended blood half-life, appropriate organ distribution, minimal
toxicity and significant siRNA activity in mammary tumors.1. Li, H. et
al. Adv. Func. Mater. 2013. 10.1002/adfm.201202215SupportDoD CDMRP
(W81XWH-10-1-0445/0446); Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science &
Engineering

