Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPAR beta/delta is a novel therapeutic target in acute myeloid
leukemia


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by the differentiation
arrest and rapid proliferation of abnormal white blood cells. Current
therapeutics involves the use of chemotherapeutic agents, which possess
high toxicities and poor efficacies. Thus, there is an unparalleled need
to identify low-toxicity therapies to improve the mortality of these
patients. Facilitating the maturation of acute myeloid leukemia cells
induces their growth arrest and death without the need for high doses of
overt toxicity from chemotherapies. Therefore, we seek to identify
differentiating agents capable of inducing monocytic differentiation
without deleterious side-effects on normal hematopoietic tissues. One
possible approach to promote AML cellular differentiation is manipulating
the activity or expression of proteins, such as PPAR delta, that are
known to modulate cellular growth processes. PPAR delta is part of a
family of nuclear hormone receptors that function as transcription
factors to induce the activation of genes related to cellular growth,
development, and metabolism. PPAR alpha and PPAR gamma have been
extensively characterized in the context of leukemia. However, little is
known about PPAR delta. In the current study, we sought to delineate the
role of PPAR delta in AML and analyze whether inhibiting the PPAR delta
pathway would induce differentiation in AML cells. Inhibiting PPAR delta
led to a significant increase in monocytic differentiation in AML cell
lines in vitro, as measured by immunophenotyping by flow cytometry and
NBT reduction assays. For instance, we observed 3% CD11b expression in
untreated HL60, OCI, NB4, and U937 cell lines and 40% CD11b expression
after PPAR inhibition. Importantly, PPAR delta does not lead to toxic
effects on non-leukemic cells at similar doses. These results were
further supported by morphological evidence of monocytic differentiation
seen from Wright-Giemsa staining and a 40% decrease in AML cell
proliferation following PPAR delta inhibition using the MTT cell
proliferation assay. A 34% decrease in self-renewal capabilities of
leukemic cells after PPAR delta inhibition suggests permanent effects on
differentiation and growth arrest, as determined by colony assays.
Consistent with growth inhibition, treatment with PPAR delta inhibitors
induced the expression of cell cycle and proliferation-related genes such
c-Myc, p21, and p27 in a dose-dependent manner. Overall, our findings
suggest that PPAR delta inhibitors may possess promising clinical
relevance as potential candidates for non-toxic alternatives to
chemotherapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

