Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gliomaspheres mimic the hypoxia-Notch signaling axis of
glioblastoma tumors


Background and objectives: Notch signaling plays an oncogenic role during
gliomagenesis. Synergism of hypoxia with Notch pathway is known to
aggravate different cancers. We studied the association between Notch
signaling and hypoxia in human glioblastoma (GBM) samples which are
characterized by intratumoral hypoxia. We also carried out in-vitro
analysis in U87MG cell line enriched in stem cells under low oxygen
conditions. The study aimed at identifying a modular gene subset that
might be a characteristic of the Notch pathway response in hypoxic GBM
tumors and GBM gliomaspheres; which might assist in individualized
therapeutics.Methods: Expression of Notch receptors, Dll/Jag ligands,
Hes/Hey targets and hypoxia markers was analyzed in 35 GBMs by q-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. Spearman's test, clustering and statistical
analyses were applied to assess the correlation between hypoxia and Notch
pathway upregulation. Expression analysis was also done in U87MG cells
grown in stem cell culture conditions under hypoxia using q-PCR and
western blot.Results: Using various statistical analyses, we found HIF-1
to be correlated with the expression of maximum number of Notch pathway
genes, followed by PGK1, OPN and VEGF. Well-segregated tumor clusters
accounting for differential Notch genes' expression were produced using
gene clustering and principal components analysis by ordering the GBMs in
decreasing levels of HIF-1/PGK1. By logistic regression, a five hypoxia
marker combination (HIF-1/PGK1/VEGF/CA9/OPN) was determined as the best
predictor for Notch signaling augmentation in GBM. A similar Notch-axis
(Notch1/Dll1/Hes1/Hes6/Hey1/Hey2) was activated in U87MG gliomaspheres
under hypoxia.Interpretation and conclusions: The hypoxia markers most
associated with Notch signaling upregulation in resected GBM were
identified. Similar components of the Notch pathway were also found to be
activated in hypoxia-exposed gliomaspheres, supporting them as an
in-vitro model for studying the perturbations of hypoxia-Notch signaling
axis.

