Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity relationships of novel N-benzoyl arylpiperidine
and arylazetidine FASN inhibitors


De novo synthesis of fatty acids in mammalian cells is catalyzed by Fatty
Acid Synthase (FASN), a complex dimeric protein with seven catalytic
domains that processes acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA into palmitic acid.
Palmitate and other fatty acids are essential for normal physiological
processes like energy storage and production and are key intermediates in
the biosynthesis of hormones and other essential biomolecules. The role
of FASN in cancer has been well documented over the past decade. While
FASN is expressed at low levels in most normal tissue (except liver and
adipose tissue), it is highly expressed in many tumors including
prostate, breast, and colon. FASN overexpression and activity is
correlated with poor prognosis and disease progression.Numerous
publications describing anti-cancer effects of small molecule FASN
inhibitors have appeared in the scientific and patent literature.
Recently, several groups reported anticancer and antiviral activities of
N-benzoyl arylpiperidine FASN inhibitors. In this work we describe the
discovery of novel N-benzoyl arylpiperidine and arylazetidine compounds
that potently inhibit FASN enzymatic activity in vitro and
antiproliferative activity in FASN-sensitive cell lines. We conducted
focused structure-activity (SAR) studies exploring the benzoyl group and
the aryl substituent on the piperidine or azetidine heterocycle to
optimize potency, improve properties and oral bioavailability, and
achieve in vivo FASN-driven pharmacodynamic (PD) activity. X-ray crystal
structures of these molecules confirm a unique binding mode within the KR
subdomain of FASN. Using structural information and molecular modeling,
we were able to rationalize SAR trends and design FASN inhibitors with
excellent in vitro potency and cellular activity. These efforts resulted
in the discovery of compounds exemplified by JNJ-54380482, a potent FASN
inhibitor (IC50 = 26 nM) that inhibits proliferation of A2780 ovarian
cells in lipid-reduced medium (LRM, IC50 = 8.9 nM). Engagement of FASN in
cellular assays is confirmed by rescue of proliferation upon addition of
palmitate. JNJ-54380482 is orally bioavailable in mice (F% = 51) and
exhibits excellent plasma exposure when dosed at 10 mg/kg (Cmax = 2.6 M,
T1/2 = 5 h). In a PD study using H460 lung xenograft-bearing mice, oral
treatment with 30 mg/kg of JNJ-54380482 results in 36-fold higher tumor
levels of malonyl-CoA vs vehicle.In summary, we synthesized several
hundred compounds having the N-benzoyl arylpiperidine and arylazetidine
chemotypes. Utilizing structural information from X-ray co-crystals to
understand SAR and guide the design of more potent molecules, we
identified >100 analogs with highly potent FASN enzymatic (IC50 50 nM)
and antiproliferative activities in A2780 cells in LRM (IC50 100 nM). Key
examples from these series have good in vitro properties, are orally
bioavailable, and demonstrate FASN target engagement in a mouse PD model.

