Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonclinical characterization and tolerability of a surrogate
anti-mesothelin-MMAE antibody-drug conjugate


Mesothelin (MSLN) is a cell surface glycoprotein widely expressed in
several cancers with normal expression limited to the serosal mesothelia,
features of an ideal target for antibody-based therapy. SS1P, a
(dsFv)-PE38 immunotoxin to MSLN that kills cells by inhibition of protein
synthesis, exhibits minor clinical responses as monotherapy, but was
dose-limited by pleuritis, likely an antigen-dependent toxicity (Hassan
et al., (2007) Clin Cancer Res 13 p3144). As mesothelial cells divide
infrequently, we evaluated whether an anti-mitotic antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) directed to MSLN would be better tolerated. Our humanized
lead anti-MSLN-MMAE (mc-vc-PAB-monomethylauristatin E) conjugate shows
excellent preclinical activity (see accompanying abstract by Scales et
al), but is specific to human MSLN, so a surrogate ADC that cross-reacts
with cynomolgus monkey and rat MSLN was generated for non-clinical
toxicity studies.While both the lead and the surrogate antibodies
recognize human MSLN, they bound to different epitopes and the surrogate
binding was sensitive to glycosylation, only recognizing a subset of cell
lines expressing human MSLN with high affinity. The affinity of the
surrogate antibody for cynomolgus monkey MSLN is 5 to 22-fold lower than
that of the lead antibody for human MSLN, depending on its glycosylation
pattern in the human parental cell line to which it was compared.
Nonetheless, the surrogate antibody detects endogenous MSLN in monkey
pleura and the surrogate ADC exhibits robust cytotoxic activity against
monkey MSLN-expressing cells in vitro. Importantly, the surrogate ADC
demonstrated comparable in vivo efficacy to the lead ADC against BJAB
xenografts expressing monkey or human MSLN respectively, thus validating
its use in safety studies. We thus conducted a repeat-dose monkey
toxicity study with a clinically relevant (q3w x5) dosing schedule, which
yielded similar results for both surrogate and lead ADCs (the primary
finding being reversible myelotoxicity, an antigen-independent toxicity
similar to those of other IgG1-MMAE ADCs (Li et al., (2013), Mol Can
Thera 12 p1255)). Unlike SS1P, there was no evidence of target-dependent
pleuritis, nor any other serositis. Our data suggest that anti-MSLN-MMAE
ADCs may be safer than SS1P and helped define the Phase I starting dose.

