Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of the LIM-only protein FHL2 enhances TGF- expression and
fibrogenesis


The four and a half LIM-only protein 2 (FHL2) is a multifunctional
protein involved in many biological and physiopathological processes. We
previously showed that enhanced expression of FHL2 in hepatocytes
increases both cell proliferation and apoptosis, and promotes liver
tumorigenesis associated with activation of the Wnt/-catenin signaling
(Nout et al, J Hepatol., 2012) and that deletion of FHL2 suppresses in
vitro and in vivo an array of NF-B-mediated effects including cytokine
expression, hepatocyte proliferation, and DEN-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis (Dahan et al, Mol. Cell. Biol., 2013). Here we
report that FHL2-deficient mice developed more severe hepatic fibrosis
compared to wild type (wt) counterparts after bile duct ligation
operation or administration of chemical agents thioacetamide and carbon
tetrachloride, as demonstrated by Sirius red staining and mRNA expression
of -smooth muscle actin, collagen-1 and transforming growth factor
(TGF)-1. Moreover, in the absence of any treatment, the resident hepatic
macrophages (Kupffer cells) and peritoneal macrophages in FHL2-deficient
mice produce elevated levels of the profibrotic cytokine TGF-1. Because
FHL2 exerts dual functions as a transcription co-activator or
co-repressor, we searched for a direct effect of FHL2 on the TGF-1
promoter. Co-transfection of murine TGF-1 promoter-luciferase reporter
constructs with FHL2 into 293T cells did not evidence significant
repressive effects of FHL2 overexpression on the TGF-1 promoter.
Remarkably however, the TGF-1 promoter activity was drastically increased
in FHL2-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) compared to wt MEFs. The
hypothesis that FHL2 may play a part in chromatin remodeling is currently
investigated by analyzing the role of FHL2 on histone modifications
including acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation. Of note, we have
recently shown that FHL2 activates TGF- signaling by increasing the
activity of Arkadia, a positive regulator of the pathway (Xia et al, J
Biol. Chem. 2013). All together, these data suggest a complex regulation
of TGF- signaling by FHL2. Finally, in line with recently published data
by Huss et al (BMC Gastroenterology, 2013) and Alnajar et al (PLoS ONE,
2013), we also observed increased renal fibrogenesis in FHL2-mutant mice
following Leptospira infection, implicating FHL2 in the control of
fibrogenesis in multiple tissues.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

