Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a global proteomics approach for
identifying novel binding partners of resveratrol


The dietary constituent resveratrol (trans-3,5,4-trihydroxystilbene) has
received a great deal of scientific attention and publicity due to its
broad ranging pharmacological effects in preclinical systems, including
cancer chemoprevention in a variety of rodent carcinogenesis models. It
has been hypothesized that resveratrol exerts its effects by interacting
directly with specific proteins such as cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and
NAD(P)H dehydrogenase quinone 2 (NQO2). Nevertheless the key targets
which may mediate its anticancer activity in humans have not yet been
identified.An affinity purification (pull-down) assay coupled with global
LC-MS/MS analysis was developed to identify proteins that bind directly
to resveratrol. Resveratrol was synthetically linked via one of its
phenol moieties to agarose beads using a short amine linker, generating
two resveratrol bead species. Resveratrol beads were incubated with cell
lysate from human-derived colon adenocarcinoma (HCA7) or adenoma cells
(AAC1) and then washed to remove unbound proteins. Resveratrol-bound
proteins were eluted from the beads by heat denaturation in SDS buffer.
Control beads end-capped with ethanolamine were used to identify
non-specific protein binding. Proteins were eluted from the beads and
identified in trypsinised gel slices by PAGE coupled with either LC-MS/MS
to identify all proteins bound to resveratrol or immunoblotting to
identify known target proteins.More than 30 proteins were identified by
LC-MS/MS that were reproducibly pulled from cell lysates by resveratrol
beads. The proteins identified fall into five main groups, including
enzymes and proteins associated with nuclear transport, apoptosis, DNA
repair, prostaglandin and fatty acid synthesis. Following MS/MS, 30
proteins were confirmed as selective binding partners of resveratrol by
Western blotting, with 97% agreement between the two detection methods.
Among the proteins identified were COX2, NQO2, fatty acid synthase (FAS)
and Exportin 1 (CRM1). The first two are known resveratrol targets, which
supports the validity of the method. Resveratrol at clinically achievable
concentrations (0.001-10 M) did not change the expression of the proteins
identified in the pull-down assay. It is conceivable that resveratrol
modulates the function of the proteins to which it binds. To test this
hypothesis the effects of resveratrol on FAS activity and on Exportin 1
and its cargoes is currently under investigation. In conclusion, the
protein pull-down assay described here may help discover
mechanism-related protein biomarkers that can be used to monitor the
efficacy of multi-targeted cancer chemopreventive diet constituents in
individuals in chemoprevention trials.

