Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Community-based participatory research leads to sustainable
lifestyle intervention program for reducing breast cancer risk among
African American and Latina women


Breast cancer mortality rates are higher among African American (AA)
women in San Bernardino County (SBC) at 36.31 per 100,000 women compared
with white women in the same region, as well as with California breast
cancer rates and the national averages. In addition, approximately 30% of
individuals in SBC are obese. Mortality rates for diabetes in SBC between
2009 -2011 were 33 per 100,000 adults. Recent literature suggests an
association between obesity, diabetes, metabolic syndrome and
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). The insulin-leptin adiponectin axis
has been implicated in these breast tumors that are insensitive to
estrogen. TNBC is common among premenopausal AA and Latina women and is
unclear whether overweight women or those with metabolic syndrome are at
increased risk for breast cancer. Engaging minority AA and Latina women
in clinical research has been difficult. Mistrust of doctors and
scientists is reported as a barrier to participation. In this pilot
study, community-based participatory (CBPR) methods were used to study
women's perceptions, beliefs and attitudes towards participating in a
breast cancer clinical study. Methods: A CBPR mixed-methods approach,
including a 6-month lifestyle intervention education program was
employed. Participants were recruited using purposive convenience
sampling. To evaluate the effectiveness of the lifestyle intervention
educational program, we used knowledge, attitudes, behavior, and
perception-based questionnaire to assess changes before and after the
educational experience. Results: Fifty eight women that included 36
African American and 22 Latina women participated in the educational
program, out of which twenty five women were recruited into the lifestyle
intervention program that required providing blood to test for metabolic
syndrome and risk for breast cancer. All the women in the intervention
study were willing to provide blood for the study. Seventy six percent of
the women in the lifestyle intervention program were either obese or
experienced metabolic syndrome. At the end of six months, 78% of the
women who participated in the study reduced their body fat by 2% change,
by reducing dietary fat consumption. Approximately 93% of the women
increased servings of fruits and vegetables in their diet and engaged in
some form of exercise after their enrollment into the study. This program
is currently sustained by community support groups, after the end of the
grant. Conclusion: Community-based participatory research projects that
engage community partners through the entire process of research planning
and conduct may result in effective sustainable projects that will result
in resilient communities. Funding supported by Kaiser Permanente Fontana
Community Benefit Grant.

