Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trametinib (Mekinist TM) has limited brain distribution in the
mouse model


The BBB can critically limit the delivery of several molecularly-targeted
agents into the brain. The discovery of focal BRAF mutations in melanoma
has stimulated the development of specific BRAF inhibitors. MEK is
downstream of BRAF in the MAPK pathway, and has been targeted for
combination therapy with BRAF inhibition. Trametinib is a MEK1/2
inhibitor that has improved survival in combination with dabrafenib in
clinical trials for metastatic melanoma. We have recently shown that BRAF
inhibitors (vemurafenib and dabrafenib) have limited brain distribution
due to active efflux at the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Melanoma
metastasizes to the brain and effective treatments require adequate CNS
exposure of all drugs used in combination therapy. The study purpose was
to investigate mechanisms that influence the CNS distribution of
trametinib, particularly focusing on the active efflux transport proteins
P-gp and Bcrp in the BBB.Intracellular accumulation and bidirectional
flux studies were conducted in polarized MDCKII cells that overexpress
human P-gp (MDR1) or murine Bcrp (Bcrp1). The brain and plasma AUCs of
trametinib were determined after an intravenous dose of 5 mg/kg in WT,
Mdr1a/b (-/-), Bcrp1 (-/-) and Mdr1a/b (-/-) Bcrp1 (-/-) (TKO) mice. The
steady-state brain distribution of trametinib was determined using
osmotic pumps in WT and Mdr1a/b (-/-) (P-gp KO), Bcrp1 (-/-) (Bcrp KO),
and Mdr1a/b (-/-) Bcrp1 (-/-) (TKO) mice. The steady-state brain
distribution of a combination of trametinib and dabrafenib were
determined in WT and TKO mice. IC50s were determined in patient-derived
melanoma cell lines (WT and V600E mutant) using the MTT
assay.Intracellular accumulation of trametinib was 45% lower in the
MDCKII-MDR1 cells and 81% lower in the MDCKII-Bcrp1 cells as compared to
WT. Trametinib permeability was 2.5 and 3.7-fold greater in the
basolateral-to-apical direction as compared to apical-to-basolateral
direction in the MDR1 and Bcrp1 cells, respectively. Following a single
intravenous dose, the brain-to-plasma AUC ratios were approximately
5-fold greater in P-gp KO and TKO mice as compared to the WT.
Interestingly, the brain distribution of trametinib in Bcrp KO mice was
no different from WT mice. The steady-state brain to plasma (B/P) ratio
of trametinib was 5-fold greater in the TKO mice when compared to the
wild-type mice. The B/P ratio of both dabrafenib and trametinib were
significantly greater in the TKO mice as compared to WT when dosed
simultaneously. The IC50 for trametinib alone was > 10 M in both the WT
(M15) and V600E (M12) mutant cells, while a combination of dabrafenib and
trametinib had an IC50 of 2.04 M in the M12 cells.This study shows that
P-gp and BCRP restrict the brain distribution of trametinib with P-gp
playing a dominant role in the efflux of trametinib at the blood-brain
barrier. These findings are clinically relevant to the efficacy of
trametinib in mono or combination therapy for the treatment of melanoma
brain metastases.

