Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the pharmacokinetics and food effect of oral
ibrutinib in healthy subjects and chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy treated with
chemoimmunotherapy. Such treatment results in high response rates but
patients may eventually relapse and require alternate therapies.
Ibrutinib (PCI-32765), a recently developed novel treatment, is unique in
its mechanism as it inhibits Bruton's tyrosine kinase, a key kinase in
the B-cell receptor signaling pathway. It's a Biopharmaceutics
Classification Systems (BCS) class 2 compound and is metabolized rapidly
by CYP3A. Three studies were conducted. The primary objectives were to
assess the pharmacokinetics (PK) of ibrutinib under fed and fasted
conditions and to assess the impact of food intake timing. Additionally,
the safety and tolerability of ibrutinib were assessed. Study 1 was a
randomized, open-label, single-center, single-dose, 4-way crossover study
in 44 healthy subjects. Study 2 was a multicenter, randomized,
repeated-dose crossover study in 16 patients with relapsed or refractory
CLL. The ibrutinib dose was 420 mg in both. Study 3 was an open-label,
single-center, sequential study to assess absolute bioavailability of
ibrutinib 560 mg in 8 healthy subjects.Ibrutinib was well tolerated in
these studies. There were no serious adverse events (AEs) or
discontinuations due to an AE. There were no clinically significant
changes in laboratory safety parameters, electrocardiograms, or vital
signs. Administration of ibrutinib to healthy subjects under fasting
conditions resulted in approximately 60% of exposure compared to drug
intake either 30 min before or 2 h after a high-fat meal. When ibrutinib
was taken 30 min after a meal, drug exposure was comparable to the dosing
conditions of either 30 min before or 2 h after the meal. Study 2
revealed that under fed conditions, the maximum concentration was 2.24
times greater and the area under the curve was 1.65 times greater
compared to the fasted conditions, but similar to uncontrolled food
intake conditions. A similar food effect was observed in study 3, in
which a standard meal was consumed starting 30 min after dosing. When
corrected for repeated dosing in patients, the PK parameters in healthy
subjects and patients were comparable.The observed food effect is most
likely the result of a decreased (intestinal and hepatic) first-pass
effect, rather than an effect on solubilization. Since ibrutinib is a
highly permeable compound, residence time in the gut and liver cells
could be reduced when mesenteric and portal vein blood flow is increased
under fed conditions, making ibrutinib less available to CYP3A clearance.
The effect on bioavailability may outweigh the higher clearance due to
liver blood flow.In conclusion, food causes no more than a doubling in
ibrutinib systemic exposure. Considering the favorable safety profile,
ibrutinib can be administered with or without food.

