Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SALL4 in lung cancer through a novel Cbl-b/IGF1R&EGFR
axis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States
with an estimated >160,000 deaths and >200,000 newly diagnosed cases each
year. Over the past 20 years, the survival rate for patients remains
extremely poor (15% over 5 years). Discovery of novel pathway involved in
the pathogenesis of the lung cancer can provide new therapeutic
opportunities. Stem cell factor SALL4 has recently merged to be a
diagnostic tool and therapeutic target for acute myeloid leukemia and
liver cancer. However, very little is known on its role in lung cancer.In
order to investigate the functional role of SALL4 in lung cancer
tumorigenesis and progression, we first performed gene expression profile
analysis and revealed that SALL4 expression level was significant higher
in all types of non-small cell lung cancer samples compared to normal
lung tissue control, which was validated by IHC. Furthermore, we
performed loss of function study using multiple shRNAs. Our data showed
that knockdown of SALL4 could induce dramatic cell growth arrest in
multiple lung cell lines including large cell carcinoma H661 and
adenocarcinoma H522, H292 and PC9, but not in HCC827 cells with none/low
SALL4 level. In order to elucidate the downstream pathway of SALL4 in
lung cancer, we first conducted gene expression microarray using SALL4
knockdown H661 cells and cells treated with scramble control vectors.
Combination of one-way ANOVA analysis and pathway analysis using Pathway
Interaction Database (PID) showed that both the EGFR and IGF1R signaling
pathways were affected by SALL4 knockdown in H661 lung cancer cells.
Using western blot, we further validated that SALL4 depletion could lead
to a decrease in both EGFR and IGF1R protein expressions in lung cancer
cells. However, we did not observe any changes at the mRNA level for
these two receptors upon SALL4 depletion. This leads us to wonder whether
SALL4 could affect these two molecules indirectly. It has been well
established that receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) including EGFR and IGF1R
can be negatively regulated by Cbl RING ubiquitin ligases. Of interest,
our microarray data also showed that loss of SALL4 led to a dramatic
upregulation of Cbl-b, a member of Cbl RING ligases, which was further
validated by using real-time RT-PCR. In addition, SALL4 downregulation
also dramatically increased Cbl-b protein expression in these lung cancer
cells. Therefore, we propose that SALL4 can indirectly positively affect
the expression of EGFR and IGF1R proteins through Cbl-b.In summary, we
have demonstrated that SALL4 expression is aberrantly elevated in
non-small cell lung cancer cells. Furthermore our data suggested that
SALL4 plays an essential role in lung cancer tumor growth and maintenance
by affecting both EGFR and IGFR signaling pathways via regulating Cbl-b
expression.

