Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repurposing disulfiram for treatment of relapsed/refractory acute
myeloid leukemia


BackgroundDespite toxic treatments, acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
continues to have an overall poor prognosis of about 50% in children
while significantly less in older adults. For patients with relapsed AML
refractory to chemotherapy, there is little chance for survival.
Therefore, the need for novel treatment modalities continues to be
critically important. Disulfiram (DS) is an aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
inhibitor that has been used for decades for the treatment of alcoholism
without major side effects. While DS has been reported to have anticancer
cytotoxicity that is in part copper (Cu2+)-dependent, the mechanisms are
still not fully elucidated. The goal of the present study was to
investigate whether DS has significant cytotoxicity against AML.Methods
and ResultsIn the present study the IC50 were determined for DS alone or
in combination with 1 M Cu2+ in a panel of 16 AML cell lines using Cell
Titer Glo assay. DS/Cu2+ resulted in significant killing of all cell
lines (IC50 between 20-75 nM) while the response to DS alone showed
significant variation (IC50 from 20 nM - 7 M). Cu2+ alone was not toxic.
Cytarabine (Ara-C), a key drug in AML treatment, was compared with
DS/Cu2+. The AML cell lines THP1 (acute monocytic leukemia), UT7-epo and
CMY (acute megakaryoblastic leukemia) were profoundly resistant to Ara-C
(IC50 between 1.2-2.4 M) but showed extreme sensitivity to DS/Cu2+ (IC50
between 31-46 nM).Although DS is an inhibitor of ALDH, we demonstrated
that the cytotoxicity of DS or DS/Cu2+ was not directly associated with
the level of ALDH or its inhibition. AML cell lines were treated with
different doses of DS or DS/Cu2+ and ALDH activity and cell death were
determined by flow cytometry. The percentage of cell death was
dose-dependent and occurred irrespective of ALDH activity in cell lines
with high endogenous ALDH activity (MV-4-11, CMY, CMK and K562) compared
to those with low or undetectable ALDH activity (Kasumi-1, Molm-13, NB4
and KG-1a). As DS-mediated cytotoxicity has been associated in previous
reports with proteasome inhibition, the effects of DS and DS/Cu2+ were
compared to Bortezumib. Western blot analysis showed that DS induced PARP
cleavage similar to Bortezumib, suggesting that proteasome inhibition may
be contributing to DS or DS/Cu2+ cytotoxicity.ConclusionThese data
demonstrate that multiple AML cell lines are sensitive to DS and to
DS/Cu2+, including some that show extreme resistance to Ara-C, such as
CMY from a patient with Down Syndrome. This DS sensitivity may provide a
less toxic and efficacious treatment approach to be tested in this group
of patients with poor outcome following relapse. The cytotoxic activity
of DS does not appear to be solely dependent on ALDH inhibition. Ongoing
studies are focusing on determining the mechanisms of cell death, and
cytotoxic efficacy in in vitro and xenograft models using patient AML
samples, with the goal of developing a clinical trial in patients with
relapsed/refractory AML.

