Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Derivation and analysis of preclinical models of human her-2
positive breast cancer


Although a number of Her-2 targeting drugs are now available for the
treatment of Her-2 positive breast cancers, resistance to these therapies
rapidly emerges. There is therefore a need to study how Her-2 targeting
strategies work in vivo, and the mechanisms by which tumors eventually
become resistant to anti-Her-2 therapies. We report the in vivo selection
of variants of the human Her-2 positive breast cancer cell lines BT474
and MDA-MB361. Both cell lines were initially implanted orthotopically
into Severely Compromised Immunodeficient mice, and the resulting tumors
were serially passaged into new hosts over a 4 year period. This
selection process produced the BT474V3 and MDA361V3 variants, which grow
rapidly in vivo and which retain their Her-2 over-expression, and which
respond (pAlthough a number of Her-2 targeting drugs are now available
for the treatment of Her-2 positive breast cancers, resistance to these
therapies rapidly emerges. There is therefore a need to study how Her-2
targeting strategies work in vivo, and the mechanisms by which tumors
eventually become resistant to anti-Her-2 therapies. We report the in
vivo selection of variants of the human Her-2 positive breast cancer cell
lines BT474 and MDA-MB361. Both cell lines were initially implanted
orthotopically into Severely Compromised Immunodeficient mice, and the
resulting tumors were serially passaged into new hosts over a 4 year
period. This selection process produced the BT474V3 and MDA361V3
variants, which grow rapidly in vivo and which retain their Her-2
over-expression, and which respond (p<0.05, relative to controls) to
trastuzumab (20mg/kg i.p. every 3 days). Tumor variants were also derived
from selected tumors that relapsed after 3 months of continuous
trastuzumab monotherapy. MDA361V3 tumors showed a significant (pAlthough
a number of Her-2 targeting drugs are now available for the treatment of
Her-2 positive breast cancers, resistance to these therapies rapidly
emerges. There is therefore a need to study how Her-2 targeting
strategies work in vivo, and the mechanisms by which tumors eventually
become resistant to anti-Her-2 therapies. We report the in vivo selection
of variants of the human Her-2 positive breast cancer cell lines BT474
and MDA-MB361. Both cell lines were initially implanted orthotopically
into Severely Compromised Immunodeficient mice, and the resulting tumors
were serially passaged into new hosts over a 4 year period. This
selection process produced the BT474V3 and MDA361V3 variants, which grow
rapidly in vivo and which retain their Her-2 over-expression, and which
respond (p<0.05, relative to controls) to trastuzumab (20mg/kg i.p. every
3 days). Tumor variants were also derived from selected tumors that
relapsed after 3 months of continuous trastuzumab monotherapy. MDA361V3
tumors showed a significant (p<0.05) response to the combination therapy
of trastuzumab plus metronomic cyclophosphamide (20mg/kg/day, p.o.).
Tumors eventually progressed under this combination therapy, and cell
lines were derived from the drug resistant tumors. Non-invasive
monitoring of the Her-2 positive models in vivo was achieved by
luciferase transfection of the tumor variants, or by transfection of
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) cDNA which allows for relative tumor growth
to be evaluated via the resulting hCG levels in the mouse urine.
Luciferase transfected BT474V3 were implanted intracranially (coordinates
for implantation from Bregma were AP, +1.1; LM, -2.0; and DV, -3), and
bioluminescence was detectable 20 days later. The implanted tumors in the
brain eventually showed a doubling of bioluminescence every 2 weeks,
which provides ample time for therapeutic intervention in this model of
Her-2 positive breast cancer brain metastasis. To further model the
response of Her-2 positive metastatic breast cancer, we employed our
met2.hCG model, derived from the human MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cell line. Thus, MDA-MB-231 were transduced to overexpress Her-2, then
tagged with hCG, and then selected for high spontaneous metastatic
capacity. Orthotopically implanted met2.hCG tumors responded to
trastuzumab as a monotherapy, and when given in combination with
metronomic cyclophosphamide. Following surgical removal of the
orthotopically implanted met2.hCG tumors, urine hCG levels indicated that
the metastases also responded (pAlthough a number of Her-2 targeting
drugs are now available for the treatment of Her-2 positive breast
cancers, resistance to these therapies rapidly emerges. There is
therefore a need to study how Her-2 targeting strategies work in vivo,
and the mechanisms by which tumors eventually become resistant to
anti-Her-2 therapies. We report the in vivo selection of variants of the
human Her-2 positive breast cancer cell lines BT474 and MDA-MB361. Both
cell lines were initially implanted orthotopically into Severely
Compromised Immunodeficient mice, and the resulting tumors were serially
passaged into new hosts over a 4 year period. This selection process
produced the BT474V3 and MDA361V3 variants, which grow rapidly in vivo
and which retain their Her-2 over-expression, and which respond (p<0.05,
relative to controls) to trastuzumab (20mg/kg i.p. every 3 days). Tumor
variants were also derived from selected tumors that relapsed after 3
months of continuous trastuzumab monotherapy. MDA361V3 tumors showed a
significant (p<0.05) response to the combination therapy of trastuzumab
plus metronomic cyclophosphamide (20mg/kg/day, p.o.). Tumors eventually
progressed under this combination therapy, and cell lines were derived
from the drug resistant tumors. Non-invasive monitoring of the Her-2
positive models in vivo was achieved by luciferase transfection of the
tumor variants, or by transfection of chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) cDNA
which allows for relative tumor growth to be evaluated via the resulting
hCG levels in the mouse urine. Luciferase transfected BT474V3 were
implanted intracranially (coordinates for implantation from Bregma were
AP, +1.1; LM, -2.0; and DV, -3), and bioluminescence was detectable 20
days later. The implanted tumors in the brain eventually showed a
doubling of bioluminescence every 2 weeks, which provides ample time for
therapeutic intervention in this model of Her-2 positive breast cancer
brain metastasis. To further model the response of Her-2 positive
metastatic breast cancer, we employed our met2.hCG model, derived from
the human MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line. Thus, MDA-MB-231 were
transduced to overexpress Her-2, then tagged with hCG, and then selected
for high spontaneous metastatic capacity. Orthotopically implanted
met2.hCG tumors responded to trastuzumab as a monotherapy, and when given
in combination with metronomic cyclophosphamide. Following surgical
removal of the orthotopically implanted met2.hCG tumors, urine hCG levels
indicated that the metastases also responded (p<0.05, compared to saline
treated controls) to the combination of metronomic cyclophosphamide plus
trastuzumab, but they did not respond to the trastuzumab monotherapy.
Collectively, our data shows that we have derived models of Her-2
positive breast cancer that can be used to evaluate anti-Her-2
therapeutic strategies, and to study the emergence of resistance to
anti-Her-2 based therapies.

