Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome and RNA sequencing identifies fusion transcripts in bladder
cancer


Urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder (UCC) is a common malignancy
with the highest prevalence rates found in Europe and United States where
it rate as the fifth and fourth most common malignancy respectively.
Bladder cancer is divided into two clinically divergent groups,
non-muscle invasive (NMIBC) and muscle invasive bladder tumors (MIBC)
accounting at diagnosis for 75% and 25% respectively and necessitates
very different treatments. NMIBC have recurrence rate of 50-70% and often
requires lifelong surveillance, however the prognosis is relatively good.
In contrast MIBC often progresses and develop systemic disease. The aim
of this study was to identify genomic rearrangements producing fusion
transcripts in bladder cancer. Translocations in coding regions are known
to be associated with malignancy. Especially in liquid tumors
translocations are frequent; however the increased throughput in
sequencing now identifies translocation associated with many solid
tumors. In this study we used next generation sequencing to annotate
genomic rearrangements in paired bladder cancer tumors (>90% tumor cells)
presenting as Ta tumors and progressed to T1 or T2. Tumors were sequenced
to 40-50x whole genome read depth (blood to >50x) and 65 million paired
end reads of whole transcriptome RNAseq. Combining DNA and RNAseq,
genomic rearrangements leading to expressed fusion transcript were
identified (nFUSE, McPherson AW et. al. Genome Res. 2012 Jun 28).
Approximately 25% of the predicted fusions could be validated using
Sanger sequencing of cDNA. Importantly more than 80% of the fusions were
only present in one of the paired tumors and primarily in the advanced
tumor.Most of the fusions were out of frame and created truncated
proteins. Two examples are truncation of metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1)
and polymerase beta (POLB) both frequently mutated in cancer. As an
interesting example of in frame fusions we found CTNNBL1
(Beta-Catenin-Like Protein 1) to be fused to FAM110A (family with
sequence similarity 110, member A). Importantly the fusion places the
promoter of CTNNBL1 in front of FAM110A and because the reading frame is
preserved it is likely that both the start codon of CTNNBL1 and FAM110A
can serve as translation start giving rise to nearly identical proteins.
Furthermore, expression analysis showed significant increase of FAM110A
expression in the affected tumor pair sample. Little is known about the
FAM110 gene family, however they are shown to localizes to centrosomes
and spindle poles and could potentially play an essential role in
chromosome segregation and thereby cancer development. All sequencing was
performed on the Illumina HiSeq platform.

