Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between asthma and pediatric brain tumors in
neurofibromatosis type 1


Background. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common hereditary cancer
syndrome, affecting an estimated 1/2,500 people worldwide. NF1 increases
the risk of several tumor types, including pediatric brain tumors that
affect an estimated 10-20% of individuals. While established risk factors
for pediatric brain tumor development in this population have not been
elucidated, consistent evidence from non-syndromic populations suggests a
strong inverse association between asthma and brain tumors. As such, the
objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that asthma is
inversely associated with pediatric brain tumors in the NF1
population.Methods. In this analysis, we employed two data sources. The
first dataset was assembled from the international NF1 Patient Registry
Initiative (NPRI) (https://nf1registry.wustl.edu/) that enrolled
individuals with NF1 over 2.5 years. Medical history data were collected
through the online registry questionnaire. The second study used private
health insurance claims data from 2006-2010 from Thompson Reuters
MarketScan to assemble an NF1 group and their claims data on asthma- and
brain tumor-related healthcare visits. Diagnoses were determined from
ICD-9 codes. The NF1 group was defined by the presence of >2 NF1-related
outpatient claims >30 days apart or one NF1-related inpatient claim.
Within the NF1 group, individuals were classified as having asthma and/or
brain tumors if they had >2 claims for these conditions >30 days apart.
The study population for both data sources was limited to subjects who
were Background. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common hereditary
cancer syndrome, affecting an estimated 1/2,500 people worldwide. NF1
increases the risk of several tumor types, including pediatric brain
tumors that affect an estimated 10-20% of individuals. While established
risk factors for pediatric brain tumor development in this population
have not been elucidated, consistent evidence from non-syndromic
populations suggests a strong inverse association between asthma and
brain tumors. As such, the objective of this study was to test the
hypothesis that asthma is inversely associated with pediatric brain
tumors in the NF1 population.Methods. In this analysis, we employed two
data sources. The first dataset was assembled from the international NF1
Patient Registry Initiative (NPRI) (https://nf1registry.wustl.edu/) that
enrolled individuals with NF1 over 2.5 years. Medical history data were
collected through the online registry questionnaire. The second study
used private health insurance claims data from 2006-2010 from Thompson
Reuters MarketScan to assemble an NF1 group and their claims data on
asthma- and brain tumor-related healthcare visits. Diagnoses were
determined from ICD-9 codes. The NF1 group was defined by the presence of
>2 NF1-related outpatient claims >30 days apart or one NF1-related
inpatient claim. Within the NF1 group, individuals were classified as
having asthma and/or brain tumors if they had >2 claims for these
conditions >30 days apart. The study population for both data sources was
limited to subjects who were <18 years old at the time of NPRI or
insurance enrollment. Unconditional logistic regression was employed to
calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the
association between pediatric brain tumors and asthma for both
datasets.Results. A total of 409 individuals with NF1 were included in
the analysis using NPRI data, resulting in 119 pediatric brain tumors.
After adjusting for birth year, we observed an inverse association
between pediatric brain tumors and asthma (OR=0.6; 95% CI 0.4-1.1). In
the analysis using MarketScan data, the NF1 group included a total of
3,871 individuals 2 pediatric brain tumor-related claims. After
controlling for number of months enrolled, birth year, and number of
healthcare visits, subjects with brain tumor claims were significantly
less likely to have asthma claims than those without brain tumor claims
(OR=0.5; 95% CI 0.3-0.8).Conclusions. Similar to findings from
non-syndromic populations, the results from this study provide strong
epidemiologic evidence for an inverse association between asthma and
pediatric brain tumors in the NF1 population.Acknowledgements. This work
was supported by Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation and NIH CTSA UL1
TR000448.

