Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting drug resistance in metastatic renal cell carcinoma:
Personalized medicine by xenografting patient tumors into chicken embryos


Introduction: Approximately 30% of patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC) will be primarily resistant to targeted agents. The
remainder will develop resistance over a longer time course. Improved
therapeutic acumen prior to the initiation of treatment may improve
patient outcomes.Aim: To develop a patient-derived xenograft model to
determine the sensitivity of each RCC patient's tumor cells to a defined
targeted therapy prior to the start of systemic treatment.Methods: We
developed a patientderived xenograft model using chicken embryos that
enables the investigator to evaluate the interplay of angiogenesis and
tumor growth. Drugs can also be applied directly to tumors to evaluate
drug sensitivities. A variety of patient-derived xenograft primary RCC
cell lines (XP127, XP121, XP22, XP206, PF22, XP258, XP158, XP185) were
implanted into the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of chicken embryos for
drug evaluation and their effect on tumor take ratios. Each cell line was
prepared for xenografting by mixing cell pellets with Matrigel (BD
Biosciences Inc.) in a 1:1 ratio and 10 uL of this mix was implanted into
the CAM of D9 chicken embryos. To evaluate drug sensitivities in vivo,
cell lines were pretreated overnight with 5 uM sunitinib. Intravital
imaging was performed to assess tumor size and tumor microvessel density
was determined by histology of resected tumors. Tumor take rates were
determined 68 days post implantation.Results: Using the 786-O cell line
that is sensitive to sunitinib, tumor take rates were 82% in vehicle
treated tumors compared to 46% in sunitinib treated tumors. Tumor
xenografts underwent extensive angiogenesis as observed by IV injection
of Dextran-Alexa555 (10 kDa size). We implanted seven different patient
derived RCC cell lines into the CAM (N>15 each cell line and treatment),
four of which are resistant to sunitinib (XP127, XP121, XP258, PF22) and
three were sensitive to sunitinib (XP206, XP158, XP185) as determined
previously in murine heterotopic models. Tumor take rates varied amongst
cell lines with decreased tumor take rates observed in
sunitinib-sensitive cell lines when compared to their vehicle-treated
control counterparts.Conclusion: This patient derived xenograft model is
a potentially useful model for drug sensitivity evaluation, enabling the
investigator to potentially individualize targeted treatments to each
patient with metastatic RCC upfront from the start of systemic therapy.

