Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benchmarking algorithms for mutation impact prediction using
functionally validated missense mutations


Background: Massively parallel sequencing studies have demonstrated that
there are few highly recurrently mutated genes in tumors and that there
are vast numbers of mutations found in a minority of cancers from a given
anatomical site. Numerous bioinformatics tools to predict the effect of a
given amino acid substitution on protein function are available, and
there is no consensus as to which prediction algorithms are the most
appropriate for the identification of driver mutations. Here we sought to
compare the performance, as standalone or in combination, of nine
algorithms predictive of the impact of a mutation on protein function,
when challenged against mutations whose pathogenic role is supported or
refuted by in vitro or in vivo experiments, or have been shown to be
pathogenic in the context of familial cancer syndromes.Methods: We mined
the literature and databases and compiled known mutations for six
oncogenes (BRAF, KIT, PIK3CA, KRAS, EGFR, ERRB2) and three tumor
suppressors (TP53, BRCA1, BRCA2). We applied Boolean logic to identify
experimental and clinical evidence of functional effects for each
mutation. A total of 3072 missense mutations were subjected to analysis
using nine mutation impact predictor algorithms, namely CHASM
lung/breast/melanoma, FATHMM cancer/missense, Mutation Assessor,
MutationTaster, PolyPhen-2, Condel, Provean, VEST and SIFT. Sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive
value (NPV) were calculated and the agreement between predictors
evaluated. Furthermore, predictions made by combinations of algorithms
were assessed.Results: The PPV of all predictors was relatively high
(median 0.941, range 0.909-0.989). Their sensitivity, specificity and
NPV, however, varied widely. The median sensitivity was 0.854 (range
0.632-0.987), with the best performers being FATHMM cancer, CHASM lung
and melanoma. The median specificity was 0.667 (range 0.482-0.939), with
CHASM breast performing best. Inter-predictor agreement was only
fair-to-moderate for most pair-wise comparisons (kappa scores ranging
from 0.187 to 0.826). Finally, 358/4653 combinations performed better
than each of the algorithms tested alone; 163/358 displayed higher NPVs
and 131/358 improved sensitivity than the highest single algorithm's NPV
and sensitivity, i.e. FATHMM cancer. The combination CHASM/FATHMM
cancer/MutationTaster showed excellent performance, with sensitivity,
specificity, PPV and NPV of 0.988, 0.824, 0.974 and 0.913,
respectively.Conclusions: Our results revealed discrepancies in
performance of mutation impact predictors. No algorithm, on its own, was
able to distinguish accurately driver from passenger events. Combining
algorithms that provide orthogonal information likely results in
substantial improvements in the functional predictions.

