Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of rosemary extract in colon cancer cells:
Involvement of Nrf2 and ERK pathways


Background: The Mediterranean herb rosemary has been used for culinary
purposes and for their medicinal properties for millennia. Rosemary and
its polyphenolic diterpenes (carnosol and carnosic acid) are known to
possess anti-oxidant activity that may be beneficial for cancer control.
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the
United States. Nutrition, particularly intake of vegetables and certain
plant components, has been reported to have a major role in colon cancer
risk reduction. In our current study, we investigated the anticancer
effects of rosemary extract and its two main active ingredients carnosol
and carnosic acid on colon cancer cell lines to understand the mechanism.
Next, we evaluated the anti-cancer activity of rosemary extract in a nude
mice model.Methods: Two human colon cancer cell lines, HCT116 and SW480,
were treated with rosemary extract, carnosol or carnosic acid. MTT, TUNEL
and ELISA were used to evaluate cell viability and apoptosis. Western
blot and immunofluorescence were used to detect proteins involved in
apoptosis. We also evaluated the anti-cancer activity of rosemary extract
in nude mouse inoculated with HCT116 cells.Results: Rosemary extract,
carnosol and carnosic acid, increased apoptosis, decreased viability in
colon cancer cell lines. Rosemary extract, carnosol and carnosic acid
significantly upregulated the expression of Nrf2 and ERK. Rosemary
extract also effectively suppressed tumor growth in a xenograft tumor
model without affecting body weight.Conclusions: Rosemary extract
inhibits colon cancer cell growth in a xenograft mouse model without
observable toxicity. Furthermore, rosemary extract, carnosol and carnosic
acid induce the expression of Nrf2 and ERK pathways in colon cancer
cells, suggesting further research is needed to evaluate its potential as
an anti-cancer and/or chemoprevention agent.

