Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of rhabdoid tumors of the kidney


Rhabdoid tumors (RT) of the kidney (RTK) are aggressive pediatric solid
tumors that predominantly affect infants. There is no effective
chemotherapy and the overall 4-year survival rate is 23%. RT has a
characteristic loss of SMARCB1 function, found in >90% of the patients.
SMARCB1 is a conserved core subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex, which in turn is responsible for proper chromatin assembly and
dynamic regulation of gene expression. Previous studies showed a
remarkable paucity of mutations in coding regions of genomes and a highly
penetrant cancer susceptibility in a conditional knockout mouse model.
These findings support the interpretation that SMARCB1 is a tumor
suppressor whose inactivation is the primary driver in RT and that RT
follows a tumorigenesis model in which cancer is driven by aberrant
epigenetic regulation and gene expression instead of accumulation of
somatic mutations. Characterizing interplays of mutations, gene
expression and epigenetic regulation will be important in understanding
RT development and biology.To achieve this goal, we will comprehensively
characterize genetic and epigenetic aberrations in RT using HiSeq
sequencing technology. Our research efforts include profiling whole
genome, whole transcriptome, promoter methylation and histone
modification in 40 primary RTK samples. Here, we report preliminary
results from whole genome analyses.Using an amplification-free library
construction method, we sequenced whole genomes of 40 RTK and matched
normal cases to an average haploid coverage of 39.4X. The RTK genomes
were mostly diploid, but we found 35 loci that are either recurrently
focally amplified or deleted using GISTIC 2.0 at FDR 0.05. Using the
Trans-ABySS de novo short-read assembler, we assembled the RT cases whole
genomes and identified a total of 19 genes that were recurrently
rearranged in 8 out of 40 cases. Eleven of the genes were either known
tumor suppressors (e.g. CABIN1, BCR) or associated with developmental or
neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. UPB1, SPECC1L). The genome-wide single
nucleotide variant and indel analysis showed an average somatic mutation
rate at 0.37 per Mb in RTK, comparable to the previous finding of 0.19
per Mb in AT/RT. Approximately 99% of the somatic mutations occurred in
non-genic regions. SMARCB1 had homozygous loss of function in 83% of
cases by somatic homozygous deletion, or heterozygous deletion or
truncating point mutations followed by loss of heterozygosity. The
remaining cases appeared to have at least 1 copy of the gene unaffected
and analyses are ongoing to investigate the inactivation mechanism in
these cases.

