Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720 inhibits mutant Kras-induced lung cancer via disrupting
Stat3-S1PR1 vicious cycle and downregulating tumor PD-L1 expression


Aberrant activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(Stat3) occurs in many cancers and plays a critical role in tumor
progression. The system that Stat3-induced Sphingosine-1-phosphate
receptor 1 (S1PR1) expression and the S1P-S1PR1 pathway reciprocally
regulate Stat3 activity was considered a major positive feedback loop for
persistent Stat3 activation in cancer cells and the cells of tumor
microenvironment. Tumor cells expressing the ligand for the receptor
programmed death-1 (PD-1), PD-L1, have been shown to increase apoptosis
of antigen-specific human T-cell to evade the immune system. In this
study, we determined the influence of disrupting Stat3-S1PR1 vicious
cycle on tumor formation and PD-L1 expression in lung cancer. We have
established mutant Kras-induced lung cancer mice model and found that
Stat3 phosphorylation was elevated in tumor tissues of lung cancer.
Treatment of lung cancer cells with AG490 (JAK2 inhibitor) inhibited
Stat3 activation and AG490 administration to the mice decreased the
numbers of lung cancer nodules, indicating that blockage of Stat3
activation could inhibit mutant Kras-induced lung cancer in mice. Similar
effects were also detected by using Stat3 inhibitor, S3I-201. We found
that lung cancer cells expressed more pStat3 showed higher PD-L1
expression levels than that of lower pStat3 expressing cells. Inhibition
of Stat3 activation by AG490 decreased PD-L1 expression in vitro and in
vivo, indicating that PD-L1 expression could be regulated by Stat3.
Moreover, FTY720 (S1P antagonist) could inhibit S1PR1 expression,
down-regulate Stat3 activity, pJAK1 expression and inhibit IL-6 secretion
in lung cancer cell lines and causes inhibition of the mutant
Kras-induced lung cancer in mice. Furthermore, FTY720 administration
dose-dependently suppressed tumor PD-L1 expression in mice lung cancer
tissues. Taken together, our study indicated that FTY720 could suppress
mutant Kras induced-lung cancer formation via inhibiting persistent Stat3
activation and down-regulating tumor PD-L1 expression.

