Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Everolimus inhibits the proliferation of aromatase
inhibitor-resistant breast cancer cells


Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are currently the standard treatment for
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer in postmenopausal women.
Unfortunately, the majority of patients treated with AIs eventually
develop resistance to these drugs. The mechanism by which AI resistance
occurs is still not known, however, there is strong evidence that
upregulation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway might play an important role.
As such, mTOR inhibition is now under study in clinical trials as a
breast cancer treatment. The newest mTOR inhibitor, Everolimus
(Afinitor), has been FDA approved for the treatment of metastatic breast
cancer. We have previously reported the development of two AI-resistant
breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A) which were clonally
derived from parental MCF-7 cells following long term estrogen
deprivation. Both MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A cells have been shown to
overexpress members of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. In this study, we
examined the therapeutic benefits of everolimus in AI-resistant MCF-7:5C
and MCF-7:2A cells compared to endocrine sensitive MCF-7 breast cancer
cells and normal breast epithelium MCF10A cells. Results from cell
viability assay showed that everolimus markedly inhibited the
proliferation of endocrine sensitive MCF-7 cells and AI-resistant
MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A cells in a time-dependent and
concentration-dependent manner with IC50s of 30 nM, 40 nM and 10 nM,
respectively. Notably, the MCF-7:2A cells were the most sensitive to
everolimus which caused a 70% reduction in proliferation at 24 hours
whereas in MCF-7 and MCF-7:5C cells only 30% inhibition was observed at
the same time point. The inhibitory effect of everolimus was due
primarily to G1 arrest and was associated with significant downregulation
of phospho-mTOR, phospho-p70S6K, phospho-Akt, GSK3, cyclin D1 and p21.
Colony formation assay in soft agar indicated that AI-resistant MCF-7:5C
and MCF-7:2A cells formed significantly more colonies than MCF-7 cells
and that treatment with everolimus notably reduced the size and number of
colonies for all three cell lines. Finally, we found that exposure of
AI-resistant MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A cells to a single dose of
gamma-irradiation (6 Gy) significantly enhanced the anti-proliferative
effect of everolimus on these cells. In summary, these studies showed
that everolimus significantly inhibited the proliferation and
tumorigenicity of AI-resistant breast cancer cells and that everolimus
might be an effective treatment option for patients with AI-resistant
breast cancer.

