Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug sensitivity of vascularized tumor tissue in vitro


While there have been significant advances in using 3D culture systems to
recapitulate physiological aspects of the tumor microenvironment, few
systems are able to capture the full range of authentic, complex in vivo
processes such as neovascularization and metastasis. Furthermore, these
systems generally utilize established cell lines which compromise the
clinical relevance. The goal of this study was to create a 3D in vitro
model of patient-specific vascularized tumor tissue that could be used to
evaluate the sensitivity to F-fluoruracil (5-FU). Colon cancer cells
isolated directly from patient biopsies and endothelial colony forming
cell-derived endothelial cells (EC) from cord blood were combined to form
multicellular spheroids, and then embedded in a fibrin gel containing
normal stromal cells (primary human lung fibroblasts). After 7 days in
culture, these prevascularized tumors (PVTs) exhibited robust sprouting
angiogenesis into the surrounding matrix, and also formed a distinct and
contiguous vessel network within the spheroid itself. Network formation
and branching of the sprouting vessels was comparable to those generated
by co-culture spheroids of EC and cells from the colon cancer cell line
SW620. These spheroids in particular demonstrated intravasation of single
cells within the lumens of the vessel networks. This phenomenon was
enhanced in low oxygen, and abrogated by silencing the transcription
factor Slug. Thus, this phenomena is consistent with
endothelial-mesenchymal transition. The PVTs have furthermore been used
to distinguish the effects of EC on SW620 viability in response to 5-FU.
Spheroids composed of EC and SW620 cells demonstrated decreased
sensitivity to low dosage 5-FU treatment compared to spheroids composed
of SW620 cells only, implicating potential EC-induced drug resistance.
Our results demonstrate the utility of a 3D model system of the tumor
microenvironment that may be used to study intravasation, microvessel
formation, and sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs.

