Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dystrophin Is a tumor suppressor in human cancers with myogenic
programs


Many common human mesenchymal tumors, including gastrointestinal stromal
tumor (GIST), rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), and leiomyosarcoma (LMS), feature
myogenic differentiation. Although presumptive initiating mutations have
been identified in these cancers, the subsequent mechanisms of malignant
progression are not known. Here we report that intragenic deletion of the
dystrophin-encoding and muscular dystrophy-associated DMD gene is a
frequent mechanism by which myogenic tumors progress to high-grade,
lethal sarcomas. Genome-wide SNP screens demonstrated DMD intragenic
deletions in 23 of 38 myogenic sarcomas (61%) compared to 0 of 58
non-myogenic sarcomas (p Many common human mesenchymal tumors, including
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), and
leiomyosarcoma (LMS), feature myogenic differentiation. Although
presumptive initiating mutations have been identified in these cancers,
the subsequent mechanisms of malignant progression are not known. Here we
report that intragenic deletion of the dystrophin-encoding and muscular
dystrophy-associated DMD gene is a frequent mechanism by which myogenic
tumors progress to high-grade, lethal sarcomas. Genome-wide SNP screens
demonstrated DMD intragenic deletions in 23 of 38 myogenic sarcomas (61%)
compared to 0 of 58 non-myogenic sarcomas (p < 0.0001). Although DMD is
an X-linked gene, somatic DMD deletions affected both sexes equally and
DMD deletions in female patients involved the active X chromosome,
resulting in functional DMD nullisomy. Dystrophin was expressed strongly
in nonneoplastic and benign counterparts for GIST, RMS and LMS, and the
DMD deletions in the malignant myogenic sarcomas clustered at the 5 end
of the gene, inactivating larger dystrophin isoforms, including 427kDa
dystrophin, while preserving expression of an essential 71kDa isoform
(Dp71) which is encoded by the DMD 3 end. Dystrophin restoration
inhibited myogenic sarcoma cell migration, invasion, anchorage
independence, and invadopodia formation, and dystrophin inactivation was
found in 96%, 100%, and 62% of metastatic GIST, embryonal RMS, and LMS,
respectively. The genomic, clinicopathological and functional evidence
validate dystrophin as a tumor suppressor and likely anti-metastatic
factor, suggesting that therapies in development for muscular dystrophies
may also have relevance in treatment of cancer.

