Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of resveratrol on chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil
induced DNA damage in prostate and breast cancer cells


Resveratrol is known as a powerful antioxidant present in many foods,
especially in grapes and red wine. Recent studies have shown that diets
rich in antioxidants, such as Resveratrol, may significantly lower an
individual's risk for developing cancer and reduce the chances of
metastasis in cancer patients. Previous studies have also shown that
cancer patient exposure to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), a widely used
chemotherapeutic agent typically used to treat colon, rectum, head, and
neck cancers, causes cell death and apoptosis in cancer cells through
various mechanisms, including DNA damage. This study investigated the
effects of high concentrations of Resveratrol in human prostate cancer
(PC3) cells and human breast cancer (MCF-7) cells exposed to relatively
large doses of 5-FU, through the use of the Alkaline Comet Assay. PC3 and
MCF-7 cells were exposed to 5-FU at concentrations of 100 M, 200 M, 400
M, and 500 M for one hour, and then subsequently exposed to Resveratrol
at concentrations of 25 M, 50 M, and 100 M for another hour. DNA damage
was quantitatively measured using the % DNA in Tail parameter. We found a
dose-dependent positive correlation between 5-FU exposure and DNA damage
in both cell lines. The addition of Resveratrol in PC3 cells also
produced a mean reduction in DNA damage of 45.10% in 25 M samples, 61.42%
in 50 M samples, and 72.86% in 100 M samples, in comparison to samples
exclusively exposed to 5-FU. Similar trends were also observed in MCF-7
cells, and there was a significant difference between the treated and
negative control samples (p Resveratrol is known as a powerful
antioxidant present in many foods, especially in grapes and red wine.
Recent studies have shown that diets rich in antioxidants, such as
Resveratrol, may significantly lower an individual's risk for developing
cancer and reduce the chances of metastasis in cancer patients. Previous
studies have also shown that cancer patient exposure to 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), a widely used chemotherapeutic agent typically used to treat
colon, rectum, head, and neck cancers, causes cell death and apoptosis in
cancer cells through various mechanisms, including DNA damage. This study
investigated the effects of high concentrations of Resveratrol in human
prostate cancer (PC3) cells and human breast cancer (MCF-7) cells exposed
to relatively large doses of 5-FU, through the use of the Alkaline Comet
Assay. PC3 and MCF-7 cells were exposed to 5-FU at concentrations of 100
M, 200 M, 400 M, and 500 M for one hour, and then subsequently exposed to
Resveratrol at concentrations of 25 M, 50 M, and 100 M for another hour.
DNA damage was quantitatively measured using the % DNA in Tail parameter.
We found a dose-dependent positive correlation between 5-FU exposure and
DNA damage in both cell lines. The addition of Resveratrol in PC3 cells
also produced a mean reduction in DNA damage of 45.10% in 25 M samples,
61.42% in 50 M samples, and 72.86% in 100 M samples, in comparison to
samples exclusively exposed to 5-FU. Similar trends were also observed in
MCF-7 cells, and there was a significant difference between the treated
and negative control samples (p < 0.001). In addition, when comparing
cell lines, we recorded higher DNA damage values in MCF-7 cells than in
PC3 cells when exposed to 5-FU. There was also a greater reduction in DNA
damage in PC3 cells than in MCF-7 cells with the addition of Resveratrol
in all 5-FU treated samples. These results may possibly indicate higher
sensitivity of MCF-7 cells to 5-FU and lower sensitivity to Resveratrol.
To further investigate possible underlying mechanisms of Resveratrol in
ameliorating DNA damage caused by 5-FU, we performed the Oxygen Radical
Absorbance Capacity (ORAC) Assay to determine antioxidant capacity. The
antioxidant capacity of various concentrations of resveratrol and 5-FU in
conjunction were calculated as Trolox equivalents per liter (TE/L) using
individually generated Trolox standard curves. We found that Resveratrol
exhibits high antioxidant capacity levels, while 5-FU exhibits limited
antioxidant capacity levels. There was a dose-dependent increase of
antioxidant capacity measured by the ORAC Assay for both compounds. More
research is necessary to further elucidate the mechanisms and pathways
involved in DNA repair in cancer cells exposed to high doses of
Resveratrol and 5-FU.

