Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rev-erb modulates Myc-driven cancer cell growth and altered
metabolism


Circadian rhythms are regulated by feedback loops comprising a network of
factors that regulate Clock-associated genes. Chronotherapy seeks to take
advantage of altered circadian rhythms in some cancers to better time
administration of treatments to increase efficacy and reduce toxicity.
While many cancers have perturbed expression of core circadian rhythm
genes, the molecular basis underlying these perturbations and their
functional implications in oncogenesis are still poorly understood, and
so it is impossible to predict which cancers have altered circadian
rhythms and would best benefit from chronotherapy. We have observed in
cancer cell models of osteosarcoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
neuroblastoma that the c-Myc and N-Myc oncogenic transcription factors
disrupt oscillation of the circadian clock by specifically upregulating
the circadian rhythm gene and nuclear hormone receptor NR1D1 (Rev-erb).
Interestingly, while Rev-erb has not been previously recognized as an
oncogene, data from The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that it is amplified
in many forms of human cancer, and we also observed that Rev-erb was
upregulated in primary human neuroblastoma and associated with poor
prognosis. Therefore, we hypothesized that Rev-erb is a novel oncogene
downstream of Myc and is important for cancer cell growth.Here we show
that Rev-erb is specifically essential for the growth of Myc-driven
hepatocellular carcinoma cells, as the related protein Rev-erb did not
strongly influence growth. While knockdown of Rev-erb expression by siRNA
slowed growth, it did not cause cell death or canonical cell cycle
arrest. Rev-erb modulates circadian rhythm by downregulating the central
circadian regulatory protein Bmal1, but this pathway did not play a
central role in Rev-erb control of cell growth. Additionally, while
Rev-erb has a well-described role in heme metabolism and subsequent
support of mitochondria respiration, this pathway was not directly
altered in Myc-driven liver cancer cells. Rather, knockdown of Rev-erb
was associated with decreased glycolytic activity characterized by a
decrease in intracellular lactate and extracellular lactate production as
well as an increase in certain glycolytic intermediates. In addition to
these glycolytic changes, the maximum respiratory capacity of cells
lacking Rev-erb increased, as measured by oxygen consumption. These data
suggest a novel role for Rev-erb in promoting the growth of cancer cells
through modulation of glucose metabolism and a shift towards increased
respiration, and imply that cancers with upregulated Myc and Rev-erb may
be good candidates for chronotherapy.We thank the following funding
sources: NIH R01CA57341, LLS 6106-14.

