Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pregnancy changes the DNA methylation profile of the breast in
postmenopausal women


Recently, we have described that the breast of parous postmenopausal
women exhibits a specific gene expression profile induced by full term
pregnancy (FTP) [Belitskaya-Levy, I. et al. 2011 and Peri, S. et al.
2012], which is centered on chromatin remodeling [Russo, J. 2012]. In
order to better understand the molecular mechanism of gene regulation
induced by FTP, we have investigated the DNA methylation profile in
breast core needle biopsies of five nulliparous (NP) and five parous (P)
postmenopausal women between the ages of 50 and 69. DNA was extracted
from core needle biopsies and highly methylated fragments of the DNA were
separated from the un-methylated DNA using MBD-Capture. The
hypermethylated DNA was then sequenced using the Illumina system. Image
analysis and base calling were performed with the standard Illumina
pipeline, and the reads were aligned to human reference genome (hg18).
Differentially methylated regions (DMR) were identified by comparing the
differences of averaged methylation values between P and NP samples using
Student's t-test (PRecently, we have described that the breast of parous
postmenopausal women exhibits a specific gene expression profile induced
by full term pregnancy (FTP) [Belitskaya-Levy, I. et al. 2011 and Peri,
S. et al. 2012], which is centered on chromatin remodeling [Russo, J.
2012]. In order to better understand the molecular mechanism of gene
regulation induced by FTP, we have investigated the DNA methylation
profile in breast core needle biopsies of five nulliparous (NP) and five
parous (P) postmenopausal women between the ages of 50 and 69. DNA was
extracted from core needle biopsies and highly methylated fragments of
the DNA were separated from the un-methylated DNA using MBD-Capture. The
hypermethylated DNA was then sequenced using the Illumina system. Image
analysis and base calling were performed with the standard Illumina
pipeline, and the reads were aligned to human reference genome (hg18).
Differentially methylated regions (DMR) were identified by comparing the
differences of averaged methylation values between P and NP samples using
Student's t-test (P<0.01). 583 genes were differently methylated between
P and NP, of which, 455 genes were hypermethylated in the P breast and
128 genes were hypermethylated in the NP. Additional visual analyses of
the sequencing results were performed in these 583 genes using
Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV), of which, 53 genes with DMRs were
identified. Analysis and research into the functions of these genes
identified seven genes (DACT1, PPP2CA, GSK3B, ROBO1, INPP4B, IL6ST, FZD1)
that have been described to interact with each other in either the Wnt
signaling pathway or its controlling PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways. The
evaluation of these interactions suggests that beta-catenin, a downstream
gene of the Wnt signaling pathway, is being inhibited in the P women. Wnt
signaling plays different roles during the stages of the mammary gland
development, and it is suggested that lowered beta-catenin expression is
essential for proper mammary involution. This observed molecular
machinery, leading to a decrease in beta-catenin production and
accumulation, may be a leftover effect from mammary involution, last
process that the parous mammary gland undergone and it may be, at least
partially, responsible for their decreased risk of cancer. The pathways
identified in this specific population are of the great importance and
could represent a safeguard mechanism mediating the protection of the
breast conferred by full term pregnancy. (The sample collection was
supported by Avon Foundation for Women Breast Cancer Research Program
grant 02-2010-117 and the methylation studies by NIH core grant CA06927
to Fox Chase Cancer Center).

