Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in metastatic patterns in relation to time between
primary surgery and first relapse from breast cancer suggest synchronized
growth of dormant micrometastases


PurposeCompared with most other cancer types, breast cancer has a long
natural history. In cases with delayed relapse, the unlinearity of
disease progression indicates the presence of periods of tumor dormancy.
Clinical and experimental studies indicate that growth might be induced
by a physiological event like tissue injury following surgery. In this
study we aimed to quantify size and number of metastatic lesions in
relation to time between primary surgery and first relapse. Our goal was
to find clinical support for the presence of a systemic synchronizing
growth signal.Patients and methodsAll patients (n=209) recorded with
metastatic breast cancer at our department during 2004-9 were identified.
180 cases with measurable metastases according to RECIST 1.1 and no
metastases at the time of primary surgery (10). Cases with only 1
metastasis (n=38) were excluded from the analyses on SD. Median SD was
5.4 (0.0 - 58). Low SD was significantly associated with low histological
grade in primary tumors (Pearson Chi Square p= 0.002), absence of liver
metastases (p= 0.001) and presence of lung metastases (p= 0.02). No
significant association was found between SD and ER status, Her2 status,
nodal status or stage. There was also no significant association between
nodal status and time to recurrence (TTR). Patients were grouped
according to TTR into two groups; early ( 3 years- after primary
diagnosis). In the subgroup of patients that were lymph node negative at
primary diagnosis (N0), the median SD was significantly lower in the
early group (3.0) when compared with the late group (5.7)(Mann-Whitney U
test p= 0.02). This effect was not present in the lymph node positive
(N1) patients.ConclusionsOur data indicate the presence of a metastatic
phenotype characterized by multiple, similar sized metastases. The
results support synchronized growth of dormant micrometastases in some
cases of breast cancer. The fact that this effect was only present in
lymph node negative patients, suggests that micrometastatic tumor
dormancy is especially important in this group, with otherwise favorable
prognosis. Systemic effects of growth factors released during wound
healing following surgery might induce a switch from the dormant state
into simultaneous growth of occult micrometastases. Further studies to
explore these mechanisms are ongoing.

