Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of a defined oleander extract by advanced cancer patients:
Case reports on toxicity and tumor-related outcomes


The present study reports cases of advanced cancer patient taking an
extract of Nerium oleander now in Phase 1 clinical trials in cancer
patients. A phytochemical constituent of the extract, oleandrin, has
multiple anticancer activities including inhibition of NF-kappaB and
induction of apoptosis. We present case reports of 9 metastatic cancer
patients who received the extract on personal use exemptions. Five of the
patients also received full integrative programs at an integrative
medicine center. Cases included 4 colon cancer patients, 3 pancreatic
cancer patients (1 neuroendocrine and 2 adenocarcinoma), 1 renal cell
carcinoma and 1 lung cancer patient. For the patients at the integrative
center, all of whom took the extract during periods when they were
receiving chemotherapy, toxicity grading of chemotherapy side effects was
performed. We analyzed the case records for potential effects of the
extract on tumor regression/stability in the absence of chemotherapy,
survival time, use concurrent with chemotherapy and toxicity. The renal
cell patient experienced tumor regression for 12 months with the extract
alone; the 3 pancreatic cancer patients and a colon cancer patient
experienced disease stabilization. Survival times were extended for all
patients with survival times ranging from 32 months to 11 years for these
patients with metastatic disease. Chemotherapy was well tolerated by
colon cancer patients with only grade 1-2 toxicity during as many as 70
cycles of chemotherapy. Mild toxicities thought to be related to the
extract included lightheadedness and mild tingling and burning of the
mouth with use of the sublingual preparation. Severe toxicities including
one myocardial infarction and one deep-vein thrombosis were observed but
not suspected to be related to the extract. Good clinical outcomes and
low toxicity were thus observed for the extract in these patients.

