Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput cysteine concentration determination by specific
fluorescence sensors in cell culture medium


Cysteine is a sulfur-containing amino acid that can be biosynthesized in
human (1). It is not stable in free solution and can be auto-oxidized to
cystine. Cystine is more stable and can travel freely through the blood
(2). After intracellular accumulation by different transporters,
especially Xc-transporter (3, 4), cystine will be rapidly reduced to
cysteine which can then be used to synthesis protein or glutathione (GSH)
synthesis5. Cysteine may also release from the cells by
Alanine-Serine-Cysteine transporter (3). The accumulation of cysteine can
feed other cells with low expression or mutation of Xc-transporter. It
has been reported that stromal cells can promote cancer cell survival by
the control of cystine metabolism to cysteine(5).Cysteine concentration
distribution now may affect cell survival and cell-cell signaling (2, 5).
It is still hard to study the total cysteine concentration in different
culture system or in vivo in a high-through put way. Traditional LC-MS
methods are not only cumbersome and time consuming, it also hard to
process different samples in parallel. Here we report a series of novel
fluorescent sensors which have great selectivity and sensitivity towards
cysteine. Using these sensor compounds, we can monitor cysteine level in
situ in cell culture system. Upon screening different culture medium, we
found cysteine concentrations are different with cell type and culture
time. We envision our fluorescent probes can be used to elucidate
cysteine's function in cell survival as well as signal transduction
between cells.1. Lehmann, A.; Hagberg, H.; Orwar, O.; Sandberg, M.,
Cysteine sulphinate and cysteate: mediators of cysteine toxicity in the
neonatal rat brain? Eur J Neurosci 1993, 5, (10), 1398-412.2. Li, L.;
Lim, J.; Jacobs, M. D.; Kistler, J.; Donaldson, P. J., Regional
differences in cystine accumulation point to a sutural delivery pathway
to the lens core. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007, 48, (3), 1253-60.3.
Scopelliti, A. J.; Ryan, R. M.; Vandenberg, R. J., Molecular determinants
for functional differences between alanine-serine-cysteine transporter 1
and other glutamate transporter family members. J Biol Chem 288, (12),
8250-7.4. Huang, Y.; Dai, Z.; Barbacioru, C.; Sadee, W.,
Cystine-glutamate transporter SLC7A11 in cancer chemosensitivity and
chemoresistance. Cancer Res 2005, 65, (16), 7446-54.5. Zhang, W.;
Trachootham, D.; Liu, J.; Chen, G.; Pelicano, H.; Garcia-Prieto, C.; Lu,
W.; Burger, J. A.; Croce, C. M.; Plunkett, W.; Keating, M. J.; Huang, P.,
Stromal control of cystine metabolism promotes cancer cell survival in
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Nat Cell Biol 14, (3), 276-86.

