Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of experimental brain metastasis of human breast cancer
by macitentan, a dual antagonist of endothelin receptors combined with
paclitaxel


Purpose: Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related mortality
among women in the United States. The major cause of death is due to
metastasis that is resistant to conventional therapy. The median survival
of women with brain metastases is measured in months due to resistance to
all standard therapies. Thus, the development of effective treatment
options for these patients is mandatory. We have reported that astrocytes
can protect tumor cells from chemotherapeutic drugs by a mechanism
involving the phosphorylation of endothelin receptors on tumor cells (Kim
et al, AACR, 2012). Moreover, we observed a heterogeneous expression of
endothelin receptors A and B in clinical samples of breast cancer brain
metastasis. We therefore examined whether blockade of the endothelin axis
by using macitentan, a dual endothelin antagonist, combined with
paclitaxel can produce therapeutic effects in an orthotopic model of
human breast cancer brain metastasis.Materials and Methods: Twenty
thousand MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells were injected into the
internal carotid artery of female nude mice to produce orthotopic brain
metastasis. Two weeks later, the mice were randomized into 4 groups
(n=10): (1) control group - mice receiving vehicle (p.o., daily; i.p.
injection once per week); (2) paclitaxel group - mice receiving
paclitaxel (8 mg/kg; i.p. injection once per week) and vehicle (p.o.;
daily); (3) macitentan group - mice receiving macitentan (10 mg/kg; p.o.;
daily) and vehicle (i.p. injection, once per week); and (4) paclitaxel
plus macitentan group. Moribund mice were euthanized, days of survival
were recorded, and the brains were harvested and processed for histology
and immunohistochemical analyses. The study was repeated with
luciferase-labeled MDA-MB-231 cells and produced similar therapeutic
results supported by IVIS imaging.Results: After 130-140 days of
treatment, the survival was significantly higher in mice treated with the
combination of paclitaxel and macitentan (80%) as compared with control
(20%), paclitaxel (20%), and macitentan alone (40%) (pPurpose: Breast
cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related mortality among women in the
United States. The major cause of death is due to metastasis that is
resistant to conventional therapy. The median survival of women with
brain metastases is measured in months due to resistance to all standard
therapies. Thus, the development of effective treatment options for these
patients is mandatory. We have reported that astrocytes can protect tumor
cells from chemotherapeutic drugs by a mechanism involving the
phosphorylation of endothelin receptors on tumor cells (Kim et al, AACR,
2012). Moreover, we observed a heterogeneous expression of endothelin
receptors A and B in clinical samples of breast cancer brain metastasis.
We therefore examined whether blockade of the endothelin axis by using
macitentan, a dual endothelin antagonist, combined with paclitaxel can
produce therapeutic effects in an orthotopic model of human breast cancer
brain metastasis.Materials and Methods: Twenty thousand MDA-MB-231 human
breast cancer cells were injected into the internal carotid artery of
female nude mice to produce orthotopic brain metastasis. Two weeks later,
the mice were randomized into 4 groups (n=10): (1) control group - mice
receiving vehicle (p.o., daily; i.p. injection once per week); (2)
paclitaxel group - mice receiving paclitaxel (8 mg/kg; i.p. injection
once per week) and vehicle (p.o.; daily); (3) macitentan group - mice
receiving macitentan (10 mg/kg; p.o.; daily) and vehicle (i.p. injection,
once per week); and (4) paclitaxel plus macitentan group. Moribund mice
were euthanized, days of survival were recorded, and the brains were
harvested and processed for histology and immunohistochemical analyses.
The study was repeated with luciferase-labeled MDA-MB-231 cells and
produced similar therapeutic results supported by IVIS imaging.Results:
After 130-140 days of treatment, the survival was significantly higher in
mice treated with the combination of paclitaxel and macitentan (80%) as
compared with control (20%), paclitaxel (20%), and macitentan alone (40%)
(p<0.0001, log-rank test). Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that the
phosphorylation of endothelin receptors A and B on tumor cells and
tumor-associated endothelial cells were inhibited by macitentan.
Treatment with macitentan also suppressed the expression of survival
proteins such as pAKT, pMAPK, BCL2L1, TWIST1, and GSTA5 in tumor cells.
More importantly, only the combination therapy induced significant
apoptosis of tumor cells and tumor-associated endothelial cells and
reduced the number of KI67 positive tumor cells. IVIS imaging confirmed
regression of brain lesions.Conclusion: Treatment with macitentan, a dual
endothelin receptor antagonist, combined with paclitaxel leads to
regression of experimental breast cancer brain metastasis and therefore
should be considered for clinical development.

