Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms by which cFLIP overexpression regulates
TRAIL-induced NF-B activation and lymphoma survival


Although recombinant TRAIL and agonistic antibodies directed against
TRAILR1/2 are considered potential anti-cancer agents, their anti-cancer
response in clinical trials was poor with the vast majority of patients
showing no remission. In addition, TRAIL has been found to act as tumor
promoters in certain contexts, increasing metastasis in
apoptosis-resistant cancer cells by activating NF-B. Therefore, defining
the mechanism that permits TRAIL to activate NF-B is critical for the
development of strategies that maximize the potential effectiveness of
TRAIL in clinical applications. We found that cFLIP-mediated and
caspase-8-dependent cleavage of RIP1 at two sites, D180 in the kinase
domain (KD) and D324 in the intermediate domain (ID), determines the
activation state of the IKK/NF-B pathway in response to TRAIL treatment.
In apoptosis sensitive cells, caspase-8 cleaves RIP1 at KD and ID domains
immediately after its recruitment to the receptor complex, impairing IKK
recruitment and activation. In cFLIP-overexpressing cells, cFLIP
restricts caspase-8 activity and RIP1 cleavage, generating a KD-cleaved
RIP1 fragment that is capable of activating the NF-B but not the
apoptotic pathway. Of note, cFLIP expression, caspase-8 activity and RIP1
cleavage in KD per se are not directly involved in IKK activation;
instead, they suppress RIP1-dependent activation of the apoptotic and
necrotic cascades, and thereby ensure the integrity of the NF-B pathway.
Moreover, inflammatory ligands such as CD40L deplete cytoplasmic pool of
TRAF2 and cIAP1/2, and promote RIP1 cleavage in lymphomas. Inhibition of
RIP1 cleavage in KD suppresses NF-B activation, and significantly
increases TRAIL-induced cell death even in cFLIP-overexpressing
lymphomas. Importantly, a portion of RIP1 is constitutively cleaved in
many types of human and mouse B-cell lymphomas. These data suggest that,
in addition to TRAF2- and cIAP1/2-mediated ubiquitination,
cFLIP-regulated and caspase-8-dependent limited cleavage of RIP1 is a new
layer of mechanism that promotes NF-B activation and cancer cell survival.

