Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in epithelial
ovarian carcinoma


[Background] Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) has shown resistance to
standard chemotherapy for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Patients with
CCC have a worse prognosis than those with ovarian serous adenocarcinoma
(SAC), which is a dominant subtype of EOC. Recently, several reports have
focused on mTOR as a therapeutic target for CCC, and the mTOR inhibitor
temsirolimus (CCI-779) combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel is in
phase II trial for stage III/IV CCC (GOG268 study). However, no molecular
biomarker to predict prognosis and/or therapeutic benefit from these
agents has been identified. This study evaluated the activation status of
all key members of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in CCC compared with SAC,
and to elucidate its clinical relevance as a prognostic
biomarker.[Material& Methods] We studied 70 patients with CCC and 70 with
SAC through formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues and clinical
records collected from Tottori University, Iwate Medical University, and
Jichi Medical University hospitals. Samples were subjected to
immunohistochemistry for expression of PIK3CA, PTEN, p-AKT (Ser473),
p-mTOR, p-p70S6K and p-4E-BP1. The expression levels were evaluated by
immuno-reactive score (IRS). For statistical analyses, IRS values of 0-3
were scored as poor expression, IRS 4-8 as moderate expression and 9-12
as strong. Additionally, freshly frozen tissues obtained from 31 of 70
patients with CCC and 36 of 70 with SAC were examined for hotspot
mutations of the PIK3CA gene by direct sequencing and gene amplification
by FISH. The association of these molecular parameters with histologic
subtype and clinical outcome were evaluated.[Results] Strong expression
of nuclear p-AKT(Ser473) in CCC was more frequent than in SAC (24.3% vs.
8.6%, p=0.011). Moderate to strong expression of p-4E-BP1 in CCC was less
frequent than in SAC (50.0% vs. 68.6%, p=0.038). There were no
significant differences between CCC and SAC in expression of other
molecules. Expression of these molecules was not associated with tumor
stage or patient outcome. Hotspot mutations of PIK3CA were detected in
22.6% of CCC and 13.9% of SAC. Of CCC, the 5-year overall survival rate
was significantly lower in PIK3CA mutant cases than in wild type cases
(50.0% vs. 78.0%, p= 0.042). On the other hand, there were no differences
in survival rate of SAC between mutant and wild types. Amplification of
the PIK3CA gene was detected among 33.3% of both CCC and SAC patients,
and did not relate to survival rate of each histological
subtype.[Conclusion] These results suggest that the PIK3CA mutation is a
promising prognostic biomarker for CCC. Further studies focusing on
patients treated with agents targeting PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway are
warranted to develop predictive biomarkers.

