Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase links oxidative PPP, lipogenesis
and tumor growth by inhibiting LKB1-AMPK signaling


6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) in the oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) is upregulated in many cancers. However, how 6PGD
is activated and provides a metabolic advantage to tumor growth is
unknown. Here we show that 6PGD is commonly activated in human cancers by
acetylation at K76 and K294,We found that 6PGD is commonly activated in
human cancers by lysine acetylation. Acetylation at K76 and K294 promotes
NADP+-binding to 6PGD and formation of active 6PGD dimers, respectively.
Moreover, we found that lysine acetylation of 6PGD is important for
cancer cell metabolism, proliferation and tumor growth. We also performed
systematic RNAi screens and identified DLAT and ACAT2 as 6PGD
acetyltransferases and HDAC4 as 6PGD deacetylase, using two novel
targeted shRNA libraries that target the majority of acetyltransferases
and deacetylases in the human genome, respectively. In addition, we found
that 6PGD controls intracellular levels of its product
ribulose-5-phosphate (Ru-5-P) to regulate lipogenesis. Ru-5-P inhibits
LKB1 by disrupting active LKB1 complex, leading to inhibition of AMPK and
subsequent activation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 and lipogenesis.
Furthermore, we screened out Physcion and its derivative S3 as novel 6PGD
inhibitors, which are efficacious in treatment of xenograft nude mice and
primary leukemia cells from human patients with minimal toxicity and no
off-target effect.Our findings for the first time decipher the molecular
mechanisms underlying 6PGD upregulation in cancer cells and suggest that
6PGD provides an additional and novel link between oxidative PPP and
lipogenesis through Ru-5-P-dependent inhibition of LKB1-AMPK signaling.
Moreover, identification and characterization of 6PGD inhibitors in
translational/pre-clinical studies for the first time provide proof of
principle to suggest 6PGD as an attractive anti-cancer target.

