Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the feasibility and throughput of quintuple modality
imaging in a prostate cancer bone metastasis model with PET, SPECT, CT,
MRI, and bioluminescence imaging


Background: Multimodality imaging presents a unique opportunity to image
the efficacy of candidate compounds against various models of cancer. The
challenge is in integrating the complimentary data that these modalities
can provide. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of
quintuple modality image in order to optimize workflows for maximal
efficacy testing of candidate compounds using PET, SPECT, CT, MRI, and
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI).Materials and Methods: Male nude mice were
injected into the left ventricle with 3x106 PC-3M-luc-C6 cells. BLI was
performed to track disease progression and ensure that animals exhibited
established metastatic disease prior to initiation of multimodality
imaging. Animals were injected with 500Ci Tc99m-MDP and allowed a 1h
uptake period prior to imaging. The animals were then placed into an
Animal Handling System (AHS, ASI Instruments) that coupled to multiple
integrated Positioning Receiver Assemblies (PRA's, ASI Instruments)
designed for the PET, SPECT, CT, and MRI scanners, and a 15min,
multi-pinhole SPECT scan was acquired. After completion of the SPECT
scan, 200Ci of 18F-FDG was administered under anesthesia. MicroCT and MRI
anatomical images were acquired during the FDG uptake period. Body
temperature was maintained via the integrated warm water circulation in
the AHS to ensure adequate FDG uptake and clearance during the
procedures. Whole body CT images were acquired at 512 projections, 75kVp,
and 220A. A series of T2-weighted and T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced
images were acquired using a 7T MRI system. At 1h post-FDG
administration, a 10min static PET emission scan was acquired and
reconstructed using a 3DOSEM/MAP algorithm.Results: Animals were
maintained under anesthesia for a total of approximately 2 hours in order
to acquire data from all the modalities. Data was able to be
co-registered in various forms in order to verify the location and extent
of disease, as well as the usefulness of 18F-FDG PET and Tc99m-MDP to
serve as biomarker probes for tumor cell metabolism, and osteolytic and
osteoblastic activity in bone lesions.Conclusions: Animals tolerated the
length of anesthesia well. The feasibility of this imaging was only made
possible through the use of the multimodality AHS bed and docking system
that permitted reproducible imaging across the different platforms. In
order to further optimize workflows, multiple AHS bed systems should be
employed so that data can be acquired on the various modalities in
parallel, instead of sequentially, thereby greatly increasing animal
throughputs.

