Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA Repair Enzyme Signature of a cohort of 100 healthy individuals
using peripheral blood mononuclear cells: In the search of cancer
susceptibility biomarkers


It is well established that mutations and combinations of polymorphisms
in DNA Repair genes contribute to cancer occurrence. However the
relationship between genotypes and cancer is not straightforward. As a
matter of fact, individuals cancer susceptibility also depends on their
genotoxic exposure history, age and lifestyle. In this context,
functional DNA-repair tests better account for DNA Repair complexity and
constitute powerful strategies to characterize effective individuals DNA
Repair capacity. Currently available tools interrogate very limited
aspects of DNA Repair mechanism and more informative assays are urgently
needed. In humans Base Excision Repair (BER) involves several
glycosylases that have the ability to recognize and cleave a set of small
base lesions resulting from oxidation, alkylation, or deamination of
normal bases, with the help of an AP endonuclease (APE1) that removes
abasic sites. To precisely characterize the BER pathway and offer better
chance to identify individuals with altered DNA repair capacities, we
developed a comprehensive approach that quantifies simultaneously several
BER repair enzymes in cell extracts. This multiplexed biochip version of
the well-known oligonucleotide cleavage assay was implemented to
characterize the DNA Repair Enzyme Signature of a cohort of 100 healthy
individuals (50% males and 50% females, ranging in age from 18 to 70
years). All were non-smokers.Two 8 mL blood samples were taken the first
day and another one one week apart. Whole cell extracts were prepared
from the subjects Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) and protein
concentration was determined. Assay robustness was assessed and the
inter- and intra-individual BER variability was also determined. We
observed a large inter-individual variability in DNA repair capacities.
We demonstrated that there was a gender-specific impact of aging on
certain DNA Repair activities. Thanks to the multiplexed approach, using
hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis, we gained new
information on the different glycosylase activities co-regulations and
assigned the samples to distinct subpopulation clusters characterized by
their DNA Repair Signature. Here again, males and females exhibited
different features.We demonstrated that our powerful assay is robust, can
be implemented on a large scale and could be used for population studies
to identify biomarkers of exposure and biomarkers of cancer
susceptibility.We thank GRAVIT and CEA program Technologies for Health
for financial support.

