Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted frizzled related protein 1 (SFRP1) as potential regulator
of chemotherapy response for patients with triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC)


Background: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is associated with an
unfavorable prognosis and increased response to chemotherapy. While
proliferation rate and tumor grade are determining factors, we have
recently suggested additional molecular structures to have significant
impact.Based on differential gene expression analysis we identified SFRP1
(secreted frizzled related protein 1) to be a potential molecular marker
for response to chemotherapy and potential prognostic marker.Methods:
Differential gene expression analysis was performed between TNBC (n=27)
versus non-TNBC (n=106) using AffymetrixU133A gene chips from breast
cancers of patients treated with neoadjuvant taxane/anthracycline
chemotherapy at MDACC (Hess et al. 2006). Differentially expressed genes
were validated using profiles of 286 patients with breast cancer who did
not receive systemic therapy (Wang et al. 2006). SFRP1 knockdown
experiments with the TNBC cell line MDA-MB 468 were performed via siRNA
transfection and carried out using assays for proliferation, chemo- and
radioresistance. Results: SFRP1 was identified as differentially
overexpressed gene in TNBC and successfully validated in the independent
dataset. Protein and mRNA quantification of SFRP1 (TNBC vs. non-TNBC cell
lines) confirm that. While in TNBC, SFRP1 expression showed no
association with recurrence-free survival, it is significantly correlated
with an increased sensitivity to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of SFRP1 expression in MDA-MB 468 was associated with increased
G2-arrested cells and importantly increased resistance to paclitaxel,
doxorubicin and cis-platinum. Furthermore, radioresistance of MDA-MB 468
cells was significantly increased after SFRP1 knockdown. Interestingly,
sensitivity to salinomycin was slightly increased after SFRP1 knockdown.
Salinomycin is known to kill cancer stem cells (Gupta et al. 2009).
Additionally, cancerous characteristics (invasion and migration) were
increased after SFRP1 knockdown while target gene expression analysis
revealed an association between loss of SFRP1 and activation of mTOR/PI3K
signaling.Conclusion: We suggest SFRP1 as a novel predictive marker of
chemotherapy sensitivity to taxane, anthracycline and platinum-containing
chemotherapy independent of Ki67 expression. Further on, we have shown
the influence of SFRP1 on cancerous characteristics thus, suggesting
SFRP1 as potential prognostic marker. Molecular role of SFRP1 may be the
influence on enrichment of cancer stem cell population which are known to
be resistant against chemotherapeutics and radiation and are usually slow
proliferating. Interestingly, the mTOR/PI3K signaling might be activated
via loss of SFRP1 which could display an opportunity for patients with
TNBC resistant to current chemotherapeutics.

