Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAX8 protein detection in serum of patients with serous ovarian
cancer


Introduction: The paired-box (PAX) genes encode a family of transcription
factors (TFs) with critical roles in the formation of tissues and organs
during embryogenesis. These TFs regulate expression of gene products that
control cell proliferation and differentiation. Since these processes are
also essential to the development of cancer, it shows that PAX genes may
participate in the initiation and proliferation of cancer. PAX8 gene
expression has been demonstrated in ovarian and other malignancies of
Mullerian origin and identified as a marker specific to gynecologic
malignancy. Determination of tissue PAX8 protein expression by IHC is
used as a clinical diagnostic tool for gynecologic cancer. However,
little is known about PAX8 protein expression in serum. Identification of
PAX8 in the serum of patients with ovarian cancer would be important in
developing an ovarian cancer-specific biomarker. We have previously
reported up-regulation of PAX8 gene in ovarian cancer using Human Focus
microarrays to characterize differences in gene expression between normal
and malignant tissue types. In this study, microarray (MA) and qRT-PCR
were performed on human ovarian tissue from patients with normal ovaries
and serous ovarian carcinoma to determine PAX8 gene expression. To
determine PAX8 protein expression in serum, ELISA was used to analyze
serum samples collected from patients with and without serous ovarian
cancer.Methods: MA analysis of mRNA from LCM captured cells from human
ovarian tissues was performed on normal and malignant ovarian tissues.
These samples were analyzed using the Affymetrix Human EXON 1.0 ST
microarray to distinguish the differential pattern of mRNA expression
between malignant and normal samples. qRT-PCR was utilized to confirm
up-regulation of PAX8 genes as determined by MA analysis. PAX8 protein on
17 normal and malignant serum samples were evaluated by indirect sandwich
ELISA.RESULTS: MA analysis demonstrated up-regulation of PAX8 in serous
ovarian cancer tissue in comparison with normal tissues (p=3.99E-6). This
finding then was confirmed using qRT-PCR. Detection of PAX8 protein in
serum was determined by ELISA and notably different between normal and
malignant serum samples (pIntroduction: The paired-box (PAX) genes encode
a family of transcription factors (TFs) with critical roles in the
formation of tissues and organs during embryogenesis. These TFs regulate
expression of gene products that control cell proliferation and
differentiation. Since these processes are also essential to the
development of cancer, it shows that PAX genes may participate in the
initiation and proliferation of cancer. PAX8 gene expression has been
demonstrated in ovarian and other malignancies of Mullerian origin and
identified as a marker specific to gynecologic malignancy. Determination
of tissue PAX8 protein expression by IHC is used as a clinical diagnostic
tool for gynecologic cancer. However, little is known about PAX8 protein
expression in serum. Identification of PAX8 in the serum of patients with
ovarian cancer would be important in developing an ovarian
cancer-specific biomarker. We have previously reported up-regulation of
PAX8 gene in ovarian cancer using Human Focus microarrays to characterize
differences in gene expression between normal and malignant tissue types.
In this study, microarray (MA) and qRT-PCR were performed on human
ovarian tissue from patients with normal ovaries and serous ovarian
carcinoma to determine PAX8 gene expression. To determine PAX8 protein
expression in serum, ELISA was used to analyze serum samples collected
from patients with and without serous ovarian cancer.Methods: MA analysis
of mRNA from LCM captured cells from human ovarian tissues was performed
on normal and malignant ovarian tissues. These samples were analyzed
using the Affymetrix Human EXON 1.0 ST microarray to distinguish the
differential pattern of mRNA expression between malignant and normal
samples. qRT-PCR was utilized to confirm up-regulation of PAX8 genes as
determined by MA analysis. PAX8 protein on 17 normal and malignant serum
samples were evaluated by indirect sandwich ELISA.RESULTS: MA analysis
demonstrated up-regulation of PAX8 in serous ovarian cancer tissue in
comparison with normal tissues (p=3.99E-6). This finding then was
confirmed using qRT-PCR. Detection of PAX8 protein in serum was
determined by ELISA and notably different between normal and malignant
serum samples (p<0.03).CONCLUSIONS: This study comparing PAX8 expression
in normal and serous ovarian cancer samples shows up-regulation of PAX8
in serous carcinoma of the ovary, in tissue and serum. In particular
ELISA suggests that the expression patterns of PAX8 in ovarian tissues is
translated to the protein component of these tissues. This resulting
protein can be detectable in serum, with higher levels in malignant
samples as compared to serum samples of normal human subjects. These
findings warrant further study of PAX8 in additional ovarian cancers
subtypes and corresponding serum, to better characterize the role of PAX8
up-regulation in ovarian cancer and validation of ELISA as diagnostic
biomarker for detection of ovarian cancer.

