Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor ACP-196 shows in vivo
efficacy against human chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells xenografted to
the NSG mouse model


Background: Targeting Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), an essential kinase
in the B cell receptor (BCR) pathway in patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) has proven very effective. For the first generation BTK
inhibitor ibrutinib, clinical response rates >70% and 75% progression
free survival >2 years have been reported for previously treated patients
(Byrd, NEJM, 2013). ACP-196 is a novel, second generation, irreversible
BTK inhibitor that may show advantages in terms of binding specificity
and drug-drug interactions compared to the first generation BTK
inhibitor. Survival and proliferation of CLL cells is highly dependent on
microenvironment interaction, which must be taken into consideration when
testing new drugs for CLL. We have previously shown that human CLL cells
engrafted in the spleen of NSG mice have comparable tumor biology to
human lymph node resident CLL cells (Herman, Leukemia, 2013). We here
demonstrate the in vivo effects of ACP-196 monotherapy against CLL cells
in the NSG xenograft model.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from previously untreated CLL patients were injected intravenously into
NSG mice. Mice received ACP-196 through the drinking water. The effect of
ACP-196 on xenografted CLL cells from peripheral blood and spleen was
assessed by flow cytometry.Results: At all dose levels tested, ACP-196
significantly inhibited proliferation of human CLL cells in the spleens
of NSG mice, as measured by Ki67 expression (P=0.002). The mean Ki67
decrease was 58%, 70% and 73%, respectively for the low, intermediate,
and high dose level compared with vehicle. Tumor burden in spleens from
mice treated with the high dose of ACP-196 decreased compared with the
vehicle treated group (P=0.007). As seen with other BCR inhibitors,
ACP-196 transiently increased CLL cell counts in the peripheral blood in
a dose dependent manner (p=0.01). ACP-196 inhibited BCR signaling in
vivo, as demonstrated by reduced phosphorylation of PLC2.Conclusions:
Results presented here for ACP-196 are in accordance with the expected
profile of an irreversible BTK inhibitor. The NSG CLL xenograft model
will be used for comparative testing of different BTK inhibitors and
exploration of combination therapies.

