Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of low-cost high throughput screening pipeline for
detecting germline cancer causing mutations in Hispanic populations


Cancer is a leading cause of non-communicable morbidity and mortality
worldwide. Hispanics are the largest and fastest growing ethnic group in
the U.S. and the largest population group in the Americas. Due to health
care disparities, this population remains understudied and under-screened
for cancer causing gene mutations. While many genes that predispose
individuals for different cancers have been discovered, the prevalence of
mutations in these genes remains largely undetermined in many
populations. Developing customized screening panels and screening for
novel variants for large population samples can be expensive and time
consuming. We have developed a low-cost, high-throughput pipeline and
method to screen 480 customizable amplicons (20 genes, 144Kbp) for up to
384 samples per run. By combining a bioinformatics pipeline for design
and analysis with Fluidigm microfluidics PCR and Illumina MiSeq, we can
quickly screen multiple cancer panels at a high depth of coverage, at a
low cost per sample. The amplicon design pipeline provides ability to
develop amplicon primer sets and pooling strategies. Libraries of 384
barcoded samples are run in a single MiSeq lane. Sequencing data is
analyzed by an automated pipeline, which aligns using BWA-MEM, calls
variants using VarScan 2, and annotates variants using multiple datasets
using Annovar. We have applied these pipelines and methods to identify
mutation in known cancer genes, such as APC, MSH2, MLH1, BRCA1, and
BRCA2, in several hundred Hispanic individuals with familial and
early-onset colon and breast cancer. While many of the mutations have
been previously reported, we have identified several novel mutations that
appear to have Amerindian origin. Moreover, a few are shared among many
individuals in isolated geographic locations, suggesting founder effects
are common in some of these populations. Over 50% of the patients
screened to date have no mutations in our cancer panels; we plan to use
these samples to screen for novel genes using whole exome or genome
sequencing in the next phase of our study. In conclusion, we have
developed a low-cost, high-throughput pipeline for screening customizable
panels for known and novel mutations. Our study is an initial step to
assess prevalence of known cancer causing genes and identify novel
genes/mutations that contribute to different cancers in the Hispanic
community. These discoveries provide a foundation for early detection,
prevention, and treatment of familial cancers in Hispanic populations.

