Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive and systematic identification of miR-215 targets in
colon cancer via a novel translation capture immunoprecipitation (TrIP)
approach


The important roles that non-coding miRNAs play in cancer development,
makes the investigation of the various genes they target particularly
crucial. In addition to targeting mRNA transcripts for degradation, miRNA
can also alter gene expression at the translational level to achieve
rapid regulation. It has been a technical challenge to study
translational control using a small number of cells. We have overcome
this hurdle by developing a translational capture immunoprecipitation
approach (TrIP) to investigate RNA binding proteins or non-coding RNA
regulation at the translational level from a small numbers of cells. The
new approach is based on the fact that nascent translated polypeptides
are associated with hsp70 chaperones along with actively translating mRNA
transcript complexes, called polyribosomes. We are able to isolate
actively translating mRNA from free cytoplasmic mRNA by
immunoprecipitation of hsp70 associated polyribosome complexes. In this
study, we utilize this novel approach to identify both degraded and
non-degraded mRNA transcripts targeted by miR-215 in colon cancer.
Following miR-215 overexpression in colon cancer cells, actively
translating mRNA transcripts were isolated using the TrIP technique and
purified following standard RNA isolation techniques. We were able to
identify additional non-degraded mRNA targets regulated by miR-215 using
a TrIP with transcriptome-wide microarray based approach, when compared
to a generic approach based on steady state total RNA that can only
identify degraded targets. Specific targets were independently validated
using qRT-PCR analysis. We further validated miR-215 targets at the
protein level with a comprehensive and high-throughput quantitative SILAC
proteomics analysis. Protein targets were further validated using Western
blotting with select positive control targets including TYMS, DTL and
DHFR. This approach offers the unique opportunity to understand not only
the mRNA targets a miRNA may target for degradation, but also those it
regulates at the translational level, providing unique insight into the
actions of miRNAs. Interest in this type of thorough analysis of
different miRNAs or RNA binding proteins will likely continue to grow as
the important roles miRNA play in cancer are further investigated.

