Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis and tumor recurrence from rare SOX9-positive cells in
Group 4 medulloblastoma


Tumor recurrence is the main cause of death in children with
medulloblastoma (MB). MYCN is a marker for poor prognosis which is
amplified in SHH and Group 4 but rarely in WNT and Group 3 subgroups of
MB. The exact mechanisms for MB relapse are not known but recent findings
(Ramaswamy et al. Lancet Oncol., 2013) suggest temporal differences
within the four MB subgroups. For instance, SHH tumors recur locally
while SHH-independent Group 4 tumors develop distant metastases. In order
to study these processes further, we used a previously described
transgenic mouse model of MYCN-driven SHH-independent MB (GTML mouse) to
recreate the metastatic recurrence of such brain tumors in vivo.We
previously showed that the expression of SOX9 transcription factor
correlates well with SHH tumors and that only a few scattered
SOX9-positive cells are found in SHH-independent GTML tumors similarly to
Group 4 human MB. By using a combination of Tet-ON and Tet-OFF inducible
systems we managed to target this rare population of SOX9-positive GTML
tumor cells in vivo. These cells were able to form a distant recurrence
after the tumor bulk in the mice was removed by using dox-inducible
oncogene depletion. These relapses showed similar morphology and
immunoreactivity of defined MB markers but presented generally higher
levels of SOX9 compared to the primary GTML tumors.Additionally, we
overexpressed SOX9 in cerebellar stem cells transfected with a
mutationally stabilized MYCNT58A and injected them back into the
cerebellum of adult mice. Surprisingly, the MB-like tumors that formed
migrated and developed in the forebrain in contrast to the cerebellar
tumors induced by the same cells transfected with MYCNT58A only. These
findings suggest that increased levels of SOX9 drives migration of
MYCN-driven MB cells. A similar correlation was found in Group 4 MB
patients where isolated metastases had consistently higher SOX9 levels as
compared to the corresponding primary tumor.Significance: We have
developed a new mouse model for MB recurrence. We show how a rare
population of SOX9-positive cells in SHH-independent MB is capable of
initiating recurrence after primary tumor removal. The relapsed MB has
similar characteristics to the initial tumor but develops at a distant
site in the brain, in line with recent data from human tumors. Further
characterization of cells with such properties will help to improve our
understanding of the mechanisms behind metastatic MB recurrence and to
develop treatments against those migrating cell populations.

