Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retroviral replicating vector transduced alloresponsive T
lymphocytes retain mobility and cytotoxic functionalities


The radial monolayer cell migration assay was originally developed to
measure the infiltrative properties of adherent tumor cells on individual
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, or on ECM extracted from tumor cell
monolayers. For this assay a single cell suspension of tumor cells is
seeded using a cell sedimentation manifold (CSM), precisely into the
center of Teflon-masked, ECM-coated slide wells. The adherent tumor cells
establish a focal, circular monolayer from which horizontal motility can
be microscopically-viewed and photographed over time. We adapted use of
the CSM to evaluate the in vitro mobility of non-adherent effector T
cells on confluent tumor cell monolayers or on ECM extracts from them.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) sensitized to the human leukocyte antigens
(HLA) on 13-06-MG glioma cells or on brain-tropic breast MDA-MB-231
carcinoma cells were generated by one-way mixed lymphocyte tumor cell
reactions. These alloresponsive CTL were then transduced with retroviral
replicating vectors (RRV) coding for green fluorescent protein (GFP).
Using the CSM, the RRV-GFP transduced CTL were seeded into the center of
wells with a confluent monolayer of glioma cells that were partially HLA
matched to 13-06-MG. By light and fluorescence microscopy, we visualized
not only the a) mobility of individual GFP+ T cells, but b) the
cytotoxicity engendered to the underlying adherent glioma cell monolayer
by the overlaid nonadherent CTL, in addition to c) transfer of RRV from
the CTL to tumor cells. The in vitro cytotoxic functionality of the
RRV-transduced CTL was confirmed by real-time xCELLigence impedance
cytotoxicity assays. In other experiments, the RRV-GFP transduced CTL
were also stained with a vital fluorescent red dye, CMPTX, to distinguish
transduced from nontransduced CTL. The CTL were placed into the center of
wells coated with ECM harvested from MDA-MB-231BR cells and radial
movement of the transduced and nontransduced CTL was also observed over
72 hr time. We conclude that effector T cells transduced with RRV
maintain mobility and cytotoxic functionality, and further, are capable
of transmitting RRV to tumor cells. Thus, transduced alloresponsive CTL
can facilitate immunogene therapy by their capability of gene delivery to
infiltrating tumor cells in the brain.

