Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study comparing breast cancer risk scores using models
with and without breast density among women of different race/ethnicities
undergoing breast screening in the University of California, Irvine
Athena Breast Health Network cohort


The USPSTF recommends that women who are at increased risk for breast
cancer and at low risk for adverse medication effects should be offered
risk-reducing medications, such as tamoxifen or raloxifene, by their
clinicians. The NCCN also recommends risk counseling for women with a
5-year risk of 1.7% as calculated by the NCI-developed Breast Cancer Risk
Assessment Tool (BCRAT, based on the Gail model) or other risk model. The
integration of risk assessment into clinical breast screening holds
promise in reducing breast cancer risk for many women; however, the
criteria that contribute to elevated risk status are different according
to different risk models. The University of California, Irvine (UCI)
Athena Breast Health Network has integrated a computerized risk
assessment largely based on the BCRAT into the screening mammography
process at UCI mammography centers. Women identified to be at elevated
risk are provided with personalized risk counseling by a Breast Health
Specialist. In recent years, breast density has been increasingly
recognized as a risk factor for breast cancer; however, it is not part of
the BCRAT. In this pilot analysis, we sought to determine if
incorporating breast density into the risk assessment program would
affect the % of women in our cohort who have a 5-year risk of 1.7%. We
hypothesized that an increased % of Asian women would reach this
threshold since breast density is known to be higher in Asians. We used
the BCSC model, which includes density as a variable, to calculate risk
scores for a subset of our screening population (n=309), age-matched for
three race/ethnic groups, and compared them to their scores according to
the BCRAT. Our results showed that while Asians did exhibit significantly
higher breast density (30.3% had BIRADS breast density classification 4,
extremely dense) than White and Hispanic women (8.7% and 5.6%,
respectively), their BCRAT and BCSC scores were significantly lower than
in White women but higher than in Hispanic women, with 14.1% of Asians
having a BCSC score 1.7% compared to 43.7% of Whites and 10.3% in
Hispanics, and 17.2% of Asians having a BCRAT score of 1.7% compared to
34.0% of Whites and 6.5% of Hispanics. Interestingly, when differences
were explored between BCRAT and BCSC scores within the same sub-group of
women, the scores were not statistically different among White or
Hispanic women but were approaching statistical significance in Asian
women. Contrary to our hypothesis, in Asian women, BCSC-calculated risk
was actually lower than according to the BCRAT. These findings suggest
that, despite higher breast density, Asian women still exhibit lower
breast cancer risk scores than White women; thus, a smaller proportion of
Asian women in our cohort will be recommended for high risk counseling
and chemoprevention.

