Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure to a therapeutically relevant dose of ionizing radiation
reveals colorectal cancer biomarker and associated receptor alterations


Purpose: Diagnostic and therapeutic radiation exposure to humans is
inevitable, and radiation exposure is known to enhance risks of
colorectal cancer (CRC) and inflammatory bowel diseases. Radiation
exposure has also been observed to promote obesity in humans as well as
in rodents. While altered levels of insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF1),
leptin, and adiponectin have been reported as potential markers of
obesity-related CRC risk, there is a paucity of long-term
radiation-risk-markers for intestinal pathologies. The goal of the
current study was to evaluate in mice whether obesity-related CRC risk
markers have the potential to serve as radiation-associated CRC risk
markers after exposure to a clinically relevant radiation dose.Methods
and materials: Mice (C57BL/6J, 6-8 week old, female; n= 8 per group) were
exposed to a radiation dose of 2 Gy, commonly used in fractionated
radiotherapy. Serum and intestinal tissues were collected two and twelve
months after radiation. Serum levels of IGF-1, IGF binding protein 3
(IGFBP3), leptin, and adiponectin were analyzed by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on small
intestine and colon sections for IGF1 receptor (IGF1R), obesity receptor
(OB-R), adiponectin receptor 1 (AdipoR1), adiponectin receptor 2
(AdipoR2) and proliferative marker Ki-67.Results: The levels of free IGF1
and free leptin measured by calculating IGF1/IGFBP3 and
leptin/adiponectin ratio showed a distinct pattern. While significantly
higher free IGF1 was observed twelve months post-radiation, higher free
leptin was observed two months after radiation exposure.
Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated increased IGF1R and OB-R,
decreased AdipoR1 and R2, and increased Ki67 in intestinal as well as in
colonic sections at both the time points.Conclusions: Considering that
one fraction of 2 Gy showed significant alterations in risk markers, we
believe exposure to a higher total dose using more fractions will show
more pronounced effects. Taken together, this study demonstrates that
adipogenic risk markers of CRC could be effective tools to assess CRC
risks after therapeutic radiation exposures.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

