Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic resistance to Notch inhibition in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Resistance to therapy is one of the major challenges in cancer treatment
today, equally applicable to conventional chemotherapy as well as
targeted therapy. Malignant tumors have widespread epigenetic alterations
including aberrant expression of chromatin modifiers in a wide variety of
tumors and chromosomal translocations involving chromatin modifiers that
can drive development of some cancers. In addition, cancer genome
sequencing studies have identified frequent somatic alterations in many
chromatin-regulating enzymes. Moreover, epigenetic changes have been
implicated in the development of drug resistance.T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) has a high rate of treatment-refractory
disease and relapse that significantly lowers survival rates compared to
other forms of ALL. The identification of activating somatic NOTCH1
mutations in over 50% of patients with T-ALL led to the development of
-secretase inhibitors (GSI) that prevent cleavage and activation of
NOTCH1. Although effective in vitro, the rapid development of resistance
that develops with Notch inhibition in vivo has so far prevented the
translation of these inhibitors into the clinical setting.We have
developed a model of therapeutic resistance to inhibition of Notch
signaling in T-ALL. In this model, persister cells readily expand in the
presence of GSI and the absence of Notch signaling. Rare persister cells
are pre-existing in nave T-ALL populations. Intriguingly, in vitro
resistance to NOTCH1 inhibitor therapy is reversible, suggesting that it
is epigenetically mediated. When compared to GSI-sensitive cells,
persisters are characterized by distinct signaling and gene expression
programs, and demonstrate global chromatin compaction. Using a
short-hairpin knock-down screen of 300 known chromatin regulators we
identified the chromatin reader BRD4 as essential for persister T-ALL
cells. BRD4 expression levels are upregulated in persister T-ALL cells.
Genome-wide binding studies of BRD4 show that it is found at active
regulatory elements in the genome that are associated with genes known to
be important for cell proliferation, survival and signaling pathways in
T-ALL, e. g. MYC and BCL2. Treatment of persisters with the BRD4
inhibitor JQ1 down-regulates expression of these target genes.
Functionally, JQ1 treatment leads to growth arrest and apoptosis in
persister T-ALL cells, at doses well tolerated by GSI-sensitive leukemia
cells. Furthermore, combination therapy of GSI and JQ1 is significantly
more effective over vehicle or single agent therapy for primary human
T-ALLs in vitro and in vivo.These studies demonstrate epigenetic
heterogeneity as a basis of drug resistance in leukemia. We suggest that
combination therapies that include targeting of chromatin regulators may
hold great therapeutic promise for prevention and treatment of resistant
disease.

