Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducing tumor apoptosis by redirecting VEGF to activate cell
death receptors


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key tumor angiogenesis
factor that is overexpressed by many tumors; the Fas/CD95 death receptor
induces apoptosis when activated by its ligand FasL. Agents that inhibit
VEGF such as bevacizumab, or activate Fas receptor have been intensively
developed as cancer therapeutics. Bevacizumab only modestly improves
overall survival or has no effect on overall survival in most cancer
patients. More effective VEGF-targeted agents are needed. We conceived of
a new strategy that goes beyond VEGF inhibition and converts VEGF to act
as a tumor cell death factor. Our aim is to co-opt overexpressed VEGF
within the tumor microenvironment to initiate apoptosis via Fas death
receptors expressed on tumor cells and/or stromal cells. We created a
recombinant homotrimeric fusion protein designated R1FasL that combines
the VEGF-binding domain of human VEGFR1 with the trimerization and death
receptor-binding domains of human FasL ligand. R1FasL was produced in CHO
cells and purified by FLAG antibody affinity chromatography to yield a
135 kD homotrimer. In vitro studies confirmed that VEGF binds to and
crosslinks the R1FasL fusion protein to form higher-order complexes that
efficiently aggregate and activate Fas death receptors to induce
apoptosis. Jurkat cells were killed by R1FasL only when VEGF was added.
R1FasL induced apoptosis in diverse human cancer cell lines in vitro,
including renal cell, glioblastoma and breast cancers. When VEGF was
sequestered by a VEGFR1-Fc trap protein, R1FasL did not induce apoptosis,
demonstrating that R1FasL used the VEGF secreted by the cancer cells to
kill them. We previously demonstrated that a single intravenous dose of
R1FasL induced widespread tumor apoptosis in a xenograft model of human
renal cell carcinoma. We have now tested R1FasL in an intracranial
xenograft model of human glioblastoma. Nude mice bearing U87 intracranial
xenografts were treated with a single intratumoral injection of R1FasL
(0.025 to 0.9 mg/kg in 10 microliters). Twenty-four hours later tumors
were collected and analyzed for evidence of apoptosis by caspase-3
immunohistochemistry. Mice treated with a single intratumoral dose of
R1FasL at 0.1 mg/kg demonstrated significant apoptosis within the tumor
but not in surrounding brain. In a safety study, intracranial injection
of R1FasL (0.1 or 0.8 mg/kg) into normal brains of nude mice did not
cause increased weight loss or death versus PBS injection. In a
subsequent survival study, mice treated with a single intratumoral dose
of R1FasL (0.8 mg/kg) survived significantly longer than PBS-treated mice
(39.5 versus 30 days, p=0.018). Non-invasive imaging demonstrated a
median 59% reduction in tumor size 48 hours after R1FasL injection. By
converting VEGF to act as a Fas death receptor ligand, the R1FasL fusion
protein may be an effective agent to simultaneously target VEGF and death
receptors to selectively induce apoptosis in the tumor microenvironment.

