Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel canine histiocytic sarcoma cell line provides a potential
path to effective treatments with relevance for translational and
comparative studies in humans


Histiocytic sarcoma in people is an uncommon and highly aggressive
hematopoietic malignancy that accounts for less than 1% of all
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Regardless of treatment, patients invariably
carry a poor prognosis and a high mortality rate. The low number of cases
limits investigations for more efficacious forms of treatment for this
disorder. To date, there is no human histiocytic sarcoma cell line
available for research purposes. Therefore, the establishment of a
representative cell line would be highly beneficial. In the present
study, we established a cell line from a tumor in a Bernese mountain dog
that was morphologically characterized as a malignant histiocytic
sarcoma. The diagnosis was further supported by the positive cellular
expression of CD18 and vimentin by immunohistochemistry, and CD11c and
MHC II by flow cytometry techniques. Together, the expression of these
markers indicated a dendritic cell origin, in accordance to the cell type
observed in the majority of histiocytic sarcoma cases in dogs. The
established cell line has been maintained in tissue culture for a minimum
of 50 passages over 12 months in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 15%
heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum. Results from a pHrodo E. coli
Bioparticles assay indicated that the cells had phagocytic behavior.
Furthermore, the cell line was successfully transplantable as a xenograft
in immunodeficient mice when injected subcutaneously. A palpable tumor
was observed within two weeks of injection and the tumor retrieved from
the mice was histopathologically similar to the primary tumor. Finally,
we performed cytotoxic assays in vitro with classical chemotherapeutic
agents and novel therapeutic drugs, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
The results from these assays demonstrated that dasatinib, a receptor
tyrosine kinase pan-inhibitor, was able to significantly inhibit the
growth of the cells in vitro within a clinically achievable, and
tolerable plasma concentration. Interestingly, the antiproliferative
response to dasatinib was augmented when combined to doxorubicin, a
classical chemotherapeutic agent, indicating the potential benefits of
drug combination for the treatment of this malignancy. In this study we
successfully established a canine histiocytic sarcoma cell line that can
be used as model for translational studies for similar disorders in
humans. In addition, studies that require a cell line derived from
dendritic cells can also benefit from this new established cell line.

