Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting K-ras mutant cancer cells with a lupus anti-guanosine
antibody


Aberrant G-protein signaling due to mutations in genes encoding the Ras
family of small GTPases is associated with approximately 30% of human
cancers, and K-ras is one of the most commonly mutated Ras proteins.
Development of targeted therapies that are preferentially toxic to cancer
cells harboring K-ras mutations is therefore an important goal in cancer
research. We have identified an unusual cell-penetrating lupus
autoantibody, 4H2, as a potential candidate for development as a targeted
therapy for tumors with activating K-ras mutations. 4H2 is an
anti-guanosine antibody that has previously been shown to penetrate
living cells and inhibit cAMP formation. Taken together, the ability of
4H2 to bind guanosine (a component of GDP/GTP) and to inhibit cAMP
formation suggests that 4H2 perturbs G-protein signaling. We therefore
hypothesized that 4H2 would be selectively toxic to cancer cells with
aberrant G-protein signaling due to activating K-ras mutations compared
to cells without mutations in K-ras. To test this hypothesis, we
evaluated the effects of 4H2 on a panel of isogenic pairs of cells with
and without activating K-ras mutations, including Cal12T lung cancer
cells (with and without a G12C activating K-ras mutation), NCI-H1975 lung
cancer cells (with and without a G12D activating K-ras mutation), and
SW48 colon cancer cells (with and without a G12A activating K-ras
mutation). Immunofluorescence experiments confirmed that 4H2 penetrates
into and localizes to the cytoplasm of cells with and without an
activating K-ras mutation. In cell proliferation assays the matched pairs
of cells were treated with 4H2 while growing as subconfluent monolayers,
and 4H2 was observed to significantly inhibit the proliferation of the
cells with activating K-ras mutations but not the cells without K-ras
mutations. Next, colony formation assays confirmed that treatment with
4H2 was significantly more toxic to cells with activating K-ras mutations
compared to cells without K-ras mutations. Mechanistically, Western blot
analyses suggest a differential effect of 4H2 on the MAP kinase and Akt
signaling pathways in K-ras mutant and wild type cells, consistent with
the hypothesis that 4H2 interferes with G-protein associated
intracellular signaling pathways. In summary, this work has demonstrated
that 4H2 is an intriguing candidate for further study and development as
a potential targeted therapy for tumors with activating mutations in
K-ras.

