Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New molecular model identifying the critical role of the GLI2
oncogene in human colonic epithelial cell (HCEC) transformation


Colorectal cancer, comprising 85% sporadic non-hereditary tumors, is the
third in cancer incidence and the second leading cause of cancer
mortality in the United States. Initiating mutations in key genes, APC,
KRAS and p53, determine transformation and early oncogenesis in the
colon. The initiating mutation in the APC tumor suppressor gene activates
Wnt signaling. Progression mostly requires mutation in the KRAS oncogene,
facilitating cytoplasmic->nuclear translocation of -catenin. Mutation in
p53 coincides with the transition from adenoma->carcinoma. While the
specific genetic mutations that determine oncogenesis in colon cancer are
well documented, the fundamental biologic mechanisms that determine
synergism in effecting transformation remain poorly understood. The GLI
genes are transcription factors that regulate Hedgehog signaling, which
is activated in colon cancer. GLI1 and GLI2 are oncogenes, induce
transformation, and determine oncogenesis in glioma, medulloblastoma
(GLI1), and basal cell carcinoma (GLI2). We have demonstrated in colon
carcinoma cells that GLI2 is activated by oncogenic KRAS, activates GLI1,
and determines cell survival. In immortalized HCEC cells with defined
genetic mutations, we discovered that GLI2 is activated during
transformation, dependent on synergistic interactions between mAPC and
KRAS[G12V] pathways in the presence of inactive p53. This renders cells
dependent on GLI for survival. In isogenic HCEC models, KRAS[G12V]
determines -catenin subcellular trafficking between membrane adherens
junctions (AJ), cytoplasm and nucleus. This is apparent following
inhibition of ERK (AJ->cytoplasm) and/or GSK3 (AJ->nucleus) that
determine -catenin subcellular localization. Further, we have identified
GLI2 as a new Wnt target gene, transcriptionally regulated by
Wnt-dependent TCF4, which binds to consensus sequences in the GLI2
promoter. Oncogenic KRAS signaling channels through and converges on GLI2
to drive GLI2 to a higher activating state. GLI2 is transcriptionally
regulated by an ERK-dependent mechanism that requires the GLI cofactor,
ZIC2. Thus, GLI2 is activated by both Wnt and oncogenic KRAS signaling
pathways. In summary, we present a new molecular model that identifies
the GLI2 oncogene as a critical determinant of human colonic epithelial
cell transformation. These studies will: 1) define the key mutational
events and biologic mechanisms that functionally activate the oncogene
GLI2 during colonic epithelial cell transformation; 2) define the role of
GLI2 in early oncogenesis; 3) identify key molecules and potential new
targets that determine transformation; 4) lead to improved therapeutic
strategies specific to colorectal cancer.

