Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovulatory wound: the site of origin for ovarian serous carcinoma


Background: New clinical and molecular studies suggest that HGSOC
originates from the neighboring fallopian tubes, rather than the surface
epithelial layer of the ovary. However, very little is known about the
process of tubal malignant cells migrating and implanting into ovary. Our
research focuses on understanding how the extraovarian malignant cells
implant into the ovary and how ovulation affects the process of their
migration and implantation.Method: Tumor initiating cells (TICs) isolated
from human HGSOC were labeled by red fluorescent protein (RFP)-expressing
lentivirus and subcutaneously or intrauterine injected to
immunocompromised mice. Hormones (PMS and HCG) were interperitoneally
injected to induce superovulation in mice. In the in vitro models, TICs
were cultured with the granulosa cell conditional medium and the extra
cellular matrix (ECM) extracted from ovarian stroma cells to evaluate
their effects on the migration and attachment of TICsResult:
Superovulation increased the ovarian tumor-forming rate from 38% (15/39
in control group) to 100% (24/24 in supervolation group). The increased
frequency of ovulation enhances the formation of ovarian tumors in mouse
models. In the intrauterine injection model, we were able to trace the
migration of TICs towards ovaries and capture the early implantation of
TICs inside ovaries in 5-10 days after the injection. We detected stage I
ovarian tumors in mice. The tumors are encapsulated in the ovary and
covered by the intact surface epithelial layer. These tumor cells closely
interacted with the stroma of ovary, particularly the structure of corpus
luteum. The granulosa cells secreted stromal cell-derived factor 1
(SDF-1, also known as CXCL12). SDF-1 attracts TICs that express CXCR4
(the receptor of SDF-1) to ovulatory wounds. Upon ovulation the ovulatory
wounds expose the stroma of ovary, which provides a collagen enriched ECM
for TICs to attach.Conclusion: The unique ovulatory wound
microenvironment attracts the malignant cells to migrate towards the
ovary and creates access for the malignant cells to implant in the
collagen-enriched ECM in the stroma of ovary. The new mechanisms revealed
by our data may explain why increased ovulation is associated with
epithelial ovarian cancer. Our findings support the extra-ovarian origin
theory and will help us better understand the initiation and progression
of HGSOC.

