Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Greater resistance of mutant p53 tumor cells to hypoxia or
chloroquine with glucose or pyruvate supplementation is diminished under
glucose starvation


BACKGROUND. Poorly vascularized solid tumors are exposed to regions of
low oxygen and glucose deprivation. These restrictions may promote either
defensive autophagy or cell death through excessive reactive oxygen
species (ROS), mediated by activated NADPH oxidases (NOX) which transport
electrons from NADPH on the cytoplasmic side of plasma membranes to
reduce molecular oxygen at the extracellular space, increasing superoxide
anion radical (O2-). .OBJECTIVES. To investigate in genetically-matched
human melanoma cells with wt or mutant p53, responses to: a) autophagy
inhibitor chloroquine and to glucose-lowering metformin or to hypoxia in
glucose-supplemented medium; b) pyruvate in glucose-free medium under
normoxia or hypoxia; c) sub-physiological glucose. EXPERIMENTAL.
Responses to normoxia or hypoxia were assesed by live-dead fluorometric
assays, or by crystal violet staining of surviving cells. Mechanisms
influencing response to glucose limitation were studied by specific
immune blotting. RESULTS. Lower susceptibility to chloroquine metformin
involving greater basal AMPK activation was seen in physiological 5 mM
glucose in mutant p53 cells. These cells were also preferentially
protected from prolonged hypoxia by glucose supplementation or by
pyruvate supplementation of glucose-free medium under normoxia, but not
under hypoxia. Sub-physiological glucose without pyruvate induced
apoptosis-associated PARP cleavage irrespective of p53 status. However,
treatment with impermeable exogenous superoxide dismutase (SOD) to remove
extracellular superoxide signalling across cell membranes, preferentially
counteracted PARP cleavage only in wt p53 cells with lower LDHA
expression after 48 hr in 2.5 mM glucose. CONCLUSIONS. Glucose
availability increases resistance to hypoxia or to chloroquine metformin
in mutant p53 cells. However, glucose starvation promotes toxicity linked
to extracellular (O2-), preferentially in mutant p53 cells.

