Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin-induced metabolic changes are k-ras-dependent in animal
models of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an aggressive malignancy, that
is very difficult to treat. To date, systemic treatment for PDA, either a
single agent or combinations of agents, has shown only modest benefits.
Numerous epidemiological studies have reported that metformin (MET), a
widely used anti-diabetic drug, provides protective benefits in reducing
PDA risk among the diabetic population. Using a stable isotope glucose
(GLUC) tracer for dynamic metabolic profiling (SiDMAP), we recently
reported that high cholesterol (CHOL) alters the cellular metabolism of
MiaPaCa2 (a PDA cell line harboring mutant K-Ras) cells by redirecting
glucose-derived acetyl-CoA toward fatty acid (FA) synthesis. This
response to MET is depended on the level of intracellular CHOL synthesis.
We now performed a SiDMAP study in the LSL-K-RasG12D/+, LSL-Trp53R172H/+,
Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) and the LSL-K-RasG12D/+, Pdx-1-Cre (KC) mouse models for
PDA, and their wild-type littermates (C57Bl6.129). The mice were treated
(or not) with MET (250 mg/kg, i.p. Q5D) and subjected to an Intra
Peritoneal GLUC Tolerance Test (IPGTT) pre- and post-MET treatment. The
KPC mice with the average tumor volume of 80.83+8.57 mm3 and the KC mice
with PanIN lesions (aver. 9 mo old) were put on study. K-Ras mutation,
with the presence of the tumor (KPC mice), induced an increase in plasma
GLUC production via de novo synthesis by the liver using futile cycling
of GLUC derived lactate and pyruvate. MET treatment decreased this flux
in mutated (KC) and tumor-bearing animals (KPC), but increased this flux
in liver of control mice. MET treatment increased the complete GLUC
oxidation into 13CO2 in the pancreas of KC and KPC animals. This
indicates that the pancreas in MET-treated animals use less GLUC for RNA,
DNA and FA synthesis. For 13CO2 production, we found that tumor growth
has to be established; the mutation is not enough to induce changes in
this flux. As in plasma, tumor growth increases pancreas lactate
production from GLUC. MET treatment dramatically decreased the Warburg
effect in the pancreas of mutated (KC) and mutated/tumor-bearing (KPC)
mice. Finally, MET decreased GLUC-derived acetyl-CoA delivery to FAS and
palmitate in control, mutated and tumor-bearing mice. Immunohistochemical
analysis of the tumors from the KPC mice revealed that treatment with MET
decreased the staining of phospho-Ser79-ACC by 54%, total FAS staining
(mainly in the tumor stroma) by 43%, and the growth-associated
transcription factor HMGA2 by 36.7%. These decreases correlated with a
decrease in Ki67 staining by almost 80%, indicative of an inhibitory
effect of MET on PDA growth. These results suggest that mutant K-Ras is
responsible for the metabolic adaptation in both the tumor- (KPC) and
non-tumor-bearing animals (KC). Our findings provide a strong rationale
for targeting the metabolic changes induced by activated K-RAS in PDA
patients which harbor mutations in K-RAS gene in >95% of cases.

