Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rottlerin induced autophagy by targeting multiple sites that leads
to the apoptosis in cancer stem cells


Autophagy plays an important role in maintaining cellular process that
controls cells in a normal homeostatic state by recycling nutrients to
maintain cellular energy levels for cell survival via degradation of
aggregated proteins and damaged organelles. Autophagy is associated with
the several catabolic and pathological processes, including cancer.
Cancer is a multifaceted disorder involving the perturbation of several
different pathways that regulate cell proliferation, cell
differentiation, and cell survival. However, persistent activation of
autophagy can lead to excessive depletion of cellular organelles and
essential proteins, leading to apoptosis in cancer stem cells. As such,
inducing cell death through this autophagic mechanism could be an
alternative approach to the treatment of cancers. Recently, we have
identified a novel autophagic inducer, rottlerin, from a medicinal plant
(Mallotus philippinensis) that induces autophagy in various types of
cancer stem cells through the formation of autophagosomes as measured by
electron microscopy and GFP-LC3 puncta formation. By computational
virtual docking analysis, rottlerin was shown to interact directly with
the protein kinase-C delta, beclin-1, and autophagy related proteins. By
biochemical assays, rottlerin was shown to increase autophagy induction
through the activation of the kinase-AMP-activated protein
kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin pathway. In addition, rottlerin
treatment causes the induction of apoptosis, which was associated with
the suppression of phosphorylated Akt and mTOR, upregulation of
phosphorylated kinase-AMP, downregulation of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, XIAP, and
cIAP-1. Rottlerin also proved to be a potent autophagy inducer in cancer
stem cells, by knocking down beclin-1, protein kinase-C delta, or Agt7.
These results provide a detailed understanding of the mechanism of action
of rottlerin, as a novel autophagic inducer by targeting multiple sites
to induce autophagy, which leads to the apoptosis in cancer stem cells.
Rottlerin has the potential of being developed into an anti-cancer agent
by targeting cancer stem cells.

