Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo visualization of heterogeneous cancer cell populations by
fluorescence molecular tomography


Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive tumor type that affects
the central nervous system in adults. Despite advances in treatment
strategies, its prognosis remains poor. EGFR and its mutant form EGFRvIII
are amplified in a subset of clinical cases and interaction between cell
populations expressing each receptor has been shown to enhance overall
tumor growth. For instance, EGFRvIII induces expression of several
secreted oncogenic factors, such as IL6 and LIF, which in turn stimulate
the growth of EGFR expressing cells through an IL6 receptor (gp130)/EGFR
cross-talk interaction. Therapy directed towards EGFR or EGFRvIII
inhibition has been ineffective because of mechanisms that inhibit cell
death. We hypothesize that these factors secreted by EGFRvIII expressing
cells, in addition to promoting tumor growth, play a role in the failure
of EGFR-directed therapies reported for glioblastoma. Preliminary data
indicate that EGFRvIII-expressing cells prompt an IL6/LIF-mediated
paracrine and autocrine antiapoptotic signaling cascade, leading to
upregulation of the pro-survival protein, Survivin. RNAi-mediated
downregulation of Survivin reverts this phenotype. To determine the
effect of identified signaling effectors and cytokines in promoting EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, an in vivo model system of
heterogeneous tumor growth was established and imaged using fluorescence
molecular tomography (FMT) technology. Survivin, upstream pathways and
cytokines were ablated in EGFR or EGFRvIII-expressing glioma cell lines
tagged with different near infrared fluorescent proteins (turboFP635 or
iRFP713). Orthotopically engrafted tumors of mixed EGFR/EGFRvIII
populations were then evaluated for their tumor growth and cellular
composition when challenged with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In
conclusion, this system allows for the validation of molecular mechanisms
that promote cancer cell survival and establishes the basis for
alternative treatment strategies.

