Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel quantitative histomorphological tool to assess multiple
biomarkers to predict prostate cancer aggression


Introduction and Objective:This study was designed to develop an
integrated, quantitative histomorphometric and molecular biomarker-based
predictor for prostate cancer (PCa) progression based on a tissue
microarray (TMA) useful for small volume active surveillance
biopsies.Methods:Two TMAs with 80 PCa cases of different Gleason scores
were used and each PCa case includes quadruplicates of cancer and
cancer-adjacent benign areas. Also, 25% of the 80 cases had recurrence.
Multiplex Tissue Immunoblotting (MTI) was used to detect and pre-qualify
the expression of five biomarkers on a single 5 micron section: CACNA1D,
Periostin, Her2/neu, EZH2 and (-7)ProPSA. Immunofluorescence was
determined using excitation at 633 nm which produced the Cy5
fluorescence, while excitation at 488 nm produced FITC fluorescence for
the biomarkers. The scanned images were analyzed using ImageQuant 5.2
software and the final data was normalized by total protein for each
biomarker. The results were graphically and statistically analyzed to
study the relationship with PCa grades and recurrence risk. The same
approach was applied to active surveillance biopsies.RESULTS:The
biomarkers showed that for CACNA1D, an epithelial expressed Ca++
transporter glycoprotein biomarker, demonstrated a decrease with
increasing Gleason score in both cancer and benign areas. The ROC
(Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve showed a continuous increase in
the AUC (Area Under the Curve) and statistical analysis also showed clear
difference by comparing group of Gleason score 3+3 with 8 and above. The
expression of Periostin, a stromal glycoprotein biomarker indicated a
decrease with increasing Gleason score from 3+3 to 3+4 and 4+3, but the
expression rebounded in Gleason score 8 and above. A field effect was
shown in benign cancer-adjacent area of prostate tissues for most
biomarkers. (-7)ProPSA, an epithelial biomarker shown to be significantly
elevated with increasing Gleason score in PCa, which was supported by the
AUC-ROC in both cancer and benign area. Applying Logistic Regression
analysis, CACNA1D and Her2/neu biomarkers predicted recurrence yielding a
0.87 AUC-ROC. Additionally, (-7)ProPSA, Her2/neu, CACNA1D and Periostin
separated Gleason score up to 7.0 vs. above 7.0 with a AUC
0.97.CONCLUSIONS:Our results suggest that several molecular biomarkers
may be useful to predict a PCa aggressive phenotype (i.e. CACNA1D,
Periostin, Her2/neu, and (-7)ProPSA). Further, this MTI tool is currently
being used to characterize aggressive PCa of active surveillance patients.

