Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a urine DNA based marker panel for early detection
of liver cancer


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) or liver cancer is an aggressive disease
and one of the fastest growing cancers in incidence in the United States.
The 5 year survival rate drops dramatically from a poor 26% in early
stages to a mere 2% in later stages of the disease. Currently, the only
available biomarker for early detection is serum alpha-fetoprotein which
can identify only 40-60% of cases. We aim to improve the poor disease
prognosis by developing a screening test capable of detecting liver
cancer in its earlier stages. Since cancer is a disease of the genome and
epigenome, if we can detect these underlying genetic mutations and
epigenetic modifications in the periphery, we should be able to
effectively detect cancer early. We have previously shown that urine
contains fragmented, cell-free, cancer related DNA, both mutated and
methylated, derived from the circulation of cancer patients. We have also
demonstrated that the concentration of tumor-derived DNA in plasma and in
urine is similar in patients with tumors. Hence, we propose the use of a
panel of HCC-associated genetic and epigenetic methylation DNA biomarkers
to develop a sensitive, noninvasive urine screening test for HCC. In
order to detect these markers in the circulation derived urine DNA, we
developed short amplicon (50 bp) PCR based assays targeting
HCC-associated mutations in TP53, CTNNB1, hTERT genes and HCC associated
methylation in GSTP1, RASSF1A and CDKN2A. Urine DNA isolated from
hepatitis, cirrhosis and HCC patients were tested in each of the assays
and analyzed. Panel performance parameters such as sensitivity,
specificity and area under the receiver operating curve were calculated
for individual markers and then as a group in order to evaluate their
ability to distinguish HCC patients from hepatitis and cirrhosis
subjects. The potential of this urine test in the early detection of HCC
is discussed.

