Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial therapeutics with targeting head and neck cancer
initiating cells using active components from antrodia cinnamomea and
conventional chemotherapy


Background: Cancer initiating cells (CICs), also termed as Cancer stem
cells (CSCs), represent a rare subpopulation of cells, which are
responsible for tumor growth. CICs such as head and neck cancer
initiating cells (HN-CICs), are often resistant to either radio- or
chemotherapy. Therefore, development for drug candidates that target
HN-CICs specifically will be effective for future oral cancer
therapy.Methods: In this study, we used the in vitro cell-based aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity assay system, which has been demonstrated
as a CICs marker, to screen for the active purified components from
Antrodia Camphorata Mycelia extract (ACME), which can target HN-CICs.
Next, the antitumorigenicity of combinatorial treatment with active
components from ACME and conventional chemotherapy on HNSCC will be
examined in vitro and in vivo.Results: Herein, we first screened for the
active components from natural products of ACM significantly down
regulate the ALDH activity and CD44 positivity of Head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Consequently, treatment of YMGKI-2 (analogue of
ergosterol), a single and active compound purified from ACME, not only
inhibited the ALDH activity but also reduced self-renewal property and
expression of stemness genes (Oct-4 and Nanog) in enriched HN-CICs.
Moreover, the repressive HN-CICs properties by YMGKI-2 treatment were
caused by promoting cell differentiation. Additionally, treatment of
YMGKI-2 results in down-regulation of Cox-2 and Src molecular mechanisms
which both play important role in CICs. Further, the tumorigenic
properties of HNSCC cells were attenuated by YMGKI-2 treatment in vivo.
Lastly, combinatorial treatments with YMGKI-2 and standard
chemotherapeutic drugs reveal synergistic effects on killing both HN-CICs
and non-HN-CICs in vitro and in vivo.Conclusion: Together, our results
indicate that YMGKI-2 treatment significantly and selectively abolished
the stemness properties and tumorigenicity of HN-CICs. These findings
provide a new drug candidate from purified components of ACM as an
alternative therapy in combination with conventional chemotherapy
treatment modalities for head and neck cancer in the future.

