Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method of active paraffin removal and efficient extraction
of NGS-quality DNA from FFPE tissues


Formalin Fixation and Paraffin Embedding (FFPE) of tissues remains a
routine histology practice by pathologists due to the quality and
stability of structural information preserved. The method was conceived
primarily to facilitate histological analysis rather than molecular
approaches increasingly common in clinical oncology settings such as
targeted sequencing and whole genome sequencing. Chemical crosslinks and
the paraffin matrix of FFPE-preserved samples present significant
challenges for the robust extraction of nucleic acids. To address this
and provide reliable access to clinical samples, we present a novel
method for consistent and reproducible extraction and purification of DNA
from FFPE samples using Covaris Adaptive Focused Acoustics (AFA).Use of
focused ultrasonic energy to emulsify embedding paraffin.The method is
predicated on the use of highly controlled acoustic energy to efficiently
remove paraffin from FFPE cores, sections, and slides enabling efficient
tissue rehydration, tissue digestion, crosslink reversal, and nucleic
acid release. In addition, this critical step is carried out without the
use of organic solvents or mineral oils. We present quantitative
fluorescent microscopy illustrating the efficiency of paraffin removal
from tissues utilizing this novel approach.Better data quality as a
consequence of improved DNA yield and quality.Having established
reproducible sample processing we sought to explore benefits in
downstream applications and analyses. Results, utilizing replicates of
several different tissue types, indicate high dsDNA yields, controllable
fragment sizes and excellent DNA quality as indicated by commercial qPCR
based kits designed to assess DNA quality.Improved sequencing coverage as
a consequence of improved DNA yield and quality.The quality of the
extracted DNA, as a function of consistent sequence coverage across the
entire genome, was then confirmed using whole genome sequencing of the
FFPE samples as compared to sequence data obtained from matched fresh
frozen tissue. Our data also indicate that the high quality controllable
DNA extraction allows for preparation of large insert (1-6kb) libraries
previously considered very difficult from FFPE stabilized tissues.Method
suitable for automation. The simple workflow allows for the parallel
processing of up to 8 FFPE samples in a 96 well plate format. We present
data showing highly reproducible results while processing a large number
of FFPE samples.

