Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and synthesis of a series highly potent and bioavailable
FASN KR domain inhibitors for cancer


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN) is a multi-domain protein that carries out de
novo fatty acid (palmitate) synthesis from acetate and malonate in
mammalian cells. FASN is up-regulated in cancer cells, providing fatty
acid building blocks for rapid cell growth and cell division. Increased
FASN expression is correlated with disease progression and poor prognosis
in many cancers including prostate, breast, ovary, colon, and lung. FASN
has been demonstrated to play an important role in carcinogenesis by
protecting cells from apoptosis. Herein we report a new series of potent,
selective and orally bioavailable FASN inhibitors.Recent publications
disclose several FASN inhibitor chemotypes that share a common
pharmacophore, wherein an aromatic group and an acylated cyclic amine are
attached to a central scaffold. We postulated that a spirocyclic
imidazolinone core would be an acceptable and drug-like scaffold,
inspired by the precedent of irbesartan, an approved antihypertensive
drug in which a spirocyclopentyl-imidazolinone core replaces the
substituted imidazole ring of losartan, an older approved agent from the
same drug class. This hypothesis led to a new spirocyclic imidazolinone
based FASN inhibitors. Extensive SAR efforts resulted in FASN inhibitors
with potent enzyme and cell activity, selectivity, and oral
bioavailability exemplified by JNJ-54302833. JNJ-54302833 is a potent
inhibitor of human FASN (IC50 = 28 nM) and also potently inhibits
proliferation of A2780 ovarian cells (IC50 = 13 nM) in lipid-reduced
medium. This cellular activity can be rescued by addition of palmitate,
demonstrating on-target effects. JNJ-54302833 is also potent in many
other cells, including PC3M (IC50 = 25 nM) and LnCaP-Vancouver prostate
cells (IC50 = 66 nM), and is highly bioavailable (F 61%) with good
exposures. In a pharmacodynamics study in H460 lung xenograft-bearing
mice, oral treatment with JNJ-54302833 resulted in elevated tumor levels
of malonyl-CoA and decreased tumor levels of palmitate. This novel series
potently inhibits the FASN KR domain (IC50 = 54 nM for JNJ-54302833);
specific binding to KR was confirmed by crystal structures.In summary, we
have designed and discovered a new series of FASN inhibitors that are
potent both in enzyme and in cell proliferation assays, are highly
bioavailable, and bind to KR domain. Additionally, palmitate rescue of
lipid-reduced cellular activity suggests selectivity and pharmacodynamics
studies confirm target engagement.

