Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog signaling maintains gastric cancer stem cells and
promotes chemotherapy resistance: results from laboratory and clinical
studies


Introduction: Gastric cancers may harbor a small subset of cancer stem
cells (CSCs) with the exclusive ability to self-renew and differentiate
into heterogenous cell types. These CSCs may also contribute to
chemotherapy resistance. The Hedgehog (HH) pathway is a key developmental
pathway that can be subverted by CSCs during tumorigenesis. However in a
recent randomized phase II trial of chemotherapy with or without the
small molecule HH inhibitor vismodegib for advanced gastric cancers, the
addition of vismodegib did not increase progression-free survival (PFS)
or overall survival (OS). In this study, we examine the role of HH
signaling in gastric CSC maintenance and chemotherapy resistance.Methods
and Results: Gastric cancer cell lines AGS, MKN-45, and NCI-N87 were
grown as spheroids to enrich for CSCs. Spheroid cells were found to have
upregulation of the putative gastric CSC marker CD44 along with HH
pathway proteins Shh, Ptch1, Smo, and Gli1. Inhibition of the HH
signaling using Smo shRNA or vismodegib decreased spheroid formation by
70.3-78.4% or 66.9-70.8%, respectively, and attentuated another CSC
phenotype, single cell colony formation, by 66.9-78.4%. Transformation
phenotypes such as migration, invasion, and anchorage-independent colony
formation were also inhibited in gastric CSCs by 50.2-65.6%, 57.4-66.3%,
and 3.8-4.6 fold, respectively. CD44(+) gastric CSCs from all 3 cell
lines were resistant to 5-fluorouracil or cisplatin chemotherapy, and
this resistance was reversed with the addition of Smo shRNA or
vismodegib. The combination of Smo shRNA and cisplatin synergistically
blocked the growth of MKN-45 xenografts, and treated tumors demonstrated
a 1.8-2.6 fold increase in tumor cell apoptosis compared to tumors
treated with cisplatin alone. Clinical tumor samples from the phase II
vismodegib trial were analyzed for CD44 expression (as a surrogate to
levels of CSCs). In the chemotherapy alone group, high CD44 expression
was associated with worse PFS and OS. However in the chemotherapy with
vismodegib group, high CD44 expression was associated with improved PFS
and OS. For two patients in the vismodegib arm of the study who had a
complete response, CD44 levels were 6.1-fold higher than the other
patients in the group (p=0.001).Conclusions: HH signaling is required to
maintain gastric CSC phenotypes such as spheroid formation and colony
formation from single cells as well malignant transformation phenotypes
such as migration, invasion, and anchorage-independent growth. Gastric
CSCs are resistant to chemotherapy compared to unselected cells, and HH
inhibition can reverse this resistance. Given gastric cancer is a
heterogeneous disease, the strategy of combining chemotherapy with HH
inhibition may only be effective in a subset of gastric cancer patients
with high levels of CD44(+) gastric CSCs.

