Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in platinating agent and taxane pathway genes as
predictors of outcome and toxicity in advanced non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Lung carcinoma is the most common malignancy worldwide, and
the leading cause of cancer deaths. Histologically, majority of lung
cancers are non-small cell carcinomas (NSCLC). The 5-year relative
survival of patients with metastatic NSCLC remains dismal at Background:
Lung carcinoma is the most common malignancy worldwide, and the leading
cause of cancer deaths. Histologically, majority of lung cancers are
non-small cell carcinomas (NSCLC). The 5-year relative survival of
patients with metastatic NSCLC remains dismal at <5%, with a median
survival of Background: Lung carcinoma is the most common malignancy
worldwide, and the leading cause of cancer deaths. Histologically,
majority of lung cancers are non-small cell carcinomas (NSCLC). The
5-year relative survival of patients with metastatic NSCLC remains dismal
at <5%, with a median survival of <6 months in unselected patients.
Platinating agent+taxane based combination chemotherapy is a standard
treatment for advanced NSCLC patients with adequate organ function and
performance status, and whose tumor lack driver mutations amenable to
treatment with a specific inhibitor. Combination chemotherapy achieves
objective response in only about 25% patients, improves survival
modestly, and is associated with diverse side effects. Although clinical
factors such as age, performance status and stage influence the
likelihood of benefit from and tolerability of chemotherapy, the genetic
profile of individual patients may be an independent predictor of
inter-individual variation in response and toxicity. Purpose: The present
study was carried out with the aim of identifying pharmacogenomic markers
predictive of response and toxicity in patients with advanced NSCLC
treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel. Methods: Genomic DNA samples
from 90 adult male patients diagnosed with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC and
treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel was isolated from FFPE specimens.
SNPs in the key candidate genes of relevance to carboplatin and
paclitaxel were selected using multiple databases. Overall 63 SNPs in 29
genes were genotyped using Sequenome platform at University of Minnesota
Genomics Center. After filtering for SNPs with minimum allele frequency
of less than 5%, 57 SNPs were evaluated for association with survival and
toxicity was evaluated using appropriate statistical tests. Results: The
overall response rate was 19% (all partial responses). Stage and
performance status were significantly associated with progression free
survival (PFS). After adjusting for these covariates, we identified
significant associations of SNPs in the drug transporters ABCB1, ABCC1 as
well as of SNPs in GSTM3 and NQO1 with PFS (pBackground: Lung carcinoma
is the most common malignancy worldwide, and the leading cause of cancer
deaths. Histologically, majority of lung cancers are non-small cell
carcinomas (NSCLC). The 5-year relative survival of patients with
metastatic NSCLC remains dismal at <5%, with a median survival of <6
months in unselected patients. Platinating agent+taxane based combination
chemotherapy is a standard treatment for advanced NSCLC patients with
adequate organ function and performance status, and whose tumor lack
driver mutations amenable to treatment with a specific inhibitor.
Combination chemotherapy achieves objective response in only about 25%
patients, improves survival modestly, and is associated with diverse side
effects. Although clinical factors such as age, performance status and
stage influence the likelihood of benefit from and tolerability of
chemotherapy, the genetic profile of individual patients may be an
independent predictor of inter-individual variation in response and
toxicity. Purpose: The present study was carried out with the aim of
identifying pharmacogenomic markers predictive of response and toxicity
in patients with advanced NSCLC treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel.
Methods: Genomic DNA samples from 90 adult male patients diagnosed with
stage IIIB/IV NSCLC and treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel was
isolated from FFPE specimens. SNPs in the key candidate genes of
relevance to carboplatin and paclitaxel were selected using multiple
databases. Overall 63 SNPs in 29 genes were genotyped using Sequenome
platform at University of Minnesota Genomics Center. After filtering for
SNPs with minimum allele frequency of less than 5%, 57 SNPs were
evaluated for association with survival and toxicity was evaluated using
appropriate statistical tests. Results: The overall response rate was 19%
(all partial responses). Stage and performance status were significantly
associated with progression free survival (PFS). After adjusting for
these covariates, we identified significant associations of SNPs in the
drug transporters ABCB1, ABCC1 as well as of SNPs in GSTM3 and NQO1 with
PFS (p<0.05). With respect to both hematological and non-hematological
toxicity, we found that SNPs in ABCB1, ABCG2 and ABCC2 were associated
with thrombocytopenia, nausea and neutropenia, whereas SNPs in the DNA
repair pathway genes, ERCC1, ERCC4 and XPC were significantly associated
with diarrhea, neutropenia and sensory neuropathy, respectively.
Conclusion: Our study provides a comprehensive evaluation of the
associations of platinating agent and taxane pathway genes with outcome
as well as toxicity associated with these medications in advanced NSCLC.
Identification of these predictive markers, in conjunction with other
known prognostic factors, may help optimize therapeutic decisions to
maximize benefit and minimize toxicity.

