Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Culturing patient-derived prostate cancer xenografts using a
three-dimensional hydrogel system for drug testing and mechanistic studies


Advanced prostate cancer (PCa) typically metastasizes to bone and current
treatments are mainly palliative. While a mechanistic understanding of
PCa progression in bone is needed to develop new therapies, the complex
phenotypes in PCa are poorly reflected by cell lines and cell line-based
xenograft models, impeding progress in this endeavor. To overcome this
limitation, a panel of PCa patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models was
established at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. While
these PDX models better recapitulate the phenotypic signature of the
original tumors as compared to cell lines, limitations exist, including
the inability to manipulate these cells ex vivo before implantation in
vivo and issues associated with the foreign animal physiology. Based on
previous studies demonstrating the potential of using hyaluronan
(HA)-based hydrogels for the 3D engineering of PCa cell line-derived
ectotumors suitable for mechanistic studies, we evaluated the ability of
these hydrogels to maintain viability of the PCa PDX tumors in vitro and
optimize culture conditions.Using the MDA PCa 183 and 118b PDX tumors as
proof-of-concept, tumors freshly harvested were digested and encapsulated
within a HA-based hydrogel, comprised of thiol-modified HA crosslinked
with poly(ethylene glycol)-diacrylate. Tumor cells remained as
multicellular aggregates or ectotumors in 3D, and were viable even up to
2 weeks in culture. Furthermore, cells were positive for Ki-67,
indicating that the hydrogel system is able to retain the proliferative
capacity of the tumor cells. In probing for the androgen receptor (AR)
expression, we found that while the hydrogel-encapsulated MDA PCa 183
cells stained positive for AR, it was not the case for the MDA PCa 118b,
as would be expected in vivo, demonstrating that the hydrogel system is
also able to preserve critical phenotypic characteristics of the original
tumors. Lastly, to evaluate this novel system as a potential platform for
rapid drug testing, we treated the 3D PDX ectotumors to docetaxel, and
compared their response against a traditional bone metastatic PCa cell
line, C4-2B. Interestingly, the 3D PDX ectotumors exhibited a
significantly greater resistance to the drug than the C4-2B cells,
reminiscent of chemoresistant tumors in vivo.We demonstrate for the first
time that PCa PDX tumors are amenable to in vitro culture with the use of
a 3D HA-based hydrogel system. The hydrogel supported the maintenance of
multicellular ectotumors of PCa cells, which remained viable and
phenotypically similar to the tumors of origin. Furthermore, a
differential drug response to docetaxel was observed for both the 3D PCa
PDX ectotumors tested as compared to the C4-2B cell line, the clinical
relevance of which is currently being investigated. This model may have
broad applicability for the culture of other bone metastatic cancers and
enable mechanistic studies of disease biology.

