Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SCT methylation is a potential cancer biomarker for lung cancer


Purpose: To validate SCT (secretin) methylation as a potential cancer
biomarker for lung cancer. Background: There is an urgent need for
specific and sensitive biomarkers for lung cancer. The human secretin
(SCT) gene is located on chromosome 11p15.5 and encodes the precursor
gene of secretin, an endocrine hormone. From analysis of The Cancer
Genome Atlas methylation array data, we (XM and MQZ) observed that the
exon 1 promoter region of SCT gene is differentially hypermethylated in
lung cancer (unpublished). These observations led us to further validate
whether SCT methylation can be a useful cancer biomarker for lung cancer.
Methods/Results: (1). We designed a novel nested PCR assay for SCT
bisulfite sequencing of the promoter and exon 1 region of SCT. Bisulfite
sequencing showed that SCT was fully methylated in nearly all CpG sites
examined in 10 lung cancer cell lines, whereas SCT was non-methylated in
11 normal WBC blood cells. Accordingly we designed a semi-quantitative
SCT qMSP assay. (2). We applied SCT qMSP on genomic DNA from frozen
tissues of 131 lung tumors and 65 non-malignant adjacent lung tissues (53
paired). The level of SCT methylation was significantly higher (>24 fold)
in all 111 malignant lung tumors (64 adenocarcinomas, 19 squamous cell
carcinomas, 12 large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, 16 NSCLC-other
type), as compared to 65 non-malignant adjacent lung tissues. The high
SCT methylation was further confirmed in malignant lung tumor
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues samples (8 pairs tested).
SCT methylation distinguishes malignant lung from non-malignant adjacent
lung with area under curve (AUC) score of 0.92 (pPurpose: To validate SCT
(secretin) methylation as a potential cancer biomarker for lung cancer.
Background: There is an urgent need for specific and sensitive biomarkers
for lung cancer. The human secretin (SCT) gene is located on chromosome
11p15.5 and encodes the precursor gene of secretin, an endocrine hormone.
From analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas methylation array data, we (XM
and MQZ) observed that the exon 1 promoter region of SCT gene is
differentially hypermethylated in lung cancer (unpublished). These
observations led us to further validate whether SCT methylation can be a
useful cancer biomarker for lung cancer. Methods/Results: (1). We
designed a novel nested PCR assay for SCT bisulfite sequencing of the
promoter and exon 1 region of SCT. Bisulfite sequencing showed that SCT
was fully methylated in nearly all CpG sites examined in 10 lung cancer
cell lines, whereas SCT was non-methylated in 11 normal WBC blood cells.
Accordingly we designed a semi-quantitative SCT qMSP assay. (2). We
applied SCT qMSP on genomic DNA from frozen tissues of 131 lung tumors
and 65 non-malignant adjacent lung tissues (53 paired). The level of SCT
methylation was significantly higher (>24 fold) in all 111 malignant lung
tumors (64 adenocarcinomas, 19 squamous cell carcinomas, 12 large cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas, 16 NSCLC-other type), as compared to 65
non-malignant adjacent lung tissues. The high SCT methylation was further
confirmed in malignant lung tumor formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues samples (8 pairs tested). SCT methylation distinguishes malignant
lung from non-malignant adjacent lung with area under curve (AUC) score
of 0.92 (p<0.0001). (3). Interestingly, SCT hypermethylation does not
significantly distinguishes low grade lung carcinoids tumors (n=20) from
non-malignant adjacent lung with AUC score of 0.54 (p=0.5759). (4).
Nearly full SCT methylation was detected in lung cancer cell lines (n=27)
as compared to absent or lower levels of SCT methylation in immortalized
human respiratory cell lines (n=38). Conclusions: SCT methylation is a
highly specific and sensitive tissue biomarker for malignant lung cancer
and can be detected in FFPE samples. SCT methylation is infrequent in low
grade lung carcinoids tumors. Its clinical uses need to be explored.

