Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a prognostic and predictive E2F signature in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded early-stage non-small cell lung cancer
samples


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death in the
United States. The 5 year survival for stage I-IIIA lung cancer ranges
from only 15-50%. For many in the early stages of the disease, especially
stage II patients, adjuvant chemotherapy (ACT) following surgical
resection is standard treatment. Still, it appears that the benefits for
ACT have plateaued at 4%. With these marginal survival rates and the
toxicities associated with chemotherapy, there is a need to develop a
predictive tool to identify those patients with early-stage disease who
would most benefit from receiving ACT. Previously, we developed an
E2F-based gene expression signature derived from microarrays of two
non-small cell lung cancer cell lines that were transfected with small
interfering RNAs targeted against several members of the E2F pathway.
This signature was then filtered for genes that were altered in cancer,
but not in normal lung tissues, agreeing between two publicly-available
lung tumor/adjacent normal datasets. Through principal component analysis
(PCA), the E2F signature was shown to be prognostic in the Molecular
Classification of Lung Adenocarcinoma (MCLA) from the Director's
Challenge Consortium, as well as predictive of early-stage lung
adenocarcinoma patients response to ACT in the JBR.10 clinical trial. In
order to demonstrate efficacy of the signature in a typical clinical
setting, we evaluated whether the NanoString platform (a method that
involves the use of a novel barcode system to measure gene expression)
would be as effective using RNA derived from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples as compared to fresh frozen RNA.
NanoString quantification of RNA from fresh frozen samples correlated
very well to FFPE samples (average r=0.9070, median r=0.9290, SD=0.0859).
Further, NanoString expression for 32 pairs of both the fresh frozen and
FFPE RNA were compared to gene expression microarray readings of the
genes in the signature. This analysis demonstrated that the NanoString
readings corresponded well to microarray expression, regardless of the
method of RNA extraction for NanoString (paired NanoString-frozen vs.
microarray: average r=0.5585, median r=0.5608, SD=0.0718; paired
NanoString-FFPE vs. microarray: average r=0.5384, median r=0.5401,
SD=0.0891). Taken together, these results demonstrate that this E2F
signature may be a useful tool for predicting which patients would best
respond to adjuvant chemotherapy, and NanoString analysis may be a very
effective means of applying this signature to patient samples.

