Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orthotopic human choroidal melanoma model characterization with
bioluminescence and magnetic resonance imaging for therapeutic efficacy
evaluation


BACKGROUND: Intraocular melanomas in the West represents 70% of all
primary eye cancers with a mortality rate greater than 50%. Current
treatment options include enucleation, plaque radiotherapy, and proton
beam radiotherapy. While enucleation is a highly invasive surgical
procedure that removes the eye, the side effects of the two different
radiotherapies include cataracts, retinopathy, cystoid macular edema, and
secondary retinal detachment. Due to the relatively protected nature of
the eye within the orbit, most topical treatment applications are
precluded and systemic treatments increases the chance and incidence of
off-target side effects. Up and coming targeted therapies that may not be
constrained by such limitations require a non-invasive, imaging-relevant
model in order to evaluate their efficacy. Therefore, the aim of this
study was to characterize the imaging of orthotopic luc-enabled OCM-1
human choroidal melanoma tumors using bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for future use in anti-cancer drug
efficacy testing.MATERIALS & METHODS: Human choroidal melanoma cells were
modified to express luciferase. 8-12 week old female NIH-Foxn1rnu rats
were implanted in the suprachoroidal space with OCM-1-luc tumor spheroids
on Day 0. BLI and MRI imaging was performed every 5-7 days starting at
Day 7 after implantation of the OCM-1-luc spheroids until animals reached
a moribund state to monitor disease progression. For BLI, animals were
injected with 150mg/kg luciferin, anesthetized with isoflurane in air and
imaged at 10 minutes following luciferin administration. Anatomical MRI
was performed using a gradient-echo pulse sequence on a 7T MRI system.
After euthanasia, eyes were removed and preserved in formalin for
histological analysis.RESULTS & CONCLUSIONS: Animals tolerated the ocular
tumor implant well. As a result of these efforts, we have successfully
characterized the growth of orthotopic luc-enabled OCM-1 choroidal
melanomas using both bioluminescence and magnetic resonance imaging. This
provides a simple approach with which to monitor tumor growth and
treatment response in a highly efficient way which should allow a high
daily animal throughput. These promising results will serve as a solid
foundation with which dose routes and levels of anti-cancer drugs can be
optimized and their efficacy evaluated with noninvasive imaging.

