Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of the Angiopep platform to enable brain penetration
of therapeutic mAbs or Antibody-Drug Conjugates for treatment of brain
tumors


Monoclonal antibodies directed against receptor tyrosine kinases such as
HER2 have been demonstrated to reduce tumor size and increase survival.
However, these agents achieve little to no brain penetration, making them
ineffective against metastatic brain tumors. The blood-brain barrier
(BBB), efficient at restricting entry of proteins such as mAbs into the
brain, is comprised of capillary endothelial cells with tight junctions
and efflux pumps. Entry of nutrients, hormones, and other required
molecules is accomplished by processes such as receptor-mediated
transcytosis. As low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1
(LRP1) is known to perform this function in BBB endothelial cells, we
have created a family of peptides (Angiopeps) designed for LRP1
recognition. Conjugation of the Angiopep-2 (An2) to confer brain
permeability has been validated for small molecules (ANG 1005, Phase II),
peptides and proteins. For example, therapeutic concentrations of an
anti-HER2 mAb have been achieved with An2 conjugation. This
Angiopep-Antibody Conjugate, ANG4043, displays HER2 binding affinity and
in vitro cytotoxic potency similar to that of native anti-HER2. ANG4043
demonstrates a high rate of entry into the brain, consistent with
achieving therapeutic concentrations. Mice intracranially implanted with
BT-474 human breast cancer cells showed reduced brain tumor size when
dosed with ANG4043 compared to controls and increased mice survival.
Here, we also describe the chemical conjugation between a brain penetrant
Angiopep, a cytotoxic agent and a mAb directed against HER2. This new
peptide-antibody-drug-conjugate shows a much higher in vitro
anti-proliferative potency against HER2+ BT-474 cells than the native
antibody. Furthermore, this new peptide-drug-antibody-conjugate
demonstrates a high rate of entry into the brain when compared to the
unconjugated antibody. Overall, these data demonstrate that the addition
of an Angiopep to therapeutic mAbs or Antibody Drug Conjugates (ADCs) can
improve their brain penetration. These results extend the validation of
Angiopep conjugation beyond small molecules and peptides to include
larger molecules such as therapeutic mAbs or ADCs for development of new
brain-penetrant antitumor therapeutics.

