Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damage response and anti-apoptotic proteins are predictors of
histone deacetylase inhibitors-mediated radiosensitization of glioblastoma


Background. Histone deacytelase inhibitors (HDACi) have radiosensitizing
properties in established cancer cell lines. This study was conducted in
the context of precision medicine, to determine the response of various
HDACi as radiosensitizers in a variety of primary glioblastoma stem cell
(GSC) cultures. The objective was to assess the response rate, the
predictors of outcome and response markers related to DNA repair and
apoptosis. Further, the optimal timing and sequence of treatments was
investigated of combined treatment as well as effects of
fractionation.Methods. SAHA, LBH589, Valproic Acid (VPA), MS-275 and
Scriptaid were tested alone and in combination with radiation on
twenty-two primary serum-free GSC cultures. SAHA and LBH589 were studied
in more detail, with regard to acetylated-H3, p21Cip1/WAF1, Bcl-2,
LC3I/II, caspase-3/7, 53BP1, and Chek2/ATM activation in various primary
GSC cultures with different sensitivity to treatment. A variety of timing
schedules and dose fractions were tested, the latter compared with single
radiation dose.Results. The various HDACi sensitized (pBackground.
Histone deacytelase inhibitors (HDACi) have radiosensitizing properties
in established cancer cell lines. This study was conducted in the context
of precision medicine, to determine the response of various HDACi as
radiosensitizers in a variety of primary glioblastoma stem cell (GSC)
cultures. The objective was to assess the response rate, the predictors
of outcome and response markers related to DNA repair and apoptosis.
Further, the optimal timing and sequence of treatments was investigated
of combined treatment as well as effects of fractionation.Methods. SAHA,
LBH589, Valproic Acid (VPA), MS-275 and Scriptaid were tested alone and
in combination with radiation on twenty-two primary serum-free GSC
cultures. SAHA and LBH589 were studied in more detail, with regard to
acetylated-H3, p21Cip1/WAF1, Bcl-2, LC3I/II, caspase-3/7, 53BP1, and
Chek2/ATM activation in various primary GSC cultures with different
sensitivity to treatment. A variety of timing schedules and dose
fractions were tested, the latter compared with single radiation
dose.Results. The various HDACi sensitized (p<0.05) a subset of primary
GSC cultures to radiation: SAHA 50%, LBH589 50%, VPA and Scriptaid 40%,
and MS/275 60%. The overlap between SAHA and LBH589 sensitive cultures
was high with 9/11 sensitive cultures being responsive for both HDACi.
The Chek2, ATM and Bcl-2 levels were higher in untreated sensitive GSC
cultures compared to resistant cultures, whereas Bcl-XL was higher in
resistant cultures. All sensitive cultures phosphorylated Chek2 after
applying radiation, the resistant GSC cultures did not. Other observed
differences after treatment, related to sensitivity were histone-H3
acetylation, caspase-3/7 activation, and enhanced DNA damage foci (53BP1
and H.2AX) by SAHA or LBH589. Incubation 24h and 48h before radiation
resulted in significantly better combination effects compared to other
sequences (p0.05).Conclusion. This study shows that HDACi as
radiosensitizers have a wide range of effects in patient-derived GSC
cultures, and tumour sensitivity is associated with protein levels of
untreated GSC cultures of DNA damage response markers Chek2, ATM, and
apoptotic markers Bcl-XL, and Bcl-2. The Chek2 activation upon radiation
was associated with response in vitro. Candidates to measure treatment
effects are enhanced DNA damage response foci, and caspase-3/7
activation. In the light of precision medicine, these markers need to be
studied to assess their in vivo specificity. Furthermore, timing of the
treatments is essential to obtain the sensitizing effects.

