Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of modified dosing approaches to achieve specific
pharmacokinetic (PK) objectives in the first-in-human phase I clinical
trial of IMGN853, a folate receptor -targeting antibody drug conjugate


IMGN853 is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) that binds with high affinity
to folate receptor (FR ). IMGN853 comprises a FR -binding antibody and
the potent maytansinoid, DM4, attached via a disulfide-containing linker.
In its first-in-human (FIH) Phase 1 study, 29 patients with epithelial
ovarian cancer (n=16), endometrial cancer (n=8), clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (n=4), or NSCLC (n=1) were enrolled across seven dose levels
ranging from 0.15 to 7.0 mg/kg total body weight (TBW) administered once
every three weeks (Q3W). The elimination half-life of IMGN853 was found
to be 5 days at the higher doses with substantial variability in Cmax and
volume of distribution. The occurrence of ocular toxicity was found to
have a strong association with high Cmax values (p=0.0004 Fisher exact
test) and with high early exposure levels, as measured by area under the
curve in the first 24 hours (AUC0-24) (p=0.0001). Additionally, a
moderate correlation between weight and Cmax (Pearson r=0.48, p=0.02) was
observed.As a result of these findings, a number of dosing strategies
were investigatedin an effort to achieve 3 objectives in the study going
forward: (1) maximize IMGN853 exposure, (2) keep Cmax and AUC0-24
levelsbelow those associated with ocular toxicity and (3) decrease
inter-patient PK variability. Cmax and AUC0-24 values were simulated
using alternative formulas for calculating dose using PK data from all
patients treated in the 3.3 (n=9), 5.0 (n=10) and 7.0 mg/kg (n=5) FIH
dose groups normalized to a 5 mg/kg dose level. These were then compared
to Cmax and AUC values from TBW dosing. Four alternate formulas were
evaluated: body surface area (BSA), ideal body weight (IBW), lean body
weight (LBW) and adjusted ideal body weight (ADJ). Of these four
alternate methods, dosing by ADJ resulted in the least total body weight
dependence and PK variability compared to the other dosing
methods.Concurrently, a 3-compartment population PK model was developed
based on rich and sparse concentration-time profiles of IMGN853 with its
Q3W dosing in the clinic. This was used to simulate steady-state exposure
to IMGN853 with various dosing schedules, including weekly (QW), every 2
weeks (Q2W), and weekly for 3 weeks in a 4 week cycle (modified weekly).
Minimal accumulation between cycles (accumulation index of 1.06) was
observed with the modified weekly regimen, while the QW dosing regimen
resulted in the highest accumulation (accumulation index of 1.97).
Comparing doses that resulted in equivalent Cmax levels, the modified
weekly schedule achieved an almost 2-fold increase in overall exposure
compared to QW3 dosing, while keeping Cmax levels below those associated
with ocular toxicity. An evaluation of the potential benefit of ADJ
dosing on a Q3W and a modified weekly schedule is currently ongoing in
the Phase 1 clinical trial.

