Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of MGD007, a gpA33 x CD3 bi-specific DART for T-cell
immunotherapy of metastatic colorectal cancer


Introduction: Encouraging clinical responses have been observed through
various strategies designed to harness T-cells for their anti-tumor
properties, including immune checkpoint inhibition, chimeric antigen
receptor-expressing T-cells or bispecific molecules designed to co-engage
T-cells and cancer cells. Furthermore, a positive correlation has been
observed in colorectal cancer between the degree and type of T-cell
infiltration and prognosis suggesting that T-cell recruitment strategies
may be particularly advantageous in this type of cancer. We have
developed MGD007, a Dual-Affinity Re-Targeting (DART) protein designed to
redirect T-cells to target gpA33 expressing colon cancer. MGD007 has
enhanced pharmacokinetic properties via incorporation of a neonatal
FcR-binding Fc domain. The gpA33 target was selected based on its
ubiquitous expression in colorectal cancer including reactivity with
putative cancer stem cell populations (Li 2013, AACR #3763). To enable
preclinical toxicokinetics and dose optimization, MGD007 was designed to
cross-react with non-human primates. Methods: MGD007 was stably expressed
in CHO cells and purified to homogeneity via a standard
antibody-purification platform; in vitro functional studies were
performed with a range of colorectal cancer cell lines and primary human
T-cells; tumor growth inhibition studies were performed in NOD-SCID mice
co-implanted with Colo205 and human T-cells (1:1 E:T ratio) and treated
IV with MGD007; pharmacokinetic analyses were performed in cynomolgus
monkeys. Results: MGD007 displays the anticipated bispecific binding
properties and mediates potent lysis of gpA33-positive - but not
gpA33-negative cancer cell lines through recruitment of either human or
cynomolgus monkey T-cells. Concomitant with CTL activity, both T-cell
activation and expansion are observed in a gpA33-dependent manner. No
cytokine activation was observed with human PBMC alone, consistent with
the absence of gpA33 expression on peripheral blood cell populations.
Both CD8 and CD4 T-cells mediated lysis of gpA33-expressing tumor cells,
with activity accompanied by increases in granzyme levels. Xenograft
studies showed tumor growth inhibition at doses as low as 4ug/kg. In
cynomologus monkeys, 4 weekly doses of 200ug/kg were well tolerated, with
prolonged PK consistent with that of an Fc-containing molecule.
Conclusions: MGD007 displays potent activity against colorectal cancer
cells consistent with a mechanism of action endowed in its design.
Furthermore it displays favorable PK in cynomolgus monkeys supporting
convenient dosing. Taken together, these data support further
investigation of MGD007 as a potential novel therapeutic treatment for
colorectal cancer.

