Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A fully automated q-PCR-based circulating tumor cell analysis
using the Alere TM q-Analyzer test platform


Background: Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) analysis has emerged as a
promising new diagnostic field for cancer patients towards the estimation
of risk for metastatic relapse and metastatic progression providing
unique information for therapeutic strategies. The reliable clinical
utility of CTCs, however, relies on the standardization of assays used
for the detection of CTCs. Here, we report a fully integrated and robust
system for the analysis of distinct molecular marker expression profiles
of CTCs in blood samples of metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
patients.Material and Methods: The CTC test platform consists of the
portable q-Analyzer instrument and a disposable test-specific cartridge
accommodating all required reagents for the processing of lysates of
enriched CTCs from whole blood samples, thus removing subjectivity from
the test process by eliminating any dependence on the test environment.
Due to the full automation of the actual process, handling is limited to
the loading of 100l of enriched cell lysate obtained from CTC Alere
AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect onto the test cartridge and insertion into
the instrument. Released mRNA is selectively captured to a solid phase
and subjected to reverse transcription providing a template for
target-specific amplification and real-time quantification of the
tumor-associated transcripts EPCAM, MUC1, HER2, ESR1 and PGR. Real-time
monitoring is achieved by utilizing the Competitor Monitored
Amplification (CMA) combining the benefits of quantitative real-time PCR
and microarray analysis for the analysis of expression profiles of
multiple genes in a single reaction sample. The implementation of an
additional control, assessing the level of contaminating leucocytes
present in the enriched sample, provides true quality monitor for the
purity of the sample and means to substantially improve the test
specificity.Results: Spiking two and five T47D cells into 5 ml blood of
44 healthy donors and evaluating 83 non-spiked healthy donor blood
samples, analytical sensitivity revealed 100% recovery and 95%
specificity, respectively. The duplicated inter-assay coefficient of
variation was Background: Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) analysis has
emerged as a promising new diagnostic field for cancer patients towards
the estimation of risk for metastatic relapse and metastatic progression
providing unique information for therapeutic strategies. The reliable
clinical utility of CTCs, however, relies on the standardization of
assays used for the detection of CTCs. Here, we report a fully integrated
and robust system for the analysis of distinct molecular marker
expression profiles of CTCs in blood samples of metastatic breast cancer
(MBC) patients.Material and Methods: The CTC test platform consists of
the portable q-Analyzer instrument and a disposable test-specific
cartridge accommodating all required reagents for the processing of
lysates of enriched CTCs from whole blood samples, thus removing
subjectivity from the test process by eliminating any dependence on the
test environment. Due to the full automation of the actual process,
handling is limited to the loading of 100l of enriched cell lysate
obtained from CTC Alere AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect onto the test
cartridge and insertion into the instrument. Released mRNA is selectively
captured to a solid phase and subjected to reverse transcription
providing a template for target-specific amplification and real-time
quantification of the tumor-associated transcripts EPCAM, MUC1, HER2,
ESR1 and PGR. Real-time monitoring is achieved by utilizing the
Competitor Monitored Amplification (CMA) combining the benefits of
quantitative real-time PCR and microarray analysis for the analysis of
expression profiles of multiple genes in a single reaction sample. The
implementation of an additional control, assessing the level of
contaminating leucocytes present in the enriched sample, provides true
quality monitor for the purity of the sample and means to substantially
improve the test specificity.Results: Spiking two and five T47D cells
into 5 ml blood of 44 healthy donors and evaluating 83 non-spiked healthy
donor blood samples, analytical sensitivity revealed 100% recovery and
95% specificity, respectively. The duplicated inter-assay coefficient of
variation was <2.5% for each individual transcript. The overall agreement
for detecting CTCs between the manual Alere AdnaTest BreastCancerDetect
and this procedure proved to be 93% with high corresponding individual
concordance for MUC1 (=1), EPCAM (=1), PGR (=0.97) and a lower agreement
for HER2 (=0.46) and ESR1 (=0.74). Data were confirmed in 10 MBC patients
and more samples are currently evaluated.Conclusion: The Alere q CTC
Breast Test presents a robust and sensitive test platform, addressing the
growing need for standardization which is a prerequisite for multicentric
evaluations. We believe that our approach ultimately will pave the way of
CTC markers into clinical practice. Moreover, the test facilitates
comparisons and improvements of different CTC enrichment methods.

