Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of IGF-2 in primary patient ovarian cancer
tumorgrafts increases bowel and thoracic metastasis


Bowel obstruction is common sequelae of advanced ovarian cancer. Reports
suggest that from 5.5 percent to 51 percent of ovarian cancer patients
with Stage III or Stage IV disease develop a malignant bowel obstruction.
During the course of the disease, one-third of all ovarian cancer
patients also will develop pleural effusions, and three-quarters of these
contain malignant cells. Such complications adversely affect both
survival and quality of life. Our murine primary patient ovarian cancer
intraperitoneal tumorgrafts (Avatars) maintain high fidelity of genetic
aberrations from the original patient tumor, thus representing a
clinically relevant model system. Expression microarray data of Avatars
with preferential metastasis to the bowel has revealed upregulation of
IGF2. To determine if IGF2 overexpression was sufficient for metastasis,
four patient Avatars were transfected with IGF2/Gluc. In order to
minimize the potential for genetic drift sometimes seen with in vitro
culture, pre-transplantation tumors were minced and incubated with
lentiviruses (Control vector or IGF-2/Gluc expression vector) ex-in vivo
for a short time (2 hours), then directly transplanted intraperitoneally
into immunodeficient mice (five or six mice in each Avatar model). Total
32 animals were used in this study. Stable transfection and
overexpression of human IGF-2 was achieved and maintained after three
passages as determined by ELISA on tumor tissue lysates. Only one out of
32 mice did not engraft tumor after three months, and tumor taking rate
was 96.875%, similar to our previous passage successful rate at 98% and
indicate that our ex-in vivo transfection method and overexpression of
human IGF-2 did not substantially affect the tumor taking rate. By using
Xenogen IVIS200 imaging system (Xenogen Corp.), pleural fluid was
observed in all the Avatar mice with tumors overexpressing IGF-2 or not,
and the retrieved pleural fluids were positive for malignant cells.
However higher pleural nodules forming rate was more common in mice with
IGF-2 overexpressing tumors 77% (n=9) vs 40% (n=6). In model PH003/IGF-2,
the tumor had 100% bowel metastasis (n=9) compare to 60% in the control
group (n=6). Taken together, our Avatar models not only effectively
recapitulate ovarian cancer abdominal peritoneum metastasis, but also can
mimic advanced ovarian cancer with malignant pleural fluid. The IGF-2
overexpression enhanced metastatic potential relative to control tumor.
These results also indicate that the ex-in vivo transfection method
developed in this study may be a viable approach for biological research
and therapies. This work is funded by the Mayo Ovarian SPORE (CA136393).

