Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of clonal evolution of leukemia in vivo following novel
targeted treatments


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous disease
characterized by significant clonal evolution. It is critical to
understand clonal diversity and evolution during cancer progression and
drug resistance in order to tailor curative therapies that block the
growth of the multiple AML subclones in each patient.In our
individualized systems medicine (ISM) initiative, we performed ex-vivo
drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT) with a comprehensive set
of 306 cancer drugs on primary cells from 22 AML patients (Pemovska et
al, Cancer Discovery, 2013). Objective clinical responses were seen in
3/6 chemorefractory patients treated based on DSRT results. Here, we
applied next-generation genome and transcriptome sequencing in order to
a) follow clonal progression of adult AML in patients during treatment
with novel targeted drugs, b) identify putative cancer predisposing
mutations in patients who later develop aggressive relapsed AML.Serial
samples were obtained from each patient during diagnosis, treatment,
remission and relapse. The data indicated significant clonal evolution
and emergence of new subclones after relapse and drug resistance. In one
such case, treatment of an AML patient with a combination of
dasatinib-sunitinib-temsirolimus led to the selection of an already
existing low-frequency subclone carrying ETV6-NTRK3 fusion. DSRT of the
relapsed sample indicated addiction to IGF1R signalling, compatible with
the NTRK3-fusion acting as a driver gene for drug resistance after this
treatment. Similar trend where a low-frequency subclone was selected for
in the resistance sample was seen in 3 other cases analyzed. Thereby, in
depth analysis of clonal evolution from paired AML samples should
facilitate the design of new combinatorial regimens to block relapse from
arising.Altogether, we analyzed the genomic profile of 20 recurrent,
chemorefractory AML cases. The profile was different between the
individual patients and showed an overrepresentation of FLT3 and WT1
mutations, whereas previously reported recurrent mutations in primary AML
such as DNMT3A, IDH1/2 and RUNX1 mutations were seen only in individual
cases.We also analyzed the germline variants in the 20 cases, of which
two had a positive family history. These patients were analyzed to
identify putative variants predisposing these patients to refractory
AMLs. The finnish population data comprising of exome sequencing data of
3700 individuals was used to filter the germline variants and assess
their potential significance. This analysis indicated recurrent germline
changes in multidrug resistance superfamily of genes, which suggests
potential germline clues to the etiology to the chemorefractory,
recurrent AML cases.

