Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive microRNAs (miR-29s/miR-218) regulate
laminin-integrin signaling in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common malignancy worldwide. In spite of advances in the therapy,
the overall five-year survival rate for patients with HNSCC is around
40%. Distant metastasis after conventional therapy appears to be a major
contributing factor for the restricted survival of HNSCC patients.
Understanding the molecular pathways of HNSCC metastasis would help to
improve diagnosis, approaches to therapy and prevention of the disease.
Our recent study of microRNA (miRNA) expression signature of HNSCC has
revealed that microRNA-29s (miR-29s) and microRNA-218 (miR-218) were
significantly downregulated in cancer tissues, suggesting that these
miRNAs are candidate of tumor suppressors. The aim of the study was to
investigate the functional significance of miR-29s and miR-218 in HNSCC
cells and to identify novel metastatic pathways regulated by these
miRNAs.METHODS: Cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays were
performed to investigate the functional significance of miR-29s
(miR-29a/b/c) and miR-218 and these target genes in HNSCC cell lines
(FaDu and SAS). Cells were transfected with mature miRNAs or siRNAs by
reverse transfection methods. Genome-wide gene expression data and in
silico analysis were used to identify the molecular pathways and putative
targets regulated by miR-29s or miR-218. The luciferase reporter assays
were used to identify the actual binding sites of target genes regulated
by these miRNAs.RESULTS: Restoration of miR-29s or miR-218 in HNSCC cells
revealed that these miRNAs significantly inhibited cancer cell migration
and invasion. Genome-wide gene expression data and in silico analysis
showed that focal adhesion pathway was a promising candidate of miR-29s
and miR-218 target pathway. Interestingly, interaction between
laminin-332 (LAMA3, LAMB3 and LAMC2) and 64 integrin (ITGA6 and ITGB4)
triggers a number of signalling cascades, promoting both cell migration
and cancer cell survival. Luciferase reporter assays showed that LAMC2
and ITGA6 were directly regulated by miR-29s. Also, LAMB3 was regulated
by miR-218. Silencing of LAMB3, LAMC2 and ITGA6 genes significantly
inhibited cell migration and invasion in cancer cells.CONCLUSIONS:
Downregulation of miR-29s and miR-218 were frequent events in HNSCC.
These miRNAs acted as tumour suppressors and directly targeted
laminin-integrin signalling. Recognition of tumour suppressive
miRNA-mediated cancer pathways provides new insights into the potential
mechanisms of HNSCC oncogenesis and metastasis and suggests novel
therapeutic strategies for the disease.

