Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase (PKM2) contributes to leukemia
stem cell persistence by maintaining oxidative homeostasis and promoting
glycolysis


Selective expression of PKM2 and its unique ability to switch between
states of enzymatic activity are exploited by proliferating cells;
limiting the generation of pyruvate available for oxidative
phosphorylation and in turn providing a robust store of glucose carbons
for the generation of daughter cells. Tumor cells rely on PKM2 to
maintain a similar metabolic state that provides a growth advantage even
in the presence of oxygena phenomenon known as aerobic glycolysis. It is
the inactive non-tetramer of PKM2 that not only contributes to the build
up of biosynthetic precursors but also limits the production of
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) and even scavenges ROS
directly (Anastasiou et al. 2011). ROS is important for the maintenance
of normal hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) as well as their malignant
counter parts, leukemia stem cells (LSCs) (Ito et al. 2004). Both HSCs
and LSCs have been characterized as having low levels of endogenous ROS
and decreased rates of oxidative metabolism (Lagadinou et al. 2013). In
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), therapy has been limited by the persistence
of LSCs that endure chemotherapy and recapitulate disease. Since HSCs
rely mainly on glucose metabolism in the hypoxic bone marrow (Suda et al.
2011), we hypothesize that PKM2 may be important in LSC maintenance by
influencing cellular redox state. We found using western blot analysis
that primitive CD34+ AML cells show no significant difference in total
PKM2 levels relative to more mature CD34- cells. However, we found CD34+
cells had significantly increased levels of phosphorylated PKM2 at
Tyr105, which has been reported to promote the less active non-tetramer
(Hitosugi et al. 2009). Importantly, fluorometric assays measuring PKM2
activity in AML cells separated by CD34 expression revealed decreased
PKM2 activity in CD34+ cells compared to CD34-. These data suggest that
LSCs may require even lower PKM2 activity than more mature proliferating
AML cells to limit the accumulation of damaging ROS while remaining
primed for proliferation with a reservoir of biomass. As LSCs give rise
to more mature malignant blasts that are exposed to oxygen in the
periphery, aberrant growth signaling as well as exposure to inflammatory
cytokines antagonize apoptosis and continue to promote aerobic glycolysis
(Bauer et al. 2004) for sustained growth. To determine the role of
proliferation signals on PKM2, we stimulated primary AML cells with
interleukin-6 and found a significant increase in PKM2 nuclear
localization, suggesting that its transcriptional activity also
contributes to the proliferation of leukemia. Our data suggests that
influencing the metabolic state of AML cells by altering PKM2 activity
using small molecules could be a novel way to disrupt LSC homeostasis
while also impairing growth in more differentiated AML cells for therapy.

