Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Schweinfurthin activity enhanced by verapamil


Schweinfurthins are intriguing natural product anti-cancer agents with
incompletely defined mechanisms of action. Schweinfurthins increase ER
stress and result in apoptosis in vitro. To augment schweinfurthins
growth inhibitory activity we hypothesized that an inhibitor of
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) may increase the intracellular concentration of the
schweinfurthins and lead to synergistic growth inhibition. The
schweinfurthin sensitive glioblastoma multiforme cell line SF-295 and the
relatively schweinfurthin insensitive lung carcinoma cell line A549 were
treated with two schweinfurthin isoforms: methyl-G and
3-deoxyschweinfurthin B P-nitro bis stilbene (3dSB-PNBS). Methyl-G and
3dSB-PNBS (1 nM - 1 M) decreased MTT activity at 48 hours but not at
24-hour incubation in both cell lines. The addition of verapamil (1M - 1
mM) strongly induced synergy at 24 hours in SF-295 cells, yet verapamil
did not greatly potentiate the schweinfurthin effect at 48 hours. This
pattern was not evident in A549 cells. Isobologram analysis revealed
combination indices of 0.38 and 0.47 at 24 hours in SF-295 cells for
methyl-G and 3dSB-PNBS respectively. Fluorescent detection of 3dSB-PNBS
demonstrated that verapamil increased the intracellular concentration of
3dSB-PNBS 3-fold in SF-295 and 2-fold in A549 cells. This effect occurred
in a Pgp-independent manner as the specific Pgp inhibitor, CP 100356,
failed to increase the intracellular concentration of 3dSB-PNBS. Flow
cytometric analysis of intracellular calcium release demonstrated that
neither methyl-G, verapamil, nor the combination increased intracellular
calcium. However, Western blotting revealed that verapamil enhanced the
ER stress caused by methyl-G in that there was increased expression of
glucose-regulated protein 78 and increased phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2. Pgp expression was increased by verapamil in SF-295
cells, yet this increase was not present when methyl-G was combined with
verapamil. Methyl-G also increased the intracellular concentration of a
known Pgp substrate, Rhodamine 123 (R123), in SF-295 cells. Pgp requires
cholesterol to function properly as a reduction in cellular cholesterol
leads to the accumulation of Pgp substrates. Interestingly, since 3dSB
depletes intracellular cholesterol and up-regulates the cholesterol
efflux pump ABCA1, add-back of cholesterol rescued the methyl-G induced
increase in R123 intracellular concentration. These studies demonstrate
verapamil is able to potentiate the schweinfurthin growth inhibitory
effect by increasing its intracellular concentration and by enhancing
schweinfurthin induced ER stress; cholesterol is also identified as a key
component of schweinfurthin action.

