Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model gene expression database reveals E2Fs as key
regulators of breast cancer metastasis


Metastasis is primarily responsible for the mortality associated with
breast cancer. Despite this, the molecular underpinnings of cancer
progression are poorly understood. By integrating bioinformatics with
traditional genetics, we have addressed the hypothesis that genetic
events mediating breast cancer metastasis can be elucidated from mouse
models. To test this hypothesis, we assembled a gene expression database
of over 1100 mouse breast cancers from 23 different models. Using this
database, E2F transcription factors were predicted to be strikingly
activated in metastatic mouse models. Transgenic MMTV-Neu mice were
interbred with E2F transcription factor knockouts to test this
hypothesis. Tumor latency was increased significantly with the loss of
any of the activator E2Fs in the MMTV-Neu mice. Strikingly, there was
also a significant reduction in the extent of pulmonary metastasis with
loss of either E2F1 or E2F2. This metastasis reduction was shown to be a
cell autonomous effect through a transplant experiment. Moreover, CD-31
staining revealed vasculature alterations with E2F loss. These data led
to the hypothesis that E2F transcription factors were critical in
mediating metastasis. Highly metastatic MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice also
had predicted E2F transcription factor activation. Genetically testing
this prediction, we noted that PyMT transgenic mice lacking E2F1 or E2F2
recapitulated the MMTV-Neu results with a vast reduction in metastasis.
Using a tail vein injection we noted defects in extravasation with E2F1
or E2F2 loss. To determine the mechanism by which E2Fs regulated
metastatic progression, we examined gene expression profiles of MMTV-Neu
and PyMT tumors in both control and E2F knockout backgrounds. This
analysis identified a cohort of genes with reduced expression in the
non-metastatic E2F knockout breast cancers relative to the metastatic
wild type E2F controls. Importantly, genes identified in the mouse model
system are co-amplified in human HER2+ breast cancer but are not part of
the HER2 amplicon. This amplicon is present in over 30% of HER2+ human
breast cancers and is inversely associated with metastasis free survival.
In addition to examining the amplicon genes in HER2+ human breast cancer,
we have also examined predicted E2F activity using genomic signatures.
This revealed four common combinations of E2F activity in HER2+ breast
cancer. Importantly, low E2F1 and high E2F2 in the same sample was
associated with far better relapse free survival than the opposite E2F
pattern. These data indicate that the effects and the mechanisms
uncovered in the mouse models are present in HER2+ human breast cancer.
Taken together, by integrating bioinformatics with mouse models of breast
cancer we have demonstrated that the E2F transcription factors play a
pivotal role in progression from primary breast cancer to metastasis.

