Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of PRKD2 in HSP90 inhibition-mediated suppression of cancer
growth


In various types of malignancies, conventional forms of therapy such as
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy are often ineffective. In the past
decade, a convergence of scientific and technological advances has
enabled the identification of molecular targets and signaling pathways
specific to cancer cells, resulting in therapies with enhanced
selectivity and efficacy and reduced toxicity. Protein kinases represent
such molecular targets. We have recently shown that PRKD2 is a crucial
regulator of tumor cell - endothelial cell communication in
gastrointestinal tumors and demonstrated the kinase to be a novel
regulator of glioblastoma growth. Here we report that HSP90/Cdc37
chaperone complex binds to and stabilizes PRKD2 in human cancer cells.
RNAi-mediated ablation of HSP90 expression but also the pharmacological
inhibition of the chaperone with two independent inhibitors induced
degradation of PRKD2 in a broad range of human cancer cell lines and in
vivo. Treatment of various cancer cell lines with proteasome inhibitors
such as MG-132 or Bortezomib, followed by incubation with HSP90
inhibitors rescued the PRKD2 levels to the detergent-insoluble fraction
suggesting that degradation of the kinase follows the proteasomal
pathway. Kinetic experiments conducted with chaperone inhibitors
demonstrated that PRKD2 was degraded in a time- and dose-dependent manner
and this degradation was associated with the activation of the apoptotic
programme both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, ectopic expression of
the kinase protected cancer cells from the apoptotic effects of HSP90
abrogation suggesting PRKD2 as a protein whose depletion mediates the
sensitivity of tumor cells to chaperone inhibition. Altogether, these
findings 1) propose PRKD2 ablation through HSP90 inhibition as a
potential therapeutic strategy with immediate implementation, 2) reveal
the kinase as a crucial modulator of HSP90-mediated apoptotic effects and
3) promote the intensification of designing specific PRKD2 inhibitors and
their implementation in targeted therapy in human cancer.

