Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cells escape from chemotherapy and hypoxia by
distinct mechanisms


Cancer relapse following treatment remains a significant barrier to
achieving cures for many patients. An emerging framework for addressing
this problem focuses on cancer stem cells (CSCs). Clinical and
preclinical data suggest that CSCs survive chemotherapy and
antiangiogenic therapy. In breast cancer, CSCs are marked by the cell
surface expression of CD44, the major receptor for hyaluronic acid. The
SKBR3 cell line was previously shown to be a clinically relevant model of
breast CSCs in vivo, and we have further developed this model to enable
mechanistic studies of tumor relapse in vitro. We found that chemotherapy
and hypoxia both enriched for CD44hi populations in SKBR3, but
surprisingly, the populations were phenotypically distinct. CD44hi cells
from chemotherapy but not hypoxia exhibited increased tumor cell growth
and increased sensitivity to the CSC-specific inhibitor salinomycin,
compared to CD44lo cells. To examine these CD44hi and CD44lo populations
further, we performed transcriptional profiling with sorted cells. We
found that the growth factor TGF beta-2 was upregulated in
chemotherapy-treated CD44hi cells and also enhanced the growth of these
cells, which suggests that TGF beta-2 autocrine/paracrine signaling can
promote the growth of surviving cells. We also observed an increase in
xCT (SLC7A11) expression upon chemotherapy treatment and identified the
CD44v8-10 variant expressed in the CD44hi SKBR3. CD44v could therefore
stabilize xCT and promote survival by lowering intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS). We have also established a functional role for CD44
in SKBR3 cell growth: CD44 knockdown prevented colony formation, and
conversely the CD44 ligand hyaluronic acid enhanced colony formation.
These findings indicate that CD44 not only marks CSC populations that
arise in response to chemotherapy but also functions in their survival.
Our work suggests that mechanisms of tumor relapse vary based on the
particular therapy, and defining these mechanisms will allow for the
development of novel therapeutic strategies to enable long-term responses
in the clinic.

