Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aggressive thyroid carcinomas are intrinsically resistant to
apoptosis but can be effectively targeted by a Bcl2 family inhibitor


Poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC) is a very aggressive and
invasive neoplasm that arises from the thyroid follicular cells and is
characterized by a poor prognosis due to its resistance to current
therapeutic modalities, including radioiodine and chemotherapy.
Therefore, targeted therapy for this type of cancer is an area of high
interest and several kinase inhibitors are currently in clinical trials.
However, these inhibitors present certain limitations due to intrinsic or
acquired drug resistance. Thus, targeted therapy using drug combinations
to increase efficiency and prevent resistance is an attractive strategy.
However, one major obstacle to our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms leading to tumor aggressiveness and drug resistance in PDTCs
has been the relative rarity of this disease and the absence of relevant
mouse models. By simultaneously activating Kras and deleting p53 in
thyroid follicular cells, we have generated a novel mouse model that
develops papillary thyroid cancer invariably progressing to PDTC. These
tumors are morphologically and functionally similar to their human
counterparts and depend on MEK/ERK signaling for proliferation. Driver
pathway inhibition in primary mouse carcinomas as well as
carcinoma-derived cells, using the FDA approved MEK inhibitor,
Trametinib, shows that these tumors are intrinsically resistant to cell
death, due at least in part to their high levels of expression of the
anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members Bcl2a1 and Mcl1. Similar
overexpression of anti-apoptotic molecules is observed in a large subset
of human thyroid carcinomas. Our in vitro and in vivo studies show that
Obatoclax, a small molecule pan inhibitor of the anti-apoptotic Bcl2
family members, induces cell death in mouse PDTC cell lines as well as in
human thyroid cancer cells. This effect is even greater when combining
Obatoclax with Trematinib. Furthermore, Obatoclax also synergizes with
chemotherapeutic drugs such as doxorubicin and paclitaxel, currently used
in the treatment of thyroid cancer. Therefore, our study, using a new
PDTC mouse model as well as human thyroid cancer cell lines, shows that
overexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members marks aggressive
thyroid carcinomas which can be targeted by inhibitors such as Obatoclax,
alone or in combination with other therapeutic approaches. These data
support the development of novel effective treatment options for
aggressive thyroid carcinomas, which can be rapidly translated to the
clinical setting.

