Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage-derived reactive oxygen species suppress miR-328
targeting CD44 in gastrointestinal cancer cells and promote redox
adaptation


Background: CD44 has recently been identified as one of the cell surface
markers associated with cancer stem cells (CSCs) in several types of
tumor. We have reported the functional role of CD44 variant isoform in
the maintenance of low reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in
gastrointestinal cancer cells. While, microRNA (miRNA) is involved in the
pathogenesis of many cancers and the networks of miRNA regulate CSCs
properties. However, the mechanism underlying the miRNA in the regulation
of CSC marker is mostly unrevealed. Objectives: The aim of this study was
to investigate the regulation of CD44 expression by miRNAs and to develop
newmolecular targets in gastrointestinal cancer. Methods and Results: To
investigate the mechanism in the regulation of CD44, We performed miRNA
screening in six human gastrointestinal cancer cell lines and identified
three candidate miRNAs that could regulate CD44 expression in
gastrointestinal cancer. Among these, we focused on miR-328 and examined
its functional relevance using growth assays and cytotoxicity assays.
CD44 expression was reduced in gastrointestinal cancer cell lines forced
to express miR-328, leading to inhibition of cancer cell growth in vitro
and in vivo, and impaired resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and
reactive oxygen species (ROS). In contrast, induction of CD44 expression
by miR-328 inhibitor led to promotion of cancer cell growth. Furthermore,
we revealed that ROS produced by macrophages triggered CD44 expression
through suppression of miR-328 in gastric cancer cells. Finally,
tumor-infiltrating macrophages (CD68 and CD163) were closely related to
both miR-328 down-regulation and CD44 up-regulation in 63 patients with
surgically-resected gastric cancer. Conclusions: Macrophages in the tumor
microenvironment may cause increased CD44 expression through miR-328
suppression, resulting in tumor progression by enhancing ROS defense.
miR-328-CD44 signaling mediated by macrophages may thus represent a
potential target for the treatment of gastrointestinal cancer.

