Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood lipids, colorectal adenomas, and non-adenomatous polyps: A
comparison of associations from clinical measurements and Mendelian
randomization


Background: Numerous studies have assessed associations between lipid
levels and risk of colorectal neoplasia, but findings have been
inconsistent. Recent genetic studies have identified >100 loci associated
with lipid levels. Knowledge of the magnitude and direction of genetic
effects permits evaluation of allele scores that can serve as proxies for
phenotypes.Methods: We collected information on blood lipids as part of a
colonoscopy study among enrollees, ages 25-79, of Group Health, a large
healthcare system in Washington State. Low-density lipoprotein (LDL),
high-density lipoprotein (HDL), triglycerides (TG), and total cholesterol
(TC) measurements were extracted from electronic medical records for 98%
of participants. For each participant, we identified the highest LDL, TG,
and TC measurement (zenith) and lowest HDL measurement (nadir) prior to
colonoscopy. All participants were genotyped for 96 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) identified by the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium.
For each lipid trait, we estimated 3 associations: 1) phenotype-polyp
odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) comparing
non-advanced adenoma cases to controls, advanced adenoma cases (10 mm in
diameter, with villous components, or high-grade dysplasia) to controls,
and non-adenomatous polyp cases to controls from polytomous logistic
regression; 2) genotype-phenotype associations from linear regression;
and 3) genotype-polyp ORs from two-stage linear-logistic
regression.Results: In total, 1,791 participants had information on
phenotype and genotype (518 non-advanced adenoma cases, 139 advanced
adenoma cases, 380 non-adenomatous polyp cases, and 754 polyp-free
controls). Individuals with advanced adenomas were more likely than
controls to have higher LDL and TG (adjusted OR per 20 mg/dL increase in
zenith LDL: 1.16, CI 1.03-1.30 and OR per 40 mg/dL increase in zenith TG:
1.09, 1.03-1.16). Associations from allele scores were in the same
direction (OR per increase in allele score scaled to be comparable to a
20 mg/dL LDL increase: 1.17, CI 0.78-1.75, and OR per increase in allele
score scaled to be comparable to a 40 mg/dL TG increase: 1.12,
0.91-1.38). SNPs most strongly related to phenotype, however, were not
associated with polyps, and SNPs that were, including variants of NAT2,
MC4R, and APOE, may function through alternative pathways. Analyses among
statin-nave participants were not meaningfully different.Conclusions:
Mendelian randomization estimates did not achieve statistical
significance, but the direction of associations suggests that polyps are
more prevalent among those with inherited susceptibility to increased LDL
and TG. Results also highlight difficulties interpreting results from
Mendelian randomization analyses of traits with complex biology, given
that variants may be pleiotropic and not suitable for use as instrumental
variables.

