Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase activity profiling combined with genotyping as a tool for
predictive biomarker discovery for the treatment of gastroesophageal
adenocarcinoma (GEC)


Background: Molecularly targeted therapy holds promise for the treatment
of GEC, but interpatient molecular heterogeneity has proven to be a
hurdle towards their successful implementation. Here we describe a new
approach towards patient selection where genotyping is combined with
kinase activity profiling. Kinases are the main targets for the new
precision drugs being developed currently. The possibility of ex vivo
testing of these new kinase inhibiting drug is a useful feature of the
PamChip kinase assay applied, which may be predictive for
treatment.Methods: Nine explanted tumors were genotyped (cMET, kRAS,
PI3K, HER2, FGFR2, EGFR) and evaluated for kinase activities by analyzing
cell lysates using dynamic peptide microarrays (PamChip assay). This
profiling was used to determine i) if there are discriminatory profiles
that identify tumor cells with various known genomic drivers; ii) if
specific inhibitors abrogated these activity profiles selectively; iii)
if patient samples (ascites fluid, cultured patient cells and/or human
tumor xenografts, and frozen samples directly from patients) were
amenable to this analysis with reproducible results.Cells or tissue
cryosections were lysed in buffer with phosphatase and protease
inhibitors. Protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) activity profiles were
generated on PamChip peptide microarrays comprising peptidic substrates
derived from known human phosphorylation sites. The direct enzymatic
effect of the kinase inhibitors crizotinib, affatinib and a dual cMET/RON
kinase inhibitor was tested by directly spiking these compounds (at 0.3,
3.0 and 30 uM) into the lysate just before analysis and comparing the
results to DMSO control. Peptide phosphorylation was monitored using
fluorescently labeled antibodies and quantified with Bionavigator
software.Results: Kinase activity profiles were highly reproducible
(r2=0.997) when repeated on GEC cell lysates. Baseline activity profiles
differed between molecular categories within GEC, including HER2
amplification (amp+), MET amp+, PI3K mutated, FGFR2 amp+ and KRAS
amp+/mutated subsets. Specific inhibitors towards the cMET or EGFR driver
events decreased substrate phosphorylation concentration dependently.
Lysates from cell lysates with known MET amp+ were selectively sensitive
to crizotinib and much less to affatinib.Conclusions: Kinase activity
profiling with the multiplex PamChip kinase assay can categorize cell
lines and tumors into different molecular subsets. Treatment of lysates
with specific kinase inhibitors and combining this functional proteomics
information with genomics data, is a new strategy we propose here to
predict responses to pharmacotherapy.

