Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Asymmetric laterality of breast tumors is correlated with place of
birth, but not race


More breast cancers are diagnosed in the left breast than the right
breast. The ratio of the number of tumors diagnosed in the left breast to
the number diagnosed in the right in a population is called the
laterality ratio. Previous studies showed that the breast cancer
laterality ratio is significantly larger than 1 and significantly
different in different quadrants of the breast.We analyzed 1.2 million
cases of breast cancer diagnosed in the US between 1973 and 2010 and
recorded by the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
program data, November 2012 submission.We found that the laterality ratio
depends upon the country of birth, but not race of the patient. We
identified five countries of birth that had p-values larger than 0.995,
while we expected to see less than 1. Those born in Japan (l/r=1.14,
p=0.997), the Ryuukyu Islands (l/r= 2.6, p=0.998), Laos (l/r=1.62,
p=0.9999) and Algeria (l/r=2.1 p=0.9959) had significantly larger
laterality ratios compared to the overall SEER population (l/r=1.04).
Those born in Poland (l/r=0.92, p=0.997) had a laterality ratio
significantly less than expected.The SEER data classified patients into
30 different race categories. We expect about six of these categories to
exceed the two tailed 90% confidence interval based upon chance. We found
seven, three of which had p-values exceeding 0.95, but none of which
exceeded 0.99. This finding suggests no correlation exists between race
and laterality.Next we sought to establish whether the difference in
birthplace laterality ratios arose from (1) different distributions of
the quadrant in which the tumor occurs or (2) a shift in the laterality
ratio of each quadrant where the tumor occurs. First, we compared the
distribution of quadrants in which a breast tumor occurs in those born in
Poland with those born in Japan. We found that the relative distributions
of tumor quadrants were identical. Next, we compared the laterality ratio
by quadrant for the two populations. We found the only significant
difference was in the laterality ratio of the upper outer quadrant. Thus,
the birthplace effect appears to only occur in the upper outer quadrant
of the breast.Finally, we found a small, but statistically significant,
increase in the breast cancer laterality ratio with age, and decrease
with birth year and year of diagnosis.

