Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trefoil factor 3 promotes angiogenesis in mammary carcinoma


Mammary carcinoma cells produce various growth factors that stimulate
endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis in mammary carcinoma. Trefoil
Factor 3 (TFF3) is a small secreted protein which is involved in
protection of the gastrointestinal tract against mucosal damage. Our
laboratory has also previously identified TFF3 as an orthotopically
expressed oncogene in mammary carcinoma and observed that TFF3 stimulated
oncogenicity and invasiveness of mammary carcinoma cells. Several studies
have reported a significant positive association between TFF3 protein
expression and microvessel density. However, the potential functional
role of TFF3 in mammary carcinoma angiogenesis has not been determined.
Herein, we defined the functional effect of TFF3 secreted by mammary
carcinoma cells on the behavior of endothelial cells in de novo tumor
angiogenesis. We utilized MCF-7 and T47D cells as our in vitro models by
stable forced expression of TFF3 or siRNA mediated depletion of TFF3 in
these cell lines. The effect of TFF3 secreted from mammary carcinoma
cells on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) was determined by
using a co-culture transwell system, whereby HUVEC cells were co-cultured
with mammary carcinoma cells. We demonstrated that TFF3 secreted from
mammary carcinoma cells promoted HUVEC cells monolayer cell cycle
progression and proliferation, survival, migration, invasion, and in
vitro tubule formation. In a xenograft model, mammary carcinoma cells
with forced expression of TFF3 produced tumors with increased microvessel
density (CD31 and CD34) compared to tumors formed by control cells.
Depletion of TFF3 in mammary carcinoma cells by siRNA or inhibition with
anti-TFF3 polyclonal antibody significantly decreased HUVEC cells
monolayer cell cycle progression and proliferation, migration, invasion,
and in vitro tubule formation. Mechanistically, we observed that TFF3
increased IL-8 expression in mammary carcinoma cells with forced
expression of TFF3. Depletion of IL-8 in mammary carcinoma cells by siRNA
or inhibition with anti-IL8 monoclonal antibody significantly decreased
migration, invasion, and in vitro tubule formation of HUVEC cells
promoted by TFF3. Hence, TFF3 is a promoter of tumor angiogenesis, which
may co-coordinate with the growth promoting and metastatic actions of
TFF3 in mammary carcinoma to enhance tumor progression.

