Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation analysis of cancer drivers and DNA repair genes in
chemosensitive versus resistant ovarian cancers


Background: The mechanisms underlying resistance to chemotherapy in
ovarian cancer are incompletely understood. Identifying genetic
alterations associated with treatment response is decisive in the
determination of which patients may benefit from adjuvant
chemotherapy.Methods: Biopsies were collected from twenty patients
diagnosed with ovarian cancer who were subjected to post-operative
taxane- and platinum-containing chemotherapy. Patients were selected for
genetic analyses based on response to chemotherapy, determined as time to
relapse (10 sensitive and 10 resistant patients). A panel of 620 genes,
including known cancer driver genes, as well as genes involved in DNA
repair were analysed by massively parallel sequencing. Alignment and
mutation calling was performed using MiSeq Reporter, with further manual
filtering of variants to exclude common SNPs. Validation of low quality
mutation calls was done by Sanger sequencing.Results: A median of 6 genes
(range: 3 - 45) per patient was found to harbour non-synonymous
mutations. Among previously identified driver genes in ovarian cancer, we
found mutations in TP53, BRCA1, CDK12, NF1 and CSMD3. These mutations
were more common among patients with more advanced disease and higher
grade. For example, TP53 mutations were found in 10 out of 12 patients
with high grade, stage 3c or 4 disease, and in 2 out of 5 with lower
stage and/or grade. One patient was found to have a tumor potentially of
a hyper-mutator phenotype with 49 mutations in 45 genes identified within
our gene panel. With respect to treatment efficacy, 73 and 40 genes were
found to be mutated exclusively in patients with a good and poor response
to treatment, respectively.Conclusion: We describe the profile of
mutations in cancer driver genes and DNA repair genes among patients
suffering from ovarian cancer according to treatment response.

