Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular biological characterization of newly established
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell lines : The cyclin-dependent kinase
1 pathway


BackgroundGene expression pattern analysis comparing normal cells with
cancer cells are performed by many competitors in the worldwide lab.
Cancer has many different species in itself due to its individual
differences, variations and heterogeneity. Therefore, it is necessary to
spend more time in gene expression pattern analysis using microarray or
whole genome sequencing. The purpose of this study was to identify genes
and proteins that are highly differentially expressed in newly
established epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell lines, and to use this
knowledge for the development of novel diagnostic and prognostic markers
for EOC. We further performed the validation studies of several candidate
genes.ResultsComparison of gene expression patterns using microarray
analysis enabled us to identify 84 genes that were commonly up-regulated
and 132 genes that were down-regulated in cancer cell lines (up; >
2-fold, down; BackgroundGene expression pattern analysis comparing normal
cells with cancer cells are performed by many competitors in the
worldwide lab. Cancer has many different species in itself due to its
individual differences, variations and heterogeneity. Therefore, it is
necessary to spend more time in gene expression pattern analysis using
microarray or whole genome sequencing. The purpose of this study was to
identify genes and proteins that are highly differentially expressed in
newly established epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell lines, and to use
this knowledge for the development of novel diagnostic and prognostic
markers for EOC. We further performed the validation studies of several
candidate genes.ResultsComparison of gene expression patterns using
microarray analysis enabled us to identify 84 genes that were commonly
up-regulated and 132 genes that were down-regulated in cancer cell lines
(up; > 2-fold, down; < 3-fold, P BackgroundGene expression pattern
analysis comparing normal cells with cancer cells are performed by many
competitors in the worldwide lab. Cancer has many different species in
itself due to its individual differences, variations and heterogeneity.
Therefore, it is necessary to spend more time in gene expression pattern
analysis using microarray or whole genome sequencing. The purpose of this
study was to identify genes and proteins that are highly differentially
expressed in newly established epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell
lines, and to use this knowledge for the development of novel diagnostic
and prognostic markers for EOC. We further performed the validation
studies of several candidate genes.ResultsComparison of gene expression
patterns using microarray analysis enabled us to identify 84 genes that
were commonly up-regulated and 132 genes that were down-regulated in
cancer cell lines (up; > 2-fold, down; < 3-fold, P < 0.05). In 2-DE and
MALDI-TOF/PMF, 31 up-regulated spots that had at least two-fold
differences between the 3 EOC cell lines and HOSE cells used as controls
were observed. 15 up-regulated genes in cell cycle related genes and 9
down-regulated genes in apoptosis related confirmed gene expression using
quantitative RT-PCR. Pathway analysis was validated in cell cycle related
genes in six EOC cell lines.ConclusionsThe data shows the aberrant
expression of several cell cycle related genes in EOC and that
Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) pathway may play a significant role in
ovarian carcinogenesis, implying that CDK1 pathway could be used as a
novel therapeutic target for ovarian cancer treatment.

