Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin modulates the inflammatory signals on colon cancer stem
cells and provides protective effect against colitis-associated colon
tumorigenesis


The inflammatory milieu of the colon cancer stem cell (CSC) niche is an
important growth regulator for both CSC and progenitor cell population.
The inflammatory signals such as cytokines arising in CSC niche, due to
the presence of inflammatory cells, also network with other regulatory
pathways to influence the expansion of both cell types. Activation of
interleukin (IL)-mediated signaling cascade in colon enterocytes also
regulates cell survival in colitis-associated tumorigenesis and provides
an autocrine/paracrine amplification loop in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Also, myeloid cells in the lamina propria of mice subjected to
colitis-associated CRC produce cytokines that stimulate the proliferation
of adjacent pre-malignant intestinal epithelial cells. Recent studies
have also identified IL-4/ 6 as critical NF-B-dependent pro-tumorigenic
cytokines, produced by lamina propria myeloid cells that stimulate
survival and proliferation of pre-malignant intestinal epithelial cells
via oncogenic transcription factor STAT-3. Together, these studies
suggest that blocking inflammatory milieu could be a rational approach to
control CRC. We found that silibinin, a non-toxic CRC chemopreventive
agent, strongly decreases colonosphere formation and that this effect on
colon CSC is mediated via blocking of IL-4/ 6 signaling in CRC cell
lines. Silibinin also caused a strong decrease in IL-4/ 6 induced
transcriptional activation of STAT-3 and NF-B, which was associated with
decreased mRNA levels of various CSC regulatory molecules, and associated
markers and transcription factors. Next, we used a colitis-related
AOM/DSS-induced colon tumorigenesis model to assess the role of
inflammatory conditions on colon CSC generation and expansion, and their
modulation by silibinin. In this model, male BALB/c mice were given a
single i.p. injection of a colonic genotoxic carcinogen AOM (10 mg/kg
body wt) followed by colitis inducing synthetic sulfate polysaccharide
(DSS) at 2% (w/v) in drinking water for 7 days, which resulted in severe
colonic inflammation, followed by cryptic dysplasia and carcinoma. In
silibinin group, starting 5 weeks before AOM, mice were gavaged orally
with 600 mg/kg of siliphos (silibinin) and continued till study end. Post
necropsy, our results indicated that silibinin feeding provided the
protective effect as evidenced by minimal inflammation in entire length
of colon, absence of large macroadenomas (>2-3mm) in the colon, and no
significant change in colon length as observed in AOM/DSS control colons
which had shortened in length. Also importantly, while rectal bleeding
and rectal prolapse incidence was frequently observed in AOM/DSS
controls, such incidences were minimal in silibinin-fed mice. Together,
these results further support the translational relevance of silibinin in
human CRC control.

