Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sp1 and HIFs mediate synergistic activation of ICAM1 gene under
serum starved hypoxia and promotes growth of ovarian cancer


Cancer tissues are generally exposed to severe hypoxia conditions due to
sparse and aberrant vasculature. Hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1 and
HIF-2 (HIF1 and HIF2, respectively) are major transcription factors
required for adaptive responses to hypoxia. HIFs complexed with
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator bind target genes and act
as enhancer of transcriptional regulation. This conventional mechanism
regulates genes such as VEGF, GLUT1, and HO to improve mild to severe
hypoxia conditions. It is likely that various oxygen concentrations and
their duration exist within tumor tissue. It appears that adaptive
response by HIFs is a major way to overcome stresses under milder
hypoxia. However, majority of tumor tissues of many cancer types are
known to undergo more severe hypoxic conditions. Thus, additional
molecular mechanisms supporting HIFs signaling may be required to enhance
survival activity of cancer cells.We have previously demonstrated that
FVII gene, which is essential for initiation of extrinsic blood
coagulation can be induced in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) cells in
response to hypoxia. Activation of this gene potentially results in
thrombotic events frequently observed in cancer patients. We have
demonstrated that a physical interaction between Sp1 and HIF2 is a major
cause of the activation of this gene under hypoxia. Furthermore, FVII
activation is synergistically enhanced when cells are cultured under
ischemic condition, in which hypoxia and serum-free conditions coexist.We
envisioned that genes regulated by this mechanism are responsible for
adaptive response to hypoxia with severity and/or duration characteristic
to CCC tissues. Furthermore, ovarian cancer is a most malignant among
gynecological diseases. CCC is highly tolerant to chemotherapy and the
prognosis is poor. Thus, we first explored genes those are regulated by
both Sp1 and HIFs in CCC cells by cDNA microarray analysis. We found that
Sp1 and hypoxia inducible factors activate multiple genes under the
ischemic condition in CCC cells. Among genes which meet this criteria,
ICAM1 is one of a most dramatically induced gene. This transcriptional
induction involves activation of NFB associated with mTOR and
autonomously produced TNF.We further performed xenograft tumor
experiments to test whether ICAM1 can be induced and contributes to CCC
progression in vivo. It was found that ICAM1 is dramatically induced
within xenograft tumor tissues. Tumor growth was evidently suppressed
when ICAM1 inducton was abrogated by shRNA transfection. Thus, interplay
among transcription factors associated with serum deficiency results in
cancer progression. This study highlights importance of adaptive response
to serum-starved condition as to how cancer cells overcome severe hypoxic
stress.

