Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and identification of circulating tumor cells in renal
cell carcinoma


Background: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney
cancer responsible for 80% of kidney cancer cases. Circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) are emerging as an important prognostic and predictive
biomarker in several types of metastatic cancers. However, methods for
CTC detection that target only EpCAM and/or cytokeratin (CK) to enrich
CTCs, may fail to recognize the CTCs in clear cell RCC (ccRCC) because
ccRCC lacks expression of EpCAM. The objective of this study was to
develop a new technology capable of detecting CTCs including those with a
mesenchymal phenotype in metastatic RCC.Methods: Blood samples from
patients affected by metastatic RCC were provided by Mayo Clinic Arizona
and analyzed by Creatv MicroTech. CellSieveTM microfilters, which have 7
m diameter pores in a uniform array, with 160,000 pores in a 9 mm
diameter area, were used for separation of CTCs in the blood specimen.
7.5 mL of whole blood was diluted in the prefixation buffer and filtered
through the microfilter. Clinical immunohistochemical markers for RCC
such as CD10 and vimentin were used to identify candidate CTCs. The cells
collected on the filter were fixed, permeabilized, and stained with DAPI
and fluorescent antibodies specific to CD10, vimentin, and CD45. The
assay protocol was developed using three RCC cell lines, 786-O, Caki-1,
and Caki-2, and validated using blood samples from patients with
metastatic RCC.Results: The capture efficiencies for 786-O, Caki-1, and
Caki-2 cell lines were determined to be 98%, 98% and 97%, respectively.
On-filter antibody staining revealed heterogeneous expressions of
vimentin and CD10 in RCC cells. Patient samples were collected in
duplicate CellSaveTM tubes and processed one day later. A
CD10+/vimentin+/CD45- cell population was detected in blood samples with
enumeration ranging from 4 to 86 cells/7.5 mL of blood. We found that the
RCC CTC profile was distinct from other types of cancers. The typical
CTCs display abnormal morphology, including large nuclei (typically 15-30
m in size), irregular cell size and shape, and high nucleus-to-cytoplasm
ratio. Although CD10 and vimentin antibodies have cross-reactivity with
white blood cells (WBC), the CTCs could be distinguished from WBC based
on morphology, cell size and CD45- staining.Conclusions: We demonstrated
that the CellSieveTM microfiltration assay is a very simple and efficient
method to isolate a CD10+/vimentin+/CD45- cell population from patients
affected by metastatic ccRCC. Future studies include fluorescence in situ
hybridization to confirm loss of 3p, a molecular event that occurs in
>90% of ccRCC. We are also analyzing blood samples from patients treated
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors to determine if cell enumeration is
predictive of response to treatment. This technology might greatly
facilitate detection of EpCAM negative ccRCC CTCs. The clinical
significance of these unusual, large, rod-shaped, naked nuclei require
further molecular characterization.

