Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted capture next generation sequencing of fresh frozen
lobular carcinoma in situ and invasive lobular cancer identifies a common
repertoire of mutations


INTRODUCTION: Epidemiologic data suggest that lobular carcinoma in situ
(LCIS) is a risk factor for invasive breast cancer, whereas analyses of
copy number aberrations between synchronous LCIS and invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC) have provided evidence to support its role as a
non-obligate precursor of ILC. Using fresh frozen (FF) tissue samples, we
sought to define the repertoire of somatic mutations in LCIS and ILC, and
to compare the mutational repertoire of synchronous LCIS and ILC, and
synchronous foci of LCIS.METHODS: Patients with a biopsy proven history
of LCIS, with or without ILC, undergoing surgery were prospectively
enrolled on an IRB approved study and FF tissue blocks were collected.
Representative lesions of LCIS and ILC were microdissected and DNA was
extracted using QIAamp DNA Micro kit (Qiagen). Matched normal germline
DNA or FF normal ducts were available for all cases. At least 50 ng of
DNA was used for hybridization capture using a bait library (NimbleGen)
comprising 273 genes, either recurrently mutated in breast cancer or
associated with DNA repair. Targeted massively parallel sequencing was
performed on a HiSeq2000 (Illumina). Sequencing data were aligned to the
reference human genome hg19 and processed by GATK. Single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) were defined on the basis of three mutation callers (i.e.
Mutect, Mutationseq and GATK Haplotypecaller); insertions and deletions
were identified using the GATK Haplotypecaller.RESULTS: 47 samples of
LCIS and 21 samples of ILC from 30 patients (with matched normal samples)
were qualified for data analysis. The constellation of somatic mutations
found in LCIS and ILC was similar, with the most frequently mutated genes
being PIK3CA, CDH1, HRNR and MAP3K1 found in 25% and 52%, 23% and 38%,
15% and 19% and 10% and 9% of samples, respectively. Paired analysis of
synchronous LCIS and ILCs (n=21) revealed that PIK3CA and CDH1 mutations
were shared in 24% and 28% of cases respectively. Overall, in 8 (38%)
pairs, the LCIS and ILC had one identical mutation in common and in 7
(33%) pairs, there were two or more common identical mutations. In 5
pairs, there were no common mutations. Paired analysis of two independent
foci of LCIS from 9 breasts revealed one common mutation in each of 4
(44%) pairs (CDH1, RUNX1, SPEN, ERBB2). Interestingly, the point mutation
in ERBB2 (L755S) was found in two LCIS foci from a patient who underwent
prophylactic mastectomy.CONCLUSION: The mutational spectrum of LCIS is
highly similar to that of ILC. PIK3CA mutations were the most common
somatic mutations in both LCIS and ILC. Further, in this study, 71% of
LCIS-ILC pairs shared at least one identical mutation, providing strong
circumstantial evidence that LCIS is a non-obligate precursor of ILC. The
finding of shared mutations among independent foci of LCIS also raises
questions about the clonal origin of these lesions.

