Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new target genes in microsatellite unstable
colorectal cancer by exome sequencing


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in Western
countries. Approximately 15% of CRCs display microsatellite instability
(MSI) caused by defective cellular mismatch repair. Most of the MSI CRCs
are sporadic and result from biallelic inactivation of the MLH1 gene,
which is most often due to hypermethylation of its promoter. Cells
displaying MSI accumulate a high number of mutations throughout the
genome, especially in short repeat areas called microsatellites. These
mutations typically lead to a premature stop codon resulting in a
truncated protein product that may inactivate the gene, a mechanism known
typical of tumor suppressor genes. The aim of this study is to identify
new target genes in MSI CRC.To date, several genes have been proposed as
MSI target genes based on high mutation frequency in targeted searches of
microsatellites. The availability of new sequencing and bioinformatic
technologies has enabled genome-wide investigation of mutations in human
cancers. This has led to identification of a vast amount of mutations in
cancer, most of which are passenger mutations that do not confer
selective growth advantage. The challenge is therefore to distinguish
true driver genes from passengers. The high number of mutations in MSI
tumors augments this challenge.In this study, 25 sporadic MSI CRCs and
their corresponding normal samples have been exome sequenced to identify
changes of somatic origin. An analysis and visualization program
developed in our group, RikuRator (unpublished), will be utilized along
with a script to estimate the accurate somatic mutation frequency of each
coding mononucleotide repeat. A statistical model based on exome
sequencing data will be developed that takes into account the background
mutation frequency of microsatellites depending on the repeat length and
nucleotide context. The most mutated repeats will be validated by Sanger
sequencing in a set of additional MSI CRCs. Functional studies will be
carried out to further investigate the pathogenic effect of the new
target genes identified.The systematic screening of mutations in
microsatellites will improve our understanding on the mutation profile
typical of these tumors. With our approach that takes into account the
background mutation frequency of microsatellites we aim to identify true
driver genes in MSI CRC. A detailed understanding of the molecular
background of this tumor type is important for the development of more
efficient screening methods and personalized treatments to improve the
prognosis of patients diagnosed with MSI type CRC.

