Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversal of Warburg effect by Apigenin and 5-Fluorouracil loaded
dual drug liposomes result in enhanced colorectal chemotherapy


Recent combinatorial approaches have demonstrated multidrug-based
chemotherapy which target multiple pathways simultaneously leading to
enhanced efficacy and reduced toxicity. Our study reports simultaneous
delivery of 5-Fluorouracil (a clinically approved drug) and Apigenin (a
naturally occurring isoflavonoid abundantly present in fruit and
vegetables) through a single liposome to combat and control colon cancer
effectively in-vitro and in-vivo based on synergy studies after screening
natural product library. Uniform homogeneous suspension of dual
drug-loaded large unilamellar vesicles with substantial entrapment of
both drugs was obtained by modified thin film hydration method. The
vesicles exhibited excellent hemocompatibility and cytocompatibility
against normal fibroblasts. The cytotoxicity and cellular effects of
individual and combinatorial free drugs, neat vesicles and single or dual
drug-loaded liposomes tested against different human colon cancer cell
lines revealed significantly higher cytotoxicity of dual-drug liposomes
in comparison to other formulations. The dual drug loaded liposomal
formulation was observed to be effectively internalized by endocytosis
and demonstrated enhanced inhibition of angiogenesis, better reduction in
cell proliferation, increased apoptotic potential and significantly
decreased cellular migration and invasion capacity. Cell signaling
studies indicating a significant upregulation of AMPK and activity
against downstream targets by dual drug liposomes resulted in apoptosis,
autophagy and senescence, suggesting its role in the reversal of Warburg
effect. Enhanced apoptotic potential of the formulation was traced to its
ability to induce greater oxidative stress through the generation of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. The formulation was tested in a
preclinical setting in nude mice tumor xenograft model and was found to
have greater anti-neoplastic and anti-tumorigenic effect. The study
indicated the potential of the synergistic effect of Apigenin in
5-Fluorouracil treatment of colon cancer which effectively circumvents
the problem of drug resistance and 5-Fluorouracil associated toxicity.
This dual drug loaded liposomal formulation thus, offers a new attractive
alternative to enhance the therapeutic potency of drugs and paves way for
potential clinical applications.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

