Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) expression is
induced in the process of hepatitis C virus-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis


Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is a DNA mutator enzyme,
which is encoded by Aicda gene. Under physiological condition, AID is
essential for somatic hypermutation of immunogloburin genes in activated
B lymphocytes and involved in immune diversity. Previous in vitro studies
demonstrated that in cultured adult hepatocytes, both the response to
chronic inflammation and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection itself
triggers aberrant AID upregulation, and due to the mutagenic activity of
AID, nucleotide alterations gradually accumulate in tumor-related genes.
In this study, we aimed to obtain a direct evidence of AID expression
induced by HCV infection in vivo using human and mice subjects.
Immunostaining of human clinical specimen revealed endogenous AID
expression was detectable in both the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
the non-tumorous inflamed liver tissues in patients with chronic HCV
infection while no AID expression was detected in normal liver tissues
without HCV infection. In mice, as endogenous AID expression level of
liver is not sufficient to detect by immustaining, we utilized the
transgenic mouse (Aicda-cre transgenic mouse), which was generated by
inserting the coding sequence of Cre recombinase into the locus of the
Aicda gene, crossing with a genetically-marked reporter mouse (Rosa-tdRFP
mouse). In this Aicda-cre/Rosa-tdRFP mouse model, AID-expressing cells
can be detected as RFP-positive. We injected HCV core antigen-inserted
plasmid to the liver of Aicda-cre/Rosa-tdRFP mice by hydrodynamic tail
vein injection procedure. 14days after injection, RFP-positive
hepatocytes were detected in the HCV antibody-labelled liver cells
whereas no RFP-positive cells were found in control mice with
physiological saline injection, indicating HCV core antigen induced
aberrant AID expression in hepatocytes. Next, to examine the effect of
constitutive AID expression in hepatic-lineage cells, we established a
transplantation model of hepatic progenitor cells derived from AID Tg
mice. We enriched hepatic progenitor cells from the E13.5 fetal liver of
AID Tg mice and transplanted those cells into recipient mice. HCC
developed in 7 of 11 (63.6%) recipient mice receiving enriched hepatic
progenitor cells from AID Tg mice. On the other hand, no tumor was found
in recipient mice transplanted with hepatic progenitor cells derived from
wild-type mice (control). In addition, whole exome sequencing of tumor
cells clarified the landscape of the accumulated genetic alterations
during tumorigenesis and detected a large number of somatic mutations in
each tumor tissue originating from the transplanted hepatic progenitor
cells of AID Tg mice. These results suggested aberrant AID production
induced by HCV infection could contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis via the
accumulation of genetic alterations by its mutagenic activity.

