Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photoimmunotherapy (PIT) combined with a nanosized cancer agent
successfully treated heterogenous antigen-expressing tumors based on
super-enhanced permeability and retention (SUPR) effect


A major barrier to cancer treatment is the inability to deliver
sufficient concentrations of drug to the interior of tumors without
incurring systemic toxicities. Nanomaterials are appealing because they
can carry a large drug payload, however, tumor delivery is limited by
modest leakage and retention in most tumors. Photoimmunotherapy (PIT) is
a newly developed therapy involving the injection of a conjugate composed
of an armed monoclonal antibody (mAb) and a near infrared phthalocyanine
dye, IR700 [Mitsunaga M. Nature Med 2011;17:1685]. When exposed to NIR
light, the conjugate induces a highly-selective necrotic cell death only
in mAb-IR700 bound cancer cells. This target-specific necrotic cell death
occurs within 10 minutes of exposure to NIR light and results in rapid
morphologic changes including cellular swelling, bleb formation, and
rupture of vesicles and cell death. Meanwhile, immediately adjacent
receptor-negative cells are unharmed. Because PIT initially damages
antigen bearing tumor cells immediately adjacent to the vasculature, it
causes marked increases in vascular permeability leading to 20-fold
enhanced nano-particle delivery into cancer tissue compared with
untreated tumor bed. This effect has been termed super-enhanced
permeability and retention (SUPR) to differentiate it from enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) which is common in tumors. In this
study, we used a mixed tumor model containing 99% (EGFR)-positive A431
cells mixed with 1% EGFR-negative Balb3T3/DsRed cells in order to
simulate tumor heterogeneity. Mixed tumors were treated with PIT alone or
PIT combined with liposomes containing daunorubicin (Daunoxome),
utilizing the SUPR effect. PIT completely treated EGFR+ cells, however,
EGFR- cells quickly became the dominant cell type leading to death in
mice. However, co-injection of Daunoxome could cure tumors following PIT.
Therefore, although PIT alone does not eliminate all cancer cells due to
heterogeneity of tumor, SUPR allows the delivery of extremely high
concentrations of nano-sized anti-cancer reagents (e.g. Daunoxome),
resulting in synergistic therapeutic effects of PIT and nano-sized
agents. In conclusion, target-selective PIT can induce a SUPR effect
leading to the accumulation of dramatically higher concentrations of
nano-sized reagents within tumors thus improving the effectiveness of PIT
in heterogeneous tumors.

