Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming drug resistance to gemcitabine in pancreas cancer cells
by targeting activated PI3K/mTOR pathway


Pancreas cancer is one of the most difficult neoplasms to treat
curatively and 5-year survival rate is only 5%. Gemcitabine, a
difluorinated deoxycitidine, has been first reported to improve pancreas
cancer both response rate and median overall survival of patients with
pancreas cancer. Treatment with combination of gemcitabine and erlotinib
was reported to prolong survival compared with gemcitabine alone against
pancreas ductal adenocarcinoma, but its benefit is modest. Further
development of potent combination therapeutics with gemcitabine should be
very useful for treatment of pancreas cancer.In our present study, we
examined whether the cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine could be potentiated
when combined with other anticancer drugs including molecular targeted
drugs and cytotoxic anticancer agents, and also whether such combination
could overcome drug resistance to gemcitabine. We observed following
findings [1]We first screened various anticancer agents that could
synergistically potentiate cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine against
pancreas cancer cell lines in culture, and observed that mTOR inhibitors,
such as rapamycin, everolimus and AZD8055, synergistically enhanced the
anti-proliferative effect of gemcitabine. [2] PI3K/mTOR/S6K-driven
signaling pathway for de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis was markedly
blocked when combined with gemcitabine and mTOR inhibitors. [3] We also
observed that mTOR/S6K-driven de novo pyrimidine synthetic pathway was
markedly activated in drug-resistant cancer cells as compared to their
parental cell line. [4] Immunohistochemical analysis of clinical samples
derived from resected pancreas tumors showed that mTOR was highly
expressed in progressive pancreas cancer. Combination of gemcitabine and
drugs targeting mTOR-driven signaling pathway will further provide potent
therapeutics against both gemcitabine-sensitive and -resistant pancreas
cancer. Furthermore, personalized therapeutics against pancreas cancer
patients by this combination will be discussed based on expression levels
of activated PI3K/mTOR/S6K in tumors.

