Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lgr5 marks an enriched population of fetal mammary stem cells


Basal-like breast cancers have unique characteristics that may contribute
to their particularly poor prognosis. These include a high degree of
genomic instability, intra-tumor heterogeneity, and gene expression
profiles similar to those of normal mammary stem cells. These
characteristics may arise through the aberrant propagation of normal stem
cells. Alternatively, mutations commonly found in this subtype may be the
dominant determinant of tumor phenotype. In order to explore these
possibilities, pure populations of stem cells need to be isolated and
analyzed. Our lab has identified a population of fetal mammary stem cells
(fMaSCs) in the mouse whose gene expression profiles show a striking
enrichment for those of human basal tumors. When fMaSCs were targeted
with a p53 mutation, commonly found in human basal cancer, a tumor arose
within 5 weeks- the shortest latency we have observed from any cell type.
This suggests that fMaSCs are particularly prone to tumorigenesis and may
likely be a source of basal-like tumors in the adult. Mammary stem cell
activity becomes detectable at a defined time in late embryonic
development, peaks right before birth, diminishes rapidly at birth, and
remains low in the adult. We have since identified Lgr5 to be highly
expressed in fMaSCs at the peak of their stem cell activity. We have gone
on to use it to isolate the most pure population of fMaSCs measured yet
by in vitro means. When plated in 3D culture containing 2% matrigel, up
to 50% of Lgr5-expressing fetal mammary cells formed correctly polarized
mammospheres.Using three independent methods, we will determine how Lgr5
expression tracks with stem cell activity throughout development and use
this marker to test for the persistence of fetal-like stem cells in the
adult mammary gland. We will develop comprehensive gene expression
profiles from Lgr5+ cells throughout development to identify molecular
correlates of the stem cell state. The relative contributions of
developmental state of cell of origin or mutational status to tumor
phenotype are poorly understood. We will test the capacity of stem cells
at various stages of development to give rise to tumors when targeted
with mutations commonly found in human basal tumors. A thorough analysis
of tumors will reveal links between development, tumor initiation and
progression, and provide insight into strategies to treat basal breast
cancers.

