Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of pathways relevant for metastatic site prediction
in prostate cancer


Background and Significance: We address the problem of metastatic site
prediction in prostate adenocarcinoma (PRAD), with a specific focus on
identifying molecular pathways that are activated in association with the
homing to a particular metastatic site. The approach can reveal the
molecular mechanisms in metastatic cancer while also providing clues
about potential drug targets. Further experimental validation of our
findings may lead to the discovery of novel therapies for patients who
are in the advanced stages of disease.Methods: We downloaded four PRAD
datasets that contained met-site information from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) and trained multi-class predictors on this set. The
predictors were then evaluated on patient samples collected as part of
the Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C) initiative. Standard normalization
techniques were used to remove batch effects associated with
non-biological factors such as the institution from which the materials
were collected and/or assays conducted.We focused our attention on linear
models due to their straightforward interpretation: higher weights
indicate stronger association of the corresponding genomic features with
a particular metastatic site. To identify pathways implicated by the
relevant genomic features, we employed model regularization via group
LASSO. This technique groups genes according to their pathway membership
using the PathwayCommons database. The regularizer (penalty trading
accurate classification with model complexity) sets the weights of an
entire group to zero if those groups were uninformative for met-site
prediction and non-zero otherwise.Results: We trained a multi-class
linear predictor to recognize lymphatic node, liver and bone metastatic
sites from gene expression data. The resulting model gave rise to two
linear signatures: one that distinguished liver mets from the rest, and
another that distinguished lymph node mets from the rest. The signatures
were enriched for pathways commonly associated with liver development and
liver progenitor cells, as well as pathways involved in integrin
interactions on the cell surface. Based on the latter, we hypothesize
that the up-regulation of particular integrin-signaling pathways may be
responsible for driving the tendency of metastatic PRAD cells to prefer
one site over another. We are currently in the process of investigating
whether there is further evidence of this hypothesis in the SU2C data, as
well as comparing group LASSO to other regularization techniques that
also incorporate prior pathway information.Conclusion: We used linear
methods to identify several pathways that may be responsible for
localization of metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma cells to specific
tissues. Our empirical results provide evidence that integrin-signaling
may play a key role in this process. We are working on robustness
evaluation of these findings, as well as experimental validation with our
SU2C collaborators.

