Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-lived Dclk1+ cells serve as colon cancer initiating cells


Introduction: In the rapidly proliferating gastrointestinal epithelium,
long-lived tissue stem cells, characterized by multipotentiality and
self-renewing ability, remain the most likely cellular origin for cancer.
Previous studies have suggested actively cycling Lgr5+ stem cells are one
cellular origin for intestinal adenomas. However, it has also recently
been suggested that non-Lgr5+ cells may also contribute to the cellular
origin of colorectal cancer. Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (Dclk1) protein
is a gastrointestinal tuft cell marker that has been proposed to identify
quiescent stem cells and cancer stem cells that sustain tumor growth. The
role of Dclk1+ tuft cells within the gastrointestinal epithelium and
their potential to function as cancer-initiating cells, however, remain
poorly understood. Here, we used Dclk1(BAC)-CreERT;ROSA26rLacZ mice
crossed to APCff mice to examine whether Dclk1+ cells contribute to
colonic tumor formation.Methods: To recapitulate the endogenous
expression pattern of Dclk1, we used a BAC strategy and generated a
transgenic mouse with a Tamoxifen inducible Cre under the control of the
Dclk1 promoter (Dclk1-BAC-Cre-ERT). Dclk1-CreERT mice were crossed to
both ROSA26rLacZ and APCff mice and treated with tamoxifen (6 mg p.o.).
Dclk1+ lineage tracing was assessed by X-gal staining. To examine the
contribution of the Dclk1+ cells to colonic tumorigenesis, we treated
Dclk1(BAC)-CreERT;ROSA26rLacZ; APCff mice with DSS (3% in drinking water)
to induce colitis. Mice were sacrificed 3-4 months after DSS weeks to
assess for tumor formation and X-gal staining performed to stain for the
Dclk1+ cell lineage.Results: Dclk1-BAC-CreERT genetic lineage tracing
demonstrated that a subpopulation of Dclk1+ cells is extremely long-lived
and shows rare stem cell abilities. Moreover, genetic ablation reveals a
pivotal role for Dclk1+ tuft cells in the response to intestinal and
colonic injury. Surprisingly, conditional loss of APC in Dclk1+ cells is
not sufficient to drive colonic carcinogenesis, whereas induction of DSS
colitis in Dclk1-CreERT; APCflox/flox mice leads to the development of
poorly differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma. Importantly, colonic tumor
formation occurs even when the onset of colitis is delayed for up to 3
months after APC loss in Dclk1+ cells.Conclusions. Thus, our data define
a novel intestinal Dclk1+ tuft cell population that is long-lived,
quiescent and important for intestinal homeostasis and regeneration.
Long-lived Dclk1+ cells maintain quiescence even following oncogenic
mutation, but are activated by tissue injury and can serve as a potent
cellular origin of colon cancer.

