Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 inhibits retinoblastoma (RB) via direct interaction with RB
pocket domain


Notch signaling is involved in many biological processes, ranging from
cellular proliferation to differentiation and apoptosis. Mammals have
four Notch genes (Notch1-4) that encode heterodimeric membrane receptors.
The transmembrane subunit is cleaved to generate an intracellular active
subunit (NotchIC). Gain-of-function Notch1 mutations are found in a
majority of T-ALL, some adult chronic lymphocytic leukemia and some
breast cancers. The Retinoblastoma (RB) protein is a tumor suppressor and
negative regulator of the cell cycle. Cellular and viral proteins that
interact with RB possess a LxCxE and/or ExxxDLF motifs or closely related
motifs. Notch1IC affects the phosphorylation and total amount of RB in
T-ALL and mouse erythroleukemia cells. Oncoproteins such as E7 and SV40
large T-antigen bind and inactivate RB but also upregulate Notch1 in some
systems. Notch1 contains an AxCxD motif, a conserved negatively charged
cluster similar to viral oncoproteins in ankyrin repeat 1 and an ExxLEDL
motif. We tested whether Notch1 interacts with RB and determinated the
binding motif responsible of this interaction. We quantified Notch
transcriptional activity using CBF-1 luciferase. We performed
co-immunoprecipitation experiments in T-ALL and other cell lines with
elevated Notch1IC expression. To map the Notch1-RB interaction, several
GST fusion proteins were constructed and used in interaction assays.
Total cellular lysate of breast cancer cells transiently expressing
Notch1IC with different point mutations in AxCxD and/or ExxLEDL motifs,
were used for co-immunoprecipitation. Luciferase assay showed that
exogenous expression of RB significantly inhibits ICN-induced stimulation
of CBF1 as well as basal CBF1 activity. We found that Notch1IC containing
putative LxCxE interacts with the pocket region of RB-GST and does not
appear to bind or interact with other domains of RB.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated binding of
unphosphorylated RB and Notch1IC in T-ALL and other cell lines. Mutations
in Notch1IC in the two putative motifs do not completely abolish
interaction with RB. These mutants appear to bind preferentially the
N-terminal region of RB, suggesting the presence of two binding sites or
a larger complex including other nuclear proteins. We showed direct
interaction of RB and Notch1IC by GST-fusion proteins and
co-immunoprecipitation in T-ALL and cells. We also showed interaction of
AxCxD and ExxLEDL Notch1 motifs with RB. We conclude that inactivation of
RB may contribute to the oncogenic activity of Notch1IC.

