Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanistic basis of BMP2 activation in NF1-deficient
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors


Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1)-deficient malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor (MPNST) is an aggressive tumor for which the only treatment
option is surgical removal with wide margins, often leaving behind cancer
cells needing chemotherapy. Ras-GAP related domain (GRD) is the most
widely studied functional target of Nf1 implicated in tumorigenesis,
however, therapeutic interventions targeting Ras activity have met with
limited success. Using gene expression profiling, we identified bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) signaling pathways as a therapeutic target
in MPNSTs, independent of the NRAS and MEK1/2 regulation. This novel
finding addresses an understudied aspect of the signaling cascades
downstream of neurofibromin deficiency, independent of the RAS-GRD
domain. Consistent with our data, gene expression studies from NF1
patient tissue samples demonstrated that increased expression of BMP2 was
associated with malignancy in NF1 patients [Miller SJ et al., EMBO Mol
Med. 1:236-48. 2009]. Furthermore, we have shown that inhibition of the
BMP2 receptor by LDN-193189 decreases invasiveness and cellular migration
in MPNST cell lines [Sun D et al., MCR, 11: 616-27, 2013]. The mechanism
by which NF1-deficiency leads to hyperactivation of BMP2 signaling
pathways, and consequently increased cellular motility and invasion is
unknown. Using NF1-wt and NF1-kd sporadic MPNST cell lines, we are
investigating the transcriptional regulation of BMP2 upon NF1 deficiency
to identify signaling mechanisms downstream of NF1 mediating increase in
BMP2 levels. The goal of this work is to determine whether NF1 knockdown
regulates BMP2 transcription through initiation and rate of transcription
or post-transcriptionally. This will be assessed using promoter-reporter
assays and mRNA half-life studies. We will present BMP2 reporter activity
analysis using various constructs of the BMP2 promoter, and show BMP2
transcript stability upon NF1 kd. Using these data, we will identify and
functionally validate signaling pathways mediating BMP2 activation as the
readout using small molecular inhibitors. Clinical trials have
demonstrated the limited efficacy of inhibition of the RAS-MEK, and
PI3K-AKT-mTOR axis in NF1 patients. The BMP2, Smad pathway is involved in
cellular motility and invasiveness, characteristic of the aggressive
MPNSTs. Therefore, we will present a combinatorial approach that targets
the growth and proliferative potential of MPNSTs by RAS-MEK and PI3K
inhibitors, along with motility and invasive capability by inhibition of
the BMP2-Smad axis for better targeting of these tumors. The overall goal
of our research is to use the regulation of BMP2 transcriptional control
to define mechanism-based novel druggable targets that can be exploited
in combinatorial therapies with RAS-MEK and PI3K inhibitors to treat
NF1-related tumors.

