Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of K-ras status on differential expression of TIMP-1 in
lung adenocarcinoma


Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 exhibits a range of novel
functions in addition to its initially recognized activity as a
physiological inhibitor of MMPs. Two specific activities have been of
significant interest in the context of oncology - inhibition of apoptosis
and induction of cell proliferation. Previously we have shown that
over-expressing TIMP-1 in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line H2009 results
in more aggressive and larger tumors in vivo with increased invasion and
colony formation in vitro. Subsequently we demonstrated elevated levels
of Bcl-2 with a concomitant reduction in apoptosis induced by
staurosporine. In the present study, we have sought to define a
relationship between TIMP-1 expression levels in
non-small-cell-lung-carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines in relation to K-ras
mutation. We identified a differential expression pattern of TIMP-1 in
various NSCLC cell lines and also found that TIMP-1 overexpressing cell
lines also had higher levels of Bcl-2 and vice versa. Upon further
analysis, we were able to correlate a low TIMP-1 expression with K-ras
dependence and high levels of E-cadherin expression as in H2009 and H441.
Similarly, K-ras independent cell line A549, expressed low levels of
E-cadherin and elevated TIMP-1. E-cadherin distribution was confirmed in
A549 and H2009 cells by immunofluorescence. Since N-cadherin cleavage has
been shown to be inhibited by TIMP-1, we examined N-cadherin levels by
western blot. Results indicate that A549 exhibiting high levels of TIMP-1
had increased levels of N-cadherin whereas the low TIMP-1 expressing cell
lines had lower N-cadherin levels. A spheroid formation assay to
determine the aggressiveness of cell lines revealed that K-ras dependent
cell line formed spheroids that were smaller and less migratory than
K-ras independent cell line whereas the K-ras independent cell line A549
formed spheroids that were larger, more spread out exhibiting wider
migratory properties. The present study underscores the multiple biologic
properties of TIMP-1. It provides further mechanistic understanding of
its documented role as a prognostic marker and a potential therapeutic
target in various malignancies, particularly lung carcinoma. This study
was supported in part by a Distinguished Cancer Scientist Award to AMR
from the Georgia Research Alliance.

