Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPOP mutations in prostate cancer across demographically diverse
patient cohorts


BackgroundRecurrent mutations in the Speckle-Type POZ Protein (SPOP) gene
have been reported in up to 15% of prostate cancers. However, the
frequency and features of cancers with these mutations across different
populations is unclear. In addition, detection of point mutations in
archival samples can be technically challenging, making mutational
analysis of well annotated archival tissue difficult. We set out to
investigate SPOP mutations across diverse cohorts, and validate a series
of assays employing High Resolution Melting Analysis (HRM) and Sanger
sequencing for mutational analysis of FFPE material.Methods:An assay
employing HRM and Sanger sequencing was optimized to screen for somatic
mutations in recurrently altered areas of the SPOP gene. 720 prostate
cancer samples from six international cohorts spanning Caucasian, African
American, and Asian patients, including both PSA-screened and unscreened
populations, were screened for their SPOP mutation status. Status of SPOP
was correlated to molecular features (ERG rearrangement, PTEN deletion,
CHD1 deletion) as well as clinical and pathologic features.Results:The
overall frequency of SPOP mutations was 8.1% in 720 patient's samples,
ranging from 4.6% in the African American cohort to 14.4% in the WCMC
cohort. There were no significant differences in frequency between
ethnicities or cohorts (p=0.14). SPOP mutation was inversely associated
with ERG rearrangement (pBackgroundRecurrent mutations in the
Speckle-Type POZ Protein (SPOP) gene have been reported in up to 15% of
prostate cancers. However, the frequency and features of cancers with
these mutations across different populations is unclear. In addition,
detection of point mutations in archival samples can be technically
challenging, making mutational analysis of well annotated archival tissue
difficult. We set out to investigate SPOP mutations across diverse
cohorts, and validate a series of assays employing High Resolution
Melting Analysis (HRM) and Sanger sequencing for mutational analysis of
FFPE material.Methods:An assay employing HRM and Sanger sequencing was
optimized to screen for somatic mutations in recurrently altered areas of
the SPOP gene. 720 prostate cancer samples from six international cohorts
spanning Caucasian, African American, and Asian patients, including both
PSA-screened and unscreened populations, were screened for their SPOP
mutation status. Status of SPOP was correlated to molecular features (ERG
rearrangement, PTEN deletion, CHD1 deletion) as well as clinical and
pathologic features.Results:The overall frequency of SPOP mutations was
8.1% in 720 patient's samples, ranging from 4.6% in the African American
cohort to 14.4% in the WCMC cohort. There were no significant differences
in frequency between ethnicities or cohorts (p=0.14). SPOP mutation was
inversely associated with ERG rearrangement (p<0.01), and SPOP mutant
cancers had higher rates of CHD1 deletions (pBackgroundRecurrent
mutations in the Speckle-Type POZ Protein (SPOP) gene have been reported
in up to 15% of prostate cancers. However, the frequency and features of
cancers with these mutations across different populations is unclear. In
addition, detection of point mutations in archival samples can be
technically challenging, making mutational analysis of well annotated
archival tissue difficult. We set out to investigate SPOP mutations
across diverse cohorts, and validate a series of assays employing High
Resolution Melting Analysis (HRM) and Sanger sequencing for mutational
analysis of FFPE material.Methods:An assay employing HRM and Sanger
sequencing was optimized to screen for somatic mutations in recurrently
altered areas of the SPOP gene. 720 prostate cancer samples from six
international cohorts spanning Caucasian, African American, and Asian
patients, including both PSA-screened and unscreened populations, were
screened for their SPOP mutation status. Status of SPOP was correlated to
molecular features (ERG rearrangement, PTEN deletion, CHD1 deletion) as
well as clinical and pathologic features.Results:The overall frequency of
SPOP mutations was 8.1% in 720 patient's samples, ranging from 4.6% in
the African American cohort to 14.4% in the WCMC cohort. There were no
significant differences in frequency between ethnicities or cohorts
(p=0.14). SPOP mutation was inversely associated with ERG rearrangement
(p<0.01), and SPOP mutant cancers had higher rates of CHD1 deletions
(p<0.01). There were no significant differences in rates or time to
biochemical recurrence (BCR) in SPOP wild-type (wt) vs mutants (p=0.18,
0.30 respectively). The mutational assays showed excellent sensitivity
and specificity in high quality samples. Limitations of this study
include missing mutational data due to sample quality and lack of power
to identify a difference in clinical outcomes.Conclusions:In this study
we were able to show the high sensitivity of HRM followed by Sanger
Sequencing to detect mutated SPOP in 720 cases consisting of fresh frozen
as well as FFPE material. Using next generation sequencing did not rescue
samples which were determined as assay failure by HRM and or Sanger
Sequencing. SPOP is mutated in 4.6-14.4% of prostate cancer patients
across different ethnic and demographic backgrounds. There was no
significant association between SPOP mutations with ethnicity, clinical
or pathologic parameters. Mutual exclusivity of SPOP mutation with ERG
rearrangement as well as a high association with CHD1 deletion reinforces
SPOP mutation as defining a distinct molecular subclass of prostate
cancer.

