Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic changes and regulation of circulating tumor cells that
govern the metastasis of colorectal cancer


Despite the growing public awareness and recent progress in multimodality
therapy to the colorectal cancer (CRC), CRC still ranks high on the list
of the most common and deadly cancers in the worldwide. The cause of CRC
mortality is due mainly to the occurrence of distant metastasis, upon
which the circulating tumor cells (CTCs), is thought to play an active
role. CTCs could serve as a prognostic marker for mortality in clinical
stage IV patients; however, the prognostic value of CTCs in early-stage
patients remains uncertain. Here, we used EpCAM-postive/CD45-negative
immunoselection and flow-cytometry to identify and quantify CTCs in CRC
patients.The number of mesenteric CTCs obtained from stage II patients
was higher than those obtained for patients with stages I, III, or IV
CRC. To explore the mechanisms underlying this clinical observation, we
established an orthotopic (intra-cecal) tumor growth and metastasis mouse
model. Cancer progression was monitored in real time with tumor cells
expressing luciferase and GFP tag by using a bioluminescence imaging
system and flow cytometery. We noticed that CTC dynamics was associated
with a corresponding change in serum interleukin (IL)-17A and an opposing
change in serum GM-CSF. Ablation of IL-17A by neutralizing antibodies and
administration of GM-CSF effectively diminished the rise of CTCs and
prevented metastasis in the mouse model. GM-CSF was through to help
eliminating CTCs by boost host immunity, whereas IL-17A affected cancer
cells intravasation by promoting cancer cell motility, matrix digestion
and angiogenesis. We also noticed that IL-17 depletion could increase
CD8+ to CD4+CD25+ ratio that might help CTCs clearance.In CRC patients,
serum levels of IL-17A positively correlated with the number of
mesenteric CTCs and the patients' disease-free survival. Our results show
that CTCs and IL-17A can serve not only as prognostic markers, but also
therapeutic targets for CRC metastasis.

