Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An anti-Jagged-1/-2 Probody demonstrates inhibition of
Jagged-dependent Notch signaling and is activated in multiple types of
tumors


Probodies represent a unique class of antibody therapeutics that
specifically target therapeutic activity to diseased tissues, such as
cancer. A Probody is a fully recombinant protein that contains a masking
peptide that blocks the antibody's antigen-binding site and is linked to
the light chain of the antibody by a protease-cleavable peptide
substrate. Probodies are designed to be inactive in circulation and in
healthy tissues but activated within the tumor microenvironment. The
Probody approach is designed to widen the therapeutic index of antibodies
to promising therapeutic targets that may be limited by significant
toxicity. One such promising set of targets are components of the Notch
pathway, which is involved in both oncogenic and healthy tissue
signaling.We have developed a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds and inhibits the activity of both human and mouse Jagged-1 and
Jagged-2, two key ligands in the Notch signaling pathway. A Probody
produced from this antibody induced dose-dependent inhibition of Notch
signaling, resulting in anti-tumor activity in in vivo tumor models
without significant toxicity.To further explore the clinical relevance of
the anti-Jagged Probody for the treatment of cancer, we evaluated (i) the
heterogeneity of Jagged expression in multiple tumor types, (ii) the
activation of the Jagged Probody in tumor biopsies, and (iii) the
blockade of Notch signaling using an intracellular pharmacodynamic
biomarker. Patient tumor tissues were screened for Jagged-1/-2 IHC across
lung, pancreatic and breast cancer_ indications where activation of the
Notch pathway is implicated. Overall, more than 75% of patient tumors
demonstrated moderate to high Jagged-1/-2 expression. We also developed
and validated a technique termed IHZ analysis that enables the
measurement of proteolytic Probody activation and binding to Jagged
ligands ex vivo in human tumor sections. We evaluated 120 patients across
the three tumor types and observed 99% of samples that were positive for
antibody binding were also positive by IHZ analysis, signifying
sufficient proteolytic activity to activate the Probody. Finally, we
evaluated the accumulation of the Notch Intracellular Domain (NICD), a
biomarker of Notch signaling, in the nucleus of tumor cells in animals
treated with antibody. Notably, our data showed that Notch signaling
blockade as indicated by a decrease in the accumulation of NICD
correlated with dose-response in in vivo models. Taken together, our data
suggest that the anti-Jagged-1/-2 Probody may have wide therapeutic
utility as a tumor-specific inhibitor of Jagged-dependent Notch signaling
in oncology.

