Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of immunoliposomes encapsulated effective
amount of glycosylated paclitaxel with novel loading strategy


Targeted liposomal drug delivery is considered to enhance the therapeutic
effects of anti-cancer agents because high amount of drug could be
administered with least side effects. However, significant hydrophobic
compounds such as paclitaxel (PTX) are not suitable for efficient
encapsulating. We conferred water-solubility of PTX by coupling glucose
at 7-OH to produce glycosylated PTX (gPTX). gPTX appeared to have a
10-fold higher solubility than PTX in 40% ethylene glycol (EG) and in
Cremophor EL/Ethanol/PBS (12:12:76 volume%) (CEP). The maximal solubility
of gPTX in these solvents was 1.1 and 20.0 mg/ml, respectively. An
anti-cancer activity of PTX is due to inhibit tubulin depolymerization.
We confirmed tubulin polymerization activity of gPTX in vitro. The
activity of gPTX to stabilize tubulin polymerization was lower than that
of PTX by only 10%. We successfully prepared gPTX-encapsulated liposome
(gPTX-L) with the remote loading method by solubility gradient between
40% EG and CEP. The encapsulation efficiency and loading efficiency were
70.8 % and 8.0 mol% (drug mol / initial lipid mol). Then, trastuzumab was
conjugated on the surface of gPTX-L to prepare immunoliposome (gPTX-IL)
for targeting HER2 positive cancer cells. The particle size of gPTX-IL
was around 150 nm and Z potential was -8.1 mV. We evaluated cellular
cytotoxicity of PTX, gPTX, gPTX-L and gPTX-IL in HER2 positive cancer
cell lines, SK-BR-3 and HT-29, and HER2 negative cancer cell line,
MDA-MB-231, by MTT assay. The IC50 values after 72 hours drug-exposure
showed gPTX-L exhibited lower IC50 values than free-gPTX in all cell
line, which indicated gPTX-L internalized with liposomal formulation
contained high concentration of gPTX. Furthermore, gPTX-IL exhibited
lower IC50 values than gPTX-L in HER2 positive cancer cell lines but no
significant statically difference in this assay condition. We then
evaluated the time required to inhibit the growth at the half maximal
level (IT50) at the minimum concentration to show maximal cytotoxicity
after 72 hours drug-exposure. gPTX-IL showed the shortest IT50 values of
6.4 and 4.7 h in SK-BR-3 and HT-29 cells, respectively. On the other
hand, gPTX-IL showed the same IT50 value of gPTX-L in MDA-MB-231 cells.
We then evaluated the anti-cancer efficacy of the formula in vivo using
tumor bearing ICR-nu/nu mice. The mice were intravenously injected at the
dose of 150 mg/kg of gPTX in a day, which was the lethal dose of
free-gPTX. While gPTX-L and free-trastuzumab did not inhibit tumor
growth, gPTX-IL significantly decreased tumor volume with low side
effects. We further evaluated dose dependency of gPTX-IL using tumor
bearing BALB/c-nu/nu mice. The doses of over 100 mg/kg decreased tumor
volume and the dose of 150 mg/kg showed the most efficient anti-cancer
activity. Collectively, the gPTX-IL with novel encapsulation strategy
should be a candidate of highly efficient targeting drug delivery system.

