Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Choosing the right schedule for progression free survival: A
systems pharmacology approach


Drug resistance is a common feature of many cancer therapies and often
limits their long-term effectiveness. Most anticancer agents are
developed with an initial focus on Objective Response (short-term
response), despite clinical evidence that, for most cancers, this does
not correlate with long term therapeutic benefit (Progression-Free
Survival), due to the emergence of resistance.Viewing cancer as a disease
of somatic Darwinian evolution reframes resistance as a consequence of
competing populations of tumor cells within a polyclonal tumor, each
responding differentially to selection pressure. In this context, the
amplification of pre-existing resistance to therapy has been implicated
as a common cause of treatment failure.Here we ask how drug scheduling
can impact long-term response to therapy, using an evolutionary model of
tumor kinetics. First, we apply a dynamic model of tumor kinetics with
competing subclones of tumor cells to a published dataset of prostate
cancer progression (Treatment thalidomide+docetaxel or ketoconazole+
hydrocortisone+alendronate), and show that it is capable of closely
predicting Progression Free Survival. Tumor cells are modeled as being
either sensitive or resistant, cell growth is modeled using a simple
exponential growth model, and drug effect is incorporated in the model as
overall inhibition on the growth-rate. Competition between tumor
sub-populations is modeled as frequency-dependent fitness, using a
logistic tumor growth model.Next, we use this dynamic model derived from
the prostate cancer dataset to understand the effect of schedule on
resistance, simulating tumor growth upon drug treatment for different
doses and schedules. Beyond a literal simulation of resistance for a
given drug schedule, we assess the contributions of resistance made by
dose amplitude and dose frequency. Our model predicts that for a graded
dose-response curve (Hill slope of 1), more frequent dosing schedules
minimize the emergence of resistance. On the other hand, for a steep
dose-response curve (Hill slope of 5), for constant dose density, we find
that a high infrequent schedule is better than a low frequent dosing
schedule for low doses. As the dose density increases, the low frequency
schedule again emerges as optimal for minimizing resistance. As a final
test, a competition term between the subpopulations is also included in
our model, with essentially identical results.We then apply our model to
published datasets of clinical response to treatment, and find close
agreement with published results. Our generalized approach to this
problem provides a framework for dissecting the underlying drivers of the
emergence of resistance, and provides a recommendation for the
minimization of resistance in a practical setting.

