Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute depletion reveals novel co-regulation of DNA methylation at
conserved loci by DNMT1 and DNMT3B


DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are responsible for establishing (DNMT3A,
3B, 3L) and maintaining (DNMT1) DNA methylation genome-wide. Aberrant DNA
methylation is frequently observed in cancer; however, little is known
about how regulation of this modification goes awry. In this study, we
aim to understand how DNA methylation is regulated by the DNMTs
throughout the genome by identifying specific and broad changes in
methylation patterning upon depletion of the DNMTs. We utilize siRNA
technology to acutely deplete NCCIT embryonal carcinoma cells of DNMT
mRNA (individually and in combination), and then assay the impact on
genome-wide DNA methylation patterns using the HumanMethylation450 Bead
Chip (450K array). Depletion of DNMT1 (individual/combination) resulted
in widespread hypomethylation, most notably in gene bodies, 3UTRs, and
intergenic sequences. DNMT3 knockdown resulted in more specific changes
in DNA methylation, but surprisingly, more hypermethylation
(predominately in gene bodies) than hypomethylation events occurred.
These specific hypermethylation events, particularly in samples with
DNMT3B KD, significantly overlapped with sites hypomethylated in DNMT1 KD
conditions, indicating a potential cross-regulatory role for DNMT1 and
DNMT3B in regulating DNA methylation across gene bodies. To gain a more
comprehensive genome-wide view of DNA methylation in the absence of
DNMT3B, we performed Methyl-CpG-Binding-Domain(MBD)-seq on DNMT3B KD
cells. MBD-seq revealed dynamic changes in methylation with minor
hypermethylation in promoters and subtle hypomethylation across gene
bodies; however, analysis of only the most significant methylation
changes (> 4-fold) revealed that more hypermethylation events occur in
intronic sequences, consistent with results obtained using the 450K
array. To further investigate the overlap between DNMT1 hypomethylated
and DNMT3B hypermethylated sites, we examined DNA methylation in HCT116
colorectal carcinoma cells lacking (KO) or over-expressing (KI)
DNMT1/DNMT3B. Interestingly, a marked number of CpG sites that gained
methylation in the DNMT3B KO overlapped significantly with sites that
became hypermethylated in DNMT1 and DNMT3B KI, and hypomethylated in
DNMT1 KO. Additionally, these HCT116 hypermethylated CpG sites gained
methylation in NCCIT DNMT3B KD (individual/combination) and lost
methylation in DNMT1 KD. Taken together, these results suggest that DNMT1
and DNMT3B co-regulate DNA methylation at conserved loci across cell
types in an opposing fashion, providing novel insight into a potential
regulatory mechanism for DNA methylation patterning. Further elucidation
of this DNMT1 and DNMT3B co-regulation holds the potential to yield novel
therapeutic strategies for correcting aberrant methylation events in
cancer.

