Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk factors and prevalence of genital HPV infection among adult
females in US between 2003-2010: Data from NHANES study


Background: More than 50% of sexually active individuals are infected
with human papilloma viruses (HPV). Patients with high-risk type HPV
infection are at risk for developing cervical cancer later in their life.
Several social, demographic and behavioral factors are associated with
HPV infection. Our study estimates the prevalence of genital HPV
infection and explores the risk factors associated with HPV
infection.Methods: Data from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) for the years 2003-2010 was used in this
study. These surveys included interviews and laboratory measurements.
Around 20,000 females aged 18-59 years were included. Data management and
statistical analyses were conducted using SAS software 9.3 and SAS
callable SUDAAN 11.0.1.Results: The weighted prevalence of HPV infection
was 42.9%. Black females had the highest prevalence of HPV infection
(60.2%). In a univariate analysis, smoking, drug use, insurance status,
age at first sexual contact, number of sexual partners, condom use, and
sexual orientation were all associated with HPV infection. In a
multivariate analysis, after adjusting for other factors (e.g. country of
birth, routine places for healthcare) age, race, level of education,
being in a married relation, number of sexual partners and condom use
were all significant factors affecting the risk of HPV infection. Age at
first sexual encounter and sexual orientation were found to be no longer
significant. Non-Hispanic (NH) blacks are 1.73 times more likely to get
HPV as compared to NH whites. Age is negatively associated with the risk
of HPV infection, except for a second peak between 45-49 years.
Participants with only high school degree are at a 30% increased risk of
HPV infection compared to college-educated women. Never married (OR=1.89)
or divorced or separated (OR=2.4) women have an increased risk of being
infected with HPV. HPV infection is 3.7 times more likely for women who
have had >11 partners as compared to women with 0-1 partners. Women who
have sex without a condom half the time are at a 47% increased risk for
contracting HPV as compared to women who have sex with a condom at all
times.Conclusions: We estimate that 42.9% of females aged 18-59 years
have genital HPV infection. There is a compelling need to implement
measures to prevent further HPV infections. Health education and
promotion should focus on limiting the number of sexual partners and
encouraging safe sexual practices including the use of condoms.
Vaccinating females against HPV at an early age will not only help reduce
the rate of infection but also prevent cervical cancer development in the
future. It will be necessary to continue monitoring the prevalence of HPV
in the general population to provide basis for intervention through
vaccination as well as by promoting healthy behaviors in the target
population, policy changes and resource allocation.

