Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomic screens identify microRNA regulators of the
oncogenic fusion transcription factor EWS-FLI1


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a highly aggressive malignant pediatric cancer of
the bone and soft tissue with a poor prognosis. The genetic hallmark of
ES is the t(11:22)(q24:q12) translocation that generates a fusion
transcript containing the 5 end of EWSR1 and the 3 end of FLI1 referred
to as EWS-FLI1. This fusion generates an oncogenic transcription factor,
EWS-FLI1 that is responsible for malignant transformation and is
necessary for ES cell survival. To enhance our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying ES, with the long-term aim of enhanced
treatment for this cancer, we are applying RNAi functional genomic
approaches. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are critical regulators of gene
expression. There is evidence that many transcription factors and miRNAs
act in concert to regulate gene expression. To identify miRNAs that
directly or indirectly modulate EWS-FLI1 activity we conducted parallel
screens of mimics or inhibitors of the human miRome using a cell-based
reporter assay. The reporter assay consists of two isogenic reporter cell
lines generated in the EWS-FLI1 expressing TC32 cell line. One line
harbors a luciferase reporter driven by the promoter of an established
EWS-FLI1 target NR0B1, while the second line expresses luciferase from a
constitutive CMV promoter. A comparison of the effects of a miRNA on
these two reporter constructs can identify proteins that specifically
modulate EWS-FLI1 activity. We first identified those miRNAs for which a
differential effect was seen when the NR0B1- and CMV-luciferase signals
were compared and prioritized those where the mimic and inhibitor
corresponding to a specific miRNA exhibited opposite effects.
Twenty-eight miRNAs were identified, including miR-145, an established
regulator of EWS-FLI1. The screen also identified miRNAs that have not
been linked to EWS biology. One such candidate is miR-200b, a known
regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor progression. We
have confirmed that biotinylated-miR-200b captures the EWS-FLI1 mRNA when
transfected into TC32 and 300 other mRNAs that includes EWS-FLI1 target
genes. This functional genomic approach gives us an opportunity to
investigate the co-regulatory activity of an oncogenic transcription
factor and miRNAs in a systematic fashion that could be extended to
investigate the co-regulation of other transcription factors and miRNAs.

