Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JAK inhibition reverses IL10-mediated resistance to B cell
receptor (BCR) pathway inhibition in DLBCL


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and can be classified into activated B-cell like
(ABC) and germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL according to gene
expression profiling. In both subtypes, dysregulation of the B cell
receptor (BCR) signaling pathway plays a critical role in tumorigenesis
and survival. BCR activation induces phosphorylation of CD79A/B by Src
family tyrosine kinases, which leads to the activation of the BTK and
PI3K/Akt pathways. Oncogenic mutations have been identified in DLBCL
impacting CD79A/B (BCR complex), PTEN (negative regulator of PI3K),
CARD11 and MYD88 (NF-kB activating factors) function. The influence of
these mutations on the DLBCL phenotype appears to be further modified by
aberrant cytokine signaling and JAK/Stat pathway activation. High levels
of JAK/Stat-activating cytokines such as IL6 and IL10 are present in
DLBCL, and patients with high serum IL10 have been shown to have shorter
event-free survival and a higher international Prognostic Index score.
Therefore, concurrent inhibition of both the BCR and JAK/Stat pathways
may provide an attractive therapeutic approach in DLBCL. We have
developed and characterized a potent and selective PI3K inhibitor
INCB040093 and have established that DLBCL cells are sensitive to
INCB040093 treatment. We demonstrate that IL10 activates the JAK/Stat
signaling pathway in DLBCL cells, which renders the cells resistant to
INCB040093 in cell proliferation assays. This resistance can be reversed
by co-treatment with a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor. Although INCB040093 induces
apoptosis in DLBCL cells, concurrent activation of the JAK/Stat pathway
by IL10 prevents INCB040093-induced apoptosis, an effect that can be
abrogated by a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor. Similar resistance to IL-10 is
observed with the BTK inhibitor, ibrutinib, which can also be reversed by
a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor. Interestingly, a JAK1 selective inhibitor is as
effective as a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor in reversing the IL10-mediated
resistance to PI3K and BTK inhibition. Combination treatment blocks both
PI3K/Akt and JAK/Stat signaling pathways and results in the
down-regulation of pro-survival proteins, including Pim2 and c-myc. These
data illustrate the functional cross-talk that exists in DLBCL between
the BCR and JAK/Stat signaling pathways, and support the clinical
evaluation of combined BCR and JAK inhibition as a novel approach to
targeted therapy.

