Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of the tumor suppressive machinery of arsenic
trioxide-induced glioblastoma multiforme inhibition via
microRNA-182-Sestrin2 regulatory circuit


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is classified the fourth grade of human
glioma that indicates the most malignant brain tumor with poor five-year
survival (5%). Accumulated evidence showed that GBM cells were resistant
to various therapeutic strategies. Recently, use of arsenic trioxide
(ATO) to induce apoptosis and to increase the radiosensitivity was
reported for the benefit in treating GBMs. However, the responsible
signaling cascades are still remain investigation. MicroRNA, a category
of RNA interference, regulates its downstream genes post
transcriptionally by binding to the 3untraslated region (UTR) of its
targets. In this study, we used S1 and S1R1 GBM cells which were derived
from the primary and the recurrent lesion respectively. Firstly, we
identified that an oncogenic microRNA, miR-182, was down-regulated after
the treatment of ATO in both GBM cells. In addition, one of the miR-182
targeted coding genes, Sestrin 2 (SESN2), plays an important role in
relieving intracellular oxidative stress and participates in TP53 tumor
suppressive pathway. Use of luciferase-based reporter assay confirmed
that miR-182 directly bound to SESN2 3UTR and interrupted the further
translation. Intriguingly, the basal level of miR-182 in the primary S1
GBM was significantly lower than the recurrent S1R1 GBM, supporting the
oncogenic evidence in the previous studies. The counteracted SESN2
expression was also determined by real-time qPCR and western blot. We
then hypothesized that ATO may retarded the growth of GBM through a
miR-182-SESN2 related regulatory axis. Overexpression of miR-182 in S1
GBM resulted in a decrease of SESN2 and insensitive to ATO treatment. On
the opposite, inhibition of miR-182 in S1R1 GBM dramatically retarded the
growth rate and sensitized the cells to ATO. Moreover, pretreatment of an
antioxidant, N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), rescued the miR-182 suppression,
suggesting that ATO-induced oxidative stress may be dominant in this
responsive axis. Concordant expression of miR-182/96/182 cassette was
revealed, indicating the transcriptional regulation was unveiled. Further
investigation on the detailed machinery still remain elucidating. Based
on our findings, we displayed that ATO-induced oxidative stress triggered
a tumor suppressive response through a miR-182-SESN2 dependent machinery.

