Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cholesterol/ 27-hydroxycholesterol axis is a novel therapeutic
target in castrate resistant prostate cancer


The most recent estimates indicate that men have a seventeen percent
chance of developing invasive prostate cancer (PCa) over their lifetime.
This makes PCa the most commonly diagnosed malignancy among men in
industrialized countries, accounting for the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths. Although PCa almost always develops resistance to
androgen-deprivation therapy, both androgen receptor (AR) itself and the
processes downstream of the receptor remain active and are necessary for
cancer progression and thus continue to be viable targets for therapeutic
intervention. In this regard, it is of significance that several
independent studies demonstrate a link between elevated intra-prostatic
levels of cholesterol and the presence of malignancy. This puts into
context our current finding that 27-hydroxycholesterol (27HC), a primary
metabolite of cholesterol, regulates pathways and processes that oppose
AR action. For example, AR activation results in a net uptake of
cholesterol by PCa cells and enhances denovo lipogenesis, while 27HC
down-regulates genes involved in cholesterol uptake and activates those
involved in its efflux. More importantly, we show that treatment of PCa
cell lines with 27HC inhibits their proliferation, an activity that is
reversed upon supplementing the cells with an exogenous source of
cholesterol or upon over-expression of low density lipoprotein receptor
(LDLR), a membrane protein that mediates the uptake of cholesterol. In
prostatic tissues, 27HC is synthesized directly from cholesterol by the
cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP27A1. To further highlight the above axis as a
novel therapeutic target, using data mining approaches from clinical
databases, we show that (1) transcript levels of CYP27A1 are dramatically
down-regulated during PCa progression and (2) patients whose tumors
express high levels of CYP27A1transcript exhibit longer disease free
survival. Most notably, we were able to show that over-expression of
CYP27A1 inhibits the proliferation of PCa cell lines in vitro and delays
the growth of xenografts in castrated immune-deficient mice. In summary,
our data thus far strongly implicates that CYP27A1 is a potential tumor
suppressor in PCa and highlights the cholesterol/27HC axis as a target
for the development of novel therapeutics for castrate resistant disease.

