Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrative genomic analysis for clinically relevant cancer
genetic aberration and targeted therapeutic prediction


While the genomic and genetic basis of many cancers has been partly
elucidated, less is known about the identity of specific cancer genes
that are associated with clinical parameters such as clinical stage,
metastasis, and survival. To address this question, we compiled multiple
genomic data types (mutations, copy number alterations, gene expression
and methylation status) as well as clinical meta-data for twelve
different cancers in the Cancer Genome Atlas Project. We used an
elastic-net regularized regression method on the combined genomic data to
identify genetic aberrations and their associated cancer genes that are
indicators of clinical parameters in each cancer type. To facilitate the
identification of clinically actionable genetic aberrations from this
cancer genomic data, we utilized genomic and drug response data from the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). These expansive data sets of
hundreds of cancer cell lines include three genomic data types
(mutations, copy number alterations, gene expression) and drug response
data. To demonstrate the performance and validity of this approach, we
demonstrated that our bioinformatics pipeline successfully identified i)
synthetic genes that have their CNVs perfectly associated with stages
from a simulated data ii) mutations of TGFBR2, methylation of MLH1 and
other driver genes that have genetic changes associated with colorectal
cancer (CRC) that demonstrate microsatellite instability CRC from TCGA
data, and iii) IDH1 that obtained mutations associated with survival
according to glioblastoma (GBM) data. We identify the top ranked genes
that delineate key clinical features such as survival analysis or
clinical stages for 13 cancers. A fit of the elastic-net regularized
regression to more than 200 samples/cancer type and integrative analysis
of integrative genomic platforms identified the set of top gene
predictors of clinical parameters (TCGA data) and drug response (CCLE
data). There are several genes ranked top in multiple cancer types while
most of them are unique to a cancer type. These results provide us with
new insights into the underlying genetic similarities and differences
among 13 cancers; namely, common genetic characteristics that have
implications for clinical phenotype. Finally, we are identifying the core
set of gene aberrations that are both clinically relevant and drug
responsible.

