Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The functional role of Tensin4 in hepatocellular carcinoma


The focal adhesion protein Tensin4 (also known as cten: c-terminal tensin
like) is structurally distinct from the three other members in the Tensin
family and has been reported to play critical roles in cancer cell
migration and invasion in breast and colorectal cancers. However, its
expression and potential function in other cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma are not well understood. By quantitative real
time PCR and western blotting with Tensin4 specific antibodies, Tensin4
was found to be expressed in a panel of HCC cell lines with a number of
cells showing high levels of expression. In these cells, treatment with
growth factors (e.g. EGF) significantly induced Tensin4 protein
expression; while treatment of pharmacological inhibitors against the
kinases in the MAPK signaling cascade abolished this induction. These
observations suggested that Tensin4 expression was Ras/MAPK signaling
dependent. Intriguingly, the growth factor-induced Tensin4 expression
could not be observed in HCC cell lines with low basal Tensin4
expression, implying that other regulatory mechanisms do exist. By
immunofluorescence microscopy, the focal adhesion localization of Tensin4
was confirmed in HCC cells. Detail examination of a panel of Tensin4
deletion constructs revealed the requirement of the C-terminal SH2 domain
for this specific localization. To examine the functional role of
Tensin4, SMMC and BEL7402 HCC cells with high basal expression of Tensin4
were subjected to stable Tensin4 knockdown followed by cell proliferation
and cell migration assays. Consistently, we observed that both stable
Tensin4 knockdown cells proliferated and migrated in slower rates in
vitro. However, the molecular mechanisms regarding this reduction remains
to be explored. Taken together, our data suggested that Tensin4 may play
a pro-oncogenic role in HCC, possibly function as a downstream effector
of Ras/MAPK signaling.The study was funded by a Hong Kong Research Grants
Council GRF grant (775110).

