Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural killer cells eradicate galectin-1 deficient glioma in the
absence of adaptive immunity


Natural killer (NK) cells safeguard against early tumor formation by
seeking out and destroying transformed target cells in a process referred
to as NK immunosurveillance. While it is clear that malignant brain
tumors such as glioblastoma (GBM) evade NK-mediated tumor suppression,
the precise mechanisms by which this occurs remain unknown. We now show
that shRNA-mediated knockdown of the -galactoside-binding lectin,
galectin-1 (gal-1), in malignant glioma cells leads to the failure to
form lethal intracranial tumors in RAG1-/- mice, a mouse strain devoid of
adaptive immunity. However, gal-1 deficient glioma growth is fully
restored on implantation into the brain of severely immunocompromised
NOD-scid IL2Rg null mice, which lack both adaptive and innate immune
function, thus implicating the innate immune response in the early
rejection of gal-1 deficient glioma. Immunodepletion of NK cells in
RAG1-/- or C57BL/6J mice using anti-asialo GM1 or anti-NK1.1 antibodies
permit the growth of large gal-1 deficient gliomas, while macrophage
depletion with clodronate liposomes only permits limited tumor growth.
This combined result suggests that NK cells and macrophages may work
together to achieve gal-1 deficient glioma rejection. Antigen-specific
IFN- ELISpot assays using splenocytes from immunocompetent C57BL/6J mice
indicate that gal-1 deficient glioma is cleared prior to the onset of an
adaptive anti-tumor immune response. Flow cytometric analysis of brain
tumor-infiltrating immune cells reveal that gal-1 deficient gliomas
contain significantly more macrophages and granzyme B+ NK cells compared
to gal-1 expressing gliomas. In-vitro experiments further show that gal-1
deficient glioma cells are inherently over 3-times more sensitive to
NK-mediated tumor lysis, fail to suppress pro-inflammatory (M1)
microglial activation, and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1,
IL-12p70, and CXCL2. We conclude that glioma-derived gal-1 is a powerful
inhibitor of NK-mediated cytotoxicity in-vivo, and predict that its
suppression will be of therapeutic value in the treatment of human
malignant brain tumors by dramatically heightening anti-tumor NK
immunosurveillance.

