Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Weight loss prevents obesity-associated basal-like breast cancer
progression: Role of hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met


Background: Epidemiologic studies demonstrate that obesity-associated
basal-like breast cancer is an aggressive subtype and as a triple
negative subtype, no targeted therapies are currently available.
Basal-like breast cancer (BBC) is often diagnosed in young and African
American women. Using a murine model of BBC, C3(1)-TAg, we previously
reported that like humans, mice made obese in adulthood displayed an
early onset of tumors. Obesity also elevated mammary gland expression and
activation of the pro-tumorigenic hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and its
cognate receptor (c-Met) pathway compared to lean controls. We sought to
investigate whether weight loss prior to tumor onset would protect mice
from accelerated tumorigenesis and elevations in HGF/c-Met
pathway.Methods: C3(1)-TAg mice were fed a high fat diet (60% kcal from
fat) at weaning and became obese compared to control mice fed a low fat
diet (10% kcal from fat). Weight loss was induced through a diet
intervention: obese mice on 60% diet were switched to 10% at 10 weeks of
age. Mice were monitored for fat mass accretion, tumor onset, and tumor
progression. At sacrifice, various tissues were collected and plasma
measures of cytokines and metabolic parameters were assessed.
Immunohistochemical analyses for HGF, c-Met and F4/80 macrophage markers
were performed.Results: C3(1)-TAg mice fed 60% diet displayed significant
elevations in body weight and body fat composition which were reversed to
control levels after two weeks after switching to 10% dietof weight loss.
Tumor latency or burden were not altered but obesity dramatically
regulated tumor aggressiveness. Obese C3(1)-TAg mice displayed
significant elevations in tumor promotiongrowth, which were reversed to
control levels when obese mice lost weight. Importantly, the HGF/c-Met
axis was also elevated by obesity and reversed restored to control levels
uponwith weight loss. Other obesity-associated parameters such as
hyperinsulinemia and leptin/adiponectin ratio were elevated in obese mice
and reduced with weight loss. Although systemic inflammatory cytokines
were not significantly altered by obesity or weight loss, macrophage
infiltration into the normal mammary gland was significantly elevated in
obese mice with a decrease to control levels observed following weight
loss.Conclusions: In sum, weight loss reversed obesity-driven tumor
aggressiveness promotion and blunted the obesity-responsive
pro-tumorigenic HGF/c-Met pathway, as well as improved several metabolic
and inflammatory risk factors associated with BBC.

