Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RBM3 overexpression increases -catenin signaling activity to
induce a cancer stem cell phenotype


Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in the
US. We have previously demonstrated that the RNA binding protein RBM3 is
oncogenic when overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells. Furthermore, several
studies have shown that RBM3 expression increases in high grade cancer
compared to lower grade cancer or normal adjacent tissues. While a
correlation between RBM3 expression and the progression of malignancies
is apparent, the evidence implying a causative link is lacking. Here we
investigate the effects of exogenous RBM3 overexpression on the phenotype
of colon cancer cell lines HCT 116 and DLD-1. We developed cells with
stable doxycycline (Dox) inducible RBM3 overexpression. Upon RBM3
overexpression, there was an increase in the percentage of Hoescht 33342
effluxing side population cells and spheroid formation capacity, both of
which are populations with increased capacity to self-renew and
differentiate. Additionally, we observed that RBM3 overexpression
increases CD44 protein levels. These studies imply that RBM3
overexpression increases colon cancer stem cell phenotype. To elucidate
the mechanism by which RBM3 overexpression increases the stem cell
phenotype, we next investigated the -catenin signaling pathway. The
majority of colon cancers initiate their malignant transformation with an
activating mutation of the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway which is
critical in maintaining the stem cells within the intestinal epithelium.
The small pool of cytoplasmic -catenin is normally degraded, however,
upon inhibition of the destruction complex, it translocates to the
nucleus and induces transcriptional changes within the cell. RBM3
overexpression showed increase in both total and nuclear -catenin in the
two cell lines. To demonstrate directly that -catenin is
transcriptionally active, we used the TOPFlash luciferase reporter
system. There was a significant increase in luciferase activity in RBM3
overexpressing cells confirming the increased nuclear -catenin levels.
Furthermore, there was increase in the expression of c-Myc, CD44 and LGR5
mRNA, all transcriptional targets of -catenin. In previous studies, we
have demonstrated that RBM3 induces the expression of cyclooxygenase-2
and interleukin-8, both of which can act through AKT to inhibit GSK3, a
member of the -catenin destruction complex. Therefore, we next
investigated effects of RBM3 overexpression on GSK3 activity. There was a
significant increase in activating phosphorylation at Akt at Ser473, and
inhibitory phosphorylation of GSK3 at Ser9. Additionally, -catenin
phosphorylation at Ser33/37/Thr41, targets of GSK3 was marked lower.
Taken together, these data suggest that when overexpressed, RBM3 induces
-catenin signaling to increase stem cell features in colon cancer cells.
Additionally, these data show a novel causative link between RBM3 levels
and the progression of colon cancer.

