Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of colorectal cancer in the setting of colitis


Introduction:Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn's disease
and ulcerative colitis, is defined by chronic inflammation of the
gastrointestinal tract. In the colon, persistent colitis is a major risk
factor in IBD-associated colorectal cancer (CRC). While primary and
metastatic CRC can often be visualized using radiotracers such as 18F-FDG
for PET imaging, the sensitivity for detection of primary CRC is
decreased in the setting of IBD due to increased glucose metabolism at
sites of inflammation. EGFR overexpression is reported in up to 97% of
CRCs. The lower expression in inflammatory cells makes it a valuable
imaging target to identify CRC in the setting of colitis.Objective:The
goal of this effort is to develop and test in murine models an EGFR
targeted PET imaging probe for the detection of CRC, with the ability to
differentiate neoplasia from colonic inflammation.Methods:The F(ab')2
fragment of cetuximab was generated by enzymatic digestion. After the
integrity and purity of the F(ab')2 was evaluated with SDS-PAGE and FPLC,
the F(ab')2 fragment was conjugated with the p-SCN-Bn-DOTA chelate, and
then radiolabeled with 64Cu. The receptor binding affinity and
specificity of the 64Cu-DOTA-F(ab')2 was evaluated using EGFR expressing
CT26 murine colon cancer cells. Tumor to bowel ratio of the EGFR PET
imaging probe was compared with 18F-FDG using DSS-treated CT26
tumor-bearing BALB/c mice at 24 h. The in vivo behavior of the probe was
demonstrated with PET-CT in two different mouse models of CRC
(ApcCKOp53flox/flox and ApcLoxP/ LoxPMsh2null/LoxP). Histochemical
examination were also performed.Results:F(ab')2 fragments of cetuximab
can be generated efficiently and with high purity. The radioligand
binding assay revealed that 64Cu labeled EGFR-DOTA-F(ab')2 conjugate
bound specifically to EGFR on CT26 xenografts, with KD and Bmax values in
vitro of 6.6 0.7 nM and 3.3 0.1 x 106 receptors/cell respectively.
DSS-induced colitis was confirmed with relative change in body weight,
18F-FDG PET imaging, and histological examination. 64Cu-DOTA-F(ab')2
showed a significantly higher (p Introduction:Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD), including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, is defined by
chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. In the colon,
persistent colitis is a major risk factor in IBD-associated colorectal
cancer (CRC). While primary and metastatic CRC can often be visualized
using radiotracers such as 18F-FDG for PET imaging, the sensitivity for
detection of primary CRC is decreased in the setting of IBD due to
increased glucose metabolism at sites of inflammation. EGFR
overexpression is reported in up to 97% of CRCs. The lower expression in
inflammatory cells makes it a valuable imaging target to identify CRC in
the setting of colitis.Objective:The goal of this effort is to develop
and test in murine models an EGFR targeted PET imaging probe for the
detection of CRC, with the ability to differentiate neoplasia from
colonic inflammation.Methods:The F(ab')2 fragment of cetuximab was
generated by enzymatic digestion. After the integrity and purity of the
F(ab')2 was evaluated with SDS-PAGE and FPLC, the F(ab')2 fragment was
conjugated with the p-SCN-Bn-DOTA chelate, and then radiolabeled with
64Cu. The receptor binding affinity and specificity of the
64Cu-DOTA-F(ab')2 was evaluated using EGFR expressing CT26 murine colon
cancer cells. Tumor to bowel ratio of the EGFR PET imaging probe was
compared with 18F-FDG using DSS-treated CT26 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice at
24 h. The in vivo behavior of the probe was demonstrated with PET-CT in
two different mouse models of CRC (ApcCKOp53flox/flox and ApcLoxP/
LoxPMsh2null/LoxP). Histochemical examination were also
performed.Results:F(ab')2 fragments of cetuximab can be generated
efficiently and with high purity. The radioligand binding assay revealed
that 64Cu labeled EGFR-DOTA-F(ab')2 conjugate bound specifically to EGFR
on CT26 xenografts, with KD and Bmax values in vitro of 6.6 0.7 nM and
3.3 0.1 x 106 receptors/cell respectively. DSS-induced colitis was
confirmed with relative change in body weight, 18F-FDG PET imaging, and
histological examination. 64Cu-DOTA-F(ab')2 showed a significantly higher
(p < 0.001) tumor to bowel ratio (TBR = 3.8 0.10) in comparison with
18F-FDG (TBR =1.5 0.05) during inflammation in the colon. Colon tumors in
GEMM were successfully visualized and showed high correlation with
ex-vivo PET imaging results and IHC examination.Conclusions:The developed
EGFR targeted PET imaging probe demonstrated high target specificity for
colonic tumors in the setting of colitis as compared to 18F-FDG. Future
clinical translation of this paradigm is promising for the detection of
CRC in IBD.

