Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential pathway activation associated with domain-specific
PIK3CA mutations


A recent study of the mutation landscape of >3000 cancers across 12 major
cancer types from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) program revealed PIK3CA
as the second most commonly mutated gene, occurring at >10% frequency in
8 types of cancer. Limited preclinical evidence suggested that mutations
affecting PIK3CA catalytic vs. non-catalytic domains can produce
different phenotypic consequences; however, whether domain-specific
PIK3CA mutations results in distinct pathway consequences across multiple
cancer types remain unclear. Thus, we used the PARADIGM algorithm, which
integrates gene expression and copy number data into a superimposed
pathway structure, to infer the activities of 13K pathway features and
compared the signaling consequences associated with different
domain-specific PIK3CA mutations within the TCGA Pan-Cancer dataset.
Restricting to tumors harboring missense mutations in the coding region
of a single PIK3CA domain resulted in 447 unique cases. PIK3CA mutations
are distributed across the domains as follows: adaptor binding domain
(ABD) = 23, Ras-binding domain (RBD) = 1, C2 = 50, helical = 199, and
kinase = 174. Interestingly, the distribution of PIK3CA mutations among
the domains is significantly different across cancer types (chi-square
test p 50% of breast cancer PIK3CA mutations, while mutations in the
helical domain predominate in head-and-neck and lung squamous carcinomas.
Employing logistic regression and adjusting for cancer type, we
identified 711 pathway features associated with kinase domain mutations
(p 50% of breast cancer PIK3CA mutations, while mutations in the helical
domain predominate in head-and-neck and lung squamous carcinomas.
Employing logistic regression and adjusting for cancer type, we
identified 711 pathway features associated with kinase domain mutations
(p < 0.05). As expected for gain-of-function mutations, the inferred
activity of the PI3K catalytic subunit appeared elevated among kinase
domain mutations; and pathway enrichment analysis identified G-alpha
(12/13) signaling events as the top enriched pathway among all
interconnected pathway features (FDR-corrected EASE score = 0.0001).
Interestingly, although the PI3K complexes appeared more activated in the
kinase domain mutants, other constituents of the G-alpha (12/13) pathway,
such as RHO GTPase complexes, showed lower activity. Similarly, 1115
pathway features were identified as associated with helical domain PIK3CA
mutations. Pathway enrichment and sub-network analysis independently
identified lower activation of proliferation-related (FOXM1, MYC and
PLK1) pathways as a key characteristic of the helical domain relative to
other PIK3CA mutants. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that somatic
mutations in different PIK3CA domains across 12 different cancer types
produce distinct patterns of pathway activation, suggesting that
domain-specific mutants likely have different oncogenic consequences,
perhaps even within the same tumor type, and that targeted PIK3CA
inhibitors may show differential anticancer activity depending on the
domain location of the PIK3CA mutation.

