Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative in vivo imaging of oncolytic virus replication


Oncolytic replication competent viruses are increasingly being tested in
clinical trials. Their optimal use would be greatly facilitated by
technologies that enable repeated and quantitative estimation of the
location and population size of the virus as it propagates within the
tumor. To address this, we have generated two replication competent
measles viruses (MV) that express the thyroidal sodium iodide symporter
(NIS) in injected cells. One virus, MV-NIS is in Phase 1 clinical trials
and kills cells by formation of syncytia. The second virus, MV-I98A-NIS
has a mutation in the MV hemagglutinin protein that prevents syncytium
formation and kills cells by lysis. Cells infected with MV-I98A-NIS
remain viable for longer compared to MV-NIS and are expected to express
higher concentrations of NIS, facilitating in vivo imaging. BxPC-3 human
pancreatic carcinoma cells were implanted in the flank of nude mice.
Subsequently, the mice were injected with Opti-MEM (control), MV-NIS or
MV-I98A-NIS (1x107 TCID50/ml) via the tail vein. On days 3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15, 17 and 19 after virus injection, mice from the control, and virus
injected groups were imaged with SPECT/CT (U-SPECT II) 1 hour after
injection of 99mTc. Immediately afterwards, the mice were euthanized, the
tumors excised, weighed and isotope activity measured. The tumors were
divided into parts for histologic analysis and RNA extraction. NIS gene
expression was determined by Q-RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, while
viral genome copy number was determined by Q-RT-PCR for the nucleoprotein
(N). Image analysis using ROI was performed using AMIDE with background
correction across all imaging planes. There was no correlation between
tumor mass (volume) and isotope uptake (R2=0.0001 and 0.0051 for MV-NIS
and MV-I98A-Nis respectively) suggesting that isotope uptake was strictly
linked to virus infection. There was a strong, linear correlation between
the levels of virus dependent NIS expression and isotope activity within
the tumor (R2=0.79 and 0.93 for MV-NIS and MV-I98A-NIS respectively).
Tumors infected with MV-I98A-NIS had a higher concentration of isotope
compared with MV-NIS (pOncolytic replication competent viruses are
increasingly being tested in clinical trials. Their optimal use would be
greatly facilitated by technologies that enable repeated and quantitative
estimation of the location and population size of the virus as it
propagates within the tumor. To address this, we have generated two
replication competent measles viruses (MV) that express the thyroidal
sodium iodide symporter (NIS) in injected cells. One virus, MV-NIS is in
Phase 1 clinical trials and kills cells by formation of syncytia. The
second virus, MV-I98A-NIS has a mutation in the MV hemagglutinin protein
that prevents syncytium formation and kills cells by lysis. Cells
infected with MV-I98A-NIS remain viable for longer compared to MV-NIS and
are expected to express higher concentrations of NIS, facilitating in
vivo imaging. BxPC-3 human pancreatic carcinoma cells were implanted in
the flank of nude mice. Subsequently, the mice were injected with
Opti-MEM (control), MV-NIS or MV-I98A-NIS (1x107 TCID50/ml) via the tail
vein. On days 3, 5, 8, 10, 12, 15, 17 and 19 after virus injection, mice
from the control, and virus injected groups were imaged with SPECT/CT
(U-SPECT II) 1 hour after injection of 99mTc. Immediately afterwards, the
mice were euthanized, the tumors excised, weighed and isotope activity
measured. The tumors were divided into parts for histologic analysis and
RNA extraction. NIS gene expression was determined by Q-RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry, while viral genome copy number was determined by
Q-RT-PCR for the nucleoprotein (N). Image analysis using ROI was
performed using AMIDE with background correction across all imaging
planes. There was no correlation between tumor mass (volume) and isotope
uptake (R2=0.0001 and 0.0051 for MV-NIS and MV-I98A-Nis respectively)
suggesting that isotope uptake was strictly linked to virus infection.
There was a strong, linear correlation between the levels of virus
dependent NIS expression and isotope activity within the tumor (R2=0.79
and 0.93 for MV-NIS and MV-I98A-NIS respectively). Tumors infected with
MV-I98A-NIS had a higher concentration of isotope compared with MV-NIS
(p<0.004) and a higher correlation coefficient of NIS isotope uptake
versus NIS expression (14.1 mCi/NIS copies/ng RNA versus 11.5, p=0.003),
compatible with the observation that tumor cells infected with
MV-I98A-NIS remain viable for longer compared to MV-NIS. Activity within
tumors increased as a function of time, compatible with ongoing virus
replication and spread within the tumors. Correlation of imaging studies
with NIS expression and viral genome copy number is ongoing. Our
preliminary studies suggest that in vivo imaging can be used to
accurately determine the size of the oncolytic virus population within a
tumor as a function of time. These observations will be used to
understand the dynamics of virus spread within tumors and optimize
therapy.

