Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multimodality imaging end-point study of everolimus and
ganetespib in treatment of pancreatic cancer: A pre-clinical PET/MRI/MRS
study


Background: mTOR is a significant regulator of cell metabolism,
proliferation, autophagy, and is strongly linked to cancer cell survival.
This suggests that inhibiting mTOR with everolimus (RAD001) may inhibit
tumor cell growth while promoting cell death. The aim was to establish
imaging end-points for the efficacy of everolimus in combination with the
second generation HSP-90 inhibitor ganetespib in everolimus resistant
pancreatic cancer (based on promising results from initial patient
trials). This study aimed to establish metabolic (FDG-PET and MRS),
morphological (DWI), and anatomical (magnetic resonance imaging, MRI)
end-points for mTOR and HSP inhibitor response in mouse pancreatic
adenocarcinoma xenografts.Methods: Human Panc-159 tumor xenografts were
established in athymic nude mice. Everolimus was administered orally at a
daily dose of 5 mg/kg; ganetespib was administered via tail vein
injection weekly 100 mg/kg. PET/DWI-MRI imaging was done at baseline,
mid-study (Day 8-9), and end of study (Day 21-22). At end of study, mice
were sacrificed, and tumors were extracted with perchloric acid for use
in 1H-MRS metabolomics. Multivariate analysis was conducted with
MetaboAnylast2.0 software.Results: Single treatments showed no
significant inhibition of tumor growth or decrease in tumor cellularity.
Everolimus single treatment did cause a slight decrease (p = 0.0296 by
FDG-PET) in glucose uptake- as previously reported for the mTOR pathway
inhibition, while ganetespib alone did not alter glucose uptake.
Combination treatment inhibited tumor growth (p= 0.0018 by MRI) in
addition to decreasing tumor cellularity (p = 0.0323 by DWI). Combination
treatment also decreased tumor metabolic activity as demonstrated through
the decrease in glucose uptake (p = 0.0085). Multivariate analysis on
combined quantitative metabolic and imaging data sets (including tumor
volume, FDG-SUV, cellularity, and 1H-MRS derived concentrations of
endogenous metabolites) showed group separation between the control and
combination treatment groups. Variables with highest importance in
projection (VIP) accounting for group separation were tumor cellularity
(VIP = 3.0262), tumor volume (VIP =2.3178), phospholipid-associated
glycerol (VIP = 1.9073), and FDG-SUV (VIP = 1.3406).Conclusions: Our
study provides the rational of combining everolimus with ganetespib to
overcome drug resistance and increase treatment responsiveness in
pancreatic cancer. Combination treatment did result in decreased tumor
growth, cellularity, phospholipid metabolism and glucose uptake giving
potential for these variables to serve as effective biomarkers for
therapeutic response once validated in clinical trials. Even though
Panc-159 is highly resistant to single everolimus treatment, this
combination treatment with an HSP-90 inhibitor provides first evidence of
proliferation and metabolic response.

