Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of mouse cells from human tumor xenografts significantly
reduces bias in molecular analysis and improves culture of target cells


Human tumor xenografts represent the gold standard method for research
areas like drug discovery, cancer stem cell biology, and metastasis
prediction. They can be derived from primary human tumor material,
serially transplanted tumor tissue, or cultured cells. When compared to
in vitro cell culture models, human tumor xenografts show a higher
validity for most assays (Rubio-Viqueira et al., 2009).During the growth
phase in vivo, xenografted tissue is vascularized and infiltrated by
cells of murine origin including heterogeneous lymphocyte subpopulations,
fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. The level of infiltration is highly
dependent on multiple factors like tumor subtype, growth rate, and region
of transplantation. However, even when these factors are kept constant,
the amount and composition of infiltrating mouse cells is highly
variable. Due to this, some molecular downstream analyses are challenged.
The contaminating mouse cells lead to cross hybridization of mouse
derived molecules to human probes on microarrays and a significant
reduction of sensitivity caused by measuring mouse signals during
next-generation sequencing or proteome analysis. In addition, the culture
of human tumor cells is frequently hampered by murine fibroblasts
efficiently plating and overgrowing the target cells.To overcome these
limitations, we have developed a fast and easy method allowing for the
comprehensive depletion of all cells of murine origin. We have
dissociated human tumor xenografts as well as normal murine tissue of
multiple origins including skin, brain, kidney and lung followed by
screening panels of cell surface markers to define an optimized
combination of antibodies capable of binding all cells from all murine
origins. Subsequently, we generated conjugates of suitable antibodies
with paramagnetic nanoparticles (MicroBeads) and titrated all reagents to
optimize the depletion efficiency by using magnetic cell sorting (MACS).
Even tumors that contain high numbers of mouse cells (> 60%) can be
cleaned up to purities of human tumor cells higher than 96% in less than
25 minutes. This depletion step substantially increased sensitivity
during empiric cell surface marker screenings as well as during the
isolation of tumor cell subpopulations. Finally, we show that downstream
molecular analysis and culture of human tumor cells is significantly
standardized upon removal of mouse contamination.Taken together, this
novel method prevents inaccurate human tumor xenograft analysis caused by
contamination with cells of murine origin. As antibodies specific only
for mouse cells are used, the target cells stay untouched and the
procedure can be used for all kinds of xenografted material without the
need for a positive marker expressed on the human cells.

