Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the role of SRBC methylation-associated gene
silencing as predictive factor of oxaliplatin secondary resistance in
metastasic colorectal cancer patients


Background: Resistance acquisition to chemotherapeutic agents is one of
the main problems that come up during cancer treatment. The mechanisms of
developing resistance are poorly understood, and the causes underlying
the loss of sensitivity to common chemotherapy drugs, like oxaliplatin,
are largely unknown. The importance of epigenetic alterations has long
been demonstrated in cancer. Several studies have shown that promoter
methylation-associated silencing inactivates tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs) as effectively as mutations and is one of the cancer-predisposing
hits described in Knudson's two hit hypothesis. SRBC gene is a TSG the
inactivation of which has been associated with malignant tumor
progression, being involved in membrane traffic, cell cycle,
proliferation, apoptosis and DNA damage mechanisms. In a previous work,
we demonstrated the involvement of SRBC methylation-associated expression
silencing in oxaliplatin resistance acquisition by using in vitro models
and functional analysis. Thus, in the present work, we propose to
investigate the role of SRBC promoter methylation alterations as
potential predictive biomarker of oxaliplatin chemoresistance in
metastasic CRC (mCRC) patients.Material and methods: By
Methylation-Specific PCR and pyrosequencing, we analysed SRBC promoter
methylation in two independent cohorts of 131 and 58 primary tumors from
mCRC patients treated with 5FU-oxaliplatin combination. Chi-square and
Fisher test were used to assess the categorical variables associations.
Kaplan-Meier plots and Log-Rank test were used to estimate
progression-free survival (PFS). The association between gene methylation
and clinical parameters with PFS was assessed through univariate and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression models. We considered
statistically significant a two-sided p-value (P) lower than
0.05.Results: SRBC epigenetic inactivation occurred in primary tumors
from a discovery cohort of colorectal cancer patients (29.8%, 39 of 131),
where it predicted shorter PFS (HR = 1.83; 95% CI = 1.15-2.92; Log-Rank
P= 0.01), particularly in oxaliplatin-treated cases for which metastasis
surgery was not indicated (HR = 1.96; 95% CI = 1.13-3.40; Log-Rank P=
0.01). In a validation cohort of unresectable metastases colorectal
tumors treated with oxaliplatin (n=58), SRBC hypermethylation was also
associated with shorter PFS (HR = 1.90; CI= 1.01-3.60; Log-Rank P=
0.045).Conclusions: Remarkably, SRBC promoter hypermethylation was
related to worse PFS rate in mCRC patients with unresectable liver
metastasis who received 5FU-oxaliplatin based treatment. These results
provide a basis for future clinical studies to validate SRBC
hypermethylation as a predictive marker for oxaliplatin resistance in
mCRC patients.

