Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained induction of TRAIL and granzyme B as well as intratumor
infiltration of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) by a novel TLR7 agonist,
DSR-6434, after systemic administration


Although immediate responses after treatment of TLR7 agonist have been
extensively characterized the genes that are directly responsible for the
antitumor activity of TLR7 agonists have not been well identified.
Moreover, the immediate responses to TLR7 agonist stimulation, such as
induction of interferon-alpha, IP-10 and IL-1RA, generally diminish
rapidly, and therefore, cannot be used as optimal pharmacodynamic (PD)
biomarkers to monitor longer term PD effects. This study was undertaken
to investigate the antitumor mechanism of TLR7 agonists and to identify
novel PD biomarkers. To identify PD biomarkers, mice were inoculated with
mouse renal carcinoma cell line, Renca, and were administered
intravenously with DSR-6434 at 0.1 mg/kg once a week, 3 times. Total RNA
samples were collected 2 hours or 5 days after final dose from tumor or
blood. Global gene expression profiles in tumor or blood were analyzed
using GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 array (Affymetrix). Differentially
expressed genes by DSR-6434 were selected compared to vehicle, and
pathway analysis was performed using the genes. Expression of TRAIL and
granzyme B and its time course after the administration was investigated
in peripheral blood leukocytes. In tumor of mouse model, 312 and 53 genes
were upregulated and downregulated, respectively, more than 2 fold at 2
hours after DSR-6434 administration. The upregulated genes included those
related to immune cell activation and apoptosis pathways. The upregulated
immune-related genes included T-cell marker genes (Cd3g, Cd3e), marker
genes of cytotoxic T-cells (CTL) (Cd8a), lymphocyte activation (Cd69),
dendritic cells activation (Cd83 and Cd86) and cytotoxic factors against
tumor (TRAIL and granzyme B). These results suggested that DSR-6434
induced infiltration and activation of CTL and production of cytotoxic
factors at tumor site. At 5 days after the administration of TLR7 agonist
DSR-6434, 4 genes, including TRAIL, remained upregulated in tumor.
Surprisingly, upregulation of TRAIL and granzyme B in blood sustained for
3 or 6 days, respectively.In conclusion, unbiased gene expression
profiling has revealed that TLR7 agonist DSR-6434 triggers CD8+ cells
infiltration into tumor and sustained increase of TRAIL and granzyme B in
blood for at least 3 days, thus offering novel PD biomarkers that could
potentially predict antitumor activity of TLR7 agonists.

