Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mucolytic drug N-Acetylcystein improves 89Zr-trastuzumab
HER2-immunoPET imaging by restoring accessibility to HER2 hampered by
membrane mucin overexpression in a HER2 positive MUC4 overexpressing
xenograft mouse model


89Zr-trastuzumab, a 89-Zirconium radiolabeled anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibody, has been shown appropriate to enable positron emission
tomography (PET) imaging of HER2 positive lesions in breast cancer (BC)
patients. Binding of 89Zr-trastuzumab to the HER2 receptor, a
prerequisite could be undermined by one of the postulated resistance
mechanisms to trastuzumab, i.e. the interference of cell membrane
glycoproteins mucins. This study aimed to assess whether mucolytic drug
N-Acetylcystein (NAC) could enhance the uptake of 89Zr-trastuzumab in a
HER2 positive and MUC4 overexpressing xenograft mouse model.Materials &
Methods: Trastuzumab was first coupled with the chelate
N-succinyl-desferal ester, subsequently N-SucDF-trastuzumab was
radiolabelled with 89Zr-oxalate in a HEPES buffered solution and purified
by size exclusion chromatography. The impact of NAC on 89Zr-trastuzumab
PET was studied in a dual model xenograft generated by s.c. inoculation
of HER2+/MUC4- SKBr3 and JIMT1 HER2+/MUC4- BC cell lines, with the latter
overexpressing MUC4. Mice were treated with NAC p.o. during 6 days. Body
distribution and uptake of the tracer were measured 1) by in vivo PET/CT
imaging and by 2)ex vivo tissue analysis.Results: In mice treated with
NAC, there was a significant increase of the Standardized Uptake Value
(SUV) mean, SUVmax and SUV Volume Histogram (SVH) in the MUC4
overexpressing tumors compared to the control group. This was not the
case for MUC4 negative SKBR3 tumors. Furthermore, ex vivo body
distribution data supported these results with a significant increase of
radioactivity uptake in the MUC4 positive tumors and no change in
non-tumoral tissuesConclusion: N-Acetylcysteine may be an interesting
drug to improve the accessibility of trastuzumab to its receptors, HER2,
by affecting mucin masking.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

