Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of Oct-4 upregulation transactivates MDR1 and is
associated with increased tumor recurrence in bladder cancer


Platinum-based drug like cisplatin is the standard first-line drug to
treat patients with bladder cancer. However, tumors may recur and develop
into multiple-drug resistant characteristics. The acquisition of
resistance to conventional chemotherapy is a challenge in the treatment
of bladder cancer relapse. Cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis has been an
attractive theory. CSCs can resist therapeutic assaults, giving rise to
multiple drug resistance and promotion of tumor relapse and metastasis.
It has been shown that the fraction of cancer cells expressing MDR1 that
functions as an energy-dependent drug efflux pump may be associated with
Oct-4 expression. We have demonstrated that Oct-4 expression in bladder
cancer predicts tumor progression. In the present study, we proposed that
Oct-4 expression in bladder cancer increases MDR1 gene expression and
thereby results in multiple drug resistance. We found a positive
correlation between Oct-4 and MDR1 expression levels in clinical samples
of bladder cancer. Furthermore, overexpression of Oct-4 increased MDR1
expression, which resulted in poor response to cisplatin in human bladder
transitional cell carcinoma cells. Conversely, knockdown of Oct-4 reduced
MDR1 expression and rendered cells hypersensitive to cisplatin. We also
verified that Oct-4 transactivated the MDR1 gene promoter by binding to
the Oct-4 response element (ORE). More importantly, Oct-4 and MDR1 gene
expression could be induced by treatment with cisplatin, suggesting that
Oct-4 is a member of the MDR1 enhanceosome. Our data can explain, in
part, the high recurrence rate and drug resistance of bladder cancer. For
clinical implication, we demonstrated that reduction of Oct-4 expression
by all-trans retinoic acid, a derivative of vitamin A, improved
sensitivity of bladder cancer cells to gemcitabine and cisplatin. In
addition, we found that high expression levels of Oct-4 and MDR1 were
associated with high tumor recurrence. Taken together, our results
provide evidence that Oct-4 plays an important role in cisplatin-acquired
resistance in bladder cancer. They also implicate Oct-4 as a therapeutic
target.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

