Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An RNA-based epigenetic network controls the expression of
E-cadherin in epithelial normal and cancer cells


Epigenetic mechanisms play important roles in many human diseases.
However, what drives epigenetic regulators to specific genomic locations
is still an open question. Promoter-associated long non-coding RNAs
(paRNAs) have been identified in many genes and have been proposed to act
as docking elements for recruitment of epigenetic regulators to gene
promoters, although the underlying mechanisms are still poorly
characterized. In this study we investigated the role of paRNAs in
transcriptional regulation of E-cadherin (CDH1), a trans-membrane
glycoprotein and an important determinant of epithelial cell
differentiation. Transcriptional silencing of E-cadherin is frequent in
epithelial cancers and loss of E-cadherin expression triggers
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and acquisition of
tumor-initiating properties. We found that bidirectional transcription
occurred from independent initiation sites in the E-cadherin promoter and
generated sense (S) and antisense (AS) paRNAs that coordinated the
transcriptional activity of the gene. S and AS paRNAs had distinct
expression patterns in normal and cancer cell lines and human prostate
tumors. Both in cancer cell lines and human tumors the prevalence of S
paRNAs and low AS/S paRNA ratio were associated with low E-cadherin
expression. We found that the S paRNA bound Argonaute 1 (AGO1) and
coordinated silencing of the gene by recruiting, along with AGO1, the
histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 to the promoter. Consistently,
knockdown of either S paRNA or AGO1 reduced SUV39H1 promoter occupancy
and reactivated E-cadherin transcription in low expressing cells. Using
promoter reporter and expression constructs we showed that the S paRNA
and AGO1 acted in cis to control promoter activity and that the
interaction with AGO1 required specific element of the S paRNA.
Furthermore, recruitment of AGO1 to the S paRNA and CDH1 promoter
depended on an isomiR derived through alternative processing and editing
of pre-miR-4534. Accordingly, mutations that disrupted the isomiR binding
sequence in the S paRNA reduced AGO1 binding and increased promoter
activity, while depletion of the isomiR induced CDH1 expression. Notably,
the novel isomiR was more abundant in transformed epithelial cells and
cancer cell lines than normal prostate epithelial cells, accumulated
preferentially in nuclei and was specifically associated with S paRNA and
chromatin-bound AGO1 in low CDH1 expressing cancer cells. This study
reveals a complex RNA-based epigenetic network that relies on
sequence-specific interactions between a paRNA, a small RNA and AGO1 and
coordinates transcriptional silencing of a critical gene involved in
tumor development and progression. Our findings give also a new
prospective and mechanistic insights on the interplay between epigenetic
regulatory factors indentifying paRNAs as relevant elements in these
processes and potential targets for gene modulation strategies.

