Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal cells-derived paracrine factors promote dedifferentiation
of human lung carcinoma cells into cancer stem cells


Tumors are dynamic entities that act like organs in a perfect trading
with the entire body. Through the employment of deceiving cellular and
molecular strategies, they use the corporal machinery for the promotion
of their survival and dissemination. The extensive crosstalk mediated by
cytokines and chemokines overcome the inefficiency of the
invasion-metastasis cascade, thus allowing the development of the often
fatal metastatic disease. As heterogeneous entities, tumors are comprised
of distinct cell populations. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subset of
notably chemo- and radiotherapy resistant malignant tumor cells with the
capacity to drive tumorigenesis and metastases formation and eventually
tumor relapse.Lung cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide and its
prevalence is increasing mostly due to sustained smoking habits and the
accumulation of atmosphere pollutants. In this work hexavalent chromium
[Cr(VI)] was the carcinogenic agent used considering its increasing
occupational relevance. The non-malignant human bronchial epithelial
airway system 2B (BEAS-2B) was malignantly transformed into the RenG2
cell line using low density culture in the presence of Cr(VI). A parallel
control cellular system (Cont1) was produced under the same conditions,
though, in the absence of Cr(VI). Two additional derivative cell lines,
DRenG2 and DDRenG2, were attained following serial rounds of injections
in immunocompromised mice. A panoply of techniques was used to
characterize the attained cellular systems leading to the hypothesis of
CSCs involvement in Cr(VI)-driven BEAS-2B malignant transformation. The
sphere-formation assay readily confirmed our hypothesis as CSCs spheres
were isolated only from the derivative cell lines (SC-DRenG2 and
SC-DDRenG2 cells, respectively). Tumorigenic and RT-qPCR studies further
supported the stem potential of the attained systems, suggesting that a
dedifferentiation process featured its emergence during RenG2 derivation
in nude mice. Using an elegant cell culture model that encompassed the
prolonged co-culture of surgically isolated mice lumbar stromal cells
with the RenG2 cells, we proved that RenG2 cells dedifferentiation was
driven by paracrine factors released by the mouse fibroblasts, as they
lost the RenG2's molecular signature and acquired a new one more close to
that of both DRenG2 and SC-DRenG2. Finally, the key cytokines released by
the stromal fibroblasts were identified in the conditioned media of such
cultures.CSCs formation boosted the malignant potential of our carcinoma
cell population, providing them with increased resistance to therapeutic
drugs. Also, the dedifferentiation process revealed to be essentially
chemical and specie-unspecific, as human cells were able to
dedifferentiate in response to mice cells-released cytokines.Work
sponsored by FEDER, POFC-COMPETE and the FCT grants
PTDC/BBB-BQB/2450/2012 and SFRH/BD/33884/2009.

