Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of cold ischemia time on protein expression in breast
cancer tissues


Background: HER2 testing is a critical tool for determining the molecular
subtypes of breast tumors. However there are various factors which may
influence the accuracy of HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) results. Those
factors have been addressed by the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO)/College of American Pathologists (CAP) and outlined in the updated
2013 guideline. The ASCO/CAP guidelines advise limiting the tissues cold
ischemia time as much as possible specifically to no more than one hour.
A tissue's cold ischemia time is defined as the time from the tissues
removal from the patient to the initiation of fixation. Our institution
works with several collaborators for whom postoperative tissue banking is
performed for the majority of breast resection specimens. In most cases,
the procedure of tissue excision takes 30-60 minutes. However, in some
cases cold ischemia time is increased more than 60 minutes. Presently,
there is limited information available on the effect of cold ischemia on
HER2 IHC staining. In this study, we compared HER2 IHC results for breast
tumor specimens to determine the effect of prolonged cold ischemia time
on protein expression. HER2 status was confirmed by the in-situ
hybridization method (FISH). Design: In this study we evaluated HER2
status using two different FDA-approved FISH and an FDA-approved IHC
assay in a large cohort of invasive breast carcinomas with differing cold
ischemia time in pathology laboratories at the University of Chicago (U
of C) and in Ibadan, Nigeria (IMRAT). Cold ischemia time was used to
stratify the samples into two groups 1-3 h (n=27 U of C cases) and >3h
(n=79 MRAT cases). Both FISH and IHC were evaluated using ASCO/CAP
scoring criteria. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) including duplicate 1.0-mm
cores of invasive breast carcinoma were constructed utilizing
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue of 106 breast cancer patients,
who had surgery at the U of C and IMRAT. HER2 status determination was
performed on the TMAs utilizing IHC with the HercepTest (DAKO, USA), and
FDA-approved FISH assay (PathVysions, Abbott Molecular, USA). Results:
Only 3.7% of the cases examined in the 1-3 h cold ischemia time group had
a discrepancy in the HER2 IHC and FISH result. However, within the >3 h
cold ischemia time cohort a total of 7.6 % were identified with a minor
discrepancy between the HER2 IHC and FISH results. Conclusions: In this
study, we compared the effect of cold ischemia time on standard HER2
testing methodologies including FISH and IHC. Comparison of FISH and IHC
showed that IHC did not identify several FISH HER2-amplified cases at >3h
cold ischemia times. These findings are important in consideration of
specimen preparation and could have an effect on specimen handling and
fixation guidelines.

