Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VS-6063 (defactinib) targets cancer stem cells directly and
through inhibition of tumor-associated macrophages and cytokine production


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase which
mediates integrin and growth factor receptor signaling to regulate tumor
growth, metastasis and angiogenesis. FAK is also required for the
proliferation/survival of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Protein tyrosine
kinase 2 (PYK2) is the most closely related protein kinase to FAK,
sharing 60% homology in the kinase domain and a similar role in cellular
signaling pathways. Several lines of evidence suggest that dual targeting
of FAK and PYK2 should confer greater antitumor efficacy than an agent
which only inhibits FAK. Inhibition of mammary stem cells or tumor
angiogenesis by FAK inhibition can be bypassed by PYK2 activity,
suggesting advantages of dual FAK/PYK2 inhibition. Results of PYK2
knockout in mice suggest that PYK2 inhibition is likely to be well
tolerated. Based on the observation of reduced macrophage infiltration in
PYK2 knockout mice, we investigated effects of PYK2 inhibition on
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). Abundance of TAMs has been
correlated with poor prognosis in multiple cancer types including
mesothelioma and breast cancer.VS-6063 is a potent and orally active
inhibitor of FAK kinase activity. Preliminary clinical activity has been
observed in a Phase 1 single agent trial and in an ongoing Phase 1/1b
trial in combination with paclitaxel in patients with ovarian cancer. We
find that in addition to potent FAK inhibition, VS-6063 also inhibits
PYK2 kinase activity with nanomolar potency in both biochemical enzymatic
and cellular autophosphorylation assays. Using both pharmacological FAK
inhibitors and FAK siRNA, we have previously demonstrated that FAK
inhibition effectively reduces CSCs. We report here that dual targeting
of FAK and PYK2 by VS-6063 may more effectively suppress CSCs than
inhibition of FAK alone. We find that human monocyte-derived macrophages
release IL-6 and IL-8, and these cytokines increase the proportion of
ALDH-positive CSCs in mesothelioma and breast cancer cell lines. VS-6063
dose-dependently inhibited production of IL-6 and IL-8, whereas a
FAK-only reference inhibitor had no effect on these cytokines.
Accordingly, PYK2 siRNA decreased IL-6 release from human macrophages,
while FAK siRNA did not. In the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenograft model
in vivo, VS-6063 reduced serum IL-6 while the FAK-only reference compound
did not. Furthermore, VS-6063 substantially reduced the number of
F4/80-positive macrophages in the tumors. These data support a model in
which TAMs release IL-6 and IL-8 in a PYK2-dependent manner. Dual
inhibition of FAK and PYK2 by VS-6063 effectively decreases both the
presence of TAMs in tumors and the ability of TAMs to release cytokines
that stimulate CSC proliferation and survival, and may therefore provide
the opportunity for more durable clinical response than inhibition of FAK
alone.

