Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of Apo2L/Trail and a death receptor 5 agonist
antibody leads to enhanced antitumor activity in mouse syngeneic tumor
models


Background: Death receptor-5 (DR5, TR2, TRAIL-R2) is a death
domain-containing receptor that induces an apoptosis signaling cascade
when engaged by Apo2L/TRAIL or a DR5 agonist antibody1. Many tumor cell
lines express DR5 and are sensitive to DR5 agonists2. Despite
pre-clinical efficacy, several DR5 agonists have failed to advance beyond
phase II clinical trials due to poor clinical efficacy. Strong
synergystic activity was observed with the combination of Apo2L/TRAIL and
AMG655 (DR5 agonist antibody) pre-clinically in vitro and in vivo
(manuscript submitted). Although Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG655 were well
tolerated in clinical trials when delivered as single agents3, the
efficacy and safety profile of combining Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG655 has not
been investigated.Objective: To determine a therapeutic index for
Apo2L/TRAIL + DR5 agonist antibody combination treatment in mouse
syngeneic tumor cell lines and xenograft models.Results: To evaluate both
efficacy and tolerability, we utilized a mouse monoclonal antibody,
MD5-1, that recognizes the mouse DR5 (mDR5) receptor. In vitro, treatment
with Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1 enhanced cell killing in multiple mouse tumor
lines, which all expressed mDR5 at similar levels. In vivo, we observed
marked anti-tumor activity after treatment with Apo2L/TRAIL at 5 mg/kg
for 5 days per week and MD5-1 at 1ug/mouse for 2 days per week. In the
Renca model, Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1 treatment resulted in enhanced efficacy
compared to either single agent (> 92% inhibition; p Background: Death
receptor-5 (DR5, TR2, TRAIL-R2) is a death domain-containing receptor
that induces an apoptosis signaling cascade when engaged by Apo2L/TRAIL
or a DR5 agonist antibody1. Many tumor cell lines express DR5 and are
sensitive to DR5 agonists2. Despite pre-clinical efficacy, several DR5
agonists have failed to advance beyond phase II clinical trials due to
poor clinical efficacy. Strong synergystic activity was observed with the
combination of Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG655 (DR5 agonist antibody)
pre-clinically in vitro and in vivo (manuscript submitted). Although
Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG655 were well tolerated in clinical trials when
delivered as single agents3, the efficacy and safety profile of combining
Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG655 has not been investigated.Objective: To determine
a therapeutic index for Apo2L/TRAIL + DR5 agonist antibody combination
treatment in mouse syngeneic tumor cell lines and xenograft
models.Results: To evaluate both efficacy and tolerability, we utilized a
mouse monoclonal antibody, MD5-1, that recognizes the mouse DR5 (mDR5)
receptor. In vitro, treatment with Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1 enhanced cell
killing in multiple mouse tumor lines, which all expressed mDR5 at
similar levels. In vivo, we observed marked anti-tumor activity after
treatment with Apo2L/TRAIL at 5 mg/kg for 5 days per week and MD5-1 at
1ug/mouse for 2 days per week. In the Renca model, Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1
treatment resulted in enhanced efficacy compared to either single agent
(> 92% inhibition; p <0.0001); whereas, in the LLC1 model, an involution
of the tumor tissue was observed following Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1
administration. On day three after treatment was initiated, a macroscopic
observation of the tumors displayed a hemorrhagic appearance in both the
Renca and LLC1 models. Histological analysis revealed that tumor cells,
as well as, tumor-associated vasculature were positive for activated
caspase 3/7 after treatment with Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1. Strong expression
of mDR5 on both tumor cells and associated vasculature were detected, but
not on vasculature in other tissues. In follow up studies, we
demonstrated anti-tumor activity in a dose-dependent manner with lower
doses of Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1 treatment. However, at higher doses,
Apo2L/TRAIL + MD5-1 treatment resulted in body weight loss associated
with diarrhea, dehydration, and scruffy coat. Histological analysis
indicated minimal to severe apoptosis/degeneration/necrosis in the
epithelium of tissues, predominantly in the gastrointestinal tract, which
expressed the highest levels of mDR5.Conclusion: Our preclinical findings
provide evidence that a therapeutic index can be achieved for Apo2L/TRAIL
in combination with a DR5 agonist antibody and may be an effective
strategy for cancer therapy.

