Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of IRE1-driven pro-survival pathways is a promising
therapeutic application in acute myeloid leukemia


Survival of cancer cells rely on the unfolded protein response (UPR) to
resist stress triggered by the accumulation of misfolded proteins within
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). IRE1-XBP1 pathway, one of the most
important branches of the UPR, is activated in different types of cancer.
Upon IRE1 activation, the spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s) is generated and
acts as a transcription factor for many pro-survival genes to prevent
cellular death and relieve cellular stress. Blockade of the IRE1-XBP1
pathway can be considered as a potential anti-cancer strategy. Acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common acute leukemia in adults. We
find that XBP1 and XBP1s are up-regulated in AML cell lines and samples
from patients. IRE1 RNase inhibitors including STF-083010, HNA and
MKC-204 blocked XBP1 mRNA splicing and exhibited modest cytotoxicity in
liquid culture against AML cell lines (HNA, mean IC50, 31 M, n=8) and AML
samples from patients (HNA, mean IC50, 35 M, n=18). Notably, the IRE1
inhibitor HNA caused a significant inhibition (mean IC50, 6 M, n=6) of
clonogenic growth in soft agar of AML cells from patients of different
leukemic subtypes. In contrast, HNA had very little toxicity against
normal human marrow committed myeloid colony forming cells (mean IC50,
123 M, n=4). IRE1 inhibition in AML cells induced caspase-dependent
apoptosis and G1 cell cycle arrest which was associated with regulation
of Bcl-2 family proteins, G1 phase controlling proteins (p21cip1, p27kip1
and Cyclin D1) and Chaperone proteins (CHOP, HERPUD1, DNAJC3, DNAJB9 and
EMDM). Absence of Xbp1 (Cre-induced deletion of floxed XBP1) resulted in
the myeloid cells becoming resistant to IRE1 inhibitors. Combination of
HNA with either bortezomib or As2O3 synergistically inhibited growth of
NB4 acute promyelocytic leukemia cells associated with enhanced levels of
p-JNK and reduced expression of p-PI3K and p-MAPK. Also, in a dose- and
time- dependent manner, inhibition of IRE1 RNase activity increased
expression of many miRNAs (especially miR-17, -21, -34a, -96, -125b and
-150) in AML cells. Furthermore, HNA treatment inhibited mRNA levels of
several miR-34a targeted genes (c-Myc, Cyclin D1 and CDK4). The
inhibition of miR-34a conferred cellular resistance to HNA, as measured
by significant increase of cell viability. Addition of a miR-34a
antagonist restored protein expression levels of c-Myc and Cyclin D1 that
had been inhibited by HNA, suggesting a crucial role of miR-34a in the
IRE1-mediated stress response pathway. Taken together, our results
strongly suggest that targeting the IRE1 driven pro-survival pathways is
an exciting therapeutic approach for the treatment of AML.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

