Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treating brain tumors with targeted-micelles containing rapamycin


The development of selectively targeted nanoparticles that can act as
drug delivery vehicles is critical for improving the treatment and
monitoring of glioblastoma, a life threatening disease. Rapamycin
(Sirolimus, rapa), a large, lipophilic carboxylic lactone-lactam
macrolide antibiotic, is recognized for its potent anti-proliferative and
immunosuppressive effects in vitro and in vivo. These properties make
rapa a potential chemotherapeutic agent against several tumors. Despite
its promising properties, clinical applications of rapa have been limited
due to its hydrophobicity, limiting its utility as an intravenously
administered drug. Presently, the commercially available formulations of
rapa include tablet or oral forms. Nevertheless, the low oral
bioavailability of rapa limits the effectiveness of both of these forms.
In addition, the lipophilicity makes the drug susceptible to attachment
to the lipid membranes of normal as well as cancer cells. A selectively
targeted carrier for rapa will enhance its delivery to malignant cells,
avoid non-specific interactions, and reduce non-tumor toxicity. In order
to design an efficient and effective drug carrier, we created a
multifunctional nanocarrier that contains a tailored surface on the
carrier to attach biomolecules for targeted drug delivery; a
biocompatible coating which can efficiently encapsulate the hydrophobic
drug thereby reducing cytotoxicity; and the capability for
stimuli-induced (pH) disruption of the carrier agent for slow and
controlled drug release to the desired environment, Micelles are the
preferred choice of carrier as they fulfill these requirements based on
their composition. Micelles containing rapamycin drug are synthesized
using PEG-PE-Amine and N-palmitoyl homocysteine (PHC, pH sensitive lipid
breaks in endosome pH 5.5). Specific targeting of the micelles to
glioblastoma cells is achieved by PDGF (platelet derived growth factor)
or EGF (epidermal growth factor) coupled to the amine moeity of the
DSPE-PEG. In addition these micelles have been labeled with a NIR
fluorphore to track them for cellular uptake. These micelles have an
advantage of small size (The development of selectively targeted
nanoparticles that can act as drug delivery vehicles is critical for
improving the treatment and monitoring of glioblastoma, a life
threatening disease. Rapamycin (Sirolimus, rapa), a large, lipophilic
carboxylic lactone-lactam macrolide antibiotic, is recognized for its
potent anti-proliferative and immunosuppressive effects in vitro and in
vivo. These properties make rapa a potential chemotherapeutic agent
against several tumors. Despite its promising properties, clinical
applications of rapa have been limited due to its hydrophobicity,
limiting its utility as an intravenously administered drug. Presently,
the commercially available formulations of rapa include tablet or oral
forms. Nevertheless, the low oral bioavailability of rapa limits the
effectiveness of both of these forms. In addition, the lipophilicity
makes the drug susceptible to attachment to the lipid membranes of normal
as well as cancer cells. A selectively targeted carrier for rapa will
enhance its delivery to malignant cells, avoid non-specific interactions,
and reduce non-tumor toxicity. In order to design an efficient and
effective drug carrier, we created a multifunctional nanocarrier that
contains a tailored surface on the carrier to attach biomolecules for
targeted drug delivery; a biocompatible coating which can efficiently
encapsulate the hydrophobic drug thereby reducing cytotoxicity; and the
capability for stimuli-induced (pH) disruption of the carrier agent for
slow and controlled drug release to the desired environment, Micelles are
the preferred choice of carrier as they fulfill these requirements based
on their composition. Micelles containing rapamycin drug are synthesized
using PEG-PE-Amine and N-palmitoyl homocysteine (PHC, pH sensitive lipid
breaks in endosome pH 5.5). Specific targeting of the micelles to
glioblastoma cells is achieved by PDGF (platelet derived growth factor)
or EGF (epidermal growth factor) coupled to the amine moeity of the
DSPE-PEG. In addition these micelles have been labeled with a NIR
fluorphore to track them for cellular uptake. These micelles have an
advantage of small size (<50 nm, to cross blood brain barrier) and
reduced toxicity due to robust packaging of rapa drug inside the core.
Leaching of the drug out of the micelle is prevented and reduces offsite
cytotoxicity. Preliminary cellular uptake studies via fluorescence
imaging of glioblastoma cells treated with targeted and untargeted
labeled-micellar particles demonstrate receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Uptake occurs rapidly within 1 to 4 hours after treatment. Once released
from the micelle, the rapa kills the cells. Future experiments involve
performing cytotoxicity assays, pharmacokinetic and tissue distribution
studies in in vivo animal models.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

