Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of Notch1 in lung, ovarian and breast
cancers


Targeting the Notch signaling pathway for cancer treatment is currently
the subject of early clinical trials. However, treatment-related
toxicities, particularly gastrointestinal adverse events, have limited
clinical development of this class of agents. The development of efficacy
biomarkers to gamma-secretase inhibitors and antibodies to Notch ligands
and receptors could speed clinical testing. Mutations in Notch1, a
dominant Notch receptor, are rare in human solid tumors, and clinical
activity has not been observed in patients with tumors bearing Notch1
activating mutations, including T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia from
available clinical data. Identification of tumors with abundant target
expression and/or active Notch signaling status characteristic of Notch
intracellular domain (NICD) expression by immunohistochemistry may have
clinical utility. All levels of tumor Notch1 expression comprised of low,
moderate and high detected by immunohistochemistry and quantitated by
digital imaging technology were observed in 52% (34/66) of lung cancers,
51% (35/68) of ovarian cancers, and 11% (7/63) of breast cancers (lung or
ovary vs. breast, PTargeting the Notch signaling pathway for cancer
treatment is currently the subject of early clinical trials. However,
treatment-related toxicities, particularly gastrointestinal adverse
events, have limited clinical development of this class of agents. The
development of efficacy biomarkers to gamma-secretase inhibitors and
antibodies to Notch ligands and receptors could speed clinical testing.
Mutations in Notch1, a dominant Notch receptor, are rare in human solid
tumors, and clinical activity has not been observed in patients with
tumors bearing Notch1 activating mutations, including T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia from available clinical data. Identification of
tumors with abundant target expression and/or active Notch signaling
status characteristic of Notch intracellular domain (NICD) expression by
immunohistochemistry may have clinical utility. All levels of tumor
Notch1 expression comprised of low, moderate and high detected by
immunohistochemistry and quantitated by digital imaging technology were
observed in 52% (34/66) of lung cancers, 51% (35/68) of ovarian cancers,
and 11% (7/63) of breast cancers (lung or ovary vs. breast, P<0.0001 by
2-sided Fisher Exact Test). Notch1 was expressed at high levels in 20% of
lung cancers including sarcoma, neuroendocrine, small cell and
undifferentiated carcinomas, as well as adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinomas. High expression of Notch1 was observed in 9% of ovarian
tumors including undifferentiated carcinoma, serous adenocarcinoma, and
endometrioid adenocarcinoma. In breast cancer, it was noted in one case
of infiltrating ductal carcinoma with triple-negative phenotype.
Expression of high-level Notch1 varies in lung cancer vs. ovarian cancer
vs. breast cancer (P=0.002 by Chi-square statistic), and was frequently
associated with NICD expression. Notch1 was not significantly associated
with estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor or HER2 status in breast
cancer. These data suggest that the frequency of all levels of Notch1
expression is significantly higher in lung cancer and ovarian cancer than
breast cancer; and high-level Notch1 is more frequent in lung cancer than
in ovarian cancer, and, likewise, more frequent in ovarian cancer than in
breast cancer. For the first time, expression of Notch1/NICD has been
identified in undifferentiated carcinomas. The findings may provide
useful information for the rational design of Notch inhibitor clinical
trials.

