Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein mimetics induce
specific estrogen receptor confirmations and inhibit MCF7 breast cancer
cell proliferation


The human Estrogen Receptor (hER) is present in 70% of breast cancers,
and dysregulation of hER signaling can lead to aberrant cell growth and
proliferation. Known anti-estrogens used in treatments of breast cancer
today, tamoxifen and raloxifene cause hER to undergo conformational
changes and inhibit normal hER signaling by directly binding to the
ligand binding pocket. However, often breast cancer cells become
resistant to tamoxifen, and prolonged tamoxifen treatment can lead to
endometrial cancers. Breast Cancer Type 1 Susceptibility protein (BRCA1)
is a well characterized inhibitor of breast cancer cell growth. BRCA1
plays an important role in maintaining genomic stability through various
DNA repair mechanisms. It is mutated in approximately 50% of breast
cancer cases that are associated with heredity. While the majority of
breast cancer cases are sporadic or unassociated with heredity, BRCA1 is
expressed 30 to 40 % less in sporadic breast cancers. BRCA1 has also been
shown to associate directly with hER, and inhibit transactivation of hER.
This association and inhibition of hER transcriptional activity is
reversed by cyclin D1. This, in conjunction with studies that have shown
that cyclin D1 gene and protein levels are amplified and overexpressed
respectively in breast cancers suggest that the normal regulation of hER
by BRCA1 and cyclin D1 may be shifted in breast cancers to primarily
regulation (activation) by cyclin D1 and other coactivators. A decrease
in BRCA1 is associated with acquired tamoxifen resistance, suggesting
that BRCA1 may play a critical role in maintaining breast cancer cells
sensitivity to tamoxifen. The hER binding region of BRCA1 contains the
known corepressor binding motif LXXIIXXXL (amino acids 78-95). Here we
present a study of several small molecules identified based on
pharmacophoric features of previously found conformation sensing BRCA1
peptides. BRCA1 mimetics induce unique ER conformations and inhibit
breast cancer cell growth (MCF7). Further development of these compounds
could lead to viable alternative breast cancer treatments as well as
supplemental treatments in the anti-estrogen resistant
cases.Acknowledgements: This research was supported via funds from the
New York State, National Institutes of Health (5P20MD002725), through the
NCMHD -RIMI program (RVR) and NSF LSAMP Bridge to Doctorate grant (BKA).

