Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of DNA glycosylases as potential drugs
in cancer therapy


DNA glycosylases are required to initiate the DNA base excision repair
pathway of lesions that are formed by DNA damage. Recently, several DNA
glycosylases including NEIL1, OGG1 and NTH1 were identified as potential
targets in combination chemotherapeutic strategies for cancer treatment.
The potential therapeutic benefit for the inhibition of DNA glycosylases
was validated by demonstrating synthetic lethality with drugs that are
commonly used to limit DNA replication through dNTP pool depletion.
Additionally, NEIL1-associated synthetic lethality has been achieved in
combination with Fanconi anemia, group G. In this work, we designed
experimental strategies to discover small molecule inhibitors of NEIL1,
with subsequent analyses of the specificity of those molecules for other
DNA glycosylases. Using NEIL1 as the proof-of-principle DNA glycosylase,
we developed a fluorescence-based assay that utilizes incision of
site-specifically modified oligodeoxynucleotides to detect enzymatic
activity. Among the top hits of these screens were several purine
analogs, whose postulated presence in the active site of NEIL1 was
consistent with the paradigm of NEIL1 recognition and excision of
purine-derived lesions. We also applied gas
chromatography/isotope-dilution tandem mass spectrometry for the
measurement of the effect of preferred small molecule inhibitors on
activities of the DNA glycosylases NEIL1, OGG1 and NTH1. The release of
modified bases, which are known substrates of these enzymes, was measured
in the presence and absence of the inhibitors. These data revealed that
several of the purine analogs were general glycosylase inhibitors with
one compound being the most effective inhibitor for all three enzymes.
However, there were significance differences in inhibition of enzymatic
activities among these three DNA glycosylases. Overall, this work forms
the foundation for the future discovery of DNA repair inhibitors as drugs
in cancer therapy for the entire family of DNA glycosylases.

