Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene therapy for peritoneal dissemination model of gastric cancer
using SOCS-1 by Adenoviral Vector


Objective: The peritoneal metastasis is one of the most common recurrence
style of gastric cancer (GC) and an effective treatment for their
patients has not been established. Suppressor of cytokine signaling-1
(SOCS-1) is a negative regulator of various cytokine signaling and has
been recently focused on as a therapeutic target in treatment for cancer.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect with the enforced SOCS-1
expression by adenoviral vector (AdSOCS-1).METHODS: We evaluated the
therapeutic effect of SOCS-1 in 6 GC cell lines with proliferation assay.
Moreover, we examined the mechanism of antitumor effect of SOCS-1
focusing on the cell signalling and cell cycle in vitro. In vivo study,
we evaluated the therapeutic effect in mice model. MKN45-Luc cell line
was intraperitoneally injected into ICR nu/nu mice. And, we evaluated the
peritoneal dissemination by the in vivo imaging system using Xenogen IVIS
Imaging System. We treated these mice using the intraperitoneal injection
of AdSOCS-1, twice a week for 4weeks. We evaluated the peritoneum
dissemination by the photon intensity with time course repeatedly.
Finally, we examined these tumor specimen pathologically and the overall
survival (N=22).RESULTS: In 3 GC cell lines among 6 GC cell lines,
AdSOCS-1 suppressed the proliferation. SOCS-1 showed an
anti-proliferative potential in the GC cell proliferation via the
inhibition of JAK/STAT and p38 MAPK signaling pathways and also induced
apoptosis in vitro. Additionally, SOCS-1 is proven to influence the cell
cycle in G2/M phase activating the Chk2 in a JAK/STAT independent manner.
In Xenograft peritoneal dissemination model, the total count of photon
after therapy in AdSOCS-1 group was significantly lower than that in
control group. By TUNEL immunohistochemical analysis, tumor specimen in
AdSOCS-1 group included more apoptosis area comparing with that in the
control group. To assess whether overexpression of SOCS-1 also reduced
proliferation of MKN-45 cells in vivo, Ki-67 expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry. AdSOCS-1 group showed decreased Ki-67 positive
cells compared to control group. We compared the overall survival of the
peritoneal dissemination mice in two groups. AdSOCS-1 group showed better
outcome than control group significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Our results
indicated that SOCS-1 inhibited the progression of gastric cancer in
Xenograft peritoneal dissemination model. SOCS-1 can be a novel
therapeutic application for peritoneal metastasis in gastric cancer.

