Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel compounds to target dormant
micrometastatic cells


In spite of decades of research and billions of dollars, cancer-specific
death rates have changed little, mainly because 90% of cancer patients
who die succumb to metastatic disease. Our hypothesis is that the most
vulnerable target for cancer therapy is the micrometastatic cell that
leaves the primary tumor early in the disease history, lies dormant or
suppressed by the normal extracellular matrix (ECM) and then emerges even
decades later. We here describe a novel approach to identifying compounds
that target micrometastatic cells suppressed by normal ECM. We first
developed an in vitro 96-well format screen based on an earlier
observation in our lab that the normal ECM suppresses the malignant
phenotype. Using paired wells, one of which contains a normal ECM gel
(small intestine submucosa, SISgel) and the other is just bare plastic,
known cancer therapeutics show lower activity (more resistance) in cells
grown on SISgel than on plastic. Our endpoint was the opposite pattern,
namely more resistant on plastic. We screened 3,000 compounds in an NCI
diversity set and identified 3 with the requisite activity. All had low
toxicity in mice (In spite of decades of research and billions of
dollars, cancer-specific death rates have changed little, mainly because
90% of cancer patients who die succumb to metastatic disease. Our
hypothesis is that the most vulnerable target for cancer therapy is the
micrometastatic cell that leaves the primary tumor early in the disease
history, lies dormant or suppressed by the normal extracellular matrix
(ECM) and then emerges even decades later. We here describe a novel
approach to identifying compounds that target micrometastatic cells
suppressed by normal ECM. We first developed an in vitro 96-well format
screen based on an earlier observation in our lab that the normal ECM
suppresses the malignant phenotype. Using paired wells, one of which
contains a normal ECM gel (small intestine submucosa, SISgel) and the
other is just bare plastic, known cancer therapeutics show lower activity
(more resistance) in cells grown on SISgel than on plastic. Our endpoint
was the opposite pattern, namely more resistant on plastic. We screened
3,000 compounds in an NCI diversity set and identified 3 with the
requisite activity. All had low toxicity in mice (<45 mg/kg). EC50 values
were in the range of 3-30 M, depending on the cell line. Screening of an
additional 10K compounds identified 2 additional compounds, but they were
too toxic to mice to be useful. We evaluated the activities of these
compounds in vivo using a novel flank xenograft method we developed in
which GFP-labeled cancer cells are co-injected with SISgel into the
flank. The SISgel reprograms the cells and substantially normalizes them,
even after the SISgel is resorbed such that a flat, glowing green spot
marks the suppressed cells. Histopathology confirmed a substantial
normalization. Cancer cells co-injected with Matrigel show rapid tumor
growth. The lead compounds significantly eliminated the suppressed cells,
whereas conventional chemotherapeutics were ineffective. Using a 4T1
triple negative breast cancer model modified for physiological metastatic
progression; surprisingly, 2 of the 3 lead compounds given
intraperitoneally or in osmotic pumps decreased primary tumor growth more
effectively than did docetaxel and resulted in small decreases in small
lung micrometastases. However, as predicted, the main effect was to
significantly (PIn spite of decades of research and billions of dollars,
cancer-specific death rates have changed little, mainly because 90% of
cancer patients who die succumb to metastatic disease. Our hypothesis is
that the most vulnerable target for cancer therapy is the micrometastatic
cell that leaves the primary tumor early in the disease history, lies
dormant or suppressed by the normal extracellular matrix (ECM) and then
emerges even decades later. We here describe a novel approach to
identifying compounds that target micrometastatic cells suppressed by
normal ECM. We first developed an in vitro 96-well format screen based on
an earlier observation in our lab that the normal ECM suppresses the
malignant phenotype. Using paired wells, one of which contains a normal
ECM gel (small intestine submucosa, SISgel) and the other is just bare
plastic, known cancer therapeutics show lower activity (more resistance)
in cells grown on SISgel than on plastic. Our endpoint was the opposite
pattern, namely more resistant on plastic. We screened 3,000 compounds in
an NCI diversity set and identified 3 with the requisite activity. All
had low toxicity in mice (<45 mg/kg). EC50 values were in the range of
3-30 M, depending on the cell line. Screening of an additional 10K
compounds identified 2 additional compounds, but they were too toxic to
mice to be useful. We evaluated the activities of these compounds in vivo
using a novel flank xenograft method we developed in which GFP-labeled
cancer cells are co-injected with SISgel into the flank. The SISgel
reprograms the cells and substantially normalizes them, even after the
SISgel is resorbed such that a flat, glowing green spot marks the
suppressed cells. Histopathology confirmed a substantial normalization.
Cancer cells co-injected with Matrigel show rapid tumor growth. The lead
compounds significantly eliminated the suppressed cells, whereas
conventional chemotherapeutics were ineffective. Using a 4T1 triple
negative breast cancer model modified for physiological metastatic
progression; surprisingly, 2 of the 3 lead compounds given
intraperitoneally or in osmotic pumps decreased primary tumor growth more
effectively than did docetaxel and resulted in small decreases in small
lung micrometastases. However, as predicted, the main effect was to
significantly (P<0.01, one-way ANOVA/Tukey post test) reduce the
formation of lung macrometastases almost to zero. Given this result, we
tested the activity of these compounds against ALDH+ CD44v3+ stem cells
(SC) isolated from the parental line and found that one of the compounds
specifically targeted the SC (EC50 = 50 M vs 630 M for doxorubicin). The
SC also retained their stemness on SISgel. Mechanistic studies showed a
weak, late apoptotic response but depending on the compound, blocking
either at G1/S or G2/M in the cell cycle. In summary we describe a novel,
first in class set of compounds that target micrometastatic cells and
prevent their differentiation into cancer cells that form tumors.

