Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 monoclonal antibody inhibits tumor growth and modulates
angiogenesis


AVEO Oncology has developed a series of inducible mouse models of cancer,
which through the preservation of critical tumor/stromal interactions,
facilitate identification of cell-surface and secreted proteins that
represent viable targets for therapeutic antibodies and other biologics.
Functional genetic screens performed in vivo in these models identified
the Notch pathway as a critical regulator of tumor maintenance. This
finding was consistent with emerging evidence that activation of Notch
signaling via receptor point mutation, receptor amplification, and
elevated receptor and ligand expression, plays a key role in various
human cancers. Moreover, the Notch pathway controls diverse aspects of
tumorigenesis and tumor maintenance, regulating tumor autonomous
processes and interactions with the microenvironment, including
angiogenesis. To further understand the role of the Notch pathway in
tumor maintenance, and to assess the therapeutic potential of targeting
the Notch pathway in cancer, we have generated monoclonal antibodies that
inhibit the Notch1 receptor. Characterization of monoclonal antibodies
targeting Notch1 through cell-based and biochemical studies demonstrated
that the Notch1 monoclonal antibody bound with high affinity and high
specificity to the Notch1 receptor, prevented ligand-mediated activation
of the target receptor, and specifically repressed Notch-dependent
signaling with high potency. Significantly, specific inhibition by the
Notch1 monoclonal antibody did not result in the dose-limiting gut
toxicity observed with Notch1 mAb resulted in tumor inhibition that was
accompanied by increased vascular density, inhibition of Notch target
gene expression, and increased expression of angiogenesis-related genes,
consistent with expected changes resulting from Notch1/Dll4 pathway
inhibition. In addition, several tumor models treated in combination with
Notch1 mAb and an investigational VEGF pathway inhibitor, tivozanib,
demonstrated increased tumor inhibition compared to either agent alone.
Interestingly, combination treatment resulted in decreased vascular
density and downregulated expression of angiogenesis genes, similar to
treatment with VEGF inhibitor alone. Collectively, our work suggests that
combination therapy of Notch1 antibodies with VEGF inhibitors should be
evaluated as a potential viable therapeutic option for VEGF-resistant
tumors.

