Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diminishing Mcl-1 protein leads to apoptosis of acute myeloid
leukemia cells responding to all trans retinoic acid differentiation


All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is successfully used for the treatment of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) through inducing terminal
differentiation and death receptor-mediated apoptosis. However, ATRA has
limited clinic efficacy in non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients.
To extend ATRA therapy to AML (non-APL), cell death and differentiation
induction were tested and compared in a panel of AML cell lines after
treatment with ATRA for 2, 4 and 6 days based on the staining of CD11b
and annexin V, respectively. ATRA treatment in APL NB4 cells induces
differentiation but not apoptosis at 2 days. ATRA differentiation peaks
at 4 days and apoptosis becomes measurable at 4 days and peaks at 6 days.
Western blot analysis revealed that both TRAIL and DR5 were induced by
ATRA at 4 days, supporting that a death-receptor-mediated apoptosis
program is initiated by ATRA. The mitochondrial apoptotic program was
determined by measuring the levels of Bcl-2, Mcl-1 and the cleaved
caspase-9. Although Bcl-2 protein was depleted, Mcl-1 protein was
significantly increased after treatment with ATRA at 2 days. As the
treatment continued to 4 and 6 days, the Mcl-1 protein levels declined
and cleaved caspase 9 was detected. Similar phenomena were observed in
non-APL HL-60 cells responding to ATRA-induced differentiation, but not
in ATRA differentiation resistant NB4 and HL-60 subclones. Silencing of
Mcl-1 with siRNA sensitized ATRA-induced apoptosis with decreased
differentiation in NB4 cells treated with ATRA for 2 days. HL-60 cells
with overexpression of Mcl-1 increased ATRA-induced differentiation with
diminished apoptosis after treatment with ATRA for 6 days. Mechanistic
studies of Mcl-1 induction by ATRA revealed that both Akt/mTOR and
MEK/ERK signaling were activated associated with increased
phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3(GSK3) and ribosomal S6
protein. Since inactivation of GSK3 by phosphorylation stabilizes Mcl-1
protein and S6 phosphorylation increases Mcl-1 protein translation, ATRA
increases Mcl-1 levels through increasing translation and stability. Akt
inhibitor Ly294002 and MEK inhibitor U0126, but not mTOR inhibitor
rapamycin, blocked Mcl-1 induction and converted ATRA into an apoptosis
inducer in HL-60 cells. More intriguingly sorafenib, a multi-kinase
inhibitor, antagonized ATRA induction of Mcl-1, p-GSK3 and p-S6, but not
Bcl-2 reduction, and synergistically induced apoptosis with ATRA in a
panel of non-APL cell lines and primary AML cells. Our data suggest that
Mcl-1 protein levels contribute to balance between cell death and
differentiation of AML cells treated with ATRA and that ATRA therapy
could be extended to non-APL cells by augmented cell death induction by
diminishing Mcl-1 protein.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

