Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing to identify permissive mutations representing
acquired vulnerabilities in lung cancer


When a lung epithelial cell acquires a driver mutation (e.g. in KRAS) it
often needs to acquire additional permissive genetic alterations to
enable the cell to tolerate the oncogenic change. These permissive'
alterations represent an acquired vulnerability' and consequently a novel
therapeutic target in lung cancers driven by known, but currently
un-targetable, driver mutations. Immortalized Human Bronchial Epithelial
Cells (HBECs) represent a cell appropriate in vitro model to study the
origin and pathogenesis of lung cancer following introduction of defined
oncogenic changes. We have previously transformed HBECs to full
malignancy by introducing five genetic manipulations (to CDK4, TERT,
TP53, KRAS, MYC, BCL2, PTEN and/or STK11). While malignant transformation
will be largely driven by the exogenous oncogenotype -i.e. the introduced
oncogenic alterations- we hypothesize the cells also must undergo
additional somatic permissive' changes to bypass anti-tumor mechanisms.
While lung cancers are often highly mutated (mainly due to carcinogens in
cigarette smoke), manipulated HBECs should exhibit fewer somatic
mutations, providing greater power to identify important somatically
acquired mutations that facilitate tumorigenic progression of lung
epithelial cells.We have sequenced the exomes of a series of 22
genetically manipulated HBECs derived from two individuals and
representing 15 unique oncogenotypes (combinations of 3-5 introduced
manipulations). Paired-end sequencing was performed with an Illumina
HiSeq 2000 using a VCRome 2.1 liquid capture design exome chip. The
median fold coverage was 114X, resulting in at least 90% of targeted
bases are covered at >20-fold. Somatic mutations were called by comparing
manipulated HBECs to their immortalized parental cell line.Manipulated
HBECs had a median somatic mutation rate of 0.92 mutations/Mb, 7-9-fold
lower than observed in lung cancers and tumor cell lines. The median
mutation rate increased with the number of introduced manipulations
(HBECs with three, four and five manipulations had 0.47, 0.97 and 0.92
mutations/Mb, respectively). Non-synonymous somatic mutations were
identified in 470 genes. Thirty-nine genes were mutated in 3 HBECs
(recurrent mutations) and of these, 35 genes (none currently regarded as
driver oncogenes and 5 potentially druggable' [DGIdb]) were also mutated
in primary lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinomas (TCGA
data).We found the introduction of defined oncogenic alterations in HBECs
is accompanied by the acquisition of somatic mutations. Leveraging
against public somatic mutation data for lung tumors has allowed us to
prioritize mutations for follow up to better identify potential acquired
vulnerabilities in lung cancer cells and therefore, novel therapeutic
targets.

