Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of cyclin G2 expression hinders the cell cycle arrest
response of MCF-7 cells to estrogen receptor signaling-antagonists and
treatment with the antidiabetic metformin


Ligand activated estrogen receptors (ER) drive growth of nearly
two-thirds of breast cancers (BC). Acquired BC tumor resistance to
endocrine-based therapeutics that inhibit ER signaling poses a
significant challenge for long-term abatement of ER-positive BCs.
Signaling crosstalk between activated ER and peptide growth factor
receptor pathways (e.g. HER2 and IGF-1R) is one adaptive mechanism
promoting ER-positive BC tumor resistance to drugs inhibiting estrogen
(E2) signaling. Definition of the cell cycle control proteins that modify
tumor cell resistance to the ER-antagonists tamoxifen and fulvestrant
could improve future therapeutic approaches for control of BC. Cyclin G2
(CycG2) is an unconventional cyclin upregulated during cell cycle arrest
responses to a variety of cellular stresses and growth inhibitory
conditions. Transcription of the gene encoding CycG2, CCNG2, is directly
repressed by E2-bound ER complexes in BC cell lines. Our previous studies
showed that blockade of HER2, PI3K and mTOR signaling upregulates CycG2
expression in HER2 overexpressing BC cells, and that ectopic CycG2
expression induces cell cycle arrest in BC cell lines. Here we show that
pharmacological blockade of ER-signaling in the E2-dependent BC cell
lines MCF-7 and T-47D enhances the expression and nuclear localization of
CycG2. shRNA-mediated knockdown of CycG2 in E2-deprived and
fulvestrant-treated MCF-7 cells dampened the cell cycle arrest response
to these treatments. Our evidence suggests that loss of CycG2 increases
phospho-activation of MEK1 and inhibitory phosphorylation of RB.
Interestingly our work also indicates that CycG2 can form complexes with
CDK10, an orphan CDK linked to inhibition of tamoxifen resistance and
modulation of RAF/MEK/MAPK signaling. Recently we reported that signaling
through insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptors (IGF-1R)
strongly represses CycG2 expression. Current studies suggest that the
anti-diabetic drug metformin (MTFN) inhibits BC cell growth by promoting
AMPK-mediated suppression of growth factor receptor activation of mTOR.
Patients taking MTFN exhibit a dose-dependent reduction in cancer risk
and clinical trials indicate that BC therapies including MTFN improve
response rates. We found that MTFN treatment stimulates CycG2 expression
and potentiates both fulvestrant-mediated upregulation of CycG2
expression and growth-inhibition of MCF-7 cells. Moreover knockdown of
CycG2 expression blunts the enhanced anti-proliferative effect of MTFN on
fulvestrant treated cells. Importantly, analysis of BC tumor cDNA
microarray databases indicates that CCNG2 transcripts are reduced in
aggressive, poor-prognosis BCs and that higher levels of CCNG2 expression
in the patient samples correlated with longer periods of relapse free
survival.

