Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin and aspirin analogs on esophageal cancer


BackgroundEsophageal cancer is the eighth most common cancer seen
worldwide and is the sixth most common cause of death from cancer. The UK
alone has over 8,000 new cases of esophageal cancer every year.
Epidemiological studies have shown that low-dose daily intake of aspirin
can decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer. However, its use as an
anti-cancer drug has been restrained because of its side effects exerted
through inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes. In our study, we have
investigated the effects of a number of novel aspirin analogs on
esophageal cancer cell lines.MethodsThe effects of aspirin and its
analogs on the viability of esophageal cancer cell lines were tested
using the MTT assay. ApoSense and flow cytometric analysis were performed
to examine whether aspirin analog-mediated tumor cell death is due to
apoptosis or necrosis. Colorimetric assays measuring peroxidase component
of cyclooxygenases were employed to screen aspirin analogs for COX
inhibition.ResultsOur data suggests that the anti-proliferative property
of certain aspirin analogs is greater than that of aspirin itself.
Benzoylsalicylates and fumaroyl diaspirin were more effective than
aspirin against the oe21 squamous cell carcinoma cells and oe33
esophageal adenocarcinoma cells. Flo-1 esophageal adenocarcinoma cells
showed resistance to aspirin and most of the aspirin analogs other than
the benzoylsalicylates. Both diaspirin and benzoylsalicylates inhibited
metabolic activity in all these esophageal cells. However, apoptosis was
induced in only a small proportion. We have also shown that these aspirin
analogs do not appear to inhibit COX enzymes.ConclusionWe have
synthesized and characterized a number of novel aspirin analogs that are
more effective against esophageal cancer cell lines than aspirin. These
compounds do not exert their anti-proliferative effect through induction
of apoptosis. Moreover, these analogs inability to inhibit COX enzymes
suggests that they may cause fewer or no side effects compared to aspirin.

