Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced targeting delivery to tumor cells using mucoadhesive
chitosan and chlorotoxin


Specific drug delivery to tumor cells without affecting normal cells
remains a major challenge in cancer treatment. We present a localized
drug delivery system with enhanced targeting ability consisting of
non-ionic surfactant vesicles (niosomes) with chlorotoxin (CTX) embedded
in a chitosan hydrogel. This system represents a novel approach in cancer
therapy through the controlled and targeted delivery of drugs to tumor
cells. We have found the specific accumulation of chitosan on the surface
of ovarian epithelial carcinoma cells known to have high expression of
mucin antigen MUC1, but not on the normal ovarian epithelial cells. This
finding demonstrates the capability of chitosan to target tumor cells
expressing MUC1. Similarly, the incorporation of CTX (a 36-amino acid
peptide capable of binding preferentially to tumor cells of
neuroectodermal origin but not to normal cells) along with niosomes in
the chitosan hydrogel has been used as the second targeting strategy to
further improve the specific delivery of drugs to tumor cells such as
glioma.To investigate the possible molecular interaction between the
chitosan hydrogel and various cell lines, Attenuated Total
Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infra-Red (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy has been
used. The expression level of MUC1 in different cell lines was
quantitatively evaluated using Cell based Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent
Assay (Cell-ELISA) to better understand the mechanism involved in
interactions between chitosan and specific tumor cells. In vitro release
studies were performed to examine the effect of CTX on the release rates.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) is being used for morphology
assessments of CTX and nisomes as well as chitosan hydrogel embedded with
niosomes and CTX.Cell-ELISA data revealed high expression level of MUC1
in ovarian epithelial carcinoma cell line (OV2008) and a moderate
expression level in normal ovarian epithelial cell line (MCC3)
implicating higher affinity of chitosan for OV2008 than MCC3 cell lines.
This is consistent with ATR-FTIR results as well as the previously
observed higher chitosan accumulation on the surface of OV2008 compared
to MCC3, confirming the mucoadhesive property of chitosan and indicating
its specificity in targeting MUC1 overexpressing tumor cells. In vitro
release studies show that embedding CTX along with the niosomes does not
disturb the controlled release from the chitosan network. In fact,
attachment of CTX to the surface of niosomes shown by TEM imaging
improves the stability of niosomes resulting in extended release
rates.Based on these findings, we anticipate that the drug delivery
system described here would improve tumor cell uptake of drugs due to the
enhanced tumor targeting and its controlled, sustained and localized drug
delivery to cancer cells.

