Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor alpha drives proliferation of prostate cancer
through PI3K and MAPK signaling


Prostate cancer, a hormone-dependent disease of aging men, occurs as the
relative levels of estrogen compared to testosterone are increasing.
Indeed, high doses of estrogen, in combination with androgens, can
initiate prostate cancer. This effect is attributed to the activity of
the estrogen receptor (ER), but a paucity of suitable models means that
the precise role of ER in prostate cancer is still poorly understood.In
this study we observed increased ER expression in three different models
of prostate cancer, PTEN null mice, Hi-Myc mice, and high grade human
tumor specimens. Within the PTEN null prostate, there was a consistent
pattern of ER expression: low in benign glands, moderate in tumors within
the dorsal, lateral and ventral lobes, and high in tumors within the
anterior prostate. This pattern significantly correlated with the levels
of the proliferative marker Ki67. There was also a significant
correlation between ER and Ki67 within individual malignant glands in the
anterior prostate. Furthermore, we demonstrated that ER sustained the in
vitro proliferation of cells derived from a PTEN null tumor in 2D and 3D
assays. There was a significant decrease in proliferation in cells
treated with TPSF, a non-competitive ER antagonist, or with ER-specific
shRNA. Loss of ER caused a significant decrease in the levels of MYC and
other ER target genes. It also reduced the activity of both the PI3K and
MAPK pathways as measured by decreased levels of phosphorylated erk1/2,
S6 kinase and other downstream factors. This effect was reversed in
rescue experiments with expression constructs for both full length ER,
capable of genomic and non-genomic actions, and membrane-only ER, only
able to trigger rapid non-genomic signalling.Collectively, these results
demonstrate that ER levels increase in prostate cancer, which promotes
proliferation through classical genomic and rapid non-genomic signalling.

