Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLK1 regulates PAX3-FOXO1 stability and its inhibition mediates
regression of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft tumors


Oncogenic addiction provides an opportunity to develop new treatment
options, especially for childhood cancers. Pediatric tumors contain a
lower number of oncogenic mutations compared to most adult cancers,
suggesting stronger dependency on individual oncogenes, such as chimeric
transcription factors that have the ability to control multiple oncogenic
pathways. Taking advantage of this addiction, targeting of oncogenic
transcription factors becomes a new powerful strategy for therapy of
translocation positive pediatric tumors like alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma
(aRMS), which is characterized by a very dismal prognosis.As
transcription factors are considered to be difficult to target, we
developed an approach to screen for druggable upstream regulators like
kinases. In two parallel activity reporter assays, using a kinome siRNA
library and a small molecule library, we identified PLK1 to contribute to
the activity of PAX3-FOXO1, the oncogenic transcription factor specific
to aRMS. Mechanistically, we were able to demonstrate a direct
interaction of the two proteins by co-immunoprecipitation. PLK1 silencing
or inhibition increased degradation of PAX3-FOXO1, which suggests a
stabilization of PAX3-FOXO1 due to phosphorylation by PLK1. Candidate
phosphorylation sites were identified by in vitro kinase assays and mass
spectrometric analysis and site-specific mutagenesis is currently
utilized to validate the impact of these sites on fusion protein
turnover. To highlight PLK1 as therapeutic target in aRMS, in vivo
treatment studies using the PLK1 inhibitor BI 2536 resulted in complete
tumor regression in two aRMS xenograft mouse models. Finally, tissue
microarray analysis of human aRMS tumor biopsies showed PLK1 to be
overexpressed and predictive of overall survival.Hence, our preclinical
studies validate PLK1 as highly relevant drug target in alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma, similar to recent findings in other pediatric tumors.
Our data suggests that PLK1 inhibitors warrant further investigations to
evaluate the potential to be translated into a clinical setting.

