Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor- and tumor initiating cells are novel targets of
diallyl trisulfide in breast cancer cells


Epidemiological studies suggest a protective role for Allium vegetables,
such as garlic, against breast and other cancers. Diallyl trisulfide
(DATS) is a promising oil-soluble anticancer metabolite generated after
cutting or chewing of Allium vegetables. We have shown previously that
DATS inhibits viability of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231) and a cell line derived from spontaneously developed tumor of
a mouse mammary tumor virus-neu mouse by causing apoptosis induction. We
also found that a non-tumorigenic normal human mammary epithelial cell
line (MCF-10A) is resistant to cell death induction by DATS. Studies by
others have demonstrated in vivo efficacy of DATS against MCF-7
xenografts in nude mice. The present study builds upon these observations
and identifies novel targets of DATS in breast cancer cells. MCF-7 and
T47D cells exposed to DATS exhibited downregulation of estrogen receptor-
(ER-) protein, which peaked between 12 and 24 h post-treatment. Diallyl
sulfide and diallyl disulfide analogs were relatively less effective in
suppressing protein level of ER- compared with DATS. The 17-estradiol
(E2)-induced expression of pS2, an ER- target gene product, was also
decreased in the presence of DATS. Downregulation of ER- protein
expression resulting from DATS treatment was accompanied by a decrease in
nuclear level of ER-, suppression of ER- mRNA, and inhibition of
ERE2e1b-luciferase reporter activity. Moreover, apoptotic cell death
induced by DATS was partially but statistically significantly attenuated
in the presence of E2 in MCF-7 cells as well as by overexpression of ER-
in MDA-MB-231 cells. DATS treatment inhibited breast cancer stem cell
(bCSC) population as evidenced by flow cytometric analysis of
CD44high/CD24low/epithelial specific antigen positive population,
aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 activity, and mammosphere frequency in MCF-7 and
SUM159 cells. Inhibition of bCSC by treatment with DATS was associated
with downregulation of EZH2 and Kruppel-like factor 4 proteins in both
MCF-7 and SUM159 cells. In conclusion, the present study identifies ER-
and bCSC as novel targets of DATS in mammary cancer cells. This study was
supported by the grant RO1 CA113363-09 awarded by the National Cancer
Institute.

