Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sam68 sustains self-renewal and invasiveness of breast cancer
initiating cells


Background: Breast cancer is the leading worldwide cause of death among
women due to the high metastatic spread of this disease. As by
definition, Cancer Initiating Cells (CICs) are a fraction of primary
tumor cells harboring tumorigenic potential and successful outgrowth at
metastatic sites. Targeting molecular events affecting CICs
peculiarities, as self-renewal and an innate chemoresistance, could
improve the ineffectiveness of current therapies.Sam68, the major CD44
splicing regulator, is a multifunctional RNA-binding protein involved in
multiple steps of RNA metabolism and its expression is aberrant in breast
cancer. Herein, we highlight novel implications of Sam68 in the mammary
tumor onset and progression.Material and methods: Tissue microarrays
(TMA) were composed of n=155 histologically confirmed invasive breast
carcinoma (T1-T2, N0, M0) and Sam68 expression was quantified as percent
of immunoreactive tumor cells, a cut-off of 90% positive cells was
chosen. Breast CICs were obtained from mechanically and enzimatically
digestion of human breast tissues. Stable Sam68 knockdown was produced by
lentiviral transduction and puromicin selection. Invasion assay was
performed in 8m pore size transwell coated with GF-depleted matrigel 1:3
in serum free medium. 3x104 cells were plated and 10% FBS medium was used
as chemoattractant. Breast CICs (3 x 105) were suspended in 1:6 matrigel
and orthotopically injected in NOD/SCID mice.Results: Univariate analysis
of the TMA data showed that invasive breast carcinoma over-expressing
Sam68 ( 90% positive cells) were associated with a significantly higher
incidence of distant relapse (P = 0.011). Notably, in a cohort of
screened breast cancer patients, breast CICs expressed higher Sam68
protein levels than tumor bulk, highlighting that Sam68 expression was
likely restricted to cells with self-renewal activity. Stable knockdown
of Sam68 in breast CICs significantly curtailed proliferation rate and
was coupled with an increase in p27kip1 and reduction of Bcl-xL. Compared
to control cells, downregulation of Sam68 was correlated with an
attenuation of cell motility capability and Twist, Snail, CD44v6 and Met
levels. Moreover, Sam68 modulated the expression of an oncogenic
alternative splice variant of Met (Met-SM), probably through the ASF/SF2
splicing factor. In addition, depletion of Sam68 sensitized breast CICs
to standard chemotherapy. Finally, Sam68 silencing ablated breast cancer
xenograft formation in immunocompromised mice.Conclusions: Based on these
results, we deem that Sam68 may promote pro-invasive signals by inducing
and modulating the alternative splicing of oncogenic variants of several
genes, such as CD44 and Met. Thus, further investigations on signaling
pathways affecting CICs self-renewal and invasiveness could represent a
crucial key to improve selective cancer treatment.

