Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor occupancy and tumor penetration by antibodies, peptides,
and antibody fragments: Molecular simulation of imaging assessment


Background: Non-uniform tumor penetration by antibodies may contribute to
therapeutic failure. Competition experiments by radiolabeled antibody
imaging can guide selection of the antibody dose that fully blocks target
binding and thus corresponds to complete therapeutic coverage. However,
because antibodies penetrate tumors slowly and non-uniformly, such a
competition experiment may reflect only the most accessible sites. A
novel approach, termed enhanced competition, has been proposed in which
the radiolabeled moiety is smaller and more readily diffusible. In this
study, simulations were conducted in order to examine the enhanced
competition experiment.Materials and Methods: The Krogh cylinder
distributed model was implemented to simulate the distribution of
antibody, antibody fragment, affibody, or peptide in the tumor as a
function of time and distance from the capillary wall. Simulations
explored traditional and enhanced competition experiments, varying
parameters including the nature of the small construct, time between
administration of unlabeled and radiolabeled compounds, mass dose,
affinity, antigen density, and internalization rate. Results were plotted
as nanomolar concentration versus time and distance from the capillary
wall. In addition, total tumor %ID/g is presented as a function of time
and as a function of unlabeled antibody dose.Results: Simulation results
showed that small constructs access sites in tumors at distances far from
capillaries that are not readily accessible to intact antibodies. Under
conditions of high affinity (1-10 nM), high antigen density (150,000
sites/cell), and compound internalization (t1/2 = 13 h), a mass of > 40
g/kg of peptide or affibody construct required a higher dose of antibody
to displace the radioactive signal compared to traditional competition
with radiolabeled antibody. However, the difference in imaging signal
between sub-saturating and fully displacing antibody doses is expected to
be difficult to detect.Conclusions: The phenomenon predicted by the
enhanced competition paradigm using small constructs is validated by
modeling. Simulated imaging competition experiments indicate that
affinity and mass dose levels are critical factors in this approach. High
affinity small constructs and enhanced precision of imaging techniques
will be required to fully evaluate target occupancy and saturation in
vivo.

