Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LEDGF IBD domain represents therapeutic target for MLL leukemia
and HIV


Lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF) is a chromatin associated
protein implicated in cell survival, cancer, autoimmune diseases and HIV
pathogenesis. LEDGF is also involved in recurring chromosomal
translocations with nucleoporin NUP98 in acute leukemia, and the
LEDGF/p75 isoform is consistently upregulated in a subset of acute
myeloid leukemias (AML) resistant to chemotherapy. Moreover, it has been
established that LEDGF is an essential co-factor required for oncogenic
activity of MLL fusion proteins in leukemia. LEDGF interacts
simultaneously with MLL and menin and is necessary for up-regulation of
HOXA9 gene and for leukemogenic transformation by MLL fusion proteins in
vivo. Therefore, LEDGF represent a valuable molecular target for
therapeutic intervention as a novel targeted therapy for MLL leukemia
patients. Furthermore, targeting LEDGF may represent an attractive
alternative to inhibition of the menin-MLL interaction as it will allow
preserving the function of menin, a known tumor suppressor in endocrine
tissues.We determined the solution structure of MLL fragment bound to
LEDGF IBD domain and identified a novel hydrophobic motif within MLL,
which we called IBM2, that is required for high affinity interaction with
LEDGF. Point mutations within IBM2 abolished leukemogenic activity of
MLL-AF9, indicating that IBM2 represents a critical site for formation of
a high affinity menin-MLL-LEDGF complex. Furthermore, we found that short
peptide corresponding to IBM2 binds to IBD domain and disrupts the
interaction of LEDGF with the menin-MLL complex, providing a proof of
concept that the novel interface on IBD domain we identified represents a
druggable site for small molecule intervention.LEDGF plays also an
essential role in pathogenesis of HIV-1 virus and is required for
integration of viral cDNA. Targeting HIV integrase to disrupt the
interaction with LEDGF has been recognized as an attractive approach to
develop new anti-viral agents. Importantly, the new MLL binding site on
IBD domain we found overlaps with the binding site of HIV integrase.
Therefore, targeting the IBM2 site on IBD may represent a novel approach
to target the LEDGF-integrase interaction. In summary, our findings pave
the way towards development of new therapeutic agents with dual
applications for both MLL leukemias and HIV.

