Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemo-preventive effect of ER- agonist on DMBA induced breast
cancers


Introduction: ER-beta (ER-) regulates genes involved in cellular
proliferation and apoptosis, and is considered to be anti-proliferative
and tumor suppressive. ER- is frequently reduced or lost in breast
cancers (BrC). ER- can also transdominantly inhibit ER- transcription at
some genes, even in the absence of ligand. Thus, ER- selective agonists
such as diarylpropionitrile (DPN) may inhibit breast cancer cells, and
may also prevent tumor initiation or tumor growth of BrC through lowering
proliferation and higher apoptosis.Methods: A total of 49 Sprague-Dawley
rats (19 ovariectomized (OVX) and 30 non-OVX) were treated with DMBA
breast cancer carcinogen. Then the rats were separated into two groups.
In the first group, the rats received daily DPN injections (1000ug/kg BW)
starting immediately after DMBA administration, to observe tumor
prevention or initiation. In the second, only the rats developed tumor(s)
1cm received daily DPN, to observe reduction or increase of tumor sizes.
The rats were sacrificed to collect tumors and normal breast tissues,
which were tested for H&E, mRNA, and ER-, ER-, and Cyclin D1 expression
by immunohistochemistry. Cyclin D1 staining was evaluated to determine
the effect of DPN on tumor and normal breast ductal cell
proliferation.Results: In spite of DMBA administration, none of the OVX
rats developed breast tumors during the experiment. However, 70% of the
non-OVX rats developed BrC, with the majority of the tumors in the 7th
week after DMBA, with multiple tumors in the same animal. The rats that
developed tumors and subsequently received DPN showed slight retardation
of tumor growth in the first 2 weeks, but ultimately tumor growth was not
inhibited. On the other hand, rats received DPN immediately with DMBA
showed delayed tumor initiation at 11 weeks, and only 25% of the rats
developed one small tumor. ER- mRNA of tumor tissues in both experiments
was up-regulated and ER- was down-regulated, with an ER-:ER- ratio of
10-100:1. However, ER- protein was expressed in more than 60% of tumor
tissues. Cyclin D1 staining in normal breast tissues and tumor cells were
40% and 70-95% respectively, but tumor tissues from the rats that
received immediate DPN injections showed decreased Cyclin D1 staining
ranging from 10 to 50%.Conclusion: ER--selective agonist DPN, when
injected daily starting immediately after DMBA administration, can
inhibit tumor induction and may be chemo-preventive. However, when tumors
have already developed and reached 1cm, and ER is reduced or lost in
tumor cells, DPN does not have any effect on prevention or inhibition of
tumor growth. It appears that early loss or reduction of ER signaling may
in turn contributes to excessive cell proliferation and neoplastic
transformation. Our study also confirms that depletion of estrogen
through OVX inhibits tumor initiation. This is a preliminary data from
our ongoing studies with additional ER agonists to test a larger group of
rats.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

