Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular analysis of BRAF gene and PTEN gene expression in
metastatic colorectal cancer patients: Feasibility study


Introduction There are numerous causes triggering CRC. 25-80% of CRC
shown a deregulation in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) pathway.
Two signaling pathways downstream of the EGFR are dysregulated in CRC the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3K) pathway. Activating mutations in KRAS and BRAF (MAPK pathway) and
PIK3CA affect prognosis and/or response to anti-EGFR MoAb. PTEN is a
downstream effector of EGFR pathway and is involved in PI3K pathway. Loss
of PTEN protein expression can occur through epigenetic silencing and
mutation or allelic loss. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the most
effective way to assay for loss of PTEN expression. IHC lack of
reproducibility and this has lead to discordant results regarding the
concordant in paired CRC metastases and primary tumors.The aim of the
work was to asses the feasibility of PTEN gene expression analysis from
FFPE tissue in CRC samples.Materials and methods We selected a series of
33 patients, already tested for KRAS mutational status and resulted
wild-type. At the time of the study mutational status of NRAS gene has
not a role as predictive marker, so was not performed. A retrospective
analysis on CRC FFPE tissue was performed. As control samples we have
selected specimen of colorectal surgery not tumor-associated
(diverticulitis). On these samples BRAF mutational analysis and PTEN gene
expression was performed. For BRAF analysis, DNA was extracted by means
of QIAamp DNA FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, USA). BRAF mutational status was
assed through direct automated sequencing (3100 Genetic Analyzer, Applied
Biosystems) and TaqMan mutation detection assay (ABI PRIM 7900HT, Applied
Biosystems). For PTEN gene expression, total RNA was obtained through the
miRNeasy FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, USA), according to manufacturer
instructions, and reverse transcribed. PTEN expression was assessed by
means of TaqMan probes.Results According to BRAF mutational status we
have found 10/33 (30%) mutated samples. PTEN expression levels were
evaluated by the comparison of tumor samples vs diverticula samples, the
data obtained were then integrated with those from BRAF mutational
analysis. Interestingly we found that all the BRAF mutated samples
present also a down-regulation of PTEN. Statistical analyses were
conducted through the X2 test with the Yatesha correction (p=0.00023).
The p-value was also calculated Exact Fisher Test (p= 0.00021) to confirm
the results.Conclusion The determination of PTEN gene expression level is
feasible with real-time PCR using TaqMan probe technology. BRAF analysis
might be used as prognostic and/or predictive marker in CRC patients
treatment. The identification of a validated method for PTEN analysis
would establish it as a molecular marker meriting further investigation
in large numbers of available primary tumors from patients with CRC.
Further analyses are requested to confirm these data.

