Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymoquinone downregulates n-cadherin, twist and snail expression
and inhibits migration and invasion in cancer cells


Background: Metastasis is the major characteristic of malignant
carcinomas, which has been found to be linked with epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions (EMT). Regulation of EMT process can provide a
significant beneficiary effect to control metastasis, as well as to treat
cancers. In this study we have investigated the effects of natural
product Thymoquinone in metastatic cancer cell lines to evaluate their
role in metastatic characteristics linked to EMT process.Methods: We have
treated HeLa and MDA-MB-435 human cancer cell lines with Thymoquinone,
and analyzed the cell proliferation, migration and invasion, which are
the major metastatic characteristics, by using the real-time cell
analyzer. The real-time PCR and Western blot analysis was employed for
the determination of the cellular expression of major EMT-associated
proteins N-cadherin and E-cadherin; their transcription factors Twist,
Snail, Slug and Zeb; and another important metastatic protein
Vimentin.Results: Thymoquinone was found to inhibit the migratory and
invasive characteristics in both cancer cell lines dose dependently, and
effective in a low dose eventually (1-5 M). Its cytotoxicity has also
been confirmed by MTT assay for cell viability. Genetic expression
analysis showed that Thymoquinone significantly down-regulates the mRNA
expression of cell adhesion protein N-cadherin in HeLa cell. Thymoquinone
also down-regulates the transcription factor Twist, which is being
considered as an oncoprotein. Thymoquinone has mild to moderate effect on
the expression pattern of other metastatic proteins in HeLa cells. In
MDA-MB-435, Thymoquinone treatment downregulates Twist, Snail, Vimentin
and N-cadherin. However, N-cadherin expression was found in extremely low
in both untreated and treated MDA-MB-435.Conclusions: We report that the
prospective anticancer molecule Thymoquinone down-regulates N-cadherin
and its transcription factors like Twist and Snail, which might have a
significant influence on the effects of Thymoquinone in controlling cell
migration and invasion. Further research is necessary for the
investigation of this compound in specific cancer types with mechanisms
in detail.Fund support: This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81172049, 30371493), Science and
Technology Innovation Team of Colleges and Universities of Sichuan
Province (13TD0032).

