Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of DLL4 in cancer immune-surveillance and its
pathogenicity in p53-dysregulated environment


Recent advances in cancer studies reveal that tumorigenesis results from
an accumulation of mutational and epigenetic changes that alter normal
cell growth and survival pathways. Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a
clinically and genetically heterogeneous inherited cancer syndrome
characterized by mutation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene (locus
17p13.1). The p53 transcription factor responds to diverse cellular
stresses by regulating target genes that induce apoptosis, cell cycle
arrest, DNA repair, and senescence. LFS can provide powerful insights
into our understanding of somatic mutations present in sporadic cancers
as well as the de-regulation of cell signaling pathways. We will be using
LFS cells and mice as models to build on our previous discovery that
showed a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11q23 and
15q15 in LFS patients' skin fibroblast cells. In our present study,
analysis of the breakpoint region reveals that in LFS, breast cancer
(MCF7) and neuroblastoma (IMR32) cell lines, there is a dramatically
increased activation in the expression of cancer susceptibility candidate
5 gene (CASC5), a part of kinetochore-microtubule attachments associated
with cell proliferation. Furthermore, there was an abrogation in the
expression of a critical protein, Delta-like ligand-4 (DLL4), in LFS
normal skin fibroblasts of TP53 mutation carriers and non-carriers. There
was also a down-regulation of DLL4 in unrelated breast cancer and
neuroblastoma cell lines by DNA hypermethylation. DLL4 is a ligand for
Notch family of receptors with crucial functions in normal development,
immune surveillance and tissue homeostasis. TP53 and CTCF (a
transcription factor involved in chromatin architecture) have a direct
activator effect at the DLL4 promoter. Notch/DLL4 plays a key role in the
generation of hematopoietic stem cells during embryonic development and
regulates the T cell lineage and subsequent stages of thymopoiesis. WNT2
is also down-regulated in LFS cell lines and abolished in MCF7. Whereas
Notch signaling controls cell fate specification in a variety of cell
contexts during embryonic and postnatal development, Wnt signaling plays
a critical role in cell differentiation and proliferation. Both Notch and
Wnt pathways are activated by oncogenic mutations and dysregulated in
cancer. The long-term objective of this research is to develop a critical
understanding of the mechanisms by which p53 regulates cancer
immune-surveillance through cross-talk with the tumor microenvironment so
that therapeutic agents can be developed to curtail cancer progression.

