Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-angiogenic compound F16 that inhibits xenograft tumor
growth


Recruitment of new blood vessels, commonly referred as tumor
angiogenesis, during cancer progression provides an important route by
which tumor cells can enter the circulation and cause distant metastasis.
Tumor cells that are overexpressing vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) can shift the balance towards pro-angiogenic mechanisms to favor
aggressive growth and enhanced metastatic potential. In this process
binding of VEGF to its receptor is very critical step for triggering
kinase activation and trans-phosphorylation that can eventually lead to
the activation of a complex signal cascade and completion of
angiogenesis. Therefore, interference with the function of the VEGFR has
become a promising strategy to inhibit tumor angiogenesis. Through the
molecular modeling approach a novel isoindol-amide compound, code named
F16, was identified as a potent antagonist for VEGFR. The anti-angiogenic
potential of F16 was confirmed through the in vitro angiogenesis assay
using HUVEC cells that were grown on ECMatrixTM gel with different
concentrations (0 to 10 M) of F16. Binding assay with fluorokine
conjugated VEGF in HUVEC cells proved a strong competitive binding
ability for F16 (0.001 to 1.0 M) with VEGFR in a dose dependent manner.
In the whole cell binding assay nearly 95% inhibition of fluorokine
conjugated VEGF was observed at 1.0 M concentration of F16. Also, the
western blot analysis showed a strong inhibition of VEGF induced
phosphorylation of VEGFR2 by F16 at the same (1.0 M) concentration in
HUVEC cells. Furthermore, In vivo experiments were conducted to confirm
the extent of F16 induced tumor growth inhibition in athymic nude mice
that were implanted with GI-101A breast tumor xenograft. In these
experiments the tumor bearing mice were designated to experimental groups
(N = 6/group), namely: Control; F16 (100 mg/kg body weight); Taxol (10
mg/kg body weight); and F16 (100 mg/kg body weight) + Taxol (10 mg/kg
body weight). All treatments were given intraperitonealy once in two days
for a period of 21 days. Tumor growth was assessed every week using the
caliper measurement. In the xenograft mice that were treated with F16 or
Taxol alone nearly 65% and 71.5% inhibition of tumor growth was observed,
respectively, while combination (F16 + Taxol) treatment showed more than
85.2% inhibition when compared to the untreated controls. Results from
our study confirm that F16 inhibits VEGF binding and consequently VEGFR2
phosphorylation to prevent endothelial cell proliferation, migration and
sprouting of new capillaries. Our findings so far have fully validated
F16 as a promising anti-angiogenic agent. (The Royal Dames of Cancer
Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is gratefully acknowledged for
their generous financial support).

