Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An antibody-independent, complementary SRM strategy for
ultrasensitive and multiplexed quantification of cancer biomarker
candidates


Stable-isotope dilution coupled to targeted mass spectrometry (MS),
applying selected reaction monitoring (SRM), provides good selectivity,
reproducibility, sensitivity, and multiplexing capability rendering it
highly suitable for robust, high-throughput and cost-effective
verification of cancer biomarker candidates. The ability of SRM-MS to
detect and quantify low abundance proteins present in blood plasma/serum
at low ng/mL or even lower levels, however, relies on the front-end
enrichment through specific affinity reagents (e.g., antibodies). To
address this limitation, we have recently developed two
antibody-independent, targeted quantification capabilities that enable
protein quantification at low or sub ng/mL levels in plasma/serum. The
first new capability, PRISM (high-pressure high-resolution separations
with intelligent selection and multiplexing)-SRM, uses high resolution
basic pH reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatographic (LC) separation
with on-line SRM monitoring for the enrichment of target peptides and
intelligent selection of target fractions for subsequent LC-SRM analysis
that uses very short LC gradient to achieve better sensitivity and
improved sample throughput. Application of PRISM-SRM enables highly
sensitivity detection of several prostate cancer relevant proteins, e.g.,
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) proteins
at 100 pg/mL level in serum, and distinct TMPRSS2-ERG fusion protein
isoforms in cell line and tumor tissue samples. The front-end sample
prefractionation often requires a relatively large amount of starting
material (e.g., 25 ug in PRISM-SRM analysis) and increased instrument
analysis time, and undesired sample losses are often encountered during
multistep sample preparation. These can be effectively overcome by the
second new capability, long-gradient separations coupled with SRM
(LG-SRM). Our results show that LG-SRM enables reliable quantification of
plasma proteins at low ng/mL levels in nondepleted human plasma/serum.
Comparing to fractionation-based SRM methods, LG-SRM offers better sample
throughput, requires minute amounts of starting materials (e.g., 4 g),
and provides at least 3-fold greater multiplexing capacity than
conventional LC-SRM due to 3-fold increase in average peak widths. The
complementary SRM strategy encompasses both PRISM-SRM and LG-SRM and is
therefore highly attractive for the sensitive and multiplexed
quantification of cancer biomarker candidates - PRISM-SRM offers 10X
higher sensitivity, but LG-SRM requires much less sample and can be
readily implemented. It is anticipated that these affinity reagent-free,
highly sensitive proteomics measurements made possible by this
complementary SRM strategy will bring new biological insights and
perspectives to prostate cancer research as well as other cancers.

