Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
following high-dose erlotinib treatment in brain cancer patients


Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who develop
leptomeningeal metastases show significant clinical improvement following
high-dose gefitinib therapy. Based on this data, we aimed to explore the
effect of high-dose erlotinib on clinical response and CNS penetration in
primary or metastatic CNS cancer.We selected patients who had received
prior therapy for either primary glioma or for NSCLC with metastases to
the brain and treated them with an alternate dosing regimen of erlotinib.
Blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected at various
time points to assess levels of erlotinib. We found that CSF
concentrations of erlotinib were generally 2% that of plasma
concentrations. Among the five patients examined, CSF concentrations of
erlotinib reached up to 131 nM when high doses were administered at 600
to 1200 mg every four to six days. Additionally, drug clearance was
decreased with an increased dosing regimen in one of the patients. In one
patient, the area under the curve (AUC) estimations showed a 24% increase
in the CSF versus only a 2% increase in the plasma following an increase
from 150 mg to 600 mg of erlotinib. Moreover, longitudinal CSF samples
were evaluated for expression and activation of EGFR as well as various
other receptor tyrosine kinases, such as ErbB2, ErbB3, cMET and IGF1R,
using the highly sensitive multiplexed immunoassay CEER platform. The
latter provides insight into the molecular makeup of the CNS cancer
throughout the therapeutic regimen.Our clinical data on patients
receiving erlotinib therapy for primary and metastatic CNS disease
suggests that increased dosing of erlotinib, administered as a pulse dose
every four to six days leads to increased CSF drug concentrations. In
spite of the variations seen among different patients, we conclude that
higher erlotinib dosing regimens can provide enhanced CNS penetration
that may prove to be more effective in primary and metastatic CNS cancers
especially when coupled with real-time molecular monitoring of the
disease to help guide the clinician during the course of treatment.

