Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High and moderate penetrance germline mutations in a number of
genes are responsible for a small proportion of familial breast cancer
risk in BRCAx families


BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA) testing is uninformative in approximately 80% of
families with clinical features of inherited susceptibility to breast
cancer. Early identification of the individuals at risk in BRCAx families
may lead to enhanced screening and prevention strategies, and potentially
improved overall survival as has been seen for carriers of BRCA1/2
mutations. A proportion of these families are likely explained by
mutations in other high penetrance and moderate penetrance breast cancer
susceptibility genes. Although multi-gene panels are now commercially
available for clinical testing, only limited information is available on
the spectrum of mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes in
specific subgroups of high-risk breast cancer patients. We performed
whole exome sequencing in 278 BRCA1/2 negative individuals with high-risk
familial breast cancer, defined as a proband and at least two first or
second degree relatives with breast cancer. Samples included 232
individuals from 97 families and 49 unrelated individuals, for a total of
146 independent cases. Data were analyzed for identification of all
variants in 18 known high and moderate penetrance breast cancer
susceptibility genes, in addition to BRCA1 and BRCA2. Two of the 97
families and one of the 49 singletons (2% of independent cases) were
found to have deleterious mutations in high penetrance genes, namely TP53
(2) and CDH1 (1). In addition, nine of 146 independent cases (6%) were
found to have deleterious mutations in the other predisposition genes.
Mutations in ATM and CHEK2 accounted for seven of the ten moderate
penetrance mutations identified; additionally one family had a mutation
in BLM, one in MRE11A, and one in PALB2. Furthermore, 15 of 146
independent cases (10%) were found to have variants of unknown
significance (VUS) in one of eight genes. There were no deleterious
mutations or VUS in eight of the 18 genes. Our data show that significant
genetic heterogeneity exists in BRCAx families. Large-scale collaborative
efforts will be required to attain sufficient power to understand how to
appropriately apply these results clinically in cancer risk evaluation.

