Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olive oil alters benzo(a)pyrene biotransformation and reduces
oxidative DNA damage in colon of ApcMin mouse


Sporadic colon cancers have been shown to be triggered by diet and
environmental factors. Epidemiological studies have shown that colon
cancer rates were significantly reduced in Mediterranean countries where
olive oil is the main ingredient of diet. Published works have shown that
olive oil inhibits cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in
colorectal cancer cell lines. Studies conducted earlier in our laboratory
have shown that dietary exposure to the environmental toxicant
benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) leads to colon tumor formation. Benzo(a)pyrene
biotransformation studies have shown that once BaP is metabolized by
cytochrome P450 drug metabolizing enzymes, it forms metabolites such as
BaP 7, 8-diol-epoxide (BPDE), BaP 3,6 & 6,12-diones. These metabolites
have also been shown to cause double stranded breaks in DNA and cause
oxidative damage. Therefore, we hypothesize that olive oil's interaction
with BaP will modulate BaP metabolism and reduce colon tumor formation.
In this study we investigated the effect of olive oil on BaP-induced
colon carcinogenesis in male ApcMin mice. Mice were assigned to a control
(n=7) or treatment group (n =7). Treatment consisted of 50 and 100 g
BaP/kg body weight dissolved in tricaprylin (BaP-only group) or olive oil
administered daily via oral gavage for sixty days. Post exposure, mice
were sacrificed; colon and liver tissues were retrieved from each group
of mice and were preserved in formalin and pathological changes were
evaluated. The tissues were further analyzed for the induction of drug
metabolizing enzymes such as cytochrome 1A, cytochrome 1B1, and
glutathione S-Transferase. Additionally, to determine if BaP caused
oxidative DNA damage to tissues, genomic DNA was isolated from the
respective tissues and we quantified aldehyde lesions. There was a
reduced incidence of adenomas in colons of mice that ingested BaP + olive
oil compared to mice that received BaP only (p Sporadic colon cancers
have been shown to be triggered by diet and environmental factors.
Epidemiological studies have shown that colon cancer rates were
significantly reduced in Mediterranean countries where olive oil is the
main ingredient of diet. Published works have shown that olive oil
inhibits cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in colorectal cancer
cell lines. Studies conducted earlier in our laboratory have shown that
dietary exposure to the environmental toxicant benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) leads
to colon tumor formation. Benzo(a)pyrene biotransformation studies have
shown that once BaP is metabolized by cytochrome P450 drug metabolizing
enzymes, it forms metabolites such as BaP 7, 8-diol-epoxide (BPDE), BaP
3,6 & 6,12-diones. These metabolites have also been shown to cause double
stranded breaks in DNA and cause oxidative damage. Therefore, we
hypothesize that olive oil's interaction with BaP will modulate BaP
metabolism and reduce colon tumor formation. In this study we
investigated the effect of olive oil on BaP-induced colon carcinogenesis
in male ApcMin mice. Mice were assigned to a control (n=7) or treatment
group (n =7). Treatment consisted of 50 and 100 g BaP/kg body weight
dissolved in tricaprylin (BaP-only group) or olive oil administered daily
via oral gavage for sixty days. Post exposure, mice were sacrificed;
colon and liver tissues were retrieved from each group of mice and were
preserved in formalin and pathological changes were evaluated. The
tissues were further analyzed for the induction of drug metabolizing
enzymes such as cytochrome 1A, cytochrome 1B1, and glutathione
S-Transferase. Additionally, to determine if BaP caused oxidative DNA
damage to tissues, genomic DNA was isolated from the respective tissues
and we quantified aldehyde lesions. There was a reduced incidence of
adenomas in colons of mice that ingested BaP + olive oil compared to mice
that received BaP only (p < 0.05). CYP protein expression was reduced
while GST protein expression increased in the colon and liver tissues of
BaP + olive oil-treated mice compared to BaP only-treated mice. The BaP
organic metabolite concentrations decreased, while aqueous metabolite
concentrations increased in the BaP + olive oil group compared to BaP
only-treatment group. DNA lesions were increased in the colon and liver
tissues of BaP-treated mice compared to BaP + olive oil treated mice. In
summary, our studies suggest that olive oil exerts a protective effect
against BaP-induced colon cancer.

