Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-138 overexpression most effectively enhanced efficacy of
apigenin to impair cell cycle progression and induce apoptosis in human
malignant neuroblastoma SK-N-DZ and SK-N-BE2 cells in vivo


Malignant neuroblastoma, which mostly occurs in children, remains
incurable with conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Innovative
therapeutic strategies must be developed to control the growth of this
childhood malignancy. Inhibition of cyclin D3 may induce cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in human malignant neuroblastoma. Also, inhibition
of the catalytic component of human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) may induce apoptosis in many human cancers including malignant
neuroblastoma. Decrease in expression of the tumor suppressor
microRNA-138 (miR-138) is often associated with increases in expression
of hTERT and cyclin D3. We hypothesized that miR-138 overexpression could
be a better therapeutic strategy than hTERT knockdown to potentiate
pro-apoptotic effect of apigenin (APG), a plant-derived flavonoid, in
human malignant neuroblastoma. We found that transfection of miR-138
mimics was more powerful than transfection of hTERT shRNA plasmid in
potentiating efficacy of APG for decreasing cell viability in human
neuroblastoma SK-N-DZ and SK-N-BE2 cells. We then examined comparative
effectiveness of different treatment strategies in reducing tumor growth
and inducing apoptosis in SK-N-DZ and SK-N-BE2 xenografts in athymic nude
mice. Combination of miR-138 overexpression and APG treatment showed
better efficacy than combination of hTERT knockdown and APG treatment in
reducing tumor growth and inducing cell death in both neuroblastoma
xenograft models. According to the microRNA database (miRDB), miR-138 may
target and inhibit expression of cyclin D3 so as to impair cell cylce
progression. Combination of miR-138 overexpression and APG treatment
caused the highest inhibition of expression of cyclin D3, CDK4, and CDK6,
which were required for G1/S transition in cell cycle. Down regulation of
cyclin D3 could inhibit phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor Rb and
impair cell cycle progression. We delineated that apoptosis occurred with
induction of molecular components of extrinsic and intrinsic pathways in
the xenografts. Combination of miR-138 overexpression and APG treatment
most effectively activated caspase-8 and cleaved Bid to tBid to induce
extrinsic pathway of apoptosis and also raised Bax:Bcl-2 ratio to trigger
intrinsic pathway of apoptosis with mitochondrial release of Smac into
the cytosol to neutralize a set of endogenous inhibitor-of-apoptosis
proteins such as Survivin so as to facilitate activation of caspase-3.
Activation of both calpain and caspase-3 caused proteolysis of -spectrin
to generate calpain-specific 145 kD SBDP and caspase-3-specific 120 kD
SBDP, respectively, in course of apoptosis in the xenografts. In
conclusion, miR-138 overexpression was more powerful than hTERT knockdown
in enhancing pro-apoptotic effect of APG for controlling growth of human
malignant neuroblastomas in vivo.

