Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of EMT positive and chemo-resistant
novel population of HCC like stem cells


Increasing evidence suggests that tumor heterogeneity facilitates relapse
of liver cancer in patients during the post therapeutic period. This
concept of heterogeneity has gained increasing support from the liver
cancer stem cells (LCSC), which have the potential of differentiation and
genetic and epigenetic alterations to adapt to the tumor
microenvironment. With the technological advancement, researchers were
able to identify new population of LCSCs besides CD133+ clones by
discovering new surface markers-CD90, EpCAM, CD13 and CD24. These studies
corroborated that CD133- population is highly heterogeneous and might
have some additional markers. Recently, by screening colorectal cancer
patient samples we discovered a novel surface marker vimentin (Vim) on
metastatic liver nodules. We further initiated screening of primary
hepatocellular carcinoma murine liver tumor samples and discovered the
surface expression of Vim in both species of HCC. Interestingly, we
purified Vim+CD133- from primary liver tumor cell suspensions. Using
sphere assays, limited dilution assays and staining of the stem cell
markers Sox2, Nanog and Oct4A, we showed that Vim+CD133- cells have stem
cell like properties similar to Vim-CD133+ population. Then we performed
differentiation assays with Vim+CD133- cells under suitable condition and
showed hepatocyte like phenotypes by upregulating protein expression of
albumin, periodic acid schiff's staining and cholangiocyte type
morphologies- tubular and star shaped structures. Several studies
correlated that cells undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)phenotypes when vimentin is expressed on their surface. Our
investigation revealed that Vim+CD133- population supported EMT like
phenotypes by presence of the twist and -catenin inside the nucleus and
absence of E-cadherin on cell surface. Contrary to this Vim-CD133+
population did not show EMT like phenotypes. In next step of our
characterization of Vim+CD133- cells, we investigated its chemoresistance
properties as LCSCs are well known to cause relapse in patients. We
treated these cells with highly toxic doses of 5 Fluorouracil and
cisplatin for 4 days and interestingly observed significantly more
viability compared to Vim-CD133+ population. We also validated multidrug
resistance properties such as expression of multidrug resistance protein
1 (MDR1) and anti-apoptotic markers in Vim+CD133- cells. Finally, we
validated their tumorigenic potential using anchorage independent assays
and in vivo inoculation in immunocompromised NOD-SCID mice.Collectively
our studies characterized a novel population Vim+CD133- in heterogeneous
LCSCs, which showed EMT like phenotypes and higher chemo-resistance
compared to Vim-CD133+ cells. In the era of personalized cancer therapy,
this population should be considered as superior druggable target
compared to our canonical Vim-CD133+ cells to obtain greater therapeutic
outcome.

