Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiles classify renal cell carcinoma subtypes


IntroductionRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for nearly 4% of all
malignancies worldwide. According to the WHO classification of tumors of
the urinary system, RCC is a collection of different subtypes rather than
one entity. Besides the conventional clear cell RCC (ccRCC), the
papillary RCC (pRCC), with an incidence of 10%-15%, is the second most
common entity among renal malignancies. By histological characteristics,
pRCCs can further be sub-divided into two distinct subtypes. Hereby,
pRCCs type 2 are correlated with a worse clinical outcome. We sought to
define characteristic miRNA expression profiles that could be useful for
a molecular classification of RCC subtypes.Material and MethodsUsing
miRNA microarrays (GeneChip miRNA arrays, Affymetrix), we established
miRNA expression profiles of a discovery set of ccRCC and pRCC subtypes 1
and 2 tissue samples. The expression of a selected subset of miRNAs was
validated by quantitative PCR. The best discriminating miRNAs of this
initial set were used to establish a classification model for tissue
samples. This core set of miRNAs was analyzed in a second, independent
patient cohort of 69 tissue samples. Using the pre-defined classification
rules, the samples of the independent patient cohort were classified in a
double-blind fashion solely by their miRNA expression.ResultsEvery RCC
entity and subtype displayed a characteristic pattern of miRNA
expression. Ten miRNAs were selected based on their ability to
discriminate between tumor and normal tissue or between different
subtypes of RCC. Binary logistic regression identified a core set of only
five miRNAs that was able to fully classify any given sample with an
overall accuracy of 88%. This classification scheme was applied to an
independent patient cohort. Here five miRNAs (miRNAs miR-145, -200c,
-210, -502-3p, and let-7c) were able to classify the samples with an
overall accuracy of 64%. MiRNAs that are deregulated in every RCC entity
target members of the family of multidrug-resistance proteins (MRPs) and
miRNAs that distinguish between pRCC subtypes target components of the
Jak-STAT signaling pathway.ConclusionsEvery entity or subtype of RCC
displays a characteristic and unique pattern of miRNA expression. A core
set of only five miRNAs can be used to distinguish not only between tumor
and normal tissue samples but also between different tumor entities with
high accuracy. Deregulated miRNAs might contribute to the high
chemotherapy resistance of RCC. Furthermore, our results indicate that
pRCC type 2 tumors could be dependent on oncogenic MYC signaling.

