Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma risk among asphalt workers
from the greater Boston area


Asphalt (or bitumen) is produced from the distillation of crude petroleum
and used in road surfacing, roofing, and waterproofing applications. When
heated during application, asphalt emits a mixture of fumes, vapors and
solid particulates, including carcinogens such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH), which come in direct contact with the epithelium of
the upper aerodigestive tract upon inhalation. Therefore, chronic
exposure among asphalt workers could potentially result in elevated risk
for upper aerodigestive tract cancers. There are presently no
case-control studies reporting on this relationship. There is limited
evidence of an association from occupational cohort studies, although
these studies offer poor control for important, potentially confounding
factors, such as smoking or alcohol consumption. Thus, we have
investigated the association between occupational exposure to asphalt and
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in a large population-based
case-control study from the greater Boston area. Occupational asphalt
exposure data was available for 951 incident HNSCC cases and 1193
cancer-free control subjects, matched on age (+/- 3 years), sex, and town
or neighborhood of residence. Study subjects completed a
self-administered questionnaire that provided detailed data on
occupational history, sociodemographics and personal characteristics, and
alcohol and tobacco use. Asphalt exposure was dichotomized as exposed or
never exposed based on self-reported occupation data, and also by total
duration of occupational exposure to asphalt. Multivariable unconditional
logistic regression was used to assess the association between asphalt
exposure and HNSCC, overall and by primary tumor site. A total of 140
(14.7%) cases and 145 (12.2%) controls reported an occupational exposure
to asphalt. There was a significant crude association between asphalt
exposure and pharyngeal cancer (crude OR = 1.47, 95% CI: 1.09-2.00) and
elevated point estimates (although non-significant) for HNSCC overall and
in the larynx. However, both the magnitude and significance eroded after
adjusting for age, sex, smoking, and alcohol consumption. Similarly, we
observed a borderline significant dose-response between occupational
duration and crude HNSCC risk, overall and for the pharynx and larynx,
but, again, the magnitude and (borderline) significance eroded following
adjustment for confounding factors. Since cigarettes are a substantial
source of PAH exposure among smokers, we repeated the analysis restricted
to never-smokers but did not observe any significant association. We
found no evidence for an association between asphalt work and HNSCC risk.
These observations suggest that the risk estimates for HNSCC among
asphalt workers provided by occupational cohort studies may be overstated
due to uncontrolled confounding.

