Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PHF6 as a temozolomide resistance factor in
glioblastoma using mirConnX


Background: Intrinsic and acquired resistance to temozolomide (TMZ)
represents a major obstacle in the treatment of glioblastoma. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) have previously been implicated to play a role in
chemoresistance including TMZ resistance. These short non-coding RNA
sequences inhibit their mRNA targets, thereby contributing to treatment
resistance. In this study, we examined the miRNA/mRNA interaction
networks in TMZ resistant glioblastoma cell lines to identify drug
targets for the reversal of TMZ resistance. Methods: TMZ resistance was
induced in duplicate in the glioblastoma cell lines U87, Hs683, and
LNZ308, creating two independent resistant subclones of each wildtype
cell line. IC50 values were increased at least two-fold in the TMZ
resistant subclones compared to their wildtype. mRNA and miRNA expression
profiles of these cell lines were obtained by microarray data analysis.
Next, we used these mRNA and miRNA expression profiles of the TMZ
resistant cells to generate miRNA/mRNA interaction networks using the
integrative network tool mirConnX. This tool combines sequence
information with gene expression data analysis to create a
condition-specific regulatory network. Results: In the obtained
mRNA/miRNA network of our TMZ resistant cell lines, we identified the
plant homeodomain (PHD)-like finger 6 (PHF6) mRNA to be targeted by the
largest set of miRNAs, i.e. miR-143, miR-93, miR-183, miR-96, and
miR-214. Analysis of PHF6 mRNA expression in the TMZ resistant subclones
by qRT-PCR showed an increased expression of this mRNA in four of six
resistant subclones. Protein expression analysis of PHF6 in these cell
lines showed a modest increase in four of the six resistant subclones.
Furthermore, analysis of mRNA and protein expression levels of PHF6 in
glioblastoma patient datasets showed increased expression of PHF6 in
glioblastoma tissue compared to normal brain tissue. In addition,
knockdown of PHF6 using siRNA in combination with TMZ enhanced the TMZ
response. These results suggest that PHF6 is a candidate drug target for
the potentiation of TMZ efficacy. Conclusion: Altogether, these results
demonstrate that mirConnX is a useful tool to investigate miRNA/mRNA
interactions in TMZ resistant cells and can be used to identify new
potential drug targets.

