Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of antimalarial compounds as inhibitors of ezrin in
osteosarcoma cells


Ezrin is a member of the ERM (Ezrin, Radixin, Moesin) family of proteins
that functions as a cross-linker between the plasma membrane and actin
cytoskeleton, thus allowing the cell to regulate cytoskeletal dynamics in
response to external stimuli. Ezrin plays important roles in cell
motility, membrane trafficking, morphogenesis, adhesion, survival and
apoptosis. Ezrin also participates in crucial signal transduction
pathways. Overexpression of ezrin contributes to the aggressive cancer
behavior in various tumor types especially by enhancing the metastatic
phenotype. Thus, ezrin represents a promising molecular target for cancer
therapy. In our earlier studies, we have established that NSC305787 can
directly bind to ezrin and inhibit its activity, which results in reduced
metastasis. Since NSC305787 shares significant structural similarities
with some anti-malarial drugs, we tested 400 anti-malarial compounds
including 200 drug-like compounds and 200 probe-like compounds for their
potential to directly bind to ezrin protein. We used surface plasmon
resonance technology (Biacore) to screen direct binding. In this initial
screen, 12 compounds demonstrated binding to ezrin over background values
and selected as primary hits. Detailed SPR analysis of primary hits
resulted in 7 compounds with comparable KD values to that obtained with
our lead compound NSC305787. Primary hits were also evaluated for
inhibition of the cell motility of murine osteosarcoma (OS) cells K7M2
and K12 that express high and low levels of ezrin, respectively. Cell
motility and chemotaxis assays were conducted in parallel with viability
assays to rule out general toxicity. Selected anti-malarial compounds
were effective in inhibiting the motility of OS cells with high ezrin
compared to cells with low ezrin. In conclusion, several anti-malarial
drugs may have new indications in cancer therapy by inhibiting ezrin.

