Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effect of a poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitor in endometrial carcinoma cell lines


The loss of PTEN is the most frequent genetic aberration in endometrial
cancer. One of the phosphatase-independent roles of PTEN is associated
with homologous recombination (HR) in the nucleus. Poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) plays a key role in the repair of DNA single-strand
breaks, and a PARP inhibitor induces synthetic lethality in cancer cells
with HR deficiency. We examined the anti-tumor activity of olaparib, a
PARP inhibitor, and its correlation between the sensitivity and status of
PTEN in a panel of endometrial cancer cell lines.MethodsThe response to
olaparib was evaluated using a clonogenic assay with SF50 values
(concentration to inhibit cell survival to 50%) in 16 endometrial cancer
cell lines. The effects of PTEN introduction on the sensitivity of cells
to olaparib and ionizing radiation (IR) exposure were compared between
parental HEC-6 (PTEN-null) and HEC-6 PTEN+ (stably expressing wild-type
PTEN) cells by clonogenic assay, foci formation of RAD51 and H2AX, and
induction of cleaved PARP.ResultsThe SF50 values were 100 nM or less in
six of the 16 (38%: sensitive) cell lines; whereas, SF50 values were
1,000 nM or more in five of the 16 (31%: resistant) cell lines. PTEN
mutations were not associated with sensitivity to olaparib (Mutant [n =
12]: 995 1,096 nM; Wild-type [n = 4]: 144 91 nM, p = 0.17 by Student'st
test). RAD51 expression was observed broadly and was not associated with
PTEN status in the 16 cell lines. The number of colonies in the
clonogenic assay, the foci formation of RAD51 and H2AX, and the induction
of apoptosis were not affected by PTEN introduction in the HEC-6 PTEN+
cells. The expression level of nuclear PTEN was not elevated within 24 h
following IR in the HEC-6-PTEN+ cells.ConclusionsOur results suggest that
olaparib, a PARP inhibitor, is effective on certain endometrial cancer
cell lines. The inactivation of PTEN might not affect the DNA repair
function. Predictive biomarkers are warranted to utilize olaparib in
endometrial cancer.

