Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting driver genes based on tumor whole-exome sequencing
studies


Driver somatic mutations confer a selective growth advantage to tumors
while passenger mutations do not. Genes carrying driver mutations are
detected in whole-exome sequencing (WES) studies if their non-synonymous
mutations are significantly more frequent than their silent mutations,
adjusting for the heterogeneous mutation rates across genomic locations,
subjects and mutation types. Typical tumor WES studies (100-300 tumor
samples) lack statistical power, and thus can identify only small numbers
of candidate driver genes and possibly miss the well-established ones.
The best algorithm to detect driver genes to date is MutSigCV. For each
target gene, MutSigCV identifies its bagel, a set of genes predicted to
have similar background mutation rates to the target gene and use the
bagels to estimate the background mutation rate. Based on the identified
bagels, we developed a novel statistical method implementing a series of
algorithms to improve the statistical power while maintaining the type-I
error rate. First, we developed a statistical framework for testing the
selective growth advantage of each mutation type and appropriately
integrating evidence of growth advantage across mutation types to achieve
robust power. We then extended the algorithm to consider spatial
clustering information. This substantially improves the statistical power
when non-silent mutations are clustered into a few short regions or
nucleotides. We applied this novel method to TCGA melanoma WES including
271 tumor samples. Without modeling spatial clustering information, over
30 candidate driver genes, including BRAF, NRAS, PTEN, TP53, PPP6C and
CDKN2A were detected controlling FDR=0.01. Modeling spatial information
of somatic mutations detected additional rarely mutated genes, including
DISP1 (P=1.310-20, involved in cellular proliferation and differentiation
that leads to normal development of embryonic structures), IDH1
(P=1.010-8, previously identified in relation to gliobalstoma and acute
myeloid leukemia), MAP2K1 (P=510-18, a member of the mitogen-activated
protein kinases that also include BRAF, MEK and other important players
in melanoma), INTS8 (P=7.710-15, an integrator of small nuclear RNA
processing), and STK19 (P=1.210-10, encoding a serine/threonine kinase,
previously identified in melanoma). Finally, we developed methods to
simultaneously analyze multiple cancers to improve the power for genes
mutated in more than one cancer type, which will be illustrated by
analyzing 12 major cancers in TCGA. Our method will provide an important
tool for improving driver gene mutation detection in cancer.

