Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interphase reduction in ZEB1 and tubulin isotypes in breast cancer
cells associated with antimitotic drug treatment


We recently demonstrated that paclitaxel treatment (10X IC50) reduces
mRNA for the epithelial to mesenchymal protein ZEB1 and -tubulin isotype
classes I, III and IVB in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, commonly used
as a model for triple-negative breast cancers [Lobert et al.,
Biochemistry Aug 13;52(32):5482-9]. This work showed that miR-200c, which
regulates ZEB1, contributes to the changes in -tubulin isotype mRNA. The
current question is whether these parallel changes in ZEB1 and -tubulin
isotype mRNA were unique to antimitotic drug treatment. We treated
MDA-MB-231 cells with equipotent (3X IC50) concentrations of paclitaxel,
vincristine, eribulin or doxorubicin for 24 hours. Flow cytometry
demonstrated that 27-30% of cells were in G2/M (paclitaxel, vincristine
and eribulin) compared to 25% of control cells. Thus the cells had
similar cell cycle profiles and were not blocked in mitosis. At 24 hours,
there were no measurable changes in total tubulin protein by Western
blotting. As shown previously, paclitaxel treatment significantly reduced
ZEB1 and -tubulin isotype classes I, III and IVB mRNA. Eribulin treatment
significantly reduced ZEB1 and -tubulin isotype classes I and IVB mRNA,
but not -tubulin class III. Vincristine treatment only reduced -tubulin
class I mRNA. These data together indicate that although antimitotic
drugs all target tubulin, they alter signaling pathways that do not
overlap. Doxorubicin did not reduce ZEB1 or -tubulin isotypes; nor did it
increase levels of miR-200c, suggesting that these changes may require
tubulin or microtubules as a mediator of the effects. These data show
that signaling during interphase is altered by antimitotic drug
treatment, leading to changes in -tubulin isotype mRNA levels. A
reduction in -tubulin isotype class III mRNA in interphase cells is
associated specifically with paclitaxel treatment. Next generation
sequencing for micro-RNAs comparing control cells to those treated with
paclitaxel under the conditions described above suggests that nineteen
micro-RNAs are either up or downregulated, indicating that the efficacy
of paclitaxel may in part be due to micro-RNA regulation of mRNA.
(supported by funding from UMMC School of Nursing)Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

