Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a PFKFB3 inhibitor suitable for phase I trial
testing that synergizes with the B-Raf inhibitor vemurafenib


In human cancers, loss of PTEN, stabilization of hypoxia inducible
factor-1, and activation of Ras and AKT converge to increase the activity
of a regulator of glycolysis,
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFKFB3). This
enzyme synthesizes fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, which is an activator of
6-phosphofructo-1-kinase, a key step of glycolysis that is tightly
controlled by multiple metabolic feedback mechanisms. We recently
identified the first competitive small molecule inhibitor of PFKFB3,
3-(3-pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one (3PO), and demonstrated
that this agent is selectively cytotoxic to Ras-transformed epithelial
cells and displays broad anti-tumor activity. We now report the discovery
of a novel 3PO-derivative, PFK158, that is markedly more potent than 3PO,
has excellent pharmacokinetic properties and causes 80% growth inhibition
in several mouse models of human-derived tumors. Importantly,
IND-enabling safety and toxicity studies have demonstrated that PFK158 is
well tolerated in rats and dogs, providing support for a phase 1 trial in
cancer patients planned for early 2014. Once the maximum tolerated dose
is identified, we intend to conduct multiple phase 1/2 trials of PFK158
in combination with targeted agents given the ability of PFK158 to
suppress glucose metabolism and multiple survival mechanisms. One such
targeted agent, vemurafenib, is a mutant B-Raf inhibitor that was
recently FDA-approved for BRAFV600E-positive melanoma patients.
Unfortunately, a multitude of resistance mechanisms have resulted in
disease progression in less than one year for the majority of melanoma
patients treated with vemurafenib. We hypothesized that PFK158 would
sensitize vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells and found that the
addition of PFK158 to vemurafenib caused a marked increase in the
apoptotic death of several melanoma cell lines in vitro. These data
provide rationale for the conduct of pre-clinical studies of PFK158
combined with vemurafenib in transgenic BRAFV600E melanoma mouse models
which are in turn expected to justify a phase I/II trial of the
combination in BRAFV600E-positive melanoma patients. In conclusion,
PFK158 is the first PFKFB3 inhibitor to be examined in a phase I trial
and may have significant clinical utility when combined with agents that
target driver oncogenes.

