Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a systemic Kasumi-3 acute myeloid leukemia model in
NSG mice


In vivo models that reproduce human disease are needed for the evaluation
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) disease progression and the development
of effective treatments for the disease. The NSG mouse strain is used to
model human AML due to the absence of mature B and T lymphocytes and lack
of functional NK cells. Successful systemic engraftment of human AML
cells in these mice may provide similar disease manifestation observed in
patient disease, thus allowing evaluation of therapeutic candidates.The
Kasumi-3 cell line from ATCC was established from the blast cells of a
myeloperoxidase-negative acute leukemia patient and expresses CD7, CD4,
CD13, CD33, CD34, HLA-DR and c-Kit cell surface markers which are
compatible with acute myelocytic leukemia, subtype M0 (AML-M0). The
prognosis of patients with AML-M0 is poor in comparison to other
classifications of AML due to the association of these leukemia cells as
being extremely immature and either undifferentiated or minimally
differentiated.We have developed a systemic Kasumi-3 human AML model,
characterizing tumor cell engraftment over time, following intravenous
implantation of Kasumi-3 AML cells in NSG mice. Kasumi-3 cells were
implanted at either 1e6 or 10e6 cells per NSG mouse and tumor burden
throughout disease progression was assessed by monitoring the engraftment
of these cells in the peripheral blood, bone marrow and spleen by FACS
analysis. The engraftment of huCD45+ cells was used as a marker for
determining the percentage of human tumor cell burden in the mice.
Results indicated that within 28 days post intravenous implantation of
Kasumi-3 cells at either concentration, huCD45+ cells were present in the
peripheral circulation, bone marrow and spleens of NSG mice, and the
tumor cell engraftment percentages strongly correlated with the number of
implanted Kasumi-3 AML cells. Both the 1e6 and 10e6 cell implant
concentrations exhibited unidirectional changes in the percentage of
huCD45+ cells engrafting in the peripheral blood, bone marrow, and spleen
at all time points throughout the experiment.After analyzing the
percentages of human tumor cell engraftment in the NSG mice, the 10e6
Kasumi-3 cell implant concentration showed tumor cell engraftment of 35%
in the blood, 67% in the bone marrow and 16% in the spleen on Day 28 and
provided the most appropriate environment for the in vivo onset and
evaluation of AML tumor burden. The 1e6 Kasumi-3 concentration had a
lower percentage of systemic tumor cell engraftment at Day 28 when
compared to the percentage of huCD45+ cell engraftment with 10e6 cells.
The higher implant concentration showed established tumor burden in the
peripheral blood and spleen 14 days sooner than the 1e6 cell dose, which
would allow for the observation of efficacy and treatment effects in this
model sooner than the 1e6 cell concentration. The establishment of this
human AML model in NSG mice can serve as an in vivo tool for the
evaluation of putative therapeutics for AML.

