Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MYC in multiple myeloma by BET protein inhibition


The numerous and diverse genetic lesions in multiple myeloma (MM) make it
difficult to discern those genetic abnormalities that may be suitable
therapeutic targets. We have observed that the MYC locus is frequently
rearranged in MM (about half of both patients and cell lines), suggesting
that MYC dysregulation is a common feature of this disease. To evaluate
MYC suppression as a therapeutic strategy in MM, we treated human myeloma
cell lines with CPI203, a potent and selective inhibitor of bromodomain
and extra-terminal (BET) proteins. The bromodomain inhibitor CPI203 has
potency and selectivity similar to that of JQ1, but has improved
pharmacokinetics for in vivo studies. From our collection of MM cell
lines we have identified sensitive and resistant cell lines and
characterized their response to CPI203 in detail. A number of conclusions
have emerged from this work. First, response correlates with MYC protein
levels after 3 days of treatment. MYC levels are significantly suppressed
in sensitive lines and much less affected in resistant lines, supporting
the hypothesis that MYC suppression alone determines cell fate in MM cell
lines. In sensitive cell lines treatment with CPI203 caused a rapid
(within 90 min.) decrease in MYC transcription that is consistent with
the response being an intrinsic property of the cell lines. Inhibition of
MYC transcription was followed by eventual cell cycle arrest and limited
apoptosis in these sensitive cell lines. Both sensitive and resistant
cell lines exhibited induction of Histone2H2BE gene in response to CPI203
treatment, indicating that drug efflux pumps alone do not mediate
resistance. Surprisingly, several of the resistant cell lines exhibited
an initial phase of sensitivity to BET inhibition. Upon drug addition,
MYC transcription and MYC protein levels are repressed 2- to 5-fold,
followed by a gradual recovery of MYC message and protein levels to the
initial levels. In this second phase the cells are truly insensitive to
BET inhibition: the drug remains active during this incubation and
addition of fresh medium with drug does not affect MYC transcription.
Furthermore, many aspects of the BET inhibition gene expression profile
remain constant throughout this transition between sensitivity and
resistance. These results suggest that the recovery phase is not a simple
reversal of BET inhibition but rather the emergence of an
alternative-signaling pathway that activates MYC expression in the
presence of BET inhibition. Presently we are analyzing gene expression
data to identify genes and signaling pathways responsible for this
induced resistance. The identification of such pathways will help us
better understand the molecular basis of the response to BET inhibition,
which in turn might enable us to identify predictive biomarkers of the
therapeutic response.

