Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single oral dose pharmacokinetics of cancer chemopreventive
phytochemicals from Angelica gigas Nakai in men and women


The ethanol extracts of the root of Korean herb Angelica gigas Nakai
(AGN) have promising anti-cancer, anti-nociceptive and other activities
in rodent models. It is currently believed that the pyranocoumarin
decursin and its structural isomer decursinol angelate (DA) in such
extracts contribute to the in vitro anti-cancer activity.We and others
have demonstrated that both decursin and DA were extensively converted to
decursinol (DOH) in rodents. However, our in vitro experiments using
human and rodent S9 fractions suggested the hypothesis that decursin
and/or DA might be metabolized differently in humans. Given the notable
difference in the biological activities between decursin/DA andDOH, we
conducted a single oral dose pharmacokinetic study of these
phytochemicals in healthy volunteers to address a key question for human
translatability of preclinical animal studies of decursin, DA or AGN
extract. Knowing that chemicals other than decursin and DA in AGN had
minimal effect on their absorption and metabolism in rodents, we used an
AGN-based dietary supplement as the study drug in compliance with the FDA
and institutional requirements. In all, 20 healthy subjects (10 men and
10 women) had completed the study in full.AGN product was very well
tolerated by all subjects as evidenced by plasma biochemistry, complete
blood cell count and physical examination. Analyzing plasma samples using
UHPLC-MS/MS showed that, though humans metabolized DA slightly slower
than rodents, both decursin and DA were extensively converted to DOH.
Gender and racial/ethnicity do not appear to dramatically affect the PK
parameters. Since we show here that humans metabolize decursin and DA in
similar pattern with rodents, the anti-cancer efficacy, safety, tissue
distribution and pharmacodynamic biomarker data generated in rodent
models will likely be relevant for human translation. In spite of the
limited number of healthy individuals in the trial, this project
demonstrated feasibility for our team to consider translational research
in disease-oriented populations.

