Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic mechanisms of exquisite sensitivity and acquired
resistance to everolimus in a patient with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma


Understanding genetic mechanisms of sensitivity and resistance to
targeted anticancer therapies may improve patient selection and rational
treatment designs. One approach to increase this understanding involves
the study of exceptional responders: rare patients with unexpected
exquisite sensitivity or durable responses to therapy. We identified an
exceptional responder on a study of the allosteric mTOR inhibitor
everolimus in thyroid cancer: a 57-yr-old woman with refractory
metastatic anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC), a highly aggressive
neoplasm with no adequate therapies and a median survival of 5 months.
After beginning treatment with everolimus, the patient experienced a near
complete response that lasted for 18 months, followed by progressive
disease, which was then re-biopsied. To date, mechanisms of clinical
resistance to mTOR inhibition have not been described.We performed whole
exome sequencing (WES) of both pre-treatment and drug resistant tumor
tissue to look for the underlying mechanisms of exquisite sensitivity and
acquired resistance to everolimus. WES of the pre-treatment tumor
revealed a somatic nonsense mutation in TSC2, a tumor suppressor gene
whose inactivation is known to activate the mTOR pathway and result in
sensitivity to mTOR inhibition in some cancers. WES of the drug resistant
tumor additionally revealed a mutation in mTOR (mTOR-F2108L) not detected
in the pre-treatment tumor. Structural modeling demonstrated that this
mutation occurs in the FKBP12-rapamycin binding domain of mTOR and is
predicted to prevent binding of the drug to the protein. Overexpressing
mTOR-F2108L in HEK-293T cells resulted in significant resistance to
rapamycin compared to cells expressing wild type (wt) mTOR. In cells
expressing the mutant mTOR, rapamycin did not decrease phosphorylation of
S6K1, a downstream target of mTOR, compared with cells expressing wt
mTOR. Notably, cells expressing mTOR-F2108L remained sensitive to the
direct TOR inhibitor torin, suggesting a therapeutic approach to overcome
resistance in this patient.In summary, we add ATC to the growing list of
cancers found to be exquisitely sensitive to everolimus when activating
mTOR pathway mutations are present. Moreover, we present the first
reported, to our knowledge, mechanism of acquired resistance to
everolimus identified in patients. The fact that this occurs via a
binding domain mutation that blocks allosteric mTOR inhibition suggests
that followup therapy with direct TOR inhibitors may still have benefit
in some patients who develop resistance to everolimus. The use of
precision medicine approaches in ATC to screen for alterations in the
mTOR pathway may help identify subsets of patients who would benefit from
targeted therapies directed against mTOR. Moreover, the use of serial
biopsies to profile patients who develop resistance to everolimus could
dictate optimal followup treatment in ATC and other cancers.

