Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Re-thinking the concept of cancer stem cells: Polyploid giant
cancer cells as mother cancer stem cells


Polyploid giant cancer cells (PGCCs) have been observed by pathologists
for over a century. PGCCs contribute to solid tumor heterogeneity, but
their functions are largely undefined. Little attention has been given to
these cells, largely because PGCCs have been generally thought to
originate from repeated mitosis/cytokinesis failure and have no capacity
for long-term survival and cell proliferation. Our group has recently
reported that we successfully purified and cultured PGCCs from human
ovarian cancer cell lines and primary ovarian cancer. These cells are
highly resistant to oxygen deprivation and could form through
endoreduplication or cell fusion, generating regular-sized cancer cells
quickly through budding or burst. They are positive for normal and cancer
stem cell markers, divided asymmetrically and cycled slowly. They can
differentiate into adipose, cartilage, and bone. A single PGCC formed
cancer spheroids in vitro and generated tumors in immunodeficient mice.
PGCC-derived tumor gained a mesenchymal phenotype with increased
expression of cancer stem cell markers CD44 and CD133 and become more
resistant to the treatment of cisplatin and also form tissue organ-like
structure. Together, our results reveal that the PGCCs present a
resistant form of human cancer that behaves like mother cancer stem cells
that can contribute to generation of daughter cancer stem-like cells and
formation of tissue organ structure. These cells can be induced in
response to hypoxia and play a fundamental role in regulating tumor
heterogeneity, stemness, and chemoresistance in human cancer. In contrast
to the phenotype unstable cancer stem cells selected by cell surface
markers, PGCCs can be stably passaged and maintained, thus these cells
provide reproducible experimental system to study mechanisms involved in
generation of cancer stem cells. The key references related this concept
are listed below. we will provide a most updated data to support this new
concept that PGCCs as mother cancer stem cells at this meeting.Zhang S et
al, Oncogene 2013, March online publication; Zhang S et al, Int J Cancer.
2013 Feb 1;134(3):508-18; Zhang S el al, Cancer Lett. 2013 Jun
10;333(2):205-12.

