Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antileukemic activity of 2-deoxy-d-glucose in acute myeloid
leukemia


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematopoietic malignancy characterized
by the clonal expansion and accumulation of immature blasts in the bone
marrow. Several receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including internal
tandem duplication mutations of the Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3-ITD)
or mutations of the Proto-oncogene c-Kit (c-Kit N822K or D816V), are
involved in the pathogenesis of AML. Another major point of resistance of
leukemic cells to chemotherapy is their inability to activate cell death
pathways, because of overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins (Mcl-1,
Bcl-2...). In this study we worked on the antileukemic activity of
2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG), a glycolysis and N-linked-glycosylation
inhibitor, which have been described in different cancer models to
sensitize to chemotherapy.First we evaluated the effects of 2-DG on cell
proliferation and apoptosis. We showed that 2-DG inhibited more strongly
cell proliferation of MV4-11, MOLM-14, Kasumi-1 and TF1 c-Kit D816V cell
lines than U-937. In accordance with this result, 2-DG induced apoptosis
in all AML cell lines previously cited excluding U-937. We also used the
murine model BaF/3 stably transfected with FLT3-ITD, c-Kit D816V or
BCR-ABL, and showed that cells transformed with a membrane tyrosine
kinase were more sensitize to 2-DG than cell expressing the cytoplasmic
oncogene BCR-ABL. Moreover, 2-DG induced apoptosis in primary FLT3-ITD
AML samples (n=9) or c-Kit D816V mutated samples (n=5). At molecular
level, 2-DG inhibited N-linked-glycosylation of FLT3-ITD and c-Kit
mutants both in cell lines and primary AML samples, leading to a decrease
of cell surface expression of these RTKs. We also showed that 2-DG
overcomes the resistance to AC-220 in a MOLM-14 ITD/TKD model, by
triggering the deglycosylation of the receptor. Furthermore, 2-DG
exposure decreased ERK and STAT3/5 signaling but, surprisingly, not the
AKT pathway in FLT3-ITD or c-Kit mutated models. Cell exposure to 2-DG
and D-mannose, which restores N-linked-glycosylation but not glycolysis,
demonstrated that 2-DG induced apoptosis and inhibition of RTKs cell
surface expression are independent of the effects of 2-DG on
glycolysis.In another part, we have demonstrated that 2-DG was able to
decrease protein expression of the anti apoptotic protein mcl-1 in
sensitive and resistant cells as well as in primary patient samples.
These results correlated with the fact that in some cells, like lymphoma
cells, mcl-1 synthesis is glycolysis-dependent. We took advantage of this
decrease to associate the 2-DG with cytotoxic agents ABT-737 or
cytarabine (Ara-C) and showed that these combinations (Ara-C+2-DG or
ABT-737+2-DG) were synergistic.Our study shows that dual targeting of
glycolysis and N-linked-glycosylation is an attractive therapeutic
strategy in acute myeloid leukemia.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

