Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic approaches to metastasis induced by mesenchymal stem
cells in the tumor microenvironment


Metastasis is the primary cause of death in non-hematological cancers yet
there are no specific therapeutics against it because of a lack of
validated targets. The Weinberg lab demonstrated that bone-marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) home to the stroma of breast tumors and
induce metastasis. We verified these findings in MDA-MB-231 (MDA)
xenografts in which co-injection of human MSCs increased MDA thoracic
metastasis by 5-fold. In vitro, MSC co-culture induced GFP-labeled MDA
cells to migrate 3-fold faster in a modified wound-healing assay,
mirroring metastasis in vivo. To identify therapeutic targets within
MSC-induced metastasis, we performed gene-expression analysis of MSC-MDA
co-cultures separated by flow cytometry compared with cells grown alone.
The interferon pathway was found to be the most activated pathway upon
co-culture, increasing mainly in MSCs. We studied the relevance of these
genes in human cancers by first analyzing 3 different gene-expression
datasets comparing human breast cancer stroma with normal stroma. Genes
upregulated in breast cancer stroma were then studied in a meta-analysis
of 19 whole tumor gene-expression datasets correlating gene-expression
changes with survival. We identified 103 genes that are upregulated in
MSCs by MSC-MDA interactions, are increased in human breast cancer stroma
and are significantly associated with poor survival. To determine if they
are necessary for MSC-induced metastatic behavior, we performed shRNA
knockdown in MSC-MDA co-cultures measuring effects on in vitro migration.
Knockdown of a number of interferon-associated genes significantly
reduced migration supporting an unexpected functional role of interferons
in metastasis. The top interferon gene, ISG15, is an attractive candidate
for therapeutic targeting because it is a secreted ubiquitin-like factor
that conjugates a number of cytoskeletal proteins involved in motility.In
parallel, we conducted a small-molecule screen with 1600 compounds on the
migration of MSC-MDA co-cultures to identify small-molecule inhibitors of
metastasis. Counter screens on highly motile endothelial cells excluded
compounds that non-specifically inhibit normal cell migration. Only 1
compound, RSL3, specifically blocked MSC-induced MDA migration with
cytotoxicity at >10-fold higher concentrations. RSL3 inhibits the
glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) enzyme that metabolizes lipid peroxides
including arachidonic acid metabolites participating in inflammatory
cascades like interferon gamma signaling. RSL3 activity was completely
abrogated by co-treatment with the 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor zileuton
consistent with the role of arachidonic acid metabolites in MSC-MDA
migration.In summary, targeting components of interferon and arachidonic
acid pathways have been discovered as novel therapeutic approaches
against microenvironment-induced breast cancer metastasis.

