Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass Spectrometry Imaging of therapeutic antibodies: Distribution
of unlabeled trastuzumab in CB.17 SCID mice implanted with the human
breast BT474 xenograft


IntroductionMass Spectrometry Imaging (MSI) is an emerging technique in
preclinical analysis that allows for analysis of the distribution and the
quantification of target molecules in tissue sections. The main advantage
of this imaging technology is the detection of the molecule of interest
in tissues without labelling and with high specificity. MSI is now
routinely used for small molecule distribution analysis in lead
optimization process, and in PK/PD or toxicity studies. Due to the mass
range limitation of the instrument analyzer one of the main challenges is
the detection of administered large molecules such as therapeutic
antibodies. . In this study, we describe the detection and the
distribution of trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody that recognizes the
HER2/neu receptor, in a BT474 human breast xenograft model.Experimental
proceduresBT474 tumor fragments are implanted in female CB.17 SCID mice.
When the tumors reach 80-120 mm3, the trastuzumab treatment of 20mg/kg
with eight bi-weekly intraperitoneal injections was initiated. The
endpoint was fixed at day 30 post first administration. At 50 hours post
1st, 5th and 8th doses vehicle and trastuzumab treated animals were
sacrificed and tumor, plasma and carcass were collected.One section of
each tumor tissue was first digested with a proteolytic enzyme deposited
with a dedicated device onto the tissue. After the proteolytic digestion,
the selected MALDI matrix is sprayed onto the tissue and then the
distribution of the Trastuzumab is determined based on its specific
peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) by high resolution mass spectrometry
imaging with a MALDI-FTICR instrument (SolariX FTICR 7.0T from Bruker).
The images are obtained with Quantinetix software dedicated to the MSI
data set.Novel AspectWe describe a process which combines MSI and
bottom-up proteomics approach directly on tissue to follow the
distribution of a therapeutic antibody without any labelling. Until now,
mass spectrometry imaging was used to study some biomarkers' (proteins)
distribution on tissue. This work describes a novel MSI application for
analysis of a dosed therapeutic antibody. Data collection is
ongoing.ConclusionsWe have adapted the use of Mass Spectrometry Imaging
to follow the distribution of a non-labeled therapeutic antibody based on
its peptide mass fingerprint in dosed tissues. This opens the use of this
technology to other large molecules, such as therapeutic proteins or
Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs) in a variety of therapeutic fields
(Oncology, Immunology, CNS, etc.)In addition to the distribution of the
target therapeutic antibody, Mass Spectrometry Imaging could also allow
the detection of other important endogenous molecules in the same or
adjacent tissue section, such as specific disease markers, thus allowing
further understanding of PK/PD relationships.

