Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-related microRNA, miR-199a-3p, inhibits ovarian cancer
progression through the suppression of c-Met expression


Purpose:Ovarian cancer has the highest mortality rate of all gynecologic
tumors. It is often diagnosed at an advanced stage after tumor cells are
disseminated within the peritoneal cavity. During the dissemination of
ovarian cancer cells, cells are floating in the peritoneal cavity without
vascular supply and exposed in hypoxic conditions, suggesting that
hypoxic stimuli affect ovarian cancer cell behavior and the cells acquire
more aggressive malignancy potential. In this study, we screened miRNAs
which expression were altered under hypoxic condition and performed
functional analysis of those in vitro and in vivo.Methods: miRNA PCR
arrays were performed using two ovarian cancer cells (CaOV3, RMUG-S)
incubated under 20% or 1% O2. miR-199a-3p, which expression decreased
under hypoxic conditions, was extracted. In silico analyses led us to
consider MET is one of the target genes of miR-199a-3p. Therefore, we
determined to analyze the effect of miR-199a-3p on ovarian cancer cells.
The expression of miR-199a-3p in various ovarian cancer cell lines was
examined by RT-real-time PCR and the expression of c-Met was examined by
Western blotting. In order to investigate whether miR-199a-3p directly
targets the 3-UTR of MET mRNA, a luciferase reporter assay was performed.
Using clinical paraffin tissues, only the tumor part was collected by a
laser capture microdissection and RNA extracted. The expression of
miR-199a-3p was examined by miRNA RT-PCR assays and compared with c-Met
protein expression by immunohistochemistry. The effect of miR-199a-3p on
c-Met expression as well as its downstream signaling was examined by the
transfection of precursor miR-199a-3p. The inhibitory effect of
miR-199a-3p on ovarian cancer cells was analyzed through in vitro cell
proliferation, adhesion assay and invasion assay. Using a xenograft
model, the inhibitory effect of miR-199a-3p against peritoneal
dissemination of ovarian cancer cells was analyzed.Results:miR-199a-3p
expression was inversely correlated with c-Met expression in ovarian
cancer cells and clinical samples. Transfection of precursor miR-199a-3p
into SKOV3ip1 cells reduced c-Met expression followed by the inhibition
of phosphorylation of c-Met, ERK and AKT. Accordingly, the proliferation,
adhesion and invasion of cancer cells were inhibited by the transduction
of miR-199a-3p. In luciferase reporter assay, miR-199a-3p directly
suppresses MET transcriptional activity. In an ovarian cancer xenograft
model, the enforced expression of miR-199a-3p in SKOV3-13 cells
significantly suppressed peritoneal dissemination.Conclusion:Hypoxia
related microRNA, miR-199a-3p, drastically inhibits ovarian cancer
progression through the down-regulation of c-Met expression. miR-199a-3p
can be suggested as a potential target for treating ovarian cancer
dissemination.

