Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splenic macrophages induce chemotherapy resistance via DNA damage
repair


The development of resistance to chemotherapy is one of the most
important obstacles to continued effective treatment of cancer in
patients. We recently identified an important network that is responsible
for reversible systemic resistance to chemotherapy. Mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs), activated by chemotherapy, secrete two specific
polyunsaturated fatty acids that confer resistance to a broad spectrum of
anti-cancer agents. These two distinct platinum-induced polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PIFAs), 12-S-keto-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic acid (KHT) and
4,7,10,13-hexadecatetraenoic acid (16:4(n-3)), can independently induce
chemotherapy resistance at picomolar concentrations. Here we show that
these PIFAs do not induce resistance to the tumor cells directly but
rather function systemically via F4/80+/CD11blow/Ly6G- splenocytes to
enhance DNA damage repair within tumors. We found that the PIFAs only
induce resistance against DNA damaging agents but not against non-DNA
damaging chemotherapeutics. When comparing tumors from cisplatin and
PIFAs treated mice with cisplatin alone treated mice we found overall
less DNA damage and a quicker restoration of DNA damage. In
BRCA1-/-/p53-/- mice lacking homologous recombination, PIFAs were unable
induce chemotherapy resistance.Several lines of evidence identified
F4/80+/CD11blow/Ly6G- splenocytes as key mediators within this mechanism
of systemic chemoresistance. First, PIFAs were unable to induce
resistance in splenectomized tumor-bearing mice. Second, administration
of conditioned medium from splenocytes (sCM) activated by the PIFAs to
splenectomized mice was able to re-introduce systemic chemotherapy
resistance in various mouse models (mean tumor volume in mm3 8 days after
treatment SEM control: 290.7 33.4, cisplatin: 118.2 8.9 and cisplatin +
sCM: 261.1 29.7). Third, analysis of the different cell types present in
the spleen indicated that F4/80+/CD11blow expressing cells were able to
induce systemic resistance in splenectomized mice. Finally,
administration of liposomal clodronate to tumor-bearing mice treated with
chemotherapy and PIFAs was able to inhibit induction of resistance. Given
the fact that 12-S-HHT is a natural ligand of the leukotriene B4 receptor
2 (BLT2) we investigated if signaling via BLT2 is responsible for
12-S-HHT-induced chemoresistance. Both genetic loss of BLT2 or inhibition
of BLT2 using LY255283 was able to prevent 12-S-HHT-mediated
chemoresistance. Taken together, our findings provide a novel role for
the spleen in inducing a systemic protection against chemotherapy via
enhancing DNA damage repair.

