Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of angiogenesis by novel
fusion protein - AD-O54.9 as a new preclinical strategy in cancer
treatment


BackgroundFor almost two decades tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL/Apo2L) has been under extensive
development as a potential therapeutic agent. TRAIL/Apo2L is a member of
the TNF superfamily with unique ability to induce apoptosis in cancer
cells while remaining neutral to normal cells.Tumor growth is tightly
related to new blood vessel formation and tissue remodeling. Platelet
derived growth factor (PDGF) is important in vascular physiological and
pathological development. Inhibition of PDGF pathway blocks angiogenesis
what results in reduction of tumor growth.We proposed a novel fusion
protein (AD-O54.9) with dualistic proapoptotic and antiangiogenic
activity. Our molecule consists of the soluble recombinant TRAIL/Apo2L
variant linked with an effector peptide sequence and an activation motif
recognized by tumor-specific proteases (MMPs, uPa) between. The effector
peptide is composed of 19-amino acid fragment derived from human PDGF,
which binds the PDGF receptors competitively to the natural ligand while
being itself devoid of activity. As a consequence, angiogenic activity of
PDGF is blocked, stimulation of new blood vessels formation does not
occur and finally tumor growth is inhibited.Materials and methodsAD-O54.9
protein was expressed in E. coli, using pET expression system, and
purified by IEC chromatography. Cytotoxic activity of AD-O54.9 was
examined using a propidium iodide assay and its antiangiogenic activity
was evaluated by HUVEC tube formation and ring aortic assays. Safety was
tested on human primary hepatocytes. The proapoptotic and
antiproliferative activity was tested using molecular biology and flow
cytometry methods. In vivo potential was examined on mice xenograft
models of human colorectal adenocarcinoma (Colo205), human lung carcinoma
(NCI-H460-luc2), human pancreatic carcinoma (MIA PaCa-2) and human
oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OE19) cell lines where molecules showed
anticancer activity.ResultsThe molecule showed in vitro specific
cytotoxic effect on various primary cancer cell lines at IC50 below 0.01
ng/ml. We demonstrated that AD-O54.9 is a very potent apoptosis inducer
and inhibitor of angiogenesis. This fusion protein showed superior
efficacy displaying significant tumor volume regression compared with
TRAIL/Apo2L and standard chemotherapeutic agents.ConclusionsThe obtained
results confirm that we developed a very promising fusion molecule with a
high potential of anticancer activity that could be considered as a novel
therapeutic agent.

