Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor LT-626 sensitizes lung and
pancreatic cancers to fractionated radiation therapy


The development of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) has
revolutionized radiation therapy for lung cancers and is an emerging
treatment option for pancreatic cancers. However, there are many
questions on how to optimize its use in chemoradiotherapy. The most
relevant addition to radiotherapy regimens are inhibitors of DNA repair
and DNA damage response pathways. One such class of agents are
small-molecule inhibitors of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). PARP
inhibitors target DNA base excision repair and radiosensitize cells
through impaired DNA repair. In this study we examined the effects of the
PARP inhibitor LT-626 (BioMarin) together with ionizing radiation in lung
and pancreatic cancers, in vitro and in vivo. Clonogenic assays showed
that lung cancer cells H1299 and H460 and pancreatic cancer cells
Miapaca2 and PDA were sensitive to LT-626 (IC50 from 0.1-5.8 M) and
irradiation (IC50 from 2.2-5.9 Gy). Next, we found the combination of
LT-626 and irradiation effective for inhibiting growth in lung and
pancreatic cancer cells. Our study showed that both 1 and 10 M
concentrations of LT-626 were highly synergistic with 2, 4 and 6 Gy of
irradiation in lung and pancreatic cell lines. Furthermore, in a
fractionated radiation regimen study pretreatment with LT-626 followed by
irradiation for three days significantly decreased cell survival as
studied by clonogenic assay compared to LT-626 or radiation alone. Lung
and pancreatic cancer cells treated with LT-626 and irradiation also
exhibited DNA damage as evident by increased H2AX and Rad51 foci
formation. However, DNA damage caused by irradiation peaked by 2-4 h
following treatment compared with LT-626 treated cells which exhibited
maximum DNA damage around 24 h after treatment. Our in vitro study
clearly demonstrated that PARP inhibition enhanced the efficacy of
irradiation; we therefore decided to study the efficacy LT-626 and
radiation therapy in vivo, using two lung xenograft (H1299 and H460)
cancer models. After tumor implantation mice were treated with either
drug alone (10mg/kg or 20 mg/kg) or radiation alone (2 Gy) or a
combination of drug and radiation for five consecutive days after which
they were followed until the end of the study. We found that combination
of radiation plus LT-626 significantly decreased tumor burden in both
H1299 and H460 xenograft models compared to drug alone or radiation alone
group. Moreover, the median survival in combination treated animals more
than doubled compared to vehicle treated group. Overall our in vitro and
in vivo studies proved that PARP inhibitor LT-626 acts synergistically
with fractionated irradiation in lung and pancreatic cancers.

