Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotype-phenotype discordance of the hepatic drug metabolism
enzyme CYP2C19 in gastrointestinal cancer patients


CYP2C19 is a hepatic drug metabolizing enzyme that contributes to the
metabolism of chemotherapeutic agents such as cyclophosphamide,
thalidomide, bortezomib, icotinib, tivantinib and indisulam. CYP2C19 null
function genotype strongly predicts phenotype in healthy populations.
However we have previously shown an additional acquired loss of CYP2C19
metabolic function in up to one third of patients with advanced
solid-tumor cancers. It is not known whether this effect also occurs in
earlier stage disease. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
this acquired loss of CYP2C19 function was detectable in patients with
stage III-IV and resected disease.Patients undergoing treatment for
gastro-intestinal tumors (n=50) with either no evaluable disease
(resected) or stage III-IV disease were recruited following informed
consent and probed for CYP2C19 activity (200 mg proguanil p.o.) on three
test occasions. CYP2C19 metabolic activity was assessed using HPLC
analysis of the 3h post dose plasma drug and metabolite concentrations.
The log metabolic ratio (drug/metabolite 1 ) was used to categorize
individuals as either extensive or poor metabolizers. CYP2C19 genotype
was determined by PCR-RFLP to identify individuals homozygous for null
function mutations (CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3).One patient had a poor
metabolizer genotype (CYP2C19*2*2) and was excluded. An acquired loss of
CYP2C19 activity was observed in 23% (n=6) stage III-IV and 13% (n=3) of
resected patients at the first test. This genotype-phenotype discordance
was a significant in both groups (pCYP2C19 is a hepatic drug metabolizing
enzyme that contributes to the metabolism of chemotherapeutic agents such
as cyclophosphamide, thalidomide, bortezomib, icotinib, tivantinib and
indisulam. CYP2C19 null function genotype strongly predicts phenotype in
healthy populations. However we have previously shown an additional
acquired loss of CYP2C19 metabolic function in up to one third of
patients with advanced solid-tumor cancers. It is not known whether this
effect also occurs in earlier stage disease. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether this acquired loss of CYP2C19 function was detectable
in patients with stage III-IV and resected disease.Patients undergoing
treatment for gastro-intestinal tumors (n=50) with either no evaluable
disease (resected) or stage III-IV disease were recruited following
informed consent and probed for CYP2C19 activity (200 mg proguanil p.o.)
on three test occasions. CYP2C19 metabolic activity was assessed using
HPLC analysis of the 3h post dose plasma drug and metabolite
concentrations. The log metabolic ratio (drug/metabolite 1 ) was used to
categorize individuals as either extensive or poor metabolizers. CYP2C19
genotype was determined by PCR-RFLP to identify individuals homozygous
for null function mutations (CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3).One patient had a
poor metabolizer genotype (CYP2C19*2*2) and was excluded. An acquired
loss of CYP2C19 activity was observed in 23% (n=6) stage III-IV and 13%
(n=3) of resected patients at the first test. This genotype-phenotype
discordance was a significant in both groups (p<0.0001). Notably, hepatic
CYP2C19 function was not stable over time in a number of study
participants. CYP2C19 phenotype categories were altered in 7 stage III-IV
patients and 5 resected patients over the period of testing. In the
majority of these subjects CYP2C19 activity declined over at least one
additional testing occasion.This study demonstrated that an acquired loss
of CYP2C19 activity was present in patients with stage III-IV disease as
well as in those subjects who had undergone resection. This work confirms
our previous finding of a significant level of CYP2C19 genotype-phenotype
discordance in patients with advanced end-stage cancer. This discordance
is unlikely to be due to rare null mutations in this gene as dynamic
changes in metabolic activity were observed in some individuals. While
the use of genotyping is often suggested as a method to personalize
treatment, this data indicates that this approach could significantly
underestimate the number of phenotypic CYP2C19 poor metabolizers. An
acquired loss of function may have implications for the safety and
efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents metabolized by CYP2C19. Further work
is required to elucidate the mechanisms behind this down-regulation of
drug metabolism in cancer and to determine whether this phenomenon
adversely affects therapeutic outcomes.

