Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of a potent stapled helix peptide that binds to
Replication Protein A


Replication Protein A (RPA) is a major regulator of checkpoint activation
and enhanced DNA repair in cancer cells. In response to genotoxic stress,
the RPA complex binds to and protects ssDNA while serving as a scaffold
to recruit critical checkpoint and DNA-damage response proteins through
the N-terminal region of the 70 kDa subunit of RPA (RPA70N). Specific
disruption of the protein-protein interactions mediated by the RPA70N
domain has the potential to produce selective killing of cancer cells
without the risk of cytotoxicity due to interference in the ssDNA-binding
function.Stapled helix peptides can serve as useful tools for inhibiting
protein-protein interactions. However, their utility can be limited due
to difficulties often encountered during attempts to improve the binding
affinity to the target. Here, we report the discovery and optimization of
a potent stapled helix peptide probe, derived from the endogenous RPA
binding partner ATRIP (ATR-interacting protein), that binds to and
inhibits the RPA70N protein-protein interaction surface. Alanine
scanning, charge abrogation, and rational sequence optimization resulted
in a peptide with a 100-fold potency gain over the native sequence and
improved physical characteristics.In addition to the application of these
traditional strategies, we describe a novel approach for efficiently
designing peptides containing unnatural amino acids. This method involves
the incorporation of an unnatural amino acid inspired by the structure
activity relationships of small molecules that bind to the same site on
the protein. Use of this approach produced stapled peptides with dramatic
increases in binding affinity to RPA70N relative to aooIn al peptide
containing only natural amino acids. The optimized peptides are cell
penetrant, able to enter the nucleus, and co-localize with RPA in the
nucleus at sites of DNA damage. Such a peptide may serve as a probe
molecule to explore both the effects of RPA inhibition on the DNA damage
response and the therapeutic potential of RPA inhibition as a cancer
target.

