Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved generation of central memory CD8+ T cells with CD40L
expressing recombinant vaccinia virus


Immunological memory is the ability of the immune system, upon
re-encounter with the same antigen, to respond with greater speed and
intensity and constitutes the basis for vaccination. Regarding CD8+
T-cells, the memory compartment has been divided in different subsets of
memory cells: Central Memory CD8+ T cells (CD45RO+CD62L+; Tcm) and
Effector Memory CD8+ T cells (CD45RO+CD62L- ; Tem). In cancer
immunotherapy, studies performed on animal models showed that Tcm
tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells, as compared to effector memory T cells,
confer superior antitumor immunity leading to better outcome.. In the
last decades has been clarified that CD4+T cells help, during CD8+ T
cells memory differentiation, is mainly mediated by the CD40L expression
on their surface upon activation and consecutive triggering of CD40
expressed by antigen presenting cells and activated CD8+ T
cells.Recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV) is one of the most immunogenic
viral vectors enabling specific targeting and modulation of anti-tumor
immune responses. We previously demonstrated that infection of antigen
presenting cells (APCs) , with a non-replicating rVV encoding human CD40L
(rVV-CD40L) was leading to an efficient licensing of APC, as demonstrated
by increased expression of surface ligand/receptors (MHC I/II, CD80 and
CD86),Th1 and homeostatic cytokines (IL-12, TNFa, IL-7 and IL-15). Using
sorted naive CD8+ Tcells (CD45RA+CD62L+) primed with infected allogeneic
CD14+ we observed that activated cells had an increased central memory
phenotype (CD45RO+ CD62L+) with rVV40L infection as compared to culture
primed with wild type virus infected CD14+ cells or treated with soluble
40 Ligand recombinant protein (s40L). The majority of Tcm express even
the a-chain of IL-7 receptor (IL-7Ra) which has been reported to be
express on Bona Fide memory cells and is associated with an increased
cells survival. In an autologous system targeting a tumor antigen
response, we demonstrated how CD14+rVV40L, as compared controls or
soluble 40L stimulation, strongly promote the expansion of MelanA/Mart-1
specific CD8+ characterized with a Tcm phenotype and expression of
IL-7Ra. Functional characterization of these tumor specific CD8+
demonstrated higher levels of IFN-g and IL-2. Studies performed in murine
models have shown that, upon activation, CD8+ T cells can also express
the CD40 receptor and therefore become directly sensitive to CD40L
activation. However,in our hands, induction and characterization of CD40
receptor, on human CD8+ T cells remained negative.Overall, these data are
confirming the potent anti-tumor capacities of recombinant vaccinia
viruses expressing CD40L notably via CD40 driven APC licensing which
promotes an effective generation of antigen specific CD8+ T cells with a
memory phenotype. These in-vitro observations validate the strong
clinical potential of our recombinant vaccinia virus constructs
co-expressing CD40L for cancer immunotherapies.

