Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of non-small cell lung cancer cells (NSCLC) to
radiation by Vitamin D (EB 1089)


Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer related deaths in the
United States and other industrialized countries, accounting for 40% of
all cancer deaths. Although smoking cessation programs have led to a
decline in death rates, the need for improved therapies remains, as the
mortality rates for lung cancer patients have not significantly changed
over the years. Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCL) have a
poor prognosis and the median survival rate is less than 12 months.
Previously, vitamin D (1,25-D3) and its analogue, EB 1089, have been
shown to enhance anti-proliferative and anti -tumorigenic effects in
breast tumor cells exposed to radiation (IR). Our current research
efforts were designed to study the effects of vitamin D on the response
to radiation in models of non-small cell lung cancer.Autophagy, a
catabolic process, has been shown to be the primary mode of
radio-sensitization by vitamin D in breast tumor cells. H460 non-small
cell lung tumor cells (wild type in p53, expressing the vitamin D
receptor, mutant in ras), demonstrate transient growth inhibition
followed by proliferative recovery when treated with radiation alone;
growth arrest becomes prolonged with minimal recovery and reduced
clonogenic survival is observed for the combination treatment of (the
vitamin D analog) EB 1089 + radiation. Induction of autophagy was
detected based on acridine orange staining and flow cytometric
quantification of autophagic vesicles. Induction of autophagic flux was
evident based on degradation of p62. In contrast, the combination
treatment failed to increase the extent of apoptosis and senescence over
that induced by radiation alone. Similar data were generated using the
A549 NSCLC cell line which also expresses the vitamin D receptor, is wild
type in p53 and mutant in ras. The autophagy induced by radiation alone
is cytoprotective in nature as a blockade to autophagy increases
sensitization to radiation. However, pharmacological inhibition of
autophagy reversed the radio-sensitization effects of EB 1089, indicating
that a novel form of autophagy, which we have termed cytostatic, appears
to be the primary mode of radio-sensitization in H460 lung tumor cells.
Our studies with autophagy inhibitors further demonstrate a switch
between the cytoprotective and cytostatic roles of autophagy in response
to radiation alone and the combination of IR+EB 1089.AMPK, an energy
sensor, has been shown to be involved in regulating autophagy. An
increase in phosphorylated AMPK levels was observed with the combination
treatment. Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, when used in combination with
IR+ EB 1089, reverted the radio-sensitization effects, implicating AMPK
in radio-sensitization. Ongoing studies are also focused on the potential
role of ULK1 in cytostatic autophagy.These studies suggest that vitamin D
could be utilized to increase sensitivity to radiation treatment for lung
cancer.

