Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in the CBL gene among breast cancer patients in an Asian
clinic-based population


INTRODUCTIONAlthough mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are associated with
familial hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, mutations are only found
in 20 to 25% of these patients. This suggests that additional genes may
be mutated. The Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (CBL) gene encodes a RING
finger E3 ubiquitin ligase. Recent studies have shown that mutations in
the CBL gene occurs in human acute myeloid leukemia and lung cancers. The
relationship of the CBL gene with breast cancer, however, is not well
characterized. The aim of this study was to identify mutations in the CBL
gene in Asian patients with familial or early-onset breast
cancer.METHODSAll patients (n=75) were accrued at the risk assessment
clinic at the National Cancer Centre Singapore, and presented with a
family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer or early-onset breast
cancer. Screening for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes was
performed using Sanger sequencing and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe
Amplification (MLPA). Next generation sequencing was done using the
Agilent SureSelect target-enrichment technology on the Illumina MiSeq
platform, followed by validation using Sanger sequencing.RESULTSTwo
mis-sense variants in the CBL gene were identified. They are CBL c.
560C>T (p. A187V) and c. 1858C>T (p.L620F) occurring in 2/75 (3%) and
8/75 (11%) of the patients, respectively. Both mis-sense mutations were
predicted to be damaging using Polyphen-2 and SIFT. The p.A187V
alteration was predicted to interrupt the N-terminal tyrosine kinase
binding domain (TKB) that is important for ligand-induced ubiquitination
of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). The CBL c. 1858C>T variant has
previously been reported in the NCBI database (rs2227988). Three
individuals, who carried this mutation, had early-onset breast cancer. In
addition, the p.L620F alteration within the proline-rich region, may
disrupt the interactions of binding partners to the c-CBL protein, which
are required to recruit c-CBL to RTKs. All patients, except one, with
germline CBL mutations were negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations.CONCLUSIONThis preliminary study has identified damaging CBL
mutations in an Asian population with breast cancer and warrants further
investigations in other breast cancer populations.

