Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harnessing the electrophilic character of michael acceptor- and
isothiocyanato-centric compounds as thioredoxin reductase inhibitors


Due to the high proliferation rate of cancer cells, reactive oxygen
species, a metabolic by-product of aerobic respiration, poses a threat to
cell survival. Cancer cells therefore rely heavily on intracellular redox
systems to attain redox homeostasis. The thioredoxin and glutathione
systems are the two major thiol redox systems that play a key role in
maintaining intracellular redox homeostasis. The thioredoxin system
comprises thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase and NADPH. Thioredoxin
reductase catalyzes the NADPH-dependent reduction of the active site
disulfide of oxidized thioredoxin. Through a conserved redox active
dithiol/disulfide motif (-Cys-xx-Cys-), thioredoxins participate in
reversible thiol-disulfide exchange reactions so as to protect cellular
proteins from oxidative damage. Thioredoxin is also involved in cell
signaling pathways that regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis.
However, in cancer, the biological effects of the thioredoxin system
contribute to tumor growth and progression.Accumulating evidence has
indicated that the selenocysteine-dependent thioredoxin reductase enzyme
is a valid molecular target for anticancer drug development. Numerous
natural products and synthetic compounds, including several clinically
used anti-cancer agents have been recognized to target thioredoxin
reductase. In our laboratory, we had evaluated the possible inhibitory
effect of a panel of structurally diversified naturally-occurring
compounds and their synthetic derivatives on thioredoxin reductase
activity. These compounds contain either an ,-unsaturated carbonyl (also
known as Michael acceptor) or isothiocyanato (N=C=S) moiety, which
contribute towards their electrophilic propensities. Analogs bearing
superior structural modifications were found to display
anti-proliferative activities against HCT116 colorectal and MCF-7 breast
carcinoma cells at GI50 values in the sub-micromolar range, as well as
inhibit activity of recombinant rat thioredoxin reductase with
half-maximal inhibitory concentrations of 10-20 micromolar. Moreover,
treatment of the susceptible cancer cells with these compounds at
apoptosis inducing doses led to a reduction in cellular thioredoxin
reductase activity. At a molecular level, the tested compounds inhibited
thioredoxin reductase, which caused thioredoxin oxidation and
dissociation of the thioredoxin-apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
(ASK1) complexes. This led to ASK1-dependent activation of the JNK and
p38 MAPK pathways to result in apoptosis induction.In conclusion, from
the results obtained, we propose that thioredoxin reductase inhibition is
a critical cellular event that contributes to the proapoptotic effects of
electrophilic bioactive compounds.

