Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of catechol-O-methyltransferase gene promoter
polymorphisms in renal cancer cells


Catechol-compounds such as 4-hydroxy-estrogen have been shown to play a
role in the renal carcinogenesis process. To counter the effects of the
highly reactive and mutagenic catechol-estrogens, the
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene detoxifies these compounds by
forming methoxy compounds, which have been shown to be biologically
inactive. Proper COMT function is thus vital for cells and a mechanism by
which activity levels can be affected is through polymorphisms. The
Val(158)Met polymorphism that correlates with renal cancer has been shown
to reduce COMT enzymatic activity, but also of importance are those
variants in the promoter region which can lead to alterations in gene
expression levels. The aim of this study was to determine if
polymorphisms of the COMT promoter can influence their transcription
levels. To examine this, plasmids containing wildtype regions of the COMT
promoter were obtained and site-directed mutagenesis used to create
polymorphic variants. Constructs were then transfected into the Caki-1
renal cell line to measure their effects on gene expression by using a
luciferase reporter assay. A total of 8 polymorphic sites covering the
distal and proximal promoter region were evaluated. Results indicate that
the variant at polymorphic sites rs2020917 (C to T), rs13306278 (C to T),
and rs6269 (A to G) caused a significant reduction (PCatechol-compounds
such as 4-hydroxy-estrogen have been shown to play a role in the renal
carcinogenesis process. To counter the effects of the highly reactive and
mutagenic catechol-estrogens, the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT)
gene detoxifies these compounds by forming methoxy compounds, which have
been shown to be biologically inactive. Proper COMT function is thus
vital for cells and a mechanism by which activity levels can be affected
is through polymorphisms. The Val(158)Met polymorphism that correlates
with renal cancer has been shown to reduce COMT enzymatic activity, but
also of importance are those variants in the promoter region which can
lead to alterations in gene expression levels. The aim of this study was
to determine if polymorphisms of the COMT promoter can influence their
transcription levels. To examine this, plasmids containing wildtype
regions of the COMT promoter were obtained and site-directed mutagenesis
used to create polymorphic variants. Constructs were then transfected
into the Caki-1 renal cell line to measure their effects on gene
expression by using a luciferase reporter assay. A total of 8 polymorphic
sites covering the distal and proximal promoter region were evaluated.
Results indicate that the variant at polymorphic sites rs2020917 (C to
T), rs13306278 (C to T), and rs6269 (A to G) caused a significant
reduction (P<0.01) whereas rs165656 (G to C) and rs165722 (C to T) caused
a significant increase (PCatechol-compounds such as 4-hydroxy-estrogen
have been shown to play a role in the renal carcinogenesis process. To
counter the effects of the highly reactive and mutagenic
catechol-estrogens, the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene
detoxifies these compounds by forming methoxy compounds, which have been
shown to be biologically inactive. Proper COMT function is thus vital for
cells and a mechanism by which activity levels can be affected is through
polymorphisms. The Val(158)Met polymorphism that correlates with renal
cancer has been shown to reduce COMT enzymatic activity, but also of
importance are those variants in the promoter region which can lead to
alterations in gene expression levels. The aim of this study was to
determine if polymorphisms of the COMT promoter can influence their
transcription levels. To examine this, plasmids containing wildtype
regions of the COMT promoter were obtained and site-directed mutagenesis
used to create polymorphic variants. Constructs were then transfected
into the Caki-1 renal cell line to measure their effects on gene
expression by using a luciferase reporter assay. A total of 8 polymorphic
sites covering the distal and proximal promoter region were evaluated.
Results indicate that the variant at polymorphic sites rs2020917 (C to
T), rs13306278 (C to T), and rs6269 (A to G) caused a significant
reduction (P<0.01) whereas rs165656 (G to C) and rs165722 (C to T) caused
a significant increase (P<0.01) in luciferase activity. No differences
were observed for rs737865 (A to G), 4646312 (T to C), and rs3810595 (G
to C). These results demonstrate polymorphisms of the COMT promoter
region to cause altered expression levels in renal cells and warrant
further studies with clinical case-control specimens to determine their
associations for renal cell cancer.

