Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant enrichment by ICE COLD-PCR prior to the next-generation
sequencing enables high sensitivity and high throughput detection of
cancer biomarkers in patient samples


Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) allows high throughput mutation analysis
of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes by targeted resequencing.
However, increased sensitivity for mutation detection due to the spatial
heterogeneity of the solid tumor or temporal heterogeneity found within
the circulating free DNA (cfDNA) may be needed to identify the key
biomarkers that may guide the personalized treatment for patients in the
era of precision medicine.ICE COLD-PCR (ICP) technology is capable of
simultaneous enrichment of mutations targeted by a 50 base reference
oligonucleotide in a modified PCR reaction followed by standard Sanger
sequencing. In this study, we sought to establish a high sensitivity and
high throughput mutation detection platform using ICP combined with NGS.
ICP products from low frequency mutation mixtures were enzymatically
treated, ligated to the Ion Torrent adapters and analyzed by the Ion
Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) and the MiSeq NGS platforms. The
ICP-NGS analysis of low-level mutations provided a virtual increase in
depth of coverage ahead of NGS analysis that increased the sensitivity of
NGS detection.High sensitivity detection of cancer genetic biomarkers
from cfDNA has the potential to facilitate cancer diagnosis and provide
guidance for personalized cancer treatment by serving as a liquid biopsy
when there is no available tumor tissue and as a process for monitoring
treatment effectiveness and emergence of drug resistance. To explore the
clinical utility of the ICP-NGS platform in detecting cancer mutations in
cfDNA, 26 plasma DNA samples harvested from patients with carcinomas were
analyzed simultaneously with NGS for PIK3CA exons 9 and 20, KRAS exon 2,
and EGFR exons 18 and 19 with or without prior ICP enrichment for
mutants. For the 15 variants (P5%) detected by ICP-NGS, only 3 variants
were observed in NGS without ICP; even so, the mutant frequency for the 3
variants was low (5-10%) without the prior ICP enrichment but was
enriched to 80-90% after the ICP. More importantly, 12 of the 15 variants
detected by ICP-NGS were only detectable in NGS analysis because of the
prior ICP enrichment. These results support the application of ICP in
front of NGS in high-sensitivity and high-throughput detection of mutants
in cfDNA.In conclusion, we have established a platform of mutant
enrichment by ICE COLD-PCR followed by NGS analysis that is capable of
high sensitivity and high throughput detection of cancer genetic
biomarkers. ICP-NGS detected the 80% of mutations in cfDNA that were
undetectable without ICP enrichment, suggesting that ICP-NGS has the
potential to detect and monitor patients' genetic biomarker in real-time
and provide guidance for the personalized cancer treatment.

