Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia inducible factor regulation of galectin3 expression in
neuroblastoma cells:Implications in controlling malignant phenotype of
neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an extra cranial tumor arising from neural crest
progenitor cells. Effective angiogenesis, or new blood vessel formation,
is critical for NB tumor growth and progression. Elevated levels of
galectin-3 (Gal-3), an angiogenic cytokine is extensively correlated with
the malignant behavior and poor prognosis of many cancers. Our studies
have shown that Gal-3 expression is significantly up-regulated in
aggressive NB cells, and Gal-3 promotes angiogenesis and migration of
microglial cells. We have also previously reported that Gal-3 expression
is up regulated under low oxygen/hypoxic conditions. The specific
mechanisms of Gal-3 induction in NB are not understood. Hypoxic
microenvironment drives malignant phenotypes of cancer cells through the
transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF1). Because NB cells
reside in a low oxygen environment, we determined if the hypoxic status
modulates Gal-3 expression. In this study, we utilized RT-PCR, western
blot analysis, immunofluorescence staining, RNA interference and
biochemical approaches. The hypoxia-mimetic, cobalt chloride
(CoCl2)-treated neuroblastoma Neuro-2a cells showed enhanced levels of
HIF 1 protein. In correlation with the increased HIF1 levels, Gal-3
expression was increased at both RNA and protein levels. Silencing of
HIF1 expression by small hairpin interfering RNA in Neuro-2a cells
blocked hypoxia induced Gal-3 expression indicating that HIF1 regulates
Gal-3 expression in NB cells. Down regulation of Gal-3 resulted in
decreased levels of the angiogenic factors IL-6 and urokinase plasminogen
activator in association with decreased proliferation, migration, and
angiogenesis. Thus our data suggest that HIF1alpha plays a role in the
regulation of Gal-3 expression and malignant phenotype of NB cells.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

