Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleolin-targeting NUCANT normalizes tumor vasculature and
inhibits tumor growth and metastasis formation in mouse models of cancer


Nucleolin (NCL) is a highly conserved nucleocytoplasmic multifunctional
protein predominantly localized at nucleolus. It shuttles to the cell
surface in tumor, and cell-surface NCL has become a target for
anti-cancer therapy. We have recently developed a several multivalent
pseudopeptides family NUCANT for NCL and Nucleophosmin antagonist. Among
these, N6L peptide, which strongly inhibits human tumor growth by
inducing apoptosis of tumor cells (1), is currently in phase II clinical
trial for cancer. Since NCL shuttles to the cell surface of endothelial
cells under VEGF stimulation, and NUCANT inhibited developmental
angiogenesis, we sought to investigate the effect of NUCANT on tumor
vasculature and endothelial cell (EC) homeostasis.In human ECs, we showed
that cell-surface NCL is glycosilated, N6L specifically induced the
endocytosis of glycosilated NCL and its accumulation in the nucleus. NCL
internalization by N6L blocked endothelial cell cycle progression and
inhibits endothelial cell adhesion and migration. It is known that NCL
belongs to intracrine pathways which form intracellular positive
feed-back loops from the cell surface to the nucleus thereby maintaining
a specific cellular state. Our findings suggest that N6L interferes with
glycosilated NCL intracrine pathway. NCL is a marker of tumor vessels we
investigated the effects of NUCANT on tumor angiogenesis in a mouse model
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) (2) and a model of pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (RipTag2). We tested NUCANT in soluble and the
clinically used poliplex form. As expected, NUCANT inhibited primary
tumor growth and vessel area. Notably, NUCANT induced both vessel pruning
and normalization of tumor vasculature. In addition, tumor vessel
normalization correlated with stronger inhibition of tumor growth and
metastasis achieved by the poliplex form.We conclude that NCL targeting
acts both on tumor and endothelial cells and suggest that poliplex NUCANT
blocks metastasis formation and normalizes tumor vasculature by
interfering with NCL-mediated oncogenic and pro-angiogenic cellular
states.1. Destouches D, et al. (2011) A simple approach to cancer therapy
afforded by multivalent pseudopeptides that target cell-surface
nucleoproteins. Cancer Res 71(9):3296-3305.2. Olson P, Chu GC, Perry SR,
Nolan-Stevaux O, & Hanahan D (Imaging guided trials of the angiogenesis
inhibitor sunitinib in mouse models predict efficacy in pancreatic
neuroendocrine but not ductal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108(49):E1275-1284.

