Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single nucleotide polypmorphisms in the estrogen receptor gene as
a determining factor in Tamoxifen-treated ovarian cancer


Epithelial Ovarian Carcinomas (EOC) frequently present as late stage
malignancies. Because of this lengthy, clinically silent period, a
significant number of mutations may accumulate with each emerging clonal
population. After surgical removal and chemotherapy, recurrent disease
may still occur. Opting for hormonal therapy is a treatment consideration
for those patients who have asymptomatic recurrence or, if they are not
tolerating treatment well, may require a break from chemotherapy.
However, because of the aggressive nature of EOC, hormonal treatment
should be administered only if it will provide some efficacious benefit.
The active metabolite of Tamoxifen (OH-tamoxifen) can function as a
hormonal antagonistic agent to estrogen driven EOCs. However, single
nucleotide variations and/or mutations in the ligand binding domain (LBD)
of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene may negatively affect the
ability of OH-tamoxifen to bind and effect its desired action, resulting
in wasted time and treatment. Identification of nucleotide variants/
mutations in the ESR1 LBD may be of clinical importance by identifying
patients with EOC who may be better suited for treatment with other
agents. In this study we identified twelve cases of ESR1(+) EOC in which
the treating clinician had requested immunohistochemical confirmation of
ESR1 expression. Four separate primer pairs were designed to encompass
the amino acids responsible for OH-tamoxifen binding identified from a
previous crystallography study. These same regions responsible for
binding OH-tamoxifen were also queried in the dbSNP database for
nucleotide variations. Representative tissue blocks with >80% tumor
content were selected from each case. DNA was extracted from formalin
fixed, paraffin embedded tissue sections and subjected to the polymerase
chain reaction creating 48 different samples. The resulting amplicons
were purified and sequenced, followed by basic local alignment analysis
to the most recent NCBI homo sapien gene annotation for the ESR1 gene. No
variants were identified in the dbSNP database for the regions of
interest. Our results found only one silent nucleotide variation which
was located in exon 10. Prior to this study the justification for using
tamoxifen in EOC was empiric. Our results indicate that the absence of
nucleotide variations in the critical ESR1 LBD for OH-tamoxifen provide
scientific evidence and support for its continued usage as an optional
treatment modality in ESR1(+)EOC.

