Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hMENA splicing program and TGF-1-mediated EMT in pancreatic cancer


BackgroundEpithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an early event in
pancreatic cancer and has been involved in cancer invasiveness. An
intense stromal reaction, peculiar to the pancreatic tumor
microenvironment, includes cancer-associated fibroblasts(CAFs), abundant
cells in the tumor stroma, recently linked to the induction of EMT. On
the other hand, the EMT process requires a dynamic remodeling of the
actin cytoskeleton, and the splicing program of hMENA, a regulator of
actin, has been associated with the EMT process. We have described two
alternatively expressed isoforms, hMENA11a and hMENAv6, with opposite
functions in invasiveness in breast cancer (1). hMENA expression was
detected in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma samples (PDAC) (2),
but no data are available on the alternative isoform expression in this
neoplasia. The aim of this study is to investigate the role of hMENA
splicing in TGF- -mediated EMT in pancreatic cancer, the mechanisms
involved in hMENA induction in PDAC and the role of CAFs in this
process.MethodshMENA isoform expression was evaluated in PDAC tissues by
immunohistochemistry using isoform-specific antibodies. Human PDAC cell
lines, untreated or TGF- treated, were characterized for the expression
of hMENA isoforms and markers of EMT by qRT-PCR and WB analysis. The
effects of both hMENAv6 knockdown or overexpression were also evaluated.
Pancreatic cancer associated-fibroblasts were isolated from primary PDAC
tissues. To study the role of fibroblast-cancer cell interactions on
hMENA expression, a noncontact coculture system was used.ResultsIHC
analysis of PDAC tissues revealed that epithelial hMENA11a is rarely
expressed in primary pancreatic tumors that express a high level of hMENA
and hMENAv6 isoforms. In a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines,
hMENA11a expression correlates with an epithelial phenotype, wherea
hMENAv6 expression is associated with a mesechymal phenotype. TGF-
treatment specifically upregulated the invasive hMENAv6 isoform
expression. Knockdown of endogenous hMENA/hMENAv6 isoform reduced cell
invasiveness, reverted cells to an epithelial -like phenotype with an
increased E-cadherin expression and impaired the TGF--mediated vimentin
up-regulation. Conversely, overexpression of hMENAv6 increased the
expression of the mesenchymal marker vimentin. Freshly explanted CAFs
expressed the mesenchymal hMENAv6, and not hMENA11a and produced
paracrine factors involved in the induction of hMENA isoforms in tumor
cells.ConclusionsThese data provide new and critical insights into the
role of hMENA splicing in TGF- mediated EMT and identify the hMENA
splicing program as a promising pathway for the development of new
diagnostics and therapeutics in PDAC.(1) Di Modugno F. et al PNAS 2012(2)
Pino S. et al Clin Cancer Res 2008

