Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomics analysis reveals differential signaling pathways
among clear cell and papillary renal cell carcinoma tumors


Introduction: The use of kinase inhibitors with targets such as VEGFR has
heralded a new era of treatment for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
patients. However, patients develop resistance with time. Therefore,
novel targets must be identified and a systems level description of RCC
produced. To this end, we used mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomics
to nominate targets as well as compare RCC subtypes. Methods: We
developed an integrative strategy combining RCC phosphoproteomics and
functional interrogation using drug screening. Tyrosine phosphorylated
peptide immunoprecipitation and purification was performed in clear cell
RCC (ccRCC) and normal renal cortex cell lines and analyzed via
nano-liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry interfaced with an
electrospray hybrid ion-trap mass spectrometer. Eight ccRCC and five
papillary RCC (pRCC) tumor tissues were also analyzed. We assembled a
library of 180 small molecules, including 60 tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), and screened them at multiple concentrations in 10 clear cell RCC
(ccRCC) cell lines. Results: Among the ccRCC cell lines, 153 phosphosites
(114 proteins) were identified. Receptor tyrosine kinases included EGFR,
MET, ERBB4, and EPHB2 and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases included ABL2,
JAK2, KALRN, and PTK2. Serine/threonine kinases were the most abundant
kinases and included, among others, several CDK and MAPK members. Other
frequently observed phosphosites corresponded to cytoskeleton (10%) and
cell adhesion (6%) proteins. Among the ccRCC tumors, 119 phosphosites (99
proteins) were identified. In contrast to the cell lines, the ccRCC
tumors demonstrated increased Src family kinase signaling but less RTK
signaling. Among the pRCC tumors, 113 phosphosites (98 proteins) were
identified, including 37 not identified in the ccRCC tumors. This data,
coupled with the TKI screen, offered some interesting observations. MET
phosphotyrosine peptide intensity was relatively low in ccRCC compared to
pRCC and among the eight MET inhibitors tested, seven failed to
significantly inhibit cell viability. These results suggest that MET
signaling may be more active in pRCC than ccRCC. Other divergent patterns
of phosphotyrosine signaling emerged. For example, certain tyrosine
phosphatases that could impact signaling displayed higher phosphorylation
patterns in ccRCC. Other kinases currently not targeted by RCC
therapeutics were more highly phosphorylated in pRCC relative to ccRCC
tumors. The functional impact of these findings is currently undergoing
evaluation. Conclusions: Integrating global phosphoproteomics of cell
lines and tumors with functional analyses can shed light on key survival
and growth pathways in clear cell and papillary RCC. Further studies in
human tissues are ongoing and will be presented.

