Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F1 deficiency causes increased migration through upregulation of
MYLK


Malignant melanoma is an extremely aggressive disease with high
metastatic potential. Several studies have shown that the transcription
factor E2F1 is overexpressed in melanoma. E2F1 belongs to the family of
E2F transcription factors; is more abundant in melanoma cells than in
normal melanocytes, which highlights its relevance to melanoma biology.
E2F1 participates in a variety of biological processes such as
proliferation, apoptosis, development, differentiation, DNA damage and
repair, oxidative metabolism, and self-renewal by virtue of its
transcriptional activator functions. However, its role in many of these
biological processes in melanoma is not yet fully addressed. In this
study, we show that E2F1 deficiency increased migration and invasion of
melanoma cells, which was associated with increased MYLK at both RNA and
protein level. MYLK is a calcium-calmodulin (Ca2+//CaM)-dependent myosin
light chain kinase, which phosphorylates Ser-19 of myosin II after
activation. This process is implicated in the regulation of smooth muscle
contraction. In non-smooth muscle, MYLK is known to be involved in many
inflammatory diseases through regulation of tight junction and intestinal
epithelial barrier function. MYLK is also involved with proliferation and
migration in cancers of the breast, prostate and colon, but its
expression and role in melanoma cells is unknown. ML-7, the specific
inhibitor for MYLK abrogated the increased migration and invasion due to
E2F1 deficiency. Transient knockdown of MYLK also significantly abrogated
the increased migration and invasion from E2F1 deficiency. Our results
strongly suggest that E2F1 deficiency enhanced migration and invasion
through regulating MYLK expression. We also found increased pERK in E2F1
knockdown cells, which suggest that ERK activation may be involved in the
up-regulation of MYLK. All of our data taken together suggests that
E2F1-mediated inhibition of melanoma cell migration occurs through a
complex cross-talk between E2F1-ERK-MYLK and is not through a simple
linear relationship between signaling molecules. Supported by R21
CA125719 (RG).

