Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel and anti-DLL4
(demcizumab) produces synergistic growth inhibition, delays tumor
recurrence and reduces tumor initiating cells in pancreatic cancer


Clinical management of pancreatic cancer is challenging and this disease
remains the fourth most common cause of cancer-related death.
Conventional chemotherapeutic agents, including gemcitabine, commonly
used in the treatment of pancreatic cancer, have low response rates and
limited effects on improving patient survival. A recent Phase III
clinical trial has demonstrated that nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane, a
protein-bound paclitaxel) in combination with gemcitabine significantly
improved response rate and overall survival compared to patients
receiving gemcitabine alone. We previously demonstrated that targeting
Notch signaling by anti-DLL4 (demcizumab) inhibits tumor growth, reduces
tumor initiating cell frequency and induces differentiation in
patient-derived pancreatic xenograft tumors. To further explore the
utility of demcizumab in the setting of pancreatic cancer, we evaluated
anti-DLL4 combination with gemcitabine/ nab-paclitaxel in a panel of
pancreatic xenograft models. We found that anti-DLL4 in combination with
gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel resulted in striking tumor regression,
whereas tumors treated with chemotherapeutic agents alone grew
continuously. The effect of the triple combination in some tumors was
quite durable and persisted after both antibody and chemotherapeutic
treatments were discontinued. The significant growth inhibitory effect by
the combination of anti-DLL4 with gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel was
associated with a decrease in cancer stem cell frequency and an increase
in apoptosis and tumor cell differentiation. The triple combination of
anti-DLL4, gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel was generally more efficacious
compared with anti-DLL4 plus gemcitabine alone. Notably, in a xenograft
established from a patient that previously did not respond to demcizumab
plus gemcitabine, the triple combination was highly effective. We are
currently evaluating demcizumab in combination with gemcitabine plus
nab-paclitaxel in a Phase 1b clinical trial in pancreatic cancer.

