Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The C-terminus of orexin plays a crucial role in the cellular
apoptosis induction mediated by OX1 receptor


Orexins (orexin-A and orexin-B) are hypothalamic peptides involved in the
sleep/wake control which interact with two GPCR sub-types, OX1R and OX2R.
Our group has demonstrated that OX1R was highly expressed in colonic
cancer cell lines (HT29, Caco-2, SW480, Lovo) in which orexins: 1) induce
a strong mitochondrial apoptosis; 2) induce a strong inhibition of tumor
growth in nude mice xenografted with those cells. This effect was
mediated by an original mechanism involving: i) the presence of two ITIMs
(immunoreceptor tyrosine inhibitory motif) in the OX1R sequence; ii) the
recruitment and activation of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2. Moreover,
OX1R was expressed in resected colonic tumors and in liver metastases but
not in normal tissue. The present study explores the structure-function
relationships between orexin-B and its OX1R. The contribution of each
side chains of orexin-B were investigated by systematic single alanine
(alanine-scanning) exchange of each residue of the native peptides. All
modified orexin-B peptides were analyzed for their binding affinities and
abilities to induce apoptosis in CHO cells stably transfected with
recombinant human OX1R (CHO-OX1R). The data shows that the substitution
of L11, L15, I25, G24, L26 and M28 in alanine and A22 in leucine resulted
in the loss of binding affinity of orexin-B to its OX1R. Moreover, the
substitution of these residues and some others including Q16, A17, S18,
N20 and T27 localized mainly in the C-terminal part of orexin-B, strongly
alter the ability of the peptide to induce mitochondrial apoptosis in
CHO-OX1R. To determine which OX1R domains are involved in
orexin-B-induced apoptosis, we have constructed a 3D-molecular model of
OX1R derived of structural data recently obtained for beta2 adrenergic
receptor. Based on this 3D-model, we have docked the C-terminal end of
orexin-B (sequence 20-28) into the whole receptor and performed the
substitution of residues presents in transmembrane domains (TM) by
directed mutagenesis. Our data reveal that K120, P123, Y124, F340, T341,
H344 and W345 localized in TM2, TM3, TM6 and TM7 of OX1R residues play a
role in orexin-B recognition and in orexin-B-induced apoptosis. These
results strongly suggest that 1) the C-terminal end of orexin-B plays an
important role in the pro-apoptotic effect of the peptide; 2) the
C-terminal end of orexin-B interacts with some residues localized into
the TM of receptor. In conclusion, this study defines the
structure-function relationship of ligand recognition and
orexin-B-induced apoptosis of human OX1R and should allow the development
of new agonist molecules.

