Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absence of S100A9 confers survival advantage in an aggressive de
novo mouse model of glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common (60%) primary brain
tumor in adults and constitutes a major challenge for both patients and
clinicians, with a median survival of only 15-21 months when treated with
surgery, radiation therapy and temozolomide. To improve patient outcome,
a promising and safe avenue of adjuvant treatment is immune therapy with
dendritic cell vaccines or adoptive T cell transfer. These treatments are
however hindered by the immune suppressive environment induced by GBMs.
Understanding the mechanisms by which GBM suppress the anti-tumor immune
response is paramount in order to develop successful immune therapies.The
Sleeping Beauty transposase system was used to modify the genetic makeup
of stem cells in the sub-ventricular zone of neonatal mice and thus
induce de novo glioblastomas with several combinations of genes. The most
aggressive tumors where induced when combining NRAS and SV-40 Large T
antigen (NLgT) generating invasive tumors which show the histological
hallmarks human GBM (WHO grade IV) with pseudo-pallisading necrosis,
neovascularization and hemorrhages, rendering the mice moribund with a
median survival of 30 days.Myeloid derived suppressive cells, a
heterogeneous population of immature bone marrow derived cells, are
induced by cancers and other consumptive diseases and strongly inhibit
adaptive and innate immune responses. We show that MDSCs isolated from de
novo GBMs, inhibit antigen-specific and antigen non-specific T cell
proliferation. Tumor infiltrating MDSCs highly express the
pro-inflammatory secreted calcium binding protein S100A9 and its cognate
receptors RAGE and TLR4. In bone marrow cultures, conditioned media from
primary cell lines derived from NLgT tumors induce a marked expansion
(60-70%) of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and enhance the
expression of S100A9. Mice deficient for S100A9 with de novo NLgT tumors
show an increased survival compared to wild-type animals (median
survival= 47days, a 56% improvement). Analysis of tumor-infiltrating
mononuclear cells in moribund NLgT wild-type and S100A9KO mice shows no
significant difference in percent infiltrating MDSCs, macrophages and
dendritic cells (% of CD45+), however the percent of CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes is increased in S100A9 KO (16% vs. 6% p=0.0228). In addition,
expression of MHCII is increased in macrophages and dendritic cells from
S100A9 KO mice when compared to wild type mice.Taken together these data
suggest that the absence of S100A9 confers a survival advantage by
allowing a stronger anti-tumor immune response with:(1) increased number
of cytotoxic T lymphocytes and (2) increased maturation of antigen
presenting cells. Experiments are currently underway to identify the
detailed cellular and molecular events, which give rise to this
phenotype.This study was supported by NIH/RO1 NS057711 and NS074387.

