Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human immune cell infiltration of tumors in a PBMC-humanized NSG
mouse xenograft model changes with treatment of an anti-tissue factor
antibody


Immunocompromised mice engrafted with human hematopoietic stem cells
(HSC) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) can be promising
models of human immune system compartments, useful for studying diseases
such as diabetes, lupus, GVHD, and cancer. We have utilized the
PBMC-humanized mouse as a platform for xenograft models. To investigate
the effect of human antibody (Ab) treatment on immune cells and
xenografts using this platform, we examined the infiltrate of human
immune cells in A431 xenografts with treatment of an effector
function-enhanced anti-tissue factor VIIA (TFVIIA) Ab.Female NSG mice
were intravenously engrafted with human PBMC, and subcutaneously
implanted two weeks later with A431 human SCC cells. One week post tumor
cell implant and thereafter twice weekly, mice received treatment with
anti-TFVIIA Ab. Peripheral blood, bone marrow and spleen were analyzed by
FACS and terminal tumor samples were analyzed by FACS and
immunohistochemistry (IHC).FACS analysis of blood from Ab treated and
untreated tumor-bearing mice collected from baseline to termination,
showed an overall increase in the frequency of human CD45+, CD3+, CD8+,
and CD4+ cells, while the frequency of CD56+ cells remained stable. In
comparison, non-tumor bearing mice had increased CD56+ cells and
decreased CD3+ cells. FACS analysis of tumors showed a robust increase in
the frequency of CD56+ cells and a decrease in the frequency of CD3+
cells with treatment of anti-TF Ab. With treatment, the frequency of CD8+
cells was markedly lower and the frequency of CD4+ cells
unchanged.Histological analysis was performed on A431 FFPE xenografts
from both the treated and non-treated groups. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining of the xenografts confirmed the presence of inflammatory cells
in the tumors and also showed greater PBMC infiltration of the tumors in
the presence of the anti-TFVIIA Ab. Xenografts treated with anti-TFVIIA
Ab exhibited greater infiltration of human CD3+, CD8+, and CD57+ cells.
There was an increase in cleaved caspase-3 (CC3)+ cells in Ab-treated
xenografts, indicating an increase in apoptosis with anti-TFVIIA Ab
treatment.In conclusion, anti-TFVIIA Ab treatment causes changes in
immune cell populations in xenografts. While the mechanism is unknown,
one possibility is that NK migration into the tumor coupled with
increased apoptosis with treatment indicates ADCC activity by the NK
cells. This would signify some preservation of immune cell function in
the PBMC engraftment model, and would enhance studying the effects of
experimental antibodies in a more humanized setting.

