Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells enriched by the negative selection system
PowerMag is a useful predictor for treatment response of metastatic
colorectal cancer patients


Enumeration of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provides prognostic and
predictive value to guide treatment options. This study aims to (1)
evaluate the merits of the PowerMag system, an immunomagnetic separation
technique that we recently developed for negative selection of CTCs, in
the prediction of treatment response; (2) perform analysis to investigate
whether there is a correlation between the imaging response and the
changes of CTCs counts before and during chemotherapy for the patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). A total of 47 mCRC patients
were enrolled in this prospective single-center study. CTCs were isolated
from the peripheral blood of these patients by PowerMag at baseline and 2
weeks after starting first dose of chemotherapy. CTCs enumeration was
then performed by immunofluorescence staining using the anti-epithelial
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) antibody. Tumor response at 12 weeks after
chemotherapy of the whole cohort was monitored by computed tomography
(CT) scans following RECIST criteria 1.0. Our data revealed that PowerMag
is a cost-effective negative selection-based CTCs isolation platform with
a CTCs detection rate of 89.4% (42/47). The CTCs counts could
successfully differ mCRC patients from healthy donors (P = 0.0015). The
higher baseline CTCs number was associated with initially metastatic
status rather than recurrent settings (P = 0.042). In all assessable
patients, a high correlation rate of 86.7% was found between changes of
CTCs (decline or elevation) and CT responses (progressive disease, and
partial response/stable disease) with a P value of 0.005 (Fisher exact
test). These data indicate that the change of CTCs counts before and
during treatment is in accord with the image response evaluation at 12
weeks after initiation of treatment. In conclusion, PowerMag is a
cost-effective method for negative selection of CTCs from cancer
patients. Moreover, comparison of CTCs counts before and during treatment
is a useful predictor for disease progression of mCRC patients that
warrants further investigation in large-scale validation trial.

