Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ormeloxifene attenuates metastatic and glycolytic pathways in
breast cancer cells


Background: Breast cancer is the second most deadly cancer in female,
resulting in over 39,000 deaths in year 2012. Triple negative breast
cancer is a subtype of breast cancer characterized by its poor outcome
and a lack of targeted therapies. New targeted therapies are therefore an
urgent unmet medical need for this patient population. Recent
investigations into anti-cancer drug are targeted on repurposing
pre-approved and safe drugs for cancer treatment. We report for the first
time that a non-steroidal, selective estrogen receptor inhibitor,
ormeloxifene (ORM) inhibits Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) and
glycolytic pathway through AMPK 1/2 inhibition in triple negative breast
cancer cells. They are both involved in promoting cancer cell survival,
proliferation and metastasis. MTA1 is an initiator of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) which is responsible for metastasis and poor
prognosis. AMPK 2 is important for glycolysis and promotes tumor
survival.Methods: Herein, we investigated the use of ORM for the
treatment of breast cancer. We used MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cell lines as
prototypical model and investigated the effect of ORM treatment on MTA1
and AMPK 2 expression pattern. We investigated the effect of ORM on cell
proliferation (MTS), clonogenic potential (anchorage dependent growth) of
the cells and analyzed its effect on markers of EMT through Western
blotting. Further, we performed glycolytic function analysis using
Seahorse analyzer and mitochondrial membrane potential analysis by
Tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester (TMRE). We performed Western blotting
to investigate the role of ORM on MTA1 and AMPK inhibition.Results: Our
results suggest that ORM inhibits proliferation of both MB-231 and MCF-7
breast cancer cells at low concentrations. Investigation of the EMT
marker profile revealed a dose dependent decrease in the expression of
MTA1 in both the cells on ORM treatment. This leads to inhibition of
motility and invasion of cells in a concentration dependent manner.
Additionally, treatment of MB-231 cells with ORM suppresses vimentin
expression, a marker for EMT that aids in rapid metastasis. ORM inhibits
transcription factors, Snail and Slug, known to promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions during tumor development. Importantly,
it was observed that ORM also inhibits glycolytic pathway in breast
cancer cells independent of mitochondrial membrane depolarization. ORM
inhibits total AMPK and dephosphorylates AMPK 2 in breast cancer
cells.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that ORM effectively targets MTA1
and glycolytic pathway and inhibits breast cancer cell growth and EMT.
Overall, this study suggests that ORM can be a potential therapeutic
modality for triple negative breast cancer treatment.

