Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicoRNAs in regulation of colon cancer stem cells


Accumulating evidence supports the contention that epithelial cancers,
including sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC), the incidence of which
increases sharply after the age of 50 years, are diseases driven by
self-renewing cancer stem/stem-like cells (CSCs). We have reported that
CSC population in the colonic mucosa increases with advancing age. This
was accompanied by a concomitant rise in microRNA-21 (miR-21) and
reduction in miR-145 in the colonic mucosa. Interestingly, increased
levels of miR-21 and reduction in miR-145 were noted in the colonic
mucosa of patients with adenomatous polyps or CRC. These observations
prompted us to speculate a role for miR-21 and miR-145 in regulating CSCs
in the colonic mucosa. Indeed, we found that overexpression of miR-21 in
colon cancer cells greatly increases CSCs and also induces tumor growth.
An opposite phenomenon was noted in colon cancer cells where miR-145 was
upregulated through stable transfection. In addition, studies utilizing
SCID mice xenograft model of colon cancer showed that administration of
either antagomir-21 (anti-sense miR-21) or excess miR-145 greatly
inhibited the growth of tumors of colon cancer cells, when compared with
the controls.This reduction in growth was associated with decreased
expression of CD44, B-catenin and Sox-2 and induction of CK-20. In vitro
cell culture studies have further demonstrated miR-21 to regulate miR-145
and vice versa. Although the precise mechanism(s) by which miR-21 or
miR-145 regulates CSCs in the colonic mucosa during the progression of
CRC is unknown, our in vitro studies suggest that they induce
differentiation of colon CSCs. The latter was evidenced by the increased
expression of CK-20 in colon cancer cells following downregulation of
miR-21 and upregulation of 145. In contrast, Sox-2 expression is
decreased following overexpression of miR-145. In conclusion, our current
observations suggest that miR-21 and miR-145, that are upregulated and
downregulated, respectively, in the colonic mucosa during aging and CRC,
play critical roles in regulating CSCs in the colon.

