Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of claudin-3 and claudin-4-targeted antiprostate
cancer prodrug


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of non-cutaneous
cancer-related death in males, and effective strategies for treatment of
metastatic disease are currently limited to androgen ablation for
temporary benefit.The tight junction proteins, claudin 3 [CLDN3] and
claudin 4 [CLDN4], serve as cell-surface receptors for the Clostridium
perfringens enterotoxin [CPE]. The toxin is especially lethal for cells
expressing large amounts of claudin-3 or -4, which includes many cancer
cells. Most prostate cancer cells overexpress CLDN3 and CLDN4, and the
over-expressed CLDNs are aberrantly distributed to the basolateral plasma
membrane, making these cells particularly sensitive to cytolysis by
CPE.To overcome potential systemic toxicity of native CPE, a modified
protoxin was constructed with a tethered ligand attached to the
C-terminus connected by a flexible linker containing a PSA-specific
protease cleavage site (construct 1). Prostate cancer cells secrete PSA
locally that is proteolytically active; however, circulating PSA is
inactivated via binding to plasma protease inhibitors. Therefore,
CLDN-binding site of the construct 1 become available after PSA cleavage.
This engineered protoxin selectively and efficiently lyses PSA-producing
prostate cancer cells whereas CLDN3 and CLDN4 positive cells that do not
express PSA were resistant to cytolysis. Combination of CLDN3, 4
targeting with PSA activation provides selectivity to CLDN3 and 4
expressing prostate cancer cells that also produce PSA.Although native
CPE has potential usefulness for treating several cancers including
prostate where CLDN3 and 4 CPE receptors are overexpressed some
challenges with immunogenicity, toxicity, and (possibly) the development
of resistance may need to be overcome. An alternative approach is to
utilize C-CPE, which corresponds approximately to receptor binding domain
I for generation C-CPE fusion compounds with cytotoxic motifs that may be
superior to use of native CPE for cancer treatment.Therefore, we replaced
the active part of CPE in construct 1 by thapsigargin (TG) (construct 2).
TG is a non-selective toxin that kills cells independently of their
proliferative status. Using TG as a cytotoxic part of the drug has
appealing prospects with respect to prostate cancer which is
characterized by slow proliferation rates of the cancer cells.For primary
investigation TG was conjugated directly to C-CPE (construct 3). This
compound was tested against a panel of prostate cancer cells expressing
variable amount of CLDN3-4 and PSA. Construct 3 was more effective than
TG against C4-2B cells that produced high amount of CLDN3, 4. It shows
low efficiency against PC-3 cells that produced lower than C4-2B amount
of CLDN3 and 4.Therefore, PSA-claudin-based dual targeted protoxin
construct is a feasible model for the development of clinically useful
agents to treat hormone-refractory prostate cancer.

