Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of PRRX1 confers cancer stem cell-like properties
and poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background:Recent studies have been focused on the relationship between
cancer stem cells (CSCs) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Unlike classical EMT inducers, PRRX1 is involved in the acquisition of
CSC-like properties when its down-regulation induces
mesenchymal-epithelial transition in breast cancer. Meanwhile,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most intractable
malignancies, and it is required to identify a bona-fide molecular target
to regulate tumor progression and the treatment resistance. The purpose
of this study is to investigate the role of PRRX1 expression on clinical
significance and CSC-like properties in HCC.Methods:(1) PRRX1 expression
was analyzed in 62 resected primary HCC cases by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR). Clinicopathological factors and overall survival (OS)
according to PRRX1 expression were analyzed. (2) The gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) on the published clinical data set of 242 HCC samples
(GSE14520) was applied to investigate the association of PRRX1 expression
levels and the stem cell-like properties. (3) PRRX1 stably expressing HCC
cell lines (HuH7) were established using a lentiviral vector. The
expression levels of the hepatic CSC surface markers (CD13, CD133 and
EpCAM) were analyzed by flowcytometry and qRT-PCR. Furthermore, the
ability of sphere formation and in vitro chemosensitivity to 5-FU were
evaluated to assess the CSC-like properties.Results:(1) Univariate
analysis showed that 5-year OS of the low PRRX1 expression group was
significantly shorter than that of the high PRRX1 expression group (49.8%
vs. 80.3%, P=0.014). On multivariate analysis, low PRRX1 expression was
an independent prognostic factor for HCC (P=0.026). (2) GSEA analysis on
the 247 HCC data set indicated that the down-regulation of PRRX1 was
significantly correlated with the stem cell signature (P=0.039).
Furthermore, using gene sets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PCR2)
targets and H3 lysine-27 trimethylation mediated by PCR2, HCC with low
PRRX1 expression showed parallel enrichment patterns with human embryonic
stem cells (P=0.002 and PBackground:Recent studies have been focused on
the relationship between cancer stem cells (CSCs) and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Unlike classical EMT inducers,
PRRX1 is involved in the acquisition of CSC-like properties when its
down-regulation induces mesenchymal-epithelial transition in breast
cancer. Meanwhile, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most
intractable malignancies, and it is required to identify a bona-fide
molecular target to regulate tumor progression and the treatment
resistance. The purpose of this study is to investigate the role of PRRX1
expression on clinical significance and CSC-like properties in
HCC.Methods:(1) PRRX1 expression was analyzed in 62 resected primary HCC
cases by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Clinicopathological factors and
overall survival (OS) according to PRRX1 expression were analyzed. (2)
The gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on the published clinical data
set of 242 HCC samples (GSE14520) was applied to investigate the
association of PRRX1 expression levels and the stem cell-like properties.
(3) PRRX1 stably expressing HCC cell lines (HuH7) were established using
a lentiviral vector. The expression levels of the hepatic CSC surface
markers (CD13, CD133 and EpCAM) were analyzed by flowcytometry and
qRT-PCR. Furthermore, the ability of sphere formation and in vitro
chemosensitivity to 5-FU were evaluated to assess the CSC-like
properties.Results:(1) Univariate analysis showed that 5-year OS of the
low PRRX1 expression group was significantly shorter than that of the
high PRRX1 expression group (49.8% vs. 80.3%, P=0.014). On multivariate
analysis, low PRRX1 expression was an independent prognostic factor for
HCC (P=0.026). (2) GSEA analysis on the 247 HCC data set indicated that
the down-regulation of PRRX1 was significantly correlated with the stem
cell signature (P=0.039). Furthermore, using gene sets of polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PCR2) targets and H3 lysine-27 trimethylation
mediated by PCR2, HCC with low PRRX1 expression showed parallel
enrichment patterns with human embryonic stem cells (P=0.002 and P<0.001,
respectively). These results suggested that down-regulation of PRRX1 in
HCC induces the acquisition of CSC-like properties through modification
of chromatin structure. (3) The level of CSC markers (CD13, CD133 and
EpCAM) and the number of spheres were significantly decreased in
PRRX1-expressing HuH7 cells compared with the controls. Moreover, PRRX1
impaired resistance to 5-FU in HCC cells.Conclusions:The down-regulation
of PRRX1 expression contributes to the poor prognosis through the
acquisition of CSC-like properties in HCC patients. We might apply the
aberrant expression of PRRX1 as a novel clinical biomarker for prediction
of the malignant potential in HCC cases.

