Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR signaling regulates aerobic glycolysis in EGFR-mutated lung
adenocarcinoma


Recent accumulating evidences suggest that genetic mutations in tumor
cells cause several unique metabolic phenotypes that are critical for
cancerous cell proliferation. Mutations in the tyrosine kinase epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) induce oncogenic addiction in lung
adenocarcinoma (LAD). However, the linkage between oncogenic mutated EGFR
and cancer metabolism has not yet been clearly elucidated. In this study,
we measured extracellular lactate production, glucose consumption and the
glucose-induced extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) after the
inhibition of EGFR signaling in LAD cell culture. Using capillary
electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE-TOFMS)-based
metabolomic techniques, the major intracellular metabolites in
EGFR-mutated LAD cells were quantified in the absence or presence of the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKIs) erlotinib. The molecular profile
regulating the metabolic enzymes at the transcriptional and
post-translational levels was characterized by RT-PCR, Western blotting
and flow cytometry. We demonstrated that EGFR signaling was required for
lactate production, glucose consumption and glucose-induced ECAR,
indicating that EGFR signaling promoted the Warburg effect in LAD cells.
Moreover, comprehensive metabolomic analysis revealed that the levels of
key intermediate metabolites in glycolysis and the pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP) were decreased after treatment with EGFR inhibitors. The
glucose transport carried out by GLUT1 and GLUT3 was the most rapid and
critically regulated function of glucose metabolism linked to EGFR
signaling, although the expression of MYC-dependent glycolytic genes and
the phosphorylation of pyruvate kinase muscle (PKM2) were down-regulated
by EGFR inhibition at a later time point. A modest down-regulation of
both total and membrane-bound GLUT3 was also observed after EGFR
inhibition. Despite an equivalent total amount of GLUT1 in LAD cells, the
levels of membrane-bound GLUT1 was decreased by EGFR-TKI treatment,
suggesting that EGFR signaling controlled GLUT1 function through
post-translational modification. We concluded that EGFR signaling
regulated aerobic glycolysis in EGFR-mutated LAD cells. Our data suggests
that the glycolytic pathway plays a central role in the pathogenesis of
EGFR-mutated lung cancer. This regulatory pathway could be an attractive
target for the development of targeted therapies to better treat patients
with EGFR-mutated LAD.

