Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between estrogen-metabolizing genetic risk scores and
breast cancer risk


Purpose: Estrogens are metabolized by phase I enzymes to intermediate
metabolites, which are conjugated by phase II enzymes to be excreted.
Differences in estrogen metabolism by phase I and phase II enzymes may
contribute to breast cancer risk. The levels and activities of these
enzymes are controlled, in part, by genetic polymorphisms. We evaluated
three genetic risk scores constructed to reflect the contributions of
phase I, phase II and combined phase I/II estrogen-metabolizing activity
in association with breast cancer risk.Methods: Data arise from 1296
White breast cancer cases and 1295 White controls enrolled in the
Nashville Breast Health Study, a population-based case-control study
conducted during 2001-2008. Telephone interviews obtained data on breast
cancer risk factors. Saliva samples were obtained to determine genotypes
for 12 functional variants in genes involved in estrogen metabolism (AHR,
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP3A4, NQO1, COMT, SULT1A1, UGT2B17, GSTM1 and GSTT1).
Risk scores were formed according to the hypothesis that women with high
phase I and II estrogen metabolizing profiles were at lower breast cancer
risk, irrespective of menopausal status. Risk alleles in single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) were
summed to form risk scores containing phase I, phase II or combined phase
I/II genetic variants. The combined phase I/II estrogen metabolizing
score used subjects in the quartile for highest phase II estrogen
metabolizing as the reference group. All other participants were
separated at the median according to phase I enzyme activity. Adjusted
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using
logistic regression to test associations between genetic scores and
breast cancer risk. Likelihood ratio tests p-values were obtained for
interactions between the phase I/II combined score and risk factors that
may modify the association between endogenous estrogen metabolism and
breast cancer, including age at menarche, menopausal status, age at
menopause, body mass index and well-done red meat consumption.Results:
Lower phase I and phase II estrogen metabolizing activity scores were
associated with non-significant increased breast cancer risk. Women with
low phase I/II estrogen metabolizing risk scores had an increased OR of
1.22 (CI: 1.01-1.47) compared to participants with high phase II estrogen
metabolizing scores. Lower copy numbers of the UGT2B17 variant were
associated with increased risk (OR: 1.16, CI: 1.03-1.30). No other
individual CNVs or SNPs were associated with breast cancer risk. Effect
modification was not observed by other risk factors (all
P>0.05).Conclusions: Lower phase I and phase II metabolism activity as
measured by functional genetic variants is associated with a modest
increase in breast cancer risk; this relationship is not modified by
established breast cancer risk factors.

