Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional repressor PRDM1/Blimp-1 directly regulates
transcriptional elongation factor ELL3 during terminal B-cell
differentiation


As the master regulator of B-cell differentiation, PRDM1 is well known
for its ability to extinguish a network of transcription factors
essential in maintaining the B-cell phenotype. In addition PRDM1 is a
tumor suppressor in Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL). However its
molecular targets remain to be clearly elucidated. For that purpose we
have identified novel targets of PRDM1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and deep sequencing. One of the strongest associations with PRDM1
was observed at the Eleven-Nineteen Lysine-rich Leukemia (ELL) 3
promoter. The ELL family of transcriptional elongation factors (ELL,
ELL2, and ELL3) is reported to increase the catalytic rate of RNA
polymerase (pol) II transcription through assembly of the Super
Elongation Complex (SEC), although their role in activated B-cells is
unknown.Two potential consensus PRDM1 binding sites were mapped within
the ELL3 proximal promoter and endogenous PRDM1 binding was confirmed by
direct ChIP-qPCR analysis in multiple cell lines. The cloned ELL3
promoter was highly active in B-cell lines and co-transfection with PRDM1
significantly repressed activity. Mutation of both PRDM1 binding sites
eliminated repression, while mutation of either individual site resulted
in a partial loss of repression.To establish the expression pattern of
ELL family members in normal human B-cells, primary nave B-cells were
isolated by negative selection and either mildly activated with IL-2 and
IL-4 or differentiated in the presence of IL-2, IL-21, anti-IgM, and CD40
cross-linking antibody. Nave B-cells did not express detectable protein
levels of any ELL family members. Mild activation induced the expression
of ELL and ELL3 while in contrast differentiation selectively suppressed
ELL3 while inducing ELL2 and PRDM1. Expression of ELL, ELL2, and ELL3 was
further profiled in a panel of B-cell lymphomas and multiple myeloma cell
lines. Cell lines representing mature activated B-cells (Burkitts, DLBCL)
displayed robust expression of ELL3 while lines of a pre B-cell, nave
B-cell or differentiated plasma cell did not express ELL3. ELL2
expression was observed only in the plasma cell lines, consistent with
previous reports. ELL was ubiquitously expressed at low levels. shRNA
knockdown of ELL3 in ELL3 expressing B-cell lymphomas reveals that ELL3
is required for cell proliferation. Together these results establish ELL3
as an activated B-cell restricted elongation factor and suggests that a
switch from ELL3 to ELL2 occurs during terminal differentiation.
Dependence on ELL3 for proliferation of lymphoma lines suggests it may be
a valid therapeutic target in ELL3 high expressing tumors and is
consistent with suppression by the tumor suppressor PRDM1.

