Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DJ4, a novel ROCK and MRCK inhibitor, potently inhibits migration
and invasion of cancer cells


Rho-associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase (Rho kinase/ROCK)
and myotonic dystrophy kinase-related Cdc42-binding kinase (MRCK) are
involved in the aggressive migration of cancer cells. These are the key
proteins involved in the formation of stress fibers that confer
contractility to cancer cells during migration and invasion. ROCK and
MRCK are primarily involved in amoeboid and mesenchymal type of migration
of cancer cells respectively. Earlier studies reported that combined
inhibition/silencing of ROCK and MRCK has more pronounced effect than
inhibition of the individual kinases suggesting a more effective
therapeutic strategy to combat metastatic cancers. With this hypothesis
in mind, we developed a series of novel multikinase inhibitors and
identified DJ4 as a potent ATP competitive inhibitor of ROCK1, ROCK2 and
MRCK. DJ4 effectively inhibits the kinase activity of ROCK (ROCK1 and
ROCK2) and MRCK in a cell-free system and multiple human non-small cell
lung cancer cell lines. In cellular functional assays DJ4 inhibited
migration of human melanoma, lung, pancreatic and breast cancer cells in
a concentration-dependent manner. In live cell imaging over 20h by
time-lapse microscopy, DJ4 (2.5M ) reduced the migration rate of lung-and
breast-cancer cells by 2.7 and 5.5 times compared to control cells
respectively. DJ4 (5M) also inhibited invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells by 70%. Fluorescent microscopic observation also revealed
that inhibition of activity of these kinases, by DJ4, causes reduction in
stress fibers which leads to inhibition of cell contractility and
migration.In summary, our studies demonstrate that DJ4 is a potent ATP
competitive inhibitor of ROCK and MRCK, and effectively inhibits
migration and invasion of multiple cancers in vitro. Together these
results indicate that DJ4 has a strong potential to be an anti-metastatic
drug against multiple cancer types.

