Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing in single
cell


The rapid advancement in Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has
allowed extensive genetic profiling and analysis of tumor tissues. While
accurate tumor characterization is crucial for cancer therapy, current
sequencing methods are unable to resolve the genetic differences between
the heterogeneous cell populations within tumor. By profiling specific
subpopulations of cells from a larger heterogeneous population, single
cell sequencing can improve the efficiency of cancer treatments through
early detection of rare tumor cells, monitoring of circulating tumor
cells, and accurate profiling of intra-tumor heterogeneity. In this
study, we compared commercially available single cell amplification
methods and sequencing platforms for whole genome and whole transcriptome
sequencing. We isolated single cells from a human breast cancer cell
line, MCF7, and human embryonic kidney cell line, HEK293, by
micromanipulation, and their whole genome and transcriptome were
sequenced. For whole genome sequencing, the performance of Repli-g
(Qiagen), Ampli1 (Slicon Biosystems) and WGA4 (Sigma) were assessed for
whole genome amplification. Next, we used TruSeq DNA Library Kit and Ion
Plus Fragment Library Kit for library preparation, and whole genome
sequencing was performed on HiSeq2000 and Proton. The sequencing data
were analyzed by SAMtools/GATK and tmap-f3. For whole transcriptome
sequencing, cDNA was synthesized from single cells using SMARTer ultra
low input RNA kit (Clontech), and the cDNA library was prepared with
Nextera XT library prep kit (Illumina) and Ion Total RNA-Seq Kit v2 (Life
Technologies). Sequencing was performed on HiSeq2000 and Proton, and
analyzed with Tophat and Cufflink. We show that the percentage of
mappable reads and regions with more than 1X coverage in whole genome
sequencing were similar to that of the genomic DNA data, but the coverage
rate of regions with more than 10X was lower in single cell data on both
NGS platforms. In the RNA-Seq, the gene detection rate in single cell and
more than 100 cells were about 65% and 85% compare to total RNA,
respectively.

