Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi 1 stabilizes TAC1 transcript in breast cancer cells to
increase the production of onco-substance P


Despite improved education and aggressive treatments, the mortality of
breast cancer (BC) remains high. The TAC1 gene exerts oncogenic effects
partly due to its major peptide, substance P, inducing the production of
cytokines, which facilitate expression of the tumor-promoting truncated
neurokinin-1 receptor. In turn, TAC1 facilitates metastasis to bone
marrow and brain. TAC1 expression in BC cells (BCCs) occurs partly
through increased translation of its mRNA. Cytosolic extracts from
TAC1-expressing cells (BCCs and ectopic expression in non-tumorigenic
breast cells) were analyzed for the candidate RNA-binding protein. In
vitro translational, RNA stabilization, RNA shift and proteomic analyses
identified a 40 kDa binding protein, which interacted with Exon 7 of the
3 UTR of TAC1. Western blots and RNA supershift assay identified musashi
1 (Msi1) as the TAC1 mRNA binding protein. The data also indicated that
TAC1 expression was sufficient for an increase in Msi1. A reporter gene
system utilizing the TAC1 3 UTR indicated that Msi1 competed with the
endogenous translational suppressors, miR-130a and -206 for the same
interacting site. Use of anti-miRs, Msi1 shRNA and the reporter gene
system confirmed Msi1 as the stabilizer of TAC1 mRNA to increase the
production of substance P. In vivo studies with nude mice showed reduced
tumor growth with Msi1 knockdown BCCs compared to control. Msi1 knockdown
retracted the tumor, indicating a role in tumor initiation. These
findings correlated with a loss of two stem cell genes, REST and Oct4. In
summary, this study identified Msi1 as a central RNA binding protein,
which enhanced expression of the oncogenic TAC1 in BCCs. The data also
suggested that Msi1, through TAC1 might be important in tumor initiation.
These findings have clinical implications as a new drug target to reverse
the oncogenic effects of TAC1. Furthermore, the feasibility of targeting
TAC1 is evident since its receptor antagonist such as aprepitant are
already approved by the FDA.

