Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of ceramide liposomes for tumor interstitial and
vascular drug targeting


Background: Interstitial and vascular targeting with cytotoxic agents has
proven to be an effective approach for cancer therapy (1). Ceramide, a
sphingolipid, plays an important role in apoptosis, regulation of
differentiation, growth suppression, and in cell senescence (2).
Liposomes containing ceramide exert an anti-proliferative effect against
the growth of tumor cells in vitro (3). In this study, we attempted to
apply a rational approach to the development of ceramide liposomes for
tumor targeting.Methods: We first determined the relative amounts of
ceramide produced by cells normally found in the tumor interstitial
matrix (ZR-75-1- human breast cancer cells), and by those lining tumor
endothelia (HMEC-1 -human microvascular endothelial cells). For this
experiment we measured sphingomyelinase activity. We next determined the
cytotoxic effects of various liposome systems containing 0 to 20%
ceramide (C6:1) content. The optimal ceramide content was determined from
this study, and 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME) was loaded in the optimal
ceramide liposome preparation type. We next evaluated cytotoxic effects
of the drug-loaded liposomes compared to ceramide liposomes
alone.Results: ZR-75-1 cells showed a higher level of sphingomyelinase
activity (4.4 fold) as compared to that of HMEC-1. The 20% ceramide
formulation demonstrated the most significant anti-proliferative effect,
regardless of the cell line. The cytotoxic drug effects were favorably
influenced by the ceramide content. Finally, preliminary studies suggest
that the overall effectiveness of ceramide liposomes against the growth
of proliferating tumor cells correlated with the sphingomyelinase
activity expressed by the target cells.Conclusion: Future studies will
determine whether sphingomyelinase activity can be used to determine the
population of cells (i.e., interstitial vs vascular) most likely to
benefit from ceramide (cytotoxic) drug-loaded liposomes as a therapeutic
approach.

