Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model-based optimization of combined antiangiogenic + cytotoxics
modalities: application to the bevacizumab-paclitaxel association in
breast cancer models


In clinical practice, antiangiogenic bevacizumab is usually administrated
concomitantly to the chemotherapy. Still, pharmacodynamics effect of
antiangiogenics lead to a transient state of normalization of the
vessels, thus increasing tumor blood perfusion. This could be used as a
time-window for administrating cytotoxics, so as to maximize the amount
of drugs reaching the tumor eventually. Our group has developed original
mathematical models describing the impact of bevacizumab on tumor
vasculature. Simulations have demonstrated in silico that a 6-days lag
between the administration of bevacizumab and starting the chemotherapy
is recommended to achieve antitumoral efficacy. To test this hypohesis,
we have used a breast cancer model to compare the efficacy, tolerance and
impact on metastatic spreading of a variety of combinations between
bevacizumab and paclitaxel. Fifty NSG mice were grafted with resistant
MDA-MB-231-LUC+ human breast cancer cells. Animals were next randomized
into 6 groups (control, bevacizumab (B), paclitaxel (T) bevacizumab +
pacitaxel (B+T), bevacizumab then paclitaxel (B/T), and paclitaxel then
bevacizumab (T/B)). Tumor growth and metastatic spreading were monitored
by bioluminescence 3D. Main endpoints were overall survival, tolerance,
tumor growth and metastatic spreading. At 60 days, survival was 100%
(B/T), 85% (B+T), 75% (T), 65% (T/B), 35% (B) and 0% (control).
Additionally, sequences proved to have a strong impact on both timing and
localization of the metastatic spreading. Bevacizumab alone led to a
metastatic acceleration, since lesions appeared earlier, even as compared
with untreated animals. Conversely, the (B/T) sequence reduced
significantly the risk of lymph-node metastatis, as compared with any
other combinations (i.e., 10% (B/T) vs. 25 and 40% for (B+T) and (T/B),
respectively), whereas 100% of untreated animals showed lymph node
metastatis. Large inter-individual variability within the groups led to
non-significant differences in tumor size at study conclusion, despite
the fact that marked reduction in tumor volume was achieved in the (B/T)
group. Finally, the (B/T) combination proved to be the best tolerated
one. Our present data strongly suggest that refining the sequence in the
administration of drugs is critical to improve both tolerance and
efficacy. Here, the (B/T) association proved to be more efficacious than
any other modalities, especially to reduce and to delay metastatis.
Conversely, bevacizumab alone proved to accelerate metastatic spreading.
Although preliminary, this POC study demonstrates the relevance of our
mathematical model, since predictions of the model have been fully
confirmed at the bench. This model could be further used to test in
silico various combinations with other anti-angiogenic drugs, so as to
identify the best modality of combination prior to use those drugs in
vivo.

