Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and characterization of a sorafenib-resistant
hepatocellular carcinoma model from patient-derived tumor xenografts


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common malignancy worldwide and
sorafenib is a standard of care therapeutics for unresectable HCC.
Although sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, can suppress both
angiogenesis and cell proliferation, its efficacy is hampered by the
emergency of drug resistance during the treatment. Thus, it is useful to
understand the mechanism underlying sorafenib resistance in an animal
model with resemblance of human HCC. Here, we report the generation and
characterization of a sorafenib-resistant HCC xenograft model derived
from patient tumors. A patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model
(LIX004) was treated with sorafenib. While sorafenib inhibited tumor
growth at the initial stage of treatment, a few tumors regrew after
prolonged sorafenib treatment. A cancer cell line (LIXC-004SR) was
generated from a resistant tumor and the xenograft derived from this cell
line maintained sorafenib resistance in vivo. On contrary, another cell
line (LIXC-004NA) established from the treatment-nave LIX004 PDX model
remained sensitive to sorafenib. We compared the gene expression profiles
between these two cell lines using both cDNA microarray and qPCR and
found that a class of genes involved in angiogenesis were significantly
upregulated in LIXC-004SR cells vs. LIXC-004NA cells, which include those
encoding secreted angiogenesis stimulators such as MMP1, FGF-5 and VEGFA.
Consistently, increased angiogenesis was detected in sorafenib-resistant
LIXC-004SR tumor compared to sorafenib-sensitive LIXC-004NA tumor.
Furthermore, the conditional medium from LIXC-004SR cell culture could
stimulate HUVEC proliferation as well as MEK,ERK and Akt phosphorylation.
These results suggest that sorafenib resistance may arise by bypassing
the inhibition of angiogenesis via upgregulation of pro-agiogenesis
genes. The generation and molecular characterization of
sorafenib-resistant tumor models could shed light on the mechanism of
sorafenib resistance which may aid in the development of strategies to
overcome drug resistance.

