Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzofuran derivatives as a novel class of mTOR signaling
inhibitors


Background: Current clinical development of rapalogues is impaired by
toxicity when combined with chemotherapy or targeted therapies.
Furthermore, the antiproliferative activity of rapalogues appears to be
limited by various molecular mechanisms of resistance in cancer cells..
Experimental evidences have suggested that specific mTORC1 inhibition
using rapalogues may be hampered by a negative feedback loop that results
in PI3K activation due to a lack of mTORC2 inhibition. Thus, new
generations of drugs targeting either PI3K or PI3K and mTOR kinases may
avoid the intrinsic weakness of rapalogues. The aim of our study was to
evaluate the antiproliferative activity of a set of 70 new benzofuran
derivatives (BFD) in a panel of cancer cell lines and to characterise
their molecular mechanism of action.Materials and Methods: Cytotoxic
effects of 70 benzofuran derivatives were determined in the HNSCC cell
line SQ20B using MTT assay after 72 hours of drug exposure. Activity of
the best candidates was assessed on a panel of 10 cancer cell lines of
different origins. Protein expression and phoshorylation after exposure
to BFD were assessed by western blot. Target identification was realised
by pull-down assay.Results: Cytotoxicity of BFD1, the first benzofuran
derivative compound, was assessed on a panel of human colon (HT29,
HCT116, Colo205, HCC2998), ovarian (OVCAR3, IGROV1), lung (HOP62, HOP92),
breast (MCF7 and MDA-MB-231), prostate (DU145) and head and neck (SQ20B)
cancer cell lines; SQ20B cells were the most sensitive with an IC50 of
40M. Structure Activity Relationship (SAR) studies led to the synthesis
of 69 derivatives with stepwise increased cytotoxicity against SQ20B
cells. Early lead compounds BFD22 and BFD27 were shown to inhibit the
phosphorylation of S6 ribosomal protein, target of mTORC1, in a dose
dependent manner. In addition, phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473) was
increased after exposure to high doses of BFD27, suggesting a specific
inhibition of mTORC1 but not mTORC2. In contrast, the derivatives BFD56
and BFD62 were more cytotoxic and displayed potent inhibition of mTOR
targets p-S6, p-4EBP1 and p-AKT, suggesting that those compounds also
targeted mTORC2 activity. IC50s of 5 best compounds were compared with
commercially available mTOR inhibitors everolimus and OZI-027. Compound
BFD27 was then selected for the design of an affinity ligand to identify
the molecular target of this class of compounds by pull-down assays.
Western blot analysis showed that BFD27 interacted with mTOR but not
other proteins that belong to the same signaling pathway, such as Akt,
Rictor, Raptor, PI3K and PDK1 suggesting that mTOR is the target of this
class of compounds.Conclusion: We identified a new class of benzofurane
derivative compounds that interacts with the complex mTORC1 to inhibit
its activity. SAR studies led to the optimization of mTOR inhibition and
increased cytotoxicities.

