Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERBB2 amplicon passenger genes: A novel class of breast cancer
antigens


DNA copy number amplification at the ERBB2 locus on 17q12-21 is a
frequent genomic event, present in 10-15% of breast tumors. This
gene-dense amplicon contains several genes that are aberrantly
overexpressed in ERBB2+ breast cancer. We hypothesized that a subset of
amplicon genes with minimal expression in normal tissue could serve as
candidates for shared tumor-specific antigens. We eliminated from
consideration other amplicon genes with high expression in specific
tissues or broad expression in normal tissues due to the potential for
autoimmune toxicity. Immunohistochemistry of a breast tumor microarray
showed expression of MIEN, GRB7, PGAP3 proteins specifically in ERBB2+
tumor cells but not in stroma or in ERBB2 non-amplified breast tumor
samples. We tested several peptide epitopes with predicted high affinity
for HLA-A2 (DNA copy number amplification at the ERBB2 locus on 17q12-21
is a frequent genomic event, present in 10-15% of breast tumors. This
gene-dense amplicon contains several genes that are aberrantly
overexpressed in ERBB2+ breast cancer. We hypothesized that a subset of
amplicon genes with minimal expression in normal tissue could serve as
candidates for shared tumor-specific antigens. We eliminated from
consideration other amplicon genes with high expression in specific
tissues or broad expression in normal tissues due to the potential for
autoimmune toxicity. Immunohistochemistry of a breast tumor microarray
showed expression of MIEN, GRB7, PGAP3 proteins specifically in ERBB2+
tumor cells but not in stroma or in ERBB2 non-amplified breast tumor
samples. We tested several peptide epitopes with predicted high affinity
for HLA-A2 (<50 nM) and confirmed that these could stabilize MHC
expression on T2 cells. In vitro sensitization of normal donor
lymphocytes with the predicted epitopes led to production of IFN-.
Moreover, Dendritic cells pulsed with lysate from SKBR3 (ERBB2 amplified)
but not MCF7 breast cancer cells could sensitize autologous lymphocytes
to epitopes from amplicon proteins. This suggests that the natural
abundance of the amplicon proteins in ERBB2 positive tumors is sufficient
to provide cross-priming. To test whether the amplicon proteins could
serve as tumor-rejection antigens we used the murine TM15 breast cancer
cell line which has amplification of a syntenic region surrounding the
murine Her2/neu gene. Quantitative PCR showed 50-fold overexpression of
the amplicon gene pnmt in TM15 cells. Mice vaccinated with recombinant
murine or human PNMT protein, but not ovalbumin, rejected challenge with
TM15 tumor without any overt toxicity and developed memory against
delayed re-challenge.These data indicate that normal host genes which are
in immediate proximity to the oncogene ERBB2 are abnormally expressed at
high levels in ERBB2+ breast tumor cells. Although the molecular
mechanism leading to aberrant expression is unknown, analysis of several
breast cancer microarray databases as well as TCGA data also show a very
high correlation between ERBB2 overexpression and high expression of
these passenger genes so this seems to be a general phenomenon. T
lymphocytes normally have tolerance to non-mutated host proteins however
tolerance can be reversed with proper sensitization conditions. Antigen
overexpression in tumor cells might allow effector T cells to surpass an
activation threshold while preserving tolerance for normal tissue. DNA
copy number amplification of specific oncogenes is a frequent genomic
event in cancer so the general strategy of targeting passenger genes on
amplicons may have broader use in cancer immunotherapy.

