Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil elastase enhances adaptive immunity via increase of
peptide presentation and downregulation of T cell inhibitory molecules


Introduction: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is an inflammatory mediator that
is taken up by breast cancer cells. We have previously shown that NE
uptake increases susceptibility to lysis by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL)
targeting the tumor antigens PR1 and cyclin E. We investigated whether NE
uptake alters adaptive immunity by affecting MHC class I antigen
presentation and T cell inhibitory molecules.Methods: MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells were maintained in standard media NE. Healthy donor HLA-A2+
peripheral blood mononuclear cells were used to generate antigen specific
CTL by pulsing dendritic cells with E75, a HER2-derived epitope we are
currently investigating as a vaccine in clinical trials. Calcein-AM
cytotoxicity assays evaluated E75-specific lysis. Flow cytometry was used
to show NE uptake, HLA-A2, pan-HLA class I (HLA-ABC) and PD-L1 surface
expression. Western blot analysis was used to show total MHC class I
heavy chain, B2M, LMP2, TAP1, calnexin and tapasin expression. Relative
PD-L1 mRNA levels were determined using qPCR.Results: NE uptake enhanced
tumor cell lysis by E75-specific CTL at all effector to target (E:T)
ratios (lysis for 20 to 1 E:T ratio was 50% 7 for NE treated vs 28% 7 for
untreated, p Introduction: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is an inflammatory
mediator that is taken up by breast cancer cells. We have previously
shown that NE uptake increases susceptibility to lysis by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL) targeting the tumor antigens PR1 and cyclin E. We
investigated whether NE uptake alters adaptive immunity by affecting MHC
class I antigen presentation and T cell inhibitory molecules.Methods:
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were maintained in standard media NE.
Healthy donor HLA-A2+ peripheral blood mononuclear cells were used to
generate antigen specific CTL by pulsing dendritic cells with E75, a
HER2-derived epitope we are currently investigating as a vaccine in
clinical trials. Calcein-AM cytotoxicity assays evaluated E75-specific
lysis. Flow cytometry was used to show NE uptake, HLA-A2, pan-HLA class I
(HLA-ABC) and PD-L1 surface expression. Western blot analysis was used to
show total MHC class I heavy chain, B2M, LMP2, TAP1, calnexin and tapasin
expression. Relative PD-L1 mRNA levels were determined using
qPCR.Results: NE uptake enhanced tumor cell lysis by E75-specific CTL at
all effector to target (E:T) ratios (lysis for 20 to 1 E:T ratio was 50%
7 for NE treated vs 28% 7 for untreated, p < 0.05), and led to an
increase in HLA-A2 and HLA-ABC surface expression (p Introduction:
Neutrophil elastase (NE) is an inflammatory mediator that is taken up by
breast cancer cells. We have previously shown that NE uptake increases
susceptibility to lysis by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) targeting the
tumor antigens PR1 and cyclin E. We investigated whether NE uptake alters
adaptive immunity by affecting MHC class I antigen presentation and T
cell inhibitory molecules.Methods: MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were
maintained in standard media NE. Healthy donor HLA-A2+ peripheral blood
mononuclear cells were used to generate antigen specific CTL by pulsing
dendritic cells with E75, a HER2-derived epitope we are currently
investigating as a vaccine in clinical trials. Calcein-AM cytotoxicity
assays evaluated E75-specific lysis. Flow cytometry was used to show NE
uptake, HLA-A2, pan-HLA class I (HLA-ABC) and PD-L1 surface expression.
Western blot analysis was used to show total MHC class I heavy chain,
B2M, LMP2, TAP1, calnexin and tapasin expression. Relative PD-L1 mRNA
levels were determined using qPCR.Results: NE uptake enhanced tumor cell
lysis by E75-specific CTL at all effector to target (E:T) ratios (lysis
for 20 to 1 E:T ratio was 50% 7 for NE treated vs 28% 7 for untreated, p
< 0.05), and led to an increase in HLA-A2 and HLA-ABC surface expression
(p < 0.05; Table). However, NE uptake did not change total expression of
MHC class I or components of the MHC class I pathway. Additionally, NE
uptake led to a decrease in PD-L1 surface expression and transcript
levels (p Introduction: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is an inflammatory
mediator that is taken up by breast cancer cells. We have previously
shown that NE uptake increases susceptibility to lysis by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL) targeting the tumor antigens PR1 and cyclin E. We
investigated whether NE uptake alters adaptive immunity by affecting MHC
class I antigen presentation and T cell inhibitory molecules.Methods:
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were maintained in standard media NE.
Healthy donor HLA-A2+ peripheral blood mononuclear cells were used to
generate antigen specific CTL by pulsing dendritic cells with E75, a
HER2-derived epitope we are currently investigating as a vaccine in
clinical trials. Calcein-AM cytotoxicity assays evaluated E75-specific
lysis. Flow cytometry was used to show NE uptake, HLA-A2, pan-HLA class I
(HLA-ABC) and PD-L1 surface expression. Western blot analysis was used to
show total MHC class I heavy chain, B2M, LMP2, TAP1, calnexin and tapasin
expression. Relative PD-L1 mRNA levels were determined using
qPCR.Results: NE uptake enhanced tumor cell lysis by E75-specific CTL at
all effector to target (E:T) ratios (lysis for 20 to 1 E:T ratio was 50%
7 for NE treated vs 28% 7 for untreated, p < 0.05), and led to an
increase in HLA-A2 and HLA-ABC surface expression (p < 0.05; Table).
However, NE uptake did not change total expression of MHC class I or
components of the MHC class I pathway. Additionally, NE uptake led to a
decrease in PD-L1 surface expression and transcript levels (p < 0.05;
Table).Conclusion: NE increases tumor antigen presentation as well as MHC
class I on the cell surface. However, NE uptake does not change total MHC
class I expression or expression of MHC class I antigen processing
components, suggesting that NE increases peptide availability as a
mechanism of increased MHC class I antigen presentation. NE also leads to
the downregulation of PD-L1. Together, our data indicate that NE uptake
enhances adaptive immune responses.


