Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel pharmacodynamic assays to measure glutaminase inhibition
following oral administration of CB-839


Glutaminase is a mitochondrial enzyme that plays a crucial role in tumor
growth and survival. Glutaminase converts glutamine (Gln) to glutamate
(Glu) fueling multiple downstream metabolic pathways required for
cellular proliferation. CB-839 is a novel, selective and potent inhibitor
of glutaminase that displays antitumor activity in preclinical models of
several hematologic and solid tumor types. Treatment of tumor cell lines
in vitro with CB-839 caused dose-dependent decreases in Glu and increases
in Gln with a potency similar to the IC50 of CB-839 on recombinant
glutaminase and the EC50 of CB-839 in cellular proliferation assays. Oral
administration of CB-839 to mice bearing human xenograft tumors resulted
in similar changes in Glu and Gln levels in the tumor. To determine if
these pharmacodynamics effects of CB-839 directly correlated with
inhibition of glutaminase, we developed an assay to measure glutaminase
activity in tumors. Since CB-839 is a reversible inhibitor, we first
developed conditions that maintain the enzyme-inhibitor complex during
preparation of tumor lysates. High concentrations of KCl (150 mM) and low
concentrations of K-phosphate (15 mM) in the lysis buffer, as well as
maintaining the lysate at a low temperature promoted stability of the
inhibited complex. Following gel filtration to remove unbound CB-839 and
exchange the buffer, glutaminase activity was measured with a coupled
enzyme assay. This assay was used to study the dose-dependence of
glutaminase inhibition in tumors. Four hours after oral administration, a
10 mg/kg dose of CB-839 resulted in >90% inhibition of tumor glutaminase
and was associated with near maximal changes in tumor Gln and Glu.
Moreover, CB-839 plasma concentrations of 100 nM corresponded to 50%
inhibition of tumor glutaminase, while maximal inhibition occurred at
plasma concentrations 300 nM. In xenograft studies, maximal anti-tumor
efficacy was achieved with BID dosing at 200 mg/kg. This dose and
schedule allowed for sustained plasma levels of CB-839 of 300 nM, and
corresponded to sustained glutaminase inhibition in tumors. In an effort
to develop a surrogate marker for inhibition of tumor glutaminase, we
adapted the assay to measure glutaminase inhibition in platelets. Ex vivo
treatment of human whole blood with CB-839 resulted in dose-dependent
suppression of platelet glutaminase activity with an IC50 of 25 nM and
>85% inhibition at concentrations at or above 300 nM. Furthermore,
glutaminase activity in platelets isolated from mice treated with CB-839
showed dose-dependent inhibition that correlated with inhibition of tumor
glutaminase. Thus, platelet glutaminase activity may represent a
surrogate for monitoring inhibition of glutaminase in human tumors. These
assays will be applied to the clinical study of CB-839 to monitor
pharmacodynamic responses and to ensure maximal inhibition of glutaminase
in patients undergoing therapy.

