Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of miR-30e overexpression and proanthocyanidin
treatment inhibits autophagy and induces apoptosis in human glioblastoma
stem cells and SNB19 cells


Glioblastoma is the most common and malignant brain tumor that harbors
heterogeneic abnormal astrocytic cells. Hypoxia in solid tumors including
glioblastoma creates a metabolic stress for induction of a basal level of
autophagy to recycle and supply cellular ingredients to surviving tumor
cells that become significantly resistant to apoptosis. Even a small
number of human glioblastoma stem cells (GSC), which are highly resistant
to radiotherapy and chemotherapy, may eventually produce huge number of
heterogeneic glioblastoma cells to regrow the brain tumor. Inhibition of
autophagy and induction of apoptosis in GSC as well as in other
glioblastoma cells could greatly cause inhibition of overall growth of
glioblastoma. We used sodium sulfite to imitate hypoxia for induction of
basal levels of autophagy in GSC and glioblastoma SNB19 cells and then
examined efficacy of combination of miR-30e overexpression and
proanthocyanidin (PAC) treatment in promoting apoptosis in both GCS and
SNB19 cells. Our flow cytometry and acridine orange staining indicated
that use of 2 mM sodium sulfite could induce 16% and 25% autophagy in GSC
and SNB19 cells, respectively. Our reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting showed significant increases in
mRNA and protein expression of Beclin 1, an important inducer of
autophagy, in the cells due to hypoxia. A search in microRNA database
(miRDB) suggested that miR-30e could inhibit expression of not only the
autophagy inducer Beclin 1 but also inhibit the apoptosis inhibitors such
as Aven (caspase activation inhibitor) and BIRC-6 (Bruce). Combination of
miR-30e overexpression and PAC treatment significantly reduced viability
in cells under hypoxia. Apoptotic mode of cell death due to this
combination therapy was manifested in morphological features (as
evidenced from Wright staining) and also in an early biochemical marker
(as confirmed from Annexin V-FITC/PI staining). GSC conferred more
resistance to apoptosis than SNB19 following this combination therapy.
RT-PCR results showed significant decreases in mRNA expression of Aven
and BIRC-6, indicating induction of apoptosis in the cells. Western
blotting subsequently confirmed that the combination therapy was indeed
highly potent to induce extrinsic pathway of apoptosis with activation of
caspase-8 and also intrinsic pathway of apoptosis with a raise in
Bax:Bcl-2 ratio to trigger mitochondrial release of pro-apoptotic factors
into the cytosol for activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3. Increases in
calpain and caspase-3 activities cleaved -spectrin to generate
calpain-specific 145 kD SBDP and caspase-3-specific 120 kD SBDP,
respectively, in cells for apoptosis. Collectively, combination of
miR-30e overexpression and PAC treatment could serve as a promising
therapeutic strategy to inhibit autophagy and induce apoptosis in human
GSC and SNB19 cells.

