Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omental derived adipose stromal cells regulate nitric oxide
homeostasis to maintain tumorigenicity in ovarian cancer cells


The rate of obesity is increasing dramatically in the United States,
resulting in a rising incidence of obesity associated diseases including
colorectal, gallbladder, esophageal, renal, breast, endometrial and
ovarian cancer. The location of excess adipose tissue is reportedly an
important factor which influences the effect of obesity on cancer
incidence. The tumor promoting effects of regional adipose may be
attributed, at least in part, to the presence of mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC) population in adipose tissue. Adipose derived stromal cells (ASCs)
are a multi-potent population of MSCs, which support cancer progression
in many models. These cells are uniquely tumor tropic, migrating into
tumor stroma from regional sources where they support formation of tumor
stroma elements and promote tumor progression. Thus, we hypothesize that
the omentum provides a particularly hospitable microenvironment for OVCA
metastasis due to the presence of omental ASCs (O-ASCs). One critically
important, yet often overlooked contributor to ovarian tumor growth,
progression and metastasis in obese individuals is nitric oxide (NO).
Cancer cells' high affinity for NO and NO's characteristic high
solubility in lipids could explain the proximity of many carcinomas to
fatty tissue, and thus the high positive correlation between obesity and
cancer. Here we report a novel NO mediated reciprocal coupling between
O-ASCs and ovarian cancer which promotes cancer cell growth and energy
metabolism. Our results show that O-ASCs supports viability of cancer
cells by secreting arginine and cancer cells in turn induce adipogenesis
in O-ASCs by secreting citrulline. We found that OASCs promote tumor
growth and increase resistance to chemotherapy by modulating NO
homeostasis. The inhibition of NO synthesis or scavenging of NO enhanced
chemo-sensitivity. Using metabolic profiling we found that OASCs rewire
metabolic pathways related to nitrogenous amino acids and reprogram
energy metabolism. In summary, our data indicate that modulation of
intrinsic NO substantially affects tumor growth and drug toxicity in
ovarian cancer cells. Our study will lead to significant advances in the
understanding of the omentum in altering cancer metabolism and lead to
novel therapeutics.

