Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of sequencing data to identify potential drug targets for
an individual newly diagnosed with basal breast cancer who failed to
respond to current standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy


INTRODUCTIONNext generation sequencing (NGS) of patients has
significantly changed our ways to study cancer genomics as it provides
precise estimates of gene expression, fusion transcripts, expressed
single nucleotide variants (eSNVs), splice variants and copy number
variants. The Breast Cancer Genome Guided Therapy (BEAUTY) is an ongoing
clinical study in which RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and whole exome
sequencing (WES) are performed prior to, during and after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Here we report the use of these sequencing technologies to
investigate gene expression levels and mutational profiles in a triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) patient enrolled in BEAUTY whose disease
did not respond to neoadjuvant paclitaxel and
anthracycline/cycphosphamide.METHODSComputational approaches were used to
integrate WES and RNAseq data obtained before therapy (V1T), after 12
weekly paclitaxel treatments (V2T) and after anthracycline-based regimen
at surgical resection (V3T) to study a single patient with persistent
TNBC disease after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.RESULTSUsing RNA-Seq data, we
identified an inter-chromosomal fusion transcript between chromosome 20
and 22 (GNAS-TTC38) that was highly expressed at V1T, V2T and V3T. We
also identified intra-chromosomal fusion transcripts that were expressed
at two time points, such as fusion transcript (KANSL1-ARL17A) on
chromosome 17 for V1T and V2T and fusion transcript (RBM12B-LINC00535) on
chromosome 8 for V2T and V3T time points. Several gene expression changes
were also observed. Gene expression analysis of V1T, V2T and V3T tumors
was performed. Differential temporal gene expression profiles of 9884
genes that were significant and varying at different time points were
obtained for pathway analysis. Pathway analysis of 9884 genes identified
up regulation and down regulation of several transcription factors with a
fold change of 2x or more. When compared to blood, DNA tumor and RNA-Seq
data, we identified 81 common somatic eSNVs that were expressed in both
V1T and V2T time points and we are in the process of investigating V3T
data. We found alterations of key transporter domains (CD225,
Coatamer_beta_C, DUF2435, Dynamitin, EI24, GLTP, LMF1, Porin_3,
V-ATPase_C) in our V1T and V2T SNV data. Similar to gene expression
analysis, we are in the process of obtaining the list of mutations at
various time points to identify driver and passenger mutation candidate
genes for this specific TNBC patient.CONCLUSIONSOur initial time-series
analysis of eSNV, fusion transcripts and gene expression data demonstrate
that intensive analysis for individual patients is feasible. Further
investigation of drug transporters and transcription regulators may help
develop personalized treatment strategies for patients with disease
resistant to current regimens.

