Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of T cell repertoire in transplanted patients
with graft versus host disease using next generation DNA sequencer


Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an effective
therapy in treating patients for a range of high-risk hematologic
malignancies. However, the success of allogeneic HSCT is limited due to
graft versus host disease (GVHD). T cell receptor (TCR), a heterodimer of
alpha and beta chains, is expressed on the surface of T cells, recognizes
some antigens on the HLA molecule on host cells, enhances T cell
proliferation, and release cytotoxic agents that cause the damage on host
cells. The TCR in each T cell is unique due to the recombination of VJ
(alpha) or VDJ (beta) segments that generates a diverse repertoire of T
cells and enables T cells to recognize a vast number of different
antigens. The development of next generation sequencing (NGS) has enabled
us to obtain massive profiling of TCR to unravel the complexity of T cell
diversity. In this study, we attempted to identify expanded T cell
populations which are induced during the course of GVHD development after
HSCT. To characterize millions of the TCR alpha and beta chains from a
single individual, we performed very deep sequencing using cDNA derived
from mRNA isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of GVHD
patients at different time-points (before and after HSCT) with Ion
Personal Genome Machine (PGM) Sequencer and a 400-bp reading kit. This
sequencing technology has allowed us to obtain several million TCR
sequences in a single experiment. A newly-developed algorithm was then
applied for characterization of TCRs at each time-point. This approach
has identified expansion of oligoclonal TCR alpha and beta chains, with
unique V(D)J junction sequences around the rearranged regions, in T cells
that are likely to be associated with development of GVHD. In the present
study, a total of nine GVHD patients with different time-points (before
and after HSCT) were examined. We obtained an average of 3,560,634 TCR
alpha sequences with VJ combinations and 2,161,990 TCR beta sequences
with VDJ combinations. Diversified TCR repertoire is observed in these
samples. Further analysis of TCR alpha and beta chains for various
time-points has suggested that a specific type(s) of T cells might be
activated in the GVHD patients. Characterization of TCR may help
delineate the molecular mechanisms of GVHD more precisely. Furthermore,
it may aid in characterizing a personalized GVHD phenotype and predicting
and/or monitoring the immunological responses after HSCT.

