Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor, PI3K/mTOR and PSMA: Exploring and exploiting
the interplay between therapeutic targets in prostate cancer


Introduction: Androgen receptor (AR), the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway and
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) represent significant potential
targets for prostate cancer therapy. The present study examined the
cross-regulation and co-targeting of these molecular pathways.Methods:
Cytotoxicity and the kinetics of antigen expression were evaluated in
prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP and C4-2) that vary according to
androgen dependence. Expression of PSMA, prostate-specific antigen (PSA),
and AR was evaluated in cells cultured in rapamycin and AR inhibitors.
Cells were tested for susceptibility to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors used alone
and in combination with PSMA ADC, a fully human PSMA monoclonal antibody
conjugated to the microtubule disrupting agent monomethyl auristatin E
(MMAE). Potential drug synergy or antagonism was evaluated using the
Bliss independence method.Results: In androgen-dependent LNCaP cells,
rapamycin exerted antiproliferative effects that were accompanied by an
increase in AR expression and signaling in the absence of any significant
effect on PSMA expression. In androgen-independent C4-2 cells, rapamycin
increased AR expression/signaling and PSMA expression in the absence of
any significant anti-proliferative effect. AR inhibitors synergized with
PSMA ADC in LNCaP and C4-2 cells, but PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors
synergized with PSMA ADC in C4-2 cells only. More modest synergy was
observed by combining non-targeted microtubule inhibitors with inhibitors
of AR or mTOR. Compared with rapamycin, GDC0941 (PI3K inhibitor) and
MK-2206 (Akt inhibitor), both upstream of mTOR, synergized less strongly
with PSMA ADC in C4-2 cells.Conclusions: In this study, AR and PI3K/mTOR
pathways exhibited cross-regulation impacting PSMA expression. PSMA ADC
synergized with AR and mTOR inhibitors via a multimodal mechanism
involving increased PSMA expression and disruption of microtubule
function. The findings support clinical exploration of regimens combining
PSMA-targeted therapies with inhibitors of the AR and/or PI3K/mTOR
signaling pathways.

