Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free, real-time analysis of endothelial cell morphogenesis
using iPSC-derived endothelial cells


Endothelial cell (EC) morphogenesis during the early stages of
angiogenesis is a highly dynamic process tightly regulated by growth
factor activity in the extracellular milieu. Other in vitro models for
the analysis of EC morphogenesis have previously been developed to
understand the cellular processes and the impact of soluble cues and
pharmacological inhibitors. However, these assays typically utilize
end-point analysis of primary endothelial cells (eg. HUVEC), which are a
physiologically relevant vascular cell type but do exhibit variability
from the diversity of donors. Additionally, current methods for measuring
morphogenesis (eg. proliferation and migration) only capture a snapshot
of cell function owing to potentially destructive labeling of the cells
and do not capture the complexity of cellular processes involved in EC
morphogenesis Here, we describe use of a real-time system for monitoring
of cellular processes using electronic cell sensor array technology. The
cellular model tested on this impedance-based platform was a well-defined
human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived endothelial cells.
Following assay optimization and workflow improvement, we assessed the
impact of serum, growth factors (e.g. VEGF, EGF, FGF-2), and
small-molecule angiogenesis inhibitors (e.g. Sunitinib, SU1498) on the
proliferation, migration, and invasion of iPSC-derived ECs compared to
primary cells. We observed that real-time monitoring of such cellular
processes offers distinct and important advantages over traditional
end-point assays - specifically, the ability to measure receptor
activation and quantify morphologic and adhesive remodeling of EC upon
growth factor activation or signaling inhibition. By better understanding
cellular morphogenesis in vitro, we can generate a picture of what
soluble cues regulate the process and how pharmacological agents can
modulate the different cell fates underlying morphogenesis. The use of
iPSC-derived endothelial cells provides a robust and reproducible source
of cells that perform equivalently to the standard that is HUVEC. The
combination of iPSC-derived EC together with a real time monitoring
system provides a biologically relevant human model system.

