Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of relative expression of SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb in lung
cancer cell lines treated with estrogen and PKC and PKA pathway modulators


Background:Lung cancer (LC) represents a major health challenge
worldwide, being the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in both men
and women. SLC34A2 is a member of the solute carrier family and encodes
the type IIb sodium phosphate cotransporter (NaPi-IIb). SLC34A2
expression is reduced by ten-fold in LC samples compared to normal lung.
Estrogen is a known risk factor for LC in women, and a relationship
between its action and SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb super-expression in certain cell
lines has been proposed. Furthermore, based on the central role of PKC
isoenzymes in carcinogenesis, and on studies showing that administration
of cAMP stimulates the NaPi-IIb mRNA expression in adult rats alveolar
type II cells, this work aimed to evaluate the correlation between PKA
(cAMP mediator), PKC, estrogen signaling pathways and SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb
expression levels in human LC cells.Methods:For both LC cell lines
studied, A549 and H460, the effects of PKC and PKA activating and
inhibitory reagents (PMA, calphostin C, dB cAMP and KT 5720) were tested
in relation to SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb expression. Additionally, a dose-response
curve of 17-beta-estradiol was performed for the expression of
SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb in A549 cell line. SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb gene expression was
analyzed by qRT-PCR, using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix as the detection
system. Relative quantification of gene expression was performed by
calculating the delta-delta Ct using two housekeeping genes: GAPDH and
Beta-Actin.Findings:In our analysis we found that PKC and PKA did not
influence the expression of SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb in LC cell line evaluated.
There was, however, a considerable increase in the expression of this
gene when treated with calphostin C, probably by a mechanism independent
of its classic role in the PKC inhibition. There was also a trend of
decreased SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb gene expression in LC cell line following the
treatment with 17 beta-estradiol, and SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb - which expression
is already reduced in LC - undergoes a greater reduction in its relative
expression.Interpretation:We believe that maintaining the reduced
expression of SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb should provide benefits to LC cells.
Calphostin C induces apoptosis in several tumor cell lines by mechanisms
not yet fully elucidated. Thus, we suggest a possible involvement of
SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb in this pro-apoptotic pathway, which corroborates the
fact that LC tumors present a reduced SLC34A2/NaPi-IIb expression
compared to normal lung. Likewise, based on our findings, we believe that
the inclusion of selective Estrogen receptor modulators and aromatase
inhibitors in the routine clinical practice of LC might help to control
the disease that is still the leading cause of cancer-related deaths
worldwide.

