Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of a novel small molecule MER receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor in B-RAF wild-type and B-RAF mutant melanoma cell lines


Metastatic melanoma is the most aggressive cutaneous cancer, with poor
prognosis and a median overall survival of less than a year. Current
therapies are effective in only a subset of patients, exhibit a variety
of side effects, and/or lead to resistance. Previous studies have
demonstrated TAM (TYRO3, AXL, MER) receptor tyrosine kinase (TK)
expression in melanoma. MER has been implicated in growth and
chemoresistance of various cancers, and we and others have demonstrated a
potential survival role for MER in melanoma. Our data revealed increasing
MER expression in metastatic melanoma compared to primary disease,
regardless of B-RAF mutational status. These findings implicate MER as a
therapeutic target in melanoma and suggest its utility in patients
without B-RAF mutations who currently have limited treatment options. In
addition, MER inhibition in combination with B-RAF inhibitors may provide
a safer, more effective, and possibly curative treatment for patients
with B-RAF mutant melanomas. To this end, we evaluated UNC TKI, a novel,
orally bioavailable and potent MER-selective small-molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI), in preclinical models of melanoma, both alone and
in combination with vemurafenib (a mutant B-RAF TKI). B-RAF wild-type
(HMCB) and B-RAF mutant (G361) cell lines were treated with UNC TKI or
vehicle. Downstream signaling was evaluated by immunoblotting, and
induction of apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry in cells stained
with YO-PRO-1 iodide and propidium iodide. Alternatively, cells were
seeded in media containing UNC TKI or vehicle and colony formation was
determined. Treatment with UNC TKI induced apoptosis and reduced colony
growth in both B-RAF wild-type and B-RAF mutant cell lines, with
concentrations as low as 300nM resulting in an almost complete block in
colony formation. In addition, MER inhibition reduced activation of
downstream pro-survival signaling pathways known to play roles in
melanoma, including ERK, AKT, and STAT6. Importantly, combined treatment
with UNC TKI and vemurafenib completely abrogated these signaling
pathways in a B-RAF mutant cell line and increased apoptosis relative to
the single agents, consistent with the idea that MER inhibition may
provide additional therapeutic advantage when combined with vemurafenib
in patients with B-RAF mutant melanomas. Taken together, these studies
validate UNC TKI as a potential treatment for both B-RAF wild-type and
B-RAF mutant melanomas and provide data supporting continued development
of UNC TKI for treatment of melanoma.

