Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Rad6 sensitizes triple negative breast cancer cells
to platinum-based therapy


Treatment of triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) poses a clinical
challenge because they are not treatable with therapies targeting
estrogen receptor and Her2/neu as they lack expression of estrogen,
progesterone, and Her2/neu receptors. Since TNBCs share several
histologic features with BRCA1-related breast cancer, and these breast
cancers have aberrant DNA repair, DNA repair pathways are thought to play
a role in TNBC development and drug response. Platinum (Pt)-based
compounds induce toxic interstrand DNA crosslinks (ICL), the repair of
which requires activities of BRCA/Fanconi anemia (FA) network and Rad6
postreplication DNA repair (PRR) pathways. PRR pathway confers tolerance
to DNA damage by enabling cells to complete DNA replication in the face
of damage and avoid mitotic catastrophe. Rad6 regulates PCNA
ubiquitination, a critical event for PRR, and also promotes FancD2
ubiquitination, a critical event for ICL repair. We have recently
reported the identification and synthesis of a small molecule inhibitor
(SMI) of Rad6 that targets its ubiquitin conjugating activity. We
hypothesize that targeting Rad6 will be beneficial to TNBCs treated with
Pt-based compounds by preventing acquisition of resistance and overcoming
Pt resistance. Treatment with the Rad6 SMI enhanced CDDP sensitivity of
BRCA1 wild type MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells that have intrinsic CDDP
resistance. Western blot analysis showed that the CDDP-induced DNA damage
is accompanied by PCNA and FancD2 monoubiquitination (surrogate markers
of Rad6 and FA pathway activation, respectively) and increases in H2AX
levels. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with the Rad6 SMI attenuated
CDDP-induced PCNA and FancD2 ubiquitination, and H2AX levels. Treatment
with Rad6 SMI inhibited formation of CDDP-induced Rad6, PCNA, FancD2,
translesion synthesis polymerase eta and H2AX nuclear foci. These data
suggest that Rad6 plays an important role in recruitment of repair
factors during CDDP-induced DNA damage response. To verify these
findings, IdU/CldU double labeling assays were performed to evaluate the
impact of Rad6 inhibition on restart of CDDP-induced stalled replication
forks. Whereas restarting of CDDP-induced stalled replication forks
occurred efficiently in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with nontarget siRNA or
vehicle, resumption of stalled forks was severely compromised in
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with Rad6B siRNA or Rad6 SMI. Consistent with
the in vitro data, orthotopic implantation of MDA-MB-231 cells pretreated
with Rad6 SMI or CDDP alone produced significantly smaller tumors
compared to vehicle, and tumor growth was further mitigated when cells
were pretreated with both CDDP and Rad6 SMI. These data imply a critical
role for the Rad6 PRR pathway in repair of Pt-induced DNA damage and that
inhibition of Rad6 catalytic activity may be exploited to sensitize TNBCs
to Pt therapies. Supported by NIH 1R21CA178117-01.

