Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Array analysis of cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) on gene
promoter methylation in human lung cells


Lung cancer is the most common malignancy affecting both genders and
remains the main cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Epidemiological studies indicate that cigarette smoking has a strong
association, since approximately 80-90% of lung cancers are attributable
to cigarette smoking. In lung cancer, epigenetic alterations such as
promoter DNA methylation that leads to gene silencing are common events.
A positive correlation between tobacco smoking and promoter
hypermethylation in human lung cancer tissue has been demonstrated for
many genes. However, the underlying mechanisms in tobacco-induced cancer
and by which tobacco smoke disrupts a cell's capacity to maintain the
normal epigenetic code during the malignant transformation are yet to be
fully established. In the present study, the degree of promoter
methylation across a defined panel of genes, reported to be altered in a
variety of lung cancers, was evaluated in control and cigarette smoke
condensate (CSC) exposed human lung cells using the Methyl-Profiler DNA
Methylation PCR System technology. PSAE cells, a primary cell line, were
exposed to 0.3 g/ml or 1.0 g/ml CSC for 72 hours and chronically for 14
days and 30 days. NL-20 cells, an immortalized cell line, were exposed
chronically for 30 days at doses of 10 g/ml and 100 g/ml CSC. Promoters
of several genes, hsa-let-7a-3, CHD1, CXCL12, PAX5, RASSF2, and TCF21,
were identified as being highly methylated (>90%) after CSC exposure.
Level of methylation tended to increase with dose and duration of
exposure. The ability of the dietary agent genistein to modulate
CSC-induced promoter methylation was also explored. Promoter methylation
was assessed in the genes panel. Under the conditions employed, the
percentage methylation of TCF21, which was >98% at exposures of 10 g/ml
or 100 g/ml CSC, was reduced to 28% and 42%, respectively, in the
presence of genistein. Using the array techniques, several tumor
suppressors in human lung cells were identified whose promoter
methylation can be increased upon exposure to CSC, providing further
evidence of their potential involvement in tobacco smoke-induced lung
carcinogenesis and may provide potential biomarkers of harm in tobacco
smoke exposure. Results from the study also demonstrated the potential of
dietary agents to exert chemopreventive activity in human tissue against
tobacco smoke related diseases through modulation of DNA methylation.
Additional studies are needed to confirm these findings, to screen other
genes, and to further characterize the role and their impact of
epigenetic changes in tumor suppressor genes in tobacco smoke-induced
harm.

