Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic and proteomic analysis of gastric tumor and its
histologically free proximal and distal margins


Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) corresponds to the fourth most common
malignancy among men and sixth among women in Brazil. GC is a
multifactorial disease that results from individual genetic
predisposition and exposure to ambient factors such as diet, alcohol
consumption, smoking, chronic Helicobacter pylori infection or
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). H. pylori and EBV are known to up-regulate DNA
methyltransferases. Aim: Compare the promoter methylation profiles of
E-cadherin, p16, DAPK, and Rb genes of histologically tumor free proximal
and distal margins from fresh tissues and perform a quantitative
proteomic comparison of the tumor, distal and proximal resection margins
profiles from the same patient. Methods: 18 samples consisting of six
gastric carcinomas, their corresponding proximal margins (PM), and distal
margins (DM) were obtained from six patients subjected to gastric
resection at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. DNA was
extracted from the fresh tissues by using proteinase K digestion and
Phenol-chloroform isoamilic alcohol followed by ethanol precipitation.
Methylation-specific PCR analysis was used to determine the methylation
status of E-cadherin, p16, DAPK, and Rb genes promoter by bisulfite
modification. The presence of EBV was investigated by PCR and a shotgun
proteomic analysis of all tissues from the H pilory and EBV negative
patient was performed using an Orbitrap Velos. Results: 3 of 6 patients
were positive for EBV viz: 3 tumors plus 6 margins. The total methylation
for the 4 genes in all 9 samples (p16, E-cadherin, DAPK, and Rb genes)
were: 5/36 in PM (esophagus); 5/36 in tumor, and 9/36 for DM
(intestinal); in the negative EBV samples: 6/36 in PM; 4/36 in tumor and
8/36 in the DM. The proteomic analysis disclosed 786 proteins identified
in the tumor fragment (58 proteins uniquely identified in this tissue),
777 to histologically normal proximal margin (87 unique proteins) and 750
to histologically normal distal margin (132 unique proteins). In all
three fragments analyzed, unique proteins related to tumor progression or
metastasis were identified; examples are: hepatoma- derived growth (HDGF)
in the tumor, Annexin 1A in the PM and Mucin 1 in the DM. Conclusion: Our
results show that histologically free tumor margins are molecularly
compromised by methylation and by up regulation of proteins correlated to
tumor progression and metastasis even in samples not infected with EBV or
H.pyloriFinancial support CNPq

