Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carbohydrate intake, glycemic index and prostate cancer risk


Background: Reported associations between dietary carbohydrate and
prostate cancer (PC) risk are inconsistent and poorly characterized by
race. We examined the associations between dietary carbohydrate intake,
glycemic index (GI), and PC risk, and whether these associations differed
by race.Methods: We analyzed data from an ongoing case-control study of
white (N=262) and black (N=168) veterans at the Durham VA Hospital. Cases
were 156 men with biopsy-confirmed PC. Controls were men who had
undergone PSA testing but were not recommended for further evaluation.
Demographic and lifestyle risk data were collected using
self-administered questionnaires prior to diagnosis. Diet information was
obtained using the Harvard food frequency questionnaire. Logistic
regression models estimated PC risk and results were adjusted for age,
race, body mass index BMI and caloric intake.Results: Among controls,
median carbohydrate intake was 224 gms/day, which amounted to 49% (IQR
43-55%) of calories from carbohydrates. Higher total carbohydrate intake
was associated with reduced PC risk (3rd tertile vs. 1st tertile,
OR=0.29, 95%CI 0.11-0.72, p-trend=0.007). Though associations were
similar in black and white men, this only reached significance in black
men (p-trend=0.007). When carbohydrate intake was measured as percent of
energy from carbohydrates, higher intake was associated with reduced PC
risk (3rd tertile vs. 1st tertile, OR=0.57, 95%CI 0.34-0.96, p=0.033).
Again, results were similar in both races, though this only reached
significance in black men (p-trend=0.025). Similarly, higher fiber intake
(p-trend=0.047) was associated with lower risk of PC, with results
similar in black and white men. On the contrary, GI was unrelated to PC
risk among all men with a suggestion that higher GI may be linked with
increased PC risk in black men (p-trend=0.06). When stratified by grade,
associations for all dietary factors examined were similar for both low-
and high-grade disease.Conclusion: Among men consuming a Western diet,
our findings suggest higher carbohydrate intake and thereby lower intake
of other macronutrients (i.e. protein and fat) may be associated with
reduced risk of overall PC and both low- and high-grade PC. However, when
examining the GI of the diet, though there was no overall association,
there was a suggestion that high GI foods may increase PC risk in black
men. While larger studies are needed to confirm our findings, especially
in black men, these data suggest that among men consuming a Western diet,
those eating more complex carbohydrates (i.e. fiber, whole grains) but
not refined carbohydrates may have lower PC risk.

