Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Citral is the major component of ginger-derived terpenes to
mediate p53-dependent apoptosis in cancer cells


Steam distillation of ginger yields a mixture of twenty two terpenes.
This mixture has anti-proliferative effect on over fifteen different
human and mouse cancer cell lines tested in our previous studies. Since
the mixture is heterogeneous, it cannot be developed into a therapeutic
drug. Hence, we tested individual terpenes from the ginger extract to
identify its bioactive component(s). Camphene and alpha-pinene together
constitute 10% of the ginger terpene extract and have no effect on cancer
cell proliferation. On the other hand, citral a mixture of the two
isomers, neral and geranial which constitute 30-50% of the ginger terpene
extract, inhibits proliferation of ECC-1, OVCAR-3, OVCAR5, OVCAR 433 with
IC50 between 20-50 M. The decrease in proliferation of the cells is due
to induction of apoptosis by citral as measured by monitoring Annexin V
and propidium iodide staining and expression of cleaved caspase3.
Treatment of cancer cells with citral results in a rapid increase in
intracellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). The cellular stress
resulting from ROS generation leads to phosphorylation of the Ser-15
residue of p53. Activation of p53 via this phosphorylation event leads to
apoptosis in cancer cells. When cells are pre-treated with ROS inhibitor,
N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), citral induced apoptosis is inhibited. Similarly
inhibition of p53 by pifithrin- or knockdown of the tumor suppressor by
siRNA attenuates the pro-apoptotic response of citral. There is a
significant increase in p53 protein expression in cancer cells when
treated with Citral This increase in p53 is likely due to an increase in
p53 gene expression as determined in our qPCR assays, even though
increase due to inhibition of proteasomal degradation of the protein
cannot be completely ruled out at this point. An increase in p53
expression in response to citral is associated with an increase in
expression of the p53 responsive genes BAX, PUMA and NOXA. All of these
experiments demonstrate a novel p53-dependent mechanism for citral to
induce apoptosis in cancer cells. Anti-proliferative effects of citral
were observed in cancer cells expressing wild-type p53 (ECC-1) as well as
in cell lines with R248Q (OVCAR3), ins224 (OVCAR5) p53 mutations. Based
on these experimental results we propose that citral should be considered
as a novel p53 activating agent that can be used as an adjunct to
conventional chemo- and biologic therapies against cancer. Our on-going
efforts will identify sensitivity of commonly found p53 mutations to
activation by citral and also the specific p53 kinases triggered
subsequent to the ROS surge mediated by this terpene.

