Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Damage-induced BRCA1 phosphorylation contributes to the timing of
end resection


Germline mutations of BRCA1 predispose women to breast and ovarian
cancers. BRCA1 functions as a tumor suppressor. A wealth of evidence has
established that BRCA1 plays an important role in DNA repair and cell
cycle checkpoint control. Efficient repair of double-strand-breaks (DSBs)
by BRCA1 is essential to its tumor suppression function. DSBs can be
repaired either by homologous recombination (HR) or by nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ). BRCA1 is hyperphosphorylated upon DSBs. Although
phosphorylation of BRCA1 is among the earliest events documented upon DNA
damage, the role of BRCA1 phosphorylation in DNA repair remains unclear
after more than a decade. It has been proposed that BRCA1 serves as a
scaffolding protein that recruits multiple repair proteins to the break
sites. One of the BRCA1-containing complexes, MRN
(Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1)-BRCA1-CtIP, promotes HR repair by initiating DNA
end-resection, the first step in the HR pathway. Mre11 possesses
intrinsic nuclease activity, which likely facilitates initial processing
of DNA ends for subsequent extensive end-resection. Believed to stimulate
the nuclease activity of the MRN complex, CtIP is recruited to the
complex by BRCA1.In spite of these useful molecular models, the precise
function of BRCA1 in DSB repair, especially the role of its
phosphorylation, remains elusive. BRCA1 is phosphorylated by Chk2 kinase
upon -irradiation at serine 988 (human) or serine 971 (mouse). Our data
shows that a point mutation in mouse BRCA1 (S971A) that abolishes the
Chk2 phosphorylation site impairs end-resection after DSBs. The S971A
mutation does not appear to affect the assembly of MRN and CtIP at DSBs,
but specifically delays dispersion of BRCA1 from DSBs. Interestingly,
BRCA1 is ubiquitinated and degraded by SCFSkp2, and loss of Chk2
phosphorylation at S988 of human BRCA1 impairs its ubiquitination.
Previous work has revealed BRCA1 as a scaffold protein for the assembly
of HR proteins at DSBs. Paradoxically, BRCA1 also inhibits Mre11 nuclease
activity. Our study suggests that BRCA1 plays a dual role in HR. Although
BRCA1 is required for initial assembly of the MRN-BRCA1-CtIP complex at
DSBs, the exit of BRCA1 from the MRN-BRCA1-CtIP complex is required to
relieve its inhibitory effect on Mre11 nuclease activity.
Mechanistically, this critical exit of BRCA1 from the MRN-BRCA1-CtIP
complex is regulated through phosphorylation catalyzed by Chk2 and then
degraded by SCFSkp2, which is expressed at S/G2 phases, thus ensuring the
initiation of end resection/HR to S/G2 phases of the cell cycle. Our
study explains two seemingly paradoxical observations: BRCA1 is required
for assembly of the MRN-BRCA1-CtIP complex, but it inhibits Mre11
nuclease activity required for end-resection.

