Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-low coverage exome sequencing of FFPE tumor specimens
identifies exposure to carcinogenic aristolochic acid


Dietary intake of Aristolochia plants containing aristolochic acid (AA,
IARC Group 1 carcinogen), leads to renal disease and to recurrent urinary
tract transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). Mutation screens identified
frequent A>T transversions, alterations underrepresented in other cancer
types, as the signature of AA exposure. AA-associated TCC is a
preventable cancer yet millions are estimated at risk due to unregulated
medicinal use of Aristolochia. Here we present an ultra-low coverage
modification of whole-exome sequencing (ULC-WES) as a novel molecular
epidemiology method that reliably detects the AA mutation signature in
small amounts of DNA from FFPE tumor tissues and can identify new exposed
populations.DNA was isolated from paraffin sections of 18 TCC tumors from
endemic nephropathy (EN) patients from regions in Croatia and Bosnia
linked to exposure to AA. Four non-EN upper tract TCCs were used as
controls. 250 ng of DNA was used for sequencing libraries and exome
enrichment (Nimblegen, Roche). Libraries were sequenced on Illumina
HiSeq2500 at 10-12x coverage. After data processing, GATK was used to
call single nucleotide variants (SNV). To assess platform independence, 7
samples were run on SOLID 5500XL (Life), using proprietary chemistry and
pipeline for data processing and variant calling. Normal genetic variants
were filtered out after SNV annotation.ULC-WES at 10x identified the A>T
predominance in 17 of 18 EN tumors (94%), and at T pattern in 14 (78%)
samples. In contrast, the A>T presence was T mutations in the genome
(R^2=0.83 for mutation count correlated with the chromosome length) but
also identified recurrent non-synonymous A>T mutations in tumor
suppressors and oncogenes including TP53, ARID1A, BRCA1/2, AXIN1, GATA3
and NRAS, DNMT1, FLT3, CSF1R and PIK3CA. We next detected recurrent A>T
mutations in a number of histone and DNA modifiers suggesting epigenetic
deregulation of genome activity in the AA-associated TCCs.In 2 patients,
pairs of distinct TCCs from the same surgery had markedly overlapping
mutation patterns (624 SNVs shared between same-side pelvic and ureteric
tumors in one case, and 191 shared between renal pelvic and bladder
tumors in the other). Thus, ULC-WES provided evidence supporting the
concept of tumor cell seeding along the urinary tract as a mechanism of
TCC spread and recurrence.We conclude that ULC-WES is a sensitive and
specific method to identify AA exposure in tumor tissue and is directly
applicable to identification of new populations at risk. The method can
ultimately facilitate evidence-based preventive measures in the affected
regions.Acknowledgments: Genetic Services Platform, IARC; Genome
Technology Center, NYU Langone Medical Center; NIH P01 ES04068, NIH
Fogarty International Center 1R03TW007042, Croatian Ministry of Science.

