Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RLI, a sushi-IL-15R/IL-15 fusion protein, is a potent
immunomodulatory agent on NK and CD8+ T cells and synergizes with
anti-PD1 treatment in preclinical mouse tumor models


The prospect of effective immunotherapies for the treatment of patients
with cancer is now becoming a clinical reality. Different major
phenotypes of tumor microenvironment are emerging and could require
distinct immunotherapeutic interventions for maximal therapeutic effect.
In the T-cell infiltrated tumors context, monoclonal antibody blocking
the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, like nivolumab or lambrolizumab, have shown very
promising clinical efficacy for patients with metastatic melanoma (MM),
Non Small Cell Lung cancer and renal cell carcinoma (1, 2). Recently, the
combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab (anti CTLA-4) has demonstrated a
strong synergy in MM patients (3). Thus, blocking peripheral tolerance
mechanisms such as CTLA-4 and PD1 molecules seems to be a very promising
strategy to cure such cancers. Many combinations with other
immunotherapeutic interventions seem encouraging to be evaluated in early
clinical trials. Leveraging or consolidating the driving forces between
the efficacy of such checkpoint inhibitors with novel activating or
inhibiting immunomodulatory agents is crucial and has to be based on
relevant pharmacological and preclinical models. RLI is a
sushi-IL-15R/IL-15 fusion protein that mimics the IL-15 transpresentation
(4). In this study, the immunomodulatory activities induced by RLI were
evaluated in vivo in mice and ex-vivo on human samples. We showed that
RLI induced a strong expansion and increased effector functions and
differentiation of NK and CD8+ T cells without any induction/activation
of regulatory CD4+ T cells (Treg). Comparison of equimolar doses of RLI,
IL-15 and IL-2, led to the conclusion that RLI is much more effective
than IL-15 for the induction of NK and CD8+ T cells and increased the
ratio of NK to Treg cells. Beside, RLI appeared as a safe, specific and
potent IL-15R/ receptor agonist. We then investigated potential synergy
with anti-PD1 treatment in the CT26 preclinical mouse tumor model.
Anti-PD1 and RLI concomitant treatment induced 31% of complete tumor
regressions (CR) in the tumor model, while anti-PD1 as standalone
treatment induced 6% of CR. The underlying mechanisms of this synergy
will be presented during the AACR meeting. Altogether, this work provides
evidence that RLI can enhance anti-tumor activity of anti-PD1 treatment.
As RLI was shown to present a favorable safety profile in different
animal species, these results are very encouraging and warrant its
investigation in early clinical trials in the coming years.(1) Topalian
SL et al. N Engl J Med. 2012(2) Hamid O et al. N Engl J Med. 2013(3)
Wolchok JD et al. N Engl J Med. 2013(4) Mortier E, et al. J Biol Chem.
2006

