Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF transactivation of EGFR protects EGFR-TKI, gefitinib induced
pulmonary epithelial cell apoptosis and injury in TNF transgenic mice


Background: TNF is a cytokine with many biological properties including
both anti- and pro-apoptotic signaling pathways. However, the molecular
switch, which determines TNF regulation of these two different functions,
is not well characterized. EGFR and other ErbB family members could be
activated by direct interaction with EGF-like ligands initiating
formation of homo- and/or hetero-dimers and increased kinase activity. In
addition to direct EGFR ligands, EGFR can be transactivated by various
extracellular stimuli, such as agonists for GPCR and cytokine receptors.
Previously, we have reported that EGFR and ErbB2 were transactivated via
Src kinase family activation with TNF exposure and blockade of EGFR
enhanced intestinal epithelial cells apoptosis. Furthermore, TNF
administration enhanced apoptotic cells in colonic grand of EGFRwa2 mice.
Hypothesis: The induction of pulmonary epithelial cell apoptosis is a
persistent finding in lung tissue from patients with emphysema and
pulmonary fibrosis. We hypothesized that EGFR tyrosine kinase activity is
required for protection from pulmonary cell apoptosis in TNF-rich
condition. Methods: We employed C57BL/6 mice as a control and surfactant
protein-C (SP-C)/TNF transgenic (TG) mice (6-8 weeks old), which showed
over-expression of TNF in lung tissue by induction of SP-C production.
The lung tissue sections were stained by H&E and trichrome stain.
Apoptosis and signal transduction was determined by TUNEL assay and
Western-blot analysis, respectively. The accumulation of collagen was
measured by Sircol assay. Results: Control mice and TG mice was
administrated gefitinib 100mg/kg for 14days. Gefitinib increased
lymphocyte infiltration into interstitial spaces of the TG mice lung,
significantly. Although TG mice lung was severely injured by gefitinib,
fibroblast proliferation was not observed and the accumulation of
collagen was not detected. In TG mice, gefitinib increased apoptotic
response 10-fold compared to 1% tween80 treated TG mice in interstitial
spaces. To test the role of EGFR in apoptosis induction in TG mice, the
protein was isolated from whole lung tissue. The tyrosine kinase activity
of EGFR was increased and the downstream of AKT and ERK were activated in
TG mice. Conversely, treating with gefitinib on TG mice, EGFR
phosphorylation was inhibited and, AKT and ERK were inactivated. One of
the pro-apoptotic signals, p38 MAPK was activated via MKK3/6 by gefitinib
treatment in TG mice, suggesting activation of ASK1/p38 MAPK signals
leading to pulmonary epithelial cell apoptosis. Conclusions: The
dysregulated production of TNF is a mediator of inflammation and tumor
growth. Therefore, the mechanisms of TNF-regulated anti-/pro- apoptotic
responses are important in understanding the role of TNF in the
pathogenesis of pulmonary disorders, such as inflammation and cancer.

