Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of miRNA in asbestos-related lung
adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer has the highest mortality rate of all of the cancers in the
world and asbestos-related lung cancer is one of the leading occupational
cancers. The identification of asbestos-related molecular changes has
long been a topic of increasing research interest. Microarray technology
is a powerful high-throughput tool capable of monitoring the expression
of thousands of small noncoding RNAs at once within tens of samples
processed in parallel in a single experiment. The aim of this study was
to construct a genome-wide expression profile of miRNA of
asbestos-related lung cancers, and was to identify novel asbestos-related
molecular biomarkers. The miRNA profiling was performed on 31 patients
(13 patients with asbestos-exposed and 18 patients with non-
asbestos-exposed) undergoing lung resection for primary adenocarcinoma,
both fresh and FFPE materials of whom were available. Data analyses on
miRNA expression revealed four novel asbestos-related miRNAs (three
over-expressed miR-210, miR-200a, miR-429, and one under-expressed
miR-140-3p). Also, 16 target genes, expression of which were inversely
correlated, were identified. Among them we obtained a set of miRNAs that
were involved in hypoxia-regulated and oxidative stress responders,
seemingly related to asbestos burden. For example, miR-210 is involved in
a wide-range of processes, including cell proliferation, migration,
apoptosis, differentiation, DNA repair and cell metabolism, and more
recently in the regulation of antitumor immune responses, suggesting
roles of this miRNA as a central master regulator of the hypoxic
response. According to gene ontology analyses of the target genes were
mostly transcription factors, cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. For
validation, we compared the expression levels of miRNA between fresh and
FFPE materials, resulting in good correlations (R=0.76-0.90). The
miRNAs/genes presented here may be interesting targets for further
investigation and could eventually have potential diagnostic implications.

