Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between weight change and response to
trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy among women with operable HER2
overexpressing breast cancer


PurposeWeight change (gain or loss) in early breast cancer patients is
associated with worse survival. However, limited research investigates
the impact of weight change in the neoadjuvant setting in women with HER2
overexpressing breast cancer. The goals of this study were to examine i)
the relationship between weight change during trastuzumab-based
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and pathologic response, and ii) determine
whether weight change during post-operative trastuzumab was associated
with outcome.Patients and methodsFrom March 2004 to March 2013, 52
patients diagnosed with invasive non-metastatic HER2 overexpressing
breast cancer were recruited from H.S. Kaplan Cancer center, France. They
received trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) before surgery,
followed by adjuvant trastuzumab. Patients were distributed in the weight
loss or weight gain/stable categories according to their relative weight
change after NAC, and after adjuvant trastuzumab. Logistic regression was
used to examine associations between weight change and pathologic
response. The Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazards regression
analysis were used to evaluate the relationship between weight change and
progression free survival (PFS).ResultsMedian age was 50 years (range 21
to 71 years); 25% of women experienced body weight loss during NAC, 40%
had stable body weight, and 35% gained weight. In multivariate analysis,
weight loss was significantly associated with worse pathologic complete
response (pCR) in tumor compared with the weight gain/stable group (OR =
0.18; 95% CI, 0.04 to 0.84). There was no difference in pCR in nodes
according to weight change (OR = 0.34; 95% CI, 0.06 to 1.76). Body mass
index was not associated with pCR. At a median follow up time of 3 years,
PFS was not associated with weight change during NAC but with weight
change during adjuvant trastuzumab. PFS was worse in patients loosing
weight during adjuvant trastuzumab (OR = 0.05; 95% CI, 0.01 to
0.34).ConclusionWeight loss was associated with worse pCR to
trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In addition, weight loss
during adjuvant trastuzumab was associated with worse PFS. These results
suggest that weight control and promotion of weight maintenance in women
with HER2 overexpressing breast cancer should be integrated within cancer
treatment to optimize patient outcomes.

