Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effects and mechanism of VR23, a novel chloroquine
derivative


Chloroquine, a worldwide used drug in treatment of malaria, rheumatoid
and other human diseases, has recently been focused as a potential
anti-cancer drug as well as a chemo-sensitizer when given in combination
with other anti-cancer drugs. In cancer treatment, chloroquine possesses
a major potential therapeutic advantage in which it specifically targets
cancer cells. Unfortunately, however, its anticancer activity is rather
low. To further improve its efficacy and specificity in killing cancer
cells, we created and characterized several chloroquine derivatives using
a hybrid pharmacophore approach, which led us to identify VR23 as the
most promising compound. Our in-vitro model of cancer cells shows that
VR23 functions as a novel proteasome inhibitor. It also deregulates
activity of cyclin E and other centrosomal proteins, resulting in
induction of multiple centrosome amplification, abnormal spindle
formation, uneven cytokinesis, irreversible mitotic arrests, and
eventually apoptosis. These VR23-induced phenomena occur in
cancer-specific manner and cause massive death in a variety of cancer
cell types. The treatment of engrafted animals with VR23 (30 mg/kg) twice
per week for three weeks effectively inhibits tumor growth.
Interestingly, administration of VR23 following 24 hours pre-treatment
with paclitaxel (20mg/kg/week) enhances paclitaxel's anti-tumor activity
by 70%. Our histological data shows that VR23 causes substantial decrease
in mitotic index, inhibition of tumor infiltration into surrounding
tissues and remarkable reduction of tumor cell proliferation and
angiogenesis. Most importantly, VR23 shows very low toxicity to vital
organs (liver, spleen, kidney and lung) of non-tumor-bearing nude mice.
In addition, VR23 seems to reduce paclitaxel-induced toxicity when used
in combination. Taken together, VR23, our novel chloroquine derivative
and newly discovered proteasome inhibitor, appears to be an effective and
safe anticancer therapeutic alone or in combination with other anticancer
agents.

