Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing lymphatic response to treatments in head and neck cancer
using near-infrared fluorescence imaging


Radiation toxicity is a major obstacle to effective head and neck (HN)
cancer treatment. Treatment-related toxicity to lymphatic tissues in the
HN region could significantly diminish patient's quality-of-life, with
lymphedema resulting in more than half of HN cancer patients who undergo
surgery and radiotherapy. Impairment of lymphatics due to radiotherapy
may be expected because radiation exposures could cause tissue fibrosis
and loss of capillary lymphatics. In this pilot study, we sought to
visualize lymphatic architecture and contractile function before and
after cancer treatments using near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) lymphatic
imaging. The approach allowed us to longitudinally assess the effect of
radiation or surgery on the lymphatics in HN cancer patients.Human
subjects, who were diagnosed with HN squamous cell carcinoma and
scheduled for radiotherapy or combination of surgery/radiotherapy, were
recruited in this ongoing study under FDA approval (IND 102,765). Imaging
sessions are conducted before and as late as one year after the
treatments at several time points. After informed consent, ten injections
of 12.5-25 mcg indocyanine green (off-label use) in 0.05-0.1 c.c. saline
were each administered bilaterally in the oral cavity, oropharynx, and on
the face (posterior auricular, preauricular, and submandibular) in each
imaging session. Immediately after injections, the skin surface was
illuminated with a diffused excitation light of 785 nm, and sequences of
NIRF lymphatic images of 0.2 sec exposure time at 2 frames/sec were
collected using a custom-built imaging system. Imaging was typically
performed for an hour. While subject recruitment continues, NIRF images
in all 13 subjects show the lymphatic draining vessels and nodes in the
face and neck. Images acquired before treatment, post-surgery, and then
post-radiation allowed us to document the change of lymphatics and
investigate the response of lymphatics to the treatments. Propulsion of
lymph in collecting lymphatic vessels were seen in some of subjects both
pre- and post- surgery as well as after radiotherapy. To date, no major
impairment of lymphatics has been noted in the first 13 subjects.
Longitudinal imaging was accomplished for 3 out of 13 subjects.
Extra-lymphatic leakage around the incision line was seen in some
subjects post surgery. In one subject, lymphatic propulsion was seen
before treatment and post- radiation, but not post-surgery. Preliminary
results show the reformation of lymphatic architecture after surgery and
radiotherapy.In conclusion, we have employed NIRF imaging to assess
lymphatics in HN cancer patients, who underwent radiotherapy and/or
surgery, and to visualize the response to the treatments. While
longitudinal studies continue, the preliminary results show the
reorganization of lymphatics after the treatments.

