Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tocopherols inhibit oxidative and nitrosative stress in
estrogen-induced early mammary hyperplasia in ACI rats


Tocopherols (T), members of the vitamin E family, exist in four different
forms designated as , , and . Due to their antioxidant properties,
tocopherols are suggested to reduce the risk of cancer. -T is known as
the classic vitamin E as it is the major tocopherol found in plasma and
tissues. However, some large scale clinical trials with -T have provided
inconclusive results. Recent studies from our laboratory and others
indicate that -T and -T have stronger anti-cancer activities than -T in
vitro and in vivo. -T is the most common form of vitamin E in the U.S.
diet, present in vegetable oils such as soybean, corn and cottonseed. The
naturally occurring -T-enriched mixture of tocopherols (-TmT) has been
reported to inhibit mammary tumorigenesis in estrogen receptor positive
models of breast cancer. Using ACI rats, we investigated the
chemopreventive activity of -TmT in the early stages of estrogen-induced
mammary tumorigenesis. ACI rats provide an established model of rodent
mammary carcinogenesis due to their high sensitivity to estrogen. Rats
were subcutaneously implanted with 9 mg of 17-estradiol (E2) in silastic
tubings and fed with 0.3% -TmT diet for 1, 3, 7 and 14 days.
Administration of -TmT gradually increased the levels of tocopherols and
their metabolites in the serum and mammary glands of the rats from day 1
to 14. Histological analysis showed that estrogen induced mammary
hyperplasia starting at day 3. However, the induction of mammary
hyperplasia was not altered by dietary -TmT. Interestingly, mRNA
expression of PPAR, a nuclear receptor which inhibits cell proliferation
and survival, was significantly increased by -TmT administration at 14
days. The oxidative and nitrosative stress markers, 8-oxo-dG and
nitrotyrosine, respectively, were induced in the mammary tissues of
E2-treated rats as early as day 1. -TmT decreased the levels of these
markers starting from day 7. Serum level of 8-isoprostane, a marker of
oxidative stress, was also decreased by -TmT. Elevated mRNA levels of a
transcription factor Nrf2 and its downstream antioxidant enzymes,
superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase, were observed
in the -TmT fed groups as early as day 1, indicating the induction of
antioxidant response by -TmT. In conclusion, inhibition of oxidative,
nitrosative stress and stimulation of antioxidant response are the
primary effects of -TmT administration in the early stages of E2-induced
mammary tumorigenesis in ACI rats.

