Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of IKK in K-ras-driven lung carcinogenesis


IKK, one of subunits of the IKK complex, is required for the epidermal
homeostasis. We previously demonstrated that keratin 5-specific deletion
of IKK induces spontaneous skin squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) in mice.
Interestingly, IKK kinase dead knockin (IKKK44A/K44A, KA) mice
spontaneously develop lung SCCs which is associated with increased
inflammation and IKK reduction. Thus, IKK downregulation is crucial for
the SCC formation in skin and lung. Here, we attempted to verify whether
IKK inactivation plays a role in the development of lung adenocarcinomas
(ADCs) as well. We have crossed between KA mice and K-rasG12D oncogenic
mutant (Kras) mice. Then, these IKKK44A/K44A;K-rasG12D (KA;Kras) mice
were intratracheally treated with adenovirus carrying the cre recombinase
gene to activate K-ras oncogene. At 4.5 months after intratracheal
injection, the lung weight was significantly increased in KA;Kras
compared to Kras mice. Moreover, the lungs of KA;Kras mice showed
increased bronchial epithelial cells and Ki67-positive cells in the
bronchial regions. At 7 months after treatment, lung tumors in KA;Kras
mice were larger compared to tumors in Kras mice. Finally, KA;Kras mice
had shorter life span due to breathing problems. KA;Kras mice started to
die at around 20 weeks after injection, while KR mice started to die from
around 30 weeks. To confirm whether IKK reduction promotes K-ras-driven
lung carcinogenesis, we generated IKKf/f (FF) mice crossed with Kras
(FF;Kras) mice. Similar to KA;Kras, FF;Kras mice showed significant
increase of lung weight, hyperproliferative bronchial abnormalities,
Ki-67-positive cells in the bronchial regions and the number of large
tumors at 4 months following treatment compared with Kras only group.
Taken together, these data suggest that IKK downregulation promotes
K-ras-driven lung tumorigenesis and plays an important role in lung ADCs
as well as in SCCs. The underlying molecular mechanism needs to be
further investigated.

