Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of PGE2 receptor inhibitor on the microenviroment of
scirrhous gastric cancer


Introduction: Prostaglandins and cyclooxygenase2 have been suggested to
play an important role for the proliferation and migration of cancer
cells. But Prostaglandins (PG) have been suggested to affect cancer cells
in various directions. For example, PGF2 and PGD2 has been demonstrated
to have anti-tumor effects against some types of cancer cells. But PGE2
has been demonstrated to promote the proliferation and migration of
cancer. Therefore, the investigation of the involvement of PG signals for
cancer in lower level of arachidonic acid cascade is very important. The
aim of this study is to investigate the effects of PGE2 and PGE2 receptor
inhibitor (EP2 inhibitor) on the growth-interaction between cancer cells
and fibroblasts.Methods: Three human gastric cancer cell lines (OCUM-2M,
OCUM-2MD3, OCUM-12) and a human gastric fibroblast (CAF45) cell line were
used in this study. Serum-free conditioned medium (SF-CM) from CAF-45
stimulated with PGE2 or EP2 inhibitor was prepared and used in study.
Cell proliferation was studied by MTT assay and cell count in the
presence or absence of CAF45. Cell migration was studied by wound healing
assay in the presense or absence of SF-CM. In vivo study, We examined the
effect of EP2 inhibitor on subcutaneous and orthotopically transplanted
tumors.Results: In proliferation, PGE2 significantly stimulated the
proliferation and migration of cancer cells. PGE2 significantly
stimulated the proliferation and migration of cancer cells co-cultured
with CAF45 or SF-CM more in comparison with single culture. EP2 inhibitor
significantly decreased the proliferation and migration of cancer cells,
EP2 inhibitor significantly decreased the proliferation migration of
cancer cells co-cultured with CAF-45 or SF-CM more in comparison with
single culture. In vivo study, EP2 inhibitor significantly suppressed the
subcutaneous tumor in nude mice and suppressed orthotopic tumor growth
and lymph node metastasis.Conclusion: PGE2 is associated with progression
of gastric cancer. PGE2 receptor inhibitors might be promising
anti-cancer drug for gastric carcinoma.

