Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Annexin A3 is a therapeutic target for CD133+ liver cancer stem
cells


Frequent tumor relapse in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been
commonly attributed to the failure to completely eradicate cancer stem
cells (CSCs) in the tumor residues by conventional treatments. We have
previously reported that the tumor growth of HCC is fuelled, at least in
part, by a small subset of CSCs marked by the CD133 surface phenotype.
Our present study aims 1) to delineate the molecular mechanism by which
CD133+ liver CSCs mediate HCC tumor formation and progression; and 2) to
develop a novel diagnostic / prognostic biomarker and targeted therapy
for HCC detection and treatment. RNA-Seq profiling was employed to
compare the gene expression profiles between sorted CD133+ and CD133-
subsets isolated from HCC cell lines Huh7 and PLC8024. Annexin A3 (ANXA3)
was identified as the most significantly up-regulated secretory protein
in the CD133+ subset. Validation in additional HCC cell lines and
clinical samples likewise showed ANXA3 to be preferentially expressed in
the CD133+ subset. Up-regulation of ANXA3 in both endogenous and
secretory forms was tightly associated with advanced tumor stages. In
addition, quantification of serum ANXA3 provides a novel biomarker with
high specificity and sensitivity for HCC diagnosis. Functional studies
involving lentiviral-based knockdown and overexpression approaches found
ANXA3 to regulate cancer and stem cell-like properties including tumor
initiation, migration, invasion, angiogenesis, self-renewal and
resistance to chemotherapy and apoptosis. Subsequent gene expression
profiling by cDNA microarray found ANXA3 to be functionally involved in
driving CD133+ CSCs via a deregulated JNK/AP-1 pathway. In light of the
functional significance and clinical relevance of ANXA3 in HCC, we
subsequently developed a novel neutralizing monoclonal antibody specific
against ANXA3 and tested for its application as a therapeutic treatment
against HCC. In vitro functional studies showed that ANXA3 neutralizing
antibody treatment dramatically reduced cell proliferation, sphere
formation, migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and sensitized cells to
apoptosis and cisplatin treatment in vitro. This observation was further
confirmed in vivo where neutralizing antibody treatment attenuated tumor
growth, concomitant with a reduced CD133+ subset in the residual
xenografts. Mechanistically, treatment of HCC cells with ANXA3
neutralizing antibody in vitro and in vivo, similarly led to a suppressed
JNK pathway. Taken together, ANXA3 confers both cancer and stem cell-like
properties in CD133+ liver CSCs via JNK pathway. ANXA3 neutralizing
antibody possesses therapeutic effect in HCC by eliminating CD133+ liver
CSCs. We believe that ANXA3 could serve as a potential therapeutic target
to attain complete eradication of HCC.

