Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Individualized therapy identified using simulation for bortezomib
resistant patient with ex-vivo validation


Background: The unique signature of a patient's tumor mandates the need
to rationally design personalized therapies employing N=1 segmentation
conceptually. By focusing on rationally designed personalized treatments,
our strategy targets key pathways to address the clinical problem of
therapy resistance. To overcome bortezomib resistance, we have (1)
employed predictive simulation modeling using patient genomic profiling
to design patient specific combinatorial therapeutic regimens and (2)
validated designed therapy ex-vivo in patient-derived cell lines.Methods:
Clinical patient samples were analyzed for chromosomal alterations using
array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) by GenPath Diagnostics and
cytogenetic chromosome analysis by NYU. Using this information, we
created a patient simulation avatar. To identify effective personalized
therapeutics, we focused on molecularly targeted agents with clinical
data. The predictive simulation based approach from Cellworks provides a
comprehensive representation of plasma cell myeloma (PCM) disease
physiology incorporating signaling and metabolic networks with an
integrated phenotype view. Therapeutic hits were shortlisted from over
1000 pharmacodynamic dose-response simulation studies using efficacy and
synergy criteria. Simulation modeling identified therapeutic mechanisms
that impact proliferation and agent combinations that overcome bortezomib
resistance. These predictive findings are in the process of being
assessed ex vivo using patient primary cells and prospectively
validated.Results: A loss of the CUL1 due to deletion of chromosome
7q36.1 region and CCND1 as a result of gain of chromosome 11q13 region
was detected. Simulation of this patient's avatar showed high
proliferation phenotype as a consequence of stated aberrations. CUL1
deletion caused increase in NFKB and CTNNB1 and a synergistic increase in
CCND1. CUL1 deletion excludes target proteins from proteasomal
degradation, thereby making cells resistant bortezomib effect. Simulation
screening identified adjuvant NVP-BEZ235 (pan PI3K/mTORC1 and mTORC2
inhibitor) with current background of bortezomib to show enhanced
efficacy in this patient. NFKB is reduced by this mechanism and along
with reduction in translation of pro-proliferative genes mediated by mTOR
inhibition. IC20 concentrations with respect to proliferation of the
single agents in combination showed 38% inhibition of proliferation in
simulation. These findings are currently being prospectively validated
ex-vivo in patient primary cells.Conclusions: This study demonstrates and
validates simulation for developing novel therapeutics and technologies
to truly leverage big data. This level of individualization, beyond
linking point mutations to associated drugs targeting the same mutations,
truly incorporates the complete patient tumor signature with a clinical
translation pathway.

