Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-emulsifying nanoemulsions target intracranial glioblastoma
tumors: In vivo optical imaging and fluorescence microscopy evidences


Introduction: As the most aggressive form of brain tumor, glioblastoma
has limited treatment options due to highly invasive nature, the largely
impermeable blood-brain barrier (BBB) and presence of efflux transporters
at BBB. We aimed to investigate the ability of self-emulsifying
nanoemulsions to delivery BBB-impermeable molecules to the brain of
orthotopic U87-luc human glioblastoma xenografts.Methods: Oil-in-water
nanoemulsions containing medium-chain triglycerides oil and
co-surfactants (polysorbate-80:transcutol 6:4 w/w) were prepared by a
spontaneous self-emulsification method. Luciferase transfected U87-luc
human glioblastoma cells were injected intracranially as well as
subcutaneously to Nu/Nu mice and tumor growth was monitored by
bioluminescence imaging. Seventeen days after tumor implantation, near
infrared dye DiD labeled nanoemulsions and size matched pegylated stealth
liposomes were injected intravenously in U87-luc xenografts and the
real-time biodistributions of formulations were monitored by whole animal
imaging.Results: Nanoemulsions had a mean particle size 120 nm with
slightly negative charge (-10 mV). It is biocompatible with no hemolysis
in vitro. In orthotopic U87-luc xenograft tumor model, intravenous
administration of DiD labeled nanoemulsions revealed enhanced
accumulation of the nanoemulsions in the brain and subcutaneous tumor at
1-9 hours post injection, comparing to that of the free dye and pegylated
liposomes. The brain accumulations of nanoemulsions were persistent till
96 hours. The ex vivo fluorescence microscopy analysis showed that the
DiD-nanoemulsions specifically accumuolated at the U87-luc tumor region,
not at the surrounding normal brain tissue. In the normal CD-1 mice with
intact BBB, the nanoemulsions accumulation in the brain was still
significantly higher than the free dye, albeit lower than the brain level
achieved in the U87-luc xenografts. The nanoemulsions were non-toxic to
both CD-1 and Nu/Nu mice after daily repeated doses for three
weeks.Conclusion: Our data indicates that nanoemulsion is a promising
nanocarrier to deliver imaging or therapeutic agents for the diagnosis or
systemic treatment of GBM.

