Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF inhibitor (vemurafenib) resistance confers sensitivity to
arginine deprivation in melanoma


The BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib, has been proven to be efficacious for
the treatment of melanomas harboring (V600E) mutation. While the response
rate is high, resistance is inevitable. The response to salvage therapy
is poor. While the MEK inhibitor may be able to enhance anti-tumor
efficacy of vemurafenib, but patients eventually relapse. Hence, there is
an urgent need for second line treatment for melanoma patients who fail
vemurafenib treatment.In this study, we discovered that BRAF
inhibitor-resistant (BR) melanoma cells are exquisitely sensitive to
arginine deprivation. Arginine deprivation was achieved using arginine
degrading enzyme (pegylated arginine deiminase, ADI-PEG20, kindly
provided by Polaris). ADI-PEG20 has been shown to induce autophagy in
primary melanoma culture derived from patients whose tumors do not
express argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS). Apoptosis does occur when
these cells are exposed longer (5-7 days) and at higher doses. Inducible
ASS expression upon arginine deprivation also impedes the antitumor
effect of ADI-PEG20. We have found that BR cells from MEL-1220 (derived
from patient with V600E and ASS (-)), A375, and A2058 cells (inducible
ASS) cultured in the presence of vemurafenib at IC50 over 20 weeks had
non-inducible ASS expression. MTT and Annexin V/PI analyses showed that
ADI-PEG20 induced 3-6 fold increase in apoptosis and growth inhibition in
BR cells compared to parental cells following 3-day incubation. These
results were further confirmed by increased active (cleaved) form of
caspase-3 as detected by western blotting after the addition of
ADI-PEG20. The mouse xenograft model also verified that ADI-PEG20
abolished tumor growth of A2058BR cells while only retardation of growth
seen in A2058 cells (the reduction rate of tumor volume is 92% vs. 63%).
We found that two vital autophagic proteins (Beclin1 and ATG5) decreased
in resistant cells after treatment with ADI-PEG20, which might explain
the inability to undergo autophagy upon arginine deprivation as a
survival mechanism and re-directing the cells toward apoptosis. The other
mechanism leading to non-inducible ASS expression is c-Myc degradation.
It has been proven that c-myc is a positive regulator in ASS
transcription, and c-Myc stability is governed by ubiquitination. By
immunoprecipitation assay, we found that BR cells had lower levels of
deubiquitinating enzyme USP28, and hence cannot prevent c-Myc from
ubiquitin-dependent prosteasomal degradation. Therefore, our results
demonstrated that BRAF inhibitor resistance suppresses c-Myc-mediated ASS
transcription and in turn increases sensitivity to ADI-PEG20.In
conclusion, ADI-PEG20 appears to be a good candidate for targeted therapy
for melanoma patients who have tumor recurrence or disease progression
after vemurafenib treatment. Supported by R01CA152197

