Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic and proteomic analysis identifies PTEN loss and
AKT/MTOR as drivers of resistance to MEK inhibitors in NSCLC cells


MEK inhibitors (MEKi) are a class of drugs targeting MEK1/2 in the
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. Previous studies have shown that the existence
of KRAS mutation sensitizes tumor cells to MEKi. However, clinical data
suggest that KRAS alone is not an adequate biomarker to predict benefit
of MEKi to lung cancer patients. To investigate the additional biomarkers
for MEKi, we conducted integrated genomic and proteomic analysis
employing non-small cell lung cancer cell (NSCLC) lines as models.
Correlation analysis showed that in resistant cell lines AKT/MTOR pathway
was more active, including higher levels of phosphorylated AKT, p70S6K,
4EBP1, and S6 in a group of 72 NSCLC cell lines. While PI3K protein level
remained the same, PTEN expression was higher in sensitive cell lines
compared to resistant cell lines. This result was confirmed by a panel of
NSCLC cell lines using western blotting. PTEN expression is lost due to
mutations in a few cell lines, which results in the activation of the
AKT/MTOR pathway. We found that PTEN mutation was one of three mutations
consistently associated with MEKi resistance besides CDKN2A and SMARCA4.
Knockdown of PTEN in sensitive cells increased their resistance to MEKi
refametinib, selumetinib, and trametinib. On the other hand,
overexpression of PTEN in resistant cells increased their sensitivity to
these MEKi, suggesting that basal PTEN expression level affects cell
sensitivity to MEKi and may serve as a predictive biomarker of response.
Proteomic profiling also showed that refametinib effectively inhibited
the phosphorylation ERK and its downstream effectors p90RSK and STK11.
Refametinib had minimal effect on PTEN expression, but increased AKT/MTOR
pathway activation. While most of the members of the AKT/MTOR pathway
remained unchanged in response to refametinib in both sensitive and
resistant cells, S6 phosphorylation was more suppressed by refametinib in
sensitive cells than resistant cells, which was further confirmed using
western blotting in a panel of NSCLC cells, suggesting that S6
phosphorylation may serve as a biomarker for response to MEKi. To study
the mechanisms of PTEN loss in resistant cells, methylation profiling
identified a number of regions in PTEN promoter highly methylated.
Intriguingly, methylation inhibitor decitabine altered PTEN expression in
most of the resistant cells, but not in sensitive cells. microRNA
profiling also discovered a group of microRNAs associated with PTEN
expression, and how these microRNAs regulates PTEN expression is under
study. Overall, we found that basal PTEN level is maintained higher in
sensitive cells compared to resistant cells. Alteration of PTEN
expression affects cell sensitivity to MEKi. Thus, basal PTEN level can
serve as a predictive biomarker to MEKi and its effect may be through
modulating downstream S6 activation.

