Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression SOCS-1 may inhibit invasion and metastasis of
cervical cancer


Purpose: To investigate whether the overexpression of SOCS-1 affects
radiosensitivity, invasion, and metastasis in xenograft nude mouse
model.Methods: We established stable SOCS-1-overexpressing ME-180 cell
line with pLNCX2-mSOCS1-Myc. Also we established xenograft nude mouse
model for tumor growth delay experiment. Immunohistochemistry was
employed to elucidate the pattern of expression of VEGF, CD-31, MMP-2,
and TUNEL assay for apoptosis in SOCS-1 overexpressing ME-180 cells.
Tumor cells were injected to right thigh of mouse to form cancer mass.
Lung metastasis assay was performed in day 45 and 60. Metastatic nodules
in both lungs were obtained and counted for statistical analysis.Results:
Tumor growth delay after 5 Gy radiation was observed in SOCS
overexpressing tumor compared to wild type tumor but the difference did
not show the statistical significance (p>0.05, Mann-Whitney U test).
Immunohistochemistry showed that decreased MMP-2 expression, decreased
VEGF expression, decreased CD-31 expression, and significantly elevated
index of apoptotic body in SOCS-1 overexpressing tumor. Lung metastasis
assay showed statistically significant decrement of metastatic nodule
count in SOCS-1 overexpressing tumor (pPurpose: To investigate whether
the overexpression of SOCS-1 affects radiosensitivity, invasion, and
metastasis in xenograft nude mouse model.Methods: We established stable
SOCS-1-overexpressing ME-180 cell line with pLNCX2-mSOCS1-Myc. Also we
established xenograft nude mouse model for tumor growth delay experiment.
Immunohistochemistry was employed to elucidate the pattern of expression
of VEGF, CD-31, MMP-2, and TUNEL assay for apoptosis in SOCS-1
overexpressing ME-180 cells. Tumor cells were injected to right thigh of
mouse to form cancer mass. Lung metastasis assay was performed in day 45
and 60. Metastatic nodules in both lungs were obtained and counted for
statistical analysis.Results: Tumor growth delay after 5 Gy radiation was
observed in SOCS overexpressing tumor compared to wild type tumor but the
difference did not show the statistical significance (p>0.05,
Mann-Whitney U test). Immunohistochemistry showed that decreased MMP-2
expression, decreased VEGF expression, decreased CD-31 expression, and
significantly elevated index of apoptotic body in SOCS-1 overexpressing
tumor. Lung metastasis assay showed statistically significant decrement
of metastatic nodule count in SOCS-1 overexpressing tumor (p<0.05,
Mann-Whitney U test).Conclusion: Decrement of radiosensitivity was
statistically insignificant in SOCS-1 overexpressing tumor while
invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis were inhibited. Also apoptosis was
increased in SOCS-1 overexpressing tumor.

