Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSCLC cells with LKB1 mutation are vulnerable to energetic and
oxidative stresses induced by 8-Chloroadenosine


Background: It has been demonstrated that loss of LKB1 is associated with
a higher likelihood of tumor recurrence after surgery and shorter overall
survival in early stage NSCLC. We sought to determine whether NSCLC tumor
cells with loss of LKB1 are preferentially sensitive or resistant to
various therapeutic agents. We tested 23 NSCLC cell lines, and observed
that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are highly resistant to standard
chemotherapy as well as EGFR inhibitors. In contrast, LKB1 mutant NSCLC
cells are highly sensitive to 8-Chloroadenosine (8-Cl-Ado). 8-Cl-Ado is
an RNA-directed nucleoside analogue, which depletes cellular ATP and
triggers apoptosis in sensitive cells. LKB1 is known to play a key role
in balancing cellular energy consumption and production. Therefore, we
hypothesize that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are vulnerable to 8-Cl-Ado
induced energetic stress. Method: Cellular ATP level was determined by
LC-MS and luminescent based methods. Cell proliferation was measured by
Celltiter-Glo assay. IC50 values were calculated by Calcusyn. Oxidative
stress was measured by CellRox assay. Result: NSCLC cell lines with LKB1
mutation were significantly more sensitive to 8-Cl-Ado than wild type
cell lines (p=0.024). We transfected H460 and A549 cells (both harboring
mutant LKB1) with wild-type LKB1. Re-expression of LKB1 rendered cells
resistant to 8-Cl-Ado (PBackground: It has been demonstrated that loss of
LKB1 is associated with a higher likelihood of tumor recurrence after
surgery and shorter overall survival in early stage NSCLC. We sought to
determine whether NSCLC tumor cells with loss of LKB1 are preferentially
sensitive or resistant to various therapeutic agents. We tested 23 NSCLC
cell lines, and observed that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are highly
resistant to standard chemotherapy as well as EGFR inhibitors. In
contrast, LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are highly sensitive to
8-Chloroadenosine (8-Cl-Ado). 8-Cl-Ado is an RNA-directed nucleoside
analogue, which depletes cellular ATP and triggers apoptosis in sensitive
cells. LKB1 is known to play a key role in balancing cellular energy
consumption and production. Therefore, we hypothesize that LKB1 mutant
NSCLC cells are vulnerable to 8-Cl-Ado induced energetic stress. Method:
Cellular ATP level was determined by LC-MS and luminescent based methods.
Cell proliferation was measured by Celltiter-Glo assay. IC50 values were
calculated by Calcusyn. Oxidative stress was measured by CellRox assay.
Result: NSCLC cell lines with LKB1 mutation were significantly more
sensitive to 8-Cl-Ado than wild type cell lines (p=0.024). We transfected
H460 and A549 cells (both harboring mutant LKB1) with wild-type LKB1.
Re-expression of LKB1 rendered cells resistant to 8-Cl-Ado (P<0.05).
Knockdown LKB1 resulted in increased sensitivity to 8-Cl-Ado in Calu6
cells (pBackground: It has been demonstrated that loss of LKB1 is
associated with a higher likelihood of tumor recurrence after surgery and
shorter overall survival in early stage NSCLC. We sought to determine
whether NSCLC tumor cells with loss of LKB1 are preferentially sensitive
or resistant to various therapeutic agents. We tested 23 NSCLC cell
lines, and observed that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are highly resistant to
standard chemotherapy as well as EGFR inhibitors. In contrast, LKB1
mutant NSCLC cells are highly sensitive to 8-Chloroadenosine (8-Cl-Ado).
8-Cl-Ado is an RNA-directed nucleoside analogue, which depletes cellular
ATP and triggers apoptosis in sensitive cells. LKB1 is known to play a
key role in balancing cellular energy consumption and production.
Therefore, we hypothesize that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are vulnerable to
8-Cl-Ado induced energetic stress. Method: Cellular ATP level was
determined by LC-MS and luminescent based methods. Cell proliferation was
measured by Celltiter-Glo assay. IC50 values were calculated by Calcusyn.
Oxidative stress was measured by CellRox assay. Result: NSCLC cell lines
with LKB1 mutation were significantly more sensitive to 8-Cl-Ado than
wild type cell lines (p=0.024). We transfected H460 and A549 cells (both
harboring mutant LKB1) with wild-type LKB1. Re-expression of LKB1
rendered cells resistant to 8-Cl-Ado (P<0.05). Knockdown LKB1 resulted in
increased sensitivity to 8-Cl-Ado in Calu6 cells (p<0.05). Moreover,
8-Cl-Ado treatment caused a significant decrease in cellular ATP levels
in LKB1 mutant cells. However, in A549 and H460 cells overexpressing
wild-type LKB1, ATP levels were not decreased. Similarly, in H661 cells
(wild-type LKB1) 8-Cl-Ado treatment did not affect ATP levels, whereas
when LKB1 was knocked down by shRNA 8-Cl-Ado treatment reduced
intracellular ATP levels. Furthermore, 8-Cl-Ado increased ROS levels in
A549 cells but not in A549 cells overexpressing wild-type LKB1.
Conclusion: Our result indicates that LKB1 mutant NSCLC cells are
vulnerable to energetic and oxidative stresses induced by 8-Cl-Ado. LKB1
played a protecting role in cells under 8-Cl-Ado treatment.

