Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical evaluation of Mcl-1 inhibition through maritoclax in
acute myeloid leukemia


There is an urgent and unmet medical need for development of new
therapeutics for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family protein Mcl-1 plays a critical role in AML cell survival and
chemoresistance. Mcl-1 is upregulated in relapsed AML and leukemic stem
cells. Inhibition of Mcl-1 expression in AML cells by kinase inhibitors
or gene targeting induces apoptosis and suppresses leukemogenesis.
However, the impact of targeting Mcl-1 in AML therapy with selective
pharmacological inhibitors remains to be assessed. Recently, we
discovered a novel Mcl-1 inhibitor, maritoclax (marinopyrrole A), which
antagonizes Mcl-1 by targeting Mcl-1 for proteasomal degradation. This
unique mechanism of action is in contrast to BH3 mimetics that exert
their inhibitory function through disruption of the interactions between
pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins. In a panel of AML cell
lines, the potency of maritoclax positively correlated with Mcl-1
expression and inversely correlated with Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL expression.
Maritoclax was efficacious as a single agent and markedly synergized with
ABT-737 to induce apoptosis in Mcl-1 overexpressing ABT-737 and multidrug
resistant AML cell lines. Moreover, maritoclax was able to overcome
stroma-mediated resistance to apoptosis in AML cells. Importantly,
maritoclax induced Mcl-1 degradation and apoptotic cell death selectively
in clinical AML specimens with high levels of Mcl-1. To evaluate the
anti-tumor activity of maritoclax in vivo, we established U937 tumor
xenografts in nude mice. As a single agent, maritoclax significantly
inhibited the growth of established xenografts at a dose of 20 mg/kg/d
intraperitoneally. At this dosing level, no significant difference in
body weight change and complete blood count was observed between
maritoclax and vehicle treatment groups. Collectively, our studies
demonstrated that maritoclax represents a novel class of Mcl-1 inhibitors
and that the selective pharmacological inhibition of Mcl-1 may be a
viable approach for the treatment of AML.

