Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clostridium cluster XIVa species an early biomarker in radiation
injury


Radiation therapy is being used in the treatment of nearly 60% of the
current cancer patients. In spite of the best efforts to provide special
care in minimizing radiation exposure, significant radiation injury
remains a common side-effect particularly to the gastro intestinal tract.
Severe injury to GI tract may lead to multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome. The status of fecal microbiota has been proposed as a rapid
diagnostic platform in radiation injury. Gut microbes play a role in
immunity, health, and disease. Imbalances in gut microbiota are related
to numerous disorders, such as inflammatory bowel disease, colorectal
cancer (CRC), and atopy. In patients with immune suppression due to
high-dose chemotherapy or that undergoing radiation therapy, disruption
of the microbiota through antibiotics and impairment of host immunity
gives rise to perturbations favoring intestinal domination by pathogenic
species, resulting in increased bacterial translocation and
susceptibility to systemic infection. Here, using real-time PCR assays,
we assessed the immediate changes and quantitative alterations to fecal
microbiota in response to radiation injury. Swiss-albino Mice were
subjected to 10 Gy X-ray whole body irradiation doses using commercially
available X-RAD 320 irradiator (1Gy/min; F2 beam hardening filter 1.5mm
Al, 0.25mm Cu, 0.75mm Sn; Precision X-ray inc, USA). Fecal samples
collected immediately after the radiation exposure were analyzed. We show
that Clostridium cluster XIVa that accounts for almost 60% of the
mucin-adhered microbiota is significantly increased (11.71 +/- 0.29 fold
n=6) in the fecal samples, compared to the total bacteria and other
bacteria that tend to enrich in the luminal region. Along with the
Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria from the luminal region, minimal changes
in the levels of Firmicutes that colonize the mucin layer were observed.
Further, these changes varied considerably between the subjects and were
inconsistent compared to the Clostridium cluster species. Clostridium
cluster XIVa has been proposed to be the mucosal butyrate producers
producing butyrate close to the epithelium. This enhances butyrate
bioavailability required in treating diseases such as inflammatory bowel
disease. These findings provide opportunities to evaluate the potential
use of intestinal microbiota as biomarkers in radiation injury. Also,
provides insights into the microbial changes tantamount to the radiation
induced GI injury.

