Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia determines the fate of myeloid cell differentiation by
controlling STAT3 activation in tumor site


The abnormal differentiation of myeloid cells is the key element of
altered immune response in cancer. Myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC) are a major component of immune suppressive network. MDSC
accumulate in large numbers in peripheral lymphoid organs and inside
tumors. Recent data indicated that the fate of MDSC depends on the
localization of these cells. In contrast to peripheral lymphoid organs,
inside tumors, MDSC rapidly differentiate to tumor associated macrophages
with potent immune suppressive activity. Hypoxia is intricate part of
tumor microenvironment. We have found that hypoxia plays a major role in
regulation of MDSC differentiation to macrophages in tumor site. Hypoxia
caused dramatic reduction in phosphorylated STAT3 in MDSC. These results
were unexpected, since high level of STAT3 activity is a hallmark of MDSC
present in blood and lymphoid organs. In our experiments spleen MDSC in
tumor-bearing mice had much higher level of STAT3 phosphorylation than
their counterparts in tumor site from the same mice. In cancer patients
MDSC in tumor site also had substantially lower level of pSTAT3 than MDSC
in peripheral blood. In vitro culture of spleen MDSC in hypoxia led to
the suppression of STAT3 activation. Furthermore, mice with
constitutively active STAT3 had shown the dramatic expansion of MDSC and
down-regulation of macrophage population in tumor microenvironment,
suggesting that STAT3 is a downstream target for hypoxia driven myeloid
cells differentiation in cancer. We found that CD45 protein tyrosine
phosphatase was a molecule that regulated STAT3 activation in hypoxia.
The activity but not expression of CD45 phosphatase was up-regulated in
tumor MDSC as compared to MDSC in spleens. The exposure of spleen MDSC to
hypoxia led to the significant increase in CD45 activity. The siRNA
mediated silencing of CD45 abrogated the effect of hypoxia on the
down-regulation of STAT3 activity in MDSC. This suggests that hypoxia
driven up-regulation of CD45 phosphatase activity suppresses STAT3
activation, which in turn plays a key role in differentiation of myeloid
cells in tumor site. These unexpected findings may provide rationale for
re-evaluation of therapeutic strategies targeting myeloid cells in cancer.

