Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel discovery of miR-30e* regulating Bmi1 expression induced by
tumor-associated macrophages in gastrointestinal cancer


Background: Bmi1 is a member of the polycomb-repressive complex 1 with an
essential role in maintaining chromatin silencing. Bmi1 plays a function
in the self-renewal of neuronal and hematopoietic stem cells through
repression of the INK4A/ARF locus. Furthermore, Bmi1 is overexpressed in
a variety of human cancers. The expression of Bmi1 is associated with
poor prognosis of gastrointestinal cancer patients. On the other hand,
solid tumors consist of cancer cells and various types of stromal cells,
fibroblasts, endothelial cells and hematopoietic cells, mainly
macrophages and lymphocytes. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
contribute to tumor progression by producing various mediators. This
study was performed to identify the tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs)-mediated regulation of Bmi1 expression in gastrointestinal
cancers.Method: The relationship between the expression of Bmi1 and TAMs
was assessed by immunohistochemistry and quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR), and 3D sphere culture. Next, miRNAs microarray in gastric
cancer cell co-cultured with macrophages was conducted. To examine the
functional relevance of miR-30e* expression, we analyzed the relationship
between miR-30e* and Bmi1 expression in high Bmi1 expressing cancer cell
lines transfected with miR-30e* mimics, and low Bmi1 expressing cancer
cell lines transfected with miR-30e* inhibitors. And we investigated if
miR-30e* directly targets the 3 UTR of Bmi1 using constructs containing
the putative miR-30e* target site or a mutated sequence of the 3 UTR of
Bmi1 cloned immediately downstream of a luciferase gene. Furthermore Bmi1
and miR-30e* expression were assessed in cancer tissues.Results: We
revealed the positive relationship between with tumor-infiltrating
macrophages and Bmi1 expression in cancer cells. We showed co-culture
with TAMs triggered Bmi1 expression in cancer cell lines and enhanced
sphere formation ability. Based on microRNA screening analysis and in
silico microRNA search, we focused on miR-30e* that could regulate Bmi1
expression. Western blot analysis revealed significantly reduced Bmi1
protein levels in high Bmi1 expressing cancer cell lines transfected with
miR-30e* mimics compared with controls, and increased levels in low Bmi1
expressing cancer cell lines cells transfected with miR-30e* inhibitors
compared with controls. And Bmi1 was a direct target for miR-30e* by
interactions with the putative miR-30e* binding sites. MiR-30e*
expression was down-regulated in tumor region compared with in non-tumor
one. Furthermore Bmi1 expression was inverse correlation with miR-30e*
expression.Conclusions: TAMs may cause increased Bmi1 expression through
miR-30e* suppression, leading to tumor progression.

