Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput toxicity assay for three-dimensional cell cultures


Introduction:Three-dimensional cell culture methods are currently not
widely used for cancer drug discovery due to the specific imaging demands
of the systems. In particular there is a need for well validated robust
high throughput methods for image-based assays that can be used for high
content screening.Methods:Therefore we have developed an image-based
three-dimensional high throughput toxicity assay. We used two platforms,
the Thermo Scientific ArrayScan VTi and BD FACSCanto, to characterize
antiproliferative potency, cell death and cell cycle distribution.
Cultures of uniform spheroids were treated with Irinotecan either alone
or in combination with the ABC transporter inhibitor Valspodar, which
blocks irinotecan efflux. All drugs were dispensed using a Tecan HP-D300
digital dispenser. Treatment-induced effects were analyzed after 48, 72
or 96 hours with both platforms using dihydro derivatives of fluorescent
live cell dyes such as dihydrocalcein, AM and DNA-binding dyes such as
DRAQ5 and Propidium Iodide.Results:All cell lines tested on the two
platforms showed the expected effects of Irinotecan alone or in
combination with Valspodar and correlations between the Thermo Scientific
ArrayScan VTi and BD FACSCanto were high, with Pearson tests varying from
0.76 to 0.95, p Introduction:Three-dimensional cell culture methods are
currently not widely used for cancer drug discovery due to the specific
imaging demands of the systems. In particular there is a need for well
validated robust high throughput methods for image-based assays that can
be used for high content screening.Methods:Therefore we have developed an
image-based three-dimensional high throughput toxicity assay. We used two
platforms, the Thermo Scientific ArrayScan VTi and BD FACSCanto, to
characterize antiproliferative potency, cell death and cell cycle
distribution. Cultures of uniform spheroids were treated with Irinotecan
either alone or in combination with the ABC transporter inhibitor
Valspodar, which blocks irinotecan efflux. All drugs were dispensed using
a Tecan HP-D300 digital dispenser. Treatment-induced effects were
analyzed after 48, 72 or 96 hours with both platforms using dihydro
derivatives of fluorescent live cell dyes such as dihydrocalcein, AM and
DNA-binding dyes such as DRAQ5 and Propidium Iodide.Results:All cell
lines tested on the two platforms showed the expected effects of
Irinotecan alone or in combination with Valspodar and correlations
between the Thermo Scientific ArrayScan VTi and BD FACSCanto were high,
with Pearson tests varying from 0.76 to 0.95, p < 0.05, depending on the
cell line used. All results were reproducible and showed minor
variation.Conclusion:The demonstrated approach provides an
easy-to-handle, low-cost, accurate and reproducible high content method
for measuring drug efficacy in three-dimensional cell cultures. This
method can be used for high throughput drug discovery screens and
personalized cancer care.

