Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting BCL-2 in hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Hypodiploid Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), is a high-risk subtype of
ALL characterized by multiple chromosomal losses with an event-free
survival Hypodiploid Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), is a high-risk
subtype of ALL characterized by multiple chromosomal losses with an
event-free survival <40%. Hypodiploidy remains an independent marker of
poor outcome. In particular, outcomes for the two subtypes: low
hypodiploid (32-39 chromosomes) and near haploid (24-31 chromosomes) ALL
have not improved even with maximally intensive therapies such as
hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Alternative therapies are therefore
of urgent need.To identify potential therapeutic targets we undertook a
biochemical characterization of primary patient samples and cell lines,
assessing the activation status of over 25 proteins involved in signaling
pathways commonly deregulated in leukemia. Our biochemical
characterization identified 1) constitutive activation of the PI3K
pathway and the Bcl-2 survival pathway, and 2) accumulation of p53 that
ultimately revealed that nearly 90% of low hypodiploid B-ALL patients
harbor mutations in TP53 (Holmfeldt, et al., Nat. Genetics, 2013).We then
set out to explore the therapeutic potential of targeting each of the
deregulated pathways. We used multiple inhibitors and a library
containing 94 compounds currently in early phase trials. Our studies
showed high sensitivity to Bcl-2 inhibition, using ABT 263, ABT 737 and
ABT 199, and partial sensitivity to PI3K inhibition. Surprisingly, these
leukemia were relatively insensitive to inhibition of the Ras/MAPK signal
transduction pathway, despite a high frequency of Ras pathway genomic
alterations.Proliferation and apoptosis assays, performed in hypodiploid
and non-hypodiploid leukemia cell lines (including both lymphoid and
myeloid cell lines) showed a dramatic efficacy of targeting the BCL-2
pathway in hypodiploid leukemias. These results were replicated in
primary patient samples xenografted into immunodeficient mice that were
subjected to these drugs in vitro. A detailed biochemical
characterization of the 12 members of the Bcl-2 family, together with a
BH3 profiling to assess priming to apoptosis, has allowed us to determine
the mechanisms underlying this sensitivity and efficacy on this
leukemia.Our overall work has provided critical insights into the
essential deregulated pathways underlying the pathogenesis of hypodiploid
ALL. We are now continuing our investigations to identify novel
strategies to treat these patients by using in vivo xenograft models of
hypodiploid leukemia. We expect that our pre-clinical studies will
provide further support for the therapeutic benefit of treating these
leukemias with Bcl-2 inhibitors to improve survival for these young
patients who suffer unacceptably high relapse rates from current
therapies.

