Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of colorectal cancer-associated genetic alterations in
urine of patients with CRC


Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths due in part to a low compliance rate (Colorectal
cancer (CRC) has been the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths
due in part to a low compliance rate (<50%) of the current screening
method, an invasive colonoscopy, resulting in failure of detecting cancer
early in its curative stages. 20% of CRCs are only detected once the
cancer has spread to a distant site, drastically reducing the 5-year
survival rate from 90% to 12%. In order to improve the success of early
detection methods of CRC, we have focused on developing non-invasive,
multi-biomarker detection assays designed to identify CRC-associated
genetic alterations. The genetic alterations of four genes, (mutations of
the KRAS (muKras) and BRAF V600E (muBRAF) genes and aberrant
hypermethylation of the Vimentin (mVIM) and Septin9 (mSEPT9) genes, have
shown to be potential biomarkers of CRC through stool or serum-derived
DNA. We set out to show that these four biomarkers could be used as a
panel for a non-invasive urine test of CRC in a highly specific and
sensitive manner. We have previously demonstrated that urine contains
circulation-derived low molecular weight (LMW) DNA (Colorectal cancer
(CRC) has been the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths due in
part to a low compliance rate (<50%) of the current screening method, an
invasive colonoscopy, resulting in failure of detecting cancer early in
its curative stages. 20% of CRCs are only detected once the cancer has
spread to a distant site, drastically reducing the 5-year survival rate
from 90% to 12%. In order to improve the success of early detection
methods of CRC, we have focused on developing non-invasive,
multi-biomarker detection assays designed to identify CRC-associated
genetic alterations. The genetic alterations of four genes, (mutations of
the KRAS (muKras) and BRAF V600E (muBRAF) genes and aberrant
hypermethylation of the Vimentin (mVIM) and Septin9 (mSEPT9) genes, have
shown to be potential biomarkers of CRC through stool or serum-derived
DNA. We set out to show that these four biomarkers could be used as a
panel for a non-invasive urine test of CRC in a highly specific and
sensitive manner. We have previously demonstrated that urine contains
circulation-derived low molecular weight (LMW) DNA (<300 bp), which
suggests that LMW urine DNA could be used to detect CRC-associated
genetic alterations. A blinded concordance study was used to validate
mVIM as a biomarker for CRC between 20 urine samples and the
corresponding tissue sample. We have developed a locked nucleic acid
(LNA) clamp and a Simple Probe to distinguish mVIM from normal VIM
suitable for fragmented short DNA templates. By using this assay, we
indicated that mVIM can be detected from LMW urine DNA, and it has the
potential to serve as a CRC-specific biomarker (Song et al., 2012). This
LNA-clamp short-qPCR assay has been adapted for quantitation of muBRAF,
muKRAS, and mSEPT9, for testing these biomarkers with open-labeled CRC
samples. In addition, a prevalidation study is in progress with blinded
CRC samples to confirm the specificity and sensitivity of these genetic
biomarkers.ReferencesSong, B. P., Jain, S., Lin, S. Y., Chen, Q., Block,
T. M., Song, W., ... & Su, Y. H. (2012). Detection of hypermethylated
vimentin in urine of patients with colorectal cancer.The Journal of
Molecular Diagnostics,14(2), 112-119.

