Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming Notch ligands into tumor-antigen targets: A
Probody-Drug Conjugate (PDC) targeting Jagged 1 and Jagged 2


The development of antibody drug conjugates (ADC) holds significant
promise for improving outcomes in patients with cancer. However, toxicity
can limit the number of accessible targets for these highly potent and
empowered antibody formats due to expression in healthy tissue. Probody
formatted ADCs enable opening up the therapeutic window for high
potential but previously inaccessible targets, such as the Jagged ligands
in the Notch pathway. Probodies are fully recombinant biotherapeutics
comprised of a monoclonal antibody whose binding to target antigen is
blocked by a masking peptide. Upon cleavage of a specific
substrate-linker by tumor-specific proteases, the activated Probody binds
its target, resulting in tumor-localized activity. Jagged expression is
observed in a wide variety of patient tumors including multiple myeloma,
pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer. We previously
described a novel anti-Jagged 1/2 antibody that is efficacious in slowing
tumor growth in mouse in-vivo tumor models but results in systemic
toxicity. A corresponding Probody mitigates systemic toxicities
associated with inhibition of Jagged-induced Notch signaling while
maintaining anti-tumor efficacy.Here we show that the Notch ligands
Jagged 1 and Jagged 2 have properties that could also enable an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) approach because the ligands are both
expressed on the cell surface and can internalize an anti-Jagged
antibody. Using FACS we have shown that Jagged 1/2 are expressed on
several human cancer cell lines and by fluorescent IHC staining, the
expression of Jagged 1/2 is maintained in the corresponding xenograft
tumors. To further explore the potential of Jagged as an ADC target, we
engineered a Probody Drug Conjugate (PDC) conjugated to the microtubule
inhibitor MMAE. This PDC is efficacious in a pancreatic xenograft tumor
model BxPC3. Importantly, in the BxPC3 model the PDC shows equivalent in
vivo efficacy to the corresponding ADC without causing the systemic
toxicity associated with ADC treatment. Supportive of the potential
clinical benefit of an anti-Jagged PDC, more than 75% of lung,
pancreatic, and breast cancer patient tumor samples evaluated show
moderate to high Jagged 1/2 expression as measured by IHC staining. These
data demonstrate that the ProbodyTM platform has potential to enable the
use of drug conjugates to target Jagged ligands in the Notch pathway.

