Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of ErbB receptors expression by histone deacetylase
inhibitors increased the antitumor activity of an anti-ErbB3 monoclonal
antibody in primary cultures from non-small cell lung cancer patients


In the last years several evidences suggested that ErbB3, a member of the
HER family receptors, has a key role in the development and progression
of several cancers including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and
above all in the establishment of resistance to therapies, leading to
major efforts towards the development of anti-ErbB3 therapies. We
recently demonstrated in head and neck cancer cells that, depending on
the ErbB3 expression level and on the tumor cell phenotype (epithelial vs
mesenchymal), vorinostat, one of the two clinically approved histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), differentially regulates HER receptors
expression at the transcriptional level and/or by modulating protein
degradation (Bruzzese F. et al. J Cell Physiol. 2011; 226(9):2378-90).
Our group has developed a monoclonal antibody against ErbB3 called A3,
that induces receptor internalization and degradation, inhibits growth
and induces apoptosis only in cells overexpressing surface ErbB3 and
potentiates the efficacy of EGFR TKIs (Noto A. et al. Oncotarget. 2013;
4(8):1253-65).In this study we first show, by using a set of malignant
pleural effusion derived cell cultures from NSCLC patients (Mancini R. et
al. PLOSone 2011; 6(7):e21320) that the combination of the anti-ErbB3
antibody A3 with HDACi such as vorinostat or valproic acid (VPA),
synergistically affect cell proliferation and induce apoptosis.
Interestingly synergistic interaction was observed in both fully
epithelial cells expressing all HER receptors including ErbB3, as well as
in NSCLC cells that had undergone EMT and expressed very low levels of
ErbB3. We provide evidences suggesting that differential modulation of
ErbB receptors by HDACi is responsible for the observed synergism. We
show in two epithelial cells expressing EGFR, ErbB2, and ErbB3 that
either vorinostat or VPA time- and dose-dependent down-regulation the of
all three receptors expression and signaling. On the contrary, in two
A3-resistant mesenchymal cells expressing undetectable levels of ErbB3,
we observe time- and dose-dependent increase of mRNA and protein levels
as well as surface expression of ErbB3, paralleled by down-regulation of
EGFR, ErbB2 and the the mesenchymal marker vimentin. Interestingly, ErbB3
induction was achieved also at low doses of both vorinostat and VPA,
corresponding to a plasma level easily reached in patients treated with
these agents.Our results suggest that the combination treatment of
antibodies against ErbB3 and HDACi represents an attractive strategy that
warrant further evaluation, even in combination with other agents, for
the treatment of NSCLC patients.

