Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of Tid1 conditional knockout mice for preclinical
testing of novel human head and neck cancer therapeutics


Background: Head and neck cancer (HNC) includes oral cancer (OC). Due to
high recurrence, high mortality and resistance to conventional therapies,
the development of new chemopreventive agents for HNSCC is an important
research priority. Tid1, a DnaJ cochaperone protein, interacts with ErbB
family members including EGFR and ErbB2, which function as oncogenes
during the tumorigenesis of head and neck cancer and breast cancer. Down
regulation of activity or expression level of EGFR and ErbB2 is
conversely correlated to expression of Tid1 in head and neck cancer and
breast cancer, respectively. In addition, downregulation of Tid1 causes
the upregulation of interleukin- 8 (IL-8) to enhance the metastatic
ability in breast cancer cells. Transgenic mouse modeling has been an
instrumental tool for gene specific physiological and functional study.
Additionally, we have demonstrated that Tid1 is important for T cell
development and early embryogenesis by established knockout mice
systems.Methods: We plan to generate the transgenic mouse models
illustrating the head and neck cancer carcinogenesis with our Tid1
knockout mice. Carcinogen administration, drinking water accompanying
with 4-NQO (4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide), has been incorporated within the
transgenic mouse modeling along with our Tid1 deficiency mice, at which
Tid1 deficiency will be a promoting hit during the progression of
tumorigenesis with requirement of extra hits.Results: Currently, we have
successfully established mice with epithelial specific ablation of Tid1
by crossing Tid1flx/flx mice with transgenic K5-Cre mice.
Immunohistochemistry or immunefluorescent staining were applied to showed
that mutant mice were deficient on Tid1 expression in epidermal layers.
Further, the mutant and control mice were subject to carcinogen 4-NQO
treatment within drinking water for modeling head and neck cancer
progression. Up to date, we discovered that mutant mice treated with
4-NQO displayed faster incident of neoplasia in oral cavity and reduction
of body weight in comparison to control mice under same administration.
In addition, the histopathological analyses showed that the tumors formed
in mutant mice were benign squamous papilloma.Conclusion: These tumors
generated in mutant mice exhibited changes in the expression pattern of
keratins similar to those observed in human premalignant oral tumors,
which are reflective of early stages of tumorigenesis. Therefore, we can
further characterize the histopathology and molecular mechanisms of
primary or metastatic head and neck cancer development from above mouse
models. With the mouse models generated and comprehensiveness with the
clinical relevance from our newly identified findings, we will conduct
the long-term objectives for the development of therapeutic intervention,
which will be based on the above findings to ensure the efficacy of
testing drugs at the pre-clinical stage.

