Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIF/CD74 guided therapeutic strategy for relapsed glioblastoma
patients


Introduction: No universally effective systemic treatments are available
for patients whose malignant brain tumor recurs after primary treatment.
The treatment for Glioblastoma (GBM) patients consists of surgical
removal of the tumor followed by combined treatment with the alkylating
agent, temozolomide (TMZ) and radiotherapy (RT) (chemoradiotherapy).
Despite this relatively aggressive treatment regime, the overall median
survival for patients diagnosed with GBM is less than 15 months. The
survival outcome for patients after the tumor recurs is dismal with just
9-16% of patients surviving longer than 6 months after recurrence. The
primary objective of this study was to identify new pathways to target in
order to improve treatment response and prolong survival.Methods: We
screened the low molecular weight proteome of patients' tumors, which
were non-responsive to chemoradiotherapy. Proteins of significant
abundance in the non-responsive patients were purified, identified and
validated in a larger cohort of GBM (n=230). Inhibitors were sourced and
efficacy of the drug was tested in patient derived tumor models.Results:
High expression of the inflammatory related protein Macrophage Inhibitory
Factor (MIF) and its receptor, CD74 were found in patients who were
non-responsive to treatment. Heightened expression of both MIF and CD74
were identified in 57% of GBM (n=230) and co-segregated with poor
prognosis. CD74 forms a complex with CD44 at the cell surface. After MIF
binds to the CD74/44 complex, Src is recruited. Src recruitment then
initiates the activation of multiple pathways including Ras/MAPK and Akt
resulting in tumor proliferation. Pro-angiogenic effects have also been
attributed to this complex. Because of its involvement in tumorigenesis,
inhibition of the MIF/CD74/CD44 complex with specific inhibitors in
combination with chemoradiotherapy will likely abate the resistance to
standard treatment and result in longer survival. Ibudilast (AV411;
3-isobutyryl-2-isopropylpyrazolo-[1,5-a] pyridine) is an
anti-inflammatory drug that has been marketed for almost 20 years in
Japan for treating asthma. Ibudilast inhibits the catalytic and
chemo-functions of MIF. We tested a range of ibudilast concentrations in
patient-derived cell lines and orthotopic patient-derived xenografts
(PDX) models. When used in combination with TMZ, strong synergistic and
inhibitory effects on tumor growth and improved overall survival were
observed.Conclusions: Collectively, these data suggest that MIF/CD74
signaling may be an additional factor that contributes to TMZ resistance.
Future studies will confirm whether the testing of GBM patients for
increased expression of MIF/CD74 and subsequent treatment with a
combination of ibudilast (or other small inhibitors of MIF/CD74) could be
effectively used in our armamentarium against GBM.

