Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative cancer analysis using digital PCR: Absolute counting
of DNA (solid tumors and liquid biopsies in glioma, breast, and colon
cancer) and RNA (mRNA and miRNA using One-Step RT-dPCR)


Background:There is a need for more accurate and sensitive methods to
quantify nucleic acids present in precious samples and non-invasively
collected liquid biopsy material. Digital PCR (dPCR) is one technology
with recent advances in automation, enabling researchers to sensitively
quantify a sample's nucleic acids by adding up digital fluorescent counts
of single target molecules. Particularly exciting are the emerging uses
of cell-free nucleic acids found in peripheral body fluids for dynamic
measurements of total body mutational burden of heterogeneous cancers,
potentially reducing the need for multiple invasive tumor biopsies. In
addition, combined measurement of mRNA and miRNA RNA biomarkers from a
single sample, for example from cell-free exosomes, is of clinical
interest. Here we present results from several studies using dPCR for DNA
and cDNA molecule counting with various cancers, as well as in a first
time demonstration quantifying RNA directly with multiple miRNA species,
and mRNA together with miRNA.Method & Results:Picoliter droplet digital
PCR was used to perform single molecule counting. Standard qPCR assay
reagents for each target were combined in duplex or multiplex formats
together with samples, and partitioned into millions of 5 picoliter-sized
droplets on a RainDance RainDropTM dPCR system. Each sample was then
thermal cycled prior to digital fluorescent quantification. In separate
studies we show quantification of mutant IDH1 mRNA (cDNA converted) in
glioma patient cerebrospinal fluid extracellular vesicles, PIK3CA
mutations and methylation of CyclinB2 and Retinoic Acid Receptor
promoters in breast tumor DNA, KRAS and BRAF mutations in colorectal
cancer plasma cell-free DNA, and multiplexed miRNA biomarkers from plasma
(cDNA converted). In addition, we show direct quantification of mRNA
molecules in highly precise multiplex One-Step RT-dPCR measurements
across a wide dynamic range. Finally, we show simultaneous One-Step RT
dPCR direct digital counting of miRNA and mRNA
molecules.Conclusion:Droplet digital PCR is a highly sensitive and
precise approach to quantify nucleic acids without the need for standard
curves. With the RainDance RainDrop dPCR platform there are sufficient
partitions and compatibility with various robust chemistries to apply
dPCR to DNA and RNA analyses from a variety of biofluids and neoplasms,
enabling accurate absolute counting of multiple target molecules across a
wide dynamic range.

