Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inside-out regulation of ectodomain protease accessibility in the
release of cytokines


Growth factors of the EGF family and numerous other growth factors and
cytokines are produced as transmembrane precursor proteins and released
by proteolysis. Also growth factor receptors, adhesion molecules, and
possibly all membrane proteins carrying ectodomains are subject to
proteolytic cleavage. Because these reactions produce many regulatory
molecules, such cleavages must be precisely regulated. Only a small
number of enzymes, metalloproteases, serve to perform defined cleavages
of ectodomains. Most efforts to understand regulation of ectodomain
cleavage have been directed towards elucidating protease function and
activity, predominantly of proteases of the ADAM
(A-Disintegrin-And-Metalloprotease) family. Given that a very limited
number of ADAMs need to handle hundreds of substrates, regulation of
enzyme activity does not generate the specificity and precise timing of
life-essential processes as growth factor releases. We have hypothesized
that the specificity can only be determined on the level of the
substrates.In a large screen we have identified intracellular regulatory
components that affect the extracellular cleavage of EGF family members
(Dang et al., 2013). These data revealed substrate-specific pathways.
Substrates of the same enzyme, ADAM17, the precursors of TGF-,
heparin-binding EGF, and amphiregulin, are regulated by PKC- and the
PKC-regulated protein phosphatase 1 inhibitor 14D, while neuregulin
release requires PKC-.By examining the ectodomain cleavage of NRG1 (an
ADAM17 substrate) and CD44 (an ADAM10 substrate), we have explored in
detail the mechanism of regulation.By comparing two
metalloprotease-cleaved substrates, we show that1) regulation occurs on
the level of the substrates2) regulated cleavage is executed after the
substrate has reached the plasma membrane3) modification of the
intracellular domains alters protease accessibility of the substrate's
ectodomains4) inside-out signal transfer from the C-terminus to the
ectodomain of the substrate requires substrate dimerization.Our data are
related to several aspects of cancer development and progression. It has
been postulated that inhibiting metalloproteases could inhibit growth and
metastasis of cancer cells. Expectedly, such inhibitors cannot generate
enough specificity and numerous side effects are to be expected.
Intracellular specific pathways as addressed by our data offer more
specific targets of interference. Another interesting aspect: the
adhesion molecule and co-receptor CD44 including its alternative splice
forms play tumor-promoting roles. Interestingly, CD44 ectodomain cleavage
is inhibited by the tumor suppressor protein merlin (neurofibromatosis
type 2), suggesting that CD44 ectodomain cleavage might have a role in
cancer progression.

