Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer progression: The failure to resolve


Background: Failure to resolve inflammation contributes to disease
pathogenesis. Inflammation in the tumor microenvironment is now
recognized as one of the hallmarks of cancer. Anti-inflammatory therapies
have focused on suppressing pro-inflammatory mediators, cytokines and
eicosanoids. However, a new direction has emerged with the discovery of a
novel genus of endogenous anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving
lipid-autacoid mediators derived from omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids, specifically resolvins (Rvs). Resolvins have potent novel
inflammation clearing (pro-resolution) activity without being
immunosuppressive and are also anti-inflammatory, anti-angiogenic,
anti-infective and anti-fibrotic. We hypothesize the failure of the
resolution of inflammation can lead to cancer progression and resolvins
inhibit tumor progression and metastasis. Results: Resolvins potently
inhibited primary tumor growth in subcutaneous, orthotopic and
genetically engineered models of cancer. After primary tumor resection,
resolvins suppressed spontaneous lung metastasis. Resolvins prevent
apoptosis-stimulated tumor growth (Rvsz effect) without toxicity by
stimulating the resolution of inflammation at nanogram levels (at doses
over 10,000 fold less than aspirin or omega-3 fatty acids). Resolvins
(RvD1, RvD2, and RvE1) activated human macrophage phagocytosis of
apoptotic human tumor cells (including prostate and ovarian), which was
reversed with a lipoxygenase inhibitor (baicalein). Similarly, RvD1
stimulated murine macrophage phagocytosis of chemotherapy-induced
apoptotic murine tumor cells (including ovarian), which was reversed by
the ALX/FPR-2 selective antagonist BOC-1. Resolvins also
counter-regulated chemotherapy-induced pro-inflammatory
cytokines/chemokines including TNF, IL-6, IL-8, CCL4 and CCL5.
Furthermore, resolvins reduced leukocyte infiltration and VEGF-dependent
tumor angiogenesis. Resolvins induce a new phenotype of tumor-associated
macrophages that are M2-like (increased CD206+/F4/80+), but possess
phagocytic activity (CD11bhigh/F4/80+). Electron microscopy confirmed
phagocytosis of tumor cells in macrophages in RvD2-treated tumors.
Depletion of macrophages promoted tumor growth in resolvin-treated mice.
Resolvins display synergistic anti-tumor activity with the
chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin to regress established primary tumors.
The expression of the RvD1 receptor, ALX/FPR-2, decreased with
spontaneous tumor (TRAMP) progression. Thus, cancer progression may be
associated with the loss of an endogenous anti-inflammatory lipid
mediator. Conclusions: Resolvins suppress primary tumor growth and
metastasis via the stimulation of the uptake of apoptotic tumor cells by
macrophages. The resolvin pathway, or the enhancement of endogenous
resolution processes, therefore offers an entirely novel approach for
controlling chronic inflammation as a modality of cancer treatment.

