Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical next generation sequencing of adolescents and young adult
(AYA) patients with cancer reveals aggressive biology: A preliminary
report from a major cancer center


Introduction: The survival of adolescents and young adults (AYA), (age
15-39 years), with cancer are worse when compared to younger ( 45 yr)
patients across all cancer registries (USA, UK and Australia). One of the
reasons cited for the inferior outcomes is the aggressive biology of
cancers (both adult and pediatric type) that arise in this population.
Clinical next generation sequencing (NGS) may unravel some of the
molecular alterations and diverse biology.Methods: A methodical chart
review of AYA patients who were referred to the Department of
Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (A Phase I Program) from July 2012 to
May 2013 was performed. All patients had clinical NGS testing of archival
tumor tissue by FoundationOne platform, a CLIA certified testing for
identification of targetable molecular alterations.Results: Among the 27
patients analyzed (14 F: 13 M), eight were adult type cancers, twelve
were pediatric type cancers and seven were orphan cancers. Unique
aberrations were identified in all types of cancers that have been
hitherto unreported in the COSMIC database. Of note, TP53, NKX2-1, KRAS,
CDKN2A, MDM4, MCL1, MYC, BCL2L2, and RB1 were the aberrations seen across
all tumor types in this population. TP53 aberrations were seen in five
patients, three patients harbored MYC, MCL1, and CDKN2A aberrations and
two patients had alterations in NKX2-1, KRAS, MDM4, BCL2L2, and RB1. The
tumor types included pediatric type tumors like osteosarcoma (N=5),
medulloblastoma (N=2), alveolar rhabomyosarcoma (N=3), neuroblastoma
(N=1), Wilms tumor (N=1); adult type tumors like non-small cell lung
cancer (N=1), colorectal cancer (N=1), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (N=2);
triple negative breast cancer (N=1), gastric adenocarcinoma (N=1); orphan
cancers like, fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (N=1), junvenile
hyalinized fibromatosis (N=1), renal medullary carcinoma(N=2), MPNST
(N=1), neurofibromatosis type 2 ( N=1), small cell sarcoma (N=1),
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)(N=1), and neuroendocrine carcinoma
of lung (N=1). Several patients had multiple aberrations viz, the wild
type GIST patient harbored 5 alterations (MDM4, MCL1, KIT, AKT3,
PDGRFA).Conclusions: A preliminary report of NGS sequencing in AYA
reveals diverse and unique aberrations. AYA patients have physiological
and pharmacological differences in addition to genomic mutations compared
to younger and older patients in regards to cancer treatment. Further
molecular profiling and deeper understanding of the biology of these
unique aberrations are warranted.

