Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis of 4T1 murine breast cancer cells to the lung is
dependent on the chemokine CCL2/MCP-1 produced by stromal cells in the
primary tumor


The chemokine CCL2, also known as MCP-1, plays an important role in the
initiation and progression of cancer. Since tumor cells produce CCL2,
they are considered to be the main source of this chemokine. Here, we
examined the capacity of CCL2 produced by non-tumor cells to affect the
growth and lung metastasis of 4T1 mouse breast cancer cells. Primary
tumors formed in the mammary pad of WT or CCL2-/- mice grew at a similar
rate; however, lung metastases were markedly reduced in CCL2-/- mice,
with significantly longer mouse survival. High levels of CCL2 mRNA were
detected in tumors growing in WT, but not CCL2-/- mice. Serum CCL2 levels
were increased in tumor-bearing WT, but not CCL2-/- mice. Transplantation
of CCL2-/- bone marrow cells into WT mice did not alter the incidence of
lung metastasis, but transplantation of WT bone marrow cells into CCL2-/-
mice increased lung metastasis. The primary tumors of CCL2-/- mice
consistently developed necrosis earlier than those of WT mice and showed
decreased infiltration by macrophages and reduced angiogenesis.
Interestingly, 4T1 cells that metastasized to the lung constitutively
expressed elevated levels of CCL2. Intravenous injection of 4T1 cells
producing a high level of CCL2 resulted in increased tumor foci in the
lung of CCL2-/- mice. Finally, the culture supernatants of 4T1 cells
markedly induced CCL2 production in mouse macrophages. Thus, CCL2
produced by tumor cell-activated stromal cells in the primary tumors
promotes lung metastasis of 4T1 cells, while tumor cell-derived CCL2 also
contributes to the metastasis once tumor cells enter the circulation. A
greater understanding of the source and role of CCL2 during tumor
progression and the mechanisms by which stromal cells produce this
chemokine may lead to novel strategies for cancer treatment.

