Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting sonic hedgehog pathway in pancreatic carcinogenesis as
a potential target for chemoprevention


Dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been
associated with cancer stem cells (CSC) and implicated in the initiation
of pancreatic cancer. The lethal nature of pancreatic cancer stems from
its propensity to rapidly disseminate accompanied by resistance to
current therapies contributes to the high mortality in patients with
pancreatic cancer. Thus, the objective of this study was to investigate
the role of Shh pathway in pancreatic cancer and to examine the molecular
mechanisms by which sulforaphane (SFN), an active compound in cruciferous
vegetables, inhibits self-renewal capacity of human pancreatic CSCs.
Interestingly, we demonstrate here that Shh pathway is highly activated
in pancreatic CSCs and plays important role in maintaining stemness by
regulating the expression of stemness genes.Given the requirement for
Hedgehog in pancreatic cancer, we investigated whether hedgehog blockade
by SFN could target the stem cell population in pancreatic cancer. In an
in vitro model, human pancreatic CSCs derived spheres were significantly
inhibited on treatment with SFN, suggesting the clonogenic depletion of
the CSCs. Interestingly, SFN inhibited the components of Shh pathway and
Gli transcriptional activity. Interference of Shh-Gli signaling
significantly blocked SFN-induced inhibitory effects demonstrating the
requirement of an active pathway for the growth of pancreatic CSCs. We
also show here for the first time, that sulforaphane treatment resulted
in a significant reduction in the tumor growth, of orthotopically
implanted primary pancreatic CSCs isolated from human pancreatic tumors
into the pancreas of NOD/SCID/IL2Rgamma mice, which is mediated through
the modulation of Sonic hedgehog-GLI signaling. Hedgehog pathway blockade
by SFN at a dose of 20 mg/kg resulted in a 45% reduction in growth of
pancreatic cancer tumors. SFN also inhibited downstream targets of Gli
transcription by suppressing the expression of pluripotency maintaining
factors (Nanog and Oct-4) as well as PDGFR and Cyclin D1. Furthermore,
SFN treatment resulted in a significant reduction in EMT markers Zeb-1,
which correlated with increase in E-Cadherin expression suggesting the
blockade of signaling involved in early metastasis. Interestingly, SFN
downregulated the expression of Bcl-2 and XIAP to induce apoptosis.Our
data reveal the essential role of Shh-Gli signaling in controlling the
characteristics of pancreatic CSCs. Such information will not only allow
rational design of SFN-based strategies for prevention and/ or treatment
of pancreatic cancer but could also facilitate development of
mechanism-driven protocols for optimal clinical effects. Thus
Sulforaphane potentially represents an inexpensive, safe and effective
alternative for the management of pancreatic cancer.

