Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RhoA is required for lung adenocarcinoma progression but is
dispensable for K-Ras-induced tumor initiation


K-Ras is a prolific driver of lung tumorigenesis, yet it has eluded
direct pharmaceutical inhibition to date. Here we test an alternative
inhibition strategy by targeting RhoA, the prototypic member of the Rho
family of GTPases and a downstream functional mediator of K-Ras
signaling. Rho GTPases are signal transduction proteins that control cell
shape, motility and proliferation. Given these roles, it is unsurprising
that Rho proteins have been implicated in multiple stages of cancer
progression. In fact, RhoA protein and activity levels are increased in
lung, gastric, pancreatic and colon cancers. In vitro studies by us and
others have found that K-Ras-driven lung adenocarcinoma cells are
exquisitely sensitive to shRNA mediated RhoA inhibition, and demonstrate
decreased proliferation, migration, invasion and anchorage-independent
growth. Despite these findings, no genetic studies demonstrating RhoA
involvement in tumorigenesis have been carried out to date. Thus, we
generated a murine lung cancer model by crossing the widely used
Lox-Stop-Lox KRasG12D transgenic mouse with RhoAflox/flox mice.
Simultaneous deletion of RhoA and activation of K-Ras is achieved by
either endotracheal administration of Adeno-Cre virus or by transgenic
expression of CCSP-Cre; a lung specific Clara cell secretory protein
promoter driven Cre. We found that Adeno-Cre administration to
RhoAflox/flox mice not only led to the growth of RhoA-null tumors, but
that surprisingly these mice had more and larger tumors as compared to
wild type controls. These results indicate that RhoA is not essential for
K-Ras-driven tumor formation. However, RhoAflox/flox RhoC-/- mice
administered Adeno-Cre virus displayed fewer and smaller tumors,
suggesting that K-Ras-driven tumorigenesis requires either RhoA or RhoC
signaling. In contrast, CCSP-Cre driven tumors grow unabated regardless
of RhoA status. Given the stark contrast between our in vivo and in vitro
studies, we are testing the hypothesis that during the natural course of
lung adenocarcinoma progression, cells grow reliant on RhoA signaling and
may be susceptible to pharmaceutical RhoA inhibition. On the other hand,
murine tumors initiated in the absence of RhoA may upregulate
compensatory pathways downstream of K-Ras, paradoxically increasing tumor
growth. While RhoA represents a valid target for suppressing K-Ras driven
tumor cell proliferation and invasion, neither RhoA nor RhoC is essential
for K-Ras-driven tumorigenesis. Moreover, our findings suggest that there
is selective pressure within tumors after RhoA loss resulting not only in
compensation between Rho-family members but also complex compensatory
signaling leading to a paradoxical increase in tumor formation.

