Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent inactivation of the Mieap-regulated mitochondrial quality
control in pancreatic and breast cancer


Mieap, a p53-inducible protein, controls mitochondrial quality by
repairing or eliminating unhealthy mitochondria via MALM (Mieap-induced
Accumulation of Lysosome-like organelles within Mitochondria) or MIV
(Mieap-Induced Vacuole), respectively (1, 2). Two mitochondrial outer
membrane proteins, BNIP3 and NIX are essential mediators of MALM (3).
Previously, we reported that the Mieap-regulated mitochondrial quality
control (MQC) pathway was inactivated in almost 80% of colorectal cancer
patients. To evaluate the role of the Mieap-regulated MQC in pancreatic
and breast cancer, we analyzed the status of p53, Mieap, BNIP3 and NIX in
50 cases of primary pancreatic cancer and 63 cases of primary breast
cancer by examining p53 mutation and Mieap/BNIP3/NIX promoter
methylation. As the result, the Mieap-regulated MQC pathway was
inactivated in 71% of pancreatic and 27% of breast cancer patients.
Interestingly, the BNIP3 promoter methylation was frequently detected in
colorectal and pancreatic cancer patients (49% and 58%, respectively)
whereas it was not detected in breast cancer patients at all (0%).
Instead, the Mieap promoter methylation was highly detected in breast
cancer patients (12.7%) compared to colorectal and pancreatic cancer
patients (8.8% and 2.0%, respectively). These results suggest that the
Mieap-regulated MQC pathway plays a critical role in tumorigenesis of
pancreatic and breast cancer, and that there may be some different
mechanisms between colorectal/pancreatic and breast cancers for
inactivation of the Mieap-regulated MQC pathway. Inactivation of
Mieap-regulated MQC pathway leads to the accumulation of unhealthy
mitochondria generating high level of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species. We are now investigating whether the p53/Mieap/BNIP3 MQC pathway
affects cell growth, cell motility or tumorigenicity using several
pancreatic and breast cancer cell lines that are subcutaneously implanted
into nude mice. In this paper, we discuss the potential role of the
Mieap-regulated MQC in pancreatic and breast tumor suppression.1.
Miyamoto Y et al. PLoS ONE 6: e16054, 20112. Kitamura N et al. PLoS ONE
6: e16060, 20113. Nakamura Y et al. PLoS ONE 7: e30767, 2012

