Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel RhoGAP independent pathway of tumor suppressor DLC1
regulates cancer invasion and metastasis


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide.
Deleted in Liver Cancer 1 (DLC1) is a tumor suppressor gene critically
involved in hepatocarcinogenesis. DLC1 is a Rho GTPase activating protein
(RhoGAP), which serves as the negative regulator of Rho proteins. Rho
proteins are important in remodeling of actin cytoskeleton, transcription
regulation, cell proliferation, tumorigenesis and metastasis. Apart from
RhoGAP activity, the inhibitory activity of DLC1 is also dependent on its
proper focal adhesion localization. It has been found that tensin
proteins are responsible for directing DLC1 to the focal adhesions via
their interaction which is important to the tumor suppression activity of
DLC1. Recently, we identified that cAMP/Protein Kinase A (PKA) could
induce DLC1 dimerization by phosphorylation for activation. PKC and PKD
had also been demonstrated to phosphorylate DLC1 and modulate the nuclear
shuttling and RhoGAP activity of DLC1. Our previous study also revealed
that PKB/Akt phosphorylates DLC1 and subsequently attenuates the tumor
suppressive activity of DLC1 through a RhoGAP independent pathway.Our
data revealed that DLC1 Ser-567 phosphorylation affects its binding with
Akt, prompting us to further search for other DLC1 interacting partners
which are specifically regulated by Ser-567 phosphorylation. We performed
differential co-immunoprecipitation assay to compare protein expressions
of phospho-defective mutant (S567A) and phosphomimetic mutant (S567D) of
DLC1. Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were then subjected to mass
spectrometry for protein identity. Among all interacting candidates, we
are interested to characterize the midline family genes: midline-1
(MID-1) and midline-2 (MID-2). MID-1 mutation is associated with
embryonic developmental defect, X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome (XLOS). It
is important for epithelial-mesenchymal differentiation, cell migration
and adhesion, and apoptosis during embryogenesis. MID1 protein is a
microtubule-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase. MID1 targets catalytic
subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2Ac) for ubiquitination by binding
with 4. In HCC, 4 is highly expressed. From our analysis, MID-1/2
proteins interact with S567A but not with S567D, suggesting that Akt
phosphorylation abolishes the interaction between DLC1 and MID-1/2. Thus,
it would be tempting to investigate how DLC1 affects MID/4/PP2A complex
in controlling epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cell-cycle checkpoint
and inducing apoptosis. Our initial investigation has provided evidence
that MID-1/2 are novel interacting proteins of DLC1 and their interaction
is mediated by phosphorylation of DLC1 at Ser-567. In this study, we aim
to investigate the functional significance of DLC1 and MID-1/2 and how
DLC1 modulates the functions of MID/4/PP2A complex in liver cancer. The
functional roles of DLC1 and MID-1/2 interaction in HCC metastasis will
also be discussed.

