Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential trafficking of dendritic cells after immunization
determines establishment of systemic anti-tumor responses


Systemic immune activation and memory cell generation is desired in
dendritic cell (DC)-based therapies against cancers, especially with
metastasis. Migration properties of DCs, however, could limit the
responses regionally constrained. Clinically, DC-vaccines are often given
subcutaneously (s.c.), intravenously (i.v.) or intradermally (i.d.),
without monitoring the migration of DCs. In this study, we visualized
trafficking of DCs labeled with In-111 oxine using a whole-body
micro-SPECT imager after immunization via different routes and examined
induction of immune activation and memory cell generation in mice. Bone
marrow-derived DCs were used. Surprisingly, most of s.c. transferred DCs
failed to migrate to the adjacent lymph nodes (LNs) and died at the
injection site, irrespective of their maturation status. DCs injected
i.v. were initially trapped in the lungs, but gradually migrated to the
spleen, liver and, to a lesser extent, LNs. In contrast, DCs administered
i.d. and intraperitoneally (i.p.) quickly entered lymphatic system and
distributed to LNs. Proliferation of CMFDA labeled OT-1 CD8 T cells
pre-transferred to mice receiving ovalbumin loaded DCs (OVA-DCs)
indicated that i.v. and i.p. immunizations triggered stronger and more
systemic expansion of effector T cells than s.c. and i.d. immunizations.
To examine the establishment of long-term defense, we next immunized mice
with OVA-DCs and challenged them with OVA-expressing tumors
intramuscularly, contra-lateral to the s.c. and i.d. injection site.
Intriguingly, i.v. immunization seemed less effective than the others in
developing long-term antigen-specific immunity, despite its capability to
induce an extensive acute responses. These results might suggest that
difference in the microenvironment of organs where CD8 T cells encounter
the antigen (i.e., spleen or LNs) controls the generation of long-lived
memory cells. Collectively, immunization route would be a critical factor
that determines the spatial distribution of immune activation and
generation of functional memory cells in DC-based therapies.

