Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of LDH-A reduced lactate production and changed
the expression of glycolysis-associated transporters


In the clinic, tumors showing a pronounced Warburg effect (high lactate
tumors) are associated with a higher risk of metastasis and a decreased
probability of survival of patients. Therefore, manipulations of the
glycolytic pathway may alter tumor cell metabolism and might be a way to
influence tumors aggressiveness, e.g. by down-regulating intracellular
lactate levels.To test for this hypothesis B16.SIY E12 murine melanoma
cells were stably transfected with shRNA down-regulating LDH-A expression
(Lac Low cells). As a control cell line B16.SIY E12 was transfected with
a scrambled shRNA construct (Lac High cells). These cell lines were
characterized regarding their metabolic properties in vitro, especially
lactate production in medium supernatants, the extracellular
acidification rates (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rates (OCR).
Furthermore, the expression of glycolysis-associated transporters (GLUT1,
GLUT3, MCT1, MCT4 and CD147) was determined at the protein level. In a
first in vivo set-up ATP, lactate and glucose content of syngeneic
experimental tumors were measured using induced metabolic bioluminescence
imaging (imBI).Changing LDH-A expression induced differences in lactate
production in the two tumor cell lines in vitro with Lac Low cells
producing significantly less lactate in 24 h than Lac High cells.
Accordingly, Lac Low cells revealed a significantly lower ECAR and a
higher OCR than Lac High cells. The protein expression of
glycolysis-associated transporters was also influenced by changes in
LDH-A expression with Lac High cells showing a significantly higher
protein expression of MCT1 and MCT4. The general expression of GLUT1 was
unchanged (Western Blot) but membrane localization was higher in Lac High
cells (immunofluorescence staining). Measuring metabolite content in
experimental tumors of the same cell lines showed that the cells
maintained their glycolytic properties with Lac Low tumors showing lower
lactate content than Lac High tumors.In summary, down-regulation of LDH-A
expression reduced lactate production and membrane localization of
glycolysis-associated transporters. The fact, that these characteristic
are maintained during the transition from in vitro to in vivo makes this
model system useful for systematic studies on therapeutic manipulation of
tumor glycolysis and associated pathways.Supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft KFO262, DE 835/2-1 (WMK) + KR1418/8-1 (MK)

