Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the DNA binding domain of the androgen receptor as a
potential therapy for prostate cancer


The Androgen Receptor (AR) is a ligand inducible transcription factor
that drives expression of genes contributing to the growth, recurrence
and metastasis of prostate cancer (PCa). The AR is activated by steroid
hormones (androgens) that bind to a C-terminal ligand-binding domain
(LBD) and cause the transcription factor to enter the nucleus, dimerize
and interact with DNA via its conserved DNA-binding domain (DBD).
Accordingly, treatment for PCa involves reducing DHT production or using
small molecules (i.e. antiandrogens) to compete with the specific
interaction between hormones and the AR-LBD, preventing AR activation.
This treatment will eventually fail as recurrent PCa changes into a
castration resistant form (CRPC) where AR signalling continues even in
the absence of androgens. The occurrence of CRPC is driven, in part, by
mutations in the AR-LBD that alter the binding of antiandrogens, or by
the presence of constitutively active AR splice variants that lack the
LBD, effectively removing the site of action of conventional
antiandrogens.Here, we describe a surface exposed pocket on the AR-DBD,
based on its 3D-crystal structure, which may qualify as an alternative
target for small molecule inhibitors of AR transcriptional activity.
Following virtual screening of many compounds, we characterize the
interaction of the AR-DBD with various potential inhibitors and measure
the efficacy of these agents to block the transcriptional activity of
both full-length and splice variant AR in cell culture. Drug-inhibition
was reduced upon site-directed mutagenesis of amino-acid residues in the
DBD that are suspected of interacting with the compounds. Biochemical
approaches are used to further examine the physical interaction of the
purified AR-DBD protein with small molecules and to investigate their
effect on protein-DNA interactions in vitro. Lastly, we use confocal
microscopy of live PCa cells to investigate the effect of our compounds
on the spatial localization and dimerization of fluorescently tagged AR
proteins. These results illustrate the feasibility of targeting the
AR-DBD to potentially inhibit the reactivation of AR transcriptional
activity that is observed in CRPC.

