Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omental milky-spots serve as a niche for ovarian cancer metastatic
colonization


Metastatic ovarian cancer remains an urgent clinical problem. The homing
and invasion of cancer cells into the omental adipose tissue, the
preferred site of ovarian cancer metastasis, is a rate-limiting step in
disease progression. Improving patient outcomes requires a mechanistic
understanding of how cancer cells colonize the omentum and ultimately
give rise to widespread peritoneal metastases. Unlike other peritoneal
adipose, omental adipose contains functional immune aggregates known as
milky spots, which contain macrophages, B, T, natural killer (NK), and
stromal cells within capillary nests. In addition to their role in
peritoneal homeostasis and immune defense, our data shows that milky
spots play an active role in ovarian cancer metastatic colonization. We
hypothesize that omental microenvironment plays a crucial role in
instructing the ovarian cancer cells to achieve an aggressive phenotype
that enables wide spread metastases.Well-established in vitro migration
assays and in vivo experimental metastasis assays were used to answer the
following questions: Does cancer cell localization depend upon the immune
composition of the milky spots? Do cancer cells utilize the native milky
spot microenvironment, or does it undergo remodeling during colonization?
Answers to these questions will be the foundation for mechanism-based
studies aimed at identifying ovarian cancer-omental interactions that can
be targeted therapeutically.Human (SKOV3ip.1, CaOV3, HeyA8), and murine
(ID8) ovarian cancer cells rapidly localized to omental milky spots and
not adipose lacking milky spots. Use of genetic models (C57BL/6, Athymic
Nude, Beige Nude, Rag1-/-, Igh6-/- mice) ruled out a requirement of B, T,
and NK cells in ovarian cancer cell homing to milky spots suggesting a
critical role for macrophages in this process. Quantitative data found no
difference in the incidence of cancer cell foci in the omentum across
these strains. Our recent data shows that depletion of omental adipose
tissue macrophages (ATM) abrogates cancer cell colonization of milky
spots. In vitro assays have found that omental adipose-conditioned media
causes 75% more cell migration and contains a higher concentration of
macrophage-secreted cytokines than media conditioned by adipose lacking
milky spots. Importantly, our data shows that factors secreted by omental
ATMs have an enhanced ability to promote ovarian cancer migration
compared to factors secreted by other peritoneal ATMs.We have shown that
omental milky spots are required for cancer colonization of peritoneal
adipose. Further, we have identified omental macrophages as the key
mediators of colonization. Future studies are focused on understanding
the cancer cell-macrophage interactions that can be targeted
therapeutically to disrupt metastatic growth and extend disease-free
survival.Acknowledgement: The DOD (W81XWH-09-1-0127), NCI/NIH
(2RO1CA089569) and Marsha Rivkin Center Pilot Study Award.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

