Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification of distant estrogen response elements epigenetically
deregulates target genes in ER-mediated breast tumorigenesis


Since the first amplified gene, MYCN, was identified in neuroblastomas,
considerable effort has been directed toward discovery of oncogenes in
amplified genomic regions. However, there is no significant correlation
between copy number gains and increased expression of corresponding genes
within amplicons. We demonstrate that amplification of distant-acting
regulatory elements, or enhancers, may be an alternative mechanism
contributing to an oncogenic event. Enhancers comprise transcription
factor binding sites known to remotely regulate transcription through
chromatin looping or transvection. Using a Seq-to-Seek strategy
integrating three next-generation sequencing approaches, we
comprehensively mapped distant estrogen response elements (DEREs) that
remotely control transcription of target genes through chromatin
proximity. Surprisingly, a densely mapped DERE region located on
chromosome 20q13 frequently amplifies in ER-positive breast cancer with
poor prognosis. Progressive accumulation of DERE copies was observed in
normal breast progenitor and cancer cells chronically exposed to estrogen
or estrogenic chemicals. Pharmacological studies with either an ER
antagonist or an ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase inhibitor
further showed that ATM-dependent DNA repair pathway participates in
ER-driven increase of 20q13 DERE copies, suggesting involvement of
breakage-fusion-bridge mechanism in DERE amplification. Furthermore,
these aberrantly amplified DEREs altered chromatin interactions, leading
to transcriptional repression of genes that are associated with
tumor-suppressor and apoptosis pathways and potentially linked to cancer
development and tamoxifen resistance. Correlation analyses of copy-number
variation, occupancy of the repressive histone mark, H3K27me3, and
methylation profiling of 20q13 DEREs in ER-positive cancer cells support
a model in which amplified DEREs preferentially induce repressive
epigenetic modulation of target genes. In addition, interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization coupled with immunofluorescence
analyses revealed that estrogen stimulation leads to DERE clustering in a
transcriptional hub nearby in a heterochromatic region. These findings
indicate that the 20q13 DERE region is a potential transcriptionally
repressive domain whose aberrant amplification can result in suppressing
expression of tumor suppressor genes. To determine the precise role of
amplified DEREs in epigenetic transcription and their biological
significance, our ongoing studies use CRISPR/Cas genomic editing system
to delete candidate DEREs at 20q13. In summary, our findings suggest that
amplification of DNA regulatory elements can profoundly alter target
transcriptome during tumorigenesis and amplified DEREs can be used as
potential prognostic markers for endocrine resistance.

