Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic mastitis in North Africa: Geographic overlap and a
potential precursor comorbidity of inflammatory breast cancer


North African countries, such as Egypt and Morocco, have a high
prevalence of non-infectious, chronic mastitis (up to 10% of patients
presenting with breast problems) compared to less than 1% worldwide. This
same geographic region also suffers from an unusually high prevalence of
inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) - 10-15% of breast cancer cases - versus
just 1-2% of cases in the U.S. IBC is a serious public health issue as it
is the most lethal form of breast cancer because of the propensity for
rapid onset of disseminated metastases, which are present in one-third of
cases at diagnosis. It is our hypothesis that this geographic overlap is
not coincidental, but that the high level of background chronic breast
inflammation changes the mammary microenvironment making it more
auspicious for the development of IBC. Here we report our work aimed at
determining molecular and histologic criteria to classify mastitis into
pathogenic groups in order to rationally guide treatment for this serious
inflammatory illness, as well as study its possible role in the
development of IBC.We identified 44 cases of chronic mastitis of unknown
etiology. Cases were defined as any female patient with histopathological
diagnosis of chronic mastitis seen at the 5 study hospitals in Egypt and
Morocco from 2008-2011. Exclusion criterion was previous diagnosis of
malignancy. Biopsy slides were analyzed by a pathologist and stained for
IgG4 and IgG. Out of the 44 cases of chronic mastitis using consensus
guidelines and our molecular IgG4 profiling, we identified 10 as
idiopathic granulomatous mastitis (IGM) and 17 as breast manifestations
of IgG4-related disease. IGM is a rare non-neoplastic, chronic, often
severe inflammatory lesion of the breast that mimics carcinoma clinically
and radiologically. Treatment strategies include watchful waiting,
immunosuppressive therapy, wide local or other excisions, or combinations
of the above. IgG4-related disease is a newly recognized
fibro-inflammatory condition. It is characterized by the formation of
tumefactive lesions, a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with many
IgG4-positive plasma cells, storiform fibrosis, obliterative phlebitis
and, frequently, elevated serum IgG4 concentrations. While no randomized
clinical trials have been conducted, glucocorticoid treatment is the
standard first line therapy and appears to be quite effective in the
majority of patients.This series is the largest reported and is the first
step toward changing the chronic breast inflammatory landscape in North
Africa by classifying the chronic mastitis into pathogenic groups that
can guide personalized treatment protocols. Further studies are needed to
discern whether effective and timely treatment of these chronic
inflammatory conditions may lower the incidence of IBC.

