Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutaminase activity determines cytotoxicity of L-asparaginases on
leukemia cell lines


L-Asparaginase (ASNase) is a front-line chemotherapy for acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), which acts by deaminating asparagine (Asn)
and glutamine (Gln). We and others have shown that its cytotoxicity
depends more on Gln than Asn depletion. Novel ASNases with different
activities have been developed in an attempt to decrease side effects and
allergic reaction. To evaluate the importance of glutaminase activity, we
developed a novel form of Helicobacter pylori ASNase (dm HpA) using
site-directed mutagenesis, with amino acid substitutions M121C/T169M.
This mutant form was designed to have the same asparaginase activity as
wild type (wt), but lack glutaminase activity. WT and dm HpA were
compared with the clinically used ASNases from E. coli (EcA-II) and
Erwinia chrysanthemi (ErA).Asparaginase and glutaminase activities of
each enzyme were measured with Nessler's assay at pH 8.6. The ratio of
glutaminase/asparaginase activity was 1.4% for dm HPase, 7.5% for wt
HPase, 41% for EcA-II, and 99% for ErA (at 0.6 IU),
respectively.L-Asparaginases (0.01 to 3 IU/ml over 72 hrs) were tested on
8 human leukemia cell lines: pre B ALL (BV173, Nalm-6, RCH-ACV, RS4;11,
SEM, SupB15), T cell ALL (Molt-4), and acute promyelocytic leukemia
(HL-60). Viable cells were determined by trypan blue exclusion.Two cell
lines which we had previously shown to be Asn-dependent (RS4;11 and
SupB15) were equally sensitive to the asparaginase isoforms (>90% kill at
0.03 IU/mL). The other 6 lines were more sensitive to isoforms with
higher glutaminase activities (Table). ErA was the most effective on all
three cell lines on which it was tested.These data show that asparaginase
activity alone may not be sufficient for ASNase cytotoxicity, and that
glutaminase activity may be required for full efficacy. These
sensitivities to ASNases match previous data on Asn- and Gln-dependent
cell proliferation (Ehsanipour et al., Cancer Research, 2013).


