Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling of lung cancers
reveals novel biomarkers and potential drug targets


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide.
Comprehensive genetic studies revealed multiple subgroups of lung cancer
of which each comprises a distinct mutational pattern. Moreover, it was
shown that genetic alterations in genes encoding for kinases like EGFR
and ALK induce constitutive kinase activity which in turn makes these
kinases promising drug targets. However, as the correlation between
genetic alterations and protein-expression/ -activity is strongly
influenced by co- and post-transcriptional as well as post-translational
regulation, we characterized a broad panel of lung cancer cell lines and
primary patient-derived lung cancer tissues by quantitative proteomic
techniques to identify diagnostic biomarkers and potential drug
targets.To this end we established a work-flow to extract large amounts
of proteins from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues by using
the FASP method. Purified proteins were subsequently subjected to a
Super-SILAC-based experimental set-up that allows for identification and
quantification of thousands of proteins and their post-translational
modifications by high-end mass spectrometry.In this study we
quantitatively characterized the proteomes of 60 FFPE lung cancer
specimens and 20 lung cancer cell lines including squamous cell
carcinoma, adenocarcinoma and small cell carcinoma of the lung, and
moreover squamous cell carcinoma metastases derived from head-neck tumors
and adenocarcinoma metastases from colorectal cancer in the lung. Using
the Super-SILAC-based mass spectrometric approach we were able to
identify and quantify around 4000 proteins per sample. Unsupervised
clustering- and principal component analyses revealed that the detected
protein expression patterns show a strong correlation with the
histological subtypes of lung cancer. Furthermore, also squamous cell
cancer metastases could be distinguished from primary lung cancers with
similar histological morphology using their protein expression
profiles.Collectively, this study provides a large set of proteomic
biomarkers that can be used in future to improve lung cancer diagnostics
including the discrimination of metastases in the lung. In particular the
differential diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma/metastases in the lung
which was so far difficult due to a lack of appropriate biomarkers will
be improved by the biomarker panels presented here. Moreover, the
expression patterns of kinases discovered in our study is of interest
regarding potential novel lung cancer therapies as overexpression of
kinases such as FGFR can contribute to the malignant phenotype of lung
cancer cells.

