Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular characters of acquired resistant non-small cell lung
cancer cells to afatinib


[Background] The non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs) with activating
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation show significant
response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, almost all
of them acquire resistance to EGFR-TKIs due to various mechanisms, such
as T790M mutation or MET amplification. Afatinib is an irreversible TKI
for EGFR and HER2 and known to be effective to the EGFR T790M variant.
However, a half of the patient responded afatinib acquire resistance by
12 months in clinical use. Thus, to unravel the mechanisms of the
resistances and to overcome them are still important issues of EGFR-TKI
treatment. In this study, we established various kinds of afatinib
resistant cell lines with changing drug exposing condition as we
previously reported (Shien K. et al Cancer Res. 2013). We also
investigated these cell lines to understand mechanisms of afatinib
resistances in NSCLC.[Materials and Methods] Afatinib resistant cell
lines were established using four NSCLC cell lines with activating EGFR
mutations by exposing afatinib with different procedures, escalation from
1 nM, escalation from 10 nM, intermittent 2 M and continuous 2 M
procedures. These cell lines were investigated about previously reported
resistant related features, T790M mutation, MET amplification, and
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). ALDH1A1 and ABCB1 expression,
which were putative stem cell markers, were also investigated.
Proliferative inhibitions with various drugs were evaluated using MTS
assay.[Results] There were no T790M mutations in all afatinib resistant
cell lines. HCC827 sublines exposed afatinib with escalation from 1 nM
and intermittent 2 M, and HCC4011 sublines showed MET amplification.
HCC827 sublines exposed afatinib with escalation from 10 nM and
continuous 2 M, and HCC4006 sublines showed EMT features. Furthermore,
ALDH1A1 and ABCB1 expression were up-regulated in HCC827 afatinib
resistant sublines with EMT features. Next, we examined the effect of
afatinib or crizotinib for the afatinib resistant cell line with MET
amplification. We found that combination therapy with afatinib and
crizotinib was effective to the MET amplified cell. The combination
exposure was continued to establish a resistant subline (HCC827-ACR) to
combination therapy. The HCC827-ACR was also showed EMT features and
up-regulation of stem cell markers.[Conclusions] As in the cases of
reversible EGFR-TKI, MET amplification, EMT, and stem cell-like features
were emerged in afatinib resistant cells. To develop strategies to
resistant cells with stem cell-like property may be critical part to
overcome EGFR-TKI resistance.

