Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stemness of gastric cancer stem cells is sustained by TGF
produced from cancer-associated fibroblasts


Purpose: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have recently been
implicated in tumor growth and metastasis in gastric cancer. Cancer stem
cells. (CSCs) have been proposed to have an important role in cancer
progression. CSCs are known to display stem cell properties, stemness,
the ability to sustain self-renewal. Because CAFs are abundant in the
stroma of gastric cancer, CAFs are supposed to affect CSC characteristics
of gastric cancer. However, the effects of CAFs on the characteristics of
gastric cancer CSCs have not been clarified. The aim of this study was to
clarify the effect of CAFs on CSCs characteristics in gastric tumor
microenvironment.Experimental Design: Four gastric cancer cell lines,
OCUM-12, OCUM-2MD3, MKN-45, and MKN-74, were used. Side population (SP)
cells were sorted by flow cytometry as CSC-rich cells from each parent
cell line. CaF-37 was established from the tumoral gastric specimens as
CAFs. Flow cytometric analysis of SP fraction, spheroid colony assay, and
RT-PCR analysis of CSC markers, ABCG2, ALDH1, CD44, CD133, NANOG, and
OCT3/4, were performed to identify CSCs properties. Effect of CAFs on the
tumorigenicity by OCUM-12/SP cells was examined using nude mice.Results:
CaF-37 significantly increased the percentages of the SP fraction of
scirrhous-type of gastric cancer cells, OCUM-12/SP and OCUM-2MD3/SP
cells, but not that of non-scirrhous-type of gastric cancer cells,
MKN-45/SP and MKN-74/SP cells. Taken together, CaF-37 significantly
increased the number of spheroid colonies and the expression level of CSC
markers of scirrhous-type of gastric cancer cells. These
stimulating-activities by CaF-37 were significantly decreased by TGF
inhibitors, but not FGFR and cMet inhibitor. Also, SP fractions of
scirrhous-type of gastric cancer cells were significantly increased by
TGF, but not by FGF2 and HGF. Tumorigenicity by subcutaneous
co-inoculation of OCUM-12/SP cells with CaF-37 was significantly high in
comparison with that by OCUM-12/SP cells alone. Phospho-Smad2 expression
level was significantly increased by co-inoculation with
CaF-37.Conclusions: TGF from CAFs in the tumor microenvironment might
sustain the stemness of CSCs of gastric cancer cells, especially in
scirrhous-type of gastric cancer.

