Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-Jun N-terminal kinases and autophagy promote adenoviral and
ectopic tumor-associated antigen presentation


Adenoviruses are innately immunogenic; thus, targeted immunotherapy with
recombinant, oncolytic adenoviruses is under investigation for the
treatment of cancer. Evidence indicates adenoviruses induce autophagy
that is required for cancer cell lysis. Importantly, autophagy is known
to promote the presentation of self and foreign antigens for immune cell
activation. The molecular regulation of autophagy and antigen
presentation in adenovirus- infected cells remains undefined. Our data
indicates adenovirus infection triggered phosphorylation of c-Jun
N-terminal kinases (JNK) in vitro and in vivo, which was essential for
autophagy. JNK-dependent B cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) phosphorylation
stimulated the dissociation of Bcl-2/beclin 1 heterodimers, enabling
beclin 1 to initiate autophagy. Additionally, our data demonstrated for
the first time that adenoviral epitopes were presented at the surface of
infected cells through JNK- and autophagy-dependent mechanisms, as
infected JNK- and autophagy-deficient cells were unable to activate
splenocytes from adenovirus-immunized mice. Rapamycin, a chemical
activator of autophagy, was able to enhance adenoviral antigen
presentation. Contrary to starvation-induced autophagy, inhibiting
adenovirus-mediated autophagy and antigen presentation required genetic
knock-out of both JNK1 and JNK2 isoforms. We propose this unique
mechanism for the processing of adenoviral antigens and consequent
activation of immune cells can be leveraged in developing recombinant
adenoviruses for the advancement of anti-tumor immunotherapy. Thus, we
developed a novel adenovirus that expresses a chimeric fiber protein
containing the cancer-specific, immunogenic epitope from the epidermal
growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII). We confirmed that the
EGFRvIII epitope was presented at the surface of cells in an
autophagy-dependent manner that could be enhanced by the pro-inflammatory
cytokine, interferon gamma. Thus, we discovered molecular events
regulating adenovirus-mediated autophagy and antigen presentation that
differs from the conventional paradigm which could be employed for the
advancement of adenovirus-based vaccines.

