Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of LMTK3 expression and tumor phenotype in
estrogen-dependent colorectal cancer


Background: Incompatible physiology between genders influences
development and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC). It is postulated
that improved survival of women with CRC may be due to exogenous estrogen
exposure. A recent study used the age of 50 as a surrogate for menopause,
evaluating survival in two age groups: women 50 and 50. It was observed
that women 50 had a survival advantage that was contributed to protection
by estrogen- a mechanism lost in menopause; with no significant
difference found in men. Lemur tyrosine kinase 3 (LMTK3) was recently
identified, that when in association with an estrogen receptor (ER)
modulator increased growth, progression, and altered resistance to
endocrine therapy was observed in breast cancer. The ER family (ER and
ER) exerts contrasting actions of estrogen on different target tissues,
where ER is the dominant receptor expressed in the gastrointestinal
tract. The different ER distribution between breast and colon cancer led
to the hypothesis that LMTK3 overexpression should stabilize ER and
decrease tumorigenesis in CRC. Methods: CRC cell lines were characterized
for LMTK3 mRNA (qRT-PCR) and protein expression (Western blot) in both
transfected and non-transfected cell lines. Overexpression of LMTK3 was
achieved utilizing pCMV6-XL4-LMTK3. Overexpressing LMTK3 CRC cells were
evaluated for alterations to cell viability by MTT, colony formation
(CFAs), invasion assays and chemosensitivity to 5-Fluororuacil,
oxaliplatin, and tamoxifen. Results: CRC cell lines demonstrated a range
of LMTK3, ER and ER mRNA and protein expression. Caco-2, HCT116 and LoVo
cells demonstrated estrogen sensitivity as evidenced by treatment with ER
antagonist, tamoxifen. CFA demonstrated that the presence of estrogen
plus overexpression of LMTK3 decreased cell viability by 27, 28 and 36%
in Caco2, HCT116 and LoVo cells respectively, had limited impact on
chemosensitivity, and decreased their ability to invade. Conclusion: This
study demonstrates that estrogen mediated cell signaling and LMTK3 play
an important role in decreasing CRC tumorigenesis. Further studies are
underway to better understand estrogen and LMTK3's role in CRC.

