Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of microRNA-15a/16 in early B1 cell development in a
mouse model of chronic lymphocytic leukemia


New Zealand Black (NZB) mouse is a de-novo model of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) that has been studied as a model of B-cell
lymphoproliferative disorder. In most human CLL and NZB there is
decreased expression of the microRNA miR15a/16. In NZB (and some CLL
patients) this is due a point mutation six bases downstream from
pre-miR-16 region. In both NZB mouse model and human CLL, the disease is
characterized by the presence of a malignant clone of B-1 cells
expressing dull levels of CD5 (T cell marker), CD11b (myeloid marker) and
B220 (B cell marker). In this report we investigated the molecular
pathways that result in increased B-1 lineage development in the mouse
model of CLL. Initially we observed that in NZB, the B-1 lineage cells
had reduced expression of Pu.1 when compared to NZB B-2 cells. PU.1 is a
transcription factor required for B lineage differentiation and PU.1
knockout mice were previously found by others to have only B-1 lineage
cell differentiation. To study early B1/B2 divergent cell development
pathways in the context of CLL and shed light on the potential malignant
cell origin of this disease, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPS) from NZB spleen stromal fibroblasts. Our in vivo and in vitro
studies on NZB iPS and hematopoietic progenitors (LSK) differentiation
towards B-cell lineage cells followed by multicolor flow based cell
sorting revealed a substantial block in the maturation of NZB iPS cells
compared to wild type counterparts. Preliminary data using congenic NZB
mice with corrected mir-15a/16-1 locus demonstrated that normal levels of
miR-15a/16 regulate B-cell differentiation towards a higher expression of
PU.1 and B220 (CD45R) and lower levels of CD11b suggestive of an enhanced
B2 cell maturation pathway. Our results support the hypothesis that
decreased miR-15a plays a role in B1 lymphocyte development bias in the
course of B cell maturation by regulating the expression of a number of
genes such as B220, PU.1 and CD11b. This work will help further uncover
early molecular events which determine the increased B1 versus B2 lineage
commitment associated with low levels of miR-15a/16 as an initial lesion
in the development of CLL.

