Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PID1, a new growth-inhibitory gene, sensitizes brain tumor cell
lines to chemotherapy


BACKGROUND: Phosphotyrosine Interaction Domain containing protein-1
(PID1) is a gene discovered in 2006 in the context of obesity, which we
recently showed inhibits growth of brain tumor cell lines and its mRNA
level is directly correlated with survival of patients with gliomas and
medulloblastomas (Erdreich-Epstein et al, Clin Cancer Res, In Press).
PID1 mRNA was lower in more aggressive medulloblastomas and gliomas, and
patients whose tumor had higher PID1 mRNA had longer survival. Moreover,
overexpression of PID1 markedly decreased 2D colony formation in cell
lines of medulloblastomas, GBM and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors
(ATRT). The growth-inhibitory effect was due to both decreased
proliferation and increased cell death.METHODS/RESULTS: COSMIC showed no
mutations of PID1 in brain tumors, suggesting that PID1 was not a formal
tumor suppressor gene. Therefore, we hypothesized that PID1 may sensitize
brain tumor cells to therapy, and thus account for the longer survival in
patients with higher PID1 mRNA. Indeed, while both cisplatin (10g/ml) or
transient PID1 overexpression increased apoptosis of glioma and
medulloblastoma cell lines (indicated by increased AnnexinV and
mitochondrial depolarization), combining cisplatin with PID1 caused a
markedly higher apoptosis. Moreover, knockdown of PID1 by siRNA inhibited
the cisplatin-induced mitochondrial membrane depolarization and apoptosis
(AnnexinV), suggesting that PID1 may be required for cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. Taken together, this suggests a sensitizing effect of PID1 to
chemotherapy in both glioma and medulloblastoma cell lines. Intriguingly,
PID1 mRNA and protein both increased in response to etoposide (5g/ml),
vincristine (50ng/ml) or cisplatin (5g/ml) in a time- and dose-dependent
manner in the brain tumor cell lines. This chemotherapy-induced increase
in PID1 mRNA was blocked by inhibitors of NFKB, suggesting that
regulation of PID1 may be an NFKB-dependent mechanism. Ongoing work seeks
to decipher the mechanism of these effects and test them in vivo in mouse
models.CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that PID1 acts to sensitize glioma
and medulloblastoma cells to chemotherapy, possibly explaining the
correlation between higher PID1 mRNA and survival in patients.

