Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of glutaminolysis as a tool for evaluating
therapeutic response in preclinical models of colorectal cancer


The metabolic repertoire of cancer cells diverge significantly from that
of normal cells. Energy production in cancer cells tends to depend on
aerobic glycolysis, a feature that is routinely monitored by positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging using 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose
([18F]FDG). In addition to predilection for glycolysis, cancer cells may
possess other unique metabolic characteristics, such as increased
consumption of glutamine. As with glucose, glutamine also serves as a key
carbon source for ATP production and biosynthesis. Given this,
quantitative measures of glutaminolysis may reflect critical processes in
oncology. Accordingly, PET agents targeting glutamine uptake, such as
4-[18F]fluoro-glutamine ([18F]4F-GLN), have been reported and used in
preclinical models of cancer.The goal of this study was to elucidate the
feasibility of using [18F]4F-GLN PET to predict response to targeted
therapy within the context of colorectal cancer (CRC). Initially we
validated expression of SLC1A5, the primary plasma membrane transporter
of glutamine, in tumor and normal colon specimens for 58 patients with
primary and advanced CRC. We found that SLC1A5 expression was elevated in
over 80%of primary tumor specimens but did not correlate with grade or
gender. Furthermore, elevated SLC1A5 expression correlated strongly with
elevated Ki67, a molecular marker of proliferation.Given this, we
evaluated [18F]4F-GLN PET in preclinical models of V600EBRAF-expressing
CRC as a means of detecting anti-proliferation responses to targeted
therapeutics. Simulating a clinical study within the context of the
Vanderbilt GI SPORE, the regimen included an inhibitor of mutant BRAF, a
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, and a combination there of. Strikingly, [18F]4F-GLN
PET was found to correlate more closely to markers of anti-proliferative
responses in vivo than analogously performed [18F]FDG PET imaging
studies. We believe that these findings not only provide a greater
understanding of the role that glutaminolysis plays in CRC but also
illuminate the potential impact that glutaminolysis derived PET could
have towards guiding drug development clinical trials as an imaging
metric of early therapeutic response detection.

