Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendritic cell-targeted lentiviral vector vaccines overcome
tolerance to generate a protective T-cell immune response to breast
cancer antigens ERBB2 and -lactalbumin


Breast cancer immunotherapy is a potent treatment option, with antibody
therapies such as trastuzumab increasing 2-year survival rates by 50%. In
contrast, active immunotherapy through therapeutic vaccination has yet to
be proven clinically effective for breast cancer. One potential means of
improving vaccine therapy is by delivering breast cancer antigens to
dendritic cells (DCs) for enhanced antigen presentation. To achieve this
in vivo, we have pseudotyped lentiviral vector vaccines with a modified
Sindbis Virus glycoprotein that targets the C-type lectin DC-SIGN, which
is expressed on DCs. We hypothesized that utilizing these DC-targeting
lentiviral vectors as a breast cancer vaccine could lead to an improved
immune response against self antigens found in breast cancer tumors. Such
an improved immune response may help to prevent or slow tumor growth in
breast cancer models. To test these hypotheses, we have constructed
lentiviral vectors encoding each of the breast cancer antigens, human
Her2 (ERBB2) and mouse alpha-lactalbumin (Lalba). Single injections were
able to amplify antigen-specific CD8 T cells to 1.6% of total CD8 T cells
in BALB/cJ mice and 0.7% in transgenic ERBB2 mice. This compares
favorably with recently published vector vaccines, which have elicited
0.9% and Breast cancer immunotherapy is a potent treatment option, with
antibody therapies such as trastuzumab increasing 2-year survival rates
by 50%. In contrast, active immunotherapy through therapeutic vaccination
has yet to be proven clinically effective for breast cancer. One
potential means of improving vaccine therapy is by delivering breast
cancer antigens to dendritic cells (DCs) for enhanced antigen
presentation. To achieve this in vivo, we have pseudotyped lentiviral
vector vaccines with a modified Sindbis Virus glycoprotein that targets
the C-type lectin DC-SIGN, which is expressed on DCs. We hypothesized
that utilizing these DC-targeting lentiviral vectors as a breast cancer
vaccine could lead to an improved immune response against self antigens
found in breast cancer tumors. Such an improved immune response may help
to prevent or slow tumor growth in breast cancer models. To test these
hypotheses, we have constructed lentiviral vectors encoding each of the
breast cancer antigens, human Her2 (ERBB2) and mouse alpha-lactalbumin
(Lalba). Single injections were able to amplify antigen-specific CD8 T
cells to 1.6% of total CD8 T cells in BALB/cJ mice and 0.7% in transgenic
ERBB2 mice. This compares favorably with recently published vector
vaccines, which have elicited 0.9% and <0.1% antigen-specific CD8 T cells
under similar conditions. In addition, DC-targeted immunization of these
mice completely inhibited tumor growth in a foreign antigen environment
(ERBB2 + wt BALB/cJ), while it significantly reduced the rate of tumor
growth in a self-antigen environment (Lalba + BALB/cJ or ERBB2 +
FVB/Tg.MMTV.f.huHER2 #5). Our data show that these vectors alone can
provide an effective therapy. Future studies may be able to improve these
responses by combining DC-targeted immunization with established methods
of reducing cancer immunosuppression. Thus, lentivector vaccines may be
an excellent component to future clinical vaccine trials, either by
themselves or in combination with other chemo- and immunotherapies.

