Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular basis of activity of rigosertib (ON 01910.Na) in
head and neck cancer cell lines


Head and neck cancer is a major global health problem, and squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is its most common subtype. Alcohol and tobacco use are
classic risk factors; however, human papillomavirus (HPV) is associated
with the fastest expanding HNSCC subgroup. Conventional therapies
(surgery, radiation and platinum-based chemotherapy) for both HPV(+) and
HPV(-) HNSCC are of limited efficacy, and are often accompanied by
significant, adverse side effects and acquired drug resistance. We aim to
develop novel HNSCC therapeutics to overcome these limitations.
Rigosertib sodium (ON 01910.Na) is a novel benzyl styryl sulfone
inhibitor of the PI3K and PLK pathways, and has shown efficacy in the
treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes. We evaluated the effects of
rigosertib on the HPV(-) HNSCC cell lines, FaDu, Detroit 562 and
UM-SCC-1, and on the HPV(+) HNSCC cell line, UM-SCC-47. We found that
rigosertib was cytotoxic to both HPV(+) and HPV(-) HNSCC cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Analyzing the potential molecular mechanisms
responsible for rigosertib-induced effects, we observed inhibition of
both the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and growth factor receptor pathways. We also found
that rigosertib inhibited the expression and activation of several cell
cycle regulators, including the cyclin dependent kinases, CDK2 and CDK4,
and CDC2. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the activation of
Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and c-Jun
NH2-terminal Kinase (JNK) increased, likely due to cellular stress
induced by blocking the aforementioned signaling pathways. Rigosertib
treatment resulted in decreased levels of the pro-survival Mcl-1 protein,
and enhanced phosphorylation of c-Jun and Activating Transcription Factor
2 (ATF-2). Rigosertib treatment also resulted in caspase 3 and 9
cleavage, molecular hallmarks of apoptosis. Microarray analysis of
rigosertib-treated FaDu cells revealed high levels of TNFAIP3/A20
expression. TNFAIP3/A20 is a tumor suppressor whose reintroduction into
null lymphoma cell lines has been shown to induce apoptosis.
Rigosertib-treated cells also showed decreased expression of CYP1B1 (a
component of the cytochrome P450 system), which plays a key role in drug
resistance to several conventional chemotherapeutics. Finally, we
analyzed the effects of rigosertib plus cisplatin on the survival of the
HPV(-) HNSCC cell lines, FaDu and Detroit 562, and found a significant
combinatorial benefit. In summary, rigosertib mediates apoptosis in HNSCC
cells by altering multiple signal transduction, survival and cell-cycle
control pathways. These data suggest that rigosertib may be an effective
treatment for HNSCC as a single agent or in combination with other
chemotherapeutics. A Phase 2 trial of rigosertib in patients with HNSCC
has recently opened.

