Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expanded biomarker results from a phase I dose escalation study of
GDC-0032, a beta isoform-sparing PI3K inhibitor


The phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is one of the most
frequently activated pathways in oncogenesis, and controls critical
cellular processes such as proliferation, transcription and survival. GDC
0032 is an orally bioavailable, potent, and selective inhibitor of Class
I PI3K alpha, delta, and gamma isoforms, with 30 fold less inhibition of
the PI3K beta isoform relative to the PI3K alpha isoform. The gene that
encodes the p110 alpha isoform of PI3K, PIK3CA, is frequently mutated in
breast, colorectal and endometrial cancers. Preclinical data indicate
that GDC-0032 has increased activity against PIK3CA mutant cancer cell
lines.As presented by Juric et al., 34 patients were enrolled in this
study and dose escalation has been completed (Juric D. et al. AACR 2013,
Abstract LB-64). Metabolic partial responses via FDG-PET were observed in
6 out of 13 patients assessed, and clinical partial responses (PRs) were
observed in 6 patients, with 5 of these patients having PIK3CA mutant
cancers. Tumor tissue was obtained from 30 out of 34 patients enrolled
onto the study. The most frequently recruited cancer type was breast
cancer (41%) followed by colorectal (15%) and lung cancer (15%). Fourteen
patients enrolled onto the study had PIK3CA mutant tumors (41%) as
determined using a TaqMan-based PCR assay. Three patients had total loss
of PTEN expression, as assessed by immunohistochemical staining, and a
further 3 patients had reduced PTEN expression based on a H-score
assessment. Out of the 6 patients that had reduced PTEN expression, 2
patients had coexisting mutations with PIK3CA. Where known, 4 out of 5
patients that had a PR showed intact PTEN expression, with the fifth
patient having reduced PTEN expression. Samples were further analyzed
using an in-house developed PCR-based multiplexed assay that detects
activating mutations within an additional ten oncogenes. PIK3CA mutations
were largely mutually exclusive with mutations in the Ras pathway,
however 3 out of the 14 PIK3CA mutant patients had a coexisting mutation
within KRas. A further 2 patients had KRas mutations, 1 patient had a
NRas mutation and 2 patients had EGFR mutations. Preliminary analysis
suggests lack of benefit in patients with KRas mutations treated with
GDC-0032 single agent. Optional on-study biopsies were collected from 2
patients and demonstrated pharmacodynamic inhibition of the PI3K pathway
as assessed by reverse phase protein array for approximately 45
endpoints, including 1 patient at the lowest dose. In conclusion, our
preliminary data indicates that GDC-0032 demonstrates single agent
activity in patients with PIK3CA mutations tumors with unaltered PTEN or
MAP-kinase pathways.

