Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trogocytosis of HER2 overexpressing human breast cancer cell lines
may induce its dormancy without depending on HER family signal


We and others showed that HER2 loss of the target cancer cell was caused
by shaving of HER2 by CD14+ cells (known as trogocytosis) when
trastuzumab mediated antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) was
introduced in the HER2 positive breast cancer cells. In the current
study, we report that loss of HER2 and HER3 of SK-BR-3 and BT-474 (both
HER2 overexpressing human breast cancer cell lines) is caused via uptake
of the receptors by CD14+ cells without trastuzumab administration. This
cell-cell contact phenomenon is quite similar to the situation of the
interaction between circulating tumor cell (CTC) and immune cells in the
blood stream. Interestingly, the cancer cells in contact with immune
cells (trogocytosis occurs) exhibited a long term dormancy in vitro.
Therefore this in vitro trogocytosis concept may explain how cancer cell
changes their proliferation ability into dormancy in tumor
microenvironment interacting with immune cells.Briefly, SK-BR-3 or BT-474
cells were co-cultured with PBMCs for 60 to 90-min with various Effector
immune cell / Target cancer cell (E/T) ratio as trogocytosis assay. The
cell suspension of 90-min incubation was applied to flow cytometry to
evaluate the expression level of HER1, HER2, and HER3. The cell
suspension of 60-min incubation was applied to MACS cell separation kit
(Miltenyi Biotec) and separated to cancer cells and immune cells. Gene
expression profile of the separated cancer cells was tested by DNA
microarray and the candidate up-regulated and down-regulated shedding of
HER family related genes were re-confirmed by qRT-PCR thereafter. The
separated cancer cells and intact SK-BR-3 were cultured and compared
their proliferation ability.Higher E/T ratio induced higher loss of HER2
and HER3 on both SK-BR-3 and BT-474 while certain amount of HER2 and HER3
were still expressed on the cancer cells with an optimized E/T ratio.
There was no HER1 loss on the cancer cells after trogocytosis. SK-BR-3
that underwent trogocytosis (SK-T) showed extremely low proliferation
ability as compared to the intact cancer cells. The candidate genes that
might be related to proteolytic shedding of HER family tested by DNA
microarray were ADAM-10, -15, and -17 and MMP-1, -3, and -28. However,
such different expression profile was not confirmed when the cells were
tested by qRT-PCR.These findings suggested that loss of HER2 and HER3 of
the cancer cells during contact with immune cells might not be affected
by proteolytic activity change of ADAM or MMP. Although it is reported
that the target cells after trogocytosis survive without apoptosis, our
study revealed that trogocytosis with higher E/T ratio induced incomplete
apoptosis of target cancer cell, which result in the cancer cell
dormancy. Because the cancer cells that underwent trogocytosis became
quiescent even if some extent of the receptors were present, factors
other than HER family that affect on the dormancy still remain to be
identified.

