Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial therapy for triple negative breast cancer


In the US, about 10-20% of breast cancers are found to be triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC). In comparison to other types of breast cancer, TNBC
is biologically more aggressive and more prevalent in younger women.
Recent molecular analysis of TNBC has suggested that these tumors might
be enriched with cancer initiating cells (CICs). According to the cancer
stem cell theory, CICs play a major role in disease recurrence and
metastatic spread, the two major causes of patient morbidity and
mortality. Therefore, an effective therapy must both eliminate
differentiated and CICs in TNBC, and counteract the escape mechanisms
utilized by tumor cells to avoid destruction. We have designed a novel
strategy which combines cell- and antibody-based immunotherapy with
metronomic chemotherapy. The molecules selected as targets of T cell- and
monoclonal antibody (mAb)-based immunotherapy are aldehyde dehydrogenase
1A1 (ALDH1A1) and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4). The latter
is also expressed on activated tumor-associated pericytes.
Immunodeficient SCID mice were orthotopically inoculated with TNBC
MDA-MB-231 cells (1 million cells per mouse) and then subjected to the
combinatorial treatment. Tumor volume was monitored twice weekly, and
primary tumors were collected at the time of sacrifice and digested for
mammosphere assays. Next, we examined the anti-tumor efficacy of the
combinatorial therapy on tumor recurrence and survival using a
post-surgery model. Immunodeficient SCID mice were orthotopically
inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells and on day 80, when the average tumor
diameter reached 0.8 cm, all primary tumors were surgically removed. Mice
were then subjected to the combinatorial treatment. The combinatorial
treatment effectively inhibited primary tumor growth by 71.2%, which is
significantly higher than that inhibited by the individual agents or any
combination of two agents. Furthermore, the cells digested from primary
tumors removed from mice treated with the combinatorial treatment formed
less mammospheres (2) than those (at least 15) from any other groups.
Importantly, the mice in the combinatorial treatment group exhibited only
20% tumor recurrence in comparison to 100% recurrence in all other groups
by day 143. Moreover, the combinatorial treatment effectively prolonged
the survival of mice after surgical removal of the primary tumors. By day
155, mice in the combinatorial treatment group exhibited 80% survival, in
comparison to 0% survival in any other groups by day 143. Our findings
strongly indicate that the combination of the CSPG4-specific mAb 225.28,
ALDH1A1-specific CD8+ T cells, and metronomic chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide effectively targets both differentiated and CICs in
TNBC, resulting in inhibition of both primary tumor growth and
post-surgery tumor recurrence, and in prolonging post-surgery survival of
mice orthotopically inoculated with TNBC cells. Thus, our described
approach may provide a novel therapy for TNBC.

