Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative technologies to overcome disparities in prostate cancer
research: Using snap-frozen prostate biopsy tissue prints to expand
patient representation in biorepository collections used for molecular
biomarker research


Cancer health disparities can arise from research that uses biospecimens
that are not fully representative of the populations affected by the
disease. In biorepositories at research oriented hospitals that support
biomarker research, an under-representation of important clinical
subpopulations can result from practices that favor the collection of
discarded tissues from surgical specimens. In prostate cancer
biorepositories, frozen samples are usually obtained from radical
prostatectomy (RP) specimens. However, collections based on RP specimens
do not include patients who are diagnosed with relatively advanced
disease and are treated with first-line hormonal and/or radiation therapy
rather than surgery. Moreover, many RP collections have limited
representation of patient groups that preferentially choose non-surgical
treatment for organ confined disease; such a preference for non-surgical
treatment has been observed for African American prostate cancer patients
in some areas of the US. Our collaborative group utilizes prostate biopsy
tissue print techniques to obtain a more complete representation of the
men who are being evaluated for prostate cancer, including the patients
with a biopsy diagnosis of no cancer and prostate cancer patients who
chose active surveillance or non-surgical treatment rather than radical
prostatectomy. Prostate biopsy tissue prints consist of nitrocellulose
blots collected from each of the fresh tissue cores as it is transferred
from the biopsy needle. This nitrocellulose blotting step is simple,
inexpensive and results in no compromise of the biopsy tissue for
surgical pathology. We have used snap frozen tissue prints as the source
of prostate tissues for multiple biomarker studies, including array-based
and sequence-based profiling techniques that require high quality DNA and
RNA. Because prostate biopsy tissue prints are easily collected in an
outpatient office setting, we have used this approach to expand the
Birmingham Area Prostate Cancer Biorepository (BAPrCAR) to include a
multi-center urology practice that serves large numbers of African
Americans and performs prostate biopsies on over 2000 patients per year.
Our BAPrCAR studies demonstrate that we can now effectively capture
prostate biopsy samples from patients diagnosed with advanced prostate
cancer and can analyze each sample for multiple molecular biomarkers,
including ancestry informative SNPs, mRNA and miRNA transcripts and DNA
methylation-marker patterns.

