Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic DNA demethylation and epigenetic reprogramming of SST1
pericentromeric repeats associate with genomic damage in colorectal cancer


Genomic instability is a driving force in tumorigenesis, but recent
studies indicate that epigenetic changes may precede genetic alterations
and genomic instability. Global hypomethylation has been linked to
oncogene-specific activation, disruption of genomic imprinting,
chromosomal alterations and increased tumor frequency in both in vitro
and in vivo mouse models. DNA hypomethylation in cancer cells primarily
reflects the somatic demethylation of DNA repetitive elements, which
account for a large fraction of the human genome. In normal cells, DNA
methylation stabilizes chromosomes by silencing non-coding DNA and
transposable DNA elements. Thus, hypomethylation is particularly severe
in pericentromeric heterochromatin and results in centromeric
decondensation, enhancing chromosome recombination and leading to
deletions, translocations, and chromosomal rearrangements.We previously
proposed a wear & tear model linking aging and genetic instability
through the gradual increase of somatic demethylation during aging and
its association with genomic disruption. In this study we identified a
family of SST1 pericentromeric repetitive elements frequently
demethylated in human cancer. Colorectal cancers (CRC) with SST1
hypomethylation exhibited higher levels of genomic damage than those with
normal levels. In addition, demethylation of SST1 significantly
associated with higher genomic damage in patients with wild type but not
with mutant p53. We further separated the SST1 demethylated tumors into
those with moderate and those with severe demethylation. The first group
included older patients with wild-type p53 conforming to the wear & tear
model, where SST1 demethylation may be a marker for a driver role of
demethylation for chromosomal instability. The second group
preferentially included younger patients and mutant p53 whereby the
causal or consequential link of demethylation with genomic instability
remains to be established.Furthemore, SST1 hypomethylation associated
with increased levels of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3)
and decreased H3K9me3. SST1 induced-demethylation by 5-Aza-dC led to a
decrease in DNA methylation accompanied by a H3K9me3 decrease and
accumulation of H3K27me3. The data suggest that when SST1 elements are
demethylated, they are reprogrammed to a more relaxed and plastic
heterochromatin. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on CRC primary
samples including formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues
confirmed the shift from high levels of H3K9me3 in normal tissues with
methylated SST1 to increased levels of H3K27me3 in SST1 hypomethylated
tumors.These findings suggest that demethylation of SST1 elements may be
a marker of an epigenetic reprogramming event, associated with changes in
chromatin structure that may ultimately affect chromosomal integrity.

