Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcineurin/NFAT signaling regulates tumor initiating cell
properties in non-small cell lung cancer


Background:Targeting specific pathways responsible for Tumor Initiating
Cells (TIC) maintenance is postulated to be an important therapeutic
strategy for more effective control of tumors. Nuclear Factors of
Activated T-cells (NFATs), consisting of 4 homologues (NFATc1-c4), are
calcium-dependent transcription factors that are activated upon
dephosphorylation by the protein phosphatase calcineurin. NFAT is known
to be involved in T cell activation and differentiation. Recently, its
roles in regulating embryonic stem cell proliferation and cancer survival
have been reported. However, the involvement of Calcineurin/NFAT
signaling in TIC maintenance remains unknown.Objective:To study the role
of Calcineurin/NFAT in regulating TIC properties in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).Methods and results:Analysis of NFAT mRNA expression in a
panel of established and early passage patient derived NSCLC cell lines
showed NFATc2 and NFATc4 were up-regulated in 92.6% (25 of 27) and 72%
(20 of 27) of cancer cells compared to normal bronchial cell line
(BEAS-2B), respectively. To study its role in TIC, tumor spheres or flow
cytometry-isolated ALDHhigh/CD44high cells were obtained and NFAT
expressions and activities were compared between TIC and non-TIC. The
expression of NFAT and downstream targets were significantly higher in
tumor spheres and ALDHhigh/CD44high cells compared to the corresponding
monolayers and ALDHlow/CD44low cells. Correspondingly, luciferase
reporter assay also showed higher NFAT activities in tumor spheres
compared to monolayers. To study its functional importance, calcineurin
and NFAT were inhibited and effects on TIC properties were analyzed.
Inhibition of calcineurin by pharmacological inhibitors cyclosporin A
(CSA) and FK506 resulted in reduced sphere formation ability,
down-regulation of pluripotent genes (SOX2, OCT4, NANOG) and TIC markers
(ALDH1A1, CD133, CD166) expression, as well as decreased TIC proportions
(ALDHhigh/CD44high and CD133+) by flow cytometry. These effects were
verified using siRNA knockdown of PPP3R1 which encodes one of the
calcineurin regulatory subunits. Apart from expression changes, stable
knockdown of NFATc2 using lentiviral shRNA inhibited in vitro and in vivo
tumorigenecity as shown in soft agar colony formation and mice xenografts
compared to shRNA control. To explore the clinical relevance of NFAT,
NFAT expression levels were analyzed in human resected lung cancers by
quantitative PCR and immunohistochemsitry. Results showed that NFATs were
significantly up-regulated in clinical NSCLC compared to corresponding
normal lung, and higher NFAT expression predicted shorter recurrence free
survival.Conclusions:Calcineurin/NFAT signaling is active in both NSCLC
and lung TIC. It plays an important role in TIC maintenance. Inhibition
of this pathway is a promising approach for long term lung cancer control.

