Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel six-month experimental mouse model of
hepatocellular carcinoma with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) is increasing in incidence, but its
clinicopathological features are still obscure. Several animal models of
HCC with NASH have been developed to facilitate the study; however, these
models require relatively long periods of time (usually >1 year) to
reliably produce HCC, and none possess all the clinical features, such as
insulin resistance, inflammation, fibrosis, and carcinogenesis. In this
study, we developed a novel 6-month experimental mouse model of HCC with
NASH, which shows clinical features in 6 months, through feeding of a
high-fat, choline-deficient diet to C57BL/6J mice combined with
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) exposure.Methods: Three-week-old C57BL/6J mice
were randomly divided into four groups: the control diet group (MF), the
high-fat, choline-deficient diet group (HF), the control diet with DEN
exposure group (DEN), and the high-fat, choline-deficient diet with DEN
exposure group (HFDEN). The mice in the DEN and HFDEN groups received a
one-time intraperitoneal injection of DEN at the start of the respective
feeding protocols. Each group of mice (N = 4 or 5) were sacrificed every
4 weeks, and body weight and liver weight were measured. Plasma alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), triglyceride (TG), fasting glucose (FBS), and
insulin were measured by ELISA-based methods. The liver tissues were
fixed with 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. The specimens were
stained with hematoxylin and eosin to assess the NAFLD activity score
(NAS), with Sirius Red to evaluate fibrosis, and with Sudan III to
evaluate steatosis. Contrast computed tomography (CT) was performed to
evaluate tumor development before sacrifice.Results: At 6 months of
feeding, the MF, HF, DEN, and HFDEN mice had a mean body weight of 31.7
g, 54.5 g, 32.6 g, and 49.5 g, respectively, and a mean liver weight of
1.2 g, 4.0 g, 1.3 g, and 2.9 g, respectively. The TG level peaked at 2
months for all four groups and decreased thereafter. The ALT level
increased monthly, with the HF and HFDEN groups showing remarkably high
levels. All HF and HFDEN mice showed insulin resistance since month 3. In
contrast, the MF and DEN groups had insulin resistance from month 6. The
NAS of the HFDEN group was the highest among the four groups. Fibrosis
and steatosis were varied, however, with those of the HF and HFDEN groups
tending to increase monthly. CT scans showed that all HFDEN mice
developed hepatic tumors from month 5. Microscopically, these tumors were
precancerous lesions or HCCs.Conclusion: Our HFDEN model showed insulin
resistance at 3 months and NASH at 4 months. All HFDEN mice developed
precancerous lesions or HCCs in 5 months and HCCs in 6 months, whereas
the HF group showed simple steatosis features even at 6 months and
developed insulin resistance at 6 months. We have thus established a
novel 6-month mouse model of HCC with NASH.

