Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATF3 suppresses the invasion and metastasis of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma cells by inducing the MDM2-mediated degradation of MMP-2


Objective: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) was a transcription
factor involved in cell cycle progression, invasion and metastasis of
cancer cells. This study explored the clinical significance and
biological function of ATF3 in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas
(ESCC). Methods: Tissue microarray analysis, immunohistochemistry and
Western blotting were utilized to examine the expression status of ATF3
in 150 ESCC samples and 21 paired adjacent normal epithelial tissues.
Impact of ATF3 altered expression on cell growth, invasion, metastasis
and the underlying mechanisms were also assessed by using in vitro and
animal models of ESCC. Results: ATF3 expression was significantly lower
in ESCC tissue than in the adjacent normal squamous mucosa (P=0.001).
ATF3 expression was associated with both overall survival (OS, P=0.006)
and disease-free survival (DFS, P=0.001) of ESCC patients. Multivariate
analysis showed that ATF3 was an independent prognostic factor in ESCC.
Experimentally, forced expression of ATF3 led to decreased cell growth
and invasion properties in vitro, whereas knockdown of ATF3 did the
opposite. ATF3 expression inhibited the tumourigenesis and lung
metastasis of ESCC cells in nude mice. Further analysis revealed that the
expression and activity of MMP-2 was decreased upon ATF3 expression. ATF3
upregulated MDM2 and formed an ATF3/MDM2/MMP-2 complex that facilitated
MDM2-mediated MMP-2 degradation and subsequently inhibited the invasion
and metastasis of ESCC cells. Finally, we showed that Cisplatin could
suppress the invasion of ESCC cells by targeting the ATF3/MDM2/MMP-2
signaling. Conclusions: Decreased ATF3 expression in ESCC resulted in
increased invasion and metastasis and contributed to ESCC poor prognosis.
ATF3 expression is an ESCC candidate clinical prognostic marker and a
potential treatment target.

