Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of diabetes and obesity with risk of esophageal and
gastric adenocarcinoma in the Iowa Women's Health Study (IWHS)


Incidence rates of esophageal and gastric cancers have increased rapidly
in developing countries during the past four decades. The rate of
esophageal adenocarcinomas has approximately tripled among US whites and
now exceeds that of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Incidence of
gastric cardia adenocarcinomas has also risen significantly during this
period, though to a lesser extent. These cancers often respond poorly to
treatment, highlighting the importance of identifying modifiable risk
factors with a view to prevention. The association between diabetes and
gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma has been examined in only a few studies
and findings are inconsistent. While obesity is a significant risk factor
for esophageal and gastric adenocarcinomas, few analyses have been
conducted in prospective cohorts. We examined the association between
diabetes, BMI, and waist circumference and incidence of esophageal,
non-cardia gastric and gastric cardia adenocarcinomas in a large
prospective cohort of postmenopausal women. A mailed survey at baseline
(1986) collected information on self-reported diabetes and anthropometric
measures and included a detailed food-frequency questionnaire. The 34,466
initially cancer free women were followed for 24 years with annual cancer
incidence obtained through the State Health Registry of Iowa, part of the
National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) Program; 83 women developed gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma.
Associations were examined using proportional hazards regression models:
hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated.
Significant associations were observed in age-adjusted models for
diabetes (yes/no) [HR: 2.09, 95% CI: 1.01-4.34], body mass index (kg per
meters squared) [HR: 1.09, 95% CI: 1.03-1.15], and waist circumference
(cm) [HR: 1.24, 95% CI: 1.01-1.53]. Additionally, a positive association
between diabetes and adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction was
found in both age-adjusted [HR: 3.43, 95% CI: 1.32-8.90] and
multivariate-adjusted models [HR: 3.00, 95% CI: 1.13-7.99]. An inverse
association was found with increasing daily fiber intake (g/day) and all
gastroesophageal adenocarcinomas [HR: 0.84, 95% CI: 0.73-0.96]. These
findings support the view that diabetes, body mass index and waist
circumference increase risk of gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma while
increased fiber intake may decrease risk.

