Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the activating protein 2 transcription factor in
regulating cell invasion and migration in malignant glioma


Background: Malignant gliomas (MG) or high-grade astrocytomas are highly
infiltrative brain tumors. Our previous work has shown that brain fatty
acid binding protein (B-FABP) regulates the migratory properties of MG
cells. B-FABP expression can be controlled by transcription factors such
as NF1 and AP2. AP2 is a family of transcription factors involved in the
regulation of genes responsible for cellular growth and differentiation
during early development. Five AP2 genes have been identified in mice and
humans: AP2, AP2, AP2, AP2 and AP2. AP2 transcription factors are
predominantly localized in the nucleus where they bind as homodimers or
heterodimers to the consensus sequence GCCNNNGGC. Recent studies have
shown that AP2 expression is inversely correlated with astrocytoma grade
and that there are higher levels of AP2 in the cytoplasm of high-grade
astrocytomas compared to low-grade astrocytomas.Objective: To study the
regulation of B-FABP expression in response to AP2 in MG.Methodology: A
panel of 10 MG cell lines was used to examine AP2 protein levels. Five of
these cell lines were B-FABP +ve and five were B-FABP-ve. The effect of
AP2 expression on endogenous B-FABP was examined by transfecting AP2
expression constructs into the B-FABP +ve U251 MG cell line. B-FABP
levels were examined by western blot analysis and the subcellular
localization of AP2 was studied by immunofluorescence analysis.Results:
Western blot analysis indicates that AP2 is expressed in four out of five
B-FABP-ve MG cell lines but in only one of the five B-FABP +ve MG cell
lines tested. AP2 overexpression studies indicate that B-FABP levels are
significantly reduced upon overexpression of AP2, AP2 or AP2.
Immunofluorescence data suggest preferential localization of AP2 in the
cytoplasm of B-FABP +ve U251 MG cells. Our preliminary result shows
difference in affinity towards heterodimerization between AP2 family
members.Conclusion and future directions: AP2 is a negative regulator of
B-FABP expression. Exclusion of AP2 from the nucleus allows transcription
of B-FABP in MG cells, which in turn leads to increased cell migration.
Experiments will be carried out to see the effect of AP2
heterodimerization on regulation of B-FABP transcription. Phosphorylation
studies will be carried out to see whether AP2 phosphorylation affects
its subcellular localization. This study may lead to new approaches to
reduce B-FABP expression in MG, thereby reducing or preventing cell
migration and tumor infiltration.

