Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 signaling is critical to glioma stem cell growth and survival


GSK3 is an attractive therapeutic target in cancer, known for its role in
regulating proliferation, differentiation, metabolism, and apoptosis.
Previous studies demonstrate the effectiveness of GSK3 inhibition on
established glioma cell lines and patient-derived glioma stem cell lines
in vitro and in vivo. In glioma cell lines, GSK3 inhibition induces
apoptosis through c-MYC activation, mitochondrial destabilization, and
reduction of NF-B activity. We have characterized a novel set of GSK3
inhibitors for their ability to inhibit glycogen synthase
phosphorylation, reduce levels of XIAP, and induce cell death in cancer
cells. However, it is uncertain if this mechanism is functional with
respect to cancer stem cells and glioma tumor subtype. The need to
investigate the mechanistic effects of GSK3 in cancer stem cells is
important given their malignancy, innate resistance to therapy, and
tumorigenicity. Moreover, the intracellular signaling and transcription
networks may differ in glioma stem cells, particularly among cells with
different subtypes. We have recently demonstrated that cancer stem cells
isolated from glioma patients can be segregated into either a proneural
or mesenchymal subtype based on their gene expression pattern. The
oncogenic activity of genes like c-MYC in glioma stem cells and
differences between glioma stem cell subtypes, such as NF-B activation,
raises questions as to whether GSK3 inhibition will be effective against
both subtypes and if their effects utilize distinct mechanisms of
inhibition. In this study, we examine the effects of two established and
two novel GSK3 inhibitors on glioma stem cells with respect to tumor
subtype and investigate their mechanisms of action. Our in vitro data
shows that GSK3 inhibition significantly reduces growth and causes cell
death in both proneural and mesenchymal glioma stem cells. Using a glioma
stem cell xenograft model, we test the effectiveness of GSK3 inhibition
as a single agent and in conjunction with clinically-approved
chemotherapeutic agents. The characterization of cancer stem cell
inhibitors and their effectiveness in different tumor subtypes has
significant clinical implications. Our work supports the therapeutic
potential of novel GSK3 inhibitors for the treatment of malignant
gliomas.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

