Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific growth suppression of wild-type p53 tumor cells by
DNA-modified siRNA sequences targeting MDM2


Background: Murine double minute 2 (MDM2) is an oncoprotein that
inactivates p53 tumor suppressor protein by ubiquitination and subsequent
proteasomal degradation. MDM2 is overexpressed in 10%-20% of human
cancers, most of which carry wild-type (wt) p53. Synthetic siRNAs silence
gene expression by RNA interference. However, siRNAs also suppress the
expression of unintended targets containing complementary sequences to as
short as 6 bases of the seed region of siRNA (off-target effects). Such
nonspecific effects can be avoided by nucleotide modifications, including
DNA replacement in the seed region.Aim: We conducted this study to select
canonical and DNA-modified siRNAs possessing high silencing activity for
MDM2 with less nonspecific effects. In addition, we examined the validity
of the MDM2-p53 interaction as a target for RNAi cancer therapy.Methods:
Twenty-four siRNA sequences targeting MDM2 were newly selected using the
siDifect software. In total, 33 siRNAs, including 9 previously reported
sequences, were chemically synthesized. Effective siRNAs were converted
to double-stranded RNA-DNA chimera (dsRDC), which had a DNA replacement
in the 5 region of the guide strand (nucleotide 1-6 from the 5 end) and
its complementary sequence of the passenger strand, including the
adjacent 2-b overhang. Three cell lines, SJSA-1 osteosarcoma (high MDM2
expression, wt p53), NUGC3 gastric cancer (mutant p53), and Kato-III
gastric cancer (mutant p53), were used. MDM2 protein and mRNA levels were
examined using Western blotting and real-time RT-PCR, respectively. Cell
viability was measured using WST-8 assay. siRNA and dsRDC were
transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer's instructions.Results: Among the 33 siRNAs examined, 7
siRNAs (2 previously reported and 5 newly designed) at 1 nM suppressed
MDM2 mRNA expression and cell viability of SJSA-1 cells by 72%-86% and
51%-75%, respectively. These effective siRNAs were converted to
dsRDC-modified form. Two of them demonstrated MDM2 knockdown and growth
suppression of wt p53 tumor cells as efficiently as the unmodified forms.
Further, in comparison with the unmodified forms, the modified forms
showed less nonspecific growth suppression of cells carrying mutant p53.
These 2 dsRDC-modified siRNAs were both newly selected
sequences.Conclusions: Our 2 newly selected dsRDC-modified siRNAs had
high knockdown activity and less nonspecific cytotoxicity. Thus, they
represent potent therapeutic agents against cancers carrying wt p53 with
MDM2 overexpression.

