Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel genes critical to invasion in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) have a poor patient prognosis, which
is attributed to their invasive nature. Our goal was to identify specific
genes that are important in OSCC invasion utilizing genome-wide
expression data generated from HNSCC patient tumor samples of varying
degrees of invasiveness. Invasion was assessed using the histological
parameter pattern of invasion (POI), which describes the manner in which
tumor cells infiltrate the normal tissue at the tumor-host interface. POI
was used to categorize tumor resections into five types (1-5), type 5
being the most invasive with a widely dispersed pattern of tumor
infiltrate and correlated significantly with the appearance of local
recurrence and decreased overall survival of the patients after surgery.
Global gene expression data was acquired from analysis of the surgical
resections from 9 OSCC patient samples collected at Montefiore Medical
Center between 2001 and 2008. Tumor cell-enriched cores from FFPE samples
were used to generate global gene expression data using the Illumina
WG-DASL array to compare gene expression in four tumors that were WPOI
type 5 and five tumors that were WPOI type 3. RNA extracted from
flash-frozen tumor samples following surgical resection from the same
patients was used to obtain global gene expression data using the
Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip. Candidate genes were assessed
using in vitro invasion assays following siRNA knockdown of specific gene
expression using siGENOME smart pools from Dharmacon. When both gene
expression datasets were analyzed, we identified 104 genes that were
overexpressed at least 1.5-fold in the WPOI type 5 tumors compared to the
less invasive WPOI type 3 tumors. Fifty genes were initially tested based
on functional criteria. In our initial screen, 16 of these genes showed a
significant reduction in tumor cell invasion when expression was knocked
down by siRNA in an OSCC cell line. The top gene from the screen, APOE,
is now being further examined to determine a mechanistic explanation for
its effect on invasion. Downstream signaling of APOE receptors and how
this may interact with invasion are currently being assessed. This
initial screen of global gene expression data in combination with pattern
of invasion has revealed APOE as a novel gene that may play a critical
role in OSCC invasion.

