Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated embryonic transcriptome analyses identify key melanoma
metastasis regulator


The enhanced ability of melanoma cells to metastasize is reminiscent of
the innate propensity of melanoblasts to migrate to distant sites during
embryonic development - from the neural crest to their eventual niche in
the skin. Once transformed, melanoma cells mimic migratory and growth
capabilities similar to those of embryonic melanoblasts. This putative
relationship between tumorigenesis and developmental processes was first
suggested by Rudolf Virchow more than 150 years ago. While this theory is
largely unproven, there are mechanistic links between the processes
regulating development and malignancy. Here we investigate this age-old
puzzle using a mouse model with melanocyte-specific GFP expression to
capture and sequence embryonic melanoblasts. We have, for the first time,
isolated and sequenced the transcriptomes of murine embryonic
melanoblasts at several key representative developmental stages. To
uncover the overall classes of gene expression and to identify and
characterize genesets whose expression is common and equally important to
melanomagenic and developmental processes, a heat-map of the top 1000
most variable developmental genes was generated, and then shortlisted
based on compared levels of expression in human and mouse metastatic
melanomas, and on the relationship with melanoma patient survival data.
By integrating bioinformatics and functional data we have devised a new
cross-species multi-dimensional embryonic-onco-genomics analyses (MEGA)
approach and show that late stage melanomas reactivate genes used during
embryonic development to achieve a more aggressive metastatic phenotype
(which we refer to as metafetal genes). One such identified gene, a KDEL
(Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein retention receptor
(KDELR) family member, was expressed in advanced mouse melanomas relative
to normal skin or benign nevi. We confirmed this in human melanoma by
showing that this metafetal gene was expressed at high levels in
metastatic patient samples relative to benign lesions, and also predicted
patient survival. Next, we determined the consequences of RNAi-based
knockdown on experimental metastasis in mouse models. We validated the
functional significance in human and mouse melanomas by showing that this
KDELR plays a key role in melanoma metastasis through adaptation to
chronic ER stress for survival by modulating the unfolded protein
response (UPR), which can be targeted. We anticipate that this approach
will identify a variety of key hardwired pathways associated with
melanocyte development that can be co-opted by opportunistic metastatic
melanoma cells. This approach also offers a novel perspective on melanoma
therapeutics and intervention and offers both mechanistic as well as
prognostic insights into our understanding of this fatal disease.

