Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR inhibitors protect from apoptosis in B-ALL cells treated with
chemotherapeutic drugs


B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most common pediatric
cancer. Although most children can be cured by combination chemotherapy,
10-20% are refractory or have early relapses. These high-risk B-ALLs
include Philadelphia chromosome (Ph+) and Ph-like with activated tyrosine
kinases that drive elevated signaling through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
High mTOR signaling correlates with poor prognosis. These findings have
raised interest in targeting mTOR in B-ALL and other leukemias. Novel
inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway are in clinical development, but
little is known about how these agents modulate responses to the standard
of care in B-ALL. Here we have tested inhibitors of various nodes in the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway on B-ALL cells in combination with chemotherapeutic
drugs. The data show that PI3K inhibition sensitizes B-ALL cell lines to
chemotherapy but, surprisingly, mTOR inhibition induces resistance to
several drugs. This chemotherapy resistance is observed when using
rapamycin as well as active-site mTOR inhibitors (MLN0128 and AZD8055).
The degree of drug resistance conferred by mTOR inhibition varies with
different chemotherapeutic agents. mTOR inhibition best protects cells
from killing by methotrexate and is least protective when combined with
daunorubicin. In Ph+ cell lines, dasatinib also confers resistance to
methotrexate that correlates with mTOR inhibition. We designed a simple
in vitro model of relapse in which B-ALL cells were treated for 3 days
with chemotherapy alone or with mTOR inhibitor, followed by 9 days of
culture without drugs. Including mTOR inhibitor in the first culture
period resulted in a striking increase in outgrowth of viable cells
compared to chemotherapy alone. Mechanistic studies show that resistance
does not correspond with effects on cell cycle. Preliminary data indicate
that mTOR inhibition enhances DNA repair in B-ALL cells treated with
etoposide or AraC. Further studies to define the resistance mechanisms
and reverse the protective effect could potentially augment the
effectiveness of inhibiting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our results will
lead to a better understanding of how to best utilize PI3K pathway
inhibitors in combination with standard chemotherapy as an option for
high-risk B-ALL cases driven by oncogenic PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling.

