Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia due to mutations in ARMC5: New
mutations in humans and modeling in zebrafish


Inactivating germline mutations of the probable tumor suppressor gene
Armadillo Repeat Containing 5 (ARMC5) have recently been identified (N
Engl J Med. 2013;369:2105-14) as a genetic cause of ACTH-independent
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH) . We assessed for the presence
of ARMC5 mutations in a cohort of patients with AIMAH. Blood DNA from 34
AIMAH patients was genotyped using Sanger sequencing. Germline ARMC5
mutations were found in 15 out of 34 patients (44.12%). In silico
analysis of the mutations indicated that 7 (20.6%) predicted major
implications for gene expression. All patients carrying ARMC5 mutation,
that were predicted to be pathogenic, had clinical Cushing's Syndrome
(7/7, 100%) compared to 14/27 (52%) of those without or with mutations
predicted as benign (p=0.029). ARMC5 mutations are implicated in
clinically severe Cushing's syndrome associated with AIMAH. Knowledge of
a patient's ARMC5 status and the pathway related with this gene has
important clinical implications for the diagnosis of some diseases,
including Cushing's syndrome and for genetic counseling of patients and
their families. To further investigate the function of ARMC5 we are
investigating its function using the zebrafish model. We knocked down the
zebrafish ortholog, armc5, with an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
(MO). Zebrafish embryos injected with 15 pg of our armc5 MO display
phenotypes at mid- through late stages of embryogenesis; these are:
hyperactive spontaneous movement at 36 hours post fertilization (hpf) and
irregularities in the notochord and a curly down body curvature at 48
hpf. Whole mount in situ hybridization (WISH) of MO-injected embryos at
an earlier stage (10 hpf/ late gastrula) reveals reductions in a marker
of paraxial mesoderm and a foreshortening of labeled chordamesoderm.
Intriguingly, reduction of the same paraxial mesoderm marker causes cysts
to form in the embryonic zebrafish kidney and several zebrafish models of
polycystic kidney disease display a curly down body shape. RNA-Seq of
Armc5 MO-injected embryos reveals enrichment in genes normally expressed
in the musculature and liver among the cohort of upregulated genes. Based
on these preliminary findings, we hypothesize that armc5 acts to repress
one or more components involved in the differentiation of muscle and
liver and possibly formation of embryonic kidney cysts. Ongoing studies
will examine embryonic kidney cyst incidence in armc5 MO-injected embryos
and validate selected RNA-seq findings by WISH and by assessment of the
armc5 overexpression phenotype in zebrafish.

