Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of pathogenetic pathways and
potential therapeutic targets in tumors derived from histiocytes and
follicular dendritic cells


Tumors derived from histiocytes and follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are
extremely rare, constituting less than 1% of hematopoietic tumors. Among
others, follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDC-S), histiocytic sarcoma
(HS) , and Langerhans histiocytosis (LH) are the commonest types. The
clinical course is variable from indolent to aggressive; however, the
disease is more often incurable. Further, probably due to their rarity
and complexity, the pathobiology of these tumor is nearly unknown at
present, with only scattered studies being reported.In this study, we
investigated by gene expression profiling (GEP) and extensive
immunohistochemistry (IHC) a relatively large series of cases, aiming 1)
to identify and characterize functional pathways possibly involved in the
pathogenesis of the disease, and 2) to unveil potential targets for novel
treatments.We studied by GEP FDC-S (N=30), LH (N=9), and HS (N=4) as well
as non neoplastic cells including tissue microdissected FDC (N=5), CD1c+
myeloid dendritic cells (N=4), peripheral blood monocytes (N=8), and
human cultured fibroblasts (N=3). All cases were studied with the
Illumina DASL whole genome microarray. The same cases as well as and
independent cohort was then used for IHC validation studies.First,
unsupervised approaches (principal component analysis and hierarchical
clustering) indicated that tissue samples were distinct from cellular
ones, while the different entities could not be clearly separated.
Second, we found by supervised comparison (ANOVA, pTumors derived from
histiocytes and follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are extremely rare,
constituting less than 1% of hematopoietic tumors. Among others,
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDC-S), histiocytic sarcoma (HS) , and
Langerhans histiocytosis (LH) are the commonest types. The clinical
course is variable from indolent to aggressive; however, the disease is
more often incurable. Further, probably due to their rarity and
complexity, the pathobiology of these tumor is nearly unknown at present,
with only scattered studies being reported.In this study, we investigated
by gene expression profiling (GEP) and extensive immunohistochemistry
(IHC) a relatively large series of cases, aiming 1) to identify and
characterize functional pathways possibly involved in the pathogenesis of
the disease, and 2) to unveil potential targets for novel treatments.We
studied by GEP FDC-S (N=30), LH (N=9), and HS (N=4) as well as non
neoplastic cells including tissue microdissected FDC (N=5), CD1c+ myeloid
dendritic cells (N=4), peripheral blood monocytes (N=8), and human
cultured fibroblasts (N=3). All cases were studied with the Illumina DASL
whole genome microarray. The same cases as well as and independent cohort
was then used for IHC validation studies.First, unsupervised approaches
(principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering) indicated that
tissue samples were distinct from cellular ones, while the different
entities could not be clearly separated. Second, we found by supervised
comparison (ANOVA, p<0.05, fold change 2, FDR according to
Benjamini-Hockeberg), the 3 tumor types could be discriminated.
Particularly, the tumors differed for genes related to immune response
(consistent with their histogenesis) and to intracellular signaling. In
this regard, we found several oncogenic pathways to be differentially
activated while others were consistently deregulated including those
related to cellular adhesion, chemotaxis, angiogenesis and response to
growth factors.We then compared each tumor type with the specific
supposed counterpart (i.e. FDC-s vs. FDC; LH vs. myeloid DC; HS vs.
monocytes) and identified genes and cellular programs deregulated in each
of them. Interestingly, all tumors presented with consistent deregulation
of previously unknown potential therapeutic targets, including
PDGF/PDGFRs, PTEN, JAK/STAT, mTOR/AKT, and EGFR. Importantly, IHC
confirmed GEP data and confirmed the activation of these selected
pathways.We defined for the first time the cellular programs deregulated
in tumors derived from histiocytes and FDC and identified remarkable
potential therapeutic targets. As appropriate experimental models (i.e.
cell lines, animal models) are not available at present, international
collaboration would be advisable to confirm these observation in large
series before eventually moving to early phase clinical trials.

