Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The unique profile of microtubule stability initiated by the
taccalonolides leads to potent antitumor activities


The taccalonolides are structurally distinct microtubule stabilizers
purified from the roots and rhizomes of plants of the genus Tacca. The
taccalonolides impart a unique mechanism of microtubule stabilization
through covalent attachment to the 212-230 peptide of -tubulin. The
profound interprotofilament stability conferred by taccalonolide binding,
as demonstrated by hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, occurs
independent of changes in the H7 or M-loops, which makes their effects
different from other classes of microtubule stabilizers. This remarkable
stability results in the formation of microtubules that are highly
resistant to cold induced depolymerization or mechanical disruption. The
covalent attachment of the taccalonolides to microtubules is proposed to
be directly responsible for their strong cellular persistence and ability
to circumvent multiple mechanisms of clinically relevant drug resistance,
including expression of P-glycoprotein.We have isolated and characterized
66 new taccalonolides that range in potency from 0.37 nM to over 50 M,
allowing for detailed structure activity relationship studies. These
studies demonstrate that epoxidation of the C22,23 double bond present in
most naturally occurring taccalonolides is optimal for potency. A simple,
one step oxidation reaction has been employed and increases the potency
of 17 natural taccalonolides by as much as 700-fold. The new, potent
taccalonolides show excellent antitumor activity against the MDA-MB-231
triple negative breast cancer xenograft model at cumulative doses as low
as 0. 5 mg/kg. This exquisite in vivo potency facilitates antitumor
evaluations from small quantities of material and allows administration
in aqueous vehicles. Studies to further map the optimal interactions of
the taccalonolide backbone with microtubules and identify a candidate for
clinical development are in progress.

