Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dualistic regulation of NF-kB signaling by CD99 and EWS-FLI1 in
Ewing sarcoma: impact on cell differentiation


Introduction: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a high-grade rare malignant bone
tumor in children and adolescents. This disease is primarily
characterized by: i) Chromosomal translocations that fuse EWS gene and a
gene of the ETS family of transcription factors (around 85% EWS-FLI1 and
10% EWS-ERG, respectively) which are the oncogenic drivers of this tumor;
ii) High expression of CD99, a cell surface glycoprotein virtually
present in all of ES cells. EWS-FLI1 and CD99 were reported to have
divergent roles in modulating ES malignancy and neural differentiation In
this study we investigated the possible role of nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kB) signaling pathway on the neural differentiation of ES cells and
its relationship with EWS-FLI1 and CD99.Materials and Methods:
Transcriptional activity of several transcription factors (AP1, SRE,
CREB, E2F and NF-kB) were evaluated by gene reporter assay. Using a
knockdown approach in stable and transient conditions we silenced CD99,
EWS-FLI1 and NF-kB itself, alone or in combination, in three ES cell
lines (TC-71, IOR/CAR and ASP14). NF-kBp65 was also transiently
overexpressed in TCshCD99 and CARshCD99 clones with pCMVp65 construct.
Neural differentiation was detected evaluating -III tubulin by
immunofluorescence microscopy.Results: NF-kB was found heterogeneously
expressed in a panel of ES cell lines. Stable CD99 silencing was found to
decrease NF-kB activity (pValue Introduction: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a
high-grade rare malignant bone tumor in children and adolescents. This
disease is primarily characterized by: i) Chromosomal translocations that
fuse EWS gene and a gene of the ETS family of transcription factors
(around 85% EWS-FLI1 and 10% EWS-ERG, respectively) which are the
oncogenic drivers of this tumor; ii) High expression of CD99, a cell
surface glycoprotein virtually present in all of ES cells. EWS-FLI1 and
CD99 were reported to have divergent roles in modulating ES malignancy
and neural differentiation In this study we investigated the possible
role of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB) signaling pathway on the neural
differentiation of ES cells and its relationship with EWS-FLI1 and
CD99.Materials and Methods: Transcriptional activity of several
transcription factors (AP1, SRE, CREB, E2F and NF-kB) were evaluated by
gene reporter assay. Using a knockdown approach in stable and transient
conditions we silenced CD99, EWS-FLI1 and NF-kB itself, alone or in
combination, in three ES cell lines (TC-71, IOR/CAR and ASP14). NF-kBp65
was also transiently overexpressed in TCshCD99 and CARshCD99 clones with
pCMVp65 construct. Neural differentiation was detected evaluating -III
tubulin by immunofluorescence microscopy.Results: NF-kB was found
heterogeneously expressed in a panel of ES cell lines. Stable CD99
silencing was found to decrease NF-kB activity (pValue <0.05) without any
differences at RNA and protein levels. On the contrary, EWS-FLI1
knockdown increased NF-kB transactivation (pValue Introduction: Ewing
sarcoma (ES) is a high-grade rare malignant bone tumor in children and
adolescents. This disease is primarily characterized by: i) Chromosomal
translocations that fuse EWS gene and a gene of the ETS family of
transcription factors (around 85% EWS-FLI1 and 10% EWS-ERG, respectively)
which are the oncogenic drivers of this tumor; ii) High expression of
CD99, a cell surface glycoprotein virtually present in all of ES cells.
EWS-FLI1 and CD99 were reported to have divergent roles in modulating ES
malignancy and neural differentiation In this study we investigated the
possible role of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB) signaling pathway on the
neural differentiation of ES cells and its relationship with EWS-FLI1 and
CD99.Materials and Methods: Transcriptional activity of several
transcription factors (AP1, SRE, CREB, E2F and NF-kB) were evaluated by
gene reporter assay. Using a knockdown approach in stable and transient
conditions we silenced CD99, EWS-FLI1 and NF-kB itself, alone or in
combination, in three ES cell lines (TC-71, IOR/CAR and ASP14). NF-kBp65
was also transiently overexpressed in TCshCD99 and CARshCD99 clones with
pCMVp65 construct. Neural differentiation was detected evaluating -III
tubulin by immunofluorescence microscopy.Results: NF-kB was found
heterogeneously expressed in a panel of ES cell lines. Stable CD99
silencing was found to decrease NF-kB activity (pValue <0.05) without any
differences at RNA and protein levels. On the contrary, EWS-FLI1
knockdown increased NF-kB transactivation (pValue <0.01). CD99 affects
NF-kBp65 activity and its effect are dominant with respect to EWS-FLI1.
Accordingly, EWS-FLI1 silencing was not able to revert the reduction of
NF-kB activity observed after CD99 deprivation. In addition cells
silenced for CD99 but not for EWS-FLI1 (TCshCD99 and CARshCD99 clones)
showed a neural differentiated phenotype, which was lost when cells were
induced to re-express NF-kB.Conclusion: Our findings support the concept
that inhibition of NF-kB is able to induce terminal neural
differentiation of ES cells. This identifying NF-kB as a potential
therapeutic target against Ewing sarcoma progression.(Supported by
AIRC_2013_IG 14049 and Liddy Shriver Foundation)

