Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Egr1 transcription factor contributes to radiation-induced
apoptosis in the mouse hippocampus and intestinal crypts


Although radiation therapy is a mainstay of cancer treatments, it can
have deleterious effects on normal tissues, leading to poor quality of
life for cancer survivors. Stem cells in normal tissues are particularly
sensitive to radiation. It is believed that they are depleted after
radiation, resulting in late sequelae such as low IQ, cognitive
disorders, intestinal malabsorption, infertility, and skin injuries. Our
laboratory has found that normal tissue stem cells express high levels of
Early Growth Response 1 (Egr1) protein and mRNA. Egr1 is a zinc-finger
transcription factor that initiates early signaling events in response to
ionizing radiation. Radiation enhances Egr1 expression and the Egr1
protein subsequently activates the transcription of genes involved in
cell death. Therefore, we hypothesized that Egr1 could contribute to the
sensitivity of stem cells to ionizing radiation. Using mouse models, we
investigated the effect of Egr1 status on cell death in two clinically
important stem cell niches-the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and
crypts of the intestine. Egr1 null mice had significantly less cell death
in the dentate gyrus and small intestinal crypts following irradiation,
as compared to their wild-type littermates. To elucidate the molecular
basis underlying the resistance of Egr1 null hippocampi to
radiation-induced cell death, we performed immunoblotting on ex vivo
protein lysates made from Egr1 wild-type and knockout hippocampi. Protein
lysates from Egr1 wild-type hippocampi showed that radiation treatment
induced Egr1, as well as its known targetsp53 and regulators of the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis, Bim and Bax. In contrast, the
induction of these pro-apoptotic proteins by radiation was attenuated in
Egr1 null hippocampal lysates. These results suggest that Egr1 is
involved in the apoptosis mode of cell death in the irradiated
hippocampus. The mechanism may involve Egr1 induction by ionizing
radiation, followed by direct binding of Egr1 to the promoters of p53,
Bim, and Bax to allow for transcription. We further conducted studies
using mouse embryonic stem cell models and showed that knockdown of Egr1
using siRNA decreased cell death after radiation treatment. This finding
supports our in vivo data that the hippocampal and gastrointestinal stem
cell niches are radioprotected in Egr1 null mice. Thus, this study
establishes an important role for Egr1 in radiation-induced apoptosis of
hippocampal and intestinal tissues. Egr1 could be a potential molecular
target to minimize the normal tissue complications associated with
radiation therapy.

