Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation changes in Lynch syndrome and FAP-associated
colorectal tumorigenesis


Colorectal cancer (CRC) develops via multiple steps which involve genetic
changes, such as mutations in growth-regulatory genes, and epigenetic
alterations, such as CpG island hypermethylation. These changes
accumulate over time in the normal tissue, for example due to many
environmental factors such as diet, and may result in pre-cancerous field
defects. Genes having high level of methylation in peritumoral tissues
could be used as biomarkers for colorectal carcinogenesis.The most common
familial cancer susceptibility syndromes are familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP), caused by inherited mutations in the APC tumor
suppressor gene, and Lynch syndrome (LS), associated with inherited
defects of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes which together with other
genetic and epigenetic changes are known to accelerate tumorigenesis.
This investigation was designed to define how CpG island methylation of
CRC risk genes varies in pre-cancerous and cancerous lesions, adjacent
normal mucosa and distinct normal mucosa from genetically predisposed
individuals.Colonic mucosa biopsies from different colorectal regions
were gathered from 40 Finnish LS mutation carriers and 23 FAP patients
during regular surveillance. In addition with normal mucosa biopsies, all
adenoma and carcinoma findings from these individuals together with
matching normals were gathered and analyzed. Patient information was
obtained from the nation-wide registry. CpG island methylation was
studied with the methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification test (MS-MLPA) which detects CpG methylation of selected
genes. Immunohistochemistry was used to detect MMR protein expression in
neoplastic lesions.Of 16 CRC risk genes tested so far 9 show increased
methylation in polyps/adenomas/carcinomas. Mean methylation values
increase along with age in both syndromes, with polyps from LS showing
the highest proportional increase relative to normal tissues. The results
offer new insights to the molecular mechanisms through which DNA
methylation can affect colorectal carcinogenesis in LS and FAP mutation
carriers.

