Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic and transcriptional biomarkers predict response
to SAR302503, a JAK2 inhibitor, in human acute myeloid leukemia
preclinical models


Research to develop new anti-cancer treatments has recently shifted focus
to identifying and targeting molecules and pathways essential for cancer
stem cell survival. However, preclinical models that rely on cell lines
for drug testing do not capture the heterogeneity of response typically
seen in the clinic that likely reflects the underlying genetic and
functional heterogeneity of the tumors. Moreover, the use of cell lines
makes it difficult to develop companion biomarker tools for patient
stratification. We have taken a novel approach that combines drug testing
of a large cohort of patient samples in xenograft assays, with
multiplexed phosphoflow cytometric and RNA-Seq analysis of each patient
sample to develop biomarkers that predict drug response. We applied this
approach to study the efficacy of SAR302503 (Sanofi), a small molecule
inhibitor of JAK2, against leukemia stem cells (LSCs) in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). JAK2 inhibitors have demonstrated efficacy in clinical
trials for treatment of myeloproliferative disorders. Activated JAK2
signaling has been reported in AML, however it is not clear whether JAK2
inhibitors are effective in this disease, particularly against the
disease-sustaining LSCs. SAR302503 treatment reduced leukemic engraftment
in 22 of 34 (65%) AML patient samples of multiple subtypes with
heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities. Phosphoflow
analysis showed that AML samples that were sensitive to JAK2 inhibition
in xenotransplantation assays exhibited high basal levels of pSTAT5 that
were rapidly decreased by SAR302503 treatment in vitro, whereas
non-responding samples showed low levels of pSTAT5, indicating that
pSTAT5 is a useful drug response biomarker. This biomarker has now been
validated in an independent cohort of AML patient samples. Phosphoflow
cytometric profiling also enabled the rational design and testing of a
novel drug combination regimen (SAR302503+Dasatinib) with efficacy
against LSCs. Additionally, RNA-Seq analysis of paired vehicle- and
drug-treated patient samples revealed that samples that were responsive
to JAK2 inhibition in vivo had distinct transcriptional profiles compared
to those that were not, suggesting that a molecular signature predictive
of response to JAK2 inhibition can be identified. Overall, our approach,
involving large-scale analysis of patient samples using state-of-the-art
xenograft assays, captures the heterogeneity of response typically seen
in the clinic that likely reflects the underlying genetic and functional
heterogeneity of the tumors and offers a new paradigm for development of
both novel agents that effectively target LSCs and biomarker tools to
identify the patients most likely to benefit from targeted treatment.

