Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary PUFA's alter the visceral adipose secretome, which
modulates mammary stem cell self-renewal


Rationale: Dietary PUFA's alter the expression and secretion of a variety
of adipokines. Diets rich in omega-6 fatty acids shift the
leptin:adiponectin ratio in favor of leptin, whereas diets rich in
omega-3 fatty acids have the opposite effect. We tested the hypothesis
that different ratios of adipose-derived factors differentially drive or
inhibit normal mammary stem cell self-renewal.Methods: F344 rats were fed
an obesogenic diet supplemented with arachidonic acid (AA) and
eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) in either a 1:0 or 1:0.4 ratio. At 20 weeks,
the animals were sacrificed and the visceral adipose explants were
maintained in culture for up to 10 days. Conditioned media was collected
at 48 hours. Adipokine concentrations were measured with the Proteome
Profiler Adipokine Array and normalized to a leptin ELISA. Primary human
mammary epithelial cells and the MCF10A breast cell line were expanded in
a non-adherent sphere-forming assay as a measure of stem cell
self-renewal. Cell suspensions were exposed to adipose conditioned media
(1 mg/ml total protein concentration). After 10 days, spheres were
counted and sphere size was measured using ImageJ.Results: Adipose
explants were maintained in culture for up to 10 days with >99%
viability. The secretome from the rats fed omega-6 PUFA's was enriched
for leptin, resistin, serpin E1, and lipocalin-2. The omega-3 rich diet
led to enrichment for adiponectin, pentraxin, and RBP4 in the adipose
secretome. The adipose conditioned media from the omega-6 fed rats
increased mammary stem cell self-renewal by 190%, whereas that from the
rats fed omega-3 PUFA's attenuated this effect.Conclusion: The n3:n6
dietary ratio promotes a shift in the ratios of multiple secreted
adipokines. These ratios have a differential effect on mammary stem cell
self-renewal. A diet rich in omega-6 PUFA's leads to increased stem cell
self-renewal, whereas a diet supplemented with EPA attenuated this
effect. Further studies will clarify the role of specific adipokines on
mammary stem cell self-renewal.


