Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the crucial microRNA, miR-1246 related to the
chemoresistance and stemness in pancreatic cancer for new targeting
therapy


Recently there have been several reports that the presence of cancer stem
cells (CSCs) was related to the high refractoriness and infiltration in
pancreatic cancer. Considering that microRNAs (miRNAs) are
number-limited, functional nucleotides, those should be beneficial for
efficient diagnostic and therapeutic approaches of pancreatic cancer. To
identify the miRNAs, which play a critical role in the chemoresistance
related to pancreatic CSCs, we performed sphere formation assay, as a
tool for concentrating CSCs. It can enrich CSCs successfully in several
types of cancer including pancreatic cancer. We use Panc1 cells and
MiaPaCa2 cells as pancreatic cancer cell lines and established
gemicitabine (GEM) resistant clones (Panc1-GRs) and Panc1 parental
spheroid cells which were cultured in ES medium with EGF and FGF and
ultra-low attachment plate (Panc1-P-Sp). The miRNA profilings between
Panc1-GRs and Panc1-P-Sp were compared each other and miR-1246 was
selected as a candidate miRNA related to the chemoresistance in
pancreatic CSCs. In vitro the drug sensitivity of Panc1 and MiaPaCa2 was
changed by miR-1246 transfection and the sphere formation ability of
Panc1 was increased by pre-miR-1246 transfection. In pancreatic cancer
cell line, Panc1, miR-1246 was up-regulated notably in the spheroid
cells. This study revealed that it was related to not only
chemoresistance but also stemness feature in pancreatic CSCs. In vivo it
was confirmed that the miR-1246 could increase the tumorigenicity and
reduced the drug sensitivity in NOD/SCID mice in which Panc1 cells were
injected. Subsequently we focused on the molecular targets regulated by
miR-1246. Because they link with elucidation for the mechanism through
which miR-1246 adds chemoresistance to Panc1 cells. Using Target Scan,
which can predict the candidates, 178 genes were selected. 7 genes
related to malignant potential, REPS2, CCNG2, GRHL1, UNC5B, NEO1 and
ZFP36L1 from previous reports were chosen. Among them, we focused on
CCNG2 for further analysis. siRNA for CCNG2 was used to validate its
involvement in the resistance to gemcitabine. Knockdown of CCNG2 was
confirmed by western blot analysis. The MTT assay demonstrated that
transfection of siCCNG2 enhanced the resistance of Panc1-P to gemcitabine
but did not change the sphere formation ability. In conclusion, we
demonstrated in the present study that miR-1246 inhibited the anti-cancer
effect of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells and that CCNG2 mediated
this effect. The response to gemcitabine in Panc1 cells was controlled by
genetic manipulation of miR-1246 and CCNG2. In addition, in vivo
examination revealed that miR-1246 could change the drug sensitivity of
pancreatic cancer cell tumor. Considered together, the results suggest
that the anti-sense of miR-1246 could be a new therapy targeting CSCs in
pancreatic cancer.

