Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity promotes growth of ovarian cancer through adipose stem
cells


Introduction: Intraperitoneal spread to visceral adipose is a frequent
event and a major cause of morbidity and mortality in women with ovarian
cancer. Excess visceral adiposity increases the risk of ovarian cancer.
We hypothesized that obesity effects may be mediated by the
adipose-derived stem cell population (ASC) to enhance the initiation and
progression of ovarian cancer.Results: Intraperitoneally injected ID8
ovarian cancer cells grew significantly faster in mice with diet-induced
obesity (pIntroduction: Intraperitoneal spread to visceral adipose is a
frequent event and a major cause of morbidity and mortality in women with
ovarian cancer. Excess visceral adiposity increases the risk of ovarian
cancer. We hypothesized that obesity effects may be mediated by the
adipose-derived stem cell population (ASC) to enhance the initiation and
progression of ovarian cancer.Results: Intraperitoneally injected ID8
ovarian cancer cells grew significantly faster in mice with diet-induced
obesity (p<0.05). To determine if ASC mediated this effect, ASC were then
isolated from the subcutaneous (SC-ASC) and visceral adipose (V-ASC) of
mice with diet-induced obesity and lean mice. ASC from all sources
expressed same mesenchymal cell surface markers and similarly increased
ID8 cell proliferation and survival following paclitaxel treatment. There
was no significant difference in ID8 migration in response to ASC
conditioned media from lean and obese mice. ASC from obese mice exhibited
impaired differentiation into adipocytes and osteocytes in-vitro as
compared to ASC from lean mice. 106 renilla luciferase expressing ID8
were co-injected intra-peritoneally with equal number of different ASC
isolates into C57Bl6 mice. SC-ASC from obese mice promoted growth of
intraperitoneal tumor and the formation of metastasis as compared to
SC-ASC from lean mice (pIntroduction: Intraperitoneal spread to visceral
adipose is a frequent event and a major cause of morbidity and mortality
in women with ovarian cancer. Excess visceral adiposity increases the
risk of ovarian cancer. We hypothesized that obesity effects may be
mediated by the adipose-derived stem cell population (ASC) to enhance the
initiation and progression of ovarian cancer.Results: Intraperitoneally
injected ID8 ovarian cancer cells grew significantly faster in mice with
diet-induced obesity (p<0.05). To determine if ASC mediated this effect,
ASC were then isolated from the subcutaneous (SC-ASC) and visceral
adipose (V-ASC) of mice with diet-induced obesity and lean mice. ASC from
all sources expressed same mesenchymal cell surface markers and similarly
increased ID8 cell proliferation and survival following paclitaxel
treatment. There was no significant difference in ID8 migration in
response to ASC conditioned media from lean and obese mice. ASC from
obese mice exhibited impaired differentiation into adipocytes and
osteocytes in-vitro as compared to ASC from lean mice. 106 renilla
luciferase expressing ID8 were co-injected intra-peritoneally with equal
number of different ASC isolates into C57Bl6 mice. SC-ASC from obese mice
promoted growth of intraperitoneal tumor and the formation of metastasis
as compared to SC-ASC from lean mice (p<0.05). There was no significant
difference in the effect of V-ASCs from obese and lean mice on ID8 cells.
There was trend towards more rapid tumor growth in mice injected with
V-ASC as compared to SC-ASC from lean mice. Ascites volume was highest in
mice injected with SC-ASC derived from obese mice. SC-ASC from obese mice
increased tumor vascularity while ASC from obese mice increased the
formation of intra-tumoral perilipin expressing adipocytes.Conclusions:
SC-ASC from obese mice promoted tumor growth more than ASC from lean mice
suggesting that obesity alters the ASC population to enhance
tumor-promoting effects. Obese derived ASC exhibit impaired
differentiation potential, which may be linked to tumor promoting
effects. Future studies will focus on understanding the mechanisms by
which obesity alters the ASC population to impact tumor progression.

