Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages modulate adaptive resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy


Targeted anti-angiogenic therapies were a highly anticipated addition to
cancer treatment, but their clinical use has been tempered by the
development of resistance. To understand the role of immune cells in
potentially mediating such resistance, we carried out systematic immune
cell profiling in a syngeneic ovarian cancer mouse model following
treatment with the B20 anti-VEGF antibody. Following injection of
luciferase-labeled cancer cells and initiation of treatment, mice
(n=8/group) were divided into B20-sensitive and resistant groups based on
longitudinal bioluminescence imaging of tumor burden. Immune cell
profiling confirmed a dramatic increase in macrophages with emergence of
resistance to B20. Using the syngeneic model, resistance to B20 was
documented with bioluminescence imaging as an increase in tumor burden in
mice with previously stable disease. Zoledronic acid, a
macrophage-depleting bisphosphonate, was then added to B20 treatment.
Restoration of sensitivity to B20 with the addition of zoledronic acid
was demonstrated by a 68% prolongation of survival in this treatment
group as compared to those receiving B20 alone (pTargeted anti-angiogenic
therapies were a highly anticipated addition to cancer treatment, but
their clinical use has been tempered by the development of resistance. To
understand the role of immune cells in potentially mediating such
resistance, we carried out systematic immune cell profiling in a
syngeneic ovarian cancer mouse model following treatment with the B20
anti-VEGF antibody. Following injection of luciferase-labeled cancer
cells and initiation of treatment, mice (n=8/group) were divided into
B20-sensitive and resistant groups based on longitudinal bioluminescence
imaging of tumor burden. Immune cell profiling confirmed a dramatic
increase in macrophages with emergence of resistance to B20. Using the
syngeneic model, resistance to B20 was documented with bioluminescence
imaging as an increase in tumor burden in mice with previously stable
disease. Zoledronic acid, a macrophage-depleting bisphosphonate, was then
added to B20 treatment. Restoration of sensitivity to B20 with the
addition of zoledronic acid was demonstrated by a 68% prolongation of
survival in this treatment group as compared to those receiving B20 alone
(p<0.0001). Zoledronic acid in combination with the VEGF antibody,
bevacizumab, significantly reduced both tumor size and nodules when
compared to either drug alone in additional orthotopic models of ovarian
cancer. CD68 staining confirmed significantly reduced macrophage numbers
in tumor samples following treatment with zoledronic acid. In vitro
immunofluorescence imaging of macrophages following prolonged exposure to
anti-VEGF therapy showed downregulation of VEGF receptors compared to
short-term exposure, suggesting a possible mechanism for their
persistence in an anti-VEGF resistant microenvironment. Collectively,
these data demonstrate a novel role for macrophages in resistance to
anti-VEGF therapy and offer a new therapeutic strategy to overcome this
problem with important translational implications.

