Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effects of the BTK inhibitor, ibrutinib, on Her2
amplified breast cancer growth, cell cycle progression and clonogenicity


Introduction: Ibrutinib is a Btk inhibitor developed for treatment of B
cell malignancies. It binds covalently to cys-481 in Btk's kinase domain,
which contributes to the drug's selectivity and enables once daily
dosing. A homologous kinase domain cysteine is conserved in 9 other
inhibitable kinases including those of the ErbB family. Ibrutinib thereby
inhibits the in vitro growth of HER2 amplified breast cancer (BrCa) cells
at pharmacologically relevant concentrations, and in vivo, in MB-453
xenografts, at dosages that model clinical exposure. To further
characterize these effects we determined the effect of ibrutinib on
growth, cell cycle progression, apoptosis and clonogenicity and stem
cell-like subpopulations following treatment for short durations.Methods:
BT-474 and SK-BR-3 BrCa cells were treated with ibrutinib at various
times and concentrations, and culture continued after washing with fresh
media. Cell growth was determined by alamar blue assay or direct cell
counting. Cell cycle analysis was performed with PI staining and flow
cytometry. Apoptosis was quantitated using flow cytometry with
annexin-V/PI staining. Clonogenic assays were performed in 6-well plates
with crystal violet staining. Putative stem-like cells were assessed by
quantitating the aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) population.Results:
After drug washout, persistence of inhibition of ErbB kinase's
phosphorylation and down-stream signaling was observed on a time and
exposure dependent basis: while substantial washout-resistant inhibition
occurred after 15 min treatment with 0.5 M ibrutinib, over 1 hour was
required for irreversibility following 0.1 M treatment. Growth inhibition
was sustained for 6 days following 1 hr exposure to 0.1 - 0.5 M of
ibrutinib. BrCa cells with short exposure were arrested in G1 with
decreased S phase 24h later. ErbB kinases' activation and downstream
signaling were also inhibited for up to 6 days. Although growth
inhibition was largely cytostatic, 17% and 30% for BT-474 cells and
SK-BR-3 cells, respectively, were apoptotic after 6 days at 0.5uM.
Continuous treatment induced higher proportions of apoptotic cells. One
hour washout or continuous treatment with ibrutinib decreased the
putative stem-like subpopulation in BrCa cells as measured by Aldefluor
assay. A short exposure of BrCa cells to ibrutinib also reduced their in
vitro clonogenicity.Conclusions: Brief exposure to the Btk inhibitor,
Ibrutinib, causes irreversible inhibition of ErbB kinases with consequent
growth inhibition of HER2 amplified lines characterized by impaired cell
cycle progression, evidence of apoptosis, and reductions of the Aldefluor
population and clonogenicity. The unique combination of inhibitory
properties of ibrutinib for both ErbB and TEC family kinases could prove
to be advantageous in selected clinical settings.

