Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear EPS8 as a potential cooperative factor for FOXM1 in cancer
cell proliferation


Tumorigenesis arises very often from dysregulated cell proliferation
mechanisms. The Forkhead box transcription factor FOXM1 is a critical
regulator of cell cycle progression as it affects the expression of genes
that control the cell cycle, such as cyclin B1, cdc25B, etc. It is
upregulated in various cancers, including cervical cancer. In a yeast
two-hybrid screen for partnering factors that interact with FOXM1, we
identified Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Pathway Substrate 8
(EPS8).The involvement of EPS8 in the EGF signal transduction and actin
cytoskeleton organization has been well documented. Despite the lack of
an SH2 domain, EPS8 associates with the EGFR and is
tyrosine-phosphorylated upon EGF signaling. With its level and
phosphorylation strongly induced by serum stimulation, EPS8 is believed
to partake in the regulation of cell proliferation. Based on recent
observations that EPS8 and FOXM1 expression are both elevated in human
cervical cancer cells, and expression levels of EPS8 and FOXM1 are
correlated in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, we hypothesize
that there is crosstalk between these two proteins in vivo to mediate
cell cycle progression.In this study, interaction between FOXM1 and EPS8
was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation analysis and the domains
important for the interaction were defined using yeast two-hybrid assay.
The presence of putative nuclear localization and export signals suggests
regulation of EPS8 function by nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, consistent
with EPS8 being a partnering factor of FOXM1 in the nucleus. Indeed,
immunostaining of Hela cells revealed nuclear localization of EPS8 at S
and G2/M phases of the cell cycle. Treatment with nuclear export
inhibitor leptomycin B led to nuclear retention of EPS8, indicating that
EPS8 localization is regulated by Crm-1-dependent nuclear export. Further
site-directed mutagenesis defined nuclear export signals on EPS8 which
affect the nuclear export/import of EPS8. Moreover, silencing EPS8 using
shRNAs in various cell lines led to decreases in FOXM1 and cyclin B
expression. Taken together, these data support that EPS8 may function
together with FOXM1 in the nucleus and contribute to carcinogenesis via
co-regulation of downstream target genes.

