Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive biomarker discovery in sunitinib treated renal cancer
patients: A non-hypothesis driven proteomic approach


IntroductionKidney cancer is one of the ten most common adult cancers,
the majority of which (90%) represent renal cell carcinomas (RCC). Over
50% of patients develop metastases, for which the standard of care is
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), such as sunitinib. Unfortunately, not all patients
respond to these agents, toxicity is frequent and the treatment is
expensive. The identification of biomarkers would have a significant
impact on patient care, but unlike many targeted therapies in other
cancers, no markers have yet been reliably found to predict response in
this setting. Previous studies have mostly adopted a hypothesis-driven
approach. Here, we use a global discovery approach, which may provide
novel insights into response and resistance to these
drugs.MethodsFormalin fixed-paraffin embedded primary renal tissues,
taken at nephrectomy from clear cell RCC patients subsequently starting
sunitinib between 2008 and 2012 for metastatic disease, were employed in
the study. Patient samples were identified from our large-scale research
tissue bank. Tumors with intrinsic resistance versus those with prolonged
sensitivity to drug were compared. Sixteen patients were selected based
on best radiological response and duration on sunitinib; eight patients
with partial response as best response and >500 days on treatment, versus
eight patients who had radiological disease progression within 200 days.
Groups were matched by sex, age and grade, and pathological review was
performed on all sections to avoid areas of necrosis and inflammation.
Proteins were extracted, digested with trypsin and analyzed by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with a Thermo Orbitrap Velos,
using label free quantitation. Data were analyzed using the MaxQuant
software suite, searched against the human UniProt database and
statistical comparisons were performed in the R environment.ResultsIn
total, 4510 proteins were identified. Pairwise comparisons between the
two groups revealed significant differences in 240 proteins (P10 fold
change between the total number of peptides identified. Proteins
upregulated in the resistant group included those involved in
proliferation, invasion and inflammation, whereas proteins upregulated in
the sensitive group included those involved in immunogenicity and
promotion of apoptosis.ConclusionWe have identified a number of protein
targets that have not previously been implicated in response / resistance
to anti-VEGF TKIs, and which may provide novel insights into the biology
governing this. Further work will focus both on verification of findings
in additional clinical samples and functional characterization of
proteins of interest. Preliminary verification of the results using
Western blot and immunohistochemistry will be presented.

