Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of the E3 ubiquitin ligase HACE1 results in enhanced Rac1
signaling contributing to breast cancer progression


The transition from ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive disease
is a crucial step in breast cancer progression. The specific alterations
that govern this transition have not been elucidated. HER2/neu
overexpression is frequently seen (50-60%) at the DCIS stage but is
significantly less common in invasive breast cancer (20-30%) suggesting
that additional alterations cooperate with HER2/neu to fully transform
mammary epithelial cells. We identified novel genes that are capable of
cooperating with HER2/neu allowing full malignant transformation, we used
a transgenic mouse model that expresses wild-type neu and performed an
insertional mutagenesis screen to identify genes whose alterations induce
anchorage-independent growth on primary mouse mammary epithelial cells,
an in vitro tumor formation assay. We identified the HECT and ankyrin
domain containing E3 ligase 1 (HACE1) as a breast cancer tumor suppressor
gene whose loss contributes to the transformation process. Loss of HACE1
expression is commonly seen in breast cancer patients and established
breast cancer cell lines supporting the role of HACE1 as a breast cancer
tumor suppressor gene. HACE1 ubiquitylates the activated GTP-bound form
of the Rho family GTPase Rac1, resulting in ubiquitin mediated
degradation of Rac1 via the 26S proteasome. The loss of HACE1 results in
the accumulation of activated Rac1 leading to enhanced clonogenicity,
migration, and invasion of human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). In
addition, the overexpression of HER2 results in activation of Rac1 levels
which is further enhanced upon HACE1 loss in HMECs that further enhance
colony formation in soft agar, migration, invasion and allows tumor
formation in mice. Importantly, knocking down Rac1 using RNA interference
or targeting RAC1 using the small molecule inhibitor EHT 1864 can rescue
the effects of HACE1 loss mediated transformation. The results establish
HACE1 as a breast cancer tumor suppressor gene by attenuating Rac1
signaling. In addition, our work further supports the role of Rac1 as a
critical signaling node in breast cancer and that loss of HACE1 leads to
enhanced Rac1 signaling that may contribute to breast cancer progression.
These results suggest that HACE1 loss may identify precancerous lesions
capable of becoming malignant as well as identify cancers susceptible to
RAC targeted therapies.

