Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Applying TCGA data for breast cancer diagnostics and pathway
analysis


The main objective of our project is to obtain a comprehensive insight
into oncogenic signaling in order to develop novel diagnostic tools for
molecular subtypes of breast cancer (BRCA). We have provided about 100
BRCA samples along with full pathology and clinical annotations to the
TCGA program. These cancer samples have been extensively characterized
using all available genomics platforms and the obtained molecular data
contributed to the molecular characterization of BRCA. This integrated
effort identified four major molecular subtypes of breast cancer that can
be identified across five profiling platform including genomics,
transcriptomics and proteomics (Nature, 490 (7418):61-70). Building upon
these datasets we aim to translate these genomics profiles into
diagnostic tools that can be used in every day medical practice. In the
first step, we have generated tissue microarrays (TMAs) from FFPE BRCA
samples obtained from the patients enrolled into the TCGA project. Next,
the TMA slides were used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) using about 100
antibodies specific for major cancer markers, including oncogenic kinases
frequently activated or overexpressed in BRCA. The obtained IHC results
have been scored and verified independently for each marker by two
board-certified pathologists. To identify markers that correlate with or
are specific to the molecular subtypes of BRCA, the TMA/IHC read-outs
from each tumor sample were correlated with all TCGA genomic data. In
addition, we integrate the pathology and genomics results with clinical
data obtained from the TCGA-enrolled patients, including up to 4 years
follow-up. Finally, we apply system biology tools to integrate the
genomic data from TCGA with the proteomic analysis to understand
causalities between changes in DNA, transcriptome and signal transduction
pathways. Our long-term goal is to identify novel diagnostic biomarkers
that will precisely identify each molecular subtype of BRCA and which may
be predictive of patient response to therapy thus paving the way for
novel personalized therapies for cancer.

