Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-distance intercellular transport of microRNAs via tunneling
nanotubes: Role in tumor-stroma interactions and malignant potential


Introduction: Intercellular communication is vital to cancer cell
organization and invasion. Identification of key cellular cargo and their
preferred modes of transport is important, and yet it remains
underdeveloped. Gap junctions and exosomes are known to play a key role
as conduits in mediating intercellular transport. Tunneling nanotubes
(TnTs) - long narrow actin-based cytoplasmic extensions - are unique
structures that facilitate direct long distance cell-to-cell transport of
cargo, potentially including microRNAs (miRNAs). These small non-coding
RNAs play a significant role in pathogenesis, primarily in
post-transcriptional gene regulation. We hypothesized that miRNA
transport via TnTs occurs between malignant and stromal cells and can
lead to changes in gene regulation that propagate the cancer phenotype.
In this study, we used murine osteosarcoma and human ovarian cancer as
model systems to investigate tumor-tumor and tumor-stroma interactions
via TnTs.Methods: miR-19a was labelled with the fluorophore Alexa-488 by
in vitro transcription, and visualized using confocal fluorescent video
microscopy. K7M2 (murine osteosarcoma) cells were transfected with
Alexa-488 labeled miR-19a prior to co-culture with K7M2 or MC3T3 murine
osteoblast cells. Parallel studies were performed using miR-199a in human
ovarian cancer (SKOV3 and C200) and normal human ovarian epithelial cells
(IOSE). Movement of miRNAs was imaged by time-lapse microscopy every 5
minutes up to 48 hours. Intercellular transport of miRNAs was further
studied by co-culture of cells separated by a membrane filter with pores
0.4 m in size in a transwell chamber, which is restrictive of cell
migration and exosome transfer but permissive of TnT formation. Cells
were collected at 48 hours and relative miR-19a levels were assessed in
recipient cells using qPCR.Results: TnT-mediated cell-to-cell transport
of miR-19a was demonstrated among K7M2 cells themselves and between K7M2
and MC3T3 cells using fluorescence time-lapse imaging. miRNA transport
was detected in TnTs spanning 40-200 m in length, occurring over 25
minutes to several hours. Relative endogenous levels of miR-19a were
elevated up to 2.4-fold in MC3T3 osteoblast cells after 48 hours of
co-culture with osteosarcoma cells. Similar experiments performed in
human ovarian cancer and ovarian epithelial cells also confirmed
transport of miR-199a between malignant and stromal cells.Conclusions: To
our knowledge, we provide the first demonstration of intercellular
transport of miRNAs between cancer and stromal cells via TnTs. This
discovery establishes a novel mechanism by which miRNAs mediate altered
gene regulation in the complex and heterogeneous tumor microenvironment.
We are further investigating the effects of TnT-mediated miRNA transfer
on recipient stromal cells and its effects on the invasive phenotype of
solid tumors.

