Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and analysis of an in vitro model for
hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system


Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL) disease is a familial genetic syndrome
characterized by a germline mutation in the VHL gene. VHL patients
develop different tumors, including renal cell carcinomas,
pheochromocytomas and hemangioblastomas (HB). HBs are complex tumors
located in the central nervous system and are currently the main cause of
morbidity and mortality among VHL patients. 60-80% percent of VHL
patients will develop multiple, synchronous or metachronous HBs in the
Central Nervous System. These tumors can also occur sporadically. HBs are
refractory to radiation or current targeted therapies. Surgery is the
only treatment modality, but due to their location (brain, cerebellum,
spine and retina) surgery may be debilitated or not even feasible at
all.Both alleles of the VHL gene were reported as inactivated (mutations
and LOH studies) in both VHL-related and sporadic HB, but the cellular
component(s) harboring this bi-allelic inactivation are unknown. HBs have
a complex histology and unclear cell lineage. They are known to consist
of a network of stromal cells, endothelial cells and pericytes.
Hematopoetic cells may also be present in some HB tumors. In addition to
this cellular complexity, the origin of the tumor cell -stromal cell -
remains unknown.To gain insight into the biology and therapeutic targets
of HB, we established an in vitro model of the disease. Using
modifications of a previously described technique (Am J Pathol.
2012;180(2):599-607) we generated cell lines from hemangioblastomas of
VHL patients. This approach allows the propagation of diverse cell
clones, reflecting the complexity of the tumor microenvironment. The
different clones and polyclonal populations were characterized using
qRTPCR and immunofluorescence. The molecular and phenotypic analysis of
the cell lines will be presented. This resource is fundamental for the
study of HB biology and it will allow us to dissect the cellular origin
of these tumors. In addition, it may facilitate the development of HB
xenografts.

