Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RIP3 is downregulated in human myeloid leukemia cells and
modulates apoptosis and caspase-mediated p65/RelA cleavage


Introduction. Impairment in cell death pathways represents a general
characteristic of most cancer cells. The receptor-interacting protein
kinase 3 (RIP3) associates with RIP1 in a necrosome complex that can
induce necroptosis, apoptosis, or cell proliferation. The role of RIP3 in
necroptosis and inflammation has been extensively studied, but its role
in cancer remains poorly understood Methods. We analyzed the expression
of RIP1 and RIP3 in CD34+ leukemia cells from a cohort of patients with
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and CD34+ cells from healthy donors. To
analyze the potential advantages for myeloid malignant cells due to
reduced RIP3 expression, we induced the expression of RIP3 in the DA1-3b
mouse leukemia cell line. Results. RIP3 expression was significantly
reduced in most AML samples, whereas the expression of RIP1 did not
differ significantly. When re-expressed in the mouse DA1-3b leukemia cell
line, RIP3 induced apoptosis, and necroptosis in the presence of caspase
inhibitors. Surprisingly, the re-expression of a RIP3 mutant with an
inactive kinase domain (RIP3-KD) induced significantly more and earlier
apoptosis than wild-type RIP3 (RIP3 WT), indicating that the RIP3 kinase
domain is an essential regulator of apoptosis/necroptosis in leukemia
cells. The induced in vivo expression of RIP3-KD, but not RIP3 WT
prolonged the survival of mice injected with leukemia cells.
RIP3-KD-induced cell death but not RIP3 WT was significantly antagonized
by an IKKSSEE constitutively active mutant, showing that RIP3-KD-induced
apoptosis, but not RIP3 WT-induced apoptosis, was dependent on NF-B
activity. The expression of RIP3-KD induced p65/RelA NF-B subunit
caspase-dependent cleavage, and a non-cleavable p65/RelA D361E mutant
rescued cells from apoptosis. The protective effect of the p65/RelA D361E
mutant against apoptosis was specific to RIP3-KD-induced cell death
because no change in cell death was observed when apoptosis was instead
induced by treatment with imatinib or DMSO. The p65/RelA D361E mutant was
generated by mutating the INFD putative consensus recognition site for
caspase-6. The caspase-6 inhibitor Z-VEID-fmk partially reduced the cell
death induced by RIP3-KD and slightly reduced p65/RelA cleavage. p65/RelA
cleavage appears to be at least partially mediated by caspase-6.
Conclusions. These data indicate that RIP3 silencing in leukemia cells
results in suppression of the complex regulation of the
apoptosis/necroptosis switch and the modulation of the NF-B pathway
through the caspase-mediated cleavage of p65/RelA.

