Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SF3B1 mediated splicing control of Mcl-1 in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia


Recently, deep sequencing technology identified SF3B1, a gene encoding a
splicing factor, is recurrently mutated in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). Moreover, its mutation was associated with rapid disease
progression and resistance to treatment. SF3B1 is a critical component of
the spliceosome, leading to the potential of splicing regulation in CLL
pathogenesis. However, the mechanism by which SF3B1 mutations affect CLL
disease progression is not known. CLL cells are characterized by their
resistance to apoptosis, driven mostly by the overexpression of the Bcl-2
family anti-apoptotic proteins. Many members of the family have multiple
splicing variants, sometimes encoding proteins with totally opposite
functions. For example, the alternatively spliced, shorter variant of the
anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1, Mcl-1S, resembles BH3-only proteins and
induces apoptosis. Using herboxidiene, an inhibitor of SF3B1, we explored
the activity of SF3B1 in splicing control of Mcl-1 in primary CLL cells.
Primers and probes were designed to specifically detect the Mcl-1
pre-mRNA, the anti-apoptotic Mcl-1 and pro-apoptotic Mcl-1S by real-time
RT-PCR. We found that inhibition of SF3B1 reduced the level of Mcl-1 in a
concentration dependent manner, which was accompanied by the simultaneous
surge of Mcl-1S mRNA by over 10 fold. Immunoblots confirmed reduction of
Mcl-1L and concurrent increase of Mcl-1S protein. These results indicated
a major role of SF3B1 in Mcl-1 splicing control toward the anti-apoptotic
variant. In contrast, although also depleting the Mcl-1 mRNA, the Cdk9
inhibitor SNS-032 reduced both the long and short forms of Mcl-1, as well
as its pre-mRNA, consistent with its inhibition on transcription. Uridine
incorporation measurements showed inhibition of total RNA synthesis by
herboxidiene at concentrations above 30 nM, but dramatic reversion of
Mcl-1 splicing was observed at 10 nM, which did not affect RNA synthesis,
suggesting that the major mechanism of herboxidiene in CLL cells was
modification of Mcl-1 splicing. As CLL cells are critically dependent on
Mcl-1 for survival, reducing its level induced mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization and apoptosis, which was further accelerated by the
accumulation of Mcl-1S. Apoptosis occurred in a time- and concentration-
dependent manner, with IC50 of less than 100 nM after 24 hr of
incubation. Herboxidiene toxicity was selective to CLL B cells, while
sparing the normal lymphocytes from healthy donors. Herboxidiene was
equally toxic to CLL cells harboring SF3B1 mutations compared to cells
carrying the wild-type SF3B1 (n=5 each). Real-time RT-PCR showed similar
increase in the ratio of short to long forms of Mcl-1 by herboxidiene in
these two groups. Together, these studies identified SF3B1 mediated
splicing control as a novel target for CLL therapy. Further
investigations are needed to understand the mechanism of SF3B1 mutations
on the control of mRNA splicing.

