Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysyl oxidase-like 2 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis
by remodelling the tumor and metastatic microenvironments


Hepatocellular carcinoma is a common and lethal malignancy worldwide.
High death rate in HCC is mainly due to metastasis. This study revealed
the detailed molecular mechanisms by which primary HCC promoted
metastasis through formation of tumor and metastatic niches via lysyl
oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2). LOXL2 is a secretory protein that belongs to the
LOX family which is consisted of 5 members. LOX family members are amine
oxidases that cross-link components in extracellular matrix (ECM) such as
collagen and elastin. Among the five LOX family members, LOXL2 is the
sole member over-expressed in HCC tissues. Remarkably, we detected a
significant up-regulation of LOXL2 protein in the sera of 80 HCC patients
as compared to normal individuals. Clinicopathological analysis showed
that up-regulation of LOXL2 in human HCC was significantly associated
with aggressive HCC feature, direct liver invasion. Interestingly, we
found that LOXL2 expression in HCC cells was positively regulated by the
hypoxia/HIF-1 and TFG/SMAD4-mediated pathways and negatively regulated by
miR-26 and miR-29, two microRNAs families that are under-expressed in
HCC. Abrogation of the LOXL2 pathway suppressed collagen cross-linking,
bone marrow cell invasion, and HCC cell invasion in vitro. Stable
knockdown of LOXL2 repressed tumor growth and intrahepatic metastasis in
orthotopic tumor implantation model. Knockdown of LOXL2 also reduced
collagen cross-linking and tumor stiffness in vivo. LOXL2-mediated change
of tension within the tumor microenvironment activated a key cell
motility regulator, rho-kinase (ROCK), and ROCK-mediated events such as
actin polymerization and focal adhesion formation. In addition, we found
that primary HCC tumor facilitated metastasis by directing bone
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) to colonize the distal metastatic sites
prior to the arrival of HCC cells. We observed a profound reduction of
collagen cross-linking, CD11b+ BMDC recruitment, and subsequent
metastasis in the lungs of the mice that were orthotopically implanted
with the LOXL2 knockdown HCC tumors. Conclusion: Our study highlighted
three important advances in understanding the cancer biology of
hepatocellular carcinoma. First, LOXL2 is overexpressed in HCC clinical
samples and could be detected in sera of patients, indicating that LOXL2
may be a good diagnostic marker for HCC patients. Second, we delineated a
complex interlinked signaling network that involves multiple regulators
including HIF-1/TGF/ microRNAs which converge to control the expression
of LOXL2 leading to HCC progression. Third, we showed that LOXL2 played
an imperative role in the tumor microenvironment and metastatic niches
formation leading to HCC progression. We comprehensively unveiled the
molecular mechanisms which drive LOXL2 dysregulation and the functional
implications of LOXL2 in human HCC.

