Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of FAM111A, a newly identified AR regulated gene, in
prostate cancer


Prostate carcinoma (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in men in
the United States. Most PCas are dependent on the androgen receptor (AR)
for growth and survival, and this dependency is exploited as androgen
deprivation is the major therapeutic intervention. However, PCa
inevitably progress to become castration resistant, yet remain reliant on
the activity of the AR. Further understanding the mechanisms that mediate
castration resistance and the pathways downstream of the AR will enhance
our ability to treat this stage of the disease. RNA-seq studies of two
castrate resistant cell lines following AR ablation identified a number
of transcripts that were AR regulated. The studies identified FAM111A as
an AR regulated gene. While little is known about FAM111A, a previous
study has shown that the FAM111A gene harbors a PCa susceptibility SNP
and that the FAM111A protein interacts with SV40 T-Ag. Our studies
indicate that AR represses FAM111A in cell culture and xenograft models
of CaP. Additionally, the expression of the only known FAM111A paralogue,
FAM111B, was reciprocally regulated in cell lines and in the xenograft.
FAM111A is expressed in all cultured prostate derived cell lines we
looked at, and we found that there are two FAM111A isoforms. Furthermore,
a siRNA mediated ablation of FAM111A modified apoptotic responses to
chemotherapeutic stimuli. An immunohistochemical analysis of a prostate
tumor tissue array was used to assess the expression of FAM111A. FAM111A
is expressed in the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments and expression
in the cytoplasmic compartment in non-tumor prostate tissue is higher
than in adjacent tumor cells. In conclusions, FAM111a is an AR regulated
gene, has been associated with PCa in a GWAS study, interacts with the
SV40 T-antigen and is expressed at lower levels in tumor cells. This
suggests that FAM111A may be have a role in prostate tumorigenesis.

