Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metaphase delays lead to chromosome cohesion fatigue, a novel
mechanism underlying chromosome instability and aneuploidy


Cohesin fatigue describes our findings that cells delayed at metaphase
undergo asynchronous separation of chromatids. We found that these
unpaired chromatids randomly migrate on spindle microtubules or become
merotelic, wherein a single centromere attaches to spindle fibers from
both poles. Many cells eventually exit mitosis after cohesion fatigue,
and the unpaired chromatids can form micronuclei, can rupture, and can
mis-segregate. These results suggest that cohesion fatigue may cause gain
or loss of whole chromosomes (numerical aneuploidy) as well as
duplications, deletions, or translocations of large chromosome fragments
(segmental aneuploidy). Numerical and segmental aneuploidies are
hallmarks of cancer cells, often occurring together, and cohesion fatigue
is a potential mechanism for simultaneously generating both. Any induced
metaphase delay will lead to cohesion fatigue as long as spindle function
is intact. Among mitotic defects, cohesion fatigue may be relatively
common, but has often gone unrecognized since its detection requires
continuous tracking of chromosome behavior. We have observed that
cohesion fatigue is induced after metaphase arrest caused by
RNAi-mediated depletion of the Ska (Spindle and kinetochore-associated)
complex. Recently we discovered the underlying mechanism for the
metaphase delay in Ska-depleted cells. We find that the Ska complex
promotes chromosome binding and activity of the Anaphase-Promoting
Complex/Cyclosome, the E3 ubiquitin ligase that controls anaphase onset
and mitotic exit. Cohesion fatigue is also induced by certain drugs such
as proteasome inhibitors, which are under development for cancer therapy.
Using proteasome inhibition we found that cohesion fatigue initiates at
centromeres and progresses along chromosome arms. While complete
chromatid separation may occur after hours of metaphase arrest, our
recent tracking reveals that abnormal centromere separation occurs after
a few minutes of arrest. This early loss of centromere cohesion may lead
to mitotic defects in cells that experience even a brief metaphase delay.
Cohesion fatigue is not observed in cells arrested in mitosis with
microtubule poisons because outward pulling forces on chromosomes are
lost. In normal dividing cells, spontaneous mitotic defects are
relatively rare, but these are substantially increased in transformed
cells. Genes coding for components and regulators of the cohesin complex,
which mediates sister chromatid cohesion, are among the most highly
mutated genes in tumors. We propose that cohesin defects in cancer cells
may exacerbate cohesion fatigue leading to increased chromosome
instability. In carcinogenesis, cells that undergo metaphase delays are
likely to generate mitotic errors through cohesion fatigue that result in
numerical and segmental aneuploidy.

