Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: (Epi)genetic profiling enables molecular re-classification of
CNS-primitive neuroectodermal tumors


According to the current WHO classification of CNS tumors, childhood CNS
primitive neuro-ectodermal tumors (CNS-PNETs; WHO IV) are poorly
differentiated embryonal tumors with early onset and aggressive clinical
behavior. Histological diagnosis can be complicated by morphological
heterogeneity and divergent differentiation. Recent studies suggest the
existence of molecular subgroups of CNS-PNETs sharing biological
characteristics with other childhood CNS tumors. Here, we aimed at a
comprehensive molecular characterization of CNS-PNETs and compared our
results to profiles of other brain tumor classes in order to define the
biological nature of tumors diagnosed as CNS-PNETs.A collective of 197
fresh-frozen or paraffin-embedded tumor samples with an institutional
diagnosis CNS-PNET was profiled for genome-wide DNA methylation patterns
and copy-number alterations, complemented by transcriptomic profiling of
a subset (n=63). (Epi-)genetic profiles of CNS-PNETs were compared to
those of >1.000 other childhood brain tumors including embryonal,
astrocytic, and ependymal entities, and their respective molecular
subgroups. We screened selected groups of tumors for recurrent mutations
and expression of established molecular markers. Five experienced
neuropathologists independently revisited the histology of 48
CNS-PNETs.Bioinformatic analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression
profiles using clustering methods and class prediction algorithms
resulted in a clear segregation of pediatric brain tumors by histological
entities and molecular subgroups. Exceptionally, profiles of tumors
classified as CNS-PNET suggested significant overlap with various
well-defined entities, including AT/RT, ETMR, high-grade glioma,
medulloblastoma, and ependymoma. When screening CNS-PNETs with DNA
methylation profiles highly resembling other entities, hallmark genetic
alterations of these, such as amplification of 19q13.42, mutations in
IDH1 or H3F3A, or mutations/deletions of the SMARCB1 locus, were
frequently detected. Molecularly distinct tumor subsets were associated
with differential protein expression patterns of previously established
subgroup markers INI-1, LIN28A, and OLIG2. Blinded histopathological
evaluation resulted in a large proportion of CNS-PNETs being
re-classified in line with affiliations suggested by molecular diagnostic
tools.The correct classification of CNS-PNET remains challenging. Based
on the detection of recurrent genetic aberrations, many cases can be
reliably re-classified, indicating that a significant proportion of
CNS-PNETs may comprise a variety of other tumor subtypes. These findings
suggest that the use of established and novel subgroups markers is needed
in order to assist the histopathological evaluation of these tumors. The
molecular biology underlying distinct subsets of CNS-PNETs only remains
to be elucidated.

