Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A molecular signature predictive of indolent prostate cancer


With more than 230,000 estimated new cases in 2013, prostate cancer
represents the most commonly diagnosed cancer in American men. While a
subgroup of patients will develop an aggressive and lethal prostate
cancer, most present with a low-risk form of the disease that requires
little or no treatment. It is therefore crucial to distinguish patients
whose tumors are likely to progress to aggressive disease from those
whose tumors will remain indolent and for whom treatment may be more
detrimental than beneficial.In our recent study, we hypothesized that low
Gleason score prostate tumors can be distinguished as indolent and
aggressive based on expression of genes associated with aging and
senescence (1). Using gene set enrichment analyses and a decision tree
learning model, we identified a 3-gene panel_FGFR1, PMP22, and
CDKN1A_that is enriched in indolent prostate cancers and accurately
predicts outcome of low Gleason score tumors at both the RNA and protein
levels. In particular, protein expression of this 3-gene panel in biopsy
samples correctly distinguished Gleason 6 patients who failed active
surveillance over a 10-year period.Following from our initial study, our
current efforts are focused on exploiting this 3-gene panel to develop a
robust clinical assay for distinguishing indolent and aggressive tumors.
We are currently using qRT-PCR, immunofluorescence, and
immunohistochemistry assays to assess the most effective way to quantify
the simultaneous expression of the 3-gene panel in low Gleason score
tumor biopsies/tissues. This quantitative assay will ultimately be
applied to a large cohort study assessing the predictive power of the
3-gene signature in patients under active surveillance. We envision that
such a prognostic test will significantly improve our ability to predict
the outcome of patients with low Gleason score tumors and facilitate
appropriate decisions of treatment for men under active surveillance.1.
Irshad S, et al. (2013) A molecular signature predictive of indolent
prostate cancer. Science translational medicine 5(202):202ra122.

