Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution of cancer stem cells in glioma to promote their
therapy-resistant phenotype


High grade glioma (HGG) is a life-threatening brain tumor. Among
heterogeneous tumor cells, glioma stem cells (GSCs) are defined as a
subpopulation resistant to chemo- and radiotherapy with prominent
tumorigenic ability. Identification of novel therapeutics designed to
target the GSC population in HGGs is a challenge. The recent genome-wide
transcriptome analysis identified 3 subtypes, proneural (PN),
proliferative, and mesenchymal (MES), in HGGs. These HGG subtypes harbor
distinct gene signatures and altered signaling pathways with some
clinical relevance. During malignant transformation, HGGs appear to gain
therapy resistance, at least in part, through their phenotypic drift into
mesenchymal tumors. In addition, some of the current therapies, if not
all, appear to induce mesenchymal transformation of HGGs resulting in
more therapy-resistant tumors. Nonetheless, identification of
subtype-specific GSCs remains elusive.My lab recently identified clinical
HGG sample-derived two mutually-exclusive GSCs: PN and MES GSCs with
striking phenotypic differences with clinical relevance (Mao et al., PNAS
2013). Transcritpome microarray analysis, miRNA profiling, and subsequent
functional analysis demonstrated that distinct signaling pathways
regulate tumorigenesis and propagation of the individual GSC subtypes.
For example, PN GSCs are dependent on the oncogenic transcription factor
c-Myb (Miyazaki et al., Clinical Cancer Res. 2012) and MES GSCs are
dependent on the oncogene/mitotic kinase MELK and Survivin (Guvenc et
al., Clinical Cancer Res. 2012; Gu et al., Stem Cells 2013; Joshi et al.,
Stem Cells 2013). Intriguingly, upon radiation treatment, PN GSCs gain
the phenotypes of MES GSCs (PN-to-MES transformation; PMT), which are
much more aggressive and radioresistant than original PN GSCs. Of note,
targeting the MES-specific pathways partially blocks PMT of GSCs. These
results may patially explain the molecular mechanisms underlying
mesenchymal transformation of HGGs to promote therapy resistance. Here I
summarize our latest data to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that
drive GSC evolution to promote their therapy resistant phenotype.

