Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expressions of lysophospholipid receptors (LPRs) in
benign and malignant tissues from various human system/organs


Background: Lysophospholipid receptors (LPRs), including Lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA) receptors and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptors, are a
group of G protein-coupled receptors. LPRs are involved in a wide range
of biological processes, such as embryogenesis, systemic development,
immune cell trafficking, and inflammatory reactions. The emerging
evidence has suggested that the activities of LPRs may be associated with
pathogenesis and metastasis of several human cancers. In this study, the
expression levels of several LPRs were determined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) in various benign and malignant tissues from various human
system/organs, in order to correlate the expression levels of these LPRs
with different malignancies.Methods: IHC for EDG1 (S1P receptor 1, S1P1,
C- and N-terminals), EDG8 (S1P receptor 5, S1P5), EDG2 (LPA receptor 1,
LPA1) and EDG4 (LPA receptor 2, LPA2) was performed on tissue microarray
slides containing 384 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded benign and
malignant tissues from 33 human system/organs. The expression level of
each LPR was reported as a final IHC score calculated as staining extent
score (0-3) multiplied by intensity score (0-3) with a maximal score of
9. Student t-test was employed to analyze the differences in IHC score of
each studied LPR between benign and malignant tissues in overall and in
individual system/organ.Results: The IHC signals for all studied LPRs
were seen in both cytoplasm and nuclei of most tissues. In the level of
overall benign and malignant tissues, the expression pattern was similar
for all studied LPRs: the cytoplasmic IHC signals were decreased, but the
nuclear IHC signals were increased in malignant tissues as compared with
benign tissues. Among them, the expression level of cytoplasmic S1P1
(C-terminal) was significantly decreased, and expression levels of
nuclear S1P1 (N-terminal) and LPA1 were significantly increased in
overall malignant tissues as compared with overall benign tissues. At the
organ level, a significant increase in nuclear expression was observed in
liver malignancies for all studied LPRs, whereas a decrease in nuclear
expression was observed in lung malignancies for all studied LPRs. In
colon malignancies, the expression levels of S1P1 (both N- and
C-terminals) were significantly increased, but the expression level of
LPA1 was significantly increased as compared with benign colon
tissues.Conclusion: The constitutive expression of cytoplasmic LPRs may
be essential for physiological processes in all tissues. However
alterations in nuclear expression of studied LPRs may differentially
correlate with the tumorogenesis in different system/organs.

