Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed extract impairs adipocyte-colorectal cancer cell
interaction and decreases adipocyte-driven colon cancer stem colonosphere
formation


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd leading malignancy with additional
increased risks due to obesity, type II diabetes and/or inflammatory
bowel disease. Whereas chemopreventive potential of a wide-range of
agents against CRC has been studied, the major limitation of most of
these studies is a lack of investigation of agent efficacy under obese
conditions, which is associated with increased CRC risk, incidence and
mortality. Given the global obesity epidemic, it is thus imperative that
we discover and develop agents with efficacy against CRC under obese
conditions. The role of adipocytes, which are the major players in
obesity, on colon carcinogenesis is just beginning to unfold. Since colon
lies in close anatomical vicinity of fat depots, it is now acknowledged
that there is a bi-directional cross-talk between both cell types,
leading to dramatic phenotypic /functional modifications in both
adipocytes and CRC cells. Thus we hypothesize that an agent, such as
grape seed extract (GSE), with both anti-obesogenic and anti-CRC
activities, would be ideal to impair different facets of adipocyte-CRC
interaction resulting in CRC chemoprevention under obese conditions.
Indeed, we found that GSE pre-treatment of adipocytes (in co-culture
under direct cell to cell or no contact models using a 3D matrigel
culture system) decreases their growth promoting effects on CRC cells. In
addition, adipocyte-conditioned media, collected after chronic and acute
pre-treatment with GSE, significantly decreased the chemotactic
properties of adipocytes towards CRC cell invasion. Next, we determined
GSE effect on the self renewal capacity of the cancer stem cells (CSC)
population by first isolating CD44+EpCAMhigh cells from the CRC cell
lines, SW480, HT-29 and LoVo, and then subjecting them to sphere cluster
formation assays. GSE significantly decreased: colonosphere formation by
colon CSC, mRNA levels of various CSC regulatory molecules, and
CSC-associated markers and transcription factors. We next examined the
effect of human diabetic adipocytes without or with GSE pre-treatment in
co-culture on growth kinetics of colonospheres. Compared to colon CSC
alone, presence of adipocytes caused a significant increase in
colonospheres formation; however, chronic or acute GSE pre-treatment of
adipocytes significantly reduced the booster signals of adipocytes
resulting in decreased colonosphere numbers which were comparable to
those without adipocytes. Based on these notable biological effects, GSE
is a strong candidate agent to be studied further for its potential use
against CRC growth and progression under obese conditions. Successful
outcomes from such studies would have significant clinical impact on
rationalized use of GSE to control obesity-associated human CRC.

