Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting carbonic anhydrase IX targets hypoxic small cell lung
cancer cells


Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an extremely aggressive disease,
exhibiting acquired resistance to therapy and poor patient prognosis.
Therapy resistance can in part be attributed to tumor hypoxia. Hypoxic
SCLC cells up-regulate carbonic anhydrase IX (CA IX) in order to survive.
CA IX is involved in pH maintenance of cells and presents a novel
therapeutic target for SCLC. This study aimed to investigate the
potential of inhibiting CA IX in SCLC as a novel therapeutic
target.Hypoxic conditions (0.1% O2) increased CA IX expression over 24
hours in both COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells in culture. S4 belongs to a
sulfamate class of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and has shown
anti-metastatic properties in breast cancer xenografts. Treatment with
30M and 100M S4 significantly decreased CA IX protein levels in hypoxic
COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells, respectively (pSmall-cell lung cancer
(SCLC) is an extremely aggressive disease, exhibiting acquired resistance
to therapy and poor patient prognosis. Therapy resistance can in part be
attributed to tumor hypoxia. Hypoxic SCLC cells up-regulate carbonic
anhydrase IX (CA IX) in order to survive. CA IX is involved in pH
maintenance of cells and presents a novel therapeutic target for SCLC.
This study aimed to investigate the potential of inhibiting CA IX in SCLC
as a novel therapeutic target.Hypoxic conditions (0.1% O2) increased CA
IX expression over 24 hours in both COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells in
culture. S4 belongs to a sulfamate class of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
and has shown anti-metastatic properties in breast cancer xenografts.
Treatment with 30M and 100M S4 significantly decreased CA IX protein
levels in hypoxic COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells, respectively (p<0.05 for
both treatments). Exposure to S4 for 24 hours resulted in predominantly
hypoxic cell death in both cell lines (pSmall-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is
an extremely aggressive disease, exhibiting acquired resistance to
therapy and poor patient prognosis. Therapy resistance can in part be
attributed to tumor hypoxia. Hypoxic SCLC cells up-regulate carbonic
anhydrase IX (CA IX) in order to survive. CA IX is involved in pH
maintenance of cells and presents a novel therapeutic target for SCLC.
This study aimed to investigate the potential of inhibiting CA IX in SCLC
as a novel therapeutic target.Hypoxic conditions (0.1% O2) increased CA
IX expression over 24 hours in both COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells in
culture. S4 belongs to a sulfamate class of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
and has shown anti-metastatic properties in breast cancer xenografts.
Treatment with 30M and 100M S4 significantly decreased CA IX protein
levels in hypoxic COR-L24 and DMS 79 SCLC cells, respectively (p<0.05 for
both treatments). Exposure to S4 for 24 hours resulted in predominantly
hypoxic cell death in both cell lines (p<0.05). Combining S4 with
etoposide (0.3M) and cisplatin (0.5M) chemotherapeutic agents resulted in
additional cell death, which was also seen under normoxic conditions (20%
O2). Sub-cutaneous xenograft tumors were grown in nude mice using either
COR-L24 or DMS 79 SCLC cells. Resultant tumors (1000mm3) expressed CA IX
largely adjacent to regions of necrosis. Treating mice with 50mg/kg S4 on
two consecutive days each week resulted in greater necrosis than saline
controls, coupled with up-regulation of CA IX. Analyzing tumors for
characteristic neuroendocrine (pro-opiomelanocortin) and epithelial
(cytokeratin) markers revealed heterogeneous expression; however, this
did not correlate with CA IX expression and is not altered in response to
treatment.In summary, CA IX is upregulated in hypoxic SCLC cells and
tumors. Inhibition of CA IX resulted in hypoxic cell death and had an
additive effect to the response observed with chemotherapy treatment
alone. This suggests that directly targeting hypoxic SCLC cells via CA IX
inhibition holds promise in improving treatment outcome for this
aggressive disease.

