Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JFD, a novel small molecule for inhibiting vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-mediated angiogenesis


Angiogenesis is the process of generating new capillary of blood vessels
from an existing vasculature that plays a vital role in tumor growth and
metastasis. Binding of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to
tyrosine kinase receptor (VEGFR) is an important step for initiating
vasculogenesis via. transphosphorylation of VEGF receptor associated
tyrosine kinase. Therefore, blocking VEGFR or associated kinases has
become a common strategy for arresting tumor angiogenesis. The newly
discovered JFD is a novel anti-angiogenic agent that can limit the
angiogenic capacity of endothelial cells and block tumor angiogenesis.
The In vitro anti-angiogenesis potential of JFD was examined by
ECMatrigelTM assay with Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
using different concentrations of JFD in the range of 0 - 10 M. Among the
different concentrations used, 1M JFD significantly inhibited the
angiogenesis when compared to control and a complete inhibition was
observed at 10 M concentration. Competitive binding of JFD against
Fluorokine labeled VEGF for the same VEGFR was studied at 0.001 - 1.0 M
concentrations of JFD. A dose dependent inhibition of Fluorokine
conjugated VEGF binding to its specific receptor in HUVEC cells was
confirmed in our study. In the competition binding assay 1.0 M
concentration of JFD caused 93.5% inhibition of conjugated VEGF binding.
The same 1.0 M concentration of JFD was able to inhibit VEGF (10 ng/ml)
induced phosphorylation of VEGFR2 in HUVEC cells. Furthermore, the
potency of JFD as inhibitor of angiogenesis was experimentally proved by
treating athymic nude mice that was implanted with GI-101A (human breast
adenocarcinoma) xenograft tumor. Intraperitoneal injection of JFD at 12
mg/kg of body weight was able to significantly inhibit the tumor growth
compared to the control group at different time periods. At the end of
the treatment period 70% inhibition of tumor growth was observed in JFD
treated animals along with prolongation of the survival. The plasma
concentrations of JFD was also measured in Balb-C mice at different time
periods (0 min - 180 min), using HPLC method. The data from both in vitro
and in vivo study provide a strong basis for JFD to be used as a potent
anti-angiogenic agent. (The financial support from the Royal Dames of
Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is gratefully acknowledged).

