Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive biomarker identification for combined anti-mTOR and
anti-IGF-1R treatment in luminal B breast cancer


Luminal B breast cancer is one of the most aggressive subtypes of breast
cancer for which effective treatments are needed. Recently, a phase I
clinical study revealed that blockade of mTOR and IGF-1R has potential
clinical activity in this cancer subtype. However, biomarkers to predict
patient's response to the combination are still needed. Previous
exploratory studies in ovarian cancer have associated low RAS-pathway
activity, as determined by a RAS gene expression signature score, and
high levels of IGF-1R axis genes with response to this combination
therapy. In the present study we evaluated low RAS signature/high
IGF-1/high IGF-1R as potential predictive biomarkers for anti-mTOR and
anti-IGF-1R combination therapy in luminal B breast cancer
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) treated with the allosteric mTOR
inhibitor ridaforolimus and the monoclonal antibody against IGF-1R,
dalotuzumab. Expression array analysis revealed that our 6 luminal B PDXs
exhibited a low RAS signature score, compared to 6 HER2 and triple
negative PDXs. Overall, luminal B PDXs expressed higher IGF-1R as
compared to the other breast cancer subtypes with some variability among
the different luminal models. Low expression of human IGF-pathway ligands
IGF-1 and IGF-2 among the luminal PDXs, compared to luminal B breast
cancers, suggested to us the need of exogenous IGF-1 ligand
supplementation to derive IGF-1R feedback activation and combinatorial
antitumor response. Accordingly, three high IGF-1R-PDXs treated with the
anti-mTOR and anti-IGF-1R combination therapy supplemented with
recombinant human IGF-1 exhibited statistically significant anti-tumor
response as compared to single agents, whereas two low IGF-1R-expressing
PDXs did not. As anticipated, ridaforolimus induced the IGF-1R-axis by
increasing the levels of the adapter protein IRS-1, which potentiated Akt
signaling. Hence, in vitro knockdown of IRS-1 promoted the
antiproliferative activity of ridaforolimus in patient-derived tumor
cells. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that baseline IGF-pathway
expression, namely IGF-1, IGF-1R and IRS-1, predict benefit to combined
anti-mTOR and anti-IGF-1R treatment in breast cancer and supports further
exploration in luminal B breast cancers that derived benefit from this
combination.

