Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamics of TET methylcytosine dioxygenases in 5-methylcytosine
and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine patterning in human cancer cells


The Ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of dioxygenases hydroxylate
5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) in DNA. 5mC
provides important epigenetic instructions during development, and its
aberrant control is a major contributor to cellular transformation;
however TET functions in regulating the epigenome, particularly in
cancer, remain largely unknown. We targeted TET1, TET2, and TET3 for
siRNA-mediated depletion in pluripotent human embryonic carcinoma cells
and examined the impact on 5mC and 5hmC genome-wide localization. TET1,
TET2, and TET3 co-regulate 5hmC at many sites, and depletion of only one
of the TETs is sufficient to reduce 5hmC at these co-regulated sites,
suggesting a functional co-dependence for TETs. Depletion of TET1 and
TET2 had the greatest impact on 5hmC levels at high and low CpG density
promoters, respectively, indicating that TETs exhibit DNA sequence-based
functional specificity. All TETs prevent hypermethylation throughout the
genome, especially in CpG island shores, where TET depletion resulted in
prolific hypermethylation. Promoter hypermethylation resulting from TET
depletion was associated with histone H2AK119 monoubiquitination, DNMT1,
and DNMT3B occupancy. Surprisingly, TETs also promote cytosine
methylation, as many loci became hypomethylated following TET depletion.
Induction of differentiation generally caused 5hmC reduction, except at
transcriptionally activated genes, which become enriched for 5hmC.
Importantly, genes prone to promoter hypermethylation in cancer become
depleted of intragenic 5hmC and 5mC with TET deficiency. This study
highlights the multi-dimensional functions of TETs in mediating DNA
methylation, hydroxymethylation, and gene expression patterns, and the
results reveal that chromatin landscape and DNA sequence composition are
regulators of TET function.

