Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 somatic mutations in breast
cancer tumors with loss of BRCA1 nuclear expression


Breast cancer is the first cause of death by cancer in women in Chile as
in many countries around the world. Until today, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the
most relevant genes for breast cancer high risk. Moreover, different
studies have shown that BRCA1 is under expressed in breast tumors. Our
group has found that in a high percentage of hereditary tumors BRCA1
protein have a diminished or null expression, or is mislocalized to the
cytoplasm (unpublished data). In this regard, it has become a goal for us
to identify if mislocalization and/or loss of expression of BRCA1 and
BRCA2 could be related to somatic mutations in the tumors. In this work,
we sequenced BRCA1 and BRCA2 in DNA extracted from 14 fresh/frozen
tumors. DNA was isolated from each tumor and amplified by PCR in 5
multiplexes (a total of 93 amplicons) considering all exons and
intron/exon junctions with approximately 30bp of intronic sequence each
side. Multiplexes were then pooled for each patient and processed for
sequencing in the GS Junior Roche. All reads were processed with AVA
software to detect nucleotide changes in BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequences and
analyzed manually to discard misinterpretations. All mutations identified
were confirmed by Sanger. From the same tumors we obtained a second
section that was formalin fixed and paraffin embedded. This FFPE fragment
was cut in 4 m sections and analyzed by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence to assess BRCA1 expression and localization. We found
a total of 5 mutations, 3 in BRCA1 and 2 in BRCA2, in 6 tumors.
Interestingly, one BRCA1 mutation present in 7 to 20% of reads, was found
in 5 tumors. Among those, two tumors presented two different mutations in
BRCA2, in addition. The last tumor presented one extra mutation in BRCA1.
BRCA1 expression analysis was coherent between immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence assays. In general 9 tumors showed weak or negative
BRCA1 nuclear expression and 5 mainly moderate nuclear staining. In
addition 6 tumors presented moderate to strong cytoplasmic expression of
the protein, considered abnormal. Considering tumors with weak or
negative expression of BRCA1, 40% presents BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. The
relevance of the absence of BRCA1 expression, or function impairment of
BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 due to somatic mutations, relays on the possible
treatment with PARP1 inhibitors. Supported by FONDECYT 1120200.

