Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting metabolic alteration in cisplatin-resistant lung cancer


We have discovered that all cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer cells
are less reliant on glycolysis while increasing oxidative metabolism and
mitochondrial numbers. Here, we showed that glutamine withdrawal has a
detrimental effect on CR cell lines, especially in non small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) CR cells. We assayed for glutaminase, a key enzyme in
glutaminolysis pathway and found a significant decrease in protein
expression and activity in all our CR cells (n=8, PWe have discovered
that all cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer cells are less reliant on
glycolysis while increasing oxidative metabolism and mitochondrial
numbers. Here, we showed that glutamine withdrawal has a detrimental
effect on CR cell lines, especially in non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
CR cells. We assayed for glutaminase, a key enzyme in glutaminolysis
pathway and found a significant decrease in protein expression and
activity in all our CR cells (n=8, P<0.01). Likewise, NSCLC-CR also take
up twice as much L-[G-3H] glutamine when compared to its parental
counterpart (n=4, p0.05). Since not all CR cells exhibited similar
sensitivity to glutamine withdrawal, we further explored other key amino
acids which may be used in TCA cycle. We have found that NSCLC-CR lost
argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) expression while SCLC-CR showed an
increase. ASS is a key enzyme in urea cycle to regenerate arginine. Thus,
NSCLC-CR will depend on exogenous arginine for their survival. Moreover,
arginine in the urea cycle can be used to generate glutamate via proline
pathway using P5CDH (pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase) which may
explain why NSCLC-CR are auxotrophic for both arginine and glutamine. To
investigate this possibility, we have studied P5CDH expression in all CR
cells and their parental cells in complete and glutamine-free media. We
have found that NSCLC-CR has significantly less to non-detectable levels
of P5CDH and cannot be upregulated upon glutamine deprivation, while its
parental cells have higher P5CDH expression which is further upregulated
on glutamine deprivation. In contrast, SCLC-CR has significantly higher
P5CDH expression compared to its parental cells and both can be
upregulated upon glutamine deprivation. To further confirm this finding,
we have overexpressed ASS using the pCMV6 vector containing full length
ASS cDNA in NSCLC cells (SCASS). These transfected cells were able to
withstand arginine free media compared to the NSCLC-CR transfected with
empty vector (10% of NSCLC-CR cells were viable after 72hrs in arginine
free media compared to 90% of SCASS were still viable). SCASS also took
up less glutamine and was able to withstand glutamine free media when
compared to NSCLC-CR. Furthermore, SCASS expressed higher levels of P5CDH
and was further upregulated upon glutamine withdrawal. Our data
demonstrate a complex metabolic network between arginine, proline, and
glutamine. The derangement of the key enzymes which are necessary for
generation of these amino acids can be exploited for future clinical
application to selectively kill cisplatin resistant cells and improve
treatment outcome in lung cancer patients. Supported by Department of
Veterans Affairs, CDA2 award.

