Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antibiotic salinomycin cotargets two pivotal pathways in
prostate cancer


Background: The androgen receptor (AR) and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling axis
are two key pathways that are activated in prostate cancer (PC). Although
interference with the AR axis is the common first-line treatment for
controlling metastatic recurrent PC, fast-growing PC progresses rapidly
on hormone therapy and chemotherapy to a terminal condition within 18 to
24 months. Inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis, such as rapamycin and
the dual inhibitor BEZ-235 (Novartis), are ineffective in treating
metastatic PC in part due to feedback regulations that activate the AR
axis. Reciprocally, inhibition of AR activity reduces the expression of
an AKT phosphatase, which is an AR target gene, with consequent increase
of the AKT kinase activity. The antibiotic salinomycin, a product of the
bacterium Streptomyces albus, has known anti-neoplastic activity, and in
a screen of 16,000 small molecules, salinomycin was found to be the most
potent in causing apoptosis of breast cancer stem cells. We previously
reported that salinomycin treatment elevated intracellular oxidative
stress and induced growth arrest of PC cells due to apoptosis.Design and
Results: Here we report further elaboration of the underlying mechanism
for growth arrest of androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and castration-resistant
(C4-2B) human prostate cancer cells by salinomycin at sub-micromolar
concentrations. We report that salinomycin can significantly reduce mTOR
activity in both LNCaP and C4-2B cells without altering the mTOR activity
of non-malignant RWPE-1 prostate epithelial cells. The specificity of the
salinomycin effect is evidenced by the result that other anti-cancer
agents such as docetaxel, the plant lignan deoxypodophyllotoxin and
vitamin D did not alter mTOR activity. Preliminary results suggest that
salinomycin may also induce autophagy in PC cells. Importantly, AR
expression was markedly reduced in salinomycin-treated prostate cancer
cells, suggesting dual targeting of the AR pathway and PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis
by this antibiotic.Conclusion: We conclude that salinomycin targets two
pivotal pathways that promote prostate cancer progression. Unlike other
PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors, the AR-activating feedback cross regulation did
not compromise the therapeutic potential of salinomycin.
Salinomycin-targeted interventions of the survival signals for
castration-resistant PC will further avoid chemotherapy-induced toxicity.
Preclinical validation of our results will pave the way for testing the
efficacy of salinomycin against prostate cancer in a clinical
setting.Supported by a Merit-Review grant from the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

