Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RN927C, a potent site-specific Trop-2 antibody-drug-conjugate
(ADC) for treatment of solid tumors


Human trophoblast cell surface antigen-2 (Trop-2), also known as TACSTD2,
EGP-1, GA733-1 and MS1, is expressed on a variety of human carcinomas and
its expression is often associated with poor prognosis of the diseases.
Trop-2 is frequently detected in many tumor types at high levels,
however, it is also present on the epithelium of a number of normal
tissues. A comprehensively designed Trop-2-targeting ADC, balancing both
efficacy and toxicity, is necessary to achieve clinical utility. We
developed a site-specific cleavable Trop-2-ADC (RN927C) using a novel
transglutaminase-mediated enzymatic conjugation method and a proprietary
MTI (microtubule inhibitor) linker-payload. Our site-specific conjugation
technology enables a precise drug-loading ratio of two and thus a better
control of desired potency. Robust in vitro cytotoxicity of RN927C was
observed selectively on multiple Trop-2 expressing tumor cell lines, with
IC50 generally in the sub-nM range. Upon binding to surface Trop-2,
RN927C internalized quickly and trafficked to the lysosomal compartment,
as visualized by the co-localization of RN927C with lysosomal marker
LAMP-2. As expected for a MTI-containing ADC, RN927C readily induced
mitotic arrest of treated cells in vitro and in vivo, followed by
subsequent cell death. The in vivo efficacy of RN927C was tested in
multiple tumor models including pancreatic, NSCLC, and ovarian cell line
and patient-derived xenograft models. Single dose administration of
RN927C at 1.5 mg/kg was generally sufficient to induce sustained
regression of Trop-2 expressing tumors and showed superior efficacy over
standard treatment with paclitaxol or Gemcitabine. Furthermore, addition
of RN927C to Gemcitiabine greatly enhanced its in vivo efficacy. RN927C
was well-tolerated in non-human primates upon repeat dosing at 6mg/kg
q2w, with non-severe toxicity observed primarily in skin and oral mucosa,
consistent with Trop-2 expression in these epithelial tissues.
Importantly, only minimal off-target hematological toxicity was observed
in monkeys. Based on the combined efficacy and safety results, RN927C is
expected to have a favorable therapeutic index and clinical development
is currently underway.

