Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MKP1-mediated survival of HER2 positive breast cancer stem cells


The overall cure rate of primary tumors has been significantly improved
in the last three decades; however, metastatic and recurrent tumors with
aggressive growth and therapy-resistance remain as the major factors
shortening breast cancer patients survival. MKP1, a mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase, was shown to be linked with
chemoresistance in breast cancer cells and was over-expressed in
radio-resistant breast cancer cells that survived long-term fractionated
irradiation. Herein, we showed that MKP1 is expressed exclusively in HER2
positive clinical breast tumors compared to HER2 negative tumors.
Comparison of normal and tumor breast tissue samples from same patients
revealed that MKP1 expression is induced in breast tumors along with HER2
expression in patients, who showed low/no expression of MKP1 and HER2 in
their normal breast tissue. Most importantly, we have shown that HER2
positive breast cancer cells rely heavily on MKP1 for survival as
knocking down MKP1 resulted in a massive cell death. MKP1 was found to
translocate into the mitochondria in breast cancer cells upon radiation
and mitochondrial MKP1 levels were significantly enhanced in HER2
over-expressing and radio-resistant breast cancer cells, suggesting a
survival mechanism where increased MKP1 translocation into the
mitochondria functions to attenuate pro-apoptotic signals initiated from
mitochondria-localized MAPK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Consistent
with this, increased mitochondrial MKP1 levels were correlated with the
reduced levels of phosphorylated active JNK in the mitochondria of
irradiated cells. Such mitochondrial MKP1-mediated dephosphorylation of
JNK was predominantly enhanced in the radio-resistant breast cancer cells
that can be sensitized by siRNA-mediated inhibition of MKP1. The
identification of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in all human tumors and their
involvement in tumor radioresistance encouraged the studies investigating
whether MKP1-mediated survival mechanism is present in radio-resistant
breast cancer stem cells. Here, we showed that MKP1 is overexpressed in
irradiated HER2-positive breast CSCs (HER2+/CD44+/CD24-/low) and knocking
down MKP1 in these cells significantly reduced their survival, which was
further reduced with radiation treatment. These data provide critical
insights on the aggressive phenotype of breast tumors and offer MKP1 as a
novel diagnostic and therapeutic target to re-sensitize resistant breast
cancer stem cells. Identification of the mechanism of MKP1-mediated
survival in these cells may provide additional druggable targets to
control breast cancer and its recurrence.

