Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting defective DNA repair as a novel chemoprevention strategy
for BRCA1-mutated breast cancer


Carriers of germline mutations in the Breast Cancer Susceptibility Gene 1
(BRCA1) have an increased risk for developing breast cancer.
Unfortunately, BRCA1-mutated cancers are not amenable to current
chemoprevention options, often associate with an aggressive clinical
course, and thus, are in need of an effective prevention strategy. We
previously found that BRCA1 plays a role in DNA base-excision repair
(BER) of oxidative DNA damage, and that BRCA1-mutated breast cancers
exhibit a compromised ability for BER of oxidative DNA damage. Given that
excessive oxidative DNA damage leads to tumorigenesis, we hypothesized
that small molecules may be used to enhance the repair of oxidative DNA
damage, and in turn, prevent tumorigenesis of BRCA1-mutated breast cancer
cells. First, a high-throughput chemical screen identified small
molecules that enhance BER of oxidative DNA damage in the presence of
mutant BRCA1. These molecules have been termed DNA repair-activating
agents. At least two DNA repair-activating agents significantly enhanced
BER in mutant BRCA1 but not wild-type BRCA1 cell lines. These molecules
also decreased basal levels of oxidative DNA damage as determined by flow
cytometry using a FITC-conjugated 8oxoG-binding protein and decreased
H2O2-induced oxidative DNA damage as determined by the alkaline comet
assay modified for detection of oxidized lesions. Both DNA
repair-activating agents directly activated BER, rather than indirectly
as a result of induction of DNA damage, as evidenced by the alkaline
comet assay for DNA strand breaks. Both agents also showed no
cytotoxicity at concentrations that enhanced BER of oxidative DNA damage,
which is ideal for chemoprevention. Finally, at least one of the DNA
repair-activating agents decreased BRCA1-associated tumorigenesis in
vitro and in vivo. The DNA repair-activating agent decreased
anchorage-independent growth of BRCA1-mutant/deficient cells without a
significant effect on cell viability, as well as delayed tumor formation
and decreased tumor burden in a dose-response manner in a xenograft mouse
model. Taken together, these data suggest that enhancing DNA
base-excision repair of oxidative DNA damage may be a novel strategy for
the targeted chemoprevention of BRCA1-associated breast cancers.

