Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a T-cell lymphoma mouse model based on chronic LPS
challenge and TGF- signaling disruption


Background: It has been demonstrated that elevated alcohol intake affects
the permeability of the gut allowing endotoxins such as LPS to enter into
the portal circulation and to promote liver ethanol toxicity. It has also
been shown that increased ethanol intake and LPS challenge impairs liver
function and affects liver tumor formation. Hence, with the aim of
generating a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease that would rapidly
develop steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis, we formulated a regimen
that combined chronic injections of low dose LPS with ethanol feeding to
mice with impaired TGF- signaling through constitutive disruption of
2-spectrin (Sptbn1+/-) , Smad3 (Smad3+/-) or both. Methods: Wild type,
Sptbn1+/-, Smad3+/- and Sptbn1+/-;Smad3+/- female mice between 8-10 weeks
of age were fed orally with a Lieber-DeCarli-based diet containing 6.7%
ethanol, and 2-4 weeks later they were injected with 2mg/kg LPS via i.p.
3 times/week for up to 20 weeks or death, whichever occurred first.
Survival analysis was done using the Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test.
Results: Unexpectedly, the mice treated with chronic low dose LPS and fed
the alcohol-containing diet only developed a mild liver phenotype, i.e.
steatosis but not hepatitis or fibrosis. Instead, these mice developed
very aggressive T-cell lymphomas with massive abdominal and thoracic
hemorrhages to which the TGF- mutant mice succumbed more rapidly than the
wild type mice. The median survival of the mutants oscillated between 39
to 42 weeks vs. undefined of the wild type mice. We found statistically
significant decreased survival of the mutant mice vs. the wild type
(p-values between 0.0015 and 0.028). Conclusions: To our knowledge, this
is the first report of a mouse model of aggressive T-cell lymphoma based
on chronic challenge with low dose LPS and alcohol feeding. We are
currently assessing the cross-talk of the LPS/TLR4 and TGF- pathways in
T-cells from these mice to understand the molecular mechanism underlying
the accelerated rate of lymphoma development in these mice.

