Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEOX-1 as a novel cancer stem cell target for treatment of
trastuzumab-resistant Her2+ breast cancers


Introduction: Previous studies showed that 60-80% of Her2+ breast cancers
develop Trastuzumab-resistance after one year treatment and more than 50%
of Her2+ Trastuzumab-resistant breast cancers have PTEN deletion and
increased populations of cancer stem cells (CSCs). The purpose of this
study is to explore novel targets to regulate cancer stem cells and to
test treatment option for Her2+ Trastuzumab-resistant breast
cancer.Method: Trastuzumab resistance of Her2+ breast cancer cells
(BT474) was induced by shRNA knockdown of PTEN and long term treatment of
Trastuzumab (LTT) in comparison with Trastuzumab-sensitive BT474. The
whole transcriptome RNA sequencing was performed and the differentially
expressed genes were evaluated using dChip analyzer and the
bioinformatics tool DAVID. Colony formation in soft agar and mammosphere
formation were used to evaluate the effect of candidate genes on breast
CSCs. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to assess the protein
expression levels in xenograft animal tissues and human breast cancer
tissues. MTS assay was used to evaluate the effect of drug treatment to
inhibit proliferation of BT474 and LTT. A xenograft model was used to
determine whether drug efficacy to inhibit tumor formation. The secondary
implantation was used to monitor cancer stem cells growth in vivo after
treatment.Result:In comparison of BT474 and LTT under treatment of
Sulforaphane (2-10 uM, 8-24 hr), RNA-Seq analysis revealed that 51 genes,
including 23 up-regulated and 28 down-regulated by Sulforaphane
treatment. DAVID functional clustering analysis revealed that 6
significantly altered genes were associated with 9 distinct functional
categories. Among them, MEOX-1 was identified as top candidate to
regulate Trastuzumab-resistance phenotype. siRNA knockdown of MEOX-1 in
LTT cells inhibited mammosphere formation by 60.4% and colony formation
by 86.7%. Further, in the IHC of 68 primary breast cancer samples,
expression of MEOX-1 was positive in 34 primary breast cancer tissues
(34/68, 50%), especially in triple negative breast cancer tissues (P50%
in SCID xenograft tumors (P50% in SCID xenograft tumors (P<0.05) and
abrogated tumor growth after the reimplantation of primary tumor cells
into the secondary mice (P50% in SCID xenograft tumors (P<0.05) and
abrogated tumor growth after the reimplantation of primary tumor cells
into the secondary mice (P<0.05). Immunostainng showed that MEOX1 protein
level in nucleus, and Sulforaphane significantly reduced MEOX-1
expression in primary xenograft tumors.Conclusion:MEOX1 is a novel target
to regulate cancer stem cells in Her2+ Trastuzumab-resistant breast
cancer cells. Drug treatment to down-regulate Meox1 provides treatment
option for Trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer by eliminating breast
cancer stem cells.

