Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and analysis of mouse brain tumor models derived from
neural stem cells expressing activated ALK


Neural Stem Cells (NSCs), having self-renewal and multipotent ability,
are considered one of the cells-of-origin of glioblastoma maltifome
(GBM). Although NSCs can be enriched in neurosphere floating culture with
serum-free media containing EGF/FGF as a classical method, neurosphere is
composed of not only NSCs but also differentiated and apoptotic cells.
Therefore, we utilize the method for efficient derivation of NSCs with
long-term self-renewal and differentiate capacity in adherent culture.
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase first
identified in a chromosomal translocation associated with anaplastic
large cell lymphomas. Subsequently, new ALK translocations were found in
a fraction of non-small-cell lung cancers and in other solid tumors. The
function of full-length ALK is involved in neuronal cell differentiation,
regeneration and synapse formation. Recently, gene amplification and
mutations of full-length ALK were identified in neuroblastoma.
Furthermore, it is reported that ALK and PTN, ligand of ALK, are required
for maintenance of the stem cell population in GBM. Although constitutive
activation of ALK signaling results in cell transformation, little is
known about the tumorigenic mechanisms induced by activated ALK. We
reasoned that ALK activity has a crucial role in GBM. To verify this
hypothesis, human GBM stem cell lines were treated with crizotinib, ALK
inhibitor. Crizotinib could suppress the proliferation of human GBM stem
cell lines in dose-dependent-manner. Next, we have established a stable
mouse model of brain tumor transplanting the genetically modified NSCs.
Active mutant of H-RAS could transform the Ink4a/Arf KO NSCs but not WT
NSCs. However, transplanting of WT NSCs transduced activated ALK could
rapidly formed highly proliferative and invasive brain tumors.
Histological characteristics of these tumors resembled human GBM
phenotype demonstrating necrosis, perivascular cuffing and giant cell
formation. Although the activated H-RAS increased expression of Ink4a in
WT NSCs, but the activated ALK never changed. On the basis of these
findings, we propose a specific regulation against tumor suppressor genes
by activated ALK.

