Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Des-g-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) and NX-DCP expressions and their
relationship with clinicopathological features in hepatocellular carcinoma


Aim: Des-g-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) is an abnormal prothrombin and has
been used as a tumor marker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). DCP has
several variants based on the number of glutamic acid (Glu) residues and
their positions in the -carboxyglutamic (Gla) domain. DCP expression in
HCC tissues has been identified using MU-3 antibody which reacts strongly
to DCP containing less Gla residues. Serum DCP also increases in patients
with vitamin K deficiency, in which DCP containing more Gla residues
(NX-DCP) elevates and can be detected using P-11 or P-16 antibody.
Recently, NX-DCP-R, calculated by dividing DCP by NX-DCP, is reportedly
useful for the diagnosis of HCC in such patients as taking warfarin. In
this study is, we evaluated tissue DCP and NX-DCP expression in
HCC.Materials and Methods: Tissue samples of HCC and non-HCC were
obtained from 157 patients and were immunohistochemically examined for
tissue DCP and NX-DCP expression using MU-3 antibody and P-16 antibody,
respectively. Immunostain of HCC was evaluated according to staining
intensity and stained area (0-1) within the tumor. The staining intensity
was graded into 4 levels (0, negative; 1, weakly; 2, moderately; 3,
strongly). The expression score was calculated by multiplying staining
intensity grade by stained area. Additionally, serum DCP level and NX-DCP
level were determined in 89 patients. We evaluated the relationship among
the tissue expression, serum level, and pathomorphological findings.
Additionally, immunostain of noncancerous tissues was evaluated according
to the stained area.Results: DCP and NX-DCP expressions were found in
69/157 (44%) cases and 35/157 (22%) cases, respectively, in HCC tissue.
The expression score of DCP [0.54 0.82 (mean SD)] was higher than that of
NX-DCP [0.15 0.39]. The DCP expression score was significantly higher in
the cases of non-simple nodular type, moderately-poorly differentiated
type, and in the cases without capsule formation, and in those with
intrahepatic metastasis (im) or portal vein invasion (vp). On the other
hand, NX-DCP expression score was significantly higher in the cases of
well-differentiated type, and in the cases without im. There was the
correlation between serum DCP level and DCP expression score, but there
was no correlation between serum NX-DCP level and NX-DCP expression
score. DCP-positive (40 AU/L) or NX-DCP-R-positive ( 1.5) cases were
significantly larger in tumor size, higher in histological grade and more
frequent in vp than negative cases. In noncancerous liver tissues, DCP
was rarely expressed, but NX-DCP was much more frequently
expressed.Conclusion: An increase in tissue DCP expression, serum DCP
level, and NX-DCP-R was closely related with malignant properties of HCC.
In contrast, NX-DCP is less frequently expressed and showed different
biological properties from DCP in HCC.

