Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using whole slide digital image analysis to quantify leukocyte
populations in tumor sections


In recent years, the tumor microenvironment (TME) has been identified as
an important factor influencing the growth and metastasis of the tumor.
Multiple studies have shown that adding the Immunoscore assessment to the
AJCC/UICC-TNM classification system improves the accuracy of outcome
prediction, and in some cases outperforms traditional TNM staging. In
many instances these studies have been performed utilizing 2-3
independent readers to manually quantify the cells, performed on
selective high-powered fields or TMA cores rather than the entire
specimen, resulting in variations in counts when different high powered
fields (HPFs) or cores are chosen. A key method to increase the
throughput and to decrease the variability is to utilize whole slide
imaging and computerized image analysis to provide leukocyte counts. An
image analysis algorithm which can automatically differentiate tumor from
stroma would allow rapid quantification of endpoints in each tissue
compartment across the whole specimen.To address these issues, Flagship
Biosciences has designed proprietary CellMapTM image analysis algorithm
tools to develop an Immunoscore-like paradigm for colorectal cancers
(CRCs) to potentially provide new and more accurate TME information to
aid in interpretation. Utilizing whole slide imaging (WSI) approaches,
CellMap allows the quantitation of leukocyte populations (e.g., CD3+,
CD8+, FoxP3+) automatically across whole tissue sections. Using this
algorithm, leukocyte populations were quantified in sections that have
been either singly or dually labeled for inflammatory markers. Our
preliminary studies indicate that Immunoscore-like scoring paradigm
should be established both in tumor areas and in adjacent stroma to
provide the most complete information on the biology of the tumor. We
compared the use of this approach in tissue microarray (TMA) cores which
generally sample areas of dense tumor mass, and compared automated WSI to
manual HPF approaches. Accuracy of the algorithm was demonstrated by
comparing data from manual counts to algorithm derived counts using
high-powered fields. These data support using CellMap in the prospective
or retrospective assessment of leukocyte subpopulations in whole slides
of clinical samples. This approach will diminish variability in counting,
expand the types of endpoints determined, and improve the statistical
value of these determinations, thereby facilitating robust TME
measurements with clinical value.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

