Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: eIF4E, an adverse prognostic marker of melanoma patient survival,
increases melanoma cell invasion


Human cutaneous melanoma is a life-threatening skin cancer due to its
invasive nature and high metastatic potential, leading to poor prognosis
for melanoma patients. However, the mechanisms for melanoma invasion and
metastasis are poorly understood. Human eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E (eIF4E) has been shown to be associated with tumor progression
in multiple cancer types. However, the role of eIF4E in melanoma
progression is not very well known. We examined eIF4E expression in 448
melanocytic lesions at different stages using tissue microarray and found
that positive eIF4E staining was significantly increased in primary
melanomas compared to dysplastic nevi (PHuman cutaneous melanoma is a
life-threatening skin cancer due to its invasive nature and high
metastatic potential, leading to poor prognosis for melanoma patients.
However, the mechanisms for melanoma invasion and metastasis are poorly
understood. Human eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) has
been shown to be associated with tumor progression in multiple cancer
types. However, the role of eIF4E in melanoma progression is not very
well known. We examined eIF4E expression in 448 melanocytic lesions at
different stages using tissue microarray and found that positive eIF4E
staining was significantly increased in primary melanomas compared to
dysplastic nevi (P<0.001), and further increased in metastatic melanomas
compared to primary melanomas (P=0.008). EIF4E expression was correlated
with melanoma thickness (PHuman cutaneous melanoma is a life-threatening
skin cancer due to its invasive nature and high metastatic potential,
leading to poor prognosis for melanoma patients. However, the mechanisms
for melanoma invasion and metastasis are poorly understood. Human
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) has been shown to be
associated with tumor progression in multiple cancer types. However, the
role of eIF4E in melanoma progression is not very well known. We examined
eIF4E expression in 448 melanocytic lesions at different stages using
tissue microarray and found that positive eIF4E staining was
significantly increased in primary melanomas compared to dysplastic nevi
(P<0.001), and further increased in metastatic melanomas compared to
primary melanomas (P=0.008). EIF4E expression was correlated with
melanoma thickness (P<0.001) and was inversely correlated with overall
and disease-specific 5-year survival of all and primary melanoma patients
especially those with tumor 4mm thick combined with metastatic melanoma
patients. Furthermore, positive eIF4E expression was significantly higher
in AJCC stage I-II melanomas compared to stage III-IV melanomas.
Multivariate Cox regression analysis also revealed that eIF4E is an
independent prognostic marker. FACS analysis and sulforhodamine B (SRB)
cell proliferation assay showed that eIF4E knockdown in melanoma cells
resulted in a significant increase and decrease in apoptosis and cell
proliferation, respectively. EIF4E knockdown in melanoma cells also
resulted in a down regulation of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin,
N-cadherin, -smooth muscle actin (-SMA) and the EMT inducing
transcription factor Twist. Additionally eIF4E knockdown in melanoma
cells led to a decrease in the expression of c-Myc and Bcl2 and an
increase in the expression of cleaved PARP and cleaved Caspase3.
Moreover, down regulation of eIF4E resulted in a decrease in both
melanoma cell invasion and MMP-2 activity. Taken together our data
suggests the eIF4E may promote melanoma cell invasion and metastasis by
inducing EMT and preventing apoptosis and also by increasing MMP-2
activity. EIF4E may also serve as a promising prognostic marker and a
potential therapeutic target for melanoma.

