Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a nanoparticle platform for the targeted delivery
of siRNA to HER2-positive breast cancers


Successful siRNA based therapy has the potential to revolutionize cancer
therapy by mediating the silencing of any gene deemed important for
disease progression. However, unprotected siRNA has a short half-life in
blood and lacks the ability to selectively identify target cells. Our
group is developing an effective siRNA based nanoparticle platform that
overcomes these shortcomings by utilizing a mesoporous silica
nanoparticle electrostatically loaded with siRNA and conjugated with an
antibody for target homing. The human epidermal growth receptor type 2
(HER2) is a highly validated therapeutic target in breast cancer due to
its prognostic role in cancer aggressiveness and drug resistance when
overexpressed in tumors. Suppression of HER2 with siRNA based therapy
(siHER2) offers a new treatment modality and provides a testable system
for the development of our nanoparticle platform. Incorporation of
Herceptin, a monoclonal antibody which binds to HER2, serves to
selectively target HER2-positive cancer cells. In vitro evaluation of the
nanoconstruct loaded with a highly optimized siHER2 sequence against a
panel of HER2-positive (HCC1954, JIMT-1, BT474) and HER2-negative (MCF-7,
MCF-10A, HDFa) cell lines demonstrated efficient knockdown of HER2 gene
expression (> 75% reduction of HER2 mRNA and protein). Concomitant cell
viability assays showed increased cell death in HER2-positive and no
HER2-negative cell lines further highlighting treatment specificity.
Importantly, treatment of cells with the siHER2-nanoconstruct effectively
inhibited growth in HER2-positive cell lines resistant to Herceptin and
Lapatinib. Subsequent in vivo tumor modeling studies using orthotopic
transplantation of HCC1954 in the mammary fat pad of SCID mice revealed
that i.v. injection of the siHER2-nanocontruct reduced overall tumor
burden. HER2 knockdown in the tumors was also significant. These findings
provide the foundation for a novel translational platform for
facilitating therapeutic siRNA.

