Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A discrete tuning of 51 integrin activity sustains the tumor-ECM
induced fibroblastic activation in pancreatic cancer stroma


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) presents one of the highest mortality
rates amongst all neoplasias. The desmoplastic microenvironment
characteristic of PDAC plays a pivotal role in this aggressive cancer
progression. Using an in vivo-mimetic 3D human stroma system, we have
shown that quiescent fibroblasts become activated, undergoing a
desmoplastic (i.e., myofibroblastic) phenotypic switch in response to
tumor-associated (TA) but not to normal fibroblast-derived extracellular
matrix (ECM). Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms responsible for this
process remain unclear.Using syngeneic human fibroblasts harvested from
patient-matched normal and tumor samples, we produced a human 3D
pancreatic stromal system. The system was used to investigate the role of
integrins during the TA-ECM-induced phenotypic switch, focusing on two
integrins associated with myofibroblastic differentiation, v5 and 51. We
evaluated the role of well-known integrin signaling effectors, i.e.,
non-receptor tyrosine kinases FAK and Src family kinases (SFK), in the
observed TA-ECM-induced phenotypic switch. Approaches included the use of
specific inhibitors or activators of integrins and SFK or FAK chemical or
genetic inhibitors. Our data strongly suggest a v5/51-integrin cross-talk
necessary to maintain the TA-ECM-induced phenotypic switch. This
fine-tuned integrin cross-talk participates in the TA-ECM-induced
overexpression and stress fiber localization of desmoplastic stroma
marker, -smooth muscle actin (-SMA).Our findings correlate with
clustering of 51-integrin at TA-ECM-altered 3D adhesion structures,
together with differences in 51 activation. Interestingly, we uncovered a
mechanism whereby v5-integrin activity, in a SFK/FAK-dependent manner,
inhibits a FAK-independent 51-integrin activity, preventing it from
inhibiting the TA-ECM-induced phenotypic switch. Finally, using patient
samples, we verified our in vitro generated hypothesis, while results
suggested that v5-integrin inhibition may constitute a valid inhibitory
PDAC-associated stroma clinical treatment/approach. Likewise, this work
also concluded that the TA-ECM-regulated mechanism studied may comprise a
clinically relevant occurrence, suggestive of a noteworthy value in
assessing stromal activity in PDAC patients.Funding provided by The
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, The Bucks County Chapter Board of
Associates and NCI/NIH grants CA113451 and CA06927

