Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of relapse prediction marker for advanced gastric
cancer using reverse-phase protein arrays


While post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy regimens have been established
in various cancers, a considerable number of patients experience
recurrence despite of these therapies. To examine whether any protein
expression at the time of operation can predict the relapse, we screened
for anticancer-associated proteins using clinically approved drugs and a
panel of human cancer cell lines. A Cell x Protein matric (CP matric) was
generated using reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPAs), which was then
combined with a Cell x (drug) Activity matric (CA matric) defined by 50%
growth suppression concentration of each drug. For the validation of
post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy model, we used archived human
gastric cancer specimens that have been removed by curative surgery and
that all patients received 5-FU-based post-operative adjuvant
chemotherapy. Proteomic and drug activity profiling revealed that 10
candidate proteins that have been highly correlated with 5-FU
sensitivity. Among the candidates, NF-B and JNK proteins were finally
identified as the most correlated biomarkers from immunohistochemical
confirmation using a total of 79 gastrointestinal cancer specimens. A
comparison of NF-B(+) and JNK(-) pattern demonstrated a strong power
distinguishing non-relapsed from relapsed gastric cancers [NF-B(+), p =
0.0002, HR11.7; JNK(-), p = 0.0302. HR4.4]. Subsequent analysis of RELA
gene, one of the NF-B component coding genes, knockdown demonstrated that
the reduction of 5-FU resistance in three out of 5 human gastric cancer
cell lines. Further studies of NF-B transcriptional activity to 5-FU
indicated that NF-B incorporates p53 as a part of DNA damaging response.
In fact, a polymorphic site in codon 72 of TP53 gene, which is important
for NF-B binding, showed a strong correlation with 5-FU sensitivity in
nine gastric cancer cell lines. Gastric cancer cell lines bearing Pro/Pro
homozigosity (n = 5) in codon 72 are more resistant to 5-FU than those
with Arg/Arg homozigosity (n = 3). Based on these results, we have
started a nationwide clinical study Predictive Biomarkers in Stage II/III
Gastric Cancer for Adjuvant Chemotherapy (NJ Biomarker study,
NCT01905969) for examining clinical utility of NF-B/JNK in the context of
gastric cancer adjuvant chemotherapy. An estimate of potential patients
for this post-operative/pre-chemotherapy screening would be at least 2
million worldwide.

