Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and targeting of radiation-inducible neoantigens
in multiple cancer types


Targeted therapy remains one of the biggest challenges in the effective
treatment of cancer. Due to their heterogeneity, not all tumors respond
to a particular treatment regimen with similar efficacy. Thus, there is
an urgent need to develop targeted therapies that are not only highly
specific to cancer subtypes but also have minimal toxicity towards normal
tissue. Currently, development of anti-cancer antibodies is limited to
antigens that are either overexpressed or antigens that are only
expressed in a few patients. This limits both the number of available
targets and their selectivity for tumors. Using phage display technology,
we have identified proteins that are induced by clinical doses of
ionizing radiation (IR): tax-interacting protein 1 (TIP-1) and TATA
box-associated factor 15 (TAF-15). Following IR treatment, cell surface
expression of both TIP-1 and TAF-15 is enhanced in a number of human
cancers, including brain, lung, breast and pancreatic cancer. The
underlying premise is that IR induces a stress response resulting from
DNA strand breaks and activation of ATM repair pathways. After IR stress,
these antigens translocate to the surface where they can be targeted for
therapeutic purposes. These radiation-inducible neoantigens present a new
synergistic model for the treatment of cancer using IR. In this study, we
characterized both radiation-inducible targets in vitro and in vivo.
Western blotting, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry data all
demonstrated increased cell surface expression of both TIP-1 and TAF-15
after irradiation. We also developed a monoclonal antibody and a single
chain antibody against TIP-1 and are currently in the process of
developing antibodies against TAF-15. ELISA and near infra-red whole
mouse imaging results demonstrate high affinity and high specificity of
our lead anti-TIP-1 antibody and anti-TAF15 peptide in lung, brain,
breast and pancreatic cancer. Dosimetry studies using immunofluorescence
and Western blot analysis show a dose-dependent increase in expression of
TIP-1 and TAF15, suggesting that these proteins may play a key role in
the cancer cell's response to radiation stress. We are currently in the
process of characterizing the mechanisms of how these proteins contribute
to radioresistance and cancer survival processes such as proliferation,
apoptosis and metastasis.

