Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment,characterization and utilization of models of
central nervous system metastasis


Metastases to the central nervous system (CNS) are the most common
intracranial malignancy and are typically associated with survival times
of only a few months. Lung and breast are the most common type of CNS
metastasis, representing over half of such tumors. The molecular
characteristics of these tumors as well as the factors driving cancers to
metastasize to the CNS are poorly understood. This is due in part to
inaccessibility of clinical samples and a lack of established,
well-characterized models. In order to shed light on the molecular
biology of these highly heterogeneous tumors and establish resources for
preclinical testing, we are working to create both in vivo and in vitro
models of CNS metastases originating from lung or breast cancer. We have
thus far received surgical specimens from 7 lung and two breast CNS
metastases. Of these, one was a spine metastasis and 6 were brain
metastases. Each surgical specimen was used for the generation of
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) and cell lines. Of these specimens, we
have successfully established continuous cell lines of CNS metastases
originating from three lung adenocarcinomas, one squamous lung carcinoma
and one ductal breast carcinoma. To verify the presence of metastatic
carcinoma cells in culture, cell lines were characterized by
immunofluorescence based on staining profiles obtained from each tumor's
pathology report. Adenocarcinomas of the lung expressed cytokeratins
typical of lung cancer (CK7, 8 and 18), as well as Napsin-A, a highly
specific pulmonary marker. The squamous cell carcinoma of the lung
expressed these as well as CK5/6 and p63-, pathological markers of
squamous differentiation. A metastatic ductal carcinoma of the breast
expressed ER, Her2, GATA-3, and Vimentin. For the development of PDX
models, tumors were initially implanted into flank of NOG mice and then
passaged orthotopically for preclinical testing. Of nine implants, tumor
growth was evident for 3 animals harboring adenocarcinoma of the lung, 2
with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung, and 1 with breast carcinoma.
Samples from metastatic tissue, xenograft tissue and primary tumors (when
available) were flow sorted to identify different clonal subpopulations
and sequenced for exome and RNA level changes. Genomic characterization
of the different clones allowed reconstruction of the evolution of
metastasis and identified therapeutically targetable genes. Studies are
ongoing to develop personalized preclinical mouse studies based on the
integration of multi-omics data derived from the models and patient
tumors.

