Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of BRCA2 genetic interactors in an ES cell-based
model


Mutations in breast cancer susceptible genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the
genetic factors conferring highest risk to develop breast cancer.
Although BRCA proteins are known to maintain genomic stability mainly by
homologous recombination-mediated DNA damage repair, detailed mechanisms
of how BRCA loss induces tumorigenesis remain unclear. Interestingly,
while inactivation of both alleles of BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes is necessary
for tumor development, their loss in normal cells affects cell viability,
indicating that cells lacking BRCA1 or 2 are able to survive and
predisposed to tumorigenesis due to mutations in other genes such as
those involved in cell cycle regulation or DNA damage response. In the
current study, we identified some of the candidate genes using a mouse
embryonic stem (mES) cell-based insertional mutagenesis screening.
Overexpression of these genes rescued BRCA2 loss-induced lethality in mES
cells. One candidate encodes a PDZ domain-containing protein, GIPC3.
While overexpression of GIPC3 rescued BRCA2 loss efficiently,
overexpression of its close homolog GIPC1 rescued much less efficiently.
The GIPC3-rescued cells were hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents and
exhibited an overall increase in genomic instability. Point mutation
analysis showed several amino acids in the PDZ domain was critical for
rescuing BRCA2 lethality, suggesting protein-protein interaction is
responsible for the rescuing. We therefore performed IP-MS analysis and
found that GIPC3 can interact with APPL1 and APPL2, two important
mediators in AKT-mediated survival signal transduction pathway. We are
now analyzing if these two molecules are potential down-stream factors of
GIPC3 in rescuing BRCA2 loss-induced lethality. Meanwhile, we found that
Gipc3 overxpression can partially rescue the lethality of Brca2ko/ko
embryos. We are now also examining the expression of GIPC3 in human
BRCA2-deficient tumors and we are monitoring tumorigenesis of GIPC3
transgenic mice in a K14-Cre;Brca2cko/cko mammary tumor model.

