Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New benzazepine BET-inhibitors with improved oral bioavailability


Bromodomain protein 4 (BRD4), a member of the bromodomain and
extra-terminal domain (BET) protein family, binds to acetylated histone
tails via its two bromodomains BD1 and BD2. It forms a complex with the
positive transcription elongation factor b which controls phosphorylation
of RNA polymerase II, ultimately leading to stimulation of transcription
elongation. An essential role of BRD4 in cell proliferation and cancer
growth has been reported in several recent studies.The benzodiazepine
JQ-1 is a strong antagonist of the binding of BRD4 to acetylated histone
tails and has been used to elucidate the functions of the BET protein
family members. JQ-1 is active in vivo in several therapeutic models but
reveals a poor pharmacokinetic profile with high clearance and low oral
bioavailability in animal studies. We investigated the benzodiazepine
core of JQ-1 with the aim of optimization of oral bioavailability.
Several possible core variations were identified that kept overall
cellular activity but increased metabolic stability. The benzazepine
BAY6356 was selected as a potent BET inhibitor with an improved overall
pharmacokinetic profile and oral bioavailability between 60 and 100% in
mouse, rat and dog. The strong antiproliferative activity observed in
vitro in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and multiple myeloma (MM) cell
lines was confirmed in vivo in the MOLM-13 (AML) and MOLP-8 (MM) tumor
models implanted in SCID mice. Daily oral treatment at the Maximal
Tolerated Dose of 30 mg/kg led to strong tumor reduction in MOLM-13 (17%
T/C on day 13 post tumor implantation) and in MOLP-8 (4% T/C on day 19
post tumor implantation) xenografts (T/C 40% = active, T/C10% = highly
active, according to NCI criteria). In the MOLM-13 model, c-Myc
down-regulation was shown in vivo. Furthermore, for a same total dose,
intermittent dosing every other day or twice a week in the MOLP-8 model
proved to be as active as daily dosing, demonstrating exposure-driven
efficacy. These favorable preclinical data support the evaluation of
BAY6356 for further development.

