Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Mediterranean herb rosemary modulates ER stress proteins to
promote androgen receptor degradation in prostate cancer cells


Background: Prostate cancer is one of the most prevalent forms of cancer
among men, especially in the United States. Epidemiological studies have
shown that consumption of natural dietary phytochemicals helps in
prevention of many types of cancers. One such dietary phytochemical,
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis), widely used in Mediterranean cuisine
is well known for its antitumor activities. However, not much is known
about the effect of rosemary on pathogenesis of prostate cancer.
Androgens play a critical role in progression of prostate cancer and
hence androgen receptor has been a target for prostate cancer treatment
since a long time. Herein we have examined the effect of rosemary on
prostate cancer progression. Specifically we have examined how rosemary
promotes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and modulates the activity and
expression of androgen receptor (AR).Materials and Methods: Prostate
cancer cell lines, 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells, were used for all experiments.
Cell proliferation and cell viability were studied using BrdU and MTT
assay respectively. Western blotting, ELISA and siRNA were used to
determine the association between ER stress and AR degradation.Results:
Rosemary inhibited growth and decreased the cell viability of 22Rv1 and
LNCaP cells in a dose-dependent manner. The anti-proliferative effect was
associated with apoptosis as evidenced by a significant increase in
levels of cleaved caspase-3 protein and TUNEL assay. Moreover, upon
treatment with rosemary we saw a dose-dependent decrease in expression of
AR in 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells along with decreased PSA levels in LNCaP
cells. Rosemary induced apoptosis was associated with ER stress as
evidenced by up-regulation of ER stress proteins PERK, IRE1, BiP, CHOP,
XBP-1 and caspase- 4. ER stress proteins are known to play an important
role in folding of misfolded proteins and degrading continuously
misfolded proteins. We therefore explored the relationship between ER
stress and AR degradation. Interestingly, we observed that AR degradation
was dependent on ER stress proteins BiP and CHOP.Conclusion: Rosemary
induces ER stress-mediated apoptotic cell death in prostate cancer cell
lines, 22Rv1and LNCaP cells, leading to disruption of AR expression. Our
data suggests that this Mediterranean dietary phytochemical possess
strong anticancer activity and should be evaluated further as potential
chemopreventive and/or chemotherapeutic agent for controlling prostate
cancer.

