Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin receptor substrate-1 regulates immune cell content in lung
adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. In the
United States, lung cancer accounts for 160,000 deaths per year while the
five-year survival rate remains stagnant at 15%. A better understanding
of the pathobiology for this disease is imperative for development of
novel therapeutics to improve mortality rates. One of the most common
activating mutations in lung cancer is K-ras. Our group previously showed
that K-ras activation generates an inflammatory response in lung tumors,
mediated largely through the increased production of neutrophil
chemokines by tumor cells. The corresponding increase in neutrophil
recruitment in this model increased tumor growth, which was associated
with degradation of the intracellular protein insulin receptor
substrate-1 (IRS-1). A study of non-small cell lung cancer demonstrated
that IRS-1 was low or absent in 46% of cases. To further dissect the role
of IRS-1 in tumor growth we generated LSL-K-ras/IRS-1 fl/fl mice and
subjected them to adenoviral cre. LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice displayed early
mortality and increased tumor burden when compared to LSL-K-ras/IRS-1+/+
controls. Surprisingly, IRS-1 loss in tumor cells generated a robust
immune response. The bronchial alveolar lavage fluid of
LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice showed increased infiltration of macrophages,
neutrophils and lymphocytes. Further examination of the chemokine
profiles of LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- and LSL-K-ras/IRS-1+/+ mice showed a
significant increase in many immune cell-recruiting chemokines in the
LSL-K-ras/IRS-1-/- mice including CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CXCL1, CXCL2 and
CXCl12. Many cancers are able to manipulate the host immune response
through signaling pathways that interface with IRS-1, including:
phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), extracellular signal regulated kinase
(MEK/ERK) and Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT). As some cytokines can activate IRS-1 via
JAK/STAT signaling, we suspected that IL-17 and IL-22 might function in
this regard. Loss of IRS-1 increases pSTAT3 production, which triggers
chemokine release and the generation of a pro-tumor immune response.
Preliminary data to support this hypothesis include: 1) presence of IL-17
and IL-22 producing cells (e.g. Th17) at sites of tumor in LSL-K-ras
mice, 2) induction of pTyr-IRS-1 upon IL-17 and IL-22 stimulation in A549
cells, and 3) increased CC and CXC chemokines in IRS-1 deficient cells
upon IL-17 and IL-22 stimulation. Experimentation is ongoing to further
elucidate the mechanism behind this phenotype.

