Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44v9 expression in clinical pancreatic cancer and the
gemcitabine plus sulfasalazine therapy against chemoresistant pancreatic
cancer murine model


Objective: Chemoresistance associating CD44-positive cancer stem cells
may presents a crucial problem in treating pancreatic cancer. Among the
various isoforms of CD44, valiant 9 (CD44v9) have revealed especially
implicated in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. Interaction of
CD44v9 with the cystine transporter subunit xCT provide the ability of
cancer cells to defend themselves against reactive oxygen species,
mediating chemoresistance. Sulfasalazine (SSZ), which is a specific
inhibitor of xCT-mediated cystine transport,could be a new therapeutic
weapon fight against cancer stem cells.However, the extent of this
remains unclear, suggesting the need for a histological evaluation of
CD44v9 expression in clinical pancreatic cancer and the anti-tumor effect
on pancreatic cancer of SSZ. Therefore,In this study, we analyze the
expression of CD44v9 in a pancreatic cancer surgical specimen and examine
the anti-tumor effect of SSZ and altered expression of CD44v9 by
administration of GEM (GEM) with tumorgrafts.Methods:Experiment 1: A
total of 70 clinical primary ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were
applied for immunohistochemical evaluation of CD44v9 expression. Randomly
picked up 10 fields for each cases were analyzed for intensity of
membrane staining and the percentage of stained cancer cells per field,
followed by summing the scores using our own scoring system.Experiment 2:
Three lines of created tumorgrafts from clinical pancreatic cancer. We
administered GEM to the tumorgrafts and also scored the clinical
specimens immunohistochemical evaluation by CD44v9. In addition, using
one line, we divided the mice into two groups, a GEM group and a GEM +
SSZ group, and repeated as above to determine the effect on GEM of
SSZ.Results:Experiment 1: There was no correlation for prognosis. It was
found that CD44v9-positive cells are present in high numbers.Experiment
2: In 1 line, which increased CD44v9-positive cell after GEM
treatment,the GEM group showed tumor regression of 85% and the GEM+SSZ
group showed tumor regression of 90%.Discussion: Result in Experiment 1
is reasonable, therefore, to consider the significance of the treatment
target CD44vv9 as likely to be very high. Further, there was one line of
tumorgrafts used, but not all percentages of CD44v9-positive cells
increased markedly by GEM administration. This suggests the possibility
that CD44v9 may be regarded as a marker of GEM resistance. In addition, a
small but insignificant tumor regression effect on GEM of SSZ was
found.We present evidence that for pancreatic cancer as well as other
carcinomas, CD44v9-positive cells may be regarded as one of the markers
of chemo resistance. Furthermore, since SSZ shows the antitumor effects
of plus for GEM, we suggest that SSZ treatment is a possibility for a new
treatment option.

