Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of JNK signaling sensitizes hypoxic colon cancer cells
to DNA-damaging agents


BACKGROUND: We have shown that hypoxia induces signaling through stress
pathways in the HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cell line, and that modulation
of signaling through MKK4/MKK7 exerts the opposite effects on oxaliplatin
cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions: higher sensitivity when MKK4
function is impaired and higher resistance when MKK7 is down- regulated.
We also observed differential effects of JNK1 and JNK2 modulation on
sensitivity of hypoxic HT29 cells to oxaliplatin treatment which implied
a pro-survival function for JNK1.PURPOSE: Here we investigate how
modulating signaling through JNK influences the sensitivity of hypoxic
HT29 cells to oxaliplatin, SN-38 and 5-FU. We used pharmacological and
molecular approaches to inhibit JNK signaling and expanded the cellular
model in a panel of colon cancer cell lines. Sensitivity to drugs and
induction of stress pathways were investigated in 12 colon cancer cell
lines of different genetic backgrounds. We also assessed cell cycle
changes and cell death characteristics upon treatment. In addition to
HT29-derived cell lines stably expressing dominant negative constructs
for MKK4 (HTS13), MKK7 (HTM9), JNK1 (HTJ1.3) and JNK2 (HTJ2.2), we also
utilized several colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, RKO1, LoVo and SW620)
in which a dominant negative construct for JNK1 or JNK2 was introduced by
viral delivery.RESULTS: Our data demonstrate that stress signaling
through JNK is induced by hypoxia to various extent and with differing
temporal characteristics in all colon cancer cell lines assessed. In HT29
cells, treatment with oxaliplatin or SN-38 alone does not cause
significant activation of signaling through JNK, whereas 5-FU treatment
leads to induction of this pathway. Inhibition of JNK1 renders HT29 cells
more sensitive to oxaliplatin and has no effect upon SN-38 treatment,
while inhibition of either isoform sensitizes hypoxic HT29 cells to 5-FU.
We also show that pharmacological inhibition of JNK by CC-401 augments
cytotoxicity of oxaliplatin, SN-38 and of 5-FU in hypoxic HT29 cells,
with CI50 of 0.42, 0.6 and 0.63, respectively. CC-401 and SP600125 have
also demonstrated synergy with chemotherapy in other colon cancer cell
lines. Finally, we show that colon cancer cell lines differ in their
responses to oxaliplatin when JNK1 or JNK2 are down-regulated, from no
effect (HCT116, LoVo) to increased sensitivity (HT29, SW620).CONCLUSIONS:
Our data demonstrate that inhibition of the JNK pathway is a plausible
approach to augment the cytotoxicity of oxaliplatin in colon cancer.
However, inhibition of individual isoforms presents a complicated
picture. Since enhancement of oxaliplatin cytotoxicity by this approach
appears to be model-specific in colon cancer, it should be undertaken
following the identification of molecular markers better able to predict
the outcome.

