Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KDM2B expression regulates ribosome biogenesis and cancer cell
growth in a p53-dependent manner


Ribosome biogenesis is a cellular process requiring a fine-tuned control,
as its deregulation is linked to cancer progression. Indeed, tumors
characterized by an intense ribosome biogenesis often display a more
aggressive biological and clinical behavior. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
synthesis is controlled at several levels, the higher one being the
epigenetic regulation of chromatin portions containing rRNA genes. KDM2B
(Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 2B) is a histone demethylase modulating
the accessibility of rRNA genes, thereby repressing their transcription.
In particular KDM2B is known to specifically act on trimethylated K4 of
histone H3 (H3K4) associated with rDNA. In this study we aimed to define
the contribution of KDM2B expression to the biological features of breast
cancer, a tumor type whose clinical behavior is known to be related to
the rate of ribosome biogenesis. We show that, in primary breast
carcinomas, lower KDM2B expression correlates with an increased size of
specifically stained nucleolar organizer regions, a morphological
parameter directly related to the rate of ribosome biogenesis, and with a
poorer prognosis. In vitro, in breast cancer-derived cell lines, siRNA
mediated KDM2B knock-down (KD) induced an increase in H3K4 trimethylation
and in rRNA transcription. However, this is mirrored by an augmented cell
proliferation only in p53 compromised cells, while p53 competent cells
undergo cellular senescence and death. The latter effect, appears to be
mediated by a p38-mediated phosphorylation of p53, inducing the
expression of p15Ink4b and p21Waf1, and is not linked to p53
stabilization. In the long term, stable KDM2B KD in p53-compromised
breast cancer cells induced a series of additional biological features
including their augmented cellular clonogenic potential and invasive
capability. Altogether our data indicate that abnormal JHDM1B-mediated
epigenetic activation of rDNA genes elicits a p53-mediated growth arrest,
but may promote cancer cell growth when p53 is lacking.

