Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biodistribution and clearance of non-targeted DyLight dyes in
tumor-free nude mice for in vivo imaging


Far red to near infra red (NIR) fluorophores are commonly used in
cell-based assays and for deep tissue in vivo imaging. The light emitting
and physico-chemical characteristics of these fluorophores, e.g.
excitation and emission spectra, relative hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity
and molecule size, can significantly influence their performance in these
applications. Currently there are no guidelines for selection of
fluorophores optimal for targeted in vivo imaging. To address this issue
we have designed a panel of DyLight dyes with maximum excitation
wavelength in the range of 650 -785 nm, maximum emission wavelength in
the range of 670 - 800 nm and different levels of sulfonation and/or
PEGylation. We studied the kinetic of tissue distribution and clearance
of these fluorophores as well as their effect on morphology of different
tissues in mice after intravenous injection. Briefly, nude mice were
anesthetized, injected with a dye (100 L of dye at 0.5mg/ml in PBS) into
retro-orbital plexus, and imaged using Carestream MSFX or Carestream
XTREME Imager. Images were generated before dye injection, immediately
after injection (0 hours) and 3, 6, 12 and 24 hours post injection. At
the end of the experiment, animals were sacrificed; internal organs were
collected and used for ex vivo analysis. The results of in vivo imaging
experiments demonstrated that: hydrophobic fluorophores have a relatively
slow kinetic of distribution and clearance, and often cleared via a
hepatic pathway. Introduction of the negatively charged groups and or PEG
chains increased dye solubility affected the kinetics of both fluorophore
distribution and its clearance. In addition, negatively charged
fluorophores had a tendency to be cleared predominantly via renal
pathway. A histological analysis of the internal organs showed no
detectable tissue damage. These results provide guidelines for the
selection of optimal NIR dyes for in vivo imaging.

