Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peripheral immune signatures and survival in stage IV melanoma


The presence of peripheral T-cells recognizing the melanoma-associated
antigens NY-ESO-1 or Melan-A, as well as low frequencies of circulating
CD14+ HLA-DR-/low myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), is associated
with prolonged survival in stage IV melanoma (n=94). In addition, the two
of 12 patients with partial responses or stable disease in pilot studies
of ipilimumab treatment both tended to have lower levels of MDSCs at
baseline which decreased further on treatment. In contrast, two patients
with progressive disease had high baseline MDSC levels, which increased
further after treatment. These patients are being followed up to
determine whether another mechanism of action of ipilimumab may be via an
effect on MDSCs. A correlation was observed between the presence of
antigen-reactive T cells and the frequency of MDSCs. Our results indicate
that patients lacking antigen-reactive T cells had significantly higher
levels of MDSCs. In addition, high frequencies of MDSCs correlated with
lower frequencies of NY-ESO-1- and Melan-A-reactive T cells that also
produced lower levels of IFN-gamma. NY-ESO-1 was recognized more
frequently by CD4+ than by CD8+ T cells, whereas Melan-A more often
stimulated CD8+ T cells. Possession of NY-ESO-1-reactive T cells
conferred a survival advantage whether the response was mediated by CD4+
or CD8+ T cells or both. However, recognition of Melan-A by CD4+ T cells
was associated with poorer clinical outcome even when the patient also
possessed CD8+ reactive T cells. This negative effect was mediated by
CD4+ T cells with a Th2- or Th17-type but not Th1-type cytokine response.
Thus, tumor antigen-specificity and function of peripheral T cells and
their interactions with MDSCs in advanced melanoma carries significant
prognostic weight for predicting survival and may provide mechanistic
insights into tumor immunosurveillance in such patients.

