Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpCAM-mediated hypomethylation of BMP and cell adhesion genes is
associated with advanced endometrial cancer


Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy, with
approximately 20% of EC patients developing advanced stage recurrent
tumors and frequent metastasis. Our goal was to investigate whether DNA
methylation signatures associated with low promoter methylation
(hypomethylation) and specific oncogenic signaling delineate predictive
markers of endometrial cancer recurrence. Global screening by
Methyl-CpG-capture sequencing revealed aberrant DNA methylation in our
endometrial cancer cohort and identified a subset of bone morphogenetic
protein family (BMP1, 2, 3, 4, and 7) exhibiting frequent hypomethylation
in primary tumors with subsequent recurrence compared with non-recurrent
tumors. This epigenetic signature correlated with poor survival and was
validated in The Cancer Genome Atlas endometrial cancer cohort. Our
functional studies also implicated epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) pathway in the transcriptional activation of these BMPs and
inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In addition to AKT and
MAPK, the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) mediated these
actions by EGFR. EpCAM involvement in cancer progression includes nuclear
co-translocation of its intracellular domain EpICD with Lef-1 complexes
and targeting oncogene promoter activation. In this study, EGF stimulated
EpICD-Lef-1 binding on BMP genes accompanied with histone active
modification marks. EpICD knockdown resulted in increased repressive
histone marks and DNA methylation at these loci, suggesting that EpICD
occupancy is involved in their epigenetic modification to an open
transcriptional conformation. Knockdown of candidate BMPs led to
decreased endometrial cancer cell invasiveness, implicating them in
aggressive growth. Extending our studies, we performed ChIP-Seq analysis
to identify global regulation by the EpICD-Lef-1 complexes in endometrial
cancer. Interestingly, under basal levels only about 28% of loci targeted
by either EpICD or Lef-1 were commonly targeted by EpICD-Lef-1, with
common targets increasing to about 50% in 24 hrs and 73% in 48 hrs post
EGF treatment. This indicates that EGFR signaling stimulates a
time-course dependent enrichment of EpICD-Lef-1 convergence on target
loci. Our initial studies of these EpICD target pathways included genes
with cell adhesion functions. Future studies on the regulation of the
EpICD-Lef-1 regulated genes and their mechanisms of action in aggressive
endometrial cancer will provide a better understanding of this gene
network in endometrial cancer. Hypomethylation signatures of candidate
loci in this regulatory network may present putative predictive markers
of poor survival and which may be used to tailor individualized therapy.

