Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A centrifugal ultrafiltration-based method for rapid purification
of exosomes from biological samples


Exosomes represent a subset of small particles secreted by many types of
cells under both normal and pathological conditions. The release of
microvesicles has demonstrated biological relevance; these particles act
as mediators of intercellular communication both within the local
microenvironment of the release site as well as systemically. Moreover,
since exosomes contain RNA (messenger and miRNA) and protein
(membrane-bound and cytosolic) from their cells of origin, and given that
this content can be influenced by cell state, they also potentially
represent a burgeoning target for biomarker discovery. Critical to
understanding the physiological significance of these particles is the
development of preparative techniques permitting reliable isolation of
purified fractions. While numerous methods of exosome purification exist,
including ultracentrifugation, immunoaffinity-based isolation using
magnetic beads, precipitation, and ultrafiltration, most are plagued by
sample limitations or require long and tedious workflows to achieve
success. Here we present a rapid alternative method for the selective
fractionation of exosomes from biological samples using an
ultrafiltration device. Since the method is spin-based and dependent on
size exclusion, the device has broad applications with regards to sample
volume and/or type. Optimization of the protocol was aided through use of
a mid infrared (MIR)-based spectroscopy platform that permits
simultaneous monitoring of lysis conditions, protein quantitation, and
analysis of total lipid content during exosome fractionation. Given the
ultrafiltration device's capacity for buffer exchange and sample
concentration, purified fractions can be easily formatted to meet the
requirements of any downstream analysis platform. To demonstrate this,
resulting fractions were assayed by numerous techniques including flow
cytometry, western blotting, ELISA-based assays, and electron microscopy.

