Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 confers a multi-modality therapy resistance phenotype
in pancreatic cancer cells


Caveolin-1 (Cav-1) is a 21kDa protein found in 50-100nm omega-shaped
invaginations of the plasma membrane known as caveolae. It has been
implicated in the processes of oncogenic cell transformation,
tumorigenesis and metastasis. Cav-1 is upregulated in pancreatic cancer
and has been shown to be correlated with poor prognosis. We hypothesized
that Cav-1 promotes resistance to chemotherapy and radiation, and that
downregulation may lead to sensitization to radiation and/or
chemotherapy. We found that radiation and chemotherapy up-regulate Cav-1
expression, and that downregulating Cav-1 in multiple pancreatic cancer
cell lines by small interfering RNA induces sensitization to
chemotherapeutics such as gemcitabine and 5-fluorouracil. Furthermore,
genetic knockdown causes reduction in tumor cell proliferation and colony
formation. Knockdown of caveolin-1 also led to radiosensitization of
tumor cells and resulted in delayed DNA repair as demonstrated by delayed
pH2.AX foci resolution, increased mitotic catastrophe, as well as
decreased formation of BRCA1 and DNAPK-cs foci in the nuclei of these
cells. Furthermore, Cav-1 loss promoted cleavage of Caspase-9 and PARP
after treatment with gemcitabine. These results indicate that knocking
down Cav-1 in pancreatic cancer cells sensitizes them to radiation with
delayed DNA damage repair and also to chemotherapeutics with the onset of
apoptosis. In vivo, stable knockdown of Cav-1 attenuated the rate of
tumor growth significantly compared to control tumors in subcutaneous
xenograft pancreatic tumors. In summary we conclude that Cav-1 is
responsible in promoting resistance to radiation and chemotherapy in
pancreatic cancer cells and that downregulation of this protein leads to
improved therapeutic response. Thus, it is possible that caveolin-1 may
serve as a prognostic predictive biomarker in pancreatic cancer patients
for response to radiation and chemotherapy.

