Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular interrogation of the androgen receptor in circulating
tumor cells to identify therapeutic resistance to androgen targeting
therapies


There is a critical need to evaluate and target mechanisms of resistance
to Androgen Receptor (AR) targeting agents, such as Enzalutamide and
Abiraterone Acetate. Preclinical models have identified resistance
mechanisms that include AR gene mutations and rearrangements, expression
of AR splice variants and AR overexpression. Circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) represent a potential source of tumor samples for further
molecular interrogation into resistance mechanisms of AR directed
therapy. Here we present, an integrated CTC capture and analysis
technology known as VERSA (Vertical Exclusion-based Rare Sample Analysis)
to allow evaluation of the AR at the protein, DNA and mRNA level. Using
the VERSA platform we have captured EpCAM+ CTCs from castrate-resistance
prostate cancer patients and quantified nuclear localization of the AR in
CTCs as a potential predictive therapeutic protein biomarker. Using
quantitative immunocytochemistry, results have shown patients that are
responding to various AR-targeting and chemotherapy treatments have lower
percentages of AR nuclear localization (38.37.4%) as compared to patients
that have progressed on AR-targeting therapies (60.44.9%). We have also
identified significant heterogeneity in both AR localization and total AR
protein expression that correlated with treatment history. Furthermore,
CTCs have been identified in having 100 % AR nuclear localization in
patients undergoing AR targeted therapies, indicating a possible
subpopulation of CTCs that exhibit resistance phenotypes. mRNA was also
extracted from CTCs of men with CRPC for analysis of AR splice variant
expression. Results showed various levels of splice variant expression
from men previously on AR targeting therapies. These studies indicate
that a comprehensive, real-time analysis of the AR can be serially
assessed for early signs of tumor resistance to AR targeting agents.

