Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of Deferasirox and Imatinib in chronic myeloid
leukemia cells


Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is diagnosed by abnormal myeloid
lineage cell proliferation and the presence of the Bcr-Abl fusion gene
encoding abnormal tyrosine kinase. Imatinib mesylate (IM) is the first
developed Bcr/Abl tyrosine-kinase inhibitor for the treatment of CML.
Despite of high response rates, significant numbers of CML patients
develop the resistance against these kinase inhibitors. Deferasirox (DFO)
is an oral iron chelating agent that has been used to treat acute iron
detoxification and chronically iron overloaded. Recent reports have been
shown that iron chelators induce anti-proliferative effect in multiple
leukemia cells. However, their roles and underlying mechanism in CML cell
lines are not yet fully understood. In this study, we evaluated the
combination effects of Deferasirox and Imatinib in CML cell line, and
investigated their apoptosis -inducing effects as the potential mechanism
in this process. Two CML cell lines (K562, KU812) were treated with
various concentrations of Deferasirox, Imatinib and combination of two
drugs. The viability and the level of apoptosis of the treated cells will
be measured with MTT assay, FACS analysis and western blot. The results
showed that both of them induce the growth inhibitory effects in dose and
Time dependent fashion in both CML cell lines. Cell cycle analysis by
FACS indicated that cell lines treated with combination therapy showed an
increase in the proportion of cells in sub-G1 phase, compared to single
treatment cell lines. Exposure of CML cells to IM/DFO also resulted in
the increase in the percentage of annexin V-positive and PI-negative
cells. The results by multiple in vitro experimental model, showed that
IM/DFO induce CML cells to undergo apoptosis with the activation of
caspase9 and 3, the cleavage of PARP and reduced significantly in
parallel with BCR/ABL phosphorylation compared with treatment with IM or
DFO alone. Importantly, inhibition of NF-kB activity demonstrated that
IM/DFO-induced apoptotic pathway was regulated by the NF-kB signaling
cascade. To determine the effect of IM/DFO on NF-B transcriptional
activity, a plasmid containing the luciferase reporter regulated by NF-B
cis-acting elements was used. The results showed that IM/DFO decreased
NF-B transcriptional activity in K562 and KU812 cells, respectively,
compared to single treated cells. IM/DFO regulated the nuclear activation
of NF-B. In conclusion, this finding indicates that combination of
Imatinib and Deferasirox, promotes apoptosis of CML cells by sequential
regulation of the BCR/ABL expression followed by the inhibition of NF-kB
signaling pathway.

