Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the cancer gene targeting of clinical kinase inhibitor
drugs by combining cellular and biochemical profiling


[Purpose] Kinase inhibitors are a prime example of the success of
targeted therapy. Crucial to the development of targeted therapies is the
ability to couple drug response to genetic markers, such as mutations in
oncogenes and/or tumor suppressors, chromosomal rearrangements, and/or
gene amplifications. The efficacy of response to such markers is linked
with the biochemical characteristics of kinase inhibitors. However, it is
poorly understood what profiles are required to achieve the best
targeting. We have systematically compared the biochemical potency and
selectivity profiles of all kinase inhibitor drugs in clinical use with
their ability to inhibit cell proliferation in a panel of forty-four
human cancer cell lines from diverse tumor tissue origins.[Experimental
procedures] Proliferation assays were established for a panel of
forty-four human cancer cell lines licensed from the American Type
Culture Collection. The panel represents twenty-three of the most
frequently identified genetic changes in the COSMIC Cell Lines (CCL)
project in at least two cell lines. We profiled all twenty-five kinase
inhibitors in clinical use on the cancer cell line panel, together with a
number of classic cytotoxic agents for comparison. The proliferation
assay data were linked to genetic data from the CCL database by Anova and
volcano plot analysis. In parallel the biochemical profiles of all
twenty-five kinase inhibitor drugs were determined on a panel of 313
protein kinase enzyme activity assays. The biochemical profiling data
were used to interpret the cellular targeting compounds in terms of
biochemical potency, selectivity and kinase poly-pharmacology.[Results]
The suitability of the cell line panel was validated by confirming the
known sensitivity of mutant B-RAF to vemurafenib, of BCR-ABL to imatinib,
and EGFR overexpression to erlotinib. Mutation in SMAD4 was identified as
a novel drug sensitivity marker for EGFR inhibitors, while mutation in
the gene for -catenin was identified as a sensitivity marker for MEK
inhibitors, such as trametinib. When comparing compounds with similar
mechanisms, dabrafenib is more efficient at selectively inhibiting
BRAF-mutant transformed cells than vemurafenib. Of all ABL inhibitors,
imatinib has the best targeting efficacy. The compound that most
selectively inhibits growth of EGFR-overexpressing cell lines, is
gefitinib.[Conclusions] Cancer cell line profiling can be used to
identify novel sensitivity markers of drug response. Cancer cell line
profiling in combination with biochemical kinase profiling revealed
biochemical selectivity and potencies as prime determinants of on target
efficacy of kinase inhibitor drugs, the extent of which is
target-dependent. The combination of cell panel profiling and kinome
profiling is an important tool for the development of optimal targeted
therapies for kinases.

