Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of fatty acid synthase reduces mitochondrial
respiration and addiction of colorectal cancer cells to glycolysis


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN), a key enzyme of lipid biogenesis, is
significantly up regulated in colorectal cancer (CRC) and its activity is
associated with poor prognosis. Mitochondrial metabolism plays a crucial
role in cancer cells proliferation and survival. However, very little is
known about the role of de novo fatty acid synthesis in production of ATP
via beta-oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation in CRC. The purpose of
the present study was to determine: (i) the role of aberrant activation
of FASN in cellular respiration, (ii) contribution of endogenously
synthesized lipids to fatty acid oxidation, and (iii) consequences of
FASN inhibition on mitochondrial properties and redox homeostasis in
CRC.METHODS. We utilized KM20, HT29, and HCT116 CRC cells with stable
knockdown of FASN. Cellular oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and
extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were measured using XF Cell Mito
Stress and XF Glycolysis Stress tests, respectively. The XF Palmitate-BSA
conjugate was used to assess oxidation of fatty acids (FAO). OCR, ECAR
and FAO experiments were performed using the Seahorse XF96 Extracellular
Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, MA, USA).
Intracellular ROS and mitochondrial membrane potential was measured by
DCFDA and TMRE assays.RESULTS. We found that stable inhibition of FASN is
associated with a significant decrease in glycolysis in all tested CRC
cell lines. The glycolytic capacity and glycolytic reserve were
significantly decreased in HCT116 cell line; however, no significant
differences in these parameters were observed in HT29 and KM20 cells.
Knock-down of FASN led to a significant decrease in OCR in CRC cells that
is consistent with a decrease in cellular proliferation. Treatment with
etomoxir demonstrated that CRC cell lines have the different level of
dependence on fatty acid oxidation. Furthermore, using the Palmitate-BSA
substrate we showed that CRC cells primarily utilize endogenously
synthesized fatty acids and knockdown of FASN significantly decreases the
capacity of cells to oxidize fatty acids. Finally, our data suggest that
FASN regulates mitochondrial membrane potential and ROS production in
CRC.CONCLUSIONS. Fatty acid oxidation is a dominant bioenergetic pathway
in many cancers. This study suggests that up regulation of FASN and an
increase in the level of de novo synthesized lipids are crucial for
modulation of mitochondrial oxidative capacity in CRC cells. Furthermore,
our results proposes that inhibition of FASN and a decrease in
mitochondrial ATP production impair glycolysis in CRC cells. Together,
our work demonstrates an importance of FASN in re-programming cellular
energy metabolism, in particular, beta-oxidation. Further investigations
into the mechanisms of regulation of mitochondrial function by FASN and
interconnection with other metabolic pathways will uncover new
therapeutic approaches in CRC.

