Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of CD47 regulates cell bioenergetics and
autophagy to reduce breast tumor growth and protect against
anthracycline-mediated cardiac toxicity


Even though, molecular profiling of breast cancer has allowed for the
development of new therapeutic drugs, cytotoxic chemotherapy remains a
primary mode of therapy for many breast cancer patients including those
diagnosed with triple negative breast cancer. Pre-clinical and clinical
studies demonstrate that increased expression of CD47 is associated with
poor prognosis in several types of cancer, including breast tumors. Our
published evidence shows that blockade of CD47 enhances radiation-induced
growth delay of tumors while remarkably protecting soft tissues from
death associated to ionizing radiation. We now show that CD47 blockade
significantly sensitizes breast tumors to anthracycline chemotherapy
while protecting cardiac tissue from the off target effects of this drug.
4T1B breast cancer cells were implanted in the mammary fat-pad of Balb/C
mice and treated with saline, doxorubicin, CD47 morpholino (CD47M), or
CD47M with doxorubicin. Tumors of mice treated with saline tripled in
size. Doxorubicin treatment caused a reduction in tumor volume and
weight, but combining CD47 blockade and doxorubicin further reduced tumor
volume by over 60%. The reduction of tumor growth was associated with an
increased in PINK1 and Parkin gene expression, indicating activation of
mitochondrial turnover by mitophagy. Further studies using the Seahorse
XF-24 analyzer indicated that blockade of CD47 reduced glycolytic and
mitochondrial metabolism measured as the extracellular acidification rate
and oxygen consumption rate in 4T1B cells and human MDA-MB-231 cells. The
regulation of glycolytic mechanism is associated with a reduction in
glucose uptake and reduction in Glut-1 expression in breast tumors.
Metastatic spread of tumors to lungs was observed in saline treated
animals. Immunohistological analysis indicated that these lesions express
CD47. Moreover, we observed positive immunoreactivity to CD47 in clinical
samples of metastatic breast carcinoma indicating that CD47 signaling may
play an important role in tumor spread and its targeting could lead to
reduction of metastatic burden. One of the most common side effects of
doxorubicin chemotherapy is cardiac toxicity. Blockade of CD47 in tumor
bearing mice protected cardiac tissue indicated by reduction in fibrosis
and cell death. This was associated by an increase in autophagy gene
expression as demonstrated by the observed increase in ATG5 and ATG7.
Therefore blockade CD47 enhances doxorubicin reduction of breast tumor
growth in a syngeneic tumor model indicating that CD47 potentiates
anthracycline-mediated breast tumor therapy while protecting normal
tissue from death associated with cytotoxic therapy.

