Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth modulation of head and neck cancer via Sgk-1 inhibition: a
novel modality of local control


Introduction: Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin is frequently
aggressive in its biologic behavior, and the prognosis with metastatic
disease is dismal. Nevertheless it is highly curable if detected early,
usually via surgical excision. Large and repeat excision can cause
considerable functional and cosmetic deformity, and in advanced stages
may not be desirable. Serum glucocorticoid-regulated kinase-1 (SGK-1) is
a serine-threonine kinase that has recently been found to activate
-catenin, part of intracellular components of the Wnt-signaling pathway.
-catenin has been implicated in promoting the stem cell compartment, as
well as tumor growth. SGK-1 has been shown to inactivate glycogen
synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3). Importantly, GSK-3 deactivates -catenin while
also serving as a pivotal regulator of the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore and cell fate determinant. In this study we tested the
effects of local SGK-1 inhibition on tumor growth, as well as expression
of CD44 and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2). CD44 is
recognized as a key cell surface marker for stem cells in human head and
neck cancer, while HER-2 is a trans-membrane protein linked to its
migration and invasion. Methods: A human SCC cell line (HTB41) was
established in vitro. Athymic mice (n=12) were then injected with
HTB41(2x106 cells/animal), and tumor growth monitored. At 6mm, tumors
were injected with an SGK-1 Inhibitor (Group 1) twice weekly (20 mg/mouse
per injection). Controls (Group 2) received vehicle only (PBS), Group 3
weekly intraperitoneal Cisplatin (5mg/kg), and Group 4 both Cisplatin and
SGK-1 inhibitor. Once the first tumor reached 12mm in size, the mice were
sacrificed and tumor cells subjected to flow-cytometry, and statistical
analysis. 2-tailed t-tests were performed, and p-values Introduction:
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin is frequently aggressive in its
biologic behavior, and the prognosis with metastatic disease is dismal.
Nevertheless it is highly curable if detected early, usually via surgical
excision. Large and repeat excision can cause considerable functional and
cosmetic deformity, and in advanced stages may not be desirable. Serum
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase-1 (SGK-1) is a serine-threonine kinase
that has recently been found to activate -catenin, part of intracellular
components of the Wnt-signaling pathway. -catenin has been implicated in
promoting the stem cell compartment, as well as tumor growth. SGK-1 has
been shown to inactivate glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3). Importantly,
GSK-3 deactivates -catenin while also serving as a pivotal regulator of
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore and cell fate determinant.
In this study we tested the effects of local SGK-1 inhibition on tumor
growth, as well as expression of CD44 and human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER-2). CD44 is recognized as a key cell surface marker for
stem cells in human head and neck cancer, while HER-2 is a trans-membrane
protein linked to its migration and invasion. Methods: A human SCC cell
line (HTB41) was established in vitro. Athymic mice (n=12) were then
injected with HTB41(2x106 cells/animal), and tumor growth monitored. At
6mm, tumors were injected with an SGK-1 Inhibitor (Group 1) twice weekly
(20 mg/mouse per injection). Controls (Group 2) received vehicle only
(PBS), Group 3 weekly intraperitoneal Cisplatin (5mg/kg), and Group 4
both Cisplatin and SGK-1 inhibitor. Once the first tumor reached 12mm in
size, the mice were sacrificed and tumor cells subjected to
flow-cytometry, and statistical analysis. 2-tailed t-tests were
performed, and p-values <0.05 considered significant. Results: The local
inhibition of SGK-1 in combination with Cisplatin showed a significantly
slower growth than the control group (p = 0.015). The growth rates were
1.80 +/- 0.12, 2.27 +/- 0.51, 0.89 +/- 0.87, 0.68 +/- 0.40 mm2/day (mean
+/- sd) for Groups 1 to 4 respectively. Furthermore, Group 1 showed a
right shift compared to controls. At 3%, CD44 expression was highest in
Group 2 versus 1%, 0.2 % and 0.07% in Groups 1, 3, and 4. HER-2+ cells
were 1% in Group 2, and 0.2%, 0.1% and 0.02% in Groups 1, 3 and 4.
Conclusions: Decreased expression of CD44 in Group 4 suggests depletion
of tumor stem cells, and may imply less metastatic potential. In
addition, lower HER-2 expression in Group 4 may indicate less malignant
behavior and perhaps better survival. It should be noted that other
pathways might have quickly bypassed a preliminary growth suppressing
effect of SGK-1 inhibition alone. Finally, SGK-1 inhibition via local
injection added to systemic Cisplatin increases tumor growth suppression,
and represents a potential modality of local control for palliation in
advanced cases.

