Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea polyphenols inhibit the growth and induce death of
melanoma cells by initiating DNA damage and inhibition of class I histone
deacetylases


Melanoma remains a leading cause of death from skin diseases due to its
propensity to metastasis, and is increasing rapidly in children.
Although, melanoma is less common than other types of skin cancers,
however, it causes the majority (75%) of skin cancer-related deaths. The
average survival of patients with advanced stage of melanoma is less than
a year because no effective strategies are available for metastatic
melanoma. Since melanoma is a highly malignant cancer, an approach that
can inhibit its growth and progression may facilitate the development of
an effective strategy for its treatment or prevention. As green tea
polyphenols (GTPs) have been shown to have anti-skin carcinogenic
effects, we have examined the chemotherapeutic effect of GTPs on the
growth of different melanoma cell lines and the molecular mechanisms
underlying these effects using an in vitro model. Treatment of melanoma
cells (A375 and Hs294t) with GTPs (0, 20, 40 and 60 g/ml) for 24 and 48 h
significantly inhibited histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, reduced the
levels of class 1 HDAC proteins (HDAC 1, 2, 3 and 8) and enhanced histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity in a dose-dependent manner. These
effects of GTPs on melanoma cells were associated with DNA damage, which
was evident by Comet assay, and significant reduction in the viability of
melanoma cells and induction of cell death. Concomitant treatment of
melanoma cells with a proteasome inhibitor, MG132, prevented GTPs-induced
degradation of class I HDACs, suggesting that GTPs reduced the levels of
HDAC proteins in melanoma cells through proteasomal degradation. Valproic
acid, an inhibitor of HDACs, exhibited a similar pattern of reduced
viability and induction of death of melanoma cells (A375 and Hs294t).
Treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with GTPs resulted in an alteration of
cell cycle regulatory proteins of G0/G1 phase, and that is a decrease in
the levels of cyclin D1, D2 and E, and cyclin dependent kinases, CDK2,
CDK4 and CDK6 in a dose-dependent manner. Simultaneously, it was also
observed that the levels of p21 and p53 proteins were also increased in
the cells after the treatment with GTPs, which may have a role in G0/G1
phase arrest and DNA damage. Together, our study provides new insights
into the role of class I HDACs in the chemotherapeutic effects of green
tea polyphenols on melanoma cells.

