Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoprotein enrichment pathway analysis tools for studying
cancer signaling


Cancer development and progression is driven by dysregulated signaling
transduction, which is predominantly regulated by serine, threonine, and
tyrosine phosphorylation. Consequently, MS-based phosphoproteomics, which
can identify and quantitate thousands of phosphopeptides, provides a
powerful quantitative tool to detect and comprehensively catalog
alterations in cancer signaling cascades that cannot be captured by
analysis of DNA or RNA alone. Unfortunately, the complexity of the
datasets generated by these advanced proteomic methodologies are still
not matched with well-established or fully tested bioinformatics tools to
extract critical pathways from these high-dimensional phosphoprotein
data.Here, we present two approaches for identifying pathways with
altered phosphorylation patterns: Protein Set Enrichment Analysis (PSEA)
and Protein Interaction Enrichment Network Analysis (PIENA). Development
of these tools was inspired by two published methods utilizing gene
expression datasets to identify disrupted gene sets: Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) and Gene Interaction Enrichment Network Analysis (GIENA),
respectively. PSEA, through pathway scoring, extracts pathways that show
a uniform directional phosphorylation change through all protein members
of that set. As in the traditional GSEA method, an enrichment score is
calculated for each pathway based on intensity values from all detected
phosphopeptides. The second method, PIENA, looks for notable differences
in phosphorylation between phosphopeptide pairs. Ultimately, this
approach identifies pathways enriched with altered phosphoprotein
interactions.Both methods have been used to identify changes in signaling
states for two lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, A549 and H358, treated
with either control or a novel phosphatase activator with anti-cancer
properties. Both PSEA and PIENA identify pathways classically implicated
in cancer, including p53, mitosis and cell cycle progression, insulin
secretion, immune regulation, and RAS signaling cascades. Furthermore,
the ERK pathway is consistently found to be significantly disrupted in
both A549 and H358. This corroborates biological findings that this novel
drug has activity against KRAS mutated cell lines. Although future
cellular experiments will help to confirm the detailed mechanism of this
drug's effects, our current results demonstrate the advantage of these
new pathway identification tools in providing unbiased and global
identification of key drivers of signaling.

