Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACP-196: A second generation Btk inhibitor demonstrates biologic
activity in a canine model of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma


Recent recognition of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling as a critical
factor in the progression of B-cell malignancies, including non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL), has resulted in the development of numerous targeted
therapeutics that inhibit this signaling pathway. Ibrutinib, a small
molecule inhibitor of Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk) a key signaling
molecule in the BCR pathway, has demonstrated significant clinical
activity in a broad range of B-cell cancers. ACP-196 is a second
generation Btk inhibitor with increased target selectivity and enhanced
in vivo potency compared with ibrutinib and, thus, may represent an
improvement over its predecessor. With the following studies, we sought
to evaluate ACP-196 in canine models of B-cell NHL with the ultimate goal
of providing the preclinical data necessary to move ACP-196 into human
clinical trials. Using two immunophenotypically confirmed canine B-cell
lymphoma cell lines, CLBL-1 and 17-71, we demonstrate potent in vitro
inhibition of activation of Btk and the downstream effectors ERK 1/2 and
PLC2 following 1 hour of treatment with ACP-196 at concentrations as low
as 10nM. In vivo studies were performed in companion dogs as part of an
ongoing clinical trial. Twelve dogs with immunophenotypically confirmed,
spontaneously occurring B-cell NHL were orally administered ACP-196 at
dosages of 2.5mg/kg every 24 hours (6 dogs), 5mg/kg every 24 hours (5
dogs), or 10mg/kg every12 hours (1 dog). Btk occupancy in peripheral
blood and lymphoma cells was assessed using a biotin-tagged probe derived
from ACP-196. Using this assay we found that at 2.5mg/kg full Btk
occupancy was achieved in peripheral B cells 3h after dosing for all
dogs, except for a single dog with high peripheral B-cell count. At 24
hours after dosing, 83-99% Btk target occupancy was observed for all
dogs. Partial response, as assessed by a modified RECIST scheme, was
achieved in 2 dogs in the 2.5mg/kg group and the dog in the 10mg/kg
group. Upon relapse, one of the responders in the 2.5mg/kg group was dose
escalated to 10mg/kg q12 on day 42 and partial response from relapse was
reestablished. Of the remaining 9 dogs, 3 achieved stable disease for >
28 days and 6 discontinued the study after developing progressive disease
within 28 days of starting treatment. In total, to date, 3 dogs achieved
a partial response, 3 dogs stable disease, and 6 dogs progressive
disease. ACP-196 was well tolerated with only mild anorexia noted in some
dogs. These data demonstrate that ACP-196 has single agent biologic
activity in a spontaneous large animal model of human NHL. Studies in
dogs with NHL are ongoing to define regimens prior to initiation of human
phase I clinical trials. Additional cohorts are planned combining ACP-196
with a phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) delta-specific inhibitor.

