Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying clonal T-cell receptor sequences and monitoring
recurrent/persistent disease by T-cell receptor repertoire profiling in
patients with mature T-cell neoplasms


This study demonstrates the broad potential of high-throughput sequencing
of T-cell receptors to contribute to the post-therapeutic monitoring of T
cell neoplasia in mature T-cell neoplasms. Identification of recurrent or
persistent disease in T-cell neoplasms is important for individualized
patient care. While patients with T-cell lineage lymphomas and leukemias
are a small subset of all lymphoma and leukemia patients, the incidence
of refractory disease in these patients can be higher than patients with
B-cell lineage neoplasms. We recently developed a method to sequence the
diversity of the TCR CDR3 rearrangements (Blood. 2009; 114(19): 4099-107)
that exploits the capacity of high-throughput sequencing (HTS) to
document the diverse repertoire of TCRB CDR3 chains simultaneously. These
assays can describe both the breadth of the T-cell repertoire and
quantify individual clones. This technology thus provides a potential
opportunity to identify and then track the presence and frequency of
clones in the context of an evolving, adaptive immune system, during the
course of ongoing therapy.We amplified the TCR repertoire of 98 index
samples to identify high-frequency TCRB or TCRG rearrangements. Clones
were classified as neoplastic if occurring at a proportion greater than 7
standard deviations above the mean frequency of the most abundant
rearranged TCRB in control samples of blood, bone marrow, or lymphoid
tissues. Eight-four percent of index samples, based on these criteria,
had a tractable TCR rearrangement. Samples that lacked a detectable TCRB
clone were excluded. For 35 patients, at least one subsequent follow-up
sample was available. For these 59 samples, we sequenced the TCRB
repertoire to screen for the corresponding index clone. We find that for
most samples, high-throughput sequencing concurs with currently
available, routine clinical measures of disease, such as clinical flow
cytometry or PCR-based evaluation of TCRG rearrangement. High-throughput
sequencing of TCRB was concordant in 46 samples with identification of
the index clones and in 7 additional samples without the identification
of the index clones. However, 5 of 59 samples were only positive for
recurrent disease based on HTS only, and 1 of the 59 samples was only
positive for recurrent disease based on current diagnostic technology but
not HTS.We find that for most disease diagnoses - high-throughput
sequencing identifies a tractable clone. In addition, we find that for
most samples, high-throughput sequencing concurs with currently
available, routine clinical measures of disease, such as clinical flow
cytometry or PCR-based evaluation of TCRG rearrangement and T-cell
repertoire analysis may be useful for clinical laboratory evaluation of
patients with T-cell neoplasms.

