Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a bone marrow-derived MDSC subset that promotes
the growth of colon carcinoma liver metastases


The hepatic microenvironment can play an important role in promoting
liver metastasis. We and others have shown that when metastatic carcinoma
cells enter the liver, a rapid inflammatory response mediated by TNF- is
triggered, enabling tumor transendothelial migration and metastasis. TNF-
binds to the cell surface through two receptors; the p55/p60 TNFR1 and
the p75/p80 TNFR2. To elucidate the roles of these receptors in the
inflammatory cascade and in liver colonization by tumor cells, we used
mice with tnfr1, tnfr2 and combined tnfr1/tnfr2 gene deficiencies and
investigated parameters of the host response and the outcome of
metastasis in these mice using the highly metastatic mouse colon
carcinoma MC-38 and lung carcinoma H-59 cells. We found that experimental
liver metastasis following intrasplenic/portal inoculation of the tumor
cells was markedly reduced in TNFR2-/- and even further in
TNFR1-/-/TNFR2-/- female mice as compared to wild-type controls but no
reduction was observed in TNFR1-/- mice. To identify the underlying
mechanism(s), we investigated changes in the liver microenvironment
following tumor inoculation using a combination of immunohistochemistry,
confocal microscopy, qRT-PCR, and cytokine/chemokines profiling. We found
that while in wild-type and TNFR1-/- mice, VCAM-1 expression on the
sinusoidal endothelium was significantly upregulated within 16 hr post
tumor injection, it was unchanged in TNFR2-/- and double negative female
mice. In addition, qRT-PCR analysis revealed that the production of the
neutrophil chemokine CXCL1, while upregulated in control mice, was
suppressed in TNFR2-/- mice. These changes were associated with a
parallel decrease in Ly6G+ neutrophil recruitment into extravascular,
pro-metastatic niches 16-48 hr post tumor inoculation. Interestingly,
these reductions were not observed in male TNFR2-/- mice and
correspondingly, their metastatic burden was not reduced relative to
control mice. Taken together, the results suggest that TNFR2 plays a
critical and gender-specific role in Ly6G+ cell recruitment into the
tumor-microenvironment by regulating sinusoidal endothelial VCAM-1
expression and chemokine production. In turn, the recruitment of these
cells into extravascular pro-metastatic niches appears to promote liver
metastasis.

