Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of Rap1Gap in the progression from DCIS to
invasive breast carcinoma


Understanding the underlying mechanisms that drive malignant progression
of breast cancer is important. The purpose of this study is to define the
role of Rap1Gap in the progression of ductal carcinoma in-situ (DCIS) to
invasive cancer. We employed an in-vitro three-dimensional (3D) overlay
model that provides a physiologically relevant microenvironment to study
mechanisms of mammary gland development and malignant progression. We
previously employed next generation sequencing (NGS) and identified 63
consistently upregulated genes in three DCIS lines (SUM102, SUM225,
MCF10.DCIS) compared to non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. To gain
insight into common transcriptional elements of co-regulated genes that
may be critical to the DCIS phenotype, we have mined our NGS data using
Frameworker (Genomatix). The 63 upregulated genes are associated with 244
candidate promoters out of a total of 82,703 promoters in the entire
human genome. Our analysis shows that the common framework
RXRF-ZF02-ZF02-PLAG-HDBP is only present in the promoters of three genes:
RAP1GAP, SPRY4 and PDGFB. All of these genes are upregulated in our DCIS
signature, which means that this framework is hugely enriched (336-fold)
over what would be expected by chance. Rap1Gap has tumor suppressor
properties; its functions, via regulation of Rap1 activity, include
regulation of cell adhesion, suppression of cell proliferation and
metastasis. In other epithelial cancers, loss of Rap1Gap has been linked
to epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion. To begin
study of Rap1Gap in breast cancer progression, we performed
immunohistochemistry. We show strong Rap1Gap staining in DCIS with little
to no expression in myoepithelial and stromal components. Immunoblotting
results show that Rap1Gap levels in MCF10.CA1d cells (a model of invasive
carcinoma) are reduced compared to those in MCF10.DCIS cells. Rap1Gap
expression is low in additional basal breast cancer cell lines, but high
in luminal ER+ /PR+ cell lines. We propose that over-expression of
Rap1Gap may serve as a tumor suppressive mechanism in DCIS; subsequent
reduction of Rap1Gap may be a switch for EMT and progression to an
invasive phenotype.

