Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K inhibitor, idelalisib, inhibits transcription and
translation through PI3K/Akt pathway in mantle cell lymphoma


PI3K is the major PI3K family class I isoform expressed in B-cells that
is known to promote cancer cell growth and survival. PI3K pathway is
activated through cell surface receptors, e.g. B-cell receptor signaling.
This suggests that PI3K is a therapeutic target for B-cell hematological
malignancies. Idelalisib is a potent and selective PI3K inhibitor
(IC50=19nM) that is currently under investigation in Phase II/III trials
in B-cell neoplasms. In solid tumors, it has been established that
PI3K/Akt axis regulates transcription and translation processes. Based on
the overexpression and hyperactivity of PI3K in B-cell lymphoma such as
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), and PI3K-specific inhibition by idelalisib,
we hypothesized that idelalisib treatment will 1) impact the
transcription and translation processes that are PI3K/Akt-dependent, 2)
disrupt RNA and protein synthetic capacity, and 3) decrease short-lived
oncogenic mRNA and proteins levels that are important for MCL cell
survival. Idelalisib (0.5 to 5M) induced modest levels of apoptosis (20%
decrease in Mino) were detected with 72hr incubation of idelalisib (0.5
to 1M). Consistent with cell line data, in B-cell lymphoma primary cells,
transcription levels were decreased by 20% or >50% following a 24hr
treatment with 1 or 5M idelalisib, respectively; and a 40% decrease of
translation level was detected with 5M idelalisib. In Jeko-1, early
response genes MCL1 mRNA level was reduced following 24hr idelalisib
treatment, whereas the other mRNAs (PIM2, MYC, CCND1) were decreased to a
lesser extent. Mcl-1 and cyclin D1 protein levels were decreased in
JeKo-1 and Mino cells following short incubation of idelalisib (0.5 or
1M). In summary, idelalisib was effective in reducing phosphorylation of
Akt and its downstream effectors in MCL cell lines (GSK-3, 4E-BP1 and
S6). Idelalisib inhibits global RNA and protein synthesis, and decreases
the levels of short-lived survival proteins. Collectively, these data
imply that similar to solid tumors, PI3K regulates key factors involved
in gene transcription and protein translation in MCL.

