Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of systemically-deliverable telomerase-specific
oncolytic adenovirus


Background: Oncolytic virotherapy is an emerging treatment strategy that
allows to destroy cancer tissues only but not normal tissues. We
previously developed a telomerase-specific oncolytic adenovirus
(Telomelysin) whose replication is controlled by the human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter, and the clinical safety and
pharmacokinetics of Telomelysin has been already evaluated in the phase I
clinical trial conducted in the US. While oncolytic adenoviruses can
produce promising treatment efficacy, their application is basically
limited to locoregional administration because of nonspecific trapping in
the liver and neutralization by immune response after systemic delivery.
Nano-sized materials have been identified as effective and attractive
drug carriers in the fields of cancer treatment and diagnosis. Liposome
is one of the most popular and widely-used drug carriers. In this study,
we investigated the possibility of systemic delivery of
telomerase-specific oncolytic adenoviral plasmid DNA via lipid
encapsulation as an alternative approach to overcome the shortcomings of
oncolytic adenovirotherapy.Methods: TelomeScan, a modified Telomelysin
expressing the green fluorescence protein (GFP), is used in this study.
Cytotoxic activity of TelomeScan plasmid DNAs encapsulated by liposomes
(Lipo-TelomeScan-pDNA) against various types of human cancer cell lines
including HCT 116, a human colorectal carcinoma cell line, and MKN1, a
human gastric carcinoma cell line, were evaluated by XTT assay and
compared with liposome complexes of GFP plasmid DNA controlled by the
cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter (Lipo-GFP-pDNA) as a control
agent.Results: Freeze-thaw procedure proved that viable oncolytic
adenoviruses were successfully produced in H1299, a human lung cancer
cell line, after Lipo-TelomeScan-pDNA transfection. Lipo-TelomeScan-pDNA
showed cytotoxic activity on various types of cancer cell lines.
Lipo-TelomeScan-pDNA killed HCT116 and MKN1 cells in a dose-dependent
manner and produced more effective cytotoxic activity than
Lipo-GFP-pDNA.Conclusions: Lipo-TelomeScan-pDNA proved potent cytotoxic
effects on cancer cells by producing viable oncolytic adenoviruses. In
vivo examination is needed for the next step.

