Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genome and transcriptome analyses on small cell lung
cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a malignant neuroendocrine tumor of the
lung accounting for 15% of all lung cancer cases. SCLC is a highly
aggressive disease characterized by early metastasis and a high mortality
rate of 95%. The standard of care is chemotherapy, which remains largely
ineffective due to quick relapse of chemo-resistant tumors. To date,
targeted therapies have not been identified for the treatment of SCLC.In
order to comprehensively characterize the genomic alterations in this
cancer type, we sought for a worldwide collaboration to collect rare
surgical specimen of SCLC patients. Thus, we were able to study copy
number alterations in 130 cases, and performed whole genome sequencing on
over 78 tumor-normal pairs and transcriptome sequencing of at least 62
primary tumors and 16 SCLC cell lines. In a complementary approach we
analyzed tumors derived from a murine SCLC model that was established by
the conditional inactivation of Rb1 and Trp53 in lung epithelial cells
(Meuwissen et al., 2003). We collected copy number alteration data for 20
mouse SCLC cases and performed exome and genome sequencing of at least 8
tumors derived from SCLC mice which additionally harbored a conditional
knockout of Rbl2 (Schaffer et al., 2010).Human SCLC tumors comprise large
areas of copy number alterations, revealing focal amplifications of MYC
transcription factors. In line with this finding recurrent MYCL1
amplifications were also detected in murine SCLC. Human primary tumors
were additionally found to harbor focal homozygous deletions of the
CDKN2A locus. Furthermore, low frequent amplifications of oncogenes were
identified among which therapeutic tractable FGFR1 amplifications were
observed in approximately 6% of the cases.The genomic data allowed for
the comprehensive characterization of the TP53 and RB1 locus at higher
resolution, aiding in the identification of mutations, hemizygous and
homozygous deletions, and larger genomic rearrangements. Consequently,
lesions of TP53 and RB1 were found to affect both alleles in almost 100%
of the cases analyzed. Other TP53 and RB1 family members were also
altered in human tumor specimen thus supporting the mouse models for
SCLC. In line with previous findings PTEN inactivation was found in 14%
of the cases. Furthermore, recurrent mutations were detected in
neuroendocrine specific genes and in chromatin and histone modifiers,
among which the inactivation of the histone-acyl-transferases CREBBP and
EP300 occurred at a frequency of 24%.In summary, as a continuation of our
initial pilot study on 29 SCLC exomes (Peifer et al., 2012) this
comprehensive large scale genomic analysis provides further insight into
the complex genomic architecture of SCLC tumors and substantially
improves the resolution to detect genomic alterations. This larger SCLC
tumor cohort allows for the identification of low frequent alterations
that might play a decisive role in the development and progression of
this disease.

