Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of HER2 overexpressing early stage breast disease
progression by lapatinib


Currently, Tamoxifen and Aromatase inhibitors are used for prevention of
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer; however, there is no
effective prevention strategy for ER- breast cancer. HER2 overexpression
(HER2+) can be detected in up to 60% early stage breast lesions, such as
atypical hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Up to 40%
of ER- breast cancers are HER2+. Thus, targeting HER2 signaling may be an
effective chemoprevention strategy for these ER- and HER2+ breast cancer.
Here, we stable introduced ErbB2-expressing retroviruses into the ER-,
non-transformed MCF10A cells (MCF10A.B2) to establish an ER- and HER2+
early breast disease model. We show that Lapatinib, a FDA-approved dual
tyrosine kinase inhibitor for both HER2 and EGFR, reduced the
proliferation rate and increased the apoptosis in MCF10A.B2 cells. In 3D
culture, Lapatinib treatment starting at day 6 prevented the MCF10A.B2
cells from forming abnormal acini, and the numbers of DCIS-like acini
have been significantly decreased compared to control group. Untreated
MCF10A.B2 cells forms DCIS-like acini in 3D culture by day 10, which have
been reverted to normal or ADH-like acini when lapatinib treatment
started by day 10. Furthermore, MMTV-neu mouse model develop ER- mammary
tumors in 6.4 months, whereas lapatinib treatment (30mg/kg/day, six days
per week) starting at 10 weeks of age significantly delayed the tumor
initiation and progression in this mouse model as detected by mammary
gland biopsy and fiber optic micro-endoscope (FOME) imaging. Mice treated
with lapatinib had fewer premalignant lesions and reduced noninvasive
tumors in their mammary glands, which are correlated with reduced
proliferation rate and increased apoptosis rate, indicating that
lapatinib is a promising agent for the prevention/intervention of ER- and
HER2+ breast cancers. To identify effective and reliable biomarkers to
assess the risk of ER-/HER2+ lesions and efficacy of lapatinib for
prevention and intervention, cDNA microarray and reverse phase protein
array (RPPA) were performed on MCF10A.B2 cells and control MCF10A cells.
We have identified several molecular pathways activated by HER2+ in this
model which will be tested for their roles in the initiation of mammary
tumors and as potential targets for prevention of ER-/HER2+ breast
disease. Our study brings better understanding of the mechanism
underlying ER-/HER2+ early stage breast disease progression to cancer and
could be rapidly translated into the clinic for prevention of ER-/HER2+
breast cancers.

