Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioenergetics of T cells in the context of adoptive immunotherapy


Tumor-specific T cell therapy has been used as an experimental approach
for an anti-tumor therapy (Sadelain M 2003, Gattinoni L 2006). Adoptive T
cell transfer therapies rely on ex vivo T cell isolation, transduction,
activation and expansion of autologous tumor-reactive T cell populations
prior to patient administration (Yee C 2002, Dudley ME 2003, Bollard CM
2004).The metabolic changes occurring in modified T-cells are the object
of growing interest. For example, it has been shown that quiescent T
cells display low energetic and biosynthetic demands, generating ATP
through the TCA cycle and OXPHOS (oxidative phosphorylation). Activated T
cells undergo conversion from a resting to an active state and ATP
production switches from OXPHOS to high glycolysis. Our objective was to
assess T cell metabolism and evaluate changes in glycolytic and
mitochnodrial function that occur during transduction and expansion,
prior to administration of T-cells in adoptive immunotherapy
protocols.Methods. Human T-cells were isolated from buffy coat using
ficoll separation. 48 hours after phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulation,
cells were transduced with the retroviral vector bearing chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) targeting PSMA (Maher, Brentjens et al. 2002), and
transduction efficacy was assessed by FACS. T-cells further were
stimulated by exposure to antigen-presenting cells, APC. The metabolic
profiles were determined at different steps of T cell stimulation and
transduction. A Seahorse XF96 Analyzer was used to measure glycolysis
(extracellular acidification rate, ECAR) and the oxygen consumption rate
(OCR), a measure of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS).Results:
Glycolysis and oxygen consumption was low in resting non-stimulated
cells. Both CAR-transduced and non-transduced T cells increased
glycolysis (5-fold), oxygen consumption (3-fold) and ATP-linked OCR
following PHA stimulation. No significant metabolic differences were
observed between CAR-transduced and non-transduced T cells. High
glycolytic activity was maintained by T cells over the 25 day course of T
cell transduction and expansion. Mitochondrial function (oxygen
consumption) declined during this period. Restimulation by exposure to
antigen-presenting cells resulted in a small mitochondrial response in
transduced T cells, whereas glycolysis remained high and showed no
additional response.Conclusion: Glycolysis (ECAR) remains high, whereas
oxygen consumption (OCR and OXPHOS) declines during T cell preparation
for adoptive T cell therapy. Whether the specific changes in glucose
metabolism and mitochondria respiration can influence cytotoxic function
remains to be elucidated.

