Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron chelation inhibits mTOR activity in cancer cells


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a critical role in regulating
cell proliferation and survival through sensing environmental cues. mTOR
functions as at least two complexes (mTORC1/2). In cancer cells, mTOR
activity is often deregulated. Intracellular iron levels are higher in
cancer cells than in normal cells mainly due to the increased requirement
of iron for proliferation. Thus, cancer cells are more sensitive to iron
chelation than normal cells. Iron chelators have been used as traditional
treatment for iron overload diseases. Recent studies have shown that iron
chelators possess potent anticancer activity. However, the underlying
mechanism is not well understood. In this study, we found that ciclopirox
olamine (CPX), an iron chelator and off-patent antifungal drug, inhibited
cell proliferation and induced cell death in human head and neck cancer
cells (PCI-13 and FaDu), breast adenocarcinoma (MDA-MB-231), human
rhabdomyosarcoma (Rh30), and skin squamous cell carcinoma (SRB-M7) cells.
Similar results were observed using Dp44mT, another iron chelator.
Concurrently, CPX and Dp44mT inhibited mTORC1 signaling in the cells.
This is evidenced by the findings that treatment with the iron chelators
inhibited phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1, two best known effector
molecules of mTORC1, which could be blocked by addition of ferrous
sulfate, but not cuprous sulfate. At the same time, the addition of
ferrous sulfate prevented cancer cell death. The findings suggest that
the inhibitory effect of CPX or Dp44mT on mTORC1 function was attributed
to selective chelation of iron in the cells. Mechanistically, chelation
of iron did not activate protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), but induced
raptor (S792) phosphorylation and disrupted mTORC1 integrity. Of note,
the effect of iron chelation on mTORC2 was cell line dependent. Further
research may enhance our understanding the role of iron in the regulation
of mTOR signaling.

