Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New inhibitors the tyrosine kinase ACK1/TNK2 active in prostate,
breast and pancreatic cancer


ACK1, is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that is aberrantly activated,
over expressed or mutated in many cancer cell types. It interacts with
several important ligand-activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), for
example, EGFR, MerTK, HER2, PDGFR and insulin receptor to initiate
intracellular signaling cascades. ACK1 activation has been reported in
various cancers including prostate, breast and pancreatic tumors. We have
shown that the androgen receptor (AR) and AKT are two major downstream
effectors of ACK1. ACK1 directly phosphorylates AKT at Tyr176 resulting
in AKT membrane localization and activation. We have also found that in
prostate cancer cells ACK1 phosphorylates AR at Tyr-267 in an
androgen-independent manner. Tyr284-phosphorylated-ACK1,
Tyr176-phosphorylated-AKT and Tyr267-phosphorylated-AR levels are
positively correlated with the severity of disease progression, and
inversely correlated with the survival of patients with prostate cancer.
Similarly, ACK1 mediated AKT tyrosine phosphorylation was found to
correlate positively with breast cancer progression. Further, we have
shown that a 5,6-biaryl-furo[2,3-d]pyrimidine inhibitor of ACK1 (AIM-100)
inhibits ACK1 activation and suppresses pTyr267-AR phosphorylation and
AKT Tyr176-phosphorylation, inhibiting AR and AKT activity. These
findings indicate that Ack1 is prognostic of progression of prostate,
breast and pancreatic cancer and inhibitors of ACK1 activity have
potential as novel cancer therapeutic agents.We will discuss the
development of new potent ACK1 inhibitors by fragment-recombination and
structure-based design by incorporating fragments of key ACK1 inhibitors.
Focused chemical libraries were developed and structure activity
relationships will be described. The work described has produced
compounds capable of inhibiting ACK1 in vitro at low nanomolar
concentrations. We have used an ELISA based assay that measures the
ability of ACK1 to phosphorylate a peptide derived from AKT, as a primary
screening assay. ACK1 inhibition of hits was confirmed in the 33P ATP
Hotspot assay platform. Selected compounds from the library have been
shown to inhibit ACK1 autophosphorylation and the phosphorylation of AR
at Tyr267, a surrogate for ACK1 inhibition in vivo. Furthermore we will
show that ACK1 is a promising drug target for cancer therapy.

