Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of cancer induced blood coagulation in cancer
diagnosis and therapy


A large body of clinical evidence indicates that abnormal coagulation
occurs in a variety of cancers, especially invasive cancers. If cancer
clusters erode adjacent normal or tumor vessels, hemorrhage may occur,
and fibrin clots immediately form in situ to stop the bleeding. The
fibrin clots are subsequently replaced by collagen, similar to the case
in the normal wound healing process. Although there are many points in
common between cancer-induced stroma and normal wound healing, the
critical difference between the two is that the pathophysiological
condition in cancer lasts for as long as cancer cells survive in the body
(Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2012).First, we successfully developed a mAb that
reacts only with human insoluble fibrin, not human fibrinogen (Cancer Sci
2011). In contrast to previously reported anti-fibrin monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs), our anti-fibrin clot mAb (clone 102-10) recognizes an
unexplored hole that is uncovered only when a fibrin clot forms. The
epitope of the 102-10 mAb was mapped to a hydrophobic region on the
B-chain that interacted closely with a counterpart region on the -chain
in the soluble state. New anti-B and anti- mAbs specific for peptides
lining the discovered hole appeared to bind exclusively to fibrin clots.
Analysis of the kinetics of fibrin clot deposition using 102-10 in
several disease models indicated that fibrin clot formation occurs only
in the acute phase of the disease process, thrombosis, inflammation or
trauma, and that these clots virtually disappear within a few weeks to be
substituted by collagen. Then, we developed a new PET probe using 102-10.
The radiolabelled mAb was injected into mice bearing chemically induced
spontaneous tumors, and the probe showed clear and specific accumulation
in the tumors. We named this detection strategy cancer stromal targeting
(CAST) diagnois. Immunohistochemistry using this mAb revealed higher
fibrin deposition in WHO grade 4 gliomas than in lower-grade gliomas.
Because erosive tumors are highly likely to show micro-hemorrhages, even
early asymptomatic tumors detected with radiolabeled 102-10 mAb may be
aggressively malignant (Sci. Rep. 2013).In conclusion, CAST diagnosis and
therapy based on anti-insoluble fibrin mAb may be a useful new strategy
in the field of oncology.

