Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIM-1 is a novel therapeutic target in renal cell carcinoma


Background. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is characterized by lack of early
warning signs, diverse clinical manifestations, absence of a reliable
diagnostic and predictive biomarker, and resistance to targeted therapy.
Given the high incidence and worse prognosis, novel approaches for
diagnosis, management and treatment of RCC are urgently needed. Kidney
Injury Molecule-1 (KIM-1) is not expressed in normal kidney tissues but
markedly up-regulated in dedifferentiated proximal tubular epithelial
cells following renal injury. We demonstrated KIM-1 is expressed
ubiquitoulsy by both primary and metastatic lesions of clear cell and
papillary renal cell carcinoma, while barely detectable in other subtypes
of RCC. The ectodomain of KIM-1 molecule cleaves by matrix
metaloproteinases and sheds into surround milieu. In the present study,
we investigated the role of KIM-1 in the pathogenesis of RCC. Methods.
KIM-1 is stably transfected in immortalized tubular epithelial cells
(LLC-PK1, gain-of-function) and KIM-1 was knockdown in RCC cell lines
(loss-of-function) using lentiviral apporach and interoggated KIM-1
function in carcinogenesis. Results. Heterologous expression of KIM-1
increased cell proliferation, induced anchorage indepdent growth,
increased migration and invasion potential, and increased the secreation
of tumor promoting fractors, including TGF beta and IL-6 in immortalized
tubular epithelial cells (PK1-KIM-1); while depletion of KIM-1 in RCC
cells leads to cell cycle arrest at G1 phase and senescence. Recently, we
and others have demonstrated that KIM-1 is a phosphatildyl serine
receptor and the expression of KIM-1 converts a normal epithelial cell
into a semi professional phagocyte and facilitates the removal of
apoptotic and necrotic cells by recognizing phosphotidyl serine (PS) on
their cell surface. Our data suggests that during this process, tumor
epithelial cells undergo reprogramming and secrete and activate cytokines
involved in cell survival and angiogenesis programs. Conclusions. The
present study demonstrates that KIM-1-expression promotes tumorigenesis
primarily by two distinct mechanisms: i) by directly conferring oncogenic
properties to renal epithelial cells; ii) by resulting in production of a
variety of chemokines and cytokines that support tumor progression and
angiogenesis. We believe that our findings can significantly contribute
to the development of novel therapeutic apporaches and in the advancement
of management strategies in renal cell carcinoma and help reduce
associated mortality and morbidity.

