Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells from small cell lung cancer patients are
tumorigenic


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), is a highly aggressive and metastatic
disease with a 5 year survival of 5%. SCLC represents 15-20% of all lung
cancers and causes >160,000 deaths a year. The majority of patients
present with metastatic disease and consequently resections are rare,
while biopsies are small and only for diagnostic purposes thus hampering
the study of SCLC. However, circulating tumour cells (CTCs) are highly
prevalent in SCLC patients and may represent an avenue for the better
understanding this disease. Our aim was to determine whether CTCs
isolated from SCLC patients were able to form tumours in
immunocompromised mice. This was accomplished by erythrocyte and
leukocyte depletion and implantation of the remaining cells. Of the 6
initial patients whose CTCs were implanted, 4 gave rise to tumours in
less than 5 months. Immuno-histochemical analysis of the tumours revealed
them to be human in nature and express markers consistent with SCLC.
Whole exome sequencing demonstrated that the tumours had mutations (e.g.
TP53 and RB1) and CNV (e.g. loss of 3p and 13q) commonly observed in SCLC
samples. Furthermore, single cell analysis of CTCs isolated from the
corresponding patient revealed that genetic abnormalities detected in the
tumour were also present in the patients CTCs. This confirmed that the
tumours (termed CDX for CTC derived explant), were indeed derived from
CTCs. In all 4 successful cases, analysis of parallel blood samples by
CellSearch demonstrated that the patients had more than 400 CTCs/7.5 ml
blood. Two of these patients were initially sensitive to
platinum/etoposide therapy, while 2 were refractory. The doubling times
of CDX derived from refractory and sensitive patients were 7.2 and 5.0
days compared to 14.2 and 13.4 days, consistent with refractory SCLC
being more aggressive than sensitive SCLC. We have been able to
successfully passage, freeze and resurrect all the CDX models and aim to
report whether the patient response to therapy is mirrored in their CDX.
These data demonstrate that SCLC CTCs are tumorigenic and we are
investigating whether the CTC derived tumours represent a faithful model
of the clinical disease.

