Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copper-chelator exerts synergistic interaction with platinum drugs
through modulating copper transporters in oxaliplatin-resistant human
gastric cancer cell


Although platinum-based chemotherapy drugs including cisplatin,
carboplatin, and oxaliplatin are commonly used in the treatment of human
solid tumor, patients ultimately develop drug-resistance and result in
treatment failure. Combination copper-chelator with platinum drugs has
been reported to successfully treat a subset of cisplatin- resistant
ovarian cancer patients. However, the underlying mechanisms of action
remain unknown. We have previously established an oxaliplatin-resistant
subclone from human gastric adenocarcinoma TSGH cells, S3. The mechanisms
responsible for oxaliplatin resistance of S3 cells included
down-regulation of hCtr1 and over-expression of ATP7A. In contrast to
displaying additive to antagonistic interaction with platinum drugs in
parental, TSGH cells, our studies showed that copper-chelator,
D-penicillamine, exerts synergistic interaction with platinum drugs
through increasing platinum- DNA adduct formations in S3 cells.
D-penicillamine promotes copper uptake transporter hCtr1 expression via
activation of transcription factor Sp1. In addition, Sp1 overexpression
promotes p53 translocation from nucleus to cytosol and binds to
ubiquitin, and finally causes p53 degradation, which further suppressed
the expression of copper efflux transporter, ATP7A. Combination of
D-penicillamine and oxaliplatin significantly inhibited S3 cell growth in
animal model. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that up-regulation of
hCtr1 and down-regulation of ATP7A were found in both D-penicillamine-
and D-penicillamine/ Oxalipatin- treated S3 tumors, which were
consistence to in vitro results. In conclusion, our results showed that
D-penicillamine increases hCtr1 expression through regulating Sp1 level.
Notably, D-penicillamine could down-regulate ATP7A expression through
regulation of p53. Our finding demonstrated a new treatment strategy for
cancer patient resistant to oxaliplatin treatment with low expression of
hCtr1 and overexpression of ATP7A in tumor tissues. (This work was
partially supported by the following grants: Department of Health, Taiwan
DOH99-TD-C-111-004, National Health Research Institutes CA-101-PP-22,
National Research Program for Biopharmaceuticals 100CAP015-5 and National
Science Council 102-2325-B-400 -007)

