Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of inhibin beta A expression in gastric
cancer


Objective: Inhibin beta A (INHBA), a glycoprotein belonging to the TGF-
superfamily, has recently been reported to participate in cancer-cell
proliferation. We comprehensively studied the ratio of INHBA gene
expression in gastric cancer tissue to that in adjacent normal mucosa by
DNA microarray analysis and found that that INHBA gene expression was
12.8-fold higher in gastric cancer tissue. To extend our previous
results, we investigated the clinical significance of INHBA gene
expression in gastric cancer.Methods: We studied 227 patients with
gastric cancer followed up for at least 5 years postoperatively. The
disease stage was I in 29 patients, II in 59, III in 88, and IV in 51. Of
the 147 patients with stage II or III disease, 80 postoperatively
received S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy, and 67 received surgery alone. We
extracted mRNA from frozen specimens of gastric cancer and adjacent
normal mucosa from these patients, calculated relative expression levels
of the INHBA gene (quantitative PCR analysis), and studied the relations
of INHBA expression to clinicopathological factors and treatment
outcomes. We also examined the relation between S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy
and INHBA gene expression in patients with Stage II or III gastric
cancer, for which adjuvant chemotherapy is standard treatment.Results:
INHBA gene expression was significantly higher in gastric cancer than in
adjacent normal mucosa (PObjective: Inhibin beta A (INHBA), a
glycoprotein belonging to the TGF- superfamily, has recently been
reported to participate in cancer-cell proliferation. We comprehensively
studied the ratio of INHBA gene expression in gastric cancer tissue to
that in adjacent normal mucosa by DNA microarray analysis and found that
that INHBA gene expression was 12.8-fold higher in gastric cancer tissue.
To extend our previous results, we investigated the clinical significance
of INHBA gene expression in gastric cancer.Methods: We studied 227
patients with gastric cancer followed up for at least 5 years
postoperatively. The disease stage was I in 29 patients, II in 59, III in
88, and IV in 51. Of the 147 patients with stage II or III disease, 80
postoperatively received S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy, and 67 received
surgery alone. We extracted mRNA from frozen specimens of gastric cancer
and adjacent normal mucosa from these patients, calculated relative
expression levels of the INHBA gene (quantitative PCR analysis), and
studied the relations of INHBA expression to clinicopathological factors
and treatment outcomes. We also examined the relation between S-1
adjuvant chemotherapy and INHBA gene expression in patients with Stage II
or III gastric cancer, for which adjuvant chemotherapy is standard
treatment.Results: INHBA gene expression was significantly higher in
gastric cancer than in adjacent normal mucosa (P<0.0001) and was
significantly related to the clinicopathological factors of invasion
depth, disease stage, and vascular invasion. High INHBA gene expression
was significantly related to poor outcomes (P=0.0320). In stage II and
III gastric cancer, survival rates did not differ according to INHBA gene
expression in patients who underwent surgery alone. In contrast, survival
was significantly poorer in gastric cancer with high INHBA gene
expression in patients who received S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy
(P=0.003).Conclusions: INHBA gene expression was suggested to be a useful
predictor of poor outcomes in patients with resected gastric cancer. In
patients given S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy, INHBA gene expression may be a
useful biomarker.

