Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720 as a novel therapeutic approach for colon cancer
carcinomatosis


Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cause of
death by cancer where its 5 year survival rate is 6% in patients with
distant metastases. Among distant metastases, median survival is more
than 20 months for liver metastases, whereas it is only 5-9 months for
peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC). The dismal survival of PC is a reflection
of lack of effective treatment for PC. Current treatment, 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) in combination with other drugs, is not effective for PC. Tumor
associated macrophages produce Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
that progress PC and cause cachexia. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a
bioactive lipid mediator produced by Sphingosine kinase (SphK1), is now
known to play important roles in cancer progression by binding to S1P
receptor-1 (S1PR1). We have recently published that S1P link inflammation
and cancer in colitis-associated colon cancer and FTY720, a functional
antagonist of S1PR1, suppress its progression. Here we demonstrate that
FTY720 significantly suppress progression and prolong survival of colon
cancer PC by decreasing both tumor associated and peritoneal macrophages,
decreased TNF-alpha levels, and prevent cachexia.Methods:PC was generated
by i.p. of CT26-luc cells or HCT116-luc cells into mice. Mice were
treated by FTY720 orally. Tumor growth was measured live by a
bioluminescence imaging system. Gene and protein expressions were
analyzed by RT-qPCR, and immunohistochemistry. Angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis were determined by microvessel density. Four cell lines
were used for in vitro studies and cell viability were determined by
WST-8 assay. In survival study, PC mice were treated by 5-FUor FTY720
alone or in combination.Results:SphK1, S1PR1, TNF-alpha and Interleukin-6
levels are remarkably elevated in PC nodules compared from peritoneum.
FTY720 suppress the growth and number of PC nodules and decrease Ki67
index and increase apoptosis in both PC models. FTY720 significantly
decrease SphK1 and S1PR1 levels, and angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis
are suppressed. FTY720 significantly decreased tumor associated
macrophages as well as peritoneal macrophages. TNF-alpha levels are
significantly decreased in the tumor, ascites, and serum by FTY720, which
maintained body weight compared to the vehicle group that developed
cachexia. Combination therapy with FTY720 and 5-FU synergistically
suppressed survival of 4 cell-lines, and significantly prolonged survival
in vivo.Conclusion:FTY720 could potentially provide a novel treatment
modality to prolong quality of life in advanced colon cancer PC patients.

