Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF promotes the DNA damage response and repair of DNA damage
induced by benzo[a]pyrene


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF) is involved in coordinating a
number of cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis, and as such, dysregulation of TGF signalling has significant
implications for cancer development. TGF is rapidly and persistently
activated in response to irradiation-induced DNA damage (Barcellos-Hoff
et al, J Clin Invest 1994; 93:892-9) and has been implicated in
regulation of the irradiation-induced DNA damage response (Kirshner et
al, Cancer Res 2006; 66:10861-9). We have recently published two studies
investigating the activation of DNA damage signalling in cells after
exposure to two highly potent polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
benzo[a]pyrene (BP) and dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DBP) (Niziolek-Kierecka et
al, Chem Res Toxicol 2012; 25:862-72 and Jarvis et al, Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2013; 266: 408-18). The aim of this study was therefore to
investigate a potential role for TGF in the response to PAH-induced DNA
damage. Using human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2) we studied
activation of DNA damage signalling by Western blotting. Formation of
H2AX and ATM foci was assessed by immunofluorescence and DNA damage
levels were quantified by Comet assay. HepG2 cells were exposed to
non-cytotoxic concentrations of BP and DBP (confirmed by MTT assay).
Exposure to BP or DBP caused a concentration- and time-dependent increase
in DNA damage signalling assessed by phosphorylation of Chk1, H2AX and
p53. DBP was approximately 60-fold more potent at inducing prolonged DNA
damage signalling than BP. Prolonged H2AX and ATM foci were observed
after exposure to 1 M BP or 50 nM DBP for 48 hours consistent with
persistent DNA damage whereas exposure to 0.1 M BP or 5 nM DBP caused a
transient increase in foci up to 24h and lower levels at 48h suggesting
repair. To investigate the role of TGF signalling in repair of
PAH-induced DNA damage, exogenous TGF (1 ng/ml) was added during
incubation with BP and DBP. Addition of TGF significantly decreased the
number of H2AX and ATM foci in cells exposed to either BP or DBP and this
was consistent with a decrease in DNA damage. Levels of both damage foci
and Comet tail moments were similar to control levels suggesting
activation of DNA repair in response to addition of TGF. Exposure to BP
or DBP with or without TGF caused an increase in Smad2 phosphorylation
confirming activation of TGF signalling. Smad2 activation was more
pronounced after exposure to BP compared to DBP and RNA interference
experiments are ongoing to further elucidate the mechanism of PAH
induction of TGF signalling. Taken together our data suggest an important
role for TGF signalling in repair of PAH-induced DNA damage. Furthermore,
our data suggest a possible link between compromised TGF signalling and
persistent DNA damage that might have important implications in
understanding PAH-induced carcinogenesis.

