Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition occurs in preneoplastic and
neoplastic lesions of canine prostate


Background: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an essential
process in the tumor progression and metastasis. In human prostate
carcinoma (PCa), the upregulation of cytokeratin and E-cadherin and
down-regulation of vimentin have been associated with aggressive
phenotype and poor prognosis. Due to the importance of canine cancer
model it was evaluated the immunoexpression of AE1/AE3, E-cadherin and
vimentin in canine prostatic lesions.Patients and Methods: A total of 75
prostatic tissues formalin-fixed paraffin embedded from dogs was
selected: 10 normal prostatic tissues, 20 benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH), 25 proliferative inflammatory atrophy (PIA) and 20 PCa. AE1/AE3
was detected with a monoclonal antibody (Invitrogen, 180132) at a 1:300
dilution, applied for 45 min at room temperature (RT). The antibody
against Vimentin (V9, Invitrogen) and E-cadherin (NCH-38, Dako
cytomatiomn) were monoclonal mouse antibodies, used at a 1:300 and 1:200,
respectively, for 45 min at RT. The immunolabelling was performed by a
polymer method (Histofine, Nichirei Biosciences,). A negative control was
performed for all antibodies by omitting the primary antibody and
substituting with Tris-buffered saline. The percentage of C-MYC,
E-cadherin, and p63- positive cells per lesion was evaluated according to
Prowatke et al. (2007). The samples were scored separately according to
staining intensity and graded semi-quantitatively as negative, weakly
positive, moderately positive, and strongly positive. The score was done
in one 400 magnification field, considering only the lesion, since this
was done in a TMA core of 1 mm. For statistical analyses, the
immunostaining classifications were reduced to two categories: negative
and positive. The negative category included negative and weakly positive
staining. Chi-square or Fisher exact test was used to determine the
association between the categorical variables.Results: All prostatic
normal and BPH tissue were positive for cytokeratin, E-cadherin and
negative for vimentin. Similarly, all PIA samples were positive for
AE1/AE3. From those samples, 48% (12/25) were also positive for vimentin.
55% of PCa (11/25) was positive for vimentin and among these samples 75%
(6/11) was also positive for AE1/AE3 and 45% (5/11) was negative for
AE1/AE3. PIA and PCa presented a higher number of vimentin positive cells
when compared with normal tissue (p=0.032). E-cadherin expression had no
statistical difference among diagnosis groups, but we found a higher
number of positive cases, with more than 51% of positive immunostaining
in BPH and PIA (81.25% and 78.60% of the cases, respectively) than in PCa
(55.55%).Conclusion: The carcinogenesis process regarding prostatic
epithelial cells in dogs showed higher vimentin protein expression
associated with concomitant loss of the cytokeratin and E-cadherin,
similar in humans.Financial Support: Sao Paulo State Foundation (FAPESP)
and CNPq.

