Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Hippo-independent pathway modulates YAP-induced resistance of
cancer cells to antitubulin drugs


Antitubulin drugs have been widely used for the treatment of various
human cancers including breast and lung cancer, etc. Although these drugs
are effective as first-line treatment of cancers, many cancer patients
are either intrinsically resistant or later develop resistant to drugs,
which is one of the major obstacles for successful cancer treatment.
Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanism underlying antitubulin
drug resistance is critical for future prognosis of cancer treatment and
development of novel therapeutic drugs for cancer treatment. The Hippo
pathway is an emerging signaling pathway that plays important roles in
various biological processes including organ size control, tumorigenesis,
stem cell differentiation and renewal, etc. Although tremendous progress
has been made toward our understanding of the roles of the Hippo pathway
in cancer development, if and how is its role in drug resistance remains
largely unknown. Recently, we and others have provided convincing
evidence that some core components of the Hippo pathway are involved in
the resistance of cancer cells to antitubulin drug Taxol. However, the
signaling pathways or genes mediating their effects in chemotherapeutic
drug response remain to be identified. In this study, we have discovered
that Hippo core component YAP oncoprotein and transcriptional
co-activitor is specifically phosphorylated only after treatment of
cancer cells with antitubulin drugs. Most significantly, we have
identified a Hippo-independent pathway in which activated Cdk1 can
directly phosphorylate YAP, which subsequently inactivates YAP function
in transactivation and anti-apoptosis during antitubulin drug treatment.
These findings have significant implication not only in future use of YAP
as a prognostic marker in predicting antitubulin drug response in
patients but also provide a novel approach for future targeting and
inactivating YAP by activating its phosphorylation for treatment of
antitublin drug resistant cancer patients caused by YAP activation.

