Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of tumor-associated cathepsins: implication for
rapid detection of human nonmelanoma skin cancer


Of the non-melanoma skin cancers, 75% are basal cell carcinomas (BCC) and
rest is squamous cell carcinomas (SCC). They are the most common cancers
in humans, and their incidence may soon surpass that of all other
cancers. Four million people will be diagnosed with BCC/SCC this year in
the US with the overall workload of diagnosis and management increasing
by 50% by 2030. Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS), which examines all
margins of the entire resected sample, is the treatment of choice for
BCC/SCC. However, of skin cancer lesions are too large for their entire
margins to be practically assessed for cancer using MMS. Therefore, 75%
of BCC/SCC patients will undergo traditional surgery. Non-MMS assesses 1%
of the margin with the results being available days after surgery. Thus,
there exists an unmet clinical need to more completely assess surgical
margins to increase cure rates and minimize removal of normal tissue.
Here we test a quenched near infrared fluorescent contrast agent, GB119,
to rapidly and globally detect cancer in skin samples. We first
characterized the feasibility of ex vivo applied GB119, to penetrate
human skin tissue and find BCC/SCC in skin cancer samples obtained from
debulking MMS. Detection of the cancer was measured by increased
fluorescence resulting from specific activation and de-quenching of GB119
as it encounters active cathepsin associated with BCC/SCC. Excised skin
samples were pre-imaged and then, using an applicator pad, GB119 was
topically applied onto the samples containing BCC (n=12) or SCC (n=3).
Activation GB119 was measured (Maestro, PerkinElmer) and fluorescent hot
spots on the surface of samples were marked with pathology ink followed
by snap freezing for histology and IHC. 13 of 15 skin samples produced
robust fluorescence spots that were marked with ink. Two samples did not
produce any signal greater than pre-imaging auto-fluorescence. H/E
staining of marked skin samples confirmed presence of ink nearby nests of
cancerous tissue. The two samples that did not activate GB119 were
determined by histology to be cancer free. Since it was not possible to
detected GB119 fluorescence after H/E staining we developed an IHC assay
to visualize the presence of activated de-quenched GB119 and used it to
pathologically correlate GB119 activation with cancer. Using an anti-Cy5
antibody (Sigma) our immunoassay detected de-quenched GB119 and could be
used to detect activated GB119 in tissue. Using this assay we detected
low levels of GB119 activation in normal skin and cancer free samples
from patients with BCC/SCC. In contrast, high levels of GB119 activation
were found within nests of cancerous tissue for BCC/SCC samples. These
data confirm the feasibility of topically applying GB119 to excised skin
samples to rapidly detect the presence of cancer within the margins of
the samples. If successful this technology could potentially impact
MMS-like precision to non-MMS surgical techniques.

