Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of radioresistant gene of esophageal cancer by the new
cyclopedic gene analysis with transposon


Backgound Radiation is one of the most important therapies same as
operation and chemotherapy for esophageal cancer. However a rate of
therapeutic effect is low, 68.3% as a chemoradiation therapy for advanced
esophageal cancer in Japan. Predicting an effect before radiation therapy
is impossible, many patients suffer from side effect of radiation without
enough therapeutic effect. To predict and improve an effect, it is need
to identify genes and mechanism of radioresistance. Aim of this research
is to detect radioresistant gene of esophageal cancer by the new
cyclopedic gene analysis with transposon.Methods Transposon is a base
sequence which transports to other location in the genome at random.
Inserting CMV promotor to transposon as a transcriptional activator, the
following gene of transported transposon is overexpressed and the gene
inserted transposon is knocked down. We can get various cells which have
a different overexpressed or knocked down gene by transposon method.
After drug treatment or irradiation for cells inserted transposon and CMV
promotor, named transposon tagged cells, survived cells have
overexpressed redioresistant genes or knocked down radiosensitive genes.
We can pick up candidate redioresistant genes to detect the location of
transposon in survived cells. We have already succeeded to acquire
candidate chemoresistant genes of breast cancer and esophageal
cancer.Results Twenty days after irradiation of 9 to 11 Gy for transposon
tagged cells, survived cells became colonies. Picking up survived
colonies and analyzing its gene, nine genes were detected as a candidate
gene. All genes were knocked down by inserting the transposon. Knock down
of candidate genes were demonstrated by decreasing an amount of mRNA in
survived colonies. Cells of survived colonies also showed higher survival
rate after irradiation than the rate of parent esophageal cancer cells
without transposon. These results mean that knocking down of the
candidate gene relates to redioresistance actually. Cytochrome c oxidase
subunit 1 is one of the gene detected by transposon method. Cytochrome c
oxidase 1 is known as an enzyme of Cytochrome c which induce apoptosis
after DNA damage from radiation by activating caspase cascade. This fact
supports that knock down of cytochrome c oxidase 1 may suppress release
of cytochrome c and then radiation induced apoptosis.Conclusion
Transposon method is able to analyze resistant genes comprehensively. To
reveal resistant mechanism of detected gene, new target of treatment may
be found.

