Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repurposing Artemisinins for treatment of acute leukemias


More effective, less toxic treatments are needed to improve quantitative
and qualitative outcomes for patients with acute leukemias. Drug
repurposing has been validated as a productive approach in which the
pharmacologic and safety information available for established drugs
promotes their rapid translation to human clinical trials for a new
indication. Artesunate (ART), the current WHO-recommended drug for severe
malaria, is a semi-synthetic derivative of the natural compound
Artemisinin. ART has broad anti-cancer activity in vitro, and is
inexpensive, safe, and can be parenterally or orally administered in
humans.We sought to characterize the anti-leukemic activity of ART and
ART-838 (a novel potent analog) and to evaluate these drugs in
combination with several current and emerging anti-leukemic drugs. We
assessed the growth inhibitory effects of ART and ART-838 against a panel
of 24 acute leukemia (Acute Myeloid Leukemia [AML], Precursor B cell
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia [B-ALL], and T cell ALL) cell lines via
alamarBlue assays. Both ART (mean IC50: 5.4 M; median IC50: 4.1 M) and
ART-838 (mean IC50: 0.12 M; median IC50: 0.06 M) were active against all
24 cell lines, indicating efficacy against the major types of acute
leukemia. Primary leukemia cases, grown on hTERT-immortalized bone marrow
stromal cells, were sensitive over a similar concentration range. Both
ART (10 M) and ART-838 (0.25 M) reduced or completely inhibited
clonigenicity of all 4 acute leukemia cell lines tested in
methylcellulose colony-forming assays. In contrast, clonigenicity of
normal CD34+ hematopoietic stem-progenitor cells was unaffected by
concentrations of ART and ART-838 that inhibited all tested acute
leukemia cell lines and primary cases, suggesting high therapeutic
indices.ART exhibited additive or synergistic interactions with several
anti-neoplastic agents (including Cytarabine, Doxorubicin, Etoposide,
Lestaurtinib, Midostaurin, and Sorafenib) against KOPN8 (B-ALL), MOLM14
(AML), and MV4;11 (biphenotypic AML/B-ALL) leukemia cell lines,
suggesting the potential for successful integration of ART or ART-838
into existing or novel combination chemotherapy regimens. 24h treatment
with ART or ART-838 caused a marked reduction in BrdU-labeled S-phase
cells and a large increase in Annexin-V positive (apoptotic) cells.
Finally, both ART and ART-838 inhibited leukemia development in
immunodeficient NSG mice transplanted with KOPN8 cells. Based on these
data, we propose that ART and ART-838 have high potential to be developed
as anti-leukemic agents that could be paired with current standard and/or
novel anti-leukemic drugs.

