Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution of the NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT cistromes in prostate cancer
progression


The archetypical co-repressors NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT exist in large
complexes with histone deacetylases and significantly control multiple
transcription factors (TFs), including nuclear receptors such as the VDR
and AR. NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT are altered in cancer by mechanisms,
including mutation, but it remains unclear how this disrupts their unique
and shared functions either to commission or decommission enhancers
through the genome. Previously, we established that altered co-repressor
recruitment in prostate cancer (CaP) induces sustained and targeted
H3K9me2 at target gene loci that drives increased CpG methylation. We
propose that the oncogenic co-repressor cistromes drive CaP progression
by inducing repressive histone modifications that in turn trigger
methylated CpG regions at selective enhancers leading to stable and
heritable changes to the transcriptome.Using a high throughput
micro-fluidic Q-ChIP approach we examined NCOR1, NCOR2/SMRT, H3K9me2,
VDR, AR, and RNA POL2 levels at 47 genomic regions distributed over 8 VDR
and 10 AR target genes in 5 normal and malignant prostate cell line
models, at two time points following either 1,25(OH)2D3 (D3) or DHT
treatment. Binding patterns of NCOR1, NCOR2/SMRT and H3K9me2
distinguished normal, androgen sensitive and castrate recurrent CaP
models. Specifically, co-repressor binding was enriched on VDR and AR
target genes in a gene-specific manner across the CaP models. For
example, PDK2 and BMP2 are AR target genes that had significantly more
NCOR2/SMRT binding and gain of CpG methylation in LNCaP C4-2 cells,
compared to the isogenic LNCaP. For these targets, and the others
examined, gene expression loss and increased CpG methylation was mirrored
by the TCGA CaP data, and a more general positive correlation between
NCOR2/SMRT and CpG methylation was identified on the genome-wide level in
the TCGA CaP data. In LNCaP and LNCaP C4-2 cells genome-wide binding of
NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT was examined by ChIP-seq to measure the unique and
shared cistromes in the emergence of castrate recurrent phenotype. In the
first instance, analyses of NCOR1 binding in LNCaP cells revealed very
significant enrichment at several TFs including SRF and GATA family
members; the most significantly enriched nuclear receptor was RAR.
Subsequent GO term enrichment analyses revealed these genes were involved
in metabolic process and chromatin/gene silencing pathways. Finally, we
examined NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT staining on a TMA of 480 men with CaP who
underwent radical prostatectomy. In the first instance, the analysis has
revealed that elevated NCOR2/SMRT staining intensity was significantly
associated with time to treatment failure.These findings support the
concept that NCOR1 and NCOR2/SMRT recruitment is significantly altered
during CaP progression to drive selective, stable and heritable silencing
of target genes for multiple transcription factors and is associated with
poor outcome in CaP.

