Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The level of aerobic glycolysis as an effective predictor of
tumorigenicity


Introduction: Cancer cells have been known to harbor characteristic
metabolic alterations such as enhanced glucose uptake and aerobic
glycolysis. However, elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying the
association between aerobic glycolysis and tumorigenesis has remained
elusive. Thus, this study aimed to investigate the role of altered
metabolism in conferring advantage to tumorigenesis, using two different
cell lines of immortalized human oral keratinocytes (IHOK) that differed
in the level of aerobic glycolysis.Experimental procedures: Levels of
glucose uptake and lactate production were measured. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and western blot were employed to
measure the expression of relevant genes. Proteomic analysis was
performed to identify protein-level differences. Small interfering RNAs
were used for transient knockdown of genes. The cell lines were injected
into mouse tongue to assess subsequent tumor formation.Results: Although
the two IHOK cell lines shared same origin, the cell line with enhanced
glucose uptake and lactate production also had higher expression of genes
involved in glycolysis, growth signal propagation, and matrix remodeling.
In particular, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, 2, 9, and 14 expressions
were significantly higher in the cell line with upregulated glycolysis.
Upon injection into mice, the two cell lines differed in the rate of in
vivo tumor formation and resulting tumor volume.Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) was upregulated in the more tumorigenic IHOK cell line as
well as in aggressive breast and oral cancer cell lines compared with
their less aggressive counterparts. EGFR knockdown in the more
tumorigenic cell lines led to reduction in lactate production and
prevented high-level expression of glycolytic genes normally induced by
EGF treatment.Proteomic analysis between the two IHOK cell lines revealed
pyruvate kinase isozyme M2 (PKM2) as the protein whose level was
significantly higher in the more tumorigenic cell line. To evaluate the
relationship between upregulated PKM2 and high tumorigenic potentials,
PKM2 was knocked down in the more tumorigenic cell line. MMP-1 level
decreased upon PKM2 knockdown, indicating that upregulated PKM2 not only
promotes aerobic glycolysis but also enhances MMP expression to
facilitate tumorigenesis.Conclusions: Cells with upregulated PKM2 likely
excel in tumorigenesis by enhancing MMP expression. In addition,
upregulated EGFR amplifies the growth signals to enhance the expression
of genes required for tumor progression. These results indicate that the
degree of altered metabolic activity, aerobic glycolysis in particular,
might be a significant predictor of tumorigenicity.Acknowledgements: This
research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education(2009-0094027).

