Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personal determinants of the human gut microbiome


Background: Previous studies have examined the relationship between
various factors, most notably adiposity and short-term diet, and gut
microbiome. As the relationships between the gut microbiome and usual
long-term dietary intake and other demographic and lifestyle factors
remain unclear, we conducted a comprehensive study.Methods: We used
freeze-dried fecal samples from 82 controls from a hospital-based
case-control study of colorectal cancer conducted between 1985 and 1987.
The participants provided information on age, sex, race, smoking status,
body mass index (BMI), and usual diet intake. 16S rRNA genes in fecal
bacterial DNA were amplified by universal primers, sequenced by 454 FLX
technology and aligned to fully-sequenced microbial genomes using the
QIIME pipeline. Microbiome overall diversity was assessed by Principal
Coordinate Analysis (PCoA). By regression analyses, we also assessed the
relationship of these diet and demographic factors to microbiome
diversity and relative taxon abundances.Results: We found that sex and
smoking were associated with overall gut microbial diversity (PCoA:
p=0.001 and p=0.02, respectively). Multivariate regression analyses
further substantiated these findings (p=0.03 and pBackground: Previous
studies have examined the relationship between various factors, most
notably adiposity and short-term diet, and gut microbiome. As the
relationships between the gut microbiome and usual long-term dietary
intake and other demographic and lifestyle factors remain unclear, we
conducted a comprehensive study.Methods: We used freeze-dried fecal
samples from 82 controls from a hospital-based case-control study of
colorectal cancer conducted between 1985 and 1987. The participants
provided information on age, sex, race, smoking status, body mass index
(BMI), and usual diet intake. 16S rRNA genes in fecal bacterial DNA were
amplified by universal primers, sequenced by 454 FLX technology and
aligned to fully-sequenced microbial genomes using the QIIME pipeline.
Microbiome overall diversity was assessed by Principal Coordinate
Analysis (PCoA). By regression analyses, we also assessed the
relationship of these diet and demographic factors to microbiome
diversity and relative taxon abundances.Results: We found that sex and
smoking were associated with overall gut microbial diversity (PCoA:
p=0.001 and p=0.02, respectively). Multivariate regression analyses
further substantiated these findings (p=0.03 and p<0.006, respectively).
Sex and smoking were also associated with specific taxa, including
Bacteroidetes (p=0.02 and p=0.03) and Actinobacteria (p=0.07 and
p=0.001). Fruit and vegetable fiber intake was associated with overall
diversity (PCoA: p=0.04; multivariate regression: p=0.03) and with
increased relative abundance of Clostridia (OR for high vs. low
Clostridia abundance=1.24, p=0.009) and decreased Bacteroidetes (OR=0.87,
p=0.06). Bean fiber intake was related to increased Actinobacteria
(OR=2.24, p=0.006 and FDR controlled P=0.05). BMI was not associated with
and overall diversity or specific taxa.Conclusion: Results from this
first comprehensive study indicate that sex, smoking status and dietary
fiber from certain food sources are determinants of gut microbiome. Gut
microbiome structural differences by sex has been observed in some
studies possibly through sex hormones or sex-specific effects on gut
transit time. Gut microbiota ferment dietary fiber to short-chain fatty
acids, which decreases the pH in the gut, possibly suppressing
gram-negative Bacteroidetes phylum while promoting gram-positive
Clostridia. Actinobacteria has been consistently shown to be positively
associated with a variety of fiber forms in both in vitro studies and in
human studies. Given the potential relationship of the gut microbiome
with diseases of the gut, our findings may have implications for
prevention of diseases related to dysbiosis through long-term dietary
manipulation of the gut microbiome.

