Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mobilization of tumor cells into the circulation during radiation
therapy for lung cancer


Thousands of patients die annually with distant metastasis after
curative-intent or radical radiation therapy (RT). Because non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), the most common cause of cancer-related mortality,
exhibits an especially high rate of distant metastasis after radical RT
or chemo-RT for locoregionally-advanced disease, it represents a suitable
model to investigate the relationship between RT and metastasis. We
hypothesized that disruption of tumour architecture during RT could
result in the release of viable tumor cells into the peripheral
circulation.We enumerated circulating tumor cells (CTCs) by fluorescence
microscopy of blood samples immunostained with conventional CTC markers.
We measured their DNA damage levels using -H2AX, a biomarker for
radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks, either by
fluorescence-activated sorting (FACS) or by immunofluorescence
microscopy. Twenty seven RT-treated NSCLC patients had blood samples
analyzed by one or more methods. We identified increased CTC numbers
after commencement of RT in 7 of 9 patients treated with palliative RT,
and in 4 of 8 patients treated with curative-intent RT. CTCs were also
identified, singly and in clumps in large numbers during RT by
cytopathologic examination (in all 5 cases studied). Elevated -H2AX
signal in post-RT blood samples signified the presence of CTCs derived
from irradiated tumors. Blood taken after the commencement of RT
contained tumor cells that proliferated extensively in vitro (in all 6
cases studied), and first experiments revealed that these cells survive
in bloodstream of NOD/SCID mice for several months. CTCs formed -H2AX
foci in response to ex vivo irradiation providing further evidence of
their viability.Although of concern, these findings could represent an
opportunity to monitor and target CTCs during RT. They provide a
rationale for the development of strategies to reduce the concentration
of viable CTCs by modulating RT fractionation or by co-administering
systemic therapies.

