Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation analysis in self-sampled material as a triage test
in hrHPV positive women


Background: Primary hrHPV testing in cervical cancer screening shows
relatively low specificity. To decrease the number of unnecessary
referrals for colposcopy, triage testing is necessary. In this study, DNA
methylation analysis was compared with routine cytology for triage
testing in hrHPV positive women. Moreover, feasibility of DNA methylation
analysis directly on original brush-based self-sampled specimens was
assessed.Methods: Non-responding women from population-based screening
were invited to self-collect a cervico-vaginal specimen for hrHPV
testing; hrHPV positive women were referred to a physician for
liquid-based sampling. For this pilot study, DNA methylation analysis was
performed on 128 triage samples and on 50 matched Evalyn brush
self-samples with QMSP for C13ORF18, EPB41L3, JAM3 and TERT.Results: In
the physician-taken triage material, DNA methylation analysis of JAM3
showed the highest specificity (88%) combined with a high sensitivity
(82%) for detection of CIN3+, whereas cytology showed a specificity of
48% and a sensitivity of 91%. Out of 39 women with abnormal cytology and
normal histology (false positive by cytology), 87% were negative for JAM3
and 90% for C13ORF18 methylation. The agreement for DNA methylation
analysis performed directly on the matched self-sampled material and the
physician-taken samples was 90% for C13ORF18 (=0.77; pBackground: Primary
hrHPV testing in cervical cancer screening shows relatively low
specificity. To decrease the number of unnecessary referrals for
colposcopy, triage testing is necessary. In this study, DNA methylation
analysis was compared with routine cytology for triage testing in hrHPV
positive women. Moreover, feasibility of DNA methylation analysis
directly on original brush-based self-sampled specimens was
assessed.Methods: Non-responding women from population-based screening
were invited to self-collect a cervico-vaginal specimen for hrHPV
testing; hrHPV positive women were referred to a physician for
liquid-based sampling. For this pilot study, DNA methylation analysis was
performed on 128 triage samples and on 50 matched Evalyn brush
self-samples with QMSP for C13ORF18, EPB41L3, JAM3 and TERT.Results: In
the physician-taken triage material, DNA methylation analysis of JAM3
showed the highest specificity (88%) combined with a high sensitivity
(82%) for detection of CIN3+, whereas cytology showed a specificity of
48% and a sensitivity of 91%. Out of 39 women with abnormal cytology and
normal histology (false positive by cytology), 87% were negative for JAM3
and 90% for C13ORF18 methylation. The agreement for DNA methylation
analysis performed directly on the matched self-sampled material and the
physician-taken samples was 90% for C13ORF18 (=0.77; p<0.001) and 88% for
JAM3 (=0.75, pBackground: Primary hrHPV testing in cervical cancer
screening shows relatively low specificity. To decrease the number of
unnecessary referrals for colposcopy, triage testing is necessary. In
this study, DNA methylation analysis was compared with routine cytology
for triage testing in hrHPV positive women. Moreover, feasibility of DNA
methylation analysis directly on original brush-based self-sampled
specimens was assessed.Methods: Non-responding women from
population-based screening were invited to self-collect a cervico-vaginal
specimen for hrHPV testing; hrHPV positive women were referred to a
physician for liquid-based sampling. For this pilot study, DNA
methylation analysis was performed on 128 triage samples and on 50
matched Evalyn brush self-samples with QMSP for C13ORF18, EPB41L3, JAM3
and TERT.Results: In the physician-taken triage material, DNA methylation
analysis of JAM3 showed the highest specificity (88%) combined with a
high sensitivity (82%) for detection of CIN3+, whereas cytology showed a
specificity of 48% and a sensitivity of 91%. Out of 39 women with
abnormal cytology and normal histology (false positive by cytology), 87%
were negative for JAM3 and 90% for C13ORF18 methylation. The agreement
for DNA methylation analysis performed directly on the matched
self-sampled material and the physician-taken samples was 90% for
C13ORF18 (=0.77; p<0.001) and 88% for JAM3 (=0.75, p<0.001).Conclusion:
DNA methylation analysis as a triage test in hrHPV positive women
outperformed cytology due to higher specificity without losing its
sensitivity and is also feasible to be performed directly on Evalyn Brush
self-samplers. This might result in more correct referrals to the
gynecologist and eliminate the need for a new scraping taken by a medical
professional thereby offering great logistic and financial
advantages.This study was financed by the Dutch Cancer Society
(RUG-NKB2009-4577).

