Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of glypican-3 in hepatocellular carcinoma


Introduction: Glypican 3 (GPC3) is a cell surface heparan sulfate
proteoglycan which plays critical roles in the control of cell division
and growth regulation. Although repressed in most of adult tissues, GPC3
is found to be upregulated in different types of cancer, including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To address whether the expression of GPC3
in HCC is regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, we studied the DNA
methylation profiles of the two CpG islands in the GPC3 promoter by high
resolution melting analysis (HRM) and by pyrosequencing. Histone
modifications were also examined by ChIP assays to further explore how
epigenetic changes contribute to GPC3 expression in HCC.Results: We
observed hypomethylation in promoters of 5 different HCC cell lines
(which express GPC3) but a partially hypermethylated pattern in HCO2, a
HCC cell line in our panel which does not express GPC3. We measured
average CpG methylation by pyrosequencing, with the average methylation
values for GPC3 expressing cells at 7.74% vs. HCO2 at 43.25%
(PIntroduction: Glypican 3 (GPC3) is a cell surface heparan sulfate
proteoglycan which plays critical roles in the control of cell division
and growth regulation. Although repressed in most of adult tissues, GPC3
is found to be upregulated in different types of cancer, including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To address whether the expression of GPC3
in HCC is regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, we studied the DNA
methylation profiles of the two CpG islands in the GPC3 promoter by high
resolution melting analysis (HRM) and by pyrosequencing. Histone
modifications were also examined by ChIP assays to further explore how
epigenetic changes contribute to GPC3 expression in HCC.Results: We
observed hypomethylation in promoters of 5 different HCC cell lines
(which express GPC3) but a partially hypermethylated pattern in HCO2, a
HCC cell line in our panel which does not express GPC3. We measured
average CpG methylation by pyrosequencing, with the average methylation
values for GPC3 expressing cells at 7.74% vs. HCO2 at 43.25% (P<0.01).
Similarly, the average methylation frequency in 9 different primary
hepatocytes (also no GPC3 expression) is 31.85%, equals to that of HCO2
and much higher than GPC3 expressing cells (PIntroduction: Glypican 3
(GPC3) is a cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan which plays
critical roles in the control of cell division and growth regulation.
Although repressed in most of adult tissues, GPC3 is found to be
upregulated in different types of cancer, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). To address whether the expression of GPC3 in HCC is
regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, we studied the DNA methylation
profiles of the two CpG islands in the GPC3 promoter by high resolution
melting analysis (HRM) and by pyrosequencing. Histone modifications were
also examined by ChIP assays to further explore how epigenetic changes
contribute to GPC3 expression in HCC.Results: We observed hypomethylation
in promoters of 5 different HCC cell lines (which express GPC3) but a
partially hypermethylated pattern in HCO2, a HCC cell line in our panel
which does not express GPC3. We measured average CpG methylation by
pyrosequencing, with the average methylation values for GPC3 expressing
cells at 7.74% vs. HCO2 at 43.25% (P<0.01). Similarly, the average
methylation frequency in 9 different primary hepatocytes (also no GPC3
expression) is 31.85%, equals to that of HCO2 and much higher than GPC3
expressing cells (P<0.01). In tissues, the methylation profiles of GPC3
promoters are more complicated, where hypo- and hypermethylation could be
found in both tumor and non-tumor adjacent tissues. In 34 pairs of
tissues, 23 pairs (67.6%) have methylation patterns correlate with
expression data. However, treatment of HCO2 with demethylating agent
(5-aza-dC) resulted in little reactivation of GPC3 expression, suggesting
that DNA methylation may not be the only factor modifying transcription
of GPC3. Treatment of HCO2 with histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin-A (TSA) resulted in more than 10 folds of GPC3 expression,
suggesting histone modification plays a critical role in regulation of
GPC3. ChIP analysis in different HCC cell lines as well as primary
hepatocytes revealed that the histone marker H3K9Ac (associated with
transcription) is present at the GPC3 promoter region of Huh7 but absence
in HCO2 and in primary hepatocytes, whereas occupancy of the promoter by
repressive markers H3K9Me3 and H3K27Me3 is increased in HCO2 and primary
hepatocytes but not Huh7. ChIP assay performed on two pairs of HCC
tissues showed similar correlation data between GPC3 expression and
histone modification.Conclusions: In this study, we showed that
methylation is correlated with transcriptional repression of GPC3 in HCC
cell lines, but demethylation of GPC3 promoter is not enough to
reactivate the protein expression, suggesting DNA methylation is not the
predominant regulatory mechanism for GPC3 gene. Histone modification, on
the other hand correlates very tightly with GPC3 expression in HCC cell
lines and tumors. Together, our data suggest that epigenetic alterations,
including DNA methylation and histone modifications are critical for
transcriptional regulation of GPC3 in HCC.

