Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSulf-1 loss in ovarian cancer cells induces lipid droplet
biogenesis


We have previously shown that a frequent loss of endosulfatase HSulf-1 in
ovarian cancer enhances the heparin binding growth factor signaling which
subsequently induces and potentiates tumorigenesis. Our recent data
indicate that knockdown of HSulf-1 in ovarian cancer cells significantly
alter levels of several metabolites which is comparable to the deranged
metabolite profiles in primary ovarian tumors. Here we report that the
metabolites associated with lipid metabolism are altered in such a way
that the cells start manifesting a lipogenic phenotype characterized by
an increased fatty acid synthesis, storage and mitochondrial beta
oxidation. The lipogenic phenotype is associated with an accumulation of
cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) in a stably HSulf-1 knockdown cells
[OV202 (Sh1/2) and OV2223 cells]. Presence of LDs is evidenced by BODIPY
staining and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis in Sh1/2 and
a non-transduced control (NTC) cells. Conversely, enhanced expression of
HSulf-1 in TOV21G, SKOV3, and C13 cells also resulted in reducing the
number of LDs. More importantly, MEFs (mouse embryonic fibroblasts) from
HSulf-1 knockout mice also showed an increased LD biogenesis compared to
the wild type MEFs. Microarray analysis identified cytoplasmic
phospholipase A2 (cPLA2; an enzyme involved in LD biogenesis) as one of
the genes that was significantly upregulated in OV202 Sh1 and Sh2 cells.
We found that Sh1 and Sh2 cells show an increased phosphorylation
(ser505) of cytoplasmic phospholipase A2 (p-cPLA2) compared to NTC cells.
Phosphorylation at ser505 is vital for the enzyme activity of cPLA2 and
also necessary for LD biogenesis. We inhibited the LD biogenesis in Sh1
cells by a pharmacological inhibitor of cPLA2 (AACOCF3 and MAFP) as well
by shRNA mediated knockdown of endogenous cPLA2. Further, we stimulated
NTC and Sh1 cells with heparin binding growth factor (50ng/ml) for
different time points and found an elevated phosphorylation of cPLA2 and
extracellular signal related kinase (ERK), which is also inhibited by a
pre-treatment of cells with cPLA2 inhibitor. Interestingly, inhibition of
phospho-ERK by U0126 (MEK inhibitor) also inhibits the phosphorylation of
cPLA2. These findings strongly suggest that loss of HSulf-1 promotes
lipid metabolism in the ovarian cancer cells via activation of cPLA2 via
an ERK dependent pathway. The present work highlights a novel role
HSulf-1 in regulating lipid metabolism which could lead to a better
understanding of tumorigenesis and identification of new targets for
tumor therapy.

