Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic clustering of gastric carcinoma based on DNA
methylation profiles at the precancerous stage: its correlation with
tumor aggressiveness and patient outcome


Aim: The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of DNA
methylation alterations during gastric carcinogenesis.Background: DNA
methylation alterations are induced by carcinogenetic factors at the
precancerous stage in various organs. As for gastric mucosae, aberrant
DNA methylation is considered to be induced by Helicobacter pylori,
Epstein-Barr virus and other carcinogenetic factors. Since field
cancerization concept has become evident in the stomach, non-cancerous
gastric mucosae obtained from patients with gastric carcinomas (GCs) can
be at the precancerous stage. However, correlations between DNA
methylation profiles in such non-cancerous gastric mucosae at the
precancerous stage and clinicopathological aggressiveness of GCs
developing in the individual same patients and patient outcome have not
been clarified.Methods: Single-CpG resolution genome-wide DNA methylation
analysis using the Infinium HumanMethylation27 Bead Array (Illumina) was
performed in 110 paired samples of non-cancerous gastric mucosa (N) and
tumorous tissue (T) from patients with GCs.Results: DNA methylation
alterations on 3,877 probes occurred in T samples relative to N samples.
Since Ns can be at the precancerous stage according to field
cancerization concept, we first focused on DNA methylation levels in N
samples (N) and performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering using N on
the 3,877 probes. 110 patients with GCs were subclustered into Cluster A
(n=20), Cluster B1 (n=20) and Cluster B2 (n=70). GCs belonging to Cluster
B1 more frequently showed undifferentiated histology and higher pT stage
and pathological TNM stage when compared to those in Clusters A and B2.
Recurrence-free and overall survival rates of patients in Cluster B1 were
lower than those of patients in Clusters A and B2. Sixty hallmark genes
of which N characterized the epigenetic clustering were identified. To
examine whether DNA methylation profiles in N samples were inherited by
GCs themselves, we next focused on DNA methylation levels of the 60
hallmark genes in T samples (T). In 43 out of the 60 hallmark genes, T
was again significantly correlated with undifferentiated histology or
higher pT stage and pathological TNM stage. In 25 and 26 out of the 60
hallmark genes, T was significantly correlated with recurrence-free and
overall survival rates of the 110 patients, respectively. Multivariate
analyses using Cox proportional hazards regression model revealed that T
in 10 out of the 60 hallmark genes were a significant prognostic factor
which was independent from histological differentiation, pT stage and
pathological TNM stage.Conclusion: These data indicated that DNA
methylation profiles at the precancerous stage may be inherited by GCs
themselves and may determine tumor aggressiveness and patient outcome.

