Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MARCKS protein inhibitors attenuate cancer cell
migration/metastasis


Background: Metastasis causes most deaths from cancer. In a number of
studies, high expressions of the MARCKS protein (Myristoylated
Alanine-Rich C Kinase Substrate, a 332-amino acid protein known to play a
key role in normal cell motion) in cancer cells have been associated with
higher rates of metastasis in breast, lung, prostate, brain, skin and
other neoplasias. Recently, Chen et al. showed that the 24-amino acid
N-terminal sequence of MARCKS, called the MANS peptide, blocked
metastasis of lung cancer cells orthotopically injected into mouse lungs
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23955080). Unfortunately, for various
reasons, the MANS peptide is not practical as an anti-cancer drug
candidate. We have identified shorter and far more soluble N-terminal
peptide inhibitors of MARCKS that appear to block migration of cancer
cells in vitro and metastasis in mice in-vivo at lower concentrations
than the MANS peptide, and when administered either IP or as an inhaled
aerosol.Methods: For the in vitro cancer cell migration assays, 1 X 105
of three separate human lung cancer cell lines (A549, PC-9, and CL1-5)
were cultured in Transwell plates (24-well, 8-um pore size). Either PBS
(control), MANS, or 3 different N-terminal peptide inhibitor analogs of
MANS; BIO-11006, BIO-11002, and BIO-10901 were incubated with the cells
for 12 hrs, and cells that migrated from the upper to lower surface of
the chambers were stained with hematoxylin and counted. For the in vivo
metastasis evaluations, PC-9 cells were orthotopically-injected into the
lungs of NOD-SCID mice with or without preincubation with either MANS or
BIO-11006, and animals were given MANS or BIO-11006 IP after 7 days and
every 3 days up until day 25, when they were harvested and examined.
Another group of orthotopically injected animals received treatment with
BIO-11006 as an inhaled aerosol starting at day 4 and every day
thereafter until day 25. Animals were euthanized at day 26; locations and
magnitudes of systemic metastases were assessed macroscopically and
microscopically.Results: All of the N-terminal peptide inhibitors showed
concentration - dependent attenuation of in vitro migration of each of
the cancer cell lines, with an inhibition of close to 75% at the highest
concentration (100M). The smaller MANS analogs appeared to be the most
effective at the lower concentrations. IP injection of MANS or BIO-11006
dramatically inhibited metastasis of the primary tumor to other sites in
the lung, heart and diaphragm, with BIO-11006 showing potent inhibition
of metastasis even at a concentration an order of magnitude lower than
MANS. Administration of 50 uM BIO-11006daily via inhaled aerosol had the
same inhibitory effect on metastasis as IP injection of 50 uM every three
days.Conclusion: N-terminal peptide inhibitors of MARCKS suitable for
development as potential new anti-cancer drugs show substantial promise
in inhibiting metastasis of lung cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo.

