Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glioblastoma stem cells with withaferin A


Introduction. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and
aggressive form of primary brain cancer affecting 3 to 4 per 100,000
people annually in the United States. Despite aggressive therapy
including surgical resection followed by both radiation and chemotherapy,
overall survival remains dismal at approximately 14 months. Recent
studies have determined that GBM's contain a small population of stem
cells (GSCs), which promote tumor growth through unlimited self-renewal.
Since GSCs are chemo- and radio-resistant and drive tumor regrowth
following therapy, successful treatment depends on the elimination of
these cells. Withaferin A (WA) is a bioactive compound derived from the
plant Withonia somnifera which possesses anti-inflammatory and
anti-cancer properties. Here we evaluated the effects of WA on patient
derived GSCs.Methods. With IRB approval, GSC lines were generated. GSCs
were propagated in neurosphere media and examined for the stem cell
markers CD133, nestin, musashi and BMi1 by immunocytochemistry and
western blot analysis. Effect of WA on cell viability was determined
using MTS assay. The effect of WA on cell survival and stress pathways
was evaluated by western blot analysis.Results. WA induced a significant
decrease in cell viability at low micromolar concentrations. The IC50 for
3 patient derived GSC lines ranged between 0.96-1.78M. WA induced ER
stress and apoptosis in the GSCs as indicated by increased expression of
ER stress markers grp78 and CHOP and increased levels of cleaved PARP.
Furthermore, WA decreased survivin but increased phospho-ERK levels.
However, inhibition of ERK activity with U0126 did not potentiate the
effect of WA on cell death.Conclusion. Ashwagandha has been used safely
for medicinal purposes for centuries and pharmacokinetic studies in mice
indicate that micromolar plasma concentrations of WA are obtainable. Our
studies indicate that very low concentrations of WA induce ER stress and
cell death in GSC lines. Targeting GSC with WA may increase patient
survival by hindering GSC mediated tumor regrowth following surgery. Our
data demonstrates the efficacy of WA and supports additional studies
toward the use of WA as an adjuvant GBM therapy.

