Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Champions TumorGraft Bank: A demographically-rich repository
of preclinical TumorGraft models


Many oncology pharmaceuticals fail during phased clinical trials, having
been advanced based on research using flawed preclinical models that do
not accurately replicate human tumor biology. For example, numerous
models are based on genetically-engineered mice, which are often
generated from limited numbers of genetic aberrations. As such, they may
not accurately represent either the chaotic heterogeneity that exists
within intact human tumors or throughout the clinical population.
TumorGrafts, in which patient-derived tumor tissue is directly engrafted
into immunodeficient mice, offer a step forward in this unresolved issue.
These models maintain the complex intra-tumoral heterogeneity and biology
of an intact malignancy, as well its 3-dimensional interplay with stromal
components and other cells fluxing into the immediate environment. The
intrinsic cross-talk between the different compartments of the tumor is
also retained.We wanted to generate a repository of these tumor models
and make them available to the research community for use in
pharmaceutical development and basic research processes. Here we describe
our extensive bank of live TumorGrafts comprising a range of different
tumor types, from more common cancers, including lung, colon, and breast,
to a number of rare subtypes such as adenoid cystic carcinoma. These
models were originally developed for personalizing cancer treatments and
are derived from patient populations across all ages and ethnicities,
encompassing both treatment-nave and heavily-treated individuals.
Furthermore, because of our distinct patient-focus, we maintain detailed
clinical histories, as well as molecular data where available. Hence, the
bank is a reasonable surrogate of the population from which treatment
groups are typically drawn for clinical trials and could potentially be
of value for predetermining target populations for therapeutic
intervention. The Champions TumorGraft Bank provides superior
pre-clinical models that faithfully capture all the biological and
molecular features of cancer and can serve basic and clinical research
groups as an increasingly valuable source for drug development and
biomarker discovery.

