Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dendritic cell vaccination and regulatory T-cell depletion augment
antitumor immunity after cytotoxic therapy


The ability of lymphodepleting cytotoxic regimens to augment antitumor
immune responses has been well established. We and others have previously
reported that nave T cells, as well as effector T cells, transferred into
lymphopenic tumor-bearing mice acquire memory-like phenotypes and show
antitumor effects. The transfer of nave T cells into irradiated
lymphopenic mice inhibited tumor progression. Further analyses revealed
that the transfer of CD4+ nave T cells was essential for this
augmentation of antitumor immunity after lymphodepletion.To enhance the
antitumor efficacy of lymphodepletion and transfer of nave T cells, we
have tested anti-CTLA-4 mAbs and anti-CD25 mAbs for depletion of
regulatory T cells. Mice were irradiated with 500 cGy to deplete
lymphocytes and were transferred i.v. with T cells (2 x 107). On the same
day, mice were inoculated with MCA205 tumor cells (1 x 105) followed by
the injection of anti-CTLA-4 mAbs (UC10) or the injection of anti-CD25
mAbs (PC61). Although the injection of anti-CTLA-4 mAbs showed minimal
augmentation of the antitumor effects of the combination of
lymphodepletion and nave T cell transfer, anti-CD25 mAbs significantly
enhanced antitumor immune responses. Next, we evaluated whether dendritic
cell vaccination augments this combination therapy. Different from
previous experiments, 3-day tumor-bearing mice were irradiated and
reconstituted with T cells. Dendritic cells were generated from bone
marrow of nave mice and were co-cultured with irradiated MCA205 tumor
cells followed by stimulation with agonistic anti-CD40 mAbs. We found
that dendritic cell vaccination significantly inhibited tumor growth in
irradiated reconstituted mice.Previously, we reported that a significant
increase of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in irradiated mice. We
demonstrated that these radio-resistant regulatory T cells from
irradiated recipient mice suppressed the development of antitumor
immunity. To clarify the roles of other recipient cells in antitumor
immunity during recovery from lymphopenia, Rag-2 knockout mice were
irradiated and reconstituted with T cells. These mice were then
inoculated MCA205 tumor cells. In Rag-2 knockout mice, antitumor effects
were not observed after lymphodepletion and reconstitution. These
findings indicate that recipient T cells or B cells were required to
augment antitumor immunity in lymphopenic mice in our model.

