Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating and accurately interpreting clinical grade cancer exomes:
Challenges and solutions


Exome and genome sequencing are increasingly utilized to diagnose and
direct treatment for cancer patients. However, there are many barriers to
sequencing cancer exomes in an accurate and comprehensive way that
assesses all crucial cancer mutations. Critical sequencing coverage gaps
in cancer genes, challenges calling structural variants, difficulty
isolating DNA from FFPE and small biopsy samples, tumor heterogeneity and
cellularity, and accurate annotation of mutations remain significant
hurdles to accurate clinical cancer interpretation. We have developed a
comprehensive approach aimed at improving accuracy and completeness of
sequencing, structural variant calling, and annotation of cancer
samples.Whole exome sequencing in particular is susceptible to missing
key parts of the cancer genome. We have designed a unique targeted assay
and set of protocols to augment and improve the standard exome sequencing
assay in order to assess all major cancer genome mutations, including
important structural variations. We have optimized DNA isolation and
library creation from FFPE tumor samples and small sample sizes. To
improve sequencing coverage of 494 cancer related genes and over 7,000
other genes of medical importance, we include additional optimized
targeted enrichments on top of the standard exome. We also utilize
altered sequencing protocols to fill in regions containing genomic
elements that are typically hard to sequence by standard protocols. We
compared coverage over 494 cancer genes with our augmented exome approach
to two different standard exome capture kits, all at 12G of sequencing.
In this comparison, we defined finishing a gene to mean greater than 99%
of bases within the gene at greater than 20x average coverage. Our
augmented exome approach finished 459 of 494 (93%) cancer genes. The
standard exome platforms only finished 276 (56%) and 318 (64%) cancer
genes at this level.While finishing cancer genes is paramount to
detecting small mutations, structural variants (SVs) are also a very
important class of mutations when assessing clinical cancer samples. In
addition to our augmented exome, we also perform whole genome sequencing
to facilitate detection of structural variants. We utilize a combined
algorithm for structural variant calling which leverages multiple lines
of genomic evidence to identify and score SVs. By combining orthogonal SV
detection algorithms with local reassembly, we achieve greater
sensitivity (96.27% compared to 55.6% average for each algorithm
independently), and a lower false discovery rate (1.37% compared to
27.55% average) on SV detection in genome sequence than any of the
methods used independently.By comprehensively and accurately assessing
cancer mutations and leveraging public and privately curated databases
for annotation, we are able to sequence and interpret clinical grade
cancer exomes to a much higher level than standard exome sequencing.

