Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of autophagy by ormeloxifene and mevastatin through
Protein Kinase D1 in prostate cancer cells


Objective: Chemotherapy-induced emergence of drug resistance is one of
the major limitations to treat prostate cancer. Numerous studies report
that autophagic cell death functions as a suppressor of tumorigenesis in
prostate cancer. Although chemotherapeutic drugs inhibit growth of cancer
cells, they also activate chemokine, CCL2 which protects prostate cancer
cells from autophagic cell death. Protein Kinase D1 (PKD1) plays multiple
roles in the fundamental biological processes and is known as a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer. Here, we report for the first time that
PKD1 inhibits CCL2 expression in prostate cancer cells. Therefore, we
also investigated whether PKD1 modulation inhibits CCL2 and potentiates
autophagic cell death. We have found a novel combination of mevastatin
(MVS) and ormeloxifene (ORM), a non-steroidal, selective estrogen
receptor inhibitor, effectively increases PKD1 expression and induces
autophagic cell death in prostate cancer cells.Methods: Prostate cancer
cells (C4-2) stably overexpressing PKD1 (C4-2-PKD1-GFP) or vector control
(C4-2-GFP) were treated with ORM (10M) and MVS (20M) and their
combination for 48h. Cell viability was performed by CellTiter 96 AQueous
One Solution cell proliferation assay. CCL2 expression levels were
quantified by ELISA as per the manufacturer's instructions. Cell
migration assays were performed with pre-incubation of 3-MA (5mM;
3-Methyladenine, an autophagy inhibitor) for 2h, or exogenously added
CCL2 (100ng/mL) in the lower part of a Boyden chamber. The cells were
treated with ORM alone or in combination with MVS for 18h for the
analysis of proteins expression involved in autophagy. Immmunoblot
experiments were performed using an autophagy sampler kit as per the
manufacturer's instructions.Results: Our results suggest that a
combination of ORM and MVS increases PKD1 and inhibits CCL2 expression in
prostate cancer cells. It inhibits cell proliferation, migration and
metastasis of prostate cancer cells. Additionally, it was observed that
ORM and MVS effectively inhibits CCL2 induced cell motility in PKD1
overexpressing cells, however the effect was not observed in PKD1 null
cells. The PKD1 dependent inhibition of CCL2 expression activates
autophagy as evidenced by activation of autophagy markers (LC3A, LC3B).
It down-regulates survivin-1, Beclin-1 and NFB-65, inducing autophagy in
cancer cells. The cells treated with 3-MA and/or exogenous CCL2 abrogated
the effects induced by MVS and ORM.Conclusion: Here, we propose for the
first time a link between PKD1 and autophagy. We have found a novel
combination of MVS and ORM that effectively increases PKD1 expression and
induces autophagic cell death in prostate cancer cells. This study
prospects combined therapies targeting PKD1/CCL2 and the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR/survivin pathway as a valid strategy to overcome the
resistance of prostate cancer cells.

