Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel CSF-1 receptor ligand IL-34 modulates macrophage-breast
cancer cell crosstalk


Crosstalk between stromal cells and malignant cells within the tumor
microenvironment is important for tumorigenesis. According to current
clinical and experimental evidence, tumor associated macrophages (TAMs)
play a major role in tumor progression to metastasis in different
cancers. In breast cancer, increased number of TAMs is associated with
poor prognosis. Previous work in our laboratory has shown that depletion
of TAMs by blocking colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) suppresses tumor
growth, matrix metalloprotease production and further recruitment of
macrophages in a MCF-7 breast cancer xenograft model. In this study, we
aim to investigate Interleukin-34 (IL-34), a novel ligand for the colony
stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R). IL-34 functions as a specific and
independent ligand and as an agonist to the CSF-1R. Furthermore it is
known to induce proliferation through mitogen activated protein kinase
(MAPK) activation in macrophages and cancer cells. To date, nothing is
known about the role of IL-34 in breast cancer and its effects on
downstream signalling pathway modulation in cancer cell-macrophage
crosstalk. Our real-time PCR data shows that in co-cultures with murine
macrophages, human MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells express
increased levels of IL-34. In addition, in vitro migration assays
demonstrated that recombinant human and murine IL-34 significantly
increases the migration of murine macrophages, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells. IL-34 also increased the proliferation of murine
macrophages and breast cancer cells. Experiments on the protein level
demonstrated the activation of MAPK/ERK in murine macrophages and breast
cancer cells by recombinant IL-34. These preliminary data indicate that
TAM-breast cancer cell interactions induce IL-34 production associated
with induction of proliferation and the migratory capacity of tumor and
stromal cells, which together may influence the invasiveness of the
developing tumor. Here we propose IL-34 as a target for the treatment of
breast cancer which may affect the accumulation of TAMs and improve
breast cancer prognosis.

