Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) positively regulates Mcl-1 stability by
suppressing GSK3-dependent and FBXW7-mediated proteasomal degradation of
Mcl-1


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) positively regulates cell growth
and survival, primarily through forming a complex either with raptor
(mTORC1) or with rictor (mTORC2). While mTORC1 is well known to exert its
biological functions primarily via inhibition of cap-dependent protein
translation, little is known about the mechanisms by which mTORC2
regulates cell survival and growth. Mcl-1 is an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family protein and functions as an oncogenic protein. It is a short-lived
protein that undergoes GSK3/FBXW7-dependent ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation. mTORC1 positively regulates Mcl-1 translation
while mTORC2 regulation of Mcl-1 stability has not been reported and thus
is the focus of this study. We found that inhibition of mTORCs with mTOR
kinase inhibitors (mTORKinibs) including INK128, AZD8805, Torin1 and
PP242 decreased Mcl-1 levels in cancer cells, particularly those
sensitive to mTORKinibs. mTORKinibs did not alter Mcl-1 mRNA levels, but
decreased its protein stability. Moreover, mTORKinib-induced Mcl-1
reduction could be rescued by proteasome inhibition (e.g.,with MG132).
Hence, it is clear that mTORKinibs enhance Mcl-1 degradation, resulting
in Mcl-1 reduction. Suppression of GSK3 using GSK3 chemical inhibitors
(e.g.,SB216763 and CHIR99021) or gene silencing approaches prevented
Mcl-1 reduction or degradation. This indicated that a GSK3-dependent
mechanism is involved in mTORKinib-induced Mcl-1 reduction. Although both
the F-box E3 ubiquitin ligases, FBXW7 and -TrCP, have been suggested to
mediate GSK3-dependent degradation of Mcl-1, we observed that FBXW7
knockdown but not -TrCP attenuated or abolished the ability of mTORKinibs
to reduce Mcl-1 levels, demonstrating a critical role of FBXW7 in
mediating mTORKinib-induced Mcl-1 degradation. These results demonstrate
that mTORKinibs reduces Mcl-1 levels by promoting GSK3-dependent and
FBXW7-mediated proteasomal degradation of Mcl-1. Through genetic
approaches, we further showed that knockdown of rictor, but not raptor
expression reduced Mcl-1 levels and promoted Mcl-1 degradation. In
agreement, enforced expression of an ectopic rictor, but not raptor,
elevated Mcl-1 levels and enhanced Mcl-1 stability. Furthermore, Mcl-1
reduction induced by rictor knockdown could be rescued by inhibition of
GSK3 or FBXW7. Thus, it is apparent that genetic inhibition of rictor,
but not raptor, can replicate the effects of mTORKinibs on inducing
GSK3-dependent and FBXW7-mediated Mcl-1 degradation. Collectively, we
conclude that mTORC2 may positively regulate Mcl-1 stability by
suppressing GSK3-dependent and FBXW7-mediated proteasomal degradation of
Mcl-1. Our current study highlights a novel biological function of mTORC2
in regulating protein degradation. Further investigation of the detailed
mechanism by which mTORC2 stabilizes Mcl-1 protein is warranted.

