Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific oncolytic adenovirus coding for trastuzumab results
in local production of functional monoclonal antibody from tumor cells


Trastuzumab is a therapeutic monoclonal antibody to HER2 that has
significantly improved the survival of HER2-positive breast and gastric
cancer. The drug reduces proliferation and angiogenesis in treated
tumors, and can induce antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) by immune cells. Unfortunately, systemic administration is
expensive and carries the risk of cardiomyopathy. Thus, local production
and antibody activity at the tumor site would be optimal. However,
antibodies are normally produced by B-cells and it is unknown if tumor
cells are able to produce functional antibody. Here, we constructed an
oncolytic adenovirus coding for human trastuzumab antibody heavy and
light-chain genes, linked with an IRES. This virus has dual anticancer
activity: First, Ad5/3-D24-tras is a chimeric serotype 5 oncolytic
adenovirus exhibiting selective replication and oncolysis in cancer
cells. Second, effective viral protein expression can lead to high and
sustained local concentrations of trastuzumab. We aimed to study the
trastuzumab production, mechanism of action and efficacy of
Ad5/3-D24-tras in gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo.Trastuzumab heavy
and light chain expression by the virus construct was confirmed by
Western blot in vitro. Cancer cells were able to produce full-length
assembled antibody, which was released from infected cells to supernatant
and could be detected by ELISA. Ad5/3-D24-tras showed cytotoxicity in
gastric and esophageal cancer cell lines similar to the oncolytic parent
virus. In addition in HER2-positive gastric cancer, Ad5/3-D24-tras
treatment induced potent ADCC mediated by peripheral blood mononuclear
immune cells. We assessed the efficacy of Ad5/3-D24-tras in a
HER2-positive gastric cancer xenograft mouse model; Ad5/3-D24-tras
treatment significantly enhanced tumor-growth inhibition over oncolytic
parent virus Ad5/3-D24 or commercial trastuzumab (PTrastuzumab is a
therapeutic monoclonal antibody to HER2 that has significantly improved
the survival of HER2-positive breast and gastric cancer. The drug reduces
proliferation and angiogenesis in treated tumors, and can induce
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) by immune cells.
Unfortunately, systemic administration is expensive and carries the risk
of cardiomyopathy. Thus, local production and antibody activity at the
tumor site would be optimal. However, antibodies are normally produced by
B-cells and it is unknown if tumor cells are able to produce functional
antibody. Here, we constructed an oncolytic adenovirus coding for human
trastuzumab antibody heavy and light-chain genes, linked with an IRES.
This virus has dual anticancer activity: First, Ad5/3-D24-tras is a
chimeric serotype 5 oncolytic adenovirus exhibiting selective replication
and oncolysis in cancer cells. Second, effective viral protein expression
can lead to high and sustained local concentrations of trastuzumab. We
aimed to study the trastuzumab production, mechanism of action and
efficacy of Ad5/3-D24-tras in gastric cancer in vitro and in
vivo.Trastuzumab heavy and light chain expression by the virus construct
was confirmed by Western blot in vitro. Cancer cells were able to produce
full-length assembled antibody, which was released from infected cells to
supernatant and could be detected by ELISA. Ad5/3-D24-tras showed
cytotoxicity in gastric and esophageal cancer cell lines similar to the
oncolytic parent virus. In addition in HER2-positive gastric cancer,
Ad5/3-D24-tras treatment induced potent ADCC mediated by peripheral blood
mononuclear immune cells. We assessed the efficacy of Ad5/3-D24-tras in a
HER2-positive gastric cancer xenograft mouse model; Ad5/3-D24-tras
treatment significantly enhanced tumor-growth inhibition over oncolytic
parent virus Ad5/3-D24 or commercial trastuzumab (P<0.05, both).
Importantly, higher local concentrations of trastuzumab were detected in
Ad5/3-D24-tras treated tumors compared to controls. Flow cytometry
analysis of the harvested immune cells suggested dendritic cell and
natural killer cell induction in local lymph nodes of the Ad5/3-D24-tras
treated mice.In conclusion, Ad5/3-D24-tras is an attractive anticancer
approach combining local production of trastuzumab with oncolytic potency
of a replicating adenovirus, resulting in improved in vivo efficacy in
HER2-positive gastric cancer. Moreover, antibody-mediated immune cell
activation via ADCC could also potentiate effects of immunotherapeutic
agents such as oncolytic viruses.

