Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: O6 methylguanine DNA methyltransferase inhibition sensitizes
pancreatic cancer cells to temozolomide


O6 methylguanine DNA methyltransferease (MGMT) is overexpressed in
majority of cancers including pancreatic cancer. MGMT has been the focus
of significant research for its role in the repair of DNA damage caused
by alkylating agents. In the present study, we tested the administration
of the MGMT inhibitor O6-benzylguanine (BG) at non-toxic doses in
combination with an alkylator TMZ (temozolomide) on pancreatic cancer
cells (L3.6 pl and PANC1) in cell culture and xenograft model. Here, we
report that TMZ decreases pancreatic cancer cell growth in a dose
dependent manner. BG further sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to TMZ
and significantly inhibits pancreatic cancer growth. We also report that
BG, either alone or in combination with TMZ, inhibits the expression of
MGMT, Ki-67 and BIRC5 (survivin), which are involved in pancreatic
tumorigenesis and cell division, and induces the expression of p21cip1
cell cycle inhibitor. Microarray analysis revealed that BG significantly
decreased the transcription of a group of proto-oncogenes, growth
factors, cell cycle and overall transcription regulators involved in
tumorigenesis like ARHGDIB, IGFL1, KIF20A, CA9, MMP10 and E2F2 and
increased the transcription of a variety of genes involved in tissue
differentiation, cell cycle regulation and invasion inhibitors like
GDF15, CDKN1A and TIMP1. In our pancreatic cancer xenograft model, BG +/-
TMZ significantly inhibited pancreatic tumor growth in vivo compared to
single agent TMZ or controls. Further, BG promotes p53 function leading
to growth inhibition, in part substantiating the underlying mechanism of
BIRC5 (survivin) inhibition and p21cip1 induction. In conclusion, our
findings suggest that MGMT inhibition may potentially provide a novel
therapeutic approach in pancreatic cancer by opening the option of using
(oral) alkylators like TMZ.

