Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAPK inhibitor resistance leads to ligand-independent Ephrin A2
receptor signaling and the formation of new melanoma metastases


Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer with the worst prognosis in
patients with metastasis to distant sites such as brain, liver and bone.
Studies have shown that MAPK reactivation is a key signaling event
leading to BRAF inhibitor resistance. As such, clinical investigations
are now underway to evaluate the efficacy of combining frontline BRAF
plus MEK inhibitors. Though this approach appears to have meaningful
clinical benefit, there are a number of patients who do not respond to
therapy, or who through unknown mechanisms, succumb to refractory
disease. In order to identify the dynamic changes that drive MAPK
inhibitor resistance, we have developed a systems level approach
combining mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomic and bioinformatics
methodologies. Based on significant changes in tyrosine, threonine and
serine phosphorylation events between naive and vemurafenib resistant
melanoma cell lines, we have mapped a resistance interactome of 550
nodes. This resistance network was significantly enriched for pathways
associated with metastatic disease where changes in network connectivity
resulted in the appearance of new signaling hubs such as EGFR, EphA2,
EphB4, STAT3, FAK1 and HDAC1. The clinical relevance of these findings
was demonstrated in a retrospective study showing that 65% of BRAFV600E
patients on vemurafenib therapy developed metastases at new sites, with
25% of these new metastases involving the brain. Consistent with our
bioinformatics prediction, resistant lines had greater metastatic
potential as seen by increased migration and invasion across matrigel and
endothelial cell barriers. Extending our findings to a panel of BRAF and
BRAF plus MEK inhibitor resistant cell lines, we found compelling
evidence that EphA2 is essential for maintaining a resistance phenotype.
This phenotype was associated with AKT activation and uncoupled
Eph-ephrin signaling resulting in S897 phosphorylation and overexpression
of EphA2. In vivo analysis of matched primary and metastatic tumors from
vemurafenib resistant xenografts showed that EphA2 expression is
increased in metastatic but not primary lesions. Importantly, analysis of
clinical specimens from melanoma patients undergoing or failing
vemurafenib therapy confirmed that EphA2 receptor expression is
significantly upregulated in metastatic but not primary tumors.
Functionally, EphA2 S897 phosphorylation was increased at the tumor
leading edge of metastatic lesions while absent in primary lesions. Our
results show that MAPK resistant melanomas can adaptively rewire their
signaling leading to a more malignant phenotype and that through
proteomics based approaches we can reliably identify resistance pathways
that will translate into rational therapeutic strategies for disseminated
disease.

