Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CB-5083 is a novel first in class p97 inhibitor that disrupts
cellular protein homeostasis and demonstrates anti-tumor activity in
solid and hematological models


Background:The AAA-ATPase p97/VCP facilitates the extraction and
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins by converting chemical energy into
mechanical force. p97 is closely involved in several facets of protein
homeostasis, including ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation,
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) and autophagy. p97
has been increasingly linked to cancer: it showed elevated protein
expression in tumors, it can mediate the degradation of proteins in
cancer-relevant pathways and is required for orchestrating the
ubiquitin-governed DNA-damage response. In this context, p97 inhibitors
may have an advantage versus other protein homeostasis inhibitors and may
be active in solid tumors where 26S proteasome inhibitors, bortezomib and
carfilzomib, have shown poor efficacy. We report here p97 inhibition as a
novel approach to exploit cancer cell addiction to protein homeostatic
mechanisms.Results:We have discovered novel small molecule inhibitors of
p97 ATPase activity with nanomolar enzymatic and cellular potency. In
cellular models, treatment of cancer cells with our lead compound CB-5083
causes disruptions in specific p97 functions, including
ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation, ERAD, endocytosis and autophagy.
In mouse models, CB-5083 is orally bio-available and causes rapid and
sustained accumulation of poly-ubiquitin in tumor xenografts after a
single administration. Concurrent with increases in polyubiquitin levels,
activation of ER stress response pathways and induction of apoptosis
markers are also observed. Sub-chronic oral administration of CB-5083 is
generally well-tolerated with 50% reduction in M-spike. Additional
efforts are focused on the development of translational assays to monitor
p97 target engagement and antitumor efficacy in upcoming clinical trials
of CB-5083.Conclusion:These data demonstrate that CB-5083 is a potent
inhibitor of p97 that translates to tumor growth inhibition in multiple
rodent models of human cancer. Furthermore, CB-5083 appears to exhibit
greater potency over current proteasome inhibitors that further validate
targeting p97 and protein homeostasis in the treatment of cancer.

