Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix components influence prostate tumor cell
sensitivity to cancer-preventive agents selenium and green tea polyphenols


Some cancer-preventive agents such as selenium and green tea polyphenols
effectively prevent cancer in some cases, but fail in other cases. It
could be possible that the cancer-preventive actions of these agents may
be altered by the interaction of cancer cells with the extracellular
matrix (ECM) components, thus making this an important issue to study.
Others have previously cloned a family of human prostate cancer cell
lines with a common lineage that show the progression of characteristics
from low to high degrees of malignancy and mimic different stages of
tumor progression seen in human prostate cancer. For this study, we used
these prostate cancer cell lines with increasing tumorigenicity and
invasive ability: WPE1-NA22 showing the lowest, WPE1-NB14 and WPE1-NB11
showing intermediate, and WPE1-NB26 showing the greatest. The low
tumorigenic cell line, WPE1-NA22 resembles noninvasive prostatic
intra-epithelial neoplasia and represents a good target for
chemoprevention in humans. Initially, we grew these cells on the surface
of ECM components, laminin, collagen I, and fibronectin and determined
the tumor cell sensitivity to methylseleninic acid (MSA) and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG). Poly-L-lysine was used as a control
substratum. Cell growth was determined by sulforhodamine B staining
assay. Then we determined whether these ECM proteins could enhance tumor
cell resistance to MSA and EGCG. ECM components, but not polylysine,
decreased tumor cell sensitivity to these agents. The effect of ECM
components was prevented by 1 integrin-blocking antibodies suggesting
that 1 integrin plays a role in mediating intracellular signaling
conferring resistance against MSA and EGCG. Previously, we have shown an
increase in expression of protein kinase C (PKC) in advanced prostate
tumor cells WPE1-NB26. A decrease in expression of PKC by siRNA approach
decreased the tumor cell resistance caused by ECM components.
Furthermore, an inhibition of cell survival enzymes
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) with its specific inhibitor LY294002 (50
M) as well as Akt with its specific inhibitor MK-2206 (1 M) decreased the
effect of ECM components on tumor cell survival against MSA and EGCG.
WPE1-NB14, a low tumorigenic cell line having low PKC and Akt activities,
responded less to ECM components and showed higher sensitivity to MSA and
EGCG. Conceivably, ECM components, laminin, collagen, and fibronectin
induced 1 integrin signaling to activate cell survival pathways involving
PKC and PI3K-Akt, thereby decreasing prostate tumor cell sensitivity to
MSA and EGCG. Thus, ECM may be one of the limiting factors for the action
of cancer-preventive agents.

