Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of dnmt1 by E2F1 in melanoma progression


Melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer due to its high resistance to
currently available therapy. Like other kinds of cancer, melanoma
presents changes in DNA methylation and epigenetic machinery such as
Dnmt1, however it is still unclear why tumor cells acquire these
epigenetic alterations. The aim of this study was to analyze the
mechanisms involved in Dnmt1 transcriptional regulation by the
transcription factor E2F1 in melanoma progression. The cell model used in
this study was previously developed in our laboratory, submitting
non-tumorigenic murine melanocytes (melan-a) to successive cycles of
anchorage blockade. A linear cell model for melanoma was obtained
consisting in pre-malignant (1C and 4C), tumorigenic non-metastatic
(4C11-) and metastatic (4C11+) cell lines. Bioinformatics data show the
existence of four transcripts for Dnmt1 in mice. The transcripts 1 and 2
have the same promoter, and the transcripts 3 and 4 share a different
promoter. Real time PCR showed the absence of transcript 3 in all cell
lines analyzed. The transcript 4 was present in all lineages, but no
significant change in its expression was observed in any one compared to
melan- a melanocytes. Transcripts 1 and 2 are present and their levels
are increased in 1C, 4C, 4C11- and 4C11+ compared to melan-a cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) showed increased binding of E2F1 in
Dnmt1 promoter in 1C, 4C, 4C11- and 4C11+ compared to melan-a cells.
Interestingly, the intensity of binding was stronger in the first
promoter, which regulates transcripts 1 and 2, than in the second
promoter, which regulates transcripts 3 and 4. These results show for the
first time that E2F1 may have an important role in the transcription
regulation of Dnmt1 during melanoma progression. Additionally, we
observed the increase in superoxide anion (O2.-) in 1C compared to
melan-a cells. Recently published data from our group showed that
depleting O2.- with MnTBAP scavenger during melan-a anchorage blockade
cycles, the malignant transformation is drastically compromised. Here, we
showed that 1C cells treated with MnTBAP do not have Dnmt1 mRNA and
protein increase compared to melan-a cells. Furthermore, E2F1 levels seem
to be regulated by O2.- in 1C cells, indicating that O2.- can be a
possible mediator for E2F1 regulation and Dnmt1 transcriptional
regulation in melanoma progression. Together, these data suggest an
important role of oxidative stress and epigenetic mechanisms in the first
steps of melanoma progression. Supported by FAPESP and CNPq.

