Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic p27 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
tumor progression via Twist1 upregulation


p27 is a cell cycle regulator that acts largely to restrain normal cell
growth. It is rarely mutated or deleted in human cancers, but is often
degraded or mislocalized to the cytoplasm in aggressive tumors.
Phosphorylation at T157 or T198 by different PI3K effector kinases leads
to p27 cytoplasmic accumulation and enhanced cell motility and invasion
in part via effects on the actin cytoskeleton, which are independent of
its cell cycle role. However, the functional contributions of
C-terminally phosphorylated, cytoplasmic p27 to cancer progression remain
poorly understood. Targeted inhibition of PI3K/mTOR impaired tumor cell
motility and metastasis via modulation of p27 in a bone metastatic model
(Wander, S. et al. BCRT 2013). We observed that p27 knockdown in highly
metastatic cancer lines with high levels of cytoplasmic p27pT157pT198
reverted EMT and impaired tumor cell invasion in vitro and metastasis in
vivo. This led us to investigate whether PI3K-activated, phosphorylated
p27 may function as a novel EMT regulator. A cell cycle defective (CK-)
and double phosphomimetic p27 mutant (T157D/T198D or DD) was introduced
into immortal human mammary epithelial cells with low PI3K activity. This
revealed a novel, oncogenic function of p27 in regulating tumor
progression, in that p27CK-DD induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and soft agar colony formation. p27CK-DD also increased motility,
invasion and formation of metastasis in bladder and breast cancer models.
A RT-PCR screen for potential p27-induced EMT mediators revealed a
20-fold increase in expression of the Twist1 transcription factor in
p27CK-DD-transduced cells. Knockdown of Twist reversed the
p27CK-DD-mediated increase in EMT marker expression. p27 knockdown
rapidly attenuated Twist1-promoter activity and reduced Twist1 mRNA
levels and also increased E-cadherin expression in metastatic cells,
suggesting that Twist1 may play a critical role in p27CK-DD-induced EMT.
These data extend our understanding of p27 function in human cancer and
suggest that PI3K deregulated p27 may promote EMT and tumor metastasis
through transcriptional activation of TWIST1.

