Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impressive efficacy and safety profile of a novel generation
duocarmycin-based HER2-targeting ADC


We have built a linker-drug platform based on a cleavable
linker-duocarmycin payload for the development of novel generation
antibody-drug conjugates. SYD983, a lead ADC originating from that
platform, is a cysteine-coupled HER2-targeting ADC based on trastuzumab.
SYD983 is a heterogeneous product that consists of a mixture of naked Ab
and ADCs with a drug-to-antibody ratio (DAR) of 2, 4, 6, the mean DAR
being 2.0.We have shown that SYD983 binds to HER2, induces
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and is efficiently
internalized into HER2-expressing cells. SYD983 very potently kills
HER2-expressing cells in vitro and is inactive in cells that don't
express HER2. SYD983 is stable in human and cynomolgus monkey (CM) plasma
in vitro but has relatively poor stability in mouse plasma. The latter is
due to mouse-specific carboxylesterase (CES1c) since stability of SYD983
in plasma of CES1c knockout mice is similar to that in human and CM
plasma. SYD983 could be dosed up to 30 mg/kg in CM in vivo with high
exposure and stable kinetics and without severe toxic effects. The CM
safety study showed no SYD983-induced thrombocytopenia and no induction
of peripheral sensory neuropathy, which both commonly occur in studies
with ADCs based on tubulin inhibitors. Finally, to reduce heterogeneity
we have further fractionated SYD983 by hydrophobic interaction
chromatography resulting in an ADC predominantly containing DAR2 and DAR4
species and we designated the resulting purified and more homogeneous ADC
as SYD985. In line with its increased average DAR and the absence of
naked Ab, SYD985 (average DAR of 2.7) shows increased potency in vitro
compared to SYD983. In vivo, SYD985 showed high anti-tumor activity in
two patient-derived xenograft models of HER2 positive metastatic breast
cancers which underscores the potential for SYD985 in this indication. We
have further initiated a program to directly compare SYD985 to T-DM1 for
anti-tumor activity in a series of tumors with different HER2 status of
which the results are published in a separate accompanying abstract.In
conclusion, the data obtained indicates great potential for SYD985 to
become an effective drug for patients with HER2-positive cancers.
Clinical studies will further elucidate how the characteristics revealed
in the preclinical studies, will translate into a benefit for patients.
Taken more generally, we conclude that this novel generation
duocarmycin-based LD technology could be used on other mAbs to create
effective and safe ADCs to treat different forms of cancer.

