Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput in vitro screening of glioma stem cell lines:
Evaluation of over 350 tyrosine kinase inhibitors


Despite the availability of hundreds of drugs, there is little data on
the efficacy of these agents in the extremely heterogeneous populations
of tumor cells observed in glioblastoma. A high-throughput
compound-screening assay was used to identify drug sensitivities in a
panel of glioma stem cell (GSC) lines to 350 tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(GSK PKIS1) with varying cellular targets and mechanisms of kinase
inhibition. Twelve glioma stem cell lines, which are representative of
the classic TCGA molecular subtypes, were screened. Cell lines were
screened in 384-well plates at a density of 1000 cells/well with drug
concentrations of either 5 or 0.5 M. Cell viability measurements were
taken using Cell-Titer Glo five days after drug treatment and compared to
control wells to calculate percentage inhibition. Compounds were defined
as highly active (>90 % inhibition at 5M; > 50% inhibition at 0.5M),
moderately active (>70% inhibition at 5M; >30% inhibition at 0.5M), or
weakly active (>50% inhibition at 5M; >15% inhibition at 0.5M.) We
identified three compounds that were highly active against eleven cell
lines, three more compounds that were highly effective against at least
seven cell lines, and seven additional compounds that were highly
effective against at least four cell lines. The compounds in the screen
were further analyzed by testing their inhibition efficacy against 220
kinases. A separate set of compounds containing molecularly targeted
agents to TGF-beta, STAT3, PI3K and Notch were used for comparison of
drug efficacy. Ongoing experiments are being performed to fully
characterize the molecular phenotypes of the different GSC's by analyzing
RNAseq, miRNA, the whole exome, the proteome, DNA methylation, and copy
number variation. Integrating this information with the kinase and growth
inhibition data will allow us to have a complete picture of the
underlying mechanisms which drive resistance/sensitivity in GSC's. After
determining which kinases are the most effective targets for the
treatment of glioblastoma, promising compounds will be validated in
intracranial in vivo xenograft models.

