Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of squamous tumors identifies novel targets
and dissects gene regulation


Background: Studies by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and others have
identified regions of somatic copy number alteration (SCNA) in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and lung squamous cell carcinoma
(LUSC). Both tumor types exhibit frequent SCNAs in chromosomes 3q, 9p,
and 11q. Although CDKN2A is the putative target of 9p deletions, numerous
targets have been proposed in the 3q amplicon, including SOX2, PIK3CA,
and TP63. Because expression levels are affected by underlying genomic
events, we hypothesized that an integrated analysis of multiple genomic
data types would provide increased ability to identify target genes in
SCNA regions when compared to methods based on copy number alone while
providing insight into mechanisms regulating expression. Findings may be
subsequently validated by examining multiple tumor types or performing
training/testing analyses.Techniques: Gene expression (GE), DNA copy
number (CN), DNA methylation (ME), and microRNA expression (miR) data
were obtained from the TCGA studies of HNSCC and LUSC. Linear models were
constructed for each gene to investigate the effect of changes in CN, ME,
and miR on GE. Analysis of model output provided an approach to identify
target genes in SCNA regions and assess the effect of genomic alterations
on expression.Results: Genome-wide GE, CN, ME, and miR data were
available for n = 279 (HNSCC) and n = 159 (LUSC) tumor samples.
Univariate modeling detected a strong overall association between GE and
CN, as measured by the coefficient of determination (model R2). Although
some genes found in SCNA studies produced large model R2 e.g. SOX2 a
number of genes with large model R2 are relatively unknown. Notable
examples include DVL3, and SENP2, which were implicated as driver genes
in the 3q amplicon by a recent study of LUSC but not identified in the
TCGA report. Remarkably, the model R2 for DVL3 and SENP2 was also high in
HNSCC, and such a finding in a distinct tumor type provides validation
and merits additional study. Output from models additionally including ME
and miR as covariates contributes insight into the diversity of
regulation of gene expression, but the strength of the association
between GE and CN could mask other effects. Thus we constructed linear
models in which the response variable was the residuals from the GE/CN
model and the covariates were ME or miR. The TCGA study of glioblastoma
noted frequent methylation of MGMT. When modeling MGMT we detected a
highly significant association between ME and the GE/CN residuals in both
HNSCC and LUSC. These results illustrate a pronounced effect of ME on GE
conditional on CN.Conclusion: Linear modeling techniques provide a
flexible and powerful basis for performing integrated analysis of genomic
data. Our approach produces predicted results when analyzing known cancer
genes, highlights lesser known genes for future study, provides insight
into gene regulation, and draws attention to genes relevant in multiple
tumor types.

