Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accumulation of CD11b+ Gr1 myeloid cells in liver metastases
stimulates tumor growth and angiogenesis


Host immune cells in the tumor microenvironment play a vital role in
tumor development and metastasis. We previously reported that
accumulation of CD11b+ Gr1mid- and Gr1low-expressing myeloid cells is
important for metastatic progression and growth in a mouse model of liver
metastasis. However, little is known about the mechanisms whereby these
cells support metastatic development. To characterize the molecular
mechanisms by which CD11b+ Gr1mid and Gr1low cells contribute to liver
metastasis, MC38 tumor cells were isolated after CD11b+ cell depletion
and analyzed using whole-genome expression profiling.CD11b+ Gr1mid- and
Gr1low cells accumulate in liver metastases generated by splenic
injection of MC38 colon carcinoma and Lewis lung carcinoma cells. The
Gr1mid population is recruited to liver metastases where they
differentiated into Gr1low cells. This differentiation is stimulated by
tumor cells in tissue culture. CD11b+ cells were depleted by DT
administration in CD11b-DTR mice, resulting in markedly smaller
metastases, decreased proliferation of the tumor cells and greatly
reduced metastasis-associated blood vessels. However, depletion had only
a negligible effect on tumor cell apoptosis and necrosis.CD11b+ Gr1mid
and Gr1low cells enhanced MC38 and LLC tumor cell proliferation,
migration and invasion in in vitro co-culture systems. These responses
were dependent on ERK1/2 activation and its inhibition in tumor cells
minimized the pro-tumorigenic effects of Gr1mid and Gr1low cells.
Stimulation of ERK1/2 by Gr1mid and Gr1low cells may explain why
depletion of CD11b+ cells diminished proliferation of liver metastases in
the murine model.Gene expression analysis of MC38 cells in liver
metastases after CD11b+ cell depletion revealed upregulation of ANGPTL7,
an angiopoietin-like protein. To test the functional significance of this
upregulation, we overexpressed ANGPTL7 in MC38 tumor cells.
Overexpression of ANGPTL7 resulted in a striking reduction in tumor
burden and tumor-associated vessels.Our findings show that CD11b+ Gr1mid
and Gr1low myeloid cells augment proliferation and the migratory and
invasive potential of tumor cells in liver metastases by stimulating
ERK1/2 signaling. They further suggest that these myeloid cells mediate
angiogenesis through upregulation of ANGPTL7 in tumor cells. These
studies reinforce the importance of host myeloid cells in sustaining
liver metastasis and identify potential targets for therapeutic
manipulation.

