Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostatitis related mitogenic stimuli cause loss of NKX3.1:
Increased risk for prostate cancer


NKX3.1 is a haploinsufficient prostate cancer suppressor which has been
shown to be reduced in most of the primary human prostate cancers.
Reduced NKX3.1 expression in luminal epithelial cells was already
observed in pre-neoplastic lesions like prostate intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) and in early tumor stages. Since the NKX3.1 knock out
mouse model displayed a higher incidence of PIN formation it is assumed
that the loss of NKX3.1 is involved in the initiation of in prostate
cancer. Another potential risk factor for the initiation of prostate
cancer is a chronic inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis). However,
a clear link between prostatitis and prostate cancer initiation has not
yet been established. To estimate whether a loss of NKX3.1 in inflamed
prostate tissue might be the basis for PIN formation and subsequent tumor
initiation, we compared the NKX3.1 expression levels in postatitis,
prostate cancer and normal tissue. We observed a pronounced reduction of
NKX3.1 in areas which are positive for B cell and MPS markers CD20 and
CD68, respectively. Stimulation of PCa cancer cell lines with cytokines
and growth factors known to be expressed by those infiltrating cells
revealed a distinct reduction of NKX3.1 expression in PCa cells
stimulated with either TNFa or IL1a. Furthermore, the loss of NKX3.1
protein and mRNA was far more pronounced in PCa cells treated with the
epidermal growth factor (EGF). Since EGF has a mitogenic function we also
tested the impact of a combinatory stimulation of LNCaP cells with the
strong mitogen phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) and the calcium
ionophor Ionomycin on NKX3.1 expression. Similar to EGF stimulation,
PMA+Ionomycin caused a dramatic reduction of NKX3.1 protein as well as
mRNA level. NKX3.1 target genes were found to be derepressed upon EGF or
P+I stimulation while androgen receptor mRNA expression was found to be
decreased. EGF or P+I induced NKX3.1 loss in PCa cell lines appears to
depend on two different mechanisms. While the decrease of NKX3.1 mRNA
levels largely remained unaffected upon pretreatment with MG132 or
Bortezomib, the stabilization of NKX3.1 protein after co-treatment with
EGF/P+I and MG132 or Bortezomib suggests the participation of the
proteasomal pathway in this process. In addition, the decline in NKX3.1
mRNA levels appears to be independent from a reduced NKX3.1 promoter
activity as determined by luciferase reporter assays.Taken together our
results imply that a mitogenic stimulus might be the cause for reduced
NKX3.1 levels in luminal prostate epithelial cells. Since the production
of mitogenic growth factors are increased in inflammatory sites the
growth factor induced loss of NKX3.1 might be the connection between
prostatitis and prostate cancer initiation.

