Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mTORC1 suppresses proliferation of keratinocyte stem
cells and inhibits skin tumor promotion in mice


Considerable evidence indicates a crucial role of Akt and mTORC1
signaling in cancer growth and progression. Previously, we discovered
that Akt and mTORC1 signaling pathways play an important role in
epithelial multistage carcinogenesis using the mouse skin model,
especially during the tumor promotion stage. Targeting mTORC1 with
rapamycin effectively blocked mTORC1 downstream signaling, epidermal
hyperproliferation induced by TPA in a dose-dependent manner in both
wild-type and BK5.AktWT transgenic mice. Rapamycin effectively inhibited
TPA skin tumor promotion in TPA-hypersensitive BK5.AktWT transgenic mice
although higher doses were required to achieve similar levels of
inhibition compared to wild-type mice. Elevated Akt expression led to a
significant expansion of the label retaining cells (LRCs) as well as a
significant increase in K15 expressing cells in the hair follicle of
transgenic mice that coincided with expression of phospho-Akt,
phospho-S6K and phospho-PRAS40 compared to wild-type mice. Furthermore,
TPA-mediated proliferation and migration of LRCs to the interfollicular
epidermis from the hair follicle were significantly inhibited by
rapamycin. PRAS40 was originally identified as a novel Akt substrate
through Akt-mediated phosphorylation at Thr246. Recently, PRAS40 has been
identified as a negative regulator when bound to mTORC1. We have used the
bovine keratin 5 (BK5) promoter to generate transgenic mice that
overexpress a mutant form of PRAS40 (PRAS40T246A) to further examine the
importance of mTORC1 signaling in epithelial carcinogenesis.
BK5.PRAS40T246A transgenic mice were significantly less sensitive to
TPA-induced epidermal hyperproliferation and hyperplasia measured by both
epidermal thickness and labeling index. Overexpression of mutant
PRAS40T246A in the epidermis led to a significant suppression of skin
tumor development by 63% as well as reductions in tumor weight and tumor
size compared to wild-type mice. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
PRAS40T246A in BK5.PRAS40T246A mice remained bound to raptor even after
TPA treatment. In addition, BK5.PRAS40T246A mice displayed reduced
TPA-induced mTORC1 signaling and cell cycle progression, but increased
autophagy signaling and elevated apoptotic cells in the epidermis
following TPA treatment. Furthermore, TPA-induced proliferation and
migration of LRCs was also effectively inhibited in BK5.PRAS40T246A mice.
Collectively, the current data demonstrate that mTORC1 downstream
signaling pathways contribute significantly to the process of skin tumor
promotion leading to a potential target for chemoprevention of cancer.
Supported by CA037111 and CA0129409.

