Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C6-ceramide containing anionic nanoliposomes are effective
chemotherapy delivery vehicles for pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) are highly fibrotic and poorly
vascularized tumors, making systemic delivery of standard chemotherapies
ineffective. To overcome the obstacles to delivering therapeutics to PDAC
tumors, we have devised an innovative, biocompatible nanocarrier
formulation that can deliver chemotherapeutic drugs to pancreatic cancer
cells: pegylated anionic nanoliposomes (anionic NLs). By dynamic light
scattering, anionic NLs are 85-90 nm in diameter and have a zeta
potential of -20 mV. Compared to the more commonly used neutral NLs, the
empty (unloaded) anionic NL formulation did not alter proliferation of
either normal pancreatic epithelial cells (HPDEs) or PDAC cells. A
variety of chemotherapeutic agents were then tested for their ability to
be effectively encapsulated into anionic NLs via a temperature-dependent
trapping mechanism. The chemotherapeutic drugs vincristine, vinblastine
and 5-fluorouracil (5FU) were all effectively encapsulated into the
anionic NL formulation, and anionic NLs encapsulated 5FU at reproducible
concentrations of 3-4 mM. At 48 hours after a single dose of anionic
NL-encapsulated 5FU, in vitro proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells
was significantly reduced compared to unloaded NLs or to vehicle controls
(pPancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) are highly fibrotic and
poorly vascularized tumors, making systemic delivery of standard
chemotherapies ineffective. To overcome the obstacles to delivering
therapeutics to PDAC tumors, we have devised an innovative, biocompatible
nanocarrier formulation that can deliver chemotherapeutic drugs to
pancreatic cancer cells: pegylated anionic nanoliposomes (anionic NLs).
By dynamic light scattering, anionic NLs are 85-90 nm in diameter and
have a zeta potential of -20 mV. Compared to the more commonly used
neutral NLs, the empty (unloaded) anionic NL formulation did not alter
proliferation of either normal pancreatic epithelial cells (HPDEs) or
PDAC cells. A variety of chemotherapeutic agents were then tested for
their ability to be effectively encapsulated into anionic NLs via a
temperature-dependent trapping mechanism. The chemotherapeutic drugs
vincristine, vinblastine and 5-fluorouracil (5FU) were all effectively
encapsulated into the anionic NL formulation, and anionic NLs
encapsulated 5FU at reproducible concentrations of 3-4 mM. At 48 hours
after a single dose of anionic NL-encapsulated 5FU, in vitro
proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells was significantly reduced
compared to unloaded NLs or to vehicle controls (p<0.01). When used in a
dose-response assay, anionic NLs that delivered a dose of 1-2 M 5FU were
equally effective at inhibiting cancer cell proliferation as 250 M free,
unencapsulated 5FU. To further enhance the effectiveness of these NLs, we
then incorporated the pro-apoptotic bioactive lipid C6-ceramide, which
had previously been shown to block PDAC tumor growth (Jiang et al.,
2011), into a second-generation anionic NL formulation. Incorporation of
C-6 ceramide (3mM) into anionic NLs had no effect on the efficiency of
chemotherapeutic drug encapsulation. While NLs containing either
bioactive C6-ceramide or a single chemotherapeutic agent were effective
at blocking pancreatic cancer cell growth, dual-loaded NLs containing
C6-ceramide plus vincristine, vinblastine or 5FU showed increased
efficacy, completely inhibiting PDAC cell growth at 48 hours after a
single-dose treatment. Overall, this study demonstrates that our novel
approach of encapsulating standard-of-care chemotherapeutic drugs and
C6-ceramide into anionic NLs provides more efficacious drug delivery with
a decreased likelihood of toxic side-effects and could be further
developed as a safe and effective way to treat PDAC. Supported by NIH
grants CA170121 to GLM and CA167535 to MK and GLM. The Penn State
Research foundation has licensed ceramide-based nanoliposome technology
to Keystone Nano Inc, PA and MK is the co-founder and CMO of Keystone
Nano Inc.

