Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducing multipolarity of acentrosomal mitotic spindles as a novel
tumor-specific targeting strategy revealed by the antimitotic effect of
mdivi-1


Traditional antimitotic drugs for cancer chemotherapy often have
undesired toxicity to healthy tissue, limiting clinical application.
Developing tumor-specific antimitotic strategies is necessary to improve
the efficacy of drugs in the selective eradication of tumor cells. In
this study, we discovered mdivi-1 (mitochondrial division inhibitor-1),
which was originally reported as an inhibitor of mitochondrial fission
protein dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), specifically disrupts M phase
cell cycle progression only in human tumor cells and not in
non-transformed fibroblasts and epithelial cells. The antimitotic effect
of mdivi-1 is Drp1-independent, as M phase abnormality induced by mdivi-1
was observed in both Drp1 wild-type and Drp1 knockout MEF cells. We also
identified that the tumor transformation process required for the
antimitotic effect of mdivi-1 is downstream of SV40 large T and small t
antigens - but not hTERT-mediated immortalization. Mdivi-1 induces
multipolar mitotic spindles in tumor cells regardless of centrosome
number. Acentrosomal spindle poles, which do not contain bona-fide
centrosome components -tubulin and centrin-2, were found to contribute to
the spindle multipolarity. The formation of such aberrant mitotic
spindles leads to gross genome instability and apoptotic cell death
through Bax/Bak-mediated mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
(MOMP). Gene expression profiling comparing non-transformed and
transformed cells revealed that the genes involved in assembly of
acentrosomal spindles are highly up-regulated in tumor cells, thus
providing the mechanism underlying the preferential formation of
acentrosomal multipolar spindles in tumor cells compared to normal cells
after mdivi-1 treatment. Taken together, our studies imply that mdivi-1
represents a novel class of quinazolinone compounds that function as
acentrosomal spindle inducers (ASI). We suggest that promoting the
assembly of multipolar mitotic spindles composed of acentrosomal poles
could serve as a novel strategy in achieving a tumor-specific antimitotic
effect.(Work was supported by P30CA047904, GM087798, UPCI and PA Dept of
Health CURE program)Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

