Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated microRNA and mRNA signature associated with the
transition from the locally confined to the metastasized renal cell
carcinoma


BackgroundMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small non-coding RNAs that
regulate gene expression by interfering translation or stability of
target transcripts. One miRNA can interact with several hundred mRNAs,
while one mRNA can be regulated by several miRNAs. This interplay between
miRNA and their mRNA has been proposed as an important process in cancer
development and progression. We have investigated molecular networks
impacted by predicted mRNA targets of differentially expressed miRNAs in
patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) diagnosed with or
without metastasis.Material and methodsmiRNA and mRNA microarray
expression profiles derived from primary clear cell renal cell carcinomas
from patients with (in total 16 samples) or without diagnosed metastasis
(in total 22 samples) were used to identify anti-correlated miRNA-mRNA
interaction in ccRCC. For this purpose, Ingenuity pathway analysis
microRNA Target Filter, which enables prioritization of experimentally
validated and predicted mRNA targets was used. By applying an expression
pairing tool, the analysis was focused on targets exhibiting altered
expression in our analysis, finding miRNAs and their target genes with
opposite or same expression. The resulting identified interactions were
revalidated by RT-qPCR in another cohort of RCC patients. The predicted
miRNA-mRNA interactions were also tested by functional analyses using
miRNA knock-down and over expression experiments in renal cancer cell
lines.ResultsAmong the significantly differentially expressed miRNAs, we
have identified 3 miRNAs (miR-146a, miR-128a and miR-17-5p) that were
upregulated in primary tumors from patients without metastasis and down
regulated in primary tumors from patients with metastasis. We have
further identified the mRNA targets which expression were inversely
correlated to these 3 miRNAs, and have been previously experimentally
demonstrated in cancer setting in humans. Specifically we showed that
BRAC1, MCM10, CDKN3, UHRF1, IL8 were downregulated and targeted by
miR-146a-5p. The relation between these identifies target genes and
miRNA-146a was validated in cell culture experiments.ConclusionsWe
identified novel target genes of dysregulated miRNAs, which are involved
in the transition from primary RCC without metastases into tumors
generating distant metastasis.

