Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of stem cell by immunohistochemistry in benign and
malignant human esophageal mucosa


Introduction: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) response to
treatment if still unsatisfactory with high mortality rate. Objective: to
identify the role of cancer stem cell in ESCC by studying the tumor by
immunohistochemistry, with the concept of identifying the possible cell
for the progression of the tumor due to its uncontrolled proliferation.
Materials and methods: endoscopic biopsy and resected specimens of
confirmed ESCC tissue were used for the study - fresh tumor tissue with
no treatment, post treated residual tumor tissue, recurrent tumor tissue
and adjoining esophageal mucosa. Primary immunomarkers used in the study
were : i) alpha 6 integrin, ii) CD71, iii) p63, iv) stem cell antigen1,
v) cytokeratin 6, vi) Bim1, vii) oct4, viii) nucleostemin, ix) Ki67, x).
CD133, x) CD44, xi) CD24 and xii) Aldehyde dehydrogenase. Study was done
routine immunohistochemistry, double immunostaining and tissue micro
array. Apropriate detection system was used. Results: There was 250 tumor
tissue altogether majority with well differentiated morphology. All
tumors showed variable range of positivity for the all the markers,
lesser number of positive cells for CD24, CD44 and CD133. Even in double
immunostaining, majority of the tumor cells showed co-expressions for the
various immunomarkers. Different tumor samples from different patient
population groups do not any significant differences. Mucosal dysplastic
samples also showed similar pattern of positive staining as by the tumor
cells. Ki67 posivity was variable, higher percentage of positivity in
poorly differentiated tumor areas and related with the nucleostemin
positive staining pattern. Conclusion: These observations indicate that
these markers are non-specific and positivity does not specifically meant
the presence of cancer stem cell. Possibly expression of these markers
may indicate cell proliferative pathway markers.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

