Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel potent antisense oligonucleotides targeting transforming
growth factor beta1 (TGF-1)


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) is a key member of a large family
of cytokines, which play critical, pleiotropic roles in the
pathophysiology of various human diseases, such as cancer, inflammation,
autoimmune disease, and cirrhosis/fibrosis. TGF-1, -2 and -3 isoforms are
cytokines encoded by different genes but sharing strong sequence and
structure homology. They function as the primary mediators of TGF-
signaling via both non-canonical and canonical signaling pathways. In
Oncology, TGF- isoforms are associated with a wide range of biological
processes such as tumor cell invasion and migration, angiogenesis,
immunosuppression, as well as regulation of tumor stem cell properties.
Hence, blocking the TGF- signaling pathway may have a multifold
therapeutic benefit in Oncology, although therapeutic relevance of the
respective TGF- isoforms remains poorly documented.In order to evaluate
the specific biological relevance of TGF-1 isoform in cancer, we have
initiated an extensive discovery program for identification of antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide constructs selectively inhibiting expression of the
TGF-1 ligand. Based on the sequence of the human TGF-1 mRNA, more than
150 Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA)-modified gapmers were designed, synthesized
and tested in cell-based assays. Highly potent and selective TGF-1
constructs were identified and selected based on efficient suppression of
TGF-1 mRNA/protein expression in different human and rodent tumor cell
lines, and in human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs). Effective
target downregulation was demonstrated after lipofectamine
aided-transfection (sub-nM concentration range), but also in the absence
of any transfection agent (gymnotic delivery) at sub-M concentrations.
Selected TGF-1 specific oligonucleotides were further tested in relevant
animal xenograft models and strong target inhibition was also observed
following systemic administration. Further details of this discovery
program will be discussed and pharmacology properties and features of
potent and selective TGF-1 antagonists will be presented.

