Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paradoxic effects of metformin on endothelial cells and
angiogenesis


Epidemiological evidence has suggested that metformin, an
anti-hyperglycemic agent commonly used in the treatment of type 2
diabetes, is a potential cancer preventive agent. Anti-angiogenesis
represents a key mechanism in cancer prevention, a concept termed
angioprevention. Since conflicting data concerning the anti-angiogenic
action of metformin are emerging, we elucidate the effects of metformin,
on endothelial and tumor cells as well as on angiogenesis using in vitro,
in vivo and transcriptomic approaches. We show that metformin inhibits
endothelial cell ability to organize into capillary-like networks; this
effect is partially dependent on the energy sensor AMPK. Gene expression
and proteins profiling revealed paradoxic effects on several angiogenesis
associated factors. We found induction of VEGF, COX2 and CXCR4 at the
mRNA level and down-regulation of ADAMTS1. Interestingly, antibody array
analysis showed essentially opposite regulation of numerous
angiogenesis-associated proteins in endothelial and breast cancer
cells.We also show that endothelial production of cytochrome p450 family
member CYP1B1 was up-regulated by tumor cell supernatants, while
metformin blocked this effect by acting on AMPK. The metformin
anti-angiogenic activity was exerted through inhibition of ERK1/2
activation, even in the presence of VEGF, while blocking AMPK activity
abrogated this effect. Metformin inhibited angiogenesis induced by VEGF
in matrigel pellets in vivo and contrasted the increase in microvessel
density in obese mice on a high fat diet. Further, it down-regulated the
number of endothelial precursor cells from white adipose tissue in obese
mice. Our data show that metformin has an anti-angiogenic activity in
vitro and in vivo, which is associated with a contradictory enhancement
of chemokines and other inflammatory pro-angiogenic mediators, as well as
a different regulation in endothelial and breast cancer cells.

