Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the JAK2/STAT3 pathway in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of death and the most lethal
gynecological cancer among women in the United States. Persistent
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3),
a cytoplasmic transcription factor, is frequently detected in EOC. STAT3
transduces signals from cytokines such as interleukin 6 (IL-6) via
interactions with the IL-6 receptor and Janus kinases (JAK). JAK2
activates STAT3 by phosphorylation, leading to dimerization and
translocation of STAT3 to the nucleus where it activates transcription of
target genes regulating proliferation, survival and motility.
Importantly, in addition to tumor cells, STAT3 signaling is also critical
for immune cell activity and, in particular, inflammatory response. The
inflammatory tumor microenvironment is important for ovarian cancer
progression; therefore, we hypothesized that disruption of the STAT3
pathway would block ovarian tumor progression by: 1) directly inhibiting
the growth of tumor cells; and 2) reducing a pro-tumorigenic inflammatory
microenvironment. To target JAK2-mediated activation of STAT3 we used
AZD1480, a JAK2-selective small molecule inhibitor. The effects of
AZD1480 treatment on cell proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion and motility
were evaluated in cultured human ovarian carcinoma cells. To study the
effects of AZD1480 in vivo, we used MISIIR-TAg mice, a transgenic mouse
model of ovarian carcinoma. Tumor growth in MISIIR-TAg mice was monitored
and quantified in mice by weekly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Drug
treatment-mediated alterations in gene expression were evaluated by
microarray analysis and changes in the inflammatory response were
evaluated by flow cytometry analysis of cells extracted from ovarian
tumors, spleens and peritoneal washes. AZD1480 treatment significantly
reduced primary ovarian tumor growth in transgenic mice. Microarray
analysis showed changes in expression of genes involved in the acute
immune response, such as Gbp6, Ifi44, Irgm, Igtp, Gzmb and Cd69. Analysis
of immune cell populations by flow cytometry showed a significant
decrease in the number and percent of T helper and T regulatory cells
present in the peritoneal cavity of drug-treated mice compared to
controls. As T regulatory cells are associated with a poor prognosis in
ovarian cancer patients, the decrease of this subpopulation in
drug-treated mice suggests a change in the tumor microenvironment that
may contribute to reduced tumor growth. Taken together, these results
indicate that targeting JAK2/STAT3 impedes ovarian tumor growth through
complex mechanisms, including the reduction of primary tumor growth and
inflammation in the tumor microenvironment. These findings highlight the
potential utility of targeting the JAK2/STAT3 pathway for the treatment
of ovarian cancer patients.

