Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PYK2 mediates microenvironment-specific myeloma survival


Multiple myeloma remains an incurable malignancy due to the influence of
the bone marrow microenvironment on survival, drug response, and
resultant minimal residual disease (MRD). Therefore, identification of
microenvironment-specific survival signaling determinants is critical for
the rationale design of therapy and elimination of MRD. The pleiotropic
cytokine IL-6 has been shown to mediate drug resistance in both solid and
hematopoietic tumors. We and others have shown that collaborative
signaling between 1 integrin-mediated adhesion to fibronectin (FN) and
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) confers a more malignant phenotype via amplification
of STAT3 activation. We have since validated the FN-adhesion-dependent
amplification of IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in myeloma patient
specimens by flow cytometry. Further characterization of the
post-translational events modulated under these culture conditions with
quantitative phospho-tyrosine profiling identified 193 differentially
phosphorylated peptides after adhesion to FN, treatment with IL-6, and
the combination. Phosphopeptides represented proteins involved in signal
transduction, cytoskeleton assembly/adhesion, transcription, RNA
processing, metabolism, and the cell cycle. Seventy-seven
phosphorylations were up-regulated upon adhesion, including PYK2/FAK2,
paxillin, CASL, and p130CAS consistent with focal adhesion (FA)
formation. In addition to the enhanced phosphorylation of PYK2 at Y580
identified by proteomic screening, western blot analysis demonstrated
PYK2 autophosphorylation of Y402 following myeloma cell adhesion to FN or
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC), correlating with the amplification of
IL-6-induced STAT3 and JAK1. We hypothesized that the collaborative
signaling between 1 integrin and the IL-6 signal transducer, gp130, was
mediated by FA formation and PYK2. Although PYK2 has been linked to
downstream signaling events of other JAK-dependent cytokine receptors, it
has not been associated with a STAT3 amplification mechanism within the
Type I or Type II cytokine receptor families. Both pharmacological and
molecular targeting of PYK2 attenuated the amplification of STAT3
phosphorylation in adhered cells. Further, myeloma cells co-cultured with
patient bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) showed similar gp130 and 1
integrin-specific enhancement of PYK2, JAK1, STAT3 signaling when adhered
to patient BMSCs, demonstrating that PYK2 modulates co-stimulation
specific STAT3 signaling in more complex, clinically relevant models of
the microenvironment. Importantly, molecular and pharmacological
targeting of PYK2 induced cell death solely in BMSC-adherent myeloma
cells. These data identify a novel PYK2-mediated survival pathway
activated only within the context of microenvironmental cues and suggest
PYK2 may be a specific target in MRD.

