Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair and metabolism inhibitors are tumor-selective when
combined with NQO1 bioactivatable drugs for therapy against pancreatic
and nonsmall cell lung cancers


The major problem plaguing DNA repair and metabolic inhibitors is their
lack of tumor-selectivity, resulting in unwanted toxicities. In contrast,
NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) bioactivatable drugs (e.g.,
-lapachone (-lap) and deoxynyboquinine (DNQ) and their derivatives) offer
exquisite tumor-selectivity, with one form of the drug, ARQ761, currently
in Phase I clinical trials against solid cancers, most of which have
elevated levels of NQO1; pancreatic and nonsmall cell lung cancers
(NSCLC) have the highest levels of this two-electron oxidoreductase. NQO1
levels are elevated during early steps of carcinogenesis in most solid
cancers in response to activated K-Ras, c-Myc or other oncogenic drivers,
as well as re-expression of human telomerase (hTERT). NQO1 catalyzes an
unique futile redox cycle using either of these two unique classes of
NQO1 bioactivatable drugs, resulting in super-lethal doses of hydrogen
peroxide; in fact one mole of -lap used by NQO1 produces >60 moles H2O2
in 2 mins. The elevated levels of H2O2 generates tremendous DNA lesions
(e.g., 8-oxoguanine formation) that ultimately results in massive levels
of DNA single strand breaks. The H2O2 generated also results in release
of ERCa2+ and culminates in the hyperactivation of Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP1). GAPDH is then inhibited initially by direct
suppression by H2O2 and then by posttranslational modification, resulting
in accumulation of glyceraldehyde-3phosphate (GA3P). This unique,
NQO1-dependent tumor-selective hyperactivation of PARP1 results in
simultaneous losses of NAD+ (generated by the NQO1 futile redox cycle)
and ATP, with suppressed recovery by inhibition of glycolysis (by
inhibition of GAPDH) and the Krebs cycle through suppression of pyruvate
production. Understanding the mechanism of action of these two classes of
unique drugs has allowed tumor-selective combination therapies with DNA
damaging agents, DNA repair inhibitors, and more recently metabolic
inhibitors, such as agents that block NaMPt and GLS1. Addition of these
inhibitors, in turn, results in a dramatic lowering of the required doses
of NQO1 bioactivatable drugs-a true synergy is established with nontoxic
levels of drugs combined to achieve one log or greater loss of colony
forming ability. This work is supported by grants from Texas CPRIT,
AACR/PanCan Action Network and NIH R01 CA102792-11 to DAB.

