Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating glutathione s-transferase M4 activity for the treatment
of Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma is a malignant pediatric bone and soft tissue tumor. The
prognosis for Ewing sarcoma remains dismal despite of intensive
treatments including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. Moreover,
these unspecific treatments often have severe side effects. We previously
reported that Glutathione S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) is a potential
specific treatment target for Ewing sarcoma. GSTM4 is required for
oncogenic transformation and confers chemotherapeutic drug resistance in
Ewing sarcoma cells; high GSTM4 level in primary tumor is correlated with
poor patient outcome. Here we further evaluate the efficacy of modulating
GSTM4 activity in treating Ewing sarcoma using patient-derived cells and
mouse xenograft models. RNA-seq analysis for RNA levels of all GSTs in
A673 Ewing sarcoma cells as well as online database searching for GSTM4
RNA level in tumor samples of various sarcomas demonstrate that GSTM4 is
specifically highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma. By MTT and soft agar
assays, we find that NBDHEX, a GSTM4 inhibitory compound, inhibits
cellular proliferation and oncogenic transformation of Ewing sarcoma
cells. Furthermore, NBDHEX has a synergistic effect in cytotoxicity with
chemotherapeutic drug etoposide. Conversely, a GSTM4-activated
anti-cancer agent, JS-K, significantly decreases Ewing sarcoma cell
viability (pEwing sarcoma is a malignant pediatric bone and soft tissue
tumor. The prognosis for Ewing sarcoma remains dismal despite of
intensive treatments including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
Moreover, these unspecific treatments often have severe side effects. We
previously reported that Glutathione S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) is a
potential specific treatment target for Ewing sarcoma. GSTM4 is required
for oncogenic transformation and confers chemotherapeutic drug resistance
in Ewing sarcoma cells; high GSTM4 level in primary tumor is correlated
with poor patient outcome. Here we further evaluate the efficacy of
modulating GSTM4 activity in treating Ewing sarcoma using patient-derived
cells and mouse xenograft models. RNA-seq analysis for RNA levels of all
GSTs in A673 Ewing sarcoma cells as well as online database searching for
GSTM4 RNA level in tumor samples of various sarcomas demonstrate that
GSTM4 is specifically highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma. By MTT and soft
agar assays, we find that NBDHEX, a GSTM4 inhibitory compound, inhibits
cellular proliferation and oncogenic transformation of Ewing sarcoma
cells. Furthermore, NBDHEX has a synergistic effect in cytotoxicity with
chemotherapeutic drug etoposide. Conversely, a GSTM4-activated
anti-cancer agent, JS-K, significantly decreases Ewing sarcoma cell
viability (p<0.05). We find that JS-K works through GSTM4 because
knockdown of GSTM4 by shRNA in Ewing sarcoma cells significantly
decreases their sensitivity to JS-K (pEwing sarcoma is a malignant
pediatric bone and soft tissue tumor. The prognosis for Ewing sarcoma
remains dismal despite of intensive treatments including surgery,
radiation, and chemotherapy. Moreover, these unspecific treatments often
have severe side effects. We previously reported that Glutathione
S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) is a potential specific treatment target for
Ewing sarcoma. GSTM4 is required for oncogenic transformation and confers
chemotherapeutic drug resistance in Ewing sarcoma cells; high GSTM4 level
in primary tumor is correlated with poor patient outcome. Here we further
evaluate the efficacy of modulating GSTM4 activity in treating Ewing
sarcoma using patient-derived cells and mouse xenograft models. RNA-seq
analysis for RNA levels of all GSTs in A673 Ewing sarcoma cells as well
as online database searching for GSTM4 RNA level in tumor samples of
various sarcomas demonstrate that GSTM4 is specifically highly expressed
in Ewing sarcoma. By MTT and soft agar assays, we find that NBDHEX, a
GSTM4 inhibitory compound, inhibits cellular proliferation and oncogenic
transformation of Ewing sarcoma cells. Furthermore, NBDHEX has a
synergistic effect in cytotoxicity with chemotherapeutic drug etoposide.
Conversely, a GSTM4-activated anti-cancer agent, JS-K, significantly
decreases Ewing sarcoma cell viability (p<0.05). We find that JS-K works
through GSTM4 because knockdown of GSTM4 by shRNA in Ewing sarcoma cells
significantly decreases their sensitivity to JS-K (p<0.05). Moreover,
JS-K significantly decreases Ewing sarcoma xenograft tumor growth in
immunodeficient mice (Mantel-Cox test p=0.0002). Next we examine the
underlying mechanism of GSTM4 mediated drug resistance and find that
GSTM4 interacts with Apoptosis Signal-regulating Kinase 1 (ASK1) and
inhibits ASK1 activation of c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) mediated
apoptosis upon etoposide treatment. Taken together, these data provide
further evidence that GSTM4 is a novel therapeutic target for Ewing
sarcoma. GSTM4 targeted inhibition by inhibitors or knockdown by RNA
interference combined with standard chemotherapeutic regimens are
potential treatments more specific and effective for Ewing sarcoma. GSTM4
pro-drugs are promising for treatment of patients with high GSTM4
expression tumors. Our data also suggest that agents intervening of
GSTM4/ASK interaction may increase drug sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma
cells and tumors and therefore be of therapeutic values.

