Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic polymorphisms of genes on the retinoic acid pathway and
risk of head and neck cancer


Background: Although most cases of head and neck cancer (HNC) can be
attributed to three established risk factors, including alcohol, betel
quid, and cigarette, the underlying genetic variations among individuals
may be important in modulating the risk of HNC. Previous studies showed
that the metabolism or function of retinoic acid may be modified by the
use of alcohol, betel quid, or cigarette, resulting in the dysregulation
of cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. The current analysis
examined the association between HNC risk and genetic polymorphisms of
genes on the retinoic acid pathway.Methods: 408 incident cases of HNC and
473 sex- and age- frequency matched controls were recruited from the
department of otolaryngology and department of stomatology. Information
on the use of alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette was collected by
in-person interviews. In the discovery phase, 223 cases and 220 controls
were genotyped for 368 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 37
retinoic acid genes. Unconditional logistic regression was performed to
estimate the log-additive odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval
(CI) of HNC risk associated with each SNP. Those that had a P Background:
Although most cases of head and neck cancer (HNC) can be attributed to
three established risk factors, including alcohol, betel quid, and
cigarette, the underlying genetic variations among individuals may be
important in modulating the risk of HNC. Previous studies showed that the
metabolism or function of retinoic acid may be modified by the use of
alcohol, betel quid, or cigarette, resulting in the dysregulation of cell
growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. The current analysis examined the
association between HNC risk and genetic polymorphisms of genes on the
retinoic acid pathway.Methods: 408 incident cases of HNC and 473 sex- and
age- frequency matched controls were recruited from the department of
otolaryngology and department of stomatology. Information on the use of
alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette was collected by in-person interviews.
In the discovery phase, 223 cases and 220 controls were genotyped for 368
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 37 retinoic acid genes.
Unconditional logistic regression was performed to estimate the
log-additive odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of HNC risk
associated with each SNP. Those that had a P < 0.05 were further
genotyped for 185 cases and 253 controls in stage 2. Additional analyses
were performed stratified by alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette to
evaluate gene-environment interaction.Results: In the stage 1, 25 SNPs
were associated with the risk of HNC with a P Background: Although most
cases of head and neck cancer (HNC) can be attributed to three
established risk factors, including alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette,
the underlying genetic variations among individuals may be important in
modulating the risk of HNC. Previous studies showed that the metabolism
or function of retinoic acid may be modified by the use of alcohol, betel
quid, or cigarette, resulting in the dysregulation of cell growth,
differentiation, and apoptosis. The current analysis examined the
association between HNC risk and genetic polymorphisms of genes on the
retinoic acid pathway.Methods: 408 incident cases of HNC and 473 sex- and
age- frequency matched controls were recruited from the department of
otolaryngology and department of stomatology. Information on the use of
alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette was collected by in-person interviews.
In the discovery phase, 223 cases and 220 controls were genotyped for 368
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 37 retinoic acid genes.
Unconditional logistic regression was performed to estimate the
log-additive odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of HNC risk
associated with each SNP. Those that had a P < 0.05 were further
genotyped for 185 cases and 253 controls in stage 2. Additional analyses
were performed stratified by alcohol, betel quid, and cigarette to
evaluate gene-environment interaction.Results: In the stage 1, 25 SNPs
were associated with the risk of HNC with a P < 0.05. With additional
genotyping performed for these 25 SNPs in stage 2, only one SNP of RARB
showed a decreasing P value with additional samples (stage 1 OR = 1.43,
95% CI: 1.02-2.00, P = 0.04; stage 2 OR = 1.33, 95% CI: 0.94-1.89, P =
0.1; combined OR = 1.34, 95% CI: 1.06-1.69, P = 0.01). In addition, the
association between this RARB SNP and HNC risk appeared to be modified by
alcohol drinking status. A positive association between the minor allele
of the RARB SNP and HNC was observed among never drinkers (OR = 1.96, 95%
CI: 1.30-2.95) but not among ever drinkers (OR = 1.09, 95% CI: 0.81-1.47)
(P for interaction = 0.01).Conclusion: The risk of HNC was associated
with a SNP of RARB and this association appeared to depend on alcohol
drinking status. Further investigations are needed to determine the
causal SNP and its functional significance.

