Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tropomyosin-related receptor kinase B at the invasive front of
gastric cancer and tumor cell dedifferentiation


Background:Tropomyosin-related receptor kinase B (TrkB) promotes
proliferation and invasion related to poor prognoses of various
malignancies. TrkB is also involved in resistance to anoikis (a form of
detachment-induced apoptosis) and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Gastric cancer (GC) with mixed histology frequently shows both a
well/moderately differentiated (low or intermediate grade) at the surface
to the center and a poorly differentiated (high grade) at the invasive
front. Dedifferentiation is the progression of cells towards a less
differentiated state. Here, we examined the role of TrkB at the invasive
front of gastric cancer and its association with tumor cell
dedifferentiation.Methods:Immunoreactive TrkB at the invasive front and
dedifferentiation, which shows a higher histological grade than that at
the surface or center, was evaluated and clarified its clinical and
prognostic significance in 320 GC specimens. In vitro study, expression
of TrkB, E-cadherin, vimentin, Oct4, and Sox2 at a wound healing edge,
which mimics the tumor invasive front, was evaluated in the human GC cell
line MKN7.Results:Fifty patients (16%) showed high TrkB expression at the
invasive front. Twenty-one patients (6.6%) showed tumor cell
dedifferentiation. High TrkB expression at the invasive front and tumor
cell dedifferentiation were significantly associated with aggressive
phenotypes of GC such as a larger tumor size, depressive macroscopic
morphology, lymphovascular invasion, advanced T stage, lymph node
involvement, synchronous liver and peritoneal metastasis, and advanced
stage. Six patients had high TrkB expression in dedifferentiated GC
cells. High TrkB expression at the invasive front was an independent
prognostic factor of GC in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio; 1.69,
p=0.039). MKN7 cells at the wound healing edge showed increased TrkB,
vimentin, Oct4, and Sox2 expression and decreased E-cadherin expression.
Tumor cells at the wound edge also showed an increased size and
morphological changes in the nucleus or cytoplasm, suggesting that MKN-7
cells at the wound edge may undergo EMT or tumor cell dedifferentiation
similar to that of tumor cells at the invasive front of primary
tumors.Conclusion:Assessment of immunoreactive TrkB at the tumor invasive
front in whole tissue sections provides prognostic information for GC
patients.

