Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in expression of DNA repair genes in human leukemia cells
treated with laromustine


The anticancer prodrug laromustine induces cytotoxic DNA damage and has
had clinical success against acute myelogenous leukemia and glioblastoma
multiforme. The causative DNA damage is principally a G-C interstrand
crosslink preceded by 2-chloroethylation of guanine O6 by a subspecies of
laromustine generated in situ upon base-catalyzed activation. Another
cogenerated electrophile, methylisocyanate, contributes synergistically
with the DNA alkylating activity towards cytotoxicity. Given this
synergism, DNA repair enzymes are considered likely targets of
methylisocyanate, which can carbamoylate amines and sulfhydryls. The
inhibition of O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase (AGT) and DNA
polymerase beta by laroumustine's carbamoylating activity, observed in
vitro, may contribute to cytotoxicity. To further investigate the
relationship between laromustine and DNA repair, drug-induced changes in
the transcription of 88 DNA repair genes were measured in cultured human
promyelocytic (HL-60) cells using quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase PCR. Cells were treated with laromustine or vehicle for six
hours before harvesting mRNA for analysis. The expression of a subset of
the tested genes emerged as significantly different in cells treated with
laromustine as compared to control cells. Included among those genes with
significantly increased expression were: NTHL1 (17 fold), PARP1 (8 fold),
and AGT (5 fold). Included among those genes with significantly decreased
expression were: PARP2 (-5 fold) and MSH6 (-74 fold). Increased
expression of NTHL1, which encodes for an N-glycosylase that can remove
damaged guanine bases, may reduce the effectiveness of laromustine's
alkylation of guanine O6. A strong negative correlation between the level
of AGT activity in patient samples and the efficacy of laromustine has
already been established. Some of the gene products identified in this
study, such as NTHL1, may emerge as possible cotherapeutic targets or
markers for clinical screening.

