Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of pIMAGO for universal detection of protein
phosphorylation


Protein phosphorylation, as the most common covalent modification of
proteins, plays a critical role in the regulation of many cellular
functions. Irregularities in phosphorylation network are a major cause of
onset and progression of many diseases, most notably cancer.
Consequently, detection of protein phosphorylation is essential in
further understanding of cellular signaling pathways and mechanisms of
cell growth and proliferation. To assist in effective phosphorylation
analyses, we introduce here a novel technique based on soluble
nanopolymers with excellent solubility, compact spherical shape and
chemical homogeneity. Soluble nanopolymers functionalized with Ti(IV)
ions have shown highly versatility and allow for highly efficient
analyses of phosphorylation and signaling pathways.We devise here a novel
strategy, termed pIMAGO (phospho-imaging), for effective detection of
phosphoproteins on a membrane in Western Blot format. Unlike
antibody-based strategies, the new method is capable of selectively
binding a phosphorylated residue independent of amino acid
microenvironment. It shows no preference for either of the phosphosites,
and thus holds great promise in biological analyses where the site of
phosphorylation is not known or its specific antibody is not available.
Using this technique, the phosphorylation levels of proteins of interest
under physiological conditions can be readily detected as part of a
standard Western Blot procedure without the need for radioactivity or
expensive phosphosite-specific antibodies. The utility of the approach
has been demonstrated using standard mixtures of proteins and by in vitro
kinase and phosphatase assays. In addition, multiplexing capabilities of
pIMAGO are presented, a feature often unavailable during antibodies-based
detection. Finally, we further confirmed that the technique is sensitive
and specific enough to detect endogenous phosphorylation changes by
analyzing physiological signaling in number of endogenous protein
complexes isolated directly from cells.

