Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase-dependent oncolytic adenovirus sensitizes human
osteosarcoma cells to chemotherapy through Mcl-1 downregulation


Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant primary bone tumor. Despite
advances in multi-agent chemotherapy, poor response to chemotherapy is
one of the critical prognostic factors in osteosarcoma. Therefore,
enhancement of chemosensitivity is one approach to improve the survival
of osteosarcoma patients. We recently developed a telomerase-specific
replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus, Telomelysin (OBP-301). A
Phase I clinical trial in the U.S. showed the safety of OBP-301 in
advanced cancer patients, and a Phase I/II clinical trial for malignant
thoracic tumors is currently undergoing. We recently confirmed the
antitumor effect of OBP-301 monotherapy in human osteosarcoma cells. In
this study, we investigated the chemosensitizing effect of OBP-301 in
human osteosarcoma cells and the molecular mechanism in the
OBP-301-mediated enhancement of cell death. We used four human
osteosarcoma cell lines, HOS, MNNG/HOS, 143B and SaOS-2. OBP-301 is an
attenuated adenovirus, in which the hTERT promoter drives the expression
of E1 gene, and causes tumor-selective lysis in a variety of human
malignant tumor cells with telomerase activity. OBP-301 infection
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapeutic agents, cisplatin and
doxorubicin, that are commonly used for the treatment of osteosarcomas.
The calculation of combination index revealed the synergistic effects in
all human osteosarcoma cell lines. Combination of OBP-301 increased
apoptosis in the chemotherapeutic agents-treated cells. To clarify the
molecular mechanism for the chemosensitizing effect of OBP-301, the
expression of Bcl-2 family proteins, which are critical regulators of
apoptosis, were investigated. In OBP-301-infected MNNG/HOS and SaOS-2
cells, the expression level of Mcl-1 was markedly decreased by OBP-301
infection. Downregulation of Mcl-1 expression by siRNA enhanced the
chemotherapeutic agents-induced apoptosis. Moreover, combination therapy
of chemotherapeutic agents with OBP-301 significantly suppressed tumor
growth in a subcutaneous xenograft tumor model compared to monotherapy
with chemotherapeutic agents or OBP-301. Anti-apoptotic Mcl-1 protein has
been shown to be frequently overexpressed in human sarcomas.
Overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins is an important factor to
prevent chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in cancer. We demonstrated the
involvement of Mcl-1 suppression in the chemosensitizing effect of
OBP-301 in human osteosarcoma cells. These results suggest that Mcl-1 is
a critical target for improvement of the chemosensitivity in human
osteosarcoma cells and the combination of chemotherapy with OBP-301 may
be a novel therapeutic strategy for osteosarcoma patients.

