Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic importance of both stage of the disease and immune
infiltrate in the outcome of NSCLC patients


The majority of prognostic studies has highlighted a positive impact of
intratumoral T cells on the survival of patients affected by solid
tumors. The high reproducibility of these data strongly support the idea
that one should take into account immune criteria for the prognostic
staging of neoplastic lesions. Several studies have indeed reported a
favorable clinical outcome for lung cancers patients whose neoplastic
lesions contain a high density of CD8+ T cells. Moreover, we recently
showed that mature dendritic cells (DC) were selectively detected in
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) in lung cancer. We showed that TLS
exhibit strong structural analogies with canonical secondary lymphoid
organs with clusters of mature DC and T cells surrounded by B cell
follicles. Lung cancer-associated TLS also present features of an ongoing
immune reaction site. Interestingly, we reported that a high density of
mature DC is correlated with the long-term survival of patients affected
by early-stage, advanced and metastatic lung cancer. The combination of
mature DC and CD8+ T cells allows the identification of patients with the
highest risk of death. Thus, the survival of lung cancer patients appears
to be positively influenced by the abundance of both cell types. This
raises the question of evaluating the clinical impact of these
tumor-infiltrating immune cells in combination with pathological
parameters in lung cancer patients.A total of 372 patients operated for a
lung cancer were enrolled in a retrospective study. Using
immunohistochemistry, we demonstrated that combination of the density of
mature DC and CD8+ T cells, with the pT stage better predicts the overall
survival of lung cancer patients than the gold standard pT stage alone.
The DC/CD8 score with the N stage allow a better discrimination of
patients with high- versus low-risk of death, especially in the group of
patients with lymph node invasion. We also demonstrated that the
combination of DC/CD8 and emboli parameters allow a better stratification
of lung cancer patients for survival. Finally, the DC/CD8 score enhances
the prognostic value of the TNM stage. Combining DC/CD8 score with the
pTNM stage yields a more refined view of the prognosis of lung cancer
patients.In conclusion, DC/CD8 score becomes prognosticator of survival
for patients with first signs of metastasis (lymph node involvement,
vascular and/or lymphatic tumor invasion). This study contributes to a
better understanding of beneficial elements of immune responses to
tumors. Combining DC/CD8 score with the stage of the tumor could guide
better treatment choices.

