Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reporter construct for functional and real-time evaluation of
cytokeratin 14+ bladder cancer stem cells


Bladder cancer is the fifth most common malignancy in the US. We recently
reported that bladder cancer stem cells isolated by cell surface markers
(i.e. CD44/CD90/CD49f) express a higher level of the intermediate
filament cytokeratin 14 (CK14). Importantly, patients with a higher
fraction of CK14+ cancer cells correlated with worse survival outcomes.
Therefore, this CK14+ cancer cell subpopulation warrants further
functional evaluation and characterization.In the current study, we
report the generation and characterization of a lentiviral reporter
construct that carries the gene promoter region of human KRT14 gene
upstream to a red fluorescent protein (tdTomato; Tm). With this reporter
stably integrated into the genome of bladder cancer cells, the viable
CK14+ cancer cell subpopulation could be isolated by FACS and visualized
by fluorescent microscopy. We first validated the reporter by
demonstrating that Tm+ cancer cells indeed express a higher level of
KRT14 mRNA and relatively lower levels of differentiated cell markers
(i.e. KRT18 and UPK1B) by qPCR. Next, we verified both in vitro and in
vivo that CK14+/Tm+ cancer cells have functional properties of cancer
stem cells by demonstrating their enriched sphere-forming ability and
proficient engraftment as xenograft tumors in immunocompromised mice.
Since neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a well-established treatment approach
in patients with high-risk bladder cancer, we investigated CK14+ and
CK14- cancer cells' response to the cytotoxic chemotherapy,
gemcitabine/cisplatin (GC). FACS-purified CK14+/Tm+ cancer cells were
more resistant to GC chemotherapy in vitro than CK14-/Tm- cancer cells.
These findings were confirmed with in vivo studies using both
patient-derived xenografts and immortalized bladder cancer xenografts. GC
treated xenografts demonstrated a greater expansion of CK14+ cancer cells
than vehicle treated controls. Additionally, we obtained a panel of human
bladder cancer specimens from patients before and after neoadjuvant GC
chemotherapy (n=15) and evaluated the CK14 status. An expansion or
persistence of an infiltrating pattern of CK14 in post-neoadjuvant GC
chemotherapy tumor specimens was associated with worse overall
survival.Collectively, these findings verified the unique intrinsic
biological properties of CK14+/Tm+ bladder cancer cells and their
response to GC chemotherapy. Ongoing experiments using fluorescence live
imaging will evaluate Tm+/- bladder cancer cells' response to
chemotherapy. The capacity to observe this CK14+/Tm+ subpopulation and
their trace response to cytotoxic chemotherapy in these studies will open
up new avenues to study the mechanisms of chemoresistance.

