Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular profiling of melanoma cell lines reveals
genotype-drug phenotype associations giving insight on development of
combination therapies


Integrated molecular profiling of melanoma cell lines reveals
genotype-drug phenotype associations giving insight on development of
combination therapiesAdaptive survival responses to targeted therapy
reduce therapeutic benefit, and thus there is a need to identify drug
combinations that co-target both oncogenic drivers and critical adaptive
responses. We screened a panel of twelve V600E BRAF melanoma cell lines
with a library of targeted drugs, and identified the combination of
lapatinib (a HER family inhibitor) plus PLX4720 (a RAF inhibitor) as
synergistically cytotoxic in the six lines that displayed complete or
partial resistance to PLX4720 alone. To understand the mechanism(s) of
drug resistance and synergy, and to identify potential biomarkers for
utilization of this combination, we have performed an extensive molecular
analysis of the cell lines and their responses to treatment with the
drugs, singly and in combination. Alamar blue was used to calculate the
cytotoxic effects of the drugs, and the cells were profiled by gene
expression microarrays and reverse phase protein microarrays, before and
after drug treatment. DNA methylation microarrays, and exome sequencing
were used to identify the epigenetic and genetic context of the lines.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of the cytotoxic effects of
the single drug and combinatorial treatments revealed four well defined
groups: synergistic to combination treatment, PLX4720 sensitive,
lapatinib resistant, and insensitive to either drug. The cell lines were
analyzed using principal component analysis on the basal gene expression
profiles. This analysis revealed four major clusters whose membership was
identical to the clusters observed in the cytotoxicity analysis,
indicating a strong genotype-drug phenotype relationship (i.e. cell lines
that showed similar basal transcriptional programs also demonstrated
similar responses to treatment. Differential gene expression analysis was
performed between the synergistic group and each of the other groups. The
most prominent gene expression differences were between the synergistic
and PLX4720 sensitive lines, which correlated with differences in MITF
expression and transcriptional output. Changes in gene expression and
phosphoproteome levels in response to PLX4720 and lapatinib treatment
between the four groups were used to identify genes and pathways
associated with drug resistance and synergy. Genes involved in apoptosis
and cell cycle regulation were found that could play a role in conferring
resistance and synergistic response to PLX4720 and lapatinib treatment.
These differing patterns of adaptive responses provide insights into
molecular mechanisms of drug resistance and synergy and a pathway to
rational construction of drug combinations.

