Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinate loss of CHD1 and MAP3K7 promotes aggressive prostate
cancer


The genomic complexity of prostate cancer contributes to disease
progression, resistance to therapy, and development of metastases. The
genes CHD1 and MAP3K7 are signficantly co-deleted in 10-15% of primary
tumors and combined loss of CHD1 and MAP3K7 expression is associated with
poor disease-free survival. We recently validated MAP3K7 as a prostate
tumor suppressor, but CHD1's role in prostate tumorigenesis has not been
evaluated. In this study, we used a mouse prostate epithelial stem cell
(PrP/SC) model and a human prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) model to
investigate how loss of CHD1 alone or in combination with MAP3K7
suppression affects prostate tumorigenesis. Suppression of Map3k7
increased proliferation of PrP/SCs. Chd1 suppression decreased growth of
wildtype PrP/SCs but not PrP/SCs already deficient in Map3k7 expression.
Similarly, suppression of CHD1 in LNCaP cells decreased proliferation
when MAP3K7 expression was present, but not when MAP3K7 was suppressed.
These data suggest that loss of CHD1 alone is deleterious to growth, but
that MAP3K7 suppression can compensate for this growth inhibition. Chd1
and Map3k7-deficient PrP/SCs were then evaluated in vivo using tissue
recombination. When Chd1-deficient PrP/SCs were recombined with fetal rat
urogenital mesenchyme (rUGM) and implanted under the renal capsules of
immunocompromised mice, grafts contained mostly benign glandular tissue
with focal areas of mild hyperplasia/prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(PIN). A few nuclear abnormalities were observed. Map3k7-deficient
recombinants generated a mixture of benign tissue, PIN, and
adenocarcinoma (consistent with our previous findings). The nuclear
morphology of these grafts was unremarkable. Strikingly, dual Chd1-Map3k7
knockdown recombinants displayed massive glandular atypia with glands
completely filled with AR-negative and p63-negative cells. These cells
had large nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant cytoplasm.
Tumorigenicity of CHD1 and/or MAP3K7-deficient LNCaP cells was also
assessed by subcutaneous implantation of cells into immunocompromised
mice. Mice implanted with CHD1-deficient xenografts formed smaller tumors
and had increased survival relative to mice injected with control LNCaP
cells (p=0.0083). MAP3K7-deficient xenografts were similar in size and in
survival rate compared to control LNCAP cells. Dual CHD1-MAP3K7 deficient
xenografts, in contrast, showed increased tumor growth and decreased
survival relative to control (p=0.0242), MAP3K7 alone (p=0.0462) and CHD1
alone (p=0.0002). Collectively, these data suggest that loss of CHD1
alone is anti-tumorigenic but that combined loss of CHD1 and MAP3K7
drives aggressive prostate cancer development.

