Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genes and pathways related to lymphovascular
invasion in axillary-node negative breast cancer: A bioinformatic
analysis of gene expression data


Breast Cancer patients whose disease has not spread to the lymph nodes
(axillary node-negative breast cancer, ANNBC) generally have a good
prognosis; however, 20-30% will experience a recurrence. We previously
reported that the presence of Lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is an
independent predictor of recurrence in ANNBC. Given that breast cancers
generally metastasize through LVI, identification of genes with altered
expression when comparing LVI+ from LVI- tumors is relevant from both the
fundamental and the clinical perspective. To discover genes and pathways
involved in LVI and recurrence in ANNBC we performed differential gene
expression microarray analysis of LVI+ (n = 37) and LVI- (n=68) ANNBC
tumors and assessed pathway enrichment using Ingenuity IPA. We also
analysed differences within the LVI+ group designed to compare genes for
their association with early recurrence (n = 14; 4 years) versus free of
recurrence for at least 10 years (n = 23). The biofunctions predicted to
be activated that distinguish LVI+ from LVI- tumors are largely related
to cell movement and invasion. Those enriched in the subset of patients
with early recurrence were mostly related to cell fate. In addition, we
observed that inflammation related pathways are enriched in the LVI+
subgroup that undergoes early recurrence. TGF-1 was predicted to be an
upstream regulator in the LVI+ vs LVI- dataset and also highly ranked in
the early recurrence vs. late recurrence analysis. Our bioinformatics
analyses are consistent with a migratory phenotype for cancer cells
associated with LVI. The results suggest important pathways as well as
upstream regulators associated with LVI and recurrence that are involved
in invasion and cell fate biofunctions. The findings are currently being
evaluated through validation and functional studies.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

