Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JMJD1a: A potential target for prevention and therapy in
pancreatic cancer


Purpose: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer related
death in the United States. Therapeutic options for patients with
advanced disease are time limited and non-curative. A growing body of
evidence suggests that cancer stem cells (CSCs) within a solid tumors
including in pancreatic cancer initiate and sustain tumor growth. Our
preliminary data implicates Jumanji demethylases1a (JMJD1a) as a prime
regulator of stem cell renewability for cancer progression. Hypoxia most
prominently controls malignant properties of cancer cells by stimulating
hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1). HIF1 binds to its response elements
(HREs) in the JMJD1a promoter and subsequently up-regulates JMJD1a. This
could explain why hypoxia exacerbates malignancy. Therefore, we
hypothesize that hypoxia induces JMJD1a that regulate self-renewability
of CSCs, thereby promoting tumor initiation. Recently, two small
molecules analogues of crocetinic acid, a carotenoid molecule isolated
from saffron, have revealed to have potent antimitotic effects in
pancreatic cancer models.Experimental Procedure: We have studied
pancreatic CSCs during hypoxic and normoxic conditions allow to form
multicellular spheroids called pancospheres and monitored expression of
JMJD1a using western blots and immunohistochemistry on those CSCs. We
also used shRNA to silence JMJD1a using lentiviral vectors in different
pancreatic cancer cell lines.Results: JMJD1a was significantly
overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer patient samples compared to
their adjacent normal tissues. JMJD1a is overexpressed in pancreatic
cancer cells and it is significantly reduced when it is knocked down
through shRNA in those cell lines. The colony formation and migration
assays were significantly reduced after knock-down of JMJD1a. Hypoxia
stimulated pancospheres formation associated with concomitant
overexpression of JMJD1a. Knock-down of JMJD1a using shRNA demonstrated
significant reduction of pancospheres forming ability in both normoxic
and hypoxic conditions. The demethylation of specific substrate of
JMJD1a, H3-K9me2, was significantly increased by knock-down of JMJD1a in
pancreatic cancer cells. Hypoxia significantly increases overexpression
of cancer stem-cell and angiogenic markers in pancreatic cancer cells in
vitro. Knock-down of JMJD1a significantly affected stem-cell specific
markers in both hypoxia and normoxia. Treatment with gemcitabine did not
affect in JMJD1a expression in those cell lines particularly during
hypoxic conditions. Crocetinic acid and its analogues inhibited JMJD1a
expression in both in vivo and in vitro pancreatic cancer
models.Conclusions: JMJD1a is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and
stimulates the self-renewability of pancospheres. In conclusion, JMJD1a
is one of important factor for pancreatic cancer progression and could be
a novel preventive and therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer.

