Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strong cross-reactive responses to pancreatic cancer cells induced
by -gal epitopes-expressing tumor lysate and their implications for a
universal cancer vaccine


We investigated the effects of whole cell vaccination with -gal
epitopes-expressing pancreatic cancer (PC) cells (Cancer Res; 70 (13);
5259-69, 2010) and examined the usefulness of this vaccine in the
induction of specific anti-tumor-responses and improvement of survival.
But, these effects were somewhat weak. We hypothesized that tumor lysate
(t-ly), which contains many tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) of both PC
and stromal cells is a suitable vaccination material and it can elicit a
broadly protective anti-tumor responses. In this study, we investigate
that vaccination with -gal epitopes-expressing PC t-ly can induce
cross-reactive protections to heterosubtypic PC cells. Human PC cell
lines, BxPC3 (Bx), expressing Mesothelin, and MiaPaCa (Mia), expressing
MUC1 were employed. PC cell lines were injected s.c. into NOD/SCID mice.
The grown tumors were enucleated and homogenized for making t-ly. To
synthesize -gal epitopes on t-ly, we cloned the 1,3 galactosyltransferase
(1,3GT) cDNA from a New World monkey and isolated a soluble form of
enzyme in the yeast expression system of Pichia pastoris. These t-lys
were incubated with UDP-Gal and 1,3GT. 1,3GT KO mice were immunized with
pig tissues to produce anti-Gal Ab. The high anti-Gal KO mice were
vaccinated intraperitoneally by either parental (control group; Bx-t-ly
or Mia-t-ly) or -gal-t-ly (-gal group; -gal-Bx-t-ly or -gal-Mia-t-ly). No
expression of -gal epitopes were observed in parental t-lys, whereas high
expression levels were clearly detected on -gal-t-lys. -gal-Bx-t-ly
vaccination elicited strong responses of anti-Bx IgG and anti-Mesothelin
IgG, whereas Bx-t-ly vaccination did not induce such Ab responses. For
Mia-t-ly vaccination, KO mice of -gal group clearly induce anti-Mia IgG
and anti-MUC1 IgG, but no Ab responses were observed in control group.
Productions of either anti-Bx or anti-Mia IgG in -gal group were 64-fold
higher than those in control group. -gal-Bx-t-ly vaccinated KO mice
abundantly produced cross-reactive IgG Abs to Mia cells, whereas no
cross-reactive humoral responses to Mia cells were induced by Bx-t-ly
vaccine. Vaccinated mice sera from -gal-Mia-t-ly strongly cross-react to
Bx cells. To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, splenocytes from
vaccinated KO mice were prepared, and these splenocytes were inoculated
i.p. into NOD/SCID mice. Either live Bx or Mia cells were challenged with
s.c. injection. Both Bx and Mia tumors in mice inoculated from parental
group reached the size of 100 mm2 at approximately 22 days after
injection. For tumors in mice transferred from -gal group, no regrowth
tumors were identified. We conclude that -gal epitopes-expressing t-ly
vaccine can elicit durable and broadly protective immune response to
subtypic PC cells, and that such vaccination may provide implications for
a universal cancer vaccine to cure for the patients with PC.

