Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenformin has anti-tumorigenic effects in human ovarian cancer
cells and in a genetically engineered mouse model of serous ovarian cancer


Objectives: Anti-diabetic biguanide drugs have been shown to have
anti-tumorigenic effects by behaving as AMPK activators and mTOR
inhibitors. Phenformin is a biguanide that is associated with a higher
risk of lactic acidosis than is seen in metformin. In vitro and in vivo
studies suggest that phenformin may be more potent for inhibiting tumor
growth than metformin. We sought to examine the efficacy of phenformin in
primary cultures of human ovarian cancers (OCs) as well as in a
genetically engineered mouse model of serous OC.Methods: Serous OC tumors
were collected from consenting patients, at the time of their surgical
debulking for primary culture. Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT
assay. Apoptosis was evaluated by Annexin V-FITC assay using Cellometer.
Effects of phenformin on phosphorylated-AMPK and -S6 expression was
documented by Western immunoblotting. For the in vivo studies, we
utilized the KpB++ serous OC mouse model. This is a more aggressive
derivative of the K18-gT121+/-; p53fl/fl;Brca1fl/fl (KpB) genetically
engineered OC mouse model. The KpB++ mice were treated with placebo or
phenformin (2 mg/kg body weight in drinking water) following tumor onset
for one month. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on the ovarian
tumors after treatment with placebo or phenformin, in regards to Ki-67
expression, cleaved caspase 3 (a marker of apoptosis), phosphorylated
AMPK and phosphorylated S6. Individual slides were digitized using the
Aperio ScanScope (Aperio Technologies, Vista, CA), and digital images
were analyzed using Aperio ImageScope software.Results: Phenformin
significantly inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in
100% (7/7) of the primary cultures of ovarian tumors, within 48 to 72
hours of exposure (p=0.00001-0.015, IC50 range of 0.1-5 mM). Treatment
with phenformin resulted in the induction of apoptosis in 71.4% (5/7) of
the ovarian tumors. Western immunoblot analysis demonstrated that
phenformin increased phosphorylation of AMPK and decreased
phosphorylation of S6. Phenformin significantly inhibited tumor growth in
the KpB++ mice (n=8-13 animals per group) by 68% as compared to placebo
treated controls, after one month of treatment (p=0.016). As compared to
the placebo treated control animals, phenformin was found to
statistically decrease Ki67 staining, inhibit phosphorylated S6
expression and increase both cleaved caspase 3 and phosphorylated AMPK
expression (p= 0.01-0.04).Conclusions: In primary culture of human serous
OC tumors, phenformin potently inhibited cell growth and increased
apoptotic cell death through AMPK activation and mTOR pathway inhibition.
In vivo studies using the KpB++ mouse model found that phenformin was
highly efficacious in inhibiting tumor growth. Although the risk/benefit
ratio clearly favors metformin over phenformin for the treatment of
diabetes, this may not hold true for the treatment of cancer.

