Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depleting macrophage or blocking cell fusion machinery ameliorates
intestine fibrosis after radiation


PurposeDelayed radiation enteritis is a frequent side effect of abdominal
radiotherapy. Recent studies reveal bone marrow (BM) cells repopulate
damaged tissue and contribute to repair in non-hematopoietic tissues.
Fusion between BM and somatic cells is enhanced by chronic inflammation.
Furthermore, BM cells (BMC) can trigger fibrotic response in damaged
organ. The role of cell fusion in the development of chronic intestine
fibrosis after radiotherapy needs further investigation.Materials and
MethodsTo evaluate cell fusion and fibrosis, gender-mismatched BM
transplantation (BMT) were used. Immunoblots of macrophage fusion
receptor (MFR), CD47 and fibronectin, connective tissue growth factor
(CCN2) were measured. BMT with CD11b (+), CD3 (+) or B220 (+) enriched
BMC were applied. The mice were treated with macrophage depleting agents,
clodronate liposome, after radiotherapy and BMT. In vitro co-culture
study of human intestine stromal and mouse BMC was established.
Furthermore, we used Rac 1 inhibitor, MMP9 neutralizing antibody and
siRNA of MFR within co-culture system and animal model.ResultsUsing
triple stains of Y chromosome fluorescence in situ hybridization, GFP and
hematopoietic cell markers including F4/80, CD3, B220, we found BM
derived macrophages contributed majorly to cell fusion (63.4%, 47.5% and
9.6%, respectively, p=0.033) within intestine of mice after radiotherapy
and BMT. The fusion within intestine decreased 57% after treatment with
clodronate liposome. BMT from CD11b(+), CD3(+) or B220(+) enriched donor
BMC also revealed prominent fusion only in mice receiving CD11b(+) one.
The level of intestine fibrosis was decreased by clodronate liposome or
BMT of CD11b(-) BMC. In vitro study showed the rate of fusion decreased
from 12.8% to 6.8% between intestine stromal cells with CD11b (-)
compared to that with whole mouse BMCs. Fusion rate could be increased by
increasing CD11b(+) BMCs (3.5% to 19.7%). Using Rac1 inhibitor, MMP9
antibody or MFR siRNA, the fusion rate decreased (19.7% to 4.6%; 11.8% to
5.6%; 31% to 19.6%, respectively). The expression of fibronectin, CCN2,
MFR and CD47 paralleled the findings of fusion. Using MMP9 neutralizing
antibody in mice receiving radiotherapy and BMT, we found decreased cell
fusion and fibrosis within intestine.ConclusionsBM derived CD11b(+)
myelomonocytic cells or macrophage contribute majorly to cell fusion and
fibrosis within intestine of mice after radiotherapy Depleting macrophage
or targeting cell fusion machinery of macrophage suppresses intestine
fibrosis after radiotherapy. Our study impacts not only for developing
novel therapies to prevent radiation enteritis but also to avoid fibrosis
after BM cell therapy in organ dysfunction.

