Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) regulates the expression of forkhead box
transcription factor M1 (FoxM1) in human oral cancer cells and determines
tumorigenicity


GRHL2 is a proto-oncogene that regulates epithelial proliferation and
differentiation through transcriptional regulation of large number of
target genes. The current study was performed to determine its role in
oral carcinogenesis through regulation of forkhead box 1 (FoxM1), which
is a known oncogene for many solid tumors. GRHL2 expression was highly
elevated in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissues compared with
normal oral epithelium (NHOM), and its protein expression is localized in
the proliferative cells at the outer border of invasive islands of OSCC.
In cultured OSCCs, GRHL2 and FoxM1 levels were both highly upregulated
compared with normal human oral keratinocytes (NHOK), supporting their
roles in oral carcinogenesis. When GRHL2 was knocked down in SCC4 cells
by RNA interference, the cells have lost their proliferative capacity and
colony formation when plated at low density. GRHL2 knockdown also
resulted in marked loss of tumor spheroid formation, which is hallmark of
cancer self-renewal. GRHL2 knockdown also led to loss of tumorigenic
ability of cells upon xenograft transplantation in immunocompromised
mice. GRHL2 appeared to determine the epithelial phenotype in OSCC cells.
GRHL2 knockdown led to loss of E-cadherin and miR-200 family genes, which
are epithelial markers. These data indicate that GRHL2 is required to
maintain the transformed phenotype in OSCC. We also noted that GRHL2
knockdown led to drastic loss of FoxM1 expression, suggesting that GRHL2
may regulate FoxM1. To test this possibility, we performed in vivo
binding assay by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), which showed GRHL2
binding at the proximal promoter of FoxM1. Luciferase reporter plasmid
under FoxM1 promoter showed that GRHL2 directly regulates the gene
promoter activity. FoxM1 knockdown resulted in loss of OSCC proliferation
and tumor spheroid formation, while its overexpression conferred
transformed phenotype in non-tumorigenic human oral keratinocytes (HOKs).
Therefore, our data indicate that GRHL2 is required for the maintenance
of transformed phenotype and that it plays a role in oral carcinogenesis
through regulation of FoxM1. This study was supported in part by the
grants from NIDCR/NIH (DE18295 and DE18959) and Jack Weichman Endowed
Fund.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

