Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting of AR and N-cadherin with Enzalutamide and 2A9
monoclonal antibody to treat castration resistant prostate cancer


Introduction: Enzalutamide (MDV3100) is an androgen receptor (AR)
antagonist that targets various stages of the AR signaling pathway, and
has been approved for the treatment of castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). Studies show improved survival in men with metastatic CRPC
after chemotherapy when treated with Enzalutamide. However, emergence of
potential AR-independent mechanisms of castration resistance and
resistance to these next generation AR inhibitors has proven to be a
challenge. Previously, we reported an association of N-cadherin, a
mesenchymal cadherin expressed on the cell surface, with tumor
progression and castration resistance. Targeting N-cadherin positive
cells with specific monoclonal antibodies affect tumor growth in both AR
positive and negative prostate cancers. Here we investigate the effects
of co-targeting AR with Enzalutamide and N-cadherin with the N-cadherin
specific monoclonal antibody 2A9 in CRPC.Method: N-cadherin was
ectopically expressed in androgen dependent prostate cancer cells (LNCaP,
MDA-PCa-2b, VCaP) and evaluated in vitro for invasion, growth, and
self-renewal in the presence of Enzalutamide and 2A9 monoclonal antibody,
raised against extracellular domain 4 of N-cadherin.
Enzalutamide-resistant cell lines were generated and characterized. For
in vivo studies, castration resistant N-cadherin and AR positive, as well
as androgen-dependent tumors were implanted in mice as xenografts. When
the tumors reached 100mm^3 in volume, mice were castrated and treated
with 5-10mg/kg Enzalutamide and/or 5-10mg/kg 2A9 and monitored for tumor
growth, local invasion, and metastasis. The tumors were harvested and
analyzed for cell proliferation, apoptosis, and other markers.Results:
Ectopic expression of N-cadherin in N-cadherin negative cells showed
increase in cell growth and invasion in androgen-deprived conditions. In
vitro studies show single or combination treatment of N-cadherin positive
and AR positive cells reduce invasion and cell proliferation.
Enzalutamide-resistant cell lines show response to 2A9 in
androgen-deprived conditions. In vivo studies using CRPC xenograft models
expressing N-cadherin and AR show inhibition of tumor growth when the
animals are castrated and treated with a combination of Enzalutamide and
2A9 than either treatment alone. Androgen dependent xenograft models in
castrated mice also showed significant delay in progression to castration
resistance when treated in combination than either treatment
alone.Conclusion: Previous studies suggested that therapeutic targeting
of N-cadherin with monoclonal antibodies have significant effect in
inhibiting tumor progression. The antibody in combination with
Enzalutamide showed synergy. Other androgen receptor antagonists and
other drugs targeting those potentially involved in downstream pathways
may prove to have additional clinical benefit.

