Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antitumor immune response generated by radiation therapy may
be limited by tumor cell adaptive resistance and can be circumvented by
PD-L1 blockade


Radiation therapy (RT) is administered to around 50% of all cancer
patients making it one of the most important cancer treatments. In
addition to the direct cytoreductive effect of RT there is increasing
evidence that radiation-induces immunogenic tumor cell death. Despite the
immunogenicity of RT-induced tumor cell death, RT delivered to tumours in
the clinic rarely generates therapeutic systemic anti-cancer immune
responses or abscopal effects.Here we show that tumor infiltrating CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) have increased expression of PD-1 following
RT in vivo. Moreover, our data demonstrate that treatment of established
syngeneic tumors with RT leads to upregulation of tumor cell expression
of PD-L1 in vivo but not when cells are irradiated in vitro. Using
depleting antibodies we determined that the depletion of CD8+ T cells but
not CD4+ T cells or NK cells could abrogate this RT-induced increase in
tumor cell expression of PD-L1 in vivo. Furthermore, silencing of IFNR1
using ShRNA confirmed that this process was dependent on CD8+ T cell
production of IFN suggesting an adaptive upregulation of PD-L1 following
RT occurs in response to CTL activation. This novel finding suggests that
the immunogenicity of RT may be limited via the PD-L1/PD-1 signalling
axis and may contribute to treatment failure.We next sought to determine
whether blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 signalling axis could enhance the
therapeutic response to RT. Our study demonstrates that administration of
either an anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 mAb in combination with RT leads to
substantially improved survival when compared to either monotherapy alone
with approximately 60% of treated mice undergoing a complete response. In
addition, our data reveal that combination therapy generates long-term
immunological memory in mice that have undergone complete response
protecting against tumor rechallenge.This is the first report to our
knowledge that demonstrates adaptive resistance through the upregulation
of tumour cell PD-L1 expression in response to an RT-induced CTL
response. This study demonstrates the potential for enhancing the
efficacy of conventional RT through blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis and
warrants clinical evaluation.

