Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of artemisinin, dihydroartemisinin and
artemisinin-glycolipid on non-small cell lung cancer induced bone
destruction


Lung cancer is the major cause of cancer-related death in males
worldwide. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately
80% of entire lung cancer and largely metastasizes to bone. Bone
consistently maintains the balance between osteoclasts and osteoblasts,
but NSCLC metastasized to bone interacts with normal bone cells and
abnormally enhances osteoclasts-mediated bone resorption. As a result,
enhanced bone resorption results in the release of transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-) and insulin-like growth factor -1 (IGF-1) which
promote cancer progression. Plant-derived compounds have been received
attention as therapeutic agents for many human diseases. Artemisinin
(ART) which is isolated from chinese medicinal herb, Artemisia annua and
its derivative dihydroartemisinin (DHA) have been known as outstanding
anti-malarial agents and have also potent anti-cancer activities.
ART-glycolipid is ART's derivative that combined ART with the glycolipid
daumone in order to enhance anti-cancer activity. We found that cell
viability was decreased in A549 cells treated with ART, DHA and
ART-glycolipid. ART, DHA and ART-glycolipid decreased the migration of
A549 cells treated with or without TGF- 1 and IGF-1 which are highly
discovered in bone metastasis of NSCLC. In addition, they inhibited the
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL)-induced
osteoclast formation in bone marrow macrophages (BMMs). In particular,
ART-glycolipid showed the most potent inhibitory effect. Therefore, we
expect that ART, DHA and ART-glycolipid can inhibit metastatic ability of
A549 cells and bone resorbing activity of osteoclasts by reducing
secretion of matrix metalloproteinases- 9 (MMP-9) and cathepsin K
activities in BMM. These results indicate that ART, DHA and
ART-glycolipid may serve as useful agents for attenuating NSCLC induced
bone destruction.

