Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human pancreatic cancer stem cells utilized to generate an in-vivo
mouse/rat model system for screening potential drug candidates for
treatment of pancreatic cancer patients


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are critical for engraftment and long-term
growth of many tumors, including pancreatic cancer. The Cancer Stem cells
are less sensitive to conventional chemotherapies and radiation
therapies, and treatments that can target CSCs are critically needed.
Human Pancreatic Cancer is a heterogeneous tumor composed of tumor cells
and small fraction of cancer stem cells, with high tumorigenic potential.
Pancreatic cancer stem cells are phenotypically similar to the normal
stem cells, they express CD133 gene and other genes characteristic of
neural stem cells (Nestin) and posses self-renewal potential. The CD133+
Pancreatic CSCs have been isolated with Celprogen Media and ECM and
characterized as chemo-/radio-resistant tumor-initiating cells which are
responsible as one of the major factors involved in post-treatment
recurrence. In order to explore the molecular properties of tumorigenic
CD133+ Pancreatic CSCs that resist treatment, we isolated CD133+
Pancreatic CSCs from tumors that are recurrent and have previously
received chemo-/radio-therapy. We found that the purified CD133+
Pancreatic CSCs sorted from the CD133+ Pancreatic CSC spheres express
SOX2 ,CD44, Nestin and are capable of clonal self-renewal. We generated
in-vivo model systems in mice and rats with these cells to screen
potential drug agents for the treatment of Pancreatic Cancer patients. We
were capable of generating Pancreatic tumors in mice and rats within 20
days by subcutaneously injecting 1000 Pancreatic CSCs at the hind limbs
of the rodents. Within day 5 the Pancreatic CSCs were already present in
the rodent's pancreas. At days 10, 15 & 20 the Pancreatic CSCs labeled
with GFP were located in the rodent's pancreas. We tested various
compound candidates in this model system and we were able to show
decrease in Pancreatic tumor when the treatment was started at day 10. We
were able to demonstrate gene signatures associated with Pancreatic CSCs
in this model system. We do see a down regulation of certain cancer
promoter genes in the treatment group when compared to non-treatment
groups.

