Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collagen matrix deposition by hepatic stellate cells protects
hepatocellular carcinoma from NK-mediated cytotoxicity


Up to 90% of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cases are preceded by chronic
liver disease and cirrhosis in which the major histopathologic feature is
hepatic fibrosis (HF), or the excessive accumulation collagen fibers in
the liver stroma. These fibers are deposited by activated hepatic
stellate cells (hSTEL) in response to hepatitis infection, and alcohol
liver disease (ALD). Both HF and subsequent HCC are associated with local
and systemic suppression of natural killer (NK) cells, which normally
serve to clear over-activated hSTELL and de novo HCC. While NK
dysfunction has been studied independently in HF and HCC, neither field
has considered a common mechanism caused by changes in the local
microenvironment. Cells interact with collagen through a subset of
integrins, or one of four known receptors that possess either activating
or inhibitory function. One of these receptors, known as
leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor 1 (LAIR-1), contains an
immunotyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM), elicits inhibitory
signaling in lymphocytes, and is highly expressed on NK cells. We
observed increased expression of LAIR-1 on dividing primary human NK
cells, and found that bioartifical collagen matrix significantly inhibits
NK proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in response to IL-2. In
contrast, NK cells isolated from LAIR-1 germline knockout mice displayed
near complete resistance to collagen-induced suppression in similar
proliferation assays. This led us to hypothesize that the accumulation of
hSTEL-derived collagen directly inhibits NK activity and protects both
hSTEL and HCC from innate clearance. We demonstrate that the deposition
of native collagen matrix by hSTELs imparts a significant protective
effect from subsequent NK lysis in standard 51Cr-release cytotoxicity
assays. A HCC cell line (HEPG2), which produces no collagen in the
absence of hSTELs, is susceptible to activated NK killing and is
unaffected by collagenase. To test if hSTEL-derived collagen
cross-protects bystander HEPG2 cells, we developed a novel flow
cytometry-based duel-target cytotoxicity assay capable of measuring the
simultaneous killing of multiple targets. Primary hSTEL and HEPG2 cells
were pre-labeled with different lipophilic dyes and co-cultured for 72h,
resulting in an accurate analogue of the HCC microenvironment including
HEPG2 nodules, interstitial hSTEL, and a complex intersecting network of
fibrillar collagen. Using this co-culture system, we show that
hSTEL-derive collagen matrix protects both hSTEL and HEPG2 targets from
NK cytotoxicity. Pretreatment of the co-culture system with collagenase
removes the protective collagen matrix and restores NK cytotoxicity.
These results suggest that hSTEL-derived collagen may contribute to NK
dysfunction in LF and HCC, and identifies LAIR-1 as a potential mediator
of collagen-induced immune suppression.

