Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gedunin, a novel HSP-90 inhibitor, synergizes with cisplatin and
paclitaxel to inhibit growth of chemoresistant ovarian cancer cell lines


High-grade serous ovarian cancer is the most lethal of all gynecological
cancers. It is often not diagnosed until FIGO stage III or IV, at which
point the 5-year survival rate is 15%. Although most patients initially
respond to the standard of care, 70% of tumors reoccur. Of these, 70-90%
are refractory to standard therapies used in the treatment of serous
ovarian cancer, cisplatin and paclitaxel. These statistics reveal a need
for novel therapeutics that target these tumors. Gedunin, a liminoid from
the Neem tree (Azadirachta indica) has been identified as an
HSP90-inhibitor. We tested whether gedunin affects the viability of five
different ovarian cancer cell lines, ID8, ID8TaxR, A2870, C30 and CP70.
We chose these cell lines because cisplatin (C30, CP70) and paclitaxel
(ID8TaxR) resistant cells were developed from A2870 and ID8,
respectively. Treatment with gedunin (0-30M) inhibited growth of all five
cell lines. In addition, combination indices revealed synergism between
gedunin and the two chemotherapeutic agents. More importantly, synergism
between gedunin and paclitaxel occurs even at doses (2.5M for each) that
do not have any effect on the cells when treated alone. We next
determined the mechanism of gedunin action. Flow cytometry and
immunofluorescence microscopy, demonstrated that gedunin induces mitotic
arrest between metaphase and anaphase. This was confirmed by western blot
analysis of cyclin protein levels. We also observed significant changes
to expression of checkpoint kinase-1 (CHK1) and polo-like kinase-1 (PLK1)
in the five cell lines. We propose that the misfolding and subsequent
degradation of CHK1 and PLK1 leads to the observed mitotic halt, which
eventually results in apoptosis. Following cell synchronization,
gedunin-treated cells show decreased inhibitory phosphorylation (Y15) of
CDK1 and increased levels of cyclin B1 compared to untreated cells.
Moreover, immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated increased monopolar
spindle formation. Furthermore, gedunin treatment resulted in formation
of double-strand breaks as observed by western blot analysis for
gamma-H2AX. This was further verified by TUNEL staining. Finally,
apoptosis was observed in gedunin treated cells as measured by increased
Bcl-2 to Bax protein ratio and mitochondrial cytochrome c release. These
data are in complete agreement with previous studies that show that PLK1
depletion causes spindle abnormalities, as well as increases gamma-H2AX
and decreases BCL-2 protein levels. In conclusion, these data suggest
that gedunin treatment results in premature mitosis followed by cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. Given that gedunin acts in synergism with
both cisplatin and paclitaxel suggests that gedunin is a promising lead
compound either alone or in combination with these compounds for the
treatment of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.

