Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneous expression of Her2, estrogen and progesterone
receptors in human breast cancer metastasized to the brain


Assessment of hormone (estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR)) and human
epidermal growth factor-2 (Her2) receptors expression in breast cancer
has been an accepted standard to predict clinical outcome. Importantly,
expression of these receptors in primary breast cancer has been an
important predictor of visceral organ metastasis. Although many studies
of breast cancer have reported risk factors for brain metastasis,
including Her2 positivity and ER negativity, currently it is not possible
to accurately predict brain metastasis. One possible reason for this
impasse could be the expression of the above receptors in different
combinations influencing metastasis to the brain (brain mets). To address
this possibility, we analyzed six different human brain mets for the
expression of Her-2, ER and PR by the fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) and immunohistochemistry procedures. To further validate this
data, eight different human primary breast tumors were similarly
analyzed.The immunohistochemistry analysis showed that brain mets are
heterogenous in the expression of these receptors: five were Her2
positive and one negative; four were ER positive and two were negative;
five were PR positive and one negative. However, expression of these
receptors in their combination is also heterogenous: three brain mets
were positive for all of the Her2, ER and PR; one for Her2 positive but
negative for ER/PR; one positive for PR but negative for Her2/ER. Similar
heterogenous expression of these receptors in primary tumors were also
observed using immunohistochemistry procedure. While this data is mostly
corroborative to the FISH analysis, the FISH identified receptor
positivity could not be established by immunohistochemistry.
Additionally, tumors characterized by immunohistochemistry as PR negative
were found to express this receptor, albeit in tens of cells among
thousands in brain mets. Such differences in results using these two
procedures were noted in the Her2 expression in both brain mets and
primary tumors. Undoubtedly, FISH is highly sensitive and identifies gene
amplification, whereas, immunohistochemistry allows the detection of
receptor expression which is heavily dependent on several factors
including accessibility of antigen and affinity of the antibody.In
conclusion, our analysis suggests that the currently utilized Her2,
estrogen and progesterone receptor detection to predict brain mets needs
further refinement to allow for better understanding of the mechanisms of
metastasis to the central nervous system and treatment of such brain mets.

