Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of structural elements in RasGRP3 and RasGRP1
controlling membrane interaction


RasGRP comprises a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors that
activate small GTPases, regulating the dissociation of GDP from Ras
GTPases to enhance the formation of the active GTP-bound form. RasGRP3
has a region homologous to the phosphoinositide binding region of
RasGRP1. The objective of this study was to explore the hypothesis that
this region of RasGRP3, like that of RasGRP1, indeed contributes to
phosphoinositide binding. For these studies, we prepared full length
RasGRP1/3, RasGRP1/3 C1 domain, and truncated (C1-SuPT-PT) RasGRP1 and
RasGRP3 green fluorescent protein labeled constructs to transfect human
prostate adenocarcinoma (LNCaP) and human cervical carcinoma (HeLa)
cells. In HeLa cells, both RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 translocated to the
endonuclear membranes, most probably to the Gogli in response to phorbol
ester (PMA) and other agents. In the LNCaP cells, which are a PTEN mutant
cell line with markedly elevated phosphoinositide levels, RasGRP1
translocates to the plasma membrane. In contrast, the full length RasGRP3
does not translocate to the plasma membrane even though it has a PT
(plasma membrane-targeting) domain with a basic/hydrophobic cluster of
amino acids (BHC) similar to that of RasGRP1. In parallel, we examined
the translocation of the C1 domains of RasGRP1/3 and of the truncated
RasGRP1/3 constructs, as well as the corresponding constructs with amino
acid substitutions in the predicted phosphoinositide binding domain of
RasGRP3. The RasGRP1 translocated to the plasma membrane in response to
PMA. The C1 domain of RasGRP3 was insufficient for targeting RasGRP3 to
the plasma membrane. However, truncated RasGRP3, which contains the PT
domain, showed stronger translocation. Substituting amino acids (Asp647,
Lys648 and Ala651) in the PT domain of full length RasGRP3 triggered the
plasma membrane translocation in the LNCaP cells. We conclude that the
differences in the BHC section of the PT domain of RasGRP3 play an
important role in the membrane translocation of RasGRP3 and will reduce
its sensitivity to membrane phosphoinositide levels.

