Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phosphoproteomics analysis reveals Akt isoform-specific signals
that link RNA splicing to non-small cell lung cancer


Akt isoforms exhibit different functional properties. To address the
signaling differences between Akt1, Akt2 and Akt3 we examined the
phosphoproteomes of a set of isogenic mouse cell lines that express
different Akt isoforms. Based on this screen, we identified a total of
606 Akt phosphorylation targets, of which many are phosphorylated in an
isoform specific manner. Bioinformatics analyses of these data revealed
that Akt isoforms regulate differentially multiple cellular functions.
One of these functions was RNA metabolism which was represented by 25
proteins phosphorylated by at least one of the Akt isoforms. One of these
proteins was IWS1, which is involved in the assembly of RNA Pol II
transcriptional elongation complex, and which was found to be
phosphorylated at the conserved site Ser720/Thr721 by Akt3 and Akt1. Here
we show that this phosphorylation event is required for the recruitment
of the histone methyltransferase SETD2 to the complex and the
trimethylation of histone H3 at K36 in the body of the transcribed genes.
H3K36me3 provides a docking site for MRG15 and its binding partner, the
splicing suppressor PTB, and regulates PTB-dependent alternative
splicing. One of the targets is FGFR-2 whose alternative splicing gives
rise to two isoforms, IIIb, which is expressed in epithelial cells and
IIIc, which is expressed in mesenchymal cells, promotes EMT and is
associated with more aggressive tumors. IWS1 phosphorylation by Akt3/Akt1
shifts splicing toward the IIIc isoform and promotes tumor growth and
invasiveness both in culture and in animals.Addressing the expression of
FGFR-2 in a set of lung-derived normal and tumor samples revealed that
whereas the overall expression was similar in both, there was a shift
toward the IIIc isoform in the tumor samples. More important, the
relative expression of the IIIc and IIIb isoforms in
non-small-cell-lung-carcinomas (NSCLCs) correlated with the stoichiometry
of IWS1 phosphorylation and the latter correlated with Akt
phosphorylation and Akt3 expression. These findings combined, underpin
the importance of this pathway in the pathogenesis of lung cancer.
Overall, our data suggest that Akt isoform-dependent phosphorylation
events are essential for RNA processing and provide novel insights into
the role of Akt in carcinogenesis.

