Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of phenformin in LKB1/KRAS mutated non-small cell lung
cancer patient derived xenograft


Metformin is an oral antidiabetic drug of the biguanide class. Several
epidemiological and case-control studies reported that diabetics using
metformin may have lower cancer risk in comparison to those using other
antidiabetic medications. Recent studies in experimental models suggest
that another biguanide, phenformin, has higher anticancer activity
compared with metformin. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
effects of metformin and phenformin in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
models. In particular, the effects of these compounds in LKB1 or
LKB1/KRAS mutated compared to wild type models have been investigated.
NSCLC cell lines (A549, H460, H1299, LT73) have been treated with either
metformin or phenformin to evaluate in vitro dose/response depending on
the different mutational status of KRAS and LKB1 genes. The effects of
the two biguanide have been investigated also in vivo models, exploiting
the panel of Patient Derived Xenografts (PDXs) directly generated from
NSCLC patients in our Institute. In vitro experiments indicated that cell
lines with already impaired metabolism (LKB1 and/or KRAS mutated) were
more sensitive to phenformin treatment. Interestingly, treatments of
these cell lines with r phenformin resulted in a 50% decrease in the
amount of CD133+ Tumor Initiating Cells (TIC). Moreover, high doses of
phenformin (LD75) did not result in the increase of TIC previously
observed after Cisplatin treatment. In vivo, early treatments (Tumor
Volume = 50-100mm3) of an LKB1 mutated PDX model resulted in a
significant reduction of tumor volume (300 50 mm3 in phenformin treated
vs 750 100 mm3 in vehicle treated tumors) already after three weeks of
treatment (100mg/Kg/day). Importantly, no regrowth was observed in
responding tumors even after the end of treatments. No effects were
observed in LKB1 wild type PDX treated with phenformin. Taken together,
these preliminary data indicate a selective action of phenformin on LKB1
mutated lung adenocarcinoma models in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly,
this compound seems to be more active in TIC than normal chemotherapeutic
drugs (i.e. cisplatin). Effects of biguanide on TIC could be the cause of
the lack of tumor regrowth after treatment, thus making these compounds
potentially useful in counteracting disease recurrence and/or metastasis
formation. Further investigations are needed to elucidate the different
effects of metformin and phenformin in double mutated (LKB1 and KRAS)
PDXs models.

