Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying key molecular events at the onset of melanoma using a
neural crest stem cell marker


An ongoing challenge in cancer biology is understanding the earliest,
initiating events that switch a premalignant cell into a fully competent
cancer cell. Driven by this challenge, we focused on the zebrafish gene
crestin that marks the embryonic neural crest from the onset of
somitogenesis through 72 hours post fertilization when it normally turns
off. Surprisingly, our lab previously showed that crestin mRNA is
reexpressed in melanoma tumors in adult zebrafish, reading out a neural
crest progenitor state. We have developed a fluorescent reporter using
the crestin promoter/enhancer that recapitulates the embryonic expression
pattern of crestin, and when bred into our BRAFV600E/p53 mutant melanoma
zebrafish model, marks grossly visible melanoma tumors. Remarkably, we
found that crestin:EGFP becomes active when lesions are only a few cells
in number, potentially in the first cell of the melanoma. Using a
crestin:CreERt2 inducible recombinase together with a lox-dependent
fluorescent lineage tracer line ubi:switch, multiple neural crest
descendant lineages including melanocytes can be traced. Further by
expressing the melanocyte lineage master transcription factor mitf under
the control of the crestin promoter, we can rescue melanocyte formation
in mitf null embryos, and in the Na/BRAFV600E/p53 melanoma-prone mutant
background, some adult fish develop darkly pigmented patches and melanoma
tumors. Finally, we isolated small patches of crestin:EGFP positive cells
and show that these precursor lesions are enriched for expression of the
neural crest progenitor transcription factor sox10. These data support a
model in which BRAFV600E/p53 mutated melanocytes stochastically
reactivate an early melanocyte or neural crest progenitor program as read
out by crestin reactivation at the initiation of melanoma formation.
Using our novel reporter, we are able to analyze in vivo the earliest
steps of cancer formation as well as the neural crest lineage program.

