Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of a new patient-derived renal
cell carcinoma xenograft panel


Objective:Patients with advanced kidney cancer have a poor prognosis. The
majority of patients develops treatment resistance towards Standard of
Care (SoC) drugs within months. The successful development of novel
personalized therapies depends on the availability of preclinical models
with high clinical relevance. Our aim was to establish a panel of
patient-derived renal cell carcinoma xenograft models for translational
research.Methods:Specimens from primary and metastatic renal cell
carcinoma tumors from consenting patients were collected after surgery
and transplanted subcutaneously to immunodeficient mice within 24 hours.
Tumor engraftment was followed for an initial period of up to 4 months.
Successful engrafted patient-derived tumors were subsequently passaged to
further mice. HE stained tumor sections were histopathologically examined
to assess morphological concordance between patient tumor and PDX model.
Renal cell carcinoma marker expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry. Stably growing xenografts were tested for
sensitivity towards SoC drugs, such as Avastin, Sunitinib, Sorafenib and
Everolimus. Response to treatment was evaluated by comparing growth
inhibition of treated in relation to untreated tumors. Primary tumors and
the derived xenografts are currently under characterization for common
oncogenic mutations using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer
Panel.Results:Nearly 200 tumor samples were transplanted since 2011. To
date, 30% were successfully engrafted in immunodeficient mice and further
patient-derived tumors are presently under establishment. Engraftment
rates of samples from pT3 and pT4 tumors were higher (34%) than those
from pT1 and pT2 tumors (12%). Two tumor samples which were pre-treated
before surgery engrafted so far (11%). We show that specific tumor
histology and renal cell carcinoma marker expression remained preserved
over the passages. The drug sensitivity testings revealed a heterogeneous
response to SoC treatments with Sunitinib (79% significant growth
inhibition) and Everolimus (64%) as most effective treatments in the PDX
models. Avastin showed a significant growth inhibition in 57% whereas
Sorafenib was effective in 36% of the RCC models. We are furthermore
presenting the individual gene mutation status of each RCC
model.Conclusions:Our newly established patient-derived renal cell
carcinoma panel provides a novel tool for the investigation of mechanisms
of drug resistance and sensitivity in kidney cancer, biomarker research
and the development of new therapeutic approaches.

