Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shotgun proteomic analysis of human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cell line SQ20B with diminished AHSG expression


The Alpha-Heremans-Schmid Glycoprotein (AHSG) has tumor promoting
properties in animal models of breast cancer and lung cancer (1, 2).
These cancer cells do not synthesize AHSG, instead utilizing the
liver-generated glycoprotein that is abundant in serum. We have reported
that head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines synthesize
AHSG (in press) and have also detected abundant AHSG in primary HNSCC
tumors (unpublished). Growth in serum-free medium and in vitro
tumorigenic properties, including proliferation, adhesion and migration,
are diminished in the HNSCC SQ20B cell line modified with AHSG-specific
shRNA to express only twenty percent of the wild-type SQ20B cell line
(SQ20B-AH20) compared to SQ20B modified with empty vector alone and
expressing the wild-type amount of AHSG (SQ20B-EV) (in press). Here we
have used shotgun proteomic analysis to identify additional proteins
whose expression may also affect these in vitro properties of
tumorigenesis associated with AHSG.The two cell lines were cultured in
serum-free medium to avoid the contribution of exogenous AHSG in serum.
Cell lysates were obtained, and the proteins were separated in
polyacrylamide gels in duplicate. Each full protein lane was cut into 10
pieces, in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed with tandem liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). MS data were analyzed against a
recent human protein database. Proteins differentially expressed were
quantified using a spectral counting approach.A total of 1386 distinct
protein groups were identified in the two samples. Forty-eight proteins
were differentially expressed in these samples (z score > 3, which
corresponds to p 0.001, and Benjamini-Hochberg [statistical] FDR The
Alpha-Heremans-Schmid Glycoprotein (AHSG) has tumor promoting properties
in animal models of breast cancer and lung cancer (1, 2). These cancer
cells do not synthesize AHSG, instead utilizing the liver-generated
glycoprotein that is abundant in serum. We have reported that head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines synthesize AHSG (in
press) and have also detected abundant AHSG in primary HNSCC tumors
(unpublished). Growth in serum-free medium and in vitro tumorigenic
properties, including proliferation, adhesion and migration, are
diminished in the HNSCC SQ20B cell line modified with AHSG-specific shRNA
to express only twenty percent of the wild-type SQ20B cell line
(SQ20B-AH20) compared to SQ20B modified with empty vector alone and
expressing the wild-type amount of AHSG (SQ20B-EV) (in press). Here we
have used shotgun proteomic analysis to identify additional proteins
whose expression may also affect these in vitro properties of
tumorigenesis associated with AHSG.The two cell lines were cultured in
serum-free medium to avoid the contribution of exogenous AHSG in serum.
Cell lysates were obtained, and the proteins were separated in
polyacrylamide gels in duplicate. Each full protein lane was cut into 10
pieces, in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed with tandem liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). MS data were analyzed against a
recent human protein database. Proteins differentially expressed were
quantified using a spectral counting approach.A total of 1386 distinct
protein groups were identified in the two samples. Forty-eight proteins
were differentially expressed in these samples (z score > 3, which
corresponds to p 0.001, and Benjamini-Hochberg [statistical] FDR < 0.05).
Proteins associated with the cytoskeleton, adhesion and apoptosis were
over-represented in the group of differentially expressed proteins. Here
we have shown that the human HNSCC cell line SQ20B exhibits changes in
the proteome when AHSG expression is diminished. These proteins are
critical for the tumorigenic properties of adhesion and migration. These
data will help to identify mechanisms of tumorigenesis associated with
AHSG in HNSCC.References1. B. Guillory, A.M. Sakwe, M. Saria, P.
Thompson, C. Adhiambo, R. Koumangoye, B. Ballard, A. Binhazim, C. Cone,
W. Jahanen-Dechent, J. Ochieng, Lack of fetuin-A (alpha2-HS-glycoprotein)
reduces mammary tumor incidence and prolongs tumor latency via the
transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway in a mouse model of
breast cancer, The American Journal of Pathology 177 (2010) 2635-2644.2.
M.N. Kundranda, M. Henderson, K.J. Carter, L. Gorden, A. Binhazim, S.
Ray, T. Baptiste, M. Shokrani, M.L. Leite-Browning, W. Jahnen-Dechent,
L.M. Matrisian, J. Ochieng, The serum glycoprotein fetuin-A promotes
Lewis lung carcinoma tumorigenesis via adhesive-dependent and
adhesive-independent mechanisms, Cancer Res 65 (2005) 499-506.

