Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural analysis of cardiac glycosides to determine the basis
for tumoristatic activity


Cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) such as digitoxin are routinely used in
the clinic to treat arrhythmias; recent studies however have delved into
their potential as anti-cancer agents. One major concern with the use of
cardenolides is their narrow therapeutic index, which precludes their use
in oncology due to the higher doses required to achieve tumoristatic
effects. However, synthesis of chemical analogs of cardenolides with much
higher anti-tumor efficacy whilst maintaining the pathway-specificities
of their parent compounds is highly desirable.Our group has previously
developed a patented palladium-catalyzed de novo synthesis methodology
for synthesis of complex carbohydrates, which has allowed us to
synthesize a library of digitoxin analogues. One novel non-natural
monosaccharide derivative (-D-digitoxin or MonoD) in particular
demonstrates strong cytotoxic effects on a wide variety of tumors as
assessed by measuring activity against the NCI panel of 60 cancer cell
lines. More importantly, MonoD exerts at least a five-fold higher
tumoristatic effect as compared to digitoxin. As opposed to digitoxin
that has three sugar moieties (trisaccharide) attached to a steroid
domain, MonoD is a monosaccharide with only one sugar unit. This suggests
that the length of the sugar side chain may play a critical role in
determining anti-cancer efficacy of cardenolides. Furthermore, our
preliminary work suggests that the nature of substituents on both the
carbohydrate and steroid portions of digitoxin affects its efficacy. In
order to further delineate the basis for such differential effects, we
selected three naturally occurring cardenolides that have similar
structures to that of MonoD with variations in either the sugar region,
the steroid unit or both - Convallatoxin (CV), Peruvoside (PV) and
Cymarin (CM) - and assessed for tumoristatic effects.Our preliminary data
shows that differences in functional groups can have direct effects on
the efficacy of cardenolides in exerting tumoristatic effects. All the
selected cardenolides demonstrated potent inhibition of cell viability as
assessed by availability of functional ATP using Cell Titer Glo.
Confounding however was the fact that unlike naturally occurring
cardenolides, increasing amounts of MonoD led to increased availability
of ATP. However, apoptosis assays clearly indicated that MonoD did lead
to cell death. We will be pursuing further structural modification
analysis to determine the underlying cause of such differential effects.
A SAR study to delineate specific variations in the substituents in both
the sugar and the steroid unit of cardenolides may help access compounds
that have higher anti-tumorigenic potential against cancers.

