Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN deficiency in prostate epithelial cells is associated with
increased CAD phosphorylation and is inhibited by fisetin


Critical loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) beside increased
insulin signaling often results in mTOR activation which is associated
with progression of lethal prostate cancer (PCa). Recently mTOR was shown
to control de novo pyrimidine synthesis via S6K which directly
phosphorylates Ser1859 on CAD (carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 2,
aspartate transcarbamoylase, dihydroorotase), the enzyme that catalyzes
the first three steps of de novo pyrimidine synthesis. We assessed the
CAD expression and phosprylation at Ser1859 in different in-vitro and
in-vivo models of PCa and also tested the potential efficacy of fisetin,
an agent which we previously established as a dual PI3K/AKT and mTOR
inhibitor. We observed upregulation of CAD both at transcriptional and
translational levels in PCa cell lines when compared with the
non-tumorigenic prostate cells. However, a highly significant
upregulation of CAD phosphorylation at Ser1859 was evident in PTEN
deficient cells when compared with wild type PTEN cells. To confirm, we
assessed the CAD phosphorylation at Ser1859 in PTEN knockout mice samples
and observed significant increase in the CAD phosphorylation at Ser1859
but not in total CAD levels, suggesting high demands of de novo
pyrimidine synthesis in PTEN deficient tumors. In another model of
spontaneous PCa (TRAMP) an inverse association between CAD
phosphorylation at Ser1859 and PTEN was observed. Based on the facts that
PTEN deficient cells have high mTOR activity that is prerequisite for CAD
phosphorylation we tested the efficacy of fisetin to inhibit CAD
phosphorylation at Ser1859 in different PCa models. Fisetin significantly
suppressed the CAD phosphorylation in tumorigenic PCa cells in-vitro.
In-vivo efficay of fisetin for inhibition of CAD phosphorylation was also
established in the xenograft study. However, decrease in abundance of CAD
mRNA and protein in xenograft samples suggested fisetin additionally
suppressed other mechanism(s) important for CAD expression. Next we
determined the effect of fisetin to inhibit the growth factors
(insulin/IGF-1/EGF) stimulated CAD oligomerization in PCa cells important
for CAD activity. Fisetin significantly suppressed the growth factors
induced CAD oligomerization as observed by electron microscopy and
density gradient based western blotting. However, we did not find
significant S-phase blockage by fisetin under similar conditions. Based
on these data we suggest that PTEN deficient PCa epithelial tumors
possess heightened de novo pyrimidine requirements, satisfied by growth
factor stimulated and mTOR regulated CAD phosphorylation and
oligomerization. Fisetin inhibits both CAD phosphorylation at Ser1859 and
oligomerization and thereby limits pyrimidine sufficiency in PTEN
deficient PCa cells. Our results add additional mechanistic insight in
the fisetin mediated inhibition of PCa and suggest the use of fisetin in
PTEN deficient PCa incidents.

