Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide and its role in photodynamic therapy


Porphyrinic pigments are used as photosensitizers (PS) in photodynamic
detection (PDD) and therapy (PDT) that is a minimally invasive modality
in the fight against cancer. When the PS is activated by visible light at
a given wavelength, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are generated, which
cause cancer cells to undergo cell death. Despite significant advances,
drawbacks of the PSs in clinical use include their non-selectivity in
cellular-targeting causing cell death by necrosis leading to tissue
inflammation. Nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to play a key role in
modulating apoptotic cell death pathways and to react with reactive
oxygen species to form additional lethal reactive nitrogen species (RNS).
In our efforts to enhance the effectiveness of PDT, we set out to
investigate the role of NO in PDT. We hypothesized that NO delivered to
cancer cells at the time that the PS was administered would enhance the
efficacy of PDT by promoting mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. To this
end, we incubated androgen-sensitive human prostate adenocarcinoma
(LNCaP) cells with both a PS and an NO releasing agent that was most
effective in NO release as was spectrophotometrically determined by its
oxidation of hemoglobin. Phototoxicity experiments were carried out at 37
OC with a noncoherent light source. Cell viability, damage and death were
assessed in both illuminated and non-illuminated cells and were
quantified by MTT staining as well as trypan blue and propidium iodide
exclusion. To corroborate the cell viability results, we assayed
clonogenic recovery in response to PDT in pigmented cells both in the
presence and absence of NO. Our results indicate that the effectiveness
of PDT in causing cell death depends on the NO concentration. PDT with NO
alone was toxic to the cancer cells at high concentration of NO, whereas
at low NO concentration no significant cell damage was observed after
light illumination. PDT with the PS alone was not as effective in
promoting cell death as PDT in the presence of both NO and the PS.
Depending on the concentrations of the PS and NO, we observed that either
necrosis or apoptosis were the prevailing modes of cell death after PDT.
Our results indicate that the phototoxicity of the compounds is mainly
determined by their intracellular concentration. Thus, understanding the
combined effects of NO and the PSs in enhancing cell phototoxicity will
aid in determining the roles that NO plays in improving the efficacy of
PDT and may provide an alternate regimen to enhance PDT efficacy.

