Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sub-lethal autolysis in livers of mice given phthalate esters
precedes development of hepatic lesions


Primary prevention of human cancers through identification of potential
environmental carcinogens is an important goal. Phthalates such as
di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) and di-n-octylphthalate (DOP), the most
widely used industrial plasticizers, are low-level environmental
contaminants. As plasticizers they impart flexibility to plastics and
comprise a large portion of the final product. However, they are
non-covalently bound and easily migrate out of the final products,
leading to human exposure. Previous studies have shown that exposure to
these compounds in the diet is associated with the development of
hepatocellular carcinomas and adenomas in rodents. DEHP and DOP are most
likely non-genotoxic, therefore the mechanism(s) by which these compounds
induce changes in hepatocyte structure and function is unknown, although
recently a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha mode of
action has been suggested for DEHP. Bosmann (BBA, 264:339, 1972) proposed
that sub-lethal autolysis at the cell surface resulting from secretion of
lysosomal enzymes can alter cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions
leading to loss of growth control and neoplastic transformation. Indeed,
cultured 3T3 cells express increased levels of lysosomal enzymes
following viral transformation and increased expression of lysosomal
enzymes is found in many human malignancies including cancers of the
breast, colon, larynx and prostate. To determine if there is an
association between the expression of lysosomal enzymes and the
carcinogenicity of phthalates, the effects of chronic exposure of male
B6C3F1 mice to diets containing DEHP or DOP on liver lysosomal enzymes
was evaluated. Mice were fed diets containing 0.12%, 0.60%, and 1.20%
DEHP and 0.1%, 0.5% and 1.0% DOP. Groups of animals were sacrificed after
15, 30, 35, 52, 78 and 104 weeks of exposure. Expression of hepatic
-galactosidase, aryl sulfatase, n-acetyl--glucosaminidase, and cathepsin
D was increased significantly following 15 weeks of treatment with either
0.6% or 1.2% DEHP. By 30 weeks of treatment animals in these groups had
focal hepatic lesions and some liver tumors. Increased expression of
-glucuronidase was found only in animals receiving 0.6% and 1.2% DEHP for
52 weeks. Hepatomegaly was found in all the animals receiving the
phthalates. The close association between early increases in expression
of some lysosomal enzymes and later development of hepatic lesions
following chronic exposure to non-genotoxic phthalate esters suggests
that sub-lethal autolyis may be a contributing factor in carcinogenesis
induced by these low-level environmental contaminants.

