Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as a new target modulating the
proliferation and immune-related pathways in melanoma


Histone deacetylases (HDACs), originally described as histone modifiers,
have more recently been demonstrated to modify a variety of other
proteins involved in diverse cellular processes unrelated to the
chromatin environment. This includes the deacetylation of multiple
non-histone targets, such as proteins involved in cell cycle/apoptosis
and immune regulation. Specifically, HDACs have garnered significant
interest due to the availability of drugs that selectively inhibits
HDACs. We recently identified that the pharmacological or genetic
abrogation of a single HDAC, HDAC6, modifies the immunogenicity and
proliferation of melanoma in both in vitro and in vivo models.Using
specific HDAC6 inhibitors (HDAC6i) we observed decreased proliferation
and G1 cell cycle arrest in all melanoma cell lines measured by MTS assay
and flow cytometry. These results were also observed in stable HDAC6
knockdown melanoma cell lines (HDAC6KD) generated by specific lentiviral
shRNA for HDAC6. In addition to the effects observed in proliferation and
apoptosis after inhibiting HDAC6, we found important changes in the
expression of immune-related pathways, including increased expression of
MHC, co-stimulatory molecules, and specific melanoma tumor associated
antigens such as gp100, MART-1, Tyrp1 and Tyrp2.Our in vitro results were
further supported by in vivo tumor growth studies. We observed a delayed
tumor growth of inoculated B16 melanoma cells in C57BL/6 mice treated
with selective HDAC6i. A similar outcome was identified after inoculation
of HDAC6KD B16 melanoma cells in C57BL/6 mice. Such an effect was
reverted partially in CD4+ and CD8+ depleted C57BL/6 mice challenged with
HDAC6KD cells, suggesting that the disruption of HDAC6 enhances immune
system recognition of melanoma cells. This delay in tumor growth could be
a reflection of their diminished proliferation and an increase in their
immunogenicity leading to improved immune recognition and clearance.
These studies provide critical insights into the molecular pathways that
are involved in the regulatory role of HDAC6 in cell proliferation,
survival, and cytokine signaling of human melanoma cells. Collectively,
our data has identified HDAC6 as an attractive therapeutic target in
melanoma.

