Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of gene repression by estrogen in invasiveness of breast
cancer cells


More than 75% of breast tumors are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
require estrogen for their growth and survival. Long-term adjuvant
therapies that disrupt estrogen signaling, in particular tamoxifen and
aromatase inhibitors, are a mainstay in breast cancer treatment. The
principal focus of mechanistic studies evaluating the role of estrogen in
breast cancer proliferation has been on gene activation by estrogen and
its antagonism by anti-estrogens. Gene repression by estrogen and its
antagonism by anti-estrogens have unclear physiological and therapeutic
consequence in breast cancer. In this study, we found that
estrogen-repressed genes but not estrogen-activated genes overlapped the
gene overexpression signature of clinical progression of ductal carcinoma
in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma. An extensive gene ontology analysis
revealed that genes repressed by estrogen are enriched for functions
known to collectively support breast cancer progression. In ER-positive
breast cancer cells tamoxifen prevented gene repression by estrogen. In
these cells, estrogen inhibited invasiveness in a manner that was opposed
by tamoxifen. These effects of estrogen and tamoxifen on gene repression
and invasiveness also occurred in Her2+/ER+ cells whose growth was
hormone-independent and insensitive to tamoxifen. The effects were also
independent of ErbB2 gene regulation by estrogen. Several ER
co-repressors supported repression of the tumor progression genes by
estrogen. Gene repression by estrogen was causally linked to inhibition
of invasiveness as a co-repressor binding site mutation in ER that
selectively disrupted the ability of estrogen to repress genes also
prevented inhibition of invasiveness. Gene repression by estrogen
involved ER binding at non-classical chromatin sites that was prevented
by tamoxifen. The findings offer a mechanistic understanding of the
invasive potential of ER+ breast cancer cells that have evaded growth
inhibition during conventional anti-estrogen treatments.

