Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional repressor DAXX promotes prostate cancer
tumorigenicity via suppression of autophagy


Objective: Cancer results from uncontrolled cell growth, in part due to
mechanisms that block cell death, including autophagic cell death. The
current study aims to understand the function of autophagy and its
modulators in the context of prostate tumorigenesis and
progression.Background: Long overlooked, the complex dynamics of the
transcriptional repressor DAXX represents a new concept in tumor biology
that promises to make a remarkable impact on cancer prevention and
treatment. DAXX suppressess the expression of numerous autophagy-relevant
genes, including tumor suppressors DAPK1/3. Through its ability to
suppress tumor suppressors, DAXX would be expected to induce tumor growth
or survival. Indeed, robust preliminary data show that DAXX has potent
growth-enhancing effects on primary malignancies. However, the mechanism
by which DAXX promotes tumorigenicity remains enigmatic. Through stable
gene knockdown and subsequent subcutaneous xenograft models, one
mechanism by which DAXX promotes tumorigenesis in PCa - autophagy
suppression - has been elucidated.Study Design & Results: To elucidate
the mechanism by which DAXX promotes tumorigenesis in PCa,
retroviral-mediated shRNA was used to silence DAXX, DAPK3, and the
essential autophagy gene ULK1 in the PCa cell line ALVA-31. A control
shRNA was also included. Subcutaneous xenograft experiments, utilizing
the above cells, were performed several times, involving subcutaneous
injection of 10 million cells per mouse and six mice per group. At the
conclusion of the experiment (4 weeks), excised tumors were weighed and
processed for histological and molecular analyses. Histological analysis
included immunostaining for p62, LC3, Beclin-1, Ubiquitin, CD31, and
Ki-67. For molecular analysis, tumor lysates were analyzed for
LC3-I/LC3-II ratios and p62 levels by immunoblotting. The results showed
that (1) DAXX is required for tumor growth, because DAXX depletion in
ALVA-31 cells results in profoundly reduced tumorigenicity of ALVA-31
cells, as determined by tumor wet weight, final volume, and growth
kinetics. In addition, DAXX K/D tumors display increased autophagy
markers LC3/Beclin-1 and decreased ubiquitin/CD31; (2) DAPK3 acts as a
tumor suppressor, because tumor growth rate is faster for DAPK3 knockdown
K/D, as determined by growth kinetics; and (3) Autophagy is directly
involved in prostate tumorigenesis inhibition, because tumorigenesis of
ALVA-31 DAXX K/D cells is significantly enhanced/restored when the
essential autophagy gene ULK1 is depleted in these cells, as determined
by tumor wet weight, final volume, growth kinetics, histological, and
molecular analyses. The above results were confirmed using an additional
PCa line, PC3.Conclusion: Autophagy suppresses early prostate
tumorigenesis, while DAXX promotes prostate tumorigenesis by inhibiting
autophagy.

