Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of a cancer stem cell marker doublecortin-like
kinase (DCLK1) leads to activation of inflammatory cascade during
development of virus-induced hepatocellular carcinoma


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common
cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Chronic infections with
hepatitis B or C viruses are the leading cause of HCC. The cancer stem
cell (CSC) marker, doublecortin-like kinase (DCLK1), is believed to be a
key factor for the development of multiple cancer types including HCC.
However, its impact on signaling pathways that promote
hepatocarcinogenesis is largely unknown. We have shown DCLK1's enhanced
expression in HCC and its stimulatory role in hepatitis C virus (HCV)
replication. Our published reports further suggest that DCLK1 positively
affects tumor-related miRNAs and transcription factors that promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). These observations prompted us
to investigate DCLK1 signaling module in virus-induced liver pathogenesis
and HCC.Methods: Genome-wide transcriptome analysis was carried out in
total RNAs isolated from DCLK1-overexpressing and control hepatoma cells.
One hundred five clinical cases representing various stages of liver
diseases in patients with chronic hepatitis B or C were analyzed for an
array of markers including DCLK1 by immunohistochemical staining and
Western blot. Huh7 hepatoma cells were transplanted into the flanks of
athymic nude mice to generate HCC-like tumor xenografts. The tumors were
analyzed for proteins, mRNAs and miRNAs or treated with siRNA against
DCLK1 and scrambled siRNA to monitor tumor growth arrest.Results: We
found that the expression of 19 genes (14 upregulated, 5 downregulated)
was specifically affected by DCLK1 overexpression in hepatoma cell lines.
Among these, the level of kinase-suppressor of Ras 1 (KSR1) scaffold
protein of Ras-MAPK pathway was increased significantly when recombinant
DCLK1 was co-expressed with HCV replicon. Examination of liver tissues
derived from patients with chronic hepatitis B/C and HCC suggests that a
pro-inflammatory S100A9 protein tends to correlate with DCLK1
overexpression in cirrhosis with or without HCC. Both DCLK1 and S100A9
proteins were mainly localized in the regenerative nodules, fibrotic
septa, mesenchymal cells, endothelium and areas with lymphocytes
aggregates. Analysis of tumor xenografts developed by hepatoma cells
suggest that overexpression of DCLK1 is accompanied by high-level
expression of S100A9 and c-Myc as well as activation of NFB. Conversely,
siRNA-led inhibition of DCLK1 causes decrease in tumor volume
considerably in a xenograft model.Conclusions: DCLK1 overexpression
appears to be intimately related to the activation of pro-inflammatory
and MAPK signaling pathways during the development of virus-induced
pre-neoplastic conditions and initiation of tumors in liver. Thus,
targeting DCLK1 at early stage of liver diseases may prevent
virus-induced cirrhosis and HCC.

