Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of introducing a C118S mutation into the endogenous
Kras gene on early tumorigenesis


The Ras family of small GTPase, comprised of HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS, have
been found mutated to remain in an active oncogenic state in many
different human cancers, which is well established to promote
tumorigenesis. All three RAS isoforms contain a conserved C118, of which
the thiol group can be post-translationally modified by processes such as
S-nitrosylation, which have been reported to promote RAS activation. To
investigate the effect of blocking such modifications on RAS function in
vivo, a C118S mutation, which lacks the reactive thiol group, was knocked
into the endogenous Kras gene in mice. We now report that KrasC118S/C118S
mice were born at the expected ratio with no overt phenotypes. To explore
the effect of this mutation on early tumorigenesis, Kras+/+, KrasC118S/+,
and KrasC118S/C118S mice were treated with the carcinogen urethane to
induce oncogenic mutations in Kras and lung lesions. Interestingly, both
KrasC118S/+ and KrasC118S/C118S mice developed fewer and smaller lung
tumors than control Kras+/+ mice, suggesting that KrasC118S impairs lung
tumorigenesis. Such a reduction in tumorigenesis could be the consequence
of the C118S mutation on either the unaffected Kras allele or the Kras
allele with the oncogenic mutation. To evaluate the first possibility, we
tested and found that mice harboring a Cre-activated LSL-KrasG12D allele
formed a similar number and size of lung tumors after activation of this
allele when the remaining Kras allele was wild-type or C118S mutant.
These data indicate that the reduction in tumor lesions observed in
KrasC118S/+ and KrasC118S/C118S mice treated with urethane was unlikely
to be the consequence of the C118S mutation on the non-oncogenic Kras
allele. To evaluate the second possibility, we tested and found that
oncogenic mutations occurred preferentially in the native compared to the
C118S mutant Kras allele in KrasC118S/+ mice treated with urethane,
suggesting a selection against oncogenic mutations on the KrasC118S
allele. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
post-translational modifications such as S-nitrosylation on C118 enhance
the oncogenic activity of Kras in vivo, and demonstrate for the first
time that blocking the ability of a protein to be modified by processes
like S-nitrosylation has a biological consequence in vivo.

