Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative feedback loop between serum response factor and androgen
receptor in castrate-resistant prostate cancer


Despite initial response to androgen ablation, patients with advanced
disease relapse to develop castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
which is difficult to treat. We previously identified Serum Response
Factor (SRF) as an important transcription factor in an in vitro model of
CRPC. Since CRPC is associated with androgen receptor (AR)
hypersensitivity and previous studies linked SRF with AR, we investigated
the relationship between SRF and AR.DHT stimulation increased SRF
transcriptional activity in both parental LNCaP cells and their
castration-resistant Abl subline. To investigate AR involvement in this
process, AR expression was down-regulated using siRNA, resulting in the
abrogation of SRF induction post-DHT. Moreover, DHT stimulation failed to
induce SRF transcriptional activity in the AR-negative PC346 DCC cells.
However, when AR was over-expressed, SRF induction post-DHT was restored.
To explore whether this was reciprocal, SRF was down-regulated by siRNA
and AR transcriptional activity and protein expression were assessed.
These experiments showed AR increased activity and expression following
SRF knock-down, suggesting a negative feedback loop, which was confirmed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in CRPC bone metastases (n=42), showing a
negative association between SRF and AR positivity. This negative
feedback was also supported by a computational model based on our
experimental data.We next assessed cell proliferation following SRF
inhibition and demonstrated that SRF inhibition by siRNA or CCG-1423 was
as effective as AR inhibition in decreasing cell proliferation. Moreover
concomitant inhibition of AR and SRF showed a synergistic effect.To
confirm SRF relevance in clinical samples, we performed IHC staining for
SRF on 94 primary tumours and 21 castration-resistant patients who
received a transurethral resection of the prostate. This analysis showed
that SRF nuclear staining was associated with castration-resistance with
95% of castration-resistant patients showing positive SRF staining versus
only 50% of primary tumours. In addition SRF expression in bone
metastases in a cohort of 38 patients who died of CRPC, was an
independent predictor of survival from (a) prostate cancer diagnosis and
(b) diagnosis with CRPC.Overall our data highlight the importance of SRF
in CRPC and support SRF as a promising therapeutic target alone or in
combination with current treatments.

