Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel trisubstituted triazoles modeled from naltrindole inhibit
the proliferation of human multiple myeloma cells


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an invasive plasma cell neoplasm of malignant
cells that proliferate in the bone marrow. This incurable cancer is
responsible for 10% of all hematological malignancies. The American
Cancer Society estimated that in 2011, 11,400 men and 9,120 women were
diagnosed with MM in the United States, and 5,770 men and 4,840 women
died of the disease. MM is characterized by monoclonal gammopathy,
destructive bone disease, renal failure, hypercalcemia, and hematological
dysfunction. The molecular pathogenesis of MM is complex. Gene expression
profiling and deep genome sequencing has revealed that in many cases,
chromosome translocations result in overexpression of growth regulatory
genes via their juxtaposition to the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus,
activation of the NF-kB pathway, activation of MYC, FGFR3, KRAS, NRAS,
and loss of function mutations in the histone H3K27 demethylase gene UTX.
Despite the development of new treatment agents in the last decade,
including lenalidomide (an immunomodulatory drug) and bortezomib (a
proteasome inhibitor), the five-year relative survival rate for MM is
approximately 40%. Obviously, there is a great need for additional
treatment options. Naltrindole (Nti) is a synthetic alkaloid with the
pharmacological profile of a selective delta opioid receptor antagonist.
Nti has also been reported to be a potent immunosuppressant. Nti
suppresses the allogeneic mixed lymphocyte reaction in vitro and inhibits
renal graft rejection in vivo. Subsequently, it was reported that Nti
retains its immunosuppressive activity in triple mu/delta/kappa opioid
receptor knockout mice, revealing a non-opioid receptor target for the
immunosuppressant activity of Nti (Gaveriaux-Ruff et al., 2001). We
reported previously (Mundra et al., J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 342:
273-287, 2012), that Nti inhibited human MM cell proliferation in vitro
and in a murine xenograft model in vivo, by interaction with a non-opioid
receptor target. In the present study, we describe a novel series of
triazole-based ligands derived from Nti by rational design (see Peng et
al., Bioorgan. & Med. Chem. 17: 6442-6450, 2009) that competed for
specific 3H-Nti binding to human U266 MM cells and inhibited MM cell
proliferation in vitro. To date, 17 trisubstituted triazoles have been
evaluated for their ability to inhibit MM cell proliferation. Following
incubation with U266 MM cells for 72 h, the majority of MM triazoles
exhibited EC50's in the 10-60 micromolar range. However, 3 of the
triazoles displayed EC50's of 300-400 nM. It is hoped that further
modification of these lead compounds will yield drugs with even greater
efficacy. This study provides a rationale basis for further evaluation of
this series of triazoles as anti-MM therapeutic agents.

