Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (ARHGEF) 10 is a putative
tumor suppressor in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) accounts for over 90%
of pancreatic malignancies, and is the fourth leading cause of cancer
related deaths. Disease prognosis is quite poor, with less than 20% of
patients eligible for curative surgical resection at time of diagnosis
and overall survival rates of 2%. PDAC arises from the malignant
transformation of ductal epithelial cells through progressive
accumulation of loss of function mutations and deletions of tumor
suppressor genes. Chromosome 8p has been shown to be a recurrent site of
deletions in PDAC. Among the deleted genes is the Rho guanine nucleotide
exchange factor 10 (ARHGEF10), a regulator of Rho signaling that is
involved in mitotic spindle formation. Here, we evaluate ARHGEF10 for its
potential role as a tumor suppressor in PDAC.Methods: ARHGEF10 expression
was assessed in 19 PDAC cell lines and in 53 patient tumor xenograft
samples at both mRNA and protein levels. Publically available datasets
were also used to determine correlation between ARHGEF10 mRNA expression
and DNA copy number. After identifying PDAC cell lines with low ARHGEF10
expression, ARGHEF10 was stably overexpressed in these cell lines by
lentiviral transduction. The effects of ARHGEF10 expression were then
evaluated by in vivo tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice, and by in
vitro cell proliferation and cell motility wound healing assays.Results:
ARHGEF10 showed reduced expression in up to 70% of cell lines and patient
tumor xenografts. Reduced ARHGEF10 expression correlated significantly
with loss of copy number in PDAC cell lines. Stable overexpression of
ARHGEF10 in PDAC cell lines significantly reduced tumor growth in
immunodeficient mice. In addition, ARHGEF10 expression resulted in
decreased cell motility in wound healing assays, but had minimal effect
on cell proliferation. Experiments for in vitro assessment of invasion
and changes in Rho activity are ongoing, and will be
presentedConclusions: This study suggests that ARHGEF10 may function as a
tumor suppressor gene in PDAC.

