Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDO1 is an integrative determinant of tumor-promoting, pathogenic
inflammation


The tryptophan-catabolizing enzyme IDO1 (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1)
has been implicated as a mediator of immune tolerance in the
reproductively essential process of shielding the foreign fetus from
maternal immunity. By extrapolation, we and others hypothesized that
tumors might elevate IDO1 under selective pressure by the immune system.
Our finding that loss of the Bin1 tumor suppressor gene potentiates the
superinduction of IDO1 provided the first discreet example of a molecular
pathway through which this immune escape process can occur. However, the
involvement of IDO1 in tumorigenesis has turned out to be far more
complex. Tumors that inherently lack IDO1 expression have been
demonstrated to induce IDO1 expression in antigen presenting cells of the
host, providing an alternative mechanism for immune escape. We have also
found from studies in the classical DMBA/TPA skin carcinogenesis model
that IDO1 can be induced by the inflammatory tumor-promoting process
itself independent of the presence of an initiated tumor. Thus, IDO1 can
be a factor in tumor promotion throughout the entire immunoediting
process. With the rapid pace of development of IDO inhibitors, which are
currently being evaluated in clinical trials, we are interested in
determining whether mouse tumor models might provide additional insight
into the optimal therapeutic application of these agents based on the
underlying biology. In current studies, we have found that
IDO1-nullizygous mice are resistant to both KRAS-induced lung
adenocarcinomas and pulmonary breast carcinoma metastases. Micro-computed
tomographic imaging confirmed that lung tumor burden was correspondingly
lower in IDO1-nullizygous mice. Surprisingly, this analysis also revealed
a significantly reduced pulmonary blood vessel density in
IDO1-nullizygous mice. Elevation of the inflammatory cytokine IL6
(interleukin 6) was greatly attenuated in conjunction with the loss of
IDO1, consistent with in vitro evidence that IDO1 potentiates IL6
production. MDSCs (myeloid derived suppressor cells) from
IDO1-nullizygous animals exhibited reduced T cell suppressive activity
that could be rescued by IL6. IL6 could likewise reverse the pulmonary
metastasis resistance exhibited by IDO1-nullizygous mice. Together, our
findings provide support for the emerging concept of IDO1 as a
prototypical, integrative immune modifier that bridges inflammation,
vascularization and immune escape to foster the establishment of a
pathogenic, tumor-promoting environment.

