Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photolabeling of -tubulin isotypes by radiolabeled
2-(m-azidobenzoyl)taxol


There are seven -tubulin isotypes present in distinct quantities in cells
of different origin. Altered expression of -tubulin isotypes were found
in cells resistant to microtubule stabilizing agents (MSAs), such as
Taxol, epothilone B, ixabepilone and discodermolide, all of which bind to
-tubulin. For example, the level of III-tubulin was very low in the human
ovarian cancer cell line, Hey, but increased 8- to 15-fold in two drug
resistant daughter cell lines, EpoB8 and Ixab80, respectively. The
V-tubulin level was increased by 2-fold in EpoB8 cells. In contrast,
levels of I- and IV-tubulin were unchanged and decreased, respectively,
in EpoB8. Therefore, it is important to measure the binding affinity of
MSAs to different -tubulin isotypes and study their influence on the drug
resistant phenotype. To study the relative binding affinities of MSAs,
tubulins from HeLa cells, bovine brain, porcine brain and chicken
erythrocytes were specifically photolabeled with the tritium labeled
2-(m-azidobenzoyl)taxol, in the presence and absence of Taxol, Taxotere,
epothilone B, ixabepilone and discodermolide. -tubulin isotype content
from these sources was different, particularly for chicken erythrocytes
that contain only one -tubulin isotype, VI. The inhibitory effects
elicited by these MSAs on photolabeling were distinct for -tubulins from
different sources. Taxol had a minimal inhibitory effect on HeLa, bovine
and porcine brain -tubulin, but a strong inhibitory effect on chicken
erythrocyte -tubulin. Discodermolide exhibited opposite effects on
photolabeling, compared to those of Taxol. However, Taxotere appeared to
have a stronger inhibitory effect than Taxol on photolabeling of
-tubulins from all sources tested. Ixabepilone had the strongest
inhibitory effect on HeLa -tubulin. The inhibition pattern for -tubulin
from porcine brain correlated very well with that from bovine brain. To
determine drug binding affinities for the different -tubulin isotypes,
tubulins from different sources were photolabeled and the isotypes
resolved by high resolution isoelectrofocusing (IEF). Approximately 20
bands were seen with bovine and porcine brain tubulin, but only 3-5 bands
were resolved with chicken erythrocyte tubulin. Many bands represent
posttranslationally modified tubulins. IEF patterns for bovine and
porcine brain tubulin were very similar. All bands were analyzed by mass
spectrometry following CNBr digestion, and the identity and relative
quantity of each -tubulin isotype determined. After measuring the
radioactivity associated with each band, it was found that the binding
affinity of 2-(m-azidobenzoyl)taxol to III-tubulin was the lowest,
compared to other -tubulin isotypes.

