Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of breast cancer stem cells using PG-101
improves breast cancer survival


Since the original description of CSCs in solid tumors in 2003, emerging
evidence suggests the presence of multiple breast CSC states
(CD44+CD24-EpCAM+, ALDH+) that might be responsible for distinct
processes in breast cancer progression such as metastasis, invasion, and
proliferation. It has been hypothesized that CSCs contribute to the
cellular heterogeneity within cancer, the metastatic spread, and eventual
recurrence. As chemotherapy and radiation are relatively ineffective at
targeting CSCs, therapeutic agents that target the relatively rare CSC
population are highly needed.To this end, we define another marker
epithelial membrane protein-2 (EMP2) as a novel target for this
population of cells. EMP2 is an oncogenic protein whose expression has
been shown to correlate with tumor progression and survival in a number
of human cancers including breast, ovarian, and endometrial tumors.
Clinical data also revealed higher levels of EMP2 in metastatic lesions
compared to primary tumors and high expression in triple negative breast
cancer. In this study, we show new evidence that EMP2 is highly expressed
in CSCs and regulates their proposed functions, namely mammosphere
formation and invasion. Moreover, in vivo modulation of EMP2 expression
in both triple negative and HER2 positive tumors show that EMP2 promotes
ALDH1 expression as well as increases tumor load.We have recently
developed a novel IgG1 monoclonal antibody to EMP2 termed PG-101, and we
have shown that this therapy reduces primary. We now have evidence that
PG-101 treatment in the primary tumor is sufficient to reduce secondary
tumor formation in triple negative breast cancer cells on the order of
1:20,000 compared to the control treated mice. To extend on the benefits
of PG-101, we have combined it with docetaxel in an effort to mimic the
clinical setting given that the vast majority of patients treated in the
neoadjuvant setting have a taxane as part of the regimen. Data using
triple negative xenografts show that PG-101 in combination with docetaxel
can cure up to 80% of animals treated. This effect is lasting as these
mice have shown no rebound in tumor load more than 2 months following the
last treatment. Collectively, these results show that PG-101 therapy has
the potential to revolutionize the outcomes for women with breast cancer.

