Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1112054, a highly selective, potent and orally available
inhibitor of PTEFb/CDK9, shows convincing anti-tumor activity


The family of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) proteins consists of multiple
cell cycle regulating CDK members as well as members involved in the
regulation of gene transcription like CDK9/PTEFb (positive transcription
elongation factor b). Inhibition of PTEFb and its direct downstream
target RNA polymerase II is thought to cause rapid depletion of
short-lived mRNA transcripts of important survival proteins like c-myc
and Mcl-1 and thereby to induce growth delay and apoptosis in addicted
tumor cells.In contrast to pan-CDK inhibitiors which are currently
evaluated in Phase I and II clinical trials, PTEFb selective inhibitors
have not been explored for clinical utility.BAY 1112054 is a potent and
highly selective PTEFb-kinase inhibitor with low nanomolar activity
against PTEFb/CDK9 and an at least 50-fold selectivity against other CDKs
in enzymatic assays. Furthermore, BAY 1112054 shows a favourable
selectivity against non-CDK kinases in vitro. The compound exhibits broad
anti-proliferative activity against a panel of tumor cell lines with
sub-micromolar IC-50 values.In line with the proposed mode of action, a
concentration-dependent inhibition of the phosphorylation of the RNA
polymerase II was observed in A549 tumor cells. This inhibition was
accompanied by a reduction of intracellular Mcl-1 protein levels.
Furthermore, BAY 1112054 increased DNA fragmentation in synchronized HeLa
cells upon compound treatment for 24 hours.BAY 1112054 showed convincing
in vivo efficacy at tolerated doses in two xenograft models in mice. Once
daily oral treatment led to complete tumor stasis in established MOLM-13
AML xenografts. Pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that unbound plasma
levels were 8 to 12 hours above the cellular IC50 in this model. In vivo
efficacy and tolerability of the once daily po schedule of BAY 1112054
was confirmed in NCI-H82 SCLC xenografts. Xenografted tumors of this
model showed lower levels of RNA polymerase II phosphorylation and Mcl-1
upon treatment with BAY 1112054.In conclusion, our data provides in vitro
and in vivo proof of concept for BAY 1112054, a potent and highly
selective inhibitor of PTEFb/CDK9 with first-in-class potential, and
warrant further clinical evaluation of PTEFb selective inhibitors for the
treatment of cancers addicted to the transcription of short-lived
anti-apoptotic survival proteins.

