Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated SphK1 and export of S1P via ABCC1 shorten disease free
survival in breast cancer


ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are known to be multidrug
resistance proteins that efflux various compounds out of cells including
chemotherapeutic agents. A number of clinical trials have been conducted
targeting ABCB1: however, none showed beneficial effects. The pleiotropic
bioactive lipid mediator sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which is
generated by sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) inside breast cancer cells and
exerts its functions by binding to its specific cell surface G-protein
coupled receptors (S1PR1-5) after being exported, is now known as a key
regulatory molecule in breast cancer progression. We have previously
demonstrated that ABCC1 and ABCG2, but not ABCB1 export S1P out of MCF7
human breast cancer cells. We hypothesized that ABCC1 expression in the
presence of S1P produced by activated SphK1 in human breast cancer is
associated with poor prognosis.We demonstrate the role of ABCC1 and
SphK1/ S1P axis in breast cancer progression utilizing ABC transporter
transduced breast cancer cell lines for in vitro and in vivo study. For
clinical study, we analyze the expression of ABC transporters and S1P
signaling factors utilizing a tissue microarray constructed from 276
breast cancer samples.Overexpression of ABCC1 in breast cancer cell lines
export more S1P. ABCC1 overexpression but not ABCB1 enhance proliferation
and cell migration, and promote angiogenesis (AG) and lymph angiogenesis
(LAG). MK571 which is inhibitor of ABCC1 suppress them. Overexpression of
ABCC1 also aggravate tumor grow and contribute poor survival in syngeneic
and xenograft mice model. In the clinical study, ABCC1 expression was
associated with significantly shorter disease free survival (DFS) while
ABCB1 was not. pSphK1 high expression group had significantly shorter
DFS. Most of the patients expressed S1PR1; however, there were no
significant differences in prognosis. Patients with tumors expressing
both pSphK1 and ABCC1 had significantly shorter DFS, while patients
expressing both ABCB1 and pSphK1 did not.These translational findings
suggest that inside-out signaling of S1P via ABCC1 may play a significant
role in the course of human breast cancer progression.This work was
supported by grants from the National Institute of Health (R01CA160688 to
K.T and R01CA61774 to S.S). M.N. is a Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science Postdoctoral Fellow.

