Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid biomarker discovery using large-scale, patient-derived
cancer genomic cohorts


Target discovery and validation in oncology has largely relied on
molecular and functional studies performed in cell lines. Recent advances
in genomics have now created large databases based on well-characterized
tumor tissue, which has enabled direct investigation of patient tumors
for novel targets and predictive markers. Following these discoveries, it
is routine to perform functional studies in cell line-based systems;
however, it is often challenging to find a relevant cell line model and
if found, there are often numerous factors which confound biology when
using historical cell lines for functional studies. The result can be a
process, which takes considerable time and does not readily translate to
clinical relevance.We report here our efforts to identify novel targets
and markers through data mining large cohorts of cancer genomics data
consisting of samples deriving from both drug-nave and -treated
patient-derived cancer samples. To serve as the drug-nave reference, we
look to the thousands of patient-derived tumor specimens, covering 30+
tissue types, genomically characterized by The Cancer Genome Atlas. For
both drug-nave and drug-treated primary data, we leverage Molecular
Response's proprietary bank of viable cryopreserved tumor cells. The bank
contains more than 144,000 tumor specimens, covering 25 tissue types and
76 clinical diagnoses. Each of the specimens has been profiled against a
panel of drugs ex vivo, and levels of resistance recorded. Nearly 400
tumor specimens from Molecular Response's proprietary bank have been
genomically characterized.Station X has designed and developed a software
environment called GenePool for the management, analysis and
communication of genomic information for cohort-scale biomarker studies.
The genomics data along with sample-associated clinical metadata deriving
from Molecular Response's bank and The Cancer Genome Atlas were imported
into GenePool. We evaluated consistency between drug-nave samples
deriving from the Molecular Response bank and TCGA, and subsequently
mined for expression-based markers differentiating varying grades of drug
sensitivities from drug-nave specimens. We are currently evaluating these
markers for further functional study in patient-derived models and plan
to report to these findings.

