Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential biotherapeutic advantages of honey in targeting the
Warburg effect and survival of MRC-5 and A549 cell lines


Lung cancer is a one of the most prevalent and deadly cancers in United
States. Experimental evidence support that cancer cells do exhibit higher
glycolytic rates than normal cells (Warburg effect). To exploit this
unique cancer-dependent ATP generation phenomenon, we hypothesize that
exposure of cancer cells to organic inhibitors of glycolysis would
negatively impact their survival and alter their growth and viability
resulting from the vast decrease in their essential glycolytic ATP
production; no negative consequences will be seen on normal lung cells.
The human lung fibroblast cell line MRC-5 and the human alveolar
epithelial cell line A549 were used as models for normal lung and lung
cancer in vitro in this study. Using standard methods, both cell lines
were maintained and exposed to honey and D-glucose reagents at
concentration levels ranging from 31.3-2,000 g/ml in 96 well plates in
quadruplets and experiments repeated at least three times using MTT, and
cell counting (T4 Cellometer) assays as well as phase-contrast
photo-imaging. Our results indicate that exposure of both cell lines to
these natural nutraceutic organics resulted in concentration dependent
cell destruction/cell survival depending on the cell line exposed. Honey
and D-glucose showed statistically significant (pLung cancer is a one of
the most prevalent and deadly cancers in United States. Experimental
evidence support that cancer cells do exhibit higher glycolytic rates
than normal cells (Warburg effect). To exploit this unique
cancer-dependent ATP generation phenomenon, we hypothesize that exposure
of cancer cells to organic inhibitors of glycolysis would negatively
impact their survival and alter their growth and viability resulting from
the vast decrease in their essential glycolytic ATP production; no
negative consequences will be seen on normal lung cells. The human lung
fibroblast cell line MRC-5 and the human alveolar epithelial cell line
A549 were used as models for normal lung and lung cancer in vitro in this
study. Using standard methods, both cell lines were maintained and
exposed to honey and D-glucose reagents at concentration levels ranging
from 31.3-2,000 g/ml in 96 well plates in quadruplets and experiments
repeated at least three times using MTT, and cell counting (T4
Cellometer) assays as well as phase-contrast photo-imaging. Our results
indicate that exposure of both cell lines to these natural nutraceutic
organics resulted in concentration dependent cell destruction/cell
survival depending on the cell line exposed. Honey and D-glucose showed
statistically significant (p<0.05) differential negative effects on the
A549 line in comparison to its unexposed control as well as to their
effects on the MRC-5 cell line. Results show a promising role of honey
and D-glucose as metabolites of interest for selective management of
cancerous cells.

