Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing analysis across 23 histotypes of
patient-derived tumor xenografts reveals their similarities with TCGA
patient tumors


Cell lines insufficiently recapitulate the genomic structure and
diversity of its parent tumor. Consequently, results from in-vitro
experiments can often not be reproduced in the clinic. In contrast,
patient derived xenograft models (PDX) more closely mimic the molecular
characteristics of patient tumors. In the present study, we analyzed a
large part of our collection of patient derived xenografts by means of
whole-exome sequencing (WES) to investigate whether their genomic
alterations were consistent with those observed in patient tumors from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).Exonic regions from 268 Oncotest PDX were
targeted using Agilent SureSelect Human all exon kits 38MB or 51MB.
Enriched genomic DNA was sequenced with Illumina HiSeq2000 in 100bp
paired-end (PE) reads with expected mean coverage of 100X. The WES data
was analyzed for concordance with a) Sanger and Sequenom OncoCarta panels
b) patient tumor mutational signatures described by Alexandrov et al.
(Nature 2013) and c) gene mutation frequencies from publically available
data of TCGA tumors.In the present study, we show that most of the
mutations previously determined by Sequenom or Sanger sequencing were
also detected by WES analyses. The mutations in our models were
distributed as follows: 86% non-synonymous SNVs, 8% small indels (1
nucleotide), 3% splicing site and 3% start/stop gains or losses. The
number and the type of mutations varied significantly across tumor types.
Similar to the findings of Alexandrov et al., who analyzed TCGA tumors,
most of our PDX were characterized by [C>T] transitions that correlated
with the patient age. High mutation rates were observed in tissues
typically exposed to mutagens, such as melanomas (UV radiation) or lung
PDX (tobacco smoke), associated with specific mutation signatures such as
increased rates of [C>T] or [C>A] mutations, respectively.Furthermore, we
found an association between the presence of mutations in DNA repair
genes such as MLH1 and increased mutation levels in some tumor types
including colon, gastric and pancreatic cancer. Interestingly, in PDX
with high mutation levels, frameshift mutations were increased two-fold,
and represented 14% of all mutations. Analyzing our PDX gene mutation
profiles and those of the TCGA dataset revealed comparable gene
alteration patterns across the tumor types, with some exceptions possibly
attributed to the enrichment of aggressive tumors in our collection.This
study demonstrates that our PDX tumor collection shows typical signatures
of mutational processes and gene alteration patterns similar to patient
tumors of the TCGA database. These results confirm the relevance of using
PDX models to evaluate anticancer agents in preclinical settings.

