Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of two salinomycin binding targets in neuroblastoma


Salinomycin, a widely used anti-coccidial agent isolated from a
Streptomyces albus strain, was recently identified from a library of
16,000 natural and commercial chemical compounds based on its highly
selective inhibitory effect on breast cancer stem cells (CSCs), with more
than 100-fold greater potency than paclitaxel. Salinomycin also exhibits
cytotoxic effects on other types of cancer cells and CSCs and overcomes
drug resistance. However, the exact mechanism of salinomycin, especially
its direct binding target(s), and its effects on neuroblastoma (NB) are
yet not known.NB is one of the most common solid tumors in children and
infants, and a leading cause of mortality in children. Despite advances
in diagnosis and treatment, currently, 35% of patients with NB remain
incurable. In addition, the majority survivors of NB suffer from
long-term side effects of current therapies and are at risk for disease
relapse or getting a second, different cancer. More effective therapies
are pressingly needed. Since the existence of CSCs in human NB cell lines
and NB tumors from patients has been well documented, and has been
closely associated with chemoresistance or tumor relapse, therapeutic
targeting of NB CSCs may be a critical novel approach to conquer the
challenges in NB therapy.Aiming to improve NB therapy, we examined the
efficacy and mechanism of salinomycin in human NB cells. Our study showed
that salinomycin markedly inhibits NB cell proliferation and tumorsphere
formation. Treatment of salinomycin induced G2 cell cycle arrest with an
up-regulation of Cyclin A and a down-regulation of p21 protein levels. We
further identified TIF1 and NCL as novel direct binding proteins of
salinomycin by using comprehensive methods, including chemical proteomics
and functional genomics. Furthermore, by analyzing tumor samples from a
cohort of 88 NB patients, we found that the elevated level of these
proteins is associated with poor prognosis for NB patients. Thus, our
results indicate salinomycin is a potential new therapeutic agent and
TIF1 and NCL as new therapeutic targets/biomakers for NB therapy.

