Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MED12 and FH mutations in HLRCC associated uterine leiomyomas


Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) are benign tumors which originate from the
smooth muscle cells of the myometrium. Almost 70% of women are affected
by these tumors by the age of 50. Even though uterine leiomyomas are
benign, they can cause difficult symptoms and are the most common
indication for hysterectomy. Most uterine leiomyomas are sporadic and up
to 70% of these lesions harbor very specific mutations in MED12 (mediator
complex subunit 12). All MED12 mutations observed in uterine leiomyomas
have been missense or insertion deletion mutations retaining the open
reading frame. Uterine leiomyomas occur also in the context of Hereditary
Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer syndrome (HLRCC, OMIM # 150800). In
addition to uterine leiomyomas, the syndrome predisposes individuals to
cutaneous leiomyomas and renal cell cancer. HLRCC is an autosomal
dominant syndrome caused by heterozygous germline mutations in FH
(fumarate hydratase). The gene is classified as a tumor suppressor and
according to Knudson's two-hit hypothesis, syndrome related tumors
display biallelic inactivation of FH. Recently, we reported 3/34 uterine
leiomyomas from HLRCC patients to harbor somatic mutations in MED12. Loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) at the FH locus was assessed from the tumors, and
interestingly none of the MED12 mutation positive tumors showed biallelic
inactivation of FH through LOH. Exome sequencing of seemingly sporadic
uterine leiomyomas revealed also one patient to carry a truncating
germline mutation in FH. The FH and MED12 loci from the uterine
leiomyomas of this patient were further studied with direct sequencing
and LOH assessment. Tumors had different MED12 mutations and none of them
harbored a somatic mutation or displayed LOH as a second hit at FH locus.
The aim of this study is to clarify the role of MED12 in HLRCC syndrome
associated uterine leiomyomas and to analyze whether MED12 mutations and
biallelic inactivation of FH are truly mutually exclusive. A tissue
microarray including uterine leiomyomas from HLRCC patients will be
constructed and FH inactivation will be analyzed with immunohistochemical
stainings. Expression analyses of the tumors harboring somatic MED12
mutation and FH mutation in germline will show whether these tumors
cluster together with MED12 mutation positive tumors, tumors with
biallelic FH inactivation, or if they form a separate cluster. Results of
these analyses will reveal if there are two distinct molecular mechanisms
behind the development of uterine leiomyomas in HLRCC patients; one
dependent on the biallelic inactivation of FH and the other on the
altered function of MED12.

