Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive 3D triple coculture model for evaluating breast
cancer progression


Current models for evaluating breast cancer progression lack a
comprehensive, physiological approach to modeling the complex tumor
microenvironment. There has been much evidence supporting the use of
tumor spheroids to mimic tumor physiology; they exhibit cell-cell bond
formation, comparable morphology, elevated cell survival and
proliferation in the outer cell layers, reduced proliferation rates in
the intermediate layers, and a hypoxic core. While the tumor spheroid
provides a physiological tumor model, other cell types within the
surrounding tumor microenvironment are essential for tumor behavior and
subsequent cancer progression. The tissue vasculature provides a critical
component for tumor progression given the metabolic requirements of a
growing tumor, and by incorporating endothelial tubules with the tumor
spheroid, we are able to model interactions between vascular networks and
growing tumors. At the same time, there is also an important stromal
component involved in cancer progression where stromal cells have been
shown to promote cell proliferation, dissemination, and drug resistance
during cancer development. By using extracellular matrix proteins, we are
able to promote the proper physiology for each of these cell types in
triple cell coculture and compartmentalize their activities. To evaluate
interactions between each cell type, they are fluorescently labeled with
fluorophores with different excitation and emission spectra; MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell lines express a red fluorescence
protein, while human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are labeled with stable
lipophilic membrane dyes. Tumor spheroids are formed using low adhesion
microwells and deposited into fully formed HUVEC tubular networks, and
the hMSCs are then added within a hydrogel overlay matrix. Cellular
interactions and dissemination are monitored via fluorescence microscopy
and cell proliferation of the breast cancer cells is monitored using a
fluorescence plate reader. The breast cancer spheroids exhibit cell-cell
interactions with endothelial tubules and stromal cells, and there is an
increase in cell proliferation and invasion over standard spheroid
monoculture model.

