Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of drug response data from 57 new patient-derived colon
cancer xenografts and 3D cell cultures for systematic correlation with
tumor biology within the OncoTrack* project


*OncoTrack is a project funded by the Innovative Medicines Initiative
Joint Undertaking (IMI JU).New therapies for colon cancer barely improved
cure rates over the last decade and typically only a subset of patients
benefits from them. The reasons for these disappointing outcomes are
likely related to the inherent genetic and cellular heterogeneity and
plasticity of tumors. Therefore only comprehensive approaches that
correlate data from systematic molecular tumor tissue characterization
with preclinical and clinical responses could improve our understanding
of this disease and help to design diagnostic procedures allowing optimal
therapy for individual patients.OncoTrack is an international consortium
funded by the Innovative Medicines Initiative (www.OncoTrack.eu) that has
launched one of Europe's largest collaborative public-private research
projects to implement novel approaches of systems biology into colon
cancer therapy.Tumor tissue and circulating tumor cells from a cohort of
more than 120 patients with primary or metastatic colon cancer were
subjected to high-throughput protein, epigenome, and gene expression
analysis as well as next generation sequencing. Three- dimensional (3D)
in vitro cultures and in vivo patient-derived xenografts (PDX) in
immunodeficient mice were generated from each tissue sample and used to
determine response to more than 14 approved drugs, investigational drug
candidates, and tool compounds. These wet-lab data, combined with
clinical data were used for in silico modeling to identify new predictors
for tailored therapies.Here we are presenting data from the subproject
tumor models and therapy response. Tumor tissues from 118 colon cancer
patients (87 primary tumors and 31 metastases) were transplanted into
mice. To date, 44 permanent new PDX models have been generated from the
primary tumors and 13 from the metastases; (establishment of 25
additional models is ongoing). These models are being used to determine
sensitivity of the tumors to a broad range of drugs, targeting signaling
pathways frequently activated in cancer. In parallel, in vitro cultures
using a Matrigel-based, serum-free 3D system were established and adapted
for high-throughput 384-well assay format for testing against a similar
drug panel.Drug response data generated from more than 30 patient
specimens using both the specific 3D in vitro assays and the in vivo PDX
experiments are available and will be shown and compared.These
experimental results about drug sensitivity together with the molecular
signatures of the tumor tissues provide an exceptionally broad basis to
analyze the relationship between tumor biology and treatment response.
Such approaches may hold promise in the design of rational therapy for
colon cancer in the future.

