Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated target discovery in the EMPathy Breast Cancer Network -
Multidimensional analysis of epithelial mesenchymal plasticity (EMP) in
experimental systems


The ability of breast cancer cells to switch between epithelial and
mesenchymal phenotypes may be key to their survival in new environments,
resistance to therapies and ability to form metastases. Epithelial
mesenchymal plasticity (EMP) is instrumental in embryological development
and has been implicated in stemness, therapy resistance and metastasis of
breast cancer. EMP markers are enriched in basal-like, triple negative
breast cancer, which is a type of breast cancer associated with early
recurrence and poor prognosis, and established as a common phenotype in
women with BRCA1 mutations. The EMPathy Breast Cancer Network (BCN) is a
national collaborative effort including scientists, surgeons, medical
oncologists and a consumer advocate investigating the role of EMP in
breast cancer recurrence. The 7 thematic research projects of EMPathy
BCN, including the 9 program-funded Satellite projects, are aligned with
the Cooperative Research Centre for Cancer Therapeutics (CTx)
(www.cancercrc.com/index), so that any potential drug targets identified
may progress into the CTx drug development program.Multiple parallel
approaches in the Target Discovery theme were used to identify candidate
regulators and effectors of EMP. A total of 10 functional or gene
expression experiments provided 7,950 significant events in any one
system, which were cross referenced against 10 public breast cancer
datasets relevant to EMP and/or breast cancer stem cells. A series of
criteria were used to select a panel of 127 candidates that were combined
with 123 ad hoc candidates (mainly hits close to the cut-off and breast
cancer context genes) to give a total of 250 candidates to be analysed in
breast cancer tissues using Nanostring technology. The 2,301 significant
events in any functional screen were further cross-referenced to 10
public functional datasets relevant to EMP in any system and a series of
criteria were used to select a panel of 320 candidates that are to be
analysed in an siRNA functional screen' of multiple breast cancer cell
lines, to support the choice of Candidate Targets for drug development.
Ongoing studies will address the biology behind selected Candidates. This
work and the EMPathy BCN is supported by a NBCF National Collaborative
Research Program Grant.

