Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGN-CD70A, a novel and highly potent anti-CD70 ADC, induces
double-strand DNA breaks and is active in models of MDR+ renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)


CD70 is a member of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily that is
aberrantly expressed in several solid tumors and hematologic
malignancies, including clear cell and papillary renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Normal expression of CD70 is
limited to stromal cells of the thymic medulla, mature dendritic cells,
and activated B and T lymphocytes. Thus, CD70 is an attractive target for
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) based therapy. Using a panel of CD70
positive RCC and lymphoma cell lines and xenograft models, we have
previously demonstrated the antitumor activity of SGN-CD70A, a novel ADC
that combines a CD70-directed engineered cysteine monoclonal antibody
(h1F6ec) with a highly potent, synthetic DNA cross-linking molecule,
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimer. The strength of these results led us
to develop SGN-CD70A for clinical evaluation in RCC and lymphoma. In this
report, we examine the mechanism of action for SGN-CD70A and demonstrate
that the formation of double strand breaks (DSB) is an early event that
precedes onset of cytotoxicity in RCC and NHL cell lines.SGN-CD70A is
more potent than auristatin-based CD70 ADCs in vitro and in xenograft
models, including those that are MDR positive, suggesting that the PBD
chemotype may overcome common resistance mechanisms. To define the
mechanism(s) of targeted cytotoxicity, we examined DNA damage pathways in
Caki-1, 786-0 and UM-RC-3 (RCC, MDR+) and Raji and MHH-PREB-1 (NHL) cell
lines. We utilized an immunofluorescence assay to monitor DNA damage foci
using antibodies specific to the tumor suppressor p53-binding protein 1
(53BP1), Meiotic recombination 11 homolog (Mre11), and Rad50. Increased
amounts of foci were observed within 6 hours of treatment with 2nM PBD to
levels observed in cells exposed to 10Gy of ionizing radiation.
Similarly, foci were found in SGN-CD70A-treated cells. Further evidence
of damage was the co-localization of phosphorylated histone H2A.X
(Ser139) to the damage foci and an increase in levels of both
phosphorylated Chk1 (Ser317/345) and Chk2 (Thr68) within 4 hours of
treatment. The levels of both pChk1 and pChk2 continue to increase after
treatment, with peaks at 24-48 hours for pChk1 and 48-72 hours for pChk2.
Concomitant, we also observed an increase in both phosphorylated ATM and
phosphorylated BRCA1, confirming that SGN-CD70A in vitro activates double
strand break response pathways. Ongoing research is examining DNA damage
pathway activation in the corresponding xenograft models to confirm our
in vitro findings. Furthermore, we are developing assays to examine
pH2A.X, pChk1, and pChk2 as potential biomarkers for clinical studies
with SGN-CD70A.

