Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo animal models with patient-derived tumor xenografts for
better clinical prediction


More predictive in vivo animal tumor models are urgently needed to test
efficacy of newly developed cancer therapies and predict clinical
response. At SRI we have developed highly innovative and predictive
models initiated with single tumor cells isolated from cancer patient
specimens, including colon, lung, and breast tumor xenografts. These
tumors propagated in immunocompromised mice recapitulate primary tumor
heterogeneity as shown by histology. In our models, the tumor cells are
implanted subcutaneously to evaluate inhibition of primary tumor, or at
orthotopic sites to recapitulate advanced metastatic disease and analyze
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) or disseminated tumor cells (DTCs). Tumor
cells are also implanted in organs, e.g. kidney capsule, to mimic the
vascularized tumor microenvironment or in the human skin graft to analyze
the tumor interactions with human stroma and vasculature, and the effect
of treatment on angiogenesis. The cellular suspension method offers
several advantages over the widely employed tumor fragments, including
the ability to assess the phenotype of tumor cell populations,
tumorigenicity, and tumor initiating cells. Cells isolated from tumors of
mice in control and treatment groups are mouse-lineage depleted prior to
evaluation in a number of in vitro or ex vivo assays, including migration
and invasion through extracellular matrix proteins. To determine whether
treatment affects frequency of tumor initiating cells (TICs) and
metastasis initiating cells (MICs), we will perform in vivo limiting
dilution assay (LDA). Moreover, to evaluate the ability of our tumor
models to induce angiogenesis we utilized the chicken embryo
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay and scored the vascularity of mouse
lineage-depleted tumor cells using an established CAM scoring guide with
5 as the highest score and 0 as the lowest score. One patient derived ER-
invasive ductal carcinoma breast cancer (SRI-B1) with high growth rate
demonstrated strong pro-angiogenic activity, inducing blood vessels in
the CAM assay with a score of 4 compared to 5 for a VEGF positive control
and 0 of negative control. The high vascular density induced by SRI-B1
tumor cells correlated with in vivo metastatic dissemination to distant
organs upon orthotopic implantation in NOD/SCID mice, suggesting that
tumor models can be screened in the CAM assay to evaluate their
metastatic potential. We plan to further use these models to test the
anticancer activity of experimental therapies that target metastasis.

