Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development and evaluation of a series of novel in vivo
imaging models of AML for the assessment of drug efficacy


A major obstacle in anti-cancer drug research is the development and
validation of suitable in vivo models to examine compound efficacy.
Non-solid tumors present a particular set of challenges for preclinical
drug testing as these are much more difficult to measure and often
require larger group sizes and satellite groups for study end points. In
conventional animal models of haematological diseases such as leukemia,
cells are implanted using intravenous injection. This can lead to
inconsistent engraftment as cells are not introduced directly into the
most receptive environment for growth. Disease burden is measured using
either terminal end points, or by fluorescence-activated cell sorting on
bone marrow or peripheral blood samples. Neither of these strategies make
it practical to identify animals in the early stages of leukemic disease
development, limiting the ability to examine therapy in these models. The
use of optical imaging presents us with the opportunity to follow disease
progression at orthotopic sites, and in the case of non-solid tumors, to
monitor systemic disease burden in the same animal over time. Here,
building on our previous imaging experience with the SEM model of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and the Kasumi-1 model of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), we further describe the development of our optical
imaging intrafemoral (i.f.) transplantation models, which implant cells
directly into the biological niche of interest, correlating with the
environment in which disease develops in patients. Luciferase labelled
SKNO-1 and MV4-11 pHR-SLIEW AML cells were injected into the bone marrow
cavity of the femur of severely immunocompromised NOG
(NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull) mice lacking B cells, T cells and Natural Killer
(NK) cells via the knee joint. These animals were monitored following
initial transplantation, and disease burden quantified longitudinally
over several weeks using bioluminescent detection. Once engraftment was
shown, animals were given treatment with either vehicle or cytarabine and
disease burden measured in each individual animal throughout the duration
of the study. The ability to quickly identify engrafted animals, and the
predictable development of disease demonstrated allows for early
therapeutic intervention, and extension of the treatment window. Efficacy
of treatment can be easily followed by optical imaging, and as such,
these models provide an attractive, clinically relevant environment for
the preclinical assessment of novel therapeutics and combination
treatment regimens.

