Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoprotective versus nonprotective autophagy induced by radiation
in head and neck cancer cells


The primary treatment options for head and neck cancer are radiation
therapy or surgery, or both combined; chemotherapy is often used as an
additional, or adjuvant, treatment. Patients treated with radiotherapy
are exposed to a high dose of radiation for a long period of time and
there is a 17-33% chance of recurrence. High doses of radiation, a long
time course of treatment, side effects and the possibility of recurrence
provide the rationale for developing approaches for radiation
sensitization, which could be helpful to patients in decreasing the dose,
duration of radiation, side effects,or the chance of recurrence.Radiation
induces autophagy,which is a catabolic process involving the degradation
of the cell's own components to generate energy under conditions of
stress. Autophagy can be cytoprotective,helping the cell to survive
during stress such as nutrient deprivation or it can be cytotoxic,
leading the cell toward death.We investigated whether blocking autophagy
by the use the antimalarial drug,chloroquine, could sensitize head and
neck cancer cells to radiation.Studies were performed using the HN30
human head and neck cancer line (p53 wild type) derived from the pharynx
as well as HN6 human cells (p53 mutant) derived from the base of the
tongue.Cell viability was determined by cell counting Hemocytometer. and
clonogenic survival assays, autophagy was monitored based on acridine
orange staining accompanied by flowcytometry ,while western blotting,
DAPI and TUNEL staining and PI/annexin/FACS were utilized for
determination and quantification of apoptosis. Senescence was monitored
by beta-galactosidase staining/ FACSanalysis.Radiation alone produced a
transient growth arrest followed by proliferative recovery in both the
HN30 and HN6 cancer cells. Radiation also promoted autophagy in both cell
lines, although the extent of autophagy was only modestly increased over
basal control levels in the HN30 cells. The combination of chloroquine
with radiation inhibited autophagy and promoted apoptotic cell death and
suppression of proliferative recovery for the HN30 cells, but had little
effect on sensitivity to radiation and proliferative recovery in the HN6
cells.The data suggest that autophagy induced by radiation serves a
protective function in the HN30 cells and that a blockade to autophagy by
chloroquine drives the cell toward apoptosis and death. In contrast,
autophagy in HN6 cells appears to be non-protective as a pharmacological
blockade did not sensitize the HN6 cells to radiation. These studies
support the premise that autophagy induction by radiation need not
necessarily have a cytoprotective function and further indicates that
caution should be exercised in efforts to sensitize head and neck cancer
to radiation through the clinical suppression of autophagy.

