Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3/STAT5 blockade by WP1066 inhibits ovarian cancer cell
proliferation and induces cell death


BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecologic malignancy with
22,240 new cases and 14,030 deaths estimated in 2013. In order to improve
the clinical management of women with ovarian cancer, it is critical to
dissect the molecular drivers of ovarian neoplastic transformation and
find efficient means of pharmacologic control.Constitutive activation of
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and 5 (STAT3 and
STAT5) pathways is found in 70% of ovarian cancer patients.
Overexpression of STATs is associated with a malignant phenotype and
confers resistance to chemotherapy.Our drug discovery and development
program has led to the development of a series of unique, small molecule
inhibitors of STATs including a promising lead compound WP1066. The aim
of this work was to investigate the antiproliferative and proapoptotic
effects of WP1066 in selected ovarian cancer cells with constitutively
activated or inducible STAT3 and STAT5.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects
of WP1066 on the levels of p-STAT3 and p-STAT5 were assessed with Western
blotting and the MSD assay. Nuclear translocation of p-STAT3 and p-STAT5
was confirmed with confocal microscopy.Cell viability was determined with
the MTS assay and dye exclusion test. Apoptosis induction was assessed on
the basis of morphological markers using live-cell imaging (cell
rounding, membrane blebbing and chromatin condensation) and biochemical
markers using the MSD assay and confocal microscopy (cleaved PARP,
cleaved caspase 3). SK-OV-3, SK-OV-3 CR (carboplatin resistant) and
OVCAR-5 cells were used for in vitro studies.RESULTS: SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-5
cells grown in vitro show constitutive activation of STAT3, but not
STAT5. Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with IL-6 or IFN- and - results
in high levels of p-STAT3 with subsequent p-STAT3 translocation to the
nucleus. Treatment with EGF results in low level STAT3 activation. Cells
treated with IFN- and or EGF exhibit activation of STAT5, while IL-6
treatment does not affect p-STAT5 level. Importantly, cells extracted
from disseminated intraperitoneal ovarian tumors express high levels of
phosphorylated STAT3 and clearly show nuclear p-STAT3 localization.
WP1066 inhibits both p-STAT3 and p-STAT5 but not STAT3 and STAT5 in the
panel of tested ovarian cancer cells. Treatment with WP1066 inhibits cell
growth, is cytotoxic to SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-5 cells as well as the
carboplatin resistant subline, SK-OV-3 CR, all at low micromolar
concentrations. We found that WP1066 induces robust apoptosis, starting
4h after its addition to the culture medium.CONCLUSION: Coordinated
inhibition of p-STAT3/p-STAT5 by WP1066 results in profound apoptosis in
ovarian cancer cells. Inhibition of STATs in ovarian cancer should be
further explored as a potential therapeutic strategy for women with
ovarian cancer.

