Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ormeloxifene inhibits cervical cancer cell growth through
intrinsic apoptotic pathway


Background: Cervical cancer (CxCa) remains the fourth leading cause of
cancer related death among women worldwide. Cervical cancer is mainly (
99.7%) derived from high risk Human papillomavirus (HR HPV). HPV E6/E7
oncoproteins interfere with p53 and pRb (retinoblastoma) cell cycle
regulatory proteins and hinder their efficacy of controlling cell growth.
Advanced stage cervical cancer is difficult to treat and patients
diagnosed with metastatic disease have a poor survival rate of only 16%.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop newer treatment modalities.
Ormeloxifene is a non-hormonal, anti-estrogen, oral contraceptive for
human use that effectively suppresses the proliferation of decidual cells
in the endometrium to inhibit egg implantation. Growing evidences also
suggest that ormeloxifene has anti-cancerous properties in breast, head
and neck, and chronic myeloid leukemia cancers. Hence, considering its
strong anti-proliferative/cancerous effect, we hypothesized that
ormeloxifene may also inhibit the growth of cervical cancer cells and may
suppress the expression of E6 and E7 HPV oncoproteins.Methods: We
performed in vitro anti-cancer studies with ormeloxifene (dose range: 5 M
to 25 M) in the HPV positive cervical cancer cell lines (Caski and SiHa)
by utilizing MTS and colony formation assays. To further determine the
effects of ormeloxifene on the cellular and molecular level,
immunoblotting, flow cytometry and real time PCR analyses were performed
using the Caski cell line model.Results: Ormeloxifene effectively
inhibited cervical cancer cell growth as determined by proliferation and
colony formation assays in a dose dependent manner. Ormeloxifene
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and induced apoptosis as shown
by flow cytometry analysis of cells stained with TMRE
(tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester) and 7AAD/Annexin V, respectively.
Apoptosis was also confirmed by immunoblotting for cleaved PARP (Poly ADP
ribose polymerase), Caspase 3 and Caspase 9. Additionally, ormeloxifene
treatment arrested cell cycle in G1-S transition and decreased the
expression of p-Akt while total Akt remained the same. Specifically
relevant to cervical cancer, ormeloxifene decreased the expression of HPV
E6/E7 at mRNA and protein levels as determined by quantitative PCR
analysis and immunoblotting, respectively. Interestingly, ormeloxifene
restored the levels of p53, Rb and PTPN 13 (Protein tyrosine Phosphatase
non receptor type 13) tumor suppressor proteins as shown by
immunoblotting.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that ormeloxifene
inhibits cervical cancer cell growth and decreases mitochondrial membrane
potential which clearly demonstrates that apoptosis is induced via
intrinsic pathway. Importantly, ormeloxifene downregulates the expression
of HPV E6/E7 oncoproteins. Thus, ormeloxifene appears to be a novel
treatment modality for cervical cancer.

