Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic analysis of multifocal glioblastoma multiforme foci points
to their monoclonal evolution and highlights early and late events in
their development


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of brain tumor
in adults with an average survival time of less than a year. A hallmark
of GBM is its infiltrating growth hampering successful surgical treatment
and precluding curative therapy. Multifocal GBMs - multiple synchronous
lesions in the same patient - represent approximately 8-10% of all
gliomas and generally have a poor prognosis. There are two theories as to
the nature of these multifocal GBMs: they could either have originated
from one main GBM or they can be independent tumors. Genetic studies of
multifocal GBMs are very rare and such studies could elucidate the nature
of these tumors.We have analyzed eleven tumor foci of six patients with
multifocal GBMs using array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH),
spectral karyotyping (SKY), and Sanger sequencing of PTEN, TP53, and
IDH1/2. Array CGH analysis of ten of the tumors revealed multiple genetic
aberrations. The most frequent were gain of chromosome 7 (9/10),
amplification of EGFR (10/10), loss of chromosome 10 (10/10), and partial
loss of chromosome 9 (7/10). SKY analysis identified multiple
translocations including complex rearrangements. None of the tumors
carried a mutation in IDH1/2 and they were genetically similar to primary
GBMs although they exhibited unique characteristics; e.g. all carried an
EGFR amplification, indicating that it is important for the multifocal
phenotype. Tumor foci derived from the same patient always shared
identical aberrations, proving monoclonal origin of these tumors but also
exhibited additional aberrations, which were specific for each focus and
therefore must have occurred later in tumor development. Moreover, our
results show that events important for gliomagenesis could occur at
different time points in tumor evolution: for example, the region
involved in the EGFR amplification was different in both foci from three
patients and identical in two foci from one patient. The same can be said
of point mutations in TP53 and PTEN; TP53 mutations were identical in the
different foci from one patient and different in another patient while
PTEN mutations were different in the foci from two patients and similar
in those of one. Interestingly, in each patient one focus always
contained more aberrations than the other, highlighting the possibility
that one derived from the other; this would further support the
hypothesis that multifocal GBMs are of monoclonal origin and then develop
independently of each other by clonal evolution. Taken together,
multifocal GBM provide an excellent model for investigating tumor
progression and invasion and might help to distinguish between driver and
passenger alterations in GBM.Acknowledgements: This work was partially
supported by a grant (MeDDrive program) of the Medizinische Fakultt Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universitt Dresden.

