Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF inhibitors induce skin and extra-cutaneous tumors via
paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway: Molecular study of 66 tumors
and visualization of BRAF/CRAF protein dimers


INTRODUCTION :BRAF inhibitors (BRAFI) are affective anti-melanoma agents
in V600BRAF mutant melanoma but have one major adverse event, the
paradoxical activation of MAPK pathway in WT BRAF cells, which favors the
emergence of benign, borderline and malignant skin cancers: verrucous
papillomas, kratoacanthomas (KA), squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and even
new melanomas.MATERIALS AND METHODS :Between January 2010 and October
2013 we collected 63 skin tumors, 1 vulvar tumor, 1 gingival tumor, and 1
urothelial tumor in 50 patients treated with BRAFI vemurafenib or
dabrafenib. Tumors were characterized histologically, p16 and P-ERK
expression were studied by immunohistochemistry. Mutation hotspots for
HRAS, KRAS and NRAS were investigated by Sanger analysis; human papilloma
virus (HPV) DNA was also investigated and genotyped by PCR.RESULTS:The 63
skin tumors consisted of 35 verrucous papillomas, 9 KA, 13 SCC, and 6
melanomas. The other tumors were 1 vulvar and 1 gingival SCC, and 1
urothelial carcinoma. All tumors showed a strong nuclear pERK staining.
Using Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA), we visualized, for the first time
in human tumors in situ, the dimerization between BRAF and CRAF proteins
in BRAFI-induced secondary tumors. BRAF-CRAF dimers were significantly
less abundant in control normal skin samples and skin tumors that were
not induced by BRAFI. P16 staining, often associated with HPV infection
in cervical SCCs, was positive in 37% of papillomas, 78% of KA and 100%
of SCC, respectively. However, the prevalence of HPV was not correlated
with p16 staining: 9, 11 and 13 %, respectively (vs 25% of a series of 10
KA controls occurring in the absence of any BRAF inhibitor treatment ).
HRAS mutation was found in 3% of papillomas and 56% of KA and a KRAS
mutation was found in 17% of papillomas. We found NRAS mutations in the
secondary melanomas, an HRAS mutation in the vulvar SCC, and a KRAS
mutation in the urothelial carcinoma.DISCUSSIONBRAFI can induce both
cutaneous and extra-cutaneous secondary tumors that might have been
underestimated in previous studies. Paradoxical activation of the MAPK
pathway facilitated by a RAS mutation can be visualized using PLA
illustrating in situ the dimerization between BRAF and CRAF. Although
most keratinocytic tumors harbor clinical and histological
characteristics of viral warts), despite the intensity of the P16
staining, we found a relatively low prevalence of HPV.CONCLUSIONBRAFI are
oncogenic agents that can induce both skin and extra-cutaneous cancers.
Differential levels of RAF protein multimers in BRAFI-induced tumors and
in control similar spontaneous tumors as well as the relatively low
incidence of HPV despite indirect virus presence stigmata demonstrate
that oncogenesis induced by BRAFI involves mechanisms distinct from
previously known cancer initiation pathways.

