Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropilin2 is a novel target gene of Wnt signaling pathway
regulating angiogenesis, metastasis and growth of osteosarcoma


Objective: Multivascularity of osteosarcoma (OS) rendered the
anti-angiogenesis is a promising therapeutics. Neuropilin 2 (NRP2), a
coreceptor of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), has been
implicated in tumor angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis of many cancers.
Its act in osteosarcoma still remains poorly understood. In order to
explore the role of NRP2 in modulating tumor growth, angiogenesis,
invasion, and lung metastasis of osteosarcoma, we conduct the current
study.Methods: Cell culture, RNA interference, stable transfection, real
time PCR, western blot, motility and invasion assay, in vivo
tumorigenesis model, tube formation assay, ChIP.Results: By microtissue
array assay, the expression of NRP2 is implicated in metastasis and poor
prognosis of osteosarcoma patients. The in vitro data showed NRP2
knockdown has an inhibitory effect on OS tumor cell growth, both
anchoragedependent and anchorageindependent way. Xenograft model showed
silencing of NRP2 expression in OS cells has an extraordinary inhibitory
effect. Both migration and invasion were significantly impaired in two
NRP2 knockdown OS cell lines in vitro. Again, a lung metastasis mice
model was used to verify the antimetastasis effect after NRP2 silencing
and the results showed metastasis was inhibited. The blood vessels and
capillaries in the xenograft samples were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry staining for CD31. The capillaries in NRP2 knockdown
tumors were rarely seen compared with the intact capillaries in control
tumors. In order to explore the mechanism underlying the anti
angiogenesis effect, we conducted the coculture of tumor cells and HUVEC
cells in both contact and noncontact way. The ability of recruiting HUVEC
cells by OS cells were dramatically inhibited by NRP2 knockdown. Also
NRP2 silencing caused the tumor cells to behave less involved in tube
formation. ChIP assay revealed TCF4, wnt effector, bound all the five
binding sites in NRP2 promoter region.Conclusion: We demonstrated that
NRP2 plays an important role in modulating tumor growth, angiogenesis,
invasion, and lung metastasis of osteosarcoma.

