Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pulmonary toxicities of molecular targeted antineoplastic agents


BackgroundA better understanding of cancer cell biology has suggested
many new targets for cancer drug discovery and development. And these
drugs are widely used in treating cancer and usually have good toxicity
profiles. But some patients are exquisitely sensitive to these drugs and
can develop particular and severe toxicities. Among the toxicities,
pulmonary toxicities are infrequent with most commonly used targeted
therapies.The aim of this study was to review the pulmonary toxicities
caused by molecular targeted agents and analyze the various radiologic
findings and clinical outcomes in these patients group.MethodsWe
retrospectively reviewed the medical records and chest image findings of
549 patients who were treated by molecular targeted anti-neoplastic
agents at Soonchunhyang University Hospital between May 2003 and
September 2012. Patients who had chest image findings that suspected
infection, pulmonary hemorrhage caused by other cause and primary disease
progression were excluded.ResultsOf these 549 patients, 364 patients
performed chest CT or HRCT during targeted agent therapy. Thirty-four
patients (6.2%) with drug induced pulmonary toxicities confirmed by
radiologist and oncologist were identified. The most common targeted
agent that induced pulmonary toxicities was gefitinib (9/34 patients),
followed by rituximab, imatinib, erlotinib, cetuximab, trastuzumab,
bevacizumab, bortezomib, and dasatinib. Pneumonitis (44.1%) and pleural
effusion (32.4%) were common radiological findings. Dyspnea was the main
presenting initial symptom and proportion in symptomatic patients (18/34
patients, 52.9%) was mostly 83.3% (15/18 patients). Sixteen patients
stopped being treated with targeted agents, 11 patients were
simultaneously treated with glucocorticoids. Sixteen patients did not
receive any other treatment and were observed with regular follow ups. Of
34 patients, 20 patients (58.8%) resolved pulmonary toxicity from chest
CT imaging. There were four patients (11.7%) who died from drug related
pulmonary toxicity.ConclusionPulmonary toxicities caused by targeted
agents are rare but important to recognize. Dyspnea appears to be the
main presenting symptom. In conclusion, we should be aware of pulmonary
toxicities and symptoms presenting dyspnea during targeted agent therapy.
If we suspect drug induced pulmonary toxicities, we should perform
immediate imaging studies and keep a possibility of variable radiological
patterns in mind. The cessation of the implicated causative targeted
agents and treatment with systemic glucocorticoids resulted in an
improvement both in symptoms and image findings, but fatal pulmonary
toxicities occurred in some patients.

