Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 plays important role in
cisplatin resistance of cancer cells


Background: Cisplatin is widely used as a cancer therapeutic for many
types of cancers. It mediates the formation of DNA adducts which impair
DNA replication and transcription, and consequently induces cell death
when there is no prompt DNA repair. However, resistance to cisplatin
continues to be the major hurdle to its optimal effect in cancer therapy.
Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2), an essential regulator of
balanced deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs), is critical for DNA replication
and repair, and hence cell survival. It has been shown that
overexpression of RRM2 is associated with resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents including cisplatin. However, the exact mechanism needs to be
further deciphered.Methods: We generated cisplatin-resistant H1299-ptR
cells from the H1299 (non-small cell lung cancer) cell line for this
study, and also employed KB-8-5 and KB-CP 0.5 cells, previously derived
from the KB-3-1 (head and neck cancer) cell line. RRM2 expression level
was compared between resistant vs. parental cell lines. In addition, the
impact on cisplatin resistance was mechanistically pursued by using RRM2
silencing.Results: Based on EC50, we found that KB-8-5 and KB-CP 0.5 cell
lines were 4- and 36-fold more resistant to cisplatin compared to their
parental cell line KB-3-1, respectively. Similarly, H1299-ptR was 12-fold
more resistant than its parental H1299 cell line. Interestingly, in all
resistant cell lines, RRM2 expression level was found to be 2- to 4-fold
higher than in the parental counterparts. Silencing of RRM2 in resistant
cell lines induced cell apoptosis, along with enhanced DNA damage, which
manifested as an elevated level of histone -H2AX. In KB-CP 0.5 cells,
RRM2 knockdown resulted in increased level of p53 (60% apoptosis) and
reduced activation of ATR-Chk1, indicating that inhibition of ssDNA
damage repair system is attributable to cellular apoptosis. Strikingly,
the ATR-Chk1 signaling pathway was found to be hyperactive in cisplatin
resistant cells. Taken together, these findings suggest that RRM2 plays
an active role in the development of cisplatin resistance through its
action in the DNA repair system.Conclusions: Increased expression of RRM2
may induce drug-resistance potential in cancer cells, whereas RRM2
suppression reverses drug resistance and decreases proliferation. This
study suggests that targeting RRM2 can be an effective approach to
overcome drug resistance and potently induce apoptosis. (This work is
supported by grants from NIH U01CA151802, P50CA128613).

