Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of miR-31 and miR-205 of apoptosis in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality
among men in the United States. However, our understanding of the cause
of prostate cancer remains elusive. Recent studies have implicated that
epigenetics, heritable changes in gene expression caused by mechanisms
other than classical genetic alterations, is an important mechanism in
tumorigenesis. MicroRNAs function as epigenetic regulators to alter gene
expression, and very limited information is available regarding the roles
of microRNAs in prostate cancer. Evasion of apoptosis is the hallmark of
cancer, and it plays an important role in the growth and development of
prostate cancer. We have recently demonstrated that miR-31 and miR-205
are downregulated in advanced prostate cancer. In addition,
anti-apoptotic protein E2F6 was identified as the target of miR-31 and
contributed resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. While we found
that miR-205 is silenced by gene promoter methylation, the mechanism of
the downregulation of miR-31 in prostate cancer remains poorly defined.
In this study, we report that EZH2 (Enhancer of zeste 2), a histone
methyltransferase and component of the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), is responsible for miR-31 silencing in prostate cancer. EZH2
plays an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of the H3K27me3
repressive chromatin mark. Our results have shown that siRNA knockdown of
EZH2 and DZNep (3-deazaneplanocin) treatment (an EZH2 inhibitor) in
prostate cancer cells increased miR-31 expression. Furthermore, EZH2 is
responsible for histone methylation at the promoter of miR-31 gene. In
addition, siRNA knockdown of EZH2 and the treatment with DZNep sensitized
prostate cancer cells to apoptosis. In contrast, EZH2 overexpression
confers resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells. Thus, polycomb protein EZH2 suppresses the expression of miR-31
and consequently contributes to apoptosis resistance in prostate cancer.
The results will improve our understanding of the mechanism of drug
resistance in prostate cancer cells. Novel strategies targeting EZH2 and
miR-31 can be developed to increase drug-induced apoptosis and improve
cancer response to chemotherapy.

