Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the cellular mechanisms of action of maximiscin,
a novel natural product with selective cytotoxic activity against a
triple negative breast cancer molecular subtype


Natural products have historically been an excellent resource for new
pharmaceuticals, particularly anticancer agents. Fungi are a remarkable
source of novel secondary metabolites that have never been evaluated for
their therapeutic potential. However, a vast majority of fungal species
found in diverse environments are inaccessible to research scientists. We
recently isolated and identified the natural product maximiscin from a
Tolypocladium sp. isolate obtained through a crowdsourcing initiative.
This compound showed in vitro cytotoxic potency against multiple cancer
cell lines in the NCI-60 in vitro screening panel and in vivo antitumor
efficacy against a UACC-62 melanoma xenograft model. MDA-MB-468, a triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line of the basal-like 1 (BL1)
subtype, was found to be particularly sensitive to the cytotoxic effects
of maximiscin compared to several other TNBC cell lines. This finding
suggests maximiscin modulates a cellular signaling pathway that
specifically drives the BL1 subtype of TNBC. In this study we
investigated the cellular mechanisms of action of maximiscin using cell
biological and biochemical approaches. The effects of maximiscin on cell
cycle distribution were evaluated and maximiscin reduced the fraction of
cells in the S and G2/M phases of the cell cycle, and began to induce
apoptosis within 8 h. Intracellular signaling through multiple pathways
was evaluated by immunoblotting, providing an indication of potential
mechanisms of action. Maximiscin also circumvented
P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance. These studies suggest
maximiscin may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of BL1 TNBC,
especially in cases where P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance
has developed. Studies are ongoing to further characterize the cellular
and antitumor effects of maximiscin in BL1 models.

