Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leukemic exosomes stimulate cells from the microenvironment to
promote chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and endothelial cells (EC) are
known to provide anti-apoptotic stimuli to chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) cells via direct contact or secretion of soluble factors. We
recently reported the profiling of circulating miRNA and identified
specific miRNAs present at higher level in CLL plasma compared to healthy
donors (Moussay et al., PNAS, 2011). Originating from endosomes, exosomes
are small extracellular vesicles (50-150 nm) known to efficiently
transport and transfer mRNA, microRNA and proteins to target cells.
Therefore, exosomes constitute a new component of intercellular
communication and their eventual implication in CLL remains totally
unknown.We first observed that CLL B cells efficiently transfer vesicles
to human MSC in vitro through 400 nm culture inserts. Therefore we
isolated, purified and characterized exosomes derived from CLL cell
lines, primary cells culture supernatants. Profiling of proteins and
microRNAs contents revealed the presence of oncogenic molecules. We
further showed that purified CLL-exosomes rapidly entered and transferred
proteins to target cells (MSC and EC). Exosome miRNAs efficiently
targeted cellular mRNA as confirmed by luciferase reporter assay.
Exosomes could also be taken up by mouse bone marrow cells in vivo. We
next identified PI3K, AKT, and MAPK signaling as the key molecular
pathways triggered by CLL-exosomes. We detected a rapid phosphorylation
of kinases after 5 min of incubation with CLL-exosomes, the subsequent
phosphorylation of NF-kB pathway inhibitors, and p65 translocation to
nucleus.Interestingly, CLL-exosomes induced a dramatic actin remodeling
suggesting a switch to a cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) phenotype. We
then observed that CLL-exosomes modulated gene expression in target cells
among which cytokines (APRIL, BAFF, IL-6, and IL-8), chemokines (CCL2,
CCL5, and CXCL1), and factors involved in cell adhesion and migration
(ICAM-1 and MMP-1). These factors were also secreted in supernatants of
MSC and EC. Some of the released cytokines supported CLL survival after 6
days of CLL culture. Finally, exosomes were also shown to increase CLL
adhesion, MSC and EC proliferation, cell migration and to enhance EC
angiogenic capabilities.In conclusion, CLL-exosomes contain pro-oncogenic
molecules and strongly affect key functions of MSC and EC which are
critical components of the bone marrow microenvironment. Activation of
these cells by CLL-exosomes led to release of cytokines/chemokines and
oncogenic factors that could promote angiogenesis and also favor leukemic
cells survival and migration. Our findings may lead to applications in
both diagnosis and therapy development. Molecules identified at the
surface or inside exosomes may be further used as cancer biomarkers.

