Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary ADAM12 levels detect the presence of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic malignancies are the fourth leading cause of all
cancer-related deaths of both men and women in the United States. Each
year, approximately 32,000 new patients are diagnosed with this disease
and nearly the same number die from it. A majority of patients with
pancreatic malignancies, including both pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNET) present with advanced
disease due to a lack of specific symptoms and current diagnostic
limitations, making this disease extremely difficult to detect. The
combination of poor prognosis and late presentation of pancreatic cancer
patients highlights the urgent need for the development of effective,
early detection strategies for this disease. Our laboratory has
established a comprehensive biomarker discovery initiative whose
objective is to identify proteins present in urine of cancer patients, to
determine whether their presence might be relevant to disease status and
stage and to validate their diagnostic and prognostic efficacy in large
scale clinical trials. In the current study, our goal was to determine
whether ADAM12 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 12) could be detected
in the urine of patients with pancreatic malignancies and whether ADAM12
levels might serve as an independent predictor of disease status.
Retrospective analyses of urine samples (n=130) from PDAC and pNET
patients as well as age- and sex-matched controls were conducted. Urinary
ADAM12 levels were determined using a monospecific ELISA system. In
addition, ADAM12 protein expression in tumor and normal pancreatic
tissues was analyzed via immunohistochemistry (IHC). Multivariable
logistic regression analyses indicated that, when controlling for age and
sex, urinary ADAM12 could serve as significant independent predictor for
distinguishing PDAC (PPancreatic malignancies are the fourth leading
cause of all cancer-related deaths of both men and women in the United
States. Each year, approximately 32,000 new patients are diagnosed with
this disease and nearly the same number die from it. A majority of
patients with pancreatic malignancies, including both pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNET) present
with advanced disease due to a lack of specific symptoms and current
diagnostic limitations, making this disease extremely difficult to
detect. The combination of poor prognosis and late presentation of
pancreatic cancer patients highlights the urgent need for the development
of effective, early detection strategies for this disease. Our laboratory
has established a comprehensive biomarker discovery initiative whose
objective is to identify proteins present in urine of cancer patients, to
determine whether their presence might be relevant to disease status and
stage and to validate their diagnostic and prognostic efficacy in large
scale clinical trials. In the current study, our goal was to determine
whether ADAM12 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 12) could be detected
in the urine of patients with pancreatic malignancies and whether ADAM12
levels might serve as an independent predictor of disease status.
Retrospective analyses of urine samples (n=130) from PDAC and pNET
patients as well as age- and sex-matched controls were conducted. Urinary
ADAM12 levels were determined using a monospecific ELISA system. In
addition, ADAM12 protein expression in tumor and normal pancreatic
tissues was analyzed via immunohistochemistry (IHC). Multivariable
logistic regression analyses indicated that, when controlling for age and
sex, urinary ADAM12 could serve as significant independent predictor for
distinguishing PDAC (P<0.001) and pNET (PPancreatic malignancies are the
fourth leading cause of all cancer-related deaths of both men and women
in the United States. Each year, approximately 32,000 new patients are
diagnosed with this disease and nearly the same number die from it. A
majority of patients with pancreatic malignancies, including both
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors (pNET) present with advanced disease due to a lack of specific
symptoms and current diagnostic limitations, making this disease
extremely difficult to detect. The combination of poor prognosis and late
presentation of pancreatic cancer patients highlights the urgent need for
the development of effective, early detection strategies for this
disease. Our laboratory has established a comprehensive biomarker
discovery initiative whose objective is to identify proteins present in
urine of cancer patients, to determine whether their presence might be
relevant to disease status and stage and to validate their diagnostic and
prognostic efficacy in large scale clinical trials. In the current study,
our goal was to determine whether ADAM12 (a disintegrin and
metalloprotease 12) could be detected in the urine of patients with
pancreatic malignancies and whether ADAM12 levels might serve as an
independent predictor of disease status. Retrospective analyses of urine
samples (n=130) from PDAC and pNET patients as well as age- and
sex-matched controls were conducted. Urinary ADAM12 levels were
determined using a monospecific ELISA system. In addition, ADAM12 protein
expression in tumor and normal pancreatic tissues was analyzed via
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Multivariable logistic regression analyses
indicated that, when controlling for age and sex, urinary ADAM12 could
serve as significant independent predictor for distinguishing PDAC
(P<0.001) and pNET (P<0.008) patients from healthy controls. Kaplan-Meier
analysis of estimated patient survival stratified by urinary ADAM12
levels indicated a significantly shorter patient survival time for PDAC
patients with high ADAM12 levels (P=0.015) compared to patients with
lower urinary ADAM12. In addition, IHC analysis indicated that ADAM12
protein expression was upregulated 4-fold in Grade I-III PDAC compared to
normal pancreatic tissue. Taken together, our results suggest that the
measurement of ADAM12 levels may have diagnostic value in detection
and/or clinical monitoring of disease status in patients with pancreatic
malignancies. [Supported by: The Advanced Medical Foundation]

