Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a validated high throughput ELISA assay for gamma
H2AX as a pharmacodynamic marker


Histone H2AX is a 14 kDa ubiquitous member of the H2A histone family that
becomes rapidly phosphorylated at Serine 139 by ATM and ATR kinases to
yield a form known as -H2AX in response to double-strand DNA damage and
apoptosis. -H2AX is an ideal Pharmacodynamic (PD) surrogate marker to
measure molecular responses to a large number of drugs; however, methods
such as western blots and immunohistochemistry are widely used but are
difficult to validate to regulatory standards, and not suitable for high
throughput screening applications. To address this need, we have
developed a novel high throughput ELISA assay to measure -H2AX levels in
cellular extracts and phosphorylation of H2AX in response to therapeutic
intervention. This assay documents differences of -H2AX levels in PBMC,
cultured cells, tissue biopsies, and will be useful in future clinical
trials providing one of many needed tools to enable hypothesis-driven
preclinical drug design strategies.pBackgroundHistone H2AX is a 14 kDa
ubiquitous member of the H2A histone family that contains an
evolutionarily conserved SQ motif at the C-terminus in eukaryotes. Serine
139 within this motif becomes rapidly phosphorylated by ATM and ATR
kinases to yield a form known as -H2AX in response to double-strand DNA
damage and apoptosis (1). During the past year investigators have
confirmed the value of -H2AX as an important Pharmacodynamic (PD) marker
(2) and genotoxicity endpoint (3). There are over 21 anticancer drugs
that are known to result in -H2AX formation. As a result, -H2AX is an
ideal Pharmacodynamic PD surrogate marker to measure molecular responses
to a large number of drugs (4,5,6). While many of these drugs have
already garnered regulatory approval, and are currently being used to
manage various types of cancers, they are the subject of ongoing clinical
studies to evaluate their efficacy when used alone or in combination with
molecularly targeted drugs.While methods such as western blots and
immunohistochemistry are widely used but are difficult to validate to
regulatory standards, the ELISA method is the most quantifiable and
easiest to validate, and not suitable for high throughput screening
applications. To address this need Trevigen's quantitative
pharmacodynamic HT -H2AX ELISA assay measures -H2AX levels in cellular
extracts and phosphorylation of H2AX in response to therapeutic
intervention. This assay documents differences of -H2AX levels in PBMC,
cultured cells, tissue biopsies, and will be useful in future clinical
trials providing one of many needed tools to enable hypothesis-driven
preclinical drug design strategies.

