Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) as cell-based vectors for
PSA-activated proaerolysin to sites of prostate cancer


Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) traffic to sites of inflammation, such as
those commonly found at sites of prostate and other cancers. Using
multi-parameter flow cytometry, our group has shown that MSCs represent
0.01-1.1% of the total cells present at sites of primary prostate cancer
(PCa). Allogeneic MSCs have been safely administered to >1000 patients in
over 350 clinical trials worldwide for a variety of diseases. Coupled
with their ability to evade the immune system, this suggests that
allogeneic MSCs can be used as cell-based delivery vectors for
anti-cancer agents.Towards this goal, a method has been developed to load
MSCs with PLGA microparticles (MP) encapsulating PSA-activated
proaerolysin. Proaerolysin is a highly potent (low pM) bacterial
pore-forming toxin that selectively kills PSA-expressing cells in a
proliferation-independent manner, which is critical due to the low
proliferative index of PCa. Proaerolysin has been modified using
site-directed mutagenesis to replace the wildtype activation domain with
a PSA cleavage sequence. Though prodrug delivery will be enriched at
cancer sites using MSC Trojan horses, entrapment in non-malignant tissue,
such as the lung, following systemic administration is expected and must
be addressed; here, using a prodrug strategy. Importantly, enzymatically
active PSA is only present in the prostate and at sites of PCa, including
metastases. Circulating PSA is inactive due to covalent binding to serum
protease inhibitors. Therefore, toxicity to non-target tissues will be
minimized through both selective delivery and prodrug activation.The
prodrug is released from the MPs in a controlled manner over at least a 1
week period in vitro. Hemolysis assays in the presence of MP-conditioned
supernatant demonstrated that MP fabrication does not neutralize drug
toxicity. Furthermore, incubation of LNCaP (PSA+) and PC3 (PSA-) cells
with MP-conditioned supernatant demonstrates selective toxicity to
PSA-expressing cells at low nM concentrations. MP internalization by MSCs
has been confirmed using both flow cytometry and confocal microscopy.
Chitosan-modification of the MPs permitted increased loading of MSCs (100
ug/mL of MPs). For long-term development, preclinical studies such as
these have raised the question of tumor homing efficiency in humans.
Therefore, an ongoing FDA-approved first-in-man pre-prostatectomy
clinical trial to quantify the number of systemically-delivered
allogeneic MSCs that traffic to sites of primary PCa has been initiated.
BEAMing (digital PCR) technology will be used to accurately quantify
donor MSCs based on differential SNP profiles (detection threshold:
0.01%). Data from this trial will be used to determine the amount of
prodrug-loaded MPs necessary to deliver per MSC to achieve a therapeutic
effect. This data will subsequently be used in ongoing animal studies to
model clinical relevance in efficacy studies prior to further translation.

