Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Related study on the fat mass and obesity associated FTO gene and
melanoma


FTO is a Fe(II)/2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxidative DNA/RNA demethylase
and plays a key role in the fat metabolism and several chronic illnesses
including cancer development. Several independent SNPs in the intron 8 of
the FTO gene, showed nominally significant association with risk of
melanoma. But the functional regulatory mechanism of FTO protein is
poorly understood. Thus, the research of downstream factors and
interaction proteins of FTO may identification of the mechanism FTO
participated in and discovery of the FTO pathway may provide a noval
evidence to the diagnosis and put forward new targets for the treatment
of melanoma. Recent reports show that there is an important link between
FTO and melanoma cancer. Our recent studies find that there are
differences of FTO expression between normal skin and melanoma cancer.
First of all, higher FTO protein expression was detected by western blot
in melanoma cancer cells, compared with primary cultured normal skin
cells. However, the mRNA expression of both normal tissue and melanoma
cancer are at the similar level. Secondly, FTO expression was also
investigated in 80 clinical samples. Compared with normal skin tissues,
malignant melanoma tissues had stronger positive immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining of FTO in nucleus, and IHC scoring confirmed the
significantly higher FTO protein expression in carcinoma tissues. In the
normal skin tissues, FTO only expressed in basal nuclei; but in the
melanoma cancer, FTO expressed in the dermal cells both at the nucleus
and membrane. Especially, the expression of FTO is closely related with
the pathological staging of melanoma. The increased FTO expression in
melanoma carcinoma suggested that aberrant FTO expression may be an early
molecular event in cancer development. Simultaneously, we focus on
identifying the specific regulation function of FTO in the melanoma
cancer cell, using the cDNA microarray and Two-dimensional fluorescence
difference gel electrophoresis combining with MALDI-TOF-MS technique to
screen the interaction proteins and their mutual regulation, determine
the molecules interaction with FTO in the melanoma cancer development.
Taken together, these data demonstrated that there is an important link
between FTO and melanoma cancer, FTO gene plays an important role in
melanoma pathogenesis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

