Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneous and low-level methylation of novel biomarker
candidates for breast cancer clinical management


Breast cancer is a highly heterogeneous malignancy, which is best
exemplified by the fact that despite similar clinical and pathological
features large number breast cancer patients experience different outcome
of the disease. Therefore there is an urgent need for identification of
new biomarkers to stratify patients for personalized
treatment.Methylation of gene promoters regulates genes transcription and
provides normal cell function. At the same time, changes of the normal
pattern of methylation are directly involved in malignant transformation,
and have been shown to provide a good source of clinical biomarkers for
cancer management. Nevertheless it is still challenging to firstly
identify methylation changes suitable for clinical biomarkers and
secondly evaluate the clinical specificity and sensitivity of those
biomarkers.We used ultra high-resolution microarrays to compare genome
wide methylation patterns of breast carcinomas (N=20) with non-malignant
breast tissue (N=5) and identified 1000+ differentially methylated
regions (DMR) in the genome, which undergo methylation changes during
breast cancer development. The results of genome wide screening
technologies (due to the high complexity of those methods) require
validation with PCR based technology. Therefore, we validated 19 of the
regions identified in the genome wide screening with the Methylation
Sensitive High Resolution Melting (MS-HRM) technique in a panel of breast
carcinomas (N=275) and non-malignant controls (N=74).The validation
experiments corroborated the results, confirming that methylation changes
within the identified regions can potentially be used as
biomarkers.Interestingly, we have observed two types of methylation gain
at the validated loci: 1) loci undergoing predominantly complete
methylation, and 2) loci acquiring mainly heterogeneous methylation
during carcinogenesis. It can be speculated that the different types of
methylation gain have different physiological consequences for
transcriptional activity of the affected genes. Consequently the
involvement of the gene in carcinogenesis may depend on the type of
methylation acquired. However more research is needed to elaborate these
findings.Our validation experiments also showed that almost all tested
DMRs (17 out of 19) displayed low-level methylation in non-malignant
breast tissue. The physiological consequences of the low level
methylation of non-malignant tissue are largely unknown. These changes
does not seem to have immediate pathological consequences but may
predispose to breast cancer and hence have significant impact on
evaluation of the clinical sensitivity and specificity of methylation
biomarkers.Summarizing in our study, we have identified two phenomena
that have significant consequences for the locus specific methylation
biomarker development and need to be further researched.

