Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a new method for the selection and detection of
circulating tumor cells in metastatic breast cancer patients


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are discussed to be an ideal
surrogate marker for individualized treatment options in metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) since metastatic tissue may be difficult to obtain
for repeated analysis. Here we established a new method for selection and
detection of the heterogeneous CTC population using immunomagnetic
enrichment followed by multi-marker profiling of genes related to
different CTC phenotypes.Materials and Methods: Establishment of a nine
gene qPCR panel was performed using various cancer cell lines for the
markers EpCAM (epithelial); PI3K, AKT2 [epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
(EMT)]; ALDH1 (stem cell); ERCC1, Aurora kinase (resistance markers);
HER2, HER3, EGFR (receptors); CD45 (leucocyte control) and GAPDH
(housekeeping gene) as well as the synthetic EpCAM fragment as an
internal reference. 2x5 ml blood of 20 MBC patients was collected at the
time of disease progression (T0) and at clinical staging (T1) after 8-12
weeks of chemo-, hormone or antibody therapy for the detection of CTCs
applying a new positive immunomagnetic selection using anti-EpCAM,
anti-HER2 and anti-EGFR coated magnetic beads (AdnaTest EMT-2/Stem Cell
Select, AdnaGen AG Germany). cDNA was gene specifically pre-amplified
using the TATAA Multiplex Grand Master Mix according to in-house designed
assays. qPCR was performed using Bio-Rad iTaq Universal Supermix SYBR
Green Mix. The cutoff was calculated for each gene separately in a way
that the false positive rate in all healthy donors (n=18) was lower than
10% (specificity >90%). Subsequently, delta delta Ct was calculated as Ct
(cutoff)-Ct(sample) - [Ct(CD45 cutoff)-Ct(CD45sample)]. Results were
correlated with clinical response to a given therapy.Results: At T0, at
least one of the studied markers was detected in 19/20 patients and at T1
in 16/20 patients, respectively. The distribution of the markers across
all patients was highly variable at both time points. However, EpCAM,
Aurora kinase as well as EGFR and HER3 were observed most frequently.
Interestingly, some patients expressed only one CTC-subtype. Clinically,
we observed an increased frequency for epithelial, EMT, stem cell and
resistance markers in therapy resistant patients as compared to
responders. Whereas EMT and stem cell like CTCs were only detected in the
resistant group, CTCs still detectable in the responder group mainly
represented an epithelial phenotype showing HER2, HER3 or EGFR
expression. Interestingly, some of these persisting CTCs in responders
were also positive for ERCC1 and Aurora kinase.Conclusion: We
successfully established a new method for the detection of the
heterogeneous CTC population which might help to match the right therapy
to the right patient in the future. Despite these promising preliminary
findings, the qPCR panel has to be further optimized and needs to be
verified in a larger patient population.

