Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P-cadherin modulates signaling of multiple growth factor receptors
and cellular aggressiveness in oral carcinoma cells


Aberrant expression of the epithelial cell adhesion protein P-cadherin
has been observed to be independently causative and preventative with
respect to tumor progression, depending on tissue type. Oral epithelial
tumors have been shown to exhibit a unique signature of P-cadherin
expression in which P-cadherin expression increases in dysplasia and is
subsequently lost during malignancy. These studies suggest that early
increases in P-cadherin expression may be critical events in tumor
progression. Since E- and N-cadherin have been shown to physically
interact with and modulate function of Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and
Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) respectively, we hypothesized that
P-cadherin could promote tumor development via its own interaction with
receptor tyrosine kinases in a ligand-dependent manner. To identify
functional interactions between P-cadherin and receptor tyrosine kinases,
we retrovirally transduced two independently isolated oral squamous
carcinoma cell lines to overexpress P-cadherin. Transduced cells were
treated independently with one of seven different growth factors to
identify alterations in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathways. For all experiments,
protein was collected over the course of six hours at multiple timepoints
to identify fluctuations in signaling. Although P-cadherin did not alter
AKT phosphorylation, it was found to alter MAPK signaling in both a
positive and negative manner. The most robust alterations in MAPK
signaling occurred in response to activation of Insulin-like Growth
Factor (IGF), Epithelial Growth Factor (EGF), and Keratinocyte Growth
Factor (KGF). P-cadherin overexpression also induced phenotypic changes.
Behavioral assays revealed that P-cadherin expression increased motility,
but decreased expression of invasive proteases MMP-9 and MMP-14.
P-cadherin cells grown in serum-free media for 48 hours exhibited
increased cell number compared to control cells. A cell proliferation
analysis (MTT assay) indicated lower rates of proliferation in P-cadherin
-overexpressing cells compared to controls. This data suggests that the
increased cell number of serum-starved P-cadherin cells was due to
increased survival, rather than proliferation. These results demonstrate
that P-cadherin overexpression can modulate ligand-dependent growth
factor signaling and alter those cellular characteristics most commonly
associated with tumor aggressiveness. Since P-cadherin expression has
been shown to increase early on in the development of tumors, our
research may provide a possible mechanism as to how this increase may
play a role in tumor progression during dysplasia.

