Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gartanin from the mangosteen fruit modulates androgen receptor and
ER stress proteins in prostate cancer cells leading to apoptosis


Background: The Purple mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana) has a long
history of usage as a medicinal plant in Southeast Asia. Many studies
have shown that the chemical constituents of Garcinia mangostana, mainly
xanthone derivatives, have a variety of health-promoting properties
including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antitumoral, antiallergic,
antibacterial and antiviral activities. In this study, we evaluated the
anticancer effects of gartanin, one of the major xanthones from the
mangosteen fruit, in human prostate cancer cells. Next, we investigated
the possible mechanisms involved in its anticancer effects.Methods: Two
human prostate cancer cell lines, 22Rv1 and LNCaP, were treated with
gartanin. Cell apoptosis, viability, proliferation, androgen receptor,
prostate specific antigen (PSA), endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress were
evaluated by TdT-mediated dUTP Nick-End Labeling (TUNEL), 3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), BrdU,
Western blot, RT-PCR, androgen receptor competitor assay, siRNA
transfection, ELISA and fluorescent microscopy.Results: Gartanin
decreased viability and inhibited proliferation of prostate cancer cells
in a dose-dependent manner. Gartanin induced apoptosis as evidenced by
TUNEL staining, increased caspase-3 and Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. As a valuable
target of prostate cancer, androgen receptor (AR) expression was
significantly inhibited by gartanin. Further, gartanin was shown to be an
effective AR antagonist, similar to flutamide. Gartanin decreased PSA, a
prostate cancer risk factor regulated by the AR signaling pathway.
Gartanin increased ER stress proteins and chaperones, such as
phosphorylated PERK, CHOP, IRE1 and Bip. Gartanin also induced spliced
XBP-1 mRNA, which is an ER stress marker. CHOP knockdown partly inhibited
gartanin-induced apoptosis in LNCaP cells, as evidenced by cleaved
caspase-3 decrease. Interestingly, CHOP knockdown showed evidence of
restoring AR expression in gartanin treated cells.Conclusions: Our study
demonstrated that gartanin inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis
on prostate cancer cells in vitro. It achieves its anticancer effects
partly through inhibiting AR and promoting ER stress. The ability of
gartanin to inhibit prostate cancer cells suggests further research is
needed to evaluate gartanin as a novel agent for the management of
prostate cancer.

