Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZBP-89 downregulates histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) through
inhibition of I kappa B in hepatocelluar carcinoma (HCC)


BackgroundHistone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) is frequently overexpressed in
hepatocelluar carcinoma (HCC) and its inhibition enhances the efficacy of
anti-HCC chemotherapy. ZBP-89 is known to induce apoptosis via an
increase of pro-apoptotic Bak. But the relationship between ZBP-89 and
HDAC3 is largely unknown.MethodHuman HCC cell lines PLC/PRF/5 and HepG2
were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium and treated with various agents
to modulate NF-B. These agents included CAY10576 and MG132 (which are
inhibitors of I kappa B (IB) degradation) as well as SN50 (an inhibitor
of p65/p50 translocation). A xenograft tumor model was established by
subcutaneous injection of HCC PLC/PRF/5 cells into nude mice and this
model was used to confirm data obtained in HCC cell culture experiments.
The expressions of relevant proteins were measured by Western blot or/and
immunohistochemical staining.ResultsOur results showed that ZBP-89
reduced the expression of HDAC3 in HCC cells. ZBP-89 could form a complex
with IB and induce the phosphorylation of IB, which inhibited IB.
Furthermore, ZBP-89-mediated HDAC3 reduction could be suppressed by IB
degradation inhibitors CAY10576 and MG132 but not NF-B subunit p65/p50
translocation inhibitor SN50. These findings indicate that IB decreases
rather than increases the activity of NF-B; and such may be involved in
the ZBP-89-mediated HDAC3 reduction. In the HCC xenograft model, it was
confirmed that the expression of HDAC3, measured by immunohistochemical
staining and Western blot, was reduced in HCC with ZBP-89 overexpression,
compared with the control. In contrast to HDAC3, ZBP-89 enhanced the
expression of Bak.ConclusionZBP-89 downregulates HDAC3 by decreasing IB
rather than elevating activity of NF-B. This novel pathway identified
helps us understand more the mechanism of ZBP-89-mediated inhibition of
HCC.

