Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gold nanoparticle-mediated infrared hyperthermia reduces the
radiotherapy dose required for tumor therapy


Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) absorb light and can be used to heat and
ablate tumors. The tissue window at 800 nm (near infrared, NIR) is
optimal for best tissue penetration (2cm). Previously large, 50-150nm
gold nanoshells and nanorods that absorb well in the NIR have been used.
Here we show that small AuNPs, that may penetrate tumors better, barely
absorb at 800nm. However, when conjugated to antitumor antibodies, they
are taken up by tumor cells, which catalytically aggregate them by enzyme
degradation and pH effects, thus shifting their absorption to the NIR
region thereby amplifying their photonic absorption. The AuNPs are NIR
transparent until they accumulate in tumor cells; this reduces background
heating in blood and non-targeted tissues thereby increasing specificity
in contrast to constructs that are always NIR absorbing. We show that
treatment of subcutaneous EGFR overexpressing human squamous cell
carcinoma (A431) tumor xenografts with 15nm AuNPs conjugated with
anti-EGFR and NIR resulted in complete tumor ablation with virtually no
normal tissue (skin) damage. Further, using radioresistant mouse squamous
cell carcinoma SCCVII xenografts, we have combined AuNP-mediated infrared
heating with x-ray therapy to take advantage of the well-known synergy of
hyperthermia and radiotherapy. Lipoic Acid modified 15nm AuNPs were
injected intratumorally by convection-enhanced delivery (CED) followed by
NIR and X-ray therapy. It was found that the dose required for control of
50% the tumors, 55Gy, could be reduced to Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs)
absorb light and can be used to heat and ablate tumors. The tissue window
at 800 nm (near infrared, NIR) is optimal for best tissue penetration
(2cm). Previously large, 50-150nm gold nanoshells and nanorods that
absorb well in the NIR have been used. Here we show that small AuNPs,
that may penetrate tumors better, barely absorb at 800nm. However, when
conjugated to antitumor antibodies, they are taken up by tumor cells,
which catalytically aggregate them by enzyme degradation and pH effects,
thus shifting their absorption to the NIR region thereby amplifying their
photonic absorption. The AuNPs are NIR transparent until they accumulate
in tumor cells; this reduces background heating in blood and non-targeted
tissues thereby increasing specificity in contrast to constructs that are
always NIR absorbing. We show that treatment of subcutaneous EGFR
overexpressing human squamous cell carcinoma (A431) tumor xenografts with
15nm AuNPs conjugated with anti-EGFR and NIR resulted in complete tumor
ablation with virtually no normal tissue (skin) damage. Further, using
radioresistant mouse squamous cell carcinoma SCCVII xenografts, we have
combined AuNP-mediated infrared heating with x-ray therapy to take
advantage of the well-known synergy of hyperthermia and radiotherapy.
Lipoic Acid modified 15nm AuNPs were injected intratumorally by
convection-enhanced delivery (CED) followed by NIR and X-ray therapy. It
was found that the dose required for control of 50% the tumors, 55Gy,
could be reduced to <15Gy, a factor of 3.7 less. AuNPs therefore provide
a method to use hyperthermia to reduce the x-radiation needed for tumor
control, thereby sparing normal tissue, reducing side effects and making
radiotherapy more effective.

