Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Components of metabolic syndrome and total cancer mortality


Metabolic syndrome becomes more and more common primarily due to the
epidemic of overweight and obesity in both developed and developing
countries. Epidemiologic studies have shown that obesity increases the
risk of several cancers. However, it largely remains unclear whether the
components of metabolic syndrome are associated with total cancer
mortality. Therefore, we sought to evaluate this important question in
the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Data
on demographics, socioeconomics, lifestyle factors, and the components of
metabolic syndrome were collected among 19,296 men and women aged 18
years or older (pregnant women excluded). Cancer mortality outcomes of
these subjects were determined by linkage to the National Death Index
(NDI), and the most recent year of the linkage was in 2010. A total of
1,111 cases of all sites of cancer have been documented during this
period of time. Weighted Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
compute relative risks (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for total
cancer mortality in relation to the components of metabolic syndrome.
After adjustment for age, sex, race, education, marital status, and
cigarette smoking, subjects in the highest quartile (Q) of serum glucose
experienced a 25% increased risk of total cancer when compared with those
in the lowest quartile [RR (95% CI): 1.250 (1.247-1.253)]. The
significant positive association was also observed for systolic blood
pressure [Q4 vs. Q1: RR (95% CI): 1.278 (1.274-1.282)]. Conversely, a
reduced risk of total cancer was found for high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol [Q4 vs. Q1: RR (95% CI): 0.798 (0.796-0.800)]. No apparent
effect was detected for waist circumference and serum triglyceride. To
our knowledge, the present study is among the first to demonstrate that
some components of metabolic syndrome modulate the risk of total cancer
among a representative population in the US. Our findings offer novel
evidence for the potential role of metabolic syndrome in cancer
carcinogenesis and mechanistic data for the associations between obesity
and the risk of some cancers.

