Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT-3 by piperlongumine induces anoikis, prevents
tumor formation in pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo


Metastasis of pancreatic cancer is a major challenge leading to the
failure of its therapy. Hence, novel strategies to prevent metastasis are
of prime importance. Anoikis is an anchorage independent cell death.
Resistance to anoikis is one of the key features of a metastatic cell. In
the current study, we show induction of anoikis by piperlongumine, a
component of black pepper, through inhibition of STAT-3. Treatment of
various pancreatic cancer cell lines under low attachment conditions with
piperlongumine reduced the anoikis resistance in a
concentration-dependent manner. The decrease in anoikis resistance was
associated with decrease in the expression of STAT-3 and its
phosphorylation at Y705. Significant down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Mcl-1,
which are under the transcriptional regulation of STAT-3, were also
observed by piperlongumine treatment indicating the role of STAT-3 in
anoikis. Concentration-dependent cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) was observed by piperlongumine treatment in these cells. IL-6
treatment not only increased the phophorylation of STAT-3 at Y05 but also
abrogated the anoikis induced by piperlongumine in Panc-1 and HPAC cells.
Silencing STAT-3 by shSTAT-3 sensitized BxPc-3 and Panc-1 cells to
piperlongumine treatment. On the other hand, over-expression of STAT-3 in
Panc-1 cells conferred resistance to anoikis induced by piperlongumine.
STAT-3 -/- BxPc-3 cells were highly sensitive to anoikis upon
piperlongumine treatment. Finally, our in vivo studies established that
pancreatic cancer cells treated with piperlongumine in suspension
condition lost their potential to form tumors in xenograft model. On the
other hand, untreated cells in suspension conditions formed aggressive
tumors. Moreover, cells treated with PL in suspension conditions
completely failed to metastasize when injected intravenously in mice
whereas the untreated cells extensively metastasized in lungs and liver.
The presence of metastatic tumors was detected by bioluminescence imaging
as well as immunohistochemistry. Taken together, our study suggests that
the decrease in anoikis resistance induced by piperlongumine was mediated
by STAT-3 inhibition which resulted in reduced tumorigenic as well as
metastatic potential of pancreatic cancer cells. Notably, STAT-3 has been
shown to be constitutively upregulated in pancreatic cancer rendering it
resistant to chemotherapy and potential to metastasize. [Supported in
part by R01 grant CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer
Institute].

