Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring of metastasis by detection of EGFR mutation, T790M,
with plasma using animal model for metastasis of human lung cancer


Monitoring of metastasis by detection of EGFR mutation, T790M, with
plasma using animal model for metastasis of human lung cancer Epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI)
significantly prolonged survival of lung cancer patients carrying EGFR
activating/sensitive mutations. However, most patients eventually acquire
resistance to EGFR-TKI, and the half of mechanisms of acquired resistance
has been reported to be the secondary EGFR mutation, T790M. To monitor
the existence of T790M, we have developed a novel detection system, named
mutation-biased PCR and quenched probe system (MBP-QP) method. Since the
system is highly sensitive, T790M could be detected using circulating
plasma DNA (ctDNA). Recurrence of lung cancers frequently occurs as
lymphogenic and/or hematogenous metastases. Metastasis has been thought
to be caused by evolution of cancer cells which happens during treatment.
In primary lesion, intra-tumor heterogeneity has been evidenced from the
view point of molecular events as well as morphological aspects, and the
cancer cells which acquired metastatic potency spread to whole body.
Based on these mechanisms, molecular characteristics between primary and
metastatic lesions are different, and sensitivity to anti-cancer agents
also differs between them. In addition, metastasis consists of several
steps such as loss of cell adhesion, intravasation, survival in
circulation, exit into new tissues, and colonization in a distant site.
Therefore, a suitable animal model is indispensable for investigation of
metastasis. We have established the animal model showing metastases into
the whole body using the xenograft of human lung cancer cells in
immunodeficient mouse, NOD/SCID/JAK3null (NOJ), which were produced by
crossing NOD-scid and JAK3null mice. The xenograft model injected by
human lung cancer cell line, H1975, using NOJ mice showed lymphogenous
and hematogenous metastases. The difficulty for analysis of metastasis in
animal model is monitoring of metastasis. Recently, in vivo imaging
systems using luciferase-labeled cancer cells have been applicable to
animal experiments, but the expensive device and luciferase transfected
cells should be prepared. In this model, we introduce the monitoring
system of metastasis using ctDNA isolating form peripheral blood. Since
H1975 is human lung cancer cell line carrying T790M and L858R, these
mutations could be detected in ctDNA using MBP-QP system. The detection
rate of T790M and/or L858R with plasma DNA was correlated with total
tumor volume and occurrence of metastasis. The animal model would enable
us to investigate the heterogeneity of primary and metastatic lesions,
and it could be applicable to screening anti-cancer agents targeted to
metastasis using monitoring system by ctDNA.

