Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Bmi-1 in benzyl isothiocyanate-mediated suppression of
breast cancer stem cell self-renewal


We have shown previously that benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC), a nontoxic
small-molecule constituent of edible cruciferous vegetables (eg, garden
cress) inhibits breast cancer stem cells (bCSC) in vitro and in vivo but
the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Bmi-1 is a member of
the polycomb group family of proteins that function in the epigenetic
silencing of genes governing self-renewal, differentiation, and
proliferation. The present study was undertaken to investigate the role
of Bmi-1 in BITC-mediated inhibition of bCSC. BITC treatment
downregulated protein level of Bmi-1 in cultured human breast cancer
cells (MCF-7, SUM159 and MDA-MB-231), and in MDA-MB-231 xenografts in
vivo. Ectopic expression of Bmi-1 alone was sufficient to drive stemness
in MCF-7 cells. In addition, Bmi-1 overexpression in MCF-7 cells
conferred marked protection against BITC-mediated inhibition of bCSC as
evidenced by mammosphere frequency and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1)
activity. Consistent with these observations, silencing of Bmi-1 in
SUM159 cells remarkably reduced the portion of bCSC. Apoptosis induced by
BITC was also partially attenuated by overexpression of Bmi-1 in MCF-7
cells but its silencing had no effect on BITC-induced apoptosis in SUM159
cells. Previous studies have shown that miRNA128 inhibits cell
proliferation and self-renewal by direct regulation of Bmi-1. BITC
treatment modestly but statistically significantly increased the
expression of miRNA128 in both MCF-7 and SUM159 cells. Inhibition of
miRNA128 increased the mammosphere formation in MCF-7 and SUM159 cells
and partially attenuated BITC-mediated inhibition of mammosphere
formation. These observations led us to conclude that Bmi-1 is a novel
target of BITC-mediated inhibition of bCSC. This study was supported by
the grant RO1 CA129347 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

