Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of osteoprotegerin in inflammatory and invasive breast cancer


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a highly aggressive and angioinvasive
form of breast cancer associated with a high incidence of early nodal and
systemic metastasis. A proactive, complex and dynamic tumor
microenvironment of IBC adds to the grim scenario of the disease by
accumulating inflammatory and angiogenic growth factors and creating a
niche for the growth and metastasis of tumor cells. The secretions from
the primary inflammatory ductal carcinoma of the breast (SUM149PT), and
highly invasive ductal carcinoma cells (SUM1315MO2) secrete unusually
high levels of osteoprotegerin (OPG) as compared to those obtained from
the primary human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). OPG, which plays a
pivotal role in bone remodeling by regulating osteoclast formation, is a
multifaceted molecule, and has been found to be involved in multiple
myeloma and prostate cancers. This prompted us to examine the role of OPG
in the aggressive breast cancers, which has not been deciphered till
date. For a better understanding of the OPG functions, apart from using
adherent cells, we used in vitro sphere culture as our working model. We
studied the functional significance of OPG in aggressive breast cancer
biology by utilizing well standardized techniques such as OPG staining
(immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence), OPG secretion (ELISA),
angiogenesis (in vitro tube formation), proliferation (MTT), and cell
cycle/aneuploidy analysis (PI staining). We demonstrated that (1) OPG
secretion as well as protein level is upregulated in IBC (SUM149PT) and
highly Invasive ductal carcinoma cells (SUM1315MO2), and their spheres
compared to those of normal human mammary epithelial (HMEC); (2) OPG
stained specifically in patient breast cancer tissue samples when
compared to the uninvolved tissue from the same patient; (3) OPG rich
secretions from IBC and highly invasive breast cancer were highly
angiogenic; (4) OPG enriched culture medium induced proliferation of the
control HMEC spheres; (5) the presence of OPG triggered the onset of
aneuploidy in the control HMEC adherent cells as well as spheres. The
functional studies showing the biological significance of OPG (i,e its
effect on proliferation, angiogenesis, and aneuploidy) were confirmed
using recombinant human OPG and OPG rich/depleted medium obtained from
breast cancer cells. Overall our studies highlight the link between OPG
and aneuploidy in aggressive breast cancer cells, and opens up avenues
for new therapeutic targets for treating IBC.

