Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NCI's Provocative Questions Initiative


In 2011, the NCI Director, Dr. Harold Varmus, created the Provocative
Questions (PQ) initiative to encourage imaginative, bold approaches
designed to tackle perplexing and previously neglected areas of cancer
research. Based upon workshops and discussions with the extramural cancer
research community and NCI program directors, a set of 24 questions and
accompanying requests for applications (RFAs) were developed, addressing
diverse topics in cancer risk and prevention, tumor development, and
cancer detection, diagnosis, and treatment. In order to stimulate
innovative hypotheses and approaches, the power of the ideas was heavily
weighted with a de-emphasis on preliminary data. In the first year of the
initiative, the NCI awarded 56 unique proposals, totaling $21.5 million
of research support via the R01 and R21 mechanisms. Building upon the
2011 RFAs and adjusting to changes in the research landscape, 24 revised
questions were developed for the 2012 RFAs with a commitment of up to $30
million in support. The NCI released the 2013 RFAs in September 2013 with
a revised set of 20 questions, including new questions related to
clinical effectiveness. Several PQ-supported research projects funded in
the first year of the initiative will be highlighted in order to
demonstrate the breadth of topics and high level of innovation supported
by the initiative. Projects will be selected from the four main PQ
thematic areas to provide a sense of the many diverse approaches being
used to answer the selected PQ. In addition, trends and criteria from
awarded proposals will be presented to provide insight to potential
applicants regarding the outcomes of the program to date. Through
engagement of the cancer research community, the PQ initiative seeks to
continually leverage scientific advances to address currently unsolved,
understudied questions in cancer, which may influence the future
directions of NCI-sponsored research.

