Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of eIF4E in promoting melanoma cell proliferation and
maintaining acquired resistance to Vemurafenib in melanoma


In eukaryotic cells, mRNA translation is restricted by the translation
initiation step, in which eIF4E has been regarded as a master regulator.
Overexpression of eIF4E has been found in different cancer types;
however, whether eIF4E is involved in melanoma tumorigenesis and
resistance to standard of care in melanoma remains unclear. We
hypothesize that eIF4E promotes melanoma cell proliferation and
facilitates the development of acquired resistance to the B-raf
inhibitor, Vemurafenib. From our preliminary data, we show that eIF4E is
overexpressed in a panel of malignant melanoma cell lines compared to
immortalized melanocytes Mel ST. By genetically knocking down eIF4E via
siRNA, we can significantly repress the proliferation of a subset of
melanoma cell lines and decrease the level of the eIF4E downstream target
Cyclin D1. In addition, the B-raf inhibitor Vemurafenib can drastically
inhibit 4EBP-1 phosphorylation in BRAFV600E melanoma cell lines, and
further cap binding analysis confirmed that Vemurafenib stabilizes the
eIF4E - 4EBP-1 association in these cell lines.. In contrast, 4EBP-1 is
highly phosphorylated in all Vemurafenib resistant cell lines, compared
to the parental A375, even in the presence of Vemurafenib. Furthermore,
cap binding assay show that, unlike their parental counterpart, four out
of six resistant lines exhibit weak eIF4E - 4EBP-1 association even in
the presence of Vemurafenib. This may imply that more free eIF4E is
available for cap-dependent translation initiation in Vemu resistant
lines compared to the parental A375. Besides, eIF4E activity contributes
to the proliferation of some melanoma cell lines with acquired resistance
to Vemurafenib, since siRNA-silencing eIF4E decreases their
proliferation. In conclusion, our data show that eIF4E promotes
proliferation of some melanoma cell lines and may be involved in
maintaining the survival of some melanoma cell lines with acquired
vemurafenib resistance. These data suggest that therapeutically targeting
eIF4E may be a viable means of inhibiting melanoma cell proliferation and
overcoming Vemurafenib resistance.

