Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of cyclin D3 enhances the CDK6-dependent skin tumor
susceptibility to malignant progression


The Cyclin-Dependent Kinases (CDKs) are a family of essential
serine-threonine kinases that are cell cycle regulated by association
with cyclins at specific time-points of the cell cycle. Specifically,
D-type cyclins form complexes and activate CDK6 and CDK4. We have
previously established that transgenic expression of CDK6 in mouse
epidermis (K5CDK6 mice) alter an early stage of tumorigenesis leading to
strong reduction of the multiplicity and incidence of skin tumors. Our
previous results have shown that CDK6 preferentially binds to cyclin D3,
which overexpression also decreases tumor development in mouse epidermis.
Thus, we hypothesized that the association of CDK6/cyclin D3 and its
enzymatic activity negatively impacts tumor development. To test this
idea, we developed K5CDK6/Cyclin D3-/- mutant mice and subjected them to
the two-stage carcinogenesis protocol. Contrary to our hypothesis, lack
of cyclin D3 expression does not affect the tumor repression activity of
CDK6 since both, K5CDK6 and K5CDK6/cyclin D3-/- mice, exhibit a severe
reduction in the multiplicity and incidence of skin tumors compared to
wild-type siblings. However, histopathological analysis of skin tumors
revealed that 60% of the skin tumors in K5CDK6/cyclin D3-/- mice were
classified as squamous-cell carcinomas I (SCC) with a variable degree of
squamous differentiation; whereas wild type, K5CDK6 and cyclin D3-/-
siblings exhibit benign tumors with no significant changes in the rate of
malignant progression. Consistent with the malignant nature of the
K5CDK6/cyclin D3-/- tumors, lack or reduction of cyclin D3 levels within
the context of CDK6 overexpression (K5CDK6/D3-/- and K5CDK6/cyclin D3+/-)
lead to 7-fold increase in tumor size compared to K5CDK6, cyclin D3-/-
and wild-type tumors. Biochemical analysis of epidermal tumors shows that
cyclin D3 ablation results in a rise of cyclin D1 protein levels. These
data suggest that though cyclin D3 expression does not alter the tumor
suppressive role of CDK6 at early stages of tumorigenesis, it does affect
the expression of cyclin D1 resulting in the increased rate of malignant
progression. Consistent with these studies, we have shown that elevated
activity of CDK4/cyclin D1 complex results in an elevated number of SCC.
We conclude that CDK6 activity can prevent tumor formation during the
initial stages of tumorigenesis in a cyclin D3-independent manner and
likely Rb-independent as well (Kollman et al, 2013). However, variations
in the expression of cyclin D3 affects cyclin D2 (Rojas et al, 2007)
and/or cyclin D1 levels, directly altering the susceptibility of CDK6
expressing tumors to malignant conversion. Therefore, therapies directed
to reduce D-type cyclins expression should be considered within the
context of the expression level of CDK6 and CDK4 to define the potential
effect in the malignant progression of skin tumors.Supported by NIH grant
CA116328.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

