Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon-gamma potentiates the targeted phenotypic reversion of
erbb2/her2/neu transformed human tumor cells


Oncogenic erbB2/HER2 is a major transforming determinant of human breast
cancer and its amplification is prognostic of poor survival. Monoclonal
antibody (mAb)-based therapy to specifically target erbB2/HER2 has been
effective in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer; however, some
patients do not respond and those who do frequently relapse despite
ongoing therapy. The evolution of tumors that resist targeted therapy is
complex and involves the emergence of complex transcriptional functions.
Snail is overexpressed in recurrent tumors of transgenic HER2/neu mice
and snail expression participates in tumor recurrence. Previous studies
from our laboratory and others have revealed that targeted therapy
requires cooperation with elements of the endogenous immune system for
optimal tumor regression activity. The cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-)
is relevant to the regression process although the mechanism by which IFN
operates on targeted cells remains undefined and the effects of IFN on
the transformed cell have not been studied during phenotypic reversion.
In the present study, we utilized cell biological and biochemical-based
assays to define if targeted therapy could be improved through the
addition of IFN- and unexpectedly defined a unique mechanism operative to
achieve this end. Cell culture model systems were used to examine the
co-treatment of erbB2/HER2 targeting with IFN- to eliminate issues such
as aberrant immune responses, which arise as a consequence of adding IFN-
to cells. We defined that while mAb targeting of erbB2 reversed the
transformed phenotype of HER2-positive breast cancer cells reversion of
phenotype was increased upon inclusion of IFN-. Co-treatment with the
erbB2 mAb and IFN- resulted in a greater reduction of snail protein
levels compared to either modality alone. Snail degradation was dependent
on GSK3- and active proteasome dependent elimination processes.
Furthermore, IFN- activated GSK3- in mAb treated cells to the extent of
that observed in cells treated with specific small molecule inhibitors to
erbB receptors. Our findings provide a mechanistic explanation as to how
to use IFN- to optimize mAb-mediated tumor regression. The implication of
this study is improvement of targeted efficacy could lead to more
comprehensive therapy options that may eliminate tumor recurrence.

