Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SAC abrogation by MPS1 kinase inhibition: preclinical proof of
concept of a novel approach to tumor treatment


Cell cycle deregulation represents one of the classical hallmarks of
cancer and consequently cell cycle arrest is the predominant mode of
action of a number of antimitotic cancer drugs (e.g. taxanes and vinca
alkaloids). Targeted disruption of the cell cycle checkpoint offers a
novel approach to cancer treatment: driving tumor cells into cell
division despite DNA damage or unattached/misattached chromosomes
resulting in a lethal degree of DNA damage or aneuploidy.MPS1, a mitotic
kinase that is overexpressed in several human cancers, has been shown to
function as the key kinase which activates the spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC) to secure proper distribution of chromosomes to daughter
cells. Here, we report the identification and functional characterization
of novel inhibitors of MPS1 from two structurally unrelated chemical
classes. In biochemical assays, these molecules inhibited the kinase
activity of MPS1 with IC50 values in the single digit nanomolar range and
have shown an exquisite selectivity against a panel of kinases. In
cellular assays the compounds were able to abrogate nocodazole-induced
SAC, to reduce time in mitosis, to induce multinuclearity and apoptotic
cell death, and to inhibit tumor cell proliferation with IC50 values in
the low nanomolar range. In combination experiments MPS1 inhibitors
showed cooperativity with low concentrations of paclitaxel. MPS1
inhibitors showed limited efficacy in monotherapy (T/C ca. 0.6) in tumor
xenograft studies. However, when combined with paclitaxel dosed at the
maximal tolerated dose, low doses of MPS1 inhibitor strongly improved
efficacy over paclitaxel or MPS inhibitor monotreatment in intrinsically
paclitaxel-insensitive xenograft models. The combination treatment was
well tolerated. These results validate the concept of SAC abrogation
preclinically and pave the way to a clinical proof of concept.

