Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of immunohistochemistry assays against c-Met and HGF to
guide companion diagnostic decisions


Establishing reagent specificity during immunohistochemistry (IHC) based
biomarker or companion diagnostic (CDx) assays is challenging. Antibody
specificity is dictated in part by recognition of 3D confirmation of the
target binding, target activity, and and/or epitope's post-translation
modifications. Fixation effects pose additional challenges to epitope
recognition during IHC assay. For these reasons, different antibodies
against the same target biomarker may demonstrate diversity in
prevalence, range, and staining patterns over identical specimens. Thus,
determining reagent specificity is a critical part of IHC and CDx assay
development. Interpretation is further complicated by the pattern of
biomarker expression in specific cell types (e.g. tumor v. stroma) or
cell compartments (e.g. membrane v. cytosol). These factors may be
critical to associate the drug's mechanism of action with efficacy. In
the companion diagnostic (CDx) setting, the mechanism of the drug,
epitope recognition, and staining features used to interpret and quantify
the biomarker to predict patient response requires an evidence-based
approach, where all features of an IHC assay are considered and tied
empirically to patient response to the drug. In this study, we
demonstrate these complexities in gastric cancer specimens, by comparing
IHC assays using two antibodies that recognize either intracellular or
extracellular domains of c-Met receptor (SP44/ C-term and EP154Y/ N-term)
in the context of the ligand for c-Met, Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF).
Therapeutic antibodies targeting c-Met [such as MetMab (OA-5D5/ Roche)];
or HGF directly [such as Rilotumumab (AMG 102/ Amgen)], have directly
linked c-Met protein expression as revealed by IHC to patient response.
Thus, we hypothesized that a link between c-Met protein expression and
HGF should be discernible. To test this hypothesis, we used image
analysis approaches to determine the staining features of each IHC assay
in comparison to each other. Surprisingly, we found little concordance
between the two c-Met antibodies in evaluating c-Met and HGF expression.
We found distinct populations of c-Met expressing vs HGF expressing
specimens, whose HGF-c-Met association differed with the c-Met assay
used. We examined the tissue and cell compartmentalization, and
identified staining features of each reagent which would aid or impede in
interpretation strategies for understanding the relationship between
c-Met and HGF. These results suggest that the epitope-specific features
of each c-Met antibody determines the relationship with HGF expression,
and how quantitative image analysis endpoints can be used to make
critical decisions during the development of an IHC companion
diagnostic.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

