Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gli2 protein and the AR operational switch to the castration
resistant prostate cancer transcription program


Gli proteins are transcription factors that mediate Hedgehog (HH)
signaling in cells. Previously, we reported that Gli2 binds to the
androgen receptor (AR) protein in prostate cancer (PCa) cells and further
upregulates expression of genes under AR control. This co-activator
effect allows the growth of Gli2 overexpressing LNCaP cells in
androgen-depleted medium, mimicking the behavior of castrate resistant
variants of PCa. We report here our success in localizing the specific
binding domains between Gli2 and AR proteins. Outcomes of GST-pulldown
and co-immunoprecipitation studies showed that Gli2 binds to AR via a
limited domain (aa628-aa897) within the C-terminal region and this
recognizes the tau5/AF5 domain (aa 392-558) within the N-terminal region
of the AR protein. Because tau5/AF5 is conserved in truncated (splice
variant) ARs, we also showed that Gli2 recognizes and co-activates the
transcriptional activity of a truncated variant AR (AR-V7). To further
define Gli2 regulatory functions on AR transcriptional activity in CRPC,
we overexpressed Gli2N (a constitutive-active form of Gli2) in LNCaP-AI
(androgen-independent) cells and examined its effects on AR target gene
expressions. Surprisingly, we found that Gli2 overexpression coincided
with significant downregulated expression of genes considered traditional
AR targets (i.e., KLK3 and KLK2), while increasing the expression of
M-phase check-point genes, such as UBE2C, CDK1 and CDC20. In contrast,
treatment of unmodified LNCaP-AI cells with the Gli-inhibitor, GANT61,
significantly increased expression of KLK2 and KLK3 while downregulating
UBE2C, CDC20 and CDK1. Our outcomes now imply that Gli2 differentially
affects the AR transcriptional program in androgen-dependent (LNCaP) vs
androgen-independent (LNCaP-AI) cells. In androgen-dependent cells, Gli2
co-activates expression of the traditional AR target genes while
suppressing expression of genes involved in the CRPC transcriptional
program whereas in androgen-independent cells, Gli2 co-activates
expression of CRPC program genes while downregulating expression of
traditional AR target genes. This dichotomy suggests that Gli2
participates in the decisions through which AR transcriptional activity
is redirected in castration resistant disease. Supported by the DOD PCRP
(W81XH-10-1-0493, to RB)

