Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic activity of lenalidomide and interleukin-21 in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia


Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is an immunomodulatory cytokine with cytotoxic
activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) B cells. Its
cytotoxic activity has been shown in part to directly correlate with
level of surface expression of the IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) on CLL cells.
Although CpG and CD40 ligand have been show to induce upregulation of
IL-21R, their limited availability for clinical use prompted us to
investigate alternative immunomodulatory agents such as lenalidomide. We
observed that treatment of CLL B cells with 0.5 M lenalidomide
upregulated IL-21R expression in 7/10 patients (samples with
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is an immunomodulatory cytokine with cytotoxic
activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) B cells. Its
cytotoxic activity has been shown in part to directly correlate with
level of surface expression of the IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) on CLL cells.
Although CpG and CD40 ligand have been show to induce upregulation of
IL-21R, their limited availability for clinical use prompted us to
investigate alternative immunomodulatory agents such as lenalidomide. We
observed that treatment of CLL B cells with 0.5 M lenalidomide
upregulated IL-21R expression in 7/10 patients (samples with <20%
induction were considered not responsive), with maximum induction of
protein at 48 hours (mean 67% increase in responsive samples, median 50%
increase). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from two patients receiving
lenalidomide showed similar, if less pronounced, induction of IL-21R
transcript and protein, with an average 42.5% increase of mRNA by Day 3
of treatment and 34% increase of protein by Day 8. In primary CLL B
cells, induction of IL-21R by lenalidomide with subsequent treatment with
IL-21 generally leads to an increase in phosphorylation of STAT1 (signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1) as compared to treatment
with IL-21 alone, and rarely an increase in phosphorylation of STAT3.We
next assessed if pre-treatment with lenalidomide resulted in enhanced
killing of CLL B cells by IL-21. Whereas lenalidomide produced minimal
cytotoxicity and IL-21 modest effect, combination of the two exhibited
synergistic cytotoxic effects against CLL B cells (p=0.028, n=8). The
synergistic interaction between lenalidomide and IL-21 treatment was
further revealed by a distinct expression pattern of miR and mRNA
signatures in CLL cells treated in vitro with combined lenalidomide and
IL-21, as compared to vehicle, lenalidomide, or IL-21 alone. Analysis of
the comprehensive mRNA expression data revealed pro-apoptotic protein BID
(BH3-interacting domain death agonist) as a potential mediator of the
enhanced killing observed with combined lenalidomide and IL-21. Western
blot analysis revealed that treatment of CLL B cells with either
lenalidomide or soluble CD154 can increase BID protein levels by 48
hours; however, while CD40 blocking antibody diminished BID induction by
CD154 in all patients tested, it diminished BID induction by lenalidomide
in only 2/6 patient samples. This indicates an alternative pathway of BID
induction in a subset of patients and presents a possible mechanism for
the enhanced cytotoxicity seen with the combination of lenalidomide and
IL-21. Further exploration of this synergistic combination is ongoing.
These data demonstrate that lenalidomide can up-regulate IL-21R and leads
to increased sensitization to IL21 treatment. These studies justify
further clinical investigation of the combination of IL-21 and
lenalidomide in CLL and related lymphoid malignancies.

