Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of antivascular tumor therapy with retargeted tissue
factor proteins to improve the activity/toxicity profiles and therapeutic
outcome


The purpose of this study is to improve the safety and activity profile
of therapeutic tumor vascular infarction using retargeted tissue
factor-(tTF-) by in vitro- and in-vivo analysis of 1. newly generated tTF
fusion proteins, 2. site-specific and randomly PEGylated tTF-NGR protein,
3. combination therapy with radiation, cytotoxics, low-energy ultrasound,
and by 4. using different routes of application.Experimental
proceduresMolecular cloning strategies and site-directed mutagenesis were
used to generate new tTF constructs. Coupling of polyethylene glycol
(PEG) units to the recombinant tTF proteins was performed by
site-directed and random PEGylation and coupling of non-peptidic ligands
was performed by maleimide-activated reagents. The biological ability of
the tTF-fusion proteins to induce coagulation was assessed by a FX assay.
The differential binding of fusion proteins to HUVECs and HuAoSMCs was
analyzed by FACS. For the in-vivo evaluation of tumor growth,
immunodeficient CD-1 nude mice were transplanted with various human tumor
xenotransplants. The anti-vascular mechanism was verified by the
molecular imaging methods SPECT, MRI, FRI, and CEUS.ResultsTo improve the
specificity of the therapy, novel fusion proteins were constructed which
are supposed to selectively target the receptor protein NG2 on tumor
vessel pericytes. The newly synthesized tTF-TAA/-LTL fusion proteins
retained their thrombogenic activity and specific binding to the pericyte
marker NG2 in vitro; first therapeutic trials with tumor-bearing mice
revealed a comparatively small therapeutic range.The conjugation of
tTF-NGR with low-molecular PEG-chains improved the therapeutic range of
the tTF-fusion protein substantially, together with increased in-vivo
tolerance. Moreover, site-directed PEGylated of cysteinated tTF molecules
were constructed and revealed promising analytical and in-vitro
thrombogenic effects. Cysteinated tTF (tTF-C) acts as fast and convenient
building block for non-peptidic ligands of receptor proteins
overexpressed in the tumor vasculature (such as CD13, V-integrins
etc.).Combination therapies of tTF-NGR with doxorubicin, irradiation, or
low-energy-ultrasound, respectively, showed synergistic
effects.ConclusionPromising results have been achieved to optimize the
anticancer profile of tumor-vessel infarction by retargeted tTF: The
therapeutic range of the tTF-NGR fusion protein has been improved by
PEGylation and by combination with either radiation, chemotherapy with
doxorubicin, or low-energy ultrasound, respectively. Ongoing experiments
further optimize this anti-vascular therapy by using new (PEG) polymers.

