Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioinformatics analysis of an Ad-VEGF flank angiogenesis model
identifies vessel subtype gene signatures: Implications for anti-VEGF
therapy


Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF-A) is the predominant growth
factor expressed by tumor cells to drive angiogenesis and solid tumor
growth. Antiangiogenesis therapies have been clinically demonstrated to
be effective, however, there are still not effective means to preselect
those patients most likely to derive optimal benefit. To identify blood
vessel markers that may differentiate patients responsive to VEGF pathway
blockade, we used a well-established in vivo model to generate
pathological angiogenesis following the delivery of adenovirus engineered
to express VEGF-A164 (Ad-VEGF) to a localized subcutaneous site within
the flank of a nude mouse. This model provides a temporally controlled
induction of angiogenesis and subsequent remodeling and maturation of the
vasculature. This enabled us to study discrete subclasses of vessel which
have been previously shown to have differential sensitivities to
anti-angiogenic therapy. Here we report gene expression profiling on a
time course of the Ad-VEGF flank model which was used to characterize
molecular and genetic changes associated with these distinct vessel
subtypes. Using a nearest centroid-based classification algorithm we
identified unique endothelial cell specific gene signatures representing
early, middle' and late' stages of vessel development and maturation. To
evaluate the utility of these gene signatures in predicting sensitivity
to anti-VEGF therapy, we profiled a publically available gene array
dataset generated from a mouse xenograft model following anti-VEGF
treatment with our vessel subtype gene signatures. A majority of the
early and middle vessel genes were significantly reduced in
bevacizumab-treated animals, demonstrating they respond to VEGF pathway
inhibition. To further evaluate the potential value of these gene
signatures as predictive biomarkers we profiled a dataset of 248 gastric
tumors using hierarchical clustering. Our analysis shows the middle
vessel signature was highly expressed in a mesenchymal molecular subtype
of gastric cancer. Interestingly, the majority of the mesenchymal gastric
tumors were diffuse' subtype in Lauren's classification. Together, our
data demonstrate the potential usefulness of our vessel subtype gene
signatures in identifying tumor subtypes that may benefit from this
anti-angiogenic therapy.

