Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity is associated with clinical characteristics in African
American multiple myeloma patients


African-American ethnicity, male sex, older age and obesity are accepted
risk factors for multiple myeloma (MM). Obesity early in life is a risk
factor for many cancers, including MM; most studies have focused on
populations of European origin. African-Americans have a higher
prevalence of obesity than other populations, and may have a distinct
genetic contribution to this condition. We established a multi-center
study to investigate possible explanations for the excess risk of MM
among African-Americans. The aim of the present case-case analysis was to
determine whether body mass index (BMI) was associated with clinical
characteristics at presentation in African-American MM patients.1,065
patients diagnosed with active MM from January 1, 2009 through September
30, 2013 were recruited through nine outpatient centers at academic
medical centers and 3 SEER population-based cancer registries.
Information on weight and height at 20 years of age and at 5 years prior
to diagnosis was obtained from questionnaires. Clinical information
collected from the medical records and interviews included age at
diagnosis, stage, percent plasmacytosis on bone marrow biopsy,B2
microglobulin level, immunoglobulin class and presence of lytic bone
lesions. Molecular profiling abstracted from pathology reports included
chromosomal gain/deletions (1P-, 1Q+, +3, +5, +7, +9, +11, 12P-, Del(13),
+15, Del(17P), Del(17P13)), translocations (4;14), (11;14), and (14;16 ).
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to test the null hypothesis that
age at diagnosis was similar across BMI categories. A T-test was used to
test the null hypothesis that the mean age at diagnosis in
underweight/normal patients was not different than that for overweight
and obese patients. The Mantel-Haenszel Chi square test for trend was
used to test the null hypothesis that the proportion of cytogenetic and
molecular abnormalities was similar across BMI categories.The study
population consists of 306 African American male and 396 African American
female MM patients. In both, obesity at 20 years of age was associated
with younger age at diagnosis, compared to a normal/underweight
(p=0.0015). Among males only, obesity at 5 years prior to diagnosis was
also associated with younger age at diagnosis (p=0.03). A trend between
increasing BMI and molecular characteristics associated with a poor
prognosis was suggested.We observed a strong association between obesity
at age 20 and younger age at diagnosis among males and females, and in
males only at 5 years prior to diagnosis. Obesity is one of the few known
potentially modifiable risk factors for MM. Younger age at diagnosis
reflects an earlier accumulation of either or both genetic and
environmental risk factors. We also observed a link between obesity at
each of the two time points and specific molecular markers of poor
prognosis. Additional studies are needed to determine biological
significance of the results.

