Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unravelling the biology of aggressive and therapy-resistant
embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes (ETMR)


Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR) is a highly aggressive
embryonal CNS tumor, which predominantly affects children under the age
of three to four years and is associated with a highly aggressive disease
course with reported overall survival times ranging from 5-30 months. As
these tumors have often been misdiagnosed as medulloblastoma or CNS-PNETs
it was thought that ETMR is a very rare tumor. However, now molecular
tools are available to detect ETMR and distinguish them from other brain
tumors it has become clear that it is one of the most common brain tumors
among infants. Amplification of a miRNA cluster at 19q13.42 and high
expression of LIN28A have been identified as molecular hallmarks of ETMR,
affecting 95-100% of samples tested and are considered unifying molecular
diagnostic markers to detect them and distinguish from other brain
tumors. Three histological variants of ETMR are known. These include
embryonal tumor with abundant neuropil and true rosettes (ETANTR),
ependymoblastoma (EBL), and medulloepithelioma (MEPL). A comprehensive
clinical, pathological, and molecular analysis of 97 cases of these fatal
brain neoplasms identified uniform molecular signatures in all tumors
irrespective of histological patterns, indicating that ETANTR, EBL, and
MEPL comprise a single biological entity. In particular, DNA methylation
(Illumina 450k arrays) and gene expression data (Affymetrix 133plus2.0
arrays) showed that the three histological variants of ETMR are
biologically indistinguishable but together highly distinct from other
pediatric brain tumors. In order to better understand the biology of
these highly aggressive pediatric CNS malignancies, we performed whole
genome DNA sequencing of 15 tumor-normal pairs including 3 recurrences,
complemented by (mi)RNA sequencing of tumor RNA. Mutations detected
included mutations in TP53, CTNNB1, and mutations affecting the miRNA
processing pathway. Chromothripsis was detected in several cases and in
all cases affecting chromosome 19q. Finally, as DNA sequencing identified
only very few somatic mutations per tumor, we next studied the epigenome
of these tumors by performing whole genome bisulfite sequencing.
Integrating these high throughput genomic analyses may now lead to
alternative treatment strategies for these highly aggressive and
therapy-resistant tumors.

