Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT6 induces EMT and promotes cancer cell invasion and migration
in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer related death in males in the developed countries. One of
the major clinical challenges is the propensity for advanced PCa to
metastasize to bone or other organs, which is primarily responsible for
its effect on patient mortality. SIRT6, one of Sirtuins family members,
is an important histone modifying protein that regulates diverse
physiological functions such as aging and metabolism. Recently there is
much evidence showing an involvement of SIRT6 in tumorigenesis. At
present, relatively little is known about the role of SIRT6 in regulating
prostate cancer or metastasis. In our study, we have used both prostate
tumor tissues and prostate cancer cell lines to study the roles of SIRT6
in the development and progression of PCa. From deposited gene profiling
studies we found that SIRT6 was overexpressed in prostate tumors,
compared with normal prostate tissues. Tissue microarray studies
confirmed the higher levels of SIRT6 in both prostate tumor tissues and
prostate cancer cells than in their normal counterparts. Depletion of
SIRT6 by siRNA inhibited PCa cell proliferation. Bioinformatics analysis
of the databases revealed that the high SIRT6 expression was associated
with markedly shorter window of clinical recurrence, and the expression
level of SIRT6 was significantly higher in PCa tissue with Gleason grade
greater than seven. Further analysis indicated that SIRT6 expression
increased along with the metastasis of PCa. We used PC-3 and DU145 cells
to study whether SIRT6 could play a role in the migration and invasion of
PCa cells. Indeed, SIRT6-deficiency markedly reduced cell migration and
invasion. Compared with control siRNA treated cells, the protein level of
N-cadherin reduced while E-cadherin level showed an increase after SIRT6
knockdown. We further revealed that SIRT6 regulated EMT-inducing
transcription factor expression in PCa cells. Taken together, our
findings indicate that SIRT6 is up-regulated in PCa, and the high
expression of SIRT6 plays an important role in the progression of PCa as
it facilitates cancer cell migration and invasion, and possibly
metastasis. These data also suggest the therapeutic value of targeting
SIRT6 in the treatment of metastatic PCa.

