Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACY-1215, a selective inhibitor of HDAC6, synergizes with
immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) to induce apoptosis of multiple myeloma
(MM) cells


Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes represent attractive therapeutic
targets in MM, but non-selective HDAC inhibitors have led to
dose-limiting toxicities in patients, particularly in combination with
other therapeutic agents. ACY-1215 is a first-in-class, orally available
HDAC inhibitor that is 11-fold selective for HDAC6, and synergizes in
vitro and in vivo with bortezomib in preclinical models of MM without
inducing unfavorable toxicities (Blood, 20[210]: 4061). In support of its
potential tolerability benefits, ongoing Phase Ib clinical trials with
ACY-1215 have thus far demonstrated an excellent safety and tolerability
profile (Yee, et al, ASH, 2013). The IMiD class of drugs, including
lenalidomide and pomalidomide, exhibit striking anti-myeloma properties
in a variety of MM models, and have demonstrated significant clinical
activity in MM patients. Prior clinical studies have demonstrated
activity of the non-selective HDAC inhibitor vorinostat in combination
with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in MM patients (Richter, et al, ASH,
2011). However, many patients experienced considerable toxicities with
this regimen that significantly limited clinical utility. In support of
our ongoing clinical development program for ACY-1215 in MM, we show here
that combining ACY-1215 with either IMiD leads to synergistic decreases
in the viability of MM cells in vitro. The relevance of inhibition of
HDAC6 to this effect was validated by demonstrating synergistic
interactions of either IMiD molecule with ACY-775, which is more than
300-fold selective for HDAC6 over class I HDAC's. Time course studies
demonstrated accumulation of cell cycle arrest in cells after prolonged
exposure to either IMiD, as well as progressive induction of apoptosis in
these cells. Notably, though, the addition of ACY-1215 to either IMiD
resulted in synergistic increases in the percentage of MM cells
undergoing apoptosis. At the molecular level, MM cells are known to be
dependent on expression of the MYC and IRF4 transcription factors. Both
ACY-1215 and IMiDs as single agents reduced expression of the critical
genes MYC and IRF4, which were reduced even further by combination
treatment. The molecular mechanism underlying this effect is currently
being explored. Finally, the combination of ACY-1215, lenalidomide, and
dexamethasone was well tolerated in vivo with no overt evidence of
toxicity, and combination efficacy studies with this combination are now
being explored in models of MM. By demonstrating that a selective
inhibitor of HDAC6 synergizes with IMiD's while maintaining an improved
safety profile, these results provided a rational basis for the clinical
development of the orally available combination of ACY-1215 and
lenalidomide plus dexamethasone in the ongoing Phase Ib clinical trial
(NCT01583283) for the treatment of MM.

