Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel topical candidate for chemotherapy and
radiotherapy-induced alopecia (CRIA) through local modulation of apoptosis


Chemotherapy- or radiotherapy-induced alopecia (CRIA) is a common side
effect of adjuvant and metastatic chemotherapy regimens or radiotherapy
treatments. The likelihood of alopecia depends on the types and modes of
treatment modalities. In cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, the
hair loss incidence is estimated to be 65%. Although CRIA is often
assumed to be an unavoidable and transient side effect that can be dealt
with using wigs, it is considered by the sufferers the most visible and
emotionally distressing consequence of cancer therapies, giving negative
repercussions on various aspects of quality of life (QOL). There are no
approved pharmacologic treatments available for CRIA, and the outcome
from scalp cooling devices are of variable quality.Normal hair cycle
mainly consists of growth phase (anagen), regression phase (catagen),
shedding phase (telogen) and resting phase (telogen). In the course of
CRIA, the rapidly growing and dividing cell populations in anagen phase
are damaged by the systemic chemotoxic agents and undergo unwanted
premature apoptosis, consequently inducing premature onset of catagen.
Apoptosis is finely tuned by endogenous and exogenous factors. The
extrinsic pathway is principally mediated by an apoptosis stimulus
factor, Fas. The intrinsic pathway is essentially mitochondria dependent
and executed by members of Bcl-2 (B cell lymphoma-2).Bcl-2 level is
depressed in the scalp of balding subjects, indicating a key role of
apoptosis. A previous study using mouse model revealed that certain
chemo-agent (e.g. cyclophosphamide) caused up-regulation of the
pro-apoptotic protein p53 in root sheaths and hair matrix, sensitizing
hair follicular cells to apoptosis. In contrast, p53-deficient mice
showed neither hair loss nor abnormal apoptosis in hair matrix
keratinocytes, most likely as a result of down-regulation of Fas and
increased expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.As Bcl-2 level
in non-alopecia subjects has not been documented so far, we conducted a
scalp biopsy study in order to measure the normal Bcl-2 level in
non-alopecia subjects. We then compared the normal Bcl-2 level in
non-alopecia subjects with the level of Bcl-2 in androgenetic alopecia
(AGA) volunteers, before and after topical application of a GMP-grade
botanical extract (the Product). It turned out that, after Product
application, the level of scalp Bcl-2 was restored, towards normal level,
consequently preventing early onset of the apoptosis-driven catagen
phase.Pharmacological inhibition of apoptosis pathways has been proposed
to prevent chemotherapy induced alopecia. The outcome obtained from our
studies have now made it possible to study the potential benefit from
positive modulation of hair follicular cell apoptotic process in cancer
patients suffering from unwanted hair loss due to chemo- or radiotherapy.

