Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The splice variant of the human papillomavirus 16 E6 protein, E6*,
displays anti-tumor properties in vivo


High-risk types of the human papillomavirus (HPV) are the causative
agents of nearly all cases of cervical cancer, as well as a significant
number of head, neck, penile, vulvar, and anal cancers. Like many other
viruses with small genomes, HPV (8 kb) utilizes numerous mechanisms to
increase the capacity of its genome to encode the proteins necessary for
successful completion of its infectious life cycle, including alternative
splicing. Studies over the past few decades have focused intensively on
the activities and roles of E6 proteins from high-risk types of HPV
during the process of cellular transformation, clearly implicating E6 as
a major transforming agent. In contrast, the role of the smaller splice
isoform, E6*, in the carcinogenic process (if any) has not yet been
established. In the present study, we examined the behavior of the E6*
protein during tumor growth in an in vivo nude mouse xenograft model. We
created E6*-expressing SiHa (HPV+) and C33A (HPV-) cells, then examined
the ability of both the parental and E6*-expressing cells to form tumors
in nude mice. The difference in tumor size observed in the presence and
absence of E6*, when expressed in both HPV+ (SiHa) and HPV- (C33A) cells,
was dramatic and consistent, strongly indicating an anti-oncogenic role
for E6* in this context. Interestingly, we found that tumor growth
inhibition by E6* was greater in tumors derived from SiHa cells, which
are HPV16-positive, than in tumors produced by C33A, which are
HPV-negative. This difference implies that E6* acts by interfering with
the oncogenic activity of the full-length protein as well as through one
or more HPV-independent mechanisms. Consistent with this idea, we found
that E6* does indeed bind to the full-sized isoform and inhibits its
ability to accelerate degradation of p53 and procaspase 8. These data
represent the first demonstration of biologically-relevant E6* activities
distinct from those of the full-length isoform in vivo. The significance
of these findings in the context of human cancers is in the possibility
of mimicking or replicating the anti-oncogenic activity of E6* in such a
way as to provide therapeutic benefit.

