Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticles for image guided focused ultrasound drug delivery


Thermally triggered, PEGylated drug- liposomes are currently in clinical
trials. Conventional thermosensitive liposomes (TSLs) lack the labels
that would allow tumor imaging upon intravenous injection and a better
mark for tissue specific applied hyperthermia (image guidance). We
suggest dual- labelled thermosensitive liposomes for focused ultrasound
(FUS) induced hyperthermia, triggered-release and functional delivery of
the therapeutic anti-cancer drugs to xenograft tumors in response to
thermal stimuli in vivo. In addition to labeling for MR Imaging we
introduce the use of near infrared (NIR) fluorophores that allow for real
time imaging of nanoparticle behavior in the absence of any significant
intrinsic tissue background fluorescence, with good to excellent
transmission and reduced scattering throughout tissues. We have
synthesized these labels as lipid-probe conjugates and using these labels
and thermosensitive lipids we have prepared TSL nanoparticles.
N`-XenoLight750-N,N-distearylamidomethylamine (XLA750.DSA) and
Gadolinium(III)
2-{4,7-Bis-carboxymethyl-10-[(N,N-distearylamidomethyl-N-amidomethyl]-1,4,7
,10-tetraazacyclododec-1-yl}acetic Acid (Gd.DOTA.DSA) were synthesized
and characterized. Both lipids were used to prepare TSL nanoparticles
carrying the anticancer drugs at substantial encapsulation efficiency.
Nanoparticles were tested for their biophysical characteristics (thermal
drug release, stability in plasma, size) in vitro. MRI contrast
enhancement ability and Near-IR signal were tested in vitro and in vivo.
Nanoparticles carrying drugs were injected intravenously in mice bearing
tumors. Nanoparticle kinetics in tumors were assessed with optical
imaging and at defined time intervals (post injection), FUS (TIPS
Phillips: 1.4MHz) was applied for 3-5 min to induce a small increase in
temperature from 37C to 41C. Optical imaging revealed both substantial
nanoparticle accumulation and drug release immediately after and only in
tumors treated with focused ultrasound induced (focal) hyperthermia.
Tumors treated with both nanoparticles and FUS post injection showed
substantial growth inhibition compared to tumors treated with
nanoparticles only. The applications of these multifunctional
nanoparticles with short and mild hyperthermia could have a
transformative effect on cancer chemotherapy.

