Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct effect of aldehydes in anthracycline cytotoxicity in S.
cerevisiae


Anthracyclines are common chemotherapeutic agents used in many cancers
which are refractory to other therapeutic alternatives. In triple
negative breast cancer which is commonly observed in African-American
women (AA) and tend to be more aggressive, carry worse prognoses and are
harder to manage because they lack the molecular targets required for
therapies, anthracyclines are some of the few therapeutic alternatives.
Although effective, resistance to this agent usually arises and serious
side-effects like the development of cardiomyopathy limits their use. To
increase our knowledge of the pathways that protect cells from
anthracyclines we carried out a genome-wide genetic screening in the
eukaryotic model organism S. cerevisiae to identify gene defects that
generate cells hypersensitive to doxorubicin. A total of 71 deletion
strains displayed varying levels of sensitivity to anthracyclines. Among
these, mutants of HOM6 confer significant increased sensitivity to
doxorubicin. This effect appears to be due to the accumulation of the
threonine intermediate L-aspartate-semialdehyde and can be abolished by
the inactivation of a prior step, involving HOM3, which prevents the
accumulation of the intermediate. In order to further characterize the
synergism of aldehydes and doxorubicin, we have tested the effect of
different aldehydes on the cytotoxicity of cells exposed to
anthracyclines.Our data show that treatment with formaldehyde (2 mM)
reduced the survival of the wild type strain to 78%. However, in the
presence of doxorubicin, formaldehyde reduced the viability of the strain
by between 31 to 39-fold (with 10 M doxorubicin) relative to doxorubicin
and formaldehyde alone and by 110-fold relative to doxorubicin at 150 M
concentration.Co-treatment with formaldehyde and doxorubicin of
anthracycline-resistant strains siz1 and msh2 also shows increased
toxicity. However, the synergistic effect is not as pronounced in these
strains compared to the wild type. Among the aldehydes tested,
formaldehyde was most effective. Glutaraldehyde and acetaldehyde
displayed distinct effect on strains siz1, and ald5. The potential use of
a combination of aldehydes and cytotoxic drugs could potentially lead to
applications intended to enhance anthracycline-based therapy. This
possibility will be discussed, as well as the targeting of aldehydes in
relevant human pathways.Research supported by NIH/NCRR RCMI grant
#RR03020 at Florida A&M University.

