Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer and obesity impact the lipid composition of breast
adipose tissue: a preliminary study using shotgun lipidomics


Obesity, an established risk factor for breast and other cancers, is
associated with systemic inflammation and increased visceral adipose
tissue. Adipose tissue is a normal constituent of the breast; however,
the role of breast adipose tissue in breast cancer development,
especially in the context of obesity, has not been addressed before.
There is no information on the lipid composition of different fat depots
in the body, especially in the context of obesity, and even less among
obese tumor hosts. The study of the lipid composition of breast adipose
tissue in diet-induced obese (DIO) tumor-bearing and normal mice and its
impact in breast cancer progression is novel and has not been previously
examined. New profiling methods employing shotgun lipidomics, a technique
employed in mass spectrometric analysis using the direct loading of crude
lipid extracts into an electrospray ionization source for intrasource
separation and identification of numerous lipids, allow for extensive
cellular lipid profiles of different tissues being accrued with relative
ease. We studied the lipidomic profiles of the breast adipose tissue in
lean and DIO normal and tumor bearing mice. Lipidomics analyses were
performed using an electrospray triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (TSQ
quantum Access Max) and class specific parent-ion or neutral loss scan in
positive and negative ion mode with appropriate collision energy. The
ratiometic quantification of lipids was done using class specific lipid
standards. The phospholipid classes quantified were phosphatidylcholine
(PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylinositol (PI) and
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). Our results for the PC class reveal an
association between the total carbon chain of the lipids and the lipid
concentrations based on four conditions: lean control, obese control,
lean tumor bearers, and obese tumor bearers. The highest total carbon
chain length is associated with the obese tumor condition. The next
highest total carbon chain length is associated with lean tumor
condition. This demonstrates that both the presence of the tumor as well
as obesity play a role in contributing to a higher number of total
carbons in the lipid chains. The other lipid classes analyzed express
similar patterns from the data gathered when compared to the PC lipid
class. Characterizing a particular lipid signature relevant to breast
cancer and obesity may allow its targeting with therapeutic purposes.

