Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular platforms for mutation analysis from whole blood derived
clinical samples by nextgen sequencing


Both cell free DNA (cfDNA) and circulating tumor cells (CTC) represent
important possible templates for mutation analysis of clinical samples
with different theoretical advantages for a clinical test. cfDNA is easy
to access and isolate, while CTC can provide both DNA as well as RNA for
clinical testing. We have tested matched cfDNA and CTC DNA in a Next
Generation sequencing test of clinical samples. Both cfDNA and CTC
samples provided sufficient quantity for a direct sequencing clinical
test. No whole genome amplification was required. The test consisted of
coupling these purification technologies to an amplicon re-sequencing
panel of 50 cancer-associated genes using a CLIA validated sequencing
pipeline for single nucleotide variant (SNV) mutations with a sensitivity
of 1%. Typically using this pipeline, blood borne cancer cells are
isolated, extracted, sequenced and analyzed in 7 days. In the CLIA
setting, the validated DNA sequencing process applied to breast cancer
patient samples, has demonstrated useful and actionable clinical data.
Results of SNV detection from known clinical positive control samples
were quite definitive. We observed perfect concordance in True Positive
(TP) SNV detection between the cfDNA and CTC templates. The only
discordant results observed were in the detection of False Positives
(FP). Using the identical software for SNV detection and variant calls,
CTC templates exhibited 5x greater sensitivity in our sample set. cfDNA
samples showed a much greater noise spectrum of FP. As blood samples are
routinely fixed at collection, we evaluated whether fixation might
contribute to the cfDNA observed high FP frequency. Our experimental
results conclusively show that fixation did not contribute to increased
FP observed with cfDNA. Whereas CTC samples showed zero FP over the
reportable range, the cfDNA samples exhibited variable FP output ranging
from 0 to >10 FP per sample. To extend the capabilities of sequencing
rare cells, several RNA sequencing panels have been developed that allow
for both SNV, expression, and fusion transcript detection. Although these
panels have not been successfully used with cell free templates, they
have been successfully applied to rare cell templates and promise to be
an important capability for clinical use of CTC in the future. Looking at
both lung and breast cancer derived samples we have measured both SNV,
CNV (expression based), and fusion transcripts. We describe simultaneous
detection of SNV mutations (KRAS: G12S, STK11:Q37*, PIK3CA:E545K,
EGFR:L858R, EGFR:T790M, TP53:R273H) as well as fusion transcripts events
EML4-ALK.E6aA20.AB374361, and EML4-ALK.E13A20.AB462411. In summary, both
cfDNA and CTC derived DNA provided concordant results in SNV mutation
detection. cfDNA exhibited a much higher FP rate as compared to CTC DNA.
We further demonstrate that rare cells can provide useful template for
RNA sequencing.

