Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nectin-4 in the progression of ovarian cancer


The mechanisms by which ovarian cancer cells are released from the
primary tumor, seed throughout the peritoneal cavity, attach to local
organs, and then invade these organs, are not understood. In this study,
the cell adhesion molecule, Nectin-4, was investigated as a potential
mediator of several steps involved in ovarian cancer progression. In
particular, due to the ability of Nectin-4 to promote cell-cell
adhesions, we were interested in determining its role in mediating the
formation of cell-cell aggregates (spheroids) which are commonly seen in
the peritoneal fluid of ovarian cancer patients. Furthermore, since
spheroids are known to have a decreased rate of cell proliferation and
are chemoresistant, we were also interested in the role of Nectin-4 in
ovarian cancer cell proliferation and invasion. In our previous studies,
we performed gene microarray analysis and identified Nectin-4
overexpression in ovarian cancer tissues compared to normal ovaries and
other normal tissues. By ELISA, we found soluble Nectin-4 in the sera of
50% of women with ovarian cancer. In this study, we performed a series of
experiments in which two human ovarian cancer cells lines were
transfected with Nectin-4 or shRNA targeting Nectin-4, and then the
resultant cells were tested in functional assays. In the first case,
MA148 cells, which do not express Nectin-4, were transfected with
full-length Nectin-4. The resultant MA148 cells which expressed high
levels of Nectin-4 showed an increased rate of proliferation compared to
control cells which did not express Nectin-4. They also formed the
initial cell-cell adhesions involved in spheroid formation faster than
control cells. Furthermore, the spheroids which expressed Nectin-4 were
slower to disaggregate and invade through monolayers of mesothelial
cells. In the second case, NIH:OVCAR5 cells, which express moderate
levels of Nectin-4, were transfected with shRNA targeting Nectin-4,
resulting in the partial knockdown of Nectin-4 expression. We found that
the NIH:OVCAR5 cells that express lower levels of Nectin-4 on their
surface required a substantially longer time to form spheroids and
migrated more slowly in a wound healing assay. In both cases, we verified
the expression of Nectin-4 in the transfected cells by Western
immunoblotting and flow cytometry. These results suggest that Nectin-4:
(a) is important in the early events of cell-cell adhesion, (b) plays a
role in multicellular aggregation within the ascites of ovarian cancer
patients, and (c) causes tight spheroid formations that may impede
disaggregation. Additional functional studies leading to a better
understanding of the role of Nectin-4 overexpression and shedding in
ovarian cancer are currently underway. Understanding the role of Nectin-4
in ovarian cancer progression is critical in order to facilitate its
development as a novel therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.

