Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Annexin A3 is selectively expressed in MET-like as compared to
EMT-like breast cancer stem cells


Increasing evidence has demonstrated that breast cancers are driven by a
cellular subset that displays stem cell properties. These cells mediate
tumor metastasis and contribute to therapeutic resistance. We recently
reported that breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) are capable of
inter-converting between two cellular states in a process regulated by
the tumor microenvironment. CD44+/CD24- CSCs are characterized by
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes, invasive and
largely quiescent, whereas mesenchymal-epithelial-like (MET) stem cells
are characterized by expression of Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH),
epithelial morphology and self-renewal. In order to further characterize
these two alternative populations of BCSCs, we carried out gene
expression analysis of sorted ALDH+ and CD44+/24- populations from a
series of primary human breast cancers and established cell lines. We
used the CSC markers to fractionate MCF7 cells and performed proteomic
analysis utilizing liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Differentially expressed proteins were identified using t-test and ANOVA
based on spectra counts. Both microarray and proteomic analysis
identified Annexin A3 (ANXA3) to be consistently upregulated in ALDH/MET
stem cell populations compared to matched CD44+/24-/EMT-like CSCs. These
results were validated through qPCR and western blotting in utilizing the
luminal cell line MCF7 as well as the claudinlow cell line SUM 159. In
the latter, ANXA3 was upregulated 2-5 fold at both the mRNA and protein
levels in ALDH+ compared to ALDH- populations. Further,
immunofluorescence studies using confocal microscopy demonstrated
co-expression of ANXA3 and ALDH in MCF7 and SUM 159 cells. To determine
the clinical significance of ANXA3 in breast cancer, we performed
immunohistochemical analyses on tissue microarrays of breast cancer
patients. ANXA3 expression was found to be significantly higher in breast
cancers compared to normal breast tissue with over 75% of primary human
tumors demonstrating ANXA3 staining. ANXA3 was expressed at significantly
higher levels in luminal compared to basal and claudinlow tumors.
Furthermore, 42% of HER2+ tumors also showed moderate to high expression
of ANXA3. These results suggest that ANXA3 is predominantly expressed in
luminal breast cancers, where it marks the ALDH+ epithelial-like CSC
populations. The functional role of ANXA3 in breast CSCs is currently
under investigation.

