Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of p70S6K/Akt inhibitor MSC2363318A in patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models of breast cancer


The PI3K pathway is involved in the regulation of cell growth,
proliferation, metabolism and other functions. Aberrant signaling (PTEN
loss of function, PIK3CA mutation, Akt amplification, etc.) from the PI3K
pathway is observed in >50% of all tumors. Clinical evidence suggests
that inhibiting the PI3K pathway is beneficial for the treatment of solid
tumors and tumors of the hematopoietic system. Inhibition of mTOR via
rapalogs has been shown to block a negative feedback loop, thereby
leading to the activation of Akt. The activation of this Akt feedback
loop has been suggested to potentially compromise the clinical efficacy
of selective mTORC1 inhibitors such as temsirolimus and everolimus. Dual
p70S6K/Akt inhibition may promote improved pathway inhibition and also
block the negative consequences of Akt activation through the negative
feedback loop.MSC2363318A is a highly selective, potent, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) competitive inhibitor of p70S6K, Akt1, and Akt3. In a
cellular context, inhibition of p70S6K leads to potent inhibition of
ribosomal protein S6 phosphorylation, while inhibition of Akt activity
blocks the negative effects of a compensatory feedback loop. In addition,
MSC2363318A exhibits potent anti-proliferative activity against many
solid tumor cell lines in vitro, especially those with PI3K pathway
genomic alterations. Further, MSC2363318A can also cross the blood-brain
barrier (via pre-clinical studies in mice, rat, and dog), a unique
characteristic that would allow for treating not only malignancies that
are driven by PI3K pathway genomic alterations, but also indications with
a high incidence of CNS metastases and primary malignancies of the
central nervous system.Patient Derived Xenograft (PDX) models from breast
cancers with a high prevalence of PI3K pathway genomic alterations;
including, triple negative breast cancer and Her2+ breast cancer were
evaluated. In addition, combinations with standard of care agents were
then evaluated in these breast cancer PDX models. Results from these
studies were correlated with PI3K pathway genomic modifications, and will
be used to guide subsequent clinical studies.

