Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thienoindoles, a novel class of DNA minor groove alkylating agents
highly suited for the generation of novel antibody drug conjugates (ADCs)


The rapidly growing field of Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs) has recently
spurred the study of novel drug payloads. In particular, much interest
has been paid to the identification of novel cytotoxic agents, which
differ in mechanism from anti-tubulin agents, currently the most commonly
employed class of drug for ADC coupling. Novel drug payloads for
ADC-based therapy should thus ideally possess highly potent cytotoxic
activity with a diverse mechanism from tubulin agents, as well as
physicochemical properties, which facilitate coupling to antibodies.
Duocarmycins are a widely-described class of DNA minor groove binding
alkylating agents, examples of which can exhibit picomolar activity
against human tumor cell lines, as well as high activity in preclinical
tumor models. The clinical development of duocarmycins as drugs in their
own right has however been hampered by an extremely limited therapeutic
window. Duocarmycins also typically exhibit poor physicochemical
profiles, most importantly generally possessing limited aqueous
solubility and a propensity to induce protein aggregation, which renders
these molecules poorly tractable as optimal ADC payloads. Based on the
premise that opportune modification of the duocarmycin scaffold could
lead to the discovery of compounds better suited to antibody conjugation,
we describe the identification and related proof of concept studies for a
novel chemical series based on a proprietary thienoindole scaffold,
characterized both by potent antitumor activity and by physicochemical
properties that are highly compatible with deployment as antibody
payloads.Extensive in vitro profiling within the thienoindole series led
to selection of potent cytotoxic compounds suitable for test conjugation
to humanized monoclonal antibodies, which were then submitted to in
vitro/in vivo profiling. Typically, average drug/antibody ratios (DARs)
of 4 could readily be achieved without induction of antibody
aggregation/precipitation and without affecting natural antibody-ligand
affinity. Efficacy and mechanism of action studies were carried out for
thienoindole-ADCs prepared with trastuzumab and with rituximab showing
target driven effects in Her2 positive vs. negative breast cancer cell
lines and against CD20 positive vs. negative hematological cell lines. PK
data indicated long, essentially unaffected plasma half life of our novel
ADCs in the mouse. In vivo efficacy studies in the Her2-positive HCC1954
human breast cancer model showed complete tumor regression in mice
treated with trastuzumab-ADC with no effects on body weight gain, while
unarmed trastuzumab and armed control antibody had little and no effect,
respectively.

