Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel and oral histone deacetylase inhibitor, resminostat,
effectively suppresses the growth of non-small cell lung cancer in a
xenograft mouse model


Background: Accumulating evidence reveals effectiveness of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition in various types of cancer, and resminostat
is a novel and oral HDAC inhibitor. In this study, we investigated the
preclinical activity of resminostat in human non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells, especially in combination with docetaxel (DTX).Materials
and Methods: Anti-proliferative activity of resminostat was evaluated in
9 human NSCLC cell lines in vitro. Monolayers of cultured cells were
exposed to resminostat and cell viability was determined. The amount of
p21, acetylated histone H3 and -tublin were analyzed by Western blotting
in NCI-H460 cells exposed to resminostat. In addition, caspase-3 activity
was measured. In a drug combination study, cells were simultaneously
exposed to resminostat and DTX, and the synergistic effects of this drug
combination were analyzed using the Combination Index, calculated by the
median-effect method. For in vivo studies, a suspension of NCI-H460 cells
was subcutaneously inoculated into the flank of male nude mice. The
antitumor efficacies of oral resminostat alone or in combination with
intravenous DTX were evaluated in this NSCLC xenograft model.Results:
Resminostat exhibited antiproliferative activity in all tested cell
lines. Sensitivity to resminostat was not influenced by the genetic
status of KRAS among the cell lines (IC50 from 9 cell lines: 0.4-8.7
mol/L). The treatment of cells with resminostat alone increased the
levels of total p21 protein and acetylated histone H3. -tublin was also
acetylated by resminostat treatment and the level of acetylation was
enhanced by the combination treatment with DTX. The amount of polymerized
-tubulin was increased by DTX treatment and this effect was greater in
the combination treatment with resminostat than with DTX alone. Caspase-3
was more significantly activated by the combination treatment than with
each mono-treatment. The Combination Index showed synergistic or additive
effects in the resminostat plus DTX combination. The antitumor activities
of resminostat were demonstrated in NCI-H460 tumor-bearing mice, where an
up-regulation of p21 was accompanied by acetylation of histone H3 in the
tumor tissues. The tumor growth inhibition ratio (IR) in the combination
treatment was 2.6 and 1.8 times higher than with DTX alone or with
resminostat alone, respectively, following a tolerable drug application
schedule.Conclusion: These results demonstrated the potent activity of
resminostat in NSCLC. The combination of resminostat and DTX appears to
be a promising regimen to be tested in clinical trials in NSCLC patients.
Based on this study, we initiated a phase I/II study in NSCLC patients to
examine the safety and efficacy of this combination.

