Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-23b/-27b cluster decreases metastasis of aggressive
prostate cancer


Metastasis is responsible for the vast majority of prostate cancer
deaths. As such, it is essential to understand the mechanisms driving
prostate cancer to this lethal stage. Deregulation of microRNAs is
increasingly implicated in the progression and metastasis of prostate and
other cancers. MiR-23b and miR-27b, two members of the same miR cluster
(miR-23b/-27b), are down-regulated in human metastatic, castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) as compared to primary tumors and benign
tissue. However, the role of the miR-23b/-27b cluster is not fully
understood, particularly in metastatic disease. Interpretation of
existing data is complicated by the analysis of the individual effects of
miR-23b and miR-27b even though these miRs are co-transcribed and
coordinately expressed. The primary goal of our study is to determine the
effects of miR-23b/-27b on metastatic processes in vitro and in
vivo.Ectopic expression of miR-23b/-27b in two aggressive prostate cancer
cell lines decreases migration, invasion and anchorage-independent
growth. Conversely, inhibition of miR-23b/-27b using specific antagomirs
in relatively indolent prostate cancer cells promotes increased invasion
and migration. E-cadherin protein and mRNA levels were inversely related
to miR-23b/-27b levels. In contrast, manipulation of miR-23b/-27b levels
had no effect on prostate cancer cell proliferation in any of the tested
cell lines. These findings suggest that miR-23b/-27b is specifically
linked to metastasis suppression. The Rho GTPase, Rac1, is hyperactive in
CRPC cell lines and patient samples. Since Rac1 promotes invasion and
migration, we investigated the effects of miR-23b/-27b expression and
inhibition on Rac1 activity. Ectopic expression of miR-23b/-27b in
aggressive prostate cancer cell lines significantly attenuates active
Rac1 while having no effect on total Rac1 levels. Conversely, inhibition
of miR-23b/-27b in less aggressive prostate cancer cells increased Rac1
activity but not Rac1 levels.We further examined the effects of
miR-23b/-27b on prostate cancer metastasis in vivo. Metastatic prostate
cancer cells expressing luciferase and miR-23b/-27b or a scrambled
control, were injected into the ventral prostates of nude mice.
Orthotopic tumor formation and metastases were assessed by
bioluminescence imaging. Metastatic tumor burden was greatly decreased in
the tumors derived from miR-23b/-27b expressing cells.Taken together,
these data demonstrate that expression of miR-23b/-27b exerts
metastasis-suppressing effects in vitro and in vivo. The miR-23b/-27b
cluster may be a useful biomarker of poor prognosis in addition to having
therapeutic potential in advanced, metastatic prostate cancer.

