Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecule Mer tyrosine kinase inhibitor (UNC MerTKi)
effectively inhibits growth of murine melanoma


The Mer Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) is overexpressed in hematologic
and epithelial malignancies. Mer is not a proliferative driver but rather
produces a cancer cell-intrinsic survival signal. In addition,
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) express Mer, which upon binding
ligand-associated with apoptotic material, triggers engulfment
(effercytosis). The Mer signal also polarizes macrophages towards an
M2-like, wound healing, anti-inflammatory state, calming the innate
immune response when ingesting self. We have previously shown that
syngeneic polyoma middle T (PyVmT) breast cancer cells demonstrate
markedly attenuated growth when orthotopically implanted into Mer
knock-out mice, with Mer-/- TAMs of PyVmT tumors producing M1-like
inflammatory cytokines (JCI 123:3231, 2013). This result suggests that
Mer inhibition could enhance innate anti-tumor responses, and toward that
end, we examine the activity of first-in-class, orally bioavailable MerTK
inhibitor on tumor growth in autochthonous murine tumor models. UNC
MerTKi is 5-fold selective for Mer vs. Axl/Tyro3 and has favorable
pharmacokinetics. Once daily, oral dosing inhibits the growth of
Mer-expressing leukemia and NSCLC xenografts. UNC MerTKi was assessed in
immune-competent, genetically engineered murine models (GEMMs) in the UNC
Lineberger Mouse Phase 1 Unit (MP1U). After dose-finding studies in
wild-type mice established an MTD, the inhibitor was given at 120 mpk/d
in mouse chow, a dose which did not cause weight loss and produced a
measurable effect (i.e. inhibition of second phase platelet aggregation,
a known Mer pharmacodynamics marker). This dose did not exhibit single
agent activity in a murine model of breast cancer (C3TAg), but exhibited
pronounced single agent activity in RAS-driven, INK4a/Arf null melanoma
GEMM (TRIA). The MP1U has previously reported the efficacy of 15
chemotherapeutic and/or targeted regimens in a large (>220) cohort of
TRIA mice (CCR 18:5290, 2012). The overall response was 10% (partial
responses and stable disease). There were no complete responses. A
combination of MEK (AZD 6244) and PI3K/mTOR (BEZ235) inhibitors were the
most active previous regimen (responses seen in 9/18 mice = 50%, with 0
CRs) with moderate toxicity. UNC MerTKi exhibited greater activity (6/8
mice = 75%, with 3 CRs) with mild, well-tolerated toxicity in the TRIA
model. TRIA cell lines do not express Mer, suggesting that UNC MerTKi as
a monotherapy may induce responses via Mer inhibition in TAMs and the
tumor microenvironment, or via inhibition of Axl, Tyro or an unknown
target. In summary, a potent and selective Mer inhibitor exhibited
greater pre-clinical efficacy in a highly faithful model of RAS-mutant
melanoma than any other drug tested to date, including several compounds
that are FDA approved for use in metastatic melanoma.

