Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyro3 and Axl receptors tyrosine kinase as potential therapeutic
targets in leiomyosarcoma


Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) represents 15% of adult sarcomas. Once metastatic,
curative options are limited and innovative strategies are needed. TYRO3
and AXL proto-oncogenes belong to TAM family (Tyro3/Axl/Mer) of tyrosine
kinase receptors, with oncogenic properties that are often overexpressed
or activated in various malignancies. Using kinexus phosphoprotein
microarrays (KAM-1.1) and western blot analyses, we evidenced that Tyro3
and Axl are overexpressed in LMS along with Gas6, their ligand.
Interestingly LMS samples harbouring high levels of Gas6 and its
receptors also presented AKT phosphorylation on S473 residue keeping with
previous studies that highlighted AKT- mTOR activation in
leiomyosarcomas. Based on these premises, we asked whether Tyro3-Axl axis
may drive LMS proliferation and could represent potential targets in
these tumors. The overexpression of Tyro3 was found to be associated with
a specific miRNA signature, notably with an overexpression of miR22 in
LMS tumors. Furthermore Tyro3 and Axl were found overexpressed in a panel
of 6 LMS cell lines (SK-LMS-1 from ATCC and IB112, IB118, IB133, IB134
and IB136 from Institut Bergoni), compared with normal human smooth
muscle. Tyro3 or Axl knockdown via shRNA retroviral vector reduced cell
proliferation by up to 50 and 64% respectively and decreased soft agar
colony-forming ability. Crizotinib and foretinib are two tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) targeting Met and Axl. Treatment of LMS cell lines with
both TKIs resulted in a significant increase in cell death, with IC50
values ranging from 3.6 to 14.6M and 0.7 to 1.8M, respectively. Annexin V
and PI staining revealed that cell death was mainly due to apoptosis.
Flow cytometric cell cycle analysis demonstrates that both TKIs altered
cell cycle phase distribution. A sub-G1 phase accumulation was observed
for one of the cell lines; meanwhile the other cell lines presented a G2
arrest and 4n chromosomes accumulation accompanied by an increase in cell
and nucleus sizes. Only foretinib induced nuclear fragmentation
consistent with late apoptosis. Pharmacological inhibition also reduced
migration and colony formation in soft agar. Drug combinations with an
AKT inhibitor led to significant increase in growth inhibition in all
tested cell lines. Crizotinib and foretinib reduced activation of Tyro3
or Axl-mediated downstream signaling including MAPK/ERK, PI3K/AKT along
with an inhibition of Axl phosphorylation in a dose dependent manner. By
immunoprecipitation we observed also a reduction in Tyro3
phosphorylation, following exposure to both agents, showing that Tyro3 is
a new target for those drugs. IHC analysis of Tyro3, Axl and Gas6
expression in a cohort of LMS patient is ongoing. In vivo analysis wil be
performed. In conclusion these results strongly suggest that Tyro3 and
Axl are relevant therapeutic targets for LMS treatment and will be
investigated in a proof of concept clinical trial.

