Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and biological significance of CXCR6 in lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related deaths worldwide in
both men and women. Metastasis is responsible for most lung cancer
related deaths; therefore, a better understanding of the metastatic
processes and therapies designed to prevent the spread of cancer cells
are greatly needed. The specific mechanisms that promote metastases have
not been fully elucidated. Among all known chemokine receptors involved
in cancer progression, most cancer cells including lung cancer express
CXCR4. Furthermore, involvement of CXCR4 and CCR7 in breast cancer and
CXCR4, CCR9 and CX3CR1 in prostate cancer progression further indicates
that multiple chemokine receptors are involved in dictating the
multi-step process of metastasis. In this study, we show significantly
higher expression of CXCR6 and CXCL16 in lung cancer tissues compared to
normal matched tissues. Expression of CXCR6 was significantly higher in
adeno- carcinoma compared to squamous cell carcinoma. It addition to
these, serum levels of CXCL16, the only natural ligand for CXCR6, was
also significantly higher in lung cancer patients compared to normal
healthy donor. Furthermore, serum CXCL16 was also significantly higher in
patients with adenocarcinoma compared to patients with squamous cell
carcinoma. Impact of this chemokines-receptor axis was determined in lung
cancer cell lines in vitro, which express CXCR6 and CXCL16. Like tissues,
lung cancer cells showed higher expression of CXCR6 and CXCL16 compared
to normal lung epithelial cells (NuLi-1). Interestingly, expression of
CXCR6 was highest in cell lines derived form adenocarcinoma followed by
cell lines from squamous cell carcinoma. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
CXCR6 and soluble CXCL16 interaction plays a crucial role in lung cancer
cells migration and invasion. The mechanism underlying these clinically
and biologically important findings need to be further explored.
Increased serum CXCL16 in lung cancer patients with metastatic disease
required further validation as a potential therapeutic target and/or
diagnostic marker for lung cancer.

