Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of clinical assay to mitigate daratumumab, an IgG1
monoclonal antibody, interference with serum immunofixation (IFE) and
clinical assessment of M-protein response in multiple myeloma


Daratumumab is a fully human anti-CD38 IgG1 monoclonal antibody currently
in clinical development for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM)
(PMID:21187443). Novel agents like daratumumab can potentially result in
partial or complete clearance of the M-protein or monoclonal
immunoglobulin produced by multiple myeloma cells. Monoclonal paraprotein
clearance by serum electrophoresis and immunofixation (IFE) is part of
the International Multiple Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria for
complete response and followed routinely in clinical practice to assess
treatment response. The current limit of detection of many serum IFE
assays is approximately 150 g/ml M-protein, which is below the serum
concentration of most monoclonal antibodies dosed in the therapeutic
range. Indeed, recent studies demonstrated that therapeutic monoclonal
antibodies in clinical development for treatment of MM are readily
detected on serum IFE and can interfere with the detection and monitoring
of endogenous M-protein (PMID: 20940329, 21521182). Therefore, mitigation
strategies will need to be put in place to remove this interference to
ensure valid clinical response calls that meet IMWG criteria for complete
response and stringent complete response (negative serum IFE). We first
confirmed daratumumab's interference on serum IFE by spiking various
concentrations of antibody into PBS and normal healthy serum. We were
able to detect daratumumab in PBS and serum at 50 g/ml. We then utilized
commercially-sourced MM serum samples to determine the M-protein profiles
that may be observed in patients undergoing treatment with daratumumab
and project the percentage of subjects that may demonstrate interference
by serum IFE. Daratumumab was spiked into MM sera at clinically relevant
doses (200 g/ml) and the interference was noted in approximately 50% of
IgG kappa samples where daratumumab and endogenous M-protein co-migrated.
In remaining IgG kappa samples, the endogenous M-protein migrated in a
different position than daratumumab and was easily identifiable. To
mitigate interference, we utilized a mouse anti-daratumumab antibody to
bind daratumumab and shift the complex migration on IFE. In addition,
labeling the anti-idiotype antibody with either biotin or Alexa-fluor
tags provided further shift of the daratumumab-complex allowing for
additional distinction between the therapeutic antibody and endogenous
M-protein. Patients with suspected daratumumab interference can be
monitored with this additional reflex serum IFE utilizing the mitigation
strategy described above. After clinically validating this assay, we
intend to incorporate this mitigation strategy in clinical trials with
daratumumab to ensure accurate assessment of clinical M-protein response,
a critical evaluation for clinical trial endpoints and disease assessment.

