Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of PI3K isoforms and mTOR kinase is critical
for cancer stem cell inhibition by VS-5584


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a subpopulation of cancer cells that
have tumor-initiating capability, are particularly resistant to
chemotherapy, and can mediate tumor recurrence both locally and at
metastatic sites. As such, these cells represent a critical challenge for
effective treatment of cancer. High-throughput screening for small
molecules that preferentially target CSCs identified dual inhibitors of
the PI3K/mTOR pathway, suggesting the importance of this signaling
pathway for CSC biology. Here we demonstrate that ablation of mTOR or
individual PI3K isoforms by isoform-specific siRNA is not sufficient to
reduce the proportion of CSCs. In contrast, combined knock down of PI3K
isoforms and mTOR effectively reduced the proportion of CSCs in tumor
cell lines. VS-5584 is a potent and selective pan-PI3K/TORC1/TORC2
inhibitor with equipotency against all four human Class I PI3K isoforms
and the mTOR kinase. We demonstrate that VS-5584 preferentially targets
CSCs in multiple orthogonal assays both in vitro and in human tumor
xenograft models. Cancer stem cells express high levels of aldehyde
dehydrogenase, and an Aldefluor assay that measures activity of this
enzyme was used to identify CSCs. VS-5584 decreased the percentage of
Aldefluor+ cells across multiple breast cancer cell lines. We
demonstrated that VS-5584 preferentially induced apoptosis in Aldefluor+
SUM159 cells relative to Aldefluor- cells as measured by Annexin V and
Caspase 3/7 assays. In contrast, paclitaxel induced more apoptosis in
Aldefluor- than Aldefluor+ cells and enriched the percentage of CSCs.
Another characteristic of CSCs is their enhanced ability to efflux
cytotoxic agents. This drug-resistant CSC population, called side
population (SP), can be monitored by exclusion of Hoechst dye. VS-5584
effectively eliminated the SP CSCs across multiple cancer types, while
cisplatin and etoposide increased this subpopulation. Furthermore, ex
vivo treatment of primary breast and ovarian tumor specimens with VS-5584
decreased the proportion of CSCs as measured by the Aldefluor assay and
cell surface markers. Significantly, VS-5584 also targets CSCs in vivo in
MDA-MB-231 triple negative and MCF7 ER+ breast cancer xenograft models as
evidenced by decreases in the percentage of Aldefluor+ cells,
tumorsphere-forming efficiency, and tumor-initiating capability in an in
vivo limiting dilution re-implantation assay. Consistent with the notion
that combined inhibition of PI3K isoforms and mTOR is critical for
exerting a strong anti-CSC effect, the mTORC1-selective inhibitor
everolimus did not reduce CSCs in the MCF7 xenograft model. The potent
anti-CSC activities in primary patient cancer tissue and in xenograft
models provide strong rationale for the clinical development of VS-5584
in combination with agents targeting the bulk tumor to potentially
achieve durable clinical responses for cancer patients.

