Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioactive compounds or metabolites from black raspberries modulate
T lymphocyte function, myeloid cell differentiation and Jak/STATsignaling


Bioactive phyotochemicals from natural products, such as black
raspberries have direct anti-cancer properties on malignant cells in
culture and in xenograft models. In addition, black raspberry components
inhibit cancer progression in more complex rodent carcinogenesis models.
Although mechanistic targets for black raspberry phytochemicals in cancer
cells are beginning to emerge, the potential role in modulating host
immune processes impacting cancer have not been systematically examined.
We hypothesized that black raspberries contain compounds capable of
eliciting potent immunomodulatory properties that impact cellular
mediators relevant to chronic inflammation and tumor progression. In the
present report, we studied both an ethanol extract from black raspberries
(BRB-E) containing a diverse mixture of phytochemicals and two abundant
phytochemical metabolites of black raspberries produced upon ingestion
(Cyanidin-3-Rutinoside, C3R; Quercitin-3-rutinoside, Q3R). BRB-E
inhibited proliferation of CD3/CD28 activated human CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes. BRB-E also limited the viability of CD3+ T cells cultured in
IL-2, and were potent inhibitors of IL-2-induced STAT5 phosphorylation.
Conversely, BRB-E significantly enhanced the monokine-induced by gamma
(MIG)-mediated chemotaxis of CD8+ T lymphocytes in transwell assays. This
enhanced chemotaxis was associated with upregulated expression of CXCR3
on T lymphocytes. BRB-E also inhibited the in vitro expansion of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC). Consistent with the reduction in
MDSC, pre-treatment of immune cells with BRB E attenuated IL-6-mediated
signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3)
phosphorylation. Finally, the C3R and Q3R metabolites were also found to
be immunomodulatory, as C3R inhibited proliferation of CD3/CD28 activated
T lymphocytes and STAT5 phosphorylation, while Q3R inhibited MDSC
expansion and STAT3 signaling but not STAT5. Together these data indicate
that black raspberries or their physiologically-relevant metabolites
contain phytochemicals that affect immune processes relevant to
carcinogenesis. Furthermore, specific components and their metabolites
may be a source of lead compounds for drug development that exhibit
targeted immunological outcomes or inhibition of specific STAT-regulated
signaling pathways.

