Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism-based combination therapy of PI3 kinase delta-specific
inhibitor Idelalisib with Bendamustine in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy influenced by
oncogenic mutations and the factors of the microenvironment such as BCR
signaling that promote B-cell survival and proliferation. BCR signaling
cascade activates multiple downstream effector kinases including
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway that is critically important
in the clonal expansion of B-CLL cells. Of the four p110 catalytic
subunit isoforms, p110 delta isoform is over-expressed in many B-cell
malignancies, including CLL. Idelalisib (I) is a small molecule highly
selective PI3K delta inhibitor. I promotes apoptosis in B-cell
malignancies by disrupting the molecular pathways related to BCR
signaling, leukemia cell migration and microenvironment. Importantly, I
inhibits BCR derived PI3K signaling, which ultimately dampens AKT
activation. Bendamustine (B), an alkylating agent that induces DNA damage
and repair response, is recently approved for CLL therapy. Kinases that
are important for CLL cell survival may also be activated during this DNA
damage response. Based on this background, we hypothesize that the
treatment of CLL cells with I and B may modulate the repair mechanisms
and sensitize B-CLL cells to enhanced apoptosis. Our model system
includes primary CLL patient samples with or without BCR activation. Our
findings show that compared to time-matched DMSO control, treatment with
I or B as a single agent resulted in 5-15% and 5-20% dose-dependent cell
death, respectively. In contrast, combined treatment (I+B at 0.5+5, 1+10,
3+15, 5+20, 10+30 M) of CLL cells for 24 h resulted in 10-40% of
apoptosis as measured by annexin/PI (n=6). This was synergistic with a
combination index of Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell
malignancy influenced by oncogenic mutations and the factors of the
microenvironment such as BCR signaling that promote B-cell survival and
proliferation. BCR signaling cascade activates multiple downstream
effector kinases including Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
that is critically important in the clonal expansion of B-CLL cells. Of
the four p110 catalytic subunit isoforms, p110 delta isoform is
over-expressed in many B-cell malignancies, including CLL. Idelalisib (I)
is a small molecule highly selective PI3K delta inhibitor. I promotes
apoptosis in B-cell malignancies by disrupting the molecular pathways
related to BCR signaling, leukemia cell migration and microenvironment.
Importantly, I inhibits BCR derived PI3K signaling, which ultimately
dampens AKT activation. Bendamustine (B), an alkylating agent that
induces DNA damage and repair response, is recently approved for CLL
therapy. Kinases that are important for CLL cell survival may also be
activated during this DNA damage response. Based on this background, we
hypothesize that the treatment of CLL cells with I and B may modulate the
repair mechanisms and sensitize B-CLL cells to enhanced apoptosis. Our
model system includes primary CLL patient samples with or without BCR
activation. Our findings show that compared to time-matched DMSO control,
treatment with I or B as a single agent resulted in 5-15% and 5-20%
dose-dependent cell death, respectively. In contrast, combined treatment
(I+B at 0.5+5, 1+10, 3+15, 5+20, 10+30 M) of CLL cells for 24 h resulted
in 10-40% of apoptosis as measured by annexin/PI (n=6). This was
synergistic with a combination index of <0.8 (Chou-Chou, CalcuSyn
method). Moreover, at these five concentrations, I+B combination resulted
in 20-60% decline in phospho-AKT (S473) but not total AKT. In contrast, B
(up to 15 M) resulted in 40-60% increase in phospho-AKT levels.
Phosphorylation of H2Ax, a measure of DNA damage response, is induced
with combination treatment in comparison to single agent treatments. We
next investigated the molecular targets downstream of BCR signaling.
Primary CLL cells treated with I, in assays with BCR (IgM) stimulation
show a time-dependent decrease in phospho-AKT except at 24 h (n=4). For
phospho-GSK3, a downstream target of AKT, results were heterogeneous. In
contrast, at 24 h, I treatment consistently resulted in a decrease in
total Mcl-1; without any change in Bcl-2 protein levels. The decline in
Mcl-1 protein level may be due to a decrease in transcription as total
RNA synthesis was decreased by at least 30% after treatment with I.
Transcript levels and post-translational modification of Mcl-1 will
elucidate the mechanism of I+B cytotoxicity. The emerging role of kinase
inhibitors in combination with chemotherapeutic agent provides a new
modality of treatment for CLL patients.

