Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of targeted inhibitors against RecQ1 helicase


Background: RecQ helicases are a ubiquitous family of DNA unwinding
enzymes involved in the maintenance of chromosome stability. RecQ1
helicase genomic variations have an important prognostic role and
represents a therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer [JCO 2006; 24 (11)
1720-1728]. Pubchem data indicated potential RecQ1 activity >600
compounds using a qHTS RecQ1 assay (NIH Chemical Genomics
Center).Methods: We applied a set of filters including molecular weight,
potency and Hill curve fitting and also removed those interfering with
biological assay to identify sixteen compounds for studying RecQ1
inhibition. Two compounds showed strong inhibition of RecQ1 helicase
activity at 50 M and at IC50 Background: RecQ helicases are a ubiquitous
family of DNA unwinding enzymes involved in the maintenance of chromosome
stability. RecQ1 helicase genomic variations have an important prognostic
role and represents a therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer [JCO 2006;
24 (11) 1720-1728]. Pubchem data indicated potential RecQ1 activity >600
compounds using a qHTS RecQ1 assay (NIH Chemical Genomics
Center).Methods: We applied a set of filters including molecular weight,
potency and Hill curve fitting and also removed those interfering with
biological assay to identify sixteen compounds for studying RecQ1
inhibition. Two compounds showed strong inhibition of RecQ1 helicase
activity at 50 M and at IC50 < 5 M, respectively. From a large library of
compounds, eight potential inhibitors were synthesized in three simple
steps. First, sulfonylation of various amines with 3-Nitrobenzenesulfonyl
chloride was performed followed by reduction of the nitro group into an
amine. Finally, acylation with variety of acid chlorides resulted in the
final library of RecQ1 analogs. These agents were studied for RecQ1
helicase activity assay with the radiolabeled partial duplex substrate in
vitro. The RecQ1 inhibitor candidate compounds were investigated in
pancreatic cancer cell lines (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Capan-1, PANC-1, and
Mia-Paca2) for anti-tumor efficacy using cell proliferation assay with
CellTiter-Glo luminescence. Combination studies with test compounds and
poly (ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib and topoisomerase
Inhibitor SN38 were performed. Results: Though none of the compounds
showed the same level of activity of the parent compounds, we were able
to demonstrate a modest level of helicase activity with several. Two
compounds displayed strong inhibition of pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation. Two other compounds displayed synergistic inhibition with
SN38 or olaparib of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and induced DNA
damage.Conclusions: Synthesis of RecQ1 inhibitors is feasible and shows
potential for anti-tumor efficacy.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

