Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of copy number alterations and gene mutations
in testicular germ cell cancer


Introduction and ObjectiveTesticular germ cell cancer (TGCC) is the most
common solid malignancy among young adult males. Cure could be obtained
by intensive chemotherapy combined with retroperitoneal lymph node
dissection, but often with substantially compromised quality of life. As
for the common genetic lesions, somatic mutations and amplifications of
KIT are found in about 20%-30% of cases with TGCCs. However, the
molecular pathogenesis of TGCC is still poorly understood. In this study,
to obtain a better understanding of the genetic basis of TGCC and to
identify druggable molecular targets, we performed whole exome sequencing
as well as SNP array-based copy number analysis in TGCC.MethodsAll cases
underwent high orchiectomy and were histologically diagnosed as TGCC.
Genomic DNA was extracted from fresh frozen specimens of TGCC. Whole
exome sequencing was performed for paired tumor/normal DNA from 10 TGCC
patients, in which target exomes were captured using SureSelect Human All
Exon V5 (Agilent Technologies) and subjected to massively parallel
sequencing on the Illumina platform (HiSeq2000). Copy number variants
were also interrogated in 40 TGCCs (25 seminomas and 15 non-seminomas)
using Affymetrix 250K NspI array.ResultsTGCC genome was triploid in most
cases with high level amplification in12p. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
of chromosome 4 was frequently observed in both seminoma and
non-seminoma, whereas 11q deletion was found predominantly in cases with
seminoma. In addition, we identified recurrent focal amplifications
involving 4q12 and 22q11, from which KIT and MAPK1 were identified,
respectively. In whole exome sequencing, 15 somatic mutations were
detected per sample on average, which was relatively lower than other
solid malignancies. When combined the results of copy number analysis
with those of whole-exome sequencing, genes involved in RAS signaling
pathway and chromatin modification were frequently altered in
TGCC.ConclusionsOur comprehensive analyses revealed genomic aberrations
of TGCC in terms of copy number alterations and gene mutations.
Mutated/amplified KIT and MAPK1 and other RAS pathway gene could be
potential targets of small molecule inhibitors for therapeutics.

