Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased phosphorylation of eIF4E induces resistance to treatment
with mTOR inhibitors alone or together with AR antagonists in advanced
prostate cancer


The standard of care for patients with metastatic prostate cancer (CaP)
is the use of androgen receptor (AR) antagonists, but the treatment
results in the development of castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC). We previously showed that upregulation of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) activity upon use of AR antagonists contributed to
acquired resistance to this therapy, and that a combination of an mTOR
inhibitor and an AR antagonist overcame resistance to AR antagonists
alone (Wang et al, Oncogene, 2008;27(56):7106-17). Based on our data, a
Phase II clinical trial was conducted to determine the efficacy of the
combination of the mTOR inhibitor RAD001 and the AR antagonist
bicalutamide in bicalutamide-nave CRPC patients (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT00814788). Our study, which was recently concluded, showed
that some patients responded strongly to the combination while others
were seemingly resistant. The overall goal of this project was to define
pathways to overcome resistance to combinations of mTOR and AR
inhibitors.Comparison of a mTORC1 inhibitor, a mTORC1/C2 dual inhibitor
and a mTORC1/C2/PI3K triple inhibitor either alone or in combination with
bicalutamide in various prostate derived cell lines revealed cells that
were resistant vs those that were responsive to these inhibitors.
Investigation of the basal molecular profile of these cell lines
demonstrated that cells that expressed high levels of the phosphorylated
form of eIF4E S209, a translation initiation factor activated downstream
of mTOR phosphorylation, were resistant to mTOR inhibitors.
Interestingly, in cells with high basal eIF4E phosphorylation,
bicalutamide further increased eIF4E phosphorylation. Inhibition of eIF4E
by siRNA upregulated p38MAPK activity and also increased the levels of
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and ErbB3, a member of the
same family. Since p38MAPK activates the phosphorylation of Mnk1/2, which
in turn phosphorylates eIF4E(S209), we investigated the effects of the
Mnk inhibitor CGP57380 in prostate cancer cells. A combination of
CGP57380 and the dual mTORC1/C2 inhibitor INK-128 completely eliminated
cell growth in cell lines resistant to either mTOR and/or AR inhibitors,
including cells that did not respond to the Mnk inhibitor by itself. Our
results indicate that patients who develop resistance to anti-androgen
therapy may benefit from a combination of an mTOR inhibitor in
combination with an MNK inhibitor.

