Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic exposure to a low dose of interferon- increases levels of
DNA damage resistance signature genes through unphosphorylated ISGF3


Ionizing radiation and DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents are used
widely to treat many cancers, but the presence of cells that resist DNA
damage often leads to failure to cure. One of the specific features of
therapy-resistance is high expression of Interferon-Related DNA damage
resistance Signature (IRDS) genes. The IRDS genes are a subset of (about
30 genes) Interferon Stimulated Genes (ISGs) including IFI27, OAS2, Mx1,
and IFIT1. However, pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative ISGs, such as
IRF1, caspases, and FASL, are not included in this signature. In this
study, we elucidated the molecular mechanism of how the expression of
IRDS genes are increased, with no increase of other ISGs, in
therapy-resistant cancer cells. When cells expressed high levels of IRF9
and STATs 1 and 2 in the absence of phosphorylation of Tyr-701-STAT1 and
Tyr-690-STAT2, the expression of IRDS genes was increased, but that of
other ISGs was not. The un-phosphorylated STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9 proteins
formed a complex resembling Interferon Stimulated Gene Factor 3 (ISGF3),
a major transcription factor in type I interferon signaling. While ISGF3,
consisting of phosphorylated STATs 1 and 2 and IRF9, mediates the
expression of whole set of ISGs, the unphosphorylated ISGF3 (U-ISGF3)
induces only IRDS genes. ChIP assay revealed that U-ISGF3 selectively
bound to the promoters of IRDS genes (IFI27, OAS2, and Mx1), but not to
those of other ISGs (MyD88, IFI16, and IRF1). Continuous exposure of
cells to a low level of interferon, which might be produced by cancer
cells or surrounding immune cells, lead to steady-state increases in the
expression of only U-ISGF3 and IRDS genes with no increase of
phosphorylated ISGF3 and non-IRDS ISGs. We examined the correlation
between the U-ISGF3 levels and DNA damage resistance in various small
cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) cell lines. The expression of IRF9 and STATs 1
and 2 proteins varied in different SCLC cell lines, and high levels of
U-ISGF3 correlated with resistance to DNA damage. H82, H1048, and H146
cells, which express low levels of U-ISGF3, were sensitive to DNA damage
induced by radiation, etoposide, and doxorubicin, while H196, H1688, and
H2195 cells expressing high levels of U-ISGF3 were resistant to DNA
damage. In response to radiation, H2A.X levels were significantly
increased and remained high up to 48 hrs in H1048 cells, but the
increased H2A.X levels returned to lower levels in H196 cells, suggesting
that U-ISGF3-induced gene products may increase DNA damage repair. When
STAT1 was knocked down to reduce U-ISGF3 levels in H196 cells, H2A.X
levels increased by radiation remained high. Knocking IRF9 down also
decreased the resistance to DNA damage. In conclusion, U-ISGF3, which is
increased by a low dose of interferons, plays an important role in
inducing DNA damage resistance, and its targeting sensitizes cancer cells
to DNA damage induced by various cancer therapies.

