Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
from peripheral blood specimens of patients with advanced solid tumor
malignancies (using ApoStream instrumentation)


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) isolated from the peripheral blood of
cancer patients provide prognostic information and may inform treatment
decisions. Current strategies for CTC isolation and characterization
commonly employ epithelial marker-specific antibody capture of fixed
cells from blood and detection based on cytokeratin (CK) expression. Our
laboratory is currently evaluating an antibody-independent CTC enrichment
technology, ApoStream, which isolates live CTCs from blood, enabled by
critical dissimilarities in morphology and dielectric properties of CTCs
and blood cells rather than surface marker expression. CTCs isolated with
the ApoStream instrument are amenable to further high resolution
phenotypic characterization, enabling unambiguous identification of
enriched cells as malignant cells. We previously reported on the utility
of ApoStream technology for the isolation of CTCs from patients with
advanced alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) with unambiguous confirmation
of CTCs by break-apart fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for
ASPL-TFE3 gene translocation. Here, we show the isolation of viable CTCs
from patients with advanced solid tumors from ongoing clinical studies at
the NCI. Since during progression, cancer cells undergo epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions (EMT) and mesenchymal to epithelial transitions
(MET), we sought to characterize ApoStream-isolated CTCs using a
multiplex phenotyping assay for CD45 (hematopoietic marker), EMT markers
(CK, EpCAM, -catenin and Vimentin), and tumor specific markers (MUC1 and
CEA). A user-defined processing algorithm and CTC scoring criteria
developed using Definiens software was used for rare cell detection and
enumeration. Our current efforts are focused on evaluating the utility of
ApoStream-isolated CTCs for assessing pharmacodynamic effects of
anticancer agents on DNA damage response in patients with refractory
solid tumors. Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

