Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing small RNAseq of archived serum samples from the Janus
Serum Bank - a search for cancer biomarkers


IntroductionmiRNAs are a distinct class of small non-coding RNA molecules
that regulate the expression of protein coding genes. They are present
and stable in the cell-free body fluids such as plasma, serum and urine.
The Janus Serum Bank contains 317 000 serum samples and more than 61 000
incident cancer cases diagnosed during follow-up. It is well-suited for
studies of miRNAs as early cancer biomarkers since samples are collected
pre-diagnostically.AimTo establish a high-throughput sequencing approach
for obtaining high quality miRNA expression profiles from archived Janus
serum samples stored for up to 41 years. Further aims were to assess the
quantity and quality of small RNAs in the samples, and establish
guidelines for the optimal sequencing depth.MethodsTotal RNA was
extracted from eight pilot samples using Trizol and miRNeasy (Qiagen)
columns. Sequencing libraries were made using ScriptMiner (EpiCentre) and
the samples were sequenced on one HiSeq (Illumina) lane. After adaptor
removal the sequences were aligned unguided to the genome. Reads mapping
to mirBASE and Ensembl smallRNA features were counted and sequencing
saturation curves were calculated. DESeq was used for differential
expression analyses.ResultsHigh-throughput sequencing results from the
Janus samples, with storage times ranging from 13 to 39 years, show that
miRNAs are preserved in the samples. High quality miRNA expression
profiles, including on average 641 miRNAs per sample, were obtained from
our pilot samples. Most of the uniquely mapped reads, on average 84%, are
miRNA. We can also identify protein coding RNAs and other groups of small
RNA, on average respectively 9% and 6% of the uniquely mapped reads. The
preliminary results from sequencing saturation curves, tracking miRNA
discovery in each sample as a measure of input reads, have identified a
guideline for optimal sequencing depth.Conclusion and future
perspectivesHere we have shown that the stability, quantity and quantity
of long-term stored sera from the Janus Serum Bank are sufficient for
obtaining high-quality miRNA expression profiles. High-throughput
sequencing approach will be used in the search for miRNA expression
profiles as early cancer biomarkers for early diagnosis, improved therapy
and surveillance of cancer.

