Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic role of cytochrome P4501B1 in DNA adduct formation by
3-methylcholanthrene in mice: Implications for lung cancer in humans


Humans are frequently exposed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
Cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A and 1B1 enzymes are known to play important roles
in the activation of PAHs such as 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) to
DNA-binding metabolites, which in turn mediate carcinogenesis in target
organs such as lung, breast, and skin. In this investigation, we tested
the hypothesis that mice lacking the gene for Cyp1b1 will show
attenuation of MC-DNA adduct formation, compared to WT mice. Eight
week-old female wild type (WT) (C57BL/6J) mice or mice lacking the gene
for Cyp1b1 were treated with MC (100 mol/kg), once daily for 2 days, and
animals sacrificed 1 day after the last treatment. DNA adducts from liver
and lung genomic DNA were analyzed by the 32P-postabeling assay. Control
animals received only the vehicle corn oil (CO). In WT mice, CO-treated
group did not show any adducts, whereas MC-treated animals showed 11
adduct spots in the lung. In Cyp1b1-null mice, although there were no
qualitative differences in the pulmonary adduct pattern, the levels of
each adduct was markedly suppressed (25-90%), with total levels of
adducts being about 15% of those formed in WT mice. In liver of WT as
well as Cyp1b1-null mice, MC induced formation of 11 adducts, and the
adduct pattern was similar to that of lung, but the total levels of
adducts in WT mice were about a third of those seen in the lungs of the
corresponding animals. In Cyp1b1-null mice, MC adducts were significantly
decreased compared to WT mice, but the extent of attenuation in liver was
lesser than that in lung. These results suggest that CYP1B1 plays a major
role in formation of DNA adducts from MC. Because DNA adducts are
pre-mutagenic lesions, our results are highly relevant to PAH-mediated
pulmonary carcinogenesis. Our data suggest that CYP1B1 could be a
molecular target for developing preventive and therapeutic strategies
against lung cancer in humans.

