Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of single-nucleotide variants by high-throughput
RNA sequencing in endemic Burkitt Lymphoma


Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) constitutes the commonest cancer in
children in Developing Countries, while the sporadic (sBL) and
immunodeficiency associated BL (ID-BL) forms are mainly encountered in
Western Countries. The molecular hallmark of three BL variants is the
translocation of MYC proto-oncogene to the immunoglobulin-heavy
[t(8;14)(q24;q32)] or one of the light chain genes [t(2;8)(p12; q24) and
t(8;22)(q24; q11)], leading to constitutive MYC activation. However,
additional genetic events contributes to BL pathogenesis, most of which
have been studies in sBL only.Here, we performed RNA Sequencing aiming to
identify genetic changes possibly cooperating with MYC in the
pathogenesis of eBL. We studied by RNA Sequencing (Illumina HiScanSQ) 21
eBL cases, collected at different African Institutions as discovery set.
Total RNA was extracted with Trizol and libraries were prepared according
to TruSeq RNA sample preparation v2 protocol. Sequence variants were
obtained using the SAVI (Statistical Algorithm for Variant
Identification) algorithm independently for each sample. Candidate
somatic mutations were obtained by eliminating common germline variants
and recurrence. To validate single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) we
performed Sanger sequencing on these 21 cases. Further, we studied these
SNVs by Sequenom Technology and Sanger sequencing on additional 24 eBL
cases as validation set. 41 sBL and 8 ID-BL were also considered as
controls.We found 66 genes affected by 219 total SNVs with different
frequency in 21 samples (range 2-22 for sample). We then focused on genes
mutated in at least three samples and predicted to induce somatic
protein-changing. We identified 25 genes affected by 172 total SNVs, that
were recurrently mutated (min. 3/21 samples; max 11/21 samples). These
included genes previously known to be involved in sBL, such as TP53, MYC,
ID3, PCBP1 and TCF3 as well as genes involved in other lymphomas such as
DDX3X and RHOA. The remaining 18 genes (AGAP6, APBB1IP, ARID1A, ASPSCR1,
AVEN, CAD, CCNF, GPATCH4, HERC2, KPNA2, MTBP, MTERFD1, NEK9,
NUP133,PARP1, POLQ, SCFD2, TIGD1) were previously not related to BL, and
resulted to be involved in several important molecular pathways as cell
cycle progression, apoptosis, matrix remodelling, angiogenesis.Sanger
sequencing confirmed such SNVs with 100% accuracy in 21 cases of
discovery set. Subsequently, we studied them in 24 independent cases of
validation set by both Sanger sequencing and by mass spectrometry
(Sequenom). We found that most eBL cases carried additional SNVs rather
than MYC translocations. Noteworthy, we failed to find these mutations in
sBL, confirming the concept that different pathogenetic events may
contribute to the pathogenesis of BL subtypes.In conclusion , we
discovered new SNVs that might have a significant role in the
pathogenesis of eBL. Functional experiments are required to definitely
assess their impact.

