Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFBR1 and other immune-related genes modify susceptibility to
HPV-associated head and neck cancer


OBJECTIVES: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-related cancer of the oropharynx
(OPC) makes up an increasing proportion of head and neck cancers (HNC).
Since viral infection and progression to cancer are both strongly
influenced by the immune system, the host immune response is one
potential determinant of susceptibility to HPV-related cancers. The
overall goal of this project is to identify immune-genetic variants
associated with an increased risk of developing virally-mediated
HNC.STUDY DESIGN: Data from a HNC Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS)
performed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and
the Centre National de Gestion (CNG) was evaluated for associations
between genetic variants in immune genes and the risk of developing
OPC.METHODS: An association analysis using multivariate logistic
regression was performed on the HNC GWAS data limited to OPC. We analyzed
all SNPs intersecting immune genes based on Gene Ontology using a multi
tier computational approach which included single gene analysis,
gene-gene interaction (GGI) analysis, pathway analysis and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis. Results were validated in 2
in-silico replications: the HNC GWAS limited to individuals with
serologic evidence of HPV infection, and a cervical cancer GWAS.RESULTS:
The OPC GWAS found 17 immune SNPs to be associated with OPC at a
significance level of pOBJECTIVES: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-related
cancer of the oropharynx (OPC) makes up an increasing proportion of head
and neck cancers (HNC). Since viral infection and progression to cancer
are both strongly influenced by the immune system, the host immune
response is one potential determinant of susceptibility to HPV-related
cancers. The overall goal of this project is to identify immune-genetic
variants associated with an increased risk of developing virally-mediated
HNC.STUDY DESIGN: Data from a HNC Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS)
performed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and
the Centre National de Gestion (CNG) was evaluated for associations
between genetic variants in immune genes and the risk of developing
OPC.METHODS: An association analysis using multivariate logistic
regression was performed on the HNC GWAS data limited to OPC. We analyzed
all SNPs intersecting immune genes based on Gene Ontology using a multi
tier computational approach which included single gene analysis,
gene-gene interaction (GGI) analysis, pathway analysis and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis. Results were validated in 2
in-silico replications: the HNC GWAS limited to individuals with
serologic evidence of HPV infection, and a cervical cancer GWAS.RESULTS:
The OPC GWAS found 17 immune SNPs to be associated with OPC at a
significance level of p<10-4 -10-7. GGI analysis demonstrated a high
degree of significant functional connection amongst the top ranked immune
genes, and PPI analysis identified three significant functional clusters
of immune genes related to TGFBR1 signaling, innate immunity, or Th1/Th2
immune balance. Pathway analysis identified multiple immune pathways
significantly enriched in the OPC GWAS including 4 cell death, 5 innate
immunity, 4 NFKB, 2 T-cell activation, and 4 TGFB signaling pathways.
While several immune genes were found to overlap multiple modes of
analysis, TGFBR1 intersected all tiers of analysis and was thus selected
for validation. Replication in the GWAS dataset limited to serologically
HPV+ HNC cases validated 14 out of the 15 significant genes including
TGFBR1. Replication in a cervical cancer GWAS demonstrated TGFBR1 to be
significantly associated with cancer risk and an identical TGFBR1
containing pathway to be highly significant in both cervical cancer and
OPC GWAS.CONCLUSIONS: The high degree of concordance among multiple
independent tiers of analysis, strongly implicates variations in
immune-related genes as modulators of susceptibility to HPV-mediated HNC
and highlights TGFB signaling as a process potentially dysregulated
across HPV-related cancers. Thus data highlights the role of host
immunogenetics as a modulator of virally-related cancer risk and the
utility of multi-component computational strategies in testing
biologically based hypothesis about mechanisms of disease susceptibility.

