Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticles loaded with indium (III) phthalocyanine are more
effective in promoting cell proliferation inhibition on MCF-7 breast
cancer cells when compared to free InPc


Background: Indium (III) phthalocyanine (InPc) was encapsulated into
nanoparticles (NP) of PEGylated poly (D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)
(PLGA-PEG) to improve the photobiological activity of the
photosensitizer. The efficacy of NP loaded with InPc and their cellular
uptake was investigated with MCF-7 cells, and compared with the free
InPc. Methods: NP were prepared by the method of emulsion/evaporation.
The emulsion was washed and centrifuged and lyophilized. The lyophilized
particles were characterized via scanning electron microscopy. The
evaluation of the cell suspensions viability incubated with InPc free and
encapsulated and subsequently irradiated with a 665 nm laser diode was
performed at different concentrations of InPc (1.8-7.5 mol/L), incubation
times (1-2h) and laser power (10-100mW) by MTT assay. The internalization
of the InPc free and encapsulated cells was assessed via confocal
microscopy. Measurement of absorbance spectra and fluorescence of free
and encapsulated InPc were monitored during irradiation assessment
photodegradation to the photosensitizer. The generation of singlet oxygen
was monitored by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy.Findings:
The influence of photosensitizer (PS) concentration (1.8-7.5 mol/L),
incubation time (1-2h), and laser power (10-100mW) were studied on the
photodynamic effect caused by the encapsulated and the free InPc. NP with
a size distribution ranging from 61 to 243 and with InPc entrapment
efficiency of 726% were used in the experiments. Only the photodynamic
effect of encapsulated InPc was dependent on PS concentration and laser
power. The InPc loaded NP were more efficient in reducing MCF-7 cell
viability than the free PS. For a light dose of 7.5 J/cm2 and laser power
of 100 mW, the effectiveness of encapsulated InPc to reduce the viability
was 343 % while for free InPc was 607 %. Confocal microscopy showed that
InPc-loaded NP, as well as free InPc, were found throughout the cytosol.
The NP aggregates and the aggregates of free PS were found in the cell
periphery and outside of the cell. The NP aggregates were generated due
to the particles concentration used in the experiment because of the
small loading of the InPc while the low solubility of InPc caused the
formation of aggregates of free PS in the culture medium. The
participation of singlet oxygen in the photocytotoxic effect of
InPc-loaded NP was corroborated by electron paramagnetic resonance
experiments, and the encapsulation of photosensitizers reduced the
photobleaching of InPc. Interpretation: The InPc encapsulated was more
effective in reducing the MCF-7 viability compared to InPc free due to
increased internalization of InPc encapsulated in tumor cells due to the
aggregate state of the InPc free hampering the generation of singlet
oxygen.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

