Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of dual labeling strategies for NIRF/PET hybrid imaging


Objectives: Positron Emission Tomography (PET) plays a pivotal role in
the surgical care of cancer patients pre- and post-operatively, however,
no functional imaging approaches are currently available for real-time
surgical guidance. Recently, antibodies dual-labeled with radioactive and
near-infrared fluorescent (NIRF) labels have emerged as potential agents
to extend whole-body nuclear imaging capabilities into the operating
room, but structural limitations in conventional labeling reagents
necessitate a random, two-step labeling process which can reduce
bioactivity and batch reproducibility. Here, we evaluate the utility of a
site-specific multimodal chelator (MMC) that combines PET/NIRF labeling
into a single moiety for enhanced production of immunoconjugates for
hybrid imaging.Methods: An anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM)-specific antibody, mAb7, was treated with varying amounts of the
reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT) to partially reduce the interchain
disulfides and permit conjugation with MMC-maleimide. The number of MMC
moieties per mAb were quantified by isotopic dilution using
non-radioactive Cu and immunoreactivity was assessed by ELISA. 64Cu
labeling was performed and samples were purified by size exclusion prior
to HPLC analysis. Stability of the immunoconjugates was evaluated by
HPLC. Multimodal PET/NIRF imaging was performed in an orthotopic prostate
tumor model to assess in vivo targeting.Results: mAbs treated with
increasing amounts of DTT had higher conjugation ratios, with values
ranging from 1-8 MMC moieties per mAb. ELISAs showed no differences in
binding potency for the MMC-immunoconjugates. Radiochemical yields were
high for all samples (>80%) and increased as a function of conjugation
ratio. Interestingly, initial 64Cu labeling of the immunoconjugate with a
MMC/mAb ratio of 4 had a corresponding HPLC trace showing >95%
radiochemical purity, however, labeling 8 weeks later revealed formation
of a second, prominent radioactive peak. Conversely, the HPLC profile of
the immunoconjugate with a MMC/mAb ratio of 2 was consistent throughout
the study, suggesting a possible correlation between the extent of
partial reduction and protein stability. This observation was supported
by in vivo imaging findings as lesions were better visualized in mice
receiving 64Cu-MMC-mAb7 with a MMC/mAb ratio of 2.Conclusions: The
results indicate that site-specific conjugation of MMC is effective for
dual labeling antibodies. However, partial reduction conditions must be
optimized in order to obtain a multimodal immunoconjugate with suitable
imaging properties and stability.

