Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of small GTPase Rab7 in the secretion of extracellular
microvesicles by head and neck squamous cells carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an epithelial malignant
tumor that shows its highest incidence in the upper aerodigestive tract
and is considered one of the six most common malignancies worldwide.
Among the processes involved in the poor prognosis of HNSCC, local
invasion and subsequent metastasis are the most important events. Recent
evidences have shown that metastasis can be the result of extracellular
microvesicles (MVEs) being released from the tumor cells to the blood or
lymphatic system. The molecular mechanisms involved in MVEs biogenesis
and secretion are, however, poorly understood. Herein, we have performed
a screen targeting for the components of MVEs biogenesis in three HNSCC
cell lines (SCC-9, Cal27 and FaDu) through western blotting. MVEs were
quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight) and the
lysosomal compartment was followed in the cell lines through
immunofluorescence. Comparing the three cell lines, FaDu cells presented
higher expression of proteins responsible for MVEs formation (pHead and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an epithelial malignant tumor
that shows its highest incidence in the upper aerodigestive tract and is
considered one of the six most common malignancies worldwide. Among the
processes involved in the poor prognosis of HNSCC, local invasion and
subsequent metastasis are the most important events. Recent evidences
have shown that metastasis can be the result of extracellular
microvesicles (MVEs) being released from the tumor cells to the blood or
lymphatic system. The molecular mechanisms involved in MVEs biogenesis
and secretion are, however, poorly understood. Herein, we have performed
a screen targeting for the components of MVEs biogenesis in three HNSCC
cell lines (SCC-9, Cal27 and FaDu) through western blotting. MVEs were
quantified using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA - NanoSight) and the
lysosomal compartment was followed in the cell lines through
immunofluorescence. Comparing the three cell lines, FaDu cells presented
higher expression of proteins responsible for MVEs formation (p<0.05),
such as Flotilin-1, Tsg101, VPS36 and also Rab7, a small GTPase that
directs vesicles to lysosomes. However, FaDu cells secreted less MVEs
than SCC-9 and Cal27. Immunofluorescence experiments showed the presence
of numerous perinuclear clusters positive to LAMP-1 (lysosome marker) in
FaDu cells, while SCC-9 and Cal27 showed LAMP1-positive organelles
dispersed throughout their cytoplasms. Taken together, the results
highlight a role for Rab7 protein in the negative regulation of MVEs
secretion by HNSCC cell lines, which may provide important information
related to tumor progression, treatment response, and especially the
development of metastasis.Supported by So Paulo Research Foundation
(FAPESP)

