Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A possible role for the Hedgehog pathway ligands Desert and Indian
in rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common type of soft tissue sarcoma in
children, is thought to derive from embryonic cells committed to
developing into skeletal muscle and is divided into 2 major subtypes:
embryonal and alveolar (eRMS and aRMS, respectively). Hedgehog
pathway-belonging proteins are considered to be key regulators of
development in pluricellular organisms, exerting crucial roles in
processes such as tissue patterning, proliferation and differentiation.
Likewise, Hedgehog (HH) signaling also plays important roles in adult
organisms such as stem cell maintenance or tissue repair. The 3 Hedgehog
ligands present in mammals are named Sonic (SHH), Indian (IHH) and Desert
(DHH). Upon binding of a Hedgehog ligand to Patched, active SMO is
detected in the membrane and prevents GLI proteosomal processing. GLI is
then translocated to the nucleus where it binds to and regulates
GLI-specific promoters. Despite the knowledge gathered to date, the
mechanism that drives activation of the pathway in RMS is not well
understood; the relative importance of the 3 HH ligands has not been
elucidated and a possible role for Desert or Indian HH in the
pathogenesis of RMS has not been studied. Previous works reported
undetectable levels of SHH in RMS tumors and cell lines with Hedgehog
pathway activation, suggesting a mechanism of GLI1-upregulation
independent of autocrine SHH expression. Herein, we report extremely low
levels of SHH expression in the majority of RMS patients (approximately
70%). Conversely, we report a prominent expression of Desert and Indian
HH ligands - instead of SHH - in RMS, thereby supporting the possible
existence of an autocrine ligand-dependent activation of the Hedgehog
pathway in this neoplasia. Furthermore, the expression of DHH
significantly correlates with GLI1 levels, pointing to a crucial role of
this ligand for the activation of the pathway in RMS.

