Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor 23 promotes prostate cancer cell
proliferation and invasiveness in vitro


Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy among American men and
remains the second leading cause of male cancer mortality. Since age is
thought to be one of the crucial factors in prostate cancer development,
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which forms a complex with Klotho,
the age-related gene product, could play a key role in prostate
development and progression. FGF23 is a peptide hormone member of the
endocrine FGF subfamily (FGF19, FGF21, and FGF23), which signals through
FGF receptors (FGFRs) in the presence of the coreceptor -Klotho. FGF-23
has a critical role in phosphate homeostasis and vitamin D metabolism.
The regulation of 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D by FGF-23 could also have
implications for cancers, given that vitamin D metabolites have been
shown to have anticarcinogenic effects. It has been reported that higher
concentrations of FGF-23 were found in patients with advanced ovarian
cancer compared with those with early-stage cancer or control subjects;
circulating FGF-23 is associated with an increased risk of colorectal
adenoma; however, to date, no investigations of the role of FGF-23 in
prostate cancer have been reported. In the present study we investigated
the function of FGF23 on human prostate cancer progression. FGF23 gene
expression was determined in the commonly used prostate cancer cell
lines: PC3, LNCaP, DU145, VCaP, and an immortalized normal prostate cell
line PNTIA. RT-PCR showed that both FGF23 and Klotho (KLA) genes are
expressed in all these cell lines. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
indicated that FGF23 gene expression is elevated in prostate cancer
compared to normal prostate tissue; FGF23 expression frequency is
significantly higher in prostate cancer in compare with normal tissue
(prostate cancer: total case number 35, positive 23; normal prostate
tissue: total number 33, positive 15; p=0.04841). Biological function
assays demonstrated that exogenous FGF23 stimulates prostate cancer cell
proliferation (LNCaP by 30%, PC3 20%), anchorage-independent growth (by
60% for both LNCaP and PC3 cells), and invasion (LNCaP by 50% and PC3
55%). Suppression of FGF23 expression by FGF23 short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
significantly inhibits PC3 and LNCaP cell proliferation, soft agar colony
formation, and invasiveness in vitro. These data suggest that FGF23
promotes human prostate cancer progression and targeting FGF23 signaling
pathway could decrease prostate cancer growth and metastasis.

