Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of inhibition of upregulated microRNAs in canine
histiocytic sarcoma


Histiocytic diseases encompass a spectrum of proliferative diseases in
humans and dogs. While these orphan malignancies are rare in the human,
histiocytic diseases are relatively frequent in certain breeds of dog. In
the dog, these diseases range from benign histiocytoma to malignant
histiocytic sarcoma (HS). Disseminated HS has a poor prognosis and lacks
effective treatment options in both humans and dogs. The overall goal of
this study is to unravel the mechanisms of tumorigenesis in histiocytic
diseases and identify better treatments. Our studies have focused on
microRNAs (miRNAs), which are master regulators of gene expression and
may have a significant role in tumorigenesis in histiocytic diseases.
MiRNA profiling of canine histiocytic diseases was conducted on cases of
reactive histiocytosis, HS, and hemophagocytic HS. These samples were
compared to normal canine histiocytes derived from peripheral blood or
peritoneal fluid. Several miRNAs were identified to be upregulated in the
disease samples and were selected for validation by qRT-PCR. From these
results, two miRNA targets were selected for further evaluation. We are
probing the significance of the upregulation of these miRNAs by
inhibiting their function in canine HS cell lines using chemical miRNA
inhibitors and sponge constructs designed to competitively bind the
upregulated miRNAs, thus preventing them from acting on their targets.
Our results to date indicate that inhibiting these miRNAs in the canine
HS cell line, DH82, decreases growth rate by as much as 39%. Studies into
other aspects of tumorigenicity potentially affected by the inhibition of
these miRNAs are underway. Our preliminary data suggests these miRNAs
themselves may be effective therapeutic targets for histiocytic diseases.
Additionally, further analysis of the pathways regulated by these miRNAs
may identify critical gene targets in HS tumorigenesis and thus increase
our understanding of these malignancies and discover novel and effective
therapies. Comparative studies have the potential to provide
opportunities for advancement in these orphan malignancies, and in this
case, improve clinical outcome in dogs and humans.

