Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural variant breakpoint detection in advanced colorectal
cancer


IntroductionDevelopment of colorectal cancer (CRC) is accompanied by
genomic alterations that drive tumor initiation and progression. Gains
and losses of large chromosome segments result in DNA copy number
alterations and subsequently quantitative changes in mRNA and protein
expression levels. Interestingly, the accompanying chromosome breakpoints
represent structural variants (SV) that may affect gene architecture and
thereby normal gene function.AimThe aim of this study was to identify
recurrent SV breakpoints in advanced CRC.MethodsPreviously a series of
352 advanced CRC samples from CAIRO and CAIRO2 clinical studies [Koopman
et al. Lancet 2007; Tol et al. N Engl J Med 2009] was characterized for
genome-wide DNA copy number alterations. DNA from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor and patient-matched normal tissue was
subjected to high-resolution array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization
(Agilent 180K arrays). Using these data, we now determined the prevalence
of recurrent breakpoints in genes in CRC by computational analysis. In
addition, multiplexed amplicon analysis involving 48 cancer-related genes
(Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel) was applied to determine mutation
frequencies. Multi-Dendrix was used to identify modules of (mutually
exclusively mutated) cancer driver genes.ResultsWe identified 748
recurrent SV breakpoints in genes (FDRIntroductionDevelopment of
colorectal cancer (CRC) is accompanied by genomic alterations that drive
tumor initiation and progression. Gains and losses of large chromosome
segments result in DNA copy number alterations and subsequently
quantitative changes in mRNA and protein expression levels.
Interestingly, the accompanying chromosome breakpoints represent
structural variants (SV) that may affect gene architecture and thereby
normal gene function.AimThe aim of this study was to identify recurrent
SV breakpoints in advanced CRC.MethodsPreviously a series of 352 advanced
CRC samples from CAIRO and CAIRO2 clinical studies [Koopman et al. Lancet
2007; Tol et al. N Engl J Med 2009] was characterized for genome-wide DNA
copy number alterations. DNA from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tumor and patient-matched normal tissue was subjected to high-resolution
array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (Agilent 180K arrays). Using
these data, we now determined the prevalence of recurrent breakpoints in
genes in CRC by computational analysis. In addition, multiplexed amplicon
analysis involving 48 cancer-related genes (Illumina TruSeq Amplicon
Cancer Panel) was applied to determine mutation frequencies.
Multi-Dendrix was used to identify modules of (mutually exclusively
mutated) cancer driver genes.ResultsWe identified 748 recurrent SV
breakpoints in genes (FDR<0.1). The highest frequency of recurrent
breakpoints was detected in MACROD2, in up to 40% of CRC samples. Most
recurrent breakpoints occurred in less than 5% of all tumors, and have
not been reported before in CRC. Mutation frequencies in APC, TP53 and
KRAS were conform expectations (60%, 58%, and 48%, respectively).
Multi-Dendrix analysis revealed modules of cancer driver genes that
included both the commonly mutated CRC cancer genes as well as genes with
recurrent breakpoints, suggesting that several of the SV breakpoint genes
are candidate drivers of the carcinogenic process.ConclusionsWe were able
to pinpoint the prevalence of 748 recurrent SV breakpoint regions in
genes using array-CGH data from 352 CRC samples. Moreover, our studies
revealed several breakpoints in genes that are mutually exclusive with
the commonly mutated APC, KRAS, and TP53 genes, and therefore represent
novel candidate cancer driver genes. Further studies are required to
investigate their functional and clinical significance.

