Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A in combination with cisplatin targets CD44 and Oct4
positive cancer stem cells in ovarian cancer


Currently, the treatment for ovarian cancer entails cytoreductive surgery
followed by chemotherapy, mainly, carboplatin coupled with paclitaxel.
Although this treatment regimen is initially effective in a high
percentage of cases, it is associated with severe side effects and within
6 to 24 months of initial treatment, tumor relapse occurs, which is
attributed to the carcinomas having become platinum-resistant. Due to the
poor survival of women with platinum-resistant carcinomas, and the severe
side effects an alternative treatment strategy is warranted. We developed
a novel strategy that combines cisplatin with withaferin A (WFA). WFA, a
bioactive compound isolated from the plant Withania somnifera, is used in
the US as an over-the-counter dietary supplement. More recently, it has
been shown to prevent tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis. In
addition, WFA has been reported to inhibit Notch 1 signaling an important
signaling pathway for the self-renewal and maintenance of cancer stem
cell population. Based on this information, we hypothesize that a novel
combination of withaferin A and cisplatin can target ovarian cancer cells
and also ovarian cancer stem cells, which can reduce the cisplatin side
effects and recurrence of ovarian cancer. Our hypothesis is supported by
our preliminary studies in which epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines
(A2780 and CaOV3 and A2780/CP70) when co-treated with low doses of the
WFA (1.5 M) and cisplatin (20 M), resulted in inhibiting 80 to 90% cell
proliferation within 48 h of treatment. In contrast, same concentration
of each drug when used alone exhibited only 15% to 20% inhibition,
respectively. In addition, treatment of nude mice bearing orthotopic
ovarian tumors with WFA/cisplatin combination resulted in 80 to 90%
reduction in tumor growth and complete inhibition of metastasis to other
organs. In addition, treatment of mice bearing ovarian tumors with
WFA/cisplatin combination showed a significant reduction in CD44 positive
cancer stem cells analyzed by immuno-staining and western blot analysis
of the CD44 protein. Tumors collected from mice treated with cisplatin
alone revealed enrichment of CD44 positive cancer stem cells and
expression of CD44 protein. Analysis of Notch1 signaling gene and its
downstream signaling gene Hes1 showed a significant down regulation of
expression. Notch1 plays an important role in renewal and maintenance of
cancer stem cells which are reported to be chemo-resistance and play
critical role in recurrence of cancer. Based on our results, we conclude
that WFA/cisplatin combination therapy not only suppresses ovarian tumor
growth but minimizes/eliminates cancer stem cell population, hence
reduces the drug resistance and recurrence of cancer. This work was
support by funds from James Graham Brown Cancer Center. Presenting author
is a post-doctoral fellow.

