Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide RNA and DNA high throughput sequencing reveals
proinflammatory and death gene signatures in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma lines with different HPV status


Our laboratory previously discovered that aberrant NF-B signaling and
activation plays a critical role in promoting the oncogenic progression
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) project, which investigated 279 HNSCC tissue specimens, uncovered
significant genomic alterations of key molecules involved in NF-B and
death signaling, including amplification of FADD and BIRC2/3, mutation of
caspase-8, and altered RIPKs in HPV(-), or deletion of TRAF3 in HPV(+)
HNSCC tissues. Using PRISM (Protein Interactions by Structural Matching),
we modeled protein-protein interaction complexes three dimensionally and
identified 30 proteins that potentially interact with these genetically
altered molecules involved in NF-B and death pathways. Among more than 20
major cancer types that TCGA project has investigated, we found that
HNSCC ranks among the top cancers harboring alterations of these genes,
which are present in more than 70% of HNSCC tumors. To further
investigate and identify models for functional studies of these genetic
and phenotypic alterations, we performed whole transcriptome (RNA-seq)
and genome-wide exome DNA sequencing (exome DNA-seq) in 16 HPV(-) and 8
HPV(+) HNSCC lines, and compared them with three normal human oral mucosa
lines and 8 matched blood samples. RNA-seq or exome DNA-seq was performed
using total RNA depleted of rRNA, or exome captured genomic DNA. The
samples were multiplexed, amplified, and sequenced with ABI SOLiD
sequencer. Quality control of the output data was performed using FastQC,
and the reads were mapped to the human reference genome (Hg19). The data
were further analyzed with LifeScope2.5 and an in-house developed
computation program of publicly available software and R package. RNA-seq
had an average of 168 million mapped reads per sample with an estimate
mean read depth of 44X coverage, and exome DNA-seq had an average of 87X
coverage in each cell line sequenced. We identified amplifications,
overexpression and mutations among the molecules involved in the NF-B and
death pathways in HPV positive or negative cell lines, which mimic the
genetic and phenotypic defects identified in the HNSCC TCGA project. Our
data are consistent with the finding from the TCGA project, and support
the conclusion that genetic and expression alterations of the molecules
involved in NF-B and the death pathways are the important events leading
HNSCC oncogenesis. Molecular mechanisms and targeted therapies can be
further investigated in these HNSCC lines having the defined genetic and
phenotypic defects associated with different HPV status.Supported by
NIDCD intramural projects ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74.

