Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Localized synchrotron radiation affects serum cytokine levels and
modulates gene expression in irradiated mouse skin and in skin distant
from the irradiated site


Synchrotron radiation has great potential to improve cancer radiotherapy,
a major cancer treatment received by about 50% cancer patients annually.
A new synchrotron-based modality, microbeam radiotherapy (MRT), has shown
promise for cancer treatment. MRT utilizes high intensity X-rays
collimated to planar microbeams 25 m-wide and with 200 m period. MRT
effectively ablates tumours but causes less damage to normal tissues
compared to conventional broadbeam (BB) radiotherapy techniques. Little
is known about the mechanisms underlying this remarkable result.We
initiated a study of systemic (abscopal, distant bystander) effects1,2 of
MRT and BB irradiation in C57BL/6J mice. Skin areas (2x2 and 8x8 mm) were
irradiated with 10 or 40 Gy, and blood and skin samples were collected at
24 and 96 hours post-irradiation. Serum levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines known to be induced by radiation or to mediate the bystander
effect, were measured. In parallel, gene expression was measured in
irradiated and non-irradiated skin using real time PCR.Statistically
significant changes were identified for known radiation responsive genes
in both targeted and non-targeted dermal tissue after both BB and MRT
treatments. Down-regulation of some genes in distant skin that were
up-regulated at the site of irradiation were identified in an apparent
contrasting response between these two sets of tissues. Also, the
expression for some genes showed differences between MRT and BB-treated
mice. MRT-specific bystander responses were also observed in distant
tissue, including gene expression of TP53 for which the protein product
has a fundamental role in cell fate. Levels of various cytokines in the
serum were also altered in response to both BB and MRT. In some cases,
the cytokine response was different for MRT compared to BB-treated
samples which could potentially explain the benefits of MRT. These
results advance the understanding of the biological responses to
synchrotron-generated radiation and provide a potential mechanism for
MRT.References1. Sprung, CN, Ivashkevich, A, Forrester, HB, Redon, CE,
Georgakilas, AG, Martin, OA. Oxidative DNA damage caused by inflammation
may link to stress-induced non-targeted effects (Cancer Letters 2013,
e-pub).2. Siva, S, MacManus, MP, Martin, RF, Martin, OA. Abscopal effects
of radiation therapy: a clinical review for the radiobiologist (Cancer
Letters 2013, e-pub).AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the NHMRC
grant 10275598 and by the Victorian Government's Operational
Infrastructure Support Program. We thank the Australian Synchrotron for
use of the IMBL and facilities.

