Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering Cis-SAGe chimeric RNAs in prostate cancer


Background:Chimeric RNAs, comprising two or more different transcripts
from distinct chromosomal regions, are common features in many cancers
and play important roles in carcinogenesis. Prostate cancer is the most
important non-skin cancer and a leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
American men. During the progression of prostate cancer, various fusion
transcripts generated as a result of chromosomal rearrangement have been
identified. However, we recently reported that a chimeric RNA
SLC45A3-ELK4 was generated in the absence of DNA rearrangement by
cis-splicing of adjacent genes(Cis-SAGe)/read-through. CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF) acts as chromatin barrier, with CTCF binding at boundaries
between the two parental genes, SLA45A3 and ELK4 to prevent the Cis-SAGe
events in normal prostate cells. On the other hand, silencing CTCF
resulted in an induction of the fusion RNA expression. These findings
promoted us to manipulate CTCF level in combination with deep RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) to discover more Cis-SAGe fusions.Methods:To
identify more Cis-SAGe chimeric RNAs in prostate cancer, we sequenced
LNCaP cells transfected with negative control siRNA and siRNA against
CTCF. The samples were processed in two different companies using
Illumina Hi-seq platform to generate two output sequences: paired-end
50-nucleotide and 101-nucleotide reads. SOAPfuse (BGI, China) software
was used to identify chimeric RNAs. To filter out non Cis-SAGe events, we
required all the candidates to have the features: induced by siCTCF;
neighboring parental genes; same transcribing direction; CTCF binding
sites at gene boundaries. Majority of the fusions were validated with
real-time PCR and Sanger sequencing.Results:Using SOAPfuse, we identified
95 chimeric RNAs from the combined 50- and 100-bp paired RNA sequencing
data. For all 95 candidates, 56 are intra-chromosomal same strand
neighboring gene fusions, 13 inter-chromosomal, and 26 other
intra-chromosomal fusions. We considered the 56 (from 48 pairs of unique
parental genes) to be candidates for Cis-SAGe. qPCR results showed 25
candidates were up-regulated more than 2 folds by knocking down CTCF and
4 candidates were down-regulated. Sanger sequencing confirmed 22 out of
the 25 candidates. Intergenic transcripts for all these 22 candidates
were detected, supporting that these chimeric transcripts could be
products of Cis-SAGe. To evaluate their differential expression in
cancers vs. benign tissues, we compared the RNA expression of these
candidates in LNCaP, PC-3, another prostate cancer cell line and RWPE-1,
a benign prostate cell line. Most of the verified chimeric RNAs appeared
to be highly expressed in all three cell lines. Four chimeric RNAs are
expressed only in the cancer cells, one fusion transcript detected only
in RWPE-1 and four other fusions only present in LNCaP cells. Together,
our results suggest that many more Cis-SAGe chimeric RNAs are expressed
in prostate cancer and they may represent a unique class of bio-markers.

