Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repression of tumor survival pathways by novel and selective
inhibitors of MNK1 and MNK2 kinases in glioblastoma and colorectal cancer


Herewith, we report development of small molecule inhibitors of MNK1 and
MNK2 kinases and their cellular activity. MNK1 and 2 are MAP
kinase-interacting kinases that are activated by RAS and MAPK signaling
pathways and are involved in regulation of translation. Both kinases
phosphorylate translation initiation factor eIF4e on a conserved serine
209 residue. eIF4E can contribute to the oncogenic transformation both in
vitro and in vivo and is highly expressed in various tumor types.
Interestingly, mice that lack both MNK1 and MNK2 do not have any apparent
phenotype, which is promising for the therapeutic window of MNK1/2
inhibitors. SEL201 is a series of small molecule inhibitors which inhibit
activity of both MNK1 and MNK2 in a low nM range. Selected compounds were
tested on the kinome panels and indicated MNK1 and MNK2 as primary kinase
targets. SEL201 compounds caused dose dependent inhibition of
phosphorylation of eIF4e at Ser209 in various cancer cell lines at
concentrations Herewith, we report development of small molecule
inhibitors of MNK1 and MNK2 kinases and their cellular activity. MNK1 and
2 are MAP kinase-interacting kinases that are activated by RAS and MAPK
signaling pathways and are involved in regulation of translation. Both
kinases phosphorylate translation initiation factor eIF4e on a conserved
serine 209 residue. eIF4E can contribute to the oncogenic transformation
both in vitro and in vivo and is highly expressed in various tumor types.
Interestingly, mice that lack both MNK1 and MNK2 do not have any apparent
phenotype, which is promising for the therapeutic window of MNK1/2
inhibitors. SEL201 is a series of small molecule inhibitors which inhibit
activity of both MNK1 and MNK2 in a low nM range. Selected compounds were
tested on the kinome panels and indicated MNK1 and MNK2 as primary kinase
targets. SEL201 compounds caused dose dependent inhibition of
phosphorylation of eIF4e at Ser209 in various cancer cell lines at
concentrations <100nM, which were lower when compared with other reported
MNK1/2 inhibitors such as Cercosporamid and CGP57380. Consistently,
potent inhibition of eIF4e Ser209 was observed also in vivo after oral
administration of the inhibitors in xenograft models. High potency,
selectivity and favorable ADME/PK profile indicates that SEL201
inhibitors would be useful tools in probing molecular consequences of
eIF4e Ser209 inhibition in cancer cells alone and in combination with
other inhibitors targeting PI3K/mTOR or RAS/MEK pathway. SEL201 in vitro
and in vivo activities on viability and metastasis will be presented in
cellular and in vivo models of colorectal cancer and glioblastoma. SEL201
series is further developed as a promising anticancer therapy with
potentially wide therapeutic window.

