Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and analytical validation of a novel real-time
multiplex RT-qPCR assay for the simultaneous quantification of ER, PR,
HER-2 and EGFR mRNA expression in circulating tumor cells of breast
cancer patients


Introduction: Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) represent an important
biological link in the spread of breast cancer from primary to metastatic
disease. CTCs have already been established as strong predictors of
prognosis in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Triple-negative
breast cancers have a more aggressive clinical outcome than other forms
of breast cancer. The aim of our work was to develop a quantitative
real-time multiplex RT-qPCR assay for studying the expression of ER, PR,
HER-2 and EGFR in CTC of breast cancer patients.Materials and Methods: A
quadruplex quantitative real time RT-qPCR assay for ER, PR, HER-2 and
EGFR was developed based on the de novo in-silico design of eight primers
and four dual hybridization probes. All primers and probes were designed
to avoid cross-reactions and primer dimer formation and to match the
assay conditions, such as amplicon sizes, and melting temperatures. The
specificity of all primer and hybridization probe sequences was first
tested by homology searches in the nucleotide database (NCBI, nucleotide
BLAST). Each probe set included a 3-fluorescein (F) donor probe and a 5-
LC acceptor probe that was different for each gene set: ER at 610nm, PR
at 640nm, HER-2 at 670nm, EGFR at 705nm. A color compensation test was
performed by using pure dye spectra so that spectral overlap between dyes
was corrected. The LightCycler 2.0 platform, (Roche, Diagnostics) was
used since it allows detection of six multiple reporter dyes in the same
capillary. The assay was designed, so that only 1 L of cDNA is used and
the total reaction volume is 10 L.Results: The assay sensitivity was
evaluated by performing spiking experiments. For this reason known
numbers of MCF7 and SKBR-3 cells, as well as external quantification
calibrators ranging from 105 copies/L to 10 copies/L, were used. The
specificity was evaluated by carefully designed cross reaction studies,
performed for each gene target in the presence of all other targets. Our
assay, under optimized conditions has shown a very high specificity for
each analyte.Conclusions: We report for the first time a highly
sensitive, specific and reproducible quantitative multiplex real-time
RT-qPCR assay for the simultaneous quantification of ER, PR, HER-2 and
EGFR. The assay is currently validated in CTC isolated from a large
number of breast cancer patients.

