Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crucial roles of helper and killer epitopes in tumor antigens for
developing dendritic cell-mediated cancer immunotherapy


Dendritic cells (DCs), powerful antigen presenting cells, play central
role for induction of the antigen-specific immune responses through
activation of CD4+T and CD8+T cells. Tumor antigen-pulsed DCs strongly
generate helper T cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which
recognize and kill the target tumor cells in response to the antigens.
Thus, proper design of antigen is required for application of DC-mediated
cancer immunotherapy.Many investigators have performed clinical trials of
cancer immunotherapy. Numerous vaccinations with tumor antigen-derived
peptides have been able to induce tumor specific immune responses to
eradicate cancer with superior specificity and without severe adverse
effects. However, the therapeutic efficacy of cancer vaccine therapy
using MHC class I-binding peptides for CTLs have been limited to induce
complete regression in cancer patients. To overcome limitation of
antitumor effects, strong and persisting activation of tumor specific
CTLs are required for eradication of tumor tissues to induce a complete
cure in tumor-bearing hosts. Recently, it has been demonstrated that CD4+
helper T cells play a critical role for inducing fully activated
antitumor CTLs. Moreover, long peptides composed of both MHC class I- and
class II-binding epitopes exhibited superior vaccine efficacy compared
with shorter peptides. Thus, the existence of helper epitopes and the
length of peptides appeared to be key factors for designing a promising
peptide for DC-mediated immunotherapy.In this work, we focused natural
tumor antigens such as Birc5, a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis gene
family, which was abundantly expressed in the majority of cancer cells.
We first prepared a Birc5 long peptide containing helper and killer
epitopes and the shorter peptides containing helper and/or killer
epitope. The long peptide was injected alone or with bone marrow-derived
DCs into several types of tumor-bearing mice. The tumor growth was
remarkably decreased by in vivo injection of the long peptide compared
with the short peptide. In addition, we confirmed that long peptides were
superior to the short peptides for inducing antigen-specific immune
responses in vivo. These data indicated that long peptides containing
helper and killer epitopes might be critical for inducing effective
antitumor immunity in cancer immunotherapy, suggesting that long peptide
vaccination containing helper and killer epitope would become a promising
therapeutic vaccine strategy for cancer patients.

