Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emerging effects of Chinese herbal medicines on human cancer cells
proliferation


Chinese herbal medicine is a major aspect of traditional Chinese
medicine, which focuses on restoring a balance of energy, body, andspirit
to maintain health rather than treating a particular disease or medical
condition. Some of Chinese herbs have shown therapeutic effects in cancer
patients. Yunnan Baiyao (White Medicine from Yunnan, YNBY) and Snow daisy
are popular Chinese herbs for routine clinical usage. YNBY is a Chinese
herbal medicinal powder used to stop bleeding, reduce swelling and
improve circulation in traumatic injuries. While Snow daisy has effects
on maintaining blood pressure and reducing coronary heart diseases and
inflammation when consumed in form of tea. Although it has been
hypothesized that both YNBY and Snow daisy flower tea (SDFT) may help to
prevent tumor proliferation and even reduce tumor growth, yet no
systematic study and analysis have been carried out. Therefore, in this
study the effects of YNBY and SDFT on tumor cell proliferation were
evaluated and the signal transduction pathways mediating the effects were
also determined. We tested tumor cells (lung, breast and oral cancer cell
lines) and normal human fibroblast cells with different YNBY and SDFT
dilution in cultured medium. Then the proliferation ability of these
treated cells was tested by MTT assay and visualized via Dil
(1,1-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3,3-Tetramethylindocarbocyanine Perchlorate)
staining. Subsequently, several apoptosis factors (Fas pathway related,
i.e., Fas/CD95, Fas Ligand, Caspase-8) which may be secreted by YNBY and
SDFT treated tumor cells were tested using ELISA and Western Blot. The
results showed that YNBY and SDFT can significantly inhibit lung tumor
cells proliferation when its concentration was above 0.4mg/mL and 2mg/mL,
respectively (PChinese herbal medicine is a major aspect of traditional
Chinese medicine, which focuses on restoring a balance of energy, body,
andspirit to maintain health rather than treating a particular disease or
medical condition. Some of Chinese herbs have shown therapeutic effects
in cancer patients. Yunnan Baiyao (White Medicine from Yunnan, YNBY) and
Snow daisy are popular Chinese herbs for routine clinical usage. YNBY is
a Chinese herbal medicinal powder used to stop bleeding, reduce swelling
and improve circulation in traumatic injuries. While Snow daisy has
effects on maintaining blood pressure and reducing coronary heart
diseases and inflammation when consumed in form of tea. Although it has
been hypothesized that both YNBY and Snow daisy flower tea (SDFT) may
help to prevent tumor proliferation and even reduce tumor growth, yet no
systematic study and analysis have been carried out. Therefore, in this
study the effects of YNBY and SDFT on tumor cell proliferation were
evaluated and the signal transduction pathways mediating the effects were
also determined. We tested tumor cells (lung, breast and oral cancer cell
lines) and normal human fibroblast cells with different YNBY and SDFT
dilution in cultured medium. Then the proliferation ability of these
treated cells was tested by MTT assay and visualized via Dil
(1,1-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3,3-Tetramethylindocarbocyanine Perchlorate)
staining. Subsequently, several apoptosis factors (Fas pathway related,
i.e., Fas/CD95, Fas Ligand, Caspase-8) which may be secreted by YNBY and
SDFT treated tumor cells were tested using ELISA and Western Blot. The
results showed that YNBY and SDFT can significantly inhibit lung tumor
cells proliferation when its concentration was above 0.4mg/mL and 2mg/mL,
respectively (P<0.01). The data indicated that YNBY could induce lung
tumor cells apoptosis through Fas related pathway. The expression of
Fas/CD95 and caspase-8 in treated lung tumor cells was much higher than
which in control groups (PChinese herbal medicine is a major aspect of
traditional Chinese medicine, which focuses on restoring a balance of
energy, body, andspirit to maintain health rather than treating a
particular disease or medical condition. Some of Chinese herbs have shown
therapeutic effects in cancer patients. Yunnan Baiyao (White Medicine
from Yunnan, YNBY) and Snow daisy are popular Chinese herbs for routine
clinical usage. YNBY is a Chinese herbal medicinal powder used to stop
bleeding, reduce swelling and improve circulation in traumatic injuries.
While Snow daisy has effects on maintaining blood pressure and reducing
coronary heart diseases and inflammation when consumed in form of tea.
Although it has been hypothesized that both YNBY and Snow daisy flower
tea (SDFT) may help to prevent tumor proliferation and even reduce tumor
growth, yet no systematic study and analysis have been carried out.
Therefore, in this study the effects of YNBY and SDFT on tumor cell
proliferation were evaluated and the signal transduction pathways
mediating the effects were also determined. We tested tumor cells (lung,
breast and oral cancer cell lines) and normal human fibroblast cells with
different YNBY and SDFT dilution in cultured medium. Then the
proliferation ability of these treated cells was tested by MTT assay and
visualized via Dil (1,1-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3,3-Tetramethylindocarbocyanine
Perchlorate) staining. Subsequently, several apoptosis factors (Fas
pathway related, i.e., Fas/CD95, Fas Ligand, Caspase-8) which may be
secreted by YNBY and SDFT treated tumor cells were tested using ELISA and
Western Blot. The results showed that YNBY and SDFT can significantly
inhibit lung tumor cells proliferation when its concentration was above
0.4mg/mL and 2mg/mL, respectively (P<0.01). The data indicated that YNBY
could induce lung tumor cells apoptosis through Fas related pathway. The
expression of Fas/CD95 and caspase-8 in treated lung tumor cells was much
higher than which in control groups (P<0.01) suggesting that YNBY and
SDFT may provoke tumor cells death by inducing cell apoptosis through Fas
pathway. YNBY and SDFT may constitute potential therapeutic effects for
lung cancer patients.

