Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 in the cell apoptosis
in oral leukoplakia


Oral leukoplakia is a common precancerous lesion. The mechanism is not
clear. The aim is to investigate the roles of apoptosis signal-regulating
kinase 1(ASK1) in the cell apoptosis in oral leukoplakia. Archival tissue
sections of 10 oral leukoplakia,23 oral leukoplakia with mild to moderate
dysplasia, 7 normal oral mucosa were detected by real time PCR and
immunohistochemical staining of markers of ASK1 and p-ASK1.The cell
apoptosis was detected by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
nucleotide shift enzyme(TdT) mediated d-UTP end labeling(TUNEL). The
results showed The mRNA and protein expression of ASK1 in oral
leukoplakia with mild to moderate dysplasia was higher than the normal
mucosa(pOral leukoplakia is a common precancerous lesion. The mechanism
is not clear. The aim is to investigate the roles of apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase 1(ASK1) in the cell apoptosis in oral
leukoplakia. Archival tissue sections of 10 oral leukoplakia,23 oral
leukoplakia with mild to moderate dysplasia, 7 normal oral mucosa were
detected by real time PCR and immunohistochemical staining of markers of
ASK1 and p-ASK1.The cell apoptosis was detected by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nucleotide shift enzyme(TdT)
mediated d-UTP end labeling(TUNEL). The results showed The mRNA and
protein expression of ASK1 in oral leukoplakia with mild to moderate
dysplasia was higher than the normal mucosa(p<0.05).From oral normal
mucosa to oral leukoplakia to mild to moderate dysplasia, the expression
of p-ASK1 was increased with the increasing grade( pOral leukoplakia is a
common precancerous lesion. The mechanism is not clear. The aim is to
investigate the roles of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1(ASK1) in
the cell apoptosis in oral leukoplakia. Archival tissue sections of 10
oral leukoplakia,23 oral leukoplakia with mild to moderate dysplasia, 7
normal oral mucosa were detected by real time PCR and immunohistochemical
staining of markers of ASK1 and p-ASK1.The cell apoptosis was detected by
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nucleotide shift
enzyme(TdT) mediated d-UTP end labeling(TUNEL). The results showed The
mRNA and protein expression of ASK1 in oral leukoplakia with mild to
moderate dysplasia was higher than the normal mucosa(p<0.05).From oral
normal mucosa to oral leukoplakia to mild to moderate dysplasia, the
expression of p-ASK1 was increased with the increasing grade( p<0.05).The
apoptosis in oral leukoplakia and mild to moderate dysplasia increased
more than normal mucose(pOral leukoplakia is a common precancerous
lesion. The mechanism is not clear. The aim is to investigate the roles
of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1(ASK1) in the cell apoptosis in
oral leukoplakia. Archival tissue sections of 10 oral leukoplakia,23 oral
leukoplakia with mild to moderate dysplasia, 7 normal oral mucosa were
detected by real time PCR and immunohistochemical staining of markers of
ASK1 and p-ASK1.The cell apoptosis was detected by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nucleotide shift enzyme(TdT)
mediated d-UTP end labeling(TUNEL). The results showed The mRNA and
protein expression of ASK1 in oral leukoplakia with mild to moderate
dysplasia was higher than the normal mucosa(p<0.05).From oral normal
mucosa to oral leukoplakia to mild to moderate dysplasia, the expression
of p-ASK1 was increased with the increasing grade( p<0.05).The apoptosis
in oral leukoplakia and mild to moderate dysplasia increased more than
normal mucose(p<0.05). It suggests that ASK1 and p-ASK1 are positive
correlation with the increased apoptosis in the development of oral
leukoplakia, its related signal pathways and cascade may play an
important role in the cell apoptosis in oral leukoplakia.

