Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammasome activation in obesity-associated breast cancer
progression


The purpose of this research is to determine the role of
inflammasome-mediated production of interleukin(IL)-1 in
obesity-associated breast cancer progression. Previous studies have shown
that obesity is a risk factor for both developing breast cancer and
breast cancer progression. Obesity is also associated with the
development of invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) versus ductal carcinoma
in-situ (DCIS; non-invasive). A number of hypotheses have been proposed
to explain the association between obesity and breast cancer progression.
It has been hypothesized that the chronic inflammation in adipose tissue
associated with obesity, especially adipose tissue in the mammary glands,
creates a microenvironment that promotes breast cancer progression by
acting as a reservoir of pro-inflammatory cytokines (including IL-1 and
IL-6). One source of pro-inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue is
activated inflammasomes in infiltrating macrophages. Inflammasomes are
multiprotein complexes whose main function is the activation of IL-1 and
IL-18 during inflammation via Caspase 1 (Casp1)-mediated proteolytic
cleavage. Chronic inflammation, Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and IL-1
are thought to be a major cause of obesity-associated insulin resistance
and are involved in many human diseases including type-2 diabetes and
cancer. However, the mechanism linking obesity and breast cancer
progression remains unknown. We hypothesize that obesity-induced
inflammasome activation in mammary adipose tissue results in active IL-1
which in turn promotes breast cancer progression. To determine the role
of inflammasome activation in obesity-associated breast cancer
progression, we will use inflammasome-deficient mice or neutralizing
antibodies to inhibit IL-1 signaling in a syngeneic orthotopic transplant
model of Py8119 cells in obese mice (mice fed a high fat diet). Our
results show that Py8119 tumors have increased tumor growth and
metastasis in obese mice compared to lean mice (mice fed normal chow).
Furthermore, tumors from obese mice had increased expression of IL-1 and
its receptor IL1 receptor 1 (IL1R1) as well as increased Casp1. Tumors
from obese mice also had increase in M1 (which can secrete IL-1) and M2
(which can be recruited in response to IL-1 signaling) tumor-infiltrating
macrophages. Finally, inhibition of IL-1 signaling using an IL1R1
neutralizing antibody or Casp1 deficiency results in reduced tumor growth
in obese mice. In conclusion, our results suggest that obesity-induced
inflammasome activation promotes breast cancer progression in obese mice.
Targeting inflammasome activation or neutralizing the IL-1/IL1R axis
represents a rational therapy to treat obese patients with invasive
breast cancer.

