Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution DNA recognition by the Snail zinc finger protein:
Testing of a molecular dynamics based model defines the atomic level
interactions required for high affinity binding, E-box specificity and
reveals potential strategies for small molecule control of EMT
transcriptional programs


In most epithelial-derived tumors, the early developmental program known
as Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), is reactivated and plays
an important role in cancer metastasis and recurrence. The EMT program
directs cells to become non-adherent, motile and highly invasive thus
leading to metastatic spread. Thus, strategies to shutdown the EMT
program might be useful in controlling EMT mediated tumor progression.
EMT is largely controlled by a handful of transcription factors,
including Snail and Slug: these are the canonical master regulators of
the EMT and function as transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin and
other cell adhesion molecules. A rate-limiting step in EMT regulation by
Snail occurs when its four tandem C2-H2 zinc finger (ZF) motifs bind the
E-box DNA sequence (CANNTG) in target promoters. The atomic structure of
Snail-DNA complex remains undefined. We derived a high resolution model
for DNA recognition by Snail using Molecular Dynamics (MD) based
threading of known ZF-DNA structures and energy minimization. The model
was tested using purified recombinant Snail protein, and
truncations/single amino acid substitutions in in vitro DNA binding
assays. A Snail monomer binds with nanomolar affinities (Kd=22.1 nM) in
the major groove of DNA. Disrupting cysteine residues in each finger
shows that fingers 2 and 3 contribute most to the specificity for DNA
recognition. Alanine scanning mutagenesis in the recognition helices
revealed that R191, W193, S221, D219, N222 and R247 are invloved in
direct DNA contact. Among them, W193 in finger 2, S221 in finger 3 and
R247 in the finger 4 are predicted to mediate critical base-pair contacts
and therefore determine the sequence specificity for Snail DNA-binding,
while R191 in finger 2 and N222 in finger 3 stabilize the complex via
phosphate backbone contacts. A comparison of the base-pair contacts
required for binding by Snail vs. the bHLH protein Twist was highly
informative. The Twist dimer does not utilize the central 2 base pairs
within the E-box (ie. NN in the CANNTG sequence) for proper binding. In
contrast, E-box binding by Snail requires a guanine as the second base in
the central 2 base pairs (ie. NG in the CANGTG sequence). However, if the
central 2 base pairs is CG, CpG methylation of this motif strongly
inhibits Twist binding but does not affect Snail binding. Thus,
remarkably, depending on the exact sequence of the E-box present in a
promoter, CpG methylation of that site can differentially effect binding
and thus regulation by Snail or Twist. These data provide the first
examples of how specificity can be generated for target gene regulation
by either Twist or Snail.

