Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib reduces preexisting antibodies to recombinant
immunotoxins in mice


Recombinant immunotoxin (RIT) therapy is limited in patients by
neutralizing antibody responses. Most patients with normal immune systems
make neutralizing antibodies after one cycle (three doses) of RIT,
preventing repeated dosing. Furthermore, some patients have preexisting
antibodies from environmental exposure to Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE), the
component of the RIT that elicits the neutralizing antibody response.
Bortezomib is an FDA-approved proteasome inhibitor which selectively
targets and kills plasma cells which are necessary for a neutralizing
antibody response. Bortezomib, in combination with methotrexate,
rituximab, and cyclophosphamide, was shown to reduce antibody levels
>64-fold following enzyme replacement therapy in the clinical setting of
Pompe disease. We hypothesized bortezomib may abrogate the neutralizing
antibody levels, making dosing of RIT possible in mice already immune to
RIT.We immunized BALB/c mice with multiple doses of SS1P, a RIT whose
antibody portion targets mesothelin. Antibody titers were determined by
immune-capture ELISA. Mice with elevated levels were separated into
groups to receive bortezomib (1mg/kg i.v., twice a week for 5.5 weeks) or
saline control. Bortezomib treatment lowered the starting antibody titer
in mice previously immunized with RIT by an average of 50%, while
antibody titers in control mice increased by an average of 20%. Despite
success in lowering titers, bortezomib did not abrogate titer in any
mice.To further diminish preexisting antibodies, we performed a separate
experiment in which mice with preexisting anti-SS1P antibodies received
bortezomib with concomitant pentostatin and cyclophosphamide (P/C)
therapy. P/C is an immune-depleting regimen already shown to be effective
in preventing the onset of new neutralizing antibodies. Combination
treatment lowered the starting antibody titer in mice previously
immunized with RIT by an average of 73%, while antibody titers in control
mice increased by an average of 80%.We have shown that bortezomib
reduces, but does not eliminate, antibody titer in mice with preexisting
antibodies to RIT. Addition of the immune-depleting P/C regimen further
diminishes antibody titers. We are investigating remaining plasma cell
populations as a potential source of remaining antibody. Ongoing
experiments also include incorporating other FDA-approved agents into our
study.

