Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA-PK is activated by microtubule-targeting agents; mechanistic
studies using isogenic wild-type and DNA-PK knockout cells


DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a serine-threonine kinase
essential for the double-strand break repair pathway non-homologous
end-joining. The DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 has been shown to sensitise
cancer cells to ionising radiation and DNA-damaging agents, both in vitro
and in vivo. Recent studies show alternative roles of DNA-PK, including
localisation and regulation at the centrosome during mitosis. We
therefore hypothesised that targeting DNA-PK would sensitise cells to
clinically-used microtubule-targeting agents. We recently discovered that
DNA-PK inhibitors sensitise cells to vincristine and docetaxel, and that
DNA-PK deficient MO59J glioblastoma cells were 2-fold more sensitive to
docetaxel than DNA-PK proficient MO59J-Fus1 cells (Mould E, Proc Ann Meet
AACR 2013; 54: #3329). Here, we studied an isogenic panel of DNA-PK
proficient and deficient cells to further understand the role of DNA-PK
in the cellular response to microtubule-targeting agents. We used the
X-MAN isogenic cell line panel of HCT116 cells (Horizon Discovery Ltd)
with varying DNA-PK catalytic subunit expression levels (parental DNA-PK
+/+, DNA-PK +/-, DNA-PK -/- and DNA-PK -/- cells with PRKDC cDNA
re-expression (DNA-PK RE).Since ionising radiation (IR) activates DNA-PK,
we used IR-induced DNA-PK activity as a positive control in studies with
these cell lines. Growth inhibition and clonogenic survival assays showed
the DNA-PK -/- cells were at least 4-fold more radiosensitive than the
parental DNA-PK +/+ HCT116 cell line. DNA-PK +/- cells displayed a
similar response to IR to the DNA-PK +/+ cells. Western blotting
demonstrated that DNA-PK RE cells expressed DNA-PK to a level similar to
the DNA-PK +/- cells, and the DNA-PK RE were 2.6-fold more resistant to
IR compared to the DNA-PK -/- cells. Cells lacking DNA-PKcs therefore
display the expected radiosensitivity.We then analysed the effect of
microtubule-targeting agents on this cell line panel. DNA-PK -/- cells
were 1.5-fold and 1.7-fold more sensitive to vincristine and docetaxel,
respectively, than DNA-PK +/+ cells (growth inhibition assay), which is
similar to the level of chemo-sensitisation by the DNA-PK inhibitor,
NU7441, in a range of cell lines treated with vincristine or docetaxel.
Vincristine treatment (24hrs) resulted in activation of DNA-PK
(autophosphorylation at ser 2056) in DNA-PK +/+, DNA-PK +/- and DNA-PK RE
cells.These data confirm our previous findings and demonstrate in an
isogenic model that DNA-PK plays a role in response of cancer cells to
microtubule-targeting agents. Ongoing studies with this cell line panel
will investigate changes in expression of DNA-PK downstream targets and
other DNA-damage-activated kinases in response to both DNA-damaging and
microtubule-targeting agents, complemented with microscopy studies to
investigate changes in microtubule dynamics and mitotic spindle formation.

