Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy of the novel, oral Selective Inhibitor of
Nuclear Export (SINE) Selinexor (KPT-330) on castration resistant
prostate cancer


Exportin 1/ Chromosomal Maintenance Protein 1 (XPO1/CRM1) is a key
nuclear export protein whose inhibition leads to the nuclear accumulation
of tumor suppressor proteins such as p53, FOXO, PTEN, pRB and I-B.
Selinexor is an orally bioavailable XPO1 inhibitor that represents a
novel class of small molecule compounds with potent activity against a
wide variety of cancers. Here we report the activity of Selinexor against
Castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).CRPC progression is mediated
by activation of various adaptive Androgen Receptor (AR) signaling
pathways. These pathways are currently being targeted by novel
anti-androgen therapies such as abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide with
favorable outcomes. However, resistance to anti-androgen therapy can be
developed through deregulation of tumor suppressor pathways. XPO-1 is
highly expressed in prostate cancer cells and therefore we tested the
effects of Selinexor on CRPC cells and tumors models. Treatment of the
C4-2B prostate cancer cell line with Selinexor in vitro significantly
inhibited cell proliferation and resulted in nuclear accumulation of p53
and p21. In addition, Selinexor inhibited expression of the
tumor-promoting gene Ubiquitin-Conjugating Enzyme E2C (UBE2C), which is
activated by AR in these cells. Selinexor was also tested in tumor graft
models of two patient tumors in castrated male mice. The MDA-PCa-133
tumor is an adenocarcinoma derived from a clinical CRPC bone metastasis.
Subcutaneous MDA-PCa-133 tumors in castrated male mice express
full-length AR and Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) but lack expression of
p53. The MDA-PCa-144-13 tumor is a small cell carcinoma derived from a
lethal variant of prostate cancer with anaplastic clinical phenotype and
does not express AR or PSA but expresses a gain-of-function p53 mutant.
Vehicle or Selinexor treatment (10 mg/kg p.o. QoDX3 M/W/F) of MDA-PCa-133
tumors for 34 days resulted in almost complete inhibition of tumor growth
with a 30-fold reduction of PSA (p8 fold compared to vehicle only; p8
fold compared to vehicle only; p<0.0047). Immunohistochemical analysis of
MDA-PCa-133 tumors showed that Selinexor induced nuclear accumulation of
XPO1 cargos FOXO3a and p27 with concomitant reduction in the
proliferation marker KI67.In conclusion, Selinexor demonstrated robust
inhibition of CRPC tumor growth and activated multiple tumor suppressors
in prostate cancer cells. Selinexor is now being evaluated in Phase 1
clinical studies in patients with advanced hematological and solid tumor
cancers, and preliminary results show adequate tolerability with evidence
of anti cancer activity. Future clinical studies in patients with CRPC
are planned and will provide more information on the use of Selinexor as
monotherapy and in combination with anti-androgen therapy of CRPC.

