Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The OncoNetwork Consortium: A global collaborative research study
on the development and verification of an Ion AmpliSeq RNA gene lung
fusion panel


Chromosomal translocations and corresponding gene fusions play an
important role in the initiation of tumorigenesis and these processes
have been strongly associated with distinct tumor subtypes. The recent
association of ALK, ROS and RET fusion transcripts as lung tumor therapy
predictive biomarkers has increased the need of a technology that could
detect these biomarkers starting from limited amount of material. Life
Technologies and OncoNetwork consortium collaborated for the development
of a lung fusion panel based on Ion AmpliSeq RNA chemistry. The
OncoNetwork consortium is comprised of twelve -translational cancer
research institutes with many years of experience in adopting the latest
molecular techniques for lung therapy research. Material and Methods:
Consortia's requirements for the panel development : 1) detect all
variants of ALK, ROS1, or RET fusion transcripts described in COSMIC in a
single reaction using 10 ng of total RNA 2) Include 5 and 3 ALK, ROS1,
RET gene expression assays as an indicator of a translocation at this
gene. 3) Include endogenous RNA assay controls to determine if the
quality of the results could be affected by RNA quality. 4) Provide
similar results on archived FFPE samples tested by FISH. Human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines H2228 (EML4-ALK positive), HCC78 (SLC4A2-ROS1
positive ) ,LC-2/ad (CCDC6-RET positive) and Ambion FirstChoice Human
Brain Reference (HBR) RNA was used as positive and negative control for
the study. Formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue was isolated
using different extraction methods. After amplification using Ion
AmpliSeq RNA chemistry samples were sequenced on the Ion Torrent PGM
sequencer using the Ion PGM 200 Sequencing Kit. The presence of the
fusions was confirmed by custom TaqMan gene expression assays when
possible. Preliminary results of the panel on ALK or ROS1 or RET positive
cell lines and FFPE archived cancer research samples gave good
concordance with FISH results. Expected negative samples were confirmed
negative. We found a KIF5B-RET fusion positive sample in a sample not
previously tested for RET fusions. Two of the expected positive samples
by FISH were found negative due to limited amount to tumor cells present
in the sample. Cell line RNA dilutions were performed to determine the
panel's limit of detection. We demonstrate a limit of detection of 1 %
tumor RNA in the presence of 99 % normal RNA using the panel with 10 ng
of RNA extracted by cell lines. Gene expression controls work well as an
indicator of the RNA quality and of the translocation presence. The Ion
AmpliSeq RNA lung cancer fusion panel workflow is easier and faster to
perform in comparison to the FISH method. The results obtained to date
are highly encouraging for panel to be used in the clinical research
setting. More data needs to be analyzed before a final conclusion is made.

