Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel interaction between EZH2 and p38 in
triple negative breast cancer


Background: Breast cancer accounts for more than 40,000 deaths yearly in
the United States, the majority of which are due to metastatic disease.
The histone methyltransferase EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2) is a
member of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) responsible for
transcriptional repression by trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27.
EZH2 is an independent predictor of recurrence and mortality that is
overexpressed in 55% of invasive breast carcinomas. We previously
identified a novel link between EZH2 and the p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase, an important mediator of breast cancer progression and
metastasis. EZH2 binds to p38, and overexpression of EZH2 leads to
phosphorylation and activation of p38. Based on in vitro evidence and
recent studies implicating EZH2 in the methylation of non-histone
targets, we hypothesized that EZH2 may methylate p38 in breast cancer
cells. We further hypothesized that this methylation event may be
important for p38 activation or stability.Methods: In order to test this
hypothesis, we used stable shRNA knockdown of EZH2 in MDA-MB-231 and
SUM149 breast cancer cell lines. We performed co-immunoprecipitation
using p38 and pan-methyl lysine antibodies to assess changes in
methylated p38 by immunoblot. We are currently performing LC MS/MS
analysis to identify the specific residues that are methylated by PRC2
both in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, in order to localize this
interaction, we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments on
fractionated MDA-MB-231 and SUM149 lysates.Results: Stable knockdown of
EZH2 resulted in reduced methylated p38 compared to vector controls,
suggesting that EZH2 methylates p38 in vivo. We found that EZH2 and p38
interact in nuclear and, surprisingly, cytoplasmic fractions.Conclusions.
We provide evidence that in addition to being a nuclear protein, EZH2 can
be found in the cytoplasm of TNBCs, where it is able to complex with p38.
Taken together, our data suggest that p38 methylation may represent an
additional mechanism by which EZH2 mediates breast cancer progression in
TNBC.

