Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug synergies observed for antibody and toxin components of
SAR3419 ADC contribute to overall conjugate efficacy and can be
combination drug or tumor cell line dependent


SAR3419, a novel antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), is composed of a
humanized monoclonal IgG1 anti-CD19 antibody (huB4) attached by a
cleavable linker to DM4, a derivative of cytotoxic agent maytansine (an
inhibitor of microtubule polymerization). CD19 expression is restricted
to B-cells and treatment of CD19-positive human lymphoma cells with
SAR3419 can result in cell cycle arrest followed by apoptosis. As
traditional monotherapies can rarely treat cancer effectively,
particularly in non-solid tumours, a combination high throughput screen
(cHTS) was performed where SAR3419 was combined with two hundred
potential enhancer compounds across a panel of twenty cell lines using a
6x6 combination dose response matrix. The enhancer compounds compose a
library of approved, emerging oncology drugs, and well-defined molecular
probes. Robust synergies were observed between SAR3419 and PI3K
inhibitors and examined further. Target/pathway inhibitor redundancy for
the class of compounds served to validate PI3K inhibition as important
for combination synergy. Surprisingly, for several of the cell lines, the
molecular mechanism important for SAR3419-dependent combination activity
is distinct. For example, for the Daudi and REC-1 tumor cell lines, PI3K
inhibitor synergy can be attributed to the toxin DM4. In contrast for
SU-DHL4 and SU-DHL6 cell lines, little combination activity is observed
with toxin alone while the conjugate is strongly synergistic. By
examining three-way combination activities (PI3K inhibitor x DM4 x huB4)
using high resolution matrices, we show that the anti-CD19 antibody huB4
contributes to the synergy in the SU-DHL6 cell line and linkage of DM4 to
huB4 (SAR3419) shifts both the potency and maximum activity for PI3K
inhibitor combinations. The results demonstrate that the antibody
component of an ADC can contribute to combination activity for specific
drug pairings in a drug and cell-type specific manner and has wide
ranging implications with respect to combination drug design.

