Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The H3K9 demethyltransferase gene JMJD1C has tumor suppressor
functions in multiple myeloma


Increasing evidence points towards the importance of epigenetic changes
in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma (MM). The biochemical
modifications that govern epigenetics are DNA methylation, and
post-translational modifications of histone proteins. Histone methylation
is catalyzed by histone methyltransferases (HMT) and histone demethylases
(HDMT). The purpose of our study was to interrogate genomics data to
identify HMT or HDMT genes that are altered in MM. We mined copy number,
gene expression and whole genome sequencing data generated as part of the
Multiple Myeloma Research Consortium Genomics Initiative. Collectively,
the datasets converged on numerous alterations involving histone
methylation of lysine 9 (H3K9). One of these genes, the HDMT JMJD1C, was
downregulated in approximately 25% of MM samples examined and was
associated with worst clinical outcome. We validated these data by
quantitative RT-PCR and by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on a tissue
microarray (TMA) consisting of over 60 MM samples. Next we demonstrated a
negative correlation between JMJD1C expression and H3K9 methylation by
IHC and western blot in 6/10 HMCL and in over 60% of clinical samples
examined on the TMA. To study the direct effects of JMJD1C on H3K9
methylation and determine the functional significance, we generated a
knockout isogenic cell line pair in KMS11 MM cells using zinc finger
nuclease technology. JMJD1C depletion resulted in an increase in H3K9
mono- and dimethylation as demonstrated by western blot and
immunofluorescence, confirming its association to H3K9 methylation. H3K9
trimethylation was unaffected by JMJD1C depletion. Differential gene
expression analysis demonstrated defects in cell cycle and G2/M
transition. Most notably, NEK2, Cyclin B, CDC20, PLK1 and TTK were among
genes upregulated in response to JMJD1C depletion. Accordingly, we
assessed cell growth using CellTiter-Glo and demonstrated increased cell
growth in JMJD1C-depleted cells. We also demonstrated a more pronounced
G2/M peak by FACS. DNA methylation analysis using the HumanMethylation
450K BeadChip showed global hypomethylation in response to JMJD1C loss, a
phenotype indicative of myeloma progression. Results to date validate the
H3K9 demethylase activity of JMJD1C, and suggest a tumor suppressive
function, which may be lost in MM. Data demonstrate a novel biological
and molecular understanding of JMJD1C, pointing us to therapeutic
vulnerabilities in MM. Studies are ongoing to further characterize the
genomic, epigenomic and functional significance of JMJD1C in MM.

