Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue accumulation and toxicity of platinum released from a novel
chitosan hybrid gel for intraperitoneal drug delivery


Attempted surgical removal of advanced stage peritoneal cancers is mostly
insufficient and often fails in areas affected by disseminated disease.
But the successful elimination of peritoneal surface spread is known to
have a significant impact on patient survival. However, standard
therapies such as surgical cytoreduction and systemic chemotherapy
combined with radiation have only shown limited-efficacy, accessibility,
and nonspecific toxicity as well as frequent development of multidrug
resistance (MDR). To overcome those limitations, we previously reported
about the development of a mucoadhesive, chitosan-hybrid gel (CS(BCDDP))
embedded with cisplatin (CDDP) containing alginate beads for
intraperitoneal administration (# 1948, AACR 2012). Here we report
additional results illustrating CDDP release from CS(BCDDP) at different
pH in vitro, CDDP accumulation to genomic DNA (gDNA) isolated from
tissues as well as toxicity data in vivo. To determine the amount of CDDP
released from CS (BCDDP) in vitro, B50gCDDP, CDDP-chitosan (CS50gCDDP)
and CS (B50gCDDP) pellets (8 mm , 1.5 mm thickness) were prepared and
placed into a 6 well plate containing 2 ml/well PBS (pH 6, 7, 7.4 and 8).
Multiple samples were collected during the 24 h incubation (37C, 100rpm)
period. The majority (75%) of CDDP was successfully released from
CS(BCDDP) within the first 2 h at pH 7.4 showing the rate of drug release
to be inversely correlated with pH yielding a more rapid release under
acidic pH conditions. To assess CDDP accumulation to gDNA, inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was performed with tissue
samples obtained from the left peritoneal sidewall of female nu/nu mice
24 hours after treatment with CS50gCDDP, CS(B50gCDDP), intravenously
(i.v.) CDDP(IV50gCDDP) and intraperitoneal (i.p) CDDP (IP50gCDDP),
respectively. The results demonstrated a greater than three-time
enhancement of CDDP-accumulation to the gDNA from CS(B50gCDDP) when
compared to CS50gCDDP and IV50gCDDP administration. In addition,
CS(B50gCDDP) showed similar levels of CDDP adduction compared to direct
IP50gCDDP administration. Moreover, assessment of CDDP accumulation in
kidneys and blood 24 h following treatment with either IP50gCDDP or
CS(B50gCDDP), demonstrated significantly decreased kidney toxicity from
CS(B50gCDDP) when compared to IP50gCDDP. Our results, therefore strongly
suggest that administration of this hybrid gel directly to mucosal
surfaces such as the peritoneal cavity is feasible making it an
advantageous, safe and non-toxic intraperitoneal drug delivery system for
the treatment of disseminated peritoneal cancers such as advanced or
recurrent ovarian cancer. Currently ongoing experiments are evaluating
the efficacy and safety of our hybrid gel/CDDP in an orthotopic
peritoneal cancer animal model.

