Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tandem genome-wide and functional screening reveals that MiRNA-29
regulates the proteasome activator PSME4 to promote therapeutic
resistance in myeloma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are newly recognized, master regulators of the human
genome and hence play key roles in cellular pathways that govern
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis during both physiologic and
pathologic states. Accordingly, alterations in miRNA levels contribute to
myriad diseases including human cancers. MiRNAs have rapidly attracted
significant attention as agents with significant potential as diagnostics
and therapeutics to improve the outcome of cancer patients. While
proteasome inhibitors (PIs) such as bortezomib (Velcade,
Millennium-Takeda) have transformed management of the invariably fatal
disease multiple myeloma, therapeutic resistance inevitably emerges
through mechanisms that remain elusive. A goal of these studies was to
investigate the role of individual miRNAs in regulating functional
activity of the ubiquitin+proteasome system. Genome-wide expression
profiling was performed to identify differentially expressed miRNAs in
the PI-resistant cells relative to drug-naive parental cells. A live-cell
functional screen that employed a recombinant fluorescent probe comprised
of a short-lived reporter bearing a destabilizing modification to promote
constitutive proteasomal degradation was used to quantitate the effect of
individual miRNAs. MiRNAs-29a/b/c were significantly reduced in the
PI-resistant cells and these miRNAs negatively regulated PSME4 which
expresses the proteasome activator PA200. Transfection of
synthetically-engineered miRNA-29 replacements reduced PSME4 levels,
promoted myeloma cell death and overcame drug resistance. Deletion of a
nuclear localization signal (NLS) enriched the cytoplasmic distribution
and enhanced the functional effect of miRNA-29 replacements.
Doxycycline-induced expression of miRNA-29b or miRNA-29 variants that
lacked the NLS also dramatically reduced the in vivo growth of
subcutaneously injected myeloma tumor cells in NOD/SCID mice. We
demonstrate that the loss of a tumor suppressive miRNA activates not only
inherently oncogenic pathways to promote the generation of a cancer
phenotype but also to promote therapeutic resistance to PIs. We provide a
platform to perform a genome-wide interrogation of miRNAs and other
non-coding RNAs that regulate the ubiquitin+proteasome system. The
significant cytotoxic effect of miRNA-29 replacements observed using MM
cell lines and myeloma patient samples as well as ability to reduce tumor
growth in vivo validate miRNA-29 replacements as highly effective
anti-cancer tools to overcome therapeutic resistance, promote tumor cell
death and eventually improve patient outcome.

