Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting autophagy overcomes enzalutamide resistance in
castrate-resistant prostate cancer cells and improves therapeutic
response in a xenograft model


Androgen deprivation or treatment with the androgen receptor signaling
inhibitor (ARSI), Enzalutamide (MDV-3100, ENZA) or biclutamide induces
autophagy in androgen-dependent and castration resistant CaP (CRPC) cell
lines. This autophagic process is mediated by AMPK activation and the
suppression of mTOR through Raptor phosphorylation (Serine 792). Using
autophagy modulators such as clomipramine (CMI) or metformin in
combination with ENZA drastically reduces the cell survival in the colony
formation assay. Metformin in combination with ENZA causes AR
degradation, which is inhibited by proteasome inhibitor MG132.
Transcriptome deep sequencing of parental and ENZA resistant C4-2B cells
was carried out to examine differential gene expression pattern that may
be related to their ability to survive under constant high exposure to
ARSI. In-vivo studies with mice orthotopically implanted with ENZA
resistant cells demonstrates that the combination of ENZA and autophagy
modulators, CMI or metformin significantly reduces tumor growth when
compared to control groups (pAndrogen deprivation or treatment with the
androgen receptor signaling inhibitor (ARSI), Enzalutamide (MDV-3100,
ENZA) or biclutamide induces autophagy in androgen-dependent and
castration resistant CaP (CRPC) cell lines. This autophagic process is
mediated by AMPK activation and the suppression of mTOR through Raptor
phosphorylation (Serine 792). Using autophagy modulators such as
clomipramine (CMI) or metformin in combination with ENZA drastically
reduces the cell survival in the colony formation assay. Metformin in
combination with ENZA causes AR degradation, which is inhibited by
proteasome inhibitor MG132. Transcriptome deep sequencing of parental and
ENZA resistant C4-2B cells was carried out to examine differential gene
expression pattern that may be related to their ability to survive under
constant high exposure to ARSI. In-vivo studies with mice orthotopically
implanted with ENZA resistant cells demonstrates that the combination of
ENZA and autophagy modulators, CMI or metformin significantly reduces
tumor growth when compared to control groups (p<0.005). Blocking
autophagy pharmacologically or genetically significantly impairs prostate
cancer cell survival in- vitro and in-vivo, implying the therapeutics
potential of autophagy inhibitors in the antiandrogen resistance
setting.This work is supported in part by Stand Up To Cancer - Prostate
Cancer FoundationProstate Dream Team Translational Cancer Research Grant.
This research grant is made possible by the generous support of the
Movember Foundation. Stand Up To Cancer is a program of the Entertainment
Industry Foundation administered by the American Association for Cancer
Research.

