Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMCgp100: A novel bi-specific biologic for the treatment of
malignant melanoma


Despite significant advances in the treatment of metastatic melanoma,
long-term remission for the majority of patients remains elusive. Kinase
inhibitors provide potent but short-term responses for a significant
proportion of patients and immunotherapy elicits long-term responses with
the prospect of cure, but only in a minority.IMCgp100 is a novel
bi-specific immunotherapy comprising a soluble, affinity enhanced, T cell
receptor (TCR) specific for the melanoma-associated antigen gp100, fused
to an anti-CD3 specific antibody fragment (scFv). The engineered TCR
portion of the drug targets and binds the gp100 peptide 280-288 antigen,
which is over-expressed and presented by HLA-A2 on the surface of
melanoma cells. The anti-CD3 scFv portion captures and redirects T cells
to kill the melanoma cells, while normal antigen negative tissues are
unaffected. Here, we present data which provides the foundation for the
clinical observations. In vitro, IMCgp100 is demonstrated to potently
redirect T cells from late stage cancer patients to target melanoma
tumors exhibiting HLA-down regulation, even in the presence of high
numbers of regulatory T cells. Target cell killing is observed within
hours and is specific for gp100. In addition killing is associated with
the release of various pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines as well
as cross-presentation of gp100 and other melanoma-associated antigens by
dendritic cells. Thus, IMCgp100 demonstrates the potential to elicit
potent short-term responses and trigger longer-term anti melanoma
activity in vivo.IMCgp100 is undergoing Phase I clinical testing in
patients with advanced malignant melanoma; with the maximum tolerated
dose having been established. The drug is well tolerated with evidence of
tumor shrinkage. Analyses of serum samples obtained from patients on the
trial demonstrate T cell mobilisation and transient drug mediated
increases in various cytokines and chemokines, some of which are reported
to play a key role in anti-melanoma responses. These data support the
potential of IMCgp100 as an effective treatment for malignant melanoma.

