Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum Mac-2 binding protein levels as a novel diagnostic biomarker
for prediction of disease severity and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis


Background & Aims: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a growing
medical problem around the world. Among NAFLD patients, those with
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) can develop cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To distinguish NASH from simple steatosis
and to estimate its disease severity would be of great clinical
significance. It is because NASH would become a more important liver
disease developing HCC after viral hepatitis is overcome. Mac-2 binding
protein (Mac-2bp) is one of the major fucosylated glycoproteins, which we
identified with glyco-proteomic analyses. In this study, we investigated
the availability of Mac-2bp for differential diagnosis of NASH from NAFLD
as a biomarker.Methods: Our cohort of 127 patients had biopsy-proven
NAFLD. Serum Mac-2bp levels were determined with our developed ELISA kit.
For the quantitative measurement of the caspase-generated neoepitope of
CK-18, we used the M30-Apoptosense ELISA (Peviva, Bromma, Sweden). Then,
we compared the usefulness of serum Mac-2bp levels with the M30 antigen
for the prediction of NASH diagnosis and disease severity. The normal
controls (NC) were sera from 23 healthy subjects. Statistical analysis
was performed with JMP 10 software.Results: In our cohort, Mac-2bp levels
were significantly increased in nonNASH patients compared with NC (1.103
0.500 vs 0.675 0.271 g/mL, PBackground & Aims: Nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) is a growing medical problem around the world. Among
NAFLD patients, those with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) can
develop cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To distinguish NASH
from simple steatosis and to estimate its disease severity would be of
great clinical significance. It is because NASH would become a more
important liver disease developing HCC after viral hepatitis is overcome.
Mac-2 binding protein (Mac-2bp) is one of the major fucosylated
glycoproteins, which we identified with glyco-proteomic analyses. In this
study, we investigated the availability of Mac-2bp for differential
diagnosis of NASH from NAFLD as a biomarker.Methods: Our cohort of 127
patients had biopsy-proven NAFLD. Serum Mac-2bp levels were determined
with our developed ELISA kit. For the quantitative measurement of the
caspase-generated neoepitope of CK-18, we used the M30-Apoptosense ELISA
(Peviva, Bromma, Sweden). Then, we compared the usefulness of serum
Mac-2bp levels with the M30 antigen for the prediction of NASH diagnosis
and disease severity. The normal controls (NC) were sera from 23 healthy
subjects. Statistical analysis was performed with JMP 10
software.Results: In our cohort, Mac-2bp levels were significantly
increased in nonNASH patients compared with NC (1.103 0.500 vs 0.675
0.271 g/mL, P<0.01). More importantly, the Mac-2bp levels in NASH
patients exhibited greater increases than did those in nonNASH patients
(2.132 1.237 g/mL, PBackground & Aims: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) is a growing medical problem around the world. Among NAFLD
patients, those with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) can develop
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To distinguish NASH from
simple steatosis and to estimate its disease severity would be of great
clinical significance. It is because NASH would become a more important
liver disease developing HCC after viral hepatitis is overcome. Mac-2
binding protein (Mac-2bp) is one of the major fucosylated glycoproteins,
which we identified with glyco-proteomic analyses. In this study, we
investigated the availability of Mac-2bp for differential diagnosis of
NASH from NAFLD as a biomarker.Methods: Our cohort of 127 patients had
biopsy-proven NAFLD. Serum Mac-2bp levels were determined with our
developed ELISA kit. For the quantitative measurement of the
caspase-generated neoepitope of CK-18, we used the M30-Apoptosense ELISA
(Peviva, Bromma, Sweden). Then, we compared the usefulness of serum
Mac-2bp levels with the M30 antigen for the prediction of NASH diagnosis
and disease severity. The normal controls (NC) were sera from 23 healthy
subjects. Statistical analysis was performed with JMP 10
software.Results: In our cohort, Mac-2bp levels were significantly
increased in nonNASH patients compared with NC (1.103 0.500 vs 0.675
0.271 g/mL, P<0.01). More importantly, the Mac-2bp levels in NASH
patients exhibited greater increases than did those in nonNASH patients
(2.132 1.237 g/mL, P<0.01). We also compared the sensitivity and
specificity of Mac-2bp with those of the M30 antigen for the
discrimination of NASH using the ROC curve. The sensitivity of Mac-2bp
was almost the same as that of the M30 antigen for the differentiation of
NASH and nonNASH (74.3 vs 78.9 %). The specificity of Mac-2bp was higher
than that of the M30 antigen (77.8 vs 61.1 %). The area under the
receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve of Mac-2bp for predicting
NASH was higher than that of the M30 antigen (0.816 vs 0.725). There was
no correlation between Mac-2bp and the M30 antigen levels in NAFLD
patients. Moreover, Mac-2bp levels could predict the fibrosis stage of
NAFLD patients. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed Mac-2bp
levels were significant determinants for NASH diagnosis and monitoring of
liver fibrosis staging in NAFLD, but M30 antigen levels were
not.Conclusions: Measurement of serum Mac-2bp can distinguish NASH from
nonNASH patients, and predict liver disease severity including the
incidence of HCC in patients with NAFLD.

