Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery at the interface: novel anticancer agents targeting
human estrogen receptor/S100 interactions


Estrogen-triggered nuclear transcription factor, estrogen receptor (ER)
is expressed in about 70% of breast cancer. ER mediates various cellular
signaling events including the genomic regulation of target genes that
affect reproduction, development, and general metabolism. The
antiestrogen tamoxifen is currently administered to patients in order to
induce regression of the tumor growth. However, upon continued
administration, breast cancer patients develop resistance to tamoxifen.
In addition, calcium binding proteins such as, calmodulin (CaM) which are
significantly overexpressed in cancer cells, can activate transcription
of target genes by directly binding to ER in lieu of estrogen. Calmodulin
antagonists (w7 and melatonin) have been shown to significantly inhibit
human estrogen receptor alpha (hERalpha) transcriptional activity. In
search of a novel anti-cancer agent, we generated a library of
interaction profiles of human ER-EF hand protein complexes and identified
S100B and S100P (high sequence and structure homology with CaM) as
potential targets. Furthermore, S100P is shown to mediate
tamoxifen-acquired resistance and cell migration capacity in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. Our objective is to develop peptidomimetics and small
molecules to block ER-S100 interactions using an integrated
proteomics-assisted drug discovery approach. Briefly, using the fold
information and contact regions obtained from the FT-ICR mass
spectrometry, 3D structures of ER-S100 protein complexes were
reconstructed. These structures of ER best represent the conformational
state sensed by the specific interacting partner. ER-S100 complex is
distinct from CaM. The lack of the connective peptidic region between the
EF hand pairs in S100 attributed to less interaction coverage than CaM.
The identified ER conformation-sensing regions of the interacting EF hand
proteins were used to develop a library of top peptidomimetics and
potential small molecule sensors targeting the interfaces of ER-S100
interactions. We have evaluated their ability to block specific ER-S100
interactions in a high throughput fluorescent polarization based screen,
to inhibit cancer cell proliferation and ER-mediated transcription of
target genes. We believe that the ensemble of ER-EF hand protein
complexes generated by our integrated proteomics-assisted protein
interaction profiling will shed light on the lingering issue of hormone
independent activation of ER at the molecular level and novel
therapeutics targeting ER-S100 interactions.

