Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesodissection of slide mounted tissue: Applications including
tumor tissue enrichment, expression analysis, and FISH on tissue fragments


We previously reported the development of a mill based instrument for
dissection of slide-mounted tissue sections. This instrument employs a
specialized disposable mill bit that simultaneously dispenses liquid,
cuts tissue from the slide surface using rotary motion, and aspirates the
liquid along with the displaced tissue fragments. An accompanying
software package is capable of transferring digital annotations between
images of serially cut tissue sections to guide dissection and generate
an electronic record of the process. Since the original report, a new
instrument and software package has been developed with a computer
controlled stage for automatic dissection of tissue. Here we report three
applications using this mesodissection system. The first application
investigated the relationship between dissection resolution and percent
tumor tissue recovered. Areas of high tumor content were indicated on
digital images of lung tumor samples. The areas of highest concentration
were dissected at 400 micron resolution, the remaining areas of tumor
dissected at 800 micron resolution, and then surrounding areas that would
typically be recovered using manual macrodissection were dissected at 2
mm resolution. The percent mutant DNA, determined using the Sequenom
OncoCarta panel, was greater than 60% for the 400 micron resolution
dissections, about 45% for the 800 micron resolution dissections, and
less than 10% for the remaining regions. The second application
investigated the effect of various dissection related parameters on
expression analysis, as assayed by Reverse Transcription and Quantitative
PCR (RT-qPCR). These parameters included placing freshly microtomed FFPE
tissue sections directly on slides vs. first floating on water,
dissection of deparaffinized vs. paraffinized tissue, the use of crude
lysates vs. purified RNA for the reverse transcription reactions, and
manual dissection vs. mesodissection of the same areas on serial
sections. RT-qPCR results were robust and equivalent for all parameters
except those derived from crude lysates, which were equivalent to the no
template controls. The third application investigated if mesodissected
tissue fragments could be re-adhered to glass slides and used for FISH
analysis. This application has the potential to automate and increase the
throughput of FISH on tissue sections while reducing sample consumption.
The preliminary results demonstrate that tissue fragments can produce
good FISH signals, but a more detailed comparison to undissected tissue
sections is ongoing. A significant concern is the loss of context of
these fragments. This concern can be somewhat minimized by adjusting
dissection conditions to obtain fragments larger than 1 mm in diameter
and by mapping the dissected area onto the corresponding area a serial
H&E stained tissue section using the mesodissection software.

