Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenetics-pharmacokinetics study of bevacizumab in mCRC
patients treated with Avastin-Folfiri regimen: Search for predictive
markers of response and study of the pharmacokinetics variability


Identifying biomarkers predictive of response is a rising trend in
clinical oncology, especially when administrating costly targeted
therapies and biologics. Unlike other monoclonal antibodies such as
cetuximab, panitumumab, trastuzumab or ipilimumab, search for genetic or
molecular makers predictive for clinical outcome with widely prescribed
bevacizumab has failed to generate consensual results over the last
decade. We have performed a pilot study in 70 patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer receiving the standard bevacizumab-Folfiri protocol.
More specifically, our study focused on the retrospective screening of
the VEGF, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2 and HIF1 polymorphisms as putative markers
associated with clinical outcome. Additionally, a validated Elisa method
was used to evaluate the inter-individual variability in the bevacizumab
residual seric concentrations in a subset of mCRC patients. Results
showed a significant association between the C allele of the 1772C/T
polymorphism of HIF1 and disease free survival. This allelic variant was
not associated with response, toxicity (i.e., AHT) or overall survival.
Other polymorphisms we studied failed to be associated with clinical
outcome. Although preliminary, our data are conflictual with other
studies published elsewhere with bevacizumab determinants of efficacy. Of
note, monitoring the residual concentrations showed an extremely wide
dispersion (i.e., >120%) in the seric levels between patients treated
with a standard dose of bevacizumab, thus suggesting that leaving
unadressed the inter-individual variability in drug exposure could be a
major confounding factor when studying the pharmacogenetics of
bevacizumab. Overall, and although the exact role (ie, predictive or
prognostic) HIF1 polymorphism could play in the clinical outcome of
patients treated with the Avastin Folfiri regimen will have to be further
confirmed on a larger cohort, our data are appealing and support the
hypothesis that therapeutic drug monitoring of bevacizumab is critical to
sort patients on their exposure levels prior to carry out next
pharmacogenetics investigations. Overall, this pilote study shed the
light on the largely ignored inter-patient variability in the
pharmacokinetics of major biologics, and the urgent need to develop
appropriate tools to address this issue.

