Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-fat diet feeding increases the expression of chemokines in
the target organs and their corresponding receptors in tumor tissues of
mice injected with highly metastatic prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer is the third most common cancer in men worldwide.
Recently, approximately 1 billion people in the world are overweight and
obese, and epidemiological evidence indicates that overweight and obesity
increase risks of developing several types of cancers. We previously
noted that high-fat diet (HFD) feeding increased prostate cancer
development and lung metastasis in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. When TRAMP-C2 prostate cancer cells which
were derived from a TRAMP mouse were subcutaneously injected into C57BL/6
mice, they grew in a solid tumor. However, distant metastasis was not
detected. When these poorly metastatic TRAMP-C2 cells were injected into
the tail vein, lung metastasis was detected at 15 weeks after the
injection. In order to obtain highly metastatic clones, we isolated
TRAM-C2 cells metastasized to the lung, cultured, injected again into the
tail vein, and the process was repeated one more time. When the resulting
highly metastatic cells (MTC2) were injected into the tail vein,
metastasis was detected in the lung at 4.5 weeks. Compared to poorly
metastatic TRAMP-C2, transcripts of the chemokine receptors CCR2 and
CXCR2 were tremendously upregulated in highly metastatic MTC2. The
ligands of these receptors, MCP-1 and CXCL1/CXCL2, stimulated the
invasion of MTC2, and neutralizing antibodies against CCR2 and CXCR2
almost completely blocked the ligand-induced invasion indicating that
these receptors are functional in MTC2. When MTC2 were injected into the
tail vein, HFD-feeding stimulated lung metastasis. The transcripts of
CXCL1 and CXCL2 were significantly increased in the lungs of HFD-fed
mice. When MTC2 were subcutaneously injected into HFD-fed C57BL/6 mice,
solid tumor growth and lymph node metastasis as well as tumor
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis were significantly increased in
HFD-fed mice. HFD feeding increased the transcripts of MCP-1, CXCL1, and
CXCL2 in the lymph node as well as those of CXCR2 and CCR2 in tumor
tissues. Additionally, the transcripts of CCR2, CCR7 and CXCR2 were
increased markedly in MTC2 cells when co-cultured with mature adipocytes.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that HFD-feeding accelerates the solid
tumor growth, metastasis and lymphangiogenesis in C57BL/6 mice injected
with prostate cancer cells. These results indicate that MCP-1, CXCL1, and
CXCL2 in the metastatic target organs draw prostate tumor cells
expressing their corresponding receptors. HFD feeding stimulates
metastasis by not only increasing the levels of these ligands in the
target organs but also increasing the levels of the receptors on tumor
cells.

