Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DKK3 expression and its function in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is frequently occurring
malignancy worldwide. It is believed that HNSCC may occur as the result
of cumulative abnormalities on cancer related genes. However, the key
genes or pathways that might serve an important role in HNSCC biology are
yet to be investigated.Therefore, we previously performed genome wide
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis in HNSCC in order to seek
specifically affected tumor suppressor genes (TSG). Using several
microsatellite markers, we searched frequently deleted allele, and
focused on dickkopf WNT signaling pathway inhibitor 3 (DKK3). DKK3 is
known as a tumor suppressor, and as indicated in its alternative name,
reduced expression in cancer (REIC), its expression was reduced or lost
in several kinds of cancer tissues and cells. The expression, function
and clinical importance of DKK3 in HNSCC were investigated.In this study,
90 cases of HNSCC tissue samples, which were obtained from Okayama
University hospital with written informed consent, for
immunohistochemistry to examine DKK3 protein expression. The protein
expression status was scored as positive or negative. Pearson's
Chi-square test and Fisher's exact test were used to evaluate the
correlation between the DKK3 protein expression and clinicopathological
characteristics. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to determine the
survival analysis. For functional analyses, HNSCC-derived cells were
used. Gastric and colorectal cancer cell lines were also used for
comparison. DKK3 mRNA expression was checked by RT-PCR, and then RNAi was
performed in DKK3-expressing cells in order to inspect the effect of DKK3
knockdown on cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.DKK3 protein
expression was observed 76 cases out of 90 cases (84.4%). The expression
was observed in the cytoplasm and cellular membrane of the cancer cells.
Small vessels around the cancer nests were also positive. Intriguingly,
DKK3 positive patients showed significantly shorter disease free survival
(p=0.038) and overall survival (p=0.155). And DKK3 negative patients did
not show metastasis. DKK3 mRNA expression was detected only in HNSCC
derived cells, whereas that was not observed in gastric or colorectal
cancer cells. DKK3 knockdown by siRNA transfection in HNSCC cells
resulted in significant reduction of cellular migration and invasion.
Western blotting revealed that DKK3 knockdown did not affect on WNT
canonical or non-canonical pathways.It is reported that DKK3 expression
was reduced or lost in several cancers because of CpG methylation.
However, the expression pattern of DKK3 in HNSCC was quite different. All
these data strongly suggest potential role of DKK3 in HNSCC invasion, and
potential clinical target for HNSCC invasion or metastasis.

