Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mitochondrial transport in neuronal cells by
microtubule-targeting drugs eribulin, ixabepilone, paclitaxel, and
vincristine


Peripheral neuropathy can be a serious, dose-limiting side effect of
cancer treatment with microtubule-targeting drugs. We hypothesize that
inhibition of mitochondrial transport contributes to the neuropathic
dying back of peripheral neurons often seen with chemotherapy-induced
peripheral neuropathy. We examined the effects of eribulin (ERB),
vincristine (VCR), paclitaxel (PAC), and ixabepilone (IXA) on
mitochondrial trafficking in neurites of SK-N-SH human neuroblastoma
cells. The concentration range used was chosen to reflect their relative
potencies for inhibition of cancer cell proliferation (3 IC50: ERB, 2.4
nM, VCR, 8.4 nm, IXA, 23 nM, PAC, 33nM). In control cells, mitochondria
moved anterogradely at a velocity of 14 m/min, and retrogradely at 16
m/min. At 3 IC50 antiproliferative values, ERB and VCR did not
significantly inhibit anterograde trafficking velocity, whereas IXA and
PAC reduced it by 30%. At sufficiently high concentrations, ERB (10 nM,
10 IC50) and VCR (10 nM, 4 IC50) reduced anterograde velocity to the same
extent as PAC and IXA, by 30%. Retrograde trafficking was not
significantly inhibited by any of the drugs.The drugs also reduced the
number of moving mitochondria. In control cells, an average of 4.3
mitochondria moved per visualized cell area. The four drugs, over a range
of the concentrations, reduced the number of moving mitochondria by
19-47%, with no apparent differences between drugs. FCCP (10 M), a
mitochondrial membrane depolarizing compound, also reduced the number of
moving mitochondria by 39%, but, interestingly, did not inhibit the
mitochondrial trafficking velocity.The more potent antiproliferative
drugs ERB and VCR did not inhibit mitochondrial trafficking velocity at 3
IC50 concentrations, while the less potent antiproliferative drugs PAC
and IXA inhibited anterograde trafficking velocity. This may be due in
part to differences in drug-microtubule binding; ERB and VCR bind
primarily to microtubule ends, while TAX and IXA bind along the lengths
of the microtubules. Additionally, structural effects on microtubules,
such as bundling, curved microtubules, and shortened microtubules, may
influence the ability of kinesin to walk along the microtubule surface.
All four drugs reduced the number of moving mitochondria, possibly as a
result of mitochondrial depolarization, suggested by the effects of the
mitochondrial depolarizing compound, FCCP. These results suggest that the
antiproliferative potency of the drugs, as well as the binding location
on microtubules and/or drug-induced changes in microtubule structure,
contribute to the drugs' neurotoxic effects on mitochondrial trafficking
velocity in the axons of peripheral neurons, while the increase in
stalled mitochondria may be due to a mitochondrial depolarization effect
of the drugs. This work was funded by Eisai Inc.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

