Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial reprogramming in triple negative breast cancer
progression


Unlike other subgroups of patients with breast cancer (BCa), for triple
negative (TN) BCa, there is a current lack of understanding of driver
pathways and hence are often managed using more generic therapies. Thus,
it is important to identify the underlying mechanisms of triple negative
breast cancer progression and its racial disparity. Mitochondria-nuclear
crosstalk is a bidirectional pathway of communication between
mitochondria and nucleus that influences many cellular and organismal
activities. This crosstalk can regulate several oncogenic pathways that
regulate cellular tumor characteristics. With the advent of
transmitochondrial cybrid (cybrid) technology, it is now possible to
examine the specific contribution of tumor-associated mitochondria in
neoplastic growth and development under a defined common nuclear
background. We used this model system to identify mitochondria regulated
pathways in TN BCa. Among different oncogenic pathways, Src pathway is
frequently over-expressed in TN BCa and Src inhibitors are proposed as
one of their current treatments of choice. However, single drug therapy
with Src inhibitors failed to control metastatic TN BCa in recent
Phase-II trials. These highlight an important question on the mechanism
behind the regulation of Src oncogenic signature in TN BCa. Using cybrid
technology, we have discovered critical role of cancer mitochondria in
the post-translational modification of Src oncogenic pathway.
Interestingly we discovered that the Src autophosphorylation, which
activate Src-mediated oncogenic pathway, depends on mitochondrial tumor
characteristics. Specifically, our strong preliminary data suggest that
mitochondrial reprogramming is a critical step in the autophosphorylation
and activation of Src pathway in metastatic TN BCa cells. Our findings
suggest mitochondria targeted drugs as promising combination therapy for
the management of Src positive TN BCa.

