Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optical imaging of cancer stem-like cells in cervical cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) defined by differentiation capacity,
self-renewal capacity and tumorigenicity have been identified in many
tumors, including cervical cancer. Current studies in the field of cancer
stem cell research identify CSCs by several specific biomarkers, such as
ALDH1, but it is difficult to monitor cervical CSCs in real-time in vitro
and in vivo. Recent research reported the visualization of CSCs in breast
cancer and giloma using green fluorescent protein ZsGreen fused to a
degron motif ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) which is destructed by the
proteasome. According to the research, CSCs are low 26S proteasome
activity, while non-CSCs are high. Therefore it is possible to observe
CSCs which accumulate fluorescent ZsGreen protein. In this study, we
investigated optical imaging of CSCs in human cervical cancer cell lines
of CaSki and Hela.We engineered CaSki and HeLa cervical cancer cells
expressing ZsGeen-ODC (Zs positive cells) by a retroviral vector. The
cancer stemness of their Zs positive cells was assessed by sphere
formation assay, and the resistance of cancer stem cells to chemotherapy
and radiation therapy was investigated by
MTT(3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H tetrazolium
bromide)assay and clonogenic survival assay.The low 26S proteasome
activity of Zs positive cells was confirmed by Proteasome-Glo Cell Based
Assay (Promega). Zs positive cells of both CaSki and HeLa showed high
ability in sphere formation assay, compared with cancer cells which did
not express ZsGreen-ODC (Zs negative cells). In MTT assay, Zs positive
cells of CaSki were resistant to cisplatin and paclitaxel, whereas those
of HeLa were not resistant as compared with Zs negative cells of HeLa.
Our data of clonogenic survival assay suggested that Zs positive cells of
both CaSki and HeLa were more resistant to ionizing radiation than Zs
negative cells. Thus our results indicated that Zs positive cells of
CaSki and Hela had features of CSCs.In conclusion, we could visualize
cervical cancer stem-like cells using a fluorescence protein system.
Further researches of detecting real-time asymmetric cell division in
vitro and analyzing the tumorigenicity of these cells in vivo are
necessary to show evidence of cancer stemness and they are now going. In
the next step, we will research the relationship between
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the radiation resistance using this
real-time tracking system.

