Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered release and presentation of antibody-bound viral
antigens: A highly specific and novel immunotherapeutic approach to
target cancer in vivo


Harnessing the power of adaptive immunity to combat cancer has been a
long-term goal of translational immunotherapy. Tumor-specific immunity,
where present, is typically at low frequency and affinity with
compromised effector function. By contrast, immunity against persistent
herpesviruses in man is characterised by high affinity cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes (CTL) at high frequency with potent effector function.
Furthermore, the immunosubversive mechanisms employed by herpesviruses
show striking parallels to tumors, yet the associated anti-viral immunity
limits these to life-long asymptomatic infections.We reasoned that the
delivery of immunodominant viral peptide epitopes to the tumor surface
might facilitate passive-loading of peptides into empty MHC class-I
molecules, effectively mimicking viral infection, rendering tumors
susceptible to lysis by anti-viral immunity.To address this we developed
a new class of targeting antibodies: APEC (Antibody Peptide Epitope
Complexes) that are able to deliver an antigenic payload at the cell
surface through proteolytic release of covalently-coupled peptide
antigens. As a proof-of-concept we used clinically-validated antibodies
cetuximab (anti-EGFR) and rituximab (anti-CD20) to develop APECs that are
able to target human tumors.We screened 15 HLA-A*0201+ EGFR-expressing
NCI-60 cell lines, CD20+ lymphoma cell lines, 20 primary CD20+ CLL tumor
samples and four healthy B-cells against a library of 190 cetuximab-APECs
(cAPEC) or rituximab (rAPEC) incorporating the immunodominant
cytomegalovirus (CMV) pp65495-503 epitope and candidate protease cleavage
sites following co-incubation with CMV-specific CTL (CMV-CTL). The most
effective cAPEC and rAPEC were those incorporating MMP2, MMP9, Cathepsin
B and Cathepsin D protease recognition domains. Very few (2/190) rAPEC
were able to redirect CMV-CTL against healthy cells. Heterogeneity was
observed for primary CLL tumors but a limited number of rAPEC were
effective in all cases (5/190).Mechanistic studies demonstrated that: (i)
peptide loading occurred at the cell surface, (ii) required the
expression of target antigens at the cell surface and (iii) T-cell
recognition could be inhibited by unconjugated antibody (92%) or by
incubation with protease inhibitors (83%).T-cell specificity was examined
using rAPEC treated tumor targets co-incubated with various HLA-matched
effector T-cell populations. No activation of CD4+ was observed including
CD4+CD25hi regulatory T-cell populations. Incubation with CD8+ T-cells
revealed that only pp65495-503-specific CD8+ T-cells engaged with
APEC-treated tumor cells. Lastly, xenograft studies using EGFR+ and CD20+
tumor cell lines demonstrated efficacy of both cAPEC and rAPEC to
eliminate tumors in vivo by redirecting anti-viral CTL.These data
indicate that APECs represent a powerful new approach to combat cancer.

