Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular proteolytic cleavage of peptide-linked antibody-drug
conjugates promotes bystander killing of cancer cells


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are designed to deliver cytotoxics to
tumor cells via binding to surface antigen followed by internalization
and intracellular drug release. ADC linkers are typically categorized as
non-cleavable or cleavable; a cleavable linker example is
Y_mcValCitPABC_X, with antibody Y, a dipeptide sequence with
self-immolative PABC spacer, and payload X. This linker is known to be
cleaved by endosomal/lysosomal proteases such as cathepsins, releasing
attached payload. In addition to intracellular processing of this linker,
we report that conditioned media of cultured tumor cell lines is
sufficient to promote extracellular cleavage of ADCs with peptide-linked
payloads. Cultured cell lines N87 (gastric) and U87 (glioblastoma), and
patient-derived xenograft PA0165 (pancreatic) adapted to in vitro
culture, were plated either in standard 2D culture or in 3D Cultrex
embedded culture. After 3 - 7 days, conditioned media from cells was
transferred onto MDA-MB-468 or HT29 cells, and then ADCs
(Y_mcValCitPABC_Aur) were added to cultures. ADCs were non-targeting IgG
conjugated via cleavable dipeptide-PABC linker to auristatin tubulin
inhibitor. Minimal cytotoxicity was observed with ADC alone on 468 or
HT29 cells. However, in the presence of conditioned media from N87, U87,
or PA0165 cells plus the ADC, cytotoxicity was observed in the recipient
cells (up to 31, 22, 56% growth inhibition respectively at 100 nM ADC).
Moreover, in all cases, the magnitude of the response was greatest when
cells providing conditioned media were grown in 3D culture (up to 56, 48,
70%, respectively). In contrast, minimal response was observed using
conditioned media from other cancer cell lines (ie HCC2429, 1 - 17%).
Additional analyses were conducted by incubating conditioned media from
these cells with a dipeptide-based cleavable substrate with fluorescent
probe and measuring released product in a plate-based assay. Conditioned
media promoted fluorescence, suggesting proteolytic enzymes secreted by
cells. An ELISA confirmed the presence of cathepsins in conditioned
media. Complementing these studies, proteolytic activity was detected in
the interstitial fluid derived from tumors grown in athymic mice. Fluid
extracted from xenograft tumors (cultured cancer lines and
patient-derived tumors) was analyzed for proteolytic activity using
cleavable-fluorescent linker-probe in a plate assay. The majority of
samples demonstrated proteolytic activity. These data are consistent with
reported secretion of cathepsins by cancer cells and we now show that
these proteases may mediate extracellular release of cytotoxic payloads
from ADCs containing peptide-based cleavable linkers. This activity is
magnified when cells are grown in 3D culture and is observed in tumor
xenografts grown in vivo. This response may provide a beneficial
bystander effect of ADCs on antigen negative cells in a heterogenous
tumor population.

