Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput screening of compounds for targeting system Xc(-)
in human breast cancer cells


Breast cancer cells often metastasize to bone, causing severe and
untreatable pain, which greatly compromises the quality of life of
patients. We discovered that breast cancer cells secrete large amounts of
glutamate via an amino acid antiporter Xc(-). Glutamate is an important
neurotransmitter that has been associated with pain and it is also
critical in bone metabolic remodeling. Excessive glutamate secreted by
invading breast cancer cells can cause excitotoxic injury to bone
neurons, disturb bone homeostasis, and activate or sensitize nociceptors,
thereby causing acute and chronic pain. Another important activity of
system Xc(-) is the import of cystine into cells, which is critical for
antioxidant defence mechanism in cancer cells. These make system Xc(-) a
potential target to overcome breast cancer induced-pain and sensitize
cancer cells to oxidative damage.A cell-based Amplex red glutamate assay
was optimized and miniaturized to be compatible with high throughput
screening (HTS) setting. The library for screening is the Canadian
Compound Collection containing 30,000 compounds. We utilized the blockade
of glutamate release to identify potential compounds.We identified 320
compounds that effectively inhibit glutamate release of human breast
cancer cell MDA-MB-231. However on closer scrutiny and stringent
conditions we narrowed our potential compounds to 8 for further
characterization. These compounds were tested in vitro for cytotoxicity
and dose response effects on glutamate release.In conclusion we have
identified several lead compounds for in vivo pain monitoring tests.
Information obtained from this study will not only advance our
understanding of the role of system Xc(-) in breast cancer cells, but
also help design novel drugs for blocking breast cancer induced-bone
pain, thereby improving the quality of life for breast cancer
patients.(This project was supported by Canadian Breast Cancer
Foundation-Ontario)

