Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGF induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cell
properties in human oral squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck cancer is one of the 10 most common cancers worldwide.
Despite advances in therapeutic research in the last few decades,
morbidity and mortality remain unchanged. Recurrent and metastatic oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) of the head and neck may have correlated
with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a property acquired by
cancer stem cells (CSCs). In our study, SCC-1 cells (a human tongue
cancer cell line) treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) underwent
EMT as confirmed by morphological changes and expression of EMT-related
markers using Western blot, immunocytostaining, and flow cytometric
analyses. Our data showed that, in comparison with non-treated cells, EGF
treatment induced SCC-1 cells to undergo EMT, characterized by
spindle-shaped mesenchymal-like morphology, an altered suppression of
E-cadherin and promotion of vimentin expression, and an enhanced invasive
capacity. Our results also indicated that EGF significantly enriched the
fraction of CD44+/CD24low/- CSCs in SCC-1 cells, from 78% to 2529%, and
simultaneously increased the expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1
(ALDH1), a common marker for stem cells. Moreover, the purified
CD44+/CD24low/- CSC population displayed stem cell properties associated
with EMT phenotypes and increased migration and invasion abilities in
vitro. Using a murine orthotopic tongue cancer model transplanted with
stably GFP-expressing SCC-1 cells (GFP-SCC-1), we confirmed that EGF can
promote tumor metastasis to cervical lymph nodes, and simultaneously
augmented CD44 and ALDH1 expression in these invasive tumor cells. Taken
together, we have demonstrated that EGF-induced EMT process is closely
associated with the acquisition of CSC properties in human OSCC, which
may contribute to the increased distant metastasis and recurrence of head
and neck cancer. Further elucidation of the underlying mechanisms will
facilitate development of new generation of effective therapies that aim
to specifically target CSCs and eliminate the root of cancer
recurrence.This work was supported by National Institute of Health
Research Grant, R01DE 019932, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Foundation
Research Support, 002894, and the Schoenleber funding support.

