Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic dysregulation of miR-196b in breast cancer


Dysregulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression levels is a major cause of
cancer development. miRNA expression profiles can determine tumor type,
patient prognosis, reoccurrence and treatment outcome, with greater
accuracy as compared to mRNA expression profiles. The expression of
miRNAs can be epigenetically dysregulated by aberrant DNA methylation and
histone deacetylation in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, one third of
miRNA promoters are targets for aberrant methylation in breast cancer.
Identifying miRNAs that are epigenetically silenced in breast cancer will
provide new insight into breast cancer development as well as define
novel signatures for predicting therapeutic response to epigenetic
modifying agents. New studies have shown that using transient low doses
of demethylating agents, such as decitabine (DAC), result in sustained
changes in major cancer cell signaling pathways, therefore reducing
tumorigenicity and cancer stem cell self-renewal. The goal of this
project is to identify epigenetically-silenced miRNAs that can be
reactivated upon low dose treatment of DAC. miR-196b has been shown to
inhibit metastasis by targeting HOXC8. Using online datasets, we
determined miR-196b is hypermethylated in breast cancer patient samples
compared to normal breast samples. We used Taqman miRNA assays to measure
the expression of miR-196b in breast cancer patient samples and found it
was down-regulated in tumor samples compared to paired normal breast
tissue. miR-196b is also down-regulated in MDA-MB-231 cells. We treated
MDA-MB-231 cells with low dose (100 nM) DAC for 3 days and found miR-196b
was upregulated 5-fold compared to DMSO control. The methylated CpG
content of miR-196b-associated CpG island was measured using bisulfite
sequencing DNA purified from DMSO and DAC treated cells. The miR-196b CpG
loci in the DAC treatment was demethylated by 33% compared to DMSO
control. Therefore, reactivation of miR-196b is associated with
demethylation of miR-196b CpG loci. Interestingly, fourteen days after
ending DAC treatment, miR-196b re-expression continued to increase up to
13-fold above DMSO control. In addition, we found that exogenously
re-introduced mature miR-196b into MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
resulted in upregulation of endogenous primary miR-196b. This suggests a
novel positive feedback loop that allows miR-196b to regulate its own
expression, possibly through epigenetic mechanisms. Future studies will
involve identifying the mechanism associated with this re-expression,
determining whether miR-196b regulates additional gene promoters, and the
affect this has on breast cancer metastatic phenotype.

