Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WIF1 re-expression in glioblastoma impairs migration through
downregulation of the lncRNA MALAT1


Glioblastoma is the most aggressive form of human glioma. Despite
progress in brain tumor therapy the prognosis remains dismal with a
median survival of 15 months. We have recently shown that WIF1, an
inhibitor of the WNT pathway, is downregulated in glioblastoma where it
functions as strong tumor suppressor gene. Indeed, WIF1 re-expression
impairs cell growth, cell migration, induces a senescence-like phenotype,
and inhibits tumorigenicity in several orthotopic xenograft models.To
analyse the molecular mechanisms underlying the tumor suppressive
functions of WIF1 we developed a TET-on inducible system. Gene expression
profiling following WIF1 induction revealed several interesting candidate
genes validated in additional cell lines. The gene with strongest
downregulation in WIF1-induced cells was MALAT1. MALAT1 is a long
non-coding RNA that has been associated with tumor aggressiveness and
invasion. Hence, MALAT1 is a plausible candidate, and its downregulation
may contribute to the attenuation of malignancy seen in WIF1 expressing
cells. Preliminary results show that the expression of a MALAT1 specific
short-hairpin drastically reduces the infiltrative capability of
glioblastoma cells. Analysis of gene xpression profiles revealed that
MALAT1 is overexpressed in glioblastoma as compared to non-tumoral brain.
These observations suggest that MALAT1 may contribute to the aggressive
phenotype of glioblastoma. Experiments to test the effect of
downregulation of MALAT1 in vivo are now ongoing.The poor prognosis is
partially due to the extremely high capability of glioblastoma cells to
migrate and to invade the surrounding brain structures, impairing
complete surgical resection, hence leading inevitably to recurrence. This
provides the rational to further investigate implications of MALAT1 in
migration. Understanding the mechanisms of high invasive properties may
indeed lead to the identification of new targets for therapy.

