Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity induces changes in adipokines profile and activates
Akt/mTOR signaling accelerating breast carcinogenesis and tumor growth


Obesity increases the risk of cancer death among postmenopausal women
with estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer (BC), but the direct
evidence for the mechanisms is lacking. The purpose of this study is to
demonstrate direct evidence for the mechanisms mediating this
epidemiological phenomenon. Transcriptomic profiles of pretreatment
biopsies from a prospective cohort of 137 ER+ BC patients were analyzed.
Transgenic and an orthotopic/syngeneic obese mouse models were created to
phenocopy obese patients and evaluate the effect of obesity on breast
carcinogenesis and tumor progression, and to explore further direct
mechanisms. We used co-culture system to examine the impact of adipocytes
and adipokines on BC cell proliferation. Functional transcriptomic
analysis of patients revealed the association of obesity with many of the
functional changes linked to cancer hallmarks. Our transgenic and
orthotopic/syngeneic obese-mouse models recapitulated the functional
transcriptomic landscape of obesity-associated changes seen in human
patients and demonstrated the role of the Akt/mTOR pathway in
obesity-induced breast carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Metformin
and everolimus can suppress obesity-induced adipokines secretion and
breast tumor formation and growth. An in vitro co-culture model revealed
that adipocyte-secreted adipokines (e.g., TIMP-1) regulate
adipocyte-induced BC cell proliferation and invasion. Metformin suppress
adipocytes-induced cell proliferation and adipocytes-secreted adipokines
in vitro. In conclusion, the patients' data provided evidence for the
mechanistic involvement of adipokines in addition to estrogen, insulin
and IGF-1 signaling in the link between obesity and ER+ BC. Our animal
experiments provide strong evidence for the role of obesity on the
accelerated breast carcinogenesis and obesity-induced tumor growth by
activation of the Akt/mTOR signaling. Metformin and everolimus may be use
as alternatives therapeutic interventions for BC patients with obesity.

