Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare genetic variation association with neurotoxicity and
infection in breast cancer patients enrolled in PG-SNPS


The genetic architecture underlying individual variation in
susceptibility to severe toxicity to chemotherapeutic agents is not yet
fully understood. We used a gene-based omnibus test to investigate the
role of rare genetic variation in severe neurosensory toxicity and
infection. Samples from a breast cancer pharmacogenetics study (PG-SNPS),
were genotyped using the Illumina Human Exome Beadchip array. Early
breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant and neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy trials were recruited into PG-SNPS. Clinical data relating
to their chemotherapy-related toxicities was collected prospectively. The
National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (NCI CTC version 2)
was used to assess toxicities. For each of the toxicities, a case-control
analysis was conducted using the Rare Admixture Maximum Likelihood
method(1). RAML is an omnibus test that looks at joint effects of
multiple variants on a phenotype. The test considers the probability that
a given variant is associated with severe toxicity, the average effect of
the associated variants within a gene on severe toxicity, and the
expected standard error of this effect. Patients were considered as
taxane-related neurosensory cases, if they had a CTC grade of 2 and as
infection cases if they have a CTC grade of 3. For both analyses variants
with minor allele frequency less than 2% were included. Only patients
treated with paclitaxel were included in the neurosensory analysis. In
this analysis we included 1,127 patients, 333 of which were considered
cases. We tested variants in 14,762 genes exome-wide. The gene LRRTM3 was
associated with severe neurosensory toxicity (p-value=5.5 x 10-4). LRRTM3
is a protein-coding gene with strong links to the maintenance and
development of the nervous system. Patients exposed to specific
adjuvant/neo-adjuvant breast cancer combination chemotherapy regimens
with paclitaxel, epirubicin, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide,
5fluorouracil or gemcitabine, were included in the infection analysis
(2,3,4). These included 1,564 patients, 583 of which were considered
cases. We tested 15,161 genes exome-wide for association with severe
infection. The top associated gene was FKBP5 with a p-value of 7 x 10-5.
This gene has a role in immunoregulation and encodes a protein which
binds to the immunosuppressants FK506 and rapamycin. These genes may be
of future interest as candidate genes within pharmacodynamic pathways.1.
Tyrer JP, Guo Q, Easton DF, Pharoah PD. The admixture maximum likelihood
test to test for association between rare variants and disease
phenotypes. BMC Bioinformatics 2013;14:177.2. NEAT trial -
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT000035773. tAnGo trial -
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT000395464. Neo-tAnGo trial -
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT00070278

