Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of anti-FGFR4 monoclonal
antibodies as therapeutic agents for human rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma of
childhood with two major subtypes embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS),
and current treatment modalities have yielded event free 5-year survival
in only 30% of the patients with high-risk disease. Therefore, there is
an absolute need for novel strategies and to identify and validate
clinically relevant targets for the treatment of RMS. The fibroblast
growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) is a very attractive therapeutic target
because: 1) the FGFR4 gene is over expressed in RMS, 2) it is crucial for
survival, proliferation, metastasis and drug resistance, 3) activating
mutations in the kinase domain lead to aggressive growth and poor
survival in patients with alveolar RMS and 4) genetic or pharmacologic
inhibition of FGFR4 signaling inhibited tumor growth in vitro and in
vivo. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against specific antigens expressed on
cancer cell surface have gained importance as potential therapeutic
agents that may be used either alone or in combination with
chemotherapeutic drugs. We have developed several mAbs against human
FGFR4 protein from rabbit and mouse (by hybridoma technology), and from
human immunoglobulin libraries (by recombinant DNA technology). In the
present study, we report the development and characterization of some of
these mAbs. Biacore analysis of these antibodies showed low nM affinity
to purified extracellular domain of FGFR4 (FGFR4-ECD). The ability of
these mAbs to bind the native molecule was demonstrated by specific
binding to RMS cell lines of both subtypes, and dose response curves
exhibited higher binding in ARMS cells than ERMS cells. More importantly,
significant binding was noticed in freshly isolated tumor cells from a
breast metastatic nodule of a patient with ARMS. The anti-FGFR4 mAbs also
bound to transfected cell line expressing FGFR4 on the surface, but not
the vector control (FGFR4 negative) cell line indicating the specificity
of the reaction. Furthermore, cell surface FGFR4 can mediate
internalization of the bound antibody upon incubation at 37C for as
little as 30 min and maximum internalization was observed at 2 h.
Receptor mediated internalization of the bound mAb was inhibited by a
chemical inhibitor, and ARMS cells showed more internalization than ERMS.
Together, these observations support the contention that anti- FGFR4 mAb
can be used as a vehicle to deliver a cytotoxic payload in the form of
small molecule drugs and toxins. Ongoing investigations are aimed at
developing anti-FGFR4 mAbs and their derivatives as potential therapeutic
agents for the treatment of patients with RMS.This study is supported in
part by the intramural research program of the National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, grants from St. Baldrick's Foundation and
Stand Up To Cancer - St. Baldrick's Pediatric Dream Team Translational
Cancer Research Grant, Grant Number SU2C-AACR-DT11-13.

