Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDSC-generated nitric oxide leads to an impairment of NK cell
functions in metastatic melanoma patients


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are able to inhibit the function
of immune cells within the tumor microenvironment. The interaction of
MDSCs with T cells has been studied extensively. However, the interaction
of MDSCs with innate immune cells such as NK cells is not well
understood. This study investigated whether the presence of MDSCs could
impair the function of NK cells.MDSC (CD33+HLA-DRneg/lowCD11b+) and
autologous NK cells (CD56+CD3neg) were isolated from the peripheral blood
of metastatic melanoma patients and co-cultured overnight at a 1:1 ratio
(2 x 105 cells each). Culture with MDSC led to a 70% decrease in NK cell
mediated antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) against HER2+
SkBr3 cells coated with an anti-HER2 antibody and a two-fold decrease in
the production of interferon-gamma in response to these targets.
Stimulation of the NK cell Fc receptor by immobilized immunoglobulin G
(IgG) led to phosphorylation of Erk (p-Erk) and this event was
significantly inhibited in the presence of MDSC in a dose and
contact-dependent manner (pMyeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are
able to inhibit the function of immune cells within the tumor
microenvironment. The interaction of MDSCs with T cells has been studied
extensively. However, the interaction of MDSCs with innate immune cells
such as NK cells is not well understood. This study investigated whether
the presence of MDSCs could impair the function of NK cells.MDSC
(CD33+HLA-DRneg/lowCD11b+) and autologous NK cells (CD56+CD3neg) were
isolated from the peripheral blood of metastatic melanoma patients and
co-cultured overnight at a 1:1 ratio (2 x 105 cells each). Culture with
MDSC led to a 70% decrease in NK cell mediated antibody dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) against HER2+ SkBr3 cells coated with an
anti-HER2 antibody and a two-fold decrease in the production of
interferon-gamma in response to these targets. Stimulation of the NK cell
Fc receptor by immobilized immunoglobulin G (IgG) led to phosphorylation
of Erk (p-Erk) and this event was significantly inhibited in the presence
of MDSC in a dose and contact-dependent manner (p<0.05). Co-culture of NK
cells with MDSC also led to reduced expression of the NKp30 activating
receptor (1.7-fold decrease) and a decrease in cytotoxicity against the
K562 cell line. MDSC were able to generate significant levels of nitric
oxide (NO) and inhibition of MDSC NO synthesis in co-cultures led to a
significant improvement in NK cell cytotoxicity and cytokine production
(pMyeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are able to inhibit the
function of immune cells within the tumor microenvironment. The
interaction of MDSCs with T cells has been studied extensively. However,
the interaction of MDSCs with innate immune cells such as NK cells is not
well understood. This study investigated whether the presence of MDSCs
could impair the function of NK cells.MDSC (CD33+HLA-DRneg/lowCD11b+) and
autologous NK cells (CD56+CD3neg) were isolated from the peripheral blood
of metastatic melanoma patients and co-cultured overnight at a 1:1 ratio
(2 x 105 cells each). Culture with MDSC led to a 70% decrease in NK cell
mediated antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) against HER2+
SkBr3 cells coated with an anti-HER2 antibody and a two-fold decrease in
the production of interferon-gamma in response to these targets.
Stimulation of the NK cell Fc receptor by immobilized immunoglobulin G
(IgG) led to phosphorylation of Erk (p-Erk) and this event was
significantly inhibited in the presence of MDSC in a dose and
contact-dependent manner (p<0.05). Co-culture of NK cells with MDSC also
led to reduced expression of the NKp30 activating receptor (1.7-fold
decrease) and a decrease in cytotoxicity against the K562 cell line. MDSC
were able to generate significant levels of nitric oxide (NO) and
inhibition of MDSC NO synthesis in co-cultures led to a significant
improvement in NK cell cytotoxicity and cytokine production (p<0.05).
Depletion of MDSC from BALB/c mice bearing tumors of the CT26
adenocarcinoma cell line led to a three-fold increase in NK cell mediated
ADCC. These results demonstrate that MDSC-derived NO can inhibit NK cell
function, and suggest that strategies aimed at eliminating or
deactivating MDSC may lead to enhanced efficacy of immune based therapies.

