Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatase PTP4A3 is critical for cell growth of triple-negative
breast cancer


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has the worst prognosis
of all breast cancers, and frequently affects young and in particular
African-American Women. Women diagnosed with these tumors currently lack
targeted treatment options. To identify novel targets for TNBC treatment,
we identified specific phosphatases that are critical for the growth of
TNBCs.Methods: To identify novel targets for TNBC, we investigated the
expression of phosphatases in breast tumors, identified those highly
expressed in TNBC, and studied whether specific phosphatases are
essential for TNBC growth. siRNA were used to knock-down each of the 20
highly expressed phosphatases in 4 TNBC, 4 ER-positive BC cell lines.
Cell growth was measured by cell count, and anchorage-independent growth
was tested with soft agar assays. Xenograft experiments were performed by
injecting TNBC cells expressing inducible shRNA-PTP4A3 into the mammary
fat pad of nude mice. Mice with palpable tumors were then randomized to
receive either water containing doxycycline (Dox) or vehicle. Tumor size
was measured every other day, and the growth rates of tumors were
calculated and compared using Student's t-test of the slopes. The
prognostic importance of PTP4A3 was evaluated using gene expression and
survival data. R statistical software was used to generate Kaplan-Meier
curves and determine statistical significance using the log rank
(Mantel-Cox) method and perform Cox proportional hazards models analyses.
Patients were dichotomized at the mean expression level.Results:
Knockdown of nine phosphatases, including PTP4A3 (PRL-3) significantly
reduced growth and anchorage-independent growth of TNBC cell lines.
PTP4A3 siRNA treatment induced a G1/S cell cycle block in all breast
cancer cell lines. Further analysis of the phosphatase PTP4A3
demonstrated that reduced expression induced apoptosis in four TNBC cell
lines, without inducing apoptosis in most ER-positive BC cell lines.
Inhibition of PTP4A3 in TNBC xenografts suppressed growth, and a
reduction in proliferation and induction of apoptosis was detected by
immunohistochemistry. In silico analysis of PTP4A3 expression confirmed
elevated expression of PTP4A3 in TNBCs and demonstrated that PTP4A3 is an
independent prognostic indicator for breast cancer specific
survival.Conclusion: These studies identified a set of highly expressed
phosphatases that represent promising targets for the treatment of TNBCs.
We also demonstrated that one of these phosphatases, PTP4A3, is critical
for the growth of TNBCs in vitro and in vivo, and PTP4A3 expression is
prognostic in women with TNBC. These results provide the rationale for
further study of growth promoting phosphatases and suggest that such
phosphatases may be targeted for the treatment of this aggressive form of
breast cancer.Research supported by: Susan G. Komen for the Cure (PB,
GM), Komen SAB, and the Norman Brinker Award for Research Excellence.

