Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-Myc positively influences mitochondrial biogenesis in
neuroblastoma


Background:Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial tumor of
childhood., accounting for approximately 7% of all cancer in children.
The morbidity and mortality are affected by a number of factors - perhaps
most significantly by amplification of the oncogene, N-MYC. Advanced
stage disease with N-MYC overexpression confers the highest mortality.
The N-MYC gene product (N-Myc) regulates the transcription of many genes,
and when overexpressed is thought to enhance the cell cycle and
dysregulate apoptosis. The function of N-Myc is virtually identical to
another oncoprotein of the same family, c-Myc, yet is restricted by
developmental stage and cell type. Overexpression of c-Myc has been shown
to increase mitochondrial biogenesis by alterations in mitochondrial
dynamics. It has been proposed that these changes may contribute to c-Myc
induced tumorigenesis. We hypothesize that N-Myc amplification will have
similar effects on mitochondrial biogenesis in
neuroblastoma.Design/Methods:To perform these studies we utilized a cell
line with endogenous levels of N-Myc (SK-N-SH). In these cells we have
ectopically overexpressed N-Myc and examined the cells for changes in the
mitochondria with various assays, including: Western blots, electron
microscopy, flow cytometry, ATP assay and confocal microscopy.Results:We
found a X-fold increase in mitochondrial mass in cells that overexpress
N-Myc,, as well as a more tubular appearance with less organized cristae.
Additionally, N-Myc changed the expression of various mitochondrial
fusion and fission proteins. The most dramatic change was seen in the
expression of the fusion protein Opa1, which changed by ten-fold. This,
combined with a decrease in expression of fission proteins DRP1 and MFF,
may account for the more tubular appearance of mitochondria in N-Myc
overexpressing cells.ConclusionsN-Myc amplification appeared to increase
mitochondrial mass. This may occur as a result of increased expression of
mitochondrial fusion proteins, as previously observed in c-Myc
overexpressing cells. Additionally, mitochondrial function is influenced
by N-Myc overexpression. Therefore, N-Myc amplification appears to
positively influence mitochondrial biogenesis in neuroblastoma. Further
studies are needed to determine if this increase in mitochondrial mass
and function is necessary for the development and maintenance of
neuroblastoma.

