Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of antibody mixtures on HER-family heterodimerization


Members of the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)-family, i.e.
EGFR, HER2, and HER3, are key oncogenic drivers in numerous cancer forms.
Monoclonal antibody therapeutics targeting EGFR and HER2 have been
clinically approved and HER3-targeting antibodies are in clinical
development. However, resistance to single HER treatment occurs due to
mechanisms such as incomplete target elimination and a switch of receptor
dependency in the resistant cancer cell population. Another potential
escape mechanism for the cancer cells to become resistant and maintain
oncogenic signaling is receptor heterodimerization. It is therefore
relevant to investigate how heterodimers can be downregulated when
targeted with antibodies against a single or multiple HER targets. It is
well established that mixtures of two or more antibodies against a single
HER family receptor induce superior and rapid receptor downregulation and
elimination compared with monoclonal antibodies. However, the effect of
antibody mixtures on HER heterodimer distribution has not been
investigated.At Symphogen, we have generated Pan-HER, a combination of
two EGFR-, two HER2-, and two HER3-targeting monoclonal antibodies with
non-overlapping epitopes in a single drug compound. Detection and
quantification of the HER family member distribution in selected cancer
cell lines, as well as proliferation assays with combinations of the
antibody components comprising Pan-HER have been performed to investigate
the effects of 2-, 4- and 6-mixtures of antibodies. Results from studies
focusing on characterization of receptor levels, surface expression and
heterodimer formation in Pan-HER responsive cancer cell lines will be
presented, as well as the effect of Pan-HER on receptor heterodimer
distribution, investigated by Co-IP and Duolink Proximity Ligation Assay
technology. Our results show that mixtures of antibodies against more
than one HER family member potently downregulate the HER family receptor
levels and significantly alter the HER family heterodimerization pattern
upon short- and long-term exposure to HER-targeting antibodies.

