Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency and function of ERBB3 mutations in bladder cancer


Deregulation of the HER family of receptor tyrosine kinases has been
widely implicated in cancer initiation and progression. Activating
mutations or gene amplification of EGFR and ERBB2 (HER2) are frequently
found in non-small cell lung, breast, colorectal, glioblastoma and head
and neck cancers. However, little is known regarding the prevalence or
functionality of genomic alterations in the ERBB3 (HER3) isoform.
Although ERBB3 has limited inherent kinase activity, ligand stimulation
promotes its dimerization with active kinases like ERBB2 and EGFR that
can phosphorylate ERBB3 which then promotes transformation. Thus genomic
alterations in ERBB3 may be a key means of promoting oncogenic signaling
despite the protein lacking robust enzymatic activity. We performed a
meta-analysis of 40 cross-cancer next generation sequencing and copy
number genomics data sets newly generated by our group (bladder) or found
in recently published repositories (The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA),
Broad, Genentech, Sanger, etc). Analogous to the singular 2013
publication on ERBB3 mutations to date, we found frequent mutations in
ERBB3 in gastric tumors (11%). Preliminary analysis of our novel and
expanding cohort of 109 high-grade bladder cancer tumors suggests that
ERBB3 mutations are equally frequent in bladder cancer (10-12%).
Collectively, EGFR, ERBB2 and ERBB3 alterations were found in 23-30% of
all high-grade bladder cancers, typically in a mutually exclusive pattern
suggesting that these may be driver events. ERBB3 mutations were
distributed across all structural domains of the protein. We identified
more than 15 novel ERBB3 mutations in our bladder cohort, including
hotspot mutations in the extracellular domain (V104L/M, D297Y, others)
that were recurrent across multiple cancers types. Stable retroviral
overexpression of ERBB3 mutants into NIH-3T3 cells induced
phosphorylation of ERBB3, activation of downstream signaling cascades and
soft agar colony formation, all which were enhanced in the presence of
neuregulin and inhibited by the dual EGFR/ERBB2 kinase inhibitor,
neratinib, and a monoclonal antibody to ERBB3, AMG-888/U3-1287. These
data highlight a large cohort of bladder cancer patients with novel,
activating mutations in the tractable kinase ERBB3, that could
potentially benefit from approved EGFR/ERBB2 targeted therapeutics in the
clinic and novel ERBB3 therapeutics in early clinical trials.

