Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a clinical next generation
sequencing-based assay for hematologic malignancies


Background: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is rapidly becoming an
indispensable cancer diagnostic, as it can detect most genomic
alterations in a single assay from limited tissue. We developed a novel,
NGS-based assay designed to provide targeted assessment of the genomic
landscape of hematologic malignancies from archived FFPE, blood and bone
marrow aspirate samples, sequencing both DNA and RNA to improve
sensitivity for driver fusion events which are common in these
tumors.Methods: The high accuracy of the assay for detection of
substitutions, indels and CNAs was previously demonstrated by extensive
validation studies achieving 95-99% across all alteration types with high
specificity (PPV>99%) [Frampton et al, Nat Biotech, 2013]. To validate
assay performance in detecting gene fusions we created reference samples
by mixing 21 cell-lines with previously characterized fusions in 39
combinations representing 167 fusion events in 10-50% tumor cell
fractions. In addition, we confirmed accuracy in 76 clinical hematologic
FFPE and bone-marrow samples profiled for 212 substitutions, indels and
fusions in 11 genes by Sanger sequencing, PCR, fragment sizing and FISH.
DNA and RNA were extracted from all samples; adaptor ligated sequencing
libraries were captured by solution hybridization using custom baits
targeting 405 cancer related genes by DNA-seq, and 265 frequently
rearranged genes by RNA-seq. All captured libraries were sequenced to
high depth (Illumina HiSeq) in a CLIA-certified laboratory (Foundation
Medicine), averaging 467x for DNA and 6M unique pairs for RNA.Results: On
reference samples, sensitivity for detection of fusions events reached
>99% for tumor cell fractions of 20-50%, and 97% for tumor fraction of
10%, all with high specificity (PPV>95%). Robust performance translated
to the clinical samples: we observed a concordance rate of 98.6% relative
to prior calls, with only 3/212 differing calls (2+, 1-) by NGS. 129
additional known oncogenic alterations in 57 different genes were
detected in these samples, for a total of 3.1 alterations per sample.
Analysis of 290 additional leukemia, lymphoma and myeloma patient samples
revealed known and novel gene fusions in 15% of cases, more than half of
which were identifiable only by RNA-seq.Conclusions: We describe the
analytic validation of a sensitive, high throughput assay to detect
somatic alterations in hundreds of genes known to be deregulated in
hematologic malignancies, which can be used to identify a spectrum of
somatic alterations from blood, bone marrow and paraffin embedded patient
samples. We demonstrate that targeted DNA and RNA sequencing can be used
to identify all classes of genomic alterations, including gene fusions,
with high accuracy. This approach offers the opportunity to streamline
the characterization of genomic alterations in hematologic malignancies
and to expand targeted treatment options for patients with liquid tumors.

