Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting premalignant lesions for early breast cancer detection
and intervention


Breast cancer patients' outcome and survival depends on the timely
diagnosis of early malignant lesions. The lack of molecular understanding
of the early changes in breast tissue that facilitate tumor progression
has limited the development of tools to non-invasively distinguish early
stage disease from normal breast tissue. Therefore, probes to target and
better understand early breast tumors are much needed. Our laboratory has
pioneered in vivo screening of phage libraries to identify peptides that
specifically recognize tumor vessels, including breast cancer
vasculature. These peptides have been employed to specifically deliver
drugs, diagnostic agents, and nanoparticles to breast tumors.Breast
cancer progression constitutes a multistep process through a series of
intermediate hyperplastic and neoplastic stages to invasive carcinoma. In
this study, we aimed to identify peptides that specifically recognize
premalignant lesions in the mammary tissue. To achieve this goal, we
utilized the power of phage display to probe hyperplastic lesions
associated with premalignant disease in a transgenic MMTV-PyMT animal
model. After multiple ex-vivo and in-vivo rounds of selection, we
identified a peptide, Prem-1, that on intravenous administration,
specifically homed to premalignant mammary lesions. Prem-1 also homed to
fully developed breast tumors in the same animal model, suggesting that
the putative receptor for Prem-1 is expressed throughout the progression
of the disease. Interestingly, Prem-1 did not show any affinity to normal
breast tissue. Furthermore, we also identified 2 other candidate peptides
that showed significant homing to premalignant lesions with a very
different binding pattern as compared to Prem-1. We hypothesized that all
three peptides recognize early changes in the breast tissue
microenvironment but each bind a different target receptor in the tissue.
We are currently investigating these receptors and analyzing their
expression in breast cancer progression. Secondly, we are testing the
peptides identified herein for the delivery of therapeutic nanoparticles
as a mode of early intervention in breast cancer progression. This
project utilized the natural environment in the early breast tumor to
probe for new markers for detection of early disease. Methods to detect
and study early premalignant mammary lesions will expand our
understanding of the natural history of the disease, especially the
changes in breast tissue that likely lead to tumor development. Hence,
the knowledge gained from this study would provide a basis for therapies
aimed at suppressing or eradicating premalignant breast lesions. This
would be particularly beneficial for women at high-risk of breast cancer
based on their genetic predisposition (mutations in BRCA genes).

