Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generating new syngeneic models for oral squamous cell carcinoma
metastasis study


Cancer metastasis is a complex problem that presents clinical challenges
and is the cause of most cancer-related deaths. Mechanistic studies on
metastasis hold promise for finding better approaches to control cancer
mortality. Oral cavity cancer brings over 200,000 deaths annually and is
one of the top eight most frequently diagnosed cancers worldwide. However
there is a lack of appropriate experimental models to address oral cancer
metastasis. An ideal experimental system should recapitulate the complete
process of cancer metastasis in vivo while maintaining molecular-level
manipulability. Our current efforts are directed at development of a
series of murine oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines that will
be amenable for syngeneic transplantation studies in immuno-competent
mice. The cell lines were created from C57BL/6J mice, a strain frequently
used in targeted gene manipulation. This strategy ensures that the cells
also have utility in orthotopic xenograft cancer models using currently
available knockout mice made with a syngeneic background. As abundant
knockout mice are available on the C57BL/6J background, our new syngeneic
cancer cell lines will greatly facilitate studies on the
interrelationship between host and tumor during the process of
metastasis. Cell lines were generated from primary murine tongue
epithelial cells by hTERT induced immortalization and oncogene induced
transformation. They were screened for tumorigenicity and metastasis in
both immunocompetent and immunocompromised mice. Properties of in vitro
and vivo growth, morphology and cytogenetics were characterized. As proof
of concept, one type of gene knockout mouse was used to test
transplantation of such new cellular models in vivo to observe the impact
of gene loss in the host on the growth and metastasis of tumors. The
completion of this project will establish solid and currently unavailable
tools for the oral cancer metastasis research community.

