Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lin28B mediated IKK- sustains the stemness of breast cancer stem
cell via regulating Wnt/TCF4 and miR-34a/LEF1 signaling pathway


Substantial evidence indicates that many human cancers are driven by a
subpopulation of cells that display stem cell properties. These cancer
stem cells (CSCs) may also contribute to tumor metastasis and treatment
resistance. It has been reported that inflammatory factors in tumor
microenvironment activate NF-kB/IKK- pathway in tumor cells which in turn
drive CSC self-renewal, but their molecular basis remain unclear. In this
study, we demonstrated a novel mechanism regarding that Lin28B, a RNA
binding protein regulated by IKK-, sustains the stemness of breast cancer
stem cell via regulating Wnt/TCF4 and miR-34a/LEF1 signaling pathway.
First, we found that all stemness properties of MDA-MB-231 human breast
cancer cells including ALDH+ population, Sphere-forming ability and the
expression of stemness genes SOX2, OCT4, NANOG and Lin28B were decreased
by IKK- inhibition, meanwhile, the down regulated expression of Lin28B
decrease the stemness properties of MDA-MB-231 cells as well.
Furthermore, it was found that Wnt/TCF4 signaling pathway was inhibited
by Lin28B down-regulation via reducing the expression of TCF4.
Interestingly, TCF4 could also regulate the expression of Lin28B by
directly binding to the intron 1 of Lin28B. Moreover, we observed that
microRNA-34a was down regulated by Lin28B at transcriptionally level, and
increased miR34a expression inhibited the activity of Wnt/LEF1 pathway by
directly targeting LEF1. Most importantly, we found that down regulated
expression of Lin28B or IKK- inhibition combined with chemo-drug (IKK-
selective inhibitor IMD-0354 combine with paclitaxel) could markedly
suppressed tumor growth and metastasis of MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells
in NOD/SCID mice model. Taken together, our study demonstrated that
Lin28B, which was activated by IKK-, could sustain the stemness of CSC
via the TCF4 and miR-34a/LEF1 signaling regulation, thus, establish the
Lin28B as a central regulator in govern inflammation to maintain breast
cancer stemness phenotype, and could serve as a therapeutical target.

