Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stathmin regulates cell migration, invasion and transendothelial
migration via RhoA activation in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer with dismal 5-year
survival rates, primarily due to metastatic disease. The microtubule
protein stathmin is highly expressed in neuroblastoma, and silencing
stathmin decreases metastatic disease in a neuroblastoma orthotopic mouse
model1. However, stathmin's role in the metastatic cascade and mechanism
of action in this process is unknown. Our aim was to investigate the role
of stathmin in neuroblastoma metastasis.Methods: To study the role of
stathmin (STMN) in neuroblastoma, siRNA gene knockdown (using two
individual siRNAs STMNsiRNA1 and STMNsiRNA2) or a non-targeting control
siRNA (ContsiRNA) was performed in both SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell
lines. 3D spheroid invasion assessed by counting and measuring cellular
protrusion length into collagen I matrix. Stathmin expression was
assessed by RT-qPCR and western blotting. Migration and invasion assays
were performed using Boyden-chambers. Anoikis was assessed using Annexin
V staining. Transendothelial migration was assessed by measurement of
lysed migrated cells using a fluorescent plate reader. RhoA activation
was assessed by RhoA activity pulldown and western blotting.Results:
Stathmin suppression significantly decreased SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell
migration (pNeuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer with dismal
5-year survival rates, primarily due to metastatic disease. The
microtubule protein stathmin is highly expressed in neuroblastoma, and
silencing stathmin decreases metastatic disease in a neuroblastoma
orthotopic mouse model1. However, stathmin's role in the metastatic
cascade and mechanism of action in this process is unknown. Our aim was
to investigate the role of stathmin in neuroblastoma metastasis.Methods:
To study the role of stathmin (STMN) in neuroblastoma, siRNA gene
knockdown (using two individual siRNAs STMNsiRNA1 and STMNsiRNA2) or a
non-targeting control siRNA (ContsiRNA) was performed in both SK-N-BE(2)
and SH-SY5Y cell lines. 3D spheroid invasion assessed by counting and
measuring cellular protrusion length into collagen I matrix. Stathmin
expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and western blotting. Migration and
invasion assays were performed using Boyden-chambers. Anoikis was
assessed using Annexin V staining. Transendothelial migration was
assessed by measurement of lysed migrated cells using a fluorescent plate
reader. RhoA activation was assessed by RhoA activity pulldown and
western blotting.Results: Stathmin suppression significantly decreased
SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell migration (p<0.05) and invasion
(pNeuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer with dismal 5-year
survival rates, primarily due to metastatic disease. The microtubule
protein stathmin is highly expressed in neuroblastoma, and silencing
stathmin decreases metastatic disease in a neuroblastoma orthotopic mouse
model1. However, stathmin's role in the metastatic cascade and mechanism
of action in this process is unknown. Our aim was to investigate the role
of stathmin in neuroblastoma metastasis.Methods: To study the role of
stathmin (STMN) in neuroblastoma, siRNA gene knockdown (using two
individual siRNAs STMNsiRNA1 and STMNsiRNA2) or a non-targeting control
siRNA (ContsiRNA) was performed in both SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell
lines. 3D spheroid invasion assessed by counting and measuring cellular
protrusion length into collagen I matrix. Stathmin expression was
assessed by RT-qPCR and western blotting. Migration and invasion assays
were performed using Boyden-chambers. Anoikis was assessed using Annexin
V staining. Transendothelial migration was assessed by measurement of
lysed migrated cells using a fluorescent plate reader. RhoA activation
was assessed by RhoA activity pulldown and western blotting.Results:
Stathmin suppression significantly decreased SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell
migration (p<0.05) and invasion (p<0.0005). Spheroid invasion was
significantly decreased in SK-N-BE(2) as measured by the number and
length of cellular protrusions (pNeuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood
cancer with dismal 5-year survival rates, primarily due to metastatic
disease. The microtubule protein stathmin is highly expressed in
neuroblastoma, and silencing stathmin decreases metastatic disease in a
neuroblastoma orthotopic mouse model1. However, stathmin's role in the
metastatic cascade and mechanism of action in this process is unknown.
Our aim was to investigate the role of stathmin in neuroblastoma
metastasis.Methods: To study the role of stathmin (STMN) in
neuroblastoma, siRNA gene knockdown (using two individual siRNAs
STMNsiRNA1 and STMNsiRNA2) or a non-targeting control siRNA (ContsiRNA)
was performed in both SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell lines. 3D spheroid
invasion assessed by counting and measuring cellular protrusion length
into collagen I matrix. Stathmin expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and
western blotting. Migration and invasion assays were performed using
Boyden-chambers. Anoikis was assessed using Annexin V staining.
Transendothelial migration was assessed by measurement of lysed migrated
cells using a fluorescent plate reader. RhoA activation was assessed by
RhoA activity pulldown and western blotting.Results: Stathmin suppression
significantly decreased SK-N-BE(2) and SH-SY5Y cell migration (p<0.05)
and invasion (p<0.0005). Spheroid invasion was significantly decreased in
SK-N-BE(2) as measured by the number and length of cellular protrusions
(p<0.05). Stathmin did not influence anoikis in either of the
neuroblastoma cell lines, however stathmin knockdown significantly
reduced transendothelial migration in both cell lines compared to
ContsiRNA cells (p0.25), indicating stathmin mediates transendothelial
migration via inhibition of ROCK signalling. Importantly, stathmin
suppression dramatically increased RhoA activation (upstream regulator of
ROCK signalling) indicating that stathmin's effect on ROCK signalling is
mediated via its effects on its regulator RhoA.Conclusions: Stathmin
suppression interferes with key metastatic events via RhoA/ROCK
signalling in neuroblastoma. Targeting stathmin may provide a novel
treatment approach for metastatic neuroblastoma.1 Byrne, FL, Yang, L,
Phillips, PA, Hansford, LM, Fletcher, JI, Ormandy, CJ, McCarroll, JA &
Kavallaris, M. (2013) Oncogene [epub Feb 11]

