Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vessel co-option in colorectal cancer liver metastases mediates
resistance to VEGF-targeted therapy


The purpose of this study is to: (1) examine whether vessel co-option is
associated with a lack of response to anti-angiogenic therapy in advanced
colorectal cancer patients, (2) identify whether inhibition of pathways
associated with vessel co-option sensitizes to anti-angiogenic therapy in
vivo.Sprouting angiogenesis is the process whereby new blood vessels are
induced to sprout from existing vessels. The growth of metastatic tumors
is considered to require sprouting angiogenesis. This hypothesis has
driven the development and clinical application of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) targeted agents, such as bevacizumab. However,
responses to such agents in cancer patients, including metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC), are variable. It is not currently clear why this
is the case and we have no way of selecting patients suitable for such
therapies.Importantly, it is now evident that tumors can also utilize a
number of putative VEGF-independent angiogenesis mechanisms, the
existence of which may limit the efficacy of VEGF-targeted therapy. One
such mechanism is vessel co-option, whereby tumors engulf existing local
blood vessels as they invade into surrounding host tissue. Published
studies have reported that this mechanism occurs in 28-30% of CRC liver
metastases.Here we present data from a retrospective study of patients
with CRC liver metatases that were treated with bevacizumab. We
demonstrate that, in this patient cohort, the presence of vessel
co-option in liver metastases was strongly associated with lack of
response to bevacizumab. We also show that a similar result is observed
in a mouse model of colorectal cancer liver metastasis. Interestingly,
when we disable actin nucleation activity in colorectal cancer cells,
vessel co-option is compromised and sensitivity to VEGF-targeted therapy
is restored in vivo. These data demonstrate a potential role for vessel
co-option as a negative predictive biomarker for anti-angiogenic therapy
and also have consequences for the development of novel therapies for
targeting tumor angiogenesis.

