Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced expression of secretory clusterin/apolipoprotein J (sCLU)
in pulmonary alveolar stem cells after ionizing radiation exposure


Ionizing radiation is commonly used in the treatment of broad range of
malignancies. However radiation induces DNA damage and oxidative stress
in malignant and normal cells and stimulates inflammation in irradiated
tissues. These vents may lead to tumor cell death, but also to a range of
side effects including self-limited acute toxicities, mild chronic
symptoms, or severe organ dysfunction. Recently, we reported that
accelerated senescence of type II pneumocytes, the alveolar stem cell,
results in depletion of type II pneumocytes and precedes pulmonary
fibrosis. Targeted isolated depletion of type II pneumocytes is known to
result in fibrosis. To understand the underlying mechanisms between RIPF
and senescence, we investigated the role of several molecules which were
markedly changed in irradiated lungs with fibrogenic exposures.Secretory
Clusterin/Apolipoprotein J (sCLU) is a heterodimeric disulfide-linked
glycoprotein encoded by a single gene. sCLU expression is implicated in
physiological processes including development, lipid transportation,
differentiation, cellular senescence, and in many age-related diseases
including neurodegeneration, vascular damage, diabetes and tumorigenesis.
It was recently proposed that sCLU is a sensitive cellular biosensor of
oxidative stress that functions to protect cells from the deleterious
effects of free radicals and their derivatives.We investigated sCLU
expression in primary murine pneumocytes after exposure to irradiation.
Increased sCLU expression following irradiation was confirmed by
immunocytochemical assays and quantitative real-time PCR in primary
pneumocyte cultures. At 5 days after irradiation, sCLU expression
colocalized with senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-gal)
activity. To determine the temporal relationship between sCLU expression
and SA-beta-gal activity, sCLU expression and SA-beta-galactosidase
activity was measured in murine lung tissues at 2 and 4 weeks after
radiation exposures. As observed in pneumocyte cultures, the expression
of sCLU mRNA was significantly increased in murine lungs after fibrogenic
irradiation, with staining colocalizing to cells staining positive for
SA-beta-gal activity. IGF-1, known to induce sCLU expression, was
positively correlated with the levels of sCLU in irradiated lungs.
Inhibition of IGF-1 signaling reduced sCLU expression in primary
pneumocytes exposed to fibrogenic irradiation. Collectively, these data
suggest that sCLU may provide a marker or target of type II pneumocyte
senescence after irradiation.

