Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells stimulate adipocyte lipolysis
and utilize adipocyte-derived free-fatty acids for proliferation


Obesity promotes the pathogenesis of many cancers, including acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the most common childhood malignancy. We
have shown that ALL cells interact with adipocytes in vivo and in vitro,
and that adipocytes protect ALL cells from chemotherapies. Since cancer
cells require free fatty acids (FFA) for energy and as molecular building
blocks, we hypothesize that ALL cells gain a survival advantage by
stimulating adipocyte lipolysis and using adipocyte-derived FFAs.To test
whether ALL cells stimulate adipocyte lipolysis, 3T3-L1 adipocytes were
exposed to ALL-conditioned media for 72 hours, and glycerol release and
adipocyte lipid content were measured. To determine whether ALL cells
take up adipocyte-derived FFA, adipocytes were pre-labeled with
fluorescent FFA (BODIPY), and then co-cultured with murine (8093) and
human (BV173, RS4;11, Molt4, Nalm6, SEM, SupB15) ALL cells in a Transwell
system. ALL uptake of BODIPY-FFAs was analyzed via flow cytometry. To
determine the fate of FFA in ALL cells, ALL cells were incubated with
BODIPY-FFA and evaluated by confocal and live cell microscopy, and lipid
classes resolved through thin layer chromatography (TLC). Real-time PCR
was employed to analyze adipocyte-induced alterations in the
transcription of key enzymes in the ALL de novo lipogenesis pathway.
Finally, TOFA, an acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1) and steroyl-CoA
desaturase 1 (SCD1) inhibitor, was used to block de novo lipogenesis in
ALL cells in vitro, and evaluate the ability of ALL cells to use
adipocyte-derived FFAs for proliferation.ALL-conditioned media stimulated
3T3-L1 lipolysis (191.0 vs. 165.5 mg/L glycerol, n=1), reducing adipocyte
lipid content as quantified with Oil Red O by 16.8 7.1% (p = 0.047). When
murine or human ALL cells were co-cultured with BODIPY-labeled
adipocytes, they accumulated the fluorescent label within 48 hours
(97-98% of cells labeled positive). TLC, live cell imaging and confocal
microscopy demonstrated the majority of this label accumulated within ALL
cell phospholipid membranes and triglyceride-laden lipid droplets.
Adipocyte co-culture reduced expression of lipogenic enzymes such as
fatty acid synthase (FAS), ACC1 and SCD1 in ALL cells. Finally, while
TOFA inhibited ALL cell proliferation (6.1 1.1x104 vs. 41.9 4.7x104
cells, p=0.004, n=3), this proliferation was partially rescued by
adipocyte conditioned media (ACM, 29.8 9.2 x104, p=0.045 vs. TOFA alone,
n=3).Therefore, we have demonstrated that ALL cells stimulate adipocyte
lipolysis and use adipocyte-derived FFAs to supplement de novo
lipogenesis and proliferation. This may contribute to the effect of
obesity on ALL development and relapse.

