Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunological significance of p62/SQSTM1 accumulation in oral
squamous cell carcinoma


Introduction: Autophagy is a prosurvival function that facilitates
cellular response to stress by cleaning damaged proteins and organelles,
and provides energy to the cells during starvation. p62/SQSTM1, which is
a multifunctional, multi-domain scaffolding protein that has been
implicated in various cell signaling pathways including
autophagy-mediated protein degradation. In autophagy, an accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins retains p62/SQSTM1 in the cell, resulting in an
increase of selective autophagy, whereas autophagy impairment can
accumulate p62/SQSTM1. To date, evidence has accumulated that, in the
tumor microenvironment, autophagy is known to play an important role in
tumorigenesis, but also influences immune response to tumor cells.
However, it still remains unknown how this autophagy-regulated protein,
p62/SQSTM1 in tumor cells takes part in antitumor immune responses. To
clarify the relation between the p62/SQSTM1 accumulation and antitumor
immunity, we investigated the expression of p62/SQSTM1 and immune cell
infiltration in tumor tissues obtained from patients with oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC).Patients and methods: Seventy-four patients with
OSCC who underwent curative surgical resection were included in this
study. Tumor sections were stained by immunohistochemistry for
p62/SQSTM1; dendritic cells (CD1a); T cells (CD3); NK cells (CD56); HLA
class I heavy chain; HLA class II; Ki-67; p53. Each expression level was
evaluated, and the association with clinicopathological factors was also
determined.Results: p62/SQSTM1 accumulation was observed in 24 of 74
(32.4 %) OSCC examined. The p62/SQSTM1 accumulation in tumor cells showed
statistically significant positive correlation to HLA class I expression
on tumor cells. Interestingly, in tumor margin regions, expression of
p62/SQSTM1 in tumor cells was significantly associated with CD3+T cell
infiltration, suggesting that anti-tumor specific T cells may infiltrate
and recognize tumor cells as target cells. Moreover, p62/SQSTM1
accumulation in tumor cells was also significant correlated with vessel
invasion by tumor cells.Conclusion: In OSCC, p62/SQSTM1 accumulation in
tumor cells was likely to associate with increase of tumor antigenicity,
resulting in the mobilization of T cells toward cancer nest. On the other
hand, p62/SQSTM1 accumulation in tumor cells may also contribute
malignant potential in OSCC. Further elucidation of the role of
p62/SQSTM1 in antitumor immunity through autophagy is currently underway.

