Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated functional RNAi screening and structural genomics
identifies inverse co-modulators of TP53 family and NF-kB transitional
activation as potential therapeutic targets in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common
cancer, with an annual incidence of over 600,000 new cases worldwide, and
50-60% mortality. Dysregulation of tumor suppressor TP53 in HNSCC occurs
in over 90% of cases. We and others have observed that TP53 related
family members p63 and p73 are also deregulated, together preventing
transcription of growth arrest and apoptosis genes. Conversely, we have
shown that members of the NF-B/REL family of transcription factors are
aberrantly activated, and drive expression of genes that promote cell
proliferation, survival, inflammation, angiogenesis,and resistance in 70%
of HNSCC cases. We have previously published that the function of
different TP53 and NF-B family members are inversely modulated within two
major subsets of HNSCC, suggesting that common molecules and pathways
coordinate this modulation and may serve as critical targets for therapy.
To test this hypothesis, we have developed HNSCC stable cell lines that
report transcriptional activation of TP53 or NF-B individually through a
lactamase reporter, using antibiotic selection and fluorescence activated
cell sorting. In collaboration with the RNAi screening facility at NIH,
kinome and druggable target genes have been screened in our NF-B reporter
cell lines. Screening was performed by 48 hour knockdown with siRNAs,
followed by stimulation with TNF-. The results have revealed known and
novel targets that maintain oncogenic NF-B signaling in HNSCC. These
targets include genes participating in Toll/IKK such as IRAK1, PI3K/AKT
signaling such as PIK3CA and PIK3R3, mitotic kinases such as BUB1B and
AURKA, and calmodulin signaling such as CALM2 and CAMK1G. Candidate hits
from RNAi screening data were first prioritized by integration with
expression, mutation, and DNA copy number variation data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. To further investigate the interactive
signaling regulation between NF-B and TP53 pathways, selected siRNAs that
can inhibit NF-B activation were cross screened in our TP53 reporter cell
lines. Transcriptional activation of TP53 was induced with doxorubicin or
cisplatin following 48 hr RNAi knockdown. We have shown that knockdown of
targets in the PI3K/AKT pathway can inversely increase TP53 activation
while inhibiting NF-B activity. Selected targets were further validated
by demonstration of anti-proliferative activity of single siRNAs in
multiple HNSCC cell lines. Preclinical studies with PI3K-mTOR small
molecule inhibitors indicate potential to co-modulate NF-B and TP53 and
inhibit HNSCC in vitro and in vivo. We predict that inhibition of targets
that inversely modulate both TP53 and NF-B signaling will be less prone
to resistance and more effective in treatment of HNSCC.Supported by NIDCD
intramural projects ZIADC000016, 73 and 74.

