Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of VNN3 gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tumorigenesis


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in southeastern China and South East Asia. However,
the detailed pathogenesis mechanisms of NPC remain to be elucidated.
Despite novel therapies and advances in early detection, it is often
diagnosed at an advanced stage and has a poor prognosis. Recent evidences
showed that SRY (sex-determining region Y)-box 5 (SOX-5) plays an
important role in Nasopharyngeal tumor development, but little is known
about the role of its associated protein such as VNN3 gene (a
pantetheinase) in controlling tumor development. SOX-5 overexpression
enhances tumor formation in NPC, and has a poor prognosis. In this study,
we compared the differential gene expression in NPC cell lines and normal
nasal mucosal epithelial cells by cDNA microarray analysis, and observed
that the RNA and protein expression levels of SOX-5 and VNN3 were
dramatically increased in NPC cell lines than normal nasal mucosal
epithelial cells by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis. In order to
investigate that whether VNN3 gene could alter NPC progression, we
observed at first the gene expression in different NPC cell lines using
qRT-PCR analysis and found that the expression of VNN3 in NPC cell line,
especially in NPC-TW01 cell line was highly upregulated. Besides, we also
found that the expression level of VNN3 protein was also increased in
multiple NPC cell lines and NPC biopsy specimens by immunohistochemical
staining and Western bloting. In this study, we also isolated the cancer
stem cell (CSC) from NPC-TW01 cell line by conditioned culture medium,
highly expression level of VNN3 gene was found in the NPC-TW01 stem cells
(CSC). To further analysis of the functional role of VNN3 in this NPC and
CSC lines, the expression of VNN3 was decreased to about 70-80% of the
control in NPC and CSC after knockdown of VNN3 by VNN3 shRNA-lentiviral
infection. This in turn resulted in a significant reduction of cell
proliferation, migration and invasion abilities. We also found that a
decreased expression level of VNN3 (Pantetheinase), which is an
amidohydrolase that hydrolyzes pantetheine into pantothenic acid (vitamin
B5) as well as cysteamine, and caused an increase of intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and cell death through apoptosis; the
weight of NPC xenograft tumors had diminished about 51% after 6 weeks,
compared with shLuc control in SCID mice bearing NPC xenografts derived
from these lentiviral infected NPC and CSC cell lines. Impairment of
tumor cell proliferation, accompanied with apoptosis was found in the
xenografts histopathologically. These novel findings of the functional
role of VNN3 may have a potential implication in molecular targeted
therapy for NPC.

