Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 radiosensitizes
lung cancer cells


Despite advances in diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, lung cancer
remains the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United
States. In most cases, lung cancer presents as an unresectable mass
requiring a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy (CRT) for
treatment. A barrier to efficacy of this treatment is radioresistance.
Radiation induced activation of pro-survival pathways are currently
thought to play an important role in radioresistance. The enzyme
cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) has been identified as a key component
in radiation induced pro-suvival pathways. Ionizing radiation activates
cPLA2, which then cleaves phosphatidylcholine (PC) to yield
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). LPC is then converted to lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA) by autotaxin (ATX). LPA binds to distinct G-protein coupled
receptors (GPCRs) on the plasma membrane; LPA1, LPA2 and LPA3, which are
encoded by the endothelial differentiation gene family. These receptors
are involved in the regulation of various aspects of cancer, including
proliferation, migration and metastasis. Previously, we have shown that
inhibition of cPLA2, as well as inhibition of ATX, was sufficient to
enhance the sensitivity of cancer cells to radiation. However, the
question remains as to whether inhibition of LPA receptor activity would
have a similar effect. Thus, we studied the role of LPA receptors as
mediators of radioresponse in human A549 and murine Lewis Lung Carcinoma
(LLC) cell models.Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) analysis
of lung cancer cells showed that LPA1 was highly expressed in LLC and
A549, and that both cell lines had nearly undetectable levels of LPA2 and
LPA3 mRNA. Hence, we used Ki16425 and VPC12249, specific inhibitors of
LPA1 and LPA3, to study the effect of LPA1 inhibition on clonogenic
survival, cellular proliferation and invasion after irradiation. We found
that pre-treatment of LLC and A549 cells with 10M Ki16425 or 10M VPC12249
significantly attenuated cell proliferation and viability after
irradiation. Pre-treatment of LLC cells with 10M Ki16425 or 10M VPC12249
also reduced clonogenic survival. Transwell cell-invasion assays showed
that the combination of LPA1 inhibitors with irradiation significantly
reduced LPA-induced cell invasion in A549 and LLC cells. To investigate a
potential mechanism for these effects, we also determined the activation
of AKT and ERK signaling pathways. Inhibition of LPA1 resulted in reduced
radiation-induced phosphorylation of both AKT and ERK. Overall, our
results indicate that LPA1 is a mediator of pro-survival signaling in the
adaptive response to radiation, and could serve as a viable target for
enhancing the efficacy of radiation therapy of lung cancer.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

