Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between Runx2 regulatory network and insulin-like growth
factor receptor/Akt signaling pathway in bone metastasis of breast cancer


The metastasis of breast cancer cells to bones is a leading cause of
cancer-related deaths. The bone microenvironment presents a vital source
of several growth factors that could promote survival and proliferation
of metastatic cancer cells. The bone-derived insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) binds to insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R) to initiate
intracellular signaling. The downstream signaling events in response to
IGF-1R stimulation include activation of Phosphatidyl Inositol 3 Kinase
(PI3K) and Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathways. However, the
inhibition of these signaling pathways has shown modest benefit in recent
clinical trials necessitating the need to identify regulatory mechanisms
to successfully block breast cancer-associated bone metastasis. The
Runt-related transcription factor, Runx2, is required for normal bone
development but is also aberrantly expressed at higher levels in invasive
mammary epithelial cells and promotes invasive properties. Previously, we
have identified a mechanism wherein Runx2 promotes survival of parental
population of invasive breast cancer MDA-MB-231cells by promoting
phosphorylation of serine/threonine kinase Akt (pAkt) via mammalian
target of rapamycin complex-2 proteins. To determine the implications of
Runx2-mediated pAkt regulation in bone metastasis of breast cancers, we
harvested Runx2 knockdown or control MDA-MB-231 cells from bones 7 weeks
post intracardiac injections in NOD/SCID mice. The gene and protein
expression levels of IGF-1R/Akt pathway effectors in the bone seeking
subpopulation were determined by real-time PCR and western blotting
approaches. The bone-derived Runx2 knockdown cells showed increased
IGF-1R levels compared to controls. The Runx2 knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells
showed an increase in pIGF1R- and pAkt levels in response to IGF-1
stimulation that could be inhibited with IGF-1R inhibitor OSI-906
(Linsitinib). However, despite inhibition of IGF-1R and Akt activity with
OSI-906 treatment, no alterations were observed in growth or survival of
bone-seeking cells. Interestingly, in contrast to IGF-1R and pAkt, the
Erk 1/2 levels were reduced in bone-derived Runx2 knockdown MDA-MB-231
cells compared to parental MDA-MB-231 cells. The treatment of cells with
Erk 1/2 inhibitor PD184161 reduced cell proliferation and clonogenic
potential. Furthermore, the Runx2 protein levels were also reduced in
bone seeking subpopulation compared to parental MDA-MB-231cells. Taken
together, our studies indicate Runx2-mediated suppression of IGF-1R and
Akt but upregulation of Erk signaling in bone seeking breast cancer cells
compared to parental MDA-MB-231 cells. Our results suggest that the
growth of bone metastatic cancer cells could be effectively blocked by
inhibition of Runx2 and Erk pathway.

