Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SLC5A8: A strategic target for advanced metastatic breast cancer


Despite intense efforts and great advances in cancer research, breast
cancer remains the leading cause of death among women worldwide. Most
breast cancer-related deaths are not due to cancer at the primary site,
but rather due to metastasis, a process in which cancer cells spread from
the primary site to distant secondary sites like lung, bones and brain.
However, the molecular mechanism by which tumor cells invade from primary
tumor site to distant metastasis has not been identified. Recently, we
identified a tumor suppressor SLC5A8, which is not only prevent the
mammary tumor incidence but also blocks tumor-metastasis by inactivating
several metastasis-deriving molecules. SLC5A8, a transporter for
small-chain fatty acids (SCFA) and monocarboxylates, is silenced in more
than 10 different types of cancers including breast cancer. In breast
cancer, irrespective of estrogen-receptor status SLC5A8 is inactivated in
more than 90% of breast tumor tissues and in breast cancer cell lines.
Ectopic expression of SLC5A8 in human breast cancer cells leads to
translocation of the anti-apoptotic protein survivin to the plasma
membrane through protein-protein interaction, thereby depleting nuclear
survivin level. Further, tetracycline-inducible SLC5A8 expression in
human breast cancer cells significantly reduced mammary tumor growth. In
addition, functional inactivation of SLC5A8 in human immortalized normal
mammary epithelial cells by lentivirus expressing shRNA showed
differential regulation of genes that are involved in cellular
transformation, oncogenesis, epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) and
tumor metastasis. This is a totally unexpected finding and represents
first of its kind for a plasma membrane transporter where mere expression
itself, independent of its substrates, leads to tumor suppression.
Reinforcing our findings further, deletion of Slc5a8 in mice is
associated with increased stem/progenitor cells and mammary gland
hyperplasia. By crossing the Slc5a8-null mice with spontaneous mouse
mammary tumor mice, we observed increased cancer-initiating stem cells,
early onset of mammary tumor formation and increased incidence of lung
metastasis. More fascinatingly, mammary gland-specific overexpression of
Slc5a8 or induction of endogenous Slc5a8 expression efficiently protects
mice from breast cancer and associated lung metastasis resulting in
extended life-span. Overall, our study provide a strong mechanism based
evidence that SLC5A8 is a novel tumor suppressor in the mammary
epithelium and it could be used as a potential new therapeutic target for
treatment of breast cancer.

