Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive response to chronic oxidative stress involves
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in MCF-7 breast cancer cells


Though the increased oxidative stress by endogenous and exogenous factors
has been hypothesized as a potential mechanism for breast cancer growth
and progression, but there is no direct mechanistic evidence for
adaptation to ROS-induced toxicity by the breast cancer cells. Therefore
the objective of this study was to evaluate effects of chronic oxidative
stress on the growth, survival and tumorigenicity of MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. MCF-7 cells were exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H202) induced
oxidative stress for both acute (48 hrs) and chronic (3 months) period.
Cell growth and viability were evaluated by cell count and MTT assay and
were confirmed by cell cycle analysis. Expression of genes related to
cell cycle, cell survival, and metastasis were measured by quantitative
real-time PCR. Effect of oxidative stress on tumorigenic phenotype was
determined in-vitro by soft agar assay. Results of cell count, MTT and
cell cycle analysis revealed increased growth, and survival of MCF-7
cells that was chronically exposed to H2O2. This was further confirmed at
molecular level by increased expression of cell cycle and cell survival
genes, whereas down-regulation of apoptotic genes. Chronic oxidative
stress also increased tumorigenic phenotype and metastatic potential of
MCF-7 cells as revealed by increase in soft agar grown colonies and
expression of metastasis related genes. Additionally, fibroblast-like
appearance with down regulation of epithelial markers, whereas
up-regulation of mesenchymal markers in cells with chronic exposure to
oxidative stress further suggest that adaptation to chronic oxidative
stress by MCF-7 cells involves epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Dysregulation of epigenetic regulatory genes expression also
suggest potential role of epigenetic mechanism in increased survival and
tumorigencity of breast cancer cells.The findings of this study for the
first time provided direct evidence for involvement EMT and epigenetic
changes in adaptation of MCF-7 breast cancer cells to chronic oxidative
stress. Results of this study are also highly significant in
understanding the mechanism for acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs that are known to produce ROS in breast cancer cells.

