Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 4-protein signature predicts outcome to tamoxifen treatment in
estrogen receptor positive recurrent breast cancer


Tamoxifen is one of the most frequently used drugs in the treatment of
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer. Although tamoxifen
significantly increases patient survival in the adjuvant setting, a major
factor that decreases its efficacy in the recurrent setting is drug
resistance. The aim of our study is to identify a protein signature
predicting outcome of tamoxifen treatment using high resolution mass
spectrometry.A total of 112 snap frozen breast tumor tissues were
gathered from patients that had received tamoxifen as first line
treatment upon recurrence. Samples were divided into a discovery (n= 56;
Erasmus Medical Center) and validation sets (n=56; multi-center cohort).
Based on progression of disease from start of tamoxifen therapy, patients
were categorized having either Good (time-to-progression; ttp>6 months)
or Poor (ttpTamoxifen is one of the most frequently used drugs in the
treatment of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer. Although tamoxifen
significantly increases patient survival in the adjuvant setting, a major
factor that decreases its efficacy in the recurrent setting is drug
resistance. The aim of our study is to identify a protein signature
predicting outcome of tamoxifen treatment using high resolution mass
spectrometry.A total of 112 snap frozen breast tumor tissues were
gathered from patients that had received tamoxifen as first line
treatment upon recurrence. Samples were divided into a discovery (n= 56;
Erasmus Medical Center) and validation sets (n=56; multi-center cohort).
Based on progression of disease from start of tamoxifen therapy, patients
were categorized having either Good (time-to-progression; ttp>6 months)
or Poor (ttp<6 months) outcome. Approximately 4,000 tumor cells (200ng
protein) were microdissected from each tissue, which were lysed and
subsequently trypsin-digested. MS analyses were performed on a
nano-liquid chromatography LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Protein
identification and quantitation were performed through MaxQuant.
Significantly differentially abundant proteins (pTamoxifen is one of the
most frequently used drugs in the treatment of estrogen receptor positive
breast cancer. Although tamoxifen significantly increases patient
survival in the adjuvant setting, a major factor that decreases its
efficacy in the recurrent setting is drug resistance. The aim of our
study is to identify a protein signature predicting outcome of tamoxifen
treatment using high resolution mass spectrometry.A total of 112 snap
frozen breast tumor tissues were gathered from patients that had received
tamoxifen as first line treatment upon recurrence. Samples were divided
into a discovery (n= 56; Erasmus Medical Center) and validation sets
(n=56; multi-center cohort). Based on progression of disease from start
of tamoxifen therapy, patients were categorized having either Good
(time-to-progression; ttp>6 months) or Poor (ttp<6 months) outcome.
Approximately 4,000 tumor cells (200ng protein) were microdissected from
each tissue, which were lysed and subsequently trypsin-digested. MS
analyses were performed on a nano-liquid chromatography LTQ-Orbitrap mass
spectrometer. Protein identification and quantitation were performed
through MaxQuant. Significantly differentially abundant proteins (p<0.05)
were filtered through multivariate analysis and used to build a predictor
for tamoxifen outcome.A total of 2741 proteins were identified in both
datasets. Comparative proteome analysis showed differential expression of
99 proteins in the discovery set. A subset of 4 proteins (PDCD4, OCIAD1,
G3BP2, and CGN) derived from the multivariate model was selected to
develop a predictor for tamoxifen outcome. The 4 protein abundances in
the discovery samples were used to build a receiver operating
characteristic curve, in which Youden J was selected as grouping cutoff.
Group prediction was tested in the validation set through log rank test,
which resulted in a significant ttp difference (p=0.004; HR=2.33, 95% CI
[1.30-4.16]) between Good and Poor outcome. Our signature significantly
predicts Poor outcome patients with 86.7% sensitivity, 41.46%
specificity, 35.1% PPV, and 89.5% NPV in the multi-center cohort. OCIAD1,
PDCD4, and CGN were significantly enriched in patients with Good outcome,
while G3BP2 was more abundant in patients with Poor outcome. We are
currently validating these results by immunohistochemistry in a large
independent cohort. In addition, we are developing a targeted,
multiplexed, quantitative MS-based assay for larger scale clinical
validation.Our 4-protein signature significantly predicts outcome to
tamoxifen treatment for recurrent breast cancer. Large scale clinical
validation will enable more tailored treatment of breast cancer patients
with advanced ER+ disease. In addition, our findings may help elucidate
the mechanisms underlying endocrine therapy resistance in recurrent
breast cancer.

